The Physical and Mortal Education in Islam
==========================================

Islam has adopted positively the principals of the general health to
concentrate in the legislative fields. All of the precepts and laws of
Islam yield the best fruits that preserve the physical health and guard
against many diseases. Some Western physicians, after they had been
acquainted with the Arab and Islamic medicine, accepted Islam. Dr.
Georgeo Dar Blanto says, “All of the Islamic precepts, rituals, and
recommended practices have a good relation to health. They always intend
to achieve two goals at the same time; religious and physical.”**[1]**

Dr. Ronan confirms the same fact. Dr. Rondsandge says, “The Islamic
instructions represent health since they call to contentment and
moderation in food and drink, cleaning, and washing with pure water five
times a day before every ritual prayer. In addition, the ritual prayer
is a set of physical activities. Islam has also decreed to confine those
who are defected by infectious diseases. The Islamic sciences allot a
great part of searches for the health conservation.”**[2]**

The fascinating physical instructions of Islam admired the Western
physicians, such as Dr. G. Blanton and Dr. Ronan, who regard the Prophet
(s) as the noblest and the excellent physician in this world. Dr.
Blanton says, “It is quite undeniable that treatment and health were
within the main topics that Mohammed dealt with. In addition, he himself
enjoyed a considerable acquaintance with medicine.”**[3]**

At any rate, the Prophet (s) cared very much for the well-being since he
believed that without the marks of the physical education along with its
application, the elements of the sound life are unavailable. He was so
careful of the physical soundness such that he used to instruct his
companions to supplicate to God for good health and recovery, “After
certitude, nothing is more beneficial than sound health.” He also
approved medicine and called to specialization in this field. He said,
“Science is of two sorts; physical and religious.” Likewise, he ordered
of medication and assured that each malady has a remedy. He said, “Use
medication. God has not made a malady before He had created its remedy,
except death- it is surely cureless.”**[4]** He also constituted a
special medical program titled ‘*At-Tibb un-Nabawi* –The Prophetic
Medicine-’. In this program, he exposed some diseases and provided their
remedies in addition to a comprehensive elucidation of food, such as
fruits, edibles, and meat that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *al-Wajiz*: ½.  
 **[2]** Refer to *al-Wajiz*: 1/3.  
 **[3]** Refer to *al-Wajiz*: 2/2-3.  
 **[4]** Refer to *Deaaimul-Islam*.

are medically useful.

Imam Ali (a) also expressed some physical courses within his
recommendations and advice, among which was that magnificent advice he
had afforded to his son Imam al-Hassan (a) in which he said: “O son! May
I offer four words after which you will no longer need medicine? Do not
eat unless you are hungry. Stop eating while you are still hungry. Chew
food deliberately. Before sleeping, go to toilet. You will not need
medicine.”**[1]**

This advice is the highest physical recommendation that the modern
medicine has declared. Overeating and inaccurate chewing bring about
many diseases to the digestive system.

Imam as-Sadiq (a) also discussed medicine and hygiene and delivered
valuable lectures that revealed the most accurate affairs of these
sciences. He also discussed physiology, blood circulation and the
microbes that affect diseases. Moreover, he reviewed the qualities of
fruits, vegetables, meat, and the like. These physical and medical
discoveries have been compiled in a book titled ‘*Tibb ul-Imam
as-Sadiq’* –Medicine of Imam as-Sadiq-. The Imam argued with the best
physicians of his age and discussed the deepest and most accurate
medical advances. Those physicians submitted to his knowledge and
confessed of the questions he had provided. Most of these argumentations
are recorded in the books dealing with the life of the Imam. We may
consider that the best of these advances are those recorded in the book
titled ‘*Amalil Imam as-Sadiq*’ –Dictations of Imam as-Sadiq-, in which
chapters pertaining to physiology with its accurate questions and topics
are recorded. The most modern scientific labs and analytic devises and
technology have not attained the topics that are discussed in that book.
Naturally, these treatises contributed in the development of hygiene. As
much as we conceive, the most splendid physical theses that are related
to the Imams (a) are those recorded in the book titled ‘*Ar-Risaletul
Thehebiya’* –The Golden Treatise-. It is also called ‘*Tibbul Imam
ar-Rida*’ –The Medicine of Imam ar-Rida-.

Imam ar-Rida (s) wrote it as a response to the demand of al-Mamun, the
Abbasid caliph. Historians mention that the caliph concerned greatly
with that book that he ordered the writing it with gold and betook as a
course of his physical life. He also eulogized that book honorably. He
said, “I named it the golden and stored it in the store of wisdom after
the Hashemite youth had copied it. The soundness of corporeality depends
upon the well preservation of food and averts diseases to form vigorous
life that brings about wisdom due to which the Paradise is gained.”

It surely deserved protection, guard, attention, and consideration since
the seekers of wisdom and knowledge could depend and refer to it. It
also was the authority since it came out of the houses that inherited
the Prophet’s rulings, the prophets’ eloquence, the successors’ proofs
and the scholars’ ethics. It is the remedy of the diseased. I showed it
my retinue and the most knowledgeable people of wisdom, medicine, and
authoring. They all praised and applauded it for the high rank of its
writer and the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to as-Saduq’s *al-Khissal*.

truthful contents.”**[1]**

The Imam (a) disputed with the master scholars of his age that the
caliph had gathered for overcoming him so that the caliph would have a
flaw through which he would debase and disgrace him. However, those
master scholars were unable to overpower the Imam. They confessed of his
virtue and mastery in that field.

In any case, Islam has constituted general principals of physical
courses that guard against many diseases.

CLEANNESS
---------

Cleanness is one of the most important elements of the composition and
prosperity of the physical life since it protects from the lethal and
epidemic diseases. Islam has adopted positively and involved some
rulings and obligations to cleanness. God praises and adds cleanness to
the qualifications of the favorable. He says:

*Surely, Allah loves the returners and loves those who purify
themselves.*

*Certainly, a mosque founded on piety from the very first day is more
deserving that you should stand in it. In it are men who love that they
should be purified. And Allah loves those who purify themselves.*

Many reports of the Prophet and the Imams deal with the adherence to
cleanness, considering it as a principal rule of the individual and
social lives.

“Cleanness is a part of faithful believing.”

“The religion is based upon cleanness.”

“Allah is good and loves the good. He is clean and loves those who are
clean.”

“Purity is the half of faithful believing.”

The cleanness to which Islam has called comprises the following:

- Islam has called to the cleanness of the body by removing the dirt,
clipping the nails, shaving the hair, and brushing the teeth.

- Islam has called to the cleanness of the clothing by removing the
insects that carry diseases.

- Islam has called to the cleanness of the residence, especially the
bathroom.

- Islam has called to the cleanness of food and drinking water.

Any negligence of these matters may lead to the effect of diseases. This
is forbidden, because it is, according to the Islamic legislation, a
sin. God says:

*And do not throw yourselves to the danger.*

Islam has also abhorred and warned against dirt. The Prophet (s) said,
“How evil the dirty servants of God are!”**[2]** Some of the types of
dirtiness are the body dirt, dress dirt, lodging dirt, sitting in dirty
places, and spitting in the public places and mosques.

Islam’s attention to cleanness is evidently clear through the following
enactment:

### Bathing

Islam has directed both sexes to wash all of the body, with water soon
after any  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Tibbul-Imamirrida*.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Deaaimul-Islam*.

sexual intercourse or wet dream. God says:

*And if you are under an obligation to perform a total ablution, then
wash yourselves.*

Modern science has proven that the human body loses a part of its
vitality and activity after each sexual intercourse, and will not return
by any action other than washing all of the body with water. It is also
obligatory upon women to wash their bodies and remove the dirt of blood
after purification from the blood of menstruation. This washing recovers
the women’s vitality and activity. Muslim jurists refer to other
obligatory and recommended baths that make Muslims clean, in most cases,
and away from dirt and filth.

### Ablution

Ablution is obligatory before the five daily prayers in addition to
other obligatory prayers except the Funeral Prayer. It is obligatory to
wash the face and the two arms, and pass the hand over, for Shias, the
head and the feet. Similarly, it is recommendable, in the ritual
ablution, to wash the hands and rinse the mouth and the nose in addition
to the other actions. The specialist physicians mention important
advantages for the ablution. They are as follows:

1. Water that is shed on the face and the hands helps in activating the
dermal capillaries. This increases the heart vivacity, activates the
body respiratory processes, and helps in inhalation and exhalation.
Consequently, the perceptive motivated nerves are stimulated. Then, the
stimulation moves to the whole cardiac, gastric, and pulmonic nerves, as
well as all of the organs and glands.

2. Eyes are protected against ophthalmia because they are washed with
water several times a day.

3. The nasal channels are cleaned from the germs gathering there by
rinsing the nose.

4. The skin is protected against dermatoses. The face and the hands are
uncovered organs that are vulnerable to the affection of microbes.
Immunity will certainly be obtained if those organs are washed several
times a day.

5. The oral cavity is protected against the germs that penetrate because
of the pollution of hands. If the hands are always clean, they will not
carry any microbe. Diseases that affect the human body through polluted
hands are the digestive parasites, typhoid, and paralysis. At any rate,
the ablution is the most notable means of protecting the human bodies
against such serious diseases.

6. The ablution alleviate tense nerves and anger, as physicians aver.
The Prophet (s) said, “Rage is the Satan’s. The Satan is created of
fire. Water extinguishes fire. You should perform the ablution whenever
you are enraged.”**[1]**

### Brushing the teeth

Islam has recommended using the toothbrushes. The Prophet (s) said,
“Unless I  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]**Abu Dawud reported this hadith.

did not want to fatigue my people, I would order them of using the
toothbrush.”

The toothbrushes in the early era of Islam were the miswaks. They are
branches of a tree that includes small fibers used for cleaning the
teeth. Dr. Hamid al-Badri refers to some of the hygienic advantages of
these fibers. He says, “This plant is chemically composed of cellulosic
fibers and some volatile oils. It has aromatic rating and mineral salts
such as Sodium chloride, which is the normal salt, and potassium
chloride and gypsum oxide. Thus, these sticks are natural toothbrushes
that are supplied with mineral salts and aromatic materials that help in
cleaning the teeth. The Prophet (s) and his companions used these
natural toothbrushes many centuries ago, while the other toothbrushes
were first used in 1800. It is worth mentioning that any negligence of
the teeth may lead to tooth decay that carries poisonous materials and
originates many diseases.”**[1]**

###  Using the toilet:

Islam has legislated cleaning after using the toilet. This process
stands for cleaning the urinal organ twice or, preferably, three times
with water. For the fecal organ, it is optional to clean with water or
with a material that removes the feces thoroughly. The first way,
however, is preferable, as jurists confirm. This notable enactment
creates body cleanness and protects against the microbes and the dirt of
the urine and the feces.

### Cleanness of dresses:

Jurists unanimously have agreed upon the obligation of wearing clean
clothes during prayers. They have also ruled the invalidity of the
prayers that are performed by those whose clothes are –intentionally-
unclean. They rule that such prayers should be repeated with clean
clothes. It is quite acceptable that the cleanness of dresses plays a
big role in the achievement of individual and social physical soundness,
and protects against definite diseases.

### Hairdressing and nail clipping:

Islam tends to clean the parts of the body; hence, it urges on
hairdressing and nail clipping. The Prophet (s) said, “There are five
matters that are within the sound nature. They are shaving the pubes,
circumcision, trimming the mustache, tearing out the hair of the
armpits, and clipping the nails.”**[2]** Health and protection against
infectious diseases are obtained through the application of these
healthy courses.

In any case, Islam has decreed cleanness, because it involves the
prosperity and the development of the general health, and contributes in
saving good physical soundness. The developed countries, along with the
international health organizations, strive for publicizing the general
health among peoples of the world. They also work for guarding man from
irregularity and aberrance. Bantam, the English, says,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Spirit of Islam*: 401.  
 **[2]** Refer to al-Bukhari’s *Sahih* and Muslim’s *Sahih*.

“Diligent preservations in the legislative purity of the Islamic
religion will dismiss sinning and quit the defects. All of the criminals
that I have seen in the jails were dirty in appearance and reality.”

NUTRIENT COURSES
----------------

Islam has constituted a distinctive course of nutrition, and ordered
Muslims of applying them to their lives.

### Moderation of food:

Islam has shown the necessity of moderation in food. God says:

*O, children of Adam! Attend to your embellishments at every time of
prayer, and eat and drink and be not extravagant. Surely, He does not
love the extravagant.*

This holy Verse includes the principals of the general health and founds
an equable rule of physical safety. This is the moderation of eating.
Overeating ravages the body and causes the infliction of many diseases.
Imam as-Sadiq (s) says, “If people economize in their eating, their
bodies will be sound.”**[1]** Imam ar-Rida (s) says in *ar-Risaletu
Thehebiya*, “O Amirul-Muminin**[\*]**! Consider only the food that suits
you and your stomach, and intensifies and relishes your body to prepare
it for yourself and use as the diet. The excessive food is useless. The
food that is neither excessive nor imperfect is the useful. You should
not have the adequacy of food. You should leave the food while you are
still craving for it. This is better for the stomach and the body, and
more helpful for the mind and less heavy for the physique.”**[2]**

Islam has underlined the necessity of moderation in eating since it
achieves the physical soundness and takes away from diseases. The
Prophet (s) said, “Eat only when you crave, and abstain while you are
still craving.” “Sons of Adam –human beings- have not filled a bowel
worse than the abdomens. Sons of Adam should be content with a few bits
that rectify the body. If this is impossible, one third should be given
to eating, and one third to drinking, and one third to breathing.”
“Stomach is the house of every malady. Diet is the head of every remedy.
Give the soul what it habituates.”

Overeating creates serious and impending developments that lead to many
dangers and difficulties. Some of these dangers are as follows:

- Overeating causes fatness, which is a serious ailment, since it brings
about heart troubles, hypertension, nephric defects, and diabetes.

- Overeating causes the digestive system to encounter many diseases due
to the extension and reduction of the stomach, such as ulcer and the
like.

- Immoderation in eating causes problems of fecundity. Modern medical
surveys  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *al-Fussulul-Muhimma*.  
 **[\*]** Although ‘Amirul-Muminin’ is a nickname given exclusively to
Imam Ali bin Abi Talib, it was used to all of the caliphs that ruled the
Islamic state.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Tibbul-Imamirrida*.

have proven that the immoderation in having food, especially the fatty,
affects the activities of the glands and the sexual reproduction. In
some cases, it may lead to barrenness.**[1]**

- Overeating may cause mental defects and idiocy.

### Food mastication:

Islam has urged on food mastication and added it to the healthy courses
due to which the physicians become unneeded. Modern medical searches
have supported this fact and assured that bad mastication creates many
defects to the digestive system.

### Coldness of food:

Islam has banned from having hot food. The Prophet (s) said, “Cool the
food. The hot food lacks bless.” Physicians have proven that having hot
food creates dental defects.

### Forbidden food:

Islam has forbidden some foods that ruin the health and destroy the
body. Instead, it has referred to some foods that comprise essential
elements. God says:

*O you who believe! Eat of the good things that we have provided you
with, and give thanks to Allah if him it is that you serve. He has only
forbidden you what dies of itself, and blood, and flesh of swine, and
that over which any other name than that of Allah has been invokes. But
whoever is driven to necessity, not desiring, nor exceeding the limit,
no sin shall be upon him. Surely, Allah is forgiving, merciful.
Forbidden to you is that which dies of itself, and blood, and flesh of
swine, and that on which any other name than that of Allah has been
invoked, and the strangled animal and that beaten to death and that
killed by a fall and that killed by being smitten with the horn, and
that which wild beasts have eaten.*

### The dead animal:

The dead animal is that departs life before legal slaughtering.
Specialists mention several damages of the animals that depart life
naturally. They say, “Animals are not died unless there is a reason. If
it is a disease, it is still in that animal’s carcass that is poisoned
by unnatural materials that harm man even if fire sterilizes it. Such
carcasses are similar to the fermented food that is harmful even if it
is sterilized from germs. Having the meat of such carcasses may lead to
death.”**[2]** “All of the natural qualities and vital materials of
carcasses are missed as soon as death occurs. If such fresh carcasses
are eaten, a gastric colic and tense enterotoxins occur. In case such
carcasses had been dead for a long time, they are changed into lethal
poisons that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Tabibuke Maak*: 31.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Islam and modern medicine*: 17.

damage the human body totally, such as hemiplegia, apoplexy, and sudden
death. Sometimes, it may cause barrenness.”**[1]**

Animals that are dead due to senility carry damages similar to the
diseased. Senility results in the disintegration of all of the tissues
that affects the nutritive values of the meat and its digestibility,
which create gastronomical diseases.

### Blood:

Islam has forbidden having blood, because it is the hotbed of germs.
They breed and spread in the blood to carry poisonous secretions. Blood,
when consumed, causes hurray in the gastric tissues in addition to other
serious diseases. The blood of diseased animals causes high temperature
and hypertension.

### Pork:

Trichinosis is a disease that pork causes. It is very serious. It is
accompanied by increasing tense, sometimes hematic, diarrhea, colic,
high fever, apathy of powers, painful aches in the knuckles, aridity in
the larynx and the respiratory organs, and clear facial intumescence,
especially near the eyes, in addition to general impuissance. It may
cause death.

In 1983, an English physician discovered this serious disease while he
was anatomizing a body of a man who had eaten pork excessively. Owing to
consecutive experiments, the physician discovered that the disease had
been caused by a worm called Trichina, and lived in the intestines of
the mammary animals such as rats, mice, dogs, and pigs. This worm,
however, breed in pigs more than other animals, because this parasite
animal eats carcasses. A great part of the operative sacs of these worms
enters the bodies of those who eat pork. Afterwards, the tissues of
those sacs dissolve in the intestines, and the worms begin to spread all
over the body to cause the previous diseases.”**[2]**

Such diseases are commonly widespread in the Western countries since
people there have the pork legally. Webney Widexon says, “This disease
is common in some provinces in France, Germany, Britain, and Italy. It
is approximately nonexistent in the eastern countries, since the
religion there bans the pork.” Other physicians state the following
matters:

- It is not possible to decide whether a single swine does not carry
these worms unless microscopes check each of the organs accurately. This
is impossible since this process will lead to the expiration of the
pork.

- Each female of these worms gives birth of about 1500 fetuses in the
mucus membrane of the intestine of the diseased; thus, millions of these
female fetuses distribute all over the organs via the blood circulation.
They gather in the intentional muscles to cause tense pains and muscular
inflammations that effect the intumescence and the inflexibility of the
muscular tissue. This produces tumors that extend to all of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *The Quran and modern medicine*: 117.  
 **[2]** Refer to *The Quran and modern medicine*: 76.

the muscles.

This disease is cureless. For technical reasons, no remedy has been
effective yet. Pork carries some decayed germs. It also carries the
paratyphoid that causes tense toxins associated by taut inflammations in
the digestive system. Death may occur in few hours.**[1]**

The previous horrible damages that are evolved from having pork reveal
the deep scope of the Islamic legislation and the genuineness of its
prohibition.

### The strangled:

Islam has forbidden the meat of the strangled animals. Physicians have
proven that strangulation causes instant rotting, and makes the meat
tend to blackness and fetor.

### The beaten to death:

The meat of the beaten to death animals are also instantly and
uneatable.

### The killed by a fall:

The meat of animals that are killed due to falling is uneatable because
it is decayed and blackened.

### The smitten:

The meat of the animals that are killed due to fighting with other
animals is uneatable because of its instant decay and blackening.

### The devoured:

Islam has also bans the meat of the devoured animals. The wild animals
usually have the carcasses that carry the fatal germs that move to the
devoured animals to pollute their meat totally. This naturally causes
problems to health.

Jurists have discussed the rulings of the forbidden food in details.
These meats cause serious problems that may lead to physical collapse
and infliction with diseases.

### INTOXICANTS

Intoxicants are the base of every crime and misfortune. They deform the
human beings and seize their minds to lead to tremendous evils.

### Prohibition of intoxicants:

Islam has forbidden the consuming of intoxicants totally, and considered
it as one of the major sins and misfortunes. The holy Quran has ordered
us to refrain from intoxicants. God says:\\

*Intoxicants and games of chance and sacrificing to stones set up and
dividing by arrows are only an uncleanness; the Shaitan’s work. Shun it*
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Spirit of Islam*: 405.

*therefore that you may be successful.*

The Prophet (s) said, “God has cursed the wine, its consumer, butler,
purchaser, vendor, presser, squeezer, and the one who carries it, and
the one to whom it is given.”**[1]** “Three sorts of people will not be
in the Paradise. They are the drunkards, the sorcerers, and those who
severe family relations.”**[2]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “The drunkards are the same as the pagans are.
Intoxicants are the chief of every sin. The consumers of intoxicants are
belying God’s Book. If they acceded to God’s Book, they would abstain
from the matters that are forbidden there.”**[3]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “He who consumes intoxicants his entire life, is
not different from the pagans. Those who abstain from intoxicants for
God’s fearing, God will admit them to the Paradise and quench their
thirst from the pure sealed drink.”**[4]**

### The terrible damages of intoxicants:

The addiction to intoxicants causes physical downfall and destruction.
Modern medical writings have mentioned the great damages of intoxicants.

### Damages on birth:

 The descendants inherit many defects from the intoxicants. The
descendants of drunkard parents carry the effects of weak structures and
the affliction of serious disorders -the outcome of which is idiocy,
general paralysis, or barrenness. It may also lead to the newborns’
death. In addition, the offspring of the drunkards may be afflicted by
painful deformities such as inequality of the brain, shortness, and
edema, and retardation of mental powers such as frailty of memory,
fatuity, and the like. Many physicians, such as Bogonus**[5]**, Shawn,
Stoker, Dingo and others, confirm this fact.**[6]**

### Damages on blood and heart:

The analysts of intoxicants have proven that the effective element of
the intoxicants is alcohol or the spirit that easily leaks into the
blood without need to disintegrate. The accompanying materials may
dissolve in the stomach into a material called aldehyde, and distribute
to all of the tissues and organs. A little of that material composes
carbonic or acetic acids. As evidence, the physicians say that if an
amount of a drunkard’s blood is brought near fire, it will be burnt like
wine and spirit.

The intoxicants cause the heart to beat rapidly because of the irregular
activity of the cardiac muscles. Withering and disintegration are the
results of the reduction of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Muslim’s *Sahih*.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Wessailushia*.  
 **[3]** Ibid.  
 **[4]** Ibid  
 **[5]** Refer to *Labor and rights of workers in Islam*: 19 (second
edition.)  
 **[6]** Refer to *Principals of health and life*: 287.

the cardiac activities. It also causes blood pressure on the walls of
the blood vessels. This induces the skin to sweat. Some physicians add
that the addiction to intoxicants is within the three major causes of
arteriosclerosis, which is a serious disease that causes cardiac damage
and the explosion of brain arteries. This produces hemiplegia and
cureless paralysis.

### Damages on liver and kidney:

Intoxicants, which the body absorbs, pass by the liver via the blood
stream and cause damages and inflammations of the hepatic cells. When
such inflammations become chronic, a swelling and cirrhosis occur in the
liver. Doctors Hill and Doth Howard confirm these facts.

Intoxicants cause the reduction of diuresis owing to the extension of
the nephric blood vessels. A considerable amount of alcohol comes out
from the kidney to cause serious inflammations.

### Effects on the stomach:

Physicians have emphasized that alcohol will dissolve into aldehyde and
acetic acids when it mixes with the ingredients of the stomach. It also
hastens the pepsin and the residuals of perthite and other enzymes.
Pepsin is the most important element that helps in digestion. The
precipitation of this element hinders the digestive processes and
agitates the mucous membrane of the stomach. This creates the extension
of the blood vessels and the effluence of the glands of the gastric sap.
Addiction to intoxicants ruins the efficiency of the gastric sap and
causes dyspepsia. The drunkards always suffer pains in the stomach.

Physicians have stressed that the addiction to intoxicants causes the
following diseases:

- Hepatic swelling that leads to edema

- Nephritis that causes general toxemia

- Hemiplegia

- Hysteria

- General nervous disorder

- Pulmonary defects that lead to tuberculosis

- The deficiency of immunity against lethal diseases such as typhoid and
meningitis

The addicts to intoxicants cannot resist such diseases or benefit by
aids or modern medication, such as penicillin and other antibiotics.

The addiction to intoxicants causes many economic damages. The drunkard
will eventually be dragged to wasting and squandering in addition to
gambling, fornication, impudence, and other dishonest matters.

### Means of controlling the intoxicants:

The malignant defect of consuming the intoxicants is the most
influential element of terminating the health and the life. The
following are some means of controlling it.

- The ruling authorities should ban the intoxicants categorically and
destroy the factories and the devises of filtration in addition to
imposing a strict punishment upon the traffickers and merchants of
intoxicants.

- All of the print media should be used for broadcasting the terrible
damages of the intoxicants.

- Jurists, educationists, and the health organizations should control
and expose the damages of the intoxicants.

- Sport clubs should be established so that the youth will practice the
various sports and other useful activities.

- Propaganda and commercials of intoxicants should be banned.**[1]**

SEXUAL DEVIATION
----------------

Islam has forbidden all sorts of sexual deviation since they cause
collapse of the general health and lead to serious diseases.

### Fornication:

** **Islam has forbidden fornication regarded it as the worst of the
forbidden acts. God says:

*And do not go nigh to fornication. Surely, it is an indecency and evil
is the way.*

 Moreover, God considers fornication as polytheism and murder. He says:

*And they who do not call upon another god but Allah and do not slay the
soul, which Allah has forbidden except in the requirements of justice,
and who do not commit fornication. And he who does this shall find a
requital of sin. The punishment shall be doubled to him on the day of
resurrection. And he shall abide therein in abasement.*

### Damages of fornication:

Health failure and ruination of the principals of life are the most
horrible damages and serious dangers of fornication.

###  Syphilitic diseases:

Fornication is the main cause of the syphilitic diseases. They affect
the nervous, respiratory, lymphatic, digestive, and genital tracts of
the human body. They also affect the bones, knuckles, the ductile and
ductless glands, skin, eye, and ear so gravely that death is its only
cure. The sufferings of misfortunes and the pains of such diseases are
terribly intolerable. Detailed exposition can be read in the books of
medicine.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Principals of health and life*: 298.  
 **[2]** Refer to *spirit of Islam*.

### Gonorrhea:

Gonorrhea is one of the fatal diseases that affect the urinal ducts. It
causes blindness to the fornicators’ newborns. Many other disadvantages
of fornication are exposed in details in the books of medicine.

### Syphilis:

Syphilis is the worst disease. It is called the ape of diseases. It
affects any organ or tissue. In the first phase, a hard ulcer emerges in
the body. In the second, red spots affect the organs totally. In the
third, the main system of the body is affected. If the brain is
affected, mental defects, such as insanity, may occur. If the medulla is
affected, paralysis may occur. If the heart and the blood vessels are
affected, heart troubles may occur.**[1]** If it affects the pregnant
women, it directly influences the fetuses that may be affected by
inherent deformities. In some cases, the fetuses may be dead.**[2]**

### Chancroid:

Chancroid is a soft red cureless chancre that has a negative effect on
the human body. Detailed exposition of this disease can be seen in the
books of medicine.

We have proven some of the lethal diseases that affect the perpetrators
of fornication. This crime, however, results in barrenness, dishonor,
destruction of the family’s entity, and other social damages.

### The strict punishment:

Islam has decreed the harshest punishment for the perpetrators of this
crime. Married fornicators should undergo stoning. Some jurists rule
that the married fornicators should be whipped and stoned. This rule
applies to both Muslim and non-Muslim male and female. The bachelor
fornicators should be sentenced to one hundred lashes. God says:

*As for the fornicatress and the fornicator, flog each of them giving a
hundred stripes. And let not pity for them detain you in the matter of
obedience to Allah, if you believe in Allah and the last day. And let a
party of believers witness their chastisement.*

Some jurists have issued that a group of people should witness the
application of the whipping so that they would take example and stay
away from this act. This firm procedure eradicates the social corruption
and poses dams and barriers before everyone that intends to perpetrate
this crime. The French legislation in this regard is the weakest. It
considers fornication as a crime only when perpetrated by the husband if
it is committed in the wives’ home. Anyhow, the punishment is no more
than a fine of a few Franks. Wives that commit adultery are sentenced to
detention. Actually, such punishments do not eradicate the crime of
fornication that ravages many souls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Principals of health and life*.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Principals of health and life*; 218-20.

SODOMY
------

Sodomy is unquestionably the worst moral crime and the most terrible
category of irregularity and deviation. Syphilitic diseases that destroy
the health and life will eventually affect the sodomite. Likewise, many
social dangers, including the reduction of matrimonial rates, stem from
this phenomenon that creates a harsh decrease in the birth rate. Islam
has constituted strict punishments for this crime. Perpetrators of
sodomy should be sentenced to one of the following punishments:

- Killing by sword

- Burning

- Building a wall around them

- Throwing from a high place

The sodomised individuals should be sentenced to death penalty if they
are adults, sane, and discerning. If the sodomised or the sodomites are
children, they should undergo the punishment of chastisement.**[1]**
This strict ruling is constituted for eradicating this crime and warning
people against it. Formerly, the crime of sodomy was lawfully banned in
Britain, but it was legislated due to the importunate persistence of the
Parliament there. Actually, the British government has led the people to
great calamity since this crime destroys the family and the social life.

MASTURBATION
------------

Islam has banned masturbation for being the vilest means of pleasing the
sexual lust. Masturbators are afflicted by mental defects in addition to
innate frailty and depression.

### Protective methods:

- Early marriage eradicates all types of sexual irregularity, most of
which are originated from bachelorhood. The Prophet (s) said, “Marriage
saves two thirds of the religion. You should fear God in the other
third.” “The vilest of the dead are the bachelors.” “Bachelors form the
majority of people of the hell-fire.”**[2]** Marriage guards against
committing such vices and protect from falling in the depths of
immorality.

- Sexual cultivation and exposing the disadvantages may help in getting
rid of this disgusting habit.

- Removal of sexy movies and the other lusty media, such as sexy
magazines and books, guards against this ill manner.

- The practice of sports and artistic exercises, and reading useful and
disciplinary books, are methods that protect against masturbating.

- The implementation of definite activities, such as general cleanness,
leaving the bed as soon as possible, and the engagement in useful
matters, protects against the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *ar-Rawda*: Chapter of doctrinal provisions.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Wassiletunnaja*: 2/298-9.

habit of masturbation.**[1]**

PROHIBITION OF COPULATING WITH THE MENSTRUOUS
---------------------------------------------

Islam has forbidden copulating with the menstruous for avoiding many
diseases. God says:

*And they ask you about menstruation. Say: It is a pollution; therefore,
keep aloof from the women during the menstrual discharge and do not go
near them until they have become clean.*

Modern clinical studies have proven that copulation with the menstruous
injures the health of the spouses. This is because the blood of
menstruation contains various microbes and germs that cause
inflammation. The women’s internal membranes congest during the
menstruation. Any copulation may rupture these membranes and cause the
infection of the microbes to spread to other places, effecting women’s
health. In many cases, such copulation may cause nervous
disorders.**[2]**

### RELAXATION

Carnal relaxation is one of the programs of the Islamic physical
education. Human beings should not bring about mental and physical
fatigue, which is a banned danger. Relaxation is a recommendable matter.
The Prophet (s) said, “Your mind enjoys rights that you must keep. Your
body enjoys rights that you must keep. Your spouse enjoys rights that
you must keep. Your eyes enjoy rights that you must keep.”**[3]** “Your
essence is as same as your pack. You should be lenient to it.” This
means that one should not overburden or neglect himself and should treat
any frailty that may affect. The Prophet (s) said, “Relax from time to
time.”

Relaxation protects against many diseases that are originated, in most
cases, from overworking, exhaustion, and behavioral instability that
causes diseases and defects.

### ATHLETIC EDUCATION

Islam has been deliberately caring for the athletic education for its
being a significant element for composing the physical vitality and
activity. It has legislated a number of courses in this regard.

### Racing:

Racing is a contract legislated for exercising competition and readiness
to fight. The Prophet (s) said, “No racing except in spears, feet, or
horses.” It is also legislated for strengthening the body and activating
the muscles. Jurists have concerned with racing. They dedicated chapters
for discussing its rulings and ethics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Principals of health and life*: 319.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Spirit of Islam*: 412.  
 **[3]** Refer to al-Bukhari’s *Sahih*.

### Archery:

Archery stands for the exercising of fighting processes and taking up
arms. This exercise creates physical powers, activates muscles and
matures the verve. It also teaches willpower and self-reliance.

### Hunting:

Hunting stimulates the organs, activates the muscles, initiates
activity, and empowers the body, because it requires movement, walking,
and other athletic motions. The Muslim kings, in the early ages of
Islam, were fond of hunting, yet they practiced it for amusement. Books
of the Islamic jurisprudence expose explicitly the legality, illegality,
and conditions of hunting.

PHYSICAL BENEFITS OF WORSHIP
----------------------------

In addition to the elevation of morals, disciplining of mentalities, and
connection to the Creator, the Islamic rites aim at amending health,
training the body, activating the muscles, and empowering the will.

### Prayer:

Prayer is the believers’ ascent and the offertory of the pious. It is
the sole sanctuary when ideas, grieves, and pains seize the mentalities.
Prayer enables the minds to connect directly with the Creator, shunning
the thorough material and personal interests. That saves against the
destroying depression and the terminating anxiety. Prayer,
fundamentally, implies mind inclination and mental turnout. Prayers lose
essence and factuality if they lack those two items. God threatens those
who perform the prayers physically while they are unaware of its purport
and factuality:

*So, woe to the praying ones, who are unmindful of their prayers.*

The performance of prayers while the soul is tending, succumbing, and
calming to God and His potentiality will certainly save against the life
pains that foist diseases and misfortunes to the body. Many reports have
asserted that the prayer brings about health in addition to the
innumerable benefits in this world and the Hereafter and large powers of
athletic advancements. As the late imam Mohammed Hussein
al-Kashiful-Ghitta, discusses the clinical and physical advantages of
prayers, he says, “The required in all of the movements and stillness of
prayers is settlement and stability. In standing erect or sitting, each
organ should be stabilized in its exact position along with performing
all of the movements that activate the whole knuckles and organs with a
new movement. Standing erect, sitting, bending, prostration, various
conditions of raising the hands and conjoining the arms intervened by
suppliant sayings, recital and praises in definite times of universal
peculiarity, like dawn, midday and sunset. All these are objects to
learn lessons and refer to the signs of the excellent creation and the
Supreme Creator, along with various fields of thinking. Each of these
movements has physical advantages. The genuflection, for instance,
empowers the abdominal membrane because of causing it to reduce,
prevents its relaxation, and

alerts the viscera and the intestines to the straight pulses. This saves
the body against tense constipation. Besides, there are many other
advantages. The ritual prostration is another example. It reduces the
muscles and bones of the breast more tensely, activates the diaphragm,
alerts the stomach to throw its contents, and saves it from symptoms of
the painful extension. Subsequently, all these activities and certain
conditions, which are orderly arranged, are athletic movements that
greatly influence the activity of the organs and the reduction, power,
and cohesion of the muscles. They also play a considerable role in
alerting the sensitive nerves, stimulating the blood circulation,
igniting the instinctive heat that prepare a consonant internal
environment and animating the powers of sound reasoning. It is commonly
familiar that the functions of the muscles are not only activating the
body movement to other places. They surely have more significant and
communal functions, which are influencing all of the limbs and systems
of analysis and respiration, and alerting the digestive system and the
spine. Those movements are healthy exercises and natural sport that
influence each organ distinctively. They are designed so regularly in
definite times per day. They are clinical prescriptions and magnificent
models of immunity for the knuckles, the nerves, the heart, the lungs,
the stomach, and the head. The ritual prayer is physical, mental,
moderate, and quiet sport that grants, if performed in their exact
times, willpower, time respect, order, fulfilling the pledge, keeping
the promise, and the like good manners. These sports are highly elevated
from those childish sports. The prayer is only cleanness, purification,
lessons, thinking, athletic activities, mental efforts, and spiritual
disclosure. The simplest result of prayers, if performed properly with
their functions and practices, is guaranteeing the performers’ enjoining
the good and forbidding the evil.”**[1]**

Dr. Mustafa al-Haffar, the specialist in the diseases of the digestive
system, was asked about the advantages of the ritual genuflection and
prostration of the prayers. He answered, “The genuflection capacitates
the muscles of the abdominal membrane and helps in contracting the
stomach for performing its digestive function properly. It also helps
the intestines in emitting the digestive residuals naturally. The ritual
prostration pushes the air in the stomach to the mouth to release it
from extension that causes digestive pains and cardiac reflections.” Dr.
F. Azure, the specialist in the nervous diseases and knuckles, exposes
the physical benefits of the prayer. He says, “Prayers of Muslims,
altogether with the genuflection and prostration, strengthen the back
muscles and tender the vertebrae, especially if the prayer is performed
in early age. Moreover, it materializes immunity from the diseases of
muscles that exceed the spine. Different sorts of nervous defects, that
cause tense pains and muscular spasm, may occur due to the weakness of
muscles.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to *Commentary on Safinetunnaja*: 247-50.  
 **[2]** Refer to *Spirit of prayer in Islam*: 137.

### Fasting:

Hadiths have stressed that fasting protects against the hell-fire and
its chastisement. It is actually the most influential means of spiritual
sports, willpower, and customs of endurance. It is the healthiest means
of reforming the digestive system. Dr. A. Ismail states that the fasting
is the only remedy that protects against many diseases, and the best
prescription of the following defects:

-The fasting is prescribed for treating the chronic disorders of the
intestines that are associated by fermentation of the albuminous and
amyloid materials. Fasting -which is the abstinence from water and food
from dawn to sunset- is the most successful way of purifying the
intestines and treating the states of fermentation.

- It is also prescribed for treating the excessive fatness that is the
result of overeating and the paucity of activities. In this case,
fasting is the best curable method provided that it is accompanied by
moderation during having the meal of breaking the fasting, and drinking
water during the post-midnight meal.

- It is also prescribed for treating the spontaneous blood pressure.
This disease is increasingly spreading due to luxury and psychic
agitations. In such cases, Ramadhan is the month of grace and bless,
especially for the excessively weighty.

- It is prescribed for treating diabetes. This disease spreads with the
pressure of blood. It is often associated by the excessive weight.
Hence, fasting is the beneficial treatment since the proportion of
saccharine decreases with the retreat of the weight. Five hours after
having a meal, the sugar in the blood reaches lower than the natural
term in cases of slack saccharine urination. Ten hours later, it reaches
lower levels. Before the discovery of the insulin, fasting, with some
nutritious notices, was the best treatment of this disease, especially
for the fat.

- It is prescribed for treating the tense and chronic nephritis that is
associated by exudation and tumefaction.

- It is prescribed for treating the heart troubles that are associated
by tumefaction.

- It is prescribed for treating the chronic arthritis, especially for
the fat, such as the forty year old ladies. It has been noticed that
fasting was the best cure, for this disease, since it has exceeded the
other means of electricity, injections, drugs, and modern medicine.

It may be cited that fasting, in these cases, needs clinical
prescription, while it is imposed on the healthy only. This is quite
correct, but fasting protects against these diseases.

 The Prophet (s) said, “Fast, so that you will be healthy.” Fasting
protects against many diseases and leads to mental disciplinary and good
traits.

### Pilgrimage:

Rites of the pilgrimage are considerable activities that strengthen the
muscles, activate the bodily movements, and alert the organs. It is also
the most notable Islamic conference by which Muslims would benefit
greatly if they take as the occasion of discussing their political and
economic problems.
