The Education in Work Fields
============================

The Islamic education in work fields aims at spreading piety, taking
precautions in earnings, and habituating the craftsmen to the moralities
and the Islamic ethics. It also aims at encouraging them on increasing
and developing the production. It also proposes works’ skillfulness and
development in such a way that is concurrent to the national maturity
and prosperity in economical fields, for releasing people from poverty
and neediness.

Islam has provided the most premium educational courses for craftsmen
and workers.

### Fidelity and sincerity:

Islam has instructed to be loyal and sincere in works and professions.
The Prophet (s) said, “The real earning is the sincere.” “Allah loves
the masterly work.” Insincere working brings about illegal earning,
which is the most critical. Rewards are given to the faithful deeds,
while the insincere are not rewarded. Workers should guarantee damages
they cause to employers.

### Avoiding cheating:

Islam has forbidden cheating totally because it causes economical and
social damages in the country.  The Prophet (s) said, “He is not one of
us that whoever cheats, injures, or defrauds a Muslim.” “For those who
cheat a Muslim in vendition or purchase, they are not among us, and God
will add them to the Jews on the Resurrection Day. He is surely not one
of us that whoever cheats us. (The Prophet repeated this statement
thrice.) For those who cheat their Muslim brothers, God will remove
blessing from their earnings, and will corrupt their livings and forsake
them.”

Imam as-Sadiq (a) said to a seller of flour, “Beware of cheating. The
consequences of cheating will be shown in the properties or the family
members of the cheaters.”

Imam Musa (a) said to Musa bin Bukeir about a counterfeit dinar, “Throw
it in the drain so that nothing cheated will be sold.”

Jurists decide the right of revocation in the cheated deals. They also
rule the invalidation of the deals in which cheating by showing
counterfeited classes is proved.

### Fulfillment of missions:

Employees must begin their works in the definite time and do their jobs
by themselves. It is invalid to hire others for doing the jobs since the
contract was concluded with certain persons. The hirelings could be not
adequate enough for doing that job except there is a previous conclusion
with the employer on this point. The Prophet (s) said, “The believers
are bound to their conditions.”

### Keeping the production means:

Craftsmen and employees must protect the tools of working and the
productive means. The employees should never neglect them because they
are their trusts. Damages of the production devices cause economical
loss and injure employers.

### Development of wealth resources:

Craftsmen and employees should work sincerely and faithfully for
developing and preserving the sources of wealth since the economic life
relies upon them. It is impossible for any nation to develop
economically unless workers possess a general cognizance of the
necessity of conserving and maturing the nation’s resources of wealth.

### Professional specialization:

Professional specialization helps in the national development,
productive increase, and economical prosperity. Governments are
responsible for encouraging these goals by sending the seekers of
specialization to institutions inside and outside the country. They are
also responsible for meeting the needs of these people. This is surely
the most important social responsibility.

### Activity and firmness:

The Islamic education in work cares for distributing the spirits of
activity and firmness in the employees’ minds. It also cares for warning
against laziness and sloth, since these matters paralyze the economic
movements and freeze the energies. The following supplication is related
to the Prophet’s household. It shows the abomination of laziness and
sloth. “O Allah! I seek thy guard against sloth, laziness, inactivity,
and indolence.” Imam as-Sadiq (a) said, “Beware of tedium and laziness.
They are the key to every vile. The tedious cannot fulfill any duty. The
lazy cannot keep any pledge.”**[1]** Imam Musa (a) said, “Beware of
tedium and laziness. They block the shares of this world and the
Hereafter.”**[2]**

Islam abhors laziness, forbids unemployment, and censures the unemployed
because it leads to poverty, misery, and neediness. Muslims in the early
ages  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Men La Yahduruhul Faqih.  
 **[2]** Refer to the lifetime of Imam Musa bin Jafar.

disgusted long rest and stillness. They came to working fastidiously.
Imam as-Sadiq (a) exposed the deeds of those companions before his
adherents. He said, “Do not be lazy in seeking earnings. Our forefathers
used to hasten in seeking their livings.”**[1]**

Proudly, Islam calls to diligence, activity, and dispatching to working
fields so that the life of luxury and amenity will prevail. In our
*‘Labor and rights of workers in Islam’*, we have referred
comprehensively to labor courses, obligations, and rights that Islam
imposed for the laborers and peasants.

### Evasion of the ill-gotten:

The most prominent course of the programs of the Islamic education in
work is seeding the spirits of piety and integrity in the minds of the
employees and craftsmen as well as taking them away from sins and vices.
Stipends and salaries of those employees were gotten due to their
efforts and pains. They should spend those stipends on their dependants
and themselves. They will surely spend them illegally if they slip in
fields of lechery. Thus, they leave the ghost of poverty in their houses
and expose their families and children to poverty and deprivation.

### Last word:

As we reach the end of this thesis, we would like to attract attention
to the fact that this has been a brief exposition of the Islamic
educational system. We cannot claim of embodying all of the topics and
affairs in this regard, since this needs too many volumes.

The educational system of Islam is based upon the most modern means that
lie at the top of the marches of the humanitarian civilizations. It can
change the general behavior and establish immunity from the moral
defects and other vicious compounds. This system achieved the best
outcome in the early stages of Islam when it created men who were above
all others in their progress towards the right, justice, confidence in
God, and wholehearted devotion for God’s sake. Those celebrities could
save people from the gloominess of ignorance, sloth, and indolence to
take to oases of knowledge, activity, and production.

We regard it obligatory to praise the efforts of the grand master Sheik
Hadi al-Qireshi, who provided the notices of this book. I can also
hardly neglect his compassion and kindness, that I highly appreciate,
without which I could not provide this work. I supplicate to God to
reward him with blessings and best merits.

Finally, I wish the readers to point out any flaw that I have
inadvertently mentioned in my work, so that we all achieve the service
of the right.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Men La Yahduruhul Faqih.
