The Author
==========

Ayatollah al-Udhma Imam Muhammad Shirazi is the Religious Authority, or
Marje', to millions of Muslims around the globe. A charismatic leader
who is known for his high moral values, modesty and spirituality, Imam
Shirazi is a mentor and a source of aspiration to Muslims; and the means
of access to authentic knowledge and teachings of Islam. He has
tirelessly devoted himself, and his life, to the affairs of Muslims in
particular, and to that of mankind in general. He has made extensive
contributions in various fields of learning ranging from Jurisprudence
and Theology to Politics, Economics, Law, Sociology and Human Rights.

Muhammad Shirazi was born in the holy city of Najaf, Iraq, in 1347 AH
(Muslim calendar), 1927 AD. He settled in the holy city of Karbala,
Iraq, at the age of nine, alongside his father. After primary education,
the young Shirazi continued his studies in different branches of
learning under his father's guidance as well as those of various other
eminent scholars and specialists. In the course of his training he
showed a remarkable talent and appetite for learning as well as a
tireless commitment to his work and the cause he believed in. His
extraordinary ability, and effort, earned him the recognition, by his
father and other Marje's and scholars, of being a Mujtahid; a qualified
religious scholar in the sciences of Islamic jurisprudence and law. He
was subsequently able to assume the office of the Marje' at the early
age of 33 in 1960. His followers are found in many countries around the
globe.

Imam Shirazi is distinguished for his intellectual ability and holistic
vision. He has written various specialized studies that are considered
to be among the most important references in the Islamic sciences of
beliefs or doctrine, ethics, politics, economics, sociology, law, human
rights, etc. He has enriched the world with his staggering contribution
of more than 1000 books, treatise and studies on various branches of
learning. His works range from simple introductory books for the young
generations to literary and scientific masterpieces. Deeply rooted in
the holy Qur'an and the Teachings of the Prophet of Islam, his vision
and theories cover areas such as Politics, Economics, Government,
Management, Sociology, Theology, Philosophy, History and Islamic Law.
His work on Islamic Jurisprudence (al-Fiqh series) for example
constitutes 150 volumes, which run into more than 70,000 pages. Through
his original thoughts and ideas he has championed the causes of issues
such as the family, human right, freedom of expression, political
pluralism, non-violence, and Shura or consultative system of
leadership.

Imam Shirazi believes in the fundamental and elementary nature of
freedom in mankind. He calls for freedom of expression, political
plurality, debate and discussion, tolerance and forgiveness. He strongly
believes in the consultative system of leadership and calls for the
establishment of the leadership council of religious authorities. He
calls for the establishment of the universal Islamic government to
encompass all the Muslim countries. These and other ideas are discussed
in detail in his books.

1. Aspects of the Political Theory of Imam Muhammad Shirazi

Muhammad Ayyub is a well-known Islamist political activist within the
Iraqi circle who has established a long history of political struggle
behind him. He was attracted by the views of the Imam Muhammad Shirazi
in the fields of social and political sciences. This prompted the author
to write this book to introduce the reader to these views that have
remained relatively unknown to the Muslim activists and reformists. It
covers such aspects on politics as freedom of expression,
party-political pluralism and organisation, social justice, peace and
non-violence, human rights, consultation system of government, etc.

2. Islamic System of Government

In this introductory book the author outlines the basic principles of
government based on the teachings of Islam. The author begins with the
aim and objectives of the government according to Islam and the extent
of its authority. He then addresses, from the Islamic viewpoint, the
significance and fundamental nature of such issues as consultative
system of government, judicial system, freedoms, party political
pluralism, social justice, human rights, foreign policy, etc. The author
also outlines the policies of a government on issues such as education,
welfare, health, crime, services, etc. as well as such matter as the
government's income.

3. If Islam Were To Be Established

This book can serve as the Muslim's guide to the Islamic government. If
an Islamist opposition group has a plan for an Islamic government, this
book would help to check various aspects of the plan. In the absence of
such a plan, this book would present one. To the non- Muslims, the book
presents a glimpse of a typical Islamic system of government. The book
would also serve as a yardstick for anyone to check the practices of any
government that claims to have implemented an Islamic system of
government.

4. The Family

In this book the author highlights the problems he sees primarily in
Islamic societies and particularly in the west today from the phenomenon
of unmarried young men and women through to birth control and
contraception. He surveys the idea of marriage in various religions and
schools of thought and discusses polygamy from the Islamic perspective.
As well as being a call to the Muslim world to revert to the true
teachings of Islam, this book can also be of use as an introduction to
others who seek some answers to the social problems of today. This is
because Islam has detailed teachings, which promise success in every
area of human life on individual and societal levels, and what's more
their practicality has been historically proven.

5. Fundamentals of Islam

In this book the author outlines the five fundamental principles of
Islam, namely the Indivisible Oneness of God (Tawheed), Divine Justice
(Adl), Prophethood (Nubowwah), Leadership of mankind (Imamah), and
Resurrection (Me'ad). For each principle, the author presents a concise
discussion on the significance of the issue concerned. The book could
serve as a good introduction to fundamental Islamic beliefs, both for
the Muslim and non-Muslim alike.

6. War, Peace and Non-violence: An Islamic perspective

In this work the author addresses three controversial issues, which
have come to be associated with Islam. Through his extensive knowledge
of the teachings of Islam, the author presents the Islamic stand on war,
peace and non-violence, as found in the traditions and teachings of the
Prophet of Islam, which could serve as exemplary models for the Mankind.
Detailed accounts of the traditions of Prophet in his dealings with his
foes during war or peace times are presented in this book, which gives
the reader a clear insight into the way and the basis upon which the
Prophet of Islam used to conduct his affairs in this respect.


