Part One : On the Compilation of the Holy Qur'an
================================================

**The Hadith of Ibn 'Abbas**

In 'al-Manaqib' it is related that Ibn 'Abbas said: 'When Allah's
words: {You are mortal and they are mortals.} 5 were revealed, Allah's
Messenger (S)6 said: 'If only I knew when this (my death) would be.'
This, when the Prophet (S) knew 'the unseen' with the permission and
inspiration of Allah. Then the 110th chapter of the Qur'an named al-Nasr
(Succour) was revealed, after which the Prophet (S) remained silent
between the 'takbir'7 and the 'reading' then he used to say: 'Praise be
to Allah, I seek the forgiveness of Allah and turn towards Him in
repentance.' He was asked about this and said: 'It is that my soul has
foretold me of my impending death.' Then he began to weep intensely. He
was then asked: 'Oh Messenger of Allah, do you weep over death when
Allah has forgiven all your sins both past and future?' The Prophet (S)
said: 'But what of the terror of the questioning and what of the
confines of the grave and the darkness of the tomb, and the resurrection
and the other fearsome things?' (Here the Prophet means to draw
attention to these fearsome things rather than say that he will be tried
by them as is clear.) Then 5 The Qur'an: The Groups (39):30.

6 Sall-Allah Alayhi wa Alihi wa Sallam, meaning Peace and Blessings of
Allah be upon him and his infallible family. This is always stated after
the mention of the name of the Prophet out of respect for the Prophet of
Islam (s).

7 The takbir or takbir al-ihram (sanctification) consists of the words
'Allahu Akbar', (God is Great) which are said at the beginning of every
one of the daily canonical prayers and other supererogatory prayers
denoting the beginning of the prayer and the fact that the person
praying has entered the sanctity of prayer. The reading mentioned here
is the reading of the opening chapter of the Qur'an, which forms the
basis of prayers in Islam.

Ibn 'Abbas said: 'The Prophet (S) lived for a further year after the
revelation of this chapter.'8 Thenceforth, verse after verse was
revealed until only seven days remained of the Prophet's life. Then the
following verse was revealed:

{And fear ye a day in which you will be returned to Allah and every
soul will be given what it has earned and they will not be dealt with
unjustly.}9

This verse - according to certain transmissions - was the last verse of
the Holy Qur'an to be revealed to the Messenger of Allah by the
Archangel Gabriel who said to him:

'Place this verse at the head of the 280th verse of the second
chapter.'10

The first verse revealed to the Prophet Muhammad (S) by the Archangel
Gabriel was Allah's words: {In the Name of Allah The Beneficent The
Merciful, Read! In the name of your Lord Who has created . . .}11

The first verse of the Qur'an to be revealed coincided with the first
day of the noble prophetic mission and the last verse of the Qur'an to
be revealed took place during the last days of the Messenger of Allah.
The time between these two verses was when the rest of the Qur'an was
revealed and this was over a period of 23 years.

8 See Seas of Lights: vol.22, p.471; and also al-Manaqib: vol.1, p.234,
The section on the death of the prophet (S): Related from Ibn 'Abbas,
and al-Sudayy that when Allah's words were revealed: {You are mortal and
they are mortals.}, the Messenger of Allah said: 'If only I knew when
this would be.', then the 110th chapter of The Qur'an named al-Nasr
(Succour) was revealed and he used to remain silent during the prayer
between saying 'Allahu Akbar' and the reading but he said: 'Praise be to
Allah, I ask Allah for forgiveness and turn towards Him in repentance.'
He was asked about this and he said:

'It is that my soul has foretold me of my impending death.' Then he
began to weep intensely. They said to him: 'O Messenger of Allah, do you
weep over death when Allah has forgiven your sins both past and future?'
He said: 'But what of the terror of the questioning, or the confines of
the grave and the darkness of the tomb, and what of the resurrection and
the fearsome things!' He lived after the revelation of this chapter for
a further year.

9 The Qur'an: The Heifer (2):280.

10 The Tafsir of al-Shubbar: p.83, The Heifer (2).

11 The Qur'an: The Clot (96):1.


