Who Compiled the Qur'an?
========================

In the previous hadith, what draw our attention are the words of the
Archangel Gabriel to the Prophet at the time of the revelation of the
final Qur'anic verse:

'Place them at the head of the 280th verse of the second chapter.'

It is then clear that Allah (through the Angel Gabriel) commanded the
Prophet (S) to compile the Qur'an and to organise its structure in a
precise manner even as far as the numbering of the verses. This the
Prophet indeed did during his life as Allah had ordered and it was not
for the Prophet (S) to leave the Qur'an disparate so that someone after
him should compile it.

It is not possible that the Prophet (S) with his great concern and
endeavour in preserving the Qur'an should neglect the task of compiling
and structuring it and leave the Qur'an scattered amongst the Muslims
and delegate the task of compiling it to them. This especially so after
revelation had informed him: {You are mortal and they are mortals.}12

It is not possible that the Prophet (S) could be deeply concerned with
the Qur'an on the one hand so that he would order that it should be
memorised and paid attention to, and encourage its recital and the
practice of its tenets particularly in his final days. He would say
repeatedly:

'I leave behind me two momentous things - the book of Allah and my kin,
the people of my household. As long as you adhere to them both you will
never go astray after me ever.'13

It is not right that he would do this and at the same time fail to
compile the Qur'an and by doing so leave it scattered.

12 The Qur'an: The Groups (39):30.

13 Fiqh al-Qur'an: vol.1,p.63, the words 'after me ever' are omitted.
See also Irshad al- Qulub: p.340, 'I leave with you the two momentous
things, as long as you adhere to them you will never go astray - the
book of Allah and my kin the people of my household. These are the two
Caliphs for you and they will never separate from one another until we
meet at the well of Kauthar.'

The Qur'an is the eternal constitution of Islam and its inimitable
miracle surviving throughout the aeons and ages until the day of
resurrection. It is not therefore logical to assume that the Prophet
would leave the Qur'an scattered, without compiling it.

How is it conceivable that Allah should permit His Prophet (S) not to
compile that Qur'an despite having said in the Qur'an: {It is our duty
to compile it and recite it.}14

Allah also says: {We have sent down the Reminder and We shall be its
protectors.}15

It is therefore the duty of the Prophet (S) to deliver the Qur'an as a
structured whole to all people as compiled and structured by Allah.

14 The Qur'an: The Resurrection (75): 17.
15 The Qur'an: The Rocky Tract (15): 9.


