Foreword
========

***In the Name of God, Most Gracious, Most Merciful***

The present volume contains the supplications transmitted from one of
the most venerated religious authorities of early Islam, \`Ali b.
al-Husayn b. \`Ali b. Abi Talib, better known as Zayn al-'Abidin (\`the
ornament of the worshipers'). His grandfather, \`Ali b. Abi Talib, the
Prophet's cousin and son-in-law, was adopted by the Prophet in his
childhood, and grew up under the personal care and guardianship of the
recipient of the divine Revelation, the Founder of Islam.

His grandmother, Fatima, was not only the most beloved daughter of the
Prophet, but also a partner in her father's mission. His father,
al-Husayn, and his uncle, al-Hasan, the only grandsons that the Prophet
had, were brought up by the Prophet, who showered his deepest love and
affection upon them. Thus Zayn al-'Abidin derived his religious and
spiritual authority and his divine knowledge in the closest and most
intimate way through his father and grandfather from the Founder of
Islam, the Apostle of God.

Zayn al-'Abidin was held in special regard not only by the adherents of
the Household of the Prophet, who considered him their fourth Imam and
the only religious authority of his time, but also by the learned
circles of the Muslims in general. His period in Medina was that of a
growing interest in the Traditions of the Prophet, especially those
which dealt with legal matters. It was the time of the \`seven lawyers
of Medina', who were engaged in collecting these Traditions and
formulating legal opinions.

Among the Medinan scholars, we find that Zayn al-'Abidin was considered
to be an eminent traditionist. The famous Medinese lawyer of this period
Sa'id b. al-Musayyab, regarded the Imam with the highest esteem. Another
great jurist and traditionist of the period, al-Zuhri though he was
attached to the court of the Umayyads, was also a great friend and
admirer of the Imam.

His honourific, Zayn al-'Abidin (the Ornament of the Worshipers), which
refers to his devotion to prayer, was given him by al-Zuhri. Thus, from
the overwhelming number of reports recorded by both Shi'a and Sunni
authorities, it would seem that Zayn al-'Abidin was widely respected by
the community in general for his extraordinary qualities, such as the
long duration of his prayer, his piety, his forbearance, his learning,
and his generosity.

Perhaps the most eloquent testimony to his exalted position is the
famous ode composed in his praise by Farazdaq, an eminent poet of his
time. In it, Farazdaq refers to the occasion when the Caliph Hisham b.
'Abd al-Malik was overshadowed by the respect which the people showed
towards the great-grandson of the Prophet. It was at the time of the
hajj when both of them were trying to reach through the crowds around
the Ka'ba to get to the Black Stone.

The people gave way to Zayn al-'Abidin while the Caliph struggled
desperately. This deeply offended the Caliph, and, in a sarcastic tone,
he enquired who the person had been to whom the people had shown such
preference. Farazdaq, who was present at the scene, thereupon composed
an ode and recited it, addressing himself to Hisham. It is worth quoting
a few lines from this ode, a masterpiece not only of Farazdaq's output
but of Arabic literature in general.

*It is someone whose footsteps are known by every place,*

*And it is he who is known to the bayt in Mecca,*

*the most frequented sanctuary;*

*It is he who is the son of the best of all men of God (i.e. the Prophet
(s)),*

*and it is he who is the most pious and devout,*

*the purest and most unstained,*

*the chastest and most righteous,*

*a symbol [for Islam]*

*This is 'Ali [b. al-Husayn] whose parent is the Prophet,*

*This is the son of Fatima, if you do not know who he is;*

*Whosoever recognizes his God knows also*

*the primacy and superiority of this man,*

*Because the religion has reached the nations*

*through his House.*

It was this \`Ali b. al-Husayn, the Zayn al-'Abidin of Islam, who, as
well as through other means, taught the Muslims the essence of Islamic
spirituality through his supplications. They are not, however, merely
supplications; they embody comforting answers to many questions with
which the man of his time and the man of our time are confronted. They
deal with the crises through which any Muslim or the follower of any
religious persuasion has to pass, which result from a variety of
stresses and strains, and which arise from sources both inward and
outward.

I do not wish to discuss here the authenticity, validity, textual
history, or even the literary beauty of these supplications, as these
points have all been dealt with by the translator in his comprehensive
introduction. Indeed, there is no space in a foreword such as this in
which to conduct such a discussion. Instead, I should like to say a word
about the relevance of these supplications to modern readers,
irrespective of their race or religion, or of whether they are from the
east or from the west.

The author, as has been pointed out, was a man of purity and piety,
sincerity and trustworthiness, who was committed to God and the cause of
a suffering humanity. He had a bond of pain with the men of his time, as
also with those who came after him. So let me start by asking the
following question: Do these supplications, composed and taught in the
seventh century, have any relevance for those who live in the twentieth
century, or indeed those who are yet to be born?

To answer this we have to ask a number of other questions. Is man to be
regarded only in biological terms as the most cunning of animals? Is he
to be seen as an economic beast controlled by the laws of supply and
demand and class conflict? Is he to be regarded as a political animal,
with a crude and excessive politicism occupying the centre of his mind,
displacing all knowledge, religion, and wisdom? Or does he have a
spiritual element which requires him to subordinate the temporal and the
merely expedient to the Eternal and the True? Are human beings to be
understood in terms of biology, politics, or economics, or are we to
take into account their sublime nature, the spirit of God infused in
them, and the ultimate ideal which they should endeavour to realize?

The essence of every epoch, age, or civilization, whether ancient,
medieval, or modern, lies not in any biological unity of race, material
achievement, or political order, but in the values that create and
sustain that epoch, age, or civilization. Our achievements in perfecting
the material aspects of life has led us to exploit matter instead of
informing, humanizing, and spiritualizing it. Our social life has given
us the means, but has denied us the ends.

A terrible blindness has afflicted the people of our civilization. The
exclusion of the element of spirituality from humanity is the primary
cause of the supremacy of matter, which has become so burdensome and
oppressive. The defeat of the human by the material is thus the central
weakness of the man of today.

Religion is rooted in a sense of wonderment at the eternal mystery of
life itself. We feel a sense of awe and amazement at the mystery of the
universe (ghayba), and move in an endless quest for answers to the
perennial riddle with an eager longing to discover the truth of
everything, the truth which is universal and absolute in the sense that
it is valid for all men in all places and at all times. The experience
of the mysterious is the fundamental quality underlying all religions.

We must, however, make a clear distinction between religion as a
personal concern, as man's encounter with the divine, and religion as a
part of history, as a social phenomenon, and as the commitment to a
group. Religion at the personal level is a commitment to a belief in the
conservation of values and is based on the discovery of the essential
worth and dignity of the individual and his relation to a higher world
of reality. Thus the crisis comes at a personal level when the forces of
evil, hatred, injustice, tyranny, betrayal, and falsehood prevail over
love, justice, mercy, loyalty, goodness, and truth.

The supplications of the Imam Zayn al-'Abidin must be read against this
background of man's crisis at the personal and individual level. Seen
from this angle, they address themselves, in their essence, to the inner
problems of the men of every epoch and age, every region and race, every
persuasion and religion.

Here was a person, an individual, confronted with hostile forces arising
from both within and without, realizing his own limits, crying in the
intense passion of devotional prayer, seeking communion with God, and
entrusting the secrets of his innermost life to Him. Here was a person
who found himself caught up in the din and clamour of life, in the clash
of emotions and interests, in the stress and strain of immediate
impulses, in the tensions and calamities of existence, and, above all,
in the search for spiritual satisfaction, a man who was lonely and
helpless, who stood before his Creator in direct communion, and called
Him from the very depths of his heart.

Before closing this foreword, something must be said about the
translation of something which is untranslatable. Among all the
varieties of Arabic literature, supplications, especially those of the
Imam Zayn al-'Abidin, are perhaps the most difficult to translate into
an alien tongue. Dr. Chittick must be congratulated on his courage and
vision, and on his grasp of the inner meanings of such an emotionally
charged and subtle Arabic text. He has admirably rendered into English
not only the meaning but also the feelings enshrined in these
spontaneous utterances of the heart. The Muhammadi Trust of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland is also to be thanked for presenting this
beautiful treasure of Islamic spirituality.

Sayyid Husayn M. Jaâ€™fari

Karachi  
 17 January 1988


