14) His Supplication in Suffering Acts of Wrongdoing
====================================================

> (14) وَ كَانَ مِنْ دُعَائِهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ إِذَا اعْتُدِيَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلَيْهِ أَوْ رَأَى مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ مَا لَا يُحِبُّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

His Supplication when Hostility was Shown to Him or when he Saw what he
did not Like in Wrongdoers [^1]

1- O He from whom is not concealed  
 news of the aggrieved!

2- O He who has no need to be told about them  
 by the witnessing of the witnesses!

3- O He who whose help is near to the wronged!

4- O He whose aid is far from the wrongdoers!

5- Thou knowest, my God,  
 how so-and-so, son of so-and-so, has harmed me  
 in that which Thou hast forbidden,  
 and how he has violated me  
 in that which Thou hast prohibited,  
 showing thereby ingratitude toward Thy favour upon him  
 and delusion concerning what Thou hast denied him.

6- O God,  
 so bless Muhammad and his Household,  
 keep my wrongdoing enemy from wronging me through Thy strength,  
 blunt his blade toward me through Thy power,  
 and assign to him  
 a diversion in that which is close to him  
 and the inability to reach his enemy!

7- O God,  
 bless Muhammad and his Household,  
 let the wrongdoer not find it easy to wrong me,  
 give me good help against him,  
 preserve me from the like of his acts,  
 and place me not in the like of his situation!

8- O God,  
 bless Muhammad and his Household,  
 and assist me with an immediate assistance  
 that will heal my rage toward him  
 and redeem my fury toward him!

9- O God,  
 bless Muhammad and his Household,  
 compensate me for his wronging me with Thy pardon  
 and replace his evil action toward me with Thy mercy,  
 for every detested thing less than Thy anger is slight  
 and every disaster next to Thy rancour indifferent!

10- O God,  
 just as Thou hast made me detest being wronged,  
 so also protect me from doing wrong!

11- O God,  
 I complain to no one but Thee,  
 and I seek help from no ruler other than Thee -  
 how could I?  
 So bless Muhammad and his Household,  
 join my supplication to response,  
 and unite my complaint with change!

12- O God,  
 tempt me not with despair of Thy just treatment  
 and tempt him not with feeling secure from Thy disapproval,  
 lest he persist in wronging me  
 and constrain me in my rights.[^2]  
 Let him soon recognize  
 what Thou hast promised the wrongdoers[^3]  
 and let me recognize Thy promised response to the distressed![^4]

13- O God, bless Muhammad and his Household,  
 give me success in accepting Thy decrees  
 for me and against me,  
 make me pleased with what Thou takest  
 for me and from me,  
 guide me to that which is most upright  
 and employ me in that which is safest!

14- O God, if the best for me with Thee lies  
 in delaying the taking to task for my sake  
 of him who has wronged me  
 and in refraining from vengeance toward him  
 until the Day of Decision and  
 the Gathering of Disputants,  
 then bless Muhammad and his Household,  
 strengthen me from Thee  
 with true intention and lasting patience,

15- give me refuge from evil desire and the impatience of the greedy,  
 and form in my heart the image of  
 Thy reward which Thou hast stored away for me  
 and the repayment and punishment  
 which Thou has prepared for my disputant!  
 Make this a cause of my contentment  
 with what Thou hast decreed  
 and my trust  
 in what Thou hast chosen!

16- Amen, Lord of the worlds!  
 Thou art of bounty abounding  
 and Thou art powerful over everything.

> 1. يا مَنْ لَا يَخْفَى عَلَيْهِ أَنْبَاءُ الْمُتَظَلِّمِينَ

> 2. وَ يَا مَنْ لَا يَحْتَاجُ فِي قَصَصِهِمْ إِلَى شَهَادَاتِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الشَّاهِدِينَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 3. وَ يَا مَنْ قَرُبَتْ نُصْرَتُهُ مِنَ الْمَظْلُومِينَ

> 4. وَ يَا مَنْ بَعُدَ عَوْنُهُ عَنِ الظَّالِمِينَ

> 5. قَدْ عَلِمْتَ ، يَا إِلَهِي ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا نَالَنِي مِنْ فُلَانِ بْنِ فُلَانٍ مِمَّا حَظَرْتَ وَ انْتَهَكَهُ
مِنِّي مِمَّا حَجَزْتَ عَلَيْهِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَطَراً فِي نِعْمَتِكَ عِنْدَهُ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اغْتِرَاراً بِنَكِيرِكَ عَلَيْهِ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 6. اللَّهُمَّ فَصَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ خُذْ ظَالِمِي وَ عَدُوِّي عَنْ ظُلْمِي بِقُوَّتِكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ افْلُلْ حَدَّهُ عَنِّي بِقُدْرَتِكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اجْعَلْ لَهُ شُغْلًا فِيمَا يَلِيهِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَجْزاً عَمَّا يُنَاوِيهِ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 7. اللَّهُمَّ وَ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَا تُسَوِّغْ لَهُ ظُلْمِي ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَحْسِنْ عَلَيْهِ عَوْنِي ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اعْصِمْنِي مِنْ مِثْلِ أَفْعَالِهِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَا تَجْعَلْنِي فِي مِثْلِ حَالِهِ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 8. اللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَعْدِنِي عَلَيْهِ عَدْوَى حَاضِرَةً ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَكُونُ مِنْ غَيْظِي بِهِ شِفَاءً ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مِنْ حَنَقِي عَلَيْهِ وَفَاءً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 9. اللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَوِّضْنِي مِنْ ظُلْمِهِ لِي عَفْوَكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَبْدِلْنِي بِسُوءِ صَنِيعِهِ بِي رَحْمَتَكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَكُلُّ مَكْرُوهٍ جَلَلٌ دُونَ سَخَطِكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ كُلُّ مَرْزِئَةٍ سَوَاءٌ مَعَ مَوْجِدَتِكَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 10. اللَّهُمَّ فَكَمَا كَرَّهْتَ إِلَيَّ أَنْ أُظْلَمَ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقِنِي مِنْ أَنْ أَظْلِمَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 11. اللَّهُمَّ لَا أَشْكُو إِلَى أَحَدٍ سِوَاكَ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَا أَسْتَعِينُ بِحَاكِمٍ غَيْرِكَ ، حَاشَاكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ صِلْ دُعَائِي بِالْإِجَابَةِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اقْرِنْ شِكَايَتِي بِالتَّغْيِيرِ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 12. اللَّهُمَّ لَا تَفْتِنِّي بِالْقُنُوطِ مِنْ إِنْصَافِكَ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَا تَفْتِنْهُ بِالْأَمْنِ مِنْ إِنْكَارِكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيُصِرَّ عَلَى ظُلْمِي ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يُحَاضِرَنِي بِحَقِّي ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَرِّفْهُ عَمَّا قَلِيلٍ مَا أَوْعَدْتَ الظَّالِمِينَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَرِّفْنِي مَا وَعَدْتَ مِنْ إِجَابَةِ الْمُضْطَرِّينَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 13. اللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ وَفِّقْنِي لِقَبُولِ مَا قَضَيْتَ لِي وَ عَلَيَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ رَضِّنِي بِمَا أَخَذْتَ لِي وَ مِنِّي ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اهْدِنِي لِلَّتِي هِيَ أَقْوَمُ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اسْتَعْمِلْنِي بِمَا هُوَ أَسْلَمُ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 14. اللَّهُمَّ وَ إِنْ كَانَتِ الْخِيَرَةُ لِي عِنْدَكَ فِي تَأْخِيرِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْأَخْذِ لِي وَ تَرْكِ الِانْتِقَامِ مِمَّنْ ظَلَمَنِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَى يَوْمِ الْفَصْلِ وَ مَجْمَعِ الْخَصْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَصَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِهِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَيِّدْنِي مِنْكَ بِنِيَّةٍ صَادِقَةٍ وَ صَبْرٍ دَائِمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 15. وَ أَعِذْنِي مِنْ سُوءِ الرَّغْبَةِ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ هَلَعِ أَهْلِ الْحِرْصِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ صَوِّرْ فِي قَلْبِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِثَالَ مَا ادَّخَرْتَ لِي مِنْ ثَوَابِكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَعْدَدْتَ لِخَصْمِي مِنْ جَزَائِكَ وَ عِقَابِكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اجْعَلْ ذَلِكَ سَبَباً لِقَنَاعَتِي بِمَا قَضَيْتَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ ثِقَتِي بِمَا تَخَيَّرْتَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 16. آمِينَ رَبَّ الْعَالَمِينَ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكَ ذُو الْفَضْلِ الْعَظِيمِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنْتَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْ‏ءٍ قَدِيرٌ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: A case can be made for translating the word dhalim (wrongdoer) in
the context of the present supplication as 'oppressor' or 'tyrant',
especially if we read the text as expressing the Imam's relationships
with the Umayyad authorities. However, the word dhulm along with its
derivatives is an important and frequently used term in the Qur'an, and
only the Qur'anic context can provide us with a reliable insight into
the way the word must have been understood by Zayn al-'Abidin and his
contemporaries. In the Qur'an, it is obvious that terms like
'oppression' and 'tyranny', with their narrow political connotations,
cannot begin to do justice to the wide range of meanings included in the
primary Qur'anic significance, since oppression is merely one of many
forms of human 'wrongdoing', an English term which is sufficiently vague
and concrete to render the Qur'anic idea rather closely. According to
the Qur'an, the basic meaning of dhulm is to deny the reality of God and
the truth of His revelation and then to transgress the bounds, limits,
laws, and statutes He has set down. This Qur'anic concept can clearly be
perceived in such typical verses as the following: Who does greater
wrong than he who bars God's places of worship, so that His Name be not
rehearsed in them, and strives to destroy them? (2:114); Who does
greater wrong than he who conceals a testimony received from God?
(2:140); Whosoever transgresses the bounds of God - those are the
wrongdoers (2:229); And the unbelievers - they are the wrongdoers
(2:254); Whoso judges not according to what God has sent down - they are
the wrongdoers (5:45); Who does greater wrong than he who forges against
God a lie, or cries lies to His signs? (7:37, 10:17); Who does greater
wrong than he who, being reminded of the signs of his Lord, turns away
from them? (18:57, 32:22); None denies Our signs but the wrongdoers
(29:49); Do not associate others with God; to associate others with God
is a mighty wrong (31:13); And whoso repents not, those - they are the
wrongdoers (49:1l); Whoso trespasses the bounds of God has done wrong to
himself (65:1). In most of the cases in which the Imam employs the term
in the Sahifa, the Qur'anic context is clear, and this is sufficient
reason to maintain consistency of translation in the present
supplication, where 'oppression' might also be a valid translation. (For
uses of the term in obvious Qur'anic contexts, cf. 1.12, 4.8, 8.4, 12.7,
12.11, 16.31, 24.11, 31.7, 37.8, 39.9, 42.16, 45.9, 45.47, 47.62,
47.132, 48.15, 51.14, 60.3, 63.8, 71.5; contexts which suggest
'oppression' as a valid rendering include 20.7, 51.4, 68.1). The term
dhulm is often used as the opposite of 'adl or 'justice'; the Sahifa
also provides a few instances where 'injustice' would translate the term
well, such as 22.13 (where it is used as a synonym for jawr, translated
there as 'injustice'), 25.11, 44.l0.

[^2]: Some editions read yuhadirani for yuhasirani. The translation then
becomes: 'and overcome me in my rights.'

[^3]: Allusion to such Qur'anic verses as: We shall surely destroy the
wrongdoers (14:13); We have prepared for the wrongdoers a painful
chastisement (25:37)

[^4]: Again reference to 27:62: He who responds to the distressed when
he supplicates Him, and removes the evil.


