2) Blessing upon Muhammad and his Household
===========================================

> ( 2 ) وَ كَانَ مِنْ دُعَائِهِ عَلَيْهِ السَّلَامُ بَعْدَ هَذَا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
التَّحْمِيدِ فِي الصَّلَاةِ عَلَى رَسُولِ اللَّهِ صَلَّى اللَّهُ
عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

After this praise of God he (upon him be peace) would supplicate by
calling down blessings upon God's Messenger (God bless him and his
Household)

1- Praise belongs to God  
 who was kind to us through Muhammad  
 (God bless him and his Household)  
 to the exclusion of past communities and bygone generations,  
 displaying thereby His power,  
 which nothing can render incapable,  
 though it be great,  
 and nothing can escape,  
 though it be subtle.

2- He sealed through us all He created,  
 appointed us witnesses over those who deny,  
 and increased us by His kindness over those who are few.

3- O God, bless Muhammad,  
 entrusted by Thee with Thy revelation,  
 distinguished by Thee among Thy creatures,  
 devoted to Thee among Thy servants,  
 the imam of mercy,  
 the leader of good,  
 the key to blessing,

4- who wearied his soul  
 for Thy affairs,

5- exposed his body to detested things  
 for Thy sake,

6- showed open enmity toward his next of kin  
 by summoning to Thee,

7- fought against his family  
 for Thy good pleasure,

8- cut the ties of the womb  
 in giving life to Thy religion,

9- sent far those close  
 because of their denial,

10- brought near those far  
 because of their response to Thee,

11- showed friendship to the most distant  
 for Thy sake,

12- displayed enmity toward the nearest  
 for Thy sake,

13- made his soul persevere  
 in delivering Thy message,

14- tired it in summoning  
 to Thy creed,

15- busied it in counselling  
 those worthy of Thy summons,

16- migrated to the land of exile and the place of remoteness from the
home of his saddlebags,  
 the walkway of his feet,  
 the ground of his birth,  
 and the intimate abode of his soul,  
 desiring to exalt Thy religion  
 and seeking help  
 against those who disbelieved in Thee,

17- until what he attempted against Thy enemies  
 went well with him

18- and what he arranged for Thy friends  
 was accomplished.

19- He rose up against them seeking victory  
 through Thine aid, becoming strong in spite of his weakness with Thy
help.

20- He fought against them  
 in the centre of their cities

21- and attacked them  
 in the midst of their dwellings,

22- until Thy command prevailed,  
 and Thy word rose up,  
 though the idolaters were averse.[^1]

23- O God, so raise him, because of his labours for Thy sake, to the
highest degree of Thy Garden,[^2]

24- that none may equal him in station,  
 none may match him in level,  
 and no angel brought nigh or prophet sent out  
 may parallel him in Thy sight.

25- And inform him concerning his Household the pure and his community
the faithful  
 of an excellent intercession,  
 greater than what Thou hast promised him![^3]

26- O Keeper of promises!  
 O Faithful to Thy word!  
 O He who changes evil deeds into manifold good deeds![^4]  
 Thou art of bounty abounding!

> 1. وَ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ الَّذِي مَنَّ عَليْنَا بِمُحَمَّدٍ نَبِيِّهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلَّى اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دُونَ الْأُمَمِ الْمَاضِيَةِ وَ الْقُرُونِ السَّالِفَةِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِقُدْرَتِهِ الَّتِي لَا تَعْجِزُ عَنْ شَيْ‏ءٍ وَ إِنْ عَظُمَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَا يَفُوتُهَا شَيْ‏ءٌ وَ إِنْ لَطُفَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 2. فَخَتَمَ بِنَا عَلَى جَمِيعِ مَنْ ذَرَأَ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ جَعَلَنَا شُهَدَاءَ عَلَى مَنْ جَحَدَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ كَثَّرَنَا بِمَنِّهِ عَلَى مَنْ قَلَّ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 3. اللَّهُمَّ فَصَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ أَمِينِكَ عَلَى وَحْيِكَ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ نَجِيبِكَ مِنْ خَلْقِكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ صَفِيِّكَ مِنْ عِبَادِكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِمَامِ الرَّحْمَةِ ، وَ قَائِدِ الْخَيْرِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مِفْتَاحِ الْبَرَكَةِ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 4. كَمَا نَصَبَ لِأَمْرِكَ نَفْسَهُ

> 5. وَ عَرَّضَ فِيكَ لِلْمَكْرُوهِ بَدَنَهُ

> 6. وَ كَاشَفَ فِي الدُّعَاءِ إِلَيْكَ حَامَّتَهُ

> 7. وَ حَارَبَ فِي رِضَاكَ أُسْرَتَهُ

> 8. وَ قَطَعَ فِي إِحْيَاءِ دِينِكَ رَحِمَهُ .

> 9. وَ أَقْصَى الْأَدْنَيْنَ عَلَى جُحُودِهِمْ

> 10. وَ قَرَّبَ الْأَقْصَيْنَ عَلَى اسْتِجَابَتِهِمْ لَكَ .

> 11. وَ وَالَى فِيكَ الْأَبْعَدِينَ

> 12. وَ عَادَى فِيكَ الْأَقْرَبِينَ

> 13. و أَدْأَبَ نَفْسَهُ فِي تَبْلِيغِ رِسَالَتِكَ

> 14.وَ أَتْعَبَهَا بِالدُّعَاءِ إِلَى مِلَّتِكَ .

> 15. وَ شَغَلَهَا بِالنُّصْحِ لِأَهْلِ دَعْوَتِكَ

> 16. وَ هَاجَرَ إِلَى بِلَادِ الْغُربَةِ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَحَلِّ النَّأْيِ عَنْ مَوْطِنِ رَحْلِهِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَوْضِعِ رِجْلِهِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَسْقَطِ رَأْسِهِ ، وَ مَأْنَسِ نَفْسِهِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِرَادَةً مِنْهُ لِإِعْزَازِ دِينِكَ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اسْتِنْصَاراً عَلَى أَهْلِ الْكُفْرِ بِكَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 17. حَتَّى اسْتَتَبَّ لَهُ مَا حَاوَلَ فِي أَعْدَائِكَ

> 18. وَ اسْتَتَمَّ لَهُ مَا دَبَّرَ فِي أَوْلِيَائِكَ .

> 19. فَنَهَدَ إِلَيْهِمْ مُسْتَفْتِحاً بِعَوْنِكَ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مُتَقَوِّياً عَلَى ضَعْفِهِ بِنَصْرِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 20. فَغَزَاهُمْ فِي عُقْرِ دِيَارِهِمْ .

> 12. وَ هَجَمَ عَلَيْهِمْ فِي بُحْبُوحَةِ قَرَارِهِمْ

> 22. حَتَّى ظَهَرَ أَمْرُكَ ، وَ عَلَتْ كَلِمَتُكَ ، وَ لَوْ كَرِهَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُشْرِكُونَ .
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 23. اللَّهُمَّ فَارْفَعْهُ بِمَا كَدَحَ فِيكَ

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَى الدَّرَجَةِ الْعُلْيَا مِنْ جَنَّتِكَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 24. حَتَّى لَا يُسَاوَى فِي مَنْزِلَةٍ ، وَ لَا يُكَافَأَ فِي
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَرْتَبَةٍ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَا يُوَازِيَهُ لَدَيْكَ مَلَكٌ مُقَرَّبٌ ، وَ لَا نَبِيٌّ مُرْسَلٌ
.
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 25. وَ عَرِّفْهُ فِي أَهْلِهِ الطَّاهِرِينَ وَ أُمَّتِهِ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مِنْ حُسْنِ الشَّفَاعَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَجَلَّ مَا وَعَدْتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

> 26. يَا نَافِذَ الْعِدَةِ ،

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا وَافِيَ الْقَوْلِ ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا مُبَدِّلَ السَّيِّئَاتِ بِأَضْعَافِهَا مِنَ الْحَسَنَاتِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّكَ ذُو الْفَضْلِ الْعَظِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Allusion to 9:33 and 61:9: It is He who has sent His Messenger
with the guidance and the religion of truth, that He may uplift it above
every religion though the idolaters be averse.

[^2]: As Sayyid '''Alikhan points out, there is an allusion here to the
hadith of 'mediation' (wasila) according to one version of which the
Prophet said: 'Mediation is a degree with God in the Garden, and there
is no degree higher than it, so pray to God to give me the mediation'
(Ahmad III, 83). The fact that this is what the Imam has in mind is
confirmed by his reference to 'intercession' in verse 25 (on the
relationship between these two, cf. note 172).

[^3]: On the Prophet's intercession, cf. Padwick, Muslim Devotions pp.
37 ff. and Encyclopaedia of Islam (old edition), 'Shafa'a'. The
commentator points out here that the Prophet's intercession alluded to
in the Qur'an as his 'praiseworthy station' (17:79) - will be of several
types, including the raising of those who are already in paradise to
higher degrees. Hence there is no contradiction between the sinlessness
of the Imams on the one hand and the Prophet's interceding for them on
the other.

[^4]: Cf. 25:70: On Resurrection Day... God will change the evil deeds
[of those who repent, have faith, and do righteous works] into good
deeds.


