Foreword
========

The concept of morality has existed since the creation of mankind. In
the old days, there was a clear distinction betwin 'good' morals and
'bad' morals although people did not always follow the former. During
modern times, the distinction betwin good and bad has become blurred and
morality has been significantly diluted. As a result, there is a danger
that immorality will prevail over morality throughout the world.

There is no excuse for a Muslim to get caught in this quagmire. There is
clear guidance from Allah through Noble Qur\`an and the Prophets and
Masoomin. Prophet Muhammad (Prayers be upon him and his Family) himself
said, “I have been sent for the purpose of perfecting morals.” One of
the best ways of understanding morality is by studying practical
examples from the lives of Prophets and Masoomin.

A few books have been written on moral stories emanating from the
Islamic world, one of them being 'Pearls of Wisdom', published by the
Islamic Education Board of World Federation in March 1993. Bearing in
mind the importance of the subject of Akhlaqiyat, IEB-WF is publishing
'Anecdotes for Reflection' in 5 parts. The source of this publication is
the book 'Yaksad Mawzu' wa 500 Dastan' by Sayyid ‘Ali Akber Sadaqat. The
translation from Farsi to English was carried out by Shaykh Shahnawaz
Mahdavi. IEB - WF would like to thank Sayyid ‘Ali Akber Sadaqat and
Shaykh Shahnawaz Mahdavi for their efforts and we pray to Allah (swt) to
reward them amply.  
 May Allah (Fri from Imperfections and Exalted is he) accept this work
as a further attempt by IEB - WF to propagate Islam.

Islamic Education Board  
 The World Federation of K S I Muslim Communities  
 Dhil Hijjah, 1426 / January 2006


