47. Fornication
===============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلزَّانِيَّةُ وَ الزَّانِـي فَاجْلِدُوا کُلُّ واَحِدٍ مِنْهُماَ
مِائَةَ جَلدَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*”The woman and the man guilty of adultery or fornication - flog each of
them with a hundred stripes.”*[^1]

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذاَ ظَهَرَ الزِّناَ مِنْ بَعْدِي کَثُرَ مَوْتُ الْفُجْأَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“After my death, when fornication increases, sudden deaths shall (also)
increase.”*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Fornication is considered to be one of the Great Sins. A person, as a
result of being overcome by lust and due to lack of faith, audaciously
transgresses the womenfolk of other people.

In this world, fornication reduces sustenance and shortens the
life-span, while on the Day of Judgment, a fornicator shall suffer the
wrath of Allah and an evil reckoning.

The murderers of prophets, such as Prophet Yahya (a.s), and the auliya
of Allah, such as Imam Husain (a.s), were mostly illegitimate children -
a consequence of the Satan's invitation to a male and female to commit
this sin.

Prophet Isa (a.s) said to his disciples: “Prophet Musa (a.s) had advised
his people: “Do not commit fornication”, (but) I advise you: “Do not
even think of committing fornication””[^3]

1) Five Fornicators and Five Rulings
------------------------------------

Five persons, who had committed fornication, were brought before Umar,
who ordered them to be subjected to the legal punishment for the crime.
At that moment the Commander of the Faithfuls (a.s) arrived and said:
“O' Umar! Allah's ruling in their case is not as you have ruled!” Umar
requested: “You issue the ruling for them and implement the legal
punishment.”

The Imam (a.s) beheaded the first person, stoned the second, subjected
the third to the full punishment of eighty lashes, the fourth to half
the punishment and ordered the discretionary punishment for the fifth!

Umar was amazed and the people astounded over the Imam's (a.s) ruling.
Umar asked him: “O' Abul Hasan! Five persons were involved in one crime
and you have issued different rulings for all of them?”

the Commander of the Faithfuls(a.s) explained: “The first person was a
dhimmi,[^4]) who had transgressed (the honour of) a Muslim woman and so
had fallen out of the dhimmah[^5]) - as such, his punishment could only
be death.

The second person who had committed fornication possessed a spouse and
so I had him stoned. The third one to have been involved in the crime
did not have a wife and so I punished him with eighty lashes.

The fourth was a slave and therefore I subjected him to half the legal
punishment (of eighty lashes), while the fifth one was poor of intellect
due to which I subjected him to the discretionary punishment (some
lashes).”

Hearing the explanation Umar exclaimed: “O' Abul Hasan! May it never
happen that I have to live with the people when you are not around (to
help me)!”[^6]

2) Interpretation of the Dream
------------------------------

Ibn Sirin was an extremely good-looking and elegant youth, and a
cloth-merchant by profession. Once it so happened that a woman became
enchanted with his looks; she expressed her desire to purchase cloth
from him upon the condition that he should deliver it to her house,
whereupon she would hand him the money.

As he reached her house and entered it, she immediately bolted the door
and invited him to commit fornication. Aghast, the youth said: “I seek
refuge in Allah”, and then proceeded to lecture her about the reproach
associated with the obscene act.

However when he observed that his words failed to have any effect upon
the woman, he decided to resort to deception in order to extricate
himself from his quandary.

He sought her permission to use the lavatory. Procuring her permission
he entered the lavatory, dirtied himself with excrement and then
approached her.

The woman, seeing him in that odious state, felt revolted and promptly
turned him out of her house.  
 Due to this abstinence on his part with respect to fornication, Allah
graced him with the science of interpretation of dreams. [^7]

3) Prophet Yahya’s Murderer was an Illegitimate Child
-----------------------------------------------------

During the time of Prophet Yahya (a.s), there lived a king by the name
of Hirodis, who was fond of him (a.s) and considered the Prophet to be a
just and righteous person.

There was an adulteress with whom this king had been having an illicit
relationship; as she became old, she began to ornament her daughter and
present her before the king, who eventually fell in love with her and
desired to marry her.

He questioned Prophet Yahya (a.s) about the issue who, on the basis of
the religion of Prophet Isa (a.s), declared it to be unlawful.
Consequently the adulteress harboured resentment and malice towards
Prophet Yahya (a.s). One day, observing the king to be in a state of
intoxication, she adorned her daughter and sent her before him. Seeing
her, the king sought to gratify himself but the daughter said: “I shall
submit myself to you only upon the condition that you sever Yahya's head
from his body.” The king, in his state of inebriation, agreed and upon
his instance, Prophet Yahya (a.s) was beheaded.

According to another tradition, the king desired to enter into marriage
with his niece, by the name of Hirodiya, but Prophet Yahya (a.s)
prohibited such a marriage as a result of which the lady coveted the
Prophet's death.

Imam Baqir (a.s) said: “Yahya's (a.s) killer was an illegitimate child,
as were the killers of ‘Ali and Husain Ibn ‘Ali (a.s)).”

When Prophet Yahya (a.s) was murdered Allah made Nebuchadnezzar (or
Kardus), one of the Babylonian kings, dominant over Bait al-Maqdas, who
initiated a massacre in the city. It was only when he had killed seventy
thousand of the inhabitants of the city that Prophet Yahya's blood
stopped bubbling and calmed down.[^8]

4) The Bath of Minjab
---------------------

Once, a wealthy person, who was unmindful of Allah and always engaged in
pleasure and enjoyment, happened to be sitting near the door of his
house. A woman wanting to go to a bath, popularly known by the name of
Minjab, had lost her way to it. Exhausted, she looked around if she
could find someone who could guide her to the place when her eyes fell
upon that man. Approaching him, she inquired: “Where is the Minjab
bath?” Pointing to his house, he said: “This is the Minjab bath.” Taking
it to be the bath, she entered the house and the man quickly entered
into it behind her. Once inside, he bolted the door and approaching the
lady, sought to commit adultery.  
 The woman, perceiving that she had walked into the clutches of a
immoral person and realizing that deception was the only means of
escape, said to him: “I am ardently desirous too; however I am hungry
and covered with dirt. Bring some perfume and some food; we can have
food together after which I shall place myself at your disposal.”

The man agreed and went out of the house. Having procured some food and
perfume he returned home only to find the lady missing. Her escape upset
him immensely and the craving for committing adultery with the lady
remained so deeply embedded in his heart that he would always recite the
following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ياَ رُبَّ قاَئِلَةٍ يَوماً وَ قَد تعبتْ أَينَ الطَّرِيقُ إِلـى
حَمَّامِ مَنْجَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“What happened to the lady, who had become exhausted? And had asked:
Where is the way to the Minjab bath?”

The time passed until it so happened that one day he lay on his
death-bed. His acquaintances approached him and asked him to recite La
Ilaha Illallah, Muhammadun Rasulullah, but instead, he would only recite
the above verses - and eventually passed away in that very state.[^9]

5) The Noble Prophet and the Youth
----------------------------------

One day a youth approached the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and with utmost
disrespect and discourtesy, said: “O' Prophet of Allah! Do you permit me
to commit fornication?”

These words created a great uproar amongst the people and objections
could be heard from every nook and corner. The Noble Prophet (s.a.w),
exhibiting sublime ethics and speaking with absolute gentleness, said:
“Come near.” The youth stepped forward and sat down beside him (s.a.w),
whereupon the Prophet asked: “Would you like someone to commit the act
with your mother?” The youth replied: “May I be made your ransom!
Never.” The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) said: “Similarly the (other) people
too do not approve of this with respect to their daughters.”

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) continued: “Tell me: Would you approve of this
act for your sister?” Once again the youth denied (and repented having
asked the question).

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) placed his hands upon the youth's chest and
prayed for him, saying: “O' Lord! Purify his heart, forgive his sins and
protect him from the pollution of depravity.” From then onwards
fornication became the worst of the deeds in the eyes of the youth.[^10]

[^1]: Suratul Nur (24), Verse 2

[^2]: Tafsir Mu’in, pg. 366

[^3]: Shaytan, vol. 1, pg. 560

[^4]: A free non-Muslim subject living in a Muslim country. (Tr.)

[^5]: Covenant of protection. (Tr.)

[^6]: Qadhawat-ha-e-Muhayyir al-’Uqul, pg. 45;
Dastan-ha-e-Zindagi-e-’Ali , pg. 145

[^7]: Shaytan, vol. 1, pg. 678

[^8]: Tarikh-e-Anbiya, vol. 2, pg. 284

[^9]: ‘Alam-e-Barzakh, pg. 41; Kashkul (of Sheikh Bahai), vol. 1, pg.
232

[^10]: Dastan-ha Wa Pand-ha, vol. 3, pg. 138; Tafsir al-Manar, under the
discussion related to verse 104 of Surat Ale ‘Imran.


