50. Satan
=========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إَنَّ الشَّيْطاَنَ لِلإِنْسَانِ عَدُوٌّ مُّبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Surely the Shaitan is an open enemy to man.”*[^1]

Imam Sadiq (a.s) had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيسَ لِإِبلِيسَ أََشَدُّ مِنَ النِّسَاءِ وَ الْغَضَبَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Iblis does not possess weapons more dangerous than woman and
anger.”*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

In opposition to Divine guidance, there exists satanic deviation. Within
the human, there is a continuous and persistent combat between the
divine forces, meaning intellect, and the satanic forces, meaning
ignorance.

It is only when the human gains a cognizance of the weapons of the Satan
and his forces, and protects himself from their whisperings that he can
escape from their snares. And if, at times, the Satan happens to
overcome him, he should turn to Allah in repentance and plead for His
forgiveness lest his heart gets imprinted with a black blemish, and seek
refuge in Him from his evils.

1) Prophet Nuh and Satan
------------------------

After Prophet Nuh (a.s) had disembarked from his ark, the Satan
approached him and said: “You have greatly obliged me and so I wish to
thank you for your obligation and give you something in exchange!”

Nuh (a.s) said: “I am indisposed to the fact that I oblige you and you
recompense me for it. Anyway, go on and tell me the truth.”

Satan said: “Indeed I have to strive hard and exert myself before I can
lead one person astray, but you cursed the people and all of them were
destroyed and so, at least at present, I am at ease till another
community is born and reaches the age of responsibility before I invite
them towards disobedience (of Allah)!!

Now, in reciprocation of your good deed, I shall give you a word of
advice. Stay away from three attributes: Firstly - never exhibit
arrogance, for it was because of this vice that I did not prostrate
before your father, Adam and was expelled from the presence of Allah.
Secondly - stay away from greed, for it was this due to this that Adam
consumed the wheat and was deprived of Paradise. Thirdly - distance
yourself from envy, for it was because of this vice that Qabil killed
his brother Habil and eventually perished as a result of Divine
punishment.”[^3]

2) Prophet Musa and Satan
-------------------------

Once, Satan approached Prophet Musa (a.s) and said to him: “You are the
Prophet of Allah while I am one of His sinning and disobedient
creations. It is my desire that I repent before Him, so request Him to
accept my repentance.”

Musa (a.s) agreed and prayed for him, whereupon Allah said: “O' Musa! I
shall accept your intercession for him. Tell him to prostrate upon
Adam's grave in order that I accept his repentance.”  
 Musa (a.s) met Satan and said: “Prostrating upon Adam's grave shall
cause your repentance to be accepted.”

Hearing this, Satan said: “I did not prostrate before Adam when he was
alive, how can I prostrate upon his grave now that he is dead? I shall
never do such a thing!” Then continuing, he said: “O' Musa! Since you
interceded for me before Allah you have obliged me. I shall advise you
to be wary of me in three places in order that you do not face damnation
and ruin. First: During anger; for in that state my soul is in your
heart and my eyes into yours. Second: During a battle (jihad); for in
that state I cause the soldiers to bring their wives, children and
relatives to mind in order that they turn back from the battle and flee
away. Third: Never sit with a non-mahram woman in one place for I shall
whisper temptations into both of you.”[^4]

3) Firawn
---------

Once, an inhabitant of Egypt brought a bunch of grapes before Firawn and
asked him to transform them into pearls.

Firawn took the grapes inside his chamber and sat down pondering as to
how he could transform them into pearls. In the meantime Satan arrived
and knocked at his door. Firawn asked: “Who is it?” Satan replied: “Woe
unto that Allah, who knows not who stands behind the door.” Having said
this he stepped into the chamber, took the grapes from Firawn and
recited one of the Holy Names of Allah upon them whereupon they were
immediately transformed into pearls.

Then, turning to Firawn, he said: “O' Firawn! Judge with fairness and
justice! Despite possessing such virtues and powers I am not worthy of
being worshipped, but you, with the ignorance that you possess, claim
Allah-ship for yourself and say: 'I am the great Allah of the people?'”

Firawn inquired: “Why did you not prostrate beforeAdam so as not to be
expelled from the presence of Allah?”

Satan retorted in disgust: “Because I knew that a dirty entity like you
would come into existence from his loins.”[^5]

4) Muawiyah
-----------

It has been reported that Muawiyah had been asleep in his palace when he
was suddenly awakened by someone. When Muawiyah looked towards him, the
person immediately concealed himself behind the curtains.

Muawiyah shouted: “Who are you that have entered the palace without my
permission and exhibited such impertinence?”

The man said: “I am Satan.”

Muawiyah asked: “Why did you wake me up?”

He replied: “It is time for prayers and I have aroused you so that you
can proceed to the mosque in time for the prayers!”

Muawiyah said: “You are Satan, and Satan is an entity who never desires
any good for the people. Is it correct to accept a thief's claim that he
had come to the house for the purpose of guarding it?”  
 Satan said: “I woke you up lest you continue to sleep and your prayers
become lapsed thereby causing you to sigh in regret and your heart to
grieve that the time for prayers had passed away and you did not go to
the mosque for offering your prayers! This sigh is more significant and
important than hundreds of prayers and I did not want you to engage
yourself in such sighing and lamentations, for then you would have been
graced by Allah's mercy.”  
 Having heard this Muawiyah attested the veracity of his words.[^6]

5) Prophet Yahya and Satan
--------------------------

Once, the accursed Satan manifested himself before the Prophet Yahya Ibn
Zakariya (a.s). Observing that he had in his possession numerous ropes,
Yahya (a.s) inquired: “O' Iblis! What are these ropes that you hold in
your hand?”

Satan replied: “These ropes are the various attachments, inclinations
and lusts that I have found in the children of Adam.”

Yahya (a.s) asked: 'Does there exist a rope for me too?'

Satan said: 'Yes. When you satiate yourself with food, you experience
weightiness and it is for this reason you become disinclined with
respect to your prayers, dhikr and supplications.'

Hearing this, Yahya (a.s) vowed: 'By Allah! Never shall I eat to my
fill, ever again.'

Iblis responded by pledging: “By Allah! Never shall I advise anyone,
ever again.”[^7]

[^1]: Surat Yusuf (12), Verse 5

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 78, pg. 246

[^3]: ‘Unwan al-Kalam, pg. 167

[^4]: Shanidaniha-e-Tarikh, pg. 258; Mahajjatul Baidha, vol. 5, pg. 59

[^5]: Pand-e-Tarikh, vol. 1, pg. 23; Anwar al-Nu’maniyyah, pg. 80. This
incident has been narrated slightly differently, in the book, Jawame’
al-Hikayat, pg. 21

[^6]: Dastanha-e-Mathnawai, vol. 2, pg. 15

[^7]: Iblis Nameh, vol. 1, pg. 35; Mahasin Barqi, pg. 439


