52. Charity
===========

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنْ تُبْدُوا الصَّدَقاَتِ فَنِعِمَّا هِيَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If you give alms openly, it is well.”*[^1]

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَصَدَّقُوا وَ لَو بِتَمرَةٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Give charity, even if it happens to be a (piece of) date.”*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Charity is of two kinds: The first being the “concealed charity” - one
that had been the conduct of the Imams and which wards away poverty,
lengthens the life, does away with seventy kinds of evil deaths and
smothers the Divine wrath. The second being the “manifest charity” -
one, that increases the sustenance and breaks Satan's back.

An important point in connection with charity is that quantity (with
respect to money, clothes or food) is not the criterion for perfection;
rather, it is the purity and sincerity of intention, which is the
requisite for perfection.

At times when the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) did not possess any money, he
would give his clothes in charity and would recommend: “Commence your
day with charity, for it serves to insure you.”

1) Auspicious and Inauspicious Times
------------------------------------

Once, Imam Sadiq (a.s) related: “There was a piece of land that I owned
in partnership with an astrologer and it was mutually decided that it
should be divided between us. He made preparations so that his arrival
should be in an auspicious hour while I should arrive in an inauspicious
hour so that the better portion of the land fell in his hands. The land
was divided but it so happened that the better portion came as my share
of the land! The man slapped his right hand over his left in regret and
said ruefully: “Oh! Had I never lived to see such a day!”

I said to him: “Why are you so upset today?” He said: “I am an
astrologer and I brought you out of your house in an inauspicious hour
while I myself came out in an auspicious hour. However, now that the
land has been divided, you have come to acquire the better portion of
it.”

I (the Imam) said: “I shall inform you of a tradition of the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w) wherein he said: 'If one desires that Allah wards away
from him the inauspiciousness of a day, he should start his day by
giving charity, and if one desires to ward away the inauspiciousness of
the night, he should commence his night by giving charity.'”

The Imam (a.s) then said (to the astrologer): “I gave charity while
coming out (of my house) today; charity is better for you than
astrology.”[^3]

2) Hatim’s Mother
-----------------

'Atbah Beente 'Afif, the mother of Hatim Tai, was an open-hearted and
generous lady, who used to distribute all her wealth amongst the needy
ones.

When her brothers saw her giving her wealth in charity, they prevented
her from accessing it and said: “You are indulging in extravagance and
ruining your property.”

For a period of one year they did not provide her with any money. When
the year had passed they spoke amongst themselves and said: “She has
suffered much in this year as a result of scarcity and perhaps now,
after this prohibition, she would spend her wealth moderately and not
exhibit extravagance.” And so, they gave her a herd of camels so that
she could make use of them.

At that juncture a woman from the tribe of Hawazan approached her and,
as in the past, sought food and assistance from her.

Hatim's mother gifted the entire herd of camels to her saying: “In this
period (of one year), I have tasted the sufferings of poverty and have
promised to myself that whatever I come to possess, I shall give in
charity to the needy and the deprived ones!”[^4]

3) In the Darkness of the Night
-------------------------------

Mu'alla Ibn Khunais narrates: “One rainy night Imam Sadiq (a.s) started
out from his house with the intention of proceeding towards the tent of
the tribe of Bani Sai'dah (under which they used to gather in the heat
of the day, while it would be utilized as a sleeping place by the
travelers and the indigent ones, during the night).

I followed the Imam (a.s) when I noticed that something had suddenly
fallen out of his hands. He (a.s) supplicated: “O' Allah! Return to me
that which has fallen.” I advanced nearer and saluted him at which he
questioned: “Mu'alla?” I said: “Yes. May I be made your ransom!” The
Imam (a.s) said to me: “Move your hand over the ground and hand over to
me whatever you happen to find.”

As I moved my hand over the ground I found some pieces of bread
scattered around; gathering them all, which eventually became a
sack-full, I handed them to him (a.s) and said: “May I be made your
ransom. Allow me to carry the sack upon my back.” He (a.s) said: “No. I
am more deserving of carrying the sack, but yes, I do permit you to
accompany me.”

Thus, together with the Imam (a.s), I reached the tent of Bani Sai'dah,
where a group of poor people lay asleep. The Imam (a.s) began placing
one or two pieces of bread below their garments till all the pieces of
bread were used up.

As we turned back, I said to him: “May I be made your ransom! Are they
Shiites?” The Imam (a.s) replied:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَو عَرَفُوه لَوَاسَينَاهُم بِالدُّقًّةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Had they been Shiites, I would have provided them with all that they
needed - even their salt.”[^5]

4) The Mother of the Satans
---------------------------

Sayyid Ne'matullah Jazairi narrates in his book: “One year, a famine
struck. During that period a preacher, from atop the pulpit in the
mosque, preached: “When one desires to give charity, seventy Satans
cling onto his hands to prevent him from giving it.”

Hearing this, a person said to his friends in amazement: “Giving charity
has no such thing associated with it. I have some wheat present in my
house which I shall immediately bring to the mosque and distribute
amongst the poor.”

With this in mind, he set off for his house. When he reached home and
informed his wife of his intention, she began to reprimand him saying:
“In this period of drought do you not have consideration for your wife
and child? Maybe the drought will extend for a long time, in which case
we shall die of hunger and …”

In short, she rebuked him to such an extent that eventually the man
returned to the mosque empty-handed.

His friends asked him: “What happened? Did you see how seventy Satans
clung to your hand and prevented you?”[^6]

The man said: “Honestly speaking, I did not see the Satans, but I
certainly saw their mother, who prevented me from performing this good
deed.””[^7]

5) The Widely Respected Shia Government Minister
------------------------------------------------

Perhaps, the only Shiite minister to have been widely popular amongst
the people of all classes was Sahib Ibn Ubbad (326 ah to 385 ah).
Initially he had been the minister of Muayyad al-Daulah Dailami (d. 373
ah), after whose death, he became the minister of Muayyad's brother,
Fakhr al-Daulah.

Sheikh Saduq compiled the book 'Uyoon Akhbar al-Ridha for him while
Husain Ibn Muhammad Qummi authored the book Tarikh Qum upon his orders.

During the period when he was the minister, it was not possible for one
who came to him in the afternoon of the month of Ramadhan, to leave
except after consuming iftar - at times the people breaking their fast
at his place totaled one thousand in number. His charity in this holy
month would equal that of all the other months combined as it was from
his infancy that his mother had trained him to act in such a manner.

During his childhood, when he would start out for his classes, his
mother would give him a dinar and a dirham everyday and advise him:
“Give (these in) charity to the first needy you come across!” This act
transformed itself into a habit for him.

From his childhood to youth and then on until he became a minister, he
never disregarded the recommendation and training of his mother. Fearful
of forgetting this recommendation, he instructed the slave, who was
in-charge of his quarters, to place one dinar and one dirham under his
mattress every night. Upon waking up in the morning, he would give them
in charity to the first needy he encountered.

It so happened that one night the servant forgot to place the money. The
next morning Sahib Ibn Ubbad, upon waking, thrust his hand under the
mattress to collect the money only to realize that the servant had
forgotten to place the money there. He took this to augur ill for
himself and thought: “Surely, my end has drawn nigh that the servant
forgot to place the charity.”

He ordered the blanket, mattress and pillows that lay in his bedroom to
be given in charity to the first destitute that came his way as an
expiation for the forgetfulness. Having collected all the items - all of
which were costly and expensive - he set out of his house, only to
encounter an old blind Sayyid (descendant of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w)),
who was shedding tears as his wife led him by the hand.

Sahib's servant went forward and asked him: “Will you accept these
items?” The man asked: “What are the items?” The servant replied: “A
blanket, mattress and some brocaded pillows.” As soon as he heard this
the destitute fell down unconscious.

When Sahib Ibn 'Ubbad was informed of this scenario he approached the
man and ordered water to be sprinkled over his face. When the man had
regained his consciousness, Sahib asked him: “What caused you to lose
consciousness?”

He answered: “I am a respectable person. It is of late that I have
fallen into bad times. I have a daughter from this wife who had reached
the age of marriage; a person sought her hand in marriage and they were
married. It has been two years now that we have been collecting items
for her Dowry. Last night my wife said to me: “We must make arrangements
for a blanket and brocaded pillows for my daughter.” Try as much as I
could, I could not get her to change her mind till there ensued a
dispute between us over this issue. Finally I said to her: “Tomorrow
morning, hold my hand and take me out of the house”, so that I could
pass in front of you. Then, when your servant spoke those words to me,
it was but natural that I should fall down unconscious.”

Sahib was greatly affected by this speech. Summoning the daughter's
husband, he gave him sufficient wealth so that he could engage himself
in a respectable profession, after which, he gave the entire dowry of
the daughter in a measure befitting a minister's daughter.[^8]

[^1]: Suratul Baqarah (2), Verse 271

[^2]: Jami’ al-Sa’adat, vol. 2, pg. 145

[^3]: Ba Mardum In Guneh Barkhord Konim, pg. 135; al-Kafi, vol. 4, pg. 6

[^4]: Jawame’ al-Hikayat, pg. 248

[^5]: Muntahal A’mal, vol. 2, pg. 127

[^6]: The Noble Prophet said: O’ ‘Ali! Do you know that alms does not go
out of the hands of a Mumin, except that seventy Satans, attempt to
dissuade him, by various means from giving it. Wasail al-Shi’a, vol. 6,
pg. 257

[^7]: Iblis Nameh, pg. 60; Anwar al-Nu’maniyyah, vol. 3, pg. 96

[^8]: Pand-e-Tarikh, vol. 4, pg. 112; Raudhah al-Jannat, pg. 105


