54. Oppression and Injustice
============================

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ سَيَعْلَمُونَ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا أَيَّ مُنقَلَبٍ يَتقَلِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And they who act unjustly shall know to what final place of turning
they shall turn back.”*[^1]

Imam Baqir (a.s) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ أََحَدٍ يَظْلِمُ بِمَظلِمَةٍ إِلاَّ أََخَذَهُ اللهُ تَعاَلـى
بِهَا فِي نَفْسِهِ أََوْ مَالِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is none who commits oppression by means of an (act of)
injustice, except that Allah afflicts him or his wealth because of
it.”*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Oppression and injustice are, in reality, insubordination to the orders
of Allah, acts of transgression and a consequence of transcending the
limits of the Shari'ah and the intellect.

All throughout history that which has befallen the weak and the
oppressed has been due to the oppression of the oppressors. Power and
craving for dominance serve as a prelude for a disobedient soul to
oppress the vulnerable and weak individuals.

One who transgresses the Divine limits and is uninhibited with respect
to every kind of oppression and injustice such as murder, Abuse,
vilification, fornication, rape, usurpation of the property of others,
etc… has, in effect, gone out of the bounds of Allah's obedience,
drowned himself in carnal desires and become afflicted with the disease
of rebelliousness. Such a person, sooner or later, shall be seized by
punishment and retribution, since the lamentations of the weak,
oppressed and the orphaned ones possess negative overtones, which
manifest themselves in this world and the hereafter.[^3]

1) The Oppression of Dadhanah
-----------------------------

In Syria. there lived a king by the name of Dadhanah, who was an idol
worshipper. Allah sent Prophet Jorjis (a.s) to Dadhanah to advise him
and invite him to monotheism, but instead, Dadhanah responded by asking
him: “Which city do you come from?” He (a.s) replied: “I am of Roman
origin and have come from Palestine.”

Upon Dadhanah's orders, Prophet Jorjis (a.s) was imprisoned, his holy
body subjected to injuries by means of iron spikes till his flesh fell
apart and vinegar poured over the wounds. After this, his thighs, knees,
soles of his feet and head were pounded by means of red-hot iron skewers
to such an extent that he was on the verge of death.

Allah sent an angel to him (a.s), who said: “Allah says: 'Be patient and
happy, and fear not for I am with you and shall deliver you from them.
They shall attempt to kill you four times, but I shall ward away the
pain and agony of the sufferings from you.'”

The second time Dadhanah ordered that this Prophet's back and stomach
should be lashed after which he should be hurled into prison. He then
summoned every sorcerer and magician before him and ordered them to use
their magic to his benefit against Prophet Jorjis (a.s), but despite
their best efforts, their magic failed to have any effect upon him.
Having failed in this, they tried to poison him, but Prophet Jorjis
(a.s) recited Allah's name and the poison caused him no harm.

One of the magicians said: “Had I fed this poison to all of the
inhabitants of the earth, they would have turned blind, their
appearances would have changed and all of them would have perished!”
Then, repenting over his past misdeeds, he declared his faith in Prophet
Jorjis (a.s), whereupon Dadhanah had him killed.

For the umptinth time Dadhanah hurled Prophet Jorjis (a.s) into prison
and on this occasion ordered his body to be cut into pieces and thrown
into a well.

With the objective of admonishing him, Allah sent down lightening and
earthquake, but he refused to heed the warning. Allah sent the angel
Mikail, who brought Prophet Jorjis (a.s) out of the well and said to
him: “Be Patient,” and then conveyed to him glad tidings of the divine
rewards.

(Once again), Prophet Jorjis (a.s) approached the king and invited him
towards monotheism, but once again he refused. However, on this
occasion, the commander of his army together with four thousand people
brought faith. Witnessing this, Dadhanah ordered all of them to be put
to death.  
 This time he prepared a tablet out of molten copper and forced Prophet
Jorjis (a.s) to lie upon it. He then poured molten lead down his throat
and then, lighting up an inferno, hurled him into it in order that he be
burnt to death.

This time too, Allah sent Mikail to grant him soundness of health.
Having regained his health, Prophet Jorjis (a.s) approaching the king
yet again advised him to abandon idolatry and invited him towards
monotheism.

On this occasion, Dadhanah hurled him into a cauldron containing molten
lead and sulphur, and ignited a fire under him in order to melt his body
with the molten lead and sulphur. Allah sent down the angel Israfil, who
issued a shriek causing the cauldron to topple over and leaving Prophet
Jorjis (a.s) safe and unharmed.

Having regained his health by the power of Allah, he (a.s) again
approached Dadhanah and invited him towards Allah-worship. Frustrated
and desperate, Dadhanah ordered all the people to gather together in the
desert and kill him in unison, whereupon Prophet Jorjis (a.s)
supplicated to Allah and pleaded for patience and fortitude.

The people beheaded him (a.s) and were on their way back when all of
them were seized by an onslaught of Divine chastisement.[^4]

2) Working for the Oppressors
-----------------------------

A person, by the name of Muhajir, narrates as follows: “I had gone to
Imam Sadiq (a.s) and said to him: “Such and such persons have sent you
their salutations.” The Imam (a.s) responded in kind, whereupon I said:
“They have also requested you to pray for them.” He (a.s) inquired:
“What is their problem?” I said: “Mansur Dawaniqi has flung them into
prison.”

He (a.s) asked: “What did they have to do with Mansur (that he hurled
them into prison)?”

I replied: “They used to work for him and one day, in a fit of anger, he
hurled them behind bars.”

The Imam (a.s) said: “But had I not prohibited them from working for him
(an oppressive and unjust regime)? Such work entails great danger.”
Having said this, the Imam (a.s) then prayed: “O' Allah! Repel from them
the evils and grant them deliverance.”

Muhajir says: “I returned from Mecca and inquired about my friends
whereupon I was informed that they had been set free”” - (according to
the dates, they had been released three days after the Imam (a.s) had
prayed for them).[^5]

3) Retaliation
--------------

Once, Hadhrat Musa (a.s) was passing by a region when he came across a
spring which flowed alongside a mountain. Performing ablution with the
water, he proceeded to the top of the mountain to offer prayers.
Meanwhile a person on horseback reached the spring and came down from
the horse with the intention of quenching his thirst. When he had
satiated himself he mounted his mount and galloped away, dropping his
money-pouch in the process.

A short while later a shepherd arrived there; noticing the money-pouch,
he picked it up and left.  
 After the shepherd had left, an old man - a bundle of fire-wood on his
head and possessing an appearance that manifested his destitution and
poverty - reached there. Placing his load on the ground he stretched
himself out near the spring and went to sleep.

Before long the rider returned to the spring and began searching for his
lost money-pouch. Failing to locate it, he questioned the old man, who
pleaded ignorance about it. There ensued an altercation betwin the two
and very soon they began trading blows. In the resulting brawl, the
rider beat the old man so severely that he died.  
 Witnessing this, Prophet Musa (a.s) said: “O' Lord! What kind of
incident was this and what kind of justice exists in this episode; the
money was taken by the shepherd but it was the old man who had to face
oppression and injustice?”

He (a.s) was told: “O' Musa! This old man had killed the rider's father
and so retaliation was achieved between them. (In addition) the rider's
father had owed to the shepherd's father, the same amount that was
contained in the money-pouch and in this way, the shepherd acquired his
right. O' Musa! (Do know) I pass My judgment on the basis of justice and
fairness.”[^6]

4) The Oppression of Dhahhak Himyari
------------------------------------

Having ruled Iran for years, Jamshed slowly came to be filled by pride,
ultimately claiming Allah-ship for himself and inviting the people to
worship him. The people, out of fear of his sword, submitted to his
demand; this continued till Dhahhak initiated a military expedition
against him and eventually killed him.

Placing himself at the helm of affairs of the sultanate, Dhahhak adopted
a policy of oppression and persecution - killing his father and
subjecting his people to various forms of brutality and tribulation.

One day he happened to experience discomfort in his head and shoulders.
One evil cook suggested a remedy saying: “The thing that can cure you is
the brains of the youths.”

Upon Dhahhak's orders two youths from the prison were killed; eating
their brains, he felt slight comfort in his state and so went to sleep.
Next day onwards two youths would be killed everyday and their brains
utilized for his treatment.

He committed great brutalities, never gave ear to any petition and never
meted out justice to any oppressed and so, when he murdered two sons of
Kaveh, the ironsmith, it turned out to be the final straw and provoked a
rebellion against him.

He was ultimately killed in an extremely gruesome manner - his head
bludgeoned by a mace (or hurled into the depths of a well, according to
another report), and it was Faridoon, who later took over the reins of
the sultanate.[^7]

5) The Incident of Harrah
-------------------------

After the incident of 'ashura and two and a half months before his
death, Yazid initiated yet another horrendous act on the twenty eighth
of Dhul Hijjah of the year 63 ah - the looting and killing of the people
of Madinah and sacrilege with respect to the shrine of the Noble Prophet
(s.a.w) at the hands of an old, sick, brash and impudent man by the name
of Muslim Ibn 'Aqabah, notoriously known as Musrif.

When the news of Yazid's oppression and depravity reached the ears of
the people of Madinah, a group from amongst them proceeded to Syria to
obtain first-hand information regarding the situation.

Witnessing his sacrilegious behaviour, they returned to Madinah and
drove his governor, 'Uthman Ibn Muhammad, together with Marwan Ibn Hakam
and the other Umayyads, out of the city. The people then flocked to
'Abdullah Ibn Handhalah - the 'Ghasil al-Malaikah,[^8]) and pledged
allegiance to him. Coming to know of this, Yazid dispatched a force
under the command of Musrif towards Madinah.

In order to defend themselves, the people of Madinah came out of the
city and took up positions in a region known as Sangistan, where a
fierce battle ensued betwin the two forces. Some of the inhabitants of
Madinah were killed while others fled and sought shelter in the holy
shrine of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w).

Musrif's soldiers advanced into Madinah, entered the holy shrine on
horseback and began their carnage - killing so many people that the
mosque and the holy tomb were covered with blood; the number of people
that were killed have been reported to be around eleven thousand!

We state one example of the numerous brutalities committed by the forces
of Musrif: One of the soldiers of the army of Yazid, an inhabitant of
Egypt, entering the house of a lady from the Ansar (The Helpers), who
had recently given birth to a child and which was in her arms, said to
her: “Bring me all your wealth.”

The lady said: “By Allah! They have not left behind anything that I can
give you.” (Hearing this) he said: “I shall kill you and your child.”
The lady pleaded: “Fear Allah, for this infant is the child of Ibn Abi
Kabshah Ansari, the companion of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w).” The name
seemed to have no effect upon the merciless man, who, picking up the
innocent child by its legs - even as it was being suckled, flung him
against the wall scattering his brains upon the floor.[^9]

In the face of such atrocities[^10], all the people of Madinah were
forced to pledge allegiance to Yazid, with the exception of two
persons - Imam Zainul 'Abidin (a.s) and ‘Ali Ibn 'Abdullah Ibn Abbas.

The Imam (a.s) arrived before Musrif after reciting a supplication as a
result of which he was so was overcome with dread and awe that he could
not get himself to kill the Imam (a.s). As for ‘Ali Ibn 'Abdullah, some
of his maternal relatives were present in Musrif's army and they
prevented him from being killed.[^11]

[^1]: Suratul Shua’ra (26), Verse 227

[^2]: Jami’ al-Sa’adat, vol. 2, pg. 220

[^3]: Ihya al-Qulub, pg. 76

[^4]: Hayat al-Qulub, vol. 1, pg. 477

[^5]: Shanidaniha-e-Tarikh, pg. 57; Mahajjah al-Baidha, vol. 3, pg. 256

[^6]: Pand-e-Tarikh, vol. 3, pg. 161; Shaytan, vol. 2, pg. 424

[^7]: Jawame’ al-Hikayat, pg. 52

[^8]: One, whose ablution (ghusl) has bin performed by the angels. (Tr.)

[^9]: Madayani reports that in the aftermath of the incident of Harrah
thousands of unwed maidens gave birth to illegitimate children, who were
referred to as ‘aulad al-Harrah’ (children of Harrah) - a consequence of
the transgressions committed by Musrif’s soldiers with the maidens and
women of Medinah. Tatimmah al-Muntaha, pg. 39

[^10]: The incident of Harrah has bin reported, in addition to Shiite
sources, by the Sunnite sources as well, such as Kamil (of Ibn Kathir),
Maqatil al-Talibin, Kashf al-Astar, Al-Imamah Wa al-Siyasah, Akhbar
al-Duwal, Tarikh Masu’di.

[^11]: Muntahal A’mal, vol. 2, pg. 34


