58. Chastisement
================

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ عَذَابَ رَبِّکَ لَوَاقِعٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Most surely the punishment of your Lord will come to pass.”*[^1]

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُعَذِّبُ اللهُ قَلباً وُعِيَ بِالْقُرآنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Allah shall not chastise the heart in which is contained the Noble
Qur\`an.”*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

In order to prevent the people from committing crimes and offences an
excess of which would result in the disintegration and destruction of
the society, Allah ordered all the Prophets to warn their people:
“Chastisement awaits you.”

The kind of chastisement depends upon the kind of offence and the type
of vice. The Arabs would be punished because of fanaticism, the rulers
due to oppression, scholars because of envy, the traders due to
unfaithfulness and the villagers as a result of ignorance.

Since the levels of hell vary, consequently the intensity and severity
of the chastisement also vary. Some shall remain eternally within it
while others, as a result of intercession or upon completion of their
term, shall attain deliverance and then go on to enter Paradise. The
worst of the chastisements is that a person suffers from
hard-heartedness in the world and finds himself in the lowest rank of
hell in the hereafter.

1) The Chastisement of the People of ‘Ad
----------------------------------------

When Prophet Hud (a.s) was forty years of his age, Allah revealed to
him: “Go to your nation and invite your people towards monotheism and My
worship.”

The nation of Prophet Hud (a.s) was 'ad, which consisted of thirteen
tribes. The people possessed a tall physique and a long life-span. They
engaged themselves in farming and possessed excellent date palms, and
their cities were the most prosperous of the Arab cities.

For years on end Prophet Hud (a.s) strived to guide his nation, but when
it yielded no result, he said to them: “I shall curse you.” His people
said: “O' Hud! The people of Nuh possessed a frail and weak physique but
our Allahs are strong and so are our bodies. We do not fear the
punishment.”  
 Allah sent down upon them a devastating wind (about which the Commander
of the Faithfuls(a.s) said: “I seek refuge in Allah from the devastating
wind.”)

When the chastisement came upon them it plucked their castles, forts,
cities and all the other structures, tossed them into the air as if
pebbles and then grounded them into fine powder. For seven nights and
eight days it blew over them - picking up the men and the women, and
annihilating them.

The people of Propet Hud were referred to as dhat al-I'mad (the
possessors of pillars) for they would carve out gigantic pillars from
the mountains and then construct their palaces atop these pillars. In
the wake of the chastisement, all of them were ground into dust.
According to the Noble Qur\`an[^3], their chastisement was **رِيحاً
صَرصَراً** - a furiously raging cold wind, which plucked them up from
the ground, tossed them into the air like a locust and then dashed them
against the mountains till their bones crumbled into powder. [^4]

2) Ibn Muljam and the Chastisement in the Purgatory
---------------------------------------------------

Ibn Raqa narrates: “I was near Masjid al-Haram in Mecca when I noticed
that a group of people had gathered near the Station of Ibrahim (a.s)
whereupon I inquired: “What is the matter?” I was told: “A Christian
monk has accepted Islam.” I pushed myself into the crowd and witnessed a
tall old man, dressed in woolen clothes and wearing a woolen cap, seated
opposite the Station of Ibrahim and delivering a speech.

I heard him say: “One day I was seated in the monastery and was looking
out of it when, as a result of mystical intuition, I suddenly witnessed
a gigantic bird resembling a hunting-hawk descend upon a slab of stone
near the sea and vomit out something. I observed that one-fourth of a
human body had come out of its mouth.

The bird then flew off and disappeared from view. A little later it
returned and vomiting out something, it once again flew out of sight. I
saw that once again one-fourth of a human body had come out of its
mouth. It returned for the third time and threw out another fourth of a
human body and yet again for the fourth time till an entire human figure
was formed.

After some time it returned and striking its beak, took away one fourth
of the body. It repeated this act three more times till it had taken
away the person completely.

I was stunned and exclaimed: “O' Allah! Who is this person, who is being
subjected to this chastisement? I was greatly upset with myself as to
why I did not go and question him but it was not long before the hunting
bird returned and vomited out one fourth of the human body and repeated
the act three more times till the entire human body was formed again.

I hastened towards the person and enquired: “Who are you and what have
you done?”  
 He replied: “I am Ibn Muljam and I am the person who has killed ‘Ali
Ibn Abi Talib (a.s). Allah has commanded this bird to kill, eat and
chastise me in this manner every day.”

I asked him: “Who is ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib (a.s)?” He replied: “The cousin
of the Prophet of Islam (s.a.w).”

Thus, it was this strange incident (and the mystical intuition of the
purgatory) that prompted me to become a Muslim.””[^5]

3) The Recompense of Deeds
--------------------------

When the forces of Chenghiz, the Mongol, had barbarically attacked Iran,
there was a bloodbath everywhere. Every city that he would enter,
Chenghiz would question the people: “Who kills you - Allah or I?” If
they answered: “You kill us,” he would kill them all, and if they
answered: “Allah kills us,” he would still kill them all.

Once, upon entering the city of Hamadan, he sent some persons to the
elders of the city asking them to present themselves before him for he
desired to speak to them.  
 All were perplexed as to what could be done, when a brave and
intelligent youth said: “I shall go to him.” The others said: “We fear
for your life.” He replied: “I too am like the others, and prepared to
go.”

Taking along with him a camel, a rooster and a goat, he approached
Chenghiz's camp and, presenting himself before him, said: “If you want
someone big, here is a camel; if you are looking for a long-bearded one,
then here is a goat for you; and if you desire someone talkative, there
is a rooster for you here - however if you need to converse with
someone, I stand here before you.”  
 Chenghiz said: “Tell me, who shall kill these people, Allah or I?”

The youth said: “It is neither Allah, Who shall kill them, nor you.”

Hearing this, Chengiz asked: “Then who is it that shall kill them.”

The youth replied: “The retribution of their deeds.”[^6]

4) The Cause for the Descent of Chastisement
--------------------------------------------

The first person to devise a balance for measurement for the people was
Prophet Shuaib (a.s). However, as time passed by, his people began to
indulge in weighing less than the weights - this sin being an addition
to their other sins of not believing Allah and rejecting the Prophets.

When weighing for themselves they would weigh correctly, but when they
would sell their products, they would sell less than the weights and
indulge in fraud.

They were leading a life of ease, comfort and Abundance till their king
ordered them to hoard goods and commit cheating in weights. Prophet
Shuaib (a.s) advised the king and the people to refrain from these evils
but to no avail; on the contrary, upon the king's orders, Prophet Shuaib
(a.s) and his followers were thrown out of the city. When this took
place, Divine chastisement descended upon them.[^7]

A wave of intense heat overtook them - so severe that neither shade nor
water could provide any relief. Subsequent to this intense heat wave, a
cloud appeared over their heads and a cool breeze began to blow
prompting all the people to gather under the cloud to escape from the
severe heat. When all the people had gathered under it, sparks of fire
began to rain down upon from it while simultaneously the ground beneath
them began to shake vigourously leaving all of them crumpled and burnt.
The duration of this sequence of chastisement has been reported to be
nine days and consisted of a scorching wind, hot water and a severe
earthquake.[^8]

5) Chastisement of those who Conceal the Truth
----------------------------------------------

Jabir Ibn 'Abdullah Ansari relates: “Imam ‘Ali (a.s) had been delivering
a sermon for us and after he had praised and glorified Allah, (a.s)
said: 'In the forefront of this gathering, there are some companions of
the Noble Prophet (s.a.w): Anas Ibn Malik, Barra Ibn 'azib Ansari,
Ash'ath Ibn Qais and Khalid Ibn Yazid Bajalli.'

Then turning towards them, he first said to Anas Ibn Malik: “O' Anas! If
you had heard the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) say about me:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن کُنتُ مَولاَهُ فَهَذاَ عَلِيٌّ مَولاَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Of whomsoever I am the master, this ‘Ali is his master too” and refuse
to testify to my leadership today, Allah shall afflict you with leprosy
such that white spots shall become manifest upon your head and face and
even your turban would fail to conceal them.”

Then addressing Ash'ath, he said: “As for you, O' Ash'ath! If you had
heard the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) say it about me and refrain from bearing
witness to it, you shall become blind in both eyes towards the end of
your life.

And you, O' Khalid Ibn Yazid! If you had heard it about me and now
conceal it and refrain from testifying in my favour, Allah shall afflict
you with a Pagan death.

And you, O' Barra Ibn 'azib, if you have heard the Noble Prophet (s.a.w)
say this and refuse to bear witness for my wilayah, you shall die in the
same place from which you had migrated (towards Madinah).”

Of course, all four of them had been present on the day of Ghadir-e-Khum
and had heard this well-known sentence from the Noble Prophet (s.a.w),
but later concealed it and denied the event!

Jabir Ibn 'Abdullah Ansari states: “By Allah! After a period, I
witnessed Anas Ibn Malik such that he had been afflicted with leprosy to
the extent that he could not conceal the white spots of the disease
which had erupted on his face and head, even by means of his turban.

I saw Asha'th such that he had become blind in both eyes and used to
say: “Thank Allah that ‘Ali (a.s) cursed me about being blinded in my
eyes in this world and did not curse me with chastisement in the
hereafter for had he done so, I would have suffered eternal chastisement
in the hereafter.

I witnessed Khalid Ibn Yazid, who died in his house; his family members
desired to bury him in the house but the tribe of Kindah came to know of
their intention and attacked them and buried him, according to the Pagan
rites, near the door of the house and he died a death of the pre-Islamic
era.  
 As for Barra, Muawiyah appointed him the ruler of Yemen and he died
there itself, the very place from where he had previously migrated to
Madinah*.*'”[^9]

[^1]: Suratul Tur (52), Verse 7

[^2]: Shaytan, vol. 2, pg. 415

[^3]: Suratul Qamar (54), Verse 19

[^4]: Hayat al-Qulub, vol. 1, pg. 99

[^5]: ‘Alam-e-Barzakh, pg. 178; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 42, pg. 307

[^6]: Dastan-ha Wa Pand-ha, vol. 6, pg. 105

[^7]: In Suratul A’raf, it has been referred to as ُ الرَّجْفَة meaning
‘earthquake’, while in Suratul Shua’ra, it has been referred to as ‘day
of overshadowing gloom.’

[^8]: Tarikh-e-Anbiya, vol. 2, pg. 34

[^9]: Hikayat-ha-e-Shanidani, vol. 1, pg. 102; Minhaj al-Bara’h, vol.
12, pg. 216


