59. Forgiveness
===============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنْ تَعْفُوا أََقرَبُ لِلتَّقوَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And it is nearer to righteousness that you should relinquish.”*[^1]

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أََلعَفوُ لاَ يَزِيدُ الْعَبدَ إلاَّ عِزّاً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Forgiveness increases a person in esteem.”*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Forgiving, despite possessing the strength (to retaliate) is of the
conduct of the Prophets; pardon is when a person commits an offence or
sin with respect to another, who in return not only forgives him, from
within his heart, but also manifests his beneficence and kindness,
externally.

How can one, who does not forgive others, expect to be forgiven by the
Almighty Lord?

Allah cloaks every servant of his with forgiveness in this world and in
the hereafter, and hence it becomes imperative for them to forgive and
pardon one another. And if it so happens that someone - intentionally or
unintentionally - does commit a malevolent deed, one should
magnanimously and graciously disregard it in order that Allah too, by
His favour, disregards one's own malevolence.[^3]

1) Beating The Servant
----------------------

Once, a companion of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) began hitting his slave.
The slave kept pleading: “By Allah! Do not beat me. For Allah's sake
forgive me.” The master, however, refused to pardon him and continued to
shower beatings upon him.

Some people informed the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) of the slave's
predicament whereupon he (s.a.w) got up and started out towards the
scene of this incident. As soon as the companion's eyes fell upon the
Noble Prophet (s.a.w) he stopped his beatings whereupon the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w) said to him: “He placed you under the oath of Allah, but
you refused to pardon him and now that you have set your eyes upon me,
you have restrained yourself?”

The man, in order to make amends for his deplorable behaviour, said: “I
now free him for the sake (and pleasure) of Allah!”

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) said: “Had you not freed him, you would have
dropped face-down into the fire of Hell.”[^4]

2) Pardon for the Killer
------------------------

During the period of the leadership of the late Ayatullah al-Udhma
Sayyid Abu Al-Hasan Isfahani, one night, as he led the congregation for
the Maghreb prayers in Najaf-e-Ashraf, a person with a knife stabbed his
son - an extremely admirable and exemplary person - to death.

When Sayyid Abu al-Hasan Isfahani was informed of his son's martyrdom,
exhibiting great patience and forbearance he said: “There is no power or
strength save with Allah” and then, standing up, he led the 'Isha
prayers.

Later, when the people approached him and sought to know of the action
he desired to initiate against his son's murderer, he simply said: “I
have forgiven him.”[^5]

3) Freedom of the Slave-Girl
----------------------------

One day, some people had come to the house of Imam Sajjad (a.s) as
guests. Preparing the meals, one of Imam's (a.s) servants hastily pulled
out the kebabs from the oven; as he did so, the skewers of the kebabs
slipped from his grasp, fell upon the head of Imam Sajjad's (a.s) child,
who had been standing below the ladder, and caused his death. The
servant stood aghast and terribly perturbed, but the Imam (a.s) said:
“You have not done it on purpose. Go away, for I have freed you in the
way of Allah.” He then ordered that the child be given ablution,
shrouded and buried.[^6]

Sufiyan Thauri relates: “One day, arriving in the presence of Imam Sadiq
(a.s) I found him to be disturbed and unsettled. I sought to know the
reason for it whereupon he (a.s) said: “I had prohibited everyone from
climbing atop the roof of the house, however when I entered the house, I
observed one of the slave-girls, who had been entrusted the
responsibility of educating one of my children, standing atop the ladder
with my infant in her arms. But as soon as she saw me, she was left
dumbfounded and began to tremble as a result of which my son dropped out
of her hands onto the ground and died. I am disturbed and uneasy over
the fear that overtook the slave-girl because of me. Nevertheless, I
told her: “There is no sin upon you and I have set you free for the
pleasure of Allah.””[^7]

4) The Son’s Pardon for the Killer
----------------------------------

When the caliphate fell into the hands of the Abbasids, the Ummayad
elders took to flight and concealed themselves - one of them being
Ibrahim Ibn Sulaiman Ibn 'Abdul Malik, an old but wise and erudite
person, who was eventually pardoned and granted protection by Abu
al-Abbas Saffah - the first Abbasid Caliph.

One day Saffah said to him: “I would like to know what transpired with
you during your period of concealment.”

Ibrahim said: “I had concealed myself in Herah, in a place close to the
desert. One day, from the roof-top I witnessed black flags advancing
from the direction of Kufah. I assumed that they were coming for me and
so fled from my hideaway and arrived in Kufah.

There, perplexed and distressed, I wandered through the streets till I
reached a large house. As I stood there I witnessed a person, seated on
his horse and accompanied by a few servants, enter the house. The
servants asked me: 'What is it that you desire?' I said: 'I am a person,
who is fearful and alarmed, and have come to you for shelter.' They took
me into the house, accommodated me in one of the rooms and entertained
me in the most excellent of manners. Neither did they question me about
myself nor did I ask them about the owner of the house, however, I
observed that everyday the owner of the house would go out in the
company of his slaves and return home after a period and so, one day, I
inquired: 'Are you in search of someone that you go out everyday?'”

He said: “We are on the lookout for Ibrahim Ibn Sulaiman, who has killed
my father, so that I can extract revenge for my father's murder.” I
realized that he spoke the truth for I had indeed killed his father. I
said to him: “Since you have accommodated and entertained me, I shall
guide you to your father's killer.” With great urgency and impatience he
asked: “Where is he?”

I said: “I am Ibrahim Ibn Sulaiman!”

Hearing this, he said: “You lie!”

I said: “By Allah! No, I do not. I killed your father on such and such
day!”

Realizing that I spoke the truth his complexion changed and his eyes
began to spew blood. He lowered his head towards the ground and then
raising it after some time, said: “Since I had granted you shelter I
shall not kill you, however, in the presence of the just Allah, I shall
surely seek revenge for my father's murder. Hasten away from here for I
fear lest you may suffer harm from me.”

He offered me a thousand dinars but I declined and departed from there.
O' Caliph! I declare with complete candidness that excepting you, I have
not witnessed a person more beneficent than him.[^8]

5) The Conquest of Mecca
------------------------

When the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) conquered Mecca, he announced a general
amnesty for all the people - except a few individuals, who were to be
killed whenever found; amongst these were 'Abdullah Ibn Zab'ari, who
used to satirize him (s.a.w), Wahshi, who had killed his uncle Hamzah in
the battle of Uhud[^9], 'Ikramah Ibn Abi Jahl, Safwan Ibn Umayyah and
Habbar Ibn al-Aswad - all of whom he eventually pardoned after they were
brought before him (s.a.w).

As for Habbar Ibn al-Aswad, he was the person who frightened Zainab -
the Noble Prophet's (s.a.w) daughter, who had been sent towards Madinah
by her husband, Abu al-Abbas Ibn Rabi' - on the way to Madinah as a
result of which she suffered a miscarriage. Subsequent to this act of
his, the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) had declared it permissible to shed his
blood.

After the conquest of Mecca he approached the Noble Prophet (s.a.w),
expressed regret over his misdeed and, seeking forgiveness, said: “O'
Prophet of Allah! We were of the polytheists, however Allah, by means of
you, guided us aright and delivered us from perdition, so disregard my
ignorance and that which you have heard about me, and pardon me!”

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) said: “I pardon you. Allah has exhibited
kindness towards you in that He has guided you into Islam; with the
acceptance of Islam, bygones become bygones.”[^10]

[^1]: Suratul Baqarah (2), Verse 237

[^2]: Jami’ al-Sa’adat, vol. 1, pg. 368

[^3]: Tadhkeratul Haqa\`iq, pg. 56

[^4]: Shanidani-ha-e-Tarikh, pg. 98; Mahajjah al-Baidha, vol. 3, pg. 445

[^5]: Sima-e-Farzanegan, pg. 336; Ganjina-e-Danishmandan, vol. 1, pg.
221

[^6]: Muntahal A’mal, vol. 2, pg. 4. It has been mentioned in Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 11 that Imam Sajjad (as) would summon all his slaves and
slave-girls before him on the day of Eid al-Fitr, forgive their misdids,
grant them gifts, fri some of them after which he would say to them:
“Say to Allah: Forgive ‘Ali Ibn Al-Husain (as) just as he has forgiven
us!”

[^7]: Ibid., pg. 128

[^8]: Pand-e-Tarikh, vol. 2, pg. 92; Thamarah al-Auraq Ibn Hijjah

[^9]: When Wahshi recounted the episode of the killing of his (saw)
uncle, Hamzah, he (saw) wept profusely but then pardoned him and said:
غَيِّب وَجهَکَ عَنِّي (Disappear from my sight).

[^10]: Shaytan, vol. 1, pg. 412 اَلاِسلاَمُ يَجُبُّ ماَ قَبلَهُ


