Introduction
============

There are numerous ways for man to achieve guidance and emerge from
darkness and move towards light. Allah, for the prosperity of man and
perfection of his morals, has created proofs, evidences and vestiges[^1]
so great in number that they are beyond reckoning and computation. For
the guidance of mankind, He sent the Prophets with Clear Proofs[^2],
books, miracles and signs so that, perhaps, the people might perceive
the right path and attain prosperity and success.

During the entire period of his prophethood, the Noble Prophet (s.a.w),
with regards to refinement of souls and perfection of morals, was an
exemplar in speech and did, and had (even) said, “I have been sent (as a
Prophet) for (the purpose of) perfecting the morals”[^3]

Man's problem lies in his disregard for virtues, acquisition of vices,
inclination towards lust and obedience to the Shaytan. Some men stoop so
low that they even lead their lives akin to animals. For the purpose of
refinement and treatment of human morals, abatement of rebelliousness
and controlling the natural disposition, the Noble Prophet spared no
effort and mentioned all that was necessary in this regard.

Attainment of prosperity in this world and the hereafter is only
accomplished under the auspices of a teacher and, at the same time, not
every person can completely identify the two extremes of moral behaviour
in order to demonstrate the moderate and balanced path. Allah, Who is
the Absolute Wise, introduced all the Prophets, especially the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w), as the 'teacher and trainer' of morals, so that the
people, by following in his footsteps, distance themselves from vices
and acquire the honour of the two worlds.

In the Qur\`an, there exists a chapter by the name of **اَلقَصَص** (The
Narratives), which itself is proof that man is in nid of stories and
narratives.

In many places in the Qur\`an, stories of Prophets, kings and nations
have been mentioned. In addition, Allah has presented issues pertaining
to wars, peace, family, religion, society and other similar topics, in
the form of stories and narratives. By reading these accounts, the
people can comprehend and distinguish the paths of progress and regress,
and ascent and descent in every field, especially morals.

The entire chapter Yusuf has been devoted to the story of Yusuf, Yaqub,
Zulaikha and the brothers. In the beginning of the Chapter, Allah says:
“We narrate to you (O' Prophet) the most excellent of the narratives by
(means of) what We have revealed to you this Qur\`an.”[^4]

While, in the concluding verse of this very chapter, He says: Indid
(there) in the history of theirs, is a lesson for men of
understanding.[^5]

Indid, one of the distinguished feats of the Qur\`an is this very story
of Yusuf (a.s), which it refers to as the 'best of the narratives', and
at the end of which, it says: “In these stories there is a lesson for
those, who desire to take a moral and adopt the path of the Perfect
Men.”

In this regard, Amirul Mo\`minin (a.s), in Nahjul Balagha, says to his
son Imam Hasan (a.s) “Even though I have not reached the age, which
those before me have, yet I have looked into their behaviour and
reflected over the events of their lives. I walked amongst their ruins
till I was as one of them. In fact, by virtue of those of their affairs
that have become known to me, it is as though I have lived with them
from the first to the last. I have therefore been able to discern the
impure from the clean and the benefit from the harm. I have selected for
you the choicest of those matters and collected for you their good
points while kiping away from you the useless ones.”

Years ago, I had written a book on ethics (for the treatment of vices),
by the name of Ihya al-Qulub. Ever since, I had been reflecting over the
idea of compiling a book on moral stories. It so happened that,
divinely, an opportunity came up before me and with it the motivation
for undertaking this assignment. In spite of the lack of necessary
books, I contented myself with those that were available and commenced
the compilation of this book, recording four to five stories for every
topic.

I have certainly not come across any book which has been compiled in
this fashion. Books like Namunah-e-Maarif-e-Islam and Pand-e-Tarikh have
been present for around 30 years and I have made use of them too (in the
course of this collection), but in those books, Qur\`anic verses,
traditions, poems and analogies have all been accumulated together;
whereas, I have sought to satisfy myself by mentioning only the stories,
while abstaining from presenting considerations relating to Qur\`anic
verses, traditions, poems and analogies, which would not only have
increased the size of the book but would also have made it difficult to
understand for many of the readers.

This collection caters for the general public, young and old alike, who
are acquainted with basic reading and writing. As far as possible, I
have endeavoured to omit scientific issues and those aspects, pertaining
to traditions, whose comprehension would be demanding and exacting for
the general masses.

Although some of the stories may not possibly possess any aspect of
reality and actuality, what I have focused on is the admonition and
'taking-a-lesson' aspect contained in them, which hopefully, the
honourable readers would perceive and comprehend.

As far as the issue of associating a story to a particular topic is
concerned, I do not claim that the stories allude to just one topic or
that particular one which has been specified here; rather, there are
stories which can be associated with several other topics too, in
addition to the topic under which it has been mentioned here.

When narrating a text or presenting a translation, I have not restricted
myself to the literal meaning but, for a better comprehension, have
resorted to paraphrasing, allusion and conceptual explanation too.

To avoid interference of topics with one another and prolongation of
discussion, I have refrained from bringing forth topics which are
related to those already presented. For example, Ithar (altruism) has
been presented as one of the topics but Infaq (spending in the path of
Allah) has been excluded.

To prevent the reader from experiencing exhaustion and boredom, and for
the sake of variety, I have desisted from presenting stories of a
monotonous kind, like those of philosophers and poets, but have strived
to make the collection varied. In this way, the readers will, hopefully,
derive a greater pleasure from the narratives.

In view of the fact that trustworthiness ought to be adhered to, I have
referred every narrative presented here, to the book from which it has
been extracted, also mentioning the volume and page. It is only with the
objective of achieving a greater fluency of work that I have endeavoured
to correct, polish or alter some of the words or sentences of the
original text.

It is hoped that the readers, after going through the stories and
narratives, reflect upon and take lessons from them so that they are
able to create within themselves, a new impetus towards perfection of
morals; and Allah Willing, those who are endowed with laudable morals,
should relate them to others, for rectification and remedy of the weaker
souls.

Sayyid ‘Ali Akbar Sadaqat  
 And our final prayer (is):  
 All Praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.  
 Mordad, 1378 [July 1999]

[^1]: Surat Ibrahim (14), Verse 5: وَ لَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا مُوسى‏
بِآيَاتِنَا أَنْ أَخْرِجْ قَوْمَكَ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلـى النُّورِ

[^2]: Suratul Hadid (57), Verse 25: لَقَدْ أَرْسَلْنَا رُسُلَنَا
بِالْبَيِّنَاتِ وَ أَنْزَلْنَا مَعَهُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَ الْمِيزَانَ
لِيَقُومَ النَّاسُ بِالْقِسْطِ

[^3]: Safinatul Bihar, vol. 1, pg. 411:   بُعِثْتُ لِأُتَمِّمَ مَكَارِمَ
الأَخْلاَقِ

[^4]: Surat Yusuf (12), Verse 3: نَحْنُ نَقُصُّ عَلَيْكَ أَحْسَنَ
الْقَصَصِ بِمَا أَوْحَيْنَا إِلَيْكَ هذَا الْقُرْآنَ‏

[^5]: Ibid., Verse 111: لَقَدْ كَانَ فِي قَصَصِهِمْ عِبْرَةٌ لِأُولِي
الأََلْبَابِ‏


