42. Religion
============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَقِمْ وَجْهَكَ لِلدِّينِ حَنِيفاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Then set your face upright for religion in the right state.”*[^1]

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أََلْمُسْتَأْكَلُ بِدِيـنِهِ حَظُّهُ مِنْ دِيـنِهِ مَا يَأْكُلُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One, who seeks to fill his stomach by means of religion, his share of
religion is what he fills in his stomach.”*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

Allah grants the worldly provisions to His friends as well His enemies.
However, He only bestows His religion to His friends - just as he has
placed monotheism within the *fitrah* and nature of every person, but
grants His special religion to those whom He pleases.

One ought to sacrifice one's life and wealth for the religion of Allah
and adorn oneself with the insignias of religion, such as truthfulness,
steadfastness, faithfulness towards trusts, fulfilment of pledges and
covenants, and goodness of behaviour.

1) Religion is Dead
-------------------

Imam ‘Ali (a.s) was passing by a place where a group of children were
engaged in play. However, there was one boy who was not playing with
them but stood aloof and sad. Imam (a.s) approached him and asked: “What
is your name?” He replied: “Mat al-Din (Religion died).”

The Imam (a.s) desired to know the reason for such a name and so
inquired about the child's father. He was informed that his father had
died, but his mother was alive. He (a.s) called for his mother and
inquired about the reason for such a strange name, whereupon the mother
said: “When this child was in my womb, his father had embarked upon a
journey. After a period his companions approached me and said: “Your
husband fell ill on the way and died, but before his death he requested
us that if his child was born, he should be named Mat al-Din.”

Having heard this, the Imam (a.s) comprehended the reason for such a
name and ordered all the people to gather in the mosque. When the people
had gathered, he (a.s) said to them: “Whenever I recite Allahu Akbar,
all of you should recite it in unison too.”

He then called for the dead person's companions - who were four in
number - and subjected them to individual and separate interrogation.

Turning to the first person, he (a.s) sought to know how he had killed
the boy's father. The man, who was stunned to hear the question, blurted
out: “All I did was to present the cord.” The Imam (a.s) recited Allahu
Akbar, and the people in the mosque chorused.

The second one, in answer to the Imam's (a.s) question, said: “My only
crime was to tie the cord around his neck.” The third person said: “I
had brought the knife”, while the fourth person, recounting the incident
explicitly, said: “We collectively murdered him for the purpose of
seizing and appropriating his wealth.” The Imam (a.s) recited Allahu
Akbar and the people too recited in unison.

Imam ‘Ali (a.s) took possession of the wealth which they had stolen from
the deceased and handed it to the boy's mother, and then subjected the
killers to a severe punishment. Then turning to the boy's mother, he
(a.s) said: “Change his name to Asha al-Din (religion is alive).”[^3]

2) The Religiousness of the Learned One from Dizful
---------------------------------------------------

At the time of his death, Sheikh Murtadha Ansari - having become the
highest-ranking religious authority, with notable popularity and
profundity in the Methodology and Science of Islamic Jurisprudence - was
not any different in the material point of life from the time when he
had first set foot in Najaf as a poor student from Dizful.

When people looked at his house, they found that he led his life just as
the most impoverished ones led theirs. A person once said to him: “This
is an immense work on your part that despite the large sum of money that
comes to you, you refuse to use it for yourself.” He said: “What great
work have I done?” The man said: “What work could be greater than what
you are doing presently?” The Sheikh said: “At the very best, my work is
similar to the donkey-riders of Kashan, who go to Isfahan and then
return from there.

The donkey-riders are given money to travel to Isfahan, purchase goods
from there and bring them back to Kashan. Have you ever sin them
exhibiting unfaithfulness and disloyalty with respect to the people's
money? They are trustworthy individuals and do not possess any right
(over the people's money). This work of mine is not as important as it
appears to you.”[^4]

3) Religion Beside the Royal Throne
-----------------------------------

During the caliphate of the second Caliph, Sad Ibn Waqqas in the company
of a few others, started out for Iran. Yazdgard, the king of Persia who
was in the city of Madain at that time, sent a herald to Sad inviting
some of the people in his caravan to come to his court so that he could
become aware of their destination.

They reached his court at a time when he had been busy consuming wine
and so he ordered the drinks to be removed. When the group had entered
the court, Mughairah Ibn Amir sat down alongside the king near the royal
bed. Witnessing this, Yazdgard, in a state of protest, said: “You Arabs
initially came to our lands for trading and begging, and after you had
consumed the tasty food and the delicious water (of our land) you went
and informed your friends. Now you return and claim to have brought a
'new religion.'

Your example is similar to that of the fox that had entered a garden
with the intention of eating the grapes. The owner of the garden allowed
him to eat and did not hurt him. The next day the fox brought other
foxes along with him and, entering the garden, began eating the grapes.
When the owner of the garden arrived and witnessed the scene, he bolted
all the exits and killed them all.

If I wished, I too could behave just like that but I know that you have
drawn up your army because of your poverty and straitened livelihood. I
shall give you abundant bounties and place over you a commander such
that you would lead a life of ease and comfort.”

Mughairah IbnAamir said: “Your statement regarding a difficult
livelihood is correct and we too agree that there was a time when we
used to eat mice and lizards, could not differentiate the lawful from
the unlawful, kill our cousins for the sake of one turnip and even go on
to brag about it. But then Allah, by means of His Prophet, sent for us a
religion, stopped us from idolatry, guided us towards monotheism, and
very soon we shall be targeting your country too.

O' Yazdgard! I give you the option to choose one out of three things:
Become a Muslim so that you can continue to rule, pay the poll-tax or
prepare for war.”

Hearing this, Yazdgard was overcome with rage and said: “Nothing, save a
sword, can exist between you and me.” Having said this, he then drove
them out of his court. Later, a war ensued betwin the two forces in
which the Muslims emerged victorious.[^5]

4) The Religiousness of Abu Ja’far Husaini
------------------------------------------

Abu Ja’far Muhammad Husaini[^6] - whose lineage reached Imam Husain
(a.s) through four generations - was a jurist and a pious and ascetic
person, who had revolted against Mutasam - the Abbasid Caliph - due to
his oppression and injustices. Mutasam sought to crush his revolt and so
he fled to Iran and into the cities of Khorasan, Sarakhs, Taliqan, Nisa
and Merv, and a great number of Iranians pledged allegiance to him.

In Merv, forty thousand Iranians pledged allegiance to him. One night,
when his army had gathered, he heard the sound of weeping.
Investigating, he came to know that one of his soldiers had forcefully
taken felt from a weaver and it was this weaver who had been weeping.

Abu Ja’far called for the soldier and sought to know the reason for the
evil act whereupon the soldier replied: We have pledged allegiance to
you so that we can loot the people and do as we like.

Abu Ja’far returned the felt to its owner and then disbanded his army,
saying: “Assistance for the religion of Allah cannot be sought from such
people.” Then, accompanied by his close companions, he left for
Taliqan.[^7]

5) Religion-Selling by Samurah
------------------------------

Samurah Ibn Jundab was of the inhabitants of Basrah. After his father's
death, he accompanied his mother to Madinah, where she married Mary Ibn
Shaiban - a companion of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) - and Samurah grew up
under his care. Despite his young age, he was an expert archer and the
Noble Prophet (s.a.w) permitted him to participate in the battle of
Uhud; later, he participated in the other battles as well.

During the reign of Muawiyah, Samurah, like some of the corrupt and
lying companions of the Noble Prophet(s.a.w), began fabricating
traditions in praise of Muawiyah and in criticism of Amirul Mo\`minin
(a.s).

Muawiyah said to him: “I shall give you one hundred thousand dirhams if
you ascribe the following verse (which was revealed in criticism of the
hypocrites) to ‘Ali Ibn Abi Talib:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يُعْجِبُكَ قَوْلُهُ فِي الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْـيَا
وَ يُشْهِدُ اللَّهَ عَلى‏ مَا فِي قَلْبِهِ وَ هُوَ أَلَدُّ الْخِصَامِ
وَ إِذَا تَوَلَّى سَعى‏ فِي الأََرْضِ لِيُفْسِدَ فِيهَا وَ يُهْلِكَ
الْحَرْثَ وَ النَّسْلَ وَ اللَّهُ لاَ يُحِبُّ الْفَسادَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And among men is he, whose speech about the life of this world causes
you to wonder, and he calls on Allah to witness as to what is in his
heart, yet he is the most violent of adversaries. And when he turns
back, he runs along in the land that he may cause mischief in it and
destroy the tilth and the stock, and Allah does not love
mischief-making.”*[^8]

…and ascribe this verse (which was revealed in praise of Imam ‘Ali (a.s)
after he had slept on the bed of the Noble Prophet during the migration
of the Noble Prophet to Medina) to Ibn Muljim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مِنَ النَّاسِ مَنْ يَشْرِي نَفْسَهُ ابْتِغاءَ مَرْضاتِ اللَّهِ وَ
اللَّهُ رَؤُفٌ بِالْعِبادِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And among men is he who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah;
and Allah is Affectionate to the servants.”*[^9]

Initially Samurah refused the offer, howver Muawiyah raised the stakes
saying: “I shall give you two hundred thousand dirhams”, but once again
Samurah refused. But when Muawiyah offered him four hundred thousand
dirhams he agreed and then forged traditions ascribeeng the first verse,
which was about the hypocrites, to Amirul Mominin (a.s) and attributing
the second verse, which was for Amirul Mominin (a.s), to Ibn Muljim, and
in this manner proved that he had indeed sold his religion.[^10]

[^1]: Suratul Rum (30), Verse 30

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 78, pg. 63

[^3]: Dastan-ha Wa Pand-ha, vol. 10, pg. 168; In the book Tarikh
al-Anbiya - vol. 2, pg. 215, this judgment has bin attributed to Prophet
Dawud and a similar one this has been ascribed to the Commander of the
Faithfuls(as).

[^4]: Dastanha-e-Ustad, vol. 2, pg. 68; Sirah-e-Nabawi, pg. 29

[^5]: Namunah-e-Ma’arif, vol. 5, pg. 234; Bazm-e-Iran, pg. 142

[^6]: He was the son of Qasim Ibn ‘Umar Ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain (as)
while his mother, Safiyyah, was the daughter of Musa Ibn ‘Umar Ibn ‘Ali
Ibn al-Husain (as).

[^7]: Tatimmah al-Muntaha, pg. 221

[^8]: Suratul Baqarah (2), Verse 204-205

[^9]: Ibid., Verse 207

[^10]: Paighambar Wa Yaran, vol. 3, pg. 258; Commentary of Nahjul
Balagha (of Ibn Abil Hadid), vol. 1, pg. 471


