44. Sustenance
==============

Allah, the Wise, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا مِنْ دَآبَّةٍ فِي الأََرْضِ إِلاَّ عَلَى اللهِ رِزْقُها
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“And there is no creature on the earth but on Allah is the sustenance
of it.”*[^1]

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أََلرِّزْقُ يَطلُبُ الْعَبْدَ أَشَدُّ طَلَباً مِنْ أَجَلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Sustenance seeks a person more intensely than his death does.”*[^2]

Short Explanation
-----------------

There exists no creature except that Allah has apportioned a livelihood
for it, and no soul departs from the world before it has consumed the
last morsel that had been ordained for it. One should strive to procure
lawful sustenance and, in the event of delay and stoppages in this path,
desist from attempting to obtain it by unlawful means - the best
approach being that of patience and self-control.

Every person has his sustenance placed in a particular thing - one has
his sustenance placed in trade, while another has it in leadership while
yet another in farming, etc. Absence of satisfaction with respect to the
share allotted, and lack of contentment strengthens the vices of greed
and covetousness within man leading him towards sins in order to procure
an increased sustenance - a state that only stems from a lack of
Tawakkul[^3]) in Allah.

1) They Should Witness the Wisdom!
----------------------------------

Prophet Musa (a.s) came across a poor person who, due to his abject
poverty, lay bare-bodied on the desert sand. When he (a.s) came nearer,
the person requested: “O' Musa! Pray to Allah that he grants me a little
sustenance for I am on the verge of dying.”

Musa (a.s) prayed for him and then proceeded from there to Mount Sinai
to converse with Allah.  
 A few days later Musa (a.s), on his return, happened to pass by that
very place when he witnessed that the same poor man had been arrested
and a large crowd had gathered around him.

He (a.s) inquired: “What has happened?” The people present there said:
“Until recently he was penniless but off late he had managed to acquire
some money; having consumed wine, he got involved in a brawl and killed
a person. He has now been arrested so that he can be subjected to
'qisas'[^4]) and put to death!”

Allah says in the Noble Qur\`an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَوْ بَسَطَ اللٌّهُ الرِّزْقَ لِعِبادِهِ لَبَغَوْا فِي الأَرْضِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And if Allah should amplify the provision for His servants they would
certainly revolt in the earth.”[^5]

Musa (a.s) acknowledged the divine Wisdom and, expressing repentance
over his request, sought Allah's forgiveness.[^6]

2) Incorrect Deduction from The Qur\`an
---------------------------------------

Umar Ibn Muslim was one of the companions of Imam Sadiq (a.s) and used
to visit him (a.s) frequently.

Once, when he did not visit the Imam (a.s) for a long time, he (a.s)
inquired about him from ‘Ali Ibn Abdul Aziz, who said: “May I be made
your ransom! He has stopped working for his livelihood, and has engaged
himself in worship and asceticism instead. Hearing this, Imam Sadiq
(a.s) said: “Woe unto him! But does he not know that the prayers of one,
who stops working, go unanswered!”  
 During the time of the Noble Prophet (s.a.w), when the verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَنْ يَتَّقِ اللٌّهَ يَجْعَلْ لَهُ مَخْرَجاً وَ يَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ
حَيْثُ لا يَحْتَسِبُ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And whoever is careful of (his duty to) Allah, He will make for him an
outlet, and give him sustenance from whence he thinks not”[^7] was
revealed, a group from amongst the Muslims abandoned their professions,
adopted seclusion and engaged themselves in worship, saying: “Allah
Himself provides the sustenance and shall never permit the religious
ones to become distressed and destitute; hence why do we need to toil in
order to procure our sustenance.”

When the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) was informed of this, he (s.a.w) summoned
them and objecting at this attitude of theirs, asked: “Why have you
abandoned your professions?” They replied: “Allah has undertaken to
provide us our sustenance.” When he (s.a.w) heard this, he explained:
“It is not as you think. Allah does not answer the prayers of a person
who, despite possessing the ability to work and exert himself, fails to
do so. You must continue to engage yourselves in your respective
professions.”[^8]

3) Sustenance in the Measure of Sufficiency
-------------------------------------------

Once, passing through a desert, the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) and his
companions happened to come across a person tending camels and requested
him to provide them with some milk. The man excused himself saying: “The
milk that is in the breasts of these camels is for the breakfast of the
people of the tribe and that, which lies in the container, is for their
evening meals.”

When he heard this, the Noble Prophet (s.a.w) prayed for him, saying:
“O' Lord! Increase this person in wealth and children” - and the group
continued on its way. A little later they came across another person,
who too was engaged in feeding the camels. When they requested him to
provide them with some milk, he immediately milked the she-camels and
poured all of the milk in the vessels of the Noble Prophet's (s.a.w). In
addition to the milk he even presented them with a sheep and said: At
the moment this is all I can offer but if you desire I shall arrange for
more.

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) raised his holy hands and prayed: “O' Lord!
Grant him sustenance in a measure that is sufficient for him.”

Astonished, his (s.a.w) companions said: “O' Prophet of Allah! For the
person who rejected your request you sought something which all of us
long for, whereas for the one who fulfilled your desire, you prayed for
something, which none of us prefer (sustenance in a measure that is just
sufficient and not excess)!”

The Noble Prophet (s.a.w) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ مَا قَلَّ وَ كَفَى خَيْرٌ مِمَّا كَثُرَ وَ أَلْهَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A livelihood that is less but sufficient for (fulfilling the needs of)
one's life is better than great riches that engrosses man in itself.” He
(s.a.w) then supplicated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ ارْزُقْ مُحَمَّداً وَ آلَ مُحَمَّدٍ الْكَفَافَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O' Lord! Grant Muhammad and his Progeny a sustenance in the measure
that is just sufficient (for them).[^9]

4) Charity Increases Sustenance
-------------------------------

Imam Sadiq (a.s) had many sons, one of whom was named Muhammad.
Occasionally it would so happen that his income would exceed his
expenses. Once, Imam Sadiq (a.s) inquired: “How much have you managed to
save?” He replied: “Forty dinars.” The Imam (a.s) said: “Give it as
charity in the way of Allah. He said: This is all that I have with me
and if I were to give this in charity there would be nothing left for
me.”

The Imam (a.s) insisted: “Go and give it in charity and Allah shall
compensate it for you. Do you not know that for everything there is a
key and the key to sustenance is charity?”

Muhammad, heeding his father's advice, gave the forty dinars in charity.
Hardly ten days had passed by since this episode when a sum of four
thousand dinars was presented to the Imam (a.s). Turning to Muhammad, he
(a.s) said: “My Son! We gave forty dinars in the path of Allah and He
gave us four thousand dinars (a hundred times) in return.”[^10]

5) Wealth from Unknown Places
-----------------------------

The Buyids, whose sultanate had commenced in the year 322 ah, ruled for
a period of 126 years. The greatest of the Buyid rulers and the most
compassionate of them all with respect to the Shiite faith and his
subjects was Imad al-Daulah - (Abul Hasan, ‘Ali Ibn Babwaih) - who ruled
for nine years (d. 338 ah). During his lifetime, several strange
incidents occurred with him in connection with riches and treasures:

1. When Imad al-Daulah arrived in Shiraz, Yaqut, whom Al-Muqtadir Billah
Abbasi had placed there as the governor, took to flight. In the
circumstances, Imad al-Daulah did not possess anything to pay for the
expenditure of his army. Distressed and lost in thought he set out for
hunting. On the way the foot of his horse plunged into a hole. As Imad
al-Daulah extracted the animal's foot, the hole widened revealing a
treasure which Yaqut had concealed there. He extracted the treasure and
used it to pay for his army's expenses.

2. Once, as he lay down and reflected about his army and subjects, his
eyes suddenly fell upon a snake that had emerged from one corner of the
roof and disappeared into another. As a precautionary measure, he
ordered the roof to be taken apart and the snake killed so that it did
not sting anyone.

When a portion of the roof was broken, a second roof became manifest and
the intervening region betwin the two roofs was found to house chests
containing a total of five hundred thousand dinars. The chests were
brought down and Imad al-Daulah distributed the money amongst his
subjects.

3. Once, having decided to have some clothes stitched for the elders of
his army, his soldiers and himself, he called for a tailor. The special
tailor of Yaqut, the erstwhile governor of the city, was recommended to
him. Incidentally this tailor happened to be deaf but Imad al-Daulah
said: “The faculty of sight is what a tailor ought to necessarily
possess; as for hearing, it is not a necessity.”  
 When the tailor was brought before him, he ordered: “I want you to
stitch clothes for my servants, soldiers, officers, generals and
myself.”

The tailor - deaf that he was - imagined that someone had spoken ill of
him and, complaining that he had money in his possession, said: “There
are only four chests of the governor Yaqut in my custody and I am
unaware of what is contained within them!”

Imad al-Daulah ordered the chests to be brought before him; when they
were opened, they were found to contain great riches, beautiful clothes
and valuable stones.[^11]

[^1]: Surat Hud (11), Verse 6

[^2]: Jame’ul Akhbar, pg. 126

[^3]: Placing one’s trust (in Allah) (Tr.)

[^4]: Retaliation (Tr.)

[^5]: Suratul Shura (42), Verse 27

[^6]: Hikayat-ha-e-Gulistan, pg. 161

[^7]: Suratul Talaq (65), Verse 2-3

[^8]: Ba Mardum In Guneh Barkhord Konim, pg. 163; al-Wafi, vol. 10, pg.
15

[^9]: Dastan-ha Wa Pand-ha, vol. 2, pg. 72; Anwar al-Nu’maniyyah, pg.
342

[^10]: Hikayat-ha-e-Shanidani, vol. 4, pg. 92; Al-Kafi, vol. 4, pg. 9

[^11]: Jame’ al-Nurain, pg. 323. It has bin reported in the book
‘Akhbar-e-Ghaibiyyah dar malahim wa fitan’ (pg. 314), that Amirul
Mu’minin (as), alluding to the rule of the Buyids, had stated: يخرج من
ديلمان بنو الصياد ... ثم يستقوي امرهم حتى يملكوا الزوراء و يخلعوا
الخلفاء


