Meet the Author
===============

Carol L. Anway, M.S. Ed. In Guidance and Counseling, has spent many
years as school counselor. For eleven years she edited and wrote
Christian education resources focusing on children, families, and women.
She has traveled in the United States and Canada presenting workshops on
intergenerational ministries, Christian education, and teacher training
as well as giving ministerial leadership at camps and retreats. Her
education, writing, and commitment to the spiritual life helped her in
the struggle to reconcile with her daughter's choice to convert to
Islam. In Daughters of Another Path, Mrs. Anway shares her experience
plus the stories of her daughter and other American women who have
chosen to become Muslim.

**ACKNOWLEDGMENT**

My deep appreciation is extended first of all to my daughter, Jodi
Anway Mobammadzadeh, who has caused me to stretch and view the world
through another window. Our whole family has been enriched and enlarged
by our venture with her to see life with new perspective and insights.
Her contribution throughout the project and writing of the book has been
so helpful-the editorial reviews, the rewriting, the title, the
feedback. My initial encouragement and zeal for the project was sparked
by Dr. Jamilah Kolocotronis Jitmoud and Susan Elsayyad, both
American-born women who became Muslims and are currently teachers at the
Kansas City Islamic School. They met with Jodi and me and helped us
define the project, expressing a need in their lives for such a
reconciling resource.

would love to personally meet each of the 53 women who shared their
conversion stories by responding to the questionnaires. Each one was an
inspiration and testimony to what she has chosen-to be a Muslim woman,
submissive to the will of God. Working with my editor and long-time
friend, Talitha PemUngton, has been a joy. She required so much of me as
she helped me present this book to you in a concise, well-organized
form. I needed her! And thanks to Joe, my husband and the love of my
life, for support and encouragement through this and all our years
together.

**DEDICATION**

The world is constantly growing and changing. All persons have a road
to travel and a path to find to bring meaning to their lives. Even
though in the United States and Canada we may be bombarded with
information on how others in the world live their lives, we somehow
don't catch on. We are prone to segregate ourselves in our own economic,
religious, or ethnic groups and resist bumping into other cultures and
ideas. We tend to be shaped by the headlines and daily news reporting,
which can feed our fears and reinforce stereotypes that are often
misleading. This book is written in dedication to you, the reader,
because you have taken the time to look beyond what you know. You have
sought to find out about American-born women who have chosen the path of
Islam. One of these Muslim women may be your classmate, your co-worker,
your grocer, your neighbor, your cousin, your niece, your grandchild,
and yes, maybe even your daughter.


