Finding a Muslim Husband
========================

+I met my husband playing Bingo. I was sitting by a family friend and
it so happened he knew her too. He had a nice smile and was easy to talk
to. I had come from a disastrous relationship with an abusive man nine
years my senior but many years my junior in maturity. When I met this
next man I was in such a bad frame of mind about men it is a wonder I
considered marriage again. He didn't mention sex or make remarks or grab
my body parts or call me his ol' lady in public. It was refreshing to be
treated in such a way. He would never take me anywhere without a
chaperon as a witness that he was a gentleman. I felt respect and I
liked it.

+I met my husband at college. He was very polite (I noticed that right
way) and very good looking. I really wasn't looking for anyone when we
met but the first thing I noticed in him, which was always on the top of
my list, was his importance of family (loyalty, respect) toward mother
and father. He answered questions so patiently. +I met my husband at the
community college I was attending. He was the grill cook. Something just
clicked between us. He was kind and nice to talk to. He had a religious
feeling about him and was mature in his ideas. Of course, I thought he
was handsome too. I liked the lifestyle he offered of a family-based
society. I especially thought he was my friend and we agreed easily on
many matters including religious. He was a catalyst for my own personal
exploration.

+I tutored him in English. He helped me study Islam, but when I
converted I could no longer see him-he fully respected my decision to
stop seeing him once I became Muslim. Later, several people noticed a
"perfect match" for me in the mosque and it turned out to be the same
man I had tutored and who had brought me to Islam. I found him to be
sincere, gentle, generous, and patient. If ever there would be a "soul
mate" for me, he's the one. He has filled the "holes" of loneliness and
need for unconditional love that had not been filled before. My family
accepted him completely from the day they met him. They love him dearly,
and he is a friend to all of them.

+My husband and I met when we worked in the same restaurant. I was a
waitress and he was a dishwasher. He was new in the country and didn't
speak English. He seemed honest, uncomplicated, hard-working, and
generous. +I met my husband while in college. We worked at the same
Mexican food restaurant. I was attracted to him because he was very
hard-working, smart, and conducted himself politely. I was in need of a
person to think I was wonderful. He put me on a pedestal and treated me
like a queen (even though we were dirt poor) with respect and dignity.

Some of the women had already converted to Islam while still single and
met their husbands in other ways. One common way of finding a husband or
wife is through advertising in an Islamic magazine or at a matrimonial
booth at a Muslim conference. It is not unusual for one who is ready to
get married to let Muslim friends know so they can help in looking for a
suitable mate. The following excerpts from the questionnaires provide a
good overview of the Muslim/Muslim relationship and marriage. +I met my
husband through the imam of the mosque. I accepted him because he was
religious. Nothing else really mattered. He had no part in my conversion
for I was already a Muslim. My marriage ceremony was all Islamic\_ I
talked to him for two weeks and then decided to marry him two days
before Ramadan 1991.

+My marriage was arranged by my request in order to have support
(religiously) to help me learn about my deen (my obligations). I asked
my wali (the one who arranged the marriage) that the man be a good
practicing Muslim which was the only characteristic he needed. I wanted
a husband that would teach me about Islam in depth and to remind me
always of Allah (SWT). I was already Muslim. My family didn't know him
before the marriage. They met him two days before the ceremony, and he
asked my parents' permission to marry me the day before. They didn't
like him. Now they tolerate him only.

My husband-to-be first came to see me on a Friday night and we were
married on the following Sunday afternoon. At our ceremony we invited
friends and family. Our wedding was an Islamic wedding. I wore an
Islamic dress, not a white gown. We were in separate rooms. The imam
came and asked me if I accept [the man] and what I wanted for my mahar
[dowry]. I heard him give a speech about the importance of marriage. At
that point my mom walked out saying what a big farce the wedding was. Of
course, I cried and was hurt, but we continued the wedding but at a
faster pace.

+I met my husband through a marriage ad in an Islamic magazine. A
friend of his had put the ad in. [I was too late in responding to the ad
for that man, but the] friend gave my letter to [another man] the one
who is now my husband because he was also wanting to get married. We
talked on the phone ten to twelve hours a week for six weeks; then he
flew to Kansas. We were about 90 percent sure about marriage even before
we met, but had to meet to know for sure. We got engaged that day, and
did the Islamic marriage (nikkah) two days later. I was looking for
someone who was a strong Muslim, both in theory and practice-one who
lived his life Islamically, regardless of how others around him lived. I
wanted someone who would be a good provider, because in a marriage it is
the man who provides the family with everything, even if the woman has
money. I had heard many stories about men who didn't work, or wanted the
wife to support them, so I wanted to make sure my husband would work
hard for us. The more I got to know about him, the more he seemed to fit
this. I had been straight-forward in my letter about wanting a strong
Muslim, that I was divorced with a child, (in case it was someone
wanting a young virgin), and enclosed my photo. Even though I didn't ask
for his photo right away, he sent one to me. Looks are not important. He
and I got to know each other very well on the phone, talking about many
things about our lives-Islam, current events (including some that
involved Muslims), etc. I made sure his family would accept an American
wife [he was from a Muslim country], even one who has divorced with one
child from that marriage. But he assured me that wouldn't make a bit of
difference to them, that they all chose their mates, and some chose
mates from other countries.

We became very close through our phone conversation, and I always
looked forward to him calling. If I had a bad day, I wanted to tell him
about it so I would feel better. It was like an old-fashioned courtship.
Our passions didn't get in the way of getting to know each other. When
we met, we realized we were right for each other, and the friendship and
affection we felt for each other turned to love. Islam does not allow
dating, pre-marital sex, etc. This is a great way to get to know
someone, and see if you get along with each other. That is the most
important [step], getting to know if someone else is on your level,
Islamically and personally. If they are, you will love them and be
attracted to them.

I wanted someone who was gentle and loving, and I found someone like
that. He does not yell at me or hit me, as is the stereotype of Arab
men. I have to admit, I thought that all Arab men were controlling and
violent, but they are not. He tells me he loves me, and makes sure I
know that he does. He is very caring and concerned.

**Entering Into a Muslim Marriage**

+My parents were unsure about my husband as they didn't get to meet him
in person until the night we married. We purposely spent a few days
(after our marriage ) with them so they could get to know him better.
They have grown to love him dearly. In fact, in my father's eyes, he is
the son he never had. My mother has confessed that she couldn't wish a
nicer husband for me. Considering their veritable objections when they
first discovered how I found him, my family has espoused my husband as
one of their own. If the couple survives family objections during the
courtship period, they prepare to enter into marriage. It is often
difficult for the parents of the woman marrying a Muslim from another
country. They may feel suspicious of the man's intentions and express
fear for their daughter. First-time meetings between the male suitor and
the woman's family may be strained. However, in many cases among this
sample of women, the family, too, grew to accept and establish a
friendship with the husband.

In the survey I asked for positive stories of those converting to
Islam. This is not to ignore the reports of the poor relationships that
exist. One woman called me on the phone after receiving the
questionnaire and said she couldn't give her name or answer the
questionnaire because her experience had not been positive. In fact, she
had been married to two different Muslims, both well-educated and one a
physician. Both beat her and abused her badly. She was in hiding, afraid
for her life.

It is not my intent to glorify Muslim marriage, but I certainly
recognize that all Muslim marriages are not catastrophes as the media
would lead us to believe. My intention in writing this is to share some
positive experiences which contrast with the negative stories in order
to present a more balanced picture. Among Muslims there are good, bad,
and in-between marriages just like that of other religions and cultures,
and abusive relationships may be found. There are even those men from
other countries who marry only to have access to the green card
(allowing the non-citizen to stay in the United States and work).

+I joined a pen pal club from a newspaper ad and got a letter from an
Arab college student. He proposed and I fell for it. He basically
married me to get my virginity and his green card. After our divorce I
was living in Tennessee. Friends introduced me to another Muslim. He was
a religious, simple guy-answered all my questions right, and I wanted a
husband and children of my own. My parents were skeptical before our
marriage because they didn't think he was any different from my first
husband who was Muslim. They accept him now and our three-year--old son.
We had a simple marriage ceremony at the Islamic Center. Then we went
out to eat at Ponderosa Steak House. The reception was fancier but only
attended by a few friends of ours. I had a sisters' bachelorette party
the night before-fun! It was traditionally Islamic. Then we went to New
York for two weeks for our honeymoon. +I was married before to a Muslim
and had a very bad marriage. For five years I was physically and
emotionally abused. My advice for anyone who wants to marry is to have a
wali to check the brothers [brothers are the Muslim men] that want to
many. This marriage was bad. After we married he prayed once, got his
green card, flirted with women, and finally became a citizen. He has a
restaurant, married a Muslima from Singapore and brought his family
here-all thanks to me being born in the U.S.A. I am now happily married
to another Muslim.

A Muslim marriage for the women surveyed was by and large very
positive, beginning with the ceremony itself, which often differed
significantly from traditional western styles. Sometimes the wedding
ceremony itself added to the fears and hurts of the family. Families
dream of walking their daughter up the aisle of the church and having
the minister join her to a man of whom they approve. It will be a
sacrament in the Christian tradition with the reception and gifts and
fellowship following. The stories of weddings between a non-Muslim and a
Muslim, however, illustrate many differences and varieties of
situations. Some did have the large weddings (often blamed on satisfying
the parents), but there were also elopements, small weddings before the
justice of the peace, and/or Muslim ceremonies.

+We had a special ceremony for a Muslim marrying a non-Muslim
(informal) which is called a term marriage. Our term was for ninety-nine
years. It was just us and two friends. Then we had a wedding for my
family in my parents' church. My father married us and did not refer to
Jesus. He was respective of my husband's needs. It was very nice and
family-oriented. There were not many problems because I was not Muslim
and my husband was not strongly practicing. We also had a third wedding
after I became Muslim to celebrate our permanent standing as two Muslims
married to each other. +My family never expressed any opposition to my
marriage or to my husband. We were not close. My mother only asked me if
I was happy. When I answered yes, she said so was she.

Our marriage was performed by a Baptist minister. Because I had not
belonged to any church for many years, I didn't know a minister, so we
asked the minister from the church that my roommates attended at the
time. It was very simple. We asked to read the ceremony beforehand. The
only change we asked for was that the minister replace the words, "In
Jesus' name" to "In God's name." The nicest part was the Arab tradition
afterwards with singing and dancing. +We were married by a justice of
the peace at a courthouse without my family and with only friends as
witnesses. Then a few months later we were married by a shaikh [Muslim
religious leader] in a short ceremony with only one witness.

+There were no cultural elements in our wedding such as cutting and
eating cake or sprinkling sugar over our heads. Our wedding was the most
basic Islamic marriage, where two people find the need to become
partners in life and agree before God to live and work together in
harmony and stay away from sins. He read the words of the marriage
ceremony in Arabic and I agreed to the marriage. For my dowry he
promised to give me my own Arabic Qur'an, which he gave to me sometime
later. He gave me items for prayer, including a prayer carpet. After we
were married, according to the law of Islam, we went to the county
courthouse and were married by a judge. (In Islam, Muslims are advised
to follow the rules of the country in which they reside as long as these
laws are not contrary to Islam.) +We had a ceremony at my church not
geared to any particular faith. We also had a nikkah performed at the
mosque the day before our wedding ceremony.

+Our marriage ceremony was beautiful! Perfect as others describe it.
The day was perfect, sunshine and cool. A string quartet, mansion for a
venue, and excellent catered brunch buffet. I understand that it is
typical to have Arabic music played at a reception and both of us were
in agreement that most of our guests would have been put off by it so we
decided on strings. Other than two items, our ceremony was an entirely
Islamic ceremony. The two elements that made it not completely Islamic
were my father giving me away and that we had guests attend the
ceremony. I am glad we had Christian guests at the ceremony because then
part of the mystery surrounding Islam was removed.

**Relating to the Husband's Family**

Another factor is the power that the family of the husband has over
acceptance of the wife. Of course, this is something we all have to do
in marriage-to work out the relationship with our in-laws, but in this
situation there is the added dimension of cultural differences. There is
a strong attachment by most of the men to their families of origin and
to their homelands, and what that family feels in accepting the wife may
be very important. Sometimes it is strong enough to break up a marriage
if families disapprove; some learn to live with a poor relationship with
the husband's family, but the majority of these women respondents found
love, acceptance, and pleasure in knowing their husband's family. They
reported good communication between the families by letter and telephone
and visits back to the husband's homeland. At times the relatives come
to visit or reside in the United States or Canada.

+1 have met my husband's family. I was scared to death to meet
them-they had bad ideas about American women. They were shocked to see
that I cover my face-they were visibly uncomfortable about it. Not a
warm welcome, but no one tried to kill me! We live in my husband's
family's home (in his country of origin). I have been here a year, and I
have not been accepted-only a few of them have wholeheartedly welcomed
me. Most of them have a fear that one day I'll leave and take the
kids.

My husband and I truly felt I would be another one of the gang. Well,
I'm not even close! I'm not sure I'll ever fit in as a true family
member. As we anticipated, we have a lot of problems regarding Islamic
practices. My husband's family is very westernized. The benefits of
being near them have been for my husband and the kids-a bigger framework
to fit into as full, permanent family members. +My husband's family was
there when we married. His mother is Brazilian and converted upon her
marriage so they are sympathetic to some of the difficulties. They are
living in the U.S. now and will probably (when we can afford a big
enough place) live part of the year with us. They will help the children
and me with Arabic and also Portuguese. The difficulties will be their
poor diet and exercise habits. I'm a health food nut (except for
chocolate!) and my husband gets tense and weird around his father but
this is improving.

We help support them financially and that does make our lives harder,
but they lost everything in '67 war and again in the Gulf War. They were
in Kuwait. They are simple people and so are we. +My husband's mother is
very dear to me and we all cry very hard when the time comes for us to
leave. It is like when I visit and leave my own family. Both my parents
and his family care deeply for each other and mine sends gifts and calls
when we are there.

+I met my husband's family on a trip we made to his country. They are
wonderful people, and they have been completely accepting even though I
was a divorced American woman with kids who was not even Muslim, because
I was important to their son and brother.

There are some areas that I have more or less difficulty fitting in.
I'll never get used to having 35 and more relatives who don't think they
have to knock, and think our private business is theirs. And I've never
gotten comfortable taking off with the women for days at a time at
larger gatherings. I made them assign a room to my family at a family
wedding so I could get my own husband and children together if I wanted
to-weird idea, I know. My husband puts up with my idiosyncrasies fairly
well most of the time, and when he doesn't, his mother tells him he had
better work out a middle ground with me! The benefits of relating to his
family are that they are really a family with all the good and bad
features thereof -something I had not really ever had before in my own
family.

+I met dozens of relatives in the first few weeks of being in Egypt,
and it was a very stressful experience. Now I can say that his family
and I get along well, and I am quite attached to them after having lived
with them by myself for two months while my husband was in Saudi
working. They've also accepted me, and feel comfortable with me, I think
mostly because I showed them I was respectful of them and that I loved
their son. The benefit is that I'll learn Arabic. The problem is always
being aware of the fact that they're wary of Americans in general.

There are those who are even more warmly accepted by their husband's
family than by their own. The following letter was written by one woman
to her friend in the United States during a visit by the woman and her
husband to his parents in Iran. +I've been here about one week now and
everything is so wonderful. I have adopted my mother-in-law for my own.
She is so wonderful. This first week has been interesting, meeting his
family and trying to remember what customs to use and when. So far my
husband has said that everyone says they love me, and I feel like I have
been accepted. They treat me like a queen. My mother-in-law kisses me
all the time and waits on me hand and foot. Not knowing for sure what to
expect when I got here, I did a lot of unnecessary worrying. We were met
at the airport by a lot of his family and it was a very touching moment,
one I'll never forget. Mama is like an angel. I can't believe we waited
so long to see her. I have spent a lot of time with tears because of
what I see here. The family system here is unique with closeness that is
beyond words. Some of my tears are due to the fact that I felt more love
in one week from his family than from my own flesh who didn't even
bother to say goodbye.


