Blending Cultures
=================

The women are learning to be Muslim and at the same time, if married to
a man from another country, may be incorporating many new cultural
elements into the family. The women indicate a blend of American
culture, the husband's background traditions, and an effort to interpret
all these Islamically.

+Many traditions including those about pets; the way we cook, bathe,
and talk; and all manners are from my hus band's traditions. My
childhood lifestyles are almost 100 percent different now and are not an
accepted part of our traditions. +In some ways our life has taken on
much Iranian traditions and culture, including the food we eat and the
way the food is prepared, and my hijab [there are many ways to wear
hijab]. Many things I do are Iranian but my mannerisms and thinking are
still very American. +There is a blend-no shoes in the house, the manner
of washing after using the toilet, answering the phone assalamu alaikum
(the common greeting among Muslims)-these are mostly Islamic customs. We
eat Persian foods about 75 percent of the time.

+Our daily life really doesn't include Iraqi culture -maybe a little
Arab culture though. Our children play games in Arabic that my husband
played when he was small. At least twice a week my husband teaches the
children Arabic and Qur'an. +Our daily life includes very much the
traditions and culture of my husband's country, Syria. Most of my
friends are from other countries. Their cultures are also an influence.
Most important, my husband's mother is with us for extended visits. She
always brings a part of Syria with her. When she is not here, our ways
are pretty much American-Muslim. This is a combination of cultures.

+My husband encourages us to learn Arabic and likewise he tries to
learn Americanisms such as children's play songs, poems, sayings. We try
to blend our cultures comfortably, and we are both accustomed to being
around people from other cultures and languages than our own. \*The only
culture is Islam. I even try not to follow the American culture. I try
to put Islam first in everything I do. My husband's family is very stuck
in tradition and Indian culture. This gave us many problems on our
visit. \*Our everyday life includes traditions or culture from Iran. How
can it not; my husband is Iranian. That will never change. He tells
stories, we sing songs, and we eat a lot of Iranian foods.

\*Our daily life is just normal everyday living. What is different
about our family is that we do try to look at life from an Islamic point
of view, and we explain Islam to our children using events that happen
in our daily lives. \*Since we are both Muslim, Islam is the main impact
on our family. Of course, it is meshed with the foods from his country
and small sayings when we wake up, bathe, and sleep. I feel I have
created my traditions in our family because I really want an
Islamically-oriented family. We have made many new traditions. My
husband is very lonely here in America. He misses his family so badly
which he left when he was eighteen years old. So I try to make up for
his sadness by taking my house role very seriously and lovingly.

The women in this survey seemed relatively happy with their marriages
at the time they responded to the questionnaire. They were attracted to
these Muslim men from other countries by a variety of characteristics
which they saw as mature and positive. Not all the women were married to
Muslim men at the time of their conversion; some converted while still
single and later wanted to be married to a practicing Muslim. As in any
religion, the couple being of "like minds" in their religious practice
helps to bring harmony and stability to their lives together.

**8. Raisins Children in Another Path Muslim Children in American
Society**

We had taken our children with us to the church campgrounds for annual
family church camps during the years our children were growing up. Jodi
also went to these campgrounds for youth camps. These were the grounds
where many good growing experiences in her spiritual life had occurred
during childhood and youth. At the campfires, at the prayer services, in
the classes, in the study of the scriptures, and in the good fellowship
of other Christian friends her life had been impressed by challenges to
worship and to follow God. It was when she was fifteen and attending a
youth camp that she wrote a poem that she felt came to her as
inspiration. This poem speaks to her life in a very special way.

**THE INSPIRATION**

Wherever I'm at, it is my home;
The people I'm with, my family.
There'll be different things
Wherever I roam,
Wherever I go, I'll go happily.
Don't worry about me-I don't walk alone
For God is walking beside me,
And as we walk along

We speak in soft tones; Together we keep each other company.

I'll go where he wants, wherever I'm led- Though the roads may be long
and dreary. I'll not remember the harsh words that are said, But the
people I've sought to help Who are weary.

The times I'll remember will be happy ones, No matter what others will
say. The bad that there is Will not overcome For God's with me all the
way.

Jodi C. Anway June, 1978 We were going to the same campgrounds again
for the weekend, but it was different this time-a different group of
people. Jodi and Reza had scheduled the campgrounds for their Islamic
group. We were invited to go, and it would be fun to help with some of
the cooking, visit with the people, and be there to help out with our
grandchild. We were the only non-Muslims present and no one seemed to
care that I wasn't wearing a scarf to cover my hair.

The weekend with the Muslim people was very comfortable. These were
mostly young adults with their children. The women all covered their
heads with the hijab, the men were modestly dressed, and the children
loved being in the out-of-doors. The swimming pool was a great
attraction, but the rules were special this weekend. Blankets were hung
on the fence to give privacy as the women went swimming together with
the younger children. The men and older boys went in at a different
time.

At meal times we all ate together in the mess hall enjoying the
interaction of visiting and sharing. There was an air of friendliness
and cooperation as both men and women worked in the kitchen, took care
of children, fished in the lake, took walks, and generally enjoyed each
other. Both men and women showed care and respect in their relationships
toward each other as they observed the Muslim code of conduct. I really
wasn't even aware of how that was carried out except that the men seemed
to congregate together as did the women.

I saw them at prayer in the dining hall several times as they lined up,
men grouped together with the older boys, the women together, and the
young children merrily going their way among the people but disturbing
no one in their prayers. This was the same dining hall where I had come
to women's retreats and studied and prayed and had fellowship. I felt a
kinship with these people. They were people of God who had come to these
grounds that were sacred to me, and they too were offering up their
prayers, their commitment, their desire to live a good life, just as I
had done so many times in the years past.

It pleased me to know that our grandchildren were being raised in a
family with that kind of commitment to God and to family. One day at my
daughter's, I was sitting on the bed by grandbaby Fatemeh. Jodi was in
the same room doing her noon-day prayers recited in the Arabic language.
She had her prayer garments on and was performing her prayers on the
special prayer rug. My grandson, Emaun, almost four years old at the
time, crawled up by me. He had listened to Baba (what he calls his
father) and Mama recite the prayers to God in Arabic several times a day
in his few years of life. Emaun said to me, "Grandma, do you do namaz?"
"Are those the prayers, Emaun?"

"Yes," he answered. "Well, I pray to God, but I do it in a different
way." "What do you say, Grandma?"

I answered that I make up my own prayers to God. Now Emaun knew that I
only speak English and not the language of his Baba, which is Farsi, or
the language of their prayers, Arabic. So to my reply that I made up my
prayers to God, Emaun said, "But Grandma, God doesn't know English."
Later Jodi talked with him to help him understand that God knows all
languages.

Islam is introduced to the newborn in the earliest moments of the
child's life as the father or other able adult whispers into the child's
ears "God is the Most Great. . . . I witness there is no God but Allah.
. . . and Mohammad is the Messenger of Allah. . . . Hasten to prayer. .
. . Hasten to success. . . . God is the Most Great." A sheep is often
sacrificed during the early days or months after a child's birth, and
the meat is distributed to the needy. The choice of a good name is
important so that it might influence the child in a positive way. It is
recommended that boys be circumcised. The parents are responsible for
teaching their children to pray and to preform the proper ablutions by
age nine. It is a Muslim belief that the parents will be rewarded by God
with many blessings and forgiveness of sins if good effort is made in
child-rearing.

The responses of the women who have children indicate that one of their
most important roles and obligations is to be a responsible parent. From
modeling behaviors to their commitment and daily training, they want to
raise their children to continue the tradition of being Muslim and to
practice those beliefs in a committed way. I see that daily training and
modeling evident with our grandson.

The women indicated that the responsibility they have in their roles as
wife and mother is to provide a peaceful, comfortable home environment
in which to nurture the husband and the children. If she works outside
the home, it should not interfere with her responsibilities as wife and
mother. Her right to maintenance (that it is the husband's
responsibility to provide for all financial support for the family) is
mainly to free her in her roles of giving birth, of breastfeeding, and
of rearing the children.

+As for raising children, I am the primary caretaker being with them
twenty-four hours a day. I'm mostly in charge of education and
discipline though the father does play a very active role in the
children's care and education, etc. +The Qur'an teaches the child that
he (or she) must honor and obey their parents unless they are told to do
something that goes against Qur'anic teaching. They are taught in
Islamic school to be obedient and to respect their mother. There will be
a time when I am old when it will be their turn to take care of me. They
are also told to kiss the hand of their mother, as I am the one who will
ensure their entrance into paradise.


