Islamic Training Emphasized
===========================

The women expressed their concern about child-rearing in several areas.
They especially want to pass on to their children the values of the
Islamic community and religion. Living in a non-Muslim country makes it
a little more difficult, and they feel they must train their children
carefully. \*Since I have become Muslim, I am more concerned about what
my child sees and hears, and how that affects her. I want to raise her
to choose Islam for herself, not force it on her. Of course, while I am
raising her, I am making decisions I feel are right. I am teaching her
values that are rarely taught to the children today in this country. I
think it is my obligation as a mother to raise the next generation of
Muslims to be good Muslims, good daughters and sons, good sisters and
brothers, good husbands and wives, and good mothers and fathers.

My husband is the male role model for my daughter. He is not her
natural father, but she loves him almost as if he were, and he loves her
almost as if she were his own. I feel that he wants to impart good
values to her, and on the children we will have, insha' Allah. But I
will be with them the majority of the time, so what they learn will come
mostly from me. I do want him to be active in raising our children
because I think they need active Muslim male role models. We need to
give them love and kindness, and try to shape them gently so they will
grow up knowing they are part of a loving Muslim family.

+As Muslims we must raise and teach our children to the best of our
knowledge and more. In Islam we are encouraged to seek knowledge.
Everything that I do as a mom has something Islamic involved: teaching
love, Qur'an, prayers, manners, cleanliness, etc. It really comes easy
when you have Islam in your heart! There is more to child-rearing than I
said, but all of my techniques come from Islam. My husband plays a big
role in childrearing-more than is to be expected from a dad working
eight to five. I must be more than an example and do my very, very best
to give the best care.

+My husband and I try our best to raise our children by the tenets of
Islam. It is very difficult, however, once the children reach school
age. They are exposed to so much that we would rather them not know
about at a young age. Alhamdulillah, however, we have two hijab-wearing
daughters, so I don't feel we're doing so badly. I hope my children will
always feel free to come to me for support with any Islamic question. In
turn, I expect them to listen to any guidance I may offer. Many of the
women expressed that their parenting wasn't so much different than how
they were reared except they are emphasizing the Islamic principles and
training. They are very aware of and attentive to the influences in
their children's lives and try to keep them from harmful influences even
as they are guiding them toward an Islamic path.

+My children are being raised very much as I was except I hope to home
school them. As a child I was raised in a very tight family, restricted
TV, lots of books, lots of camping, restricted friends and associations.
Sunday was family only. My husband works 5 or 6 days a week, 12-14 hours
a day. When he has time off, he plays with the children and often takes
the three-year-old out for awhile to give me a break. I'm with them 24
hours so most of the education and discipline falls on me. We must raise
our children to have a strong sense of self and self confidence. They
must know Islam as based on principles, values, and logic not just
halal, haram, and wajeb. We must help them find their best life's work
and set them on the road to achieve it.

+Though some of my child-rearing practices are family traditions from
my childhood, even these are influenced by Islam. There is no way to
separate one from the other. We must raise our children Islamically if
we are to fulfill part of our obligations as Muslims such as teaching
them how to pray and fast. My husband is very helpful but most of the
time he is away from home. Therefore, much of the responsibility for
teaching the children is on me. I expect my children to respect me as it
says in the Qur'an and to obey me. +Islam has been my guide in raising
my boys. They were born Muslim. They know, respect, and practice Islam.
They pray five times a day just as I do. They study Islam with me on a
weekly basis. Islam is our lifestyle. My husband is an equal partner. He
wants to be an important part of their life and is. They have a great
relationship. We have a strong family. There is no danger of problems of
straying. Our boys are well-grounded in a time when gang violence and
other peer pressures abound.

The parents tend to express a "tough love" policy by expecting the
children to respect them and to respond. Discipline is extended but
usually in a loving and guiding manner. Severe and harsh punishment is
not reflected in the statements of these women, nor do they perceive
harshness and abuse in discipline as Islamically acceptable. The
following response gives an overview of the theory and practice of
discipline as interpreted by one woman. +Parents must be loving and kind
to their children. In Islam, the slapping, hitting, spanking, or shaking
of children is prohibited. These are forms of abuse that Muslim parents
must not use. We have numerous traditions against abuse from the Prophet
Muhammad (pbuh) and his holy family (pbut). Because of this, I have
tried to verbally explain to our children if they misbehave and
demonstrate to them the correct behavior. Children so young cannot be
expected to do what is correct and cannot benefit from a spanking
because they do not understand it-they only know that they are being
hurt. If the child runs into the street, hold the child by the hand or
pick them up and hold them in your arms. Take the child to a safer place
and watch them so they do not do it again. Spanking will not deter the
child. It will just make him or her angry and then they will become
sneaky, trying to do things when the parents are not watching.

My husband discusses the events that sometimes occur and the actions of
our children. He points out their mistakes in judgment because he loves
them and wants them to learn how to do what is right whenever they are
presented with a similar situation in the future. He wants them to learn
that they are responsible not only for their actions but also for the
consequences of actions. I also discuss problems with our children;
however, the two of us never reprimand our child at the same time. If
one of us is discussing, the other one will stay silent because we do
not want to gang up on him. Then we hug him and comfort him, reminding
him that criticism of his action was done in love and we want only the
best for him; that he should learn from his mistake and must not repeat
the behavior. Of course, we forgive our children's mistakes and we do
not keep talking about it over and over again. Parents should not
constantly pick on their children. Children need to feel safe in their
homes and not be nervous about everything they do. Some children may be
more sensitive. than others and cannot accept criticism very well. They
may need extra praise for their achievements to assure them that their
parents love them. Praise can boost their self-esteem and then they may
become more confident about themselves and their abilities.

As parents, we only ask that our children have respect for us, other
people, and themselves. If a child is disrespectful of another person,
it can become a habit that is hard to break. Our children are young and
cannot make adult decisions. My husband and I make decisions for them.
For example, we decided that when our children are promoted to junior
high school, we would teach our children at home and they do not have
any choice about this. As their parents, we feel we know what is best
for them. The public school system constantly exposes our children to
talk of (or activity in) alcohol, drugs, sex, and violence. After three
months of home school, our middle child told me that he was glad that he
was in home school because he had remembered the bullying he endured on
a daily basis by a classmate the year before.

We also encourage their physical well-being by scheduling thirty
minutes of exercise every morning. They have thirty minutes of free time
after lunch to play basketball, work on the computer, or read. After
school they may play soccer in the backyard or ride their bicycles on
our street. They choose what kind of snack to prepare and then they must
clean up the kitchen before leaving. With each responsibility that they
take on, our children make us glad that they are learning and growing to
be independent. Education for the children is a top priority, but it has
to be in the right setting. Some have chosen to home school their
children, others have the availability of an Islamic school, and some
feel the public school setting is acceptable with the backup in values
they give at home. The Islamic guidelines for education for children
allows them to not start being "book" educated until after age six. But
other training and education for life should be going on during the
early formative years.

+My child-rearing techniques are to instill family values and Islamic
values into my children and if that means living in a closed situation
(no public school, neighborhood friends) then so be it. Muslim children
do not require formal education until age six or seven where they are
required to sit and learn. I will not put them into a school of this
type until then. I am not against exploring Western child psychology
methods for behavior and learning, but they should correspond with
Islamic ideas.

My husband helps with the children and stays with them when I am
working or in class. He is interested in the children's upbringing, is
very loving and kind. He is also somewhat strict, too, and that is good.
Islamic schools are private schools and tuition is charged to help meet
costs. In addition to tuition, transportation to and from school becomes
a concern to parents and involves many miles of travel. Those who are
able to arrange for Islamic schools for their children seemed very
satisfied and very supported. Arabic, which is the religious language of
Muslims, is taught as well as good discipline with kindness, the Qur'an,
how to wear hijab, and the practices and obligations of Islam. Children
in Islamic schools also build friendships with other Muslims their age
and learn a peer standard that is different from that in the public
schools.

+Of course being Muslim has influenced the way we raise our children.
My kids go to Islamic school even though I have to drive 15 miles to get
them there. My husband is at home so he is very involved. My kids know
that they owe me great respect and that paradise is under the feet of
the mother. My obligation is to care for them and to raise them to be
the best Muslims. +We follow Islamic principles so our child-rearing
techniques are completely influenced by Islam. Again, we have the
Islamic school to thank because we have support from them. My husband is
very involved in child care. He likes spending time with the kids and
that gives me a break. Also he likes spending time with me, so sometimes
the kids go to a babysitter (a Muslim friend).

An alternative to attending an Islamic school is home schooling. This
is working very well in some families where the mother is home and has
the expertise and patience to do so. Sometimes the mothers share in the
responsibility of teaching each other's children. A support group of and
for parents of full-time and part-time home-educated Muslim children,
The Islamic Home School Association of North America (LHSANA), assists
by producing a newsletter. +In Islam, the raising of children is one of
the most important things. Rearing one's children is the best possible
way to bring a person closer to God. The first thing is to respect your
child and his/her opinions even though it may be difficult. Because we
want our children to grow up being good Muslims, we keep them away from
negative influences as much as possible. In our case we decided public
schools with the peer pressure and other negative teachings was not an
option for us. Instead we home school. I do want them to have the
freedom of friends so I let them meet American children (non-Muslim) but
if I see anything negative, I pull them back and involve them in other
activities.

The father of the children takes an active part in child rearing. He is
involved in education with them-Islamic teachings, Qur'an, prayer,
Islamic stories. He spends much of his free time with them. Raising
children in any society takes a commitment from both mother and
father. +Because of "negative" influence from the outside world, my
husband didn't want the children to go to public school. This forced me
to find an alternative, which existed in home schooling. Most of the
child-rearing is my responsibility. He helps when he is asked, but not
on a self-initiated "wanting to spend time with them" level.

My obligation is to discipline them toward one model, the Prophet
Muhammad, and my right is to expect their submission and cooperation in
this. Their rights are to expect shelter, food, clothing, and education;
their obligation is to make this chore enjoyable to give, for them to be
thankful for what they receive. +How I raise my child is very much
influenced by being Muslim. I'm more cognizant of the satanic influences
that come from all sides and, therefore, as of six months ago, we have
no television. I've taught him in home school since he was in second
grade and plan to continue. My husband is as involved as he can be. He
helps when he's not working. Having a big extended family around (seven
adults) also helps. My child is to obey me and remember God. He has
chores and duties around the home. I am to provide love, food, clothing,
teaching, and a balance of play to his life to give him as much
God-conscience and Islam as I can.

Only one of the women commented about the experience of having a child
in public school even though the objective part of the questionnaire
indicated that 47 percent of the families had children in public school.
Sometimes only one of the children in the family attended public school,
and it varied as to whether the students attended public school in high
school or elementary. There were also those who sent their children to
private schools that were not Islamic. +Both my husband and I are trying
to raise our children to be good followers of Islam. We take our girls
to tafseer classes and do a lot of things with our Muslim friends. We
try to provide good role models for the children, believing it is
important to keep them close to us and thus close to the faith. We also
encourage outside activities like preschool and gymnastics so they will
not feel isolated. We will provide alternative activities throughout
their "growing-up" years so they will not feel alienated when not
allowed to participate in activities at school which we feel are
inappropriate for Muslims (eg. Christmas concerts, dances, mixed slumber
parties, etc.). We believe it is possible to raise faithful followers of
Islam in public schools for we have seen success stories firsthand, but
we will seek alternative education routes if severe problems arise.

**Parents Mutually Involved**

The surveys indicated that both parents were involved in the care and
training of the children. Reference was made to rights of children and
parents from the aspect of rights that need to be extended to the
children by the parents and from the children to the parents. They feel
children's rights do not include having everything they may impulsively
want. Children do have the right to be directed in the prescribed way
through good parental guidance and have the right to safety, good care,
and treatment that helps them maintain good self-esteem. On the other
hand, parents have the right to receive respect and care from the
children. Inherent in those guidelines for rights are respect, hard
work, and a sense of authority that is often hard to maintain in our
democratic setting where the children tend to claim their "rights" early
on regarding what they want to do.

+A hadith [one of the sayings, deeds, and practices of Prophet
Muhammad] says the first school is the lap of the mother. The only thing
that has changed since my conversion is my awareness of my children's
rights. It was easy to quiet them before but they have a right to be
heard. It was easy to smack their buttocks before, but is the smack
justified? You can't leave marks or scars inside or out. I must
constantly be aware of their rights and my responsibility toward them,
to feed, clothe, and educate them both academically and religiously. One
day, I'll have to answer for all of it.

+Our child-rearing techniques are conservative and strict with lots of
love, hugs, and kisses. My husband has always participated in all
child-rearing activities. My rights with the children are equal to that
of my husband, if not a little extra on my side. My obligations are to
provide them the environment, rules, and love that they will need to
grow into compassionate, well-rounded adults with a clear view of right
and wrong. Their rights and obligations to me are to treat me with
respect.

As previously stated, the fathers are often very much involved in the
care of the children whether or not the wife works outside the home or
is involved in furthering her education. The fathers may feel especially
strong needs to be involved in the guidance of their children when they
are not living in a country that offers support to their Islamic
principles. Lacking the presence of extended family may also foster a
greater involvement with their children. Specific reasons for the active
involvement by the fathers are not made clear in the responses of the
women. The women do, however, seem to appreciate their husband's
involvement in child care and training.

+I am more concerned about what our children learn and who teaches them
than I would be if I weren't a Muslim. My husband is very involved by
spending time with them in the evenings, playing with them, reading to
them, and teaching them things. He helps feed them and with potty
training and sometimes gives them a bath. He takes our son with him
sometimes when he has to go out, to spend more time with him and to give
me a break. I am about 95 percent of the time obligated to take care of
their every need. I am allowed to do anything within reason with them. I
always have my husband's permission to take them with me wherever I
go. +From day one, my husband has been very active and helpful with the
child-rearing. He has been watching our daughter for several years while
I worked outside the home. He has never hit her or spanked her, and
plays with her often. I often feel he has high expectations sometimes
not within reason in regards to dress, etc. Then we talk and obtain
resolution.

+My child-rearing techniques have not been influenced by being Muslim.
I was already doing most of what I do before I converted. My level of
patience and understanding in dealing with the children has improved,
but I have not made any changes in the techniques. My husband is
involved in caring for the children as much as he can be. When he is
home we share the tasks just about equally. He bathes the children every
other night, helps with hand washing and tooth brushing; deals with
arguments, fixes snacks, and occasionally reads for our , nightly story
time. My children are young (six and four). Our rights and obligations
with respect to each other are still very basic. The responses of the
women to their responsibility of child-rearing reflected how seriously
they perceived that role. They yearn to provide the kind of training and
opportunities that will result in their child becoming an adult who will
be in submission to Allah and be good, practicing Muslims. Those of us
who have raised children in our own religious traditions have yearned
for our skills to be adequate to the task of rearing children in the
path that would lead them to God. How similar are Our desires!

**9. Respecting Divergent Path Working Together to Build And Maintain
Relationships**

Jodi's different lifestyle and dress were difficult for our whole
family at first. Jodi's uncle, not many years older than she and always
close to the family, made what he thought was a funny statement about
her scarf in front of a visitor, and it hurt Jodi terribly. Yet he was
the one who had dreams of Jodi being in danger and his being the one to
rescue her. Her cousin, who had been a best friend growing up, no longer
understood how to relate to her in this new lifestyle. Her grandma could
not understand her ';choice that resulted in such changes, but Grandma,
being basically kind and accepting, was able to deal with the situation
in a loving way. There were stresses with other family members, but as
time went by it all became easier. We are so grateful for the time and
close proximity that we have had over the years to work through the
various relational changes. Jodi and Reza certainly did their part too.
They have had to decide where they could give, what was important to
them, and how they could retain their commitment while maintaining
family relationships. Each person (and each family) needs to define who
he or she is, what they believe, and what values are important. This is
an essential part of the growing up process for all people, regardless
of culture. Therefore a wide diversity of beliefs and practices can
exist within a family, a nation, or a religious system.

The Islamic world covers many countries, cultures, and ethnic peoples.
What is the norm in one culture may not even exist in another Islamic
area. There are five types of activity: (1) obligatory (2) encouraged
(3) legal or halal (4) cautionary, and (5) forbidden. The obligatory and
forbidden acts are universal and should be practiced in all Islamic
areas. Examples of obligatory acts would be the daily prayers and the
fasting at Ramadan. Forbidden acts would be activities such as consuming
alcohol, cheating, lying, and eating pork. The other three, encouraged
(or highly important), the legal (halal), or the cautionary fall in the
category of personal choice. These would include doing extra prayers,
getting married and having children, doing good deeds, or being cautious
about behaviors such as gossip. There are many guidelines for living,
and these may be highly influenced by one's particular community of
Muslims, the school of Muslim thought one follows, or the traditions of
the husband's country of origin.

American women converts are trying to combine who they have been in the
past and their habits with the practices of Islam. The divergent path
these daughters have chosen cause traditional relations to be changed.
Social habits between Muslims and non-Muslims are different, belief
systems may clash, and both the families of origin and the daughters
will be called on to reestablish new ways to relate to each other. There
are some guidelines that we can keep in mind as we relate to Muslims in
the workplace, in the family, in public places, and as friends and
acquaintances.


