Food and Drink Considerations
=============================

Pork products and alcoholic drinks are considered haram (forbidden) by
practicing Muslims. They check labels carefully to be sure those
products are riot in food items they purchase. Many practicing Muslims
also try to eat only halal (approved) meats that are slaughtered in a
prescribed manner. These meats are purchased at specialty stores, or the
families butcher their own meat in the appropriate manner. Checking with
the Muslim family is the only way to determine what is best to serve
when they come to visit. Vegetarian meals or fish are acceptable
alternatives, or they may bring an halal main entree to be served along
with what is being prepared. Some of the women expressed concern about
eating when visiting families.

+Stress usually comes up when we visit my parents. Since we eat only
Muslim slaughtered halal meats, we are reluctant to eat anything, so we
would bring our own food. Even though we have explained the Islamic
method of slaughter, I feel that they are uncomfortable with us bringing
our own food. They thought this was another rejection, as if their food
was not good enough for us or was unclean. However, when they come to
visit in our home, they eat whatever I cook and we seem to have a much
happier and less stressful time. I would never leave my child with my
parents. There is too much pork in the house. The worst thing about
visiting my folks is eating. They don't care what they eat. My parents
sometimes get mad when I tell them I can't eat the same food they are
eating.

I do not leave my children with my family. We have never visited for
more than a couple of hours at a time since I became Muslim. In doing
this, I also avoid another potential problem-that of halal food. My
parents do not understand or accept the concept of halal/haram food. We
simply avoid the issue and don't eat at their house. Alcohol is
offensive to most Muslims and they would feel more comfortable if it is
not served when they are present. They may even avoid restaurants that
have a bar or serve liquor. They may often avoid business lunches or
company picnics where alcohol is served.

**Modesty in Dress and Social Relationships**

Many Muslims try to avoid places or media that feature scantily clad
persons or actions that are considered offensive. Even family swimming
pools may be off limits. The woman may be dressing hijab and covering
her hair by way of normal practice when in the presence of men other
than her father, husband, sons, or brothers. She will appreciate the
family's help in providing a chance for her to cover if other male
company drops by. It is also important to be aware of the type of
television programs viewed when Muslim children are present. Some of the
children's shows most American kids watch may not be considered
appropriate for children by the Muslim mom and dad. Non-Muslims should
find out what is allowable if the children are involved; even many
Muslim adults don't allow themselves to watch everything that is on.
Scenes that show dating relationships, dancing, or scantily clad women
are common ones to avoid.

Islamically, I don't like for the children to watch commercials or
dancing, rap music, dating situations, looseness on TV, anything which
you can see by turning it on for two minutes or less. I would prefer
they not get used to musical instruments or music which has adult
rock -and-roll rhythm even if it has children's lyrics. My parents are
pretty good about avoiding these things. There are also guidelines for
male/female relating. Males do not shake hands with females and often
will not look directly at them. Men should not reach out to touch Muslim
women or be too openly curious or friendly. One should be reticent but
pleasant. Usually, the safe approach is for the men to talk with men and
the women to talk with women. Women will often greet other women with a
cheek-to-cheek greeting.

**Celebrating the Holidays and Gift Giving**

American holidays may be very difficult for the families of origin of
the Muslim converts and for Muslims in general. Office parties featuring
alcohol, dancing, and/or flirting relationships; the giving of gifts
such as liquor, hams, turkeys; national or Christian religious
ceremonies and decorations-all these are unacceptable to Muslims.
Avoidance of holiday celebrations may be the behavioral norm for Muslims
in the business world. For the families, holiday times have been worked
out in a variety of ways. Some of the women respondents refused to be
part of the traditional Western celebrations at all. Others have
modified the celebrations in order to be with the family. Still others
participate in almost the same way as before.

My children have the best of both religions. My parents and in-laws
make a big deal about Christmas. We accept their gifts and explain the
concept to our boys. They don't serve us pork or alcoholic beverages. My
family is my life. No problems. Lots of love-always was! Thanksgiving
seems to be one holiday that can most easily be worked through if halal
meat or an alternative is served. Attitudes toward participation may
change as the couple have children, and the Muslims may feel a need to
withdraw from holidays they are now celebrating that reflect non-Muslim
religious holidays or even national holidays. Birthdays may not be
celebrated in the same way as non-Muslims and activities may need to be
negotiated. Muslim holidays are of great importance to the Muslims, and
they celebrate with great commitment. Eid al-Fitr, the most important
celebration of the year, is on the first day after the month of Ramadan
(the month of fasting). Gifts are sometimes given, cards are sent, and
families of origin may be included if it is convenient and families are
willing. This inclusion seems to be an exception, however, for Eid is
most often celebrated with other Muslims. The women have found many
problems with celebrating Christian or national holidays with their
birth families and have had to determine the extent to which they were
willing to be with the family at such times.

I try to avoid talking about the "holidays." My brother and sisters
understand that I don't celebrate them, and they respect me for it. But
my parents don't understand and keep asking every year if I'm coming
over for the holidays and what to do with the presents they got for me,
my husband, and kids.

My father's mother was ill when he was young, and his father was an
alcoholic. My mother's birth mom abandoned her at two years of age. So
my parents always tried to do special things during the holidays with my
brother and me (we were the only family they felt they had). My not
celebrating Christmas any longer was especially hard for them. We
accommodated their feelings with much compromise on their part. They may
buy our children Christmas gifts and the children may only open them
after we read and recite passages from the Qur'an regarding Jesus'
birth, Mary, the Mother of Jesus and commandments about what to believe
in the Qur'an. Thanksgiving is enjoyed with halal (Islamically allowed)
turkey killed in the prescribed manner but no baked ham. We've basically
turned it into a good excuse to eat together! My parents agree that is
most important. It helps establish and maintain family bonds and
memories.

My mom, dad, and brother get anxious for Eid gifts which now take the
place of Christmas gifts. I really try to emphasize the Islamic holidays
for the sake of my children. I do get a lot of competition with my mom
and Christmas, so I have to emphasize Islamic holidays more than most.

My family doesn't really follow Christmas as a Christian holiday (not
as Christ's birthday), but since everybody usually has Christmas off and
many brothers and sisters have married those who do practice, we now
have a family dinner and some exchange gifts. I would like to include my
family more in our Islamic celebrations. But many times that means
traveling two or three hours to where other Muslims gather. There have
not been that many chances. Often the main part of celebration is a
special congregational prayer, which they would not participate in
anyway, since they are not Muslim.

I send Eid cards and candy to my nieces and nephews.

Last Eid was the first time I gave presents to my family in exchange
for the presents they gave us at Christmas. For my Islamic holidays, Eid
al--Fitr and Eid al-Adha, I send my mom Eid cards that are homemade. And
I will put such things as: Hadith-Heaven lies below the mother's feet,
etc. I invite them to eat at the park or at the mosque during the
Islamic holidays. My mom and my sister do come to see what it is like.
Because they live in another state, my family has never participated in
any of our Islamic celebrations. They keep their distance, and we each
allow the other to be as we are. I call some of my relatives on the
telephone, and I send letters or cards at Thanksgiving and Christmas.

Sometimes if I cannot reach them on Christmas, I call them and wish
them a Happy New Year on the first day of January. When we first got
married, we went for Christmas and exchanged gifts. But this year we
have a child, and we need to get them used to the idea of our not being
involved in Christmas. My parents sent us gifts this year and we thanked
them, but we didn't give them any. And we didn't send out cards. We do
plan on celebrating Eid, and we are going to send them a card to explain
what we do. Hopefully it won't be an issue by the time our daughter is
older. I do want her to know my side of the family, so we will have to
work on how to do that. I think that for my family of origin the main
point of stress was probably Christmas-whether it's okay to give us
gifts, include us for dinner, etc. It took a lot of time and talk to
come to terms with Christmas because I cannot turn my back on my family
of origin. My husband and I joined my family for dinner and received
gifts from them with the understanding that this is a celebration in
which we do not participate and that we wouldn't be reciprocating the
gift exchange. We will, however, reciprocate by including my family in
our Islamic celebrations. Everyone was in agreement with this idea and
the spirit of the "season" was not dampened.

My family doesn't show any interest in our Islamic holidays. I tell
them about them a few weeks or a month ahead of time, but they don't
seem to care, and I think they avoid being around us during that time.
Gift giving goes along with holiday and birthday times. Being open to
discussions on how these occasions could be observed helps preserve the
joy of sharing as a family or in the office setting. Creating some new
traditions that respect each other's feelings might make the occasion
more special than ever.

Parents (or other relatives) may find it best to forego giving Muslims
presents on non-Muslim holidays, choosing instead to give gifts at other
times, either on their holidays or just for the sake of giving. One
could also find out when Eid is and ask about sending gifts then,
checking to see what gifts are appropriate. American toys such as
Batman, the Turtles, Power Rangers, or Barbie and Ken may be completely
off-limits. Even clothes with Thomas the Tank Engine or bed sheets with
Barney may not be acceptable. If parents talk it over with their
daughter, they will probably discover she has some good ideas. Then if
parents want to give gifts, they can follow the guidelines agreed on and
do it with joy. They know we are Muslim and that we don't celebrate
Christian holidays the same way they do. My mother sometimes sends gifts
to our children for no particular reason-just because she sees something
they might like. She also sends gifts at Christmas time. We accept them
as gifts for the New Year. We celebrate Jesus' birth, may God's peace be
upon him, with a prayer.

My family of origin lives far from us and have very little
understanding of Islam and the Eid holidays. So far, they have not been
included in our Islamic celebrations, but if they lived closer to us
they would be included as much as they would like to be. My sisters and
parents (father and stepmother) are sensitive to the fact that we don't
celebrate Christian holidays. They always ask before giving or doing
anything which could be construed to be related to such holidays. They
respect our holidays. I have no concerns about the children with them.
It helps that we have a varied family encompassing many types of
religions: Christian, Jewish, Buddhist, and Muslim. It is an unspoken
family rule to respect others' beliefs so long as they aren't harming
themselves or others. Both my parents' families do this.

**Leaving the Children in the Care of Others**

Some Muslim parents are willing to let the children stay with the
grandparents or others for a few hours or overnight, but it isn't often.
Muslim parents feel very responsible and have so many things they want
controlled in their children's environment that those outside the Muslim
family almost have to prove themselves. This is true of extended family
members or even with non-Muslim neighborhood children. Careful
consideration is even given when leaving children in the care of other
Muslims. It is best to listen to the concerns of the parents and try to
follow the rules. Such ordinary things as bathroom habits require
different learning by non-Muslims. Being supportive of Muslim religious
views with the children and refraining from "indoctrinating" with
opposing views will be much appreciated by the parents. Care should be
taken about the television programs or music that is played in their
presence. Providing the right food and omitting the forbidden foods is
also important.

My parents often request for the children to sleep over. The children
and others have noticed my mom asking the children if they have prayed
and reminding them to do so. (Appropriate if done from Islamic
viewpoint!) My area of concern is my ten-year-old daughter. Mom thinks
she is too young to worry about modest dress and buys her mini-skirts,
which I hurriedly hide away. My daughter does not wear hijab yet, but
she is accepting of the idea and very positive about it. She does dress
modestly outside the house mostly in cotton printed long sleeves, loose
fitting pants or a long skirt.

1 visit my family on a regular basis. I let my mother watch the
children for three to four hours, but with other grandchildren at my
mother's it is hard for me to leave them. I worry more about my children
picking up non- Islamic ideas more from peers than from adults (e.g.,
when nieces play Barbies they usually have Ken and Barbie dating). The
cousins also have boyfriends or girlfriends at school that they talk
about. My children will always be welcome at my parents, and my mother
is wonderful with the kids. My family knows they do not have to change
to accept me the way I am now. My child gets no different treatment than
any other child except they know he can't have beer, pork, or any foods
that we don't allow.

During the summer my brothers would always let their children spend a
week or two with my parents, but our children never went to visit their
grandparents without my husband and me. They never tried to push us or
persuade us because they knew our children could not eat their food. 1
know if we left our little girl alone with my mom when she is older, she
would try to Christianize her, and that I cannot abide by! The fact that
I can't trust her causes me great sadness-the depth of which my husband
cannot understand. I must abandon my mother for her own stubbornness but
this I do, not only for the good of my marriage and family but for my
own good as well. Leaving my child is difficult in that they feed him
too much junk food and spoil him, which I know is usual for grands. The
biggest concern is him not eating anything but halal meat, so they get
upset when he can only eat fish and vegetarian meals.

My parents have assured me that if God forbid, something should happen
to my husband and me, they would make sure our children would be raised
Muslim and keep close with my husband's family. Both his and my family
have mutual concern and respect for each other. The Daily Prayers Often
in the fervent discussion regarding school prayer, no consideration is
given to those who may be of a religious faith other than Christian.
Muslim youth are brought up to pray five times a day with at least two
of those times during the school day. Yet any consideration to providing
for their needs for a place and time to pray is probably avoided in most
discussions on school prayer.

This also becomes a problem for those Muslims in the business world who
need to have both place and time scheduled to allow them the privacy for
a few minutes, probably twice a day, to perform this obligatory
practice. When they visit us, Jodi and Reza feel free to go into another
room of the house that isn't being used when it is time for their
prayers. If non-Muslim parents are uncomfortable with this practice, an
agreement should be worked out with all parties involved. My parents are
very considerate of our beliefs. They have no problems with us praying
at their house, are extremely careful of what they fix us to eat, and
try not to say anything offensive.

Muslims may feel very uncomfortable when prayers are offered in the
name of Jesus Christ and try to avoid situations where this may occur. I
am grateful that my parents understand our feelings of being in offense
if we are present when a prayer is-given in the name of Jesus. They are
careful to close their prayers "In the name of our Mutual God, Amen."

**Religious and Political Discussions**

I have found that Muslims are very certain about what they believe.
They feel they have the truth, and they can't understand Why non-Muslims
don't see it. As with all people, a variety of opinions and
interpretations also exists among Muslims, and political or religious
discussions can become quite animated whether between Muslims or between
Muslims and non-Muslims. One day after I got into either a religious or
political discussion with Reza and Jodi, I started to cry. It was just
too much for me. "Jodi," I said, "we just can't talk about this topic
anymore-it hurts me too much." Jodi said, "Oh, Mom, we can't do that; we
have to talk about it.

Reza gave us these words of wisdom: "Sometimes, even in my own family,
we find things that we can't talk about, and we just have to be together
because we love each other." And that has been good advice for us many
times. Oh, we try to talk, and Jodi and Reza know just about how far
they can push me before I get upset-then they back off. Their beliefs
mean so much to them that they want to share them and yet it often sets
up explosive situations for family and acquaintances.

I love my parents dearly and respect them to the utmost extent. I just
wish they would ask me what I believe or just read a bit of the Qur'an.
Of course I would like to see them embrace Islam, but at this point or
anytime in the near future it is not realistic.

When I am visiting my family I feel as though I'm surrounded by idols,
but since they accept my Islam I tolerate their beliefs also. I hope to
just keep things going as is and keep in touch with my parents,
especially since we have a baby now. They are my parents and I should
care for them. Everything seems to be a point of stress for our family.
It is difficult to talk about anything except the weather, the car we're
thinking about buying, what vacation we'll take next summer.

The women's responses on the questionnaire indicate there are a variety
of ways to work things out with the family of origin. There are also
those families not as open as others. There is a difference in how far
and how open some can go. Although questions on the survey were not
directed toward relationships in the business world, I have, in my own
conversations with Muslims often picked up their frustrations connected
with social relationships, holidays, lack of understanding, and the
feelings of prejudice toward them. The stories seem to illustrate that
many times the more cooperative and supportive the family or
acquaintances are, the less conservative the women feel they have to be.
A more strict attitude may be a protective response to lack of support
and trust.


