10 the Daughters Speak Out What the Muslim Converts Would Like Us To Know
=========================================================================

Twelve years had passed since Jodi had chosen to become Muslim. The
healing had taken years, but I found myself okay with Jodi as Muslim.
There are still twinges of regret at times when I see that choice
blocking some things we could do together either as mother and daughter
or as grandparents and grandchildren. But my respect is there for her
and that which her life demonstrates as good and upstanding. I found
myself wanting to know more about other women who had converted. How had
their families accepted it? Were the daughters able to work it through
with their birth families? Could my story help them move toward healing?
I really wanted to assist other grieving parents in their acceptance of
these daughters and the path they had chosen.

My decision to do something to share with others about the strength and
goodness I saw in my daughter's lifestyle and that of her Muslim friends
was made one Sunday morning while I was still in bed. I remember
swinging my feet out of bed onto the floor and as I got up, it was as if
I were taking the first steps toward a new and challenging endeavor. I
talked with Jodi about my ideas. She was in the beginning courses of an
M. S. degree in nursing, had two young children, and worked part-time.
I'm sure she wasn't eager to take on any other responsibilities, but she
agreed to invite to her home a few American-born Muslim women to talk
about the possibilities. If this was something these women felt was
important, I would go ahead with the project.

Only two women came to meet with us, but it was through their support,
encouragement, and ideas for proceeding that I felt the determination
and enthusiasm to carry out the almost three-year project of gathering
information from other American-born Muslim women, writing my own story,
and then finding a way to share it. At this first meeting, the Muslim
converts discussed how important it was to them to help family members
understand better what they had chosen, how and what they were doing,
and how they longed for acceptance by their families. They also wanted
to share with the population in general what it means to them to be
Muslim.

I have learned so much from these women. I am grateful to them for
sharing their lives with me through the questionnaire. This project has
smoothed over the scars that I didn't even know were there. Daughters of
Another Path has been further healing for me, and I salute these women
who have the strength to walk in such a path. Not many of us could do
it. Through the questionnaires, the women shared their stories about
their conversion, their joys and struggles in taking on the Muslim
practices, and how they relate with families of origin, husbands and
in-laws, their children, and the world of work. The last question to
which they responded on the questionnaire was: "What would you like the
American public to know about you that has not yet been asked?" What
would they say to us? This is what they wrote. Let us hear them.

Who We Are I would like the American public to know that we are people
just like them. We struggle to pay bills (we don't all have oil wealth),
we worry about tomorrow, we want peace. We just happen to have strong
religious convictions and try to live our life to be acceptable to
Allah. My husband didn't make me dress this way, and I'm not oppressed.
I'm set free-free from the bondage of fashion, clothes, hair, shoes, and
the like. Inheritance is guaranteed to me and my children after payment
of debts. I don't hate America or Americans. I still love Jesus, and
pray to the same one God he referred to. I don't hate Jews or Israel. In
fact, I would love to live there if I knew I wouldn't be persecuted.
What I do hate is injustice, lies, ungodliness, prejudice, abortion,
defiling of flesh, and all disobedience to the commandments of God,
because I love God.

I have chosen this way because I like it. I have not given up anything
that I didn't want to give up. I have not been brainwashed. I am an
educated person with full-thinking capabilities. I am not a traitor to
my country but an advocate of the world. I will always be Muslim with or
without my husband. I did not become Muslim because I "love" my husband.
I do want my children to grow up Muslim. I do expect them to be Muslim
and my daughter to wear hijab. Everyone is always asking me these
things. I will put my children in an Islamic environment, not a
non-Islamic environment, then ask them to be Muslim. The average Muslim
seeks peace. All that one hears about are the Muslim extremists, the
political revolutionaries. These are a minority. The majority (by the
way, Arabs only comprise one-fifth of the Islamic world) are peaceful.
Look at the Indonesians we never hear about, and their numbers are far
greater than the Arabs.

I am willing to communicate with them and answer questions if they are
respectful of my opinions and beliefs.

I became a Muslim of my own free will.
I am a person with my own mind.
I study the facts before commit to something. Islam is the best choice
I could ever make.
I am happy being a Muslim woman.

It is very hid to communicate with your family after such a big and
complete change I would like to encourage parents of Muslim converts to
ask their children why they changed and try to understand them. It's not
easy to live in this society after becoming a Muslim. You see things and
people differently, and they see you as different, too. It helps a whole
lot if you know that your family is at least talking to you about it and
trying to comprehend what you are going through and how important this
change is to you. We are changing for the better, for the sake of
Allah.

The only thing I feel Americans need to know is that if a person or a
woman converts to Islam, that it is not because we are being forced into
it. No one can force another person to pray, learn Arabic, to put on
long sleeves, dresses, cover the hair, or any other practice that a
Muslim must do. We are Americans. We have rights just like anyone else
to work and to support what we believe in.

I would like to remind the American public that I am a human being just
like them. I do not like to be ridiculed. I feel sad when someone mocks
the clothing I wear. Would you mock a Christian nun for wearing her
habit or an Amish or Mennonite woman for wearing her bonnet? I have not
been brainwashed by my husband. I am an intelligent person who chose to
become a. Muslim. Islam is founded on the precept that there is no force
in religion. You can believe your way and I need to believe my way.

Some people who want to discredit Islam suggest that women are treated
like second-class citizens or as inferior to men. They say that Muslim
women must feed the men and children first and only eat what is left.
This is a gross distortion of the truth. Yes, sometimes women eat later
than others do, but it is not a punishment or a sentence imposed on her
because she is a woman. When a woman feeds others first, she is doing so
because of her love and concern. She knows that children need to eat
often to stay healthy and grow normally. She understands that men need
to eat to maintain their strength so they can go to work or to school.
She makes sure that women who are: pregnant drink their milk, eat plenty
of fruits and vegetables, and take their vitamins. She feels that she
cannot eat and satisfy her own hunger if others need something.

Muslims do not celebrate Christmas, but we hope that our relatives,
neighbors, and co-workers who are Christian have a wonderful holiday.
Please do not think that our children are deprived because we do not put
up a Christmas tree or decorations. We have other holidays that you are
not aware of and we think our children are happy and growing up just
fine. I am not oppressed, and it is not degrading to wear proper
clothing. I'd like them to know that my husband does the laundry, helps
with cleaning (even does the toilet bowl!) and helps look after the
children so I can go out. How about the so called liberated woman?
Muslim women do not change their name when married. We are not supposed
to take our husband's last name. When, insha' Allah, my daughter is
married, her name will remain as she is recognized as an individual, an
equal human being. No need for hyphens.

Not all Muslims in America are either foreigners or African-Americans.
There are many white-American Muslims in the country. A lot of people
find it hard to believe that you can be white and American and a Muslim
at the same time. We have more rights than Christian women or any other
women. As you can tell, I'm a little different because I feel that the
spiritual aspects of my faith are very important, possibly more than the
day-to-day problems of what to wear, what to eat, etc. My faith is very
deep, however, and will not waver. Something else about me is that I was
diagnosed with Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma over six years ago. I've had one
round of chemo and have not needed treatment for five years. I had both
my children (five years and fifteen months) after having cancer. My life
is very interesting but also difficult with this extra problem thrown
in. My faith in God has helped me immensely though this time, and I
firmly believe that getting cancer was God's will for me. I am grateful
because it has taught me so much: to live now, to love myself and my
family, to worry only about big things - "Don't sweat the small stuff'-
and it turned my life around to where I'm much more assertive and
outspoken than I used to be. But that's a whole other book in itself.

Don't judge me by the few Muslims who do un-Islamic things in the name
of Islam. Get to know me, talk to me, invite me to your schools and
churches, and let's allow ourselves to dialogue about each other's
religion. Don't be afraid of Islam. Get to know me. Ask us what books
best describe Islam instead of the paper or anti-Islamic books written
by "Middle East experts." Don't think I am repressed by my clothes. When
you look at me, look at Abraham's wife and Jesus' mother and how they
are dressed. It is nothing new. It is part of your heritage.

I have mixed feelings. I do public speaking on Islam. I tell people we
are just like them. We have our dreams and goals and love our families,
but some of our attitudes and approaches to problem-solving are
different. We are not oppressed or repressed by our faith, but only by
ourselves. We are as are all people-good and bad. Americans and
Europeans must be careful because those governments have an agenda that
is definitely anti-Muslim (our own Congress passed a resolution in the
mid '80s declaring Islam to be the greatest danger to the U.S.). They
must filter what they are told and seek truth. We Muslims must stop
hiding and making excuses and speak for ourselves. In many ways, we
represent the positive and often imaginary values which founded this
nation but with some very positive differences. As Muslims we need to
clean our own closets, shake ourselves up, and re-examine what we are
passing off as Islam before we start knocking on anyone's door to tell
them about it.

(From new single convert in her 40s with a teenage daughter] Being
Muslim is the best and the hardest thing in my life. It is all the
answers and all the tools. I was fired from my job on February 28, 1994.
I am filing a claim with the Ohio Civil Rights Commission because I feel
my termination was due to my reversion [sometimes this word is used in
place of "conversion"] to Islam. With every struggle comes ease. The
Qur'an is an infinite source of answers, counsel, and warning. I am
grateful to Allah for these struggles, yet as a weak human I continue to
vacillate between joy 80 percent of the time and something less positive
20 percent of the time. The greatest blessings for me in Allah include
my reliance on Allah , my loss of my previously short temper (it's
gone!), learned patience, and the peace and tranquility reflected by my
Muslim name which means for all of us, Allah is there, Allah is there.
The greatest difficulty is to give up old habits of trying to control my
life, a need to understand, and to accept the fact that although Islam
is perfect, Muslims are not.

I am not a foreigner. I am not an alien. I expect them to treat me and
my family with the respect that we deserve. I wish the culture and
government of this country could have a system for a standard of living
that would allow a Muslim family to live without going into debt or
welfare. I want people to know that I don't worship cows, that I don't
get oppressed because of Islam, that Islam frees women, that I worship
the same God as Christians and Jews, and that Muslims are not all
terrorists! I wish people would open their minds and stop being so
ignorant. Stop staring and laughing at women who wear hijab! It's their
right and their husbands/fathers aren't forcing them to do so! Accept us
as Americans, and live and let live! We are not stupid and we are here
to serve Allah (SWT) first and not our men. Our duty is this life, and
we are happy with our choice.

Just because I cover my head does not make me a weirdo, a
fundamentalist, a suppressed woman, or a weak woman. I hate it that
everywhere I go people stare (sometimes with mean looks). I just want to
be left alone to live my life as I want. One of the biggest
misconceptions is that all Muslims are from the Middle East or are
married to someone from this region. This is not the case. There are
thousands of American Muslims who learned about Islam from other
Americans. Both my husband and I are examples of this fact.

oThe best thing that ever happened to me in my life was becoming
Muslim. Although my religious and political. views may differ from many
Americans, I would hope that they would be open-minded enough to know
that "different" doesn't always equal "bad." Muslim women (who are
granted their rights under Islam) are not chained to their houses or
beaten regularly or tortured. We are part of society, and have a most
important task. As Imam Ali said, "Nations are raised on the laps of
mothers." We have a very important job to do. I would hope that the
American public would not belittle that job.

**What Islam Is About**

Americans need to understand that Muslims are just living their lives
by how they feel Allah (SWT) wants us to live. We are a very
misunderstood religion. We are also the most growing religion in the
world. In ten years we will, insha' Allah, be the second largest
religion in the United States. Why are Americans turning from
Christianity to Islam? Americans need to look past the stereotypes and
look to the real Islam, the Islam of peace, the Islam which is getting
more and more followers every day. Getting an Islamic society, to me,
doesn't mean being fanatical or militant. It means having a society
where the members are following the moral codes that Allah gave to us,
as well as the religious obligations and social laws. Islam governs all
of our lives. It is for all time, for all peoples. If Americans looked
closely at Islam and realized that, then Islam would at last be
understood.

Islam is not a prison for women as has been the belief in America for
many years! It has sensible guidelines and laws as every decent society
has, but Islam is flexible, where some others are "written in stone" and
cannot be altered. I would like the American public to realize that
Muslim women are not second-class citizens. We don't walk behind our
husbands, and we do have inalienable rights. Islam is not an extremist
religion. Islam does not believe in extremes. Islam always promotes the
middle road. Islam is not an Arab thing or an African-American thing; it
is a religion for all peoples of all nationalities. Islam is a timeless
religion that is suitable for all times and places. The beauty and
antiquity of Islam has no bounds. In summary, Islam is a religion of
peace and happiness.

If you ever saw what Islam really is, you would adore it immediately.
As yet it is only an ideal in our minds! The marriage relationship is
protected and sexuality blossoms behind the veil! The streets would be
safe. Your children would not be exposed to sex and drugs. They would
receive a values education and practical skills. Your husband's income
would be enough to support the family, leaving you free to either work
or have as many babies as you want, to study and grow in other ways.

People would not live in fear of unemployment or mortgage foreclosure.
The economy would be based on small local businesses and an
interest-free banking system. Life would be affordable again. All that
is only the beginning. If you could ever enter a beautiful, spacious
mosque and participate in true prayer to God Most High, you would become
truly satisfied and dignified. Some day all this will be ours by God's
mercy.

Islam is a way of life! It has answers on every aspect of life. I
choose Islam as my way of life by conviction-not by force or for my
husband. I love my Islam and I feel that when I was born I was a Muslim
and was raised Christian. Now I have reverted-not converted-to the true
and straight path. I have achieved success. I've come back to Islam! May
Allah always keep my heart pure and on the straight path.

As a Muslim woman I would like to say that Islam has liberated me in
many ways. Most Americans see Muslim women as an oppressed lot, but I
would like them to know that if Muslim women are oppressed, it's because
they forsake the true Islam and follow their country's cultural
practices. Islam throws away all the garbage that keeps women down and
lifts them up to a status of self-respect and confidence. Most American
women feel that they are the most liberated women on earth, but they are
not really relieved from the bonds of oppression. Anyone who has to have
a perfect body for fear of rejection, anyone who has to reveal their
bodies to receive so-called "attention," anyone who gets paid less for
equal work versus a male counterpart, anyone in those categories is
still oppressed, and the only solution is to throw the chains of bondage
away and accept God and Islam in their life.

The American Muslim woman is not oppressed and our cover (hijab) is our
right, not a punishment. We consider the Western way of life a step
backward not forward. The Middle Eastern woman may see the so-called
glamour of American Western lifestyle because their country practices
culture and not Islam. If Islam was really practiced in the countries of
my Eastern sisters, Western (females) would be fighting for Islamic
rights.

The one most important issue I would like to get across, not only to
the American public but even to many Muslims themselves, is that Islam
must be judged on its own merits and not on the behavior of Muslims.
Islam is a perfect system because it was created by God, just as we
were. We, however, were not created perfect. We have free will and we
choose our ways of life and make our own decisions; sometimes they are
the correct decisions and sometimes they aren't. Also, I hope that
non-Muslims will someday understand that every Muslim, true Muslim who
lives by the laws of God, is a fundamentalist, and would understand the
true meaning of that word. Regardless of the 1400 years that have passed
since the teachings of God through the Prophet Muhammad, Islam has not
changed. In fact, the laws of God have never changed since Adam was
created by God. God is not creating different humans than he did before.
We are all human beings created by God. When we are born we have the
same needs for love, affection, food, protection, and the same need to
worship a higher being. These needs change as we mature and become
shaped by our environment, but they remain essentially human needs.
Change, however, never starts with countries, or leaders. It starts in
the home, with the children, where the women rule. As soon as the Muslim
women of the world realize this, the changes for the better will
begin.


