Tell of Your Conversion To Islam
================================

My conversion to Islam was a very long and gradual process. I was
raised in a culturally Christian household, a place where the major
holidays were celebrated but the deeper meanings left unexplored. This
was intentional on the part of my parents who felt that much hatred had
been done to the world in the name of organized religion. At the
insistence of both sets of grandparents, we children were baptized and
given some rudimentary Sunday school training. My parents told us that
when we were grown we could pick our own religions, if indeed, we wanted
a religion. My religious training left me with a belief in God (how else
could one explain all the wondrous interconnections and intricacies of
earth and universe?) but no belief in any system of religion. I
considered myself a Christian, but in a broad sense: belief in God,
belief in Jesus as a prophet, belief in the moral and ethical teachings.
However, my upbringing engendered a high degree of skepticism and
cynicism, and I questioned every aspect of church dogma. In the end, I
decided that I didn't believe in organized religion as it was illogical,
internally inconsistent, and hypocritical (having sanctioned many
unethical and immoral acts in the name of God).

However, I had a vague, almost unrecognized idea that without religion
something essential was missing from life. A life lived without some
sense of a higher purpose was just an empty, random chase after
perpetually changing desires. So I began a rather half-hearted,
disorganized search for my "spiritual" self.

I saw glimpses of the spiritualism that I was looking for in various
religions but they all seemed to be missing some essential ingredient.
This one had a beautiful sense of peace and tolerance, but had lost its
moral and ethical sense in the meantime. That one had a strong element
of personal responsibility to others and a high code of personal
conduct, but was repressive and suppressed logical inquiry. Another had
a strong sense of religious collectiveness and historical context but
promoted exclusivism. Still another understood the mystery, beauty, and
peace that surrounds God, but was impractical about everyday matters and
forgetful of our responsibilities to our fellow human beings. At about
this time, I met the man who later became my husband and in trying to
understand him and his culture, I came across Islam. Islam's ideas and
teachings appealed to me immediately. They were coherent, they were
logical, they were moderate, and they promoted a balance of personal
responsibility and collective action. They were inclusive and yet
outreaching; God was powerful and yet just; God was merciful and yet
exacting. I took my shahada the day my husband and I were married.

My conversion to Islam at first seemed to require no change in my life.
My husband, having lived in the U.S. for some years, and I, having been
raised here, followed the cultural norm and separated our "religious
life" from our "secular life." The first changes (noticeable to those
around us) occurred as we began to raise a family and began to make
decisions that affected our child and our life together. If there was
one definable turning point in our commitment to God, it came when our
oldest child was just three years old. I had a good friend who was a
practicing Muslim and with whom I spent a great deal of time. My son was
a keen observer and quite articulate for his age. One day around
Christmas, he questioned why it was that we called ourselves Muslims if
we didn't do any of the (observable) things that Muslims do? He wanted
to know why we had a Christmas tree. He wanted to know why I didn't wear
a scarf.

I didn't have very good answers for him, and his questions prompted a
complete evaluation of the role of religion in our lives. My husband and
I debated the merits of raising children with or without a strong
religious identity and examined how important we felt religion was for
ourselves. In the end, we felt that a sense of religion was important
for our child(ren) and, therefore, it was necessary for ourselves as
well.

Over the next five years or so we adjusted ourselves and our lifestyle
to be within Islamic parameters. Gradually we began to eat only halal
foods and avoided social situations that involved alcohol consumption by
others. We began to fast Ramadan, to pray all of our prayers, to study
the Qur'an, and became more involved in the Muslim community. Generally,
becoming more conscious of Islam meant constantly re--evaluating
ourselves and our surroundings. At times the constant evaluation felt
constrictive, and we longed for the carefree days of the past where life
was lived unthinkingly. However, these times were few, and we would
never have seriously considered giving up all that we had gained by
living Islam. Living as a practicing Muslim has brought a sense of
purpose to my life. There is a pervasive sense of serenity in the
knowledge that life is lived for a purpose. I feel that I have become a
much better human being-more compassionate, more moderate, more
deep-thinking. There is a richness and a calmness in my life that was
not there prior to becoming a practicing Muslim. Life in its broadest
sense has become one beautiful, intricate whole. How I Learned to Live
and Practice as a Muslim I learned to live as a Muslim primarily by
reading the Qur'an and by asking questions of knowledgeable Muslims. I
also watched and observed Muslims around me.

I learned how to pray by reading a book designed to guide new Muslims
through the prayer. Any other questions I had, I asked other Muslims. I
also drew upon sources and people in my husband's family. My
mother-in-law and father-in-law were particularly helpful as were other
relatives abroad who sent books or other resources as I needed them. The
ease or difficulty of taking on any specific Islamic practice has always
been directly correlated to how I understood it in connection with what
I already knew about Islam. If I didn't understand its significance or
see its connection to the intricate "whole" of Islam, I found it
difficult to integrate into my life. When I had read enough, asked
enough questions, talked enough, and finally understood, I didn't have a
problem adding that practice into my life.

**My Family of Origin**

My becoming a practicing Muslim has had a very profound effect upon my
relationship with my parents. My parents regard Islam quite negatively
and consider it an oppressive, dogmatic religion. They don't hold
religion, in general, in very high esteem and regard Islam, in
particular, to be very oppressive of women. However, my only sibling, my
sister, is quite supportive of my choice. I hope that in the future I
might be able to sit and talk with my parents about Islam and its role
in my life. We have attempted to discuss it many times but have made
very little progress. They seem unable to understand that being Muslim
brings me peace and joy and has added immeasurable depth to my life.
Islam has not taken anything away from who I am, but has only added to
it. My parents seem to regard my choice only as a rejection of them and
a rejection of my heritage. They believe that I have committed a form of
cultural apostasy and blame themselves. They believe that they failed
me-failed to give me strong self-esteem and failed to involve me fully
in my own culture. I hope that one day they will accept my
choice-perhaps not understand it, but accept it.

There are many points of stress between myself and my parents regarding
Islam. They dislike anything that physically marks me (or my children)
as "different" (read "Muslim"). They are uncomfortable going out in
public with me or my daughters because we wear hijab (myself) or modest
clothing (my daughters wear pants under their dresses). They were upset
when we asked them to stop drinking alcohol in our house when they
visited us. They used to bring it with them. They try not to take a
picture of me if I have on my scarf. They don't like our children's
Muslim names and argued greatly with me about it when our first child
was born. My parents are uncomfortable with my husband's and my
insistence that family comes first-they feel that I have sold myself
short by staying home (although I do work part-time!) and being
family--oriented. They wished a "career" for me. They are uncomfortable
with our world outlook and find it to be impractical and idealistic.
Except for the fact that they believe we are too conservative, they
think we are too politically correct. Frankly, most of the time, I am
not sure exactly what they think about me because they never discuss it
openly. I do know from the uncomfortable, explosive, and divisive
conversations we have had, that they disapprove of and are disappointed
with my choices in life. They can't, however, ever seem to tell me WHY.
I believe it is because they are unable to argue against something that
is ethical, moral, moderate, and logical-and is something that they
taught me to believe in since I was a small child (only they didn't call
it "Islam").

In our holiday celebrations, we attempted with our first-born to
continue celebrating Christmas with my parents. We changed the emphasis
to "helping Grandma and Grandpa celebrate their holiday" and also spoke
about the importance of Prophet Jesus (pbuh) in Islam. It didn't work
for many different reasons. Our child was too young to really be able to
make that distinction, and peer pressure to be like all the other
Christmas celebrants pushed him toward the popular idea of Christmas. My
parents used Christmas to push American culture at him creating an "us
WTSUS them" environment and creating confusion and tension in our child.
As our next children were born we realized that we didn't want these
same scenes replicated with them, and so we gradually stopped going to
my parents' house for Christmas. It was a decision that both
disappointed and angered my parents. They now celebrate Christmas with
my sister and her children and husband.

We do send Christmas cards to my parents, my sister, and my surviving
grandparent, wish them a Happy New Year, and call them on Christmas Day.
We also send my family letters or cards on Eid al Fitr of Ramadan. My
family sends us cards at Christmas and my sister also calls several
times during Ramadan to see how we are doing. The other Christian
holidays (e.g. Easter) were not celebrated in my family as I was growing
up and are not a factor now. My mom sends all the grandchildren cards at
Halloween (which we do not celebrate but overlook in deference to my
parents), Valentine's Day, and on their birthdays.

We would love to include my parents in our Islamic celebrations, but
they are not comfortable with the idea. They will not accompany us to
any gatherings with our Muslim friends if they happen to be visiting us,
and in deference to my parents, we usually stay home unless it is
impossible to get out of the activity. We have many difficulties when we
visit my parents, most springing from their disapproval of our
lifestyle. Our world views are quite different-from politics to the role
of "independence" and "materialism" in a person's life. We do have many
good times with my parents and want a close and mutually respectful
relationship with them.

**My Husband**

I met my husband while I was in college, through mutual friends. The
characteristics which most attracted me were his generosity of spirit,
honesty, compassion, loyalty, intelligence, and his general strength of
character. He knew who and what he was and yet he was humble. I greatly
admired his strength of character and his generosity to others. He was
very accepting and gentle and yet there was strength inside. My husband
had a large role in my conversion to Islam because he was able to answer
all my questions, and he spent a great deal of time explaining both
Islam and his culture to me. He always included me in all his Islamic or
cultural activities and acted as my interpreter, linguistically and
culturally. He made Islam available for me and helped me to experience
it firsthand. He never, at any point, pressured me to convert. The
decision was entirely mine.

My family didn't accept him very well as my "friend" but were fine
after we became "engaged." They like him immensely as a human being but
blame him for brainwashing me into becoming Muslim. They also blame me
for being so gullible. Our relationship with my parents was very good
until we became practicing Muslims. We were married in a civil ceremony
at the county courthouse and by proxy in Iran (so that relatives who
were "clergy" could perform the ceremony for us). Our civil ceremony
contained no Islamic elements and our Islamic ceremony was very basic:
the marriage contract, the intent (declaration of desire) to be married,
the public announcement of our marriage.

**The Homeland of My Husband**

We try to run our household on an Islamic model and to the extent that
Iranian culture is basically an Islamic culture, our household reflects
it. We speak Farsi at home and eat mostly Iranian food although tacos,
spaghetti, and stir-fry are big favorites (along with roasts and
hamburgers). We intend to live in the U.S. for the forseeable future due
to the- economic situation in Iran and because we have student loans to
repay in this country. We feel that we cannot forsake our debts here,
and we could never afford to both live and pay off our loans if we lived
in Iran. We have considered moving to another Middle Eastern country. My
husband is an Iranian citizen.

My Husband's Family

I have met all the members of my husband's immediate family and some
members of the (immense) extended family. I met my motherin-law and
father-in-law before we married, when they visited the United States for
a summer. They accepted me very well, although it must have been
difficult for them since they are very traditional Muslims and I was
your typical twenty-year-old college co-ed. I have been accepted
wonderfully by my in-laws although they have disagreed with the way we
have done many things, e.g., getting married as undergrads and having
three children while my husband was still in graduate school. However,
they have never belabored their concerns. My in-laws lived with us for
about a year and then moved down the block for the next year after that.
It was a great experience, although it had both its ups and downs! I
expect that should we move to Iran, I would fit in fairly well and that
I would be graciously accepted by the extended family. I might have a
few problems with Iranian culture particularly in those areas which
deviate from Islamic norms. Any problems from the extended family might
arise from my independence and self-reliance.

I have learned a great deal from my in-laws. They have a wonderful way
of relating to their children, a way which engenders respect for others
and great amounts of self-esteem. It is interesting to see how a child-
oriented and religious-oriented culture operates. My in-laws, by virtue
of being a contrast to American culture, have given me a great
appreciation for certain elements of my American cultural identity. From
all my comparing and contrasting of Iranian and American cultures, I
have seen that Islam is truly correct in saying that moderation in all
is the right path!

**My Position as a Woman**

As a Muslim woman I experience the full benefits given to me by God as
a member of the human race. I am responsible only to God for how I live
my life, and how well I fulfill my duties to Him. The most important
right which I enjoy by benefit of being a Muslim woman is the right of
equality before God. Among the other rights which are detailed for women
in Islam are the right to earn and keep our own money, to retain and/or
dispose of our own property, the right to inherit, the right to initiate
and contest a divorce, the right to an education, the right to retain
our own name after marriage, the right to participate in choosing our
own mates, the right to custody of our children.

However, as Islam is a just and fair religion, along with my rights
come my obligations. All levels of Islamic society-including the
individual and on through the relationships of husband/wife,
parent/child, employer/employee, and the society/societal member-are
firmly connected by interlocking and mutually reciprocal rights and
duties. A right does not exist without a corresponding duty; a duty does
not exist without a corresponding right. As an example: it is one of my
rights as a wife to be financially supported by my husband-that is his
obligation. Among others, my obligation is to try and live within his
financial means without complaint, derision, or greed, and to care for
his property and assets in his absence. My husband is obligated to treat
me with courtesy and respect, and I am obliged to do the same for him.
As a member of a society, I am obliged to help my fellow members, and
they and the societal bureaucracy at large are obligated to help me in
my times of need. There is much misunderstanding on the part of
non-Muslims (and some Muslims) regarding the absolute
inter-connectedness of rights and obligations-they come as a unit and
cannot be separated out to be viewed separately without losing their
essential qualities.

I feel no apprehension about my position as a Muslim woman in my
marriage. I do not feel that there are any areas of private or public
endeavor that are closed to me. I do have concerns regarding the status
of some women in those societies and within those marriages where there
is ignorance of or misunderstanding of the teachings of Islam. There
exist many Muslim societies where deviations from the Islamic norms
regarding the status and role of women (as well as other issues) have
resulted in a constriction of the role of women. "Cultural Islam" very
often is at variance with Islam. Verses from the Qur'an and Hadis of the
Prophet (pbuh) are often taken out of their context of revelation or
transmission and used to support patriarchal cultural viewpoints. Both,
men and women are often uneducated as to the true meanings of Islamic
injunctions and, by default, follow the standard cultural practice of
their societies.

**Child Rearing**

My child-rearing techniques are directly influenced by being a Muslim.
Islam touches all parts of my life and as such I try to raise my
children in the most Islamic way possible. My children came into this
world as Muslims, innocent and submissive to the will of Allah. It is
our great responsibility, indeed both a trust and a test from Allah,
that my husband and I raise them to remain Muslim. The most easily
observable Islamic influences on our child-rearing techniques include
encouraging the children to follow us in prayer, teaching them Qur'anic
verses, using traditional Muslim greetings and everyday phrases,
encouraging them to dress modestly and behave with compassion and
kindness. We use a lot of modeling and verbal encouragement and
reminding, but the children are never forced to join us in any given
activity as Islam teaches that there is no compulsion in religion. We
do, if necessary, insist that the children remain near our activity
(while quietly occupying themselves) so that at least they have exposure
to the activity and understand that there are some minimal family
standards that they must adhere to. We try to be tactful and discreet
when enforcing these standards to avoid provoking outright rebellion.

The major way in which Islam influences my child-rearing techniques is
that I try to remember that I am always within Allah's sight. Allah has
set high standards of personal behavior for humans, not because He is
vengeful, but because He knows that we are capable of rising to meet
those standards. I am also always aware that my two recording angels are
ever watchful! I try to be patient (this one can be quite difficult!),
polite, and respectful; and to act with compassion, sincerity, and
understanding towards them [the children]. I encourage them to value
education and view learning as a life-long endeavor that is not limited
to school hours or "school topics." We put great emphasis on doing their
personal best at school and elsewhere; to be helpful and kind; not to
lie or cheat; to value Allah (and therefore Islam), their family, and
their fellow human beings; to stand up for what they believe in, to
combine personal piety with outward action; to be sincere and
straightforward; and to be generous in thought as well as in action. We
also try to view each child as an individual, to view them outside of
the influence of birth order, to try not to compare them to their
siblings or to ourselves, to try to accept and value those personality
traits that are irritating to us but part and parcel of who they are.

Insha' Allah, our children will grow to be compassionate, productive
Muslims. To that end we are always re-evaluating our progress and our
child-rearing techniques. We always try to follow the specific Islamic
injunctions, but also attempt to follow the "spirit of the law." My
husband is very involved with the care of the children. I work
part-time, and while I am at work he is their sole caretaker. He also is
with the children when I go to meetings or study groups. He takes the
kids to the doctors, takes them out on excursions, takes them on
errands, goes to the swimming pool with them, and any number of other
activities.

My rights and obligations with my children? When people mention
Islam/mothers/mother's rights, they are usually referring to child
custody in the event of a divorce. Both my husband and I are of the
opinion that the children should go with whichever parent is better able
to care for them. Of course, in Islam, divorce is allowed, but
exhaustive efforts to keep the family unit intact should be made first.
In most cases, it is the mother who is better emotionally equipped to
raise the children. Unless circumstances warrant differently, the
non-custodial parent has the right to frequent visitation. The custodial
parent should be helped financially to raise the children, if it is
necessary. All divorces should take place in an Islamic family court
with a qualified jurist making the decision.

My obligation to my children is to love them, respect them, and help
them grow to be Muslim adults. This is as much an obligation to my
children as it is to Allah, who placed these children in my care as a
trust from Him. I am obliged to remember that my children belong to
Allah, not to me-and I must treat them accordingly.

As specified in the Qur'an, my children's obligations to me are that
they should respect me (but I must be worthy of that respect), obey me
(as long as I am within the bounds of Islam in my request), and care for
me if I attain old age. They have the right to expect love, good
physical care, and guidance from me. They have the right to be treated
with dignity and respect, as I do. What I Would Like to Express to
Others I would like the American public to know that I am a Muslim by
personal choice. I am a fully mature, intelligent human being, capable
of making rational decisions. My decision to embrace Islam is not an
effort to fit into my husband's culture or family; it is not the result
of too little self-esteem; it is not the result of pressure from my
husband. I would also like people to understand that Islam is not
repressive of women, it does not condone terrorism, and that it is
squarely within the Judeo- Christian tradition. I would like people to
realize that Islam stands for moderation and modesty and that there are
often great discrepancies between the practices of "cultural Islam" and
the directives of Islam.


