2.the Beginnig Path Growing Up Christian in an American Family
==============================================================

Jodi dropped out of college during the fall semester of her sophomore
year. She was in a state of emotional and spiritual turmoil and moved in
with her grandmother because she wasn't sure she could handle living
with us. Later that fall Jodi went with a small group of young adults on
a church tour to bring ministry to several congregations and to explore
some church historical sites. When she came back from the trip, she told
of her experience of emotional healing. "Mom and Dad, I now know what
you mean about there being a God-I had an experience with God. As I sat
with the group praying, it was like a warm flooding of my soul. It was
an assurance that there actually is a God. It was a healing time for me,
and now I am ready to start getting on with my life." But Jodi still was
not ready to move back home, so we provided a small apartment in one of
our rental houses while she attended the community college where her dad
taught.

In that semester, Jodi and Reza became acquainted. An engineering
student at the same community college, Reza was a serious young man who
held similar moral values that Jodi wanted for her life. Here was
someone who could help her be what she really wanted to be. At
Eastertime we were going out of town to visit relatives. We invited Jodi
and Reza to go with us. On Easter morning, as we prepared to go to
church, Jodi excitedly whispered, "Mom, Reza wants me to marry him and
go to Iran to live! Isn't that great?" No, it wasn't great. Iran was
where the hostage crisis was happening. No, this couldn't happen. All
through the Easter service, tears streamed down my face. I kept seeing
in my mind the scene from Fiddler on the Roof where Tevya sends his
second daughter off at the train station, knowing he would never see her
again. She sings to her father the song, "Far From the Home I Love." I
could not tolerate this! Reza invited us to his apartment for dinner the
next Thursday. Could we come? Well, that would be very nice. Yes, we
would like that. It was a pleasant time together-then Reza got to the
point. "Joe and Carol, I invited you here because I want to marry Jodi
and would like to have your approval." "When?"

"As soon as possible-by this summer, we hope." He explained their
feelings, their friendship, their agreement on values. We just could not
agree. She had college to finish. How would they pay for it? No. No. But
as time went on we could see they were going through with it, approval
or not. It was the first of May and I was out of town on a work
assignment. As I viewed a video in preparation for the weekend workshop
I was to conduct, I watched a segment about a missionary to India. The
missionary told about walking miles in rough terrain and hot weather to
reach a village. His feet were blistered and sore. When he reached the
village, he sat on a tree stump. An old lady of the village came to him
with a pan of water, removed his shoes and socks, and bathed his feet.
As he looked into her eyes, he said he saw the light of Jesus in those
eyes. As I heard the story, I fell on my knees. "God, I have not tried
to see anything in Reza. I have only resisted. I will look for your
light in his eyes and find acceptance."

When I saw him again after my return, I looked at Reza in a different
way. His beautiful dark eyes reflected love, gentleness, and light, and
I was overwhelmed with a feeling of acceptance. My husband, Joe, also
had come to accept him, so the wedding was planned for the first of
August. Reza was a good man. We would share the gospel with him and,
perhaps before long, he would become a Christian.

How familiar the feelings and emotions are for many of us whose
children are young adults. They make choices that we don't agree with.
We think we are raising them to take on our values and make the
decisions which would fit our lifestyle. But somehow it doesn't work.
They have options, and they often choose lifestyles different from the
ones we hoped they would choose. In my collection of stories of
American-born women who had converted to Islam, the overwhelming
majority described growing up with a religious commitment either because
the family required it or because the girl herself wanted to be
involved. Only two respondents said religion was not important in their
formative years, and one had never been a Christian. Several had dropped
out of church because they felt they couldn't get their questions
answered, or when they left home, they no longer "had to go" to church
because of parental demands. Some of these women were daughters or
granddaughters of ministers.

They came from fundamental as well as more liberal denominations.
Although 28 percent did not give specific denominations, those mentioned
were Catholic, Southern Baptist, Methodist, Christian-Disciples of
Christ, Episcopalian, Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day
Saints (RLDS), Nazarene Church, Presbyterian, Lutheran, Jehovah's
Witness, Quaker, Greek Orthodox, Seventh-Day Adventist, World Wide
Church of God, as well as charismatic and born-again Christians. One was
a Christian who had become Hindu and another was looking into Judaism.
Most came from a religious background and were searching for meaning in
their lives during the young adult questioning stage. In the following,
some of these women describe their perceptions of the religious
environment in their early lives.

**Families Who Were Strict in Religious Expectations**

Some of the women came from families who were determined that their
daughters would be diligent in their church attendance, not only on
Sundays but also during the week. The word "strict" was often used to
describe the expectations of some families in regard to religion. +I was
raised as a Catholic. I was taken to church and Sunday school every
Sunday because my father insisted and physically forced me and my
brothers and sisters to go and told us if we did not go to church we
would go to hell. I believed in God and feared him to some extent and
asked him for help. When I was seventeen I stopped going to church and
had horrible nightmares about the devil coming to get me for about six
months or more. +My father is a United Methodist minister. My
grandfather was a Baptist minister. I was raised in a very religious
environment. I went to church almost every day of the week.

+I grew up a Christian (Seventh-Day Adventist), going to church and to
private schools run by the church. I grew up in a strict environment: no
non-religious activities from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday, many
church activities, restricted diet (not only no pork, but also other
things specified in the Bible in the Old Testament), no drinking or
smoking, no jewelry, etc. In high school I got disillusioned with the
church because I saw so much hypocrisy in it. I stopped going to church
and dropped out of high school at seventeen.

These families required what they thought best for their daughters
growing up. The women often developed a deep belief in God but going to
church became something they had to do, and they were relieved when they
were old enough to make their own decisions about church attendance.
Parents Whose Denominational Convictions Were Changing or Weak Although
many parents had deep religious convictions, they had either dropped out
of church or were only attending on a part-time basis. Some families
were split in regard to denominational allegiance; others changed
denominations during the daughter's growing up period. Some of the women
expressed dissatisfaction with their religion of origin. +When I was a
child my family belonged to the World Wide Church of God, but they broke
away while I was still young. My father felt that most organized
churches were corrupt, but he was (in my opinion) extremely religious.
Being raised in this way, I was always seeking some religious
fulfillment.

+I was a born-again Christian-but was not practicing. I didn't go to
church because I wasn't interested in the whole overly religious,
pressured atmosphere. My mom became a born-again Christian when I was in
third grade. We were Catholic before that. I remember Mom having us
kneel in front of the TV while she was watching Jim Bakker on TV. +My
religious commitment was deeply imbedded. My parents did not attend
church but sent me with family and friends from the time I was two years
old. My parents had and, to some extent, still have moral standards that
were taught to me in my youth regardless of their church attendance
record. My mother's father is a Pentecostal preacher and my mother had
always expressed her ill feelings toward her father for making her go to
church three times a week.

+When I was a child, I went to the Church of God, my father's
denomination. Then, when I was a teenager, I went to the Episcopal
church with my mom. The reason for the change was because my mom decided
to go back to her Episcopal roots. I was not really satisfied with
either one. As reflected by some of the survey respondents, a degree of
turmoil or unrest was present in their families in regard to religion.
Consequently, the prevailing attitude was one of confusion and doubt.

**Women Who Felt a Pull Toward the Religious Experience**

Disillusionment, confusion, unanswered questions-these describe the
early religious experience of many of the women. However, in spite of
frustration, their stories show their devotion, of being in the "search
mode" and looking for stability in their religious life. +My father is
Presbyterian and my mother is Catholic. My father was never active in
any church, but Mother tried to raise us Catholic. I was baptized in the
Catholic church and received my First Communion at about the age of
eight. After that, we only went about once a year. When I was about ten,
I became a very active member of a small Presbyterian church nearby. By
ninth grade, I was helping the minister's wife teach Sunday school. In
high school I started a church youth group by recruiting four of my
friends to join me. It was a small group, but we were content to get
together to study the Bible, talk about God, and raise money for
charities.

These friends and I would sit together and talk about spiritual issues.
We debated about questions in our minds: What happens to the people who
lived before Jesus came (go to heaven or hell)? Why do some very
righteous people automatically go to hell just because they don't
believe in Jesus (we thought about Gandhi)? On the other hand, why do
some horrible people (like my friend's abusive father) get rewarded with
heaven just because they're Christian? Why does a loving and merciful
God require a blood sacrifice (Jesus) to forgive people's sins? Why are
we guilty of Adam's original sin? Why does the Word of God (Bible)
disagree with scientific facts? How can Jesus be God? How can One God be
three different things? We debated these things, but never came up with
good answers. The church couldn't give us good answers either; they only
told us to "have faith." +I was raised Catholic, but stopped attending
services in high school due to disenchantment on my mother's part. I
enjoyed the traditions of the Catholic church and liked the conservative
values. There were always many unanswered questions for me even as a
child-I could not accept the vague or nonsense answers. I knew even as a
small child that these vague areas of faith and philosophy of blind
obedience to the clergy were not right.

+I was a Christian by birth. I had always loved Sunday school and
church. In a mixed-up, divorced, dysfunctional family, I was looking for
stability, not just from a community but from God. After the age of
eighteen I searched from church to church looking for "the answer" only
to find more confusing messages from each minister and pastor. I
remember always telling my best friend that I wished I could find a
church. I always had an empty space inside of me. She would empathize
with me and try to encourage me to go on Sundays. But by the age of
twenty-two, I had given up on "man-made religion" but not on God.

+I was raised as a Catholic. My mother practices her faith but my
father is not attending mass regularly. Since I was in elementary
school, I questioned the teachers (nuns) and parents about the Trinity
(who should I pray to: Jesus, God the Father, Holy Spirit? How about the
Saints?). I was told there was no explanation and I just had to accept
it the way it is. It was too confusing to me. I was never satisfied with
Catholicism. I stopped going to church at age seventeen, but I was still
praying to God as I had from very early childhood. +I was a Baptist and
I was attending Catholic school. I was very involved with the activities
of the family church, but I can't say that I had any real commitment. As
a teenager, I was constantly searching for what was correct.

+For many years I "bounced around" from one Christian church to
another. I was not happy at any of them. If something didn't work out
with one church, I'd go to another. I thought that's all there was.
Eventually, I became disenchanted with the whole idea. All I had seen
were hypocrites, anyway, so I stopped attending church all together. I
then entered the darkest phase of my life. I literally sank to the
bottom of society. These women were discontent with what they found at
church and were questioning and searching for something to fill their
spiritual void. There was a sense of readiness on their part for that
which would meet the religious and spiritual needs they felt.

**Women who Came from a Mode of Commitment**

For many of the women, religion was at the heart of their faith journey
in their growing-up years. They were active participants in the church
as teachers, pianists, soloists, and worshippers and felt deeply devoted
to God and the religious aspect of their lives. +I was born and raised
the daughter of a Nazarene minister and was very active in church
musically. I was the church pianist for years and played and sang in
many local contests.

+I was raised a Baptist, but studied different religions after leaving
home. I was raised in a Christian family that tried to live as
Christians, not just pay lip service. +I grew up Catholic. For most of
my youth I wanted to be a nun. I even spent time with the parish priest
and even contacted a convent for information. I can say I was a devoted
Catholic, attended daily mass-the whole works. +Prior to my conversion I
was a Christian, going to Sunday school from two years of age and also
attending church services with my family every Sunday from about six
years of age. I was very devout and was baptized at age eight after
being questioned by the minister of our church. At first he was
skeptical to baptize someone so young, but after I answered all his
questions, he decided that I was ready to become a formal member of the
church. I was baptized and remained a faithful member until I met my
husband. Then I began to study Islam.

+Until eighteen years of age, I was a Methodist. At eighteen, I became
a Catholic. Prior to that conversion I had read about all world
"religions." I was very active in both denominations and other
churches-to the point of receiving awards, medals, certificates, etc. I
considered myself very active and religious. I wanted to become a nun. I
knew several sisters in a local convent and inquired about nunnery life.
For many of these women, religion was a natural way of life. They were
often dissatisfied with the answers they received to the questions they
asked of church leaders. They were at "that phase" in life when they
were trying to decide for themselves who they were and what they wanted
their lives to be like; they were young adults making independent
choices. It was at that point of searching that they made contact in
some way with Islam.

**3. Changing Path American Women Choosing to Become Muslim**

We were with Jodi for two days one summer attending a friend's wedding.
She and Reza had been married or two years and were studying at the
University of Arkansas, about an eight-hour drive from our home. She
seemed so different, yet I liked her mature manner and her kindness.
When making a hair appointment, she was careful to insist on a female
rather than a male beautician. Even though it was in the middle of a hot
summer, she wore long sleeves. Her conversation was serious as she spoke
of what she was learning about Islam. On the way to the wedding, we
talked. Jodi sat with her dad in the front seat. She turned around to
look at me sitting in the backseat and said, "Mom, who do you believe
Jesus was?"

"Well, Jodi, you know. You've been going to church all your life," I
replied. "But, Mom, I want to hear you tell me now." And so I told her
what I thought was basic to the Christian belief of Jesus' birth, of his
ministry, of his being the Son of God, of his death and resurrection for
our salvation. "Then Jesus is God?" Jodi asked.

"Yes, Jesus is part of the Trinity," I replied, "and throughout his
teaching and ministry, he points us toward God." I felt frustrated.
Somehow her responses left me feeling inadequate. Why couldn't I do
better? Even though she didn't say so, I could feel her moving toward an
Islamic viewpoint. Well, no chance of her going all the way, I comforted
myself. All too soon Jodi was gone again, back into the world of
university studies with her husband, Reza. We, too, returned to our home
and jobs. We kept in touch with Jodi by phone. With each call, we felt
the gap widening. She was a natural at imitating others and often
sounded like an Iranian trying to learn English as she imitated her
friends' accents. She talked of cooking-not American foods but Iranian
cuisine. She spoke only of her Muslim friends-not Christian or even
American friends. We couldn't quite define it, but there was a shift.

November came and Jodi and Reza came home for Thanksgiving. We had been
apprehensive but looked forward to it. We really loved those two, and we
missed them. Jodi came through the door. She was wearing a long dress
over her jeans and sweater. She carried a scarf in her hand, and her
hair was flat against her head. We embraced, then sat and talked in a
rather stilted, surface manner. It was late and time to retire. Reza
went out to carry in the suitcases. As I got up, Jodi came over by me.

"Mom, I need to talk to you." I turned my back and headed for the
kitchen. Tears were welling up in my eyes. No, I wouldn't talk with her.
I couldn't stand what I thought she had to say. "Not now," I answered
without looking at her. The next day was Thanksgiving. We were all
heading to Grandma's house, an hour's drive away. "Mom, we won't be
eating the turkey or dressing. We're only eating approved meats." Well,
big deal! See if I care! I wouldn't look at or acknowledge her. She had
the long dress on over her jeans again, and as we walked out the door,
she put on the scarf so it covered all her hair. I sat in the front seat
and sulked the entire trip. The rest of the family seemed to carry on as
usual-Reza and Jodi, her two brothers, and her dad. I managed to avoid
her the whole day until that night back at the house.

"Mom, we have to talk."

"I don't want to hear it." "You've got to hear it, Mom, please." I
finally gave in, and we sat down. "Morn, I've converted to Islam. I was
already Muslim this summer, but I wasn't ready to tell you then. I
needed to grow stronger before I told you." The signs are often there
that our young adults are changing from the path we want for them, yet
we aren't sure just what to do about it. Consequently, we frequently
ignore it, hoping the whole situation will go away, and we won't have to
deal with it. As young adults, our children are beyond our control; they
encounter many new ideas and new perspectives in the world, and they
make their own decisions.

**Daughters Learning of a New Path**

Of the respondents to the questionnaire, 63 percent were married to
Muslims before their conversions. Their attitudes toward Islam at the
time of marriage ranged from fear of Islam to having already
investigated Islam on their own. Twenty-three percent converted before
marriage and later met and married a Muslim, while 6 percent who
converted are still single. Only one woman responded as having become
Muslim even though married to a white, American, non-Muslim male. None
of these women felt compelled by their husbands to study Islam and
convert. In many instances it was the searching of the wife that drew
the husband back into practice of his religion. These Muslim men (often
not practicing) seemed, for the most part, to be well-versed in their
religion. It wasn't a case of not knowing what Islam was and what it
required; it was being away from family in a land where it was difficult
to practice Islam that fostered less involvement. Family
responsibilities and a searching, supportive wife naturally drew them
again into the practice of their faith.

Although the stories of these women vary in the specifics, there are
many commonalities in their introduction and conversion to Islam. The
majority of women were introduced to Islam by the husband. Others were
introduced by classes they took in college, and a few by acquaintance
with Muslim neighbors or from having visited in an Islamic country.
Islam touched in them a need they felt. Each in her own way chose to
accept Islam and make shahada, declaring herself as Muslim by
acknowledging "There is no God but Allah and Muhammad is a messenger of
Allah." The following stories help us gain a sense of the variety of
ways they learned about Islam and the conversion experiences that
brought these women to the point of declaration.


