The Witness of the Significant Other
====================================

The desire to further a relationship with a Muslim who had become a
significant other was a motivator for some to investigate Islamic
beliefs more seriously.

+I met my husband in 1983. Prior to that I held all the common
stereotypes of Islam, that it was medieval, subjugated women, and was
violent. I never had any formal exposure to Islam despite a master's
level education. Although not practicing the prayers or fasting
regularly, my husband was very sure that Islam was the true religion of
God. I was aware that although I was under no obligation to convert, he
would not marry me without my committing to raise any children we would
have as Muslims. I felt he had a sound value system and my initial
exposure to the Qur'an did not convince me one way or the other, but I
saw nothing I felt adverse about in raising our children Muslim. In
1988, our first son was 18 months old. Our marriage was in deep trouble
for a variety of reasons. I turned to the Qur'an to find ways I could
use it to manipulate my husband into counseling. Our conflict reached a
zenith in September, 1988, and I asked him for a separation. I felt I
had no options, even though I still loved him. I was calm driving to
work. Out of my soul came an intense pain, and I cried out loud for God
to help me. At that moment I recognized my desire to be Muslim, and it
did not matter if my marriage broke up or not. I wanted to be Muslim for
me.

+I met my husband at Louisiana Tech University. He didn't want to have
an illegal relationship with me, so he immediately proposed marriage,
asked me if I was interested in reading about Islam and becoming Muslim,
and he actually asked me to put a cover on my hair. I was insulted by
the last two requests, and at eighteen, I wasn't sure I wanted to get
married. I was attracted to him and wanted to be with him. He
discontinued contact with me. I went home and read on my own about
Islam. I changed and wanted to many him.

+[From one who was unchurched] My husband was supportive in helping me
put my life together. I was recovering once again from emotional
problems. He really had very little to do with my conversion. He
introduced me to Islam but never asked me to convert. Islam does not
require me to, but he returned fully to his religion. As I saw him
gradually acquire an inner peace, I became envious. Inner peace was what
I sought. So I asked for literature. The more I read, the more I wanted
to learn. Islam means "submission to the will of God" or "inner peace."
I felt God himself was leading me.

**Learning About Islam in an Islamic Country**

Some of the women actually visited Muslim countries and were profoundly
affected by the people and their practice of Islam. They observed the
lifestyles and the norms as lived out in an Islamic-based culture. When
I was eighteen I married my boyfriend because he was going to Vietnam. I
decided to enlist in the Medical Corps. Around that time I was studying
Judaism [although a Christian at the time], mainly because they did not
believe in the Jesus as Savior thing. But I found out I did accept Jesus
as a prophet and the Jews did not! I also accepted the virgin birth,
which was another no-no, but everything else about their beliefs was
okay with me-much different than the arguments I had with pastors and
priests before, so I sort of considered myself a Jew-non-Jew type
person.

I was a trained combat nurse and was present during the last days
before Saigon fell in Vietnam. (Yes! A bona fide Vietnam veteran with a
bronze star and 2 purple hearts!) In 1978 I was sent to Saudi Arabia
because the United Nations needed trained personnel to conduct a relief
campaign for immunization and care of the cholera epidemic sweeping
through south Saudi Arabia, Oman, and Yemen regions. Many children were
dying as well as old people. When I could, I watched the Bedouins pray
several times a day and the only word I could make out was "Allah," but
the devotion of those people impressed me.

I took a tour of the Middle East in early 1980 with my husband. In
Cairo my "light bulb" went from dim to bright as I continued my study of
Islam. My marriage was in the process of ending and when the divorce
came, I had a nervous breakdown because my family and my husband's
[family] were trying to "deprogram" me from this dangerous, religious
"cult" I had become fascinated with. I buckled under and simply cracked
from the confusion.

After intense therapy, 1 moved south to return to college and finish my
half-completed bachelor's degree. There I met many Muslim students who
wondered at my knowledge of their religion. Six months later I was
reading the Qur'an full-time and took my shahada during Ramadan in
1989. +My conversion started when I took a religion class at Purdue
University, This first introduction to Islam struck my mind and made
more sense (and later, total sense) than other religions I studied. Then
I decided to join a study summer tour to Egypt to visit a Muslim.
country firsthand, to see the mosques, to talk: with the people. This
opened my mind tremendously. From that point on, Islam was the only way
for me to go. When I got back from Egypt, I went to the local mosque,
and the sisters helped me begin my path of knowledge and life. In
November 1993 I converted and have found peace in my life. Before
converting I was not religious. I was drinking and being "wild." Islam
taught me that this life is the judgment for the after-life and pleasing
Allah (SWT) is most important.

+I studied Islam as part of my college major in African and Middle
Eastern Studies. . . I did not believe anyone could truly practice Islam
in the present age.

I traveled to West Africa as a volunteer and stayed 3 months. In that
time, I met true Muslims. When they heard the call to prayer, they ran
to the mosque. If someone had extra money beyond his basic needs, he
gave it to someone less fortunate. The name of Allah was always on their
tongues. The more I was with them, the more I wanted to embrace Islam.

I became very sick and had to be evacuated to a hospital in the
capital. I had no one to comfort me-all my friends were far away. All I
could do was pray. I prayed almost constantly for three days. I
remembered the conversion story of Yusuf Islam (Cat Stevens); he was
drowning and promised God he would devote his life to God if God spared
his life. I did the same. Within two days, I was back in the village
with my Muslim friends, but I still resisted converting.

I was miserable when I returned to the U.S. I could no longer function
in a society so far removed from what I wanted. I met many American and
Arab Muslims who encouraged me ever so gently to let go and submit to
Allah. I became so exhausted from trying to resist the pull of Islam
that finally on January 21, 1989, I converted. These women seemed to
have a fascination with what they observed in the Islamic countries.
They were moved by what they saw and felt, and they responded by
becoming part of that which was introduced to them.

**The Witness of Muslim Neighbors and Acquaintances**

Some of the young women met Muslims in this country who influenced them
by their daily living and practice. They sensed in the Muslims personal
strength that seemed to come from their beliefs. Sometimes the Muslims'
witness was verbal as they responded to questions, but more often it was
how they chose to live their lives.

+I was fifteen years old when I first started to learn about Islam. A
Saudi family moved in next door, and I was fascinated by their behavior,
dress, language, and religion. The wife and I became very close, but it
took four years for me to convert. They never pushed it on me; they
simply answered my questions and showed me great kindness and
hospitality. All throughout high school, though I was not a Muslim, I
stayed away from negative elements. It came from my Saudi friends'
influence. So when I converted, the only real things I changed were my
clothing and leisure time activities such as concerts, movies, and
sports.

+Before becoming Muslim, I was an atheist and had withdrawn from the
church; however, I wasn't closed toward long and in-depth discussions
about God and this world. After several years of satisfying but
"burnout" type working, I started traveling through South Central
America and ended up in Texas. A Muslim community welcomed me to stay
and sort out my total and utterly miserable confusion. By the will of
Allah, I was guided toward becoming Muslim, saying the shahada, and
wanting to be married. This then settled me into a new identity and a
different life orientation but without totally losing the old "me." +My
husband wasn't practicing his religion at the time I met him so he had
no objections when I decided to go back to church and take the kids. The
only thing he requested was that we eat no pork. Visitors from Egypt to
my father's business let me see for the first time Islam in full
practice. It was then that my husband began to think about putting it in
his life more seriously.

Then my aunt married a Muslim, and I spent much time there asking
questions about Islam. In 1990 I gave birth to my fourth child, and I
was caught unaware in my belief. What I mean is I really didn't know I
believed in Islam. But one night Allah made the truth to hit me, It felt
like a rock, and I cried like my three-week-old daughter that night as I
sat staring at my plaque of the Lord's Prayer.

I kept my belief a secret even from my husband for another two weeks. I
told him on the phone one day when he called me from work. He
immediately started asking me why. He told me it was very serious, that
I shouldn't "hop on to it." One must be convinced and not compelled. He
cut me short saying "We'll talk about it when I get home." He later told
me after he hung up the phone, he cried and thanked God. He promised to
try to begin a new life and practice Islam to the full extent. He told
me that night, he whispered the call to prayer in our newborn's right
ear and the readiness call in her left-something he had not done with
our other children. +In 1983, through friends I met an Arab woman, and
we became best friends. One day she asked if I could babysit her
daughters, and I did. One night before the kids went to bed they told me
their prayers and also wanted to teach me. The next day, she asked me if
I considered Jesus the Son of God. I replied, "Really, I have no
religion but tell me more about your religion, Islam." It took me two
more years from then to say shahada.

+I volunteered to help tutor Saudi women who were studying English as a
second language. I found it odd that these women refused to have a man
tutor them, but after checking out and reading several books on Islam
from the public and school libraries, I began to understand these
"mysterious" ladies in black. The women began to open up more and more
and invited me into their homes and my knowledge of Islam unfolded,
really respected the religion as I saw it practiced on a daily basis.

It was irn the spring of 1988 that I really began to practice. I
contacted the local Islamic Association and joined a sister's Qur'an
study group. There I met sisters who were and still are great role
models and guiding forces for me yet today. The impact of devout and
dedicated Muslims on the lives of these women supports the church growth
principle that in Christianity most are converted to a church because of
someone they know who influences their lives toward accepting Christ and
the church. These women sensed that living as a Muslim fulfilled these
people spiritually and they, too, wanted to feel very close to God by
being a true Muslim. Learning About Islam in the College Setting Many of
the women made contact with Islam for the first time in the college
setting. It may have been through specific religion courses, books they
read for general college classes, or Muslim students or friends they
associated with on campus. Hearing about Islam greatly interested
them.

+ I was meeting with a group of international students ass part of a
conversation group program to practice English. As I listened to a
Palestinian man talk about his life, his family, his faith, it struck a
nerve in me. The more I learned about Islam the more I became interested
in it as a possibility for my own life.

The following term the group disbanded, but I registered for a class
"Introduction to Islam." This class "'fought back all the concerns I had
about Christianity. As I learned about Islam, all of my questions were
answered. All of us are not punished for Adam's original sin. Adam asked
God for forgiveness and our merciful and loving God forgave him. God
doesn't require a blood sacrifice in payment for sin. We must sincerely
ask for forgiveness and amend our ways. Jesus wasn't God; he was a
prophet like all the other prophets. They all taught the same message:
believe in the One true God, worship and submit to God alone, and live a
righteous life according to the guidance he has sent. This answered all
my questions about the Trinity and the nature of Jesus (all God, all
human, or a combination?). God is a perfect and fair judge, who will
reward or punish us based on our faith and righteousness. I found a
teaching that put everything in its proper perspective, and appealed to
my heart and intellect. It seemed natural. It wasn't confusing. I had
been searching. I found a place to rest my faith.

+I was in college taking psychology and sociology but felt a need to
turn back to religion even though I didn't agree with Christianity a
whole lot, especially the way it had been presented to me before in
life. After shopping around at all the different religions like
Hinduism, Buddhism, I enrolled in the religious studies class in college
and took literature of the Old Testament. One of the things that came up
was going back to look at the roots of Christianity. It seemed that
Christianity was okay then, but it got changed to the point to where
women were not really accepted, as well as other changes. Reading
through the texts, I came across things that the pastors in our church
had never talked about. It really shook me, and it made me begin to
question the Bible.

My husband gave me a Qur'an as a wedding gift, and it just sat on the
shelf during the time I was taking the religion classes. After that we
went to Syria to visit the family. I couldn't speak the language so I
had a lot of time on my hands. So I read the whole thing, and while
reading it I was looking for things that seemed incorrect or were
problems to me. I came across things in the English translation that
bothered me, like "Lightly beat your wife." So I would say to my
husband, "How can you believe this stuff?" Then he would say, "No, in
Arabic that's not the way it really is," and would explain from the
original. 1 went through the whole thing and couldn't find anything
inaccurate. And I thought, "Well, this is better than anything else I've
seen." I converted in 1988. +1 was Roman Catholic. I studied
African-American studies as part of my work toward a degree in social
sciences. After reading The Autobiography of Malcolm X, I felt compelled
to understand the power behind Brother Malcolm's transformation after
making hall, when he returned to the U.S. and said that racism is not a
part of Islam. As I began to study, I felt certain that lightning would
strike me down 'for studying another religion. I studied casually for
three months, intensely for the next three months, then made shahada to
Allah before I first stepped into a masjid for the first time on May 29,
1993. On May 30, 1993, I made shahada in front of witnesses in the
masjid.

The change was not a choice for me; it was going home. It gave me
answers to questions I'd had and questions I didn't have. I love Islam.
I love the concept of ummah. Alhamdulillah, that Allah has seen me fit
to test. **Searching to Fill the Spiritual Void**

Many of the respondents were searching for something in the spiritual
area to fill the void in their lives. It was through this openness that
many began to receive the pull toward Islam. This need is reflected in
most of the descriptions the women give of their conversion experience..
They may have come to the conversion point from a variety of situations,
but most were receptive because of the need within themselves and the
gentle persuasion of the Muslim person Of resource which touched their
hearts and souls. +I married someone who was not a Christian and we both
were non-practicing in anything religious. I still thought of myself as
a Christian. "What else is there," I thought. I still held my belief of
God and his creation of the earth, but wasn't sure of the other beliefs
I was taught growing up.

The year after my divorce in 1990 I started thinking about what I
needed, about what I believed. Early in 1991 I started checking books
out of the library and reading about Islam, more because I was curious
about it than anything. I slowly read books on it, but also lived my
life as I had been living it. It wasn't until the fall of 1992 that I
decided I had to do something about it-either get serious about studying
it or forget about it. I found several American Muslim sisters in
Manhattan, twenty miles from where I lived in a very small town. I
studied with them and learned the practical aspects of what I had read
for the past year and a half. T took my shahada in December 1992. +My
struggle began many years ago with my search for self-identity. Growing
up in America as a black presented meaningful challenges to me during
the 1960s and 1970s. After rallying around certain racial issues and
feeling the pressures of early integration in Mississippi and Texas, I
began to question my "role" in life as a black woman.

I was a successful professional, but my personal life was a mess. Bad
marriage, poor relationship with parents and siblings, discontented with
church and God-these all led me to question who I was and why and what I
could do to improve relationships with these people and the world in
general.

I began to seek out answers by researching black history. I was amazed
to find out that most African people came from Islamic states. I later
met some Sunni Muslims who shared very impressive information about
heaven and hell that touched my Sufi heart. I was teaching speech and
drama at a Catholic high school in Washington, D.C. at the time. I
became Muslim in 1974. I was asked to resign at the end of the year
because several students also converted to Islam. Islam cooled me out.
It helped me to find God without all of the hangups and guilt I felt as
a Christian. I've always loved God, and knowing that I could talk
directly to Allah was a welcoming treat.

+1 was first introduced to Islam at the age of fourteen, but because of
family conflicts I was not able to learn or practice. After leaving home
to go to college, I had the freedom to pursue the religion. The biggest
change I had to make (besides the obvious ones of dress, diet, etc.) was
to put some distance between myself and my family and former friends. I
did this as a protection for myself that would allow me to grow stronger
in my religion without distractions. I had little sense of loss because
I filled the void with newfound Muslim friends, and later, my husband.


