Sensing the Authority of the Qur'an
===================================

Many of the women have expressed their growing respect and love for the
Qur'an, which is considered the final and literal word of God. For some
women the Qur'an was an important part of their conversion experience.
oMy conversion began as the result of a challenge by a Muslim to read
the Qur'an in order for us to have a debate on the position of women in
Islam. I held the stereotypical view of Muslim women as being oppressed
and in a bad position relative to their Christian counterparts. I was
nominally Christian, raised in a Catholic environment, but was not
practicing the religion and really only bothered to label myself a
Christian in order not to appear too rebellious in front of my extended
family (my family was also really only Christian in name, not
"reality").

The reading of the Qur'an and of hadith of the Prophet is what captured
me. I went through a very odd experience whereby for the whole week it
took me to read the Qur'an I couldn't sleep and seemed to toss and turn
all night in a feverish sweat. I had strange and vivid dreams about
religious topics, and when I would get up all I wanted to do was
continue reading the Qur'an. I didn't even study for my final exams
which were happening at the same time! I began a course in Middle
Eastern History, which immersed me further into the study of Islam. When
the professor read passages from the Qur'an to illustrate how powerful a
"tool" it was in spreading Islam throughout the world, my heart sang. I
knew I had found the TRUTH! I had been searching for God since the early
'80s. At this point I knew I would someday be a Muslim. After the class
was over I continued my investigation into Islam. I bought an English
translation of the Qur'an and read it daily. I was living at home at the
time so hid most of this from my family. I got together often with my
new friends and my total lifestyle began to change.

+My conversion was a long process. I left Christianity while in junior
high school. I was raised Methodist. My father had been a minister one
time and was rather strict when I was a child. My parents left the
church-mother went the American Indian Lakota way and father just left.
I looked into a number of faiths but nothing attracted me. I was raised
to look at other cultures from a point of understanding to try to step
out of my own culture to view others. The Iranian revolution sparked
many questions for me. I decided to learn more about the people and
culture and began reading the history of Iran which led to history of
Islam-an area not even touched in school. This led to reading Qur'an. I
hit an emotional crisis when a relationship (with an Arab) fell apart,
and I found myself turning to the Qur'an. I realized a need to rely on
something other than people. My mother was dead, my family far away. I
didn't know who I could turn to or trust. The Qur'an touched a chord. I
got in touch with a [Muslim] women's study group and they were very
supportive and informative. I especially liked Islam's base of logic. It
took me a year to finally take shahada.

This holy book, the Qur'an, so revered by Muslims as the final word of
God and the direction for humankind, touched these women as if it were a
call to the faithfu1 to come and submit themselves to that which is holy
and divine. They responded with zeal and passion to Islamic scripture.

**Finding Answers in Islam**

Some of the women tied to prove Christianity to their Muslim husbands.
They sought help from Christian leaders but were frustrated in. their
attempts. Some of the women smuggled with letting go of Christianity
even though they felt "Muslim." Several religious questions seemed
unsettling to them. Whereas Islam tends to "have the!, answers," there
is often confusion Christian theology. In Islam there is only one God so
how can Jesus also be God, the Muslims ask.

The Bible, viewed by many Christian as being the literal word of God,
is also questioned. Muslims emphasize the many changes made over the
centuries in the numerous manuscripts that make up the Bible and that it
was written by those who only "felt inspired," cam many years after the
events occurred. They point out what they led are contradictions in the
Bible. Muslims, are well-versed in their beliefs and are often able to
fill in the gaps for the confused person longing or God, answers, for
what to do to be at peace. Varying degrees of dissatisfaction with
Christian theology as they perceive it is apparent in many of these
women's stories. Some of the problems center in the concepts of Trinity,
original sin, or Jesus as the Son of God or Jesus as God. Their
frustration with some of these ideas helped to open the doom for "new"
religious expression.

oAfter the birth of our second child, I decided to go back to church. I
was so enthusiastic and went around singing, reading the Bible, and
telling my husband how much he should get back to God. With some
reluctance he went to church with me and my daughter several times.

One day he said, "I can't go, anymore and I don't want you to take our
doughty (either." We had a big fight and were going to split up until we
decided that we would take a look at both religions. If I could explain
Christianity satisfactorily, he would become a Christian. At the same
time, I would take another look at Islam. (I had claimed Islam two years
after we were married, but he wasn't active and I lost interest
quickly.) I started asking a lot, of questions from ministers,
theologians, and seniors in the field to help me prove Christianity to
my husband. I wanted it se badly, I vied to several of them to help me
and most of them said, "I'm sorry-I don't know" or "I'll write you," but
I never heard from them. The harder I tried to prove Christianity to
convert him, the more I moved toward Islam because of its logic, until I
finally yielded to the belief and oneness of Allah. One thing led to
another until my husband and I became practicing Muslims Islam for me
gives me peace of mind because I don't have in understand the Trinity
and how God is "three in one" or that God died on the cross. Fu me Islam
supplies the answers. +I called myself agnostic when I' went to college.
I thought I believed in God and didn't want to do anything about it.
After a few years, was ready to go back to being "religious" again. In
the meantime, I met a man from Lebanon who would later become my
husband. He and both started learning mor,.7t about Islam and about six
months later converted. We were married six months after that. The
hardest part was changing my ideas about Jesus, It took A long time to
he able to say that Jesus isn't the Son of God without it feeling like
blasphemy. But., I realized that the beliefs are really close, in some
ways. Mary was a virgin and Jesus is a great prophet. The difference is
in the divinity of Jesus.

+I never knew anything about Islam except that "Muhammad was a killer
and Islam was spread by the sword." I was going out with my husband
prior to marriage (he was not a practicing Muslim at that time), but
when we got married and he finally told his family, his father's
stipulation was that I was to be Muslim. I told him I could not change
my religion for a man because I have always been close with God but
never had a direct path to walk. Then I started talking about what I
really believed. I promised God that I would look into Islam, and I
asked God to guide me.

Over the course of several months I started talking to my husband's
friend who had embraced Islam and was a humble practicing Muslim. I
asked him many questions. I kept away from my husband about this topic
because I wanted to be as objective as possible. My hardest hurdle was
getting over the fiery images of what we would look like burning up in
hell from my Sunday school books and training. I had been told so many
times that if I did not believe Jesus had died for my sins and was my
personal savior I would go to hell forever. But Allah showed me the way.
I was reading many books about Islam, and everything I read was exactly
how I felt inside me. All the answers were there. I may not have
understood everything but what I did made sense. I embraced Islam and
shared my first Ramadan with my husband of six months who was now
practicing his beliefs.

The idea that Jesus is considered God by Christians was something that
hadn't become a reality to some of the women. Muslims were, therefore,
able to refute this belief by affirming that putting anything or anyone
on the same, level as God is a eat sin. This point is probably the most
dividing belief between Christians and Muslims. For Christians it would
be a peat sin to deny Jesus as part of the Trinity; for Muslims the
greatest sin would be to place Jews (whom they consider as a revered and
great prophet) on the level of God.

+I asked my fiend to attend Mass with me. He said he didn't attend
church, that he was a Muslim. "What's a Muslim?" I asked, totally
unaware that my life was going to change forever as soon as he began his
answer. At first, I listened intently but after he got to the part which
denied Jesus being the Son of God, even denied his sacrifice for us on
the cross, I excused myself from this friend and kicked myself for
wasting so much time that now I had missed Mass and would have to go to
confession. We talked again later about his beliefs. We seemed more and
more alike in our belief: heaven and hell, angels, our duty to our
fellow roan, holy scriptures. was just the "Jesus thing" that kept us on
opposite ends of the spectrum. I also noticed another complication;
despite everything, I was failing in love with him.

It wasn't Islam that was the issue. It was Christianity I was a
"doubting Thomas" in every way and the guilt was overwhelming. I began
to seek all kinds of advice to rid me of this demon of doubt. Then,
three events took place in the space of a week that caused me to decide
to 'eave Christianity altogether.

First, I went to a nun that I trusted deeply and poured my heart o-w.
She responded with compassion, but she handed me a Qur'an as I left. I
was very confused. Then, I went to my religion teacher, who was a lay
person. As we talked, I ,siew more confused and finally said, "Look, I
just want you to tell me that, undoubtedly and with full conviction,
Jesus Christ is the Son of God" He didn't look at me when he said, "I
can't tell you that" Now I was angry too. What was wrong with these
people that they refused to give me the answers I was looking for?
Finally, I turned to God. At least I was sure that he was still there
for me. And he would help me. I prayed that he would open my mind and my
heart and show me the answer I was looking for. I used a method I had
used many times before. I would pray everything in my heart, then open
the Bible to a random page and find my answer. I opened my Bible to the
trial of Jesus in front of Pontius Pilate. Pilate was trying to get
Jesus to say something by which he could be convicted, in order to
relieve his own guilt for having him sentenced to death to fulfill the
wishes of the people. Pilate asked him, "Are you the Son of God?" and
Jesus answered, in Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, "It is you who have
said it." Suddenly, I felt at peace.

+When I was eighteen I went to a local two-year Christian college. It
was there that I first came in contact with Muslims. There were a lot of
them there, and I was fascinated with the idea of another group of
people I knew nothing about-some people from the "Holy Land." I took a
course called "The World's Living Religions" and learned a little about
Islam. I net my husband-to-be there when I was nineteen years old. I
married him after four months.

We moved far away to go to a university. There I met an American-Muslim
woman who wore hijab. She gave me books and pamphlets about Islam. I
read some of them and watched some debates between Muslims and
Christians about the divinity of Jesus and the authenticity of the
Bible. It was then that I heard clearly for the first time that the
Christians (including the Catholics) thought that Jesus was God and that
the Bible had been changed by men and mostly made by men's words, not
God's. I was shocked. I knew then that I was not one of "them"
anymore.

**Finding Something Familiar in Islam**

The close identity of Islam with the prophets, with the emphasis on
Allah as the same God the Christians and Jews worship, with the
acceptance of Jesus as a great prophet and teacher, with the tracing of
their roots to Abraham-all these make a familiar setting into which
Prophet Muhammad came to bring the final word, to set right with direct
revelation God's word of "the way" to the people. This familiarity may
have been part of the easy transition for some of the American-born
women when Muslim beliefs were explained. +After meeting my husband we
shared our religious beliefs, which were similar. I began exploring my
religious feeling after he asked me about my beliefs of Jesus being God,
and he explained about prophethood and Muhammad. I agreed with these
Islamic interpretations. I began studying from interest about Islam. Six
months after we had married I began doing the prayers. After another six
months, I participated in the fast during Ramadan. I found at this point
that Islam defined my belief I could no longer deny my belief in Islam
just to prevent hurting people's feelings.

+When I met the man who would become my husband and learned that he was
Muslim, I was scared and asked all the questions that caused my fear. I
also took a course in college called "Islam and Social Change" and
learned even more about Islam. As I learned more and more in the course,
the more questions I had and the more afraid I became. This fear,
however, was different than the fear of the unknown; this fear was a
fear a self- discovery. I found that all along I shared the beliefs
taught through Islam but never had a name for it. This course, the
Qur'an, and my husband helped me realize that for a number of years I
had been living a Muslim life without knowing it. (It wasn't until I
learned the Five Pillars of Islam that I began completely practicing as
a Muslim.) So when people ask how long I have been a Muslim I can't tell
them, but I can think that it has been eleven years. If they ask me when
I converted, I can tell them in 1992. As a matter of fact, my husband
knew before I did that I was Muslim but let me come to that realization
on my own.

And so began the faith journey for these women that would affect those
around them-the families in which they were raised, their friends, their
colleagues at work or school. Most of all, it would change the direction
and flow of their own lives, not just in a religious sense but in every
facet of their existence.

**4. FORSAKING THE PEVIOUS PATH Reactions of Relatives**

Jodi and I sat in the family room that evening on Thanksgiving Day,
just the two of us. At last I knew I had to listen. I wanted to be sure
I could go over at a later time what she would say to me-this was
important! I knew I was too emotionally distraught to be logical, so I
set up the tape recorder to record our conversation. The following
excerpts are taken from that recorded conversation between Jodi and me.
She began. "Last July I decided to change to Islam, not drastic at first
but this last month I decided to wear the cover. So I wear it every day,
and it is my own choice. This was all on my own. Reza is happy about it,
but he didn't ask me to do it. I wanted to tell you and let you ask any
questions you have. I have chosen this for me. I will help you work it
through, if you want to work it through. That is all I can offer. I'm
willing to take all the nasty comments or whatever you want to dish out.
It's not going to be easy for me to be on the 'wrong' side . . .
although I don't feel like either of us is on the wrong side; we just
have made different choices. I have other things I want to say, but I'd
like to hear your expression."

I responded. "I'm very hurt because of this. There were several things
I asked you to do and wanted you to do-to hear about Christianity from
an adult point of view, from someone who really knows. I feel that you
made no effort to do that. I'm very disappointed you didn't follow
through on that. I am very any and have been for a long time. For the
last few months it has been like you are dying and slipping away from
us. It's like we are in constant grieving." "Mom, this is my own
decision. It is not a rejection of you. I don't want to hurt you; I feel
like I can express myself through this. I've come a long way from what I
was."

"What do you expect from us as parents?" "I don't know that I expect
anything. Maybe it's the fact that I'm not going to be around. I don't
even know how long my life is going to be. Maybe it's just a dream, but
I have been feeling like there are certain things I have to do in Islam.
I have asked other people if they have these feelings and they say no.
They have hopes and dreams, but mine is more a feeling that I have a
certain way to go. My life may be hard and I will have to be a strong
person, but if I am strong enough I can make it." "So how do we fit into
your life, Jodi?" I asked.

"I see you as being very far away, and I see you as being the building
blocks for what I am." "I feel like you are saying what you have
had-what we have given you-is not good enough, and you are going to junk
all that and reject everything about us. You're breaking all your ties
like you don't care about anything in the past."

"Mom, I first felt that when I was at our church youth camp as a
teenager. They were talking about how the disciples laid down everything
and followed Jesus, and the material things were not that important;
they even left their families. I started to think there were so many
things I couldn't give up. I couldn't give up my records-I loved to play
them. I was soul-searching at that point. No, I couldn't give up several
things. It would surely take a strong person to give things up and go
follow Jesus in that way. No, I could never do that, and I was sad about
it. But then there came a time when I realized that for once in my life
I didn't care about the material things, that other things were more
important-the spiritual life and relationships."

We continued to talk. I harangued her about the drastic change of
wearing hijab. I made insulting remarks about her sloppy clothes and
scarf Over and over I accused her of rejecting us.

She tried to affirm to me over and over, "I am not rejecting you. I'm
only doing things in a different way. . . . You and Dad are my models. I
love the way you help people and counsel with those in need. . . . I've
chosen a different way. All I can do is help you deal with it." Finally
I lost control and broke down crying. "I'm just crushed. I never would
have thought I'd react this way. I have worked so hard on how to accept
all this, and I'm just not making it. I've suffered so much these past
days. I just don't know what to do. I keep wondering where we went
wrong, yet some of the things you're doing are fantastic. I don't want
to lose you, yet I want to push you as far away from me as I can. If I
didn't care so much, I'd want to never see you again. I hate it. But I'm
going to keep working at it." We clung to each other and cried for a
long time. Then Jodi added, "Reza really loves and respects you and Dad.
We have chosen a little different way, what we think is right, but we
see you as good, strong people too. We hope our marriage can be as good
as yours and that we will help people like you do. We are dust very
simple and have a lot of struggle as far as health and study and
work-making everything hang together. But we want to keep working at
it." Finally, we had no more to say to each other. I went to my room,
and I sobbed most of the night. Never have I experienced grief like that
period of time. I hurt so much that it felt as if something was
physically being pulled out of me. About noon the neal day, I knelt at
my bedroom window and prayed: "God of the Christians, the Muslims, the
universe, what am I going to do? How can I stand this?" Then, as I sat
back waiting for help, I heard the music my sons were playing in the
next room--the Beatles singing "Yesterday, all my troubles seemed so far
away.

Love was such an easy game to play./ Oh, how I long for yesterday!" I
prayed, "God, that is just how I feel. I long for yesterday when it was
so much easier with Jodi." Then the Beatles sang another song: "Hey
Jude, don't be sad; Take a sad song and make it better." That hit me
because I wanted to take this sad song and make it a glad song. A
positive feeling came over me. The healing process was beginning. When
Jodi and Reza left to go back to Arkansas, I was able to put my arms
around them and say: "I want to work it through. Please help me. I love
you so much. I want my daughter back, and I'll learn to accept what you
have chosen." I could not risk losing my daughter and son-in-law. I
would do whatever it took to heal the relationship.

Religious decisions are often among the most intense types of trauma in
family life. Emotions run high, and reactions to such decisions lead to
changes that may cause separation in families. The journey toward
acceptance, if occurs at all, may be long and arduous. The respondents,
sharing their personal stories about initial parental responses, reflect
everything from acceptance to complete cutoff and rejection. Forty-six
percent ranked their parents' responses at first as negative and
stressful, while 23 percent indicated they were accepted in an "okay
manner" without much stress and anger, Fourteen percent said their
parents were very accepting and supportive. Some indicated it was not a
choice for the parents to accept or reject; it was none of their
business what their children chose to do as adults. Over time, healing,
where needed, has begun to take place in a majority of the families.
Most of the women have seen great improvement in their relationships
with and acceptance by family members although a few have been cut off
with no relationship worked out. Sometimes physical distance works for
them as a positive contribution to the relationship because they are not
close enough to need to work through day-to-day contact. In other
situations, however, the distance keeps the relationship frozen at the
status quo with no movement toward resolution. The women wrote of
various reactions and stages that families may go through when faced
with their daughter's choice to become Muslim.


