Accepting the Choice
====================

There are those families who were open and accepting to their
daughter's choice to convert, especially after initial concerns were
dealt with and the parents felt assurance that their daughters would be
okay. +After my conversion, I presented myself wearing hijab. I
explained myself to them. I never worried much about my family. I knew
they would accept what I was happy with. I had one brother who would
tease me and tell me to take of my scarf. I think it was easy for me to
become Muslim because I knew I could depend on my family not to turn
their back. I explained and answered questions freely. I gave my dad the
Qur'an to read.

+My choice to be Muslim has not affected my relationship with my family
of origin. My mother is glad that I am a more religious person. She is
happy for me. She doesn't know much about the Islamic religion, but she
knows that I believe in the one and only God so she has been accepting
of my conversion. We don't live close to my family of origin.

When I came to Islam and told my parents, my father was understanding
and supportive. My mother was apprehensive. I feel she was apprehensive
because of several factors: (1) her love for me and wanting the best for
me; (2) the stereotypes associated with women's role in Islam; (3) a
journey to Beirut [she made] when she was younger; and (4) a serious
relationship she had with a Muslim man. I think my mom wanted me to be
certain of all aspects of the religion before I made a decision. Most
mothers want the best for their children and want to protect them, and
we all are aware of the attitude toward Islam in today's society. I
would like to stress that not once did my mom not support me in my
decision; she only voiced her concerns, which is just what I was looking
for when I told my parents-questions, concerns, and comments.

+Unfortunately we haven't yet been able to visit my family in
Switzerland (however, it is in our plans). They had to come to the
United States when I converted and married. Once they had reassured
themselves that I was okay, that my husband was lovable, they accepted
my decision. Questions abound however. We probably will be talking a
great deal. My prayer is to have my father become Muslim, since in his
heart he already is. +1 have no family of origin except a brother whom I
haven't seen since long before my conversion. I think he is fairly
pleased with my conversion because he can see that I am setting more
realistic goals.

+I have had no major problems with my family. They have accepted me as
Muslim as long as it is what I want. Some of them think I'm crazy
because I'm wearing the hijab and my husband acts more like an American.
We have never gotten into any fights though. We spend as much time as we
can with each other in person or by phone.

+My family is okay with me. There was never any problem because I was
quiet about my reasons for changing my lifestyle. My parents watched my
attitude change in college. I came home with an Afro hairstyle, and they
nearly died. I had the first divorce in the family. That was high on
their no-no list. By the time they realized TI had a life of my own,
they just wished me the best and never have criticized me or Islam. They
are just happy I believe in God and have kept good morals and values and
passed them on to my sons. These families were able to make the
adjustment to accept their daughter's decision once they felt confident
that she would be safe and understood to some extent the intentions and
commitment. Perhaps these families were also the kind to let go and let
their daughter be an individual with boundaries of her own whether or
not she became Muslim. This does not mean there will not be future
relationships to work out; family relationships are always in flux,
shifting and repositioning as time and life go on.

**Acceptance with Reservations**

Seeing daughters embrace another religious tradition may leave family
members feeling as if an unseen but deeply felt chasm separates them.
This sense of separation is felt by brothers, sisters, grandparents,
aunts, uncles, and friends although the level of acceptance varies among
family members. Some may accept readily; others may not be able to be
open at all. Brothers or sisters may be embarrassed to be seen in public
with their sister's new mode of dress and cover. Grandparents may not
understand how this beloved grandchild could make such a choice, but
they may be the ones who maintain contact as may other extended family
members.

Some families fear their daughter is going to hell for her denial of
Christ. They are pushed theologically to work through the Christian
concept of salvation in regard to their daughter, and they struggle to
find a satisfying level of comfort concerning this issue. +With the
exception of my mother, my family took my conversion in stride. To this
day I still feel as if she begrudges me for my decision to convert. I
hope, insha'Allah, she can fully accept my lifestyle someday. Last
fourth of July we had a picnic that turned ugly because we got on the
subject of politics and the World Trade Center, which in turn came down
to Christianity verses Islam. I resolved the situation by making it
clear that if she was telling me to turn away fitom Islam, I would never
see her again. She relented, but I feel she wasn't quite sincere.

+I have a very small family, one sister. I don't have contact with my
mother-my father raised both my sister and me. My sister is
university-educated and has studied religions, so she totally accepted
my decision to convert and accepted my marrying an Arab Muslim. My
father has had a harder time accepting it. He hasn't gone to church
since before I stopped going, but he thinks that I should act
"American," dress like everyone else, celebrate Christmas like everybody
else-basically, not be different than others. But he is beginning to
accept my life as a Muslim and that my daughter will be raised a
Muslim.

+My family always saw me as the "weird" one, so when I called and told
them of my "new" religion, they just waited to see when I'd lose
interest. Years later, my mother made comments about how I [had] changed
and why I didn't stay in the religion I was raised in (we only went to
church on Easter). She and my dad accept it, but I think my mom wishes
I'd "go back." They especially dislike me staying home versus working,
although they support my home school efforts. My parents are very
hands-off They accepted my first name [Muslim name] change easily.

My father seems more accepting, maybe even approving. He likes my dress
(my mom is embarrassed) and has even read some of my books. +My parents
were very upset when they first learned of my conversion. I think they
hoped it was a "phase" I'd go through and grow out of. My dad read the
whole Qur'an, my mom took a course in her church about Islam and so they
both learned more about it and now feel more comfortable with it. I
don't think they will ever become Muslim, but I hope they do. My sister
is a fundamentalist Christian and refuses to talk about it. She is upset
that I will be going to hell when I die and prays for me all the time.
We have a good relationship otherwise, and it is understood that neither
one of us should bring up religion unless we want to argue.

+My relationship with my parents is fine. They are quite understanding
about my conversion and are very open- minded. My grandmother is not
very happy about me being a Muslim. She denied the fact that the local
paper reported that I was a Muslim. She said it was a mistake and I told
her it was not. I hope that someday my grandmother will understand my
desire to be a Muslim. The only stress is with my grandmother. I wish I
could be open with her regarding my faith. I have no difficulties with
my parents. In fact I love to visit them and even my grandmother is fun
to talk to if we leave religion out of the discussion.

+They were very upset at first but now they reluctantly accept it. My
father got very angry and twisted my arm and told me about my hijab, to
"take that thing off because I don't want to be seen with you in
public." This happened in 1983.

I hope to remain close to them. But I also plan to live where the
Muslims are, which will separate us by miles. I know Islam is against
severing blood ties (a major sin mentioned in the Qur'an). I really love
my mom, brothers, and sisters.

There is a tremendous struggle in adjusting relationships to find
acceptable ways of relating with this daughter who has forsaken the
parents' path and is so different now. The chasm is so wide and affects
the relationship physically, emotionally, and spiritually. Despite the
resistance at first to the daughter's changing path, there is a gradual
acceptance and bridging of the separation. This bridging no doubt comes
out of the intense need for love by the daughter for her family and the
family's need to have their daughter close in relationship.

**Working Toward Acceptance**

Although families may have reacted with shock and grief at first, they
were willing to work through their relationship with their daughter.
Their willingness to work on the relationship was often motivated by
other circumstances such as the birth of a baby to the Muslim couple.
The movement toward acceptance may come with the passage of time,
perhaps after the family of origin recognizes that what the daughter had
chosen was not just a phase in her life. At times the commitment to work
it out seems to come more from the daughter than from the family. Such
drastic changes in lifestyles, religion, dress, and tradition made the
husband an easy mark for some families to shift the blame from their
daughter to her husband. Some of the women made the change to Islam
while still living in their parents' home. All of these situations
required time, effort, and work on the part of both the family and the
daughter to come to some level of acceptance. These families are still
working on that process of acceptance.

+.When I embraced Islam, I told my family. They were not surprised.
They saw it coming from my actions and what I said when I was home that
summer. They accepted my decision and knew that I was sincere. Even
before, my family always accepted my activities and my deep faith, even
if they didn't share it.

They were not as open-minded, however, when I started to wear the
hijab. They worried that I was cutting myself off from society, that I
would be discriminated against, that it would discourage me from
reaching my goals, and they were embarrassed to be seen with me. They
thought it was too radical. They didn't mind if I had a different faith,
but they didn't like it to affect my life in an outward way.

It has been three years and a lot has changed. My family recognizes
that I didn't destroy my life. They see that Islam has brought me
happiness, not pain and sorrow. They are proud of my accomplishments and
can see that I am truly happy and at peace. Our relationship is back to
normal and they are looking forward to our visit next month,
insha'Allah.

+Upon becoming a Muslim, I felt that my parents were disappointed in
me. Telling them that I was a Muslim was like a slap in the face to
them. It was as if I had rejected everything they had taught me as a
child-everything that they had learned from their parents. It was good
enough for them, so why was it not good enough for me? My brothers were
sixteen, fourteen, and eleven years old when I converted, and they were
not really concerned about rne. It was my choice and I had the right to
do what I wanted. My other relatives are still friendly with me by
telephone,

but when my husband and I visit them in person, they seem tense and
aloof; even ignoring us at times and talking to each other as if we were
not even there. No one in my family has been interested in Islam and
none of them want to become a Muslim. My mother used to wish that my
husband would go back to Iran and leave me behind. She imagined that I
would then leave Islam and be the daughter she had before. After four
years of marriage, my husband went overseas and returned about six weeks
later. My mother realized he was not going to leave me and slowly began
to accept my conversion to Islam. Then I discussed my beliefs and
practices with her, and she accepted me unconditionally. She realized I
had chosen to believe as I do. She said she and my dad were too old to
change their ways. After my thirteen years of marriage, she told me that
I looked beautiful in my head scarf; just like the statues of the Virgin
Mary.

When my brother, who is a minister, wrote me a letter and said that my
husband, our little children, and I would be going to hell for our
beliefs, my mother disagreed with him. She said that she believed there
were several ways to get close to God and that she did not think we
would go to hell. Five years later she passed away, may God grant her
peace, and the last time I spoke to her she talked about not being
afraid to die. She said she was not worried about me, but she did worry
about my three brothers, including the Christian minister. She may have
finally come to accept Islam as truthful even though she could not
practice it herself.

+My husband and I are in a unique situation because we both still live
in my parents' house. They are very understanding and have not openly
expressed any feelings against our beliefs, and my mother always takes
care to only make pork for my father when we are eating out. We usually
get together with my grandparents around holidays and they usually give
us gifts. I learned from when I was a Jehovah's Witness not to try to
"spoil their fun" by refusing gifts.

There have been small matters of difficulty such as fighting with my
mother over the length of the clothes she makes for me. "Why do you want
them so ridiculously long?!" and her frustration when I told her I could
not eat food made with gelatin either (since it is usually made from
pork). All in all, she has become more understanding over time, even
realizing by herself that the American media purposely portrays Muslims
in a bad light, now that she knows what we are really like.

I hope in the future we will be able to discuss more about our specific
beliefs, which we haven't done much, and also discuss more with my
father, who has basically no interest in religion of any
kind. +Initially my conversion to Islam caused major conflicts with my
family. They were not supportive and felt that I was being misguided and
brainwashed by my husband. This later changed for two reasons: (I) they
realized this wasn't a fad or change I was going through, and if they
wanted to have any contact with me they would have to accept me as
Muslim, and (2) once my children were born and being raised Muslim, it
was hard for them to deal with the children in the same negative manner.
I've tried to speak to my family about Islam in hopes that I can help
them to live and die as Muslims.

-.At first my mother and father were shocked. My father blamed my
husband. Although the two had been the best of friends, after my
conversion my father rarely spoke to my husband for an entire year. Many
family squabbles have come out of my conversion. Most of the intolerance
was on my mom's side of the family. To them I had become a devil
worshipper who had denounced Christ. However, at a recent family
reunion, I had been upgraded to a Christian who just didn't know [how]
to accept and claim the healing of Christ. I've learned not to discuss
religion with them.

Now my mom tells me what color of scarves look best on me and
compliments me often. She has grown to accept it. I just wish my parents
would ask me what I believe and read some of the Qur'an. +My choice to
become a Muslim has made a difference in my relationship with my
family-it is very stressful. I feel as though they think it's a stage of
life I'm going through. It has been four years now and things are still
a bit weird. I feel a little rejection. I would like for my family to be
open with me and ask questions, instead of taking the facts of Islam
from the media or other wrong sources. The most stressful thing I feel
is that my family blames my husband for my conversion to Islam.

I like to be the best example of a Muslim when I visit my family, but I
get very sad knowing they are not Muslims. My mom always tells me she
wished my other two sisters were as good a mother as me. Being a good
mom is part of being a good Muslim. How fortunate were these women whose
families made some effort at reconciliation and understanding. Often
parents feel that decisions made by children in the young adult years
are impulsive and frivolous. Although that is a possibility, time has
demonstrated that the daughter's commitment is lasting and the change in
her lifestyle is permanent.

**Turning Their Backs on Acceptance**

Some families seemed to be unable to tolerate the change. They felt
safer by breaking off relationships completely or having very little to
do with their daughter. For some of the converts, the lifestyle of the
family of origin is so different from what their life as a Muslim
requires that they have chosen to stay removed from the family. The
family's lack of acceptance seems to stem from two basic problems: (1) a
lack of understanding about the choice or (2) a refusal to understand
the choice. Families may learn to get along on a surface basis but feel
uncomfortable if it goes beyond that. Serious discussion may be
difficult in these families, and an undercurrent of blame and hostility
may be present.

+Since I took my shahada, my family has grown farther apart from me in
our relationship. I ask Allah (SWT) to give them guidance and the
blessing that Allah (SWT) gave me-a future to work for in the hereafter.
I hope for them to respect me and my religion. They thought the
religious part was a cult and I would outgrow it, until they saw how
serious I was and then had an arranged marriage. The marriage to my
husband was a main point of stress. My family rarely visits me. They
have visited three times in twelve years. The first five years they only
made problems with me and refused to visit. +I knew I was in for major
changes and disappointments. My family was number one. But to this day,
I am not welcomed in their home. I went to visit them last September,
and not only did they give me a hard time but refused to meet or allow
my husband in their home. In fact, we were told to get going before the
neighbors saw us in front of their house. That was the first time I had
seen them for years.

+Since I became Muslim I have unfortunately lost contact with many
family members. This bothers me, but it has been their choice. Little by
little, things are improving, however. During the past few months,
several family members have contacted me, so there's hope. My father's
main objection-because it's the most visible aspect of my beliefs----is
wearing the hijab. He doesn't understand or approve of it. My family
does not, as a general rule, know much about Islam nor do they care to
know. At first my parents were mad. This was because they did not
understand Islam. When I started wearing hijab one and a half years
after becoming a Muslim, the real trouble began. My sister still thinks
I am weird and crazy and does hot have much to do with me.

+I feel distant from my family. I was very close to my brother and
sisters, but now we are not as close. Religion is a very touchy subject
even though I have convinced them to a certain extent that what we were
following as Catholics was not all right. I feel very distant from my
parents. My mother doesn't want to believe that the book (the Bible) she
has been following has been changed or that Islam is the right way. She
doesn't understand why I cover and don't eat food with pork by-products.
I've never opened the subject with my father. He's not very educated and
he's "stuck in his ways." I really want to talk to him about it, but I
don't know how or even what to say.

Most of my family think I became a Muslim for my husband's sake. They
just don't understand that I truly believe in Islam with all my heart,
so much that I want to preach to them the truth about Islam until they
say they believe it and take shahada. +I know they think my husband
forced me into Islam and they refuse to believe otherwise. I hoped that
my mom could accept me as I am, and accept the fact that it was and is
still my choice. I made the best decision of my life in choosing Islam!
They refuse to acknowledge that we even believe in God, and therefore,
believe we are going to hell! I hate their stubbornness!

My mother does not respect my husband's opinion on anything and won't
ask him his opinion. When he tries to talk to Mom about Christianity, to
get things out in the open, she refuses to talk about it; she will not
even consider our point of view. My husband is very aggressive and
demanding when he talks/debates with someone, but he wants so badly for
her to see our side of it; he doesn't want to give up even if it
regresses into a shouting match. But Mom is not used to people standing
up to her. Certainly not me! My husband does not understand how
something so obvious and clear to him isn't the same to someone else.

+They really didn't comment on my marrying a Muslim a whole lot. When
we first got married, some of my extended family objected-especially my
grandfather-not because he was Muslim but because he wasn't American. He
didn't want one of those "damn foreigners" in the family. He didn't talk
to me for a couple of months. But his wife got on his case and told him
it wasn't the right thing to do, to either let go of it and leave things
as they were or he might lose me in the process. One time a cousin
suggested that maybe my husband would convert to Christianity.

We are not a close family in that we discuss things. It tends to be
mostly surface talk. One time my brother five years younger than me was
asking my husband about the beliefs of the Muslims. But my dad soon let
him know that was not to be discussed, so early on it was made clear
that religion was not a topic to be discussed. I told my husband that I
wished it was not like this, but there isn't a lot of emotional
attachment. +My parents had to accept my change. I wasn't going to go
back to Christianity or Americanism just for them. They are not
open-minded, but I do my best to maintain and encourage contact, in
whatever way we can afford. I hope my parents, and all non-Muslims, will
find Islam. I also accept the fact that individuals are responsible for
their own actions and I will have to testify according thereto.

I don't try to push my family, or anyone into anything. If they bother
me, which is often, I just pray about it and try not to let it "eat on
me." +There are still areas left behind that cause me grief and loss
which are not feeling or getting close to my mother, sisters and
friends; also being close to my grandmother who tries so hard to
understand and accept me and my lifestyle but hasn't gotten it yet. \*I
have not worked it out with my parents. It has been almost three years
this November since they have seen us, and they still want nothing to do
with any of us. My brother has done the same. My aunt talks to me, but
she says things like my belief is of the devil. I don't have to worry
about the holidays with my family because for nearly three years I
haven't had a relationship with them.

+My decision to convert to Islam brought mixed results from my family.
My father and stepmother (my mother is deceased) totally rejected me
because of it. We did not speak for more than five years. My
grandparents have always made me feel welcome, but they make no bones
about the fact that they totally disagree with what I'm doing. These
women might not have had the support of their families in whatever
situation they chose for themselves, but certainly they have to be
strong to make it without the support of their families of origin. There
may well be movement in the relationship as the years go by. Family
crisis, change of heart, or overwhelming need are but a few motivators
for reconsidering the relationship.


