Acceptance Not a Family Issue
=============================

The view expressed by two women converts was that their families of
origin didn't have any say about their choice. They felt it really was
not any of their family's business and if the daughter's decision was
disturbing, it was the family's problem, not the daughter's. +The effect
on my family members is nonexistent. I am an adult, and I choose to do
what I want. We conduct ourselves as adults and do not ask for
permission to live our lives. Religion is not an outward part of my
parents' lives, and we do not talk about religious matters unless asked.
When we move overseas, I hope they will understand, but if they don't,
that is an issue that they will have to deal with.

+Becoming Muslim has no effect on my relationship with my family. They
knew they could accept or reject my religion; either way they had no
influence. My husband (non-Muslim) accepted my changes because he
respects me as a person. I live in the West [of the United States] and
my relatives live in the East/Midwest. I feel as though they will never
fully understand. But after they found out I was a Muslim.; and since
there was no one that influenced me to make the choice, they accepted
that Allah (SWT) guides who Allah wills.

In no instance did the questionnaire responses reflect that the women
were becoming Muslim in order to anger their parents or family of origin
or to try to get back at them in any way. Most were cognizant that
relationships would be strained by their actions and tried to find ways
to soften the news of their conversion. But for the women, this newfound
faith was worth even the loss of their families if that was the only way
it could be. They had chosen their path, and they intended to walk it.

**5. Journeying the Muslims Path Living and Practicing Islamic
Principles**

I thought the ache and hurt of that Thanksgiving weekend encounter
would never pass, but we were all determined to work it through. The
next time Jodi came to visit, we spent time sewing together. That was
something we had loved to do from the time she was little. As we sewed,
we talked. There was so much for me to learn about what Jodi had chosen.
"Mom, I brought you some tapes to listen to so you will understand more
about what Islam is all about. Really, Mom, there is a lot in common
with Christianity. I feel more like I can live as you raised me to live
than I did before." Yes, she probably was right about that part since
our church had some expectations that were difficult for youth to live
up to in society. But Islam similar to Christianity? Well, that would be
hard to prove to me. It all had caused so much trouble politically and
had such strange ideas. However, I was open to learning. What other
choice did I have if I wanted a relationship with my daughter?

It took almost a year and a half to accept and support Jodi in the life
she had chosen. I saw her so disciplined in her religion, so wanting to
serve God and others around her, so strong as she wore the strange
clothing with head cover to classes on the campus. And yet, she was
still our Jodi who loved us, who loved to talk and be with people, who
struggled to keep up with her studies, who wanted to be a nurse-and was
doing it.

My friends helped me by their acceptance. I found that just sitting and
crying after reading a poem or article or being in Jodi's old room was
healing. I placed her in God's hands as I prayed, and no doubt there
were many praying for me. I also had to help other members of the family
who felt rejected. But the healing was taking place. We were a family
who didn't like conflict; we wanted to love and to be accepting. We also
wanted to be open to the world around us, so we began to learn about
what our daughter had embraced. Jihad is a word that has become familiar
to many non- Muslims because the media has often associated it with
terrorist activities. Dr. Jamilah Kolocotronis, an American-born convert
to Islam, in her doctoral dissertation, explored this Islamic concept,
which came out of the Arabic language, meaning struggle or exertion. In
the time of Muhammad, it took on new meaning as this young new religion
began its growth. In her book, Islamic Jihad: An Historical Perspective,
Dr. Kolocotronis states:

Now it took on the meaning of "struggle in the cause of Allah." After
the period of Muhammad, historians began to translate jihad as "holy
war," but this definition does not account for the full meaning of the
term. Jihad should always be defined as struggle in the "Cause of
Allah," for this definition alone encompasses all the nuances of the
term.(1) In this sense, any activity related to Islamic practice may be
a struggle such as waking up for the dawn prayer if one is not an early
riser. Negative connotations of jihad have developed for Westerners as
radical groups (representing a small minority of people) have used the
term extensively.

During the time of Muhammad, this term was applied individually,
especially in the first few years as Muslim converts joined the small
movement and struggled to leave the old traditions and way of life and,
in spite of family members and other difficulties, take on what they had
come to believe. Their personal existence was jihad as they struggled in
the cause of Allah. American women who have chosen Islam are in that
struggle themselves as they leave old traditions and live out their new
beliefs. Islam is an unknown to most of us. Even though we may have read
a book on Islam or Muslims, studied it in a class- at church, or had a
unit on it at school, the content didn't have much meaning or really
stay with us. Now, however, there is a walking, talking loved one who
has become Muslim. Now we need to find out about that which is so
important to her, to understand the journey she is on.

Islam is the name of the religion. It is an Arabic word that means
"acceptance of God as Supreme" and calls for submission to the One God.
The literal meaning of the word is peace-to live in peace with the
Creator, within one's self; and with other people. The followers of
Islam are called Muslim. They do not like to be referred to as
Muhammadans or Islamites or Islams. The people are called Muslims.
Muslims believe that Muhammad was chosen by God to be a prophet to
receive God's message from the angel Gabriel. This was in Mecca in the
Arabian Peninsula in the seventh century. The Qur'an (or Koran) is the
book of the divine messages that came through Muhammad over a period of
twenty-three years. Muslims believe that the Qur'an contains the literal
and final word of God to the world.

In review, the religion is Islam, the people are Muslims, the prophet
is Muhammad, and their sacred book of God's revelations through Muhammad
is the Qur'an.

**Articles of Faith**

Three fundamental beliefs are the basis of the Islamic faith: the
oneness of God, prophethood, and life after death. The oneness of God is
the foundation of their faith. Allah is the one and only God. The word
Allah literally means "The God" and has no masculine, feminine, or
plural form; thus Allah is elevated to the highest being. Allah is the
creator of all human beings. The Muslims believe that Allah is the God
of the Christians, Jews, Muslims, and others. To put anything or anyone
as equal to Allah is considered blasphemous. This Unity of Allah is
called tawhid, and establishes the oneness of God. Islam rejects the
Christian notion of the Trinity-Father, Son, and Holy Spirit-giving no
divinity to Jesus. But they do regard Jesus as a revered prophet and
messenger of God.

The second article of faith is that God has provided guidance for
living through such prophets as Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses,
Solomon, and David-some of the Old Testament prophets; John and Jesus of
the New Testament; and Muhammad as the last and final prophet bringing
Allah's final and literal word to humankind. As Muslims say or write
each prophet's name, they say "Peace be upon him" or write (pbuh) after
the name. They consider Christians, Jews, and Muslims to be people of
"the book" and feel kinship through the prophets. Prophet Muhammad is
revered (not worshipped as divine) as God's messenger, and Jesus also is
accepted as a messenger of God's word. Even though Muslims and
Christians disagree about the divinity of Jesus, they do agree on many
ideas about morality, life after death, and the day of judgment. The
Qur'an teaches that adultery, murder, lying, stealing, and cheating are
wrong. Life after death is the third fundamental belief in Islam. Both
belief and action are important in this life. They believe in a day of
judgment in which we will be held accountable before God for our
conduct. It is important that in each action there is consideration
given to whether or not it is in accordance with what God has
commanded.

**The Five Pillars of Islam**

There are five major tenets (pillars) in Islam that a Muslim is
expected to follow. The first pillar is to declare shahada as the
statement of conversion: "There is only one God [Allah] and Muhammad is
the Messenger of God." The other four are the practical obligations of
daily prayer, fasting at Ramadan, paying the annual "welfare money" to
be distributed among the poor (often done in connection with Ramadan),
and making the pilgrimage to Mecca. In embracing Islam, the converts
declare shahada by repeating in Arabic that they bear witness to no
other deity but Allah and that Muhammad is a prophet of Allah. They also
take on a way of life that has many requirements and obligations as they
set their course on the "straight path." Although such practices seem to
require great effort, responses to the questionnaire indicated that,
overall, the women were delighted with the opportunity to have these
disciplines in their lives. Some of the women respondents found fasting
to be easy while others found it extremely difficult at first. Many of
the women were able to slip regularly into the schedule of the five
obligatory prayers each day while others had to work hard at getting
into that routine. Wearing the scarf was a blessing and no problem for
some; others took years to get to the point of wearing a scarf at all
the required times.

The women received help in finding how to live an Islamic lifestyle
from several sources. Their husbands were a strong support. They taught
and directed their wives in the practice of Islam, and in the process
reestablished their own faith practice. Books, videos, and audiotapes
explained techniques on how to do things. Many found help from other
Muslim women who were either American-born converts or were women born
into Islam. +Since I was introduced to Islam by my husband, it was
easier for me to learn to live as Muslim by observing his daily example
and that of some of his friends. As for specific religious practices, he
tried to teach me to pray and explained how to fast and perform
ablutions, but it was my sister-in-law, who became like a sister to me
during our stay in Morocco and who had just started wearing hijab a few
months earlier, who helped me perfect my worship and gave me the
confidence and enthusiasm to begin praying five times a day.

The first time I fasted, I was so afraid I wouldn't be able to bear it,
never having gone even a short time without food. My husband explained
the importance and significance of fasting, but said I didn't have to if
I absolutely couldn't stand it, since Allah never requires more of us
than we can bear. His moderation helped me through it, and since then I
have always fasted whenever required. The five daily prayers are
probably the most difficult, since our American lifestyle often doesn't
allow for them to be performed at their proper times. Sometimes time
gets the best of me, but I never stop praying, even ill miss some [of
the prayer times]. It may not seem like much, but the small act of
prayer is what keeps Allah in my heart and mind at all times.

In each instance the women surveyed expressed the blessings and peace
and satisfaction brought to their lives by the discipline required to
change their lives, to focus their actions and will toward Allah. The
second of the Five Pillars of Islam is the performance of the five daily
prayers (salat) that are required of all Muslims. These prayers are
repeated in Arabic and have certain movements and positions for various
parts. The prayers must be preceded by ablution or cleansing oneself
(wudu) with water by washing of the hands up to the wrist, washing the
face and head, and washing the feet up to the ankle. Women wear a
special prayer covering. The person must face in a predetermined
direction (toward Mecca), which symbolizes Muslim unity.

There is a prescribed schedule for when to offer these obligatory
prayers: early morning before sunrise, at noon or shortly thereafter, in
the late afternoon, after sunset, and about an hour later. The prayers
last about five minutes each. Women are not required to pray when they
are menstruating. Muslims are free, of course, to offer their own
personal prayers at any time and any place and encouraged to combine
them with the obligatory prayer times. Muslims almost universally leave
their shoes at the door as they enter a home or mosque in order to keep
the rugs clean for prayer.

\*Praying five times a day was a big commitment for me. When my husband
told me a few minutes after I converted that I had to pray, I was very
hesitant to do it. I wasn't used to being actively involved in my
religion. But once I started, I didn't want to stop. \*The change to
Islam has helped me be more grounded, more relaxed, more focused. You
can't stray too far when the next prayer pulls you back. It has
certainly had a positive effect on our marriage and family life, and
helped me to be a better and calmer mate and mother. The most meaningful
part of Islam for me is the internal process-the prayers and the other
reading and spiritual work that is ongoing in my own life for my own
spiritual development. Being able to stop a few seconds and surrender
everything that is going on to Allah for guidance is a major blessing.

\*Praying according to salat (ritual prayer) times is the hardest. I'm
still not in tune to clocks. \*Learning the formal ceremony of the
ritual cleansing (wudu) and the prayer itself was easy. My husband wrote
the words of the prayer on a sheet of paper and added a sketch showing
the movements of standing, bowing, and prostrating. I memorized the
words of the prayer in just one day, but it took perhaps a week of
practice to make sure that I was performing the movements correctly at
the right time. I enjoyed the ritual cleansing, putting on my prayer
garments, and performing the prayers because I felt I was coming closer
to my Creator. I wanted to display my devotion and thankfulness for all
that he had given me.

The prayers are recited in Arabic and everyone is encouraged to learn
Arabic so they can read the Qur'an in the original text. Children in
Islamic schools are taught Arabic. +I am still leaning to live as a
Muslim. I ask a lot of questions and read. My mother-in-law sent me a
book on prayer, and I memorized the Arabic by myself Wearing the head
cover and [learning] rituals concerning prayer and clean/unclean have
been hard. I watched a lot of Islamic videos and took extensive notes
and attended debates.

+The hardest part is praying. I do it phonetically in Arabic, and I'm
afraid I'm pronouncing it wrong and that my prayers won't be accepted as
a result. But I know that as long as I try and have good intentions, God
will understand. Praying in Arabic and not knowing the Qur'an and hadith
[an authoritative source of Islamic practice] like I should have been
the hardest parts for me. +I learned to live as a Muslim mostly through
my own reading and research. My husband wrote out the prayers for me in
Arabic--which I read-after I had learned them in English. I am just
beginning to learn sections of the Qur'an in Arabic--I can't read the
fancy calligraphy of Arabic, so I have to rely on having them read and
said to me. I regard myself as still studying basic Islam.

IL has been quite difficult, actually, incorporating all the religious
practices I feel are important, but quite satisfying once I have managed
it. The third pillar of Islam is fasting (siyam) and is observed for the
month of Ramadan, the name of the ninth month in the lunar year of the
Muslim calendar. It is a sacred month for Muslims and combines fasting,
prayer, and charity. Fasting during the month of Ramadan is a religious
obligation. During this time a Muslim can eat food before daybreak but
is to remain without food or water or intimate sexual activities from
dawn to sunset each day during the entire month. Exceptions to required
fasting would be for children, the elderly, the sick, travelers,
pregnant women, women who have difficulty with breast feeding, and women
in menstruation. Adults should make up their missed fasts at another
time after Ramadan when their situation is better. Often the breaking of
the fast at sunset is done in community with other Muslims.

The last day of the fast is called Eid al-Fitr and is a major
celebration time with gifts, special foods, sending of cards, and
worship. The women come to love Ramadan even though the discipline of
fasting is difficult at first. It is also a time when community bonds
with other Muslims are strengthened as well as a time for individual
spiritual growth. Sometimes there is frustration in practicing it in
non-Muslim countries. +My first Ramadan was one to remember. It was just
shy of six months after my shahada. It was easier than I thought it
would be---although it was still a struggle. To be honest I broke my
fast three times early in the day, my first Ramadan. It is something
that takes total religious commitment and a sound mind.

+Fasting once a year for a whole month was difficult at first, but the
more I learned about why we fasted and what it did for us, the easier it
became. +Fasting during the holy month of Ramadan was the hardest
practice I have encountered. Before my first fast, I was worried that I
would not be able to do it and that I would fail this challenge. Of
course I was able to do it because fasting is easy when you are doing it
for God.

A few times my throat was extremely dry or I had a headache and wanted
to take medication, but I abstained. I thought about Imam Husain (pbuh)
and his followers (peace be upon them) who were martyred thirsty in the
desert of Karbala. I thought about the homeless and poverty-stricken
people who did not know when or if they will have another meal.

Fasting helps one gain nearness to God, spiritual awareness, kindness
and generosity for others, humility, and thankfulness. Because it is
such a spiritual time, I look forward to the holy month of Ramadan each
year. During the last ten days of Ramadan I feel sad that it will be
over so soon. +Living as a Muslim has not been that difficult because I
have unconsciously been doing that for a number of years. My husband
does help make living as a Muslim easier because he is Muslim as well
and it's easier to do something when you have company. The only times I
find religious practices difficult is around Christmas time when
everything is Christianized, and I have to explain why I don't
celebrate. The other time is during Ramadan when people ask what I want
for lunch and I tell them I am fasting. It's difficult for people to
understand, and I know that they judge me for it, but I will not
compromise my beliefs for a sandwich from a fast-food restaurant.

The fourth pillar of Islam is the paying of a charity tax or tithing
called zakat, and it is to be paid during Ramadan along with the fasting
and worship.

The fifth and last pillar of Islam is hajj, a pilgrimage to Mecca for
those who have the financial means. Opportunity for the pilgrimage
occurs once each year and is the largest gathering of people in the
world as 2 to 2 1/2 million gather from every continent of the globe to
fulfill this obligation.


