The Muslim Lifestyle in American Society
========================================

Islam addresses all aspects of life including personal morality,
politics, and commerce; Islam is a way of life. Very important is the
concept of ummah, the community in which God's will is attainable only
through a society built around Islamic principles. Much time and
discussion is spent on interpreting in action the prescribed manner of
living. The women learn quickly what it is they are expected to do and
make decisions of how they will implement those expectations in their
lives. The extreme change in dress is probably the hardest shift for the
parents and relatives to accept when a daughter becomes Muslim. It seems
to us such an extreme statement about what they have chosen. For some of
the women themselves, choosing to dress modestly and cover themselves
has been readily accepted and incorporated in their practice; for others
it has been very difficult to do.

The passage from the Qur'an that prescribes the covering describes it
this way: Tell the believing men to lower their gaze, and protect their
private parts. That is purer for them. Verily, Allah is All-Aware of
what they do. And tell the believing women to lower their gaze, and
protect their private parts and not to show off their adornment except
only that which is apparent and to draw their veils over their bosoms
and not to display their adornment except to their husbands, or their
fathers, or their husband's fathers, or their sons, or their husband's
sons, or their brothers, or their brothers' sons, or their sisters'
sons, or their wives, or the slaves whom their right hands possess, or
male servants free of physical needs, or small children who have no
sense of the shame of sex. And let them not stamp their feet so as to
reveal what they hide of their adornment. And beg Allah to forgive you
all, 0 believers, that you may be successful."-S24, A30-31 Various
Islamic countries have traditions on how to wear the cover. The basic
tradition is loose-fitting clothes (not "see through" or defining the
figure) which cover all but the face and hands. In some countries the
veil over the face is worn also. Some wear flowery bright colors or
beads and fringe; others wear only the more serious plain colors such as
white, beige, brown, green, blue, black, or soft prints. Those in the
know are often able to tell what country a woman is from by the way she
covers. Not all women who are Muslim cover their hair with a scarf, but
most do try to dress modestly.

+Wearing hijab was easy, but people were always asking me if I had some
sort of disease. They seemed to assume that I had lost my hair and I was
covering up my baldness. Then after I explained about the religious
reasons and significance of wearing hijab, they would say, "You mean I
can never see your beautiful hair again?" It was as if my personal
choice of practicing my own religion was taking away one of their
pleasures or privileges and they did not approve of that They missed the
point.

+I have worked out with my parents and other family members my choice
to be Muslim. The main point of stress has been hijab or the Islamic
dress. I think this is a constant reminder and embarrassment for them.
If I were Muslim but did not cover, I think they could accept it more
readily. My hope is that they will understand Islam and like it on their
own, not just because of me.

+Taking on Islamic religious practices wasn't hard once I did it for a
while. Wearing hijab was the one that took the most getting used to,
both for me and for others around me. I lived in a very small town and I
got strange looks there, and several people asked me about it. But in
our larger university town, the majority of people are educated about it
and see women wearing hijab around town. I started wearing hijab in
winter, so it wasn't difficult until summertime. Many people wear a
scarf or hat in winter, but when summer came and I was still wearing a
scarf, I did stand out in a crowd. But Islam is not about blending in or
"when in America, do as the Americans do." It is about standing up for
what you believe and what you know is right, even if others do not,
whether Muslim or non-Muslim. +It has been easy for me to take on the
religious practices. I had no trouble accepting and enjoying the
benefits of praying, fasting, giving up alcohol. My biggest battle is
the head covering, the scarf Nobody knows this though, since I accept
and submit to the covering for modesty reasons.

+Six months after shahada, I observed my first Ramadan. I had been
contemplating the issue of hijab, but was too scared to take that step
before. I had already begun to dress more modestly, and usually wore a
scarf over my shoulders. When I visited [a Muslim] sister, she told me,
"All you have to do is move that scarf from your shoulders to your head,
and you'll be Islamically dressed." At first I didn't feel ready to wear
hijab because I didn't feel strong enough in my faith. I understood the
reason for it, agreed with it, and admired the women who did wear it.
They looked so pious and noble. But I knew that if I wore it, people
would ask me a lot of questions, and I didn't feel ready or strong
enough to deal with that.

This changed as Ramadan approached, and on the first day of Ramadan, I
woke up and went to class in hijab. Alhamdulillah, I haven't taken it
off since. Something about Ramadan helped me to feel strong and proud to
be a Muslim. I felt ready to answer anybody's questions.

+Covering was a very gradual change. I went from jeans to skirts and
long sleeve shirts or blazers. Then I decided I would wear the scarf and
long clothes or coat after I had my first child. It was very hard to
cope with the looks and questions about the way I dressed (i.e., long
sleeves and jackets in the summertime) while I was working. That's why I
waited to fully cover. Once I did start fully covering I was very
uncomfortable and felt so different from everyone else that I almost
took it of as if to prove to everyone (even those I didn't know) that I
was still the same person as before. But I kept it on and eventually got
used to it. Now I get mad at people who stare at me or make fun of me,
but that only makes me want to wear it more. I've been covering for
three years.

Featured throughout an entire issue of Islamic Sisters International
(January 1994) was the topic, "Hijab-Definition and Discrimination."'
Many of the women described the discrimination that occurred in the
workplace when interviewing for jobs. Some had difficulty dealing with
the jeers and name-calling experienced in various public places. One
stated that she feels the non-Muslim women are more offended by the head
cover than the non-Muslim men. In these articles the women encouraged
coveying as very necessary and in some cases the word "obligation" was
used.

The editor of the magazine encouraged all sisters to actively
participate to end discrimination from unfair business practices to
exclude, deny, or otherwise hide those sisters who cover, and work for
the rights they are guaranteed while living in the United States or
Canada. A date was set and the sisters were encouraged to wear halal
Islamic clothing to their places of work or regular activities, to write
or call their senator, to call or write local and national news to
protest unfair misrepresentation, and to arrange peaceful picket lines
in appropriate places. The women wearing hijab express not only what a
meaningful experience it is for them but also the frustration they
sometimes have. Many women converts are choosing to wear the cover in
this Western setting, are establishing Muslim homes, and are concerned
that the rights extended to them as women in the Islamic faith are
actualized in their lives. Some of their stories in regard to these
areas are included here.

The best Islamic right by far is the hijab. I have a right to be looked
at as a moral woman, not a piece of meat to be gawked at. People look at
my eyes when talking to me. I am treated like a lady as a general rule.
There are always those who jump at a chance to condemn. I would be more
encouraged to go into the work force if it weren't for those few people
ignorant of Islam. +We live in a very strong and close-knit Muslim
community. I graduated magna cum laude last year with a degree in child
development. I have had several jobs, from secretary to preschool
teacher, with no problems about my hijab. I'm active in the community
and still do volunteer work. +Due to hijab, there are a lot of
prejudices out there. I definitely can't hold a very public "meeting
people" job.

+The only obstacles that have been placed in my way as a Muslim woman
have not been from Muslims or Islam, but from the society in which we
live. One often feels like a fish swimming upstream in America, like
constantly explaining hijab. I have been denied jobs because of my hijab
and have been otherwise openly discriminated against. Nonetheless, I am
truly grateful for hijab. It is liberating in a sense that pro-ERA women
will never know. I feel honored to represent Islam in such a powerful
way as to be recognized as Muslim whenever I venture out.

+My perception of being a woman has changed. I no longer find freedom
in tight pants and miniskirts, but through hijab and modesty. I no
longer believe men and women have to be the same to be equal and that
there are roles each are better suited for. At the same time, we all
(men and women) have our own unique, individual talents and need to have
the opportunity to nourish them. 4 I wish non-Muslims understood that
hijab is only a small part of being a Muslim woman. It is too bad that
the majority tend to "judge the book (or woman) by the
cover(ing)"-meaning they measure Islam by a style of dress. In a society
which claims to envision a "freer" means of life for women, the American
male attitude toward women actually puts women way down by promoting the
sex-symbol image. Hijab removes the possibilities for men to "ogle" and
demands they view women as people rather than objects.

Only one woman in the survey indicated that she wears the veil,
covering everything but the eyes. At present she lives in a Muslim
country, but did veil in the United States prior to moving.

+I cover from head to toe-gloves, socks, the whole package. I wear a
hair cover under a cloak, and I wear a veil. I anticipated so many
problems, yet I can hardly believe how easy it has been. I even veiled
for 3 1/2 years in the United States with no trouble. So many people
learned about Islam because they were curious about the veil. It is a
bit hot, but when the temperature gets over 100 degrees everything is
hot to wear! I greatly prefer this dress to anything. Especially people
who understand the reason for the veil and dress have been supportive
and respectful. I get special treatment everywhere I go here and in the
States. Old Muslim ladies will do anything for me. I get great seats on
planes, people let me in front of them in lines, and sometimes merchants
here in this country will give me free gifts or free service.

Dawah is the word used in place of the Christian terms "witnessing" or
"evangelism." The scarf is often an opportunity for a woman to tell
about Islam because she is more apt to be questioned than a man. As one
woman wrote, "You can see us coming a mile away but [an observer] can't
really tell if a man is a Muslim or not."

oI have learned and am still learning to put into practice what is
allowed and forbidden. It was difficult to get used to covering, but now
I am proud to be a Muslim and I find dawah, at the proper times, is my
passageway. I just have to ignore the prejudices or use them as even
more of a reason to put my beliefs into practice.

In addition to dress, acceptable social behaviors are encouraged that
reflect the Islamic culture as interpreted by tradition in various
Muslim countries and influenced by family and personal preferences. In
general, modesty in behavior as well as in dress is important between
men and women. Men and women should be modest in their conversations
with one another, being cautious to avoid flirtations and personal
innuendoes. Men and women who are not related according to the previous
Qur'anic passage attempt to avoid being alone with one another. When
they become Muslim, many of the women choose to stay home rather than be
employed, especially if they have children. Others are still in the work
force or attending universities. Each woman has to gain a "sense" of how
she will present herself as a Muslim woman in her situation.

+One of the major changes I made was to be careful how I talked to men.
I needed to do it more maturely-not talk about personal things. I cannot
greet my male friends as I used to or even stop for an impromptu talk.
My husband's co-workers and friends are off-limits for even a chat by
the car while I'm waiting for him to come out of work.

+The religious practices are not hard, but some of the Western ideas
are hard to break and can pull you from religious duties. For example, a
Muslim should not be rude, but polite and firm in belief. I find it hard
to be a good Muslim when I want to tell people (who are rude) to get
lost. Also Western TV can be contradictory to Islamic values. This is
the hardest for me. +During my first Ramadan, we gathered together and
the shaikh [elder or spiritual leader] would give talks. These talks
were so pure and meaningful that they stood in stark contrast to the
ugliness I found happening among the people. And this is a reality I
find limiting our Islamic practice: How come it is so difficult for
people to really practice and live up to the model of Prophet Muhammad
(pbuh)? Maybe I have to realize that Americans' morals have already so
much deteriorated. It is possible I need to thank my parents for such a
solid and basic upbringing, where corruption and jealousy, anger and
hatred, impatience and other human ugliness weren't present.

+When I became Muslim, I had guidelines to express the beliefs I
already had. Yet these changes were tough. It was hard to excuse myself
from class or work to pray. When my clothing changed (covering my hair)
I lost a lot of friends. I also had to explain to male friends that it
was no longer appropriate for me to see them. I've also been shunned by
a lot of relatives who tell my family I'll burn in hell! I became
cleaner and quieter the further I went into the religion. I became
highly disciplined. I had not intended to marry before I was Muslim, yet
I quickly became a wife, then a mother! Islam has provided a framework
that has allowed me to express the beliefs I already had such as
modesty, kindness, love. It also led me to happiness through marriage
and the births of two children. Before Islam, I had no desire to have my
own family since I hated kids! No matter how bad things get, I have
something I can hang on to. Never do I feel alone or desperate because I
know Allah is close, and I know he is testing me to make me stronger.
The sisterhood and brotherhood of Muslims has been a comfort to me in
hard times.

The role of the women in the home is of utmost importance in Islam, and
the emphasis on the rearing of children and the care of the home is
taken very seriously by Muslim women. Often the children are home
schooled by the mothers. Some of the parents of Muslim women converts
are upset when their daughters choose to stay home. They are afraid it
might be an indication of the woman not having an opportunity to reach
her Rill potential. This concern is especially strong. if the patents
have paid for their daughter's education.

After marrying a Muslim (or even after becoming acquaintanced with a
Muslim), a woman learns quickly not to serve pork or anything that
contains pork products to a Muslim. Often by the time the women convert,
they have decided to eat only "halal" meats and foods. Halal means
"slaughtered according to Islamic law." This takes a lot of dedication
on the part of the couple because halal meats are not readily available
unless they live in a heavily populated Muslim community, and the meats
are usually more expensive. The women often learn to cook many of the
foods that their husbands appreciate from their own heritage.

oTo follow the Qur'anic injunction of eating only Muslim
slaughtered-approved meats was easy. I knew the Bible prohibited eating
pork and wondered why Christians did not follow that law. Eating meat
that my husband slaughtered according to Islamic law gave me a sense of
pride that he was following God's ordinance and that God was pleased
with us. We shared our meat with other Muslims, and I was glad that we
had the opportunity to help them obey God's law.

+A point of stress in visiting my family is our commitment to eating
only Muslim slaughtered halal meats. We are reluctant to eat anything,
so we bring our own food. Even though we explained the Islamic method of
slaughter, they were uncomfortable with us bringing our own food. They
thought this was another rejection, as if their food was not good enough
for us or was unclean. However, when they come to visit in our home,
they eat whatever I cook, and we seem to have a much happier and less
stressful time.

These are just a few of the many changes women converts make as they
develop and grow in their faith journey as a Muslim. They seem to help
and support each other through the initial journey. Although the basic
Islamic precepts are shared by all Muslim sects, there are some
differences in how people choose to fit these practices into their daily
lives. The extent to which they choose to follow and interpret these
precepts differs from person to person and culture to culture.

+Living in Egypt and Saudi Arabia has influenced me greatly, and has
resulted in my really knowing that the manifestation of Islam varies
from place to place, but the most important thing is the way we
personally live out the religion and to make sure we always approach it
with good intentions.

Muslims feel it is important to do the "right thing" as far as they can
determine what that is. They view the religion of Islam as a
comprehensive system dealing with every facet of life including the life
of the individual, the society, and the government. The women have
turned to many sources of information in order to better understand the
system of beliefs they have chosen to represent. The women do not seem
to have followed blindly, but they have spent time learning and seeking
out answers in order to practice more knowledgeably.

+I learned to live as a Muslim both through books and the help of other
Muslims. Good books describe the things that can and can't be eaten, how
one should dress, the things one should not have in one's house, etc. A
new Muslim has to get this information through books and other Muslims
because it takes a lot of time to learn all of it from the Qur'an and
hadis. I did study the Qur'an and hadis; I didn't just take things
blindly. If someone told me something, sometimes I wanted to look it up
to see for myself if I would make that same conclusion after reading
about it.

oMy Saudi friend was the one who taught me how to live as a Muslim. She
showed me how to pray, how to make wudu (cleansing or ablution), and how
to socialize with other Muslims. She answered every Islamic question I
had, from marriage and children to hadith and fiqh (science of Islamic
law). I obtained (through the Saudi embassy) an English-Arabic version
of the Holy Qur'an as well as books on a variety of Islamic subjects.
Islam as a lifestyle was easy for me to adopt because my previous
lifestyle was not very extravagant. The Arabic language was probably the
most difficult thing for me. Praying, fasting, wearing hijab, etc., all
came easy for me.

+I really did not have to learn to live as a Muslim because I already
had the lifestyle of a Muslim. I dressed morally, I did not eat pork, I
did not drink, and I tried to do right by my fellow human beings. To be
quite honest, no one had to help me to be a Muslim. I learned on my own.
The only things I had to change were my holidays and worship day. This
was quite easy for me because when I converted to Islam it was a way of
life for me. In fact, I enjoy the fact that Islam makes it simple to be
a practicing Muslim.

+I learned to live as a Muslim from other Muslims. I was blessed to
meet two very knowledgeable couples who taught both my husband and me
the things that every Muslim needs to know. Although many things. in
Islam are not complicated, living in a non-Islamic society makes them
seem as such. I also feel that it depends on what area of the country
one lives. In most of the larger cities, especially in the North, there
are large Muslim communities. This makes it a bit easier to find items
such as halal meats. Also the non-Muslims are familiar with Muslim dims
and some Islamic practices; therefore, they seem to be more tolerant and
less awestruck by our presence. I find that having close ties with other
Muslim families makes it easier to deal with the difficulties.

**Rights of Muslim Women**

The Arabia of the seventh century was a setting in which the killing of
baby daughters was common and women had few rights and were often
mistreated. The Qur'an gave women the rights to hold title to property,
to receive inheritance, to receive a dowry, to have a say in whom she
chooses to marry, to be supported and protected by her husband, and
other rights too numerous to list.

Dr. Riffat Hassan, a woman and Muslim theologian at the University of
Louisville states, "I remember how stricken I felt when I first began to
see the glaring discrepancy between Islamic ideals and Muslim practice
insofar as women are concerned.' She believes women in other countries
are largely unaware of the differences, for despite the important roles
played by the wives of Muhammad, "the Islamic tradition has remained
rigidly patriarchal . . . prohibiting the growth of scholarship among
women particularly in the realm of religious thought. . . ."4 Thus it
follows that Muslim women have not been cognizant of how their human
"rights have been violated by their male-dominated and male- centered
society... [unaware] that Islam has given women more rights than any
other religious tradition."' American-born women who have converted to
Islam also have the challenge of feminist leadership as they interpret
the rights that have been extended to women through the Qur'an. American
women who have not been exposed to an Islamic culture have a unique,
opportunity to sea the rights of women Islamically interpreted and
practiced in the American setting. These ideas are affecting and,
hopefully, changing incorrect customs which have developed in Muslim
societies. The women suggest both frustration and gratefulness for such
customs in the Muslim community, the ummah.

+Sometimes I feel Muslim women aren't given a chance to speak out about
their opinions or views on things within the Muslim community. They are
put in the back and hidden away. If I go to a lecture not in a masjid, I
like to sit near the front, so I can see and hear the speaker. I am
dressed Islamically, so why should I sit in the back just because
someone thinks men cannot control themselves? Men need to take the
responsibility for their own actions. Women cannot always be hidden so
men won't think bad thoughts. We should dress and act so as not to
promote that, but I still will not live my life locked up in a cage, or
in the back row at a university lecture. I can live my life with respect
and dignity, and live as a Muslim woman at the same time.

+As a Muslim woman I would like to see women take a more active role in
society-be more outspoken instead of the silent shadows Western cultures
see Muslim women as. Islam gives Muslim women many rights. One of the
main reasons for hijab is to enter society. Muslim women should play an
active part in being role models for children.

The move to recognize the rights of Muslim women is of great concern,
and these rights are treasured by Muslim women in the United States and
Canada. They believe that Allah, through the Qur'an 1400 years ago, set
in place rights for women that have never, at any time, been equalled in
the spiritual, intellectual, political, social, and economic areas of
life. Some of these rights are reflected in the following in regard to
maintenance and kindly treatment, education and a career, and being
regarded as an equal with man before God but with roles that are
somewhat different 3n their responsibilities.

41 have the same rights as other women. I have the freedom of education
and career if desire. I think actually Muslim women are treated with a
lot of respect. I've been married eleven years and my husband has never
shown disrespect for me or tried to take away my freedoms of opinion or
choice. We have argued about them but he hasn't tried to stop them. +My
husband has been kind and generous to me and allowed me to make
decisions in our home. I clean and decorate our home as I wish. I make
it a place of peacefulness and rest-a place where all family members can
relax and soothe their anxieties and forget their worries of the outside
world. When I wanted to leave my teacher/ counselor position before our
first child was born, he willingly accepted my decision to stay at home
and never asked me to keep working to help pay our expenses.

+One area. I am grateful for in my position as a married woman is that
I prefer to let someone else make the big decisions. My husband is the
leader of my household, but as I tell my kids, I'm vice president. Also
I am treated with respect as well as dignity. I like it. +As a Muslim
woman, I have the tight to worship, to choose a good husband, and to
lead a clean life. I have the right to be protected and not abused. I am
grateful for a husband who puts his wife first into consideration, a
husband who asks for and respects my opinion. I don't feel any -eal
disadvantages as a Muslim woman. The only thing perhaps is in regard to
finding outside employment. Sometimes, it's hard to find a job
(especially with non- Muslims).

+Definitely I appreciate the right not to be hassled by men for dates,
meetings, and obnoxious cliches and lines. I also am experiencing more
freedom in my choices pertaining to my occupation, money I earned, and
personal limitations according to my needs-not someone else's. +My
becoming a Muslim gave me the courage to stand up against ignorance and
to take charge of and responsibility for my life. My life as a Christian
was continually filled with dilemma after dilemma in which I hoped my
father or someone else would save me. My outlook on life was analogous
to the faith. Unfortunately, such an immature outlook not only hinders
personal growth but also affects self-esteem. Islam gave me the
self-esteem to be able to make great decisions without being afraid to
carry through with them.

Muslima [a Muslim woman] is not responsible for her support at all. The
husband has to totally shoulder her support, including clothing and
Islamic learning materials. Any money she gets, either child support
from previous marriage, working, her mahar [dowry], her inheritance, or
anything like that is hers to save or spend as she sees fit (as long as
it falls under Islamic guidelines for halal). Her husband cannot touch
any of it! If she is working, she can contribute to the household if she
chooses, because she is taking time away from the house to work. The
rest is hers and hers alone. My husband didn't realize this when we got
married. When I explained it to him, he said that men sure got the short
end of the stick! That is true! If I get a few dollars from somewhere, I
can spend it on a new dress, or jewelry, or save it; but my husband
first has to pay all the household bills before he can spend any money
on himself Men have a lot of responsibility. I do worry about the
household, but it is not ray responsibility to meet the bills every
month My husband knows that it is his total responsibility.

The one right I have that's very important to me is not having to work
and getting the chance to be with my daughter! It also is nice to have
my husband provide for me at my standards and above without really
asking. Nice home, clothes, the basics, and more. I feel the home is for
the wife and mother, and I love it. I'm very, very grateful to have this
opportunity, and it wouldn't be possible if I weren't married. There are
no areas not open to me as a Muslim woman.


