Question : Do You Believe the Story of Miraji ?
===============================================

Answer:

We believe that our Holy Prophet ascended with body up to 'Arsh' at
least once while he was at Mecca.

Question :

Do you pray five times a day or four times a day as indicated in the
Qur'an?

Are your prayers like those of the Sunnis, that is (a) Fajr 2 rakaas;
(b) Dhuhur 4 rakaas; (c)

Asr 4 rakaas; (d) Maghrib 3 rakaas and (e) Isha 4 rakaas ?

How do you call for prayers ?

How do you aim at prayers (e.g., saying 'Usalli faradh Subh') ? What
are the necessary steps to follow so as to fulfil (i) Prayer; (ii)
Fasting (iii) Zaka (iv) Hijja ?

Answer:

We pray 5 times (not 4 times) and there is no difference in the number
of Rakaas. For further details please refer to our 'Kitabu Cha Sala' and
'Kitabu Cha Saumu'. (Now "Elements of Islamic Studies" is
recommended).

Question :

What are the obligations of a Shia Muslim to God, Prophet, Caliph,
Living Parents, Imam, Neighbour, Orphan, Ruler, Government, Widow,
Stranger, Poor, Wife, Money, Child, Non- Muslim, Religion as a whole and
Country ?

What are the obligations of a ruler to Citizens, Government servants,
Soldiers, Government money, Religion and its leaders, Poors, Wives and
children of those who died for their country and faith ?

Answer:

There is a tradition of our 4th Imam Ali Zainul-Abedeen, son of Imam
Husain, describing the duties of a Muslim towards his fellows. That
tradition is the cream of Islamic ethics. It is not possible to give
that tradition, because space does not allow it. Its translation has
been published as "Reciprocal Rights". (It is available from this
Mission).

Question:

What are the qualifications of (i) Caliph, (ii) Imarn, (iii) Lawyer,
(iv) Treasurer, (v)General of the army ?

Answer:

I have already mentioned the qualifications and conditions necessary
for an Imam (or as you say, Caliph). Anyhow, if by Imam' you mean 'one
who leads in prayers' then he, in addition to other necessary
qualifications, must be 'Aadi!', i.e. one who does not commit any
Kabirah (big) sin even by mistake and does not repeat any Saghirah
(small) sin if committed by mistake.

About others :

1. Lawyer: Lawyer, as known today, is not recognised in Islam. Of
course, there were and are experts of Islamic Laws.

2. Treasurer and General of the Army: They were to be appointed by the
Holy Prophet or the Imam, and it is their prerogative whom to appoint.
But generally speaking, they must be honest, brave and knowing the rules
of Sheriat concerning their duties and responsibilities.

Question:

How do you judge the following :

Thief; One who uses witchcraft; Robber; Liar; One who commits adultery;
One who commits adultery with an animal; A murderer; One who steals or
uses a thing put Wakf without proper permission; A child born
unlawfully; One who reveals others' shamefulness; One who tries to
destroy faith; A political prisoner ?

Answer:

Islamic Penal-Code is very reasonable. The following facts must be
mentioned here :

i. There is a difference between sin and crime. Every crime is a sin
but not vice versa.
ii. Sins and crimes are sometimes against God and sometimes against
other people.
iii. Tawba (repentance) is a recognised factor in this Code. The
important conditions of Tawba' are that:

(a) He should repent to please Allah, not to avoid any material harm;
(b) he should have a firm resolve not to commit that sin again,
(c) if the sin is against God and can be amended, he should do so at
once,
(d) if the sin is against other people and can be amended, he does so
at once; otherwise, he should ask pardon from the wronged party.

Thus if a man, for example, steals something and then repents (with all
the conditions mentioned above, including the return of stolen thing to
the owner), before the owner lodges the case against him in a Qadhi's
court, there will be no case against him at all. "A man who repents from
sin is like a man who never sinned". (Holy Prophet).

This highest standard of justice and mercy cannot be found in any other
code of law. Now, if someone is brought before a Qadhi, without any
trace of repentance, he deserves punishment to save society from his
mischief.

Again, the crimes, in Islamic penal Code, are of two kinds : Those
whose punishment has been fixed in the Qur'an; and those whose
punishment has been left to the discretion of the Qadhi. Even fixed
punishments are of different grades for any given crime. A man who kills
another man, can be set free or made to pay blood-money or put in prison
or put to death, according to the circumstances mentioned in the
Qur'an.

Now about the matters mentioned by you (only the maximum punishment is
mentioned here) :

Political prisoner: Political difference, in itseif is neither a sin
nor a crime in Islam. An Illegitimate child, in Shia law, is not treated
as a sinner. The parents are liable to punishment, but not the child.

Lie is a sin, but not a crime.

Revealing others' shamefulness: A person who accuses a married woman of
adultery (without sufficient proof) is to be whipped 80 times. In other
cases, there is no fixed punishment.

Destroying the Faith and using Wakf property without proper right, have
no fixed punishment. Witch-craft: A Muslim, if guilty of witch-craft, is
to be killed. Theft: Cutting four fingers of the right hand, leaving the
thumb intact. Robbery: Highway robbery with violence carries the
punishment Adultery: An adulterer is to be stoned to death.

Sodomy: Killing and burning the corpse.

Committing indecent act with an animal: No fixed punishment. But
generally he is whipped 25 times. The animal is to be killed and its
meat destroyed. Murder: It carries the punishment of death. Stealing
from Wakf property: The punishment is on the discretion of the Qadhi.

Question :

Which days of the Islamic year do you observe ? What are the importance
of those days ?

Answer:

In addition to the Fridays, Id-ul-Fitr, Idul-Adh-ha and the Holy month
of Ramadhan, we arrange lectures on birthdays and death anniversaries of
the Holy Prophet and 12 Imams. Question:

What is the proper way of (1) marrying; (2) Inheriting ?

Answer:

Please refer to the 'Light' (July-August, 1967) in which our memorandum
about matrimonial affairs, submitted to the Commission set up by Kenya
Government, was published

Another memorandum, submitted to another commission of the Kenya
Government, on the laws of Will and Inheritance, is published in this
issue.

I hope you will find these writings more comprehensive and will realise
the beauty of Islamic sheriat as defined by the family of our Holy
Prophet and preserved in Shia madhhab.

Question :

Do you allow other Muslims to pray in your mosques ?

Answer:

Yes, willingly. Mosque is the house of Allah. And everybody within the
sphere of Islam has a right to pray in it. Only recently we renovated
our mosque in Bagamoyo (though there is no Shia Ithna-asheri there since
last 40 years) so that our Sunni brethern may use it. Question:

How do you relate with other Muslims, for example, the Sunnis ? How do
you think this relation can be improved ? For example : the world
Muslims decide a unity of all "Madh-habs", what regulations would you
(the Shia) demand before you accept any unity ?

Answer:

We have brotherly relations with the Sunnis. You would never have heard
of any trouble between us and our Sunni brethern in the countries where
we are in majority, like Iran and Iraq.

But I think, the word 'Unity of Madh-habs' is misleading. 'Unity of
Madh-habs' cannot be achieved in any way. If you are to take something,
from Shafiis, others from Hanafis, still others from Shias and so on, it
will not please any group. In fact, it will be a new sect, in conflict
with all the existing sects. What is actually required is tolerance,
cooperation and respect for each other's views.

Our late Mujtahid, Seyyid Husain al-Burujurdi, of Iran, joined hands
with the late Mufti of Al-Azhar (Egypt), Sheikh Shaltut, to establish a
joint institution, Dar-ut-Taqureeb-Bainal- Madhahib-il-lslamia, to bring
two main sects, Sunnis and Shias, closer. They decided that the students
of both sects should be taught the tenets and laws of the other sect, to
remove misunderstanding and prejudice which are bred mainly by
ignorance.

Such ventures must be carried on in every Muslim country. Catholics,
Orthodox and Protestant Christians are coming together, without
sacrificing their own beliefs and practices. Muslims can do it in a
better way and with far better results (because our differences are
trivial if compared with the differences between the Christians). And we
Must do it. The sooner the better.

15th September, 1968 Dear Maulana, Excuse me for being late in writing
to you concerning the receipt of your registered letter. I was out to
Musoma for Teaching Practice.

I would like to congratulate you for the great work you have carried
out in order to answer my questions.

I also, should thank you in this letter, for uncovering the thick
blanket which sheltered me from happiness and being proud of my
brethren - the Shias, You have given me a helpful knowledge of your
sect.

Concerning question 9 (ii) : My aim was to ask 'whether your Shia
scholars allow to add more points to the former Shariat which can be
used for actions of the modern life:- for example, judging people who
try to change sex as done in some parts of the world like U.S.A. ?

I would like to apologize for using the word 'break-up' in question
11.I would ask you to be patient about my mistakes, for I have very
little knowledge of Islam. I have been schooling in Christian schools
for twelve years. As the result, I have more knowledge of Christianity
than I have of Islam.

Now, I am trying to get what I should have got earlier, that is the
knowledge of Islam. Please, Maulana, I have several other questions
which makes me ask for your help - as a Muslim, not as a Shia only.

1. I heard that our Holy Prophet said that Islam will split or be
divided into 73 sects.
i. May I get a list of these 73 sects ?
ii. For each may I get a short reason of how it differs from other
sects.
iii. Have all these sects already existed in the world or are we to
expect others to come ?
iv. Should we include Baha'ism and Ahmmadiya to the sects of Islam ?

2. How can I deny that people were converted into Islam by "SWORD"
(that is force) ?
3. The Christians have written in several of their books that our Holy
Prophet was suffering from epilepsy. Is this true ?
4. Is there any particular reason why we Muslims should put pig and dog
to the highest degree of impurity among all animals ?
5. May I know the Holy Generation from Hazrat Ibrahim (a.s.) to Hazrat
Muhammad (a.s.).
6. Is there any possibility for me to take the "Quranic Arabic" as a
language so that I can read any book written in Arabic and understand
it?

Lastly I would like to ask whether I can buy Islamic books translated
into English from you like "Qur'an", "Hadith" and Historical books of
Islam.

Your Brother in Islam,
Dhikiri O. Mohamed Kiondo.
6th October, 1968
Dear Brother in Islam,
Thank you for your letter dated 15th September, 1968. I will write
detailed answers in about 4 or 5 weeks. I hope you will not mind this
delay.
Thanking you,
Yours sincerely,

S. S. Akhtar Rizvi.

Mwanza : 15th October, 1968. Dear Maulana, Thank you for your letter of
6th October, 1968, which informs me that you are now trying to get
detailed answers to my questions. I will complete my course in this town
on 24/10/1968 and will leave this place. Therefore, I will ask you,
kindly to send the answers using this address :- Mr. Dhikiri Omari
Mohamed Kiondo,

Kwemkole Village, c/o Kizara Upp. Primary School, P.O. Korogwe /
Tanzania. Thanking you, Your Brother in Islam, Dhikiri Omari Mohamed
Kiondo. 25th October, 1968 Dear Brother in Islam, I was glad to hear
that you have now completed your training. May Allah Bless you with
success in this life and Najat in the life hereafter. Amin. Why not try
to get your posting at Dar es Salaam ? If you are here we can teach you
Arabic and other religious subjects.

Meanwhile, you can learn Arabic from "Arabic by Radio" programme of
Cairo radio. It comes on 16.99 or 17690 kcs, at 9.20 p.m. on Tuesdays
and Sundays. You should write to Arabic by Radio, P.O. Box 325, Cairo,
U.A.R., to send you the books connected with this programme. It will
come to you free of charge. If you happen to pass through Kampala, you
may purchase a translation of the Holy Quran from M/s. M. H. Ali & Co.,
P.O. Box 2597, Kampala. I am afraid there is no English translation of
Hadith books.

As for your question about spreading Islam by Sword, remember that the
Holy Prophet never fought except in defence. After the Holy Prophet, it
is justified to say that "Arab Imperialism" (not Islam) was spread by
sword. But Islam was not the main concern of many of the early rulers of
Muslim world. As a matter of fact, Bani Umaiyyah did not like any body
to embrace Islam because it meant decrease in "Jaziya" revenue.

This is a very vast subject. But I will leave it here. Yours sincerely,
S. S. Akhtar Rizvi, 6th December, 1968. Dear Maulana, Thank you very
much for the registered letter of the answers to my questions. You have
opened my mind so widely that, now I need much studies on Islam. But my
problem is how I should approach them. Can you advice me ? Are you ready
to teach me through correspondence ?

I am ready to pay any amount of fees required. Lastly, I would ask God
to bless you in your career, give you long life and help Islam. Good
wishes from me in this month of Ramadhan and Idd-el-Fitr as well. Your
brother in Islam, Dhikiri O. Muhammad Kiondo.

16th December, 1968. Dear Brother, I have given the replies to your
questions about epilepsy and pork in the Light which is in the press and
will be sent to you in due course. Meanwhile, I am enclosing a copy of
the article 'Was the Holy Prophet an epileptic ?' for your study. (Now
see "Qur'an and Hadith" published by this Mission).

(PORK is now published as a booklet). The answer about the sects of
Islam is also enclosed herewith, (see Appendix 'B'). So far as the
genealogy of the Holy Prophet is concerned, I would like to mention two
things first :

(a) The genealogy from the Holy Prophet up to 'Adnaan' is without any
difference of opinion. From Adnaan up to 'Qedar', (or Kedar) there are
many differences in different traditions.' This Qedar was son of Hazrat
Ismail who was the son of Hazrat Ibrahim.

(b) For many reasons, I am of the opinion that those traditions which
give about 38 to 40 names between Adnaan and Qedar are nearer to the
truth. But as, owing to the differences of the traditionalists, a firm
stand cannot be taken, it is better to leave that portion of genealogy
unmentioned here.

The names from the Holy Prophet up to Adnaan are as follows:-

Muhammad (s.a.w.) - Abdullah - Abdul-Muttalib - Hashim - Abdu Manaf -
Quusai - Kilaab - Murrah - Kaab - Lui - Ghaalib - Fahr - Malek -
Nadhar - Kanana - Khozaima - Mudrikah - llyas - Nizaar - Muid - Adnaan.
About your question regarding additions in the 'Sheriat': The sheriat of
Islam as brought by the Holy Prophet and explained by his 12 successors
during a long period of 250 years, contains a most comprehensive set of
rules. Whenever a seemingly new question crops up - in which our Sunni
brethern cannot find satisfaction from their books and resort to 'Rai'
(opinion of their own) - our Mujtahids simply find out some traditions
from the Prophet or any of the Imams and act accordingly.

About the institution of Ijtihad, please see the booklet 'Islam' (at
the end of the chapter of Imamat). Our Sunni brethren closed the door of
Ijtihad (religious research) after the 4 mujtahids (Abu Hanifa, Malik,
Shafii, Ahmad bin Hanbal). Therefore, they became backward in the
matters of Islamic Law. It is only since last century that they started
again the research on Muslim Law. But they are so primitive, in
comparison to the Shia Ithna- asheri Law that cannot be described in
this short letter. Suffice it to say that they slept for one thousand
years when the Shias kept the torch of Ijtihad shining. Therefore,
thanks to our sound and perfect directions (received from our Imams), we
never become baffled when a seemingly new problem comes in our way. Our
Mujtahids give rulings, based not on their own opinion but on some sound
religious traditions and the matter is settled.

For example, Sunnis are still debating whether birth control (by
medicines or contraceptives) is allowed. But owing to the guidance given
by the Holy Prophet and the Imams in such conditions, our present
Mujtahid, Seyyid Muhsin al-Hakim (Iraq) declared that it is allowed
provided it does not harm the health of either party, is done by consent
of both parties, and does not lead to abortion.

Now this matter is settled in Shia sect. What I want to say is this. It
was to explain the Sheriat to the full extent that Allah decreed through
the Holy Prophet that there would be 12 Imams from the family of the
Holy Prophet. Our Sunni brethren did not follow this ruling; they went
to everyone for guidance, except the family members of the Holy Prophet.
As a result, they are still groping in the dark, while the Shias have no
problem at all.

For us the door of knowledge is not shut tight. I hope you will
understand our stand perfectly.

With best wishes, Sincerely yours, S. S. Akhtar Rizvi. 30th December,
1968 Dear Brother, Thank you for your letter dated 6th instant. I am
glad to see that you want to increase your religious knowledge through
correspondence course. I am thinking of preparing a course for
interested and intelligent people like you. But I think there will be a
delay of about 6 months in starting this course. I will inform you as
soon as the course is ready.

Sincerely yours,

S. S. Akhtar Rizvi.

Dear Maulana,

I was very glad when I arrived home during my holiday in February, to
see books, pamphlets and a letter from you telling me that you are now
preparing a Correspondence Course for such people like me. I should
thank God for giving you such thoughts, and pray for the blessing of
your plan. I would like to inform you that, now I am working here as a
teacher. You can use the above address for anything concerning me.

Your Brother in Islam, Dhikiri O. Muhammad Kiondo.

13 March, 1969. Dear Brother, I sent you some booklets by book-post
some weeks ago, but have not got any indication whether it reached you
safely. I am going for about 3 months to India for the marriage of my
daughter and will be back at the end of June, Insh-Allah. After my
return, I intend to start correspondence course, which was asked by you.
In the meantime, I would like you to go through the booklets which were
sent to you. Wishing you happiness and success. Sincerely yours, S. S.
Akhtar Rizvi.

8th September, 1969. Dear Maulana, I kindly ask you to go through my
questions carefully and answer them for me. The purpose of such
questions is simply to increase my Islamic knowledge and in some cases
to understand how the Shias take some cases and compare with the Sunnis.
I think you will not be angry with my questions at all.

Your Brother in Islam, Dhikiri O. Muhammad Kiondo. 30th September,
1969. Dear Mr. Dhikiri Omari, Thank you for your two letters. I will be
coming to Lushoto some time at the end of October, and will be pleased
to meet you for the first time. I will send the replies to your question
as soon as possible. Correspondence course has been put off for 1970,
as, at present we are busy in re- organising Light and Sauti Ya Bilal
and in publishing some of our books. With best wishes, Sincerely yours,
S. S. Akhtar Rizvi.

24th November, 1969. Dearest S. S. Akhtar Rizvi, How are you Mauiana !
! !

I was very pleased to hear that you were aiming at visiting Lushoto in
the end of last month (October, 1969) trying to meet me if possible for
the first time.

Unfortunately, I was not here, when your letter arrived. I was at
Kwemkole organizing the work of building my house. I arrived here on
24/10/69 and returned back to Lushoto very soon when I received your
letter to wait for your arrival there.

I thought our Lord God has counted you in taking part in the Maulidi
which was to be celebrated for the birth of my first born child
(daughter born on 21/10/69) at Lushoto. I would have invited you to this
ceremony if it had not come to my mind that it would have troubled you
much for you are far from Lushoto and that you are just arriving from
India. I was also late in informing you that I will meet you at Lushoto.
Did you come ? Please let me know when you will be coming, if you did
not; so that I may meet you there. I also would like to know whether you
would like to see my village - Kwemkole, Korogwe - so that I may arrange
and choose the best holidays of the year; possible for communication.

Sunga is 35 miles north of Lushoto. We have daily bus leaving Lushoto
for Sunga at 12 noon. When you come to Lushoto, ask to see Muallim Seffu
Abdallah (my uncle) or Muallim Omari Amiri (my best friend). They will
bring you here.

Your Brother in Islam, Dhikiri O. Muhammad Kiondo. 11th December, 1969.
Dear Dhikiri Omari, Please accept 'Eid Mubarak' on this auspicious day
of Eid-ul-Fitr. I went to Tanga at the end of October I tried to go to
Lushoto just to see you, as I had promised in my letter. But people
pointed out that those being the holidays, perhaps you would have gone
home. Therefore, I did not persue the idea.I am glad to hear that you
have got a child. My congratulations.

As I intended to meet you, I did not send the replies to your questions
earlier. Now, that it seems that we will not be able to see each other
for some time more, I am sending the replies to you and hope that you
would be satisfied.

It appears to me that your intelligence compels you to question many
tenets and practices of your ancestral faith (Sunni-ism). I cannot blame
you, because that faith has some tenets which no logical mind can accept
without reservations (just as Christianity cannot be explained to a
logical mind).

During the last two years we have developed a firm bond of love and
brotherhood between ourselves. And I think it would be a betrayal of
confidence if I do not tell you frankly that you cannot attain the peace
of mind unless you follow the path shown by the Holy Prophet and his
Holy Ahlul-Bait. I mean, Shia Ithna-asheri faith, which is the true
Islam as brought by the Prophet. Therefore, I cordially and with full
confidence invite you to accept Shi'ism, so that your intellect and
faith remain no longer in conflict with each other. I hope you will
write to me as soon as possible, so that I may guide you about the
details. With best wishes and Dua,


