Question: What Are the Necessary Points That May Lead To Counting a Child As Illegitimately Born ?
==================================================================================================

Answer:

If the man and woman at the time of the conception of the child were
not married to each other lawfully (or, at least, were not under the
impression of already being lawfully married) the child will be
illegitimate.

Question:

Can a child born illegitimately be converted to being lawfully born?

Answer:

No.

Question:

Suppose a man makes a girl pregnant before they are married (but both
of them aimed at marriage and could not control their sexual urge till
their marriage), will the child be counted as illegitimately born?

Answer:

Yes. He will still be illegitimate. Remember that Islam does not allow
a person to mingle with a member of opposite sex (who is not within
his/her prohibited degree - like mother, father, sister, brother,
father-in-law, mother-in-law, uncle, nephew etc.) or with whom he/she is
not legally married. For this reason, the mixing of men and women who
are strangers to each other (in the sense mentioned above) is strictly
prohibited in Islam. And the wisdom of this rule can be very well
confirmed by the subject of your question itself.

Now, if somebody breaks a law, he must be prepared to suffer its
consequences. If the said man and woman were so anxious to save their
offspring from the stigma of illegitimacy, they should have remained
separate till marriage. Or, alternatively, they could have married
themselves before indulging in their sexual activities. After all,
marriage in Islam is a very simple and swift process. It is a matter
between the man and the woman and reciting the formula of Nikah is not
the prerogative of any sheikh or scholar. Any body can perform his/her
own Nikah, provided he/she is adult and discreet and of sound mind, and
provided they observe all the conditions of reciting that formula. There
is no other ritual or function to solemnize the marriage.

If, in spite of all these facilities, they did not marry before sexual
intercourse, they have themselves to blame for the consequences.

Question:

According to Sunnis, a child born unlawfully is to be put to death. So
are the father and mother of such a child. Is this correct to punish
someone for the mother's offence, while the Qur'an says that 'no one
will carry another's load ?'

Answer:

Your information is not correct. The child is not to be punished. In
fact, the punishment of the woman is postponed till after the delivery
and weaning of the child, to protect him from harm.

By the way, you have used the phrase 'for the mother's offence'.
Fornication or adultery is not a one person's offence. It needs a man
and woman together to make them fornicators. The man who put that child
into the womb of the woman is equally criminal. The punishment of
fornication and adultery differs according to the marital status of the
man and woman. It ranges from 100 strokes to the stoning to death.

Question:

According to Sunnis, a dead body may be taken out of the grave if he is
buried with some money or gold. But 'Sauti ya Bilal' (Vol.III no. 5)
shows that Imam Husain was buried with gold. Is this not bad or was it
done purposely?

Answer:

Imam Husain (a.s.) is not buried with gold. The dome above his grave (a
photo of which was published in Sauti ya Bilal, Vol. Ill No. 4) is
covered with gold.

Question:

I think the purpose behind the rule of 'Idda' period is to ascertain
that the woman does not go with a child in her womb who belongs to her
late husband and thus gives the child to the new husband. Can't we use
scientific means to find out whether the widow has a child in her womb
or not ? For, it is very hard to the widows and worries wives much when
their husbands fall ill.

Answer:

Islam is the universal religion, meant for all mankind - scientists and
illiterates, so-called civilized ones and bush-dwellers - to be
practised everywhere and in all circumstances. It is not a 'scientists'
club.' That is why its rules and regulations have been made by Allah in
such a way that a Nomad of Arabia, an Eskimo of Greenland and a pigmy of
the Central part of Africa can follow it with equal ease. That is the
reason behind adopting lunar calendar, and prescribing the prayer-times
by positions of the sun etc. . . .

And that is the reason of prescribing a certain period of 'Idda' (3
months in case of divorce, 4 months 10 days in case of the death of the
husband) in which the woman cannot marry another husband.

I do not think any woman, at the approach of the death of her husband,
would be worried of not being able of marrying another husband for a
short period of 4 months 10 days, instead of grieving for her beloved
present husband who is about to depart from this world. As for the
scientific methods : How many women can get themselves scientifically
examined? And even if such facilities were available world-wide and
cheap enough to allow a begger-woman to take their advantage, there is
always the possibility, nay probability, of wrong deduction by the
doctors and technicians. You must be aware that in so many cases the
experts draw diametrically different conclusions from the same X-ray
photo. Therefore, the rule of 'Idda' can never be treated as out of
date.

Question:

How do the Shias mourn for a dead person ? Explain for me all that is
done for a dead Shia after his death to the ending of the mourning
period ?

Answer:

Mourning has two aspects: showing natural grief and uttering words
tantamount to complaining against Allah. The first is allowed in Islam;
the second is strictly forbidden and Haraam. Even in the fist case,
restraint is preferred except in the mourning for the Holy Prophet or
his family members.

When a Shia dies, people start reciting the Holy Quran for his/her
'thawab'. The dead body is washed thrice - by water mixed with a little
water squeezed from the leaves of lote-tree, by water in which a little
camphor is mixed, and finally by pure water -; then he is given the
'kafan' (shroud); then he is taken to the grave-yard. In East Africa,
the people joining the funeral procession recite Kalema on the way. At
grave-yard, and sometimes in the mosques, the prayer of 'Meyyit' is
held; after prayer a short 'majlis' is recited in which the sufferings
of the Holy Prophet and his Ahlul-Bait are narrated. Then the 'Meyyit'
is buried.

On second or third day, 'Ziyarat' is held, in which people recite the
Holy Qur'an for the 'thawab' of the dead person, and at the end a short
'majlis' is recited. People give whatever they like to the charities and
its 'thawab' is intended to be given to the dead person. Then, after
about a month or so, 'Arbain' is held, in which 'majlis' is recited.

After about a year, 'Haul' is held just like 'Arbain'.

Question:

How do the Shia send reward to their dead (Fateha) and when ?

Answer:

The answer is almost fully explained in the previous description. So
far as 'when' is concerned, there is no time fixed for it. Apart from
the functions mentioned above, most of the Shia Ithnaasheris go to the
grave-yard on Thursdays and recite Sura Fateha for their dead
relatives.

Question:

The Sunnis say that during the Day of Resurrection, everyone is going
to get beautiful ladies; the 40th being his wife in this life. Is this
story true ? Suppose a lady got married to more than one man in her
life, whose wife will she be on the Resurrection day ?

Answer:

The existence of 'Huur' ('Houri') has been affirmed in the Qur'an in
numerous places; and no Muslim (whether Sunni or Shia) can doubt it. If
you are afraid of the objections of the Christians, read the recent
Light which has already been posted to you. There in the article
'Quiyamat' you will find that, according to Shia belief, everyone who
will go to paradise, will find happiness according to his own spiritual
perfection. That is quite reasonable; otherwise, if you give a man of
little literary knowledge a book of highest literary standard, what will
he do with it ? He can never enjoy it, because his standard is not so
high. Likewise, people of high spiritual perfection will be happy in
company of the angels, and so on. Those who have not attained such
height of perfection, will find joy in material things. Hence the
provision of milk, honey, fruits, rivers, streams, and 'houri' in the
paradise. This much will be sufficient to show the reason behind the
basic idea. Now coming to the number 40, it is not for us to determine
who will get what and how much. If God wants to give someone 40, or 400,
or 4,000, it is not our concern.

So far as the believer wife of a believer husband is concerned, she
will be with her husband. If she was married to more than one man in her
life, she will go to that husband who was more considerate to her and of
better behaviour.

Question:

Nowadays, it seems as if Muslims are filled with bad feelings about the
landing of Americans on the Moon. What do the Qur'an and Islam say about
science and exploration of the solar system ?

Answer:

This question needs detailed answer. You may have to wait for sometime
for the full explanation. Meanwhile, to put your mind at ease, I may
tell you that it is not the "Muslims" who are filled with 'bad
feelings'; it is only the East African Sunnis.

According to the Qur'an and the traditions of the Holy Prophet and
Imams, it is quite possible to reach heavenly bodies. You may refer to
the booklet 'Islam' (page 12) where I have pointed this out. Also see
the article 'Space Travel', published in The Light (Appendix 'C').

Question:

A certain person in this area does not think that there is any need for
an African to accept an Arabian religion. He counts Islam as Arabic
religion. He says that every nation has its own prophets. He says that
Sambaa people had some prophets, one of whom was Kighobo of the 10th
century who prophesied about the coming of Europeans, the birth of
children who will not care about their parents and the ending of the
Kilindi dynasty rule in Usambaa - all these have come to truth.

Answer:

This question also needs detailed answer; and I am terribly busy these
days. I would like you to read my "Thought For The Week" (copy attached)
in which I have touched this subject.

In short, your friend does not know the significance of the term 'Nabi'
This word is translated as 'prophet' and 'prophet' in English lanquage
conveys the meaning of 'one who prophesies'. But prophesying can be done
by so many people: astrologers, crystal-gazers, sooth-savers, all make
prophecies. Even the meteorological department has scores'of 'prophets'
(in the sense of English language). But prophesying does not make them
'Nabi'. A Nabi is the one who, being the representative of Allah,
conveys His message to the people and leads them to the path of God,
giving them a code of life based on love and justice. He must have many
qualifications, most important of which are 'sinless-ness', appointment
by Allah, and showing of miracles after the claim of Nubuwwat, without
any practice, medicine or tools.

And nobody has succeeded in substantiating such claim of Nubuwwat after
the Holy Prophet of Islam, Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.)

So far as the question of 'nation' is concerned, it must be remembered
that Islam is not a 'national' religion, like Judaism and Christianity.
It is the 'Universal' religion sent by Allah for the whole mankind,
through Muhammad, who, of course, was an Arab; but being a human being,
he was bound to be born in some place.

It is really surprising that at a time when all thinking people are
dreaming of a world government, your friend cherishes the idea of tribal
religions. Such thinking cannot take mankind any further from the
present chaotic situation. It was to curb such separatism that God sent
Islam as the Religion for 'al-Alameen' (the whole universe).

Question:

He also proves his theory that when any person of any religion prays
for anything, he gets it. It shows, according to him, that all religions
in the world are true and from God. Answer:

Well, here is an episode which will throw some light on this question.
Once Hadhrat Musa (a.s.) prayed to Allah saying that one apparent cause
of the pride of Firaun was the limitless bounties which Allah had
bestowed upon him. Allah replied: "Musa, if Firaun has forgotten that he
is my creature, how can I forget that I am his Creator ?" According to
the sayings of Ahlul-bait (family members of Holy Prophet), Allah, Who
is Rehman and Rahim and Whose love to His creatures knows no bound,
sustains everyone, and provides all the needs of all His creatures, in
this world, irrespective of the beliefs of the individuals. Therefore,
He provides even the atheists (who pray to no one) with their needs.

So, you should understand that those who ask some gods other than
Allah, do not get their needs from their supposed deities. They still
get them from the only source of life which has power and strength to
grant anything to anyone, and that is Allah. You may ask that, in this
condition, what is the need of asking things from Allah, as He would
give us our requirements, anyhow. But you should remember that, among
other things our prayers to Him and our asking requirements from Him
show our gratitude to Him and confirm the fact that we realize from
where we are getting our sustenance. Thus, we improve our ethical and
spiritual standard by praying to Allah. It is a way of strengthening our
relationship with Allah.

Imam Zainul-Abedeen (a.s.), the great-grandson of the Holy Prophet,
said in one of his invocations (Duas) : "O Allah, Who gives to those who
ask Him, and even to those who do not ask Him."

As I said above, even atheists get their sustenance from Allah, though
they believe in no god at all. Therefore, getting their requirements
after praying to the supposed deities does not prove that "all religions
must be true". Otherwise, such a man would have to admit that even
atheism is true. In fact, such a claim as you have narrated is so
foolish that it does not deserve any attention. There are religions
claiming hundreds of gods and semi-gods; there is Christianity, claiming
3-in-1 god; there is Islam denying more than one God; ....

Can all these diametrically different religions be true at one and the
same time ? There are religions believing in a Day of Resurrection;
there are religions believing, instead, in perpetual transmigration of
souls. Can both these views be true and from God ? Remember, only those
people make such claims who are unable to prove the truth of their
religious beliefs. So they want to hypnotize people of other faith by
claiming the divine origin and truth of 'all religions'; thus making
sure that their illogical superficial beliefs also will be treated as
divine truth.

Question:

We Muslims are much blamed by non-Muslims for using Holy Book for
witch-craft. What really astonishes the non-Muslims is that those
sheikhs and sharifus are the leaders of such activities - especially in
the Coast area. My question is : How can Islam teach both religious
tenets and witch-craft ?

Answer:

There are two aspects of this question which must be explained
separately:

First: Is there any harm or evil in healing the people or benefiting
them with the help of the name of God ? Certainly not. Hadhrat Isa (a s
) used to do so; and the fact is admitted by the Christians and Muslims
both. Also, it is written about his 12 disciples that "he gave them
power against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner
of diseases" (Mathew, 10:1), and he ordered them that: "Heal the sick,
cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils". (Mathew, 10:8).

When he removed some evil spirit from some people afflicted by those
spirits, his enemies accused him of being in league with demon, saying
that "he hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out
devils. And he called them unto him, and said unto them in parables, How
can Satan cast out Satan ?" (Mark, 3:22-23).

So you will see that healing with the name of Allah is not evil; and it
is not 'witch-craft'. If the Christians have lost that power, it is
because they are not the followers of Jesus Christ. Otherwise, they
would have been able to "say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and
thou cast into the sea" and it would have been done (Mathew, 21:2).

Second: What is the difference between healing with the help of God and
the witch-craft ? It is the same difference which exists between a
medicine and a poison. The poison brings harm to body, while the
medicine removes the harmful effects. Therefore, if any Sheikh tries to
benefit someone with the name of God, or the ayat of the Qur'an, it is
like curing someone of his sickness by the medicine, and therefore,
should not be ridiculed. On the other hand, if he tries to bring harm to
someone, or uses methods other than the name of Allah or ayat of Qur'an,
it is witch-craft, and it may be likened to poisoning someone. But this
does not mean that Allah has taught the witch-craft as you have asked in
your question.

But, remember that, according to true Islamic belief (i.e., of Shia
faith) a man is obliged to strive to the utmost limit of his capacity to
improve his condition and then he should pray to Allah to bless his
efforts with success. It is no use to sit idle and pray to Allah to send
him his food. He must try hard to earn his living, and side by side
should pray to Allah to give 'baraka' in his earnings. Likewise, if a
man is sick, he should go to the doctor and use the medicine prescribed
by him faithfully following all his instructions, and side by side
should pray to Allah to give him back his health. This praying is more
important than hanging some 'hirizi' in the neck or binding it on the
arm.

Unfortunately many Sunni Sheikhs have made this 'hirizi' writing a
source of their income, bullying people to procure goats, or cock of
such a colour, or so many yards of a cloth of such a colour, or so many
shillings; certainly they have crossed the limit of religion, and
deserve condemnation as exploiters and 'mirija'. They have disgraced the
name of Islam.

**THOUGHT FOR THE WEEK (ISLAM : A UNIVERSAL RELIGION)**

"And We did not send thee (Muhammad) but for the whole mankind".
(Quran, 34:28). Look at the major religions of the world minutely and
you will find that it is only Islam which claimed from the beginning to
be the religion for the whole mankind.

God sent, before Muhammad, thousands of prophets and apostles to
different places and nations to guide their people to the right path. It
should be mentioned here that the word 'prophet', when used by Muslims,
does not mean 'one who foretells the events'. Foretelling the events is
not a very important function of a 'prophet'. A prophet, according to
Islam, is sent by God to call people to His path. He is the link between
Allah and His creatures; and by following his foot-prints the followers
can be sure of receiving the glory of God. Anyhow, when as a result of
the efforts of these prophets, mankind reached the stage of maturity,
the Holy Prophet of Islam was sent by God for the whole mankind. He
reaffirmed, revived, consolidated and perfected the teachings of the
earlier prophets (which by passage of time had become distorted and
disfigured).

Muhammad came in the world, announcing that, "I have been sent to all
people - red and black and yellow." Among his early followers were
people from Ethiopia, Iran, Rome and India.

According to the Qur'an, Allah is not a tribal god but the 'Lord of
Universe'; Qur'an is the 'Declaration for the universe'; and the Holy
Prophet is 'The Mercy for the universe' By sending his messengers to
Asia Minor, Iran, Egypt, Ethiopia, Syria, Yemen, Bahrain, Umman and many
other places, calling those people to come within the fold of Islam,
Muhammad left an undeniable proof that his was the universal religion,
unfettered with shackles of tribe, region, colour or race.

23rd January, 1970
Dear Maulana S. S. Akhtar Rizvi,

Mr. Mwangamilo has written me in December, 1969 concerning the "Answers
to my Questions" which have been sent to my home address (Kwemkole,
Kizara-Korogwe).

I wrote to my brother, there, about the matter so that he may send the
answers here. Up to this time I have neither received any reply from my
brother concerning this, nor did I receive the answers as I hoped,
because the postman at Kizara was directing all letters of mine to this
centre. Have they returned the letter there ? If so, please send the
letter here. If not help me in getting the answers.

May Allah help you all in all matters. Yours in Islam, Dhikiri O.
Muhammad Kiondo. 7th February, 1970 Dear Sir,

I enclose the passage you have asked for in your letter of 30/1/70.
Concerning the letter No. BMM/40/201/69, the reply of which you are
waiting for, I think is the letter signed by Mr. Mwangamilo which does
not bear any date, This letter tells me that, the answers to my
questions of early March, 1969 have been sent to me on my home address -
Kwemkole Village, Kizara Upper Primary School, P.O. Korogwe. If at all
you mean such a letter, up to this time, I have not received the answers
although I have written to my brother at Kwemkole concerning this.
Please help me in this matter. May Allah be with you all.

Your brother in Islam, Dhikiri O. Muhammad Kiondo. 9th February, 1970
Dear Maulana S. S. Akhtar Rizvi,

This is to inform you that I have received the answers to my questions
yesterday 8/2/70. Thanks for troubling yourself in trying to show me
where the truth is. Now it is clear to me that I am lost and I should
find the right path.

It has taken me a long time to realize that I am in a wrong way. I
thank Allah for showing me the right way by means of your services. May
He save others also. I kindly ask your service to give me more guidance
so as to get more knowledge about my new and true faith.

Question: (a) Should I have a particular "Baptism" and who shall
baptize me while all here are Sunnis ? (b) Islam encourages much
congregational prayers. Will I be allowed to pray with Sunnis and in
Sunni style ? (c) Much of my religious knowledge is Sunnic. How can I
get much Shia knowledge. - Please give me a list of Religious books used
by Shias, from the simplest to the hardest so that I can buy them, and
study them if I get a teacher to teach me. (d) How can I help in the
spread of Shiaism in Tanzania, East Africa, Africa or in the whole world
?

May Allah bless your holy works, and reward you with heavenly
rewards.

Your brother in Islam, Dhikiri O. Mohamed Kiondo. 21st February, 1970.
Dear Dhikiri Omari Moh'd Kiondo,

I was very glad to receive your letter dated 7th instant. I got your
previous letter after I sent my letter on 30/1/70. I sent the copy of
the replies to you per Registered Post, and from your latest letter
dated 9th February, I gather that you have got that letter. I welcome
you most gladly to the Shia Ithna-asheri faith of Islam. As regards your
questions, please see the following :-

(1) There is no baptism in Islam. You are already a Muslim and if you
believe in the tenets of Shia'ism, you are a Shia without any need of
any rite. But for the purpose of our own record, I would request you to
fill up the enclosed declaration form and send it to us.

(2) For the time being you may pray with the Sunnis. We will discuss it
in detail when we meet, fnsha-Allah.

(3) So far as the knowledge of Shia faith is concerned, I would be glad
to receive you in Dar es Salaam. Please let me know whether you can get
transfer to Dares Salaam. If it is possible, then you can easily get
necessary religious training in our Night Class here. But if it is not
possible, then we will have to make some other plan for you. Meanwhile,
I am collecting some good books for you and will send them within a week
by surface mail.

(4) You have asked: "How can I help? 'n the spread of Shia'ism in
Tanzania, East Africa, Africa, or in the whole world ?"

Well, people like you can do a lot because you have access to the young
minds and you can influence their way of thinking even indirectly. First
of all, you should yourself acquire the necessary knowledge. Secondly,
you should make yourself a good model of Ithna- asheri faith, so that
people are attracted first to you and then, through you, to your faith.
That was the way of Tabligh of Holy Prophet and our Imams. Thirdly, you
should have friendly discussions and discourses with your friends and
thus help in removing the prejudice and ignorance which is prevalent in
this part of the world regarding our faith. Yours in Iman,

S. S. Akhtar Rizvi. 3rd March, 1970 Dear Maulana S. S. Akhtar Rizvi,

Thank you for accepting me in the Shia Ithna-asheri faith of Islam.
Concerning the transfer to Dar es Salaam as you have asked me, is very
difficult as my employer is Lushoto District Council which has no
connection with Dar es Salaam. Let me buy some books of Shia faith at
present. After having completed my National Service duty, I will arrange
with you to send me a young teacher to teach me religion. I will be able
to pay that teacher a little sum of money monthly.

My home address may change later to the one in the form, because I am
building a house there, and planning to have a permanent station
there.

May Allah allow us to meet and may He spread Islam all over the globe
as well. Yours in Islam (Shiaism),

Dhikiri O. Mohamed Kiondo. 9th April, 1970. Dear Dhikiri, I was in
Congo for some time and came back on 28th March, 1970. The books (which
I promised you) could not be sent because of my absence. Today I have
despatched the following books for your perusal :-

Book of Salaat (Illustrated). Mubahela. Islam the Religion with God.
Co-existence of Shia and Hanafi Muslims. Muhammad the Man.
Saheefa-e-Kamelah. Discourses on Tauheed. Muhammad the Legislator.

Teachings of Islam (Unity of God). God of Muhammad (S). Bhooli Huwi
Baten. Book of Islamic Part 1-11.

Husain (a.s.) The Prince of Martrys and the Saviour of Humanity. The
Boundry Line between the Shias and the Sunnis. Tragedy of Hussain. The
Sacrifice at Karbala, its Causes and results Also, I Would like you to
wite a short article on "Why I became a Shia?" in English or Kiswahili;
and if possible send us your passport size photograph. Please treat it
as urgent. Thanking you Your sincerely S.S. Akhtar Rizvi 16th April 1970
Maulana S. S. Akhtar Rizvi, Assalamo Alaikum, Maulana,

Thank you very much for the books you have sent me. I have received all
27 books. I also thank the Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania for taking
so much trouble for my Islamic studies.

In order to take benefit from the books, I have concluded as follows
:

(a) Because Shiaism is new to me, I must spend much time in studying it
so that I may have as much knowledge as possible about it - therefore, I
kindly ask you to make a syllabus equivalent to Std. XII level, covering
Qur'an and Sheriat.

(b) Because I have a little knowledge in Arabic handwriting, I kindly
ask you, to send lesson of "Arabic language" equivalent to English for
Std. I, if possible. (c) I kindly ask you to help me in getting the best
Quranic commentary ever translated into English. Let me know its
price.

I am sending you the article, my picture and my questions to be
answered by you, so that I may have good knowledge of Islam. (See
Appendix 'D'). I am very well here by mercy of Allah. Much greetings to
you and your family from my wife. May Allah let us meet one day.

Your Brother in Islam, Dhikiri O. Mohamed Kiondo 20th June, 1970 Dear
Maulana S. S. Akhtar Rizvi, How are you Maulana, The only purpose of
this letter is to inform you that I will be out for five months. I am
going for National Service at Oljoro, Arusha. I will be back in
November, 1970 if Allah wills. But before I am back - I will kindly ask
you to find for me a suitable teacher willing to teach me both Arabic
language and Nahow at this place. I am ready to pay him a little sum of
about 100/- a month according to what I can afford.

I prefer a single person; feeding and clothing will be provided by me.
Please help me in this matter. Insha-allah Allah will let us meet one
day and bless our good aims. Yours in Islamic faith Dhikiri O. Mohamed
Kiondo. 26th July, 1970. Dear Dhikiri,

Thank you for your letter, dated 20th June, informing me that you are
going to Oljoro, Arusha, for National Service. I do not know how far
this place is from Arusha; but if it is near Arusha, I may be able to
see you sometime in August.

You asked about best Tafseer of the Qur'an in English. There is a very
detailed Tafseer in English. In fact, its only defect is that it is too
detailed. But I think you will get benefit from it. Its price is Shs.
100/-. If you want it, I may send it to you on the address you propose.
About Arabic Language : I am looking out for such a Muallim as you want.
I will send to you some books when you are free from National Service.


