Question : How Far Is a Muslim Allowed To Entertain Himself ? Is He Allowed To Entertain Himself With Music ? (appendix 'a') Origin of Shi'ism
==============================================================================================================================================

A Shia student from Mombasa is writing a thesis for H.S.C. examination
and needs information about the origin of Shi'ism. The fact is the Shia
sect is the follower of the original Islam; and, therefore, the origin
of Shi'ism is the same as that of Islam. The main difference between
Sunni and Shia sects is about the successorship of the Holy Prophet. The
Sunnis believe that Hazrat Abu Bakr was the first caliph; the Shias
believe that Hazrat Ali was the first Imam. When we see the declarations
of the Holy Prophet, as recorded in the books of Tafseer, Traditions,
Biographies and Histories, by the Sunni scholars themselves, it becomes
clear that it was the Holy Prophet of Islam who was the originator of
Shi'ism.

The first open declaration of the Prophethood was the very occasion
when the first open declaration of the Khilafat of Hazrat Ali was made,
Imam Ahmad Bin Hanbal, in his Musnad (one of the Sihah Sitta), and Imam
Tha'labi, in his Tafseer Ma'alim-ut-tanzeel (Bombay, p. 663) have
recorded the event a summary of which is given here :-

"When the ayat of the Qur'an 'Warn thy near relatives' was revealed,
the Prophet gathered 30 people from his clan; they feasted; and then the
prophet declared his Prophethood and asked: "Who among you will be
responsible for my promises and debts and will be my caliph and will be
with me in Paradise ?" Nobody came forward except Ali who said "I"; the
Prophet said "Yes, You."

In the famous book of the traditions 'Kanzul-ummal' (Vol. VI, p. 397)
the words of the Holy Prophet are recorded as follows :-

"The Prophet told his family "I have brought to you good of this world
and that of life hereafter. And my Lord has commanded me to call you to
it. Who among you will help me in this work of mine on the condition
that he would be my brother, my successor and my caliph ?"

Ali said, "I, O Prophet of Allah, wil! be your helper in it". Then the
Prophet caught his shoulder and said: "Verily, he is my brother, my
successor and my caliph among you. Listen to him and obey him." The
group stood up laughing and telling Abu Talib (Father of Ali) that
Muhammad had ordered him to listen to his son and obey him."

The words "Wasi'i wa Khalifati" (My successor and my caliph) have been
recorded also in "Tareekh" of Tabari (Laden, Germany, 1879, page 1,173)
and in Sirat of Ibn- Is-haque. It is interesting to note that in the
Cairo edition of Tareekh-e-Tabari (1939), which claims to be checked
with the Laden edition, the important words (My successor and my caliph)
have been changed to 'Kadha wa kadha' (so and so)! How sad it is to see
the academic world sacrificing its honesty on the altar of political
expediency!

This was in the beginning. In the last months of his life, the Prophet
declared Ali to be his successor and Master of the Muslims, in Khum. The
event is recorded in countless Sunni Books. At present I would like to
refer to such Sunni authorities as Kanz-ul-ummal (Vol. VI, p .397, 399)
and Al-Khasais (by Imam Nasai) p.48. They have conceeded that the
Prophet conferred the Khilafat, in Khum, upon Ali. The following words
of the Prophet are most important:

"I am leaving behind, among you, two most precious
things....................1) the Book of Allah...........and 2) my
descendants who are my family members. They will not be separated from
each other until they come to me near Kauther (in Quiyamat). Verily,
AlIah is my Master and I am the master of every believer. (Then he took
the hands of Ali and said) Everyone whose Master am I, Ali is his
Master."

These two traditions are referred to as the traditions of Two precious
things' and of 'Vilayat' (Mastership). They are jointly and severally
narrated by hundreds of traditionalist. Nawwab Siddique Hassan Khan of
Bhopal, says : "Hakim Abu Said says that the traditions of Two precious
things' and of 'Whose Master am I, Ali is his Master' are 'Mutawatir'
(i.e. narrated by so many people that no doubt can be entertained about
their authenticity), because a great number of the companions of the
Prophet have narrated them. So much so that Muhammad bin Jarir has
written these two traditions by 75 different chains". (Manhaj-u!-wusul,
p. 13).

Al-Amini, the Shia author, has classified the narrators of this
tradition and has found that among them are 120 (one hundred twenty)
Companions of the Prophet, 84 Tabein (their deciples). The number of
famous traditionalists who have narrated it reaches up to 360. 26
special books have been compiled by Shia and Sunni scholars on this
tradition only. When we see that between these two events, the Prophet
repeatedly referred to the followers of Ali as Shia, we come to the
conclusion that not only the faith of Shi'ism, but the name also was
originated by the Prophet himself.

Allama Ibn Hajar Makki, in his book As Sawai-qul-Muhriqua, and Ibn
Athir in his book Nihaya, say that Prophet said : "O Ali, verily thou
wilt come before Allah, thou and thy Shias, happily and God will be
happy with you."

As-Suyuti says in his Tafseer 'Ad-Dur-rul-manthur': "The Prophet said,
pointing towards Ali: 'He and his Shias are those who will be successful
in Quiyamat."

**(Appendix 'B') SECTS OF ISLAM**

There is no difference of opinion amongst Muslim sects that the
'religion' of God is Islam; that the only way to know Islam is through
the Book of God and the Sunnah of the Prophet; that the Book of God is
what is known as Qur'an, without any addition or substraction.

And what difference is there, is in the interpretation of some of the
verses of Qur'an; and in believing or not believing some of the Sunnah
as genuine; or in its interpretation. This difference of approach has
led towards the difference in some beliefs and some laws of Sheriat.

As the basic principles of Islam are well-known, I do not think it
necessary to enumerate all the beliefs. All the Muslims agree that Allah
is one; Muhammad is His last Prophet and that one day Allah will
resurrect all the human beings and all will be questioned about their
beliefs and actions.

All of them agree that anyone not believing in any of the above 3 basic
principles is not a Muslim. Also, they agree that anybody denying the
famous tenets of Islam, like Prayers, Fasting, Hajj, Zakat etc., or
believing that the well-known sins, like drinking wine, adultery,
stealing, gambling, lie, murder etc., are not sins, is not a Muslim,
though he might be believing in Allah and His Prophet Muhammad, because
to deny such well-known Islamic tenets is tantamount to denying the
Prophethood of Muhammad and his Sheriat. When we go further, we come
across those subjects which are not agreed amongst the Muslims, and
there the differences between different sects of Islam begin. PERSON OF
GOD:

Sunnis say that Allah has body, not like the bodies we know. There is a
vast material which can be quoted here describing that belief. But as
all the Sunnis nowadays are Ashaira (followers of Abul-Hasan-al-Ashari),
I would like to note down his belief on this subject. He says :

"We confess that God is firmly seated on His Throne;...........We
confess that God has two hands without asking how,...........We confess
that God has a face............ We confess that God has a
knowledge........We affirm hearing and sight, and do not deny that, as
do the Mutaziia, and Jahmiyya and Khawarij..............We affirm that
God has power." (A. J. Arbery. Revelation and Reason in Islam pp. 22-23;
from a quotation from al-lbana by Abul-Hasan al-Ash-ari).

We, the Shia Ithna-asheris believe that Allah has not got a body:
"Verily, Allah is one, unique, nothing is like Him, He is Eternal;
Hearing, Seeing, Omniscient, Living, Omnipotent, above every need, He
cannot be described in terms of substance, nor body, nor form, nor
accident, nor line, nor surface, nor heaviness, nor lightness, nor
colour, nor movement, nor rest, nor time, nor space. He is above all the
descriptions which can be applied to His creatures."

"He is away from both extremes: Neither He is just a non-entity (as
atheists said and in a lesser degree Mutazilites implied), nor He is
just like other things. He is Existent, not like other existing things.
(Sheikh As-Saduque : Al-ltiqudiyah). Of course, there are some verses in
the Qur'an which ascribe the words used for limbs to the person of God.
But according to the interpretation of our Imams, they are used in
metaphorical, not literal sense.

For example, the verse: 'Everything is mortal except His Face' means
'except His Person'. Surely, even the Sunnis cannot say that only the
Face of God will remain, while all His so- called limbs will die.
Similarly, Allah has used the word 'Hand' in several places in Qur'an.
But it means His Power and His Mercy, as in the verse : 'But His Hands
are outspread.' CAN ALLAH BE SEEN ?

As a direct result of the above-mentioned difference, the Sunnis say
that Allah can be seen. Some of them, like Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, say
that He can be seen in this world, as well as in the life hereafter.
Others say that He can be seen in the life hereafter only. On the other
hand, we, the Ithna-asheris, say that He cannot be seen anywhere,
because He has no body, and because Allah says in Qur'an : 'Sight cannot
reach Him'. The Sunnis quote the following verse as their proof: "Some
faces on that day (Akherat) will be fresh, looking towards their
Lord."

But in Arabic language the word 'nadhar' does not imply 'seeing'. Often
it is said 'Nadhartu ilal-hilale fa lam arah' (I looked towards the new
moon but I did not see it). Therefore, the verse cannot imply that they
will see God. According to our interpretation, it means that they will
be looking forward for the blessings of Allah.

**ATTRIBUTES OF ALLAH:**

According to Shia Ithna-asheris, Attributes of Allah can be put in two
distinct groups : First, those Attributes which denote His Person;
second, those Attributes which denote His actions.

Sheikh As-Saduque says : "For example, we say that Allah was forever
Hearing, Seeing, Omniscient Wise, Omnipotent, Having power, Living,
Self-Existent, One, and Eternal. And these are His personal Attributes.
"And we do not say that He was from ever Creating, Doing, Intending,
Pleased, Displeased, Giving sustenance, Speaking because these Virtues
describe His actions; and they are not eternal; it is not allowed to say
that Allah was doing all these actions from Eternity." The reason for
this distinction is obvious. Actions need an object. If, for example, we
say that Allah was giving sustenance from ever, we will have to admit
the existence of sustained things from ever. In other words, we will
have to admit that the world was from ever. But it is against our belief
and nothing except God is Eternal.

It appears that the Sunnis have no clear view of this distinction. And
they say that all His attributes are Eternal. And that was the actual
cause of their belief that Qur'an, being the Kalam (speech) of God, is
Eternal, not created. Because they said that He was Mutakallim
(Speaking) from ever. "The Hambalites so far as said that 'Not only were
the words and sounds of Qur'an eternal, so that even its recital was
uncreated, but its parchment and binding shared the same
qualities..........In the so-called Testament of Abu Hanifa..........a
more moderate view is expressed: 'We confess that the Qur'an is the
speech of Allah, uncreated, His inspiration, and revelation, not He, yet
not other than He, but His real quality, written in the copies, recited
by the tongues............The ink, the paper, the writing are created,
for they are the work of men." (A. J. Arbery: Revelation and reason in
Islam, pp. 26-27).

But, as we, the Shia and His actions, we say: Ithna-asheries,
distinguish between

His personal Virtues

Our belief about the Qur'an is that it is the Speech of God, and His
Revelation Sent by Him, and His Word and His Book ..........And that
Allah is its Creator and its Sender and Its Guardian (Al-ltiquadiyah).
The bitter quarrels between two groups of Sunnis (Mutazilites and
Asharites) on this subject are well known, and there is no need to
narrate them.

**PLACE OF REASON IN RELIGION**

This is one of the most important distinctions between Sunnis on one
side, and the Ithna- asheris on other. To be more exact, I should have
used the word Asharites, in place of Sunnis. But all Sunnis nowadays are
Asharites. Mutazilite have become extinct long ago, though some of the
great scholars of recent times like Justice Amir Ali were Mutazilites.
Anyhow, Shias say that irrespective of religious commandments, there is
real merit or demerit in different courses of actions, and it is because
a certain thing is good that God orders is, and because the other is bad
that He forbids it.

Sunnis deny this conception. They say that nothing is good or evil in
itself. Only what God has commanded us is good and what He has forbidden
us is evil. If a thing is forbidden by God it is bad; then if God
cancels the first order, and allows it, it will become good, after being
bad.

In other words, Shias say that God has forbidden us to tell lie because
it is bad; Sunnis say that lie has become bad because God has forbidden
it. Shias recognise the relation of cause with effect. Sunnis deny it.
They say that there is no cause except Allah. And it is just a habit of
Allah that whenever, for example, we drink water He quenches our
thirst.

Based upon the above difference of attitude about the position of
reason in religion are the following differences :-

Shias say that God never acts without purpose or aim. All His actions
are based on wisdom and intelligent purpose. Proof: Because it is not
commendable, rationally, to act without purpose. Sunnis on the other
hand, because of their denouncement of rational merit or demerit, say
that it is quite possible for God to act aimlessly.

It follows that, according to Shias, God does nothing which has
inherent demerit in it. Sunnis deny it Shias say that all actions of
Allah are intended for the benefit of His creatures. Because He Himself
has no need; and if His actions become devoid of benefits for His
creation also, they will become aimless, which is rationally not
commendable. Sunnis deny it, because of their stand about rational merit
or demerit. LUTF: GRACE: Based upon the above differences, is the
difference about their attitude towards Grace of Allah.

Shias say that Grace is morally incumbent upon Allah. "By Grace is
understood that action on the part of God which would help to bring His
creatures nearer to His devotion and obedience and facilitate their
moral correction, (which is) morally incumbent on Him. .......... Allah
Has commanded us to be just, while He Himself treats us with something
better, namely Grace, Tafadhdhul." Sunnis, on the other hand, say: God
leadeth astray whom He wills and guideth aright whom He wills, and it is
not incumbent upon God Most High to do that which may be best for the
creature, (creed of al-Nasafi.)

**GOD'S PROMISES:**

Based upon our stand on Justice and Grace is our view that: Whatever
God has promised as reward for a good work, He will fulfil it; but
whatever He has threatened as punishment for a bad work, it is upon His
descretion : If He meted out the punishment it will be by His Justice;
if He forgives it, it will be by His Grace. (Sheikh As-Saduq :
Al-ltiquadiyah). We are confronted both by Kharijites and Mutazilites on
one side and Ash-arites on other side. Mutazilites and Kharijites say
that it is incumbent upon God to fulfil His threats also. He has no
power to forgive. Asharites, on the other hand say that it is not
incumbent upon Him even to fulfil His promises of rewards. They go so
far as to say : Even if Allah were to send the prophets in Hell, and
Satan in Paradise, it would not be against virtue, because there was no
inherent demerit in any action.

**WHY BELIEVE IN GOD :**

Shias say: Man is obliged by his reason to know God, and to obey His
commands. In other words, necessity of religion is proved, first of all,
by reason Sunnis say: Reason has nothing to do with anything. Of course,
it is necessary to believe in Allah, but not on account of reason. It is
necessary because Allah has ordered us to know Him. According to Shiite
view, this type of proof creates a vicious circle. Believe in God. Why ?
Because God has ordered it. But we do not know who is God. Why should we
obey Him ?

LIMIT OF LAW?

Shias say: God cannot give us a command beyond our strength, because it
is wrong rationally. Sunnis do not agree with this reasoning.

OUR ACTIONS: TAQDEER :

Are our actions really ours? Or are we just a tool in the hands of
Allah ? Shias say : Taqdeer means that 'Allah possesses foreknowledge of
human actions. But He does not compel any man to act in any particular
way." (Al-ltiquadiyah).

To make it clear, it should be explained here, that Man's conditions or
actions are of two kinds: (1) Those actions about which he can be
advised, ordered, praised or blamed. Such actions are within his power
and are dependent upon his will. (2) Such conditions about which he
cannot be praised or blamed, like life, death, etc. Such conditions are
outside his sphere of will or power. For example, we can advise a
patient to consult this or that doctor and remain under his treatment;
but we cannot advise him to become cured. Why this difference? Because
getting treatment is under his power, but getting cured it not in his
power. It is something which comes from Allah.

But even our freedom of action is a gift of Allah. He has given that
power, that freedom, the strength, the limbs, the wisdom and everything
with which we do any work. Therefore, we are not independent of Allah,
because our freedom is not only given but even sustained by Him. But our
actions are not compelled by God, because He, after showing us the right
and wrong ways, and after enjoining us to do right has left us to our
own free will. If we go right, it is by our own good sense. If we go
wrong, it is our own choice. As Sheikh As- Saduq says : "Our belief in
this respect is what has been taught by Imam Jafar Sadique: "There is no
compulsion (by God) and no relinquishing the authority (of God); but a
condition between these two conditions." Then Imam was asked : How is it
? He said: "Suppose you saw a man Intending to commit a sin; and you
forbade him; but he did not listen to you; and you left him; and he did
commit that sin. Now when he did not listen to you and you left him, it
cannot be said that you ordered him or allowed him to sin." (Al-
ltiquadiyah).

In other words, we believe that God have given us power and will and
then has left us free to do what we like. At the same time, He has
taught us, through the Prophets, what is right and what is wrong. Now,
as He is Omniscient, He knows what will be our actions at various times
of our life. But this knowledge does not make Him responsible for our
actions more than a meteorologist can be responsible for cyclones and
storms, if his forecasts come true. True forecasts are the result, not
the cause, of the impending event. Sunnis on the other hand say that
Allah is the creator of all our acts. "No act of any individual, even
though it be done purely for his benefit is independent of the will of
Allah for its existence; and there does not occur in either in physical
or extra-terrestrial world the wink of an eye, the hint of a thought, or
the most sudden glance, except by the decree of Allah .... of His power,
desire and will. This includes evil and good, benefit and hurt, success
and failure, sin and righteousness, obedience and disobedience,
polytheism and belief. (Al-Ghazali: as quoted in Shia of India p. 43).

PROPHETHOOD :

Based upon their belief of Lutf (Grace), Shias believe that it is
incumbent upon Allah to send Prophets or their successors in this world
to guide people to right path. Sunnis say that it is not incumbent upon
Allah, because they do not accept necessity of Lutf.

SINLESSNESS :

What is our conception of Ismah? It is Lutf (Grace) of Allah which
helps a person to refrain from sins, without effecting in any way his
will and power. A Masum (sinless) person has power to commit sins; but
he does not even think about sins because his spiritual standard is so
high that such inferior things do not enter his mind.

Sunnis do not speak with one voice upon this subject: They first differ
about the point when Ismah begins. Some say it is after the declaration
of Prophethood; others that it is since childhood.

Second Difference : Scope of Ismah before declaration of prophethood :
Some say that it covers all sins; majority says that they are protected
from Kufr (infedility) only. Third Difference: Scope of Ismah after
declaration of Prophethood : it is agreed that the Prophets could not
tell a lie after prophethood. But what about other sins ? Some say that
they could commit other sins either intentionally or unintentionally;
but the majority says that they could commit it unintentionally, but not
intentionally. Fourth Difference : About minor sins : They say it was
possible for the prophets to commit minor sins, even intentionally; but
they were protected from such minor sins which might have degraded them
in the esteem of people.

Shia Ithna-asheris' stand about Ismah is that all the prophets were
sinless and infalliable; they could not commit any sin, whether capital
or minor, and whether intentionally or unintentionally; and that they
were Masum from the beginning of their life till their last breath.

THE PROPHETS:

Sheikh As-Saduq says about prophets that :-

"their word is the word of God, their order is the order of God, their
forbidding is the forbidding by God........And that the Chiefs of the
prophet are five - and they are (called) Ulul-azm - and they are Nuh,
Ibrahim, Musa, Isa and Muhammad, Be Blessings of Allah upon them all:
and that Muhammad is their Chief and best of all. (Al-ltiquadiyah).
IMAMS :

Shias say that Imam must be appointed by God; that appointment may be
known through the declaration of the Prophet or the preceding Imam.
Sunnis say that Imam (or Caliph, as they prefer to say) can be either
elected, or nominated by the preceding Caliph, or selected by a
committee, or may acquire power through military strength. If he is
elected, it is enough that one man should do bai-at (declare allegiance)
to him.

Shias say: that Imam must be Masum (sinless). Sunnis say (including
Mutazilites) that Ismah is not a condition for Khilafat. Hanbalites,
Shafiites and Malikites do not allow people to rise against a Caliph
even if he is tyrant and sunk in sins. They say that they should suffer
patiently. Shias say that Imam must be above all persons in such
qualities as bravery, justice, wisdom, piety, love of God etc. Sunnis
say it is not necessary. A person inferior in these qualities may be
elected in preference to a person having all these qualities in superior
degree.

Shias say that Ali was appointed by Allah to be the successor of the
Prophet, and that the Prophet declared it on several occasions. Sunnis
say that the Prophet did not appoint anybody to be his successor.


