Imam al-Mahdi
=============

All Muslims agree that at the end of time al-Mahdi will reappear to make
justice prevail on earth after being overwhelmed with injustice,
corruption, and tyranny. However, the dispute between the different
schools of thought is as to who he is, and whether or not he is already
born. Great scholars emphasize that al-Mahdi is a member of the Ahlul
Bayt (the Family of the Prophet):

Imam al-Bukhari narrates from the Prophet Muhammad, “How will you feel
once the son of Mary descends among you, and your leader (imam) is from
you?”[^1]

Imam Muslim narrates from the Prophet Muhammad, “A caliph will be
appearing at the end of time from my nation.” Timridhi and Abu Dawud,
commenting on this hadith, say that this caliph will be al-Mahdi.[^2]

Abu Dawud narrates from the Noble Prophet, “If there remained but a
single day until the end of time, Allah will prolong that day until He
sends a man from my progeny whose name will be like mine and who fill
the earth with justice and equity as it had been filled with oppression
and tyranny.” [^3]

Ibn Majah narrates from the Prophet Muhammad, “We are the Ahlul Bayt for
whom Allah has chosen the hereafter to this world. My Ahlul Bayt after
me will face difficulties, hardships, and persecution in the land until
a group of people will come from the East, bearers of black banners.
They will demand the right, but it will be denied. So they will fight
and emerge victorious. They will be given what they demanded but will
not accept it until they give the right to rule to a man from my Ahlul
Bayt*,* who will fill the earth with justice as it was filled with
oppression.”[^4]

Ibn Majah also narrates from the Prophet Muhammad, “The Mahdi is from
us, the Ahlul Bayt. He is among the children of Fatima.”[^5]

Tirmidhi narrates from the Prophet Muhammad, “A man from my Ahlul Bayt
whose name is like mine will verily rule the world and if there remains
but a single day before the end of time, Allah will prolong that day
until he assumes rule.”[^6]

According to the Shi‘a school of thought, Imam Muhammad ibn al-Hassan
al-Mahdi was born in 255H (869AD) on the 15th of the month of Sha’ban in
the city of Samarra in northern Iraq. His father was Imam Hassan
al-Askari, whose lineage traces back to Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, and his
mother’s name was Narjiss.

He is the last of the twelve imams for the people on earth, and with him
the line of succession to the Prophet ends. Due to the necessity of
having a representative from Allah present on earth, he is still, by the
will of Allah, living in this world—but out of the public view. He will
however reappear towards the end of human civilization to restore order
and justice at a time when the world will be filled with evil and
injustice.

Although the idea of Imam al-Mahdi still being alive after nearly
thirteen centuries is difficult for some people to fathom, nonetheless,
the Noble Qur’an sets several examples of prophets who lived even longer
than al-Mahdi has lived, such as Prophet Isa, and al-Khidr (see Qur’an,
chapter 18, verses 60-82 for his story with Prophet Musa). The Noble
Qur’an also gives two other examples about people who died and then were
resurrected by Allah. One is the example of the companions of the Cave
(*ashab al-kahf*; see Qur’an, chapter 18, verse 25). The other is the
example of ‘Uzayr:

Or like the one who passed by the town, and it had tumbled over its
roofs. He said, ‘How will Allah ever bring it alive after its death?’ So
Allah caused him to die for a hundred years and raised him up again. He
said, ‘How long did you remain dead?’ He replied, ‘Perhaps I remained
dead a day, or part of a day.’ He said, ‘Nay! You have remained dead for
a hundred years. Look at your food and drink. They show no change.’[^7]

Furthermore, if Allah allowed Prophet Ibrahim, Prophet Musa, and Prophet
Isaa to perform certain miracles, then allowing al-Mahdi to live for
such an extended period of time is not difficult for Him, for He is
capable of doing all things.

[^1]: Sahih al-Bukhari, Vol. 4, 143

[^2]: Sahih Muslim, Vol. 2; Sunan Tirmidhi; Sunan Abu Dawud, Vol. 2, 421

[^3]: Sunan Abu Dawud, Vol. 2; 421

[^4]: Ibid., Vol. 2, Hadith 4082 and 4087

[^5]: Ibid., Vol. 2, Hadith 4082 and 4087

[^6]: Tirmidhi, al-Jami‘al-Sahih, Vol. 9, 74-75; For more references on
this topic see: Fath al-Bari, al-Hafiz, Vol. 5. 362; Ibn Hajar
al-Haythami, al-Sawa’iq Vol. 2, 212; Muntakab al-Athar, Ayatullah
Lutfullah Safi, which includes over sixty hadiths from the Sunni sources
and ninety hadiths from the Shi΄a sources.

[^7]: Noble Qur’an, 2:259


