Dissimulation (Taqiyyah)
========================

*Taqiyyah* is the practice of hiding one’s belief under duress and it is
mentioned in the Noble Qur’an in three places:

Let not the believers take the disbelievers as guardians instead of the
believers, and whoever does this will never be helped by Allah in any
way, unless you indeed fear a danger from them (*illa an tattaqu minhum
tuqat*).[^1]

Whoever disbelieved in Allah after his belief—except him who is forced
thereto and whose heart is at rest with faith.[^2]

And a believing man from Pharaoh’s family who hid his faith.…[^3]

These three verses clearly point to the permissibility of concealing
one’s ideology and opinion whenever in danger. Those living in countries
with zero tolerance for the followers of the Ahlul Bayt, where democracy
is absent and tyranny, oppression, and abuse of human rights are
rampant, and people are subjected to persecution, torture, and killing
on account of their beliefs should according to the Qur’anic teachings,
practice taqiyyah - to conceal their lives, wealth, properties,
families, and friends. Taqiyyah should only be practiced whenever there
is fear of danger or harm.

If there is no fear of danger or harm, such as for the Muslims in the
United States of America and Europe, then taqiyyah should not be
practiced. Surah 16:106 illustrates this point, as it was revealed to
allow some of the companions of the Prophet in Makkah to express
disbelief with their tongues and hide their true faith in their hearts
when they were being tortured by Abu Sufyan. Even the most prominent
companion of the Prophet, ‘Ammar ibn Yassir declared disbelief when the
infidels were torturing him in Makkah. People came to the Prophet and
complained that ‘Ammar had become a disbeliever, a *kafir*. The Prophet
replied, “No, indeed ‘Ammar is full of faith (*iman*) from head to toe,”
and he told ‘Ammar that if the disbelievers were to torture him again,
then he should again deny his faith in public. This story is also
mentioned in the explanation of verse 106 of Surah 16.

The first person in Islam to practice taqiyyah was the Messenger of
Allah himself; when he concealed his mission in the beginning of Islam.
For three years,[^4] his mission was very secret, and in order to
protect the message and the ideas he was carrying, he did not reveal
them to the Quraysh until Allah commanded him to speak openly.
***“Therefore, proclaim openly the message of Allah—that which you are
commanded—and turn away from the idolaters,”*** as Allah instructed the
Prophet.[^5] Afterwards, the Prophet began openly inviting people to
Islam after this period of taqiyyah.

Moreover, Islamic history shows that many prominent leaders, of all
schools of thought, from various recorded traditions practiced taqiyyah
on different occasions. For example, Imam Abu Hanifah when he gave
verdicts to abandon prayers and break fast during the month of Ramadan
for the person who was being coerced. Similarly, Imam Malik was obliged
to use high levels of diplomacy with the Umayyad and ‘Abbasid dynasties
by using Surah 3, verse 28 as justification. Imam Shafi΄i also used
taqiyyah in his verdict regarding a man who swore falsely by the name of
Allah under coercion that he will not have to pay the *kaffarah*
(expiation).[^6] Imam al-Ghazzali narrates that protecting the Muslim
blood is obligatory thus lying is obligatory, if it means preventing the
shedding the blood of a Muslim.[^7]

Some people associate taqiyyah with *nifaq* (hypocrisy). However,
hypocrisy is defined as falsely displaying faith (*iman*) while hiding
disbelief (*kufr*), whereas taqiyyah is showing agreement, while in the
heart there is disagreement in order to protect one’s self, family,
money, or religion.

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, 3:28

[^2]: Noble Qur’an, 16:106

[^3]: Noble Qur’an, 40:28

[^4]: Sirat ibn Hisham, Vol. 1, 274. Tarikh al-Tabari, Vol. 2, 216 and
218; Ibn Sa΄ad, al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, 200

[^5]: Noble Qur’an, 15:94

[^6]: Al-Amidi, Difa ‘an al-Kafi, Vol. 1, 627

[^7]: al-Ghazzali, Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din


