The Prayers Upon the Prophet (Salat ‘ala an-Nabi)
=================================================

Muslims are commanded by the Noble Qur’an (33:56) to send their prayers
upon the Prophet Muhammad in which Allah has said:

***‘Indeed God and His angels bless the Prophet; O you who have faith!
Invoke blessings on him and invoke Peace upon him in a worthy
manner.’***

The Prophet indicated how to do this and also commanded his followers
not to send their prayers only upon himself, but always to send their
prayers simultaneously upon his family as well. He is quoted to have
said:

‘Do not send me an amputated prayer.’ The companions asked, ‘What is an
amputated prayer?’ He said, ‘When you say, ‘*Allahumma, salli ‘ala
Muhammad’* and stop. Rather, you should say, ‘*Allahumma, salli ‘ala
Muhammad wa al-e-Muhammad.*’[^1]

The supplication will be intercepted (not accepted) until it is prayed
upon the Prophet and his family.[^2]

On the authority of ‘Abdullah ibn Abi Layla, as reported by Imam
al-Bukhari, the Messenger of Allah came to us and we said to him, ‘We
have learned how to invoke peace upon you; how should we pray for you?’
He (the Prophet) said, ‘Say: O Allah, bless Muhammad and his family as
You blessed the family of Ibrahim. Verily, You are the Praiseworthy, the
Glorious. Grant favor to Muhammad and the members of his household as
You granted favor to the members of the household of Ibrahim in the
world. Verily, You are the Praiseworthy, the Glorious.’[^3]

When teaching his companions the *salat* (prayer), the Prophet
specifically included his progeny (*al-e-Muhammad*). Hence, Muslims must
adhere to the teachings of the Prophet and send blessings upon all of
those whom he commanded for us to do.

[^1]: Yanabi’ al-Muwaddah, Vol. 2, 59; Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa’iq
al-Muhriqah, Ch. 11. Sect. 1

[^2]: Yanabi’ al-Muwaddah, Vol. 2, 59

[^3]: Sahih al-Bukhari, “Book on Traditions of Prophets” Hadith 3119,
“Interpretation of the Noble Qur’an” Hadith 4423, “Supplication” Hadith
5880; Sahih Muslim, “Book on Prayer” Hadith 614; al-Tirmidhi, “Book on
Prayer” Hadith 445; al-Nisa’i, “Book on Inattention” Hadith 1270-1272;
Abu Dawud, “Book on Prayer” Hadith 830; Ibn Majah, “Book on Immediate
Call for Prayer” Hadith 894; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Vol. 4, 241, 243,
and 244; al-Darami, “Book on Prayer” Hadith 1308


