Introduction
============

***Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim***

***Those who listen to the Word and follow the best of it:***

***those are the ones whom Allah has guided, and***

***those are the ones with understanding.***[^1]

The Shi‘a and Sunni schools of thought form the two wings of the Islamic
nation that allow it to fly and carry out its lofty objectives. A great
Muslim scholar once said, “Those who attempt to cause division between
the Shi‘a and Sunni are neither Shi‘a nor Sunni.” Written under this
premise, the book in hand should clarify some common questions and
inquiries about the philosophy and practice of Shi‘a Islam. The Shi‘a
and Sunni schools of thought differ primarily in jurisprudence and have
far more similarities than differences. Every school of thought in Islam
must be respected because they all can lead people to salvation.

Due to the lack of clear information, the Shi‘a *Imamiyyah* school of
thought has remained a mystery to many Muslims. Numerous Muslims are
relieved to discover the truth about Shi‘a Islam from reliable sources.
Nevertheless, the enemies of Islam have found that the best way to
slander Islam and disturb the peace within the Muslim nation is to
encourage division and sectarianism. Thus, a myriad of negative and
false rumors with no basis in the authentic books of the Shi‘a school of
thought have been spread. These rumors have two sources: animosity
towards Islam on the part of those who invent them, and ignorance on the
part of those who believe and propagate them.

This book is a call to unite the Muslims since true unity stems from an
understanding of each other’s philosophies, not from keeping them
secret. While the majority of Shi‘a scholars and even average
individuals keep many books belonging to other schools of thought in
their libraries, few other Muslims take the time to read the original
sources of Shi‘a philosophy. I have endeavored in this book to present
the most controversial issues that distinguish Shi‘a Islam in a simple
manner understandable by all people, particularly our youth generation
in the Western countries. To make this book accessible to all readers
regardless of their school of thought, I have relied mainly on the Noble
Qur’an and traditions of the Prophet Muhammad (PBUH&HF) as reported in
the books of narration (hadith).

I have endeavored to be as accurate and scientific as possible in
presenting what has been recorded in the commonly accepted Islamic
sources. I share the aspiration of most Muslims to see the Muslim nation
heed to the call of the Noble Qur’an, ***“Truly your nation is one
nation, and I am your Lord. Therefore, worship Me.”***[^2]

Another aim is to build a strong, cohesive, and cooperative Muslim
community around the globe, and for this nation to be respected it must
be united. Muslims must understand and accept each other’s positions and
principles. The best way to disperse the misunderstandings and
misconceptions between the schools of thought is through constructive,
sincere, and objective dialogue.

If the Noble Qur’an invites the adherents of the three monotheistic
religions (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam) to share dialogue in a
civilized manner[^3] then certainly the schools of Islamic thought
should also come together to discuss their differences based on the
Noble Qur’an and the authentic traditions of the Prophet Muhammad
(PBUH&HF). While none can deny that the schools of thought have juristic
(*fiqh*) differences, these differences should not prevent adherents to
these schools from acknowledging and respecting each other’s opinions,
for the leaders of these schools of thought acquired their knowledge
from one source—the Prophet and ultimately Almighty Allah.

Almighty Allah created human beings with both an inner messenger and an
outer messenger. Both, the inner messenger, which is the brain or the
reasoning faculty, and the outer messenger, which is the divine
revelation, invite a person to exercise his or her own intellectual
abilities to search for the truth, and not to take their customs,
traditions, or family behavior as sacred beliefs. This call is directed
to the followers of all the branches of Islam. All Muslims must research
and study their history and not be bound by the customs and traditions
of their ancestors which may not rest on solid ground, for the Noble
Qur’an condemns the blind following of ancestors as follows:

***And when it is said to them, ‘Come to what Allah has revealed and to
the Messenger.’ They say, ‘enough for us is that which we found our
fathers following,’ even though their fathers had no knowledge
whatsoever and no guidance.***[^4]

***When it is said to them, ‘Follow what Allah has sent down.’ They say,
‘Nay! We shall follow what we found our fathers following.’ Would they
do that even though their fathers did not understand anything, nor were
they guided?***[^5]

I ask all who read this book to read it objectively, with
open-mindedness and without sectarian biases, and I welcome any
suggestions, criticisms, or inquiries.

We ask Allah for guidance and enlightenment in our search for the truth.
May Allah open our hearts and minds to it, and may He guide and extend
His mercy upon us, for He is the one who grants all things. ***“Our
Lord! Let not our hearts deviate from the truth after You have guided
us, and grant us mercy from You; truly, You are the Bestower.”***[^6]

We ask Allah for His mercy, grace, and blessings in this endeavor, and I
ask the readers for their prayers that we all continue to be humble
servants of the religion of Allah on the Earth.

Sayed Moustafa al-Qazwini

August 13, 1999

Orange County, California

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, 39:18

[^2]: Noble Qur’an, 21:92

[^3]: Noble Qur’an, 3:64

[^4]: Noble Qur’an, 5:104

[^5]: Noble Qur’an, 2:170

[^6]: Noble Qur’an, 3:8


