Conclusion: A Call for Muslim Unity
===================================

Discussing historical facts or jurisprudential differences should not in
any way discourage Muslim unity, since the majority of Muslim historians
from all schools of thought agree on similar historical facts.
Differences between the philosophers, scholars and thinkers of the
schools of thought can be either constructive or destructive. If they
lead to the fragmentation of the Muslim nation, then they are
unacceptable, as the Noble Qur’an says,

***“But they have broken their religion among them into sects, each
group rejoicing in its belief.”***[^1]

Such groups of people support ideas which are not based on the truth and
use them only to serve their own purposes, whereas the Noble Qur’an
refers all arguments to one source,

***“And obey Allah and His Messenger, and do not dispute with one
another lest you lose courage, and your strength depart, and be patient;
surely, Allah is with those who are patient.”***[^2]

Unfortunately, the weakness of the Muslim world today is because of this
type of disunity. Nonetheless, constructive differences is a sign of a
healthy society in which people compete for what is best,

***“If Allah willed, He would have made you one nation (religion) but
that He may test you in what He has given you. So strive (as in a race)
in good deeds.”***[^3]

Differences in scientific and jurisprudential opinions can lead to
progress and prosperity, and on a philosophical level, they are
beneficial if they lead to certainty (*yaqeen*), since all people must
doubt, question, and differ from a matter before arriving at the truth.
Therefore, Islam does not reject reasoning in the field of jurisprudence
(*ijtihad*), as long as it is not contaminated with politics or personal
aims and conceit. Thus all Muslim scholars agree that *mujtahid*
(juristic scholar) receives two rewards for every correct decision, and
at least one for every incorrect one because he is endeavoring with all
of his effort to reach the correct decision.

Nevertheless, Muslim unity is one of the goals of Muslim society and is
an obligation upon all Muslims, both individually and collectively.
Allah says in the Noble Qur’an,

***“Truly, your nation is one united nation, and I am your Lord,”***[^4]

 and

***“Verily this (your nation) is one nation, and I am your Lord, so
uphold your duty to Me.”***[^5]

Throughout the twenty-three years of his propagation, the Messenger of
Allah emphasized the unity of his nation and called them “My Nation
(*Ummati*).” The Noble Qur’an gives six meanings for the word ummah: a
group of people, an example, adherence to a religion, a religion itself,
the time, and a group that follows one tradition and one way. However,
it is not used for a group that does not follow one tradition and one
way.

The concept of unity itself is discussed in the Noble Qur’an on three
levels. Foremost, it is the unity of humanity,

***“O mankind! We have created you from a male and a female, and made
you into nations and tribes that you may know one another. Verily, the
most honorable of you with Allah is the one who has piety.”***[^6]

The aim of this unity is to direct all the racial, tribal, and religious
differences into a constructive direction. Thus the emphasis on “knowing
one another” (*li-ta‘arifu*) is that people should find mutual
understanding rather than conflict, so that no one is denied the rights
for life and prosperity.

The second form is within the unity of the People of the Book (or the
monotheistic religions), for which the Qur’an says,

***“Say (O Prophet Muhammad): O People of the Book! Come to a word that
is just between us and you, that we worship none but Allah, and that we
associate no partners with Him, and that none of us will take others as
lords besides Allah. Then if they turn away, say: Bear witness that we
are Muslims.”***[^7]

The Noble Qur’an reiterates that the People of the Book were asked to
worship only Allah,

***“And they were commanded not, except that they should worship Allah
and worship none but Him alone.”***[^8]

The essential monotheistic unity of the People of the Book exists, but
it should not be taken to mean that there are no differences between
their rules and laws and that of Islam’s. While the original way
(*din*/religion) is seen throughout all monotheistic religions, the
practical implementation—i.e. the law—is different according to the
Qur’an,

***“To each among you We have prescribed a law, and a clear way. If
Allah willed, He would have made you one nation but [His purposes
require] that He test you in respect to what He has given you.”***[^9]

Of course, the third unity that the Noble Qur’an speaks of is the unity
of the Muslim nation,

***“And hold fast, all of you together, to the rope of Allah, and be not
divided among yourselves.”***[^10]

 Muslim unity has two fundamental purposes - one is to uphold the Noble
Qur’an as the constitution of life, and second, is to accept our mutual
responsibility towards each other as Muslims, for the Messenger of Allah
has said, “Whoever does not care about the affairs of the Muslims is not
one of them,” and “Whoever hears a man calling ‘O Muslims!’ and does not
respond is not a Muslim.” He also used the parable of the human body to
describe the Muslim nation - if one part suffers, the entire body will
suffer. One of the greatest achievements of the Messenger of Allah was
to unite hundreds of fragmented tribes throughout the Arabian Peninsula
into a single strong nation.

When he united them, he did not eliminate differences of opinion between
them, but rather, he enabled them to have dialogue with each other and
to come to a sense of mutual understanding. Under this philosophy, the
Muslim nation was a powerful nation in the past, and only with this
understanding it would be able to return to this respected position
among the nations of the Muslim world and have the same significant role
that it did in the past.

A modern example that the Muslim countries should examine is the
European Union in which several states of different languages, cultures,
ethnicities, religions, and political agendas have unified under one
monetary system, economic agenda, and political front. The Muslim
governments could be similarly united if they so chose. The first step
to such a unity is to increase the regular conferences and seminars
which are held by Muslim intellectuals and scholars and aim to bridge
the gap between the schools of thought.

In short, differences of opinion, when properly channelled, are an asset
to the intellectual growth of the Muslim nation and are a sign of the
vitality of the Islamic culture. The competition arising between
different scholars, from all schools of thought, should encourage them
to strive with their maximum effort to reach the best decisions, and
ultimately, the truth. Diversity should not lead to division and
fragmentation; on the contrary, it is part of the unity, just as it was
in the society created by the Messenger of Allah 1,400 years ago.

We would like to encourage all the scholars and intellectuals of Islam
to continue the discussions on the juristic and philosophical issues
under the umbrella of *la ilaha illa Allah Muhammadar rasul Allah (There
is no entity worthy of worship except for Allah and Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah)*, and with the spirit of brotherhood and faith. And
ultimately, we ask Allah, the Almighty for His guidance and wisdom.

O you who believe! Fear Allah as He should be feared, and die not except
in a state of Islam (submission to Allah). And hold fast—all of you
together—to the rope of Allah, and be not divided among yourselves, and
remember Allah’s favor on you, for you were enemies, one unto another,
but He joined your hearts together so that by His grace you became
brethren. And you were on the brink of a pit of fire, and He saved you
from it.

Thus Allah makes His signs clear to you, that you may be guided. Let
there arise out of you a group of people inviting to all that is good,
enjoining the good and forbidding the evil, and it is they who are the
successful. And be not as those who divided and differed among
themselves after the clear proofs had come to them. It is they for whom
there is an awful torment on the Day when some faces will become white,
and some faces will become dark. As for those whose faces will become
dark (to them it will be said),

***“Did you reject faith after accepting it? Then taste the torment for
rejecting faith.”***

And as for those whose faces will become white, they will be in Allah’s
mercy. Therein they shall dwell forever. These are the verses of Allah.
We recite them to you in truth, and Allah wills no injustice to
mankind.[^11]

**  
**

صدق الله العلي العظيم

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, 23:53

[^2]: Noble Qur’an, 8:46

[^3]: Noble Qur’an, 5:48

[^4]: Noble Qur’an, 21:92

[^5]: Noble Qur’an, 23:52

[^6]: Noble Qur’an, 49:13

[^7]: Noble Qur’an, 3:64

[^8]: Noble Qur’an, 98:5

[^9]: Noble Qur’an, 5:48

[^10]: Noble Qur’an, 3:103

[^11]: Noble Qur’an, 3.102:108


