The Five Schools of Islamic Thought
===================================

Schools of Islamic thought (*madhahib*) are the paths people follow to
the Noble Qur’an and Prophet Muhammad. Obviously, these schools of
thought were founded considerably after the death of the Prophet; in
fact, they never took shape until the time of the Umayyid Caliphate. The
common phrase *ahl al-sunnah wal-jama΄ah*, for example, became prevalent
during the third century of the Hijrah. By the year 250H, the four Sunni
schools of thought were being popularized and patronized during the
Abbasid Caliphate. The Shi‘a school of thought on the other hand,
continued its growth and progress after Imam ‘Ali through his
descendants who were connected to each other through a chain of
narration and knowledge. Prophet Muhammad and the designated imams in
the Shi‘a school of thought were shielded by Allah from any sin,
religious error, or forgetfulness.

Today, the five schools of Islamic thought accepted by all Muslims are
the Ja‘fari, comprising 23% of the Muslims; the Hanafi, comprising 31%
of the Muslims; the Maliki, comprising 25% of the Muslims; the Shafi΄i,
comprising 16% of the Muslims; and the Hanbali, comprising 4% of the
Muslims. The remaining small percentage follow other minority schools,
such as the Zaydi and the Isma΄ili.[^1]

Ja‘fari
-------

The Ja‘fari school of thought was headed by Imam Ja‘far ibn Muhammad
al-Sadiq who lived from 83H to 148H. He was born in and died in the holy
city of Madina, and he is the sixth Imam of the twelve designated imams
of the school of Ahlul Bayt. Although the *fiqh* (Islamic Jurisprudence)
was developed by the Prophet Muhammad and his successors (i.e., the
imams), the fiqh, as taught by the Shi‘a, did not have the opportunity
to be presented to the masses of people because of the political
predicament that the Ahlul Bayt suffered under the rulers for many
centuries.

The imams refused to acknowledge the legitimacy of the Umayyad and
Abbasid caliphs, and their governments; and thus they and their
followers were exposed to tremendous harassment and persecution at the
hands of the unjust caliphs. Once the Umayyad government became weak,
Imam Ja‘far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq found a golden opportunity to
formulate and spread the tradition of the Prophet Muhammad and his
family. At one time, four thousand scholars, commentators of the Qur’an,
historians, and philosophers attended his classes in the holy city of
Madina.

Therefore, he was able to pass down the authentic teachings of the Noble
Qur’an and the Prophet Muhammad and crystallize them in what came to be
known as *al-Fiqh al-Ja‘fari*, the Ja‘fari Jurisprudence. His teachings
were collected in 400 *usul* (foundations) which were written by his
students and encompass hadith, Islamic philosophy, theology, commentary
of the Qur’an, literature, and ethics.

After a period of time, three distinguished scholars categorized these
400 usul in four books which are the main sources of hadith for the
Shi‘a school of thought. They are: *Usul al-Kafi* by al-Kulayni
(d.329H), *Man La Yahduruh al-Faqih* by al-Saduq (d.381H), and
*al-Tahdib* and *al-Istibsar* by al-Tusi (d.460H). These three scholars
were known as the “three Muhammads” since their first names were all
Muhammad.

While these four books are the main sources of hadith for the Shi‘a,
their authors still did not label their books as “*sahih*” (authentic).
Although they did their best to gather only authentic traditions, but if
a particular tradition contradicted the Noble Qur’an then it was not
accepted as legal and valid. Hadith, according to the Ja‘fari school of
thought, are accepted only if the Noble Qur’an verifies them, since the
Noble Qur’an is the only undoubtable source of guidance.

Hanafi
------

The Hanafi school of thought was headed by Imam al-Nu΄man ibn Thabit
(Abu Hanifa) who lived from 80H to 150H. Imam Abu Hanifa was born to a
non-Arab father, was raised in Kufa, and died in Baghdad. This school of
thought prevailed during the time of the Abbasid Empire when a student
of Imam Abu Hanifa, Abu Yusuf al-Qadi became the head of the judiciary
department and the highest judge, and thus he spread this *madhhab*
(school of thought), in particular, during the caliphates of al-Mahdi,
al-Hadi, and al-Rashid.

No other man was as close to the Abbasid caliph, Harun al-Rashid as was
Abu Yusuf al-Qadi, but the Abbasid caliph, al-Mansur also worked hard to
support and consolidate Imam Abu Hanifa’s school of thought and to
spread his madhhab in the face of the growing popularity of Imam Ja‘far
al-Sadiq. Imam Abu Hanifa studied under the instruction of Imam Ja‘far
al-Sadiq for two years,[^2] and said in regards to him, “I have not seen
anyone more knowledgeable than Ja‘far ibn Muhammad, and indeed, he is
the most knowledgeable one in the nation.”[^3]

Maliki
------

The Maliki school of thought was headed by Imam Malik ibn Anas al-Asbahi
who lived from 93H to 179H. He was born in the holy city of Madina, and
his fame spread throughout Hijaz. On the account of his disagreement
with Imam Abu Hanifa, Imam Malik became the leader of the school of
tradition (*hadith*), while Imam Abu Hanifa was the leader of the school
of opinion (*ra΄i*). Yet, most Muslim governments were supportive of
Imam Abu Hanifa.

Imam Malik joined the *‘Alawiyiin*, the descendants of Imam ‘Ali, and
received his knowledge from Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq, but thereafter,
inconsistencies marked his life. At one point he was oppressed and
having earned the anger of the government, he was dragged through the
streets by his clothes and lashed. In 148H, his fortunes reversed and he
regained his popularity and dominance.

The Abbasids tried to set him up as a popular reference for the nation
in giving verdicts and injunctions. The Abbasid caliph al-Mansur asked
him to write *al-Muwatta’*, his book of fiqh, which contains the
principles of the Maliki school of thought. Furthermore, during the hajj
season, the official announcer of the government proclaimed that no one
had the authority to give *fatawas* (religious decisions) except for
Imam Malik.

The Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid sat on the floor to listen to him,
and the caliphate in general exalted him to the point where they said
that no book on earth, except the Noble Qur’an, was more authentic than
that of Imam Malik’s. Ibn Hazm al-Andalusi says that two schools of
thought were spread due to the government and the sultan: the school of
Imam Abu Hanifa, since Abu Yusuf al-Qadi only appointed Hanafi judges;
and the school of Imam Malik ibn Anas, for a student of Imam Malik,
Yahya ibn Yahya was so respected in the caliph’s palace that no judge
was ever appointed in Andalus, Spain without his consultation and
advice.

Shafi΄i
-------

The Shafi΄i school of thought was headed by Imam Muhammad ibn Idris
al-Shafi΄i who lived from 150H to 198H. Imam Shafi΄i was born in Hijaz
and his school of thought emerged in Egypt. At the time of the Fatimid
Dynasty, the Egyptians were mainly followers of Ahlul Bayt, and the
teachings of Ahlul Bayt were being taught in al-Azhar University. At a
later time, Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi came and waged an extensive war
against the school of Ahlul Bayt by banning the teaching of their
madhhab (school of thought) in al-Azhar and resurrecting the other
madhahib, including that of Imam Shafi΄i, who was killed in Egypt in
198H.

Hanbali
-------

The Hanbali school of thought was headed by Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal who
lived from 164H to 241H. He was born and died in Baghdad. He only gained
popularity in Najd (a region of the Arabian Peninsula) due to the ideas
of Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab, the founder of Wahabism. The Hanbali
madhhab spread in Najd primarily due to the teachings of Ahmad ibn ‘Abd
al-Halim al-Dimishqi ibn Taymiyyah (661H–728H) and his student ibn
al-Qayyim al-Jawziyya.

A close study of the history of the madhahibs and a search into the
reasons for their birth, existence, and spread, reveals that the various
governments were the main factor in the birth and spread of these
schools. Governmental aid took physical and financial forms by
establishing schools, sponsoring books of *fiqh* (law)*,* adopting and
sponsoring official madhahib*,* and giving freedom to the founders and
scholars of some of the “official” madhahib. This trend has occurred in
almost every religion worldwide; for example, one might compare this
trend in Islam to the birth of the Anglican Church in 1534AD by the
English king, Henry VIII who made it the official religious tradition of
the state, thus giving it 55 million followers.

History tells that the school of Ahlul Bayt suffered extreme oppression,
tyranny, and discrimination at the hands of the Umayyad and ‘Abbasid
caliphs. But in spite of oppression, by the divine will of Allah, the
school of the Ahlul Bayt reached a climax during the caliphate of
al-Ma‘mun, and Shi‘ism reached so far into the governmental dignitaries
that al-Ma‘mun himself was forced to show deep sympathy towards the
*‘Alawiyiin*, the descendants of Imam ‘Ali, and to show an inclination
towards Shi‘ism, to the point that he invited Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa
al-Rida, the eighth Imam of the Ahlul Bayt to be his successor—a
position which Imam al-Rida declined.

[^1]: “Bulletin of Affiliation” Al-Madhhab Schools of Thought
Statistic - Dec. 1998, Vol. 17-4. 5

[^2]: Kalili, Min Amali al-Imam al-Sadiq, Vol. 4, 157

[^3]: Tadhkirat al-Hiffadh, Vol. 1, 166; Asna al-Matalib, 55


