Imamah
======

The major distinction between the school of Ahlul Bayt and the other
Islamic schools of thought revolves around the issue of *Imamah*, or the
early succession to Prophet Muhammad. The school of Ahlul Bayt maintains
that the office of the imamah is a divine office - meaning, the *imam*
or *khalifah* (leadership) has to be appointed and given directly by
Allah, for this office holds the same significance as that of
prophethood. People are thus commanded by Allah to follow specific
successors (*imams*) after the demise of the Prophet.

Other schools of thought say that the imamah is determined by *shura*
(election) and that this method was used to determine the successor of
the Prophet Muhammad. However, the Shi‘a school of thought considers
that the concept of shura was never fully enacted after the death of the
Prophet because ibn Qutaybah asserts that the first caliph was nominated
mainly by two people;[^1]

Ibn Kathir says that he had confined the candidacy for the khilafah to
*‘*Umar ibn al-Khattab and Abu ‘Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah, both of whom
declined and nominated him, a nomination that was seconded by Ma΄adh,
‘Usayd, Bashir, and Zayd ibn Thabit.[^2] Tabari narrates that the Ansar
refused to submit to his allegiance in al-Saqifah (the place where the
matter of immediate succession to the Prophet was discussed) and
declared that they would only pay allegiance to ‘Ali (because he was the
one appointed by the Prophet to be his successor).[^3]

The first caliph has been recorded to have said in his inaugural
ceremony, “O people! I was appointed over you, but I am not the best one
among you.”[^4] Historian ibn Abi al-Hadid al-Mu΄tazili records that the
second caliph admitted his role in orchestrating the meeting at
al-Saqifah when he later declared that paying allegiance to the first
caliph had been a mistake (*faltah*) but that Allah had averted the
disaster of it from the Muslims.[^5]

The concept of shura however was not implemented during the second
caliph’s ascension to the caliphate since the first caliph appointed him
before his death. It was not even enacted during the ascension of the
third caliph to power, since he was also selected nominally by five
people, but in essence by one—namely, the second caliph, who also
appointed two governors to remain in power after his death namely: Sa΄d
ibn Abi Waqqass and Abu Musa al-Ash΄ari.[^6]

Qur’anic Evidence for the Divine Ordination of the Imam
-------------------------------------------------------

Numerous verses in the Noble Qur’an refer to the fact that throughout
history Allah alone has the right to ordain an *imam* (leader) or
*khalifah* for mankind – some of them are as follows:

And remember when your Lord said to the angels, ***‘Verily, I am going
to place [for mankind] a successor (khalifah) on the earth.’***[^7]

***O David! Verily We have placed you as a successor (khalifah) on the
earth, so judge between men with truth and justice, and follow not your
desires, for they will mislead you from the path of Allah.***[^8]

***And remember when the Lord of Abraham tried him with certain commands
which he fulfilled. Allah said to him, ‘Verily I am going to make you a
leader (imam) for mankind.’ Abraham said, ‘And (what about) my
offspring?’ Allah said, ‘My providence (does not) includes the
wrongdoers.’***[^9]

***And We made from among them leaders (imams), giving guidance under
Our command, when they were patient and believed with certainty in Our
proofs and evidence.***[^10]

These verses clarify that not just anyone is entitled to assume the
office of leadership or the *imamah* and one who qualifies for this is
the one who Allah examines and he fulfills Allah’s test. In particular,
the Noble Qur’an in the above verse of 2:124 stresses very clearly that
the wrongdoers (*dhalimeen*) are forbidden from assuming the leadership
of the believers.

Yet, does Islamic history show this command to have been carried out?
How many caliphs and sultans during the Umayyad and Abbasid periods were
corrupt and did not practice Islam properly, yet they were leaders of
the Muslim nation?

Succession—khilafah or imamah—is appointed solely by Allah whenever it
is mentioned in the Noble Qur’an. In the school of Ahlul Bayt, the
khilafah refers not only to temporal power and political authority over
the people but more importantly, it indicates the authority to do so.
This authority must be from Allah since Allah attributes governing and
judgment to Himself.

[^1]: Ibn Qutaybah, al-Imamah wal-Siyasah, Vol. 1, 6,

[^2]: Ibn Kathir, al-Sira al-Nabawiyyah, Vol. 2, 494

[^3]: al-Tabari Tarikh, Vol. 2, 443

[^4]: al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa’, 69

[^5]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid al-Mu΄tazili, Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah, Vol. 2, 29

[^6]: Ibid., Vol. 9, 50

[^7]: Noble Qur’an, 2:30

[^8]: Noble Qur’an, 38:26

[^9]: Noble Qur’an, 2:124

[^10]: Noble Qur’an, 32:24


