Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib
=======================

The Noble Qur’an and Prophet Muhammad specifically refer to the
leadership of Imam ‘Ali after the Prophet in several incidents.

Ghadir Khum
-----------

This incident took place on the 18th of Dhul Hijjah*,* the twelfth month
of theu Islamic calendar, and has been narrated by 110 companions of the
Prophet, 84 members of the following generation (the *tabi΄in*), and 360
Muslim scholars from all schools of thought. Prophet Muhammad and
approximately 114,000 of his companions had performed the farewell
*Hajj* (pilgrimage) and were returning home.

That year, during the *Hajj*, the weather was very hot with the blazing
sun taking its toll on the pilgrims. When the Prophet arrived at Ghadir
Khum, a marshland crossroads from which all the Muslims from different
lands would part on their own ways, the Prophet stopped the caravan at
noontime, and waited for those who were behind to arrive and called upon
those who had gone ahead to return, for he had received a revelation
from Allah which he had to deliver to the people. The revelation
read***,***

 ***“O Messenger! Declare what has been revealed to you from Your Lord,
and if you do not, then your mission will not have been fully declared,
and Allah will protect you from the harm of the people.”***[^1]

Then the Prophet spoke a bit before asking the assembly whether he truly
had authority over them or not. The people replied, “Yes, O Prophet, of
course you are our leader (*mawla*).” He repeated this question three
times, and the people responded in the same way each time, acknowledging
his leadership. The Prophet then called for ‘Ali, held up his arm so
that their two arms formed one shape pointing upwards, and said to the
people, “He whose leader (*mawla*) I am, ‘Ali is his leader.”

At that time, ‘Ali was 33 years old. The people received this news with
a variety of responses—some with happiness and some with resentment. The
foremost to congratulate ‘Ali were the future first and second caliphs;
the second caliph said, “Congratulations, congratulations to you, O
‘Ali; you have become my leader (*mawla*) and the leader of every
faithful Muslim.”[^2]

After declaring the mentioned revelation another verse was revealed to
Prophet Muhammad. Allah said,

***“Today I have completed for you the religion, and favored you with My
bounty, and accepted Islam for you as the religion.”***[^3]

With this verse, the religion of Islam was completed by the appointment
of Imam ‘Ali to succeed the Prophet, and had he not been appointed as
the successor, the religion of Islam would have been incomplete as is
specifically mentioned in these verses.

The Verse of Warning (Indhar)
-----------------------------

Three years after the advent of Islam, Allah commanded the Prophet to
proclaim his invitation to Islam to his immediate family in Makkah by
commanding,

***“And warn your tribe who are of near kindred.”***[^4]

The Prophet gathered forty members of his tribe, Bani Hashim and held a
feast inside the house of his uncle Abu Talib by preparing food for
them. After they had finished eating, the Prophet said to them, “O
children of ‘Abd al-Mutallib! By Allah, I don’t know any young person
from among the Arabs who has brought his people something better than
that which I am bringing you. I have brought you the best of this world
and the next, and Allah has commanded me to invite you to it. So who
will be my supporter in this endeavor, to be my brother, my successor
(khalifah), and legatee?” No one stood up to accept this invitation
except ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, who was only about 13 years old at the time,
said, “I will be your supporter in this endeavor.”

The Prophet requested him to sit down and then repeated his question a
second time. Again, only ‘Ali stood up, and again the Prophet asked him
to sit. When even the third time the Prophet heard no answer from the
other family members, ‘Ali stood up again and repeated his support. The
Prophet then put his hand on his leg and said to the forty men from his
immediate family, “This is my brother, my legatee, and my successor
(khalifah) over you, so listen to him and obey him.” The men stood and
while laughing told the father of ‘Ali, “Your nephew has ordered you to
listen to your son and obey him.”[^5]

The Verse of Bowing (Ruku)
--------------------------

***Verily, your guardian (wali) is Allah, His messenger, and the
believers; those who perform the prayers and give zakat (alms) while
bowing down (in ruku).***[^6]

Numerous commentators of the Qur’an from all schools of thought identify
the one referred to in this verse is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib. The famous
commentator, Zamakhshari says about this verse, “It was revealed in
favor of ‘Ali (may Allah enlighten his face). When a beggar asked him
for alms in the masjid and ‘Ali was in the position of ruku during the
prayers, he gave away his ring while in that position.

It seems it was loose on the little finger, for he did not exert any
effort in taking it off, which would have nullified his prayer. If you
ask how it could be in favor of ‘Ali since the wording is in the plural
form, I would say that the form is plural although its instigator is a
single man to encourage people to follow his example and earn a similar
reward; and also to draw attention to the fact that the believers must
be extremely mindful and benevolent towards the poor such that if a
situation can not be postponed until after the prayer, then it should
not be delayed until having finished it.”[^7]

Similarly, al-Wahidi in his book on the commentary of the Qur’an
entitled, *Asbab al-Nuzul*, cites Kalbi’s narration, that the cause of
this revelation was Imam ‘Ali. Kalbi says, “The later part of this verse
is in favor of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (may Allah be gracious to him) because
he gave his ring to a beggar while in the state of *ruku* during the
prayers.”[^8]

Many other commentaries also hold that this verse refers to Imam ‘Ali
including: *Sunan al-Nisa΄i*, *Tafsir al-Kabir* by Tha*΄*alibi*,*
*Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal*,[^9] *Musnad ibn Marduwayh*, and *Kanz
al-‘Ummal*.[^10]

The Verse of Guardianship
-------------------------

***O you who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and those
vested with authority over you (’Ul ul-’amr minkum). And if you quarrel
about something, then refer it to Allah and the Messenger.***[^11]

By the explanation from the Prophet Muhammad, this verse is also one of
the Qur’anic references to the leadership of Imam ‘Ali after the
Prophet, and it necessitates the obedience of the faithful to Allah, the
Prophet, and those vested with authority over them. When this verse was
revealed to the Prophet, one of his great companions, Jabir ibn
‘Abdullah al-Ansari asked:

O Prophet of Allah! We know Allah and His Messenger, but who are ‘those
vested with authority over you’ (*’Ul ul-’amr*) whose obedience Allah
considers equal to that of Allah and the Prophet? The Prophet replied
that those are my successors and the leaders of the Muslims after me.
The first of them is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, then al-Hassan and al-Husayn,
then ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, then Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, who is known as
al-Baqir. You, Jabir will see him and when you see him, give him my
salam.[^12] Then al-Sadiq Ja‘far ibn Muhammad, then Musa ibn Ja‘far,
then ‘Ali ibn Musa, then Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, then ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, then
al-Hassan ibn ‘Ali, then the one who bears my name, Muhammad. And he
will be the proof (*hujjah*) of Allah on the earth.

Prophetic Narrations Appointing Imam ‘Ali as Successor
------------------------------------------------------

Prophet Muhammad told the Muslims both about the succession of the
designated members of his family (Ahlul Bayt), which will be dealt with
in the next section, as well as the specific succession of Imam ‘Ali.
The Messenger of Allah has been recorded to have said in regards to Imam
‘Ali:

You are in the same position with relation to me as Aaron was with
Moses, except that there will be no prophet after me.[^13]

He who wishes to live as I have lived and to die as I will die, and
enter the Garden of Eternal Bliss which Allah has promised me—let him
take ‘Ali as his leader (*wali*), because ‘Ali will never lead you away
from the Path of Truth, nor will he take you into error.[^14]

‘Ali is the authority (*wali*) over every believer (*mu΄min*) after
me.[^15]

‘Ali is the doorway to my knowledge, and after me he will explain to my
followers what has been sent to me. Love for ‘Ali is faith, and spite
towards him is hypocrisy.[^16]

I am the city of knowledge, and ‘Ali is its gate. He who wishes to reach
this city should enter through its gate.[^17]

‘Ali is from me, and I am from ‘Ali, and none delivers except me and
‘Ali.[^18]

He who obeys me will have obeyed Allah, and he who disobeys me will have
disobeyed Allah. And he who obeys ‘Ali will have obeyed me, and he who
disobeys ‘Ali will have disobeyed me.[^19]

At the Battle of Khaybar the Muslims were struggling to conquer the
castle. The two companions, Abu Bakr and Umar had previously failed in
their attempts to defeat the enemies, at which the Messenger of Allah
said, I will certainly give this standard (i.e. flag) to a man whom
Allah and His Messenger love.” Other narrations say that the Prophet
said, “Allah will grant victory through the one who loves Allah and His
Messenger.” In either case, the Prophet Muhammad gave the standard to
‘Ali, and Allah granted victory through his hand.[^20]

Twelve Leaders to Succeed the Prophet
-------------------------------------

In addition to the specific narrations emphatically identifying Imam
‘Ali as the successor of the Prophet Muhammad, the Prophet was also
recorded to have said on numerous occasions that after him he would be
succeeded by twelve leaders from his tribe of Quraysh. Some of these
narrations are:

The caliphate will remain among the Quraysh even if only two people are
left (on the earth).[^21]

I joined the company of the Prophet with my father and heard him say,
“This caliphate will not end until there have come the twelve caliphs
among them.” The narrator said, “Then he (the Prophet) said something
which I could not follow.” I said to my father, “What did he say?” He
said, “He has said, ‘all of them will be from Quraysh.”’[^22]

Nevertheless, extensive research show that the accurate version of the
Prophet’s narration is that ‘all of them will be from Bani Hashim,’
which is exclusive to the imams of Ahlul Bayt.

Who are the Twelve Leaders?
---------------------------

The Prophet said:

I and ‘Ali are the fathers of this nation. He who recognizes us as such
believes in Allah, the Mighty and Glorious. And from ‘Ali are my two
grandchildren, Hassan and Husayn, each of whom is a prince over the
youth in Heaven; and among the descendants of Husayn are nine. Obedience
to them is obedience to me, and disobedience to them is disobedience to
me. The ninth of them is the *Qa΄im* (the firmly established) and
*Mahdi*—the executor and the one divinely trained for right
guidance.[^23]

Stated to his grandson Husayn when he was only a few years old, the
Prophet said to him:

You are a *sayyid* (master) and the son of a sayyid. You are an *imam*
and the son of an imam, the brother of an imam and the father of imams.
You are Allah’s proof and confirmation and the son of His proof. You are
the father of nine of Allah’s proofs in your line of descendants. The
ninth of them is the *Qa΄im* (the firmly established, the
executor).[^24]

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, 5:67. See the following commentators (mufassirin):
Tabari, Wahidi, Tha‘alibi, Qurtubi, al-Razi, Ibn Kathir, Naysaburi,
Suyuti, and Alusi al-Baghdadi, and the following historians: Balathari,
Ibn Qutaybah, Tabari, al-Khatib al-Baghdadi, Ibn ‘Abd al-Birr,
Shahristani, Ibn Asakir, Ibn al-Athir, Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Ya‘qut
al-Hamawi, Ibn Khalaqan, Yafi‘i, Ibn Kathir, Ibn Khuldun, al-Dhahabi,
Ibn Hajar al-Askalani, Ibn al-Sabbagh al-Maliki, al-Maqrizi, and Jalal
al-Din al-Suyuti, and also the following recorders of hadith:
al-Shafi‘i, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Ibn Majah, Tirmidhi, Nisa΄i, al-Baghawi,
al-Dulabi, al-Tahawi, Abu Ya΄la al-Musali, al-Hakim al-Naysaburi, Khatib
al-Khawarizmi, Muhibb al-Din al-Tabari, al-Dhahabi, and al-Muttaqi
al-Hindi.

[^2]: Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Musnad, Vol. 4, 281; al-Ghazali, Sirr
al-‘Alamin, 12; al-Tabari, al-Riyadh al-Nadhirah, Vol. 2, 169

[^3]: Noble Qur’an, 5.3.

[^4]: Noble Qur’an, 26:214

[^5]: Ihqaq al-Haqq, Vol. 4, 62; Tarikh al-Tabari, Vol. 2, 117; Musnad
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Vol. 1, 159; Tarikh Abul Fida, Vol. 1, 116; Nadhm
Durar al-Simtayn, 82; Kifayat al-Talib, 205; Tarikh Madinat Dimishq,
Vol.1, Hadith 87, 139 and 143; al-Hasakani, Shawahid al-Tanzil, Vol. 1,
420; Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari, Jami‘ al-Bayan, Vol. 19, 131; Jalal
al-Din al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur, Vol. 5, 97; Tafsir ibn Kathir,
Vol. 3, 350; al-Baghdadi, Tafsir al-Khazin, Vol. 3, 371; al-Alusi
al-Baghdadi, Ruh al-Ma΄ani, Vol. 19, 122; al-Tantawi, Tafsir al-Jawahir,
Vol. 13, 103; al-Hakim al-Naysaburi, al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn, Vol.
3, 135. Other historical sources, such as Sirat al-Halabi, say that the
Prophet added, “And he will be my minister (wazir) and inheritor
(warith).”

[^6]: Noble Qur’an, 5:55

[^7]: Zamakhshari, Tafsir al-Kashif (See interpretation of ch. 5 v. 55)

[^8]: Wahidi, Asbab al-Nuzul, (See interpretation of ch. 5 v. 55)

[^9]: Noble Qur’an, 5:38

[^10]: Vol. 6, Hadith 391 and 5991

[^11]: Noble Qur’an, 4:59

[^12]: i.e. peaceful greeting or greetings of peace.

[^13]: Sahih al-Bukhari, “Book on Outstanding Traits” Hadith 3430,
“Battles” Hadith 4064; Sahih Muslim, “Book of the Merits of the
Companions” Hadith 4418; al-Tirmidhi, “Book on Outstanding Traits”
Hadith 3664; Ibn Majah, “Book on the Introduction” 112 and 118; Musnad
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Vol.1, 173, 175, 177, 179, 182, 184, and 185.

[^14]: al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. 3, 128; al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz
al-Ummal, Vol. 6, 155

[^15]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Vol. 5, 25; Sahih Tirmidhi, Vol. 5, 296

[^16]: Kanz al-Ummal, al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Vol. 6, 170

[^17]: al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. 3, 226; Ibn Jarir, Kanz al-Ummal;
al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Vol. 15, 13; Tarikh ibn Kathir, Vol. 7, 358

[^18]: Sunan ibn Majah, Vol. 1, 44; Sahih Tirmidhi, Vol. 5, 300

[^19]: al-Hakim, Vol. 3, 221, al-Dhahabi

[^20]: Sahih al-Bukhari, “Book of Jihad and Marching” Hadith 2724 and
2753, “Battles” Hadith 3888; Sahih Muslim, “Book on the Merits of the
Companions” Hadith 4423-4424; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Vol. 5, 333

[^21]: Sahih al-Bukhari, “Book on Outstanding Traits”, Hadith 3240;
Sahih Muslim, Kitab al-Imarah, Hadith 3392; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal,
Part 2. 29, 93, and 128

[^22]: Sahih al-Bukhari, “Book on Legal Judgments” Hadith 6682; Sahih
Muslim, Kitab al-Imarah, Hadith 3393; al-Tirmidhi, “Book on the Trials”
Hadith 2149; Abu Dawud, “Book on al-Mahdi” Hadith 3731; Musnad Ahmad ibn
Hanbal, Vol. 5, 87, 90, 92, 95, 97, 99-101, and 106-108

[^23]: Ikmal al-Din

[^24]: Ibid.,


