The Ahlul Bayt
==============

The best way to introduce the *Ahlul Bayt* to the Muslim nation is to
recall what the Noble Qur’an says about them. Several verses of the
Noble Qur’an refer specifically to the virtues of the Ahlul Bayt and
their outstanding position in Islam. Whenever the Noble Qur’an refers to
the Ahlul Bayt, it refers to a specific group of people who were related
not only by blood, but more importantly, by ideology and faith to the
Prophet. However, it does not refer to all of his blood relations, his
friends or his wives.

The Verse of Purity (Taharah)
-----------------------------

***Allah only desires to keep away uncleanliness from you, O People of
the House (Ahlul Bayt), and to make you as pure as possible.***[^1]

The prominent scholars of Islam and the narrators of the Prophetic
tradition unanimously agree that Ahlul Bayt (the household of the
Prophet ) which Almighty Allah uses in the above verse of the Noble
Qur’an refers to the daughter of the Prophet Muhammad, Lady Fatima
al-Zahra, his cousin, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, and their children Hassan and
Husayn.[^2] Tabarani narrates from one of the respected wives of the
Prophet, Umm Salamah that the Messenger of Allah once told his daughter,
Lady Fatima to call her husband ‘Ali and their two sons, Hassan and
Husayn. When they came, the Messenger of Allah covered them with a
cloak, put his hand on them and said, “O Allah, these are
*Al-e*-Muhammad (the family of Muhammad), so shower Your blessings and
favors upon *Al-e-*Muhammad just as You showered them on *Al-e-*Ibrahim.
You are the Praiseworthy, the Glorious.” Umm Salamah says that she
raised the cloak to join them, but the Prophet took it from her hand
saying, “You are also on the right.”[^3]

Although the beginning of verse 33:33 addresses the wives of the Prophet
and continues to address them up until the middle part of the verse, but
upon reaching “Ahlul Bayt” it excludes them.[^4] The previous and
subsequent statements which are directed towards the wives of the
Prophet are in the feminine pronouns and gender, but this verse
referring to the Ahlul Bayt is in the masculine or mixed gender; thus it
makes it clear that it is not addressed to the wives of the Prophet.
However, even without the grammatical evidence, the relationship between
some of the wives of the Prophet does not fit the spirit of this verse
which asserts the physical, mental, and spiritual purity of the family
of the Prophet Muhammad.

To emphasize that the phrase “Ahlul Bayt” in this verse refers only to
five people—Prophet Muhammad, ‘Ali, Lady Fatima, Hassan, and
Husayn—narrators say that whenever the Prophet used to pass by his
daughter, Lady Fatima’s house on the way to the masjid for the dawn
prayers he would stop there and proclaim, “Come to prayer, O Ahlul Bayt,
to prayer. Allah desires to keep away un-cleanliness from you, O Ahlul
Bayt, and to make you as pure as possible.”[^5] Imam Anas ibn Malik adds
that the Prophet did this for six months every day on his way for his
morning prayers at the masjid.[^6]

The Verse of Affection (Muwaddah)
---------------------------------

***Say, I do not ask from you any reward for it (preaching the message)
but love for my relatives (qurba which here refers to the Ahlul
Bayt***[^7]***).***[^8]

When explaining this verse, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi says, “Without doubt,
no one was as near to the Prophet as Lady Fatima, ‘Ali, Hassan, and
Husayn. This is a well-known fact for all the chains of narration, that
these were his ‘*al*’.” Thus, ‘*al*’ or ‘*ahl*’ refers only to the
immediate family of the Prophet—namely: Lady Fatima, ‘Ali, Hassan, and
Husayn.

Some argue that Hassan and Husayn were not the sons of the Prophet
because they were the sons of Imam ‘Ali. According to old Arab custom,
the mother was considered as only a means to deliver a child, but
nonetheless, their direct lineage to the Prophet is through their
mother, Lady Fatima al-Zahra.

It has been narrated that the ‘Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid asked the
seventh Imam of the school of Ahlul Bayt, Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far how he
could attribute himself to the Prophet while he was the child of ‘Ali
and Lady Fatima – thus, how could he be related to the Prophet? The Imam
then cited to him a verse that refers to the descendants of Prophet
Abraham (Ibrahim), ***“And from his progeny were David (Dawud), Solomon
(Sulayman), Job (Ayyub), Joseph (Yusuf), Moses (Musa), and Aaron
(Harun)—thus do We reward the good-doers—and Zachariah (Zakariyya), and
John (Yahya), and Jesus (Isaa), and Elias (Ilyas)—each one of them was
of the righteous.”***[^9] The Imam then asked the caliph who the father
of Isaa (Jesus) was. Harun answered that he was fatherless. The Imam
replied, “Then you can see that Allah linked him to Ibrahim through his
mother, Mary and Allah did the same for us, linking us to Prophet
Muhammad through our mother Lady Fatima al-Zahra.”[^10]

In many instances, the Prophet refers to Lady Fatima with intense love
and affection, such as when he says, “Fatima is a part of me. Her
happiness is my happiness, and her pain is my pain.” The Prophet would
also point towards the children of Fatima - Hassan and Husayn - and say
on many occasions, “These are my sons,” or “This is my son.” That is why
the community of the companions in Madina referred to both Hassan and
Husayn as the ‘sons of Prophet Muhammad.’

The Verse of Malediction (Mubahilah)
------------------------------------

***But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say, ‘Come, let us call our sons and your sons,
and our women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves, and let us
beseech Allah and invoke His curse upon the liars.’***[^11]

This milestone event in the Islamic history has been narrated by all the
historians, narrators, and commentators of the Qur’an. It is an event
which reveals the exalted status of the Family of the Prophet. The
narrations say that a delegation of Christians from Najran came to the
city of Madina in order to meet with the Prophet to discuss his
prophethood and the religion he was preaching.

The Prophet proved to them that Jesus (Isa) was the son of Mary; he was
a human being, a Prophet, and a servant of Allah as the Qur’an states
and that regarding him as the son of God is blasphemy, since Allah, the
Exalted is much higher than such human characteristics. After discussing
these points extensively, the Prophet found them still deliberately
persisting in their false beliefs and traditions—namely on the
deification of Prophet Jesus—thus, Allah revealed the verse, which was a
major challenge to the Christians, to pray and invoke upon Allah that a
curse may overtake the party that insists on falsehood.

Early the next morning, on the 24th of the lunar month of Dhul
al-Hijjah, in accordance with Allah’s command, the Prophet arrived at
the meeting carrying Husayn in his arms, while holding Hassan by the
hand, followed by his beloved daughter, Lady Fatima and behind them was
his son-in-law and cousin, ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib carrying the banner of
Islam. Seeing that the Prophet was accompanied only by his immediate
family, the Christians were convinced that he was truthful otherwise he
would have never dared to bring his dearest kin along with him. The
Christian delegation backed away from the malediction argument and
returned back to Najran.

Zamakhshari, in his *Tafsir al-Kashshaf*, narrates the event as:

When this verse was revealed, the Prophet invited the Christians to the
malediction, to invoke the curse of Allah upon the liars. The Christians
held a discourse among themselves tmhat night in which their leader,
‘Abd al-Masih stated his views. He said, “O Christians, know that
Muhammad is a God-sent Prophet who has brought you the final message
from your Lord. By God, no nation ever dared to challenge a Prophet with
malediction but that woe befell them. Not only will they perish, but
their children will also be afflicted by the curse.” Saying this—that it
is better to reach a compromise with the Prophet rather than challenge
his truth and perish—‘Abd al-Masih advised his party to stop hostilities
and retain their religion by submitting to the Prophet’s terms.

“So if you persist (for a confrontation) we will all perish. But if you,
to keep your faith, refuse (to have a showdown) and remain as you are,
then make peace with the man (the Prophet) and return to your land.” The
next day, the Prophet, carrying Husayn in his arms, leading Hassan by
the hand, followed by his daughter Lady Fatima, behind whom came ‘Ali,
entered the appointed place and the Prophet was heard saying to his
family, “When I invoke Allah, second the invocation.”

The pontiff of Najran, upon seeing the Prophet and his family, addressed
the Christians, “O Christians! I am witnessing such faces that if God
wishes, for their sake, He would move mountains for them. Do not accept
their challenge for malediction, for if you do, you would all perish and
there will not remain any Christians on the face of the earth till the
Day of Resurrection.”[^12] Heeding his advice, the Christians said to
the Prophet, “O Abul-Qasim, we have decided not to hold malediction with
you. You keep your religion, and we will keep ours.” The Prophet told
them, “If you refuse to hold malediction, then submit to Allah, and you
will receive what the Muslims receive and contribute what the Muslims
contribute.” The Christians delegates, saying that they had no desire to
fight the Muslims, proposed a treaty asking for peace which the Prophet
of Islam accepted.

Although other women were present in the family of the Prophet at that
time, all the commentators, narrators, and historians agree that in
reference to the Qur’anic verse, “our women” referred only to Lady
Fatima al-Zahra, “our children” referred only to Hassan and Husayn, and
“ourselves” referred only to the Prophet and Imam ‘Ali.

The Verse of Prayer (Salat)
---------------------------

***Surely Allah and His angels bless the Prophet. O you who believe,
call for divine blessings upon him, and salute him with a becoming
salutation.***[^13]

In the five obligatory prayers, during the *tashhahud* (testimony),
those offering their prayers must salute the Prophet and his progeny—a
term exclusively reserved for ‘Ali, Lady Fatima, Hassan, Husayn, and
their righteous descendants. The emphasis on the Prophet’s family in
salutation is another indication of their pivotal position after the
Prophet. By asking the believers to exalt these noble personalities,
Allah, the Almighty reminds the Muslim nation that He has chosen the
Ahlul Bayt for the role of leading the Muslim nation.

One of the most prominent commentators of the Qur’an, Fakhr al-Din
al-Razi narrates the response of the Prophet when he was asked by some
of his companions how to send blessings upon him. He said, “Say, ‘O
Allah, send blessings on Muhammad and on the progeny of Muhammad as you
sent blessings on Ibrahim and on the progeny of Ibrahim. And send grace
on Muhammad and on the progeny of Muhammad just as you sent grace on
Ibrahim and on the progeny of Ibrahim. You are the Praiseworthy, the
Glorious.’”[^14]

Al-Razi comments that if Allah and His angels send their blessings upon
the Prophet, then what need is there for our blessings? He answers his
own question by saying that when we send blessings on the Prophet
Muhammad it is not because he is in need of them, because he already has
the blessings of Allah and thus, he does not even require the blessings
of the angels. When we send blessings on him, we send them to glorify
Allah and also to reveal our gratitude towards Allah such that He may
have compassion on us and reward us. Thus, the Prophet says, “Whoever
sends blessings on me once, Allah will send blessings on him ten times.”

Another verse in the Noble Qur’an asserts the same teaching when Allah
the Almighty sends His blessings on the family of the Prophet by saying,
***“Peace be upon the Al-e-Yasin!”***[^15] According to some
commentators, “Yasin” is one of the names of the Prophet, as stated in
Surah (chapter) *Ya Sin* when it addresses the Prophet as, “*Yasin*, by
the Qur’an full of wisdom, truly you are one of the messengers….”[^16]

The Verse of Feeding
--------------------

***Truly, the righteous drink of a cup tempered with camphor, a fountain
from which the servants of Allah drink, flowing in abundance. They (the
Family of the Prophet) fulfill vows and fear a Day, the evil of which is
widespread. And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the
orphan and the captive. ‘We feed you for Allah’s sake and pleasure only.
We desire from you neither reward nor thanks. Surely, we fear from our
Lord a stern, distressful Day,’ so Allah will ward off from them the
evil of that Day and cause them to meet with splendor and happiness and
reward them for their steadfastness with a garden and with silk.***[^17]

Surah 76 in the Noble Qur’an descended to honor a sacred gesture
performed by the Ahlul Bayt. Allah entitled this Surah, Insan
(*Mankind)* to draw attention of the people to the beauty of mankind’s
deeds on earth, and to tell them that they should not be selfish or
greedy; rather, they should be caring and thoughtful people who spend
their time thinking of other human beings around them. The chapter
begins, “Has there not been over man a period of time when he was
nothing to be mentioned? Verily, We and created man from drops of mixed
semen in order to try him, so We made him hearing, seeing. Verily, We
showed him the way, whether he be grateful or ungrateful.”

This introduction prepares our minds for the big sacrifice of the Family
of the Prophet—’Ali, Lady Fatima, Hassan, Husayn, and their maidservant
Fiddah. The incident provoking these verses began when Hassan and Husayn
fell ill, and Lady Fatima al-Zahra asked her father what to do. The
Prophet advised her to make a vow with Allah that if He cured them then
the entire family would fast for three days. Hassan and Husayn were
cured, and the process of fasting began. At that time there was nothing
in their house to eat, so Imam ‘Ali went to a Khaybarian Jew named
Shimon and borrowed three measures of barley.

His wife, Lady Fatima milled one measure into flour and baked it into
five loaves of bread, one for each of them. ‘Ali, Lady Fatima, and their
two sons, Hassan and Husayn along with their maidservant Fiddah fasted
for three consecutive days. On the first day, at the time of breaking
the fast, a destitute (*miskin*) person came to the door asking for some
food. They took the food they intended to eat—a loaf of bread each—and
gave it to him. They then broke their fast only with water. On the
second day, at the time of breaking their fast, an orphan came to their
door, and they again gave him all their food.

On the third day, at the time of breaking the fast, a prisoner of war (a
non-Muslim who had been captured in the defensive wars of Islam and was
living in the city of Madina) came to their door and asked for some
food, and again, they took all five loaves of bread and gave it to the
man, breaking their fast for the third consecutive day with only water.
Afterwards, the Messenger of Allah made a visit and saw his daughter,
Lady Fatima al-Zahra and her two children, Hassan and Husayn were pale
and too weak to speak, and he saw that they were trembling from hunger.
Lady Fatima herself was sitting hollow-eyed on her prayer mat, her
stomach sunk into her back. As he was asking them the reason for their
state, angel Jibril (Gabriel) immediately came to the Prophet with Surah
76, “O Muhammad, Allah congratulates you for the sacrifice of your
household.”[^18]

These verses not only translate the generosity and steadfastness of the
Ahlul Bayt but also reveal the total submission of the Family of the
Prophet and their immaculate and pure personalities. Commentators of the
Qur’an have a consensus that these verses speak of the Ahlul Bayt and
place them at the highest level of piety and show them as models for the
generosity of mankind. Humanity would be rightly guided if they
followerd their parable.

The Verse of Guardianship
-------------------------

***O you who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and those
vested with authority over you (’ul ul-’amr minkum). And if you quarrel
about something, refer it to Allah and the Messenger.***[^19]

This verse, as explained in the previous section, refers to the
guardianship of Imam ‘Ali, and subsequently, the rest of the Ahlul Bayt.
The Prophet has said about “those vested with authority over you,” that
“They are my successors and the leaders of the Muslims after me. The
first of them is ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib, then al-Hassan and al-Husayn, then
‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, then Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, who is known as al-Baqir,
then al-Sadiq Ja‘far ibn Muhammad, then Musa ibn Ja‘far, then ‘Ali ibn
Musa, then Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, then ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, then al-Hassan ibn
‘Ali, then the one who bears my name—Muhammad. And he will be the proof
(*hujjah*) of Allah on the earth.”[^20]

The Hadith of the Two Weighty Things (Thaqalayn)
------------------------------------------------

It is probable that I will be called soon, and I will respond. So I
leave behind me two weighty (very worthy and important) things, the Book
of Allah (the Qur’an), which is a string stretched from the heaven to
the earth; and my progeny, my Ahlul Bayt. Verily Allah, the Merciful,
the Aware, has informed me that these two will never be separated from
each other until they meet me at the Fountain of Abundance (the *Hawdh*
of *Kawthar*, a spring in heaven). Therefore, be careful of how you
treat these two in my absence, said the Messenger of Allah.[^21]

This hadith was declared on, at least five occasions—the first being the
farewell speech during the last hajj, the second at Ghadir Khum, the
third after the Prophet left the city of Ta΄if near Makkah, the fourth
at the pulpit in Madina, and the fifth—just before he died—in his room
which was full of his companions.

Given the high importance of the Noble Qur’an, why would the Prophet
associate the Ahlul Bayt with the Noble Qur’an and place them second in
importance to it? The answer is that Ahlul Bayt are the best to explain
the true meaning and interpretation of this Noble Book. The Noble
Qur’an, as it states itself, contains both clear (*muhkam*) and unclear
(*mutashabiah*) verses, and so the correct interpretation of these
unclear verses must be passed on from the Prophet himself, as he did to
his Ahlul Bayt. In addition, the Ahlul Bayt, due to their closeness to
the Prophet, had an unparalleled knowledge of his traditions.

Similar Narrations from the Prophet Muhammad about his Ahlul Bayt
-----------------------------------------------------------------

The parable of my Ahlul Bayt is similar to that of Noah’s ark. Whoever
embarks it will certainly be rescued, but the one who opposes boarding
it will certainly be drowned.[^22]

Just like the stars protect mankind from losing its way in travel, so
are my Ahlul Bayt; they are the safeguard against discord in matters of
religion.[^23]

Acknowledgement of the *Al-e-*Muhammad means salvation from the
Hellfire; the love of *Al-e-*Muhammad is a passport for crossing the
bridge of *Sirat*; and obedience to *Al-e-*Muhammad is protection from
divine wrath.[^24]

[^1]: Noble Qur’an, 33:33

[^2]: al-Suyuti, al-Durr al-Manthur

[^3]: Tirmidhi, Manaqib Ahlul-Bayt, Vol. 2, 308

[^4]: It is not uncommon to find a group of verses discussing one theme
and having one verse in the middle that discusses another theme. For
example see Qur’an, Surah 5, verse 3 and Surah 5, v. 66-68.

[^5]: Ibn Mardawayh. Ahmad ibn Hanbal. Tirmidhi. Ibn Mundir. Tabarani.
For more details see: Tabataba΄i, al-Mizan.

[^6]: al-Miqrizi, Fadha΄il Ahlul-Bayt, 21

[^7]: Ibn Hajar, Sawa΄iq. Vol.11, 160; Tabaqat al-Kubra, Ibn Sa΄ad;
Sahih Muslim; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal; Tafsir al-Durr al-Manthur

[^8]: Noble Qur’an, 42:23

[^9]: Noble Qur’an, 6:84-85

[^10]: Tabarsi, al-Ihtijaj, Vol. 2, Argument 271 and 335

[^11]: Noble Qur’an, 3:61

[^12]: Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Vol. 1, 185; Tabari, Tafsir, Vol. 3,
192; al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak, Vol. 3, 150; al-Hafiz Abu Nu΄aym, Dala΄il
al-Nubuwwah, 297; al-Naysaburi, Asbab al-Nuzul, 74; Abu Bakr ibn
al-‘Arabi, Ahkam al-Qur’an, Vol. 1, 115; al-Fakhr al-Razi, Tafsir
al-Kabir, Vol. 8, 85; al-Juzri, Usd al-Ghabah, Vol. 4, 25; Ibn al-Jawzi,
Tadhkira Sibt, 17; Qurtubi, al-Jami΄ li-Ahkam al-Qur’an, Vol. 3, 104;
Tafsir ibn Kathir, Vol. 1, 370; Ibn Kathir, al-Bidayah wal-Nihayah, Vol.
5, 52; Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, al-Isabah, Vol. 2, 503; Ibn al-Sabbagh
al-Maliki, al-Fusul al-Muhimmah, 108; Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, al-Durr
al-Manthur, Vol. 4, 38; Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti, Tarikh al-Khulafa΄, 115;
Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa΄iq al-Muhriqa, 199; Altogether 47 narrators and
commentators of the Noble Qur’an from the four schools of thought
narrate that the immediate family of the Prophet were only Lady Fatima,
‘Ali, Hassan, and Husayn.

[^13]: Noble Qur’an, 33:56

[^14]: Tafsir al-Kabir, Vol. 3, 56

[^15]: Noble Qur’an, 37:130

[^16]: Ibn Hajar, al-Sawa΄iq, Ch. 11

[^17]: Noble Qur’an, 76:5-13

[^18]: Zamakhshari, Tafsir al-Kashhaf, Ch. 76; Fakhr al-Razi, Tafsir
al-Kabir, Ch. 76; Tabarsi, Mu΄jam al-Bayan, Ch. 76

[^19]: Noble Qur’an, 4:59

[^20]: Tafsir al-Burhan

[^21]: This hadith has been narrated by more than twenty companions of
the Prophet and has also been narrated by over 185 narrators mentioned
in Sahih Muslim, Vol. 2, 238; Musnad Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Vol. 5, 181-182;
Sahih Tirmidhi, Vol. 2, 220.

[^22]: This hadith has been narrated by eight companions of the Prophet
and eight disciples of the companions, by sixty well-known scholars and
more than ninety authors from the brothers of the Sunni school, such as
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Mishkat al-Masabih, 523; Fara΄id al-Simtayn, Vol. 2,
242; al-Sawa΄iq al-Muhriqah, 234; ‘Uyun al-Akhbar, Vol. 1, 211.

[^23]: al-Hakim, al-Mustadrak (quoting Ibn ‘Abbas), Vol. 3, 149

[^24]: al-Shafa, Vol 2, 40


