Characteristics of Shiite Belief about Mahdi and Questions Arose from this Belief
=================================================================================

Mahdi the Twelfth Successor of the Prophet (S)
----------------------------------------------

What has been analyzed until now in this book about “great universal
peacemaker” and “revolutionary programs of Mahdi” was in two parts, one
part in a general rational form and another part in a general Islamic
form; but belief of Shiites which is being fed from the school of Ahl
al-Bayt of Prophet (S) has some characteristics which will be studied in
this chapter; these characteristics are:

1) Shiites believe that Mahdi is the twelfth successor of Prophet (S)
and son of Imam Hassan Askari (as); His name is “Muhammad”, his Kunya
(honorific) is “Abolghasem” and his Laqabs are “Mahdi”, “Sahib Al-Zaman”
and “al-Qa’im”.

2) “Mahdi” is alive now and according to the fact that he was born in
the year 255 after Hijrah, now he is more than thousand years old.

3) “Mahdi” is hidden from the eyes while he is alive; which means, while
he has a natural life but lives in this world unknown.

But other Islamic sects - except some of them - believe that he will
born in End of Days, although he is from the dynasty of prophet;
therefore, they don’t consider an age with this long occultation for
him; albeit, few Sunnis also consider him as son of Imam Hassan
Askari(as).

Anyway, special belief of Shiites arise three questions:

### First Question

It is the famous question of “longevity” which has been introduced from
the past that how is it possible for a human to live this much longer,
while we have never seen that a person’s age exceeds one hundred to one
hundred and twenty years! How this old age can be proper to maximum
ages, which we see around us?

### Second Question

It is about the philosophy of this long occultation that why Imam and
leader of Islamic society should be absent this much time, what is the
secret of this matter?

### Third Question

Which has close relation with the second question - although it is
separated from that - is about the philosophy of existence of Imam (as)
during the occultation; when the leader has no connection with his
followers and the people of the world cannot see him and gain benefits
of his leadership then which role can be considered for him? And in
other words, during this time, his life is a personal and private life
not social and in the position of a leader!

First, it is necessary here to mention the evidences of Shiites about
these triple beliefs.

Then we can see that how is it possible to answer the above triple
questions.

At the beginning, it should be considered that rational reason can never
point a specific person about this matter, but the results of these
reasons are always general.

Narratives of Sunnis about Mahdi are usually general; they only talk
about “a person from the dynasty of prophet with laghab of Mahdi and the
name of Muhammad (like the name of prophet of Islam)”; except some
narratives which quote all characteristics of his father or forefathers
and is compatible with Shiites belief, like the two following
narratives:

1) “Sheikh Suleiman al-Qunduzi”, who is one of Sunni scholars, quotes in
famous book of “Yanabi al-Muwadda” from the book “Fara'id al-Simtayn”
from Ibn Abbas that a Jewish man went to Prophet (S) and asked many
questions and after hearing the answers, the light of belief shined in
his heart and became Muslim; including:

“Who is your successor? Because any prophet should have a successor, as
our prophet Moses (as) placed Joshua as his successor”.

Prophet (S) answered this question:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّ وصیّی علیّ بن ابی طالب و بعده سبطای الحسن و الحسین تتلوه تسعة
ائمّة من صلب الحسین
  </p>
</blockquote>

My successor is Ali ibn Abi Talib and after him my grandsons Hassan and
Hussein and after Hussein, nine Imams from his generation

Jewish man asked Prophet (S) to say their names; Prophet (S) said:

When Hussein dies his one Ali; and when Ali dies his son Muhammad; and
when Muhammad dies his son Ja’far, and when Ja’far dies his son Musa,
and when Musa dies his son Ali, and When Ali dies his son Muhammad, and
when Muhammad dies his son Ali, and when Ali dies his son Hassan and
when Hassan dies his son Muhammad al-Mahdi al-Hujjah will be his
successor; they are twelve persons (my successors) …

Then he asked from the condition of their death and martyrdom and
Prophet (S) said after some explanations:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و انّ الثّانی عشر من ولدی یغیب حتّی لا یری، و یأتی علی امّتی بزمن
لایبقی من الاسلام الّا اسمه؛ و لایبقی من القرآن الّا رسمه فحینئذ یأذن
الله تبارک و تعالی له بالخروج فیظهر الله الاسلام به و یجدّده ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

My twelfth child will be occulted and won’t be seen and the time will
come for my followers that nothing remains from Islam but its name and
nothing remains from Qur’an but its text; at this time, almighty God
will give him the permission to rise and appears and renews Islam by
him…

The Jewish man says some poems after accepting Islam that includes the
names of the successors of prophet and he says about the last one of
them:

> آخرهم یسقی الظّماء و هو الامام المنتظر1

The last one of them waters those who are thirsty (of truth and justice)
and he is the expected Imam!

Again in that book, it is quoted from “Amir ibn Wathilah”, who is the
last one of the prophet’s companions who died, from Ali (as) that
Prophet (S) said:

> یا علی انت وصیّی، حربک حربی، وسلمک سلمی، وانت الامام و ابوالائمة احدی
> عشر الذّین هم المطهّرون المعصومون و منهم المهدی الذّی یملأ الارض قسطاً
> و عدلاً.2

Ali you are my successor, your battle is my battle, and your peace is my
peace; and you are Imam and father of eleven Imams who are all
infallible and pure; and he is “Mahdi” from them who fills the earth
with justice.

But there are many narratives from Ahl al-Bayt about Mahdi(as) and the
fact that he is the eleventh son of Ali(as) and the ninth son of Imam
Hussein and the inseparable son of Imam Hassan Askari that mentioning
all of them takes too much time and it is out of the plan of our book
which is based upon briefness; therefore, we mention a list of them and
refer you to the book “Muntakhab al-Athar fi Ahwal al-Imam al-Thani
Ashar” (a translation-like version of this book called “Promise of Pace
and Security” has been also published from the same author) for more
information.

Narratives about the father and forefathers of Mahdi (as) have been
quoted in this book, which are mostly from Ahl al-Bayt including:

91 narratives about the fact that Imams and leaders of twelve persons
and the first one of them is Ali (as) and the last of them is Mahdi
(as).

And 94 narratives are quoted about that the last one of Imams is Mahdi
(as).

And 107 narratives about that Imams are twelve persons and nine of them
are from the sons of Hussein (as) and the ninth person is “al-Qa’im”.

And 50 hadith about the names of all twelve leaders that the last of
them is Mahdi and in this way, followers of this school specify Mahdi
(as) with all his characteristics based upon the above several
evidences.

But it is also necessary to mention that there are many ahadith in
reliable and famous Sunni hadith resources about the twelve Imams and
caliphs (generally) and as we said before, no logical interpretation can
be found for these narratives except by accepting the Shiites’ belief.

In some of these ahadith like hadith of “Sahih al-Bukhari” and “Sahih
al-Tirmidhi” اثنی عشر امیرا4 (twelve emirs), and in “Sahih Muslim” اثنی
عشر خلیفه4 (twelve caliphs) and in Sahih of Abu Dawood also اثنی عشر
خلیفه5 and in “Musnad Ahmad” اثنی عشر خلیفه are mentioned in tens of
ways.

Is it possible to deny this much of ahadith from famous books!

Should we complete the twelve caliphs by adding Umayyad caliphs like
Muawiyah, Yazid and Abd al-Malik, or by adding Abbasid caliphs like
Harun, Al-Ma'mun and Al-Mutawakkil to the first four caliphs!

1. Yanabi al-Muwadda, page 440.

2. The same document, page 85 (printed in Istanbul).

3. Sahih al-Bukhari, page 175 (printed in Egypt) and Sahih al-Tirmidhi,
vol. 2, page 45 (printed in Delhi).

4. Sahih Muslim, vol. 2, page 191 (printed in Egypt).

5. Sahih of Abu Dawood, vol. 2, Book of Mahdi, page 207 (printed in
Egypt).

Who are these twelve caliphs whom prophet has named and has praised?
--------------------------------------------------------------------

This is the question that - except the follower of Ahl al-Bayt who
believe in twelve Imams - should find an answer for that; because no
fair person can consider Umayyad and Abbasid caliphs - who deviated the
Islamic government from its way and performed any kind of crime,
oppression, transformation and distortion of concepts of Islam - as the
successors of prophet and competent of being praised.


