The Way of the Victory of that Great Peacemaker
===============================================

Does he Rise with Sword
-----------------------

We know the important condition of victory over the enemy is
predominance of the forces; these forces don’t include only military
forces; but predominance of spiritual power and faith, firmness of
economical and social bases are entirely included in this predominance
and have essential roles.

And if a society has failed and remained captive then there is no reason
other than negligence about efforts in providing the factors of victory
or miscalculation of forces.

By considering the above essential principle, some questions are
introduced about the rise of the great universal peacemaker:

1) Does the leader of this great movement use traditional weapons of
previous ages (non-firearms) for establishment of global peace and
victory of the army of the adherents of peace and justice over the
predators, oppressors and tyrants? In this case, how is it possible to
justify this method of fighting for others and how such weapons can make
us win the battle against the advanced and frightening armaments of our
time that is like a plaything before them?

Or fight against the armaments more advanced from today’s armaments that
industrial countries have?

How will it be given to him and his followers?

2) Furthermore, we read in Islamic narratives:

“He rises with sword” and it shows that the first possibility, which is
using traditional weapons, is closer to the truth and in this case the
same problem remains unsolved:

How is it possible to disable modern armaments and return to the age of
non-firearms?

Will today’s world be possibly destroyed completely in a nuclear war -
as some scientists have predicted - in the way that there is no way
other than returning to the past and then he rises?

Is this possibility acceptable?

3) Again another question arises that essentially and totally, in the
age of dominance of light over darkness and justice over injustice, will
modern mechanical age, with this much of facilities, which have provided
for humanity, be destroyed and humans return to some centuries ago?

Is this restitution and return believable?

Or contrariwise, not only it remains, but it is completed very fast, a
revolution without the negative aspects of mechanical life and its
dangers? And in other words, mechanical life will be both “developed”
and “purified”!

For finding the answers of these questions, it is possible to get help
from both hadith resources and rational reasons, because it is related
and connected to both of them.

Wisdom says:

Returning to the past is neither possible nor logical, and it is against
the nature of creation and evolution in human life; therefore, there is
no reason for human society to stop developing by mutation toward truth
and justice, or to retreat; return and looking behind is not compatible
with this development and mutation.

Therefore, the rise of a great peacemaker for establishment of justice
and freedom in the entire world never causes the industrial and
mechanical movement, in its positive form, to stop or to be removed.

Current industries have solved many problems of human lives and, as we
said in previous discussion, they are even one of the bases of the
universal united government, closeness and attachment of the world in
communication and social relations and it is not possible without
industrial evolution.

But, there is no doubt that his industrial mutation and technological
evolution should necessarily pass trough a precise filter in order for
its unhealthy and harmful aspects to be removed, and finally extensively
be used for the benefits of humans and peace and justice; a government,
which demands truth and justice, will surely perform this act.

But about the weapons, it should be said that:

For establishment of such government, autocratic governments should be
removed from the world; and for removing them, at least in present
conditions, a “super-weapon” is needed; as weapon which is maybe not
even assumable for us today.

Is this weapon something like a “mysterious and unknown ray” which has a
power beyond all present weapons and can disable all of them and
neutralize the plan of superpowers for utilizing that?

Or is it a mysterious mental effect and disabling their thinking systems
even from faraway that they cannot think about using present destructive
weapons?

Or is it something life a feeling fear and extraordinary terror that
prevents any kind of decision about this matter?

Or something else …

We don’t know. And we cannot specify the kind of this weapon neither for
being material or mental nor other aspects; we can only say that it will
be a super-weapon.

And we also know that this weapon is not a king of weapon, which
destroys innocents and sinner together and places the fundamentals of
future justice on today’s oppression and injustice.

This was rational analysis.

But, in Hadith Resources

There are interesting expressions in hadith resources that imply clear
answers for above questions, including:

1- It is quoted from Imam Sadiq (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّ قائمنا ادا قام اشرقت الارض بنور ربّها و استغنی العباد من ضوءالشّمس
  </p>
</blockquote>

(When our al-Qa’im rises, the earth will be shined by the light of his
God and servants of God won’t need sunlight anymore!)[^1]

It is understood from this expression that the matter of light and
energy will be solved in the way that people take the benefits of
powerful sources of light, which can replace sunlight.

Should we consider this matter a miracle again while daily life program,
continuously, should by based upon natural traditions not upon miracles;
that miracles are exceptional matters and for the cases of exception and
necessity and for proving the truthfulness of the invitation of prophet
of Imam.

And anyhow, normal life of people was not based upon miracles in the age
of no prophet; therefore, evolution of sciences and industries will
reach a point that people will find an extraordinary source of light
with the leadership of that great leader, which can even replace
sunlight.

And in these conditions, is it possible for weapons of humans for
providing peace and freedom and justice to be from the kind of the
weapons of the past centuries and essentially, is there any comparison
between these two?

2) It is quoted in another hadith from Abu Basir from Imam Sadiq (as)
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّه اذا تناهت الامور الی صاحب هذا الامر رفع الله تبارک و تعالی لَه
کلَّ منخفض من الأرض، و خفّض له کلّ مرتفع حتّی تکون الدّنیا عنده بمنزلة
راحته، فایّکم لو کانت فی راحته شعرة لم یبصرها
  </p>
</blockquote>

(When the main owner of guardianship (Mahdi(as)) takes the
responsibilities of matters, almighty God will rise up any deep place of
the earth for him and lowers any high place in the way that the world
will become like the palm of the hand for him! Which one of you doesn’t
see a hair if it is in your palm of the hand!)[^2]

Today, they transfer pictures to different parts of the world by
installing transmitters on top of the mountains and even satellites are
being used for covering more expanded regions for broadcasting images,
in order for all those who have receivers to use them.

But, against his issue is not possible, at least by now; it means that
it is possible to transmit the pictures from one point to different
points of the world but it is not possible to transmit the pictures from
all points of the world to one points, except by installing equipped
transmitters in every city, even every house, desert, mountain and every
part of the world in order to be informed from all parts of the world
and such thing is not possible with current equipments.

But, it is understood from above hadith that in the age of the rise of
Mahdi (as) a powerful and equipped system of picture transmission will
be made which maybe it is not even assumable for us today, in the way
that the entire world becomes like the palm of the hand; neither high
obstacles nor deep places prevent the creatures on the earth to be seen!

It is certain that universal united government and peace and security
and justice in multilateral and fast and serious form won’t be possible
without such information dominance over the entire earth; and God will
give him and his government this tool.

Again, I insist that these matters, which are related with daily life of
the people, don’t seem to be based upon miracles, but they should be
performed through normal tools and naturally based upon the advancement
of science and industries.

It is also clear that this advanced information unit cannot be in an
apparently backward society, but other parts of the life should also
advance in the same direction, in all aspects and matters and even kinds
of weapons.

3) It is quoted from Imam Baqir (as) that he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ذخر لصاحبکم الصّعب!
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: و ما الصّعب؟ قال: ما کان من سحاب فیه رعد و صاعقة او برق، فصاحبکم
یرکبه، أما انّه سیرکب السّحاب و یرقی فی الأسباب؛ اسباب السّماوات
السّبع و الارضین!
  </p>
</blockquote>

(That indomitable equipment is reserved for your guardian and friend
(Mahdi (as)).[^3]

The narrator of hadith says: I asked what is the purpose of indomitable
equipment?

Imam (as) said:

It is a cloud which has the roar of thunder and the speed of lightening;
he will ride this equipment; beware that he will soon ride the clouds
and ascends to seven heavens and earths).

Certainly, the purpose of cloud is not this ordinary cloud; because
ordinary clouds are the equipments for space travels; they are moving in
the space close to the earth and have little distance with the surface
of the earth and cannot rise upper than that; and, it is pointed to a
very fast equipment with a power light thunder and lightening; and opens
the sky with its extraordinary power when moving, and continues moving
and can move everywhere in the sky.

And accordingly, it is a super modern equipment that with don’t have its
example in current equipments; only, it maybe similar to UFOs and hyper
speed space equipments about which we here stories today and we don’t
know that how much are these stories real and scientific; but anyway, it
is not a UFO.

Anyhow, it can totally be understood from above hadith that the matter
of industrial backwardness won’t happen, but contrarily, it is talked
about extraordinary advancement that completion should be achieved in
all aspects parallel to that.

4) Another wonderful hadith, which is quoted by Jabir from Imam Baqir
(as), says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّما سمّی المهدی لانّه یهدی الی امر خفی؛ حتّی انه یبعث الی رجل لا
یعلم النّاس له ذنب فیقتله حتّی ان احدهم یتکلّم فی بیته فیخاف ان یشهد
علیه الجدار
  </p>
</blockquote>

(He is named Mahdi (guided one) because he is guided to hidden matters,
until he sends for a person whom people consider him to be innocent and
kills him (because he is informed about his final sin, like murder, that
causes Qisas!), until some of people fear the testification of the walls
when they talk in their homes (and inform the government of Mahdi about
their violations and conspiracies)![^4]

This hadith also confirms that during the time of his government, while
good and righteous people live completely free, criminals are strictly
under control in the way that maybe their voices will be recorded from
their homes by advanced equipments and it is possible to know that what
have they said in their homes, when it is necessary!

Maybe, this expression was not acceptable except to be a miracle
one-hundred years ago; but today that we see in many countries vehicle
movements in road is being control by radar without the presence of
police officer, or we hear that scientists were capable of reviving the
voices of Egyptian potters of two-thousand years ago from the waves
remained on the surface of the vases in some of the museums of Egypt, or
we hear that there are equipments which can take photos of a thief from
the waves that have remained in the place from where he has recently
escaped by thermal waves (infrared waves) and recognize him through this
method, is not so much amazing.

The answer of previous question becomes clear from what have been
mentioned above that in the age of universal revolution of Mahdi (as)
not only the matter of backwardness is introduced but technology and
industries will be advanced unexampled but only in the way of the
benefits of humans and establishing the goal of truth-demanding persons,
liberals and those who are thirsty of truth and justice.

Meaning of Sword
----------------

Only, this question remains that what is the meaning of these many
expressions about the “rise by sword” about Mahdi (as)? Even we wait for
the day in which we stand in the rows of these Mujahids with bare sword
“شاهراً سیفه” in invocations, which teach the preparedness for
participating in this great freedom-giving jihad.

But, the truth is that the “sword” has always been a metaphor referring
to power and military force and it is still the same as “pen” refers to
science and culture.

There is no doubt that even in traditional battlefields in the past,
there were other weapons except the sword, like arrow, harpoon and
dagger, but it is always said if you don’t obey the matter then “sword
will force you” or it is said that “I will take my right by the power of
the sword”.

Or it is famous from the past that “the country is rules by two things,
pen and sword” and all of these are symbolic and its meaning is relying
on force and military power.

There are many proverbs available today which talk about this issue:

“That person has hanged the sword in front!” which means, he is showing
his power explicitly.

“The sword will judge between us!” in refers that the problem won’t be
solved except by fighting.

“We won’t put the swords in sheaths until we reach our goal!” refers
that we continue the fight until the end.

“That person has put his sword in the sheath!” it means that he has quit
fighting.

“He is two-bladed sword!” it means that he fight in two directions.

In all of these expressions the sword is a metaphor about power and
fighting; we also read in Islamic narratives:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“الجنّة تحت ضلال السّیوف”
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Paradise is under the shadow of swords).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“السّیوف مقالید الجنّة”
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Swords are the keys to paradise!)

All of these point to jihad and devotion and using the power; and there
are many of these symbolic expressions about “sword” and “pen” in
different languages.

It is cleared here that the purpose of the rise of Mahdi(as) with sword
is relying of power, in order not to be assumed that this great divine
peacemaker appears in the form of a teacher, preacher or a consultant of
social issues and his prophecy is not only advising the people.

But, he is a forethoughtful leader who firstly uses logic, and when the
expression of truth has no benefit, as it is the same about many of the
oppressors and tyrants, he will use his sword; it means that he will use
force and defeat the oppressors, or in case of necessity, removes their
polluted existence from the way, and undoubtedly, there is no way other
than this for correcting a group of people, because it has been said
that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
النّاس لایقیمهم الّا السّیف
  </p>
</blockquote>

(People won’t be corrected except by sword!)

And in other words, his duty is not only enlightenment and showing the
way but his more important duty - adding to them - is execution of
divine laws and establishment of evolutional revolution of Islam and
taking to the destination and achieving the goal.

Although this matter has been cleared from above discussion, but it is
necessary to affirm that against the thoughts of some narrow-minded ones
who assume that when he rises, he will use force and weapons suddenly
and based on that false legend “He bloodsheds continuously until blood
reaches his stirrup!”, at first he starts intellectual leadership and
enlightenment in all aspects.

According to clear religious expression he gives “ultimatum” in the way
that anyone, who has even a small preparedness for logically accepting
the religion of truth, becomes enlightened and only those remains that
are not correctible except by force.

From clear evidence about this issue - regardless of the fact that its
reason is inside itself - is that we know his method is the method of
Prophet (S); Prophet (S) was inviting people hidden and apparent in
Mecca for thirteen years and those who were ready for truth gathered
around him; but powerful oppressors who were mostly the leaders of
ignorant people rose against him and inevitably he went to Medina and
stood against them by establishing the Islamic government and providing
power, and opened his way toward a public invitation.

Although, many poisonings have been performed about the invitation of
Islam that it is the religion of sword but the best evidence which is in
hand today against them and fortunately, they couldn’t hide or destroy
that is Qur’an.

If the feature of Islam was a feature relying on force and violence then
this much reasoning and arguments were not available in Qur’an for
proving the truths; this much of different reasoning were not introduced
about the issue of monotheism and resurrection, two essential principles
of Islam; it wouldn’t invite this much of thinkers and wise persons for
judgment; wouldn’t talk this much about science and knowledge; a violent
military system doesn’t understand reasoning.

And even clears its position with logical reasons as an inevitable
necessity when using force.

Anyway, he will act like Prophet (S) in this method; moreover, the level
of public thoughts is higher in his age and using logic is more
necessary as it is necessary to use force and violence against the
expanding violence of turbulent oppressors.

Certainly, his revolution will be a bloody revolution in some parts, and
dirty bloods of the body of human society will be shed by his blade and
there is no way other than this for making fundamental corrections in
any corrupted society; but the meaning of this expression is not that he
will bloodshed uncounted and kills with no reason; he is exactly like a
physician who takes blood from the patient very carefully!

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 13, old printing, page 176.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, page 328.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 12, page 182.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 13.


