His Method of Government
========================

Three Ages
----------

There are three ages for the great revolutionary person of human
history, Mahdi (as):

1) Age of preparation and waiting and signs of the advent

2) Age of establishment of the revolution and fighting against
oppression and corruption

3) Age of government of truth and justice

Hitherto, we have talked about the first and the second ages too much;
and now is the time for discussing about the third age which is the
result of this expanded and multilateral revolution, and this matter has
been less discussed, while being so important.

Anyway, assuming that:

A world becomes free of discriminations and class differences, and
corruptive positioning;

Free of separations and disintegrations;

Free of war, bloodshed and aggression;

And free of bacchic laughter of imperialists and cries of enchained
deprived people;

Is how interesting, calming and joyful, indeed!

But certainly, as imagining such world in mind is easy, it is extremely
hard in reality, but anyway, humanity has to proceed this way and make
it real that otherwise, there is no way other than destruction and
nonexistence.

Main frames of the systems of such society has been specified with short
and meaningful points in Islamic narratives, and while these expression
have reached us from twelve or thirteen centuries ago, but they are
still new and fresh.

And here, we mention some important parts of them:

### Hyper-speed Development of Sciences in the Age of Mahdi (as)

No revolutionary plan will be persistent and dynamic without
intellectual and cultural mutation and won’t achieve necessary growth
and perfection. Therefore, undoubtedly, the first step toward the
establishment of such goal is a cultural revolution, which moves the
thoughts in to directions:

In one direction, toward sciences which are needed for a flourished,
free and healthy society (about materialistic and appearing aspects).

And in other direction, toward the knowledge about the principles of
correct human life mixed with belief for spiritual and fundamental
aspects.

We read in a hadith from Imam Sadiq (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العلم سبعة عشرون حرفاً فجمیع ما جائت به الرّسل حرفان، فلم یعرف النّاس
حتّی الیوم غیر الحرفین، فاذا قام قائمنا اخرج الخمسة و العشرین حرفاً؛
قبثّها فی النّاس و ضمّ الیها الحرفین، حتّی یبثّها سبعة و عشرین حرفا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Science and knowledge is twenty-seven words (has twenty-seven branches);
all the things which have been brought by divine prophets for the people
was only two words, and the people have not understood more than those
two word until now, but when our al-Qa’im rises, shows other twenty-five
words (twenty-five branches), and distributes among the people and adds
two words to that in order to complete twenty-seven words. [^1]

This hadith clearly shows the extraordinary scientific mutation of the
age of revolution of Mahdi (as) that an evolution happens 12 times more
than the entire science and knowledge which had been given to humans
during the ages of all the prophets of truth! And the doors of all
useful and constructive branches of science will be opened to the people
and humanity goes the way which has been gone in thousands of years, 12
times more in a short time; what mutation can be faster and more
important than this!

Another hadith, which has been quoted from Imam Baqir (as), completes
the meaning of this hadith, where it says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا قام قائمنا وضع یده علی رؤوس العباد، فجمع بها عقولهم و کملت بها
احلامهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

When our al-Qa’im rises, puts his hands on the heads of the servants of
God and completes their wisdom and educates their thoughts.[^2]

And in this way, brains begin moving toward perfection under the light
of guidance of Mahdi (as) and under his hand of mercy, and all
narrow-mindedness, envies and cheap thoughts, which are the source of
many of oppositions, disturbances and violent social conflicts, will be
removed.

Open-minded people with open thoughts and broad minds and hearts and
superior ambition will be educated who solve lots of social problems in
their souls and makes a world full of peace and joy.

Also today, any kind of social reforms, in any scale, depends on this
intellectual change and spiritual revolution.

### Extraordinary Development of Industries in that Age

Interesting ahadith, which we mentioned in previous discussion of “the
way of victory…” by numbers 1,2,3,4, show that this scientific mutation
also contains industries and technology in a large scale.

Communication equipments will be so much advanced in the way that
appears the world like the palm of the hand; and dominate the central
government over the conditions of then entire world in order to try to
solve the problems of the world immediately; and destroys any kind of
corruption (deliberate and in deliberate) at the beginning.[^3]

The matter of energy will be solved in the way that even the energy of
the Sun, which is the source of all energies (except nuclear power),
won’t be needed anymore.

And it may be under the light of an advanced nuclear energy system - by
purifying all harmful radiations, which are today the main problem of
using this source of energy.[^4]

Hyper speed equipments, which are not comparable with today’s vehicles,
will be used by that government not only for moving around the earth in
a short time, but long space travels.[^5]

And it is also helping the corrective goals of this government.

It is mentioned in another hadith from Imam Sadiq (as) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّ قائمنا اذا قام مدّالله بشیعتنا فی اسماعهم و ابصارهم، حتّی لایکون
بینهم و بین القائد برید، یکلّمهم فیسمعون و ینظرون الیه و هو فی مکانه
  </p>
</blockquote>

(When our al-Qa’im rises, the God will strengthen the eyes and ears of
our Shiites in the way that there will be no mailman between them and He
Who arises (their leader); he talks to them and they hear him, and see
him while he is in his place (and they are on other parts of the
world)!)[^6]

It means that the means of transmission of “sound” and “image” will be
provided extensively and easily for all of his followers in the way that
something called post office is considered unnecessary and useless in
the age of his government! And current issues of this government will be
executed and solved without paperwork - as it is the way of today’s
world and maybe wastes half of the time of human resources and delays
the circulation of all acts and achieving the rights of rightful
persons.

All order and programs will be given and executed through the system of
“watch and presence”.

And how it is excellent to have such plan for managing human societies
and removing unnecessary and time-wasting programs!

Another clear hadith, which has been quoted from Imam Sadiq (as),
completes this subject explicitly; where he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّ المؤمن فی زمان قائم و هو بالمشرق سیری اخاه الّذی فی المغرب؛ و کذا
الّذی فی المغرب یری اخاه الّذی بالمشرق
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Believer person sees his brother and sister in the West while he is in
the East in the age of al-Qa’im; also the one who is in the West sees
his brother who is in the East!)[^7]

Direct communication will become practically not only for the
government, even for the people; and visual and physical communications
strengthen spiritual communication of the hearts; in the way that the
world will be like home and its people like the members of a family!

And in this way, science and knowledge and industries will be used for
making better conditions for the world and strengthening the bases of
brotherhood - and not in the way of destruction.

Great Economical and Social Justice Development
-----------------------------------------------

The earth, on which we live, has several facilities for our living and
next generations and population much more than current population; but
nonexistence of enough knowledge about available resources and potential
resources of the earth on the one hand, and nonexistence of a correct
system for distribution of wealth on the other hand, have caused the
feeling of deficiency in different aspects; in the way that in our time,
everyday a group of unfortunate people die.

The system ruling today’s world economy, which is an imperialistic
system, trains an oppressive war system beside itself that destroys an
important part of intellectual and human resources that should
continuously search for new resources for making better life for humans.

But when this system and its side system are destroyed, forces will be
used for extracting numerous resources of the earth; and the advanced
science will be used for this program and new resources will be found
soon and flourish human economy.

Therefore, there are many meaningful expressions in pointing to this
economical advancement in narratives related to the government of that
great peacemaker.

For instance, we read in a hadith:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انّه یبلّغ سلطانه المشرق و المغرب؛ و تظهر له الکنوز؛ و لا یبقی فی
الارض خراب الّا یعمّره
  </p>
</blockquote>

(His government will cover the East and the West of the world, and
treasures of the world will appear for him and no ruins will remain on
earth except that he constructs!) [^8]

And indeed it should happen, because the ruins of the world is neither
because of deficiency of human resources not financial deficiencies, but
they are the result of destructions made by humans and wasting financial
and human resource and nonexistence of responsibility; and when this
obstacles are removed by a correct social system then construction and
flourishing is certain; especially, when it has the support of new
extraordinary resources.

We read in another interesting hadith from Imam Sadiq (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا قام القائم: حکم بالعدل
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وارتفع الجور فی ایّامه و امنت به السّبل و ردّ کلّ حقّ الی اهله ... و
حکم بین النّاس بحکم داوود (ع) و حکم محمد (ع) فحینئذ تظهر الارض کنوزه و
تبدی برکاته ولا یجد الرّجل منکم یومئذ موضعا لصدقته و لا لبرّه لشمول
الغنی جمیع المومنین ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

When al-Qa’im rises: establishes the government based upon justice.

And oppression and injustice will be removed in his time.

And roads become secure under the light of his existence.

The earth will show its gifts.

And any right will reach its owner.

People like David (as) and Muhammad (S) will judge among the people.

At this time the earth will disclose its treasures.

And shows its blessings.

And nobody finds a case for charity, giving alms and financial help,
because all believers will be needless and rich …! [^9]

Affirming the appearance of the gifts and disclosure of the treasures
shows that agriculture will advance to its highest level; also all
underground resources will be discovered and used; and income of the
people increases so much in the way that there will be no poor person in
society and all the people become needless.

And undoubtedly, executing the principle of justice and attracting human
resources to constructive ways will have such effect; because as hunger
and poverty are not the results of deficiencies but they are direct and
indirect results of oppressions, discriminations and injustices and
wasting the resources and assets!

It is quoted from Abu Sa’id al-Khudri in another hadith, which has been
mentioned in Sunni resources:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص):
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ابشّرکم بالمهدى یملأ الارض قسطاً کما ملئت جوراً و ظلماً، یرضى عنه
سکّان السّماء والارض، یقسم المال صحاحاً، فقال رجل ما معنى صحاحاً، قال
بالسّویه بین النّاس; و یملأ قلوب امّة محمّد(ص) غنى; و یسعهم عدله، حتّى
یأمر منادیاً ینادى یقول من له بالمال حاجة فلیقم فما یقوم من النّاس
الاّ رجل واحد (ثم یأمر له بالمال فیاخذ ثم یندم و یردّه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Holy Prophet (S) said:

I promise you the advent of Mahdi (as); he fills the earth with justice
as it is filled with oppressions and injustice; habitants of heavens and
the earth will be satisfied from him and divides the properties and
assets in correct way. [^10]

Someone asked: What is the meaning of correct division of the assets?

He said:

Equally among the people!

(Then added)

And fills the hearts of the followers of Muhammad (S) with needlessness
and his justice covers everyone; until he orders a person to calls with
loud voice that anyone, who has financial needs, rises and nobody will
rise but one.

(Then we read beneath the hadith that Imam orders to give him
considerable amount but he returns soon and will be regretful of being
greedy).

Some points should be considered in interpretation of this hadith:

1) The purpose of satisfaction of the habitants of heavens from his
government is either referring to the angels of heavens and close angels
of God or referring to the expansion of his government to other
inhabited planets and opening the way of space travels to faraway places
of the universe.

2) The purpose of fair dividing of wealth in the form of equal
division - by considering that we know in Islam that Mahdi (as) is its
guardian and promoter, more assets are paid in change of more work and
efforts and competence - is either refereeing to the assets of Bait
al-Mal and public assets in general that everyone is equal before that
in Islamic government - as it is quoted from the way of Prophet (S) and
Ali (as), against what we have read about the time of some of caliphs
like Usman who make all kinds of discriminations - or referring to that
in equal conditions, equal rewards and wages will be given to the
people; against what we see in today’s world that a worker in a part of
the world takes ten dollars for an hour but another worker in another
part of the world may take less than one dollar for ten hours of work
and it is the extreme of oppression that wage of the people are
different in equal conditions.

3) Another point is that, it is clearly understood from beneath the
hadith that in that day there isn’t even one needy person, because that
one person who rises doesn’t have a rich soul and has greed and he is
financially needless; and it is important that he will fill the hearts
with spiritual and mental richness, and removes this evil feeling of
“greed” from the land of the hearts by his correct leadership; the very
same greed which is the source of useless efforts of brainless wealth
collectors, who still try for collecting more wealth by having thousands
of times of necessary assets for themselves and their children; maybe
they are infected with polydipsia that how much they drink they are
still thirsty.

Another factor, or in more correct way another excuse of collecting the
wealth, which is fear about the future, will be completely removed under
the light of his social justice and nobody finds the need of collecting
the wealth; because he is insured both for today and the future.

Again, we read another hadith from holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... حتّى تملأ الارض جوراً فلا یقدر احد یقول الله! ثم یبعث اللّه عزّوجل
رجلا منّى و من عترتى فیملأ الارض عدلا کما ملأها من کان قبله جوراً و
یخرج له الارض افلاذ کبدها و یحثو المال حثواً و لا یعدّه عداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Time will come in which the earth will be filled with oppression and
nobody can say the name of God (explicitly) (and talks about justice and
truth); then almighty God rises a man from me and my dynasty, who fills
the earth will justice, as it was filled with injustice before him and
the earth exits the parts of its liver for him, and he distributes the
wealth among the people without calculation (and everyone will take its
benefits as the amount of his/her need…).[^11]

“افلاذ” is plural of “فلذ” and means part and branch; and “افلاذ کبد”
refers to precious things and here it refers to precious and valuable
resources inside the earth.

It is also possible that the above expression points that humans will be
able to reach the core of the earth which is completely heat and fire
and maybe they use it as an important source of energy; and maybe they
extract previous resources of different kinds of metals and by
considering that crust of the Earth is a comparably thin crust and there
is a world of molten materials and different resources inside the Earth,
having such great resource can ease the mind of the people in many
aspects.

Moral growth and providing the future needs in a reliable way, and
abundance of sources of income, and totally, gathering spiritual and
physical richness removes even the necessity of counting and calculating
the assets and anyone who needs takes his/her need from Bait al-Mal of
the government without formalities.

All of these on the one hand, and on the other hand:

There are points in news which show that in the age of his government,
expanded and flourished cities, broad roads, large mosques but without
ornaments will be constructed; and the government supervises the
construction of the houses in the way that they have no disturbance for
others:

1) We read in a hadith from Imam Sadiq (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و یبنی فی ظهر الکوفه مسجداً له الف باب و یتّصل بیوت الکوفه بنهر کربلا
و بالحیرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

(He builds a mosque behind Kufa, which has one thousand doors, and the
houses of Kufa reach the river of Karbala and Hayrah!)[^12]

And we know that the distance between these two cities is 70 kilometers
now.

2) We read from Imam Baqir (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا قام القائم ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
یکون المساجد کلّها جمّاه لاشرف لها کما کان علی عهد رسول الله (ص)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و یوسّع الطّریق الاَعظم فیصیر ستّین ذرع
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و یهدم کلّ مسجد علی الطّریق
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ویسدّ کلّ کوَّة الی الطّریق
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و کلّ جناح و کنیف و میزاب الی الطّریق
  </p>
</blockquote>

When al-Qa’im rises …

Mosques will have short wall without crenels in his time as it was the
same in the time of Prophet (S).

He expands the main roads and they reach 60 cubits!

And all mosques which are in the way (and disturb the people) will be
destroyed by his command!

And all the gates which open to the ways (and disturb the movement of
the people) will be destroyed.

And (disturbing) balconies and sewages and chutes which open in the way
(of the people) will be blocked![^13]

3) Also, it is quoted in a long hadith from Imam Sadiq (as) that said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... و لیصیّرنًّ الکوفة اربعة و خمسین میلا و لیجاورنًّ قصورها کربلا، و
لیصیّرنًّ الله کربلا معقلا و مقاما...
  </p>
</blockquote>

(He will expand Kufa 54 miles until its castles reach Karbala, and
Karbala (the place of the martyrs and heroes and self-devoted persons in
the way of God) will become the center of many activities …[^14]

4) There are many narratives about the advancement of agriculture and
abundance of agricultural products and waters, cattle and construction
and flourish in all aspects.[^15]

Judiciary Development
---------------------

On the one hand, strengthening the bases of belief and moralities is
required and on the other hand, making a correct and powerful judiciary
system with complete awareness and vase dominance for fighting
corruption, aggression and oppression.

Certainly, complete advancement of industries gives humanity the
equipments with which it is easily to control all movements of the
people - in case of necessary - and observe any inharmonious act which
can cause corruption and aggression and oppression; and taking images of
criminals through the effects which are remained from them at crime
scene; also recording their voices and recognizing them. If a righteous
government has these equipments then it can be an effective factor for
preventing corruption and oppression and in case of happening, giving
the right to the rightful person.

There is no doubt that in the age of that great universal peacemaker,
moral educations will be expanded so much by using super-advanced
communication tools that prepares absolute majority of the people of the
world for a correct human life mixed with purity and social justice.

But, as humans have been created free and don’t follow determinism in
their acts; maybe some humans can be found - even in minority - in any
righteous society who abuse their freedom and use it for reaching evil
goals.

Therefore, a healthy, completely aware and dominant judiciary system
should be available in order to give the rights of people and defeats
the oppressor.

By precise studying and consideration on social crimes and corruptions
and the ways of prevention, it is cleared that:

Firstly, by execution of social justice and fair division of wealth, the
root of many of social corruptions, which are the results of conflicts
for preserving assets and exploiting weak classes, deception, different
kinds of frauds and lies and betrayals and crimes for more income in any
way by any means, will be destroyed; and maybe large number of
corruption and oppression in any society is because of these issues; by
destroying the main root, branches and leaves will be dried our
spontaneously.

Secondly, correct education and training has deep effect in fighting
against corruption, aggression and social and moral aberrances; and one
of the important reasons of expansion of corruption in today’s societies
is that not only mass media isn’t being used for correct education, but
most of them are serving the most ugly and polluted imperialistic
programs of corruption; and they serve oppression, discrimination and
corruption continuously day and night through distribution of
destructive movies and deviating stories and programs and even false and
incorrect news which are in benefits of global imperialism.

Albeit, these matters have also economical source and move for
stupefying the brains and spoiling constructive concepts, and destroying
active and aware forces of each society, for more exploitation of giants
of economical imperialism, without facing serious obstacle.

Whenever this conditions change then an important part of social
corruptions will be removed in a short time; and this cannot be
performed except by a righteous and healthy government which is working
in benefits of the people of the world - and not for exploiters - for
making and flourished and free world full of peace and justice and
belief.

Thirdly, existence of an aware and informed judiciary system by having
advanced equipments of supervision that it is either possible for
criminals to escape nor to deny the crimes, will be also an effective
factor in reducing the amount of corruption, sins and violations of
laws.

And if these three aspects work together then the aspects of its
effectiveness will be so much large.

It is understood from the whole ahadith about the age of government of
Mahdi(as) that he uses all of these three preventive factors during the
age of his revolution, in the way the famous sentence which is
considered as a proverb becomes practical; that sentence which says:

“Time will come when wolf and lamb drink water together!”

Certainly the nature of the wolves won’t be changed, and there is no
necessity for that, also lambs don’t change their present condition; it
is referring to establishment of justice in the world and changing the
way of bloody wolfish persons, who were drinking the blood of the
deprived people of human society for centuries, by serving the
government of tyrants.

They completely change their manner under the dominance of new system,
because wolfishness has never been, and is not, in human nature and is
from the accidentals and it is changeable, or at least they retreat and
isolate themselves and takes the benefits of divine gifts accompanying
others fairly instead of eating other people’s benefits, as “wolf”
beside “lamb” at the “river”!

In other than these two ways, they will be included in purification and
their existence will be removed from the way!

From considerable referrals about this matter is what has been quoted in
a hadith from Prophet (S) about diving the assets correctly in, that
people will have spiritual and physical richness that extra properties
remain without demand; it means that people will be trained and educated
in a correct system of government that consider properties over their
needs as problem for themselves! And all conflicts and brawls on this
subject will end!

All the people will be provided for their living and they also have no
worry for the future in order to pollute themselves and participate in
the competition of wealth collecting, for securing the future.

Also, we read in another hadith that in the time of his government
intellectual level of the people will increase in the way that it is not
comparable with today at all, and naturally, conflicts and fights, which
are the results of narrow-mindedness and envies, and lowness of level of
intellectuality and summarizing the personality in the amount of wealth,
will be removed.

According to previous narratives, even criminals are not safe in their
homes because of strong supervision during the time of his government,
because it is possible that they are being monitored with advanced
equipments and even their sound waves can be controlled on the walls; it
is another referral to the development of fighting against corruption in
the age of his government.

His judgment according to the law of judgment of Muhammad (S) and the
judgment law of David (as) points to this precise matter that he will
use both external regulations of Islamic investigation and judgment like
confession, testification and like them, and through mental and
scientific ways of discovering the crime, as it is quoted from some of
its examples from the age of David (as).

Moreover, in his age, beside the advancement of sciences and techniques
and industries, tools of discovering crime will be advanced in the way
that few criminals will be able not to leave trace with which cannot be
recognized.

I read an article about the wonders of human brain in one of newspapers
that human brain sends waves according inner beliefs that it is possible
to understand the amount of truths and lies of the person’s expressions!

Certainly these equipments will be advanced and other equipments will be
invented. And by using the advanced mental methods, criminals will be
completely controlled, although essentially, there are few criminals in
such society (but that few are completely important).

We repeat again that:

It is a mistake to think that in the age of his government all of these
issues will be performed through miracles, because miracles are
exceptions, and are used in necessary cases and especially for proving
the truthfulness of the invitation of Prophet (S) or Imam (as), not for
adjusting daily life and normal way of living, that no prophet has used
miracle for this purpose.

Therefore, the way of his universal government in through what we
mention not through the miracles!

Anyway, world become so much secure under the shadow of his government
that according to a narrative a woman can travel from the East to the
West alone without being disturbed!

If we add the matter of simplicity of the life of Mahdi (as) to that -
according to what have been mentioned in narratives - the issues become
even clearer; because his acts are the patterns for those who are under
the cover of his government which means all the people of the world.

And by considering that an important part of crimes and social
corruption are the results of luxury loving, glamorization of living,
useless and costly formalities and rituals, another reason of removing
corruption during the time of his government will be cleared.

It is mentioned in a hadith from Ali ibn Musa al-Reza (as):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و ما لباس القائم (ع) الّا الغلیظ و ما طعامه الّا الجشب
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Clothing of al-Qa’im is nothing more than thick cloth and his food is
only simple and unimportant food!)[^16]

Similar to this matter has been quoted from Imam Sadiq (as).

Longtime Government
-------------------

Although, there are several ahadith in Islamic resources about the time
of his government which mentioned from 5 or 7 years to 309 years (the
time of sleep of Kahf companion in that dark cave) - which is in fact,
maybe it refers to the levels and ages of that government (its
establishment five or seven years and the time of its completion 40
years and it final duration more than 300 years! Attention!) - but
regardless of Islamic narratives, it is certain that these narrations
and preliminaries are not for a short time government and certainly they
are for a longtime government that is worth this much of efforts!

Rejuvenation of all Intellectual and Cultural Fields
----------------------------------------------------

Heavenly religions are in fact the same water, which is descended from
the heaven.

Clear drops of rain - when the weather is not polluted - are pure and
clear and beautiful and life-giving, free of any kind of pollution;
wherever they drop they bring the message of life and beauty; and their
shining invites those who are thirsty; and even suggest those who are
not thirsty to drink water.

But when they drop on polluted lands, they gradually lose their
beginning purity, and sometimes, they change into a shape which any
observer abstain from watching and escapes from the putrefaction!

Divine religions, which has at first the purity of the rain, and shining
of sunlight, and beauty of spring, sometimes become so much distorted by
having contact with retrograde thoughts of ignorant persons, and
polluted hands of despiteful people and being mixed with personal habits
and traditions and tastes, that lose their attraction completely.

Islam, this living active religion that transformed most backward
nations into the most pioneer ones, are also included in this issue,
although the essence of Qur’an has not been touched and scholars in any
age and time, who have tried to save its genuineness even with the price
of their lives, have prevented these changes so much; but we should
confess that many of its meanings have been transformed for large group
of Muslims that it is possible to say that today, genuine Islam of the
time of Prophet (S) cannot be found among many people!

Most constructive meanings like “piety”, “patience”, “waiting”,
“martyrdom”, “intercession” and “worshiping” sometimes, are so much
distorted and falsely interpreted that true Islam fears from them!

Many of Islamic laws have been practically destroyed by “religious” and
“irreligious” hats (excuses), like the ruling of usury that only its
name is remained.

Another part - like Hijrah, jihad and martyrdom - has been forgotten or
at least has taken a historical shape exclusive to a specific period of
beginning of Islam.[^17]

Islamic monotheism has been polluted with many of polytheisms; and the
school of Ahl al-Bayt (as) who educate genuine Islam among them
according to the order

> “56 انّی تارک فیکم الثّقلین، کتاب الله و عترتی”,

has remained completely unknown among a large group of Muslims and they
have kept the people far from that with different kinds of accusations.

He will destroy and dispel various weeds from the garden of Islam like a
skillful and capable gardener; however, they have been tied with main
saplings in the way that it seems impossible to be separated.

He cuts deformed branches immediately; purifies this dark and polluted
water; removes the rusts of incorrect interpretations; cleans the dust
of forgetfulness; and cuts the hands of abusers and aberrant persons.

Briefly, renews the same truthful Islam of the time of Prophet (S) and
Ali (as).

One of the prophecies of Mahdi (as) is trimming Islam from these
attachments and in other words, rejuvenation of the building of its
glorious palace.

Transfers the mosques, which were one day the most active centers of
Islam and the center of any kind of political, scientific, cultural and
social movement and today, they have become the place of retired and
jobless persons or as a form of entertainment or in its best condition
as a habit, to their beginning shape.

Inaction and silence give their position to movement and action.

Revives Islamic jihad in all aspects.

Frees genuine Islamic monotheism from any pollution of polytheisms, and
interprets the transformed and reversed meanings correctly.

Removes personal tastes from Islam and removes the rust of habit and
rituals from that.

Exits Islam from its tribal and regional limited shapes and discloses
that in its global shape.

Cuts the hands of abusers and those who make religious hats (excuses)
and offers its laws free of these extras.

The whole rejuvenation and reconstruction is so much and changing that
in some of Islamic narratives it is considered as “new religion”.

We read in a narrative from Imam Sadiq (as), which has been quoted in
the book “Ithbat al-Hudat”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذا خرج القائم یقوم بامر جدید، و کتاب جدید و سنّة جدید و قضاء جدید
  </p>
</blockquote>

(When al-Qa’im appears brings new order, new method and new judgment
with him).[^18]

It clear that the newness of these programs, methods and judgments is
not because he brings new religion with him, but exits Islam from the
congestion of superstitions, distortions and incorrect interpretations
and false understandings in the way that it appears like a completely
new building.

Also the newness of the book doesn’t mean that a new divine book will be
descended to him, because Imam is Qa’im and guardian of religion, not
prophet and the one who brings new religion and book; but, extracts the
forgotten genuine Qur’an from the angles of spiritual distortions and
incorrect interpretations in the ay that it is possible to name it a new
book.

The proof of this expression, adding to explicitness of Qur’an about the
last of prophets in Ahzab sura, verse 40 and narratives which explicitly
prove that the prophet of Islam (S) is the last of prophets, there are
several ahadith that affirms he will rise with the same method of
prophet of Islam (S) and his book and tradition:

One of the companions of Imam Sadiq (as), “Abdullah ibn Ata” says:

I asked Imam how is the method of way of Mahdi (as)?

Imam answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
یصنع ما صنع رسول الله (ص) یهدم ما کان قبله کما هدم رسول الله (ص) امر
الجاهلیّة و یستأنف الاسلام جدید
  </p>
</blockquote>

He will perform the same act which prophet of God performed; destroys
previous (incorrect) programs, as prophet of God destroyed the acts of
ignorance, and rejuvenates Islam.

We read in the same book (Ithbat al-Hudat) that Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القائم من ولدی؛ اسمه اسمی و کنیة کنیتی و شمائله شمائلی؛ و سنّته سنّتی؛
یقیم النّاس علی طاعتی و شریعتی و یدعوهم الی الکتاب ربّی
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Qa’im is one of my children; his name is my name and his Kunya
(honorific) is my Kunya and his face is my face; his method is my
method; encourages people to follow me and my religion and invites them
to the book of my God. [^19]

And it is mentioned in the book “Muntakhab al-Athar” from the Prophet of
God (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و انّ الثّانی عشر من ولدی یغیب حتّی لایری، و یأتی علی امّتی بزمن
لایبقی من الاسلام الّا اسمه، ولایبقی من القرآن الّا رسمه فحینئذ یأذن
الله له تبارک و تعالی بالخروج فیظهر الاسلام به ویجدّده
  </p>
</blockquote>

(My twelfth son will be occulted and won’t be seen; and he comes to my
followers when nothing has remained from Islam but its name and nothing
has remained from Qur’an but its shape; at this time great God permits
him to exit, and appears and rejuvenates Islam by him.[^20]

Explicitness of this news is so much that there is no need for any
explanation.

Unity of Religion
-----------------

There is no doubt that religious disagreements are not compatible with a
monotheistic system in all aspects; because these agreements are enough
for disordering any unity.

Contrariwise, one of the factors of unity is unity of religion which can
be beyond all disagreements, and can gather different races, languages,
nationalities and cultures in it, and make a united society from them
that people live in that like brothers and sisters that“انّما المؤمنون
اخوه”.

Accordingly, one of the essential programs of that great peacemaker and
revolutionary man is unity of the rows under the shadow of unity of
religion.

But, it shouldn’t be doubted that this unity neither is possible to be
obligatory nor if it was possible to be obligatory then it was not
logical to be obligatory.

Religion communicates with the heart and the soul of the human and we
know that the heart and the soul are outside of the territory of force
and obligation; and nobody can transgress their boundaries.

Moreover, method and tradition of Prophet (S) - as Qur’an also
confirms - was not based upon force that: “لا اکراه فی الدّین”

Therefore, Islam has always accepted Ahl al-Kitab as a healthy minority
and has supported them until they don’t start motivation.

By considering that in the time of he government of that great
peacemaker, all the advanced equipments of communication will be used by
him and his truthful followers and by considering that genuine Islam, by
removing the extras, has extraordinary attraction, it is clearly
predictable that Islam will be accepted by most of the people of the
world through logical and continuous propagation, and unity of religions
will become practical by pioneer Islam.

This truth, which we understand from the above rational reason, can also
be clearly seen in Islamic narratives.

“Mufazzal” quotes in a long hadith from Imam Sadiq (as) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
... فوالله یا مفضّل لیرفع عن الملل و الادیان الاختلاف و یکون الدّین
کلّه واحداً کما قال الله عزّ و جلّ انّ الدّین عند الله الاسلام ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

… O Mufazzal! I swear to God that disagreements of religions will be
removed and all become one religion; as almighty God says: religion is
only Islam before God…[^21]

We previously read the same matter in interpretation of some of the
verse of Qur’an which points to the rise of Mahdi (as).

And in this way, religion of Tawhid and Islam enters all homes, all
livings of all humans and in to all hearts.

But, it is not possible to say that few minorities of the followers of
other divine religion won’t be absolutely available because humans has
free-will and there is no force and obligation is such system of
government; and it is possible for some person to remain on previous
belief because of mistake or bias, although majority of the people will
accept monotheistic system of Islam and it is natural.

But anyway, if such minority will be available, will be supported by
that government as a healthy minority and by observing the conditions of
“Ahl al-Dhimmah”.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, page 336.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, page 328.

[^3]: Refer to the second hadith of previous chapter.

[^4]: Refer to the first hadith of previous chapter.

[^5]: Refer to the third hadith of previous chapter.

[^6]: Rawdat al-Kafi (according to the quotation of Muntakhab al-Athar,
page 483).

[^7]: Muntakhab al-Athar, page 483.

[^8]: As’aaf ar-Raghibeen, chapter two, pages 140 & 141.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 13.

[^10]: Noor al-Absar fi Managhib Aal Bayt al-Nabi al-Mukhtar, pages 156
& 157, printed in Egypt.

[^11]: Amali of Al-Shaykh al-Saduq (according to the quotation of
Muntakhab al-Athar, page 168).

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, page 330.

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, page 333.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, page 12.

[^15]: Muntakhab al-Athar, pages 472, 473 & 474.

[^16]: Muntakhab al-Athar, page 307.

[^17]: It should be considered that this book has been written some
months before Islamic Revolution in Iran.

[^18]: Ithbat al-Hudat, vol. 7, page 83.

[^19]: Ithbat al-Hudat.

[^20]: Muntakhab al-Athar, page 98.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, page 4.


