False Claimants
===============

Hasn't Mahdi Appeared?
----------------------

In the history of Islam, approximately from the beginning, we see the
names of those who had called themselves “promised Mahdi”, or others had
called them so, and had big claims, or others had considered for them;
although, none of this claimant were not successful in correcting the
world and didn’t fill the world full of oppression and injustice with
justice, even they were not the source of a small corrective movement in
their small environment.

Maybe the first person who had been called with this name - although he
was not satisfied with this act - was Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah son of
Ali (as) albeit from a mother other than Fatima (sa), that the group of
“Kaysanites” believed that:

He is the promised Mahdi and after his death, they cried out that he has
never been died; but he is concealed in mount “Radwa”[^1] guarding by
lions!

While we know that “Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah” died in the year 80 or
81 after Hijrah and was buried in Baqi’ (famous cemetery of Medina), and
fortunately, today nothing is heard from this group.

Then some of Abbasid tyrants introduced themselves as Mahdi for
achieving the title of caliph and using pure beliefs of simpleminded
people for reaching this goal, by considering mental readiness of
Muslims about the promised Mahdi.

But, time shows that not only they were not Mahdi, but also they were
from the oppressors who should be destroyed by Mahdi and his sword!

This matter continued and once in a while someone claimed of being Mahdi
and gathered a group around him and deceived them; but these seasonal
Mahdi’s became known soon and their plans failed.

Because claim of being Mahdi is dangerous and our of the benefits of
exploiters as it is useful and attractive for temporary attraction of a
group of people, because Mahdi should fill the world with justice and
this is what decries false claimant very soon.

There were all types of people among these false claimants.

In some of them, signs of mental illness, idiotism and at least
simplemindedness can bee seen, while some others were ambitious and
materialist and for saturation of this feeling, claimed this claim
without studying its results.

Some others were the tools of recognized enemies of Islam, who were
being used for deviating the minds of Muslims from vital issues with
which they were facing, and for separation and concision and weakening
religious power, specially the power of clergies who were always their
strong disturbance.

Briefly, this game of being Mahdi continued until these days that they
take “Sayyid Muhammad Ali Baab” to the scene.

Although, he didn’t have the courage for this claim but according to
living evidences and his own expressions which are available today in
writings, he didn’t claimed of being Mahdi, but it was enough for him to
be considered as “Baab” and “special representative of Mahdi”.

But, by the pass of time and gathering some people around him, and
motivations of those who was directing the piece, he changed his claim
to be al-Qa’im (Mahdi).[^2]

Evidences and proofs which have been collected from the story of his
life and his followers - and how good they have collected - show that
his claim was from all three roots; which means, he was officially
“motivated”, “strengthened” and “supported” by the agents of
imperialistic government - like “Tsarian Russia” at the beginning,
“Britain” and “United Estates the heir of imperialism” in the following;
also special ambition which dominated his soul didn’t leave him alone;
and he was not free of a mental complex, too.[^3]

Albeit, this series continued and successors have practically left him
behind and made him as a second-degree person who was the preliminary of
their advent and had bigger claims in mind!

But, multiplicity of their branches on one side[^4], and distribution of
living evidences proving their direct connection with imperialistic
governments on the other side[^5], and most important of all,
nonexistence of considerable contents in their invitation, which can at
least saturate the commons, on the third side, and enlightenments of a
group of aware Muslims which have been performed for introducing this
“imperialistic political party” in the fourth side, cleared their
conditions very soon.

Albeit, our goal in this discussion is not to talk about the weaknesses;
that this matter needs a separated book and fortunately, many books have
been written in this subject that some of them are interesting in
contents.[^6]

Here, our goal is only expressing two matters:

1) Some says:

We know that the belief of the advent of Mahdi has been abused many
times and still is being abused, isn’t it better to keep silence about
the main matter in order not to be abused by these many abusers;
essentially, why should we accept a thing which can be taken this much
wrong and undesirable?

2) Another question, which is approximately the opposite point of the
first question, is that:

Is it really acceptable that all the claimants of being Mahdi were fake;
don’t you assume that one of them was real and all of them were not
opportunist and abuser or motivated by imperialism?

In this discussion, our only goal is answering the two above questions
and analyzing them.

About the first question, first this question should be asked that:
which valuable reality had been available which had not been abused by a
group of evil persons?

History shows us this much of false claimant of prophet hood who are
still claiming in the age of atom and space and we hear the murmur of
their claims everywhere.

Therefore, it is good to forget the invitation of prophets and like
“Brahmans” deny the prophecy itself in order not to be disturbed by
these abuses!

Do you consider this expression logical!

In daily life, we hear about many people who have abused the titles of
doctor and engineer and like them for taking money from people or for
other purposes and maybe sometimes, they continue their way without
leaving any trace behind, and were famous with this fake title.

Is it possible to say, now that the title “doctor” has been
illegitimately abused by a group of persons then we should completely
deny the existence of physicians and doctors!

This kinds of speech, although seems to be strongly illogical, but
unfortunately, it can be seen in the writings of those who essentially
deny the advent of Mahdi.

Anyway, it is a general rule that always any lie puts on the clothes of
truth and uses that truth’s validity for covering its invalidity that
“This lie shines by truth!”

No traitor, dishonest, thief and liar appear in his/her main feature,
but reach his/her illegitimate goals by using the honor and reputation
and “trust and purity and honesty” and pretending them.

Is it the reason for invalidity of these superior human values!
Secondly, is believing the advent of Mahdi a reality that has been
abused or an imaginary matter?

If we have accepted its reality - as we should accept because we have
many evidences for that - then it is not possible to leave it behind
because of the abuses of others, and if (assumable) it is not real then
it should be left aside, whether it has been abused or not!

Anyway, correct or incorrect way of using a matter cannot be the means
of judging that.

If someday, cruel fire-starters of the world misuse “atomic energy” and
in an atomic attack to “Hiroshima” kill 300 hundred thousand persons and
injure another 300 hundred thousand persons that after 30 years,
terrible injuries of some of them have not been healed yet then can it
be the reason for us to completely abstain from this great source of
energy or completely deny its existence, because cruel imperialists has
abused that; or by accepting this reality, try to use it in correct way
and in benefits of human society?

After this question and its answer, it is the time for the second
question that is more important in some aspects that whether all of this
false claimant of being Mahdi were liars and there was no reality in
their claims, or not?

According to our belief, reaching the answer of this question is very
easy by having the signs, reflections and results of this great advent.

We understood enough in previous discussions that “Mahdi” has a
universal responsibility, and uses all gifted facilities and available
equipments and those, which he will make himself for fulfilling this
responsibility.

His main responsibility is removing all kinds of oppression and
injustice from the living environment of humans, and designing a new
plan for universal government based upon justice and fighting against
all kinds of discriminations, imperialisms, exploitations and oppression
of the tyrants.

He mutates the minds.

He greatly advances sciences and knowledge and industries.

He makes movement in sleeping world in all aspects.

He gathers all the followers of religions under one flag.

He divined the wealth of the world fairly.

He juices up the world’s economy, in the way that nobody remains needful
in the world.

He gives any right to its owner.

He leaves no ruins in the world except that constructs it.

And in his age, the world is secure in the way that a woman can travel
from the East to the West alone without being disturbed.

He extracts the resources of the earth.

And position everyone in a multilateral monotheistic system.

These are practical programs and responsibilities of that great
revolutionary man of the world in the greatest revolution of human
history, which has been mentioned, in different resources and we
presented the evidences of them in previous chapters.

Did any of these claimants fulfill one-thousandth of this program, were
they successful in adjusting their place or city according to this
program?

We see that oppressions and injustices and aggressions are still
advancing; The First and the Second Word War have left millions of
casualties and tens of millions of wounded persons and filled the world
with blood.

Dangerous competitions of superpowers becomes more day by day, and their
distance with poor countries becomes farther; each night, about one
billion people of the world sleep hungry; and prisons are full of
innocents.

Devilish autocrats are still performing different kinds of tortures on
the people.

It means that still, the world is going to the congestion of oppression
and injustice, where and when has been filled with justice?

And this reason is the strongest and the most effective answer to all
claimants of the entire history and living evidence for there lies, a
short and summarized reason, but sharp and certain!

Yes! That Sun is still behind the clouds, and we should still wait for
that day that clouds will disappear completely and the dark world shines
by his essence; and perhaps the dawn is near.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
“الیس الصّبح بقریب”
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: “Radwa” or “Razwa” is a mount near Medina; I have expressed the
reason of mentioning the name of this mount in Nudba supplication in the
book “Answers to Religious Questions”.

[^2]: We read in the book “Appearance of Truth” (ظهور حق) , which is
accepted by this sect (in page 173), that “Baab” in the middle of the
year 1265, in Maku prison, wrote to Mulla Abdul Khaliq “انا القائم الحق
الّذي انتم بظهوره توعدون” and after this, Mulla Abdul Khaliq was very
upset of his claim.

[^3]: The reason for his mental illness, regardless of the contents of
his books and expressions and phrases which are completely similar to a
mentally ill person, is that we read in the book “Kashf al-Qita’” (كشف
الغطاء) from “Mirza Abul Fazl Golpayegani”, who is one of his heads,
that Mujtahids of Tabriz said after their inquest from “Baab” in that
famous meeting: “Your words makes your blood Mubah (neutral) for us but
the reason that we don’t order to execute you is the possibility of your
madness”.

[^4]: Hitherto, their sects have become more than twenty sects.

[^5]: Refer to the books written by “Kinyaz Dalgurki” and “Prince
Dalgurki” and the book “What else Baha’is Say?” (بي بهايي باب و بها).

[^6]: Refer to the books “What does Baha’i Say” and “Trial and Revision”
and “Fine Words of Yar Gholi” and “Hadyat al-Namlat” and “Prince
Dalgurki”.


