All Curious Persons Ask Themselves
==================================

1) Is peace, justice, security and freedom of people from the hands of
any kind of oppression, injustice, discrimination and imperialism, the
future destiny of humanity?

Or, as some people predict, chaos increases, distances become more,
disharmonies and imbalances advance and finally a nuclear or
super-nuclear world war destroys human civilization and if some humans
remain on the earth then they will be retarded, handicapped, forlorn and
helpless?

2) If the first opinion is correct and peace and justice is the destiny
then why?

3) If the world should go to "justice", "peace" and "brotherhood" then
are they achievable without a revolution? And in other words, are
"gradual corrections" and "reforms" capable of changing the general
feature of the world with this much of conflicts?

4) If it is necessary for a revolution to happen then is it possible
solely through material laws, or it isn't possible without using
immaterial principles and genuine human values?

5) And again, if we accept that it is possible to make such revolution,
in any way, and then what should be the characteristics of the leader of
this revolution?

6) Is the result of this revolution necessarily a "universal united
government"?

7) Isn't any preparation necessary in advance for such revolution?

8) Are these preparations available in the present world or not? And if
they are not available then presently, is the world going toward these
preparations or against them?

9) Are these matters, in any way, related to general belief of religions
about the advent of a great divine peacemaker?

10) How is the general belief of Muslims about the advent of "Mahdi" and
what is its relation with these future-maker issues?

11) Does believing in such advent draw us toward general reformation of
the world through a multilateral revolution, or as some people assume,
takes us far from that?

12) Is this general concept and belief of religions an objective reality
and the result of logical reasons, or is it just an imagination for
false saturation of repressed desires of humans in the general missing
way which is "peace" and "justice’?

In this book, it is tried to answer these questions free of fanatical
and extremist inclinations and free of illogical prejudices; answers
which come from the depths of the soul, which are compatible with wisdom
and answers which can satisfy the "wisdom", "feelings", "soul" and
"spirit".

It was a while that I was providing notes about the foresaid
discussions, but congestion of the tasks in Qom didn't permit me to
"explain", "organize" and "complete" them, and perpetual temptation
which I have in writing a book prevented me to publish them in that
form, and truly they were raw and incomplete.

But adventures and happenings took me to the place, which I did never
believe.

The Port of Chabahar! ... Which means the most far-off and insalubrious
place of Iran, which is approximately 2300 km far from Tehran and has
very limited facilities for living and its people are unbelievably
deprived.

Fortunately, this forced journey happened in winter, a winter which was
sometimes spring and sometimes summer with its water and ices and
cooling equipment’s!

Since maybe 90 percent of the people were Sunnis, it was an opportunity
to contact some of their educated ones, remembering the time when I was
in Hejaz, and gatherings were made which were mostly formed by these
religious brothers; fortunately, the result of these gatherings were
interesting and considerable.

In this desert region, beside blue waters of Sea of Oman, under its sky
full of stars, and in this corner of solitude, naturally there were more
opportunities for studying; and by using this unexpected opportunity,
one of the first discussions which I began to study was this discussion
(and beside that, some jurisprudential studies which were not possible
to be performed in this way in Qom); and totally I concluded that
according to "عَسى أَنْ تَکْرَهُوا شَیئاً وَهُوَ خَیرٌ لَکُم" (maybe you
dislike a thing but it is good for you) maybe spending these times of
"exile" was necessary in different aspects.

I hope that the discussions of this book would be an answer to the
request of educated persons who intend to study the issue of the advent
of the great universal peacemaker as a research.

Also, I hope that reading this book gives us new visions for the fight
which we have began against "oppression and corruption" and we continue
this fight until the end of domination of tyrants over our society.

Albeit, certainly it is possible that the content of this book has
deficiencies especially because few research books have been written in
this subject.

The author will appreciate any opinion, correction and criticism of dear
readers and experts to be sent directly to him (to Qom seminary).

Chabahar, Nasir Makarim Shirazi

Safar 1398 - Bahman 1356 - February 1978


