Great Peacemaker among other Nations
====================================

Manifestation of this Program in Zoroastrian Books
--------------------------------------------------

1) We read in the famous book of “Zand”, after mentioning the
everlasting battle of “Yazatas” and “Daevas”:

… And then the great victory is for the side of Yazatas, and
exterminates the Daevas…

After the victory of Yazatas and exterminating the Daevas, universe
reaches its genuine felicity and humans will sit on the throne of
happiness!

2) “Jamasp” quotes from the Zoroaster in the book “Jamasp Namag”:

A man will rise from the land of Arabs… A man with a great head, great
body and great legs and following the religion of his forefather and
with great army and moves toward Iran and constructs the lands and fills
the earth with justice.

Manifestation of this Belief in Hindu and Brahman Scriptures
------------------------------------------------------------

1) It is written in the book “Vasishta Yoga” from Hindu scriptures:

At the end, the world will return to the one who loves God and is from
his special servants. And his name is “auspicious and blessed”!

2) It is mentioned in another book called “Didah”:

After the destruction of the world, a king will appear in End of Days
who is the leader of all creatures, and his name is “Mansour” and
conquers the entire world; and converts to his religion.

3) It is written in the book “Ddatek” from Brahman scriptures:

… the hand of God will appear and the last successor “Maitreya” will
rise and conquers the east and the west of the world; and guides
creatures.

4) It is mentioned in “Patikel” from Hindu scriptures:

When the day ends and the old world begins anew; and becomes alive and
the king of the new kingdom appears; from the children of two great
leaders of the world, one of them honor of End of Days and the other one
and even his guardian whom his name is “Pashan” and the name of that new
kingdom is “the guide”; he becomes the king rightfully and is the
successor of Rama and rules and has many miracles.

5) It is written in the book “Basek” from Hindu scriptures:

Kalpa ends to a just king in End of Days who is the leader of angels,
fairies and humans; and indeed he is rightful king, and gains whatever
is hidden in the seas, the earth and in the mountains, and informs from
the heavens and the earth whatever it is, and nobody will be born
greater than him!

Signs in the Old Testament
--------------------------

1) In “Psalms of David”, psalm 37, we read:

9 For the wicked shall be cut off; but those who wait for the Lord shall
possess the land.

10 Yet a little while, and the wicked will be no more; though you look
well at his place, he will not be there.

11 But the meek shall possess the land, and delight themselves in
abundant prosperity.

2) Also we read in the psalm 37 (from the Psalms of David), in the
sentence 22: for those “blessed” by the Lord shall possess the land, but
those cursed by him shall be cut off.

3) It is also mentioned in the sentence 29 of the same psalm:

The righteous shall possess the land,

and dwell upon it forever.

4) In the Book of Habakkuk, chapter VI, we read:

… If it seem slow, wait for it; it will surely come, it will not delay.

… He gathers for himself all nations, and collects as his own all
peoples.

5) We read in the Book of Isaiah, chapter XI, in a discussion full of
metaphors:

1 There shall come forth a shoot from the stump of Jesse[^1], and a
branch shall grow out of his roots.

4 but with righteousness he shall judge the poor, and decide with equity
for the meek of the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of
his mouth, and with the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked.

5 Righteousness shall be the girdle of his waist, and faithfulness the
girdle of his loins.

6 The wolf shall dwell with the lamb,

… and a little child shall lead them.

9 They shall not hurt or destroy in my entire holy mountain; for the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the
sea.

Signs in the New Testament
--------------------------

1) We read in the Gospel of Mathew, chapter 24:

27 For as the lightning comes from the east and flashes as far as the
west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.

30 … and they will see “the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven”
with power and great glory.

31 And he will send out his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they
will gather his elect …

2) And it is written in the Gospel of Luke, chapter 12:

35 Be dressed for action and have your lamps lit;

36 are like those who are waiting for their master, so that they may
open the door for him as soon as he comes and knocks.

This Belief among Chinese, Egyptians, etc
-----------------------------------------

1) We read in the book “On Advent and Signs of Advent” (collected by one
of the friends of Sadeq Hedayat), page 47:

Major part of translations of Pahlavi texts by “Sadeq” is about the
advent and the signs of advent and if we totally consider the entire
Pahlavi texts of Sadeq then we should say that all of them have
religious aspects.

… the issue of the advent and the signs of advent is the issue which is
especially important in all major religions of the world … according to
“Sadeq”: Regardless of faith which forms the basis of this hope, when,
any person who is interested in the destiny of humanity and demands its
spiritual perfection, becomes hopeless and sees that unfortunately the
ignorant and negligent humanity is still moving toward corruption and
destruction day by day and avoids the almighty God and disobey his
orders more and more by having this much amazing intellectual and
scientific developments, turns to the presence of the almighty God based
upon his nature and asks for his help in order to remove oppression and
corruption!

Accordingly, the hope for a great universal peacemaker had been
available in the hearts of all monotheists and not only this hope has
record in the followers of major religions, like Zoroastrians, Jews,
Christians and Muslims, but it is possible to find its signs in the
ancient books of the Chinese, beliefs of Hindus, among Scandinavians and
even between ancient Egyptians; also Mexican aboriginals and like them.

It should be reminded that the book “Zand va Human Yasan” and some other
Zoroastrian texts, also the last two chapters of Jamasp Namag including
the prediction of Zoroaster by the words of the Sage Jamasp to
“Goshtasp”, king of the time who converted to religion of Zoroaster,
about the Promised One of End of Days, have been translated to Persian
from Pahlavi by Sadeq Hedayat, and has been published by “Hassan
Ghaemian”, friend and colleague of Sadeq Hedayat, under the title of “On
Advent and Signs of Advent”.

Signs of this Belief among Western People
-----------------------------------------

Believing in the advent of a Great Savior and disappearance of
oppression and injustice among the people, and government of truth and
justice is not exclusive to the eastern people and religions, but it is
a general and universal belief which its different features can be seen
in the faiths of different nations and all of them clarifies this truth
that the source of this ancient belief is innate human nature and
prophets’ invitation.

In the book “A Preface to Leadership”, while talking about the existence
of waiting for the advent of a great savior among different western
nations and manipulation of such general belief by some persons, the
writer mentions the name of five claimants who arose from Britain:
“James Naylor”, “Joanna Southcott”, “Richard Brothers”, “John Nichols
Thom” and “Henry James Prince”; and quotes the existence of such belief,
even among the North American Indians, from “Bernard Barber”, American
sociologist, in the paper “Acculturation and Messianic Movements”: Among
the North American Indians … this belief is prevalent that one day, the
Great Spirit will come and guide them to the heaven of the earth …

Only until 1890, about twenty types of these movements have been
recorded in American history.

In the discussion, which was quoted before from the book “On Advent and
Signs of Advent”, it was affirmed, that: It is possible to find the
signs of this belief among Scandinavians, Mexican aboriginals and like
them.[^2]

Totally, according to what was said, and other several matters and
evidences which was not mentioned for observing the abstraction, we
conclude that this waiting is has logical aspect, it is expanded,
pervasive and universal, and finally it is an evidence of the innateness
of this belief.

In the next discussion, we will see that this belief is much expanded in
Islamic beliefs under the title of “the Advent of Mahdi” and has been
considered as a fundamental belief.

Also, we will see that how noticing and believing in this innate
reality, which reason and wisdom also support that, removes the dark
clouds of disappointment and pessimism from the sky of human soul and
prepares him for a bright future:

Makes the powers more ready,

The thoughts more awakened,

The readiness more increased,

The revolutions faster,

The affections more fiery,

And makes the way easier for achieving a human society with its certain
meaning’

A society which oppressions do not burn it like fire, discriminations do
not destroy it from the inside like termites, and injustices do not take
it to destruction.

[^1]: The name “Jesse” means “powerful” and is the name of the father of
King David. (Quoted from Bible Dictionary)

[^2]: In this section, the books “On Advent and Signs of Advent”,
“Blossoms of Hope” and “A Preface to Leadership” have been used.


