Universal Revolution
====================

Revolution or Gradual Reforms
-----------------------------

Until now, the discussion was about the matter that mankind thinks about
a bright future by the command of wisdom and innate intuition, a future
which is much different with today, and there is no sign of this much of
darkness in that.

But now, this question is asked that how should such a big change
happen, by gradual reforms or in revolutionary and fundamental ways?

Essentially, and generally, there is no common opinion about the way of
performing social reforms among scientists. Some of them believe in
gradual reforms that are called “reformists”; and there are
“revolutionists” against them who consider that no essential change in
society is possible without a revolution.

They believe that as changes of nature happen in revolutionary and
sudden ways, and gradual “quantitative” changes reach a level that
become “qualitative”, but are replaced with their opposites by
revolution.

Adherents of this principle have made many branches for the way of
revolution and social mutation in all social changes, which all of them
are neither reasonable nor according to historical issues and objective
evidences, but it is undeniable that this principle is acceptable in
many cases.

The explanation:

The thing which seems to be more closer to reality is that the degree of
corruption of societies are different; where corruption has not become
epidemic and expanded, gradual reforms can form the basis of reformative
programs.

But, where corruption has covered everywhere or has penetrated in most
social organizations, it is not possible to overcome the disharmonies
without a fundamental revolution and mutation.

And this is exactly like repairing a great building with gradual
amendments and returning the beginning glory to that, but when base is
being destroyed from inside and main columns are falling then they
destroy it completely and construct a new building over its ruins.

We have many evidences in hand for correctness of this belief:

1) Gradual reforms are always being put on the same old bases and their
effects depends of the health of the bases, and in other words, patterns
and regulations are same as previous patterns and regulations in
“reforms” and it is useful when patterns have been remained healthy,
otherwise there is no benefit in “designing the balcony” when “the base
of the house is destroyed” (referring to a Persian proverb). Here, new
patterns should be used and fundamental issues should be studied in the
way of change.

2) Gradual reforms are usually being performed in peaceful ways and in
most of the cases they rely on “logic”, and it is useful when there are
intellectual and background preparation in society, but where these
backgrounds are not available, the logic of revolution which is the
“logic of power” should be used; although, logic has also en effective
role in “revolutionary changes”, but “revolutionary forces” make the
last strike.

Using non-revolutionary methods in societies, in which corruption has
penetrated to the depths, gives opportunity to main factors of
corruption to equip themselves against the “reformists” and take
“counteractive” and “deterrent” tools for confronting their weapons;
exactly the same as powerful microbes which have become immune against
gradual usage of “medicine” and continue their job; and won’t be
destroyed except by a sudden attack of powerful medicines!

3) Societies in which corruption has penetrated to the root, powerful
anti-reform factors have occupied all sensitive centers of society and
can neutralize any gradual reform plan; except that reformists surprise
them by a “revolutionary attack” before they “organize” and “equip”
themselves, and demolish them!

4) Usually, great reformist and revolutionary powers won’t remain hot,
excited, ready and united for a long time, and they are not used in
proper time then maybe they lose their “effectiveness and sharpness” by
the pass of time, and anti-revolution elements penetrate their mind
gradually; therefore, when expanded reforms are needed, their maximum
power should be used “extremely fast”; and they should be used before
they faint and before backward powers reduce their strength and
excitement.

5) History also shows that these kinds of societies have not been formed
through gradual reforms, but their corrections have been performed by
mutation and revolution.

Great prophets and reformist men of the world have always chosen
revolutionary method when they faced such societies, and made their
steps in the way of jihad and fight until the last drop of strength.

Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus and especially prophet of Islam, peace be
upon him, were all revolutionary men.

Other men and women who changed the feature of the history and were
turning points in the way of human life or their own societies were all
revolutionary people and this is living evidence that correcting these
kinds of societies are not possible without a revolution.

But, about correcting general conditions of the world and removing
current system, which is based upon wasting active powers,
discrimination, oppression and injustice, and replacing it with a “fair
system” free of these disharmonies, the situation is more clear; because
this the most revolutionary act which should be performed in the world,
and broader and more expanded than any other revolution.

In this case, how is it possible for such expanded and fundamental
change to happen through gradual reforms?!

Here, it should explicitly be said that:

If present world, which is full of impartiality, oppression and
corruption, has to be taken away from the chasm of destruction and
inexistence then expanded revolution should happen in that.

Revolution in all fields:

In intellectual, cultural, moral, economical, political, and in the
fields of laws and programs.

Material or Spiritual Revolution?
---------------------------------

Another discussion which can complete previous discussion is that, by
considering several evidences which show that finally human life will
see the brightness, and the dark clouds of insecurity and injustice will
be removed from the sky of human civilization, this question arises that
will the expanded revolution which should execute this plan be performed
through the perfection of material laws or should this goal be achieved
by the help of spiritual assets?

And in other words, is continuing the conditions of “current
one-dimensional life” and completing that capable of execution of such
plan, or should the change happen from this point and one-dimensional
perfection gives its place to multidimensional perfection:

Human values to be revived,

Moralities to be utilized in an expanded way,

Faith and Affection to be revived,

And by using these assets, rebellious mechanical and material life to be
restrained?

Noticing the main roots of present misfortunes and disharmonies shows
that completion of this situation is in fact, completion of misfortunes!
And continuing this way will be continuing the crises.

Because:

Today, democracy and government of people over people is known as the
fairest way of government, that in most parts of the world only its name
can be heard; assume that this type of government is established all
around the world, then that is the beginning of all big problems.

Explanation:

We see at a glance that there are only four types of government in the
world:

1) Autocracy in its main feature: the purpose if individual autocracy,
which its conditions are clear in the past and the present and it is
possible to say in a short sentence that: The source of any kind of
slavery, misfortune, misery and backwardness of humans is this deadly
type of government.

2) Autocracy in the clothes of democracy: it means the same individual
bloody autocratic and oppressive government, which has worn the clothes
of democracy and brings its title and pretends democracy by establishing
“false parties and assembly”. That party and assembly which the list of
its members and leaders is written and ready before the establishment
and the players wear their clothes behind the scene one by one and get
ready for playing their roles by appearing on the scene.

Behinds the scene, they all eat and drink and laugh and deride together,
but when they come on the scene one agrees and the other opposes, one of
them is in the progressive wing and the other is in the constructive
wing, one is coordinator of this wing and the other is coordinator of
that wing, they start fake fights for deceiving the public, who aren’t
deceived by these acts anymore; even they attack each other by closed
fists and angry faces for completing this scene!

This kind of government was not available in the past history, because
people and even dictators were frank, and maybe they didn’t think that
it is possible to offer autocracy in the shape of democracy.

This type of government is the phenomenon of our age, the age of
concisions, duplicities and the age of changing faces! And it is bitter
fruit that its kernel belongs to the past and the shell belongs to the
present, and its only goal is to delay the date of freedom of nations
for some days and is capable of nothing other than that.

3) Dictatorship of the Proletariat: this type of government was not
available in this way in the past, and it is product of mechanical age
and exclusive to communist countries, in which “proletariat” (workers)
takes the power and achieve its desire in all aspects under the title of
Marxism.

Although, Marxists themselves have chosen the title “Dictatorship of the
Proletariat” as the motto of their government, but regardless of the
meanings which are hidden inside this title, it should be studied that
whether proletariat governs such societies or members of the central
committee of the party and its secretary general, a party which neither
is comprehensive nor have free elections nor have a sign of democracy,
and autocracy and tyranny of the heads of the government, and violence
and depriving people from freedom in that is not hidden to everyone.

While history is being written and the list of governors and rulers is
being compiled, is it possible to put the names of Stalin, Khrushchev
and Mao Tze Tung except in the category of the most rigorous autocrats
whom their governing time remembers burdensome miseries of humanity!

It is true that the leaders of these societies make effective steps in
adjusting the capitals and it is true that they end the time of
legendary wealthy persons, but is it possible to ignore this clear fact
that they consume billions of the wealth of their countries foe
strengthening the bases of their powers, and perform whatever they want
unbridled, and take the right of criticism, revision and strike and any
kind of questioning from their people.

4) Democracy in its main feature: this kind of government, which is
considered as the best and the most complete way of government in
today’s world, and even pretending and claiming that is a cause of pride
for many of the leaders, needless to mention its objective and external
existence, is summarize in one sentence:

In this system of government, all people from any group or class can
seemingly go to voting boxes freely and choose their real
representatives, and give their future to them for some years, under
circumstances.

They also seemingly legislate the laws, which consider that are useful
for people, freely by consultation.

And sometimes the representatives choose the chairman of this executive
committee and sometimes directly by people, that is called “prime
minister” or “president”.

Defects of Democracy
--------------------

But, by all the advantages and benefits which can be seen in this type
of government, when we look inside it and its final product then we see
that, despite its beautiful appearance, it is so scary; because:

1) Group Exploitation - The first product of this system, which is
government of “majorities”, by considering that always minorities are
limited and few people who can be ignored in group calculations, is that
permits group exploitation and permits fifty-one percent of the world to
impose their thoughts and goals to the other forty-nine percent, and
ignore the benefits of a considerable group which is only two percent,
and even sometimes one percent, fewer than them for saving the benefits
of the majority.

And this is a strong strike to justice and freedom in the world of
humanity, which is being performed under the title of the most developed
type of government.

2) Minorities in the shape of majorities- Worse than that is in this
type of government “minorities” are often appear in the shape of
“majorities”, and impose their beliefs to them forcefully; in the way
that those who possess “wealth” and “power” brainwash the majorities and
deviate the thoughts to the way of their desire by having mass media and
by feeding their desired goals, purposes, programs and persons, directly
and indirectly, to commercial media, radios and televisions in the way
practically a government appears that moves only toward the benefits of
this multiplied minority (those who excessively demand power and money).

Accordingly, it is no surprise that in countries, which are governed by
this system, governments are “usually” supporters of bourgeois and big
capitalists (although seemingly free lections are performed by public
participation and written participation of them in voting boxes).

Albeit, if majority can firstly dethrone this group and then perform an
election then maybe the real majority rules the society’s destiny, but
this matter will also be put in a loop and becomes impossible.

And if we can justify the government of real majority over minority
(assumedly) in some way then certainly, government of minority over the
exploited majority is not justifiable anyway.

3) Equal, in the conditions of inequality - In this governing system,
any person in any condition has the right of one vote, which means:

A great scholar is completely equal to an illiterate person; an aware,
experienced and nationalist politician is equal to an inexperienced
person, and a virtuous reputable human is equal to a polluted infamous
criminal thief …

And this kind of injustice is clear because one of these two can be
thousand times more future-maker than the other.

It is true that if we want to make differences between people then we
will face unclear criterion, but whatever it is, this is a kind of
deficiency, which is included in the nature of western material
democracy.

4) Following instead of leadership - In this system, governments and
representatives of assemblies certainly oblige themselves to observe the
demands of majorities (unconditionally), because they are counting on
them for the present and the future, and without this following, their
positions and powers will be in danger.

Therefore, in the nature of this way of government, the issue of
leadership is practically replaced with following, and social
corruptions, oppressions, aberrances and pollutions, which are
majorities’ favorites, from any kind, are followed and even resonated.

By considering this fact, it is no surprise that for example we see that
unfortunately, the Parliament of England enacted the law of
“homosexuality”!, because homosexuals have representative and even
representatives!

By considering what was said, you will confirm that how much this
material ideal government is non-ideal because:

Firstly, material laws, by assuming that are useful for weak persons and
spread the justice, have no execution assurance, because the matter of
“justice” that is accompanied by ignoring lots of benefits and material
facilities, doesn’t have a correct and wise definition for powerful
persons in an environment which all values are specified according to
material criterions; therefore, in such environments, only weak people
claim justice and equality not powerful persons.

But, if spiritual values are considered then justice will have also a
definition for them, because in execution of justice, although they lose
some of their benefits, but they will reach a spiritual value and
superiority.

Clear example of this matter is expanded international organizations,
which established after the Second World War. These organizations, which
are the most important so-called centers for providing universal peace
and thinker politicians of the world participate in them, have been a
plaything for the influences of nig powers or a conference hall for
small governments that can express some of their opinion in there, until
now.

Secondly, historical studies and experiments show that excessive desires
of human have been never saturated through material means; it means that
a person has never reached a stage that says this much is enough for me.

Human desires are unlimited in this kind and material facilities,
whatever they are, are still limited and these limited facilities cannot
fulfill those unlimited desires and this “contradiction of facilities
and demands” has made war the everlasting equipment of material life.

But, if spiritualities and belief of God, and noticing to human and
moral values and responsibilities before that great source who is above
the entire material and secular world, are revived in the hearts of
humans then it can restrict this instinct and utilize in a correct way
and establish peace and security instead of war.

And in other words, excessive demands of humans can be saturated with
spiritual matters, which are unlimited, and that contradiction, which
was the main reason of war and oppression, will be removed.


