Necessary Preparations for Universal Government
===============================================

General Preparations
--------------------

Even if we are very optimistic and hopeful, still we should know that
reaching a stage of history in which:

All humans gather under one flag and all terrible weapons to be removed
from the earth;

And classes, with the definition of exploiter and exploited, to be
removed;

And conflicts and dangerous political and military games of superpowers
to be forgotten forever and the world to become free of sick name of
“superpower” and frightful nightmare of their evil powers;

And unhealthy and destructive economical competitions give their place
to public cooperation toward a better and more pure life …

Is still soon and needs general preparation.

But, as in recent times, changes are being made fast then we shouldn’t
consider that very far like a sweet dream.

But anyway, four preparations are necessary in order for the world to
accept such government:

1) Intellectual and Cultural Preparation
----------------------------------------

It means that level of thoughts of the people of the world develops in
the way that they understand the issue “race” and “different
geographical regions” are not considerable issues in human life; the
differences of colors, languages and lands cannot separate humans from
each other; tribal and group fanaticisms should die forever; hilarious
thought of “superior race” should be thrown away; factitious borders
with barbed wires! And wall like the ancient wall of china! Cannot
separate humans.

But, as sunlight and lively breezes, and raining clouds and other gifts
and powers of the nature never pay attention to these borders and all of
them move around the entire earth and practically consider the world as
one country, we humans also reach this level of intellectual growth.

And if we carefully notice then we see that this thinking way is going
to be created and completed among aware and open-minded the people of
the world, and day by day the number of those who think about the issue
of “world-country” is increasing.

Even today, the matter of united global language is being discussed in
different places.

2) Social Preparations
----------------------

The people of the world should become tired of oppression and injustice
and available systems and feel the bitterness of this material and
one-dimensional life, and even become disappointed of solving current
problems by continuing this one-dimensional way.

The people of the world should understand that what was being promised
in 18th and 19th centuries in the light of mechanical developments was
in fact nothing more than an imagination, or like a mirage in front of
the eyes of thirsty travelers in a hot desert.

Peace and welfare and security of the people of the world were not
provided and even material and spiritual conflicts and insecurities
expanded.

Making ostensible amazing laws didn’t remove oppression, discrimination,
exploitation and huge class differences, even previous corruptions
appeared in larger scales and more dangerous forms.

Understanding present conditions of the world first makes the condition
of thinking, and then hesitation and finally disappointment and
readiness for a multilateral revolution based upon new values.

This is the thing if is not achieved then it is not possible to reach
such level, exactly the same as an abscess that should be treated when
the time has come.

3) Technological and Communicational Preparations
-------------------------------------------------

Contrary to what some persons assume that reaching the level of social
perfection and a world full of peace and justice will certainly be
possible accompanied by destruction of modern technology, existence of
these developed industries doesn’t disturb a fair universal government
and even, it may not be possible to achieve such goal without that.

For establishing and then controlling a universal system, series of
super-modern equipments are needed in order to travel throughout the
world and check everywhere in a short time, and to get information from
any place and in case of necessity to move necessary equipments and
facilities from one side of the world to the other side, and to
broadcast needed messages, information and warnings to the entire world
in the shortest time.

If industrial life returns to previous conditions and for example it
needs one year for sending a message from one part of the world to the
other part then how is it possible to govern the world and expand the
justice in everywhere?

If too much time is needed for being informed about the aggression of a
person or a group, which even certainly it is possible to exist in such
world, and sending forces for making peace then how is it possible to
provide truth, peace and justice throughout the world?!

Briefly, undoubtedly such government needs to be informed about
everywhere at the moment and to have complete dominance over any place
for establishing order and justice in the world, in order to train and
lead the people who are ready for correction and inform them and awaken
and revive them, and in unrighteous people want to rise, repress them.

Those, who think other than this, maybe don’t thing about the concept of
universal government and compare it with government of a small region.

Essentially, the world which wants to reach such level should have
expanded and public means of training in the way that executes major
part of correctional programs with “self-awareness” and “self-helps” of
people and reviving the soul of public “self-awareness” and “self-helps”
and needs the most powerful global cultural centers and mass media and
the most complete books and publications and like them, that none of
them is not possible without the best and the most advanced industrial
equipments.

Yes! If all the acts had to be performed by “miracles” then existence of
such system would be possible without developed industrial equipments
but is it possible to manage the lives of the people of the world by
miracle!

Miracle is a logical exception in current system of the nature, for
proving the legitimacy of a divine religion, not for governing the
society forever. This act should be performed based on natural laws.

Albeit, we will talk about this issue, later.


