5. Final Words
==============

A cursory glance at the state of the Muslims today shows us that we are
desperately in need of unity on all its levels - from the inner or
esoteric and transcendental to the outer or exoteric and political - and
on all its scales - from a study group of two Muslims to the
super-collective that is called the Ummah.

But we will not achieve it by just being aware of the need, nor by
harbouring a thousand good intentions. The methodology has been shown to
us weak and imperfect beings by the all-Perfect Being and His prophets,
saints and friends (‘a).

Glimpses of this all embracing vision cum ideology and methodology have
been presented above. What remains now is for us to ponder and think.
Given this need, should we not be doubling our efforts? Should we not
renew our vigilance? Should we not stop being complacent and happy with
the name of “Muslim” or “Mu’min”, but rather try to make the din
everything in our lives?

How can we claim to be the followers of tawhid when we practice
disunity?!

We talk of Islam but follow sectarianism as our way! How can we change
the state of affairs? What must be done?

What we must do is gain and apply the knowledge that has been handed
down to us. We must follow the lead of the ’ulama, such as Imam
Khumayni, who discounted secondary differences and divisions and
remained fixed on the Divinity and His plan for man, in all its
dimensions from the mystical to the political - or rather, the political
based on the mystical and the exoteric on the esoteric. God tells His
beloved Prophet (S):

<p dir="rtl">
قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَعِظُكُمْ بِوَاحِدَةٍ أَنْ تَقُومُوا لِلَّهِ مَثْنَىٰ
وَفُرَادَىٰ ثُمَّ تَتَفَكَّرُوا …
</p>

***Say, ‘I advise you just with one [thing]: that you rise up for God,
in twos, or individually, then reflect…’ (Qur’an 34:46)***

We the Muslims have been advised by the best of God’s creation to rise
to the occasion. Let us try to obey. Individually or collectively, we
must increase our knowledge; then apply the knowledge and hence gain
wisdom and understanding. If we are sincere in this, grace and blessings
will descend - as this is God’s promise - and we will be able to form
the small cells of believers or communities that we have been encouraged
to do.

It will be the coming together of such qualitative and enlightened
groups of the faithful, by their following the One Light of the heavens
and the earth and under the leadership of Its human representative, that
will lead to the formation or manifestation of the Single Ummah
(the*ummatan wahidah* referred to in the Qur’an).

We previously saw that the Hajj has been called the “sustentation of the
people” or the place of “rising”. As such, it not only is a lasting
monument to the plain of Alast, where we all stood and acknowledged our
Lord, but it is also a foreshadowing of the final Resurrection, where we
will be once again impelled to recognize His absolute Dominion and
Sovereignty over creation.

The coming together of Muslims of all walks, tongues, and races every
year for the Hajj then - as a commemoration of our common Origin, our
common End and our absolute abasement in His presence - is a rhythmic
tribute to the presence of the One in the many. It is a graphic reminder
of our potential - of what we could be in breadth and depth, quantity
and quality, dunya and akhirah - if only we witnessed His signs and
believed in His word during the rest of our lives as we do in the Hajj.

<p dir="rtl">
وَاعْتَصِمُوا بِحَبْلِ اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا وَلَا تَفَرَّقُوا …
</p>

***Hold fast, all together, to God’s cord, and do not be divided [into
sects]. (Qur’an 3:103)***


