Consuming Tobacco
=================

Pregnant women are advised to abstain from cigarettes and any other type
of tobacco based product. Consuming of tobacco is not only deleterious
to their personal health but will also have harmful effect on their
foetus. In this connection we quote from a paper published in a foreign
journal. We invite your attention to what it has to say:

One study made in the Scandinavian countries on 6363 pregnant women
showed that those of the group who smoke have given birth to babies on
an average weighing 170 grams less than the babies of the women who do
not smoke. This weight difference was recorded in 50% of pregnant women
who habitually smoked. On the other hand the height of the babies of the
smoker mothers was recorded to be less than the other group. Similarly
the heads and the bladders of the babies of smoker mothers were found to
be smaller than those of non-smoker mothers are. The infantile mortality
of the babies of the smoker mothers has also been recorded to be six
times more than those from the other group. The children of the smoker
mothers are likely to be born with physical defects than those of
non-smoker mothers. The use of

cigarettes causes deficiency of oxygen in the blood of the foetus
thereby causing excessive production of hemoglobin. Congenital heart
disease is 50% more prevalent in babies born to cigarette smoking
mothers than others. Statistics prove that children of mothers who smoke
are poorer at their studies when they go to school than those of the
other group. The intensity of this condition depends on the quantum of
smoking the mother did during her pregnancy because the tobacco causes
reduction in the cells of the brain of the foetus. What has been said
above is only a part of the damage that can be caused to the baby of the
mother who consumes tobacco. Perhaps there are more serious damages
caused by cigarette smoking that have not been identified so far.
Therefore, all those mothers who are concerned about their own and their
childrens health should avoid smoking.**[1]**

Dr Jazairi writes:

Tobacco smoking is harmful for the mother and also for the baby growing
in her foetus. Alcoholic beverages too are very dangerous for carrying
mothers. In addition to the poisonous effect of the alcohol it destroys
the vitamins which are the essential requirement of the mother and her
foetus. Such women have the risk of giving birth to babies with
disabilities. Smoking and consumption of strongly brewed tea too are
very harmful for pregnant women.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Maktab Islam, Year 15, Issue No. 6.  
 **[2]** Aijaz Khurakia, Page 215.

Dr Jalali writes

Alcohol, marijuana and other drugs get into the blood stream of the
parents and move into the embryo thereby affecting the growth of the
foetus adversely. Some experts are of the opinion that when pregnant
women smoke cigarette, the heart of the foetus is affected and its beats
increase abnormally.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rushinasi Kudak, Page 222.
