When Pregnant Women Fall Ill
============================

When a pregnant woman needs medication for any indisposition, she has to
exercise utmost care in the consumption of medicines because the
medicines are generally designed for adults and might not be compatible
for the delicate foetus and affect it adversely. It cannot be predicted
what effect the drugs might have on the foetus. It is a fact there is no
medicine, which will not affect the foetus. This is the reason a
pregnant mother must exercise maximum restraint in taking medicines.
Firstly, she should avoid intake of medicine. But if the condition of
the health becomes such that medication becomes absolutely necessary,
then she should have access to it on the expert advice of a medical
practitioner who can suggest the right medicine and the dosage.

When the illness is risky for the mother and the child, the pregnant
mother should obtain expert medical opinion and treatment, as, otherwise
it might cause irreparable damage to the foetus.

One expert writes:

It is possible that certain viruses and microbes escape from the mother
and the father into the indefensible foetus and infect it with the same
disease which the parents were suffering from.

He writes at another place:

Any change in the dietary habit of the mother, the medicines which she
has to take and the diseases with which she gets afflicted will have
effect on the embryo. Any diseased condition, which affects the embryo
in the initial stages of conception, will progressively enhance. It is
therefore imperative that the pregnant women should prevent themselves
against diseases. Sometimes diseases may destroy their capacity to
conceive in the future.

He also writes:

There are several non-food materials which, when consumed by a pregnant
mother, will adversely effect the development of the foetus. Most of the
medicines are for adults and their trials are made only on grownups
before they are approved for prescription. The viruses, bacteria and the
germs in the body of the mother sometimes affect the foetus too.

Sometimes the foetus starts getting the same symptoms of the disease or
sometimes abnormal growth takes place in the foetus because of the
infection.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Biography Pish az Tawalud, Page 182.
