Miscarriage
===========

There is no objection in Islam to contraception or family planning with
the mutual consent of the spouses. If the wife and the husband desire
not to have any more issues, they can prevent conception with harmless
pills, injections and other contraceptive methods. But obviating birth
of already conceived is undesirable in Islam. Islam wants that the
progeny of its followers flourish. When the male and female cells have
fused to form an embryo, it is the rudiment of a living being and its
abortion is forbidden in Islam. Although the embryo is a minuscule
object, it has full right to existence. It is an existence, which is
fast developing towards becoming a full-fledged human being. This small
creature wants its mother to provide congenial environment to grow in
and take birth as full-fledged human. If one aborts such an existence,
one has committed murder and the act will be liable to punishment of the
parents on the Day of Judgement.

The Faith of Islam, which is the guardian of the rights of all, has
banned completely the abortion and infanticide.

Ishaq bin Ammar says:

I submitted to Imam Moosa ibne Jafar that in case a woman is scared of
getting pregnant do you permit her to take medicine which brings about
abortion. The Imam replied, No! I cannot give such a permission!

The narrator again said, What is the decree for the time when the
pregnancy is in its initial embryonic stage?

The Imam replied, The development of man commences with the formation of
the embryo. Allah says in the Quran: On the Day of Judgement the parents
will be asked: for what crime you have killed your innocent child?
81:8-9

Abortion of foetus is a very amoral act, which Islam has forbidden.
Also, such operations are highly risky for the life and health of the
mother. Dr Pak Nagar, addressing a seminar on abortion has said:

It has been proved that forcing abortions reduces the expected age of
the woman. Scientific research also has proved that abortion upsets the
psychological balance of the womans mind.**[1]**

From 1951 to 1953, according to the statistics of the New York City,
2601 women died during abortions. In the next ten years the fatality on
this account has risen by 42%. In Chile 39% of female deaths were on
account of abortions.

One excuse for having access to forced abortions is poverty. Some
parents take shelter behind their poverty to kill their innocent
children.

There is no doubt that lots of families are victims of poverty. It is no
doubt very difficult to bring up a family in the midst of poverty. But
Islam does not accept the excuse of aborting children because of the
unfortunate condition of poverty and penury. Allah says in the Holy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Maktab e Islam, Year 13, Issue 8.

Quran:

Do not kill your children with fear of poverty. We give you and them the
sustenance. Killing children is definitely a big sin. 17:31

When the foetus has already formed, the parents should bear the hardship
courageously that possibly the child might grow into a great person and
bring laurels for the family and the society. Possibly the child may
become the cause of the economic well being of the family and they get
relief from their poverty.

Other excuses are also made for undergoing abortions like outdoor
activities, official responsibilities and already having too many
children. But these are not such valid excuses that the Islamic
Jurisprudence and common sense permit abortions.

Not only abortion is unlawful in the eyes of Islam but also retribution
has been fixed for this sinful act which differs according to the age of
the foetus which has been aborted forcibly.

Imam Sadiq says:

If the aborted child is in embryo form then the blood money is equal to
20 dinars of gold. If the pregnancy has reached the form of a lump of
flesh, the blood money has to be forty dinars of gold. If the pregnancy
has advanced to the form of muzga and flesh the blood money has to be
sixty gold dinars and if the foetus has formed bones the levy is eighty
gold dinars. If the foetus has reached total human form the levy is one
hundred gold dinars. If the aborted child is so developed that it has
spirit in it, then the deet or

punishment will be one human life.**[1]**

Khanam Afsar al-Malook Aamili has written a beautiful poem on this
subject.

Its translation is:

The tiny aborted child appeared in my dream and said:

If you meet my mother, ask her, mom! What fault you found in me that you
shed my blood unnecessarily!

As a child I was biding my time peacefully, then why the order for my
killing?

You have sharpened your fangs and paws, and have sullied your lapel with
my blood!

I was a newly arrived guest with you and had caused no harm to you.

Guests are there to be entertained, not to be killed heartlessly

You were worrying about the expenses for my upkeep that you extinguished
my tiny existence!

Mom! I had brought my sustenance with me, but it is a pity you didnt
believe in it!

You preferred to keep yourself free to move around, instead of looking
after me, and laid the foundation for tyranny!

For children the mother is their hope and with her they are contented!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassail al-Shia, Vol. 19, Page 169.

I wished that I look at your face and pick flowers from your beauteous
garden.

I wished to suckle milk from your bosom and thus relieve your sorrows.

I wished that I drank your milk and your voice reached my ears.

I thought that when you saw my smiles you would sit near me on my bed.

I hoped that you would send me to school and give me the lesson of
righteousness.

Returning home from school I would make you happy by reciting the
nursery rhymes.

I wished that when I am a youth, then you would realize my value.

In your frail old age I would have been your prop and help.

Now I am in the Heaven like a pure spirit and my place is with the
Houris.

You should now express repentance that perhaps the Merciful Allah
forgives you.

O Afsar! My request to you is to is to convey my message to all the
mothers
