After the Birth
===============

When a child takes birth the air gets into its lungs and it starts
breathing. After commencing the act of breathing the baby cries for the
first time. This crying is because of the reaction of the air getting
into the lungs. If the child doesnt breathe and cry, it is held with its
feet up and the head is gently stroked to help it breathe. Then the
umbilicus is tied and is severed with a sanitized scissors. After this
the child is given a bath with soap and lukewarm water and clothed. For
sometime the child does not need feeding. Then drops of warmish water
mixed with sugar are put into the childs mouth.

The newborn will generally be in a state of dreaming. It needs lot of
rest because it has undergone external and internal transition. Earlier
it was dependent on the mothers nutrition but now its own digestive
system has to start functioning.

During pregnancy the child depended for oxygen on the mothers breathing
but after delivery its own respiratory system has to start functioning.
It now takes its own oxygen from the atmosphere and ejects carbon
dioxide during breathing. Its internal functioning would have undergone
a major change and its external condition and environment is also
totally changed. Earlier in the womb of the mother the temperature was
37.5 Degrees Centigrade but now it is in an environment which has
transient temperature conditions. During delivery too the

Â child is subject to lot of pressure which needs mitigation. At this
time the child will be like a postoperative patient who has just come
out of an operation theatre who, above all, needs lots of rest. It will
be like a machine, which has just come out of the shop floor, which
needs delicate and careful handling. In this circumstance the best that
can be done for the child is to provide him restful environment that it
overcomes the hardship faced during the process of delivery.

Dr Jalali writes:

Tickling the child to laughter, lifting it up repeatedly, changing its
garments frequently and showing it to others are not desirable acts
which one should refrain from. The child is not a toy and it needs rest
and peace. Avoid speaking loudly in its presence and refrain from
lifting him up and down in an attempt to soothe him. Hugging and kissing
the child too are not good for him.**[1]**

The mother too needs lots of rest and strength. During the nine months
of pregnancy she would have gone through lots of travails. Especially
after delivery she would be very weak as if she has lost most of the
blood from her body. At this time the thoughtful husband: should provide
to her all possible comforts and with good nutrition try to put her back
to normal health. If medical attention and medication is required, then
it should be provided without any loss of time. If the husband is
negligent at this juncture then the wife will remain dull and weak and
the consequences will have to be borne by him too.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ruwanshinasi Kudak, Page 223.
