Foreword
========

There is pronounced difference between education and training or
upbringing. Education means inculcation of knowledge, or imparting the
meanings of the contents of curricula. But upbringing is molding of
personalities on desired lines. The society can be transformed with
proper upbringing of its population.

It is imperative that upbringing is based on well thought out program to
ensure the degree of desired success. Upbringing is not only sermonizing
and admonishing but it requires creation of the right environment
towards attainment of the desired results. The criteria necessary for
proper upbringing can be listed as:

The mentor should be properly acquainted with the student whose
upbringing he is assigned to take up. He should familiarize himself with
the physical and mental status of the student.

The mentor should have defined aims of the training program for the
student. The ultimate goal of the upbringing process has to be the
development of the student into a humane person.

The training program to be inclusive of the desirable criteria and
conditions for producing best results. The mentor then can expect
positive results over a period of time.

The best period for commencement of the upbringing or training is the
childhood of the student. Childhood is the most impressionable period in
the life of a person. At thisÂ 

delicate and responsible juncture the parents can play a very crucial
role. But upbringing of small children is not an easy and simple
function and requires deep thought of identification, knowledge,
experience, determination and perseverance in the mentor or the parents.
It is sad that most parents are found ignorant of the art of upbringing
of the children. This is the reason most children are not receiving
upbringing on desirable lines and they keep growing like self-sustained
saplings.

In the progressive countries of the West and the East upbringing of
children receives prime importance. They have conducted lot of research
in this field. Many useful books have been published on the subject and
they have many experts in the field. But in our country scant attention
has been given to this crucial matter. We have few knowledgeable persons
in this discipline and very few books on the subject which are
absolutely insufficient. Quite a few books have been translated from
other languages into Persian which are available to people. But these
books from the West and the East have two big lacunae.

The first lacuna is that they treat of only the physical requirement of
the students and the stress is on the worldly education of the subjects.
All the research rotates around these aspects only and they are totally
silent on the spiritual aspect of human life and have ignored any
reference to mention of the concept of hereafter.

In the West the only objective is to train the children for their bodies
and minds for the attainment of worldly conveniences and pleasures so
that when they grow up they have ideal living conditions at their
disposal. And if

these books deal with the subject of morality they limit themselves to
the treatment of morality specific only to the worldly benefits and are
totally silent about the rewards or retribution which one can earn on
the basis of his actions during the worldly life.

The second lacuna is that the training problems in the West are
dependence for a solution only on past experiences and statistics. There
is no impress of Faith in this process. Therefore, these books are not
of comprehensive utility for the people of the Muslim Faith. In the eyes
of a Muslim the human being has two pronounced aspectsone is the body
and the other is the spirit. One pertains to the worldly life and the
other to the Hereafter. In view of this the writer has decided to study
and research and thereafter present the conclusions to the seekers of
knowledge in the form of a book. For the writing of this book the main
source of information has been the Holy Quran, the books of tradition
and the writings on moral science. Reference has also been made to works
in Arabic and Persian on the training of children, their psychology,
health etc. The books written by Iranian scholars on the upbringing of
children were also kept in view. The personal experiences of the author
have also been invaluable in this effort. It is hoped that this humble
presentation will be of use to the mentors who are associated with the
training of impressionable minds in the Muslim community.

Ibrahim Amini Najafabadi

January 1980
