The Schedule of Breast Feeding
==============================

The experts have suggested two methods for feeding of the babies. Some
are of opinion that for feeding the child well thought out schedules
have to be devised and the feeding should be done implicitly at those
predetermined intervals. Between two feedings some have prescribed a
delay of three hours and some suggest a gap of four hours. In the
interim period it is recommended to abstain from feeding the baby.

Some other experts do not approve of this type of scheduling. And they
believe in feeding the baby more frequently on the basis of the
indication of the appetite by the baby. They say that whenever the baby
shows the desire for food, it must be fed.

Some other nutritionists feel that the latter method of feeding is more
suitable as they believe that the baby must get the milk whenever it
shows signs of hunger. Both the methods, however, have their own pros
and cons as illustrated here:

Hunger or thirst of a child cannot be determined positively because it
cannot express its need clearly. In the initial stage of feeding it will
be drinking the milk for sating its appetite and then it continues to
suckle the breasts. In such situations the child cries not so much with
hunger as with the desire to suckle the mothers

breast. The mother too gives her milk to the child to stop his crying.
Often the child cries without any appetite for food but the mother gives
it the milk thinking that it is hungry...The child therefore drinks the
mothers milk while it has the appetite and sometimes when it doesnt. It
is a well-established fact that taking of food at erratic intervals is
not good for the health of the children as it is for the adults this
habit might upset the digestive system of the child. . .

This is why unplanned feeding of babies is fraught with risk of illness
for them.

Hazrat Ali says:

Excessive eating and eating more thereafter should be avoided. Those who
eat more are more likely to fall ill.**[1]**

The child who drinks milk without any controlled schedule will have a
disorganized existence from the very beginning and grow into a
disorderly adult.

It is common practice that whenever a baby cries, the mothers breast is
given to it without trying to determine the cause of the crying. Such
children get into the habit of skulking all the time. They think that
crying and shouting is the only way to get things done according to
their wishes. They can never show patience and courage in doing
anything. They want to achieve their end immediately even if they have
to cry profusely for the purpose. They do not feel ashamed at playing
such shameful antics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak, Vol. 3, Page 82.

The parents and other members of the families are always restless
because of such children.

Dr Jalali writes about such children:

If the feeding schedule of a child is fixed in consultation with an
expert paediatrician then it will get used to the timings and the
mothers will understand when the child is hungry and when its appetite
is sated.

Secondly, people do their daily tasks as a force of habit. Similarly
feeding of the child too becomes a habit and is done almost
automatically at the scheduled timings.**[1]**

Russell says:

These days an ordinary mother knows the norms of bringing up children.
She knows that it is important to feed the baby at predetermined
intervals and not whenever it cries for some reason or the other. She
knows that such regime is followed to keep the digestive system of the
baby in good trim

When the children see that the parents are acceding to their cries, it
becomes their second habit and keeps crying at the slightest excuse. It
also happens that the repeated episodes of crying over a long period
earn them the anger of their parents. When the children realize this,
they become morose and the world looks cold, dry and bleak to
them.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ruwan Shinasi Kudak, Page 224.  
 **[2]** Dar Tarbiat, Page 78.

Attention must be paid to a few points:

(1) For all the children the same program of feeding could not be
possibly adopted. Every child will have its own digestive and nutritive
requirements. And also the food requirements of any child are very
dynamic. The digestive system of the new- born will be delicately tiny
for the first forty to fifty days from birth. Therefore it can retain
very small quantity of milk. It will be able to take a very small
quantity of milk at a time. But it becomes hungry very soon thereafter.
During this period the feeding times have to be of shorter intervals,
say, every hour and a half to two hours. But as the children grow the
gap between the feeds have to be increased, say, a feed every three to
four hours or even more.

(2)   All the children will not be of the same physical condition and
digestive capacity. Therefore an individual feeding program has to be
developed for every individual child. Some children become hungry quite
soon after a feed and others take more time for the same. Careful
mothers are very observant and they take care to design an ideal
schedule of feeding for their children in consultation with experts.

(3)   Whenever milk is given to the baby, care has to be taken that it
is fully satisfied with the feed. But mothers must carefully observe
that the newborn babies fall asleep while feeding on their breasts. In
such instances they may not be fully fed and the mother has to gently
strike the back of the

child that it wakes up and completes its feed.

(4)   When the complete program of feeding the child is prepared it must
be put to practice very carefully. The gaps between the feeds must be
strictly adhered to. In between two scheduled feeds the child must not
be given the milk even if it cries. This task needs patience and
firmness on the part of the mother to ensure that the child gets used to
the regime. Then the child will awake automatically at the scheduled
time to receive its feed. Patience and forbearance will become a part of
the nature of such children.

(5)   The feeding schedule of the children must be prepared in such a
way that from midnight to dawn there is no need of feeding it. When the
child takes to this habit, both the mother and the child will have a
good nights rest.

(6)   The breasts must be cleaned with a little cotton wool after every
feed. This is essential for the health and hygiene and will also prevent
the chance of injury to the breast.

(7)   When a child suckles the mothers milk some air too enters its
digestive tract and makes it uneasy. Therefore, after every feed the
child has to be raised a little and its back is gently tapped to see
that the air comes out of its digestive system.

(8)   The suckling baby should be fed from both the breasts of the
mother. This should be done to avoid drying of the milk, which can
result in the pain of the breast. One lady says:  
 Imam Sadiq told me: Do not feed your child only

from one of your breasts to ensure that it gets complete food.**[1]**

(9)   The lactating mothers should take care that they do not perform
very tiring physical tasks and avoid spells of anger. This is advised
because such events can affect their capacity to produce milk, which
ultimately is bad for the child.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassail, Vol. 15, Page 176.
