If the Mother Is Deficient in Milk
==================================

If the mother is unable to satisfy the appetite of the baby, she has no
right to deprive the baby of her own milk. She must breast feed the baby
to the extent of the milk available with her and supplement it with
other milk and nutrition. But if the mother

Is totally dry, which condition is quite rare, she can wean the child
and turn to the cows milk, which is qualitatively very similar to the
mothers milk. When shifting to the cows milk the following have to be
borne in mind:

The cows milk is generally denser and heavier than the mothers milk.
Therefore it should be diluted with some boiled water before feeding to
the child so that it comes closer to the density of the mothers milk.
The milk should also be sweetened with a little sugar.

The cows milk should be boiled for fifteen minutes to ensure that any
germs present there are destroyed.

The milk, while feeding to the baby, should neither be too hot nor very
cold. The temperature of the milk to be ideally close to the temperature
of the mothers milk.

Every time the child is given milk, ensure that the feeding bottle is
properly washed and free from contamination to prevent the child from
getting infected.

Efforts have to be made to ensure that right type of milk is used for
feeding.

If the mother wishes to use dried milk powders for feeding the child
then it is necessary to consult a paediatrician to get the
recommendation for the baby food suitable for the child. There are
several products available in the market to suit specific requirements
of children of varying ages and physical condition and only an expert
can decide on the product suitable for any particular child.

If the milk recommended by the doctor is not found suitable, then the
mother should refer back to the doctor and get a fresh recommendation.
