Daughter Or Son
===============

No sooner a woman becomes pregnant the speculation commences whether she
will have a male or a female issue. She offers prayers for having a son.
When her relatives come visiting her they say that the glow on her face
indicates that she would get a son. Her adversaries say that her eyes
indicate she is carrying a girl. The husband too wishes for a son. He
occasionally expresses this desire to her. Prior to delivery the mind of
every relative around in the maternity home wonders whether she will
give birth to a boy or a girl. When they come to know that the new
arrival is a girl, sudden quiet descends on the gathering. But if it is
a boy there will be instant shouts of joy. When the father hears of the
birth of a boy, he becomes overjoyed. He will run to fetch sweets and
fruits for the visitors. He issues instructions for taking good care of
the child lest he caught cold. He starts pampering his wife and
distributes gifts to the midwife and the attendants. But, if the new
arrival were a girl, his mien would drop. He would go and sit in a
corner. He starts cursing his ill luck He thus makes his existence
bitter. He neglects his convalescent wife and sometimes even talks of
divorcing her. This is the state of affairs of our degenerate society.
But there are always exceptions. There are parents who receive a
daughter with open arms and affection as they do the son. But such
families are in a minority

Dear father and respected mother:

What difference it makes if you have a son or a daughter? Is a daughter
less human than a son? Doesnt a daughter have the capacity to grow and
progress? Cant she become a useful and valuable person? Is the daughter
not your offspring? What special advantage the parents draw from a son
that the daughter cannot provide them? If the daughter was not important
in the eyes of Allah, then the progeny of the Holy Prophet would not
have come through his daughter Fatima Zahra.! If you bring up the
daughter properly she will not be any less than a son for you. If you
see the pages of history you will find references of women who were more
capable than thousands of men. Why this ignoble thinking in our society
which has reduced the status of our women. There is need to carry on
jihad against this evil. There is need to remove the thought of any
difference between a son and a daughter. A daughter can be as useful and
efficient a person as a son. You must receive the news of the birth of a
healthy child, be it a son or a daughter, with equal happiness. You must
thank God that it is a gift from Him that has come to you. It is a part
of your existence that has come to the world.

The Prophet and his Holy Descendants always took this attitude towards
the life.

Whenever the Imam Sajjad received the news of the birth of a child he
never enquired if it was a son or a daughter. But he used to offer a
prayer to Allah when he used to be informed that the newborn was hale
and hearty.**[67]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassail, Vol. 15, Page 143.

One day the Holy Prophet was busy talking to his companions when a
person reached his presence and informed that Allah has given to him a
daughter. He was joyed and offered his thanks to Allah. But when he saw
the faces of his companions he found them crestfallen. He was upset with
them and said,

What has happened to you? Allah has given to me a flower whose fragrance
I smell. Allah has ensured sustenance for her too as He would for a
son!**[68]**

Allah has deplored the discrimination between the sons and daughters
thus:

When they get tidings of a daughter their faces turn dark with shame;
anger pervades them and they hide their faces from others. 16:58-59

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassail as-Shia.
