Naming the Child
================

One of the prime responsibilities of the parents is the selection of a
name for the new- born child. They should not treat this important thing
as a triviality. Individuals and families are recognized with their
names. If the name is affable the person will be well received by the
people. Persons with unpleasant sounding names will not get good
attention from others and sometimes even they might ridicule them. The
persons who are given improper names will be victims of inferiority
complex. Therefore Islam requires the parents to exercise care in
selecting good names for their children.

The Holy Prophet has said:

It is the responsibility of every father to choose a good name for his
child.**[1]**

The Prophet also said:

The children have three rights over their fathers. The first is that
they are given good names. Secondly, they are provided good education;
and lastly, they help them to select good spouses.**[2]**

Imam Moosa Kazim said:

The first good that a father does to his child is that

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak, Vol. 2, Page 618.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 104, Page 92.

Â he selects a worthy name for him.**[1]**

On the other hand the name of a person has a lot of social significance
too. It is his name, which gets recognition to a person that he belongs
to a respectable family. If the parents have high regard for a well-
known poet, they may name their child after him. If the parents are fond
of high learning they may select the name of a reputed scholar. The
highly religious parents name their children after the prophets, the
Imams and other religious personalities. If the parents desire their
children to struggle in the cause of the faith, they name them after
Mohammed, Ali, Hasan, Hussain, Abul Fazl, Abbas, Hamza, Ja'far, Abu
Dhar, Ammar, Saeed etc.

If the parents are enamored of any sport they like to name their
children after renowned players of that sport. Similarly if the parents
appreciate the art of any musician, they may prefer to name their child
after that person.

When the nature of the parents is tyrannical, they take pride in naming
the child after historical personalities like Alexander, Changez, Timor
etc. It is noticed that while naming the child the parents generally
associate themselves with certain groups and people of the past this
will have a definite impact on the nature and thinking of the child when
he grows up.

The Holy Prophet has said:

Keep good names, because on the Day of Judgement you will be called by
these names only. It will be

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassail as-Shia, Vol. 15, Page 122.

proclaimed, so-and-so son of so-and-so! Rise and get associated with
your light! O, So-and-so, son of so-and-so! Arise that there is no light
for you that can guide you!**[1]**

One person said to Imam Ja'far Sadiq, We name our children after your
name and the names of your revered ancestors. Is this beneficial for us.
The Imam replies, Yes! By Allah! Is faith anything else than love for
the pious and hate towards the profane!

For the propagation of their beliefs people derive benefit from every
opportunity to project the names of the important personalities. They go
to the extent of naming the towns, streets and other landmarks after
important personalities. A responsible and devoted Muslim too takes
every opportunity to perpetuate the names of the great personalities of
Islam and one of such acts is to name his children after them.

Yes! Hasan, Hussain, Abul Fazl, Ali Akbar, Hur, Qasim, Hamza, Jafar,
Abuzar, Ammar are amongst the names which enliven the spirit to remember
the valiant acts of the great persons and encourage the coming
generations to groom themselves on those models. When a person is named
after the Holy Prophets like Ibrahim, Moosa, Issa or Mohammed he is
bound to have a feeling that he must try to be as righteous a person as
he can. When a person is named after the friends and devotees of the
Holy Ahl al-Bait like Abuzar, Meesum and Ammar he will realize the
significance of the deeds of those great men. An intelligent Muslim will
not give the names of tyrants and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassail as-Shia, Vol. 15, Page 123.

enemies of Islam to his children.

Imam Mohammed Baqir says:

Beware of the Satan! When he hears that someone is called as Mohammed
and Ali, he melts in such a way as the lead melts and when he hears that
someone is named after one of our enemies he is overwhelmed with
happiness.**[1]**

The Prophet of Islam said:

Whoever gets four sons, and he has not named even one after me has been
cruel on me.**[2]**

Imam Mohammed Baqir said:

The peerless names are the names of the Prophets.

The Holy Prophet attached so much importance to names that if he did not
like the name of any companion or a place, he would immediately change
the name. He changed the name of Abd al-Shams to Abd al-Wahab. He named
Abd al-Uza (the slave of Uza the idol) to Abd Allah. Abd al-Haaris (the
tiger) to Abd ar Rehman and Abd al-Kaaba to Abd Allah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassail as-Shia, Vol. 0, Page 127.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 127.
