The Parents Responsibility
==========================

In the eyes of Islam the status of the father and the mother is very
exalted. Allah, the Holy Prophet and the Infallible Imams have exhorted
the people in this regard. There are a lot of verses in the Holy Book
relevant to the subject. The exemplary behavior of children towards
their parents is rated as one of the best invocations.

Allah says:

Your God has decreed that thou shalt worship only Him and adopt good
behavior with (thy) parents. 17:23

Imam Ja'far Sadiq observes:

Three actions are the best: (1) Offer the five mandatory prayers with
punctuality, (2) Maintain good behavior with your parents, and (3)
Struggle in the cause of Allah.**[1]**

Now the question arises why this exalted position has been bestowed on
the parents of the Faithful! Is Allah giving this status for no specific
reason? What big deed the parents perform for their progeny that they
are deemed deserving of the august status. The father, in satisfaction
of his carnal desire transfers his sperm into the womb of the mother
where it compounds with the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Usool al-Kafi, Book 2, Page 158.

 ovum and a new being starts to develop and after nine months of the
incident arrives into the world as a tiny babe. The mother suckles it
and gives it other nutrition. Sometimes she cleans it and sometimes
changes its raiment. She cares of its wetness and dryness. During this
time the father takes care of the expenses required for the upkeep of
the child. Dont the parents have any other responsibility besides these?
Is it because of performing these duties that the parents have been
endowed with the exalted status? Do the parents only have a right over
their offspring and the children dont have any rights over them? In my
opinion no one will accept any such one sided privilege. The traditions
of the Infallibles of the Holy Prophets Family are quoted in this
regard:

1. The Holy Prophet of Islam has said:

As your father has a right over you, so does your progeny have a similar
right?**[1]**

The Prophet also said:

As are the children disinherited for their disobedience so also it is
possible that the parents may be disowned by the children for not
fulfilling their bonded duties.**[2]**

The Prophet said:

Allahs curse on such parents who become the cause of disinheriting their
children.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma al-Zawaid, Vol. 8, page: 146.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, Volt 19, Page 93.  
 **[3]** Makarim al-Akhlaq. Page 518.

Imam Sajjad said:

Your children have a right that you consider if they are good or they
are bad. You have been the cause of their birth and the world recognizes
them as your offspring. It is your responsibility that you teach them
good manners and guide them toward the recognition and obedience of
Allah. Your behavior towards your children must be of a person who
believes that a good deed shall get a suitable reward and ill treatment
shall call for retribution.**[1]**

Amir al-Mominin Ali says:

Beware; your behavior might render your family and your relatives part
of the ill fated people.**[2]**

The Prophet said:

Whoever wishes that his children are safe from disinheritance, he should
help them performing good deeds.**[3]**

The Prophet also said:

To whomsoever a daughter is born should strive to impart norms of good
behavior to her and make efforts to educate her. Provide means of
comfort to her that she becomes a cause of his deliverance from the Hell
Fire.**[4]**

Above all, Allah says in the Holy Quran:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Makarim al-Akhlaq, Page 484.  
 **[2]** Ghurar al-Hikam Page 802  
 **[3]** Majma al-Zawaid, Volt 8, Page 158  
 **[4]** Ibid.

O, Believers! Save yourselves and your dependents from the fire whose
fuel are humans and the stones. 66:6

The time when a child is in the process of adopting a way of life which
can make him either virtuous or wicked, he can be metamorphosed into a
perfect human being or a degraded wild animal. The virtue or wickedness
of a person will be dependent on the upbringing he receives and this
responsibility rests squarely on the shoulders of the parents. In fact
the parents are instruments of shaping a human being, good or bad, from
the child. The greatest service which the parents can render to their
children is that they train them to be good mannered, kind, friends of
humans, well meaning, freedom loving, bold, just, wise, righteous,
noble, faithful, dutiful, hard working, educated. The parents must mould
their children in such a way that they are successful in both the world
and hereafter. Only such people are those who are endowed with the
exalted status of parenthood, and not those who in fulfillment of their
carnal desire caused the birth of children and left the children to fend
for themselves and rendering them likely to fall into evil ways.

The Holy Prophet said:

The best thing a father provide to his child is good manners and ethical
training.**[1]**

The mother has a more important function to perform towards the
upbringing of the progeny. Even during the pregnancy the mothers food
habits and her behavior

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma al-Zawaid, Volt 8, Page: 159

 affects the future virtuosity or otherwise of the developing child.

The Prophet of Islam said:

Lucky is the one whose foundation of his virtue has been made in the
womb of the mother and unlucky is one whose wickedness had its rudiments
in the mothers womb as well**[1]**

The Prophet also said:

The Janna (Heaven) is under the feet of ones mother.**[2]**

The parents, who dont pay attention to the education and training of
their children, become guilty of gross negligence. Such parents must be
asked whether the innocent child pleaded with him to give him birth in
the world to be abandoned like sheep and cattle. Now that you have
become the cause of his existence, by virtue of religious tenets and
human wisdom his education and training is your bonden duty.

The parents are also answerable to the society. Todays children will be
men and women, the citizens of tomorrow. The fabric of the society will
be made of these individuals. Whatever lessons they learn today, they
shall put them into practice tomorrow. If their upbringing today is
perfect, the society of tomorrow shall be flawless. And if todays
generation follows a faulty program of training it is imperative that
tomorrow's society will be evil and perverted. The personalities in the
fields of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Volt 77, Page 115-133.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak, Vol. 2, Page 38.

politics, education and society shall emerge from these elements. Todays
children are tomorrows parents. Todays children can be tomorrows
reformers. If they have received good training at the hands of their
parents, they in turn can carry forward this practice with their
children. If the parents have the will, they can be the instruments of
the reform of the society for the future and with neglect of the
children they can be the cause of the ruination of the society. By
giving the right training to their children, the parents can render
invaluable service to their society.

Education and training should not be treated as an insignificant
subject. The efforts which the parents make to educate their children
and the hardships that they undergo in this quest result in the creation
of thousands of professors, doctors, and engineers. It is the parents
who strive to nurture perfect human beings, capable and pious mentors
and other professionals.

The mothers in particular bear more responsibility for the upbringing of
the children. The children spend most of their childhood with the
mothers. The foundation of the direction their future is bound to take
is laid here. So, the key to the vice or virtue of a person and the
progress or decline of a society is with the mothers of the society. The
womans place is not in the shop floor, ministerial or administrative
positions. These functions dont measure up to the importance of a woman
as a mother. Mothers breed perfect human beings. Virtuous ministers,
lawyers, professors owe their positions to the loving care received from
their mothers during their formative years.

The parents, who nurture truthful, pious children not

only serve their children and the society but also create a niche for
themselves in the society. These children will be a support of the
parents in their frail old age. If parents strive towards the education
and upbringing of their children they reap the harvest of their troubles
during their lifetime only.

Hazrat Ali says:

Evil off-spring is among the greatest hardships for the parents.**[1]**

Hazrat Ali also says:

Evil off-spring causes loss of respect for the parents and the
successors are shamed.**[2]**

The Prophet of Islam says:

May Allah bless the parents who trained their children to behave justly
with them.**[3]**

Therefore those who attain parenthood have great responsibility on their
shoulders. This responsibility is to Allah Almighty as also to their
fellow human beings and also to their own children. If they discharge
the responsibility properly they will be rewarded in this world and
hereafter. But if they falter in the discharge of this responsibility
then they themselves will be the losers and they will be tantamount to
have cheated their own children and the society at large and they would
be perpetrating an unpardonable sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 189.  
 **[2]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 780.  
 **[3]** Makarim al-Akhlaq, Page 517.
