The Sense of Belonging
======================

The newly born baby will be a delicate identity who cannot live on
without support from others. When he was in the mothers womb, he had a
warm and cozy corner for himself. Where the nutrition and warmth was
provided by the mother. He had no concern for any needs. Now that he has
arrived into the world, he has started to feel dependent. The first need
the baby feels is, perhaps, the need for warmth because the environment
it has come into is cooler. Then he feels the need for satisfying its
hunger. For the first time it knows that for warmth and food he has to
depend on others. At this stage he doesnt know any one who can help. By
nature he is aware of his needs and focuses his attention on an unseen
Power to satisfy these needs. From the very beginning of his life the
child is possessed with this sense of belonging, and this sense will be
there with him throughout life. When the child feels hungry or thirsty,
it cries. It will cling to the bosom of the mother and feels soothed
with the lullabies sung by her. If the child gets the feeling of any
danger around him, he clings to the apron strings of the mother.

This sense of belonging which later on manifests itself in the habit of
following the lead (taqleed) of others. The child models his morals and
behavior on the morals and attitudes of the persons in his immediate
surroundings. This sense of belonging which later on helps the child to

make friends and play with his mates. The fraternity and affection
towards the spouse and his own children are a natural continuation of
the sense of belonging. This development in the child is the precursor
of the gregarious nature of human beings. Therefore the sense of
belonging that a child has is no triviality and is the most important
aspect of the structure of the human society. The child develops the
faculty of hope and contentment. He will develop the feeling of
camaraderie towards others, he thinks good of others and expects their
co-operation. When his opinion about the society is good, then he would
extend his hand in support to it and make the necessary sacrifices
towards this end. The people in the society will consider him as their
well-wisher

Contrary to this, if the sense of belonging is suppressed, and is not
utilized rightly, then the child might deviate from the straight path
that God has assigned for him. The view of the psychologists is that at
many stages the child, on account of the happenings in its environment,
might get the rudiments of feeling of fear, restlessness, lack of
confidence, shame, loneliness, sadness and even suicidal tendencies.

If you want to satisfy the sense of belonging of the child properly,
then always try to be its supporter. When it is hungry, feed it. Provide
means of comfort to it. If the child has any discomfort or pain, try to
ameliorate it. Keep his program of sleep and feed in control in such a
way that it has no inconvenience.

Avoid beating the child. The child doesnt know anything other than its
immediate needs. It only trusts an Unknown Power and it cries seeking
the help of that

Power. Dont take out your ire on the child by beating it.

The Holy Prophet says:

Do not beat the babies when they cry, because when a child under the age
of four months cries, it is bearing witness to the Unity of
Allah.**[1]**

Be a supporter of the child under all circumstances, even if you are
unable to perform a task for him, try to treat him with love and care.
If the child is uncomfortable, try to remove the cause of the
discomfort. Never reprimand the child and threaten him that you would
leave him alone and go away. Doing such acts might affect the childs
psychology. The child expects to be the cynosure of the eyes of the
parents. If they dont show affection to the child, it will be very
upset. The child always tries to get the love and affection of the
parents. Some parents make a wrong use of this tendency and tell him
that if he did not obey them, they would not love him. They should avoid
using this pretence. These subterfuges might ultimately affect the
psyche of the child in stages. If the child cries, it can also be to
attract the attention of the parents. The parents should handle the
child with patience and thoughtfulness. If the child is admonished or
beaten when it cries, it might quieten for the moment, but this will be
the quietness of disappointment which might have dangerous impact on its
mind. The child is always happy with the parents around and is
uncomfortable when they are away. The parents should never talk about
their death in the hearing of the child that will be very upsetting and
disturbing for him. A sick parent should not mention possibility of his
death in the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 104, Page 104.

presence of the child. If a parent has to travel away from the child for
a considerably long period, prepare the child for the event. While away,
maintain contact regularly.

When a child refuses to take medicine, dont frighten it by saying that
if it did not comply, it would die. Take a positive attitude and try to
console and convince him to take the medicine to get well. If the child
is suffering from a serious ailment, maintain calm and composure in its
presence. The parents should always try to be good friends and
well-wishers of the child throughout their lives.

It should be borne in minds that the expression of love and affection
for the child should be moderate. Pampering a child might be harmful for
it in a long run. Wherever a child is unable to perform a task, the
parents should assist it. But when the child is capable of doing a thing
by itself, the parents should leave it alone to accomplish it.
Sometimes, a child might try to get attention of others by crying
despite having the capability of performing its own task. In such an
event, it should be ignored.

Russell writes:

If the child cries for no reason, then it should be left to its own
scruples and allowed to cry as much as it could. If any other attitude
is adopted in such circumstances, the child might become dictatorial and
misbehave more often. Whenever a child cries for a genuine need, the
attention given should not go to the extent of pampering it.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Dar Tarbiat, Page 79.
