Affection
=========

Man is ever thirsty for love and affection. Love gives life to hearts.
One, who loves oneself wishes that others too should have similar
feelings for him, feels happy in his heart. When a person feels that
none in this world loves him: feels forlorn and hapless. He will
therefore be always sad and melancholy. The child too is a man in
miniature and, in fact, needs more love and affection than the adults.
As the child needs nutrition, so does he need love and affection? The
child does not care if he is living in a palace or a shack. But he knows
it pretty well whether he is getting the love and affection of his
companions or not. From the feeling of love and care the child proceeds
on the path of growth and well-being. The fountainhead of good character
is love and affection. Under the reflection of love the feelings and
thoughts of a child can be nurtured properly to make him a good human
being.

The child who receives profuse love will have a happy spirit and heart.
He will not be a victim of disappointment. He will turn into a person
who is confident, good-natured and self-respecting. He will not become a
victim of psychological problems. The children who have received the
love and affection of the elders are better prepared to face the harsh
realities and problems of the adult life.

A girl who has received the love and affection of her

parents, and her household, is endowed with the aura of affection, will
not succumb to the overtures of a boy in her youth that might affect her
future life. . A boy who had his upbringing in the atmosphere of true
love and affection will not become victim of evils like drugs and
drinking.

From the psychological point of view too it is proven that the children
who have received profound love and affection of their parents during
their growing years are more intelligent and healthy than those who grow
in dormitories away from their parents. It is another thing that
children from boarding schools may have better nutrition and health
care.

But those who have their upbringing in a mechanical atmosphere devoid of
feelings of love and affection, and have not experienced close comfort
of the company of the

Parents, may not have the natural feelings of affection towards others.

A child who has not fully shared the love and affection of his parents
will be a victim of the feeling of deprivation and inferiority. Mostly
the cause of anger, shamelessness, short temper, depression etc is the
lack of the parents love and affection during the childhood of the
person.

The persons who turn to evils like theft and murder in most cases were
devoid of parental love and affection in their early lives. They behave
like the rebels of the society. They may even have suicidal tendencies.
The newspapers and magazines are replete with stories of such
unfortunate persons. Dr Hassan Ahdi, chief of the Division of
Psychiatry, of The National Society for Care of Children (Anjuman Melli
Himayat Bachhagan), has

conducted an experiment on five hundred convicts and concluded that the
persons committed the first crime at the ages between 12 and 13. The
main cause of the delinquency has been lack of love and affection from
their families.

He says:

The rudiments of most of the psychological problems can be traced to the
childhood. Even the most balanced child has the problem of allaying his
emotions.**[1]**

A young person writes:

I opened my eyes in a poor family in a small village. The upkeep of my
two sisters and me was beyond the means of my parents. My grand mother
took me to her home. Her circumstances were better. She loved me very
much. She used to buy good dresses and other things for me. But these
comforts were no substitute for the love and affection of my mother and
father that I wanted. I used to feel as if I had lost something. Many a
time I used to cry inconsolably hiding from others view. I was a student
of the Third Standard then. Once my father came to meet me. He asked me
to come home. I was overjoyed at the prospect and immediately got ready
to go. I felt as if my troubles of years have come to an end in a
moment. I advise all fathers and mothers not to deprive their children
of their presence, love and affection by sending them away howsoever
straitened the circumstances. They must realize that living away from
the parents and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ruznama Kehan, Issue 42.

being deprived of their personal love and affection will be very hard on
the children. This void cannot be filled by any amount of comforts.

He writes in another letter:

I was deprived of the love and affection of my parents. That is the
reason I am now a heart broken jealous person. I am a cowardly and angry
person. In childhood I used to run away from my school. With difficulty
I could reach till the Sixth Standard at the school and then dropped
out.

The Holy Faith of Islam, which provides great care to the process of
upbringing of children, makes particular stress to love and affection
for the children. The Quran and Hadith have volumes on the subject.
Here, a few examples are sited:

Imam Jafar Sadiq has said:

Because of the profound love that the parents have for their children,
Allah will include them in His Blessings. (Grace)**[1]**

Allah has said to the Prophet Moses:

Loving children is the best of acts because the purpose of their
creation is for worship of Allah and witnessing the Unity of Allah. If
the children die in their childhood, they would enter the Heaven.**[2]**

The Prophet of Islam said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wassail, Vol. 15, Page 98.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak, Vol. 2, Page 615.

Love children and be kind to them.**[1]**

The Prophet has also said:

Kiss your children profusely, because every time you kiss the child,
Allah will advance your position in the Heaven by one stage.**[2]**

One person told the Prophet: I have not kissed any child till today.
When that person left the company of the Prophet, he told his
companions,

In my view, the person is destined for the Hell.**[3]**

The Prophet said:

A person who is not kind to children and not respectful to elders is not
from amongst us.**[4]**

Hazrat Ali, while making his will and last testament said:

Be kind to children and respectful to your elders.**[5]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 104, Page 92.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 92.  
 **[3]** Ibid, Vol. 104, Page 99.  
 **[4]** Ibid., Vol. 75, Page 147.  
 **[5]** Ibid., Page 146.
