The Expression of Love and Affection
====================================

Love for ones own children is a natural instinct. Perhaps there will be
few parents who dont love their children from the depths of their
hearts. But only loving the child from the heart is not sufficient for
the betterment of the child. The child needs love that is reflected in
the actions of the parents. The child wants to be kissed, hugged and to
be looked at with caring smiles. When the parents sing the lullabies,
the child savors their sweetness. The child desires that the parents
play with and gambol with him. The child treats this as a sign of love.
It considers the anger and conflicts as signs of thoughtlessness.
Whenever the parents look at the child at different times, it visualizes
at that moment if there is a look of love on their faces or not.

There are also parents who shower their love on the child till it is a
baby. But as it grows up, they gradually reduce the expression of love
and when the child reaches adolescence and adulthood they totally
forsake him and even say that any more expressions of love might spoil
him. But this is not the right attitude. The child expects the love of
his parents throughout his life. He feels joy over the expression of
love by the parents and if he finds them ignoring him, he has a feeling
of hurt. Particularly the adolescence is a very critical period in the
life of a person when support and guidance of the parents is

required the most. It is this neglect of the adolescent-adults by their
parents that there are many cases of suicide in this age group. There
are also cases of such persons fleeing to some unspecified place. It
wont be out of place here to quote some entries from the diary of
Nazneen, a teenager:

When I think of my mom and dad I cannot but laugh! Although they deserve
more to be sadly pitied than laughed at! Mom is busy in her own world,
occupied with her daily chores. She wants to sit gossiping for hours at
end with Aunt Vizri Jaan and Hameeda Begum. If some of us sisters and
brothers arrive in the midst of these conversations for some errand, she
abhors the interruption. She doesnt realize that while gossiping about
the idiosyncrasy of others footwear and attire she makes me feel like a
bird who is fluttering around to pour its hearts feeling to someone. Mom
and Dad are either busy arguing with one another or sitting with friends
for society gossip. Or otherwise, they are away from home. I am also
busy at the school from morning to evening on all working days. It is
since many days that I have set eyes on Dad. My teacher of Literature is
a psychologist. Today he talked on the effect that a father can have on
the psyche of his daughter. His talk went straight to my heart. He was
right in saying that I am a grown up in the eyes of everyone. But I feel
the need of the guidance of my dad more than at any other time in my
life. There is need for the moral strength of someone wise and kind. But
he, my Dad, seems to have no time

Â for this.**[1]**

The best place for the training of a child, particularly in the early
stages of life, is the home. In this period the child receives total
attention, kindness and love of the parents. The parents are advised
that as far as possible they dont entrust their small children to the
care of crches. Perhaps, these crches may be better equipped for hygiene
and nutrition but they provide a cold and strange environment to the
child. The place will be like a gaol for the child who wants the company
of the parents more than anything else. Only good environs and nutrition
cannot fill the void created by the absence of the love and care of the
parents.

The Prophet of Islam has observed:

If you like someone, express your feelings to him. This expression of
love brings you closer to each other.**[2]**

The Prophet used to play with his children and grand children every
morning expressing his love and affection for them.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Daily Ittalaat, Issue 14112, Khurdad Month 1358.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak, Vol. 2, Page 67.  
 **[3]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 104, Page 99.
