The Spoilt Child
================

This is a reality that every child wants love and affection; but excess
of love borders on pampering. Love is like food and in optimum measure
it is very beneficial but excess of it will be harmful in many ways.
Excessive pampering and mollycoddling will adversely affect the
upbringing of the child. The child is not a plaything for the parents
and nor should it be treated as a source of recreation by them. The
child , in fact, is a precursor of the man of the future. It has to be
brought up carefully and methodically. The responsibility for the
upbringing, training and education of the child rests with the parents.
The child grows into an adult and has to be a part of the society. It
will have to face the ups and downs of life, successes, failures, rise,
fall, happiness and sorrow as it goes along in its life span. A good
mentor will have all these factors in mind and prepare the novice to
capably confront all the tests and hurdles which might confront him. The
parents should be aware of the fact that love and affection is essential
for good breeding of the child but excess of these can also come in the
way of the desired results. The children who get excess of love and
affection are likely to be spoilt with very harmful consequences.

When a child realizes that the parents love it very much, always allow
him to have his own way, then naturally his demands will increase by
leaps and bounds. He gets into the habit of ordering and expecting tacit
compliance from

the parents who are not willing to displease him. In such children the
tendency of despotism keeps increasing with passage of time. When such
persons enter the ranks of the society they expect the same compliance
from their fellow citizens, as they did with the parents and other
members of the family. But people dont like self-seeking persons nor do
they take cognizance of their wishes. This attitude of the people
dampens the spirit of the selfish persons and they become the victims of
the feeling of defeat and ennui. They develop a strong feeling of
inferiority complex and tend to become recluses. In acute cases they
think of committing suicide to escape from the psychological pressures
that go beyond their ken. The marital lives of such persons too are
generally on the rocks. Such persons expect too much love from their
spouses and expect them to comply with all their wishes, howsoever
unreasonable they might be. But in practical lives, there is always the
need of give-and-take and seldom there are any spouses who submit to
one-way traffic in their lives! There are innumerable wives who take
cudgels against unreasonable attitudes adopted by their husbands. The
result is domestic unrest. Similarly a pampered daughter, when married,
expects greater love from her husband than he has for his parents. She
expects him to meet all her demands without giving a thought to their
reasonableness. Generally men do not like complying with all the wishes
of such nagging wives. The result, naturally, is constant bickering in
the family. Such men and women are also seen who continue the childish
habit of quarrelling in their advanced ages. Such persons are so
immature that they continue to behave like small children in their adult
days.

The children getting their upbringing with over-indulgent, pampering
parents are generally of delicate constitution and frail physique. They
generally look for the support of others and are not independent.
Whenever they face any hardship, they look for avenues of escape. They
lack courage of taking up big and difficult tasks. If faced with
difficulties, they look for succor from others than depending on their
own selves and on Allah.

The persons who have received over-indulgent upbringing are generally
egotistic and self-centered. Having received superficial praises in
their early days, they assume false airs of importance during their
adult life. They are not able to discern their own failings and, to the
contrary, think that these very lacunae are their merits. They work
under a false sense of pride, which in itself is a grave psychological
ailment.

Hazrat Ali has said:

Self-conceit (egotism) is the worst thing.**[1]**

Imam Ali also said:

A person who is an egoist and is living within himself, will become
aware of his own flaws and failings.**[2]**

Such a person expects others to heap on him their false praises. He will
therefore have sycophants and flatterers around him. But the forthright
and true persons will not have any place in his company. The egoists,
instead of winning devotion of others, generally invite their ire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 446.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 685.

Hazrat Imam Ali has said:

Whoever is an egoist and self-centered will be confronted with lot of
difficulties.**[1]**

The children who receive excessive love and care and their parents are
overindulgent towards them, they will in stages dominate the parents.
When they grow into adults, they persist with the dominating trait and
their expectations surpass the means of the parents. .

If the parents express their inability to meet their demands, they have
recourse to lots of hullabaloo to get their way. Because such children
are aware of the overindulgence of the parents, they always have
recourse to lies to get what they wish to have.

Parents at times come to such a pass that out of their love they
overlook the need for good upbringing and indulge the childs whims and
fancies. They close their eyes to the failings of the child and neglect
the need for reforming him. To humor the child, the parents sometimes
overlook the norms fixed by the religion (Shariah)

Imam Mohammed Baqir says:

The worst father is one who exceeds unreasonably in the love for his
child.**[2]**

The child should always live in optimism and fear (of God). He should
have the feeling that truly he is the beloved of the parents and they
would come to his rescue

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 659.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 659.

in times of need. He should also be made aware of the fact that for any
fault of his the parents would hold him accountable.

Dr. Jalali writes:

If a child lives in an environment where he is pampered, always others
take sides with him, close their eyes to his wrong deeds and he is not
groomed for the harsh realities of the future; he will then be subject
to many hardships as a member of the society. From his very birth the
child has to be trained that he has to exist with others in the society
and his wishes have to be in harmony with the wishes of others in the
society.**[1]**

Dr Jalali also writes:

Love for the child is essential. But the feeling in a child that the
parents spend all their time humoring him is not right.**[2]**

If the child cries unnecessarily and expresses anger to win the
attention of the parents to fulfill his unfair demands, then the parents
should firmly and tactfully deny compliance. They should leave him alone
for a while for him to realize that he cannot always get his way. If the
parents exercise some patience in such situations, the child will become
quiet after some protestation.

If a child falls on the ground, it is not necessary to pick him up or
console him. Let the child rise himself when he falls down. Train him to
take care that he does not fall

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Rudanshinashi Kudak, Page 354.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 461.

again. When a child hits his head against a wall by accident, it is not
necessary to kiss him or over-indulge him. Instead, he should be trained
to take care of himself against such happenings again. When a child is
indisposed, medical treatment should be arranged for him. Proper
attention should be given to the childs illness, but daily chores should
be attended to as usual. The parents should have their rest, sleep and
food as normally as possible by not spending all their time near the bed
cuddling the sick child. This behavior over indulgence doesnt help in
any way, but it can aggravate the childs habit of craving for the
attention of the parents.

A lady writes:

After the first two daughters my parents had their first son. I cannot
forget the celebratory mood of my mother at that time. My parents
pampered my sibling so much that at the age of two years he used to beat
us sisters. He used to bite us and we had no courage to defend
ourselves. Whatever he desired was made available to him without any
fuss. He used to be naughty with other children. For going to school he
was shown lot of indulgence. But he used to avoid doing any schoolwork.
He never paid the slightest heed to his teachers. He never progressed
and ultimately dropped out of school. Now that he is a grown up adult,
he is an uneducated and lonely person. He takes no interest in any work
and has become very excitable. He has no love for his sisters.

Our dear brother has become a victim of the faulty upbringing and
excessive indulgence of our parents!
