The Knowledge and Mutual Cooperation of the Educators
=====================================================

The training and upbringing of a child is not an easy and simple task
that the parents can perform with little or no effort. This task
requires, in fact, delicate handling and temperament. There are myriads
of fine points to be considered to achieve success in the efforts. The
mentor has to relate himself with the spirit of the child. He cannot
perform the task without knowing the spiritual, psychological,
educational and practical niceties of the job. A childs world is a world
of his own and his imaginations and fantasies will be unique to him.
These cannot be compared to the thought process of the adults. The
childs spirit will be delicate and will be very impressionable. The
child will be a human being in miniature that has not as yet assumed a
permanent identity but it has the capability to attain this change. The
mentor of the child has to be capable of fathoming and identifying a
human being and, also, identifying the mind of the children. He should

 have a keen eye on the intricacies of the process of upbringing. He
should be aware of the human capabilities and failings. He should have
sense of responsibility and keen interest in the job on hand. He should
be patient and courageous that the hardships dont overpower him.
Besides, the rules of training are not rigid and cannot be implemented
the same way under different circumstances. In fact these rules have to
be modified and applied to each individual child according to his
physical make up and mental capabilities. The parents must keenly
observe the physical built of the child and educate him keeping this
factor in mind. Otherwise, the effort may not bring about the desired
result.

The man and woman should acquire knowledge about education and training
before parenting a child. The education of the child commences with its
birth and, in fact, from the time of conception. During this period the
foundation of the childs nature is established and his nature, behavior,
thinking process starts taking shape.

It is not right that the parents remain unconcerned during this visibly
dormant period. .

They postpone the upbringing of the expected new arrival till its actual
arrival. They tend to keep away this task till the child is capable of
distinguishing between good and bad behavior. While it may be easier to
correct the behavioral defects in the early stages, it may be difficult,
if not impossible, to effect these corrections once the habits are
formed.

Hazrat Ali says:

The most difficult politics is bringing about changes

 in the habits of people.**[1]**

Hazrat Ali also says:

Habits settle down upon people.**[2]**

Hazrat Ali says:

Habits become second nature.**[3]**

Shunning habits is so difficult that doing it is considered amongst
better invocations.

Hazrat Ali says:

Overcoming bad habits is amongst benevolent invocations.**[4]**

Another important factor in imparting ideal training to the child is the
coordination and cooperation between the parents and other mentors like
the grand parents on the program of training to be followed. Their joint
effort will produce the desired results. But if any one of them takes a
cavalier attitude on the training process, the results may not me as
desired.

The child should be made aware of its duty. When the parents give
contrary directions the child gets confused. Particularly if they insist
on their contrary points of view, there is likelihood of negative
results in the process of the training of the child. The biggest
difficulty in imparting training to the child is that the father makes a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 181.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 580.  
 **[3]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 260.  
 **[4]** Ibid., Page 176.

 decision about him and the mother or the grand parents insist on a
contrary course. There is always a need for such understanding between
the mentors that the child is able to clearly understand what he has to
do and the idea of doing anything against this does not enter his mind.

Sometimes it happens that the father is well educated and reasonable and
the mother of the child is ill tempered and uneducated. Sometimes the
situation is reversed, when the mother is better equipped to train the
child and the father is not. Many families face this problem. Children
in such families do not receive proper training. But this doesnt mean
that they should give up efforts of properly training their children.

In such a difficult situation the responsibility become more pronounced.
The need in such a situation is to give more thought to the program of
educating the child. The parents should make sincere efforts to overcome
the lacunae in their character and behavior and give more attention to
the children. With good actions the parents can attract the childrens
attention and set a desirable example before them. The parents action
should help the child to decide what is good for him and what is not. If
the mentor is wise, thoughtful and patient he can to a greater extent
counter the negative impact of his wifes behavior on the training of the
child. This is no doubt a difficult task but there is no way out of it.

One intellectual says:

A family in which the father and the mother think alike about the
upbringing of the children and are able to mould their character and
actions accordingly the

impact on the senses of the children will be ideal. The family unit is a
small society in which the childs moral character assumes definite form.
A family in which the members are friendly towards each other their
children are generally mild mannered, self-respecting and judicious.
Against this, a family where the parents have the habit of contradicting
each other their children will be morally deficient, pretentious and
excitable.


