Conceit Or Pride
================

Conceit and boastfulness is present in every individual to a lesser or
greater extent. Every person will have a desire to project himself by
performing some feat or other. He intends to attract the attention of
others around him through these actions. In a child these tendencies
start manifesting themselves when it is about a year old. The child
wants to move around and attract the attention of others through its
antics. It will repeat acts that make the parents and others happy. It
will be pleased at the reaction of the parents and feels a subtle pride
at its success in making them happy. The child sometimes indicates its
satisfaction through gestures as if to assert its importance.

Pride in itself is not a negative trait. In fact, this feeling spurs an
individual to strive for greater achievement with a competitive spirit.
The child works hard to get a higher grade in his class. He tries to
develop skills at elocution or become a skilled painter. It is this
desire in the child to compete that proves the harbinger of the great
poets, artists, authors and scientists of the future.

The presence of this trait of pride in children need not be a cause for
worry. But the important thing is that it must be gainfully exploited to
the advantage of the child. If it is guided in the right direction there
can be salutary results. In the initial stages the child cannot
distinguish between good and bad. It observes the reactions of the

parents to decide at its actions and to arrive at a conclusion. A
careful mentor will encourage the childs desirable actions by expressing
happiness at them. The mentor can encourage good manners in a child by
indicating his displeasure at its undesirable actions.

Some thoughtless parents, out of their love for the child, shower
excessive adulation and praise without giving a thought as to whether
the actions of the child are desirable or not. They thus lay the
foundations of bad manners in the child inadvertently. In their
adulation for the child they exaggerate its good qualities and keep
praising the child at the drop of a hat. There is every probability of
such a child becoming conceited and progressively he becomes egotistic
and arrogant. He will start expecting others adulation as he does from
his parents. When the child fails in getting the desired response, he
becomes distraught. He develops rancor towards people and might even go
to the extent of thinking of causing harm to them at a later stage.

The parents should bear in mind that they have to groom the thinking of
the child to guide him on the path of righteousness. Then will come the
stage that the parents divert the childs mind towards God. Now on, if
any of the childs action is found incorrect, instead of saying that dad
doesnt approve of it, they should tell him that God will not approve of
it.
