Independence
============

There are plenty of parents who think that restricting or denying any
freedom to the children is good upbringing. They think that the children
are incapable of distinguishing between good and bad. They dont have
enough wisdom and if they are given some independence, they might go
astray. Such parents start thinking for the child and make all the
decisions for him. They try to keep control over the childs eating,
playing and other activities. They want to model the childs life
according to their own thinking. They believe that the child doesnt have
any right to independence and freedom. He should not do anything without
the express permission of the parents. Whatever the parents decide, the
child must do implicitly without a whimper. Whatever the parents decide
is wrong, the child must stop doing without any complaint. The children
have no say in the plan of upbringing charted by such parents. Earlier,
most families used to follow this policy for upbringing their children.
They used to bring up the children with a iron hand. Even these days
there are families that follow this practice of their forbears.

Although such has been the practice in the past, and is still followed
by some families, it is not a desirable trend. It has many drawbacks and
lacunae. There is always a possibility that with such training the
children might remain comfortable, quiet and obedient to the parents.
But they grow into timid persons devoid of self-

confidence. Their inventive and innovative instincts will become
dormant. They will not have the courage to take up important and
difficult tasks in hand. They are also not capable of becoming leaders.
But they will be habituated of taking orders and bearing ill treatment
stoically. When they grow up, they are not able to overcome this defect
easily. They carry a hitch in their psyche that might later on be the
cause of several psychological ailments. It is also possible that such
persons develop sadistic tendencies and become tyrannical with their
children and others. Many intellectuals and psychologists have started a
campaign against this cruel practice of upbringing and are advocating
total freedom for the children. They advise the parents to leave the
children free to act according to their own desire and liking. They say
that the child should be free to do anything that he desires, although
it may not be the right thing in your eyes. This way the child will grow
with an independent mind.

The famous psychologist Sigmund Freud believes in this method and has
many followers in the East and the West. Lot of parents too followed
this method in upbringing their children. They have given total freedom
to their children and do not order them around. But this practice too is
not totally right. It has several drawbacks. The children brought up
this way dont believe in any restriction for doing what they decide to
do. Such children generally will be selfish, excitable and of impudent
nature. They think that others dont have any rights. They usurp others
rights and privileges. They unnecessarily trouble their brothers and
sisters. Such children tend to become a nuisance to their neighbors

and others. Because their desires are driven by total independence, they
commit excesses towards others. Their expectations reach such a level
that they will find it difficult to fulfill them. When such children
grow into adults they expect others to obey them without any complaint.
They dont want to be controlled by anyone else. When they notice that
they are unable to get their way with others, then they become
heart-broken after having faced rebuffs in the society they become
reclusive, or, to take revenge against their defeats they devise
stratagems for tyranny and dangerous acts. Unrestricted freedom
sometimes becomes hazardous too. Sometimes a child wishes to run
dangerously on the road or to touch the live electrical wire. Thus, the
two methods of upbringing, one that gives no freedom to the child and
the other which recommends total freedom, are both fraught with glaring
faults. The best path to follow in the matter of the upbringing of the
child is to give him selective freedom. Allah has endowed the human
beings with different instincts and feelings that go to make the nature
of a person. Some of these instincts are love, hate, bravery, fear etc.
These are intrinsic feelings and notions endowed by Allah to all human
beings for tackling the problems that confront them. These instincts go
to make the individuals personality. In a free environment these
instincts keep growing.

Fear is for escape from dangers. Anger helps in deciding to attack the
adversary. Diligence is required for acquiring learning. A person who
does not have the instinct of fear and anger in his nature will be an
inferior person. It is not right to suppress these instincts in a child.
In an atmosphere of freedom a child can make use

of these instincts to advantage.

The Religion of Islam gives particular attention to the need for
freedom. A few traditions are quoted here:

Hazrat Ali said:

Dont become slave to others, Allah has given birth to you as a free
person.**[1]**

Imam Jafar Sadiq said:

A person who has the following five qualities will be a successful
person: First: Faith, Second: Wisdom, Third: Morals, Fourth: Freedom,
Fifth: Good behavior.

The Prophet of Islam said:

The child is a ruler till he is seven years old, seven to fourteen years
he is a subject and after fourteen years he is the deputy and adviser
for his parents.**[2]**

But total freedom is not possible in the society. For one persons
freedom, the freedom of others in the society cannot be compromised. The
child must be made to understand early in life that without any
restrictions one cannot live in the society. Others too have some rights
and privileges. For example: a child wants to play. Play is good for his
training He must have freedom to play games that suit his temperament.
But while playing the child should be aware of the rights of others. He
should exercise care that property of the neighbors is not damaged, the
window- panes of buildings in the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 77, Page 214.  
 **[2]** Wassail, V 15, Page: 195.

neighborhood are not broken. Therefore, he does have the freedom to play
but this freedom is having some restrictions.

The child can exercise his instinct to get angry. He can defend himself
by showing anger at proper time. But in the exercise of his anger he
does not have the freedom to damage the property around him, cause some
injury to others or heap insults at them.

The parents should devise a strategy for the upbringing of the child
keeping in consideration his age, intelligence, strength and feelings.
They should put his actions in two categories:

<span style="font-size: 16pt">The actions that are desirable for
him.</span>

<span style="font-size: 16pt">The actions that are taboo for him.</span>

They should determine the limit for each type of action. Then they
should give total freedom to the child for the desirable activity so
that he fully exercises his instincts in performing these activities
without any restriction. The child should be free to think and act. Not
only the child should be given total freedom, but also on occasion he
must be guided, if so required. But the acts which are taboo for the
child, he should be strictly prevented from doing them.

If this attitude is adopted, neither will the freedom of the child be
curbed nor his capabilities hindered. He will have the right amount of
freedom and control to ensure that his instincts are utilized gainfully.

The parents should carefully determine the right and wrong acts that the
child might do. The acts which are harmful to the family, which might
cause harm to the

persons or property, which are against the norms of Shariah and the law
should be blacklisted and the child should be strictly prevented from
perpetrating them. For the right acts the child should be given total
freedom. In performance of these good acts the child should be allowed
to use his own thinking and intuition.

The rules of behavior should be determined keeping in view the strength
of his body and mind, his thinking capacity. Care should be taken to set
rules which are not harsh on the child.

The parents should be firm in their pronouncements to the child, You can
do this. You must not do this.

The parents should keep aside unnecessary sentiments and emotions. They
should abstain from doubts and suspicions so that the child understands
its responsibilities and will not have any hesitation in fulfilling his
duties.

Imam Hassan Askari says:

When a child disobeys his parents, and is impertinent to them, he will
grow into an adult who is rebellious and insubordinate.**[1]**

The parents must both co-ordinate with one another to abstain from
differences of opinion while dealing with the child. The differences
amongst the parents can create doubts in the mind of the child.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 78, 374.
