Stubbornness
============

Every child will have a degree of stubbornness in its nature that
becomes evident from the age of two years. A stubborn child generally
insists to get things done his way.. Whenever he finds some resistance
from others, he will have recourse to crying and shouting. It will roll
on the ground and hit its head against the walls. The child may even
refuse to have food. It will throw the crockery and sometimes even
become aggressive and hit the other members of the family. This habit of
stubbornness, if it persists, is also noticed in grown up youth.
Generally the parents complain about this aberration in their children
and keep searching a solution to the problem. It is the common
experience that the parents have access to one of the two methods,
mentioned here, to overcome the problem:

Firstly:

Some parents are of opinion that a tough attitude should be taken, if
the child is stubborn, by refusing to accede to his demands. These
parents say that the child has become very assertive and they need to be
firm in denying its wishes. They try to correct the child by being
strict and go to the extent of punishing and beating him.

They try to impose their own wishes on the child. The behavior of such
parents is tantamount to tit-for-tat attitude. This approach is not
desirable even if they have momentarily quietened the child by being
strict. To the contrary they cause grave harm to the psyche of the child
with their strict attitude.

Two years is the age of the onset of self-determination and confidence
in a child. The obstinate behavior of the child is the assertion of its
nature of independence. At this tender age the child is not capable of
controlling its wishes and imagining the consequences of fulfilling
them. It makes up its mind and wants the things done accordingly. If the
parents deny him his wishes, they would be hurting the childs psyche.
Such children might grow into calm individuals but they will be devoid
of the trait of confidence and determination. When a child notices that
nobody is concerned about its wishes and are preventing him by force
from having his way, then he will become dejected and disappointed. This
condition of unrest and frustration becomes a part of his nature. There
can also be the possibility of his becoming rebellious as he grows up
and indulges in extreme acts like tyranny and murder as an expression of
his extreme feelings of hurt.

Secondly:

Some experts on the subject of upbringing believe that, to the extent
possible, the childs wishes should be satisfied. He must be allowed to
do what he wishes to. They feel that the child should be given a degree
of independence. They believe that as the child grows up, it will stop
being stubborn. But this method of handling the

children too has its own flaws.

There are certain acts that can be harmful to the child and others
around him, if he is allowed to do them. The elders closing their eyes
to such acts of the child is not being wise. Imagine a three- year- old
trying to scale a ladder unhindered. The possibility of his falling and
maiming himself for life will always be there. The child might try to
light the oven unattended and consequently cause a big fire. The child
may get into its head to bodily harm other children around him. The
elders always have to prevent the child from doing such things.

The child who is free to do what he likes, and finds acceptance for
these acts, with unruly behavior will in stages become a selfish and
dictatorial individual. He expects that people will accept his point of
view without complaint. He has not met with any denial of his wishes in
the childhood and expects the same attitude from others when he has
grown up. But in practice this is not the case. People can differ with
his points of view. After facing many such denials he gets frustrated
and becomes reclusive. He will consider himself a defeated person and
thinks that others are unreasonable.

Islam considers stubbornness as a negative trait in an individual as
several traditions can be quoted in this regard:

For instance, Hazrat Ali says:

Stubbornness is the cause of evil.**[1]**

Brazenness (or stubbornness) causes harm to the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 16.

human intelligence.**[1]**

Stubbornness is the cause of conflict and enmity.**[2]**

Stubbornness harms a person the most in this world and Hereafter.**[3]**

The best attitude is one of moderation. The parents who adopt this way
of upbringing their children dont consider the stubbornness of the child
as an aberration and are aware that it is the expression of his
individuality. Instead of curbing this instinct, they use is for the
training and upbringing of the child. They carefully consider and
analyze the demands and acts of the child. They give freedom to the
child for his acts that are harmless and thus encourage the growth of
its mental capabilities. They become his friends and give him a helping
hand in the performance of his actions.

Such children strengthen their determination to perform acts and give
expression to their individualities. These children consider the parents
as their friends and not persons who unnecessarily impede their actions.

But such parents assert constraint on the harmful acts of the children
and dont mince words in advising the child to refrain from such acts.
They clearly explain the reasons for stopping the child from such acts
and divert its mind to some other useful activity. Because the child has
a good feeling towards the parents, who dont put too many restrictions
on him, agrees to refrain from the act which

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 17.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 18.  
 **[3]** Ibid., Page 104.

they ask him not to do. But if sometimes the child persists with his
demand for doing an undesirable act, .the parents have to put their foot
down and prevent him from doing it. The child will then cool down after
some time. The child should be trained to realize that in life one
cannot always be stubborn, the parents must exercise restraint while
handling the children and should not take recourse to beating them. The
child should not get the idea that the parents are tyrannical such
children can turn rebellious with passage of time.

At the end of this discussion, it is in place to mention the following
points for the consideration of the mentors:

(1) As far as possible give freedom for action to the children. Dont
interfere too much with their actions. Dont perpetually keep on telling
them not to do things. When the child tries to climb over a chair or a
shrub, you ask him not to do it! He tries to peel a fruit; you stop him
from doing it lest he cut his fingers! He wants to light the
water-heater, you prevent him from doing it, fearing he might burn his
hand! He tries to pour decoction in a teacup, you stop him saying he
might break the expensive China! He plays inside the house, you say he
is making too much of noise! He stirs out into the lane, you fear he
might be run over by a bicycle! Then, what would you expect the little
child to do! He too has human feelings! When you interfere too much with
his acts, he might develop stubbornness. One reason for the trait of
stubbornness in the children is excessive interference of the parents in
their actions.

(2) When a child becomes querulous, then try to find the reason for this
and find a solution. The child will then calm down. If he is hungry,
feed him. If he is tired, help him to sleep. If the child is disturbed
with the environment, like a noisy television near him, or noisy
visitors around, set the environment right for him.

(3) Dont insult or upbraid the child that can make him more stubborn.
Hazrat Ali says:  
 Reprimand gives wind to the fire of stubbornness.**[1]**

(4) Sometimes the siblings commit excesses on a child and he finds no
supporter. He will then become rebellious and stubborn. In such cases
the parents must intervene.

(5) If your child behaves stubbornly and you are unable to fathom the
reason for this; then introspect whether his behavior is because of your
own failing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tuhaf al-Uqool, Page 80.
