Training-through Deeds, Not Just Talk
=====================================

Most parents think that oral instructions and occasional talk about dos
and donts is sufficient for good upbringing of children. They presume
that the upbringing of the child is thus taken care of and they do not
have to do anything about the upbringing of the child concerning other
walks of life. This is why such parents do not feel any need to think of
the upbringing till the child is a tiny tot. They say that the child is
still a babe and is incapable of understanding anything about
upbringing. When the child comes to the age of understanding they give a
thought to its upbringing. It is the period in the life of a child when
he starts discriminating between good and bad. While this thinking is
incorrect, the child, as a matter of fact, is ready for the upbringing
the day he is born. He gets trained every moment and his nature is
molded in a particular way. Whether the parents are aware of this
process or not the child does waits not for any initiative on their
part. The childs active mind and other senses are like a camera, which
keeps preserving images of what happens in its environment. A child of
five to six years would have acquired a certain character.

Good or bad habits would have got engrained in its nature and it would
be a difficult task to bring about a change in his behavior. The child,
as a matter of fact, is a mimic. It tries to emulate its parents and the
other inmates in its surroundings. The child views its parents with a
degree of respect and makes efforts to copy their life style. Their
actions become his yardstick for good and bad actions. The nature of a
child is not cast in a mould but it takes the parents as the example to
follow. The child depends more on the behavior of the parents as a model
for its actions than any amount of sermonizing.

The daughter observes her mother and learns the niceties of house
keeping. She sees her father and understands the nature of men. The boy
takes lessons about life from his fathers actions and from his mothers
behavior he learns about the nature of women.

It is therefore necessary for responsible people to reform themselves at
the outset and if they have any flaws in their behavior they should
avoid them. In a nutshell, they should mould themselves into good human
beings before they embark on the road to parenthood.

The parents should give a thought to what sort of offspring the desire
to give to the society. If they feel that their child should be a
morally upright, kind, humane, freedom loving and responsible person
then they too have to be owning such characteristics that they set an
example for him to emulate. The mother wishes that her daughter should
be responsible, kind, equanimous person who respects the feelings of her
spouse then she should herself try to fit into these norms. The daughter
will then observe the behavior pattern of the mother and

automatically mould herself the same way. If the mother is an ill
tempered, lazy, disorderly, untidy and selfish person then she cannot
expect to train her daughter only through lecturing on the norms of good
behavior.

Only those persons can competently train and bring up children properly
who had similar upbringing themselves in their childhood. They will have
better understanding of the nature and psyche of the children. The
parents who have differences and pick up fights over trivialities will
be incompetent in bringing up children. Similarly professional educators
who have taken up the task only for the material remuneration, who are
impatient, excitable and do not have an understanding of the childs
nature and psyche will not be able to put their trainees on the right
track.

Dr. Jalali writes:

Whosoever has the responsibility of upbringing a child should
occasionally do introspection on his own character and behavior, realize
his responsibilities and try to correct his failings.

Hazrat Ali says:

The person who is in the lead should first reform himself and then try
to correct others. Before teaching the norms of good behavior to others
he should set an example himself. One who educates himself in learning
and manners is more deserving of respect than he who only teaches the
norms of good behavior to others.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[19]** Nahj al-Balagha.

You respect your elders that your children respect you.**[1]**

If you wish to reform others, then commence the exercise with reforming
yourself. If you like to correct others and keep yourself flawed it will
be the biggest blemish.**[2]**

When the talking tongue is silent on sermonizing and the actions of the
sermonizer speak for themselves, then no ears can keep the sermon out
and nothing is more effectively beneficial than this.**[3]**

One lady writes in a letter:

my parents character has deeply impressed me. They have always been kind
to their children. I never found any flaw in their words or deeds. We
also acquired this habit. I cannot forget their good character and
behavior. Now that I am a mother my endeavor is to see that I dont do
any thing in the presence of the children, which is not considered good.
My parents character is the example to be emulated in my life. I try to
see that my children too are brought up the same way.

Another lady wrote in a letter:

When I recapitulate my past life I recall that my mother used to argue
and shout on trivial matters. Now that I am a mother I feel that with a
little difference my condition is nearly the same as my

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[20]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 546.  
 **[21]** Ibid., Page 278.  
 **[22]** Ibid., Page 232.

mothers was. All her negative manners have become a part of my
character. The strange problem is that however much I try to reform
myself I am unable to make much progress. Definitely it is proved in my
case that the parents character and behavior has far-reaching effect on
the molding of the character of their children. The saying, therefore,
is correct that a mother with the good training of her children can
transform the world.
