Keeping Promises
================

The human society cannot function without the institution of promises
and assurances of their fulfillment. People make agreements and
covenants with one another that goes to make families and clans. There
will be agreements between cities that meld them together. People give
great importance to these covenants because they are the basis of their
collective lives. Keeping promises is an important aspect of human life
and every person considers it very bad to do anything in infringement of
a promise. Every person who enters into a covenant with another expects
that the terms of the contract will be adhered to implicitly. Whichever
groups abide by the terms of their covenant will be termed as
well-organized units. The reason for their well-being is that they will
have trust on one another without any reason for conflict. The lives of
their people will be successful and contented. To the contrary the
people of an area that doesnt abide by its covenants with others will
suffer from a feeling of uncertainty and unrest. They will be victims of
perpetual conflict. Every individual or society who respect the
agreements made with others will have the respect and confidence of
others. Those who break their covenants will be abhorred and looked down

upon by the others. Islam is a religion of nature that lays great stress
on fulfillment of promises.

Allah says in the Holy Quran:

Fulfill your promises that you will be questioned about them. 16:24

At another place in the Quran it is said:

The sign of successful Momineen (Muslims) is that they discharge their
trusts and keep their promises. 23:8

The Prophet of Islam said:

The person who has no covenant has no faith**[1]**

Whoever has faith in Allah and the Day of Reckoning, should fulfill his
promises.**[2]**

Hazrat Ali has said to Malik Ashtar:

Breaking promises makes others unhappy as also Allah will be
unhappy.**[3]**

Hazrat Ali says:

Where you cannot keep your promise, dont make one. Where you cannot
discharge a guarantee, dont give one.**[4]**

To perpetuate the habit of keeping promises and abiding by covenants in
the society, it is imperative to train the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 75, Page 96.  
 **[2]** Kaafi, Vol. 2, Page 364.  
 **[3]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 77, Page 96.  
 **[4]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 801.

people from their very childhood to be true to their word. This training
starts with the childhood in the environment of the family. The child
emulates the actions and words of the parents. The parents can set an
example for the children. By nature, the child expects that promises
will be kept. When the parents fulfill their small promises the child
gets trained in this important aspect of life. But if they take their
small promises lightly and neglect them, the child takes the negative
example and develops the habit of breaking his word. They start
believing that promises are made to be broken.

If the parents make false promises to momentarily calm the child, they
are inadvertently training the child to make false promises Can such
children grow into respectable individuals? To quieten the child the
mother promises to buy him sweets, ice cream., toys etc Sometimes she
makes these promises to make him take the bitter medicine or to get him
vaccinated. She frightens him by saying that if he did a certain thing,
she would send him to the police, report him to his Dad or deny him new
dress for the festival. If you consider the lives of the people around
you, or your own life, there will be innumerable instances of such false
promises and threats made to the innocent children. Do the parents ever
imagine what impact they are making on the impressionable minds of the
children? This injustice is perpetrated on the innocent children quite
innocuously!

The ignorant parents dont know that they are sinning by making false
promises and also they are training the child to follow in their
footsteps..

This is the reason Islam requires the parents to keep the

promises that they make with their children. The Prophet of Islam has
said:

Love the children. Treat them with kindness and if you make a promise to
them, fulfill it without fail. The children think that you are the
provider of sustenance for them.**[1]**

Hazrat Ali says:

Whenever you make a promise to the children, definitely keep it.**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasail, Vol. 15, Page 101, Bihar Vol 104, Page 92.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak, Vol. 2, Page 106.
