Ownership
=========

Love for the mother is a part of human nature. Man wants to own the
things that he needs. He thinks he is the master of these things. He
also expects others to respect his sentiment about his belongings. This
instinct of ownership in the human nature cannot be completely
obliterated. Whichever way it is curbed, it will rise again. Ownership,
although a notional phenomenon, is such a phenomenon that has assumed
the garb of reality. Without the sense of ownership the running of human
life seems impossible. From the time a child starts recognizing himself,
he identifies his needs, he instinctively thinks that he owns them.

When a child gets a thing lying on the floor, or takes it from someone
elses hands, he thinks that it belongs to him. He will not readily part
with it. He knows that he is the owner of his clothes, shoes, toys and
other things. He doesnt like others handling these things.

You must have noticed that children love their toys, however bad shape
might they be in. They protect them and even fight for them. They have
pride of ownership in their natures. If someone rises to protect his
rights, he should not be counted as evil. Sense of ownership is not a

negative instinct. The parents must accept the childs natural instinct.

It often happens that the children trespass over the ownership of other
children and try to usurp the toys of other children. The parents should
prevent such acts. If an older child bullies the smaller ones, the
parents must intervene in a just manner. They must be convinced that
they should not take away the toys of younger siblings by force. If the
attitude continues even after this, the child must be strictly warned to
behave. The human needs are ever growing. If some control is not
asserted on them, the needs might surpass the means. They can also
become the cause of destruction of the person.

The concept of ownership is for fulfilling the legitimate needs of
persons. Work is deemed essential for achieving ownership. Love for
wealth in legitimate limits is considered good. But if it exceeds
certain limits, it can come under the category of avarice and parsimony.
There are lots of people who can be termed mammon worshippers. They keep
running after wealth tirelessly. They even compromise their rest, self-
respect and honour in this futile search for wealth. It is a type of
madness. They only want to create hordes of wealth that are useful
neither to them nor to others. .These persons cannot be termed wise.

Therefore, the parents should encourage the sense of ownership in the
child and also teach him to be contented with what he can acquire
legitimately. He should have toys, but not too many of them. The toys
should be sufficient to play and learn and not too many to create a
hoard... If the child has too many new toys that

are lying in the shelf, the parents should better give some to other
children. But this should be done discreetly by telling the child that
he has many toys and the other child has none. If he gave him some, he
will be happy. You will also be pleasing your parents and Allah too. The
child will then be happy in parting with some of his toys. The child
wants to please his parents. This instinct encourages him to listen to
them and part with some of his possessions. This way the habit of
sharing things is cultivated in the child. Sometimes the parents can
encourage the child to lend his toys to other children for playing and
return. This way the spirit of co-operation and sharing can be
cultivated in the child.

In a nutshell the parents should keep in mind that there is moderation
in all aspects of upbringing of the child. They should promote the sense
of ownership in the child and see that it does not exceed certain
limits. They must ensure that the child does not become a blind lover of
wealth in his future life.
