Justice & Equality
==================

A family consisting of a few members is like a small society and the
parents manage the affairs of this small habitation. As running a
country is not possible without justice and equality, so is the
management of a household not possible without these concomitant
factors; namely Justice and equality for all. Selflessness, love,
affection and unity is possible only in an environment of justice and
equality. The children will get proper upbringing in this atmosphere.
The inherent traits of the children will find expression and they will
learn to be just and fair from the example set to them by their parents.
If the parents are ignorant of the need for justice and fair play, so
will be their children.

Imam Jafar Sadiq says:

As pure and cool water is craved for by a thirsty person, so do people
desire to have justice and equality and their taste is sweeter and
better for them. There is nothing better than justice.**[1]**

Three types of persons will be closer to Allah on the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Usool al-Kafi, Vol. 2, Page 147.

Day of Reckoning:

First: Those who are not cruel to their subordinates in times of anger.

Second: Those who go to mediate between two litigants, but dont do
anything against the requirement of justice.

Third: Those who always uphold the truth, even if they come to personal
harm by doing so.**[1]**

Allah says in the Holy Quran:

Allah orders for Justice and Fairness. 16:90

Just and equitable parents treat all their children equally. They dont
show particular preference for any particular child. Be it a son or a
daughter, pretty or not so pretty, capable or mediocre; the parents have
the same feelings of love and affection for all of them. They give
equitable treatment to all their children

The Prophet of Islam has said:

Keep justice for all your children in your mind even when some of them
are away. If you desire treatment of love, kindness and justice from
your children, then give them similar treatment.**[2]**

The Prophet noticed that a person was more attached to one son than to
the other. He told him:

Who dont you keep the need for justice and equality

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 75, Page 33.  
 **[2]** Makaarim al-Akhlaaq, Vol. 71, Page 252.

of treatment in mind?**[1]**

One person was sitting in the company of the Prophet when his son
arrived. The person kissed the boy and made him sit on his lap. After a
while the persons daughter came there and the person made her sit in
front of him. Then the Prophet told the person:

Why didnt you keep in your consideration the need for justice and
equality between your children?**[2]**

Hazrat Ali says:

Delivering justice and equality to people is the best of
politics.**[3]**

One woman came to the presence of the Prophets wife, Ayesha, with her
two little children. Hazrat Ayesha gave her three dates. The mother gave
one each to the two children and then equally divided the third date and
gave one to each of them. When the Prophet returned home, Hazrat Ayesha
narrated the incident to him.

The Prophet said:

Why are you surprised at the action of that woman?! For keeping justice
and equality in view Allah will give her a place in the Heaven!**[4]**

If the parents treat their children unjustly in a partial manner they
will create a very harmful impression on them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Makaarim al-Akhlaaq,, Vol. 11, Page 252.  
 **[2]** Majma al-Zawaaid, Vol. 8, Page 156.  
 **[3]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 64.  
 **[4]** Sunan Ibn Maajah, Vol. 72, Page 1210.

The children will take after the unjust attitude of the parents and
behave the same way with others. With time this attitude will become a
part of their natures.

The children who had been the victims of injustice from their parents
will carry rancor for them in their minds It is possible they turn
rebellious and disobedient.

With treatment of injustice and partiality there is chance of jealousy
and enmity springing up between brothers and sisters and it might go to
the limit of sometimes harming each other.

The children who have received unjust treatment at the hands of their
parents will have feelings of dejection and oppression that will get
engraved in their minds It is quite possible that later on they develop
psychic disorders

The parents will be responsible for all the consequences of their
partial and unjust treatment meted out to their children.

But the parents, in all fairness, give equitable treatment to all their
children. At different ages the children will have differing
requirements. Because they are born at different times and are of
different sexes, they may not have similar requirements all the time.
The law of justice and equality too is not rigid about equal treatment
in such differing circumstances. Will it be right to lift the elder
child in your lap like you do to a babe in the cradle? Similarly, will
it be right to give the same amount of pocket money to a child of three
years as is given to his sibling who is eighteen years old. Can a
daughter be given the same freedom of movement that is given to a grown
up son? Fair play and justice dont approve of any such

concessions and we too dont recommend them.

The parents must thoughtfully adopt such fair and just standards of
treatment for their children that they dont give rise to the feelings of
partiality in some of them. This matter has been dealt at some length in
the chapter on Jealousy which you may refer.

One person writes in his memoirs:

The memory of my childhood is very bitter and I am unable to forget it.
Dad used to discriminate between us brothers.. He used to comply with
all his wishes and never for once considered my wants. He used to treat
my brother with respect and treated me insultingly. Father loved him
more and always had kind words for him. As a result of this treatment I
started thinking that Dad and my brother are not good. I used to think
of taking revenge on my Dad for the unjust behavior with me. In my
worried state I preferred to be alone by myself. I started spitting on
the walls and tarnishing them. I used to break the glass window- panes
to take out my spleen. What was the alternative for me? But Dad was
totally unconcerned about this. He didnt know that my actions were
solely to harm his interest.

One lady writes in her diary:

One of our closest relatives had two daughters One was a good student
and very bright while the other was mediocre. Both used to go to the
school. The elder daughter, who was not bright, used to secure lower
grades in her examinations. The younger girl always used to perform very
well in her studies. Their mother always used to brag about the
brilliance of her

younger daughter and run down the elder one. She used to be full of
praise for the younger daughter and always criticized the elder one that
she was wasting all the expense incurred on her schooling. She even used
to say that all the good dresses and food given to her is a waste.

The same elder daughter is now married. She has several children. She is
a ordinary housewife. She gives a unhealthy look and seems a victim of
inferiority complex. She looks tired and lost in her thoughts. At
parties she takes a quiet corner and doesnt converse with others. When I
egg her on to talk, she only takes a sigh and says, about what can I
talk? I remember, prior to her marriage, I took her to a psychiatrist.
The doctor, after a long session of discussion with her, said that there
was nothing wrong with her. In fact, her parents are sick that they have
not treated her properly and reduced her to the present plight.

Once the doctor asked her, Can you cook? She started crying and said, I
can cook. But whenever I prepare anything my parents say that my younger
sister cooks better food.
