Self-assessment & Meaningful Existence
======================================

The entire lives of the animals are spent in eating, sleeping, and
breeding. The intelligence and knowledge of animals is imperfect. They
are unable to discriminate between good and bad. Therefore they dont
have any responsibility imposed on them. They will not be required to
account for their deeds. There is no preordained responsibility for
them. But man, who is the best of the creations of Allah, is not like
the animals. Man has wisdom and capability. He can discriminate between
good and bad, pretty and ugly. Man has been created for a perpetual and
eternal existence and not for extinction. Therefore he carries a great
responsibility and duty ordained for him. Man is the vicegerent and
trustee of Allah in this world. The purpose of the life of the man is
not just eating, sleeping, satisfying desires and procreation. But the
man has to tread such a path that he proves himself even more superior
than the angels. He is human and must strive to promote his humanity.
Man should have a goal in life. The goal has to be idealistic. Man
strives in Allahs cause and to serve His creations and not only for
achieving the worldly benefits. Man has to search the Truth and to
follow the Truth.

Â 

Yes! The human existence is such a precious jewel which is far superior
than all the animals. It is a shame that lot of men have squandered
their invaluable worth. They spend their lives literally like animals.
In their view eating, drinking, sleeping, fulfilling carnal desires
alone are the purpose of their lives. It is possible that a person might
live for a hundred years without understanding himself and die in utter
ignorance, He comes into the world like an animal and will die an
animal! He will remain aimless and itinerant all his life. The result of
all his striving will be naught.

Man should know himself. Who is he? From where he has come? Where he has
to go? What is the purpose of his birth? What path he must take? What is
the real goal and what is auspicious for him?.

Hazrat Ali says:

The best enlightenment is that the man recognizes himself, and the
greatest ignorance is when a person doesnt know his own self.**[1]**

One who did not recognize himself, he strayed from the path of
salvation, and took the road to ignorance and aimlessness.**[2]**

For Allah the most abhorrent person is one who has made eating and
satisfaction of carnal desires the sole purpose of life.**[3]**

One who has made achievement of Salvation on the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 179.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 77.  
 **[3]** Ibid., Page 205.

Day of Judgement his purpose in life will get fulfillment.**[1]**

The parents should give the lesson of self- assessment and purposeful
existence to their children. They can progressively give a purposeful
character to the lives of the children. The child, with the help of the
parents, should be helped to know himself. From where he has come? What
is the purpose of his existence? Where he will go ultimately? What are
his duties and responsibilities in this world? With what program and aim
he should live his life? If the parents know themselves and have
definite aims in life, then they will be successfully able to guide
their children on the desired path.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam,, Page 693.
