The Income of the Household and Expenses
========================================

In the management of a house, the most vital aspect is the control of
the purse strings. Any sensible household would keep track of their
regular income and expenditure. As it is said, they cut the coat
according to the length of the cloth available. They make efforts to
keep their expenses within the amount of inflow of cash into the familys
account. Every family should know their priorities and allocate money to
different items of expense on that basis. Careful families always try
that they dont fall into debt trap. They will thus avoid unnecessary
worries coming their way. Even if their economic condition is bad for a
time, they plan and overcome these difficulties in some time. They avoid
reducing themselves to the status of penury through proper management of
their limited resources.

Contrary to this the families that are careless about proper management
of their expenses, who are extravagant and continue living beyond their
means, fall into the habit of compulsive

borrowing. To meet the bills for their expenses, they are forced even to
borrow money at high rates of interest. Since they are compulsive
borrowers, they dont mind buying expensive things on credit. Such
families are never free of worries. They come to such a pass that
sometimes they are not able to buy the basic necessities of day-to-day
living. Such things happen even to families whose incomes are reasonably
sound. They will be in their straitened circumstances because of not
having a proper plan for expenditure. These people are the victims of
false pomp and show. The welfare of the family depends not only on
earning and bringing some money home, but it also requires proper
budgeting and control of the expenses.

Imam Jafar Sadiq says:

When Allah wants a family to prosper, then he gives them the capability
of wisdom and order in life.**[1]**

All excellence is assembled in three things: One of them is making use
of understanding and prudence in managing their finances.**[2]**

Extravagance becomes the cause of poverty and penury, and moderation in
life provides contentment and comfort.**[3]**

Hazrat Ali says:

With thrift, half the requirements can be met.**[4]**

There are three signs of an extravagant person: (1) He wants to eat what
he has not; (2) He buys the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kaafi, Vol. 5, Page 88.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 87.  
 **[3]** Wasaail al-Shiah Vol. 12, Page 41.  
 **[4]** Mustadrak, Vol. 2, Page 424.

thing for which he has no money, and (3) he wears the dress which he
doesnt afford to buy.**[1]**

To streamline the financial affairs of the family it is essential that
the husband and wife should have similarity of views. If the husband or
the wife spends without keeping in mind the priorities, then the
management of the house will go haywire.

Secondly, even the children should have some understanding of the needs
and priorities. If the children become thoughtlessly extravagant and the
parents, out of their love, humor them and permit their spending sprees,
the family can come into financial problems at some stage.

The parents should inform the children the financial status of the
family and discuss the budget in their presence. This will give them an
understanding of the importance of thrift in spending. They should also
know that the management of a house is not all bed of roses.

It is essential that the children should, in stages, be made acquainted
with the household chores and also the income of the family. They should
know that the house runs on the income of the parents and they have no
other means besides that. They should understand that all the needs of
the house have to be met from that money only. They should also be told
that expenditure on certain matters have to be given priority over
others. For example the household expenses, the house-rent , the bill
for amenities like power/water etc. In the first instance the expenses
on necessities have to be met. Then the other

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasaail al-Shiah Vol. 21, Page 41.

requirements can follow. The children need to understand and extend
their co-operation to the parents in this matter.

From the very childhood the children should be trained to match their
needs and demands to the means of the family. They must be stopped from
wasteful expense and thoughtless purchasing. They must be introduced to
the habit of thrift and they should consider themselves as members of
the family who have to spend within the means of the family. They should
not get a false notion that they are from a rich family and they can
spend as they wish. They must be trained to control their wishes in the
interest of the essential expenses of the family that cannot be avoided
or postponed.

These children, when they grow up, will have the reins of the society in
their hands. Therefore they must be groomed into the habit of thrift
from the very childhood. However comfortable the financial status of the
parents the children must be taught to spend money carefully and
judiciously. They should explain to the children that all men belong to
one family of human beings. Therefore the fortunate ones who are rich
should give help to the poor. If the income of the family is
insufficient, they must prune their daily expenses and try to make the
ends meet within their meager resources. The parents should not complain
to their children about the financial straits they are in. They should
instead of this give the lesson of patience and trust on Allah. Prepare
them to face the odds in their future life with courage and equanimity.
When a child is capable of working, initiate him into work and give him
the moral support. They must tell to the child that if he starts
working, his wages will supplement the familys

income and they will thus be more comfortable. The child must be
encouraged to give a portion of his earnings for the household expenses.
This way he will appreciate his responsibility for the family. A young
earning member of the family should draw his pocket money from his wages
keeping in mind the requirements of the household expenses.
