Respect For the Law
===================

People in a civilized society cannot live without law. Where the law of
the jungle prevails, that is not a civilized society. To run the
administration of a society very well defined laws are absolutely
essential. These laws are for upholding order and providing protection
to the aggrieved and dispensing punishment to the guilty. For the
comfort and safety of the populace, laws are absolutely necessary. In
the countries where there is good understanding between the people and
the lawmakers, the laws are made for the benefit of the people and they
therefore respect the laws. There can be general well being if the
people in a country are law abiding.

In countries where the lawmakers work with ulterior selfish motives, and
while framing the statute they dont have the welfare of the people in
mind, the people stop honoring the law and there can be unrest in such
societies. Unfortunately, earlier our country faced a similar situation
(Here the author means Iran of the Shahs period).. Most of the laws were
neither Islamic nor good for the people. The laws were formulated
keeping in mind the ruling clique and the wishes of the Imperialists and
their stooges. No attention was given to the plight of the worker, the
toiler and the deprived populace. The

lawmakers tried to hoodwink the people with oppressive and repressive
laws to subjugate the masses. But since the people of Iran felt that
those un-Islamic statutes were against their interests, they had no
respect for them. However there were some laws in that statute that were
good for the people. But since the legal system was anti-people in
totality, they rejected the complete system.

Respect for legitimate and people-friendly laws is essential and the
parents have to explain about them to the children. When a child finds
the parents crossing the road from the zebra crossing only, he feels
that he must do likewise. He gets into the habit of following this rule
of safety and may never transgress it.

The parents must tell the children that the cars and other fast moving
vehicles have the right of way on the roads and the pedestrians can only
use the zebra crossings when they require to cross to the other side of
the road. Pedestrians trespassing on the roads commit an offence and
also are exposed to the risk of accidents. When the child understands
the advantage of abiding by the law, he becomes a good citizen.

Hazrat Ali says:

Habits are second nature!**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 26.
