Abstain From Domestic Differences
=================================

For a child the home is like a nest. He feels very much attached to it.
His heart is always tied to it. If the parents are on friendly terms his
nest remains durable like a warm lap. The child in such a home feels
contented and secure. Getting an upbringing in such congenial atmosphere
the latent qualities and capabilities in the child will truly find
expression and will bring out salutary results. But if the parents are
excitable and fighting type then the child will lose its calm and
contentment and he will be uneasy and restless. The parents who argue
and fight do not realize that the feelings of the poor child. In such a
situation the children get frightened and with hurt hearts they seek
some corner to hide themselves wondering as to why their parents are
behaving in that manner. Otherwise they seek the avenues of fleeing from
the nest that has been so dear to them and seek refuge in some lane or
bazaar. The bitterest memories of a child are the times when the parents
have heated, loud arguments and fights. The children are unable to
forget such scenes till late in their own lives. These events remain
etched on their psyche and have deleterious effect on their natures.

Such children have weak hearts and stunted physique. They will be heart
broken and spend their lives miserably. It is quite possible that
daughters of such

Â parents carry an impression that all men are as harsh and rude as their
own father is. This may lead to abhorrence of the very thought of
marriage for such girls. It is also possible that the sons of such homes
think that all women are as ill mannered as their own mother is and
decide to remain celibate all their lives. . In such an environment the
children become rebellious and start hating the parents and the things
come to such a pass that some children become revengeful. The statistics
indicate that lot of gallivanting, alcoholic and anti social children is
the consequence of the disturbed atmosphere at home

If one thinks of the bitter events of his childhood when the parents had
bitter differences then he will feel that despite the passage of long
years the unpleasant memories are remaining etched on his mind.

One intellectual writes:

The parents should know the fact that when there is an argument or fight
between the elders of the house there will be deleterious effect on the
thinking of the children. The type of relations the elders keep will
have definite effect on development of the children..if the atmosphere
of unity and peace is absent from the house then it is not possible to
give proper upbringing to the children. When the elders become
argumentative and excitable they forget that the impressionable children
are with them whose upbringing is their responsibility. In such an
atmosphere the children do not learn any good lesson. The children then
become secluded and ill tempered. Particularly children of slightly
higher age find the

situation very difficult. Their hearts cry over the attitude of the
father. They are unable to decide whose side they should take. In some
cases they become antagonistic to both the parents.

Another person writes in a letter:

..from the most unpleasant incidents of my childhood the vividly etched
on my mind are those when my parents used to fight exchanging abusive
language. During these events my sister my brother and myself used to
stand shivering in a corner. As long as the fight continued we used to
watch helplessly. I remember my sister used to cry at such events and
these fits lasted for long. She is now a victim of nervous breakdown. It
seems that the wrangles of our parents had a very bad effect on the
spirit of my sister

Another person writes:

the thought of an unpleasant event of my childhood doesnt leave my
memory. My father was ill mannered, excitable and selfish. He used to
invent excuses to fight at home and shout at everyone. Our parents used
to fight throughout the day. I wonder they never tired of doing this.
The fights generally used to be on trivialities. There was no night when
I went to bed without shedding tears. This was the reason that my nerves
were weak. I am a scared person and I get bad dreams. I have consulted
doctors who say that the reason for my condition is the effects of the
atmosphere at my home. He says that there is no cure for this other than
rest and peace at home. My happy days started when I got married and I
escaped

from that house. Now, although my life is peaceful, I have a feeling
that I am a defeated person and I cannot make much progress in life. I
appeal to parents, In the name of God! If you have any differences, do
not fight in the presence of your children!

He further writes in his long letter:

The worst event of my life happened when I was eight years old. That day
my parents had a very bad fight. All the children went scurrying to
corners. The event had such a sad effect on my spirit that for a long
time I couldnt erase the thought from my memory. I was fed up with my
family and myself. I used to think that I should not return home from
school. I used to offer a silent prayer to God that I die of some
serious sickness. Many a time I thought of committing suicide. Several
times I dreamt that I was married and fighting with my spouse. During
such dreams I used to plan a strategy for preserving my rights. After my
marriage I tried several times to pick up a quarrel with my wife to
demonstrate to her that I am an angry person. Luckily my wife is of a
cool nature. She treats me with love and affection and convinces me with
good arguments and advice. It is my good luck that the ill temper did
not last long with me. When I recall the mistakes of my parents I did
introspection over my own failings and I tried hard to mend my nature.
Now I am leading a peaceful life.

Another gentleman writes:

When I was nine years old my parents separated because of acute
differences. They left my sister, my

brother and me in the care of our paternal grand father. We used to cry
there very often. While visiting my mother I used to dream while
sleeping that I wouldnt go to my fathers house. After some time some
well-meaning relatives intervened and made my parents to reunite. My
mother returned back to our home. But during that short break my spirit
got so much affected that even now I feel sad about it. Now I make a
serious effort that whenever I have any differences with my wife, we
dont give vent to our feelings in the presence of our children.

Another letter reads thus:

there are many bitter memories of my childhood and pleasant memories are
but few. When I remember those days I become sad and I am unable to
control the tears wetting my eyes. The reason for this sadness is that I
always found my parents arguing and fighting. Thus they made life
difficult for us brothers and sisters. We are a family of eight
children. I never argue with my husband that I do not become the cause
of the bitterness of my husband and children.

In one letter someone writes:

. Age five is the best part of ones childhood. When I was of this age
there came about bitter differences between my parents. My father
brought a second wife. Because of these differences my mother secured a
divorce from my father. We were six brothers and sisters. One day turned
very bitter for us. I was playing with one of my brothers when our
mother came to say her adieus to us. God knows how sad we children were.
Our mother went away and we

remained with our father and the new mother. We remained away from our
own mother for two years bearing the pangs of negligence that our father
showed to us. Then one day our mother came and took me and one of my
brothers home. She had received some legacy from her mothers property.
With that inheritance she carried on our upkeep. Later on the other
brothers and sisters too joined us. Our mother gave us the treatment of
both a mother and a father. We cannot forget her courage and sacrifices.

Another lady writes in her letter:

My parents always used to quarrel and there was turmoil in our home. My
mother always used to be angry. I was eight years of age when she used
to leave my other siblings in my care and go out. My sister and brothers
were of age two, four and six. I used to care for them to the best of my
capability. Sometimes I used to get beatings from our father. Despite
all the difficulty I was trying to continue my studies but I failed in
my second standard. My tutors were aware of my difficulties. They took
pity on me and gave me grace marks. In such circumstances I reached high
school. Now I am also a mother. I make a sincere effort that differences
do not plague me and my family.

The parents who feel their responsibility and they have interest in good
upbringing of their children refrain from giving rise to any differences
and fights in the family and they definitely avoid airing any
differences in front of the children. There is no worse act than the
parents disturbing the children by squabbling in their presence

and leaving them behind. If they realize the feelings of the children
during such absences, however brief they are, then they would try never
to fight again. Such events are remembered till the end of ones life.
However there are hardly any families where there is no meaningful
difference of opinion. But in marital life there is always the need for
rapprochement. Wise and informed couples resolve their differences with
cool and calm discussions. If the children learn of the differences of
their parents, they should handle the matter tactfully and convince them
that the matter is being sorted out and they need not worry on that
count. The parents should take care that they do not talk of divorce in
the hearing distance of their children. This not only affects their
married life but can cause damage to the delicate minds of the children.
Separation between husband and wife is a grave injustice to the
children. They feel that their nest has fallen down. And their lives are
shattered. This is naturally because the children have love for both the
parents and cannot imagine any one of them abandoning them. If the
children remain in the custody of the father after the divorce and he
gets a second wife they will be required to unwillingly live under the
care of a stepmother. However good and gentle the stepmother is, she
cannot take the place of the real mother. General observation is that
most stepmothers do not take good care for stepchildren. The newspapers
carry many stories of bad treatment of children at the hands of
stepmothers. If the children revert to the care of the separated mother,
they still feel the void created by the absence of the father. And if
the parents are so thoughtless that they leave the children to the care
of foster parents, it will be very sad for the young kids.

Anyway, the husband and wife are free till they have children. But they
have added responsibility after they have children and this will be the
time when they have to make sincere efforts to avoid any serious
differences cropping up. They must protect the good atmosphere at home
and do not become the cause of worry to the children. Otherwise they
will be answerable and subject to retribution in the Court of Allah.
