Backbiting Or Carrying Words
============================

Backbiting is a very bad habit, and unfortunately it is very much
prevalent in the society. If someone speaks something against someone,
the backbiter carries the word to the other person saying that so-and-so
was saying such-and-such a thing about you. Carrying words are signs of
meanness and evil. This creates chasms between good friends. Many
crimes, skirmishes, enmities, murders and feuds are the result of
misunderstandings between people due to backbiting. The peace of many
households gets shattered due to this nasty practice. Husbands and wives
are separated, friends become enemies, parents turn against their
children mainly because of the backbiting by some nasty, thoughtless
persons. When a backbiter gets exposed, he will be thrown out from
everywhere and people hate to see his face. The people curse the
backbiter and wish him destruction. The worst of backbiting is the act
of sleuthing for the evil tyrants. If someone does eves dropping for a
tyrant and a pious person unnecessarily comes into trouble because of
this, and suffers bodily damage or death due to torture, then the
backbiter will be equally answerable as that evil person who engaged him
to do the nefarious job. They will both be punished on the Day of
Judgement. Although, in this case, the backbiter was not directly
involved with the physical act of torturing the innocent person.

The Prophet of Islam says:

The worst person is one who does backbiting against his Muslim brother
to the King and do sleuthing against him. This sleuthing is bad for him,
for the friend against whom he had reported and also for the
King.**[1]**

Islam has pronounced the act of sleuthing and backbiting taboo (haram)
and there are many traditions of the Prophet and others in this regard.

Imam Mohammed Baqir says:

The backbiter will be denied entry to the Heaven.**[2]**

Hazrat Ali says:

The foul and evil amongst you are those who do backbiting and create
differences between friends and expose the defects of good people**[3]**

There can be many reasons for backbiting. Sometimes enmity becomes the
cause of the act. The backbiter may be inimical to one of the parties
and be jealous of their good relations. He keeps giving false and
malicious reports about one to the other till they fall into his trap.
Sometimes the backbiter, as a force of habit, transmits a false and
damaging information about one person to the other creating serious
differences between them. In this instance the backbiter doesnt have any
ulterior motive except to satisfy his urge to carry a tail. The Religion
of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 75, Page 266.  
 **[2]** Usool al-Kafi, Vol. 2, Page 369.  
 **[3]** Ibid., Page 375.

Islam has forbidden even to give ear to backbiting.

The Prophet says:

Neither should you do backbiting, nor listen to a backbiter.**[1]**

Hazrat Ali says:

Refute the talk of the backbiter and the one who is unduly
inquisitive.**[2]**

It is evident that if no one takes cognizance of the talk of the
backbiter, then he will stop doing it. Whoever carries words to you
about others, you must be sure that he is not your friend. If he was
really your friend he would have defended you while others talked
against your interest. If someone tells something in confidence, a good
Muslim never speaks about it to others.. He will keep control over his
tongue and never try to sleuth around. Many persons pick up the
offending habit of backbiting from their childhood. It is a reflection
of what they see and hear happening around them. Therefore the parents
shoulder a big responsibility that they protect their children from
getting the nefarious habit of backbiting. First, the parents themselves
should refrain from talking ill of others. The mother should not report
of some acts of her neighbor and other relations .to the father. The
father too should not speak to the mother against his friends and
acquaintances. Because, if the parents have the habit of speaking ill of
others behind their backs, the children too will indulge in such talk.
.Sometimes a child

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma al-Zawaaid, Vol. 8, Page 91.  
 **[2]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 145.

speaks to his father against her mother and the elder sister. In such
instances the duty of the father is to correct the child and tell him
that it is not good to backbite. He should tell him that if want to say
something about your mother or sister, tell directly to them. What you
are doing is backbiting, which is very bad. If the children try to
backbite, totally ignore them at the moment and try to talk on some
other interesting subject.

The Prophet of Islam has said:

Dont give your ears to the backbiter!**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 125.
