Childrens Quarrels
==================

One matter of some concern is the differences and fights between
children at homes. When a family has more than one child, there is
likelihood of fights. One thinks that the other is usurping his
privileges and has unnecessarily come to share things with him. They
push each other around and grab toys from each other. When they start
going to school they dirty each others note- books and other things.
They make fun of each other. When one tries to concentrate on his school
assignment, the other makes noises to disturb him. Every child knows the
pranks that he can play on his brothers and sisters. In this situation
the parents are the helpless spectators. The complaints about the fights
reach them. The difficulty comes for them when sometimes the parents get
involved to arbitrate in the quarrels of the children.. The mother tells
the father that he doesnt give attention to the upbringing of the
children. They dont fear you. It is your careless attitude that the
house is literally an arena for fights.

The father complains to the mother that if she were a careful person,
the children wouldnt have turned so naughty as they are. It is her
support that encourages the children to misbehave.

Here the parents should remember that the children are, after all,
children! They cannot be expected to sit quietly in a corner like old
persons. You must accept the fact that childrens fights are a natural
phenomenon. Even the elders sometimes do fight. How can the children be
expected to sit quietly all the while. Children are generally
mischievous. Playing pranks at one another they might fight. But soon
they get together and forget the differences. They cannot remain away
from each other carrying long faces. One psychologist says:

This is an important matter that we should never think that in a house
where there are many children there prevails perpetual peace amongst
them; the children live amicably, never fight for once! Whichever child
we have talked to, said that Mom and Dad expect them to live amicably
without fighting with one another. But if you give a serious thought to
the matter, the trend of the children fighting with one another is not
such a big problem.**[1]**

We should also know that the habit of the children fighting with one
another would disappear as they grow in age. If the parents accept the
fights between children as a temporary and natural phase, then they
would not worry about it so much.

Another psychologist says:

Lots of activities of the children like playing pranks on one another,
fighting and wrestling with one

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ruwan Shinasi Kudak, Page 286.

another will taper off with passage of time.**[1]**

Yes, it is right that most parents cannot completely eliminate the
fights between their children. But with tact and clever handling they
can reduce their frequency and intensity. The careful parents never
remain spectators when the children fight. They intervene tactfully and
ensure that the children dont cause bodily harm to each other during
fights. They have first to investigate the cause of the fight and try to
eliminate it. One main cause of the differences between the children is
the feeling of jealousy. It is necessary that the reason for the
jealousy springing up in the child is detected and a remedy found.

A child wants all the attention for himself. He doesnt like to share the
affections of the parents with other children. The first-born is
generally pampered by the parents. But when the second arrives, the
conditions are changed. Naturally the parents have to divide their
attention and have to give the major share to the smaller child. Now the
elder child starts getting the feeling of insecurity. He starts feeling
neglected. He feels the new arrival is an uninvited guest who is holding
the attention and care of his beloved parents. He becomes envious of the
baby, but knows that he has to tolerate him because the parents are
showering love on him. In such situations the elder child sometimes
malingers, pretending illness, to keep the attention of the parents
concentrated on him. Sometimes he may fall on the floor, refuse to eat
food, cry and try other pretences to attract the parents attention. Such
a child considers himself deprived and develops a

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ruwan Shinasi Kudak,, Page 286.

sort of hatred for his other siblings. He awaits an opportunity to wreak
revenge on them. The parents have to discreetly avoid such situations
arising. They should prepare the children to receive the new arrival
before he is born. They must tell the children that their little sibling
is expected soon. When it will grow up, it will play with them and love
them. When they prepare something for the newborn, they should give some
gifts to the elder children too, so that they dont feel neglected. When
the mother gets admitted to a maternity home for delivery, the father
should give some gifts to the children at home so that their minds are
diverted and they dont miss the mother. The father should tell them on
the occasion that the gifts are given to them to celebrate the arrival
of the little one! He should ask them that when the little one came
home, they should not make much noise. The parents should not praise the
baby too much in the presence of the other children. They should give a
little more attention to the older children to give them the feeling of
assurance that the new one is not come to deprive them of their parents
attention.

Hazrat Ali says:

Justice removes differences and promotes friendship.**[1]**

Just treatment is always the best strategy.**[2]**

It is always possible that some of the children might have special
qualities that become the darlings of the parents. Some children may be
more intelligent, some more pretty

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 64.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 64.

and some other more polite to deserve special attention of the parents.
One child might perform excellently at school and attract lot of praise
from the parents.

These extraordinary expressions of love because of some special quality
in a child will not be anything out of the ordinary. But excessive
repetition of such praises is not advisable.

Some parents, as a strategy to promote competition between their
children, talk about the good qualities of one to the other(s). For
example, they may say, Hassan! Work hard at studies that you get high
grades in your examinations as did Abbas! They say, Zainab! You must
help your mother for his household chores as Zahra is so nicely doing!
Reza! Observe good table manners like your brother, Ali! What a polite
and courteous boy he is!

This attitude of the parents is not right. It might not bring about
positive and desirable results. To the contrary, it might create hard
feelings and jealousy between brothers and sisters. They may become
revengeful and might themselves indulge in unnecessary comparisons
between each other.

Another very important reason for the fights between the children is the
high expectations of the parents from them. The child wants to play with
the toys of his sibling; the parents prohibit him from doing it. This
gives rise to the fight between the two. At this juncture the parents
intervene. First they quietly try to convince the children to become
quiet. If the quarrel still persists, they ask the other child to give
its toy to the one who wants to borrow it for playing. They tell him
that it is they who have brought the toy for him. The toy is not his
property. If he

still refused to give the toy to his brother, they would not love him
nor bring any more toys for him.

The child becomes helpless and parts with his toy. But he starts
thinking that the parents are tyrannical and the brother is bad. He
develops hatred in his heart for both. He will express this hatred
whenever there is an opportunity. This is quite natural that the child
was thinking that the toys were his own and that none other had a right
to play with them. Without his consent. He thinks that he is the victim
of the tyranny of his parents and the other brother. In the
circumstance, the child is right. Because, in the first instance they
dont permit the other siblings to play with the toys they had given to
him. The thoughtful parents try to create a spirit of co-operation
between their children. They must have an amicable atmosphere that they
share all their toys and games with each other.

Sometimes the reason for differences cropping up between the children is
that the parents entrust one task to a particular child and leave the
others with nothing to do. This situation can give rise to fights. To
avoid such situations the parents should try to make the children busy
with something or other. Then they will not have a feeling of neglect.

Sometimes even fights between the parents encourage the children to
follow suit. When the innocent children see that the parents are
compulsive fighters, they start thinking that fights are a way of life.
In emulation of the parents they start looking for reasons to commence
fighting.

Therefore, the parents who are fed up of the constant

fights between their children, should do introspection and reform
themselves. Then they must turn their attention to set the children
right. There will hardly be any family that has no difference of opinion
amongst its members. But if the parents take care not to air their
differences in the presence of the children, the children will not be
encouraged to argue and fight. But, even then if there are some minor
fights between the children, the parents must discreetly intervene and
sort out the matter to the satisfaction of all.

In the end we would like to caution you that in spite of observing all
the cautions, your family may not be totally free of fights between the
children. After all children are human, and the instinct to fight is
there in every individual. In fact the children are generally
hyperactive and fighting can be a way of dissipating some of their
energy. The parents must exercise care that when the children fight,
they dont cause bodily harm to one another and the property around them.
They should not worry too much if some children have more inclination to
fight. This is a transient habit and it tapers off with time.
