The Child & the Religious Duties
================================

It is true that the boys attain the age of responsibility (Baligh) at
fifteen and the girls at age nine. This is the age when the juridical
norms become mandatory for them. But the performance of religious duties
may not be postponed till the child reaches the age of responsibility.
They must be encouraged to perform the religious duties from early
childhood so that when they become compulsory, they would already be in
the habit of fulfilling them. Fortunately, in families of religious
people, a child starts to emulate its parents performing the religious
rites. Sometimes he spreads the prayer carpet for the parents, sometimes
he puts down his head to the ground in supplication with the parent. He
repeats Allah Akber (God is Great) and La ilaha il Allah with his
parents. He will recite small religious couplets with his mother. The
thoughtful parents make good use of this natural instinct of the child
to emulate. If a child does these things, the parents give him a smile
of appreciation. There should not be an element of force in making the
child learn the religious rites. The parents should not start formal
teaching of the religious rites in early childhood. At the age of five
the child can learn to

recite the Surat al-Fateha (The Opening) of the Holy Quran. This has to
be done slowly in several days to keep the interest of the child in
learning to do the recitation. At the age of seven the child should be
asked to offer regular prayers. The parents should themselves set an
example to the child by offering all the five prayers, regularly and
punctually, at their appointed times. At the age of nine years make it
binding on the children to offer regular prayers. They should explain to
the children that the prayers are mandatory when they are home and also
when they travel. If the child abstains from praying, the parents should
deal with him strictly. If the parents are themselves regular at
offering their prayers, they can easily make the children habituated of
following suit. When the children reach the age of responsibility, they
will already be regular at offering the mandatory prayers. If the
parents take the excuse that the child is still too small, and they
would teach him to pray when he comes of age, then it would be very
difficult to initiate the child into regular prayers. It is a common
belief that old habits are difficult to change. This is the reason that
the Prophet of Islam and the Holy Imams have asked the parents to
initiate the children to offer prayers from the six or seven years of
age.

Imam Mohammed Baqir says:

We encourage our children start praying from the age of five years and
at seven years we order them to pray five times a day regularly.**[1]**

The Prophet of Islam has said:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasaail al-Shiah Vol. 3, Page 12.

When your children are six years old, order them to offer the prayers.
When they are seven, ask them more strictly to be regular at prayers. If
necessary, they must be punished if they dont become regular in their
prayers.**[1]**

Imam Mohammed Baqir or Imam Jafar Sadiq has said:

When the child is seven years old, then ask him to wash his face, the
feet and the hands before offering prayers. But when he is nine years
old, teach him the correct method of doing the Wadu (the mandatory
ablutions prior to offering prayers). This is the time when the child is
strictly instructed to offer regular prayers.**[2]**

Imam Sadiq says:

When a child is six years old, then it is necessary he learns to offer
prayers and if he is physically capable he must also be encouraged to
fast during the month of Ramadan.**[3]**

The child should be initiated slowly to fasting during Ramadan. A child
who is physically fit for fasting should be woken up at the time of
Sahar (the meal before sunrise), so that he eats at this time instead of
the breakfast at the regular morning times. If the child is keen to fast
the whole day, encourage him to complete it. But, if during the day, the
child feels uneasy, he may be permitted to break his fast before time.
The number of

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak, Vol. 1, Page 171.  
 **[2]** Wasaail al-Shiah Vol. 3, Page 13.  
 **[3]** Ibid., Page 12.

fasts by the child may be increased gradually.. When the child reaches
the age of understanding, he must be instructed that offering regular
prayers five times a day and fasting on all days during the month of
Ramadan is mandatory. If he is irregular in his compliance of these, he
would be a sinner and liable to punishment by God. The parents must
explain to the child the advantages and the rewards of fasting during
Ramadan. This will give more courage to the child to do the fasting.
During the last days of Ramadan, make other duties lighter for the
child. He must be allowed more hours of rest during the day. At the end
of the fasting period, the child must be given some gift as an
encouragement for his efforts. During the fasting period the parents
should take care that the children dont try to eat something hidden from
others view.

It is necessary for the parents to instruct the children at the proper
time about the wet dreams they get at puberty. They must be instructed
about doing the Ghusl (the mandatory cleansing bath after having an
emission) and Istinja (the washing of the genitals with water after
urinating).

It is necessary to remind here that if they wish their children to be
regular visitors to the mosques and religious symposia, then they must
put them into the habit from their childhood. They should take them to
the mosque and the places of religious discourses. These visits will
create interest in the children for going to the congregations.

In the end, it will not be out of place to remind that before reaching
the age of understanding it is not

mandatory on the child to observe the compulsory religious rites. If he
is unable to perform certain rites at certain times, he is not
committing any transgression. But it will not be proper for the parents
to leave the children totally independent to do whatever they wish to.
The child must be told that if in his innocence he causes any physical
or bodily harm to others, he shall have to pay the Diyyah (the fine for
harming others) when he reaches the age of understanding.

On the other hand if the child is left free without any checks
whatsoever, he might get into the habit of committing sins and wrong
acts. The dictum is: Old habits die hard The habits cultivated during
the childhood remain with the person, however much one tries to banish
them. Therefore it is necessary for the parents to instruct the children
about the dos and donts from their very early days. They must stop them
from doing taboo acts and encourage them to do good deeds.
