Political & Social Training
===========================

Todays children are the youth of tomorrow. They will run the affairs of
the society in the future. Their awareness and understanding of the
political compulsions of the country will be of great importance. They
will be the keepers of the cultural and economic wealth of the nations.
They will have to strive maintaining and advancing the greatness of
their homeland. They will have to face the imperialist aggressors and
fight against their machinations. The children should therefore be
groomed from their early days to be ready to serve their country. The
greatest responsibility will rest on the shoulders of the parents to
groom their children properly.

The foundation for the political and sociological training has also to
be laid in the childhood of a person. By the time a child reaches the
stage of youth, he should be aware of the social and political problems
of the community in which he lives. He should be made aware of the
poverty and backwardness rampant in his country. The good qualities and
failings of the rulers of the day have to be informed to the child who
is on the threshold of youth. They should be told about the lacunae in
the running of the society. He should know the general conditions
prevailing in the towns and the countryside.

The child may still not have the adult franchise and he cannot cast his
vote. But the parents must explain to him the purpose of the election
and the conduct thereof. They should also explain to him as to how to
select the best candidate from the list of persons contesting in that
area. The parents must give the child their own example that they voted
for a particular candidate because of certain qualities he has. The
child can attend the election meetings and processions. He can join in
raising slogans. He may distribute leaflets of the candidate he thinks
is deserving of being elected. This work will give boost to his
awareness. The Iranian Revolution has proved that the children and youth
can contribute meaningfully in the political process of a country. They
were the youth who, with their slogans, meetings, protests and active
participation made the oppressive regime surrender. They relieved the
oppressed people of Iran from the clutches of the agents of the
tyrannical Shahs minions. The world knows that the Iranian Revolution
succeeded because of the supreme sacrifices made by the youth of the
nation.

It is necessary that the children study the political situation of their
country, in particular, and of the world, in general. They can do this
by cultivating the habit of reading a good newspaper everyday. The can
also watch and listen to the news bulletins on the television and the
radio. They can also have group discussions with their parents and
friends. This way they can develop interest in the welfare of their
countrymen and themselves. This process will help the child develop good
political and social awareness. The future of the country, no doubt,
will be in their hands and the hands of myriad other

youths of the land. The children should know that the worldly life
cannot be separated from the Hereafter, and, similarly, the Faith from
the political process also could never be separated. The youth of the
country should be actively associated with the political and social
happenings of the country. The youth must be given more freedom of
choice to participate in the political process of the nation.
