The Habit of Reading Books
==========================

Books are one of the best tools for training and upbringing. A good book
always has a salutary effect on the mind of a reader. It will elevate
spirit and thoughts. It will augment his store of knowledge. Books help
in correcting moral ineptitude. Particularly in these days of mechanical
existence, when people have hardly any time to attend meetings and
symposia, the best source of acquiring religious and general knowledge
are books that can be browsed whenever a person finds some time to
spare. It is possible that the reading of book might have a deeper
impact on the minds of the readers than the other sources of acquiring
knowledge. Sometimes, reading brings about a revolutionary change in the
outlook of a person. The habit of reading is the best pastime. It can
keep a person busy when he has nothing else to do. The persons who are
in the habit of reading, not only make the best use of their spare time
but they will keep their minds away from the worries that might chase
them if they sit brooding, doing nothing. A good book, for a reader, is
better than visiting the best of gardens and scenic places.

Hazrat Ali says:

A person who keeps himself occupied with books, will never lose his
peace of mind.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 636.

Obtaining fresh knowledge remove the tiredness and cloudiness of your
hearts; because the hearts, like the bodies, too experience
exhaustion.**[1]**

The gauge for the progress and civilization of any nation is the quality
and the number of books and the number of persons habituated of reading
them. Formal education of a person is no criterion of judging a persons
learning. A really learned person is one who is engaged in meaningful
reading and research. We unfortunately have lots of persons with school
diplomas and university degrees but very few learned scholars and
researchers. Most children, when they complete their formal education,
keep aside the books and get busy with other activities of life. The
growth of knowledge of these persons gets stagnant from that time. Their
criterion of acquiring education for finding a job has been achieved.
They feel that there is no further use for any more knowledge. In fact,
education should be for achieving excellence in the chosen field of
knowledge. Education is a continuous process and goes on till the last
breath of a person. The Religion of Islam too has exhorted its followers
to pursue the path of learning from the cradle to the grave.

The Prophet of Islam has said:

Search for knowledge is the duty of every Muslim. Allah likes the
seekers of knowledge.**[2]**

Imam Jafar Sadiq says:

Even if my companions are motivated to acquire

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Usool al-Kafi, Vol. 1, Page 48.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 30.

knowledge at the threat of a whipping, I would approve of it.**[1]**

The Prophet of Islam has said:

Barring two types of persons, there is no reward for anyone else; First
the erudite scholar and then he who is busy acquiring knowledge.**[2]**

Imam Jafar Sadiq said:

Persons are of three types: (1) The erudite scholar, (2) The seeker of
knowledge, and (3) The others are mere a heap of garbage.**[3]**

Hazrat Luqman, the Prophet, told his son:

Spare some time in the day and night for reading and acquiring
knowledge. If you stop reading, your knowledge will dissipate.**[4]**

Imam Jafar Sadiq said:

Search for knowledge in all conditions is absolutely necessary.**[5]**

The Prophet of Islam has said:

Search for knowledge is the duty of every Muslim man and every Muslim
woman.**[6]**

Imam Jafar Sadiq says:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Usool al-Kafi, Vol. 1, Page 33.  
 **[2]** Ibid., 33.  
 **[3]** Ibid., Page 34.  
 **[4]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 1, Page 169.  
 **[5]** Ibid., Page 172.  
 **[6]** Ibid., Page 177.

If the people knew the uses of knowledge, they would have tried to
acquire it even at the cost of their very lives. For this purpose they
would have undertaken hazardous sea voyages.**[1]**

The Prophet has said:

If I spent one day without adding to the store of my knowledge, I would
consider that day unlucky for me.**[2]**

It is the duty of the parents to send their children to schools for
acquiring knowledge of reading and writing. Islam has very clear
directions in this regard for the followers of the faith:

Imam Jafar Sadiq says:

A child plays for seven years, studies for seven years and for another
seven years learns about Right (Halal) and Wrong (Haram).**[3]**

The Prophet of Islam has said:

A son has three rights over his father: (1) The father must select a
good name for him, (2) The father should teach him to read and write,
and (3) when he grows up, get him a spouse.**[4]**

When a child is taken to the school, and the teacher instructs him to
say Bism Allah (In the name of Allah Almighty), Allah will spare the
childs parents from

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 1, Page 177.  
 **[2]** Majma al-Zawaid, Vol. 1, Page 127.  
 **[3]** Mustadrak, Vol. 2, Page 645.  
 **[4]** Ibid., Page 625.

the fire of the Hell!**[1]**

The Prophet of Islam has said:

Pity on the children of the Last Epoch, for what their forebears have
brought to them. Although the parents would themselves be Muslims, they
would not acquaint the children with the religious duties.**[2]**

The other responsibility of the parents is that they bring up their
children in such a way they cultivate the habits of reading good books
and become researchers of knowledge. The atmosphere in their homes
should be one of education and learning. They must motivate the children
by their words and actions to cultivate the habit of reading. Before the
child goes for formal education to the school, he should be introduced
to books. In the beginning the parents must read out books to the child.
They should read small and interesting stories and fables to make the
child interested in books. Give the children books with lots of
multicolor pictures and illustrations. Every day, the parents or the
elder siblings should read to the child a part of the book to keep his
sustained interest in the contents. They should explain to the child
about the illustrations in the book. Then the child should be asked to
recount the story and tell about the illustration printed with the
story. In this informal education, the parents should not make haste in
teaching and should not give to him any books that are beyond his
comprehension. They must first make the child interested in listening to
stories, then bring the process of reading out from the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mustadrak, Vol. 2, Page 645.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 625.

books.

Continue this process till the child learns to read and write himself.
Then leave the work of reading the books to the child. Sometimes ask the
opinion of the child about a new book that he has read. Discuss the
contents of the book with him continue giving attention till the child
becomes habituated of reading books.

Here the parents must be reminded of certain points:

(1) The children like stories and fables and understand their contents
well. It is therefore useful the material provided to them on any
subject should be in the form of stories.

(2) Every child will have his own individual personality. The capability
and tastes too will differ from person to person. There will be changes
in the tastes of a person with advancements in years. Therefore, the
parents must first try to gauge the taste and the capability of their
child and then bring the books to suit his requirements. Dont thrust
difficult and boring contents on the child. This might have negative
impact on the childs reading habit.

(3) Since the child is in the process of developing his personality, and
the books can have deep impact on this process, care must be exercised
to see that books with appropriate content are chosen for him. The
parents should first read the books themselves, then decide about their
suitability for the child's reading. The child should not read any
undesirable matter that might have negative impact on his impressionable
mind. If he gets into the habit of reading such literature, it might be
difficult to wean

him out of it.

(4) Children show more interest in reading about crime and adventure.
These books may have deleterious effect on the psyche of the child.
Similarly books that give vent to the sexual instincts in the child
should be kept out of his reach. One person writes in his memoirs thus:
My Granny used to love me very much. I used to sleep with her in the
nights. I always used to ask her to tell me bed-time-stories. To make me
go to sleep, she used to tell me one story every night. In her
repertoire there were stories about the Jinn Baba and other tales of
horror. These stories have left their mark on my psyche. I used to sleep
in the feeling of horror after hearing the stories. I started seeing
horrible bad dreams. Over time, I turned into a timid and cowardly
person. I was always afraid to be alone. I became excitable and
restless. This condition persists with me. How I wish parents and elders
dont relate horror stories to their impressionable children. I have
decided that I will not tell such stories to my own children. I
generally tell them stories from the Holy Quran and other stories with
good morals.

(5) The habit of reading is not just a pastime. The main purpose of
reading is to acquire knowledge and understand the contents of the books
and deriving advantage from them. It is not very important how many
books the child reads, but the important thing is how he has read them.
Is he just making a cursory rapid reading? Has he read a book with
absorbed interest and understood its contents? The parents should give
full attention to this aspect.

Occasionally, they must ask the child to give the gist of a book he has
read. They should derive their conclusion if the child has understood
the contents correctly or not. They should correct the child, if his
understanding of the contents is not correct.

(6) Children generally like books with imaginary stories. Some
intellectuals encourage reading of such books. They feel that such book
will encourage the imaginative faculties of the child. But the author
feels that the reading of imaginary and fictitious stories can promote
the habit of lying in the child. His mind will become the storehouse of
false thoughts. When he grows up, he might allude to falsehoods to
fulfill his needs and wishes.

It is true that a child prefers to read stories than other reading
matter. But care must be taken that he is given a carefully selected mix
of books on various subjects and not just the story- books. The child
must slowly develop interest in reading and understanding intricate
subject matter of serious literature.

It is not true that the children are fond of only fictitious stories.
They will definitely show keen interest in reading the stories of great
personalities, their lives and achievements. They can have their role
models in these personages and aim to model their own lives on the lives
of the great personages.
