Physical Punishment
===================

Lots of parents give physical punishment to their children in the
interest of proper upbringing. Even some teachers too contribute to this
attitude. They believe that the devils cannot be tamed with mere words.
In the past a majority of people believed in this dictum. Those days the
canes, chains and whips were considered important tools to be handy with
a school. The parents desirous of good upbringing of their children
never abstained from beating them when required. But most intellectuals
consider this tyrannical method of upbringing as barbaric and harmful
for the children. In most developed countries of the world there is
almost a total ban on the physical punishment for correction of
children.

A child cannot be reformed through physical punishments. Perhaps, it
might have a temporary effect on the child, but will be very harmful in
a longer run. For example:

When a child is beaten, he gets habituated of bowing down his head to
torture and force. He may perhaps start thinking that force is the only
key to success. He starts thinking that when one is angry, he should
beat. By

giving physical punishment to the children, the parents set an example
for them to adopt the tyrannical laws of the jungle in their future
lives.

The children who get beatings, develop hate and antagonism against their
parents. The children never forget the harsh treatment they received at
the hands of the parents. Such children might even become rebellious.

Repeated beatings can make a child timid and cowardly. The personality
of the child can also be suppressed with physical punishment. He might
later on become a victim of psychological ailments.

In most cases physical punishment seldom improves the child. It doesnt
create a wish in the child to correct his behavior. . He might perhaps
show some momentary signs of change out of fear of the rod and the
beatings, but is no guarantee that he will not repeat the same act
again. His basic failing will persist in his subconscious mind. It will
manifest itself later on in some other form.

One person says:

My twelve year old son picked up some money from my wifes wardrobe. When
I came to know about this, I punished him with a stick. From that time,
he never went near his mothers wardrobe.

It is true that the boy did not pick anything else from his mothers
wardrobe. The father appears to have succeeded by meting out physical
punishment to the child. But the matter was not so simple. The story
proceeded further. The boy found other subterfuges to continue his bad
activities. He started boarding the omnibus and avoiding to pay the fare
to the conductor.

When his mother asked him to shop at the grocers, he would pinch the
change. Later on it was learned that he has stolen money from his
friends too. The conclusion of the story is that, when the child was
beaten for one fault, he cleverly didnt repeat that act. But his mind
worked overtime, and he invented other methods of committing
thefts.**[1]**

One intellectual writes:

The children who receive corrective beatings, become weak and useless
persons. Or, otherwise they turn into stubborn and deceitful
persons...They seem to be taking revenge of the ill treatment received
in their childhood.**[2]**

Mr. Russell writes:

In my opinion, physical punishment of children is not right in any
way.**[3]**

Islam too has termed physical punishment harmful and has prohibited it.

Hazrat Ali says:

The intelligent person gets guidance through politeness, it is only the
animals that cannot be corrected without beatings.**[4]**

Imam Jafar Sadiq says:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ruwan Shinasi Tajrubi Kudak, Page 263.  
 **[2]** Ibid., Page 266.  
 **[3]** Dar Tarbiat, Page 169.  
 **[4]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 236.

Whoever whips another person once, Allah will shower the fiery whip
against him.**[1]**

The Prophet of Islam said:

Use love and affection in education and upbringing and dont have access
to cruelty because a wise mentor is better than a cruel one.**[2]**

One person said that he complained about his son to Imam Moosa bin
Jafar. The Imam replied:

Dont ever beat him! But maintain a distance from him, and this distance
too should not be kept for too long!**[3]**

Physical punishments are very harmful for the upbringing of the children
and they must be avoided. But if there is no other way of correcting the
child, adopt it as a last resort. Islam too permits this in certain
conditions.

The Prophet of Islam has said:

Ask your children to start offering prayers at the age of six years. If
they dont listen to your repeated warnings, you may beat them to become
regular at offering prayers when they are seven years old.**[4]**

In another tradition Imam Jafar Sadiq says:

When the child is nine years old, teach him to do the Wadu (the ablution
prior to offering prayers); order

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasaail al-Shiah Vol. 19, Page 14.  
 **[2]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 77, Page 175.  
 **[3]** Ibid., Vol. 104, Page 99.  
 **[4]** Mustadrak, Vol. 1, Page 171.

him to do the Wadu and pray. If the child doesnt obey, beat him and make
him offer prayers.**[1]**

Hazrat Ali has said:

As you reprimand your own son, so can you reprimand an orphan. And the
occasion on which you might beat your son, you can beat the orphan on a
similar occasion.**[2]**

If your slave disobeys Allah, beat him. If he disobeys you, forgive
him.**[3]**

One person came to the presence of the Prophet of Islam and said that an
orphaned child was in his care. He wanted to know if he can beat the
child to correct him. The Prophet replied:

In a situation where you can beat your son, you may beat the orphan on a
similar situation in his best interests.**[4]**

It is always better not to make access to the physical punishment of
children as far as possible. And when it becomes necessary, make use of
maximum restraint in the matter. The punishment must be well thought out
and appropriate to the occasion.

One person asked the Prophet of Islam:

The members of my family dont obey me. How should I reform them?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Wasaail al-Shiah Vol. 3, Page 13.  
 **[2]** Ibid. Vol. 15, Page 197.  
 **[3]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 115.  
 **[4]** Mustadrak, Vol. 2, Page 625.

The Prophet replied:

Forgive them!

The man repeated the question a second, and a third time. The Holy
Prophet gave the same reply; but then he said:

If you wish to reprimand your people, then you must keep in mind that
the punishment should not be more than their misdemeanour. You should
also abstain from beating them on their faces.**[1]**

Imam Jafar Sadiq has said:

If needed, dont inflict more than five or six blows to your child or the
servant and these blows should not be too severe.**[2]**

While reprimanding children, better dont do it in the presence of
others. Others presence might cause mental torture to the children and
might harm them. If the beating is excessive, there is a Deet or fine
prescribed in Islam for one who inflicts the punishment. Therefore, care
must be exercised while beating the children to correct them. According
to the Islamic Laws, if a persons face turns black on account of the
beating, the fine is six Gold Dinars (coins). If the face turns blue,
three dinars and for a red face, a Dinar and Half.**[3]**

The parents have no right to behave like tyrants with their children.
They must not kick them, box them and

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Majma al-Zawaid, Vol. 8, Page 106.  
 **[2]** Wasaail al-Shiah Vol. 18, Page 581.  
 **[3]** Ibid., Vol. 19, Page 295.

beat them with chains and rods.

Islam does permit reprimanding and beating the child for purposes of
correction and, in fact, orders such action. We find that the youth in
the Western countries go astray because of excess of freedom given to
them.
