Encouragement & Reward
======================

One very good method of good upbringing is the appreciation and
encouragement when a child performs well. This will have a salutary
effect on the mind of the child. It will provide him the reason to do
still better in the future. Every human being loves himself.. In his own
way he thinks of developing and advancing his personality. He wants that
others recognize and appreciate his personality. If he receives the
appreciation of others, he will strive for further improvement. But if
he is discouraged, his enthusiasm will be dampened. A few suggestions
for obtaining good results are given here:

The actions of the child can be appreciated, but not too often. Because
, if the appreciation is too much, it might lose its importance in the
eyes of the child. He may then take your appreciation as a matter of
routine.

The appreciation of the child should be at a specific place and time so
that he realizes why and for what he is being commended. Then he will
try to perform better and earn appreciation on other occasions too. This
is the reason that repeated and unnecessary appreciation is not
advisable. For example, if a child is repeatedly given a pat on his back
that he is a good and polite individual, it might lose its significance
for him. The child will not be able to comprehend the reason for the
appreciation.

It is also necessary that good acts and works of the child are
appreciated and not his person. This way he will

understand that he is praised for what he does, and not for what he is!
The importance of every person is because of his achievements.

While praising a child, never compare him with other children. For
example the father should not tell to his son, You are a good and
truthful boy, unlike Hasan who is a liar. This attitude might make the
child form a poor opinion about the other boy. While comparing the
children, the parent is doing faulty upbringing of the good child.

The praises and commendations of the child must be within certain
limits. Excess of these might make the child proud and conceited.

Hazrat Ali says:

Lots of people develop conceit for the reason of praises heaped on
them.**[1]**

Dont exaggerate in praising others.**[2]**

One very good tool for effective upbringing and training is giving of
rewards. Rewards are not a bad method of encouragement if they are
spontaneous and not in fulfillment of an earlier promise that if the
child achieved a certain thing, he would be given a particular gift. If
promises are made to the child beforehand, it might have negative impact
on him. The child starts expecting a gift for every good thing he does.
This will become a sort of gratification and the child would not strive
to do better if these gifts stop forthcoming.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 72, Page 295.  
 **[2]** Ghurar al-Hikam, Page 209.

A person should have the habit of doing good deeds. He should do them to
please Allah and serve mankind and not with an eye on the probable
material rewards. If the child gets used to receiving gifts for every
small reason, he might become narrow minded and selfish. He may not
think it his duty to do anything for others, unless he gets something in
return for his efforts. He will try to escape from doing anything for
others, as far as possible. This attitude is a very big fault in a
person and the society. The rewards for any good work to the children,
therefore, should be few and selective that receiving such gifts dont
become a second nature for them. When a child gets into the habit of
doing tasks with his own initiative, reduce the frequency of gifts and
rewards. Encourage him to do the work. Many parents give gifts to their
children getting higher grades at their examinations. This way they
encourage them to work harder at their studies. Perhaps this method is
effective to some extent. But there is a big defect in this. That it
affects the childs sense of responsibility. The child works hard at his
studies only because he wants to get the gift by obtaining higher
grades. Otherwise, he would not bother to work hard. For every thing he
does, he expects a gift in reward for that.

One person writes:

I was admitted to the fourth standard of a Religious School. I was very
poor at the recitation of the Holy Quran. But my other class- mates were
very good at their recitation. In the very first class I attended, the
teacher asked me kindly, Can you recite the Holy Quran? I replied
nervously, No, Sir. He rejoined, Dont worry! I shall give you the
lessons. I know you

can become one of the good students in the class.. Whatever doubts you
may have, dont hesitate to ask me. These kind words of the teacher
encouraged me and I started working with determination on my studies. By
the end of the year I excelled at recitation of the Quran. I reached
such a degree of proficiency that in the absence of the teacher I was
asked to conduct the class. I was also made responsible for reciting
verses from the Quran at the morning assembly before commencement of the
classes

One girl writes in her memoirs:

My father was a progressive person. One day, when my mother was away, he
invited some of my teachers for the meal. He brought the ingredients for
cooking and gave to me. I started to work in the kitchen with
enthusiasm. In the noon Dad arrived with his friends. When I poured the
victuals in the dishes, I noticed that they were not cooked properly.
The chicken was half done and the rice has become slushy with excessive
water added while cooking it. All this was because I had not properly
learned the art of cooking. I was very worried. I was expecting a
reprimand from my Dad at any moment. But contrary to all my
expectations, Dad praised me in front of his friends. He said, This food
has been cooked by my darling daughter! It is so tasty! The guests too
assented in agreement and praised me for my effort. Later on my Dad gave
me a pat on my back. This word of encouragement enthused me to start
earnestly at learning the culinary art. Today I am an expert at
preparing lots of very good dishes.
