Welfare of the Embryo (foetus) Depends On the Mothers Nutrition
===============================================================

In the womb of the mother the foetus is not an integral part of her body
although it gets sustenance from her blood and nutrition. A pregnant
mothers food has to be properly planned and balanced which has to
provide nutrition not only for her maintenance but also to the foetus.

Therefore a pregnant womans recipe of nutrition has to be meticulously
planned. Otherwise there is always a risk that the deficiency of certain
vitamins and minerals in the food may prove deleterious to the health of
the mother and the child.

In the eyes of Islam the nutrition of the pregnant woman is of prime
importance to the extent that she can be exempted from mandatory fasting
during the month of Ramadan. She is given the liberty to fulfill her
obligation after delivery of the baby.

Research proves that eighty percent of the genetically deformed children
with physical and mental aberrations

Â 

are because of deficient food given to the mother during her
pregnancy.**[1]**

Dr. Jazairi, an eminent nutritionist, writes:

It is known since long that the development of the foetus and the baby
before birth and during feeding on mothers milk the nutrition received
by the mother is very important. The mother has to take care that all
the essential proteins, vitamins, carbohydrates, fats and other
materials are taken in optimum quantities and at proper intervals for
proper growth of the living cell that is the foetus. The foetus, which
remains in the stage of metamorphosis in the womb, requires all these
essentials for proper and healthy growth. It does happen during
pregnancies that the mother remains healthy outwardly but due to
deficiency of certain vitamins the foetus shows abnormal growth.**[2]**

Karner says:

Sometimes the reason for a new-born being abnormal is that although the
seed is good it doesnt get a proper environment in the womb. It also is
sometimes because although the wombs environment is good the seed is
defective. In these conditions babies are born with several deformities
like cleft lips, small and sunken eyes and flat soles of the feet etc.
Earlier these defects were thought to be genetic of nature but now the
research points out that they are caused by deficient availability of
elements like oxygen during the pregnancy. The living environment and
the

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Aijaz e Khurakiah, Page 220.  
 **[2]** Biography Before Delivery, Page 182.

surroundings during the pregnancy of a woman are considered the cause of
the congenital defects like paraplegic limbs etc.

Imam Sadiq says in a tradition:

Whatever a pregnant mother eats or drinks, the foetus draws its
sustenance from that.**[1]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Bihar al-Anwar, Vol. 6, Page 342.
