Hazrat Shah Qasim (as)
======================

Hazrat Qasim was the youngest son of Imaam Hassan (A.S.). Qasim was
born in 47 A.H., three years before his father was martyred. When Imaam
Hussain prepared to leave Madina in the month of Rajab 60 A.H. Qasim
mother Umme-e-Farwa asked Imaam Hussain to take her and Qasim with him.
Imaam Hussain agreed. Hazrat Qasim, although only 13 years old, had,
like his cousins Aun and Muhammad, learnt fencing from Hazrat Abbas and
Hazrat Ali Akber. Hazrat Abbas was very fond of Hazrat Qasim.

On the night before Ashura when Imaam Hussain was passing by
Umm-e-Farwa's tent he heard Qasim say to his mother, "Mother, tomorrow
Uncle Abbas, Ali Akber and I will defend Imaam Hussain. Mother, if I get
killed please do not weep for me." Umm-e-Farwa replied, "My son although
I dearly love you, I shall not weep for you. Nothing will make me
prouder than to see my son give his life for Islam". When Imaam Hussain
heard this conversation he prayed to Allah to bless Hazrat Qasim and
Umm-e-Farwa.

On Ashura day after Aun and Muhammad had fallen in the battlefield,
Hazrat Qasim came to Imaam Hussain and begged for permission to go and
fight. Twice Imaam Hussain refused saying "Qasim you are young and your
mother's only son". Hazrat Qasim was very disappointed. He went to his
mother. When she saw her son so disappointed she remembered that just
before he died, Imaam Hassan had written a letter, given it to
Umm-e-Farwa saying ,"If ever you find Qasim in difficulty, give him this
letter.

" She gave Hazrat Qasim the letter. In the letter it was written, "My
son Qasim, a day will come when my brother Hussain will be facing an
enemy army of tens of thousands. That will be the day when Islam will
need to be saved by sacrifice. You must represent me on that day."

Hazrat Qasim read the letter. He smiled. He rushed to Imaam and gave
him the letter. After reading the letter Imaam Hussain said, "O my
brother's son, how can I stop you from doing what your father wanted you
to do. Bismillah, go. Allah be with you".

Imaam Hussain tied Imaam Hassan's turban on the head of Hazrat Qasim
and helped him mount his horse.As Qasim was riding out, Imaam Hussain
said "Inna Lilla-hi Wa Inna Ilai-hi Raji'oon". Hazrat Qasim said "O my
uncle - Do not be upset. I do not fear death. Death for Islam will be
sweeter for me than honey". Hazrat Qasim came to the battle field. He
was a very handsome boy. When the enemy saw him, they began to murmur,
"How can we kill someone whose face is shining like moon?"

In a loud and a clear voice Hazrat Qasim introduced himself and cried
out a challenge for single combat. He killed several famous warriors who
came forward.

Every time he felled an enemy Hazrat Qasim would stand on his stirrups,
look behind and wave to Hazrat Abbas, just as a pupil would seek
approval of his teacher on any assignment, Hazrat Abbas would proudly
wave back. When the enemy saw his bravery and realized that they could
not possibly over power him in single combats, they came from behind and
one of them hit Hazrat Qasim on the head with a sword.

Hazrat Qasim tried to go on fighting but alas he was so young and he
was so very thirsty! He fell from his horse crying out, "YA AMMAHO,
ACCEPT MY LAST SALAAMS." Imaam Hussain and Hazrat Abbas rode out. The
soldiers tried to stop them, when finally they came to where Hazrat
Qasim had fallen they saw a dreadful sight!!

Hazrat Qasim's body had been trampled by the horses of the soldiers who
had tried to stop Imaam Hussain and Hazrat Abbas. Hazrat Abbas was so
angry when he saw this that he began to shake with fury. He took out his
sword and wanted to attack the enemy. Imaam Hussain restrained him
saying "Abbas, have patience, dear brother. Do not give them an excuse
for saying that we attacked them first".

Was Qasim body carried to the camp to his mother? This is not very
clear. It is reported, however, that Imaam Hussain took off his abaa,
spread it on to the ground, gathered the pieces from the ground as one
gathers flowers from a garden!

**Hazrat Aun and Muhammad (as)**

Aun and Muhammad were the sons of Bibi Zainab. They had not accompanied
Bibi Zainab when she left Madina with Imaam Hussain A.S. Just before
Imaam Hussain started his journey from Mecca, Hazrat Abdullah ibne
Jaffer brought his two sons to Mecca and handing them over to Imaam
Hussain said, "Ya Imaam, since you have decided to go and will not allow
me to come with you, please take my two sons with you. Aun will
represent his maternal grandfather Hazrat Ali A.S. and the other will
represent his paternal grandfather Hazrat Jaffer-e-Tayyaar".

Aun and Muhammad were quite young. It is reported that Aun was about
thirteen and Muhammad was a year or two younger. They had learnt the art
of fencing from their uncle, Hazrat Abbas.

On the night before Ashura Bibi Zainab said to them, "My sons, tomorrow
there will be a battle. I can not ask you to fight because you are
young. But if anything happens to Imaam Hussain, while you are still
alive, I will be filled with shame." Both the boys stood up and said
"Mother, we have the blood of Ali and Jaffer in our veins.

Our grand fathers were warriors whose fame will always be remembered.
Do you think we can possibly shame them? More over we are the pupils of
Uncle Abbas. Mother, unless you forbid us and stop us from fighting, we
shall go to the battlefield and show the enemies of Islam how bravely
the children of Islam can fight. All we want from you is a promise that
you will never weep for us. Or souls will never rest in peace if you
grieve for us after we are gone".

Tears of joy and pride flowed down Bibi Zainab's eyes as she embraced
her two boys. In the morning during the general attacks from the enemy,
Aun and Muhammad fought side by side with Ali Akber, Qasim and Hazrat
Abbas. Every time either of them succeeded in felling an enemy, he would
look proudly at Hazrat Abbas who would smile and nod his approval. Imaam
Hussain would not, however, give the two boys permission to go for
single combat.

They were very disappointed. They came to their mother for help. Bibi
Zainab sent someone to request Imaam Hussain to come to her tent., When
the Imaam came Bibi Zainab said, "Hussain, at the battle of Siffeen
Abbas was only eight years old. When he saw someone trying to attack
you, he rushed into the battle field and killed the man. Do you remember
how proud our father Ali was? Today I too want to be proud of my sons. I
want to see them go out there and defend Islam.

Will you not allow me that privilege?" Imaam Hussain stood there in
silence. He looked at his sister. He saw the disappointment on her face.
He saw tears forming around her eyes.

He put his arms around the two boys and led them to their horses. He
kissed them and then helped them mount. "Go," said Imaam, "Go, and show
the world how those as young as you can fight the injustice and
oppression of Yezid!" Then he turned round and lifted the curtain of the
tent. The boys raised their hands and said "Fi Amaani-llah, mother!"
Bibi Zainab replied, "Bismillah my sons. Allah be with you!"

The two boys rode out into the battlefield. They fought bravely. At one
point Umar Sa'ad asked, "Who are these two youngsters? They fight like I
have seen Ali ibne Abu Taalib fight." When he was told who they were he
ordered his soldiers to give up single combats and surround and kill the
boys. Aun and Muhammad were attacked from all sides.

Soon they were over-powered and brutally killed. Imaam Hussain and
Hazrat Abbas carried the two young bodies to a tent and laid them on the
floor. Imaam walked to Bibi Zainab's tent. He found her in sijdah
praying, "Ya Allah, I thank you for accepting my sacrifice. My heart is
filled with pride because my two sons have given their lives for your
religion."

**Hazrat Ali Asghar (as)**

Hazrat Ali Asghar was the youngest child of Imaam Hussain. He was born
only a few weeks before Imaam left Madina. His mother's name was Rubaab
daughter of Imra'u'l Qais who was the chief of the tribe of Kinda.

Rubaab had two children, Sakina and Ali Asghar. She and her two
children accompanied Imaam to Kerbala. The fact that Imaam took with him
a newly born baby further demonstrates the that his intention was never
to engage in any armed rebellion.

At Kerbala Asghar was only six months old. From the seventh Muharram
there was no water in Imaam's camp. Asghar was in great pain because of
thirst.

On Ashura day, after Ali Akber had been killed, Imaam Hussain was
standing outside the camp. He was left all alone and he was preparing to
go into the battlefield. Just then he heard a child cry. It was Ali
Asghar, tormented by the pangs of hunger and thirst.

Imaam walked into Bibi Rubaab's tent. He lifted the child from the
cradle. "Rubaab," he said, "I will take him to Yazeed's army. Surely
they can not possibly deny this little infant a few drops of water?"
Rubaab changed Ali Asghar's clothes. She even tied a small turban on his
head. Like any other mother she wanted her son to look at his best in
front of strangers.

Imaam Hussain carried the child to the battle field. Walking up to
Yazeed's soldiers Imaam Hussain said, "This child has done you no harm.
He is dying of thirst. I am begging for a few drops of water for
him."There was no response. Imaam said, "If you are afraid that when you
bring Asghar any water I will drink it, look, I will put him on the
ground and you can come yourself and give him water.

" He put the child on the sands of Kerbala and moved a couple of steps
back.You can imagine how hot the desert sand was. Asghar lay there not
even wincing.

He turned towards the enemy and stared at them. A murmur arose among
the soldiers but no one came forward to give water to the baby. Imaam
took Asghar in his arms and in a clear voice said, "Asghar, my son, show
them how thirsty you are!" Asghar turned his head towards the soldiers.
He smiled sweetly. Opened his mouth. Brought out his dry tongue and
moved it over his lips. The ultimate sword had been unsheathed !

The soldiers were so moved by this that they could be heard sobbing.
Still, they were very afraid of Yazeed and none dared come forward to
give water to Ali Asghar.

Umar Sa'ad was worried. It seemed that Asghar was emerging victorious
in this confrontation against the might of Yezid. He looked at Hurmala,
a famous archer, and said, "Silence Hussain!"

Then a terrible thing happened. Hurmala lifted his bow. Aimed an arrow
at the child. The arrow flew across the hot desert. There was a hissing
sound. Asghar smiled. He lifted his head and arched his neck!! No
civilized mind can even imagine what happened next. The hissing sound
stopped and Asghar lay still on his father's arms.

Imaam Hussain looked down at Asghar's neck, he saw the arrow, he saw
the neck, he saw the smile and then he could see no more!!!

Our Imaam began to feel faint. For a moment everything went dark. He
could not see! There was a total silence over Kerbala, broken only by
the sound of the gentle waves of Furaat. Even the enemy appeared
stunned.

Slowly Hussain turned round and now looked at the baby in his arms.

The arrow had passed through the tender neck and lodged in Imaam
Hussain's chest. There was no way Imaam Hussain could dislodge the
arrow. His two arms were supporting the still child. He looked at the
sky, and prayed "Ya Allah, give me courage in this most difficult moment
of my life. No Prophet ever was subjected to a test as severe as
this."

It is said that the Imaam was so shaken up by what had happened to the
infant child, that all of a sudden his beard went all grey and he looked
an old man. With his teeth he pulled his abaa over Asghar to shield the
body from the scorching sun. Then he took a few deep breaths, and began
to walk towards his camp.

As he got near he saw Rubaab standing at the entrance to her tent. He
saw the anxiety, the hope, the fear and the restlessness in her eyes.
Our Imaam seemed to lose all strength. He could not walk forward towards
Bibi Rubaab. He took seven steps back saying "INNA LILLA-HI WA INNA
ILAY-HI RAJEEOON".

He stopped and thought that he must take the child to his mother. He
again took seven steps forwards saying "INNA LILLA-HI WA INNA ILAY-HI
RAJEEOON". Once again his eyes met with those of Bibi Rubaab's. Again
our Imaam seemed to lose his courage and walked backwards repeating
"INNA LILLA-HI WA INNA ILAY-HI RAJEEOON".

Imaam Hussain did this seven times. Forward and backward. All the time
Bibi Rubaab's eyes remained transfixed on the child. Each time Imaam
reciting "INNA LILLA-HI WA INNA ILAY-HI RAJEEOON".

Finally, somehow, he got the arrow dislodged. He now took the dead
infant to Bibi Rubaab. He said, "Rubaab! This is a test from Allah which
no mother has ever been asked to go through. Come with me" Bibi Rubaab
followed. With their own hands they dug a small grave! The father and
the mother together buried Ali Asghar!!

**Imam Husayn (as)**

Our Imaam is all alone! He looks around him. There lie Habeeb ibne
Mazahir, Muslim ibne Awsaja, Zuhair ibne Qain and all his friends and
companions. There lie Awn and Muhammad. He looks at Qasim's trampled
remains. He looks at Ali Akber, his beloved son, with that dreadful
wound on his chest. He looks towards Furaat. Gently he whispers, 'Abbas,
Abbas, I am alone! So very alone!'

Slowly Imaam Hussain moves towards the tent of Imaam Zain ul 'Abideen.
Zain ul 'Abideen is lying unconscious on his bed. Lovingly Imaam shakes
his son by the shoulder. The sick Imaam opens his eyes, 'Father, Father,
why are you alone? Where is my uncle Abbas? Where is Ali Akber? Where is
Qasim? Where are all your companions?' Imaam Hussain says, 'Son, no man,
save you and I, is left alive. All of them have died for Islam'.

Imaam Zain ul 'Abideen tries to get up. 'Where are you going, my son?'
asks Imaam Hussain. 'To fight Yezid's army!' replies the young man. 'No,
my son, you are too sick for Jihad. I have come to say good-bye. Look
after the ladies and the children. And, my son, when you get to Madina,
give my love to Sugra. Tell her that I always remembered her and that in
these last moments of my life, I wish I could give her a hug before I
get killed.. And also, my son, give salaams to our friends and tell them
to think of me when they drink water!'

Imaam Hussain then stands in the centre of the camp and cries out, "O
Zainab, O Kulthoom, O Sakina, O Ruqayya, O Rubaab, O Fizza my greetings
to you! Farewell to you all !" The ladies and children weep and wail as
they say farewell to Imaam.

Imaam walks towards his horse. There is no one to help him mount. Bibi
Zainab steps forward. She holds the reins as Imaam mounts the horse.The
horse moves a few steps and then it stops. Imaam Hussain urges the horse
to move, but it stands still looking towards its hind legs. Imaam turns
his head. He sees Sakina clinging to the horse's leg, pleading, 'O
horse, do not take my father away from me. Do not let them make me
yateemah!'

Imaam dismounts. He says, 'Sakina, you are the great grand daughter of
the Holy Prophet! I love you so much that if you tell me not to go, I
will not. But then Islam will be destroyed. How will you or I be able to
face the Holy Prophet on the Day of Judgement?' Fighting back her tears
the four year old Sakina can only manage to say, 'Bismillah, father!'
The four year old holds the reins as her father mounts for a certain
death !! Hussain rides on. He stands on a hill and cries out,

"Who is there who will come to my help?"

Of course our Imaam is not expecting any of the enemy soldiers to come
to his help! To whom is he addressing this plea for help? Our Imaam is
addressing the plea to all the Muslims, in every age and everywhere,
young and old, men and women, grown ups and children urging us all to
always fight Yezidism and refuse to disobey the commands of Allah. Every
little effort we make to preserve and act according to our Islamic
conscience is a response to our Imaam's call with LABBAIK! LABBAIK!

Imaam rides towards the enemy. There is a shower of arrows! Imaam
ignores the arrows and rides on. He wants to make one last effort to
preach true Islam to the enemies of Islam. He stops and turns towards
the enemy and begins to speak :

"O those of you who do not know me, know that I am the grandson of the
Holy Prophet. I am on the path of truth. Yezid personifies falsehood and
corruption. He wants to lead you away from Islam. Do not follow him. Do
not kill the grandson of Allah's messenger. Allah will never forgive
you!

Remember that when you see a ruler who does what has been forbidden by
Allah and His Messenger, who indulges in sins, who oppresses the people
he rules, and you do nothing to stop such a ruler, before Allah you are
as guilty as he is. You know my ancestry. My parents did not raise me to
submit myself to an evil tyrant. I am your Imaam. You have surrendered
the freedom of your mind to the evil ways of Yazeed. If you do not care
for Islam, do, at least, care for the freedom of your spirit!!"

Umar Sa'ad cries out, "Do not fall victims to Hussain's oratory! Kill
him!"

From all directions the soldiers advance towards Imaam Hussain with
their naked swords! Imaam says: "You are determined to fight me Then
fight you I shall ! I do not fear death. Death to me is sweeter than
dishonour. Now I shall let you witness the valour of the son of Ali ibne
Abu Taalib !"

Imaam Hussain takes out his sword and begins to fight. Thirsty, tired,
wounded, grieving, our Imaam fights as no one had ever seen any one
fight! Where ever he turns to, the soldiers flee as rabbits do at the
sight of a lion! Umar Sa'ad sends all his best warriors against Imaam.
They all perish. No one dares come near our Imaam! Imaam stands on his
stirrups. Casts his eyes to where Hazrat Abbas lies, and murmurs, "Abbas
did you see the battle of your brother, the thirsty, the broken hearted
brother?"

And then Jibra'eel appears and says, 'O Hussain, Allah is pleased with
your bravery. The moment has now arrived for you to save Islam with your
life!" Hussain looks at the sky! Yes, it is the time of Asr! Hussain
returns the sword into the sheath. Lowers himself on the horse-back.
Whispers to the horse "Take me to where my mother Fatimah is waiting for
me! But, O my faithful horse, go past where my Akber is lying so that I
may see my beloved son just one more time before I die."

Seeing that Imaam has sheathed his sword the enemy come from all sides.
Some throw stones at him, some hit him with swords. Arrows are shot at
him! Suddenly the horse stops! "My son, my son!" cries out the soul of
Fatimah Zahra.Imaam Hussain falls from the horse! But his body does not
touch the ground. It is resting on the blades of the arrows. He performs
his Asr prayers lying on this musallah of arrows! Now he goes in to his
last sijdah and says :

"O Allah! All praise is to You and You alone!"

Someone is moving towards where our Imaam is in sijdah on the arrows.
He is holding a dagger in his hand. The earth trembles! The sun goes
into eclipse! Jibraeel cries out "OH HUSSAIN HAS BEEN KILLED, HUSSAIN
HAS BEEN KILLED!!!!" Sakina falls on to the ground unconscious! Bibi
Zainab runs to the tent of our fourth Imaam. 'Oh Son! What has
happened?" Imaam Zain ul 'Abideen staggers towards the curtain of his
tent. Lifts it up, and pointing his finger at a head mounted on a lance.
He cries out in a trembling voice :

"Assalaamu 'alaika, Ya 'aba 'Abdillah !!!"


