The Martyrs of Karbala
======================

Those who surrendered their souls in the way of the Lord at Karbala
were the divinely selected ones of the human family. They were ideal
personalities with unique qualities which humanity could justly be proud
to own in their kind as the matchless gems which the world had ever
seen.

They were the noblest models of devoted Muslims. The faith in God, the
sincere devotion, the dauntless courage, the unconquerable fidelity, the
unfailing patience, the charitable disposition, the ideal consideration
for life after death and the ever mindfulness of the Day of Judgment
which the great martyrs manifested in the hour of their trial at Karbala
were obviously the qualities they were divinely conditioned with for the
fulfillment of the Divine attributes in a human personality may look
into the wonderful sacrifice which Husayn, the King of Martyrs offered
in Karbala, in the way of the Lord.

It is a historic fact that a large crowd followed Husayn from Mecca but
before the great offering he had to make, Husayn started relating to
these people through his repeated sermons the sufferings and the
gruesome massacre in store for those who remain with him. The Holy Imam
made those in doubt to leave his camp.

Only the sincere ones who were wholly devoted to the Lord and who were
really anxious of surrendering themselves in His way were left. Husayn
wrote letters and sent messages to the chosen few worthy of inclusion
into his fold informing them of the arrival of the awaited hour. Thus
were collected the gems worthy of presenting to the Lord.

**The Companions of Husayn and those of the Holy Prophet**

The kind of faithful companions the Holy Imam Husayn had gathered
around him was not given to any of the Apostles of God including Jesus
and even the Holy Prophet Muhammad to claim such a band of men of
spotless character and godly conduct in such a large number among their
companions. While one of the disciples of Jesus betrayed hem and
connived to get him in the hands of his enemies, none of the other
disciples offered to get killed with their Master.

In the case of the companions of the Holy Prophet, most of those who
claim prominence in their devotion to him, deserted him leaving him in
the jaws of death, not once or twice but on every occasion when they
felt any danger to their lives.

But in the case of Husayn, the faithfulness and the devotion of his
comrades in the worst and the most torturous miseries which culminated
in the gruesome massacre of one and all of them, is nothing but a
matchless marvel which has thrown the human world into wonder and has
moved every human heart to sorrow and grief for them, with tears
irresistibly rushing into the eyes of men, women and even children in
sympathy for the great sufferers in the way of the Lord.

**Husayn's Martyrdom was prophesised in the Old Testament**

"For this is the day of the Lord God of hosts a day of vengeance, that
he may avenge him of his adversaries and the sword shall devour, and it
shall be satiated and make drunk with their blood for the Lord God of
hosts hath a sacrifice in the North country by the river Euphrates."

**Brief Notes on some of those Martyred in Kufa and Karbala**

1. Abu-Bakr ibne Ali ibne Abi Taleb

He was called 'Muhammad-e-Azghar' or Abdullah from Laila daughter of
Masu'ud, son of Hanzala, son of Manath, son of Tameem.

2. Abi Bakr son of the Second Imam Hassan, son of Ali.

3. Abdul Hatoof Ansari and his brother

4. Sa'ad (both sons of Hur).

Both from Kufa who joined the Holy Imam at Karbala.

5. Adhan son of Omayya-al Abdi. From Basra son of Abi Obaida, whose
father had been the companion of the Holy Prophet.

6. Aslam-the slave who was purchased and liberated by the Holy Imam-
was the scribe engaged to write communications from the Holy Imam.

7. Anas bin Hars-e-Kahili, son of Baniah, son of Kahli who was one of
the companions of the Holy Prophet

8. Borair Zibe Khozair-e- Hamdani -

A very old, pious, and devoted companion of Amirul-Momineen, Ali ibne
Abi Taleb, one of the prominent noblemen of Kufa. He was the one who
came to the Holy Imam begging most humbly to permit him to get martyred
for he wanted to die in the way of the Lord and show his face to the
Holy Prophet on the Day of Judgment.

9. Omayyabib Sa'd at Tale :

He was one of the companions of Amirul-Momineen.

10. Bushr bin Amrual Hazrami from the famous ones among the faithful
ones among the faithful devotees of the Holy Prophet.

11. Bakr bib Hai at Taimi :

Of the Bani Taimi tribe who came to the Holy Imam and volunteered to be
martyred in the way of the Lord.

12. Jabib ibne Hajjaj al Taimi :

He was the follower of Muslim-bin-Aqeel in Kufa. Since Muslim was
arrested, he hid himself until Husayn arrived in Karbala, and submitted
himself until Husayn arrived in Karbala, and submitted himself to the
Holy Imam.

13. Jibilath ibne Ali-e-Shaibani :

The one who was attending to Amirul-Momineen in the battle of Siffin.

14. Jafar ibne Aqeel ibne Abi Taleb :

The third brother of Abbas the Standard Bearer of the Holy Imam.

15. Jafar ibne Aqeel ibne Abi Taleb :

Brother of Muslim ibne Aqeel the Deputy of the Holy Imam to Kufa.

16. Jinadat ibne Ka'b Ansari Al-Khazraji :

Along with his son-martyred at Karbala- one of the greatest devotees of
the Holy Imam.

17. Jundab bin Mujee al Khaulani :

One of the companions of Ameerul-Momineen who came to the Holy Imam,
fell down on his feet and prayed to be permitted to be martyred.

18. Jaun-The liberated slave of Abi-Zar, joined the Second Holy Imam
and thereafter he remained with Husayn and had come to Karbala with
Husayn. He was trained under Abi-Zar and was a very pious devotee of the
Holy Imam.

19. Jaun bin Malike Tameemi :

Of the tribe of Bani Tameem. One who was in Yazid's army. Seeing the
Devil's forces decision to attack the Holy Imam, which he never thought
would happen, left the ranks of the Devil's forces and joined the Holy
Imam.

20. Hars-The liberated slave of hazrat Hamza, the uncle of the Holy
Prophet-had come from Madina along with Husayn.

21. Habshi bin Qais-e-Nahmi :

Of a group from the tribe of Hamdan. His grandfather was one of the
faithful companions of the Holy Prophet.

22. Hars bin Amarul Qais-e-Kandi :

A very brave nobleman of Arabia. He went into the armies of the Devil,
and found his own uncle there. His uncle asked him: "Have you come to
kill your uncle?" He replied Yes! you are my uncle, no doubt, but God is
my Lord and you have come here against him." He killed his uncle. Along
with him three others from the enemy's ranks joined the Holy Imam. All
were martyred.

23. Habib bin Amir-e-Taimi :

One who had already paid allegiance to the Holy Imam at the hands of
Muslim, was martyred in Kufa. Habib left Kufa and joined the Holy Imam
on his way to Karbala.

24. Habib bin Muzahir al-Asadi :

He was known as Habib ibne Mazahir bin Re'aab bin Al-Ashtar from the
lineage of Asad Abdul Qasim Al-Asadi - aged 70 years. He was one of the
faithful companions of the Holy Prophet, who after the Holy Prophet
always remained with Ameerul-Momineen Ali and migrated toe Kufa when the
Capital was shifted from Madina to Kufa, and accompanied Ali in all
battles he fought against the rebels and traitors. His ideal
faithfulness and sincere devotion to he Holy Imam has many glorious
details.

25. Hajjaji bin Masrooq al-Jaufi :

One of the faithful companions of Ameerul-Momineen Ali in Kufa.

26. Hajjaji bin Badr as S'di :

Of Basra from the tribe Bani Sa'd, famous nobleman in Kufa. He was the
one who carried the communications of the Holy Imam to the pious ones of
the devotees of the House of the Holy Prophet in Kufa.

27. Hur ibne Yazdi ar Riyah :

He was the son of Yazid ibne Najiyah bin Qa'nab bin Yitab bin Hur in
the lineage of Al'Tarbo'ir Riyahi. A famous nobleman of Kufa, and
experienced warrior specially selected by Ibne Ziad to command a
contingent against Husayn. He was the one who obstructed Husayn's way
near Kufa, but he never believed that the venture of Ibne Ziad was to
end in the martyrdom of the Holy Imam.

When at Karbala he found that the decision was to martyr the Holy Imam,
Hur left the Devil's forces and joined the Holy Imam, seeking pardon for
his previous conduct. The Holy Imam received him with special grace. Hur
was among the foremost martyrs in the way of God.

28. Hallas bin Amro' ar Rasibi :

He was the son of Amru ar Rasibi who was one of the faithful companions
of Ameerul-Momineen Ali.

29. Hanzala bin As'adus-Shabami :

He was the one who carried the message of exhortation from the Holy
Imam to ibne Sa'd in Karbala.

30. Rafe' -the liberated slave of Muslim Azdi :

He came from Kufa and volunteered to be martyred in the way of the
Lord.

31. Zavir bin Amro al Kandi :

A sincere devotee of the Ahlu Bait and a devoted companion of the Holy
Imam. He was a noble personality very much revered and respected by the
people.

32. Zohair al Qaine Bijilly :

He was a noble chieftain of his tribe, a man of great influence in
Kufa. In the beginning he was attached to the Third Caliph Othman. Once
returning from Haj he met the Holy Imam and became a staunch devotee of
Husayn. He is the one who bade goodbye to his wife Dalham daughter of
Amru, liberating her with a divorce to go to her relatives, and he
joined the Holy Imam.

33. Ziad bin Areeb al Sa'idi :

Son of Areeb one of the faithful companions of the Holy Prophet. A very
pious and brave noble personality enjoying the trust and the confidence
of the people.

34. Salim the liberated slave of Amire Abdi :

A staunch devotee of Amirul-Momineen Ali, from Basra.

35. Salim the liberated slave of Bani Madinatul Kalbi :

Of the tribe Kalb one of the devotees of Amirul-Momineen Ali in Kufa.

36. Sa'd bin Hars and Abul hatoof bin Harse Ansari :

These twin brothers had come from Kufa employed in the forces of the
Devil to fight Husayn. Later they left the ranks of the Devil's forces
and joined the Holy Imam and got martyred.

37. Sa'd the liberated slave of Amirul-Momineen Ali :

After the martyrdom of Amirul-Momineen, he remained attached to Imam
Hassan and later after the martyrdom of Imam Hassan, he remained devoted
to Husayn.

38. Sa'd - the liberated slave of Amro bin Khalid :

He volunteered to be martyred for the Truth. A noble personality with a
high degree of fidelity and valance.

39. Sayeed bin Abdullah Hanafi :

A noble and very influential personality in Kufa uniquely brave. He was
the gentleman who carried Muslim's letter form Kufa to Husayn and
remained with the Holy Imam until he was martyred. He was the man who,
while the Holy Imam offered his prayers in the field of action (Karbala)
stood in front of the Holy Imam and received the arrows from the Devil's
forces, on his breast, and protecting the Imam in prayers.

40. Salman bin Mazarib bin Qais al Anmari al Bijilli :

A cousin of Zohair al Qain. He went to Mecca with Zohair and when on
his return form Mecca Zohair decided to join the Holy Imam, he
accompanied him and got martyred at Karbala. A man of very noble conduct
and character endowed with strong will and prowess. A very pious
personality fearing none but God.

41. Suleiman bin Razeen-A liberated slave of the Holy Imam :

A truthful and a very reliable gentlemen. A staunch devotee of the Holy
Imam. He carried Husayn's letters to the devotees of the Ahlul-Bait in
Basra. Ibne Ziad, the Devil's governor of Basra caught him and this
faithful servant of the Holy Imam became a martyr.

42. Sawar bin Manyim-e-Nahmi :

A highly respected noble veteran of Iraq, travelled all the way to
Karbala to join the Holy Imam to get martyred with him.

43. Suwaid bin Amro bin Abil Mataa al Anmari al Khash'mi :

A noble, highly respected, God-fearing and a brave personality. He
fought and fell seriously wounded, and was lying unconscious, the enemy
thinking him dead had left him but when he returned to consciousness and
heard the rejoicing of the Devil's forces shouting that the Holy Imam
had been killed, he got up, and fought, and was martyred.

44. Saif bin Hars al Jabiri and Malik :

These two cousins from Kufa joined the Holy Imam.

45. Saif bin Malid al Abdi a Basri :

A leading devotee of the Holy Ahlul-Bait.

46. Shabeeb a liberated slave of Hars-e-Jabiri-e-Hamadani :

A very brave man who got martyred in the very first attack from the
enemy.

47. Shaneb-e-Shakiri :

Well-known in Kufa for his nobility of character, courage, and a
revered noble veteran of the town.

48. Zarghaman abin Milik-e-Taghlabi :

A lion-hearted, brave who was faithful to Muslim bin Aqeel in Kufa.
After Muslim's martyrdom, he joined the Holy Imam.

49. Aaiz bin Majama'al Aazi :

One of those six, who along with Hur ibne Yazid-e-Riyahi had joined the
Holy Imam.

50. Aabis ibne Abi Shabeeb-e-Shakiri :

One of the most pious devotees of Amirul-Momineen, and one of the
noblemaen of Kufa. He was one of those who helped Muslim ibne Aqeel in
Kufa.

51. Amir bin Muslim at Badi Basri :

With his liberated slave Salim, both the devotees of Amirul-Momineen in
Basra, joined the Holy Imam.

52. Abbas Ibne Ali ibne Abi Taleb, Qamare Bani Hashim :

This is the great son of the First Holy Imam Ali ibne Abi Taleb, from
the noble lady Hazrat Ummul-Baeen, who was brought into this world to
fulfill the desire of Amirul-Momineen to have his own representative, on
his behalf to be martyred with Husayn in Karbala. Abbas is well-known to
the Muslim World for the unique divine qualities he was endowed with.

This great lion-hearted son of the Lion of God in his qualities and
position in Karbala, is next only to the Holy Imam Husayn.

The 'Alam' or the Banner which he held on behalf of the Holy Imam, was
the Standard of Islam or the Truth, which is hoisted by the Shias,
popularly during the mourning season of Muharram, and is revered as do
the faithful subjects of good Kings as a token of their loyalty to him.
The Banner being the Standard of Truth is only revered and respected and
never worshipped as wrongly imagined and depicted by some ignorant
ones.

Worship in Islam is due to none but the One, the Only True God.

53. Abdullah ibne Husayn, known as Ali-e-Asghar :

The 6-month old baby son of the Holy Imam, martyred in the very lap of
his father whose martyrdom no human heart can bear without shedding
tears.

54. Abdullah bin Hassan ibne Ali :

The son of the Second Holy Imam Hassan, a young boy who ran out of the
tent to save Husayn when he was being martyred, and was martyred before
the Holy Imam.

55. Abdullah bin Bushr Khash'ami tribe. A well known noble personality
in Kufa. He came out of Kufa with ibne Sa'd but joined the Holy Imam.

56. Abduallah bin Omair Kalbi :

He had come to Kufa from Madina, and joined the Holy Imam. His wife
also accompanied him to serve the Holy ladies. When Abdullah was
martyred, his wife sitting at the dead body of her husband said "O
Abdullah Thou hath entered Paradise, take me along with thee." The good
lady had not finished her lamentations when a slave of Shimar delivered
a blow on her head with an axe and she was martyred.

57. Abdul Rahman and Abdullah sons of Orawah bin Harraq al Ghaffari :

These two brothers were noblemen of Kufa. Their grandfather Harraq, was
one of the faithful companions of Ameerul-Momineen. They came to the
Holy Imam and joined the noble cause.

58. Abdullah bin Muslim bin Aqeel :

Son of Muslim bin Aqeel ibne Abi Taleb. His mother was Roqiah, daughter
of Ali through his wife Sahba, from Yamamah was martyred when he went to
save the Holy Imam.

59. Abdullah bin Yaqtar-e-Himyart :

He was the son of the good lady who had served the Holy Imam as his
nurse in his babyhood.

60. Abde Qais Basri-e-Abdi :

Along with Abdullah bin Zaid-e-Abdi. Obaidullah bin Zaide Abdi, Yazid
bin sabeet al Abdi. These great men well-known and highly respected ones
of their tribe came and requested the Imam to permit them to drink the
cup of martyrdom along with him.

61. Abdul A'la bin Yazeed al Kalbi al Aleemi :

The famous and respected nobleman from Kufa.

62. Abdul Rahman bin Abdul Rab-e-Ansar Khazrji :

One of the faithful companions of the Holy Prophet and a Traditionist
and a faithful devotee of Ameerul-Momineen.

63. Abdul Rahman bin Aqeel ibne Abi Taleb :

Son of Aqeel from his wife Omme Walad.

64. Abdul Rahman-e-Arhabi :

One of those who carried the letters of the devotees to the Holy
Imam.

65. Abdul Rahman bin Mas'ood at Taimi :

Came out of Kufa along with Ibne Sa'd but later joined the Holy Imam.

66. Othman bin Ali ibne Abi Taleb :

One of the brothers of Hazrate Abbas, the third son of Ommul Baneen.

Joined the Holy Imam on his way to Karbala.

67. Omar bin Janada-e-Ansari :

This is the son of the godly lady who came to the Holy Imam and
implored for his permission for her son Omar to be martyred and somehow
succeeded in getting it.

68. Ali -e-Akbar son of the Holy Imam :

The 18-year old son of the Holy Imam who resembled the Holy Prophet the
most, was martyred by a lance pierced through his breast.

69. Omer bin Zabi'ah Az Zabiyee :

Son of Zabiya at Taimi. Came out of Kufa with Ibne Sa'd but later
joined the Holy Imam and was martyred.

70. Amro bin Khalid-e- Saidavi and three others :

When these four person marched towards the camp of the Holy Imam, Hur
asked the Holy Imam for permission to stop them from getting near the
camp for they were coming from the enemy's ranks. The Holy Imam
miraculously said "Oh struck them not, they are coming to me with a good
hears. They are my devotees."

71. Amru bin Abdullah-e-Jundayi :

Of the tribe of Hamden.

72. Arm bin Quart al Ansari :

One of the faithful companions of the Holy Prophet and also of
Amirul-Momineen.

73. Amru bin Ha'b Abu Thamama al Sa'idi :

One of the faithful devotees and companions of Amirul-Momineen.

74. Amru bin Hassan Talee :

One of the staunch devotees of the Ahlul-Bait.

75. Ammara ibne Salama al Daaalani :

One of the companions of Amirul-Momineen.

76. Aun and Muhammad sons of Jafar-e-Tayyar :

Two sons of Hazrat Zainab the sister of the Holy Imam. Aun was her own
son and Muhammad was from the deceased wife (Khausa), of her husband
Abdullah bin Jaffar Tayyar. These two were only young boys of about nine
and ten years of age. The Holy Lady Zainab, the daughter of
Amirul-Momineen and Lady Fatimah, brought these two young boys and
implored her brother, the Holy Imam, to permit them to free the enemy.

At the persistent implorings from his sister the Holy Imam permitted,
and these two young souls were martyred before the very eyes of their
mother. This godly daughter of Ali and Fatima, the grand daughter of the
Holy Prophet, stood quietly at the dead bodies of her children and said
"I will not lament for you have gone in the way of the Lord." The whole
camp wept but Zainab stopped them from crying,

saying: "Let no my brother feel that I am sorry for losing them in the
way of the Lord. Today I am pleased with my children."

77. Qarib :

The son of a liberated slave girl of Husayn This lady, after having
been liberated by the holy Imam, was married to a gentlemen and brought
her son Qarib and presented him to the Holy Imam and Qarib was brought
up by the Holy Imam. He was martyred along with the other devotees,
offering himself in the way of the Lord.

78. Qasim bin Hassan bin Ali :

Son of the Second Holy Imam.

79. Qasim bin :

A well-known noble of Kufa.

80. Qasith, Kardoos, Musqit-Sons of Zohair al Taghlabi :

These three brothers were the devoted companions of Amirul Momineen who
were with him in all his expeditions against the infidels and traitors.
They came form Kufa and offered themselves for noble cause and achieve
martyrdom.

81. Qan'ab an Namri :

One of the devotees of Amirul-Momineen who came for Basra.

82. Qais bin Mushir as Saidavi :

A very pious personality from a group of the Asadi tribe,
extra-ordinarily brave, faithful and one of the sincere and faithful
companions of the Holy Prophet. He reported himself to the Holy Imam,
from Kufa, and was martyred.

83. Kannah at Taghlabi :

A very noble personality known for his piety in Kufa. A good reciter of
the Holy Qu'ran and a very brave, God fearing, influential and powerful
noble of Kufa.

84. Majma'ul Jahni :

Son of Zian bin Omar Jahni, one of the aged companions of the Holy
Imam. When people began deserting the Holy Imam on the night of Ashura,
this old devotee of the Holy Imam remained and achieved martyrdom.

85. Muslim bin Aqeel :

The Deputy of the Holy Imam to Kufa, where he was martyred.

86. Muslim Ibne Ausaja al Asadi :

One of the faithful companions of the Holy Prophet. An aged veteran who
had earned a glorious name and fame for his valor and prowess in the
expeditions against the infidels. On the night of Ashoora when the Holy
Imam told his companions to find their own ways and save themselves from
the wholescale massacre of his supporters which was in store for them
the following day, Muslim addressing the Holy Imam said: "O son of the
Holy Prophet! Where am I to go before myself getting martyred here"?

Muslim was one of the most prominent supporters of the Holy Imam in
Karbala, and was martyred there.

87. Muslim bin Katheer al A'waj al Azdi :

One of the devotees of Amirul-Momineen in Kufa.

88. Mas'ood bin Hajjaj Taimy and his son Abdur Rahman bin Mas'ood :

The devotees of Amirul-Momineen from Kufa. These two were known for
their piety and righteousness.

89. Muhammad bin Abdullah ibne Jafar :

A young son of Abdullah son of Hazrat Jafar-e-Tayyar, his mother was
Khausa, daughter of Hafsa bin Rabi'a.

90. Muhammad bin Muslim Aqeel :

One of the two young sons of Muslim bin Aqeel the Deputy of the Holy
Imam who was martyred in Kufa.

91. Muhammad bin Muslim bin Aqeel :

The grandson of Muslim bin Aqeel the Deputy of the Holy Imam to Kufa.

92. Munjeh--the liberated slave of the Second Holy Imam Hassan :

He accompanied Qasim bin Hasan from Medina.

93. Mauq' bin Thamamah Asadi Saidavi Abu Musa :

One of the devotees of the Ahlul Bait in Kufa who escaped from the town
at night and joined the Holy Imam at Karbala.

94. Nafe' bin Hilale Jamali :

A companion of Ameerul-Momineen. Reciter of the Holy Qu'ran and
Traditionalist. A noble personality known in Kufa for his piety, who
escaped from Kufa and joined the Holy Imam in Karbala. A great devotee
of Holy Imam who always remained by the side of Abbas the Standard
Bearer of Husayn. He could not bear the least disregard for the Holy
Imam, from anyone in the Devil's forces.

95. Nasr bin Naizar :

A liberated slave of Amirul-Momineen (The Leader of the faithful). He
was presented to the Holy Prophet by the King of Persia and the Holy
Prophet presented him to Amirul-Momineen, who freed him. He came to
Karbala.

96. Wazeh the Turk :

The Turkish liberated slave of Harse Madhaji. A pious gentlemen, a good
reciter of the Holy Qu'ran, who came to Karbala, and presented himself
to the Holy Imam.

97. Hani bin Orwah :

Martyred at Kufa with Muslim ibne Aqeel.

98. Yazid bin Ziad bin Mohasir-e-Kandi-Behdile Abush-Sha'sa :

One of the nobles in Kufa. A staunch devotee of Ahlul-Bait. A very
pious personality who joined Husayn from Kufa.

99. Yazid bin Maghfal Ja'fi :

A very pious devotee of Ameerul Momineen. A learned poet. His father
and grandfather were faithful companions of the Holy Prophet.
(s.a.w.a.s.).

100. Husayn ibne Ali, the King of Martyrs :

The divinely promised and prophesised Martyr of the Zibhe Azeem (The
Great Sacrifice) in the seed of Abraham through his son Ishmael, in the
lineage of Ishmael through Muhammad the Last Apostle of God, Ali the
Ameerul Momineen, the First of the Holy Imams and Lady Fatima, the Lady
of light.


