Imam Muhammad Baqir (as)
========================

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s) was born in the 58th year of the Hijra, on
the third day of the month of safar, in the city of Medina. His honoured
father is Imam Sajjad and his revered mother, Fatema, daughter of Imam
Hassan (a.s). Imam Sajjad (a.s), according to the command of Allah and
the decree of the prophet, appointed his son, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, to
Imamate and leadership of the people, and introduced him as such.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s), like the other Imams, in knowledge and
science had no equal. Great learned men benefited from his knowledge and
science and used to ask him to solve their problems.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s) instructed people in percepts of religion,
taught them the ethics of life, and used to strive very hard to educate,
culture and guide the people. During the course of his life, he taught
the people thousands of theological and religious principles, as well as
scientific subjects, and his teachings have been handled down to us. His
wisdom and learning was so much that he was called Baqir ul-ulum, which
means "the opener of sciences".

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s), lived in this world for a period of 57
years, and in the 114th year of the Hijra, on the seventh day of the
month of Zul-Hijjah, in Medina he left this world. His body was buried
in Baqi cemetry alongside the graves of Imam Hassan and Imam Sajjad
(a.s) in Medina.

**Imam Ali al-Hadi (as)**

Our tenth Imam is al-Imam Ali al-Hadi (a.s), who is also called al-Imam
Ali-al-Naqi. He was born to al-Imam Muhammad al-Jawad (a.s) on 15th Dhul
al Hijjah, in one of the villages around Medina. According to the Divine
decree and the command of the Prophet (s.a.w), al-Imam Muhammad al-Jawad
designated Ali al-Hadi (a.s) as his successor, the Imam and leader of
the people after himself.

Like his father, al-Imam Ali al-Hadi (a.s) attained the position of
Imamate at a very tender age, and in this position he guided and led the
people.

From his early childhood al-Imam al-Hadi (a.s) was a perfect model of
Islam. He was free of all faults and defects, and was adorned with all
good qualities and virtues. It was for this reason that the people
called him al- "Naqi" which means pure and holy, and al- "Hadi" which
means guide.

With great determination and effort al-Imam al-Hadi (a.s) worked hard
to guide the people, and he taught them the correct manner of living.
The people were extremely fond of him, and they benefited greatly from
his guidance, his knowledge and his awareness. Through him they found
the right path in life.

Al-Mutawwakkil, the bloodthirsty Abbasid tyrant, was envious towards
al-Imam al-Hadi (a.s) and fearful of the Imam's powerful influence. For
this reason he summoned the Imam from al-Madinah to Samarra, in present
day Iraq, and placed him under surveillance in an army camp.

Al-Imam al-Hadi (a.s) lived in this world for forty years. He was
always opposed to the oppression of the ruling Abbasids, and used to
condemn their tyranny and oppression. The result was that on 3rd Rajab,
254 A.H, he was martyred in Samarra through poison. His sacred body was
buried in Samarra. May eternal peace be upon him.

**Hazrat Muslim ibne Akeel (as)**

Imaam Hussain's caravan left Madina on 28th Rajab, 60 A.H. and reached
Mecca on the fourth of Shabaan. Imaam had not yet made up his mind on
where to go. For the time being he decided to stay in Mecca at least
until the month of Dhul-Hajj and perform the pilgrimage.

The people of Kufa in Iraq heard of what had happened in Madina. Kufa
was an important Shiah centre. The Shiahs there had long suffered under
Muawiya. They feared even greater sufferings under Yezid. They felt that
slowly Islam would be totally destroyed by the greed for power and glory
of these two men.

They were anxious to preserve the teachings of the Holy Prophet. They
needed an Imaam who would teach the tafseer of the Holy quraan and
relate to them the true sayings, ahaadees, of the Holy Prophet.They a
held a meeting in the house of Sulayman bin Surad and decided to write a
letter to Imaam Hussain inviting him. In this letter they wrote: "We
invite you to come to Kufa as we have no Imaam to guide us. Through you
Allah will unite us on the path of truth."

A messenger took the letter to Mecca and gave it to Imaam Hussain. A
few days later the people of Kufa sent an emissary, a special messenger,
to Imaam to persuade him to go to Kufa. His name was Qais ibne Musheer
as-Saydawi.

There followed hundreds of other letters and many special emissaries
from the people of Kufa to Imaam Hussain.The Governor in Kufa was a man
called Nu'amaan bin Basheer. Although he was a follower of Muawiya and
Yezid, he was not by nature a cruel man. The people of Kufa believed
that Imaam would be safe in Kufa.

When Imaam Hussain received so many petitions and messages from Kufa he
decided to send Hazrat Muslim as his emissary to Kufa to study the
situation there and report to Imaam. Imaam would go only if there would
be no danger to the people of Kufa or to Imaam or any of his companions
or family.

He wrote a letter to the people of Kufa and gave it to Hazrat Muslim.
In this letter Imaam said, "I am sending my cousin and one of the most
trusted ones from my family, Muslim ibne Aqeel, to report to me about
your affairs. If his report agrees with what you have writ\_ten I will
soon be with you. You must be clear of the fact that the Imaam is only
one who follows the book of Allah, and serves Allah in all matters and
affairs with justice, honesty and truth."

Who was Muslim ibne Aqeel? He was the son of Aqeel ibne Abu Taalib. He
was a famous warrior. He married Ruqayya binti Ali, Imaam's sister
through another mother. We know of his four children. Abdullah aged
about 15 years, Muhammad who was about ten years old, Ibraheem who was
eight and young Ruqayya who was just five or six. All these children had
travelled with their parents and were in Mecca.

As Hazrat Muslim was preparing for the journey, Imaam Hussain went to
him and said: "Muslim, the whole world knows that you are one of the
bravest warriors. It is just possible that seeing you in Kufa some
people may think that our intention is to fight Yezid. Take your two
sons Muhammad and Ibraheem with you. When they see you with such young
children, they will know that our intentions are peaceful.

Hazrat Muslim and his two sons said good-bye to all and left Mecca.
Their journey through the desert in the heat of summer was very
difficult.

They arrived in Kufa towards the end of Dhul Qaad. They were received
extremely well by the people of Kufa. Very soon more than eighteen
thousand people appeared before Hazrat Muslim and pledged their
allegiance to Imaam Hussain as their Imaam.

Hazrat Muslim reported to Imaam Hussain that most of the people in Kufa
were ready to receive him as their Imaam and advised that Imaam should
proceed to Kufa. Amongst the people of Kufa there were many spies
employed by Yezid to report to him direct. When Yezid heard from them of
the invitations to Imaam Hussain and the arrival in Kufa of Hazrat
Muslim he was filled with fury.

He sent a message to his Governor in Basrah, Ubaydullah ibne Ziyad, to
go to Kufa and take over the position of Nu'amaan ibne Basheer. Ibne
Ziyad was also told to arrest Muslim and kill him and do all that was
necessary to suppress the Shiahs in Kufa.

Ibne Ziyad was a cruel and unjust man. He arrived in Kufa on the
evening of 2nd Dhul Hajj. On the following day he went to the mosque and
addressed the people of Kufa. He first announced his appointment as
Yezid's governor. He then threatened any one who was engaged in any
activity against the government with immediate death, and ordered them
to surrender Hazrat Muslim to him.

Ibne Ziyad sealed Kufa in such a way that no one could go in or out of
the city without the governor's permission.

At this time Hazrat Muslim was staying with Al Mukhtar. At the
invitation of Hani bin Urwah, another leading member of the Shiah
community, he moved to Hani's house. This was done secretly and except
for a few people no one knew where Hazrat Muslim was. Through a spy who
pretended to be a Shiah, Ibne Ziyad found out where Hazrat Muslim was.
Hani was arrested and thrown into prison. Not wishing to endanger the
lives of his friends, Hazrat Muslim and his two sons left Hani's
house.

He left the children with Qadhi Shurayb, a judge, and went into the
desert to try and get back to Imaam Hussain to warn him not to go to
Kufa. This was the seventh of Dhul Hajj. That whole day and the
following day Hazrat Muslim tried to get out of the city. He found all
the exists sealed and guarded by Ibne Ziyad Soldiers.

On the eighth, late in the evening, tired, hungry and exhausted, Hazrat
Muslim knocked at the door of a house on the outskirts of the city. A
lady opened the door. Hazrat Muslim requested for a little water to
quench his thirst. The lady gave him water. When she learnt who he was,
she invited him in and offered him shelter for the night. This lady was
called Tau'aa. She gave Hazrat Muslim some food and water and took him
to a room where he might spend the night.

Late that night Tau'aa's son came home. When he learnt that the man
Ibne Ziyad was looking for was in his mother's house, he felt that he
would be rewarded by the governor if he got Hazrat Muslim arrested.
Unknown to his mother he slipped out in the darkness of the night and
gave the information to a captain in ibne Ziyad army.Early the next
morning, five hundred soldiers surrounded the house of Tau'aa and
demanded Hazrat Muslim's surrender. Hazrat Muslim came out holding his
sword. Three times he drove the enemy away. Twice Ibne Ziyad had to send
in reinforcements.

While Hazrat Muslim was fighting, some soldiers went up the rooftops
and began throwing stones and lighted torches at him. Others dug a
trench in the path of Hazrat Muslim and covered it with grass. Although
badly wounded and totally exhausted, Hazrat Muslim kept on fighting.
Then he fell into the trench. More than fifty soldiers pounced upon him
and chained him. He was dragged to the court of Ibne Ziyad.

Ibne Ziyad told Hazrat Muslim that he would be killed and asked him if
he had any last wishes. Hazrat Muslim said: "I owe a debt which should
be discharged by selling off my sword and armour. Secondly I want my
body to be given a proper burial. Thirdly I want a message sent to Imaam
Hussain advising him not to come to Kufa." Ibne Ziyad agreed to the
first request but refused to do anything about the second and third
requests. He then ordered Hazrat Muslim to be taken to the roof of the
palace to be executed and his body thrown to the ground.

Hazrat Muslim was calm and composed as he was dragged up the steps. He
was reciting "Allahu Akber" until the last moment. Then there was an
absolute silence followed by a thud as Hazrat Muslim's body fell to the
ground.

This was on 9th Dhul Hajj. Immediately after Hazrat Muslim was killed
Hani bin Urwah was dragged to the roof top and executed.

**Hazrat Muhmammad and Ibrahim (as)**

Hazrat Muslim had taken with him his two sons Muhammad and Ibraheem.
After Hazrat Muslim was killed, Muhammad and Ibraheem were also arrested
and put into a dungeon. It is said that Muhammad was just eight years
old and Ibraheem was ten years old.

On the 20th of Dhul-Hajj in 60 Hijrah, when the jailer came to give the
children their evening meal, he saw them saying their prayers. The
jailer waited. When the boys had finished their prayers, he asked them
who they were. When the jailer learnt that they were the sons of Muslim
Ibne Aqeel and the grandsons of Hazrat Ali, he let them escape.The
children came out of the prison.

It was a dark night. Their first thought was to go to Imaam Hussain and
warn him not to go to Kufa. Everywhere they went, they found the roads
blocked by Ibne Ziyad soldiers. It was impossible to get out of Kufa.
Now it was almost day-break. Where could these two young boys go?

They found themselves by the side of the river Euphrates. They drank
some water from the river and then went up a tree to hide for the day.
Just then a woman came to the river to get water. She saw the two young
boys and asked them who they were. Ibraheem said, "We are two orphans,
could you please leave us alone and not tell any one that you have seen
us?" The woman asked them to accompany her to her mistress who would
help them.

The woman's mistress was a kind lady. After talking to the boys for a
while she realized who they were. She gave them food and said to them,
"You can spend the day here and I will try to help you. Unfortunately my
husband Harith is working for Ibne Ziyad. He is out at the moment. You
can rest in the spare room but make no noise otherwise when he comes
back, he will find out you are here".

The children said their prayers and went to sleep. In the evening
Muhammad woke up and started crying. Ibraheem asked him why he was
crying. Muhammad said "I saw our father in a dream. He was calling out
for us". Ibraheem said, "Brother, be patient. I also saw our father in a
dream beckoning us to him". They both started weeping.

Harith, who had come back heard the children crying. He opened the door
and asked the children who they were. On learning they were the sons of
Muslim Ibne Aqeel, he tied both the boys to a pillar. Harith's wife
tried to stop him, but he beat her up. Harith wanted to collect the
reward which Ibne Ziyad had offered to anyone capturing the children.

The children spent the whole night tied to the pillar. In the morning
Harith dragged them to the river-bank. He took out his sword. Ibraheem
asked him, "Harith, are you going to kill us?". Harith said "Yes !".
Ibraheem said, "In that case give us time to finish our morning
prayers". The two boys said their prayers.

They raised their hands and cried out "Inna Lillaah wa Inna IIay-hi
Rajeeoon! O Allah we are coming to you. Give our mother courage when she
hears of our death and judge between us and our killers!!" The sword
came down! There were splashes in the water. Two young bodies were seen
floating away in the waters of the river Furaat.

**Imam Ali (as) - Our First Imam**

Born inside the Holy Kaaba in Mecca on Friday the 13th Rajab, 30
Amulfeel, 11th October 599 A.D. His father was Hazrat Abu Talib, his
mother was Bibi Fatema Binte Asad, his wife was Bibi Fatema Binte
Muhammad and he was the father of Imam Hassan (AS), Imam Hussein (AS),
Bibi Zaynab (AS) and Bibi Kulthum (AS).

At the age of twelve, Imam Ali (AS) was the only one who stood up and
declared his allegiance and full support for the Prophet Muhammad's
(SAW) mission. In return, the Prophet blessed Imam Ali (AS) and said,
From now on you are my helper, my Wazeer and the Khaliph after me on
Earth. History bears witness that all his life Imam Ali (AS) fulfilled
this pledge and supported the Prophet of Islam in his mission.

On the famous night of the migration of the Prophet (SAW) from Mecca to
Medina, when 40 swordsmen were preparing to murder the Holy Prophet
(SAW), Imam Ali (AS) occupied the Prophet's bed while the Prophet, on
instructions from Allah (SWT), escaped their evil intentions in the
darkness of the night.

In Medina Imam was always with the Prophet and his presence was felt at
every battle that was fought to defend Islam: Badr, Ohad, Khandaq,
Khayber, Honain were all fought and won under the command of Imam Ali
(AS).

He regarded it his duty as the Holy Imam to give advice on religion, to
whoever asked him. The famous historial Yaqubi puts Imam Ali's name on
the top of the list of jurists at the time of the first three Caliph's.
After the death of the third Caliph, Hazrat Uthman (RA) in 36 A.H,
people of Medina bespeeched him to accept the mantle of Caliphat, which
he reluctantly accepted saying that :

Had they not swom unconditional allegiance to me, had they not sworn
their gratefulness in my accepting their rulership and had Allah (SWT)
the Almighty not taken a promise from the guides of religion to put a
check on the luxurious and vicious lives of the oppressors and tyrants,
as well as to reduce poverty and starvation of the oppressed, I would
even now have left the rulership of the State and would have allowed it
to sink into anarchy and chaos as i did in the early days. The pomp and
glory of a vicious life is to me worth less than the sneeze of a goat.

**Bibi Khadija (as)**

Bibi Khadija's father was a merchant like most of the tribe of Quraysh
in Makka. He sent caravans to other cities to trade in the summer and
winter. Her mother and father both died within 10 years of each other.
Their wealth was divided amongst the children but it was bibi khadija
who took over the family business and expanded it. With the profit she
made she helped the poor, widows, orphans, sick and the disabled people
of Makka.

She had a cousin called Waraqa bin Naufal who was very learned man and
who was not an idol worshipper. Both Waraqa and Bibi Khadija believed in
one Allah.

Becauise of her excellent Akhlaq the Arabs (who at that time used to
look down upon women) called her Tahira - the pure one. She was also
known as the 'princess of Makka' because of her wealth. A lot of Arab
nobles and princess wanted to marry her but she refused all of them.

In 595 AD, Bibi Khadija was looking for someone to be in charge of her
caravan to Syria. Abu Talib suggested the Prophet to her. She had heard
of his trustworthiness and agreed to employ him although he did not have
much trading experience. To help him she sent her slave Maysara. The
trading caravan was a great success and when Bibi Khadija heard of the
Prophet's skills and excellent conduct, she became his admirer.

Soon it was arranged for Bibi Khadija to be married to the Prophet
(S.A.W). Abu Talib read the Nikah on behalf of the Prophet whilst Waqara
read it for Bibi Khadija. Abu Talib paid the mehr for his nephew and fed
the people of Makka for 3 days in celebration. Bibi Khadija too fed the
people. The marriage was a very happy one and their first child was a
son called Qasim. The second was Abdullah. Both died in infancy. Their
third and last child was Bibi Fatema Zahra (A.S).

When the Prophet used to go to meditate in the cave of Hira on Jabel An
Noor, it was Bibi Khadija herself who would climb up there to give him
his food and necesseries. Bibi Khadija was the first person to accept
Islam as taught by the Prophet (S.A.W).

In 616 AD, the Quraysh isolated the Bani Hashim (the family of the
Prophet) and they took refuge ina ravine called Shib e' Abu Talib. Bibi
Khadija was there too and it was her wealth (which she donated for
Islam) that sustained the Muslims at that time. The seige lasted for 3
years during which time they experienced hunger, thirst, and the cold
and heat of the desert.

In 619 AD, Bibi Khadija died. When she died nothing was left of her
wealth. Abu Talib died in this year too. The Prophet called the year
Aamul Huzn (the year of grief).


Imam Hassan Askari - A Brief Look at his Life
Name: Hassan.
Title: Al-Askery.
Kuniyya: Abu Muhammad.
Birth: 10th Rabi-ul Aakher 232 a.h. in Madina.
Mother: Bibi Sulail (or Hudaitha).
Father: Imam Ali un Naqi (a.s.)
Death: 8th Rabi-ul Awwal 260 a.h. in Saamarra
Buried: In Saamarra.

**Birth & Childhood**

When he was born his father said that it was an order from the prophet
s.a.w. that he should be named Hasan. It was so well known that the last
Imams father would be called Hasan that people had previously looked for
the 12th Imam amongst the sons of Imam Hasan Al-Mujtaba (a.s.)

His mother was Sulail (or Hudaitha) who was a slave of the 10th Imam
whom he had freed and subsequently married. The 10th Imam said of her
that she was one who was free from all vice and pollution and that she
was one of the righteous ones. After the 11th Imam's martyrdom he left
all the "orders" of Imamate with her (his mother).

Once when Imam Hasan Al-Askery (A.S.) was a young child he fell into a
well near their house. His father Imam Ali An-Naqi (A.S.) was praying
and didn't even notice the commotion around him of the ladies crying.
When he finished praying and asked what had happened, he was told. He
went towards the well. The water rose and all saw the 11th Imam sitting
peacefully on the water and playing.

Bahlool once saw the young Imam crying in the street where all the
other children were busy playing with their toys. He asked whether Imam
was crying because he had no toys to play with. Imam replied: "We have
not been created to play!"

Bahlool asked where he had learnt his from and the Imam said :

"Have you not read the Qur'an where it says - "Do you think we have
created you in vain and that you will not be returned to us". When
Bahlool heard this he asked Imam for some advice. Imam talked about
death, barzakh and qiyama and cried so much, he fainted. When he came
to, Bahlool asked him why he was so fearful as he was not even baligh
yet. Imam said:

"I have watched my mother light a fire; she uses the little twigs to
get the big pieces of wood to burn; I fear that on qiyama Allah too will
use little ones to light the big ones.

**Title: Al-Askery**

The 10th and 11th Imamayn were both called Al-Askery as they lived in
an area of Samarra called Askery.

Another reason that the 11th Imam was called Askery is said to be that
once Mutawakkil wanted to show the Imam the strength of his army of
90,000 men and so he asked his men to fill their sacks with sand and
pile all the sacks up. He then showed Imam this mountain of sacks. Imam
asked Mutawakkil, to look through his (Imam's) two fingers, where he saw
a an army of armed Angels. Imam told him that they were at his disposal
but he would not use them. (An army is called Askery).

**Life & Works**

Ahmed Bin Ishaq relates that when he heard of the death of the 10th
Imam he went to Samarra and asked for the whereabouts of the 11th Imam.
He was told that Imam had been imprisoned by Mo'taz Billah. After
bribing the guards he was able to visit Imam one night. He described the
prison as a tunnel under the Khalifa's home where there was no space to
stretch ones legs nor room to be able to stand. Ahmed says he cried when
he saw Imams condition. Food was only one glass of water and a piece of
dry bread a day.

He was imprisoned because all the rulers knew of the justice that was
promised to come with the coming of the 12th Imam and they wished to
prevent anyone being born of the 11th Imam. Whilst in prison he told his
companions to accumulate all the masails of Fiqh and he completed the
masails on the chapters that were found missing.

He introduced the institution of "Taqleed" advising people to follow
those who were learned, "Muttaqi", and just, as he was in prison and it
was extremely difficult for people to meet him. Khums was collected
through his representative and masails too asked to him, Abu-Ja'fer
Uthman bin Saeed, who was later to become the representative of the 12th
Imam.

There was once a severe drought in Samarra and a Christian priest came
who whenever he raised his hands caused rain to fall from the heavens.
The Muslims faith started wavering and the Khalifa Mo'taz Billah got
worried for if they left Islam he would have none to rule over.

He went to the 11th Imam saying that Imam's grandfathers religion was
in trouble. Imam asked him to call all the people outside Samarra with
the Christian priest. He asked the Christian priest to pray for rain.
When he raised his hands to pray it started to rain. Imam asked for
whatever was in this hands to be taken away and then asked him to pray
for rain again.

There was no rain this time. Imam showed that what the priest had in
this hand was the bone of a Prophet which whenever placed under the open
sky caused it to rain. Imam then prayed for rain and it rained. Mo'taz
could not re imprison Imam for some time for when the people saw the
miracle they all wanted to visit Imam and asked where they might find
him. Imam pointed to the Khalifa and asked them to ask him. Mo'taz told
them that Imam was staying at the house where the 10th Imam used to
reside.

Bibi Nargis was there and it was in that year that the 12th Imam was
born. Imam was allowed out of prison for 13 months after which he was
rearrested.

**Martyrdom**

In the six years of his Imamate several attempts were made on his life.
On the 1st of Rabi-ul Awwal 260 a.h. Mo'tamad arranged for Imam to be
poisoned in prison and then sent him home. Imam was in great pain and
difficulty for 8 days. On the 8th of Rabi-ul Awwal he asked his son, the
12th Imam, to bring him some water and then leave him. He died that day
and was given ghusl & kafan by his son, the 12th Imam.

**Burial**

The funeral prayers were led by the 12th Imam and it was then that a
lot of Shia's saw him for the first time. A large number of people
attended the funeral and he is buried in Samarra.

**Additional Notes**

The 11th Imam was once asked of the signs of a mo'min (believer).He
listed the following signs.

He is one prays 51 rakaats of salaa daily.
He prostates on Khake Shafaa.
He wears rings on his right hand.
He repeats the verses of Azhan & Ikama.
He recites "Bismillah" loudly in Salaa.
He prays his Fajr Salaa before the stars disappear and his Dhuhr
prayers before the sun starts to decline.
He recite Qunoot in Salaa.
He dyes his hair and beard.
He recites 5 takbirs in Salatul Mayyit.


