Women’s Inheritance in Islam
============================

In Islam, men and women have equivalent rights, including but not
limited to working, acquiring wealth, possession of property, and the
concept of inheritance. The Quran declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِّلرِّجَالِ نَصيِبٌ مِّمَّا تَرَكَ الْوَالِدَانِ وَ الأَقْرَبُونَ وَ
لِلنِّسَاء نَصِيبٌ مِّمَّا تَرَكَ الْوَالِدَانِ وَ الأَقْرَبُونَ
مِمَّا قَلَّ مِنْهُ أَوْ كَثُرَ نَصِيبًا مَّفْرُوضًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For men there is a share from what their parents and close relatives
leave, and for women there is a share from what their parents and close
relatives leave, be it little or considerable; a definite share.”***[^1]

This verse makes it clear that, like men, women inherit and have a
definite share. The verses regarding inheritance were revealed to the
Prophet (S) at a time that women in the world, and especially among the
benighted Arabs, were bereft of worth or status. In the Age of
Ignorance, men were ashamed when they heard that their newborn child was
a girl and many innocent baby girls were even buried alive.

The possessions of the deceased went to their sons or eldest son only,
and girls were deprived of inheritance altogether unless a father
determined an amount in his will or his sons took pity upon their female
siblings and gave them something. Thus, when the verse of inheritance
gave women a *definite* *share* in the legacy, some people were
astonished. Regarding the conditions revolving around this verse’s
revelation, Imam Fakhr Razi has written:

Ibn ‘Abbas gives account that Aus ibn Thabit Ansari died and left behind
his wife and three daughters. Two of his male cousins by the names of
Sawid and ‘Arafjah, who were his inheritors, came and took all his
possessions. Aus’ wife came to the Prophet (S) and told her story and
said, ‘Aus’ two inheritors left nothing for my daughters and I.’ The
Prophet (S) said, ‘Return home until I see what God instructs.’
Subsequent to this was the revelation of the aforementioned verse, which
shows that both men and women inherit.[^2]

Indeed, by legislating women’s inheritance in such times, Islam has
honored women and has considered their status as inheritors equal to
that of men. However, in Islamic law, the share of women’s inheritance
is half that of men’s. Allah, the Almighty, has stated in the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُوصِيكُمُ اللّهُ فِي أَوْلاَدِكُمْ لِلذَّكَرِ مِثْلُ حَظِّ
الأُنثَيَيْنِ فَإِن كُنَّ نِسَاء فَوْقَ اثْنَتَيْنِ فَلَهُنَّ ثُلُثَا
مَا تَرَكَ وَ إِن كَانَتْ وَاحِدَةً فَلَهَا النِّصْفُ وَ لأَبَوَيْهِ
لِكُلِّ وَاحِدٍ مِّنْهُمَا السُّدُسُ مِمَّا تَرَكَ إِن كَانَ لَهُ
وَلَدٌ فَإِن لَّمْ يَكُن لَّهُ وَلَدٌ وَ وَرِثَهُ أَبَوَاهُ فَلأُمِّهِ
الثُّلُثُ فَإِن كَانَ لَهُ إِخْوَةٌ فَلأُمِّهِ السُّدُسُ مِن بَعْدِ
وَصِيَّةٍ يُوصِي بِهَا أَوْ دَيْنٍ آبَآؤُكُمْ وَ أَبناؤُكُمْ لاَ
تَدْرُونَ أَيُّهُمْ أَقْرَبُ لَكُمْ نَفْعاً فَرِيضَةً مِّنَ اللّهِ
إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلِيما حَكِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah charges you in regard with your children: a son’s share is
equal to the share of two daughters; if the [children] are [only]
daughters and two or more, their share is two thirds of the legacy, and
if there is only one daughter, her share is half [of the legacy]; and
each of the parents inherit one-sixth of the legacy if the deceased had
children, and if the deceased had no children and the parents are the
only heirs, the mother inherits one-third; if the deceased had brothers,
the mother inherits one-sixth; [all this is] after executing the will
and settling the debts of the deceased. You do not know which of your
parents and children benefit you the most. This is Allah’s injunction;
surely Allah is All-knowing, All-wise.”*** [^3]

According to Islam, sons inherit twice that of daughters, brothers twice
that of sisters, and husbands inherit twice that of wives, except
regarding the father and mother of the deceased: if they are living at
the time of their child’s death, each equally receives one sixth of the
deceased’s legacy.

Criticism
---------

The law of inheritance has been thus faulted: Why have women been
discriminated against, with allotment of half the share of men? Is this
not prejudice and oppression?

### Response

The difference in the inheritance shares of women and men must not be
considered dissociate from other laws and commandments and discussed and
judged independently. It is true that, regarding inheritance, Islam has
differentiated between men and women. However, this differentiation is
due to realistic perception and the financial obligations that men bear.
In Islam, men have to bestow *Mihr* upon their wives. All the expenses
of a wife and children must be paid for by men. Thus, men must work
diligently to provide all living expenses whereas women are not required
to work and pay for such living expenses.

If a woman has wealth, she is not required to spend it for her family;
she may save it if she desires. All possessions that she gains through
work, *Mihr*, gifts, inheritance, or any other legitimate method are
solely hers and she can amass it all if she wishes. This is in contrast
to men, who are legally and canonically required, in addition to
bestowing *Mihr*, to provide all living expenses of their spouses and
all other members of the family.

Thus, women are partners in all the possessions of their husbands,
including their husband’s inheritances, which are indirectly given to
them; while a woman’s inheritance is absolutely and unquestionably hers
only. Because of this, Islam intended to assist men by formulating the
laws of inheritance in this manner.

With regard to this fact, can one still say that Islam discriminates
against women in regard to inheritance?

If you fairly examine the matter, you will affirm that not only have
women not been treated in a biased manner, they have been supported.
Various Hadith indicate this reason. Imam Ridha (‘a) has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الرضا (ع) قال: علّة إعطاء النساء نصف ما يُعطي الرجالَ من المیراث؛
لأنّ المرأة إذا تزوّجت أخذت و الرجل یُعطی؛ فلذلک وفّر علی الرجال. و
علّة أخری في إعطاء الذکر مثلي ما تُعطی الأنثی فی عیال الذکر إن احتاجت،
و علیه أن یعولها، و علیه نفقتها، و لیس علی المرأة أن تعول الرجل، و
لاتؤخذ بنفقته إن احتاج فوفّر علی الرجل لذلک و ذلک قول الله: الرِّجالُ
قَوّامُونَ عَلَی النِّساءِ بما فَضَّلَ اللهُ بَعضَهُم عَلی بَعضٍ و
بِما أَنفَقُوا مِن أَموالِهِم....»
  </p>
</blockquote>

The reason that women receive half the share of men from inheritance is
that when a woman marries, she takes and the man gives; for this reason,
men have a larger share. Another reason is that a wife is the dependant
of her husband and he must pay for her expenses, but a wife is not
required to pay her husband’s expenses or financially support him in
need. Hence, men have a larger share and this is [the interpretation of]
the declaration of Allah: ***Men are the*** ***protectors and
supervisors of women because of the advantage Allah has given some over
others and because they support them from their means***[^4]

Hisham ibn Salim narrates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هشام بن سالم، قال: إنَّ أبي العوجاء قال للأحول: ما بال المرأة الضعیفة
لها سهم واحد و للرجل القوي المؤسر سهمان؟ قال: فذکرت ذلک لأبي عبدالله
(ع). فقال: «إنَّ المرأة لیس علیها عاقلة، و لا نفقة، و لا جهاد-و عدّد
أشیاء غیر هذا- و هذا علی الرجال؛ فلذلک جُعل له سهمان و لها سهم.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Abil‘uja’ said to Ahwal, ‘Why should a weak woman get one share
while a wealthy man gets two shares?’ He answered, ‘I asked this same
question of Imam Sadiq (‘a), he answered: *‘Aqilah* (blood price)[^5],
*nafaqah*, and Jihad—and some other things—are not obligatory for women,
they are for men; thus, two shares have been designated for men and one
for women.’[^6]

[^1]: - Surah Nisa’ 4:7.

[^2]: - Tafsir-e Kabir, vol. 9, p. 194.

[^3]: - Surah Nisa’ 4:11.

[^4]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 104, p. 326; Surah Nisa’ 4:34.

[^5]: - This is the blood price that must be paid by the family of
unaccountable individuals, such as minors or mentally incapacitated
persons, due to injuries or fatalities that are caused by such people.
[trans.]

[^6]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 104, p. 327.


