Islam and Polygamy
==================

Islam allows polygamy and permits men, under specific circumstances, to
have at most four wives at any given time.

Polygamy was customary before Islam and was not abrogated with the
coming of Islam; instead, Islam has corrected and set various conditions
for the practice. The principle was permitted, but polygamy was limited
to four wives.

In authorizing polygamy, Islam does not have the intention of siding
with men and encouraging them to form harems or overindulge in sexual
desires and debauchery or to overlook the rights of women and oppress
them. Rather, Islam’s aim is to uphold a range of women’s natural
rights—the right to marriage, forming a family, and having and rearing
legitimate children. Of course, the rights of men have also been kept in
mind. The permitting of polygamy, while observing prescribed conditions,
is a social necessity and in the ultimate interests of both women and
men and in order to elucidate this matter, the following two premises
are indicated.

**First premise:** Even though female births are not more than that of
males, statistics show that the number of women who are available for
marriage is often more than men. There are two reasons for this:

First, the fatalities of men, especially young men, exceed fatalities of
girls and women. This becomes evident by referring to the casualties of
incidents such as war, falling from heights, getting buried under
debris, drowning, mine and industry mortalities, car accidents, work
related accidents, etc. Because of these accidents, which are not few,
the equilibrium between men and women is lost and the ratio of women to
men increases. This is evident in the human casualties of recent wars,
such as the wars of Iraq and Iran, America and Iraq, Russia and
Afghanistan and their internal wars, Serbia and Bosnia, and other wars
and acts of aggression that occur all over the globe. The human death
toll in these battles is monstrously high and the majority of deaths
concerns men and youths that either had not married or had married
recently before their demise. Now consider the increase of women over
men as a result of these wars.

Second, some scientists hold that women’s resistance to diseases is
higher than that of men. Studies of the deaths of children, adolescents,
and young adults affirm this theory. The average lifespan of women is
longer than men. Statistics show a higher rate of widowed women than
widower men.

Thus, the number of single women who want and need to marry is higher
than the number of single men who need and desire marriage. We all have
seen many widowed women who wish to remarry a desirable man but cannot
due to the circumstances. On the other hand, there are not many
unmarried men who wish to marry that cannot find a woman willing to
marry.

**Second premise:** One of the natural rights of all human beings is the
right to marriage and formation of a family; just as humans have the
right to have jobs, homes, health and hygiene, food, and clothes, they
also have the right to marriage. All humans, both males and females,
have the right to marry, enjoy familial peace and love, develop lasting
emotional attachments, and bring forth and raise legitimate children. As
human beings, women have this right. Thus, social laws must be regulated
in such a manner that this natural right is readily available to all.

In short, in every society there are a large number of unmarried women
who need and desire to marry and if they do not, they may be driven to
deviation and corruption. The number of single men who are willing to
marry widows is not high enough to appease the requirements of every
society, due to the fact that young men usually prefer to marry
previously unmarried women, who are already more than enough to satisfy
their numbers. On this account, what must widows who wish to remarry do?
In this case, the society must either accede to sexual freedom,
corruption, and unrestraint, such as has been accepted in the West or,
as in Islam, must follow a polygamous system.

In order to resolve this problem to the advantage of widowed women, who
wish to marry and perhaps start a family, and prevent social corruption
and sexual deviations, Islam has allowed polygamy.

Another justification for polygamy is sterility or incapacity of a man’s
spouse. In the event that a woman is completely sterile or pregnancy is
harmful to her due to an incurable illness, and her husband feels the
need for a child, both reason and conscience give assent to his right to
remarry.

Additionally, if one’s wife is ill and cannot satiate the sexual needs
of her husband, remarrying becomes a necessity for the man. In order to
resolve this problem, the man either has to divorce his first wife or
marry again without divorcing her. The second option is to the advantage
of the first wife because she does not become destitute and alone in her
illness.

Nevertheless, it must be stressed that in light of the fact that the
most important benefit of marriage is familial love, tranquility, and
affection, monogamy is far preferable to polygamy. Moreover, Islam does
not encourage men to remarry to appease their concupiscence and to
sacrifice familial love and peace for evanescent pleasure. The reason
that Islam acquiesces to polygamy is due to a social necessity and in
order to protect the rights of widowed women and women who need to
marry.

Conditions of time, place, societies, and personal resources and
facilities differ regarding this issue. If there is no personal or
social necessity for polygamy, monogamy is preferable and if polygamy is
required in a society or for some persons, women and men must cooperate
in attaining this goal. A man who intends to remarry for one of these
reasons must adhere to his financial and physical means and in the event
that he does not have the means to manage two households, he must forego
remarriage. Then, if he has the means, he must discuss the issue with
his wife and prove to her the necessity for remarriage, assure her that
he will observe justice and equality among his wives, and obtain her
consent in any fair manner possible.

The duty of such a wife is self-sacrifice in order to ensure personal
and social necessities; she must set aside harsh emotions, mind the
predicament and needs of her husband or widowed women, and above all
else, she must think of God’s satisfaction and thus, allow her husband,
his legitimate request.

If remarriage results through mutual consent of husband and wife, it
will be far less problematic for everyone involved.

Conditions for Polygamy
-----------------------

Islam tolerates polygamy; however, it has placed various conditions for
it that, in practice, are very difficult to observe. These are as
follows:

1. Possession of sufficient financial resources to provide all expenses
of each family

2. Physical prowess for completely satisfying the sexual desires of each
wife

3. Observance of complete justice and equality among each family in
every way without any favoritism

Allah, the Almighty has declared in the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...فَانكِحُواْ مَا طَابَ لَكُم مِّنَ النِّسَاء مَثْنَى وَثُلاَثَ
وَرُبَاعَ فَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ أَلاَّ تَعْدِلُواْ فَوَاحِدَةً...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…then marry [other] women, who seem virtuous to you, two or three or
four; and if you fear that you cannot do them justice, then one
[only]…”***[^1]

This verse gives permission for polygamy on the condition that there is
no likelihood of refraining to observe fairness and justice, which is
rather unfeasible and very hard to attain.

A man who has more than one wife is obligated to observe equality,
justice, and fairness among his wives in the amount, type, and quality
of *nafaqah*, sexual enjoyment and intercourse, and even in mannerism.
It is the duty of polygamous men to behave comparably in all events,
even if their wives are different in age, beauty, character, social
status, and other virtues and perfections.

It is clear that completely adhering to justice and fairness is quite
challenging and few men can be sure about their ability to shoulder such
heavy responsibilities whereas the Quran makes it quite clear that if
they doubt their ability to behave equally and justly with their wives,
they should suffice themselves with one wife.

Consequently, polygamy in Islam is a very onerous and high-liability
undertaking, something that most men are not competent enough to
accomplish.

[^1]: - Surah Nisa’ 4:3.


