Divorce in Islam
================

Islam tolerates divorce and separation of a husband and wife under
specific conditions; however, Islam regards divorce as abhorrent and
reprehensible. Thus, it has been censured in Hadith. Imam Sadiq (‘a) has
declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: «إنَّ الله عزّ و جلّ یحبّ البیت الذی فیه
العرس، و یبغض البیت الذی فیه الطلاق، و ما من شیء أبغض من الطلاق.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, Allah loves a house in which a wedding is held and hates a house
in which a divorce is conducted and there is nothing more hateful than
divorce.[^1]

Noble Sadiq (‘a) has elsewhere announced:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: «ما من شیءٍ اُحلّه الله أبغض إلیه من الطلاق، و
إنّ الله یبغض المطلاق الذّواق.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Among that which Allah has made permissible there is nothing He hates
more than divorce and Allah hates a man who divorces and marries many
women.[^2]

He has also stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: «بلغ النبی (ص) أنّ أبا أیّوب یرید أن یطلّق
امرأته فقال رسول الله: إنّ طلاق امّ أیّوب لحوب، أی إثم.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

When the Prophet of Allah heard that Abu Ayyub (Ayyub’s father) intended
to divorce his wife, he declared: The divorce of Umm Ayyub (Ayyub’s
mother) is a sin.[^3]

Imam Muhammad Baqir (‘a) cited from the Prophet of Allah (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی جعفر (ع) قال: قال رسول الله (ص): «أوصانی جبرئیل علیه السلام
بالمرأة حتی ظننت أنّه لا ينبغي طلاقها إلّا من فاحشة مبیّنة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Gabriel (‘a) commended wives to such an extent that I presumed divorce
is not permissible unless a wife performs an‌ explicit act of
unfaithfulness and infidelity.[^4]

Noble Sadiq (‘a) had stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الصادق (ع) قال: «تزوّجوا و لا تطلّقوا؛ فإنّ الطلاق یهتزّ منه
العرش.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Marry and do not divorce because surely divorce shakes the very Throne
of God [*‘Arsh*].[^5]

The Prophet of Allah (S) has proclaimed:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص): «ما أحبّ الله مباحاً کالنکاح، و ما أبغض الله مباحاً
کالطلاق.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah loves no permissible like marriage, and Allah hates no permissible
like divorce.[^6]

Islam holds divorce as an extremely ugly and vile act, which must be
avoided within the bounds of possibility as it even rocks the very
Throne of God. Even though it has not been forbidden, for various
reasons, it is severely condemned. In order to prevent divorce, Islam
campaigns against its causes, some of which are enumerated below:

One influential factor for divorce is the disheartenment of a husband
for his legitimate wife and his fondness and affection towards
non-*mahram* women. The chief instrument for this is lack of adequate
*Hijab* among women and leering in men. When a man looks upon a woman
who is more beautiful and attractive than his own wife he may become
infatuated with her and become disheartened with his wife. Little by
little he makes familial life bitter by finding faults, seeking excuses,
and picking quarrels, which might ultimately lead to divorce.

In order to keep this from happening, on the one hand, Islam enjoins
women to observe *Hijab*, cover their attractions from men, and refrain
from being alluring for anyone but their own husbands. On the other
hand, Islam directs men to abstain from looking at, and joking and
bantering with non-*mahram* women. If their eyes happen upon a
non-*mahram* woman, they must not linger and immediately look away.

Another agent for divorce is indifference of spouses towards one other
and apathy and lack of passion in fulfillment of the sexual needs of one
another. Many divorces and deviations occur when a husband or wife is
not sufficiently sexually gratified.

To prevent this, Islam instructs women to wear their best clothes when
at home, make themselves up according to their husbands’ wishes, and
display themselves with ardent fervor. Moreover, Islam charges men to
observe cleanliness and personal hygiene, style themselves, and show a
handsome and warm demeanor for their wives.

Furthermore, Islam advises both women and men that when making love and
performing sexual acts, they must not only think of their own pleasure
and release but seek to give pleasure and gratification to their partner
also.

A third catalyst for divorce is misconduct, discourteousness, carping,
picking quarrels, and stubbornness in a husband, wife, or both.
Statistics show that the prime reason for most divorces is behavior
incompatibility of spouses.

Islam strives to pre-empt these factors and strengthen the cornerstones
of the holy institution of family by prescribing various rights and
responsibilities for men and women. In addition, it advises against
selfishness, egocentricity, autocracy, and recalcitrance, and advocates
tolerance, forgiveness, and resolving differences with reason, fairness
and affection.

The moral obligations of both women and men have been explicated in
detail in various books on ethics, but some of these have been indicated
in chapter five.

Islam has also anticipated the need for a team of arbitrators to resolve
the disputes of spouses and preclude divorce. This team consists of two
mediators; one chosen by the wife’s family, and one by the husband’s.
They may be of the couple’s family or unrelated. The Quran states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِنْ خِفْتُمْ شِقَاقَ بَيْنِهِمَا فَابْعَثُواْ حَكَمًا مِّنْ
أَهْلِهِ وَ حَكَمًا مِّنْ أَهْلِهَا إِن يُرِيدَا إِصْلاَحًا يُوَفِّقِ
اللّهُ بَيْنَهُمَا إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا خَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if you fear a breach between the two, then choose an arbitrator
from his people and an arbitrator from her people. If they both desire
reconciliation, Allah shall effectuate concord among them. Surely, Allah
is All-knowing, All-aware.”***[^7]

In order to bring about reconciliation, the team of arbitrators arranges
a meeting with the wife and husband. They unearth the problem, hear out
both sides with punctiliousness and fairness and advise, in friendship
and love, each person regarding their mistakes and shortcomings. They
remind each of the spouses of their responsibilities. Then they enjoin
the couple to forgiveness, tolerance, observance of marital duties, and
determination to fortify the holy institution of their marriage and
family. They also warn them of the detrimental effects of discord and
separation. In this manner, they restore harmony among the pair.

However, it must be expressed that the reconciliation brought about by
Islamic arbitrators is different from the settlement that results from
the force of law. Judicial settlement is like the placating of two
partners or neighbors or two persons who are hostile towards one another
by obstructing them from encroaching upon each other’s rights, whereas
the reconciliation brought about by the team of arbitrators has nothing
to do with judicial constraint; rather, it results from rectifying
rancor, uprooting the source of the disputes, endeavoring to create
mutual understanding, consolidating familial love, heartening the couple
regarding their life together, and normalizing the relations between
them.

The merits of this method over the modern judicial method are obviously
far superior. If, however, after careful scrutiny and necessary action,
the arbitrators realize that the conflicts are excessively deep-seated
and that the flames of marital love and affection have been completely
quenched and there is no hope for concord after encouraging forgiveness
and forbearance, they may leave the couple to their own devices or they
advise them to seek a divorce.

Another instrument that may prevent divorce or at least forestall it is
the payment of *Mihr*. A man who has paid his wife’s *Mihr*, does not
have the right to take it back, and if he has not, he must pay it
completely before divorce. The Holy Quran states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِنْ أَرَدتُّمُ اسْتِبْدَالَ زَوْجٍ مَّكَانَ زَوْجٍ وَ آتَيْتُمْ
إِحْدَاهُنَّ قِنطَارًا فَلاَ تَأْخُذُواْ مِنْهُ شَيْئًا
أَتَأْخُذُونَهُ بُهْتَاناً وَ إِثْماً مُّبِيناً\* وَ كَيْفَ
تَأْخُذُونَهُ وَ قَدْ أَفْضَى بَعْضُكُمْ إِلَى بَعْضٍ وَ أَخَذْنَ
مِنكُم مِّيثَاقًا غَلِيظًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if you desire to take a wife instead of a [current] wife and
have given her much wealth, do not take back any part of it; would you
take it back with slander and blatant sin. And how shall you take it
while you have taken pleasure of each other and after they have taken
from you a strong pledge (at the time of marriage)”***[^8]

*Mihr* is the canonical and lawful right of women and they can collect
it in any way possible. If the husband has not given it, he must pay it
before the divorce. If it is a large enough amount, it can to some
extent impede divorce, especially for people who are not financially
well-off.

Another factor is keeping and fostering children and providing for their
expenses, which are both the duty of men. In the event that the couple’s
conjugal relationship is normal and the husband and wife live together,
women mostly handle the responsibility of fostering children. This gives
men a better opportunity to work and provide family expenses.

However, if they are separated by divorce, the husband must take custody
of their children and rear them (in addition to providing their
expenses) and jointly accomplishing these two endeavors is very
difficult. Additionally, children need motherly affection and this is a
need that a man cannot deliver himself. This is why if a father
contemplates the matter well and examines the consequences and
difficulties of such an action, he usually is discouraged from getting a
divorce.

Consequently, the existence of children and the responsibility of
fostering them may be considered a support for the persistence and
consolidation of the family institution and an obstruction for divorce.

Another factor is the necessity for two righteous witnesses. Islam
necessitates the presence of two righteous witnesses when the formula of
divorce is recited because it must be recited correctly, which is not
achievable by just anyone. Also, the two righteous witnesses must be
present when the formula is recited so they may bear witness to the
recitation if necessary in the future.

Because a reciter of the divorce formula and two righteous witnesses are
not easily available and require time to find, men are impeded from a
hasty divorce.

In the meantime, it is possible that the husband sees reason and
attenuates his resentments and stubbornness, thinks well about the
downsides of divorce and its future complications, and thus changes his
mind. Well-wishing friends and advisers can help in this matter. Even
after all the necessary conditions are accumulated, the reciter of the
divorce formula and the witnesses do not carry out the divorce
immediately. They endeavor to resolve differences and make peace among
the couple and delay the divorce as long as they deem necessary to give
the man and woman more time to think about their future and change their
minds. Because Islam is opposed to divorce, it attempts to prevent it in
any manner possible.

Finally, after all the conditions of divorce are fulfilled and the
process completed, Islam does not consider the marriage terminated; it
has determined a duration called *‘iddah*[^9] in which after a revocable
divorce a man may return to his previous marriage by mutual consent
without having to recite the formula of marriage and determine *Mihr*
anew.

Islam favors the continuance of marriage to such degree that even after
the divorce it gives the couple an opportunity, for the duration of
*‘iddah*, to contemplate well and return to one’s spouse if they both
consent.

The Philosophy of Divorce
-------------------------

Some might criticize the principle of divorce thus: If divorce is truly
hated by Islam, as has been previously stated, why has it not prohibited
it? Essentially, how is the union of legitimacy and detestability
possible? Why has Islam permitted divorce and what is its philosophy?

In answer it must be said: Even though divorce is hateful and ugly,
sometimes it is a necessity that cannot be avoided. For instance,
surgical removal of parts of the body is painful and abhorrent but it is
crucial in certain conditions and is to the benefit of humans; such as
when a person has cancer. If enduring the marriage is torturous and
unendurable for the husband and wife and the problem cannot be solved in
any other way, divorce may be the best solution.

For example, one of these instances is where the fires of a husband’s
love and affection for his spouse are completely extinguished. Here, the
woman has fallen from her beloved status of attractiveness and the
foundations of the family are in ruins. A home that does not have love
is cold, dark, and sinister; not only has it lost its tranquility in the
eyes of the wife and husband, it is a forbidding prison and fiery hell.

Matrimony is a natural union of a man and woman. It is completely
different from all other social contracts such as transactions, leases,
mortgages, and peace treaties. They are wholly social and contractual
with no instincts and nature involved whereas marriage is a natural
union that has its roots in the essence and instincts of couples and
stems from natural needs and desires. Marriage results from the inner
attraction of a man and woman and their desire for unification, linkage,
and unanimity.

This attraction has been instilled differently in each gender. For men
it manifests as love and affection, desire and possession of the female
individual. For women it exhibits as self-beautification, allure, and
captivation of a man’s heart. Men want to possess their beloved and
women want to be their husbands’ beloved and attain their hearts.

The foundations of family are grounded on these two principles and if
each part of a couple achieves their inner desires the institution of
family becomes warm, pleasant, and beautiful. Men are heartened by their
family and work hard to secure the ease and welfare of the family. Women
consider themselves happy and successful and endeavor diligently in
taking good care of their husbands, children, and home.

One the other hand, if a husband does not have affection towards his
legitimate wife (or vice versa) and despises seeing and associating with
her, and if the wife feels that she has fallen from her status of
beloved and that her husband does not like her, the family has lost two
of its key pillars and is considered dilapidated and ruined. Living in
such a cold and broken family is exacting and painful for both women and
men and its continuance in not to either’s advantage. In such a state of
affairs, even though Islam despises divorce, it is regarded as the best
solution and thus allows it. Hence, the legitimization of divorce is for
such cases.

Another item is lack of behavioral compatibility: when a man and woman
have incongruent morals and attitudes or unlike beliefs. They might both
be selfish, spiteful, inflexible, and fight continually; they may not
listen to reason or advice or refuse to adjust and rectify themselves.
Living in such a family is grueling and agonizing and maintaining it is
neither to the woman’s advantage nor the man’s. In such instances
divorce seems to be the best solution and thus Islam authorizes it.

As one can see, there are some cases in which divorce is a social
necessity and the best solution; hence, it cannot be prohibited.

One might say: Even if we accept the necessity of divorce in some cases,
why then is the law regarding divorce so general? It gives any
capricious man permission to divorce, with the merest of excuses,
expelling his unfortunate wife, who has expended her youth, energy,
health, and spirit in her disloyal husband’s house from her cherished
home and taking another wife soon after. Is not allowance of such
divorces oppression towards women?

In reply it is said: Islam is also exceedingly opposed to capriciousness
and inhumane divorces. It campaigns extensively against its causes, has
determined conditions and rules for divorce, and has set obstructions
that can to a great extent prevent divorce.

If, however, for any reason a wife falls from her cherished status and
becomes hated by her husband, what must be done? The wife knows that she
is not her husband’s sweetheart and the mistress of the house, and that
her husband dislikes her. This painful occurrence causes the greatest
humiliation and anguish for a woman. Is it right to forcefully keep such
a woman in wedlock with laws and prevent her from divorce?

A woman can be kept in wedlock with the force of law and the man forced
to pay her *nafaqah*; however, no laws can create love, which is the
backbone of marital life, between the couple. Even though Islam loathes
divorce, it seems to be the best solution to some problems.

It might be asked: If divorce is necessary and the best answer to some
problems, why is it specific to men, and why do women not have sanction
to divorce? These feelings may also originate in women. A woman may lose
her love for her husband and abhor continuing their conjugal
relationship. In such a situation it can be said: Because there is no
love, in essence, their familial life has ended and the wife must have
the right to divorce her husband and proclaim the termination of their
marriage.

In answer, it is said: A wife’s disinterestedness cannot be considered
the end of marital life; rather, it is a sign of her husband’s
shortcomings and faults or his negligence regarding performing his
nuptial duties and caring for his wife. The key to a woman’s love and
affection is in her husband’s hands. If a man truly loves his spouse and
desires her plentifully, performs his duties regarding his wife, and
rectifies his behaviors, usually the wife gains high spirits, hope, and
love for her husband and endeavors to retain her husband’s heart
indefinitely.

Thus, if a woman is unenthusiastic toward her life and husband, it is
the fault of her husband. In such a situation, divorce is not necessary;
the husband must be informed of his duties and the delicate and subtle
art of caring for a wife, so that he reconsiders his ways, speech, and
manners, and strives to gain his wife’s heart in any method possible and
give her hope for a better future.

It may be asked: What must a wife do if her husband beats her, does not
provide her *nafaqah*, makes life hard on her, does not correctly
perform his sexual duties, torments and harasses her, curses and swears
at her, and even refrains from divorcing her? Do you tell her to have
patience and “grin and bear it” until her death arrives? Why have women
not been given the right to divorce in such cases, so that they may be
freed of their torturous prison?

In answer it is said: Islam is based upon justice, fairness, and human
rights; thus it never allows or approves of such indecent and oppressive
behavior. Islam greatly opposes such mannerisms and defends the rights
of women.

In such cases, a woman must approach the team of arbitrators and ask
them to advise and council her husband and induce him to observe justice
and fairness, and to perform his duties. If they are successful, she
continues her life with him and if he does not see the light and amend
his ways, she must advance her complaint to a canonical Islamic judge or
family court.

The judge summons the offending husband and demands that he refrain from
oppression and abuse and that he perform his duties. If he does not
accept, he is obligated to divorce her. If he refuses to do so, the
judge himself divorces them and forcefully takes the wife’s rights from
her husband.

[^1]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 22, p. 7.

[^2]: - Ibid, p. 8.

[^3]: - Ibid, p. 8.

[^4]: - Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 248.

[^5]: - Ibid, p. 225.

[^6]: - Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 15, p. 280.

[^7]: - Surah Nisa’, 4:35.

[^8]: - Surah Nisa’, 4:20-21.

[^9]: - The ‘iddah of a revocable divorce is the duration of three
menstrual cycles of a woman after divorce.


