Introduction
============

Divine decree requires that life continue within all echelons of
creatures and animals. This was not feasible with a single sex, rather,
pairs were necessary. The two genders were essential for the propagation
of the human species. Meaning that some must be ‘male’ and others
‘female’. Thus, women and men were created in conformance with the noble
designs of creation with similar human and natural characteristics, but
plainly different physical, emotional, and spiritual traits, and
accordingly with particular rights and duties.

Islam views both men and women from the perspective of their humanity
and regards both as noble and superior beings for whose creation God
Almighty has praised Himself. According to the exigencies of human
creation and for the continuance of human existence, He has put various
responsibilities upon us. However, these differing obligations and the
varying rights based upon them have produced some ambiguities for us;
such that the minds of some perceive a number of these laws as
prejudiced and regard others opposed to freedom.

In the previous section I have replied to these controversies and have
discussed freedom, *Hijab*, marriage and divorce, inheritance, *Mahr*,
*nafaqah*, and other topics from various aspects. However, in this
section I shall employ a different method. Specifically, using questions
that were asked of me, I shall directly address the questions of my
readers and answer some of their questions regarding the status and
standing of women, their social, political, and cultural activities,
housewifery, art, freedom, lifestyle, natural and acquired rights, and
other issues in the hopes that they will be beneficial.

• *Why are most of your works oriented around the character and status
of women?*

**Reply:** Basically, my strategy in choosing the subject for each book
I have written is twofold: one is societal necessity, which I understand
from appraising the society, and the other is the lack of a good book on
the subject that can resolve this necessity. It does not happen much
that I see a good book on a subject and desire to write a book on that
subject. I go after subjects that are needed and do not have books
available or if they do, they are somehow incomplete. Almost all my
books are such.

The first book I wrote was *Dadgustar-e Jahan* (*The World’s Executor of
Justice*), which I wrote in the year AH 1346 (AD 1967). In those years,
the issue of the *Baha’i* and the campaigns against them was prevalent.
There were questions regarding the Imam of the Age (‘a) which was an
especially important issue for youth. I became aware of this need at the
time and gathered and read the existing books on the matter. I realized
that even though there were good books on the topic, there was no
complete work which could answer the needs of youth and seekers of
knowledge. Thus I thought of writing the book.

The books I have written on the subject of women include *Ayin-e
Hamsardari* (*The Art of the Marriage Relationship*), *Ayin-e Tarbiyat*
(*The Art of Training and Edification*), *Islam va Ta‘lim va Tarbiyat*
(*Islamic Education and Edification*), *Intikhab-e Hamsar* (*Choosing a
Spouse*), and *Banu-ye Nimunah-ye Islam* (*The Model Woman of Islam*).
These books are specifically about women and issues regarding women.

As for my motives for these works, regarding the book, *Ayin-e
Hamsardari* (*The Art of the Marriage Relationship*), which was written
in AH 1354 (AD 1975), it was that while I was a young theologue
[*talabah*] and because of the close contact I had with people, I was
witness to the people’s—and my own family and relatives’—marital issues
and problems and some came to me with their difficulties.

This caused me to strive to compile the book and communicate various
issues in this regard. First of all, I collected books regarding these
issues, which were very few. While studying them, I realized that they
could not appease the needs of the society. That is why I decided to
write *Ayin-e Hamsardari*. The book had many readers and was useful.
Naturally, after that I was consulted much regarding family problems. I
did not brush off my consultees; in fact, I welcomed them and I took
pleasure from the fact that I could help resolve family problems.

After three to four years, in which I had first-hand experience with
these issues, I realized that most family conflicts result from the lack
of correct edification of girls and boys within the family. Hence, I
thought about writing a book regarding training of children. Regarding
this issue also, I collected and studied relevant books and realized
that, incidentally, there were no adequate books on this subject either.
Of course, there were some books—some that were not based on Islam and
others that were too scientific and not suitable for the masses.

Therefore, using the experience I had gained, I employed myself in
preparing *Ayin-e Tarbiyat* (*The Art of Training and Edification*).
Simultaneously, I asked a friend of mine in Tehran who held conferences
for women, and explained issues regarding training and edification, to
ask the women about their problems and questions. I received over two
hundred letters in this manner, which went far in helping me to identify
problems and write the book. Of course, in this regard, I also read
various magazines and newspapers.

As for the book *Intikhab-e Hamsar* (*Choosing a Spouse*), while
reviewing family problems, I became aware that a lot of problems also
arise from the fact that many young men and women do not marry
judiciously and wisely and thus, they are later afflicted by various
difficulties. It seemed that knowing the process of choosing a spouse
was a pressing need for youths. After considerable investigation, I did
not find any satisfactory books on the matter. There were some books
that discussed the problem in a very subsidiary manner; however, they
were not helpful to young women and men. This prompted me to write
*Choosing a Spouse*.

In the meantime, because I participated in many seminars, I felt that
there was need of a more scientific book regarding Islamic education and
edification that could satisfy the needs of the academic community. As a
result, while writing *Intikhab-e Hamsar*, I started with another book
named *Islam va Ta‘lim va Tarbiyat* (*Islamic Education and
Edification*). Though, before these books, I had written *Banu-ye
Nimunah-ye Islam* (*The Model Woman of Islam*).

In this book, I tried to incorporate moral aspects in a behavioral
aspect as opposed to historical. At the time, all these books were
needed. Even now, besides the work I do in seminars and on television,
one of my jobs is resolving family conflicts, which I perform as much as
I am able, and I enjoy it. However, I am sorry that I do not have more
time to spend in these issues. Even so, I do not refrain from these
activities unless I have no choice.

• *How can families be made more knowledgeable regarding conjugal
relationships?*

**Reply:** I believe that the mass media such as television, radio,
newspapers, and magazines must give more weight to the matter of
marriage and safeguarding the institution of family. I feel danger for
the future of families in Islamic Iran. Of course, the mass media have
some programs and writers write about these issues, but it is not
enough. There is need of much more than this. Books are one of the
important media of information.

However, many couples do not read them. It would be good if charitable
people would make books regarding family education available with lower
prices, or charity organizations, such as the Imam Khomeini Charity
Committee, which holds marriage ceremonies for several thousand young
men and women each year, would make these books freely available. I wish
that, in addition to the household appliances such as refrigerators,
freezers, and televisions they donate to young couples, they would also
give them a book on morals and behavior. This is easily achievable. The
price of a two dollar book is nothing compared to the price of the dowry
they donate to the bride.

Additionally, I feel that seminars and workshops must be held in order
to prevent family troubles and make marriages more successful.
Unfortunately, we are deficient in this area. When a company hires
someone for teaching or any other job, they do not let them work until
the new employees take part in a period of training and instruction.
*However, marriage, which is the most fundamental issue in the lives of
young women and men, is performed without knowledge of how to consort
with one’s spouse.*

These issues are neither given regard in study books nor are there
classes held for this purpose. If our Islamic government would require
all couples who wish to marry to take part in a one month training
course, in which family issues were correctly examined and taught and
then give them permission to marry, I believe that there would be many
fewer problems. Theologues and learned people should especially support
this matter and implement it into their schedules. Some theologues have
started programs in some cities, but it is not enough. In any event, an
extensive program must be started by all those who work in social
services, advertizing and publication such as the clergy, writers,
television and radio personnel, etc.

• *What do you think about the freedom of women in Iran?*

**Reply:** There is no doubt that throughout history, women have been
oppressed and their rights have been disregarded. While today European
countries give women much ostensible and superficial freedom, their
history shows that they greatly oppressed them in the past. This problem
caused the advent of the feminist movement in the early 20th century,
which was honestly an apt movement because it provoked many
intellectuals and public-spirited people into giving women
consideration. Needless to say, many women and men gave the movement
good reception and propagated the campaign.

The issue they advanced at the time was that men and women must be equal
in all aspects and that no difference exists between women and men.
Women are human and men are also human. Two humans have equal rights and
just as men are free in possession of personal property, work, and other
issues, so also women must be free. Anyway, an extensive campaign, which
was outwardly a good movement began. They greatly promoted the matter;
however, the movement had the following drawbacks:

First, in this movement, the issue of family was disregarded and only
the call of freedom could be heard. Unfortunately, what this freedom and
equality would do to the institution of family was not regarded in the
least!

Second, when they wanted to propound the matter of liberty and equality,
no heed was given to the fact that women have a differing genetic and
spiritual makeup from men. With the pretext that women are human they
asserted that women should have the exact same place as men.

Negligence of these two facts resulted in women entering public work
because the defenders thought that if women have financial independence,
men can no longer oppress them.

Consequently, at the time, there was the matter of industrialization and
development of factories and such, and naturally, they needed workers.
The owners of these factories completely used this opportunity with the
realization that women would enter the workforce and they could be
employed with lower wages. Thus, tycoons and industrialists also
welcomed this innovation. Naturally, women felt that they had gained
some rights and an income and this made them happy.

Little did they realize that some of these jobs were not suited to women
and their special genesis. In short, the proprietors of businesses,
those same males who before had exploited women within their homes,
again became predominant in exploiting women outside their homes. In
addition, men used women to attract customers and gain profit. In this
manner, some women were brought into offices, advertising, cinemas, and
theaters in order to provide men with pleasure. In the long run, the
effect of this so called ‘equality of women and men’ is what we see in
the Western world.

In the West, families are truly shattered. Even those that are not
completely shattered, have many problems. When I went to Australia, they
said that a high percentage of marriages result in divorce. There was a
high tally of unofficial offspring. Bachelor life was extensive and
there were many other problems. For example, having illegitimate
children is something that is no longer considered indecent or improper.

They jest and call one another illegitimate and no one becomes offended!
Now, as a result of a movement it has started itself, the West is in
very bad shape. Due to rapid communications, countries have become
closer and the danger is that something that occurs in one place,
quickly spreads everywhere.

Here, I will point out our situation before the victory of the Islamic
Revolution. At that time, women were oppressed just like the women
everywhere else, and their rights were greatly ignored. Some men abused
women. Men would make unjust restrictions for women and unfortunately,
they put Islam at fault for many of these restrictions, even though they
had nothing to do with Islam. This was until the movement that started
in Europe slowly propagated to Iran though various books, writings, and
other media of communication.

This produced a parallel movement in Iran with the backing of the former
regime with the tag of defending the rights of women. Therefore, an
identical movement to the one in Europe stared in Iran. The matter put
forth at the time was the equality and liberty of women, like in the
West. This movement was the mainspring of perversion among women in
Iran, and brought about abolishment of *Hijab* and other problems.

At the time, some men attempted to preserve the previous state in their
homes, and they kept up their bad behavior and solidified bigotry.
Others, who were supporters of the new situation ‘did as the Romans’ and
perversion thrived and greatly threatened the institution of family
until God Almighty did a kindness and the Revolution occurred. Even if
the Revolution had not transpired, we might not have become like the
West, but the situation of our women and society in general would have
become very bad.

Naturally, after the Revolution, without much propaganda or
restrictions, the women themselves observed *Hijab* for a period and the
situation had become extremely good. With his wise recommendations, Imam
Khomeini (may Allah have mercy upon his soul) bought women into the
society. Maybe if someone else was the helmsman of the Revolution, women
would not have become active in the society so quickly. In his speeches,
Imam greatly encouraged them, such as in issues revolving around the
war. Finally, this resulted in severance of traditional chauvinist men,
who would not let women enter the society.

This was a good opportunity and wonderful atmosphere because those who
previously had unreasonable freedom were now relatively happy that they
had freedom to be present and work in the society. Those who were under
restrictions because of some men’s narrow-mindedness, for which Islam
was sometimes faulted, now entered the society. Ultimately, nearly ideal
circumstances were produced for women in order for them to attain their
true rights and be saved from their previous problems.

However, this opportunity was not used very well. It was befitting that
women enter their true paths; the same path that Islam had set for them.
They should have entered the society with foresight and received their
rights, but this has not happened in many cases. In the past, many
people were prejudiced—they would not let their daughters go to school.
Now the path has been paved for them to go to school and enter
universities. However, education alone cannot resolve the predicament of
women.

Of course, it is good and there is no doubt that women must also learn,
vote, become candidates for election, enter the senate and ministries,
create works of art, etc. These are all good and well, but are the
problems of women limited to these issues? Women are encouraged in
sports and the ultimate goal of some women might be to take part in
international games and win. Taking part in sports is permissible for
women; however, these are not the pivotal affairs of women. Women should
have traveled on their true paths and pursued their real rights. Which
of the basic problems of women do professional sports solve?

In performing the things we did—many of which were done recklessly—we
disregarded two issues: First, we did not reckon whether what we did
would cause strengthening of the family or its weakness or whether the
number of divorces would plummet or skyrocket. In our plans of action,
we did not think of the instability or fortification of the family
institution while we should have regarded it in all programs as a
criterion. Family is a reality that, through its strength, the society
becomes strong.

The endurance of the family is to the advantage of both women and men,
and its fragmentation harms both men and women. Regrettably, the tally
of divorces not only has not become less, it has soared. Even though in
our Islamic regime divorce, which is the most hated of the permissible
things in Islam, should reach its minimum, it has sadly reached an
all-time high! This is a result of our inexperience and greenness.

Sadly, I see too many people who should themselves be the ones to
resolve the family problems of others, but who do not even act correctly
with their own families.

Another issue that was tragically disregarded in the plan to bring women
into the society was their special genesis. Jobs that were well suited
to women wherein they could both fulfill their God-given
responsibilities and also have an influence in the society were not well
thought out. It is vital to discover what types of work are suited to
the needs of women. If we do not contemplate the matter well, I fear we
shall be afflicted with the same fate as the West. I sense the peril of
this truth.

Nonconformance of Publicity and Education
-----------------------------------------

Unfortunately, we do not have coordinated communication and organization
in cultural issues, albeit this deficiency is not specific to women
alone, and when communication is not coordinated we cannot arrive at a
desirable outcome. In fact, we may even get an opposite result. What I
mean by coordination is that all people and organizations must work
synchronously in cultural decisions: television and radio, writers,
magazines, publishers, speakers, etc. If all walk the same path, all
will be very successful.

For example, in the eight year imposed war, we publicized the culture of
*jihad* and martyrdom[^1] among the people and we were successful. At
the time, we were all harmonious, from Imam Khomeini to all
administrators, the clergy, and the media. Thus, even with an abundance
of problems, we were miraculously triumphant and we were able to defeat
all the powers that were behind Saddam, even though we were empty-handed
and alone. The reason for this victory was that we spread this culture
and because *jihad* and martyrdom were the greatest of values.

When youths went to the frontlines, they welcomed martyrdom. The
tradition of martyrdom could be seen on all fronts. In sermons,
speeches, eulogies, and poems there was talk of self-sacrifice, *jihad*,
and proximity to Allah. Back at the Friday Prayer, I addressed eulogists
and said that throughout the years of battle against the previous
regime, eulogies and poems regarding Imam Hussain (‘a) had a wonderful
color and other types of poem were moot.

With the rise of the Revolution, poems changed and addressed the path of
martyrdom, *jihad*, and related matters. However, when the war was over,
the poems returned to their previous style and higher values were
ignored. Now, look in our newspapers and art and literature media and
see what values are prevalent and what is rewarded.

In this turbulence, if someone wishes to spread a tradition, they will
not be successful. Changing or spreading a custom requires a common and
united movement such that at least seventy percent of administrators and
organizations are coordinated and the other thirty percent follow their
lead. Unfortunately, we have done no such thing and do not presently
have it in our culture.

At the beginning of the Revolution, women willingly accepted *hijab*
along with the flow of the Revolution without intimidation or
discipline. However, we should have used this opportunity to vitalize
the tradition of *hijab* with coordinated publicity and educating
principles. Women must believe that *hijab* is in their own interests.
When this value came without effort, we did not appreciate it. Women’s
acceptance of *hijab* was truly a miracle considering the situation of
the society. We could have undertaken much cultural education, but we
did not. Then the surge of the Revolution and the term of the imposed
war passed and still we did nothing.

Coordinated cultural education is very important. The truth of the
matter is that cultural administrators should have made a united
decision about women. What is their correct path? What are exemplary
values concerning women? If this had been done, they would have more
easily accepted their worthy path. Instead of coordinated work, we
undertook scattered and preferential projects and focused attention on
cultural scenes such as Friday Prayer, while many newspapers, books, and
cinemas became battlefields of the whims. These incongruities and
differences in inclination retarded cultural education.

• Is the position of family in the moral and jurisprudential system of
Islam an immutable affair?

**Reply:** The matter of family is one of the difficult issues of
sociology and its complete analysis requires extensive discussion.
However, in short, I can say that the importance of family is hidden to
none and sociologists agree on this. The institution of family is held
to be the best and most secure place for the tranquility and ease of
husband and wife and for correctly rearing children. If families are
healthy, so is the society and if families shatter, there will not be a
healthy society.

Islam puts much importance upon family. It has legislated its laws such
that the institution of family remains intact and strong. Thus, in
Islam, preserving and fortifying the family is considered a chief
principle. However, the rules and regulations and the rights and
privileges governing families can be adapted and changed with respect to
varying prevailing conditions.

• What are the main points of difference in criterion between your
views, which are religiously based, and other views?

**Reply:** The positions some religious persons took regarding the
defense of women’s rights did not consist of a unanimous, clearly
thought out Islamic strategy. It did not start with regard to the
special genesis of women and the necessity for preserving and
strengthening the institution of family. It was not coordinated. Among
the advocates of women’s rights, differing and sometimes conflicting
positions were taken. Some liberalist individuals, who preferred the
situation of Western women, propounded the issue of freedom and equality
of rights and responsibilities for women and men.

Without giving heed to the special genesis of women and the necessity of
upholding and bolstering the institution of family, they endeavor to
drag Muslim women down the same path of Western women—upon which Western
women have incurred much loss. This is a dangerous task. Conversely,
others attempt to keep women in the previous traditional situation and
attribute their incorrect ways to Islam. They are not willing to
impartially accept the true views of Islam and give women their
canonical freedom and rights.

I believe both these parties have gone to extremes. Regarding the
positions I take regarding women’s issues, I seek to understand and
follow the true opinion of Islam. I take into account the special
genesis of women and reinforcing the institution of family. Accordingly,
the main criterion for my views is ‘moderation’.

• What is the rank and stature of women in the Islamic perspective?

**Reply:** The status of women as stated by the Quran and Islam is the
status of ‘humanity’. It is very interesting that around one thousand
and four hundred years ago, when women were mostly considered a weak and
inferior gender and some even doubted the humanity of women, Islam does
not even directly address the issue; rather, naturally, it encompasses
both women and men when it speaks about humans. Therefore, in order to
clarify the status of women in Islam, we must investigate the status of
humans in Islam.

Even though this issue requires a comprehensive discussion, in a
nutshell, I can say that Islam regards humans as an elect being composed
of a body and soul, superior to all material things. Humans are eternal
beings that have a lofty purpose for their creation. This purpose is
spiritual perfection, and bliss in the anthology of life, especially
otherworldly bliss. Islam regards humans as superior life forms, the
noblest of creatures [*ashraf-e makhluqat*] and due to this nobility,
various duties have been placed upon our shoulders. Of course, this is a
summary of a matter which requires much more thorough discussion.
Through this discussion, the status of women may be illuminated.

The Quran and Hadith has put much emphasis on this issue. As an example,
this noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَرَّمْنَا بَنِي آدَمَ وَ حَمَلْنَاهُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ وَ
الْبَحْرِ وَ رَزَقْنَاهُم مِّنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَ فَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَى
كَثِيرٍ مِّمَّنْ خَلَقْنَا تَفْضِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

In this verse, God Almighty states: **‘*****Surely We have exalted the
children of Adam*** [meaning that God has promoted humans—both men and
women as children of Adam—above other material beings] ***and We gave
them means of transport on land and sea, and We provide them with good
and pure things, and We have elevated them much over many of those We
created*****.’**[^2] Of course, many exegetes state that other than
material creatures and angels, there may be other lofty creatures over
which humanity has been exalted, but Quranic verses and Hadith clearly
state that humanity is superior to the angel race.

Thus, it seems that the minority to which humans are not superior are a
few specific sublime creatures. In any case, by citing this verse I
intended to show the elevation of the children of Adam over many other
creatures and that regarding the designation ‘children of Adam’ women
and men are equal as humans. If women were not lofty, it would be said:
“We have exalted men.”

Again, there is another verse that states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ فِي أَحْسَنِ تَقْوِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely We have created humanity in the best formation.”***[^3]

This means that the spiritual and corporeal formation of humans is the
best possible form. Exegetes state that this ‘supremeness’ means that
humans can do many things that other beings cannot. Humans can even do
things that angels cannot. Here also humans are at issue, not men. Men
and women are generic in their humanity. The creation of humans is
detailed in the Quran. God Almighty declared to the angels that He
intended to create a trustee [*khalifah*] on the earth. The trustee was
not only man, but all humans; the children of Adam and all humans
throughout history are the trustees of Allah—men and women are no
different in this regard. The rank gained by Adam (‘a), who was able to
learn the ‘Names’ God Almighty taught him, was due to his humanity not
his maleness. Because he was human, he was able to understand them and
answer questions regarding them. Women are also such. When the angels
saw that Adam (‘a) could answer when they could not, they bowed and made
obeisance to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَجَدَ الْمَلآئِكَةُ كُلُّهُمْ أَجْمَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Thereupon, all the angels made obeisance, bar none.”***[^4]

In truth, the obeisance of the angels was due to this ability and
potential, and women and men are no different in this manner.

Some may argue: Considering the following facts, how can the name Adam
be generalized to the whole of humanity? The Quran employs the name of
Adam (‘a) in various verses such as وَ عَلَّمَ آدَمَ الأَسْمَاء كُلَّهَا
(and He taught Adam the Names, all of them…[^5]) and وَ إِذْ قُلْنَا
لِلْمَلاَئِكَةِ اسْجُدُواْ لآدَمَ (and when We said to the angels:
prostrate yourselves unto Adam…[^6]). Moreover, the name Adam (‘a),
which is a proper noun used as opposed to Adam’s wife such as in the
verse يَا آدَمُ اسْكُنْ أَنتَ وَ زَوْجُكَ الْجَنَّةَ (O Adam! Dwell you
and your wife in the Garden…[^7]), is used specifically to indicate the
first man.

In answer, we must say: True, here Adam is the addressee. However,
sometimes Adam is addressed as a person and sometimes as a human. Here
Adam is addressed as a human. It is not true that God intended to
designate a certain man as His *khalifah* upon the earth. Also, it was
his human soul that enabled him to understand the ‘Names’. The angels
bowed to Adam because of his humanity not his personage or gender.
Additionally, some Quranic verses also use the term ‘the children of
Adam’.

Consequently, the understanding the angels voiced in their question
regarding this new creation (Why do you want to create a creature that
will cause corruption and spill blood on the earth?) was the creation of
the human kind as opposed to Noble Adam the person. Their understanding
was that because this creature is material, it can cause corruption. The
corruption, they presumed, involved both genders. This humanity is where
we derive our characteristics.

The fact that Islam has not separated males and females is very
interesting; it means that it is an indisputable fact that does not even
merit a discussion. Especially in times that some cultures doubted the
humanity of women, Islam did not see any need to defend the issue. Islam
never says women are *also* human, because it is taken as a given fact.

It is also interesting that no verse in the whole Quran can be found
that regards women as less than men or indicates the possibility of
deficiency or weakness in their intellect or social behavior. No part of
the Quran reproaches women due to their femininity. It does reproach
women, not because of their womanhood but due to their deeds, just as it
also reproaches men on account of their deeds.

• What are the common duties that Islam has put upon both men and women?

**Reply:** Humans are superior beings among the creations of God. One of
their responsibilities is that they must preserve their species because
the extinction of humankind may cause great harm. They are complete
beings who are magnificent and are the purpose of Creation. Thus, the
first duty of humans is self-preservation and reproduction.

Of course, God has also implanted the instrument for this, which is
sexual desire, in the nature of both men and women. In his exegesis
‘Allamah[^8] Tabataba’i states: Providing this sexual drive in humans is
a veil for the reality that the Creator wants humans to sustain their
race; this duty has been put upon the shoulders of both women and men
and both are the source of the race’s perpetuation. The Quran has also
stated this issue; for example in this noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُم مِّن ذَكَرٍ وَ أُنثَى...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Humans! Verily We have created you from a male and female…”***[^9]

First, this verse addresses humans [*nas*], which comprises both women
and men. Then it states, We have created you from one male and one
female. Again it mentions them both together and does not differentiate.
Near the end of the verse it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِندَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely the dearest of you to Allah are the most righteous of
you…”***[^10]

Here also there is no distinction between men and women. Woman can be
just as pious as men and both can deviate from the correct path.

The second common duty among humans is to perfect their souls, use this
world to gain a better place in the next, and improve and develop both
their worlds. This mystical quest, spiritual perfection, and improvement
of worldly and otherworldly life are common responsibilities upon all
humans, regardless of whether they are male or female. There are many
verses on this issue, some of which I shall enumerate.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَى وَ هُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيِّبَةً...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whosoever performs a good and righteous deed, whether they be male
or female, while they are a believer, We shall certainly vivify them
with a good and pure life…”***[^11]

Good and pure life [*hayat-e tayyibah*] is congruous in both this world
and the afterworld [*akhirat*]. Life in this world and the next is not
separate. One enters pure and good life in this world and continues it
in *Akhirat*. The verse ends thus:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَ لَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْرَهُم بِأَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and We shall recompense them with a reward according to the best of
what they used to do.”*** [^12]

Again it is made clear that any man or woman that does good deeds shall
be given *hayat-e tayyibah*.

Another verse states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...أَنِّي لاَ أُضِيعُ عَمَلَ عَامِلٍ مِّنكُم مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَى
بَعْضُكُم مِّن بَعْضٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…I shall not waste the work of any agent among you, whether man or
woman; you are all members of the same race…”***[^13]

The last statement is very interesting: بَعْضُكُم مِّن بَعْضٍ (i.e. some
of you are from some others). This can mean some women are from other
women; some men are from other men; or that some men and some women are
from each other. Regardless, it is saying that men and women are the
same in this respect. It seems that it wants to say that you are all
together, have to continue this life together, and work together to
attain human perfection.

Just as the Quran has praised some men for their faith and righteous
deeds, so also it has praised some righteous women. For example, it
beautifully eulogizes Saint Maryam (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِذْ قَالَتِ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ يَا مَرْيَمُ إِنَّ اللّهَ اصْطَفَاكِ وَ
طَهَّرَكِ وَ اصْطَفَاكِ عَلَى نِسَاء الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And [remember] when the angels said: O Maryam! Verily, Allah has
chosen you and purified you and preferred you above the women of the
worlds.”***[^14]

This is a great excellence. Or the example of Asiyah, Pharaoh’s wife,
who is also thus. She has been extolled in the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلًا لِّلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اِمْرَأَةَ فِرْعَوْنَ
إِذْ قَالَتْ رَبِّ ابْنِ لِي عِندَكَ بَيْتًا فِي الْجَنَّةِ وَ
نَجِّنِي مِن فِرْعَوْنَ وَ عَمَلِهِ وَ نَجِّنِي مِنَ الْقَوْمِ
الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah has set forth an example for the believers, Pharaoh’s wife
when she said, ‘O Nourisher! Build for me, in your presence, a house in
Paradise, and deliver me from Pharaoh and his deeds, and deliver me from
the evil doing people.”***[^15]

It is interesting that God Almighty has cited Pharaoh’s wife as an
example for the believers: لِلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا–meaning all believers, men
and women alike. It wants to say: Look! This is a woman who has gained
such rank. It shows great excellence for the Quran to give a model woman
as an example for all believers.

Another common merit and duty for humans is gaining knowledge. God
Almighty has created humans such that they can acquire both intellectual
and empirical knowledge and their greatness is due to this ability. The
worth of humans is due to their knowledge, and women and men are similar
in this respect. God Almighty has given both men and women the matching
ability to learn and acquire knowledge.

The fact that He has given humans this capacity means that we must use
it. God has anticipated a purpose and end for everything he has given to
humans. If women were not supposed to obtain knowledge, surely God would
not give them the capacity to do so. Therefore, they must endeavor to
learn and they are completely identical to men in this regard.

Moreover, it is evident that the Quran does not give any special
preference to men when speaking of knowledge and women also have these
merits. There are many Hadith that instruct us to acquire knowledge,
such as this well-known Hadith of the Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«طلب العلم فریضة علی کل مسلم.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Seeking knowledge is a duty for every Muslim.

As I have said, the term ‘Muslim’ equally refers to both females and
males, but some citations also state this Hadith specifically with the
words ‘Muslim’ and ‘Muslimah’:

> «طلب العلم فریضة علی کل مسلم و مسلمة.145»

However, even if it did not contain the word “Muslimah” it would be
sufficient for this purpose. Also:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«الا ان الله یحب بغاة العلم.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Allah loves seekers of knowledge.

Thus, I deem it necessary to succinctly state that if women and men both
have the capacity for knowledge and if Islam expects it of both and if
the Quran does not differentiate between men and women, then one of the
important things to which women must pay attention is the acquisition of
knowledge and completing their erudition.

Women must strive to obtain the rights that God has given them. It is
with knowledge that humans attain civilization, development, and
advancement, and scientists and scholars have delivered humanity to the
current state of development and advancement.

Humans are responsible for their own advancement; both men and women—it
makes no difference. Women consist of approximately half the population.
They should try to become self-supporting because half of the society is
women. Naturally, half of universities and schools must be for women and
it would be better for them if they governed them, meaning that all the
people involved should be women; including the drivers, janitors,
teachers, professors, etc. Because half the society consists of women,
half of the hospitals, laboratories, and other medical centers must be
run by women.

This is due to the fact that women have needs just like men. It is
proper that women be independent in these fields; that is, they must
have professors, doctors, specialists, nurses, etc. from themselves and
be independent of men in this regard. Half of doctors in Iran should be
women—no, even more than half; because women usually consult doctors
more than men. The wife of one of my students was ready to give birth.
He said to me, ‘She was not inclined to let a man help deliver the baby.
When I told this to the person in charge, they gave only women
responsibility over the necessary tasks and services.’ It is very noble
and dignified of a woman to decline to allow a man to examine her. These
are truths that women must seek for themselves.

Women also need to learn religious issues, religious jurisprudence,
religious precepts, and theology. Half of religious centers must be held
by women. Half of preachers must be women. They must hold classes,
discussion forums, and lectures for themselves. In fact, they understand
each other better and their own words influence other women better. It
is very delightful for women to say, ‘We are capable and independent and
we wish to be independent in religious issues also. We will train and
provide teachers and specialists in this field ourselves. We will do
research, write books, make speeches, we will do it by ourselves.’ Why
should women not be able to do these things?

Why should we not have enough educated women to teach in schools so that
men do not have to teach in women’s high schools?

Why should women be secretaries and men doctors? There should be female
specialists with female secretaries and they should perform injections
and other services themselves. It is not in a woman’s dignity for her to
be a man’s secretary or a male surgeon’s assistant in an operation. A
women’s dignity is much greater than this, and they should not be
content to be only nurses. True, the work of a nurse is very noble and
women are quite competent in such work, but cannot women also be
competent as specialists in medicine? We have many talented and
brilliant women. They must go after these jobs; this is what gives them
greater character.

It would be good if women would reveal the greatness of their character
to men. They can if they desire to. I have seen women who are great in
various sciences or jobs—even better than men. Unfortunately, the
arrogance of men sometimes keeps women from attaining greatness. I have
heard that many male specialists do not accept women as their students
to become specialists, maybe because they fear that by becoming
specialists, women will take over their jobs. I believe that, with
regard to statistics, we should lower the number of men that are
accepted in medical universities so that more women can enter these
fields and the ratio of men to women balances out.

Then woman may say, ‘We have strived for our own independence and now we
have really attained it.’ Development and independence is not in sports.
Sports are a good thing; however, it is deceiving women to over-promote
sports among women because women are similar to men in this respect and
can do sports on their own. It is not a merit for which men can hold
women under obligation that, ‘we let women do sports’. It would be of
much worth if they were to become experts or intellectuals.

I am amazed at women. They sometimes ignore their true rights and
dignity and go after inferior things. They say, let us work—but where?
They choose second-rate jobs like being a secretary for a male doctor?
Women are far more worthy than this. This is also true of the clergy and
religious schools. I truly believe that if we want to do it right, if we
plan correctly, half of theologues must be women.

However, it is evident that they must learn particular studies that are
appropriate to them and hold female-specific specialties, which can help
them become more independent. Of course, it is also a matter for debate
that even though women have the right to study in any field, is it to
the advantage of women and the society in general for women to study in
all fields and are not some fields better suited to women? In any event,
we should not disregard the femininity of women, the specific situation
of women, their families, and even the society.

• Why do you emphasize medical fields so much for women’s employment?

**Reply:** My stress on medical professions and their dependencies for
women is due to the facts that such fields are always needed by everyone
and in order to diagnose an illness an examination is necessary, which
usually entails observing and touching the body of the patient. Islam
has prohibited both men and women from viewing or touching the body of
non-*mahram* persons because this is a preliminary for deviation. Thus,
we should strive to bring about the prerequisites for preventing
deviation so that we may easily carry out divine commandments and
maintain the interests of religion.

A while back, a distressed final year medical student came to me and
said, ‘I wish to change my field.’ I asked why and he replied, ‘Because
after graduation if I want to not take female patients it would be
problematic and if I do accept them, I would have to examine them which
would entail a *haram* act. So it seems that it would be better for me
to just change my field now and save myself from this problem.’ Women
also have this problem. Those that are religious and wish to observe
their Islamic duties cannot see a male doctor save in necessity. As long
as there is a female doctor in town who can perform examinations, woman
cannot canonically consult a male doctor. Also, under such conditions,
male practitioners of medicine do not have the right to examine women.
Therefore, I feel that there is an extreme need for women to be more
active and become independent in this regard.

Islamic laws engender circumstances in which individuals and society do
not deviate from and are not stunted on the path of development,
advancement, and the lofty purposes of the human race. Regardless, the
nature of men and women is such that they feel attracted to one another.
When the seeds of inclination and tendency are sown in a person due to
undisciplined association and contact, they may deviate which would be
deplorable. If they do not alleviate themselves or are religious and do
not desire to perform a sin, they will slowly become mentally or
spiritually ill. In addition, the situation may also cause other
complications; for instance, the person may lose the affection and love
they previously felt for their spouse, which may cause family problems.
This is why Islam emphasizes this issue.

Another benefit of women’s independence in this matter is that they may
freely prove their worth and virtue in their own regard. Moreover, women
who seek medical advice in independent medical centers that belong to
women are more at ease, because they look on it as their own and take
pride in it and are peaceful there; for example, a patient laying on a
bed in such a center is at peace because she knows that no male doctor
or nurse will frequently come up to her to examine her or take her
readings. Also, men will not be worried or anxious because of their
wives’ or daughters’ presence in such environments. This is better and
lovelier for the whole community. If these things happen, we can even be
an example for other countries and prove the excellence of women.

• Must we accept the separation of men and women that is implemented in
some facilities? Does not this separation make men and women more
sensitive toward each other? Some say that the sensitivity that women
and men have toward each other in Islamic societies is not so intense in
Western cultures and this is because of the attitude and restrictions
that must be religiously observed. Do you confirm the more intense
attraction between men and women in Eastern and Islamic communities and
do you believe that this is its cause?

**Reply:** Women and men are naturally attracted to one another. If this
attraction is unrestrained, it usually brings about illegitimate
relations, and moral and social corruption. However, in Western
cultures, due to complete unrestraint in the relations among men and
women, they do not regard these corruptions as corruption. They have
become addicted to the immoral by-products of uninhibitedness in
morality, spirituality, and the society. It has become normal to them.
Sometimes when a person has never seen health and well-being, they
become accustomed to their deformity and contortion. However, another
related fact is that geographically, sexual arousal is less severe in
humid environments as opposed to torrid climates.

This separation is not bias, it is independence and independence does
not entail bias. There was bias in the past and we intend to prevent it.
If women become self-reliant it is to their own advantage and they can
prove their excellence and freely progress. Besides, I do not mean that
women must not go to men’s hospitals or vice versa. There is no problem
with women being self-sufficient; they can have hospitals, medical
universities, and such for themselves and be independent. And if a woman
wishes to visit a male doctor and her illness does not require contact
or observation of the body, what is the problem?! There is no problem.
By separation I do not mean that men and women should not even see each
other; rather, it is to prevent interactions that are religiously
prohibited.

• What is your opinion about other fields of study?

**Reply:** Women have the aptitude for all types of knowledge and if
they are inclined to choose any field of study, there is no prohibition
or proscription. There is no doubt about this and women can study in any
field they wish. However, regarding the fact that education is usually
for employment, I do not deem some fields suitable for women. I do not
say that some fields are prohibited (*haram)*, just that I do not deem
them suitable because women will have problems when they wish to go to
work. There are some fields of work that are not appropriate for women,
such as heavy mechanical fields, mining, seamanship, and so on. First,
beauty, exquisiteness, and elegance are great merits of women and the
more they are able to retain these characteristics, the more they are
successful in life. If a woman wishes to have influence in the heart of
her husband she must endeavor to maintain her beauty. Regardless of how
much income certain experts have, vigor and cheerfulness have great
influence in the family. Hence, Islam emphasizes for women to adorn
themselves and apply beauty products for their husbands, wear lovely
clothes, and maintain their beauty. We even have a Hadith that states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«المرأةُ ریحانة و لیست بقهرمانة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

A woman is a beautiful and fragrant flower [*riyhan*], not a champion.

Also, various Hadith state that women must not be committed to tasks
beyond their endurance.

Thus, women must place sufficient importance on preserving their beauty.
There is no problem with women working in the society, though it is good
for them to find work that will not harm their beauty. Consider a woman
who is an engineer whose work is in the desert where she has to endure
the sun and sweat. Or a woman who works in crude oil extraction or
similar jobs with all the hardships such jobs have. Her beauty cannot
endure. Even though such jobs have good incomes, she may not keep her
attraction for her husband. Therefore, I do not consider professions
with such conditions in the interest of women and the institution of
family.

We regard preserving the family a truly fundamental issue and a societal
necessity. The institution of family and rearing children is the
foremost role of men and women. Having children is a fact of life and it
is a need that both women and men have. Women must have foresight and
think ahead about whether their intended field of study is compatible
with the cohesion of their family. It should not be a job that shatters
the family or makes them unsuccessful in training their children.

It is an undeniable truth that children do not need their fathers as
much as their mothers. Fathers mostly provide their living expenses, but
it is the affections of a mother, and her patience, forbearance, and
method of training that is very important for a child. This is not a
shortcoming but a perfection that women have an emotional makeup that
can sustain children.

There is a saying in Persian that in ashes (poverty) a mother can manage
her children such that a father cannot, even in richness and comfort.
Women must choose a field in which they may also tend to their children.
If she chooses a line of work in which she must be on a ship for six
months of the year or travel for days at a time, naturally, her children
will have problems. Therefore, they should choose a job that will not
harm their beauty, the solidarity of their family, and training of their
children.

In general, I believe that some fields are quite suited to women, like
educational and training fields, in which women are usually more
proficient than men, such as education, psychology, sociology,
mathematics, IT, and other fields that are suited to the nature and
situation of women.

I must also state that sometimes if women do not work, the household
cannot be managed (their work is necessary for the family’s livelihood).
Among nomads or in rural, farming, and animal husbandry communities
women work as much as or sometimes even more than men. They also do
household tasks and jobs like carpet-weaving. Naturally, help in
providing such income is not a problem; in fact it should be considered
one of the merits of women.

However, I advise men not to expect women to perform tasks that
interfere with the cheerful home atmosphere and the training of their
children unless absolutely necessary; because according to Islam, a
woman is like a *riyhan*, a fragrant and delicate flower, and as such
they must be cherished and not forced to do taxing jobs. I council men
that it is in their own interests to refrain from asking their wives to
perform heavy work. However, if women wish to work and are able at the
same time to observe religious regulations, there is no problem with
them working.

It would be befitting for the government and related organizations to
promote a culture in which heavy jobs are not given to women. I see that
sometimes very arduous jobs are given to women, in some places of Iran,
such as in some northern regions. It can be seen that men are mostly
unoccupied while women perform difficult occupations, such as farming,
and when they come home, again men do nothing while the women do
household duties. Truly women endure many hardships. Women’s hardships
should become fewer and men should take care of and accommodate the
women.

• Is there any ban, reproof, or criticism regarding the education of
women in Islam?

**Reply:** Essentially, the ability to acquire knowledge is an aptitude
that has been given to all humans—whether man or women. In truth, this
aptitude gives them license to seek knowledge.

Hence, learning is one of the natural and human rights of women. In
addition, Islam confirms this right and there are many Quranic verses
and Hadith that emphasize the necessity to learn and women and men are
no different in this regard. I shall enumerate several verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...قُلْ هَلْ يَسْتَوِي الَّذِينَ يَعْلَمُونَ وَ الَّذِينَ لَا
يَعْلَمُونَ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say, ‘Are those who know and those who know not alike?’”***[^16]

The verse leaves the answer to our inner selves, our human nature and
instincts; it is an evident and indubitable fact that a knowledgeable
person is not equal to a person without knowledge. Here it is clear men
and women are no different. Just as a male scientist cannot be compared
to an ignorant man, women are the same.

Or this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...يَرْفَعِ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنكُمْ وَ الَّذِينَ أُوتُوا
الْعِلْمَ دَرَجَاتٍ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah exalts those of you who believe and those who have been given
knowledge to great ranks.”***[^17]

In this verse Almighty God regards those who believe—both women and
men—to have high ranks and those with knowledge are even higher. Again
men and women are the same in this.

Many verses of the Quran advise people to think, contemplate, and
acquire knowledge. Such as:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ فَتَكُونَ لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ يَعْقِلُونَ
بِهَا...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have they not traveled upon the earth so as to have hearts to
understand with…?”***[^18]

Here, the Quran enjoins travel so that our minds open in order that we
may better think and understand. Or for example this noble verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَ يَجْعَلُ الرِّجْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ لاَ يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He places uncleanness (sin and unbelief) upon those who think
not.”***[^19]

These verses indicate that knowledge and the quest for it is a great
virtue for a person and women and men are similar in this respect.
Elsewhere, God Almighty declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ سَخَّرَ لَكُم مَّا فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَ مَا فِي الْأَرْضِ جَمِيعًا
مِّنْهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He has made submissive to you that which is in the heavens and
that which is in the earth, all these are from Him.”***[^20]

All creations are compliant to humans and ultimately humans must
subjugate them. There is no distinction between men and women.

From these verses I conclude that Islam regards learning and acquiring
knowledge a great virtue in humans due to their humanity. Islam greatly
underscores that we must not be ignorant people—on the contrary we must
be intellectuals and scholars. We also have many Hadith in this regard.
Because learning is a natural and human right, Islam accepts it,
emphasizes it, and condemns the contrary.

Therefore, we understand that Islam intends that women also seek
knowledge. In opposition to these strong arguments, if one resorts to
some narrations with weak credentials [*sanad*] and denotations
[*dilalat*] it is an inappropriate and useless act. I believe that such
weak narrations cannot stand up to the previous strong and secure
reasoning.

There do exist around six or seven narrations on similar matters, which
do not prohibit women from learning per se, but do seem to prohibit
writing; they say not to teach women writing and penmanship. There is no
prohibition regarding learning.

Women can seek knowledge, but regarding script there are a few
narrations that are either weak or are only attributed to one Infallible
(‘a) and do not have strong denotations or credentials. For example, the
most clear of them is a Hadith in which the Prophet of Allah (S)
declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لا تنزلوا النساء الغرف و لا تعلموهن الکتابة و علّموهن المغزل و سورة
النور.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not quarter women in upper stories [*ghurfah*] and do not teach them
writing. Teach them spining and Surah Nur.[^21]

I have investigated the credentials of this Hadith and even though it is
clearer than some other similar Hadith, it does have weak credentials.
In addition, it says do not accommodate women in upper stories! Has such
a thing ever been practiced or has any religious authority ever decreed
that women must not live in upper stories?! Then writing has been
mentioned. If two things are to be banned in one statement, they should
be cohesive and similar; residing in upper stories and writing?!

Maybe if they had detrimental consequences they would be disapproved
[*makruh*] due to their harm and if there is no harm in them, they
cannot even be considered disapproved. Also, the following statement is
in an imperative mood; does anyone consider learning to spin yarn and
mastering Surah Nur to be obligatory in order that we may, based on this
dictum, consider the previous injunctions to imply prohibition or
*haram*?!

Anyway, with such narrations, which are indeed few and weak, one cannot
stand against our previous strong and solid arguments; especially
regarding the fact that writing is one of the definite necessities and
preliminaries to studying.

I believe that there is no problem in this matter and some people
unreasonably adhere to the forms of these narrations and seek to bar
women from studying. In addition, this was never the custom of women
from the time of the Prophet (S) until now. In the age of the Prophet
(S) there were many erudite women who sought knowledge; such as noble
Zahra’ (‘a), and two of the Prophet’s (S) wives ‘Ayishah and Hafsah.
Various narrations indicate that in addition to knowing how to read,
Hafsah also knew how to write and would narrate Hadith just like many
other women who were narrators of Hadith. Therefore, these Hadith cannot
inhibit the decree to learn. Hence, I do not deem it necessary to
scrutinize each and every one of these Hadith and to inspect their
context, meaning, and credentials.

• What is your opinion about Hadith regarding deficiency of reason and
weakness of faith in women?

**Reply:** In books of Hadith there are instances where the faculties of
intellect and reason of women are considered weak. First, the numbers of
such Hadith are few, maybe around ten. Second, they are both debatable
in denotation and credentials. A Hadith that is in a book is not reason
enough to follow that Hadith. In the science of Hadith, Hadith are
divided into several types. For instance, a ‘correct’ or ‘sound’
[*sahih*] Hadith is a Hadith whose chain of narrators up to an
Infallible consists of only righteous persons. A ‘trustworthy’
[*muwaththaq*] Hadith is a Hadith whose narrators are not righteous but
are trustworthy and a ‘weak’ [*dha‘if*] Hadith is one that at least one
of its narrators is neither righteous nor trustworthy.

Sometimes a Hadith is *Marfu‘*, which means that it is attributed to an
Infallible (‘a) but its chain of narrators is vague and is thus set
aside. Also, a Hadith may have no credentials at all; meaning that its
chain of narrators is completely unknown. Among these, only ‘correct’
Hadith are considered authoritative. Some people consider ‘trustworthy’
Hadith to be authoritative also. However, other narrations are not
proof. Now the problem is that we must go through and inspect these ten
or twelve Hadith to see if there are ‘correct’ and ‘sound’ Hadith that
can be considered authoritative among them or not.

On the other hand, sometimes we are sure that a Hadith is from the
Prophet (S) or an Imam (‘a); for example, we were witnesses ourselves or
have definitive evidence that this Hadith has surely been stated by an
Infallible (‘a). Such Hadith are surely authoritative and substantive.
However, sometimes a Hadith is not definite, and such are divided into
*mutawatir* and non-*mutawatir* Hadith. A *mutawatir* Hadith is one that
has so many parallel narrators from the Prophet (S) or Imams (‘a) that
it would normally be impossible for them all to collectively conspire to
lie and forge the Hadith; for instance, a Hadith might be narrated by
fifty or one hundred persons who directly heard it from the Prophet (S)
or an Imam (‘a).

If a Hadith has so many narrators, anyone would accept that there is no
possibility for it to be a lie; especially when the narrators are from
different cities and professions. Not many conspiracy theorists could
come up with the probability that all of the narrators could come
together and forge such a Hadith. Such a Hadith is considered
‘*mutawatir*’ and, because it brings about conviction, it is considered
authoritative.

Sometimes the utterance of a Hadith is not *mutawatir*, however, the
narrators of the Hadith report the same thing using different words from
the Prophet (S) or the Imams (‘a) in a *mutawatir* manner. If such
narrations are so numerous that they could not have been forged, they
are also considered *mutawatir*. In addition, there is another type of
Hadith that is called a ‘singular report’ [*khabar-e wahid*]. This does
not necessarily mean that there exists only one report of the Hadith;
rather, that there are so few reports that they do not cause conviction
and certitude as to its veracity; in this case, it is still considered a
‘singular report’. Even so, it must be noted that most of our Hadith are
singular reports.

Another method for investigating Hadith is through their content; for
example, we can realize from the utterance whether the Hadith is correct
or not. The late Ayatullah Burujirdi, God’s absolution upon him, would
say: Sometimes we see a Hadith of which the text clearly shows that it
is from an Infallible (‘a) and sometimes we see a statement that, even
though its credentials seem to be correct and reliable, obviously does
not correspond to the dignity and status of the Prophet (S) or one of
the Imams (‘a) because they were the most eloquent of people. It is also
such in various supplications [*du‘a*]; for instance, the *Supplication
of Kumayl*, the *Supplication* *of Abuhamzah*, or the *Khamsah ‘Ashar
Supplication*–other than an Infallible (‘a) who could form such eloquent
phrases?!

Of course, this ability of discernment[^22] can only be gained by a
person who persists sufficiently in studying Hadith and becomes an
expert in the field in accordance with their sense of the science of
Hadith and their knowledge of other religious disciplines; not through
their own personal taste and partiality. In any event, almost all of our
religious authorities consider ‘singular reports’ to be valid and
authoritative; of course only those that are *correct (sound)*, not
those that are *weak*, *obscure*, and the like.

Another important point is that we cannot consider all *correct* reports
as proof. Only a report that relays a decree or duty, gives commands or
prohibits, proclaims an action as obligatory [*wajib*], recommended
[*mustahabb*], prohibited [*haram*], or disapproved [*makruh*], and in
short, assigns a duty to people can be considered proof. Obviously, we
have duties that are revealed to us by the Prophet (S) and Infallible
Imams (‘a). We must make every attempt to know what our duties are and
when there is no way to reach certainty in this regard, the probability
we gather from such narrations is sufficient and is proof enough for
determining our religious responsibilities.

However, a Hadith whose accuracy is not certain and that Hadith is about
belief and doctrine cannot be considered proof and credible unless one
can become certain of its correctness because, regarding beliefs, we
must reach conviction and certitude for it to be acceptable. Therefore,
even though the Hadith may be *correct*, it is not certain and cannot be
followed as a Hadith that reports a truth. Suppose according to a
Hadith, an Infallible Imam (‘a) has instructed others to eat such and
such fruit because it has a positive effect on the body. Such
narrations, even if they are *correct*, do not cause certitude and are
not jurisprudential; they are simply reports of various issues.

Accordingly, some of our Hadith are such. Hadith regarding women that
state they are deficient in intellect or faith are of this sort. They
are not proofs that bring about a duty or commitment; their issuance by
the Infallibles is not certain or *mutawatir*; there are no sure
indications of their accuracy; thus, they do not entail compliance.
Hence, we cannot say that they are authoritative and must be put into
effect. We cannot absolutely refute them, but we cannot accept them or
attribute them to the Legislator [*shari‘*] i.e. God either. Because
such Hadith regarding women are not *mutawatir* or cannot be credited to
an Infallible (‘a) with certainty, we cannot state that Islam believes
that women are deficient in intellect or faith. Based on a probability
and likelihood regarding this important matter, no one can put such a
thing into effect.

In places where we are not certain, we must investigate and research the
matter. Thus, we should test women to see whether it is really true
whether they are inferior in faith or intellect or not. These narrations
can be considered as conjecture and we cannot impute these thoughts to
Islam. Were women such as *Fatimah* (‘a), *Khadijah* (‘a), *Zainab*
(‘a), *Sakinah* (‘a), *Maryam* (‘a), and *Asiyah* (‘a) who were great
and some of whom the Quran has greatly exalted truly so?! Can we say
that women throughout history who had greater minds than men and had
great influence were weak in faith or lacking in reason?! No, we cannot
say this. Therefore, the generality of this statement is impaired. If we
wish to make a correct evaluation, we must say that among women there
are those of weak minds and weak faith, just as among men.

Another aspect to this discussion is the question regarding the
interpretation of ‘reason’ or ‘intellect’ that is spoken of in these
Hadith? We have an ‘immanent intellect’ [*‘aql-e dhati*] that humans
possess, but other animals do not, which is the point of excellence of
humans over other animals. This intellect is the incorporeal soul of the
human being and it provides humanity with the ability to think in
abstracts, generalities, and the like. This immanent intellect is
characteristic to all humans, both male and female.

Another type of intellect is ‘acquired intellect’ [*‘aql-e iktisabi*]
which is also called the ‘social intellect’ [*‘aql-e ijtima‘i*]. It is
the intellect that a person gains from social interaction. Everyone has
an initial intellect that evolves and is perfected throughout their
lives. The more a person acquires knowledge or gains experience, their
intellect grows and becomes more complete. Acquired intellect is
something that all human beings, women and men alike, can cultivate
within themselves and perfect.

All humans are more or less equal in immanent intellect; men and women
are no different in this; they are both human and sapient. We have
previously cited various Quranic verses in this regard. Both can also
have acquired intellect. If we keep a man in a closed and restricted
environment he will not mature intellectually; however, if we give him
responsibilities in the society, his mind will grow. If a man does not
acquire knowledge his intellect shall be lacking and if he studies and
learns, his mind will mature. Women are the same. If women are not
active in the society and live in a restricted environment, it is
evident that their minds will not become complete. On the other hand, if
they play an active role in the society, their minds will become more
complete.

Thus, we can state the case in this manner: Assuming the narration is
correct, if for example the Prophet (S) identified women as deficient in
mind and religion, he was referring to the women of that time; meaning
that those women, due to their deprivation and lack of activity in the
society were like that at that particular time. None of these narrations
stated that women must stay like this; rather, Hadith encourage people
to further their knowledge and faith. Women can become higher than men
and experience shows that women who have roles in the society have more
mature minds.

Naturally, this does not mean that any type of presence in the society
develops intellects. There are many women in various societies that have
much freedom and presence in the community; nevertheless, their minds do
not develop. Minds develop comparatively in both women and men through
social responsibility, acquisition of knowledge, etc.

Of course, there is no doubt that women have stronger sentiments and
emotions; however, having stronger emotions is not a point of weakness.
They are emotional, but emotions are not in opposition to reason and
thought. A person may be emotional and also be very thoughtful. If you
keep a woman at home and she only trains her children, her emotions will
become stronger, and her intellect might not develop very much. However,
if this same woman were to become a scientist or scholar, she will
become strong in both fortes. Then she could be said to excel over men.

Regarding the fact of whether there is a physical difference between
women and men, in short we must say: Women have no flaw in their
genesis. The differences are not such that we can say women are
‘defective in mind’. This is something that is said of someone who
essentially is not sane. It also cannot be said that women are weaker in
intellect than men because experience has shown that wherever women have
performed jobs, they have performed them as well as men.

Regardless, intellect itself, which is the incorporeal transcendent soul
of humans, is equal in women and men. The characteristics of intellect
which are understanding, reasoning, deduction, and such are possessed by
both males and females. We cannot say that one gender is dispossessed of
one; doubtless, women may be stronger in some abilities and men weak in
the same, and vice versa. Even so, these differences are not reason for
being considered flawed. One gender may be stronger in one aspect and
the other gender stronger in another. Each gender is also the same among
itself. For instance, sometimes a man may have a strong memory and other
men may be stronger in intelligence, art, humanities, etc. The same is
true of women. We cannot consider diversity in capacities and abilities
to be flaws.

• In Islamic texts and references, it seems that women are considered
ignoble, second-rate, and subordinate creatures and in genesis and in
familial and social life, men appear to be noble and superior. As
examples, there are differences between women and men in inheritance,
blood money [*diyah*], etc; women must obey men under some
circumstances; as a condition for marriage, a virgin woman must have her
father’s or paternal forefather’s permission; a wife may not exit her
home without her husband’s permission, and similar issues. Is this
understanding correct?

**Reply:** There are various issues in the above question, each of which
requires a discrete discussion and each must be clarified in its own
place. There are some issues that cannot be attributed to Islam at all
and we cannot judge Islam based on them; for example, there is a
narration that claims: “المرأةُ شرّ کلّها” (‘The whole being of women is
evil’). Such narrations have no credibility for numerous reasons. There
are issues regarding women such as the fact that women need their
husband’s permission to exit the house. This needs to be discussed. What
does it mean? Under what conditions? Is it conditional or absolute?
Inheritance, marriage, and such issues each require a separate and
lengthy discussion.

There are narrations regarding the imperfection of intellect; or the
verse الرِّجالُ قَوّامُونَ عَلَی النِّساءِ...[^23] which announces that
men are the protectors and supervisors of women. It would not be right
to add all these up and come to a conclusion without a comprehensive and
in depth review of Islamic teachings and decrees.

Islam *does not* consider women subservient and second-rate creations
and some people’s conjectures in this regard are incorrect. They have
ascribed things to Islam that have no proof or they have incorrectly
understood various Islamic documents and references. They have judged
Islam according to fallacious perceptions. In order to resolve these
doubts and misgivings we must explain religious issues all-inclusively,
purely, and completely in order to reveal all of Islam’s rightfulness
and beauty.

It is wrong to say that Islam is patriarchal. Islam has prorated duties
and Islam prefers tasks that have been given to women. For example,
training children is a woman’s characteristic and men can never reach a
women’s level in this respect. In the society also some jobs are more
suited to women and others to men. We cannot deny this suitability, as
it is due to the discrete genesis of men and women. However, this does
not mean that women must be underlings and men must have the last word.
If women utilize well their abilities and the rights and privileges that
Islam has given them, they have a fine situation and much dignity both
in the society and within their families.

• Some Hadith prohibit men from consulting with women. Are such
narrations correct?

**Reply:** We do have Hadith that prohibit consulting with women and
some even say that if you are in doubt, consult with a woman and do the
opposite.

Such a Hadith has been attributed to Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«اياک و مشاورة النساء الّا مَن جُرّبَت بکمال عقلٍ فانَّ رأیِهن یَجُرُّ
الی الأفن و عَزمهن الی وهن.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

I warn you of consulting with women, except those whose complete
intellect you have experienced. Surely their opinions make a person
timid and weaken their resolve.[^24]

Regarding such Hadith, of which we have maybe ten or twelve, I must
point out several issues:

First, as I have previously stated, all Hadith are not credible. Only
*sahih* (correct or sound), *muwaththaq* (trustworthy), or *hasan*
(good) Hadith are considered credible. *Ḍa‘if* (weak), *mursal*,
*marfu‘*, *majhul*, *maj‘ul* and such Hadith are not authoritative
proof. Some Hadith are *dha‘if* and as such are not credible even though
some such Hadith may be right. Therefore, we cannot consider them
certain due to their numerousness.

Second, among uncertain narrations, we only give credit to those that
give us instructions not those that notify us of a fact. For instance as
it says: Do not consult with women because it will make you weak. The
tone of these Hadith is not instructive such that they entail a
religious decree or duty; rather, they are recommendatory.

Another issue is that some of these Hadith are absolute and others
conditional; for example, it excludes: «الّا مَن جُرّبَت بکمال عقلٍ»
meaning: Do not consult, save with a person whose complete intellect has
been proven. If we wish to form a rational conclusion from these Hadith,
we must say: At first do not accept the consultation of women, because
their opinion is typically weak and makes one timid, except those whose
competences have been proven. Thus, it is clear that one may consult
with and act upon the opinions of wise women.

There are also similar narrations regarding men. There are narrations
that recommend consulting with wise persons and not to consult with
injudicious individuals. Thus, the same has been said of men.
Ultimately, we can say that if a person wishes to consult with another,
whether male or female, they should first get to know the person,
whether he or she is benevolent, wise, and righteous and there is no
difference between men and women in this respect.

The Prophet (S) and Imams (‘a) themselves consulted with women on
occasion. Such as regarding the *Peace of Hudaibiyyah* when the Prophet
(S) signed the peace treaty with the polytheists, he and his followers
had already put on their pilgrim’s garb in order to make pilgrimage at
Mecca and circumambulate the *Ka‘bah*. However, according to the treaty,
it was agreed that the Muslims would not do the *Hajj* that year. The
Prophet (S) instructed his followers to become *muhill* (to take off
their pilgrim’s garb and withdraw from state of the pilgrimage).

This was very hard for his followers because when a person becomes
*muhrim* (enters the state of pilgrimage) they should only become
*muhill* after they have circumambulated the *Ka‘bah*. Withdrawing from
the state of pilgrimage was not acceptable to them. Thus, even though
the Prophet (S) himself clearly instructed them to become *muhill*, they
did not obey him. The Prophet (S) returned to his tent.

Umm Salmah, his wife, declared, ‘O Prophet of Allah! Why are you
disturbed?’ He replied, ‘I gave this instruction and the people did not
obey.’ Umm Salmah suggested, ‘O Prophet of Allah! Sacrifice a sheep, and
transgress by becoming *muhill* and do not pay attention to what the
people do. Thus, the Prophet (S) did this in their presence and everyone
followed his lead.

There were also many instances where Ali (‘a) consulted with Fatimah
(‘a). Regardless of such Hadith, the Imams (‘a) would consult with
women. However, due to the conditions of the time, because women were
less active in the society and had less social experience it was advised
that people not consult with women, because they were not complete in
their social knowledge and understanding; however, these Hadith were not
said for the purpose of keeping women from entering the society. The
presence of women in the society leads to development of their minds and
better judgment.

Another point here is that if we maintain that exceptions contain
important meaning, when a narration instructs against consultation with
women other than those with proven complete intellects, we can deduce
that taking counsel from women with verified wisdom is not only not
prohibited, but it is even recommended in Hadith.

Nevertheless, Islam does stress and endorses consultation and it is
helpful for a person to consult with anyone who is competent and worthy.
In addition, various Hadith advise consultation with women and children
regarding their own affairs, because they know more about their own
issues. Basically, if we wish to discuss narrations regarding deficiency
of intellect and similar issues, we must individually scrutinize each
Hadith on this issue.

• In various Hadith there are sayings regarding the undesirability of
the presence of women at Friday Prayer, collective prayers, funeral
processions, and the like. Is the presence of women in such activities
absolutely prohibited or were these Hadith due to the circumstances of
the time?

**Reply:** Such Hadith reject the necessity for women to perform actions
that are sometimes difficult and arduous for them; for example, in a
Hadith that Jabir ibn Ju‘fi cites from Imam Baqir (‘a) it is said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
«لیس علی النساء أذانٌ و لا إقامةٌ و لا جمعة و لا جماعة و لا عیادة
المریض و لا اتباع الجنازة و لا إجهارٌ بالتلبیة و لا الهرولة بین الصفا
و المروة و لا استلام الحجر الاسود و لا دخول الکعبة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Adhan*, *Iqamah*, Friday Prayer, collective prayer, visiting the sick,
escorting funeral processions, saying *Talbiyah* loudly in *Ihram*,
running between *Safa* and *Marwah*, touching and kissing the Black
Stone [*hajar ul-aswad*] (in the Ka‘bah), and entering the *Ka‘bah* are
not obligatory for women.[^25]

Most of the narrations use similar wordings. My understanding of the
matter is that because of various complications and preoccupations that
women have, such as fostering and training children, Islam sympathizes
with them; thus, Islam has released them of various obligations, but has
not prohibited those actions. In this way, Islam has shown consideration
for women. Consideration is not restriction. It does not say: do not;
rather, you do not have to. If you can and it is suitable, you are able.

Of course, some Hadith are not like this. They might say, for example, a
woman’s prayer is superior at home. By considering all such Hadith, it
seems that they intend to appease women so that they do not feel that
they are sustaining loss if they cannot present themselves for
collective prayer because it is greatly encouraged. If they had told
women not to present themselves for collective prayer, women would
surely become upset because they felt obliged to pray collectively.

These narrations wish to console women in that, if they have a problem
or reason for not attending collective prayer, they can pray at home and
God will bestow upon them the same reward and excellence. My opinion
regarding all such Hadith is the same. Of course, I do not consider it
unlikely that such Hadith were stated due to prevailing conditions and
problems for the presence of women in such affairs.

The credentials of narrations that state that it is better for women to
pray inside their homes must be investigated for their correctness and
credibility. If their credentials are correct, that it is said to be
better for women to pray inside their homes can be considered to be
intended for times when women cannot attend collective prayer so that
they are not upset because of the excellence and rewards they have lost.

In consequence, the presence of women in cultural and political centers
such as mosques and various other assemblies, and their participation in
social activities are desirable and advisable, and there is no problem
with these things. In fact, they are responsible in these affairs as
members of the society and must fulfill their roles. Women must perform
these activities, such as participating in communal demonstrations and
performing behind the lines support tasks, while observing the terms and
conditions of such work.

• What is your opinion regarding social, political, and economic
activities of women and their employment in current conditions?

**Reply:** Regarding social, political, and economic activities of women
I should first say that like men, women can be active in all social,
political, and economic arenas and there is no religious prohibition in
any of these areas. There are however two points of controversy. One is
the field of judgeship: some religious jurisprudents regard it
permissible for women to be a judge, and others do not. Also there is
disagreement as to whether women can hold high government offices such
as the presidency. However, they are completely free and without
restrictions in all other fields. Of course, keeping their
characteristics in mind, women must choose a compatible and suitable
job.

One of the characteristics of women that I previously mentioned is their
elegance, beauty, and delicateness; these are some of their merits. Not
only are these not deficiencies, they are perfections. Preserving these
merits is to their own advantage, and to the advantage of their families
and ultimately, the society. Accordingly, performing heavy jobs that are
not compatible with these characteristics is not recommended, including
coarse jobs such as trucking, desert jobs, road and building
construction, long and taxing overnight jobs, and jobs in polluted
environments that harm the beauty and delicateness of women such as
ironworks, mine working, equipment mechanics, etc. Also, laborious
agricultural occupations that put health at risk and blemish skin by
long hours in the sun are also of this type. It cannot be said that such
lines of work are prohibited for women; nevertheless, they are not in
their interests.

Another quality in women is their emotionalism and this again is not a
weakness but perfection. It can be a source of many beneficial effects.
Of course, some men are also sentimental; be that as it may, women are
more so. When choosing a line of employment, it is better that women
refrain from professions that are not compatible with their
emotionalism. A military commander must give the order to attack, kill,
and destroy. Naturally, some people will get killed. There will be wails
and screams. Hence, an emotional person might be influenced; their
emotions will clash with their duties and will harm the well-being of
the country. Also, professions that require execution of disciplinary
punishment and sentences such as dealing lashes are not compatible with
the delicate nature of women. They may violate their duties or suffer
the loss or detriment of their emotions and mentalities.

Naturally, there are exceptions. Some women may not be like this, but
most are. The Hadith regarding judgeship of women and jurisprudents that
regard this profession unsuitable for women effectuate from this truth.
It is natural that this profession is not suitable for women because, as
a rule, one side will lose. A person who loses sometimes grieves,
pleads, weeps, makes threats, sends people to beg their case or
intimidate the judge, or exhibits a meek or oppressed attitude.
Characteristically, due to their compassion, sympathy, and kindness
women take pity and might be influenced. Even though there may be
exceptions, the law must encompass the majority of circumstances.

Another attribute of women is that they are more and better prepared for
training and edifying children. Of course, men also are fit for this and
do have this duty; however, the tenderness and affection of women helps
them to be more worthy for this task. Even though training children is a
common duty of a father and mother, the important role of women in this
affair cannot be overlooked. If there is no husband, a mother can still
train her children but the opposite is extremely difficult.

Women must never forget this basic power and merit that they are
prepared and able to train children. They must endeavor to choose a job
that is not in conflict with this human responsibility and great
service. There may be no work more important and influential for the
welfare and happiness of the entire society than the profession of
training human beings. A pivotal issue that women must anticipate is the
perseverance and preservation of the institution of family. The
responsibility to uphold the family is for both men and women. Men must
choose jobs that do not harm their families. Women also must be careful
that their occupation does not clash with the perpetuation of the
family.

Another issue is that it is not expedient for women to work in jobs that
entail excessive contact and relations among males and females because
in addition to causing mental pressure and work delays, immoderate
mixture and relations of the sexes may bring about corruption and damage
the delicate fabric of the families just as we witness in the West. In
my opinion, these aspects necessitate that women observe restrictions in
their work. Again, I underscore the fact that it must not be concluded
from this discussion that some occupations are forbidden or *haram* for
women; rather, heeding these issues prevents problems for women, their
families, and their society while they can still work and have an
influential presence in the community.

On the other hand, some jobs are completely suitable and even advisable
for women. These include professions in teaching which do not
incorporate any of the above hazards. Women can occupy jobs in all tiers
of education and training, from the most elementary and rudimentary
levels to the highest and if possible in completely independent and
self-governed environs. These are the best of jobs which are compatible
with their nature and elegance. As I have previously stated, some lines
of occupation are necessities for women. Women must endeavor to be
self-sufficient in all affairs regarding health and treatment, including
education, administration, and implementation. There is no problem with
them providing services for men also, but it would be very good if they
were independent of men in this area.

Other fields of work that are suitable for women include scientific,
literary, cultural, and artistic activities. Work such as scientific
research in various fields, writing, painting, sewing, and carpet
weaving are all quite appropriate for women. They are also compatible
with housework and rearing children. Some people might think that carpet
weaving is not an appropriate job—but what is wrong with it? It is a
delicate and beautiful undertaking in which a person creates gorgeous
works of art with their hands and also helps their own livelihood and
their country. Nowadays, women can also do many interesting and useful
tasks with a computer in scientific and artistic fields. Regardless, I
suggest that women not stay unemployed. I would like to see all women
work at their own leisure; however, they must observe the necessary
criteria.

• What is your opinion regarding the profession of household management?

**Reply:** A policy of the previous regime was to annihilate household
management as a profession and promote it as a type of unemployment and
this lowered its status. Of course, this has changed to some extent
after the Revolution. Even so, housewives are not considered as part of
the workforce and are not influential in economic growth and development
in official statistics and their output is not considered to be part of
the gross national product! All in all, we might say that the role of
housewives is disregarded in human and social development.

Housewifery is essential for the survival of families. It is not merely
the performance of household services—it is a much more significant
matter. Maintaining and managing this establishment, which also includes
human aspects such as taking care of one’s husband and children which we
could call *wifecraft* and *mothercraft* respectively, are primary and
chief requirements of all societies. It is surely not frivolous or
futile but exceedingly valuable and precious. If the internal affairs of
a household are not managed well, the family is greatly harmed.

Normally, women take the responsibility of housewifery upon themselves.
From a financial point of view, the cost of this occupation is
considerable so that if neither the man nor the woman of the house takes
it upon themselves to work at home, the management of the household will
become crippled and someone else must be found to manage the home. In
this case, a large salary must be paid for fulltime management of the
household—and even so no hired household staff will make the same
efforts as the lady of the house.

The matter of taking care of children is also entirely different. If a
couple chooses to send their children to a childcare center in order
that they care for them like a mother, the couple must pay a large
portion of their salary for this. Therefore, housewifery has economic
value and both men and women must keep this in mind. This is why I
believe housewifery is a very important and respectable profession and
men must appreciate the value of a housewife. Husbands must realize that
due to the work of their wives, they are exempt from great expense and
it would be good and worthy for husbands who are wealthy enough to give
their wives the money that they save them.

In Iran it has been legislated that if a man and woman choose to
divorce, half of the wealth the man has gained after marriage belongs to
the woman. If we judge righteously, it is evident that this is mostly
fair. Women must be optimistic and hopeful regarding their lives; they
must know that they are truly partners of their husbands in life. Some
women decide to work outside their homes because they fear that if their
husbands choose to divorce them they will have to leave his house empty
handed. Hence, we must respect women and truly appreciate the value of
their work. I advise women to give top priority to the home and
household management and, as long as there is no necessity, I recommend
that they refrain from choosing occupations that harm the household
management.

In general, housewifery can help the society in two other ways. First,
the endeavors of a mother at home and her struggle to correctly train
her children helps the children grow well in a family full of love and
affection. A child that is saturated with proper love and is nurtured
with proper training usually does not go after corruption and does not
become tainted and can be useful to the society. Truly, housewives
manage the future of the society. All the services men do for the
society is a result of the endeavors of women. Imam Khomeini (q)[^26]
also stated, ‘Men ascend to heaven from the laps of women’. This means
that if men do something important and attain great ranks it is due to
the services and training of their mother and this is no laughing
matter.

Second, in addition to the fact that the work of women at home is, in
itself, beneficial and necessary, it influences the quality of other
people’s work. If the husband and other members of the household live in
a warm and congenial environment, they can be more successful in the
society—in scientific research, political work, economic endeavors, and
everything in general. Thus, housewives are full partners in the
activities and successes of their husbands.

If it were not for the support, sympathy, and hard work of women, Mr.
President, Mr. Minister, or even Mr. Scientist who work outside would
not be very successful. In truth, their wives have as much part in their
success as they do; both regarding the social value of the activities
and their outcomes. It is very delightful and beautiful for ministers to
be able to consult their spouses at home on various issues, to gain
morale and help from them and to depend on them.

Therefore, even if a housewife does not get out much but is able to have
a good effect from her home, she is truly influential in the economics
and politics of the society. She must not belittle her existence or
think that success and service can only be achieved in jobs outside the
home.

When ‘Allamah Tabataba’i’s (q) wife passed away, he wept much. One day I
told him in private, ‘We must learn patience and forbearance from you.
Why are you so agitated?’ He replied, ‘The truth is that my distress for
my wife concerns my feelings and devotion for her. This woman gave me
such help and support that I can never forget her.’ After a while he
told me of his difficulties regarding the time he lived in *Najaf* until
he got to where he said, ‘In order to write my exegesis, sometimes I
would concentrate and work for eight hours straight. Sometimes I would
have to contemplate an issue for four hours.

On the one hand, I was tired and on the other hand if someone wanted to
come to me and talk my train of thought would be broken. Then I would
have to deliberate all over again. My wife understood this. She would
always leave the samovar on and when I would go into my room to work in
the morning, she would not disturb me. She would manage the house and do
the housework.

At the outset of each hour she would bring me a cup of tea and without
saying anything she would put it before me and leave. She would do this
as long as I was in my workroom. If she had not helped me in this manner
I would not have been able to perform my scientific research as I have.
She was a partner in my work and that is why I am upset. Because how can
I forget her kindnesses?’ The lamented ‘Allamah said this and started to
weep.

The great thinker ‘Allamah Tabataba’i considers his great exegesis,
*Tafsir-e Al-Mizan*, indebted to the sacrifices and devotion of his wife
who would correctly and wisely manage the household. If this woman was a
discordant person how could ‘Allamah Tabataba’i have performed his
work?! Doubtless this woman is a partner in all the accomplishments of
the ‘Allamah; both in worldly aspects and otherworldly rewards. In a
meeting where I was talking about the excellences of the ‘Allamah I
mentioned this story and said that we must also respect and be grateful
to the ‘Allamah’s wife. May God bless both of them!

Managing the household is not an easy task. It is an art; an art that
not all women have. Unfortunately, in our society the value of the
profession of household management is not appreciated. This important
job must be seen as an independent discipline and requires special
research and training.

For example, there must be a class called household management in high
school and boys and girls must study this as part of the curriculum.
Many women wish to be good housewives but do not know how. I completely
endorse that classes be established in high school and even university
in which youths, both young women and men, can become experts and
authorities on the subject. I have also said this before: it would be
good if every man and woman attended a course regarding home management,
*‘spousecraft’*, and other necessary issues before marriage in order to
lessen conflicts and so that they utilize their facilities and
capacities in the best possible manner.

Women must observe precepts when choosing an occupation inside or
outside the home and they should also be aware of the dignity of every
position. For example, even at home it is not in the interests of women
for them to do heavy or dirty jobs. The occupational laws of the country
must adhere to these points and amenities must be prepared in the
interests of women and families.

Some women are inclined to heavy-duty professions and disciplines and if
we tell them that these are not in their interests they consider it to
be a personal insult. This might be an extreme reaction to past
restrictions, which makes them deem it of great value to take on jobs
that are more suited to men.

However, the restrictions that we have in mind for women are not for the
reason of belittling them or considering them weak or flawed beings. Our
reason is that some professions are more suited to the special genesis
of women. If a woman is prepared to endure hardships and become, for
example, a mechanic of heavy machinery, well, that is her own choice and
it is not *haram*. However, there are better jobs for her to do and they
are more advantageous to her and the society.

The truth is women were very restricted in the past and they were
prohibited from jobs that were suited to them. This caused an opposite
reaction and now some women say that men think that they cannot. So they
say: We will do these jobs to show men that we can indeed. In order to
resolve this problem, first we must realize the true value of the jobs
women do; for example, we must conduct extensive cultural promotion
regarding the importance of housewifery. We must encourage, praise, and
honor the profession of household management.

Second, as I have mentioned, men must realize the worth of women and
consider them full partners in their income and provide them with their
fair share so that women sense their true importance and feel secure and
so they do not consider jobs suited to them restrictive or undignified.

Regarding the effect of unsuited occupations on the souls of women I
must say: It is hard for a woman to preserve her female characteristics,
delicateness, and spiritual elegance in strenuous and punishing
conditions and coarse jobs and effectively put distance between
impersonal work demands and the softness and calm that she must apply at
home and in training her children. For this reason, it is better for men
to perform jobs that entail such hardships, because they have more
endurance in these areas. When each person takes up a part of an
undertaking which is more suitable for their mentality and abilities,
great works can be completed with the participation of both genders.
Everyone has a part in managing the society; however, women in one way
and men in another.

If complete facilities are provided for women in areas that are suited
to them and they are encouraged to become self-sufficient in these
areas, it would be far better for their identity than seeking jobs that
are not in their interests. Even though we will not ban these
professions, it is not necessary for us to encourage them. If we express
gratitude for the positive advances of women, they will think about
these things themselves. For example, women can have positive roles in
political arenas such as the parliament. They can perform cultural work
and have influence although in my opinion there are some cultural jobs
that are not in the interests of women.

• In what sort of artistic areas can women become active?

**Reply:** In general, women have the capability and ability for
artistic work; however, every job is different. Some jobs are alright;
such as painting, sewing, writing, etc. On the other hand, some jobs may
sometimes be problematic for women. For instance, acting and the
presence of women in some roles and stages and coming before millions of
people can put the stability of their family life in jeopardy. I have
seen time and again that the shared lives of such individuals has ended
in divorce.

Sometimes actresses call me and talk of such problems. Here, I must
advise women that even if their husbands agree with their artistic
endeavors, they must completely perceive their husbands’ feelings and
when they choose to present themselves on stage, they must accept jobs
that do not cause sensitivity. If their husbands are not satisfied,
their common life shall be shattered. Their children will become
motherless or fatherless. Regardless, great care must be taken in
artistic and cultural work so that the talents of women are utilized but
no moral, social, or familial problems arise.

These days, the inclination for artistic activities, especially acting,
has risen among youth and young women in particular. Acting is one of
the professions and fields that receives much attention and has many
supporters. On the other hand, due to the points of moral vulnerability
in these fields, which sometimes influence the workplace, naturally,
religious persons look upon such fields with doubt and seek them out
much less. This results in fewer religious individuals in artistic and
cultural areas. This is a prevalent problem and under such conditions we
cannot be successful in the cultural encounter with foreign countries.

We need films, cinema and television. We must defend the positive
aspects of our culture. Many values have been weakened in the West.
Modesty is a human value. We must do something to preserve our values
while also providing for our needs and requirements. Adhering to
religious precepts is very instrumental. For example, if it is necessary
for a young woman to play a part in a movie, adherence to religious
precepts results in less sensitivity. If moral issues and *Hijab* are
observed, laughter and allurements that are out of place are avoided and
matters of *mahram* and non-*mahram* are completely observed, it is
evident that such acting will not result in calamities and negative
effects in families and the society. If moral limits are honored it is
both to the advantage of the actors and the society.

Performers must not think that viewers will get only what the actors
intend. Viewers perceive more generally. Polite, reasonable, and
honorable behavior between male and female actors teaches women and men
who are watching the scene to act the same. On the other hand, an
undignified and immodest performance between actors also sets a negative
example for the society. Thus, we who wish to promote our culture and
influence others must realize that film-making and acting are very
delicate matters—much more delicate than we think. Sometimes artists pay
less attention to such matters and desire more that their work be
interesting or entertaining for viewers; whereas, if they conform to
these issues, they can greatly help improve the morality of the society.

Naturally, negative roles are sometimes necessary in movies and
observance of ethical and religious criteria ties the hands of the
artists in fulfilling their roles as desired. Sometimes actors show
demeanors that are not typical of the personality of their role; for
example, they act tactlessly and perform rude and loathsome gestures in
a *Chadur* and act dignified and pleasant in inappropriate clothing.
Nevertheless, it seems that this issue requires special care and
original methods and approaches must be formulated.

In this regard, I advise that positive aspects are shown as much as
possible because whether we like it or not the negative aspects are
influential. Even when the film-maker intends to criticize the negative
points by presenting them, some viewers take pattern after these same
negative points. The training background of some people is such that,
for example, when they see actors swear, curse, and use foul language,
they learn, imitate, and take pattern after them even if one’s intention
is to criticize this behavior. If a positive character and a negative
one is introduced, some people incline toward the good protagonist and
set that one as their role model and others, according to their
temperament, lean toward the antagonist—the one that was intended to be
condemned. Hence, I advise that negative aspects be used as little as
possible and only where necessary.

• What is your opinion regarding political activeness of women?

**Reply:** The presence of women in political arenas can have a decisive
role in the society. If women congregate they can be very influential in
various orientations. In the demonstrations at the time Islamic
Revolution and also arenas after the Revolution such as war and
elections, women proved that they are very influential in some areas.
When we see the votes of the elected, we see that women had great unity
and presence in order to bring about such results and this is very
important. Women can have a fateful role in choosing the president and
can cause the election of a president other than the one men might have
chosen.

This is no small matter. There is no problem with women having more
presence than men in the parliament. Their presence on the seats of the
parliament has been satisfactory until now. The important thing is: How
active are they? If women can bring representatives that truly have
authority and influence, and are indeed active it would be very good
because all members of the parliament are not so active. Only a minority
are truly active, so if women can increase the active members by sending
in active and thoughtful women, this can greatly help them defend their
rights even though nowadays many men do defend the rights of women, even
more than women themselves.

Another issue is the organization of women. Having organization is very
good because people work better when organized, especially when they
spread their organization throughout the country—they can both select
better representatives and better demand their desires from their
representatives. This can be very influential and cause men to think
higher of them. I believe the organization of women must be thoroughly
thought out. First, it should not be like a union or be gender-biased in
that they only think about themselves and about defending their own
rights because if it is like this it will only restrict them.

Second, in addition to supporting the true interests of women, they
should have a hand in the main affairs of the country. Women must know
who to choose and they must keep in mind all economic, cultural, and
religious issues of the country. If women do not restrict themselves to
only women, and work for the whole society, they will have more
influence and this organization will cause them to gain power and lead
to men counting on them more.

• Can women also hold positions of judgeship or government rule?

**Reply:** The two issues of judgeship, government rule (women being at
the head of the government), and such are religious jurisprudential
issues that have been analyzed and explored in books on religious
jurisprudence [*fiqh*]. Jurisprudents have varying opinions regarding
these matters. Some declare them permissible, others *haram*, others
*makruh*. This is a matter of controversy. First we must note that these
issues are matters of *taqlid* (following a religious jurisprudent or
*faqih*).

Our tradition is one of *taqlid* and religious jurisprudence. In
*taqlid*-related issues we must refer to the religious jurisprudent that
each of us has accepted and ultimately they shall give the decisive
opinion. Therefore, when it is stated in a speech or magazine that
something is permissible or not permissible, some become confused. In
effect, all disciplines have experts and the experts of these issues are
religious jurisprudents.

The second issue is that my recommendation to religious jurisprudents is
that they should see that times have changed and many things are
different from the past. Fundamental changes have been made. Iran is not
separate from other countries. Women are not apart from other societies.
We can no longer govern women like in the past. The people of our
society have become acquainted with the conditions and thoughts of other
people of the world and their expectations have risen.

We expect the great *faqihs* to examine women’s issues with a
wide-ranging and liberal view and to clarify our responsibilities
regarding these matters based on solid and substantial jurisprudential
sources of reference so that there is no need for the opining of
non-authoritative and possibly unrighteous persons.

Of course, other scholars can, if they are well-versed in religious
jurisprudence and heed such issues, discuss these subjects. Such
discussions can be useful for religious jurisprudents and might
influence their religious opinions. However, the ultimate decision
belongs to religious jurisprudents and the bounds of the tradition of
religious jurisprudence must not be broken in jurisprudential issues.

[^1]: - In Islam, those who go to jihad are considered victors whether
they live or die because if they live, it is because they have defeated
the enemy and if they ‘die’, they attain the rank of martyr [shahid],
which is one of the highest ranks one may attain in Islam. According to
the Quran, the shahid is not dead, but lives on even though we cannot
perceive them. [trans.]

[^2]: - Surah Isra’ 17:70.

[^3]: - Surah Tin 95:4.

[^4]: - Surah Hijr 15:30.

[^5]: - Surah Baqarah 2:31.

[^6]: - Ibid 2:34.

[^7]: - Surah Baqarah 2:35.

[^8]: - Allamah is a title imparted upon only those with extensive
knowledge in many diverse fields. [trans.]

[^9]: - Surah Hujurat 49:13.

[^10]: - Surah Hujurat 49:13.

[^11]: - Surah Nahl 16:97.

[^12]: - Ibid 16:97.

[^13]: - Surah Al ‘Imran 3:195.

[^14]: - Ibid 3:42.

[^15]: - Surah Tahrim 66:11.

[^16]: - Surah Zumar 39:9.

[^17]: - Surah Mujadilah 58:11.

[^18]: - Surah Hajj 22:46.

[^19]: - Surah Yunus 10:100.

[^20]: - Surah Jathiyah 45:13.

[^21]: - Usul-e Kafi, vol. 5, p. 516.

[^22]: - The ability to understand a true Hadith due to its divine
eloquence (ed.).

[^23]: - Surah Nisa’ 4:34.

[^24]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 100, p. 250.

[^25]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 254.

[^26]: - This is short for quddisa sirruhu, which means may his grave be
sanctified. [trans.]


