Common Rights of Women and Men
==============================

• What are the common rights of men and women?

**Reply:** Islam does not regard women and men any different in their
humanness and it considers this principle so obvious that it does not
feel the need to openly stress this issue in the Quran or Hadith. Hence,
whenever a Quranic verse or Hadith addresses humans, both men and women
are intended. At the advent of Islam even in ‘civilized’ nations there
was a controversy as to whether women were human or not or perhaps
half-human.

The case of human rights has only become global for about a century.
Assuredly, Islam has discussed this topic from the very beginning and
has determined and validated various rights. The issues I shall
subsequently discuss regarding women’s rights are the same that are
sometimes discussed as human rights, which are common among women and
men. Here I shall itemize several of the most important points:

1. The Right to Live and Exist
------------------------------

As living beings, humans have the right to continue their lives and no
one has the right to take this right away from them without religiously
and legally legitimate grounds.

2. The Right to Freedom
-----------------------

Every person, man and woman, has been created free and this freedom has
been ingrained upon every soul. No one has the right to deprive any
person of this freedom unless it causes conflict with the freedom of
others or divergence from their own or the society’s interests.

3. The Right to Utilize Natural Resources
-----------------------------------------

We live in a world that requires of us various needs: water, air, food,
clothing, etc. We must be able to consume food, oxygen, and the like.
Resources such as mines, forests, jungles, and seas belong to the people
and naturally, humans have the right to utilize them. No one has the
right to prevent us unless this right conflicts with the rights of
others. It is the same regarding the right of residency.

Because humans require a home, naturally, they have the right to obtain
a home for themselves within the boundaries of their country or city, or
anywhere else for that matter. Of course, it is established that this
must be according to a specific regulative system, which is a necessity
for social life and required for providing public interests.

In all of these points, we state that due to our human nature and
according to primary principles, we have such rights. Naturally, if our
use of these rights entails violation and infringement upon the rights
of individuals or the society, they must assuredly be restricted. For
example, the right to live of a person who performs acts of aggression
against the lives of others or puts the security of the society in
danger cannot be said to be respectable and secure. In fact, such
persons divest themselves of this right and civil law, whose rank is
just after human rights, shall determine what must be done regarding
them.

4. The Right to Health Care and Sanitation
------------------------------------------

In order to protect their lives and health, as humans, women and men
have the right to enjoy a healthy and hygienic environment and make use
of what they require for treatment and eliminating illness. This is a
natural right of all humans and no one can legitimately obstruct them
from it.

5. The Right to Employment
--------------------------

A prerequisite for providing living expenses is work. Thus, in order to
resolve one’s needs, men and women have the right to work and the fruits
of every person’s toils belong to themselves. Whoever works for another
person must receive fair wages. Fair wages means compensation for the
amount of work that is done, regardless of whether the employee is man
or woman, black or white.

Every person has the right to receive compensation for the work they do.
One cannot say to their employee: because you are a woman you must
receive lower wages for the same amount of work. Islam is completely
against this. According to Islam, if a woman works at home or anywhere
else, she must receive the same income that a man receives. In my
opinion, women are oppressed in this regard all over the world because
usually others take advantage of the needs of women and employ them and
instead of a fair income they give them less pay than a man.

Unfortunately, this is also true in the West and women are used as an
inexpensive workforce. The concept of just rights is not the same as
equal rights. Each person must receive as much pay as the value of their
work. A female worker might work as much as a male worker or even more
and she must receive an equivalent amount of pay for the work she does.
Gender must not be a criterion—the work, its conditions, and its yield
must be the basis for a person’s salary.

### A Sympathetic Word

In current conditions, we have hundreds of thousands of university
graduates in various disciplines, many of which are women who are
usually inclined to work. With the pretext of the equality of the rights
of men and women, those in charge prefer to employ women rather than
unemployed young men because they are content with less pay and are more
compliant. With the current high rates of unemployment, the numbers of
unemployed young men rises every day.

Women are not willing to marry unemployed men and every day the number
of young women and men who cannot marry increases. The age of marriage
has skyrocketed and many people are completely deprived of marriage,
forming a family, and raising children and must live their whole lives
in solitude. Single life is very hard and has many detrimental side
effects.

With the current situation, the foundations of family are in great
jeopardy. Government officials must find a remedy for this problem.
Also, women must not neglect the issue of timely marriage and formation
of a family when choosing a university field and job. They must
cooperate with men otherwise they will have many regrets.

6. The Right to Possession and Enjoyment of Property
----------------------------------------------------

When a person works legitimately, they become the owner of the proceeds
of their work. The results of one’s work do not belong to anyone else.
By way of example, if a woman works and her husband or father takes her
income, this is oppression. Of course, if she chooses to spend her wages
for her family she may do so.

However, due to the fact that the property belongs to her as a result of
legitimate means, whether through work, inheritance, donation, etc., she
has the right to enjoy or dispose of her properties in any way she likes
and her femaleness does not result in the restriction of her right to
possess and utilize assets.

If a woman obtains some goods and chattels and chooses to give it as a
gift, start a business, hoard it, or donate it for God, she is free to
do so. However, there are some things that neither men nor women may do
even with their own money, such as if a person wishes to set fire to
their own wealth, utilize it in an illegitimate manner, or make use of
it in a way that is harmful to the society. Such usages are forbidden
and there is no difference in this whether one is a woman or man.

7. The Right to Security
------------------------

A person who wishes to live in the society—whether man or woman—needs
security. This means that there must be an environment in which their
lives, possessions, honor, and standing may be safe and in which no one
interferes with their legitimate rights, affairs, and liberties.
Security is the greatest and most important desire of every person.

For women this need must be provided for both in her husband’s home and
in the society. If their security is violated, they have the right to
approach righteous courts with their complaint in order to receive their
rights. If it does not cause a conflict of interest or disorder in the
society, she may directly defend herself and demand her rights. Men and
women are no different in this respect.

Women can advance complaints, take necessary legal steps, hire a lawyer,
speak in court, defend themselves, and perform any necessary actions
their defense might require such as travel or perform any other
legitimate action. In addition to the fact that Islam has not denied
this natural right, it is also obvious that the way of the women at the
advent of Islam was so and the conduct of noble Fatimah (‘a) confirms
this.

In order to get her rights, Fatimah (‘a) made speeches, performed
debates and gave logical reasoning. She spoke in the presence of a great
gathering of people in the Mosque of the Prophet (S) and interpellated
government officials in order to obtain her just rights. These are clear
and apparent issues in Islam.

Women must not say that they are embarrassed to speak out for justice
and others must not say that it is shameful and indecent for women to
demand their own rights! Why is it indecent?! Even others must help in
this regard so that women may better and easier rise to obtain their
just rights.

8. The Right to Legislation and Living in the Presence of Laws
--------------------------------------------------------------

The existence of laws is one of the indispensable items of human social
life. Men and women both have the right to have a part in legislation
and naturally, they have the right to live in the presence of laws and
benefit from the advantages of such laws. No one has the right to have
bias and for example deny the right of women to have a part in
legislation or deprive someone of the protection of the law because they
are a woman.

9. The Right to Participate and Associate in the Government
-----------------------------------------------------------

It is definite and certain that the society requires government. The
prerequisite for enforcing laws is that there be a government that has
the responsibility for bringing order to the society. Women and men
alike, as citizens who have the right to participate in choosing their
futures, can have a part in the government and its determination.
Naturally, presence in the prerequisites of this affair is also
everyone’s right.

Establishment of unions and political parties, participation in various
groups, taking part in elections and other political activities are
several of the rights of all people, including women.

Women may form groups and defend the rights of men, women, and their
whole country. They must not only think of their own affairs. They must
also take the rights of the oppressed into consideration. If they think
of these things also, they shall be much more successful. The useless
rivalry and separation between men and women must not be provoked. While
preserving religious and legal criteria, women must act in the interests
of the whole society and all humans.

10. The Right to Choose a Spouse
--------------------------------

Just as men have the right to choose who to marry, so also when women
arrive at the age of marriage, they have the right to choose a husband
for themselves. A woman is free to choose a husband and no one may force
her to marry or bar her from marriage. No one has the right to force a
woman or maiden to marry a certain person. Fathers, mothers, relatives,
nor any other person or persons may force her into an imposed or
arranged marriage. Humans are completely free in choosing a legitimate
spouse and there may be no coercion or compulsion involved.

11. The Right to Have and Raise Children
----------------------------------------

Having children is a natural need and right. Humans regard having
children as a method of perpetuating their existence. Women and men have
the right to have children. If a man tells his wife that he does not
want children at all, he can say that but that is only his side of the
matter; the rights and desires of women must not be disregarded.
Therefore, civil laws must preserve both their rights in some manner.
Every man and woman has the right to train their children as they deem
fit—in a legitimate manner. This is a natural desire and feeling that
exists in all women and men. This issue requires a lengthier and clearer
discussion in the area of family rights and I shall end it here.

12. The Right to Think and Have Opinions and Beliefs
----------------------------------------------------

Women are sapient and so are men. Having reason and thought is a
characteristic of both. When God gives someone a blessing, they have the
right to make use of it. It goes without saying that as a consequence of
thought, people arrive at an opinion or belief. This belief may be about
issues spiritual and otherworldly or social and worldly. In any event, a
person’s belief is respectable, regardless of the way they are achieved.

True, others may give them advice and ask that they revise their
beliefs. They may debate and refute their beliefs, but they cannot force
them to change their views. For example, a person believes in God and
someone tells them not to. Or a person has not yet apprehended the
existence of God. No one may put others under pressure and condemn and
imprison them because they could not accept their beliefs!

So, they could not accept them, so what? They can bring them logical
reasons, guide them, and encourage them to think in a certain manner in
order to rectify their beliefs. However, if ultimately the person says,
‘I do not agree with what you are telling me’, one cannot punish the
person because they do not accept our views or are uncertain regarding
them.

I must declare that some people protest Islam’s decree regarding
apostates [*murtad*] and maintain that it conflicts with freedom of
belief as one of the natural rights of humans. They say: If a Muslim
becomes skeptical regarding the righteousness of their religion or one
of its pillars and cannot accept it, why do you deny their right to
live?

In short, I must say that this issue does not concern a natural right;
rather, it goes back to the social and political rights of humans. Just
as individuals have rights, the society also has rights that must be
preserved. For example, at the advent of Islam some unbelievers would
instruct their friends to accept Islam and then renounce and repudiate
it after they were known as Muslims. This was a conspiracy for weakening
the faith of the people and harming the society of Muslims. This is one
of the motives for this decree.

The beliefs of people must be respected. Men and women are the same.
However, if it goes beyond just believing and grows into expression of
belief—meaning if a person intends to harm the beliefs of others, whose
beliefs are also respectable, by promoting their own individual
beliefs—civil rights and laws must determine the boundaries of freedom
and naturally, special restrictions and regulations are necessary.

All human rights are such that when they attain social manifestation,
like it or not, they are faced with conflicts. These conflicts prevent
them from being realized in their pure forms; rather, they require
special molds and channels. The spirit of these principles must be
introduced in the form of constitutional laws and civil rights so that
all people may benefit from the highest amount of rights and freedom
possible and so that nobody’s freedom debars the freedom of others.

One of the necessities of freedom in belief is that if someone must
perform specific rites and ceremonies as a result of their belief, it is
their right and no one may obstruct them from or interfere with it.

13. The Right to Seek Knowledge
-------------------------------

Liberty in seeking knowledge is a human right which has been extensively
discussed previously. In short, women are as free as men in acquiring
knowledge and there is no need to repeat the discussion.

14. The Right to Spiritual and Mystical Improvement
---------------------------------------------------

Humans have the capacity and ability for spiritual improvement and
intellectual advancement. Thus, women and men have the right to strive
for lofty spiritual ranks and attain spiritual perfection and
transcendent refinement and no one has the right to bar anyone from this
path.

This was a summary of the rights woman have as humans. All people are
obligated to accept these rights. Not only must everyone refrain from
subverting these rights, they must also struggle to help defend them.
The government and others are responsible for the fulfillment of these
rights and must provide the instruments for the attainment of women’s
rights.

• What is the meaning of ‘natural rights’ and ‘acquired rights’?

**Reply:** Two types of rights can be conceived for humans: natural
rights and acquired rights. Natural rights are rights whose source and
provenance is the special genesis of humans. Such rights do not require
laws or conventions. Every “natural capacity” is a basis for a “natural
right”. The reason that these rights are equal or equivalent for all
humans is that no human is born superior, dominant, or subservient to
others and the social systems of human life are not natural (inborn) or
fatalistic. Jobs, posts, and responsibilities are not distributed by
nature. Therefore, these rights belong to everyone and every human
individual benefits from them according to nature. As these rights do
not need to be formulated, no one can take them away and obstruct others
from these rights. Regarding these rights, color, race, femaleness,
maleness, or other differences or advantages are unimportant and no one
is different. For example, the rights to learn or marry are rights that
have been chronicled by the genesis of humanity and nature itself.
Someone who attempts to prove such rights have nothing new to say. They
can only recite obvious and definite truths. Correspondingly, those who
attempt to deny such rights are in conflict with logic, nature, and the
human genesis.

It is of primal importance to observe and honor the natural rights of
others. Thus, constitutional and civil laws must be legislated based on
natural and inherent rights and under no condition must they violate or
conflict with such rights.

If laws do not conflict with foundational rules and principles—some of
which have been enumerated—their differences and temporal development
must be considered a result of prevailing conditions and changes in
circumstances. For instance, in a society it may be necessary to
designate various restrictions and regulations for facilitating
administration so that everyone may equally enjoy their natural rights,
such as restrictions in familial marriage, birth control, conditions and
manners of marriage and other contracts, labor laws, property laws, etc.
These laws may differ from country to country. Even so, in similar
circumstances, all humans who are subject to these laws have an equal
right to benefit from them and the law itself determines exceptions, if
any.

Another aspect that is usually regarded in the legislation of laws is
that they must clarify what is to be done when rights are in conflict.
For example, suppose some have a specific contagious disease in which
case the law might bar them from marriage until they are cured. This
deprivation of a natural right is because their enjoyment of their own
right equals the divestment of others of some of their rights. Thus, the
preference is that, in order to preserve the legitimate rights of the
majority and to prevent their loss, the rights and liberties of a
minority are restricted. The law must determine these limitations. It
must secure the rights of the society while also respecting individual
rights and liberties and attempting to further them.

To state matters differently, secondary and specific laws incorporate
the factor of objective truths and adhere to securing and providing the
natural rights of all citizens with respect to specific temporal and
physical conditions. Here, the question exists as to whether, apart from
humanity’s natural needs and attributes and also the necessities of
social life, there are any other factors involved in the formulation of
laws?

In answer we must say: God, the Wise, the Glorified, has created humans
for a specific purpose. He has ingrained some of the prerequisites for
this objective in the nature and constitution of humanity. As an
example, for the perpetuation of the human race, it is part of an
individual’s being to feel the need to marry and have affection for
their children. When determining laws, we do not have the right to
oppose this plan and ideal in a way that jeopardizes the continuance of
humankind. This is one reason that the formation of a ‘family’ by two
members of the same sex cannot be sanctioned.

In addition, each person must choose and pursue various objectives based
on their own principles and values. The development and success of
individuals and societies alike depend upon this. In addition to not
deterring or impeding the journey towards advancement and salvation,
laws must make such paths smother, easier to cross, and brighter. Of
course, as a result of the limits in humanity’s knowledge and
differences in opinion among people, laws that human beings legislate
differ from each other and sometimes even conflict.

Some people state that this discussion has a close and interlaced
relationship with “the relationship of truth and ideology”, or in
different terms “the relationship of truths and requisites”. Can it be
said that requisites (legislated laws) are completely derived from and
based on realities?

This is a basic issue which the late ‘Allamah Tabataba’i, Shahid
Mutahari, and some others have discussed at length. Other authorities do
not agree with their logic. I believe that requisites are based on
realities. Humans have capacities and needs and as a result, they must
fulfill them. As I have stated before, legislative rights and matters
are a response to humanity’s genetic needs and circumstances which
cannot be denied or opposed. However, one point must be kept in mind:
any “requisite” cannot be derived from any “fact”.

If, for instance, science comes to the conclusion that such and such
race is superior to another race in some abilities and features, we may
conclude that each must develop their own greater points of capacity and
their acquired rights must be determined based on their success and
efficiency. We cannot conclude racial bias from such differences because
racism is a formula that is based on an essential difference between
races. If we regard the races different in their humanity, then we can
differentiate their natural rights and merits.

However, because all are identical in their humanity, their natural
rights are absolutely equal. Everyone has the right to freedom,
self-determination, education, political activeness, health, hygiene,
etc. and they must all have complete benefit of the facilities and
rights that are the entitlement of all human beings. Then, if varying
results are achieved after this equal benefit, each person must take
their suitable place in the society and play a role that is most
appropriate to their abilities.

Some assert that there exists equality among all humans in regard to
natural rights. Racial and individual differences have no effect on
these rights. However, because acquired rights are based on the
capacities, endeavors, and circumstances of people, naturally they will
not be equal or similar. Now that there is equality in this matter, is
there a specific rule that can be considered the basis and criterion for
acquired rights?

In answer I must say that one criterion is the manifestation of
capacities. If a person works hard and attains competence in knowledge
and science, management and leadership, or physical prowess, that person
must be situated in his or her appropriate place in life so that their
individual skills are wasted and impeded to the least extent possible.

Another criterion is that benefiting from individual rights must not
cause damage or loss to others or violation of their rights. They must
not even induce detriment in the persons themselves. Also, they must not
cause disorder in or harm to the social system and must not conflict and
cause discord with other human standards and criteria. The corpus of
these criteria may be summarized in the word justice; meaning that no
right may be inharmonious with the principles of justice.

If the use of a right entails injustice, it becomes unjust and loses its
status as a right. It is not permissible or lawful for any woman or man
to violate the rights of others with the pretext of benefiting from
their own rights. This is forbidden on grounds of rights abuse.


