The Noble Zahra (‘a): The Epitome of Women
==========================================

• What was your motive for writing the book *Banu-ye Nimunah-ye Islam*
(The Model Woman of Islam)?

**Reply:** My second work was the book *Banu-ye Nimunah-ye Islam* which
I wrote in the year AH 1349 (approximately AD 1970). For a long time I
was thinking that we must provide the Islamic society with an ideal
family as a paragon with which men and women can learn lessons for all
areas of life. The best family that could be considered for this aim was
the family of ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (‘a) and Zahra (‘a).

This is because, among men, after the Prophet (S), Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a)
and among women, noble Fatimah (‘a) are the best of people and the great
personages of Islam. Because they were Infallible, these two worthy
personalities completely observed all their religious duties and lived
by virtuous Islamic values. Thus, they can be considered models for
families in marriage, social relations, and internal family
relationships including *spousecraft*, raising children, household
management, etc. Hence, I thought to inspect and examine this family and
introduce it as a paragon.

In order to chronicle the family life of these two personages, two
methods were available: One was investigation of their inherent virtues.
Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) and noble Zahra (‘a) each possessed intrinsic
virtues due to their infallibility and investigating these was, in
itself, an extensive affair. The second method was illustration of the
family and to some extent social behavior of these luminaries. This was
my main purpose; even so, I also more or less engaged in the first focus
though my intent for this was also to elucidate the practical program
and behavior of these two great personalities.

At first I believed that our Islamic sources were very rich and profuse
regarding the life of noble Zahra (‘a). However, during my research I
realized that, in fact, we have very few references because the lifespan
of *Hadhrat*[^1] Zahra (‘a) and especially her married life was very
short. In addition, due to her main responsibilities, a large portion of
the life of this guiding light was played out at home and people are
less notified of what goes on within the homes of others. Therefore, we
do not have thorough information regarding the details of *Hadhrat*
Zahra’s (‘a) behavior. Moreover, the women of that age were under
various restrictions and the nature of these restrictions was that no
one realized the details of their behavior. Basically, behavioristic
matters were not considered important enough to mention. Although I was
faced with such problems, I tried to use anything I could, however
miniscule, and extract results.

As I advanced in the study, I became more interested and attracted to
the issue; it achieved a spiritual aspect. The perfect character of
noble Zahra (‘a) had greatly affected me such that many times I cried
while writing. I had become captivated. My inspiration to pursue the
subject further would strengthen by the moment. At this juncture it
seems suitable to reminisce about one of my memories:

When the book was finished I softly spoke to the *Hadhrat*: ‘O Daughter
of the Prophet! If this work is satisfactory and acceptable to you I
desire a reward from you.’ Due to the course of events, I was not able
to go to *Hajj* because I did not wish to go as a caravan cleric or
using similar titles, and I did not want to pay by installments. I also
did not have enough money to go on my own. Naturally, I almost had no
hope. Therefore, I said before the presence of the exalted Sadiqah
Tahirah (‘a): ‘The prize I want from you is a *Hajj* pilgrimage. I want
to go to *Hajj* with my own money and I want my pilgrimage to be
successful.’

One day, I was walking home through *Safa’iah* street in Qum when a man
that I was somewhat acquainted with pulled his car over to the side of
the road and insisted that he take me where I wanted to go. I finally
got into his car. He asked were my house was and took me there. At the
door he said: We want to compile and author religious books for some
Islamic schools in Tehran. We have the permission of the Department of
Education and Training. I want to put you in charge of the work so that
we may prepare a suitable book with the collaboration of some others.

Because I had not worked on children’s books until then, the job seemed
hard for me and I said that I could not. However, he insisted and when
he left he was still adamant that I certainly accept the project. Then
he put two, one thousand toman bills, which had recently entered
circulation at the time, on the mantel and left. For a time, I
endeavored to prepare the preliminaries for the job until he again came
to my house. As much as I tried to evade the job he would not accept and
he said: You are the only one for the job. Again before he left, he put
two one thousand toman bills on the mantel. That made it four thousand
tomans.

The job was forced upon me. At the time, they were registering people
for *Hajj* in *Safa’iah* street. I took the four thousand tomans and
signed up for *Hajj*. I do not remember where I got the rest of the
money (five hundred tomans) that was needed for the pilgrimage. Anyway,
that year I made a pilgrimage to the House of God. After that also I
succeeded in making a few more pilgrimages in the most desirable manner
to *Hajj*. In two of my journeys I was able to visit the interior of the
*Ka‘bah* and I do not see this as anything but the favor of the noble
Zahra (‘a).

It has been over 27 years from the first print of the book *Banu-ye
Nimunah-ye Islam*. By the grace of Allah, the Almighty, the book was
reprinted at least once almost every year. The fact that in the recent
prints it is written 14th or 15th print is because in the past they did
not write the print number and it is much more than that. Every year it
has been reprinted at least once and sometimes even twice. It has also
been translated to some foreign languages. Even though 27 years has
passed from its authorship, it is still considered a new book and this
is due to nothing but the special favor and grace of the lauded Zahra
(‘a).

I have continually tried to add on new content I found in Hadith or the
Quran or things that came to my mind. Its file was always and still is
open to amendment and improvement. Throughout these years I have made
significant changes a few times and have added new content. This may
have had influence in the continuing novelty and freshness of the book.

• What are the criteria for a model woman? Can the passage of time
influence such criteria?

**Reply:** Temporal transition and transformations in the circumstances
of human life do not remold the substructures and fundamentals of human
life. Only superstructures, lifestyle, and forms of human communication
change. The nature and constitution of humans is uniform in all ages and
generations. The Traditions of Allah (i.e. the laws of existence), which
includes the laws governing human life, are all constant and immutable.
The relationships of humans with God, the society—including family—and
nature are relationships that in their essence follow set principles and
cannot change.

As a woman who was enlightened in these values and lived by divine and
human standards, *Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) can serve as a perfect example for
all humans until the end of time. In other words, we can say just as
religion is unchanging and constant, an exemplar may also be constant
and eternal. We need not set details that are not values or basics per
se and are direct results of prevailing circumstances as our paragon.
Rather, we should accurately understand the measures and values derived
from the conduct of the Infallibles (‘a) and execute them in our lives
according to current states of affairs.

Can anyone claim that the essence of choosing and taking a suitable
spouse, simplicity and unpretentiousness in living, reciprocal respect
and mutual understanding among spouses, devotion and sacrifice, defense
of the rights of the family, honesty and integrity, giving importance
and endeavoring to train children, feeling responsibility towards the
society, and similar issues are things whose righteousness and value
transform with the passage of time? All these are seen in the life of
the lofty Zahra (‘a) and people such as she can be a perfect paradigm
for everyone for all time.

• What important and facilitating characteristic in the life of
*Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) has drawn your attention the most?

**Reply:** In truth, the lives of *Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) and Amir
al-Mu’minin (‘a) are intriguing and perfect examples in all aspects.
However, that which most enchanted me was their modest livelihood.
*Hadhrat* ‘Ali (‘a) was the second personage of Islam and the Prophet’s
(S) son-in-law. If it was not for the struggles and selflessness of Imam
‘Ali (‘a) Islam could not have easily attained such success. His was a
superior character in all aspects. Fatimah Zahra (‘a) was both the
greatest of women and the daughter of the Prophet (S) and as such she
was honored by him. Even so, they lived in ultimate simplicity. They
endeavored to keep their livelihood even below the usual and common
level of the times. They endured the hardships of life more than others
and *Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) was completely willing and prepared for this.
This is a very important matter because at the time the Prophet (S) kept
the Islamic funds and taxes and he could for example provide an
extensive trousseau for his daughter or he could have given ‘Ali (‘a)
great sums of money for his services to Islam to help him in his life.
But he did not do this.

The noble Zahra (‘a) observed this value very carefully and endured all
types of hardships with heart and soul and never made excuses or
protests. One day the Prophet (S) saw a curtain in *Hadhrat* Zahra’s
(‘a) house. When he left her house to pray Fatimah (‘a) felt that he got
upset that she had a curtain. She gathered the curtain and sent her
children to take the curtain to the Prophet (S) at the mosque. The
Prophet (S) was elated and said: My daughter has done what I wanted.
Their entire life is imbued with simplicity and in my opinion this is
very important.

• Why is simplicity in livelihood and abstinence from consumerism and
luxury considered a value? Is this recommendable for everyone or only
officials, leaders, and their families?

**Reply:** It is a general principle that wealthy and prosperous people
should help the weak and needy classes. In addition, they must not live
in such a manner that the inclination for luxury is intensified and
fortified among the various social classes and causes the unhappiness of
the lower classes. Islam in no way endorses competition for luxury. That
which one wants to spend for luxury must be spent for social affairs and
helping the poor. However, officials and those that, spiritually or
politically, possess elevated statuses or are great personages must pay
special attention to the matter. If they even wish to live luxuriously
with their own personal and legitimate property and be bound to welfare,
others will also follow this path and the lives of those that are not
economically endowed will become more difficult.

Another detriment to the society in this area is that fundamental
beliefs and values in the minds and hearts of the people will become
undermined. They will say: When our personages act in this manner it is
evident that the cardinal purpose is money and materiality and
spirituality has no real credence.

Even if there were no poor and disadvantaged people in the society and
the extravagance and profligacy of the prosperous did not have a
detrimental effect on others, simplicity in livelihood would still be a
value and duty. This is because Islam is opposed to wastefulness and
prodigality and deems these things indecent even if there are no poor in
the society. Instead of using wealth for luxuries and formalities, it
should be used on the path of growth and perfection of the society so
that the people and society advance in all areas and become powerful.

In order to attain this purpose, we must lessen our material attachment
because the more attachment we humans have to the world the farther we
get from spirituality. However, worldliness is not just having wealth,
welfare, or excellent facilities it is also extreme affection to such
things. A person may be poor not because of their lack of interest in
the world but because even though they were overly fond of the world
they were not successful in attaining wealth or a person may have very
few worldly possessions but love them dearly and be extremely attached
to them.

These human spiritual inclinations may also be influential in the
methods and strategies of acquiring riches. A person who has great love
for worldly chattel seeks it in any way and does not refrain from
injustice, unfairness, oppression, or sin. On the other hand, persons
who are not greatly attached to the world do not see illegitimate paths
open before themselves and abstain from violating the rights of others.

The great Zahra (‘a) was daughter to the Prophet (S) and wife to the
vicegerent of God. The conformance of the life of this luminary with the
values and slogans of the Prophet (S) and *Hadhrat* ‘Ali (‘a), her
simple livelihood, her attention to spirituality, and her high regard
for the interest and benefit of the society were things that can be
considered the secrets of the Holy Prophet’s (S) success.

Of course, the value of simple living is not limited to the time of the
Prophet (S). The people expect all those who claim to be good Muslims,
those who support Islam, those who have gained renown as Islamic
personages or proponents of the Islamic government to live like the
Prophet (S), Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a), and Fatimah Zahra (‘a). If the
people observe simplicity and lack of attachment to the world, they will
become fond of religious authorities, the Islamic government, and
officials. On the other hand, if they see attachment and lavishness and
a chasm between words and deeds, they lose hope in these things.

The trustworthiness of a savant that describes the life of Fatimah Zahra
(‘a) and ‘Ali (‘a), praises the justice of ‘Ali (‘a), speaks of the
underprivileged and downtrodden but has a luxurious life—albeit through
legitimate wealth—comes into question. The people say the Prophet (S)
and *Hadhrat* ‘Ali (‘a) worked and surely their great intelligence and
incredible foresight brought them great benefits. Even so, whatever they
obtained, they would give it to the poor. The people also expect the
same nowadays from government officials.

Thus, religious personages and officials of the Islamic government have
a great responsibility in that they must be very careful of their
behavior and that of their families and those close to them. If they
live correctly they are in effect propagating Islam.

Some women encourage their husbands to prodigality, overindulgence, and
luxury-living in order to “keep up with the Joneses”. They must take
example from the life of noble Zahra (‘a) and know that if they perform
an offence and desist from observing their status and station they are
harming the Islamic government and are answerable in the next life.

• Regarding her social relationships and activities, which
characteristic of *Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) has entranced you the most?

**Reply:** *Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) was present in political and social
activities in various manners. Participation in war related issues, even
direct participation in behind the lines activities, spiritual and
mental cooperation and aid of Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) in matters of
*Jihad*, holding meetings for education and edification, and similar
tasks. However, I believe that the most important issue for Fatimah
Zahra (‘a) was defense of the right and vicegerency of Amir al-Mu’minin
(‘a) which she worked on as a social duty in any form possible. For
instance, regarding the *Fadak* affair the basic essence and reason for
her deeds and persistent follow ups was the defense of right and
vicegerency.

Even her last effort in which she willed that her husband hold her
funeral and bury her in the middle of the night and conceal the grave
was an extension to *Hadhrat* Zahra’s (‘a) political and social
presence. It shows the intensity of her purpose and greatness because
everyone likes others to attend their funeral procession and burial and
honor them, they like others to come to their graves and remember them.
However, this great woman sacrificed all this for the purpose and
message that was her duty to convey.

• Without taking into account her infallibility, what individual,
familial, social factors and influences in her background helped
determine the formation of Fatimah Zahra’s (‘a) virtues?

**Reply:** *Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) had a superior familial position. She
was born into the house of a father who was the best teacher and guide
of all of humanity. Her mother was also not an ordinary person. In a
time that women were subject to great deprivation, Khadijah (‘a) was a
woman who was able to establish and manage a great commercial firm and
dispatch grand commercial caravans to other countries.

This shows the intrinsic worthiness of this woman. In my opinion, even
more important than this was the correct determination, deep
understanding, and exact insight in human character of this woman who
had great wealth and social standing that caused her to propose marriage
to a person who did not have a great financial standing in the society
and was an employee in her business. This shows how subtle and
sharp-sighted she was in apprehending lofty human values which she
decisively and faithfully chose and preferred over material values.

Also, after the fact, when the Prophet (S) was appointed by Allah, she
put all her belongings in his control to use for furthering Islam.
*Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) grew up and was trained by such a mother and
father. She matured in a family that was immersed in religion and
perpetual struggle for the faith. Later, when she entered her husband’s
household, she lived with a person who was the spiritual son of and had
been trained by the Prophet of Allah (S) and who was the essence of
human virtues. And all these people and events had roles in the
formation of the superior character of Siddiqah Tahirah (‘a).

Fatimah (‘a) was the daughter of the Prophet (S) and Khadijah (‘a), the
wife of ‘Ali (‘a), the mother of the two Hassans (‘a) and the two
Zainabs (‘a)… But, I must say that the most expressive word is that:
“Fatimah was Fatimah”. Sometimes the character and prestige of a person
is due to their kinship with their father, mother, or others. However,
in addition to having these merits, the character of *Hadhrat* Zahra
(‘a) was because she was Fatimah and due to her inherent personality and
greatness.

The fact that in some prayers handed down by the Infallibles (‘a), noble
Zahra (‘a) is addressed using her relation to others is because it is
necessary to emphasize these relationships to people so that they are
made aware that these are the *People of the House* [*Ahl al-Bayt*] of
the Prophet (S) and so that they remember what was written in the Quran
and the sayings of the Prophet (S) regarding the dignity and status of
the Ahl al-Bayt.

There are many instances in history where the Imams (‘a) emphasized this
aspect so that even if the people could not comprehend their other
merits, they would not forget this merit and know them through this.
Another issue is that when we address the noble Zahra (‘a) as the
“Daughter of the Prophet of Allah (S)” [*binta rasul allah*], this means
the true daughter of the prophethood. This is different from saying, for
example, daughter of Muhammad (S). When we say Daughter of the Prophet
of Allah (S) the person and physical relationship is not intended;
rather, it is the character and spiritual relationship of the person we
intend.

• What expectations did *Hadhrat* Fatimah (‘a) have of the people in her
historical speech in the Madinah Mosque and what was the reason for her
anger?

**Reply:** The momentous and sensitive speech *Hadhrat* Fatimah Zahra
(‘a) made in the Mosque of the Prophet (S) and among his followers was a
very interesting occurrence which showed the depth of the character of
her eminence. Such a brilliant and meaningful oration by a bereaved and
pained woman and in such times with their problems and limitations shows
her great social commitment, precise power of analysis, and boundless
spiritual and mental prowess. In this lecture, the *Hadhrat* (‘a)
referred to the people’s shining record of service to the Prophet (S)
and then maintained that their current behavior was opposed to prior
expectations.

It is a fact that from her childhood *Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) was witness to
all the sufferings of her father. She experienced the Shi‘b of
Abitalib,[^2] she saw the torture Muslims were subject to, she felt the
hunger and pressure the Muslims bore for the advancement of their
religion with her whole being, she was witness to all the steadfastness,
struggles, emigrations, and martyrdoms of the Muslims. She remembered
the history of Islam from a time of conditions that caused Muslims not
to be able to perform their religious rites and ceremonies in peace, up
to the time when the Muslims attained greatness and the advancement and
development of Islam gained great momentum.

*Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) had much hope for the future of Islam and it was
not far from reality for the light of Islam to illuminate the whole
world. All these triumphs were due to the endeavors and leadership of
the Prophet (S) and the sacrifice, selflessness, and unity of the
Muslims. However, on that day, against all expectations, she saw a new
problem for the advancement of Islam.

There was neither a trace of continuing divine leadership nor unity of
the Islamic community [*ummah*]. Thus, she was upset: What happened to
all my father’s advice about holding fast the rope of Allah [*habl
Allah*]? She knew of the knowledge, infallibility, piety, and management
abilities of ‘Ali (‘a) and she saw that the people disregarded all the
guidance and divine sayings of the Prophet (S) regarding ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib (‘a). The deep sorrow of Zahra (‘a) arose from observing the great
distance and gaping chasm between that which should have been and that
which was.

• Sometimes the characters and lives of *Hadhrat* Fatimah (‘a) and the
other Infallibles are introduced as entirely composed of sadness and
sorrow and blended with lamentation and grieving. Is this correct?

**Reply:** That which is discussed as the greatest element regarding the
character of the Infallible Imams (‘a) and noble Zahra (‘a) is that
their thoughts, morals, and mannerisms must be examples for the people
because we can easily declare that Islam was absolutely manifested in
their existence. Our love for our Infallible leaders is love of
completely perfect manifestations of Islamic commandments, beliefs, and
values.

Our duty toward the leaders of our religion is that we must love them as
perfect divine examples, understand their thought, execute their
instructions, and structure all aspects of our lives by their intended
standards. The exemplariness of the Prophet (S) which was stated in the
Holy Quran is a principle and it teaches us that we must, more than
anything, see the Infallibles (‘a) in this perspective.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ فِي رَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُسْوَةٌ حَسَنَةٌ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely you have in the Prophet of Allah a good example…”***[^3]

The Holy Prophet (S), Pure Imams (‘a), and Fatimah Zahra (‘a) were each
afflicted with various worldly tribulations and adversities and it is a
truth that due to their emphasis and decisiveness in righteousness and
extraordinary intransigence before evil, they were treated with
animosity, oppression, and spite by antagonists. We must join in their
sadness, sympathize with them, and shed tears for them. This is a
necessity for being their allies and followers.

However, that which is of greater import and which essentially must be
the soul of mourning and lamenting is that we must learn from them, from
their words, their deeds, and their whole lives. Our mourning gatherings
must be held for this purpose. However, with utmost regret we see that
the situation has changed; meaning that instead of accepting them as our
role models and learning from their lives, we have lost everything about
the leaders of our religion and only remember their calamities and
mourning.

What I mean is that Imam Hussain (‘a) did not go to Karbala to die so
that we might cry for him and go to heaven. He had a purpose for going
to Karbala and our chief duty regarding this great man is to *follow his
objectives*. This is the best service and task that will both make Imam
Hussain (‘a) happy and have the most rewards and recompense for us in
the afterlife. In fact, this is the true meaning of Imamate and
Vicegerency [*wilayat*].

It is the same regarding the other Infallibles (‘a). We must realize the
reason for *Hadhrat* Zahra’s (‘a) stance and behavior, why she made
those speeches, why she was insistent on the affair of Fadak, and so on.
We must know our duty as Shi‘as and followers and friends of Zahra (‘a).
We have erroneously let go of all this and have held fast only to the
weeping.

Of course, various Hadith state that crying for Hussain entails much
otherworldly reward [*thawab*], and this is true. We might cry for Imam
Hussain (‘a) because he was surrounded by enemies in Karbala and was
killed while he and his children were thirsty and parched. These tears
do not have the true value that must be sought. However, if we cry for
Imam Hussain (‘a) because this grand man rose up in defense of Islam,
stood against evil with his whole being without the slightest doubt or
hesitation for God, wholeheartedly accepted all the hardships of this
path, and was ultimately tyrannously martyred due to the naïveté,
insensateness, derangement, negligence, nonchalance, sybaritism, and
greed of those who regarded themselves the Ummah of the Prophet (S) and
followers of his religion, such tears have value; such tears mean
alignment and unity with Hussain; such tears mean being Shi‘a.

If we cry for Fatimah Zahra (‘a) because she was an eighteen year old
woman who took no pleasure from life and was oppressed and her Fadak was
misappropriated and the like, this has no real value. Crying for
*Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a) has value when we know and realize that she was
undeviating and adamant for her purpose and because of this she endured
many hardships. We can cry in two ways for a *shahid* (martyr). One way
we can cry is because they died unfulfilled or unmarried and took no
pleasure from life, which is worthless.

However, sometimes the magnificence, beauty, and greatness of their act
causes our hearts to tremble and tears to flow. We cry–for why should
evil have power in the world so that it may overcome righteousness in
such a manner? Such tears are constructive motivators. They strengthen
the passion and eagerness for Godly deeds within the souls of humans and
thus, they have value. It is a great tragedy that we have lost this
aspect and have fallen into other paths. All of us have the duty to
remedy this occurrence. As long as we do not rectify this affair, many
of our problems shall endure.

• In your opinion what are the roots of these problems?

**Reply:** Those who propagate these things more than anyone else are
eulogists and tragedians. They must be made knowledgeable so that they
can perform their duties correctly. They must be perfectly acquainted
with Imam Hussain (‘a), *Hadhrat* Zahra (‘a), and noble Zainab (‘a) and
introduce them accurately. Eulogists must be made to realize that they
must incorporate useful purposes into their poetry. If eulogists pay
attention to these aspects and delineate, realistically and properly,
the personalities of the Saints of God in their mourning ceremonies and
pay the most attention to learning from them, these problems will
resolve themselves and they must be resolved because the current state
of affairs is truly not right.

The people should be made aware that listening to and orating eulogies
and attending ceremonies of Imam Hussain (‘a) can only be useful when,
through them, they are enlightened with the aims and teachings of this
luminary. Mourning him is only useful when it is for the path and
purpose of Imam Hussain (‘a). The people must be careful that they not
accept everything that is said in such ceremonies. In order to make the
people cry, some eulogists present many weak and untruthful materials.
Sometimes they say things that reduce the status and personality of
those great individuals even lower than normal people.

In any event, the laws of supply and demand also hold true here. Because
the masses want tears, eulogists and preachers take more to this path to
make people cry even with untrue attributions to the Imams (‘a)! We
should not neglect the fact that fabrication is a sin and *haram* and
lying about the Imams (‘a) is even worse. Without having competence in
this area, some have entered the field and have gained renown. Thus,
they imply incorrect duties regarding the greatness of the Imams (‘a)
and the people’s responsibilities towards them, and wrongly present
various issues such as some aspects of intercession [*shafa‘at*] to the
people. They also promote styles of lamentation that are not without
fault.

In my opinion, religious authorities have the greatest responsibility in
guiding these programs. Religious authorities must analyze the facts
correctly and inform the people. They must not dissimulate [*taqiyyah*]
before the people. Just as Shahid Mutahari—may God bless him—has put
forth some great materials in speeches that were gathered into a book
called *Epic of Husaini Valor* [*hamasah-ye husaini*]. In times that
were very different from today, he had the courage to say words of
righteousness.

Nowadays the path has been widened and paved because the people are more
enlightened. It is the certain duty of religious authorities to provide
insight. Religious authorities should not be public-oriented in that
they verify and follow any custom or way that becomes common is the
society. In revealing righteousness one should not fear the anger or
dismay of others. All religious authorities, writers, mass
media—everyone must perform their duty; otherwise the situation will
become worse day by day.

At the decline of the previous regime and the apex of the religious
Movement our religious societies were much better. I remember that
because preachers could not plainly state regime and government matters,
they would assert these issues by analyzing the uprising of Aba
‘Abdillah al-Husain (‘a) and its objectives.

However, now, instead of in depth analysis of such issues, the main
issue is forgotten and we have returned to where we were before. If we
want to hold a ceremony or do something in the name of religion, it
should be according to religious precepts. A deed worthy of rewards is
not something we can just make up by ourselves. We must see if there is
a religious reason behind it or not; if it is congruous with religious
principles, values, and aims or not. However, can just anyone do these
things?

Again only religious authorities can and must. They must examine the
methods and styles of mourning and their content to find from where an
innovation [*bid‘at*] stems, why it exists, what effect it has on the
society, and if, God forbid, there are deviations they must be
corrected. Especially programs that are broadcast by the Television and
Radio Department of the Islamic Republic of Iran must be scrutinized and
it must be determined whether the thoughts and deeds of the people that
make the programs are sound.

[^1]: - This is an honorific title that precedes the name of great
personages. [trans.]

[^2]: - This is an area where the unbelievers of Mecca banished the
Muslims for several years. [trans.]

[^3]: - Surah Ahzab 33:21.


