The Standing of Women in Islam
==============================

According to Islam, women and men alike possess the lofty status of
humanity because they are both equally human. The Quran identifies
humans as “viceroys of God” [*khalifat ullah*] and reveres them greatly:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَقَدْ كَرَّمْنَا بَنِي آدَمَ وَ حَمَلْنَاهُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ وَ
الْبَحْرِ وَ رَزَقْنَاهُم مِّنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَ فَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَى
كَثِيرٍ مِّمَّنْ خَلَقْنَا تَفْضِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And We have surely honored the children of Adam. We have presented
them with transport on land and sea, provided*** ***them good and pure
sustenance, and We have greatly exalted them over many of Our
creations.”***[^1]

Additionally, it states that Adam (‘a) had such high rank that the
angels bowed to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَ نَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِن رُّوحِي فَقَعُواْ لَهُ
سَاجِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when I shape him and breathe into him of My spirit, fall down,
prostrating yourselves*** ***unto him.”***[^2]

All this is due to our humanity. Regarding Adam (‘a), the Holy Quran
declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَلَّمَ آدَمَ الأَسْمَاء كُلَّهَا ثُمَّ عَرَضَهُمْ عَلَى
الْمَلاَئِكَةِ فَقَالَ أَنبِئُونِي بِأَسْمَاء هَؤُلاء إِن كُنتُمْ
صَادِقِينَ\* قَالُواْ سُبْحَانَكَ لاَ عِلْمَ لَنَا إِلاَّ مَا
عَلَّمْتَنَا إِنَّكَ أَنتَ الْعَلِيمُ الْحَكِيمُ\* قَالَ يَا آدَمُ
أَنبِئْهُم بِأَسْمَآئِهِمْ فَلَمَّا أَنبَأَهُمْ بِأَسْمَآئِهِمْ قَالَ
أَلَمْ أَقُل لَّكُمْ إِنِّي أَعْلَمُ غَيْبَ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَ الأَرْضِ
وَ أَعْلَمُ مَا تُبْدُونَ وَ مَا كُنتُمْ تَكْتُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He taught Adam all the Names; then He presented them upon the
angels and said: ‘Explain to Me these names, if thou speak truly.’ They
said: ‘Glory be unto Thee! We have no knowledge save what Thou hast
taught us. Surely Thou art the All-knowing, the All-wise.’ He said: ‘O
Adam! Explain unto them their names.’*** ***When he notified them of
their names, God said, ‘Did I not tell you that I know the invisible
things of the heavens and earth and that I know what you reveal and what
you hide?’”***[^3]

The fact that noble Adam (‘a) was able to understand the Names and
explain them was due to his unique genesis as a human and men and women
are equal in this genesis. In general, all extolments in the Quran and
Hadith regarding humans encompass both women and men. There is no verse
in the Quran that reproaches women for being women.

Therefore, according to Islam and the Quran, men and women are equally
human, they are no different in worth, and they possess common
responsibilities in managing the society, some of which are enumerated
below:

Common Responsibilities of Men and Women
----------------------------------------

I. Men and women are both equally responsible for reproduction and
continuance of the human race.

The Holy Quran states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّا خَلَقْنَاكُم مِّن ذَكَرٍ وَ أُنثَى وَ
جَعَلْنَاكُمْ شُعُوبًا وَ قَبَائِلَ لِتَعَارَفُوا إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ
عِندَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ عَلِيمٌ خَبِيرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Humans! Surely, I have created you as males and females and have
made you into [diverse] races and tribes that you may know one another.
Verily, the most noble among you before Allah is the most pious of you.
Truly, Allah is All-knowing, All-aware.”***[^4]

It also declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اتَّقُواْ رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُم مِّن
نَّفْسٍ وَاحِدَةٍ وَ خَلَقَ مِنْهَا زَوْجَهَا وَ بَثَّ مِنْهُمَا
رِجَالاً كَثِيرًا وَ نِسَاءً وَ اتَّقُواْ اللّهَ الَّذِي تَسَاءلُونَ
بِهِ وَ الأَرْحَامَ إِنَّ اللّهَ كَانَ عَلَيْكُمْ رَقِيبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O humans! Fear your Lord who created you from a single soul and from
it created its mate and from the pair of them has disseminated many men
and women. So be pious toward Allah, in whose name you ask for
assistance, and do not cut off from your relatives.*** ***Surely, Allah
watches over you.”***[^5]

In these verses, women and men are identified as two chief pillars of
the society. Additionally, piety is regarded as the criterion for the
superiority of men and women.

II. The Quran identifies faith in God, edification [*tahdhib*] and
purification of the soul of all evils [*tazkiyah*], piety, and
performing good deeds as the only path to human salvation. In this
context, it does not differentiate between women and men. In fact, it
regards both equally worthy of spiritual advancement, perfection, and
proximity to God [*qurb ila allah*].

God, the Sublime, has stated in the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَى وَ هُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيِّبَةً وَ لَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْرَهُم
بِأَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُواْ يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whosoever performs a good deed, whether man or woman, while having
faith in Allah, We shall assuredly restore them with a good and pure
life and We shall recompense them with rewards according to the best of
what they have done.”***[^6]

Allah also declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاسْتَجَابَ لَهُمْ رَبُّهُمْ أَنِّي لاَ أُضِيعُ عَمَلَ عَامِلٍ
مِّنكُم مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَى بَعْضُكُم مِّن بَعْضٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore their Lord granted their prayers. Verily, I shall not
suffer the work of any agent among you to be lost, whether man or woman;
you are all members of the same race.”***[^7]

The Quran praises righteous and worthy women and men similarly and thus
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُسْلِمِينَ وَ الْمُسْلِمَاتِ وَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَ
الْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَ الْقَانِتِينَ وَ الْقَانِتَاتِ وَ الصَّادِقِينَ وَ
الصَّادِقَاتِ وَ الصَّابِرِينَ وَ الصَّابِرَاتِ وَ الْخَاشِعِينَ وَ
الْخَاشِعَاتِ وَ الْمُتَصَدِّقِينَ وَ الْمُتَصَدِّقَاتِ وَ
الصَّائِمِينَ وَ الصَّائِمَاتِ وَ الْحَافِظِينَ فُرُوجَهُمْ وَ
الْحَافِظَاتِ وَ الذَّاكِرِينَ اللَّهَ كَثِيرًا وَ الذَّاكِرَاتِ
أَعَدَّ اللَّهُ لَهُم مَّغْفِرَةً وَ أَجْرًا عَظِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily, for Muslim men and women, for faithful men and women, for
obedient men and women, for truthful men and women, for patient men and
women, for humble men and women, for almsgiving men and women, for
fasting men and women, for men and women who guard their private parts,
and for men and women who remember God much, Allah has prepared
forgiveness and a mighty reward.”***[^8]

The Quran has indicated worthy women in history just as it has mentioned
such men and has commended them greatly. For example, regarding Saint
Maryam (Mary) (‘a), the Quran states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَقَبَّلَهَا رَبُّهَا بِقَبُولٍ حَسَنٍ وَ أَنبَتَهَا نَبَاتًا
حَسَنًا وَ كَفَّلَهَا زَكَرِيَّا كُلَّمَا دَخَلَ عَلَيْهَا زَكَرِيَّا
الْمِحْرَابَ وَجَدَ عِندَهَا رِزْقاً قَالَ يَا مَرْيَمُ أَنَّى لَكِ
هَذَا قَالَتْ هُوَ مِنْ عِندِ اللّهِ إنَّ اللّهَ يَرْزُقُ مَن يَشَاء
بِغَيْرِ حِسَابٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So her Lord accepted her with gracious favor and nurtured her well
and appointed Zachariah to foster her. Whenever Zachariah came to her in
her sanctuary, he would see that she had (special) food. He said, ‘O
Maryam! From where does this come to you?’ She answered, ‘This is from
Allah. Verily, Allah provides sustenance to whomever He wills without
reckoning.’”***[^9]

Furthermore, it proclaims:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِذْ قَالَتِ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ يَا مَرْيَمُ إِنَّ اللّهَ اصْطَفَاكِ وَ
طَهَّرَكِ وَ اصْطَفَاكِ عَلَى نِسَاء الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (remember) when the angels said, ‘O Maryam! Allah has chosen you
and made you pure and has preferred you above all women in
creation.’”***[^10]

Regarding Asiyah (‘a), Pharaoh’s wife, God the Most High has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ ضَرَبَ اللَّهُ مَثَلًا لِّلَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اِمْرَأَةَ فِرْعَوْنَ
إِذْ قَالَتْ رَبِّ ابْنِ لِي عِندَكَ بَيْتًا فِي الْجَنَّةِ وَ
نَجِّنِي مِن فِرْعَوْنَ وَ عَمَلِهِ وَ نَجِّنِي مِنَ الْقَوْمِ
الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah cites Pharaoh’s wife as an example for the believers when
she said, ‘O Lord! Build for me, close to Yourself, a home in Paradise
and deliver me from Pharaoh and his works and deliver me from evil doing
peoples.’”***[^11]

Virtuous Fatimah (‘a), the honorable daughter of the Prophet (S), is
also one of these superior women. The Verse of Purification [*ayah
tathir*] is about Fatimah (‘a), her husband, father, and children. The
exalted Lord declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يُرِيدُ اللَّهُ لِيُذْهِبَ عَنكُمُ الرِّجْسَ أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ
وَيُطَهِّرَكُمْ تَطْهِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, Allah only wishes to remove from you, People of the House,
all uncleanness and purify you thoroughly.”***[^12]

Regarding these lofty women, the Messenger of Allah (S) stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبي (ع): سيّدات أهل الجنة أربع: مريم بنت عمران، و فاطمة بنت
محمّد، و خديجة بنت خويلد، و آسية بنت مزاحم إمرأة فرعون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The great women of paradise are four: Maryam daughter of ‘Imran,
Fatimah daughter of Muhammad, Khadijah daughter of Khuwaylid, and Asiyah
daughter of Muzahim, wife of Pharaoh.”*[^13]

As you can see, the Quran does not regard being a woman an impediment to
advancement, elevation, and attaining human perfections [*fadhayil-e
insani*]; rather, it regards women to be as worthy as men in attaining
perfections.

Of course, some women have been reproached in the Quran, such as Prophet
Noah’s (‘a) wife, Prophet Lot’s (‘a) wife, and the wife of the idolater,
Abu Lahab.[^14] In a similar manner, various men have also been
reproached due to their contemptible works, such as Pharaoh, Nimrod, and
Abu Lahab.

III. Islam regards women and men as two pillars of the society that have
a common role in the emergence, formation, and management of the society
and have an equal share in all its aspects. Men and women are both part
of the community and they uniformly benefit from the virtues of a
righteous society and suffer from the destructive effects of its
corruption. Consequently, the responsibility of correct management and
reformation of the society is charged to both women and men. God most
high states in the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَ الْمُؤْمِنَاتُ بَعْضُهُمْ أَوْلِيَاء بَعْضٍ
يَأْمُرُونَ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ وَ يَنْهَوْنَ عَنِ الْمُنكَرِ وَ يُقِيمُونَ
الصَّلاَةَ وَ يُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَ يُطِيعُونَ اللّهَ وَ رَسُولَهُ
أُوْلَئِكَ سَيَرْحَمُهُمُ اللّهُ إِنَّ اللّهَ عَزِيزٌ حَكِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And male and female believers are protecting friends of each other;
they enjoin righteousness and forbid evil, they perform***
***salat***[^15] ***and pay their alms-tax, they obey Allah and His
Messenger. Upon these, Allah shall have mercy. Truly, Allah is Almighty,
All-wise.”***[^16]

It is true that presence in jihad and fighting against enemies is not
obligatory [*wajib*] for women. However, they have not been relieved of
any other social responsibilities: enjoining virtues [*amr be ma‘ruf*]
and forbidding evils [*nahi az munkar*]; protecting the religion and its
sanctities; propagating Islam; struggling against violation and
infringement; defending the rights of the deprived and oppressed;
cooperating in good works; aiding the destitute and afflicted; nursing
the sick, elderly, and invalids; campaigning against ethical and social
corruption; proper fostering and nurturing of the young; augmenting
knowledge in the society; fortifying the just government of Islam;
upholding Islamic values; contributing to the financial well-being of
the family and country; and many other common responsibilities have been
given to men and women alike.

IV. Other common duties of women and men are acquisition of knowledge
and decipherment of the secrets of the cosmos, and their utilization for
increasing welfare. Men and women are both human and thereby responsible
and capable in this regard.

Islam greatly emphasizes pursuing knowledge and even identifies it as an
obligation. Thus, Imam Sadiq (‘a) has quoted from the Messenger of Allah
(S) that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبي عبدالله (ع) قال: قال رسول الله (ص): «طلب العلم فريضة على كلّ
مسلم، ألا إنّ الله يحبّ بغاة العلم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Obtaining knowledge is obligatory for all Muslims. Know that Allah
truly loves seekers of knowledge.”[^17]

Moreover, Imam Baqir (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبي جعفر (ع) قال: «عالم ينتفع بعلمه، أفضل من سبعين ألف عابد.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A learned person who uses their knowledge is better than seventy
thousand devout worshipers [*‘abid*].”[^18]

There are hundreds of similar Hadith on this subject and there is no
differentiation between men and women in this respect. As Muslims, women
are charged with gaining knowledge in order to become self-sufficient;
especially regarding sciences that are essential such as therapeutics,
dentistry, psychiatry, pharmaceutics, nursing, obstetrics, experimental
sciences, education, psychology, biology, chemistry, management,
accounting, Islamic sciences, exegesis, religious belief, religious
jurisprudence, history, literature, art, linguistics, language, law,
economics, etc.

Women comprise around half the society; therefore, they must share in
its administration. This is why female scientists and specialists of
necessary and relevant sciences must equal the men in these fields in
order that they are self-sufficient. Half of all hospitals, clinics,
universities, schools, academies, pharmacies, laboratories, academies of
religion, and Islamic promotional institutes must be assigned to women.
Additionally, all maternity hospitals must be female specific and have
only as many male specialists as needed for their male patients, though
unfortunately this is not so. This defect or disparity may be for the
following two reasons:

a. The selfishness, egocentricity, and injustice of men throughout
history, which has prevented women from attaining their lawful rights in
independence and has kept women dependent

b. The self-negligence, absence of self-knowledge, opulence-centricity,
and aestheticism of women who have not understood the correct manner to
vindicate their rights and have fallen astray

Women must understand their true roles and responsibilities. They must
endeavor to realize independence, self-reliance, and their lawful rights
and must be careful not to deviate from the correct path as many others
who have diverged.

[^1]: - Surah Isra’ 17:70.

[^2]: - Surah Hijr 15:29.

[^3]: - Surah Baqarah 2:31-33.

[^4]: - Surah Hujurat 49:13.

[^5]: - Surah Nisa’ 4:1.

[^6]: - Surah Nahl 16:97.

[^7]: - Surah Ali ‘Imran 3:195.

[^8]: - Surah Ahzab 33:35.

[^9]: - Surah Ali ‘Imran 3:37.

[^10]: - Ibid 3:42.

[^11]: - Surah Tahrim 66:11.

[^12]: - Surah Ahzab 33:33.

[^13]: - Kashf ul-Ghummah, vol. 2, p. 76.

[^14]: - Surah Tahrim 66:10; and Surah Masad 111:4.

[^15]: - Salat is the daily ritual prayer of Muslims, which must be
performed five times a day in a specific form. [trans.]

[^16]: - Surah Tawbah 9:71.

[^17]: - Kafi, vol. 1, p. 30.

[^18]: - Ibid, p. 33.


