Women and Freedom
=================

Like men, women have been created free and desire to live without the
intrusion of others. The inclination for freedom is a natural and
legitimate desire. However, can humans truly live independently and
unassisted in a community?

Humans have need of their fellow creatures. They must observe the rights
and wants of others and must restrict their individual freedoms to the
limits of societal laws. Such restrictions are not adverse to humans;
they benefit humanity. Additionally, living in complete freedom and
unquestionably following one’s carnal desires injures humankind. In such
cases, restrictions must be endorsed since it is to everyone’s true
advantage.

Even though Islam respects humanity’s right to freedom, it regards
absolute freedom neither possible nor compliant with humankind’s
individual or social good. Hence, by observing the spiritual, material,
worldly, otherworldly, individual, and social benefit of humans, Islam
has decreed ordinances, laws, and responsibilities and has thus confined
the freedom of humans. Some of these limiting rules and injunctions may
not be pleasing to some people and they may regard them obtrusive to
their personal freedom. However, these assessments are an effect of
shortfalls in correctly understanding one’s own true interests. If
humans were fully aware of their true interests, they would not deem
religious restrictions detriments to their freedom and would willingly
consent to these limitations.

The freedom of women is also such. Islam respects the freedom of women
and observes it in its legislation, provided that it is not contrary to
the true interests of the collective human society. Thus, in cases that
freedom is at variance with the true interests of women, Islam prefers
restrictions to unconditional latitude. Herein several of women’s
liberties shall be briefly reviewed:

1. Freedom in Work
------------------

As previously stated, Islam regards women as one of the two pillars of
the society and has given them various responsibilities. Women cannot
and must not be crippled members or useless constituents of the society.
Islam regards work as an obligation and a superior form of worship and
warns its supporters to avoid idleness, vanity, and retirement from
work. There are many Hadith regarding this issue, some of which are
mentioned below.

The Messenger of Allah (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص): «العبادةُ سَبْعُونَ جزءً أفضلها طَلَبُ الحَلال.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Worship has seventy elements; the noblest of which is endeavoring to
gain legitimate income.”[^1]

The noble Musa ibn Ja‘far (‘a) has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بشير الدهان، قال سمعت ابالحسن موسى (ع) يقول: «انّ الله عزّوجلّ يُبغِض
الْعَبد النّوام الْفارغ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Surely Allah, the Honored, the Glorified, disfavors languid and idle
servants.”[^2]

According to Islam, working is not a right but a duty and men and women
are no different in this regard. Women must also perform their social
duties and they are free in choosing their occupation. However, taking
heed of the special physical and spiritual genesis of women, not all
lines of work are consistent with their eminence or abilities and other
members of the society. Women are exquisite, sensitive, and beautiful
beings. Because of this exquisiteness and beauty, they have much allure
and influence with men.

Thus, they must endeavor to choose professions that can keep their
spiritual and physical beauty impeccable for their husbands. Thus
working in onerous and physically taxing jobs is not advisable for
women; these include professions such as driving heavy vehicles,
overnight jobs, farming, animal husbandry, and working in mines,
ironworks, cement and automobile factories, etc. These occupations are
usually beyond the normal physical capacities of women and endanger
their beauty, exquisiteness, and allure, which is neither to the benefit
of women nor to that of their spouses.

Consequently, Islam advises that men not allow women to perform
laborious work. Amir al-Mu’minin[^3] said to his son Imam Hassan (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
في رسالة أميرالمؤمنين إلى الحسن (ع) قال: «لا تملك المرأة من الأمر ما
يجاوز نفسها؛ فإنّ ذلك أنعم بحالها، و أرخى لبالها، و أدوم لجمالها؛ فإنّ
المرأة ريحانة و ليست بقهرمانة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Do not tolerate that women do things beyond their abilities because
this is more suitable for their status, it calms their hearts, and
preserves their beauty; surely women are like fragrant flowers and not
warriors.”[^4]

Another important issue is that the exquisiteness, beauty, and allure of
women are as natural as the inability of most men in resisting sexual
temptation. Thus, it is in the interests of women and the society in
general that they choose professions with less contact with non-kindred
men, especially youths and unmarried men, in order to avoid probable
harm to their faith and reputation and aid the health and virtue of the
society.

We must also bear in mind that women are sentimental and affectionate
beings and can be more quickly affected by their emotions than men.
Hence, it is not in the interests of women or the society that they take
professions that require increased decisiveness or brutality such as
judgeship and military and disciplinary professions.

The final issue that women must take in mind in choosing a line of work
is observing the rights of their children and preserving the family. If
a woman is married and has children, she must be heedful of the fact
that she has an even greater responsibility, which is caring for her
husband and correctly rearing their children; a charge that the unique
genesis of women has put upon them. It is true that women are free in
selecting their careers, but they must choose one that does not weaken
the benign cornerstones of the family and that does not deprive children
of maternal love and affection and correct education and training.

In such cases, the course of action must be determined by mutual
agreement and men must abandon inappropriate prejudices, selfishness,
egocentricity, and patriarchal habits and must impartially allow women
to choose suitable careers in proportion with the interests of the
family as a whole.

2. Freedom in Proprietorship
----------------------------

Islam respects the ownership of both women and men. A woman may gain and
become owner of properties and wealth through industry, commerce, dower,
gifts, working as a staff member, or any other legitimate method. She
may gain profit from these methods and no one has the right to
appropriate her possessions without her consent, whether they be her
father, mother, husband, or children. The Quran declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لاَ تَتَمَنَّوْاْ مَا فَضَّلَ اللّهُ بِهِ بَعْضَكُمْ عَلَى بَعْضٍ
لِّلرِّجَالِ نَصِيبٌ مِّمَّا اكْتَسَبُواْ وَ لِلنِّسَاء نَصِيبٌ
مِّمَّا اكْتَسَبْنَ وَ اسْأَلُواْ اللّهَ مِن فَضْلِهِ إِنَّ اللّهَ
كَانَ بِكُلِّ شَيْءٍ عَلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not covet that by which Allah has elevated some of you over
others. To men is allotted what they earn and to women is allotted what
they earn. So ask Allah of His bounty. Surely Allah has absolute
knowledge of all things.”***[^5]

3. Freedom in Marriage
----------------------

Like men, women are completely free in marriage and choosing their
spouse. A mature woman may not be married without her consent and such a
marriage is void. No one has the right to force a woman to marry or to
choose a specific husband for her, even one’s father, mother, sibling,
or grandparents. Imam Sadiq (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
منصور بن حازم، عن أبي عبدالله (ع) قال: «تستأمر البكر و غيرها ولا تنكح
إلّا بأمرها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Women must be asked permission for their marriage, virgin or otherwise,
and marriage is not correct without the woman’s behest.”[^6]

Concerning a man who wanted to marry off his sister, Imam Sadiq (‘a)
stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
داود بن سرحان، عن أبي عبدالله (ع) في رجل يريد أن يزوّج أخته، قال:
«يؤامرها، فإن سكتت فهو إقرارها، و لا تنكح إلّا بأمرها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“She must be asked permission; if she is reticent, her silence is
permission. However, marriage is not correct without the woman’s
behest.”[^7]

Hence, in order for a marriage to be correct, the acquiescence of the
woman is necessary regardless of whether she is a virgin or not. Here,
the question arises that: in order for a marriage to be correct, in
addition to the woman’s consent, is her father or grandfather’s consent
also a requirement?

The answer of this question has been expounded thus: If the woman is not
a virgin (hence previously married), the consent of her father or
grandfather is not necessary and she may decide to remarry
independently. Various Hadith have emphasized this fact. Regarding the
marriage of a non-virgin woman, Imam Sadiq (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حلبي عن أبي عبدالله (ع) قال: في المرأة الثيّب تخطب إلى نفسها، قال: «هي
أملك بنفسها، تولّي أمرها من شاءت إذا كان كفواً بعد أن تكون قد نكحت
رجلاً قبله.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“She has more authority over herself than any other person. If she has
had a previous marriage, she can choose her desired spouse for
remarriage if he is good for her.”[^8]

Imam Sadiq (‘a) has also stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبي عبدالله (ع) قال: «لا بأس أن تزّوج المرأة نفسها إذا كانت ثيّباً
بغير إذن أبيها إذا كان لا بأس بما صنعت.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“There is no problem with a non-virgin (previously married) woman
getting married without the consent of her father if she has no
defects.”[^9]

However, if a woman is a virgin (and previously unmarried), almost all
religious jurisprudents [*faqih*] regard the permission of the father or
grandfather necessary for her marriage and have substantiated this claim
with various Hadith. Imam Sadiq (‘a) has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو مريم، عن أبي عبدالله (ع) قال: «الجارية البكر التي لها أبٌ لا
تتزوّج إلّا بإذن أبيها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“A virgin woman who has a father must not marry without her father’s
consent.”[^10]

The freedom of virgin women in choosing a husband has only been
restricted in this case to the permission of their fathers or
grandfathers. Even so, this restriction is not only not harmful to the
woman, it is primarily in her good interests. Because virgin women have
not married before, they have no experience is this matter and cannot
completely investigate their suitor due to their modesty. In this case,
they need a compassionate, loving, and experienced advisor who can give
them guidance. Hence, a father or grandfather is the best person for
aiding the woman in this important and fateful issue.

Consultation with and permission of the father has an additional
benefit. It is a type of respect towards the father, seeking his
approval and cooperating with him. Doubtless, this will have a great
part in improvement of family relations, the future life of the married
couple, and the solving of potential problems.

However, it must be stated that there are two exceptions to this rule:
First, when the woman’s father or grandfather is not available for
obtaining permission. Second, when it is time for the woman to marry and
she has a fitting suitor but her father brings undue excuses and refuses
everyone. In these two cases, religious jurisprudents can give the woman
permission to marry a desired and worthy suitor in lieu of her father’s
permission.

4. Freedom in Seeking Knowledge
-------------------------------

Unmarried women may freely endeavor to acquire knowledge and no one has
the right to prevent them from learning. However, a married woman must
observe the rights of her spouse and children and must confer with her
husband on this issue in order to reach a consensus.

The conditions surrounding this issue are similar to those of freedom in
work. Of course, this refers to studying outside the home at educational
facilities such as a university; studying at home in one’s leisure time
is not detrimental to familial life.

5. Freedom in Residence Selection
---------------------------------

Single women are at liberty to choose a home for themselves, though
wedded women must adhere to their husband’s place of residence.
Providing a house is up to men and it is their prerogative.

Naturally, the home must be within the dignity of the family, consistent
with the husband’s capital, and such that the peace and welfare of the
family is assured. If they are living in a shared home (with other
relatives) and the woman requests a private home, if it is in his power
the man must acquiesce. In addition, if their house is small or if they
are under pressure for some reason and the woman asks for a new
residence the man must accept if he is able. These are examples of kind
association [*mu‘ashirat bi ma‘ruf*] that God enjoins in the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَ عَاشِرُوهُنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And consort with your wives in kindness.”***[^11]

It is also stated in the Quran as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَ لَا تُضَارُّوهُنَّ لِتُضَيِّقُوا عَلَيْهِنَّ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And harass them not, so as to straiten life for them.”***[^12]

Even though choosing a home is the man’s prerogative, the woman may
stipulate as an annex to the marriage contract that she select a
dwelling place or request that she be given dwelling rights. If the man
accepts the annex, he must abide by his wife’s desires in this matter
and if he violates her request, he is a sinner.

[^1]: - Kafi, vol. 5, p. 78.

[^2]: - Ibid, p. 84.

[^3]: - Amir al-Mu‘minin (meaning: Commander of the Faithful) is the
title of Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib ('a). [trans.]

[^4]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 168.

[^5]: - Surah Nisa’ 4:32.

[^6]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 284.

[^7]: - Ibid, p. 274.

[^8]: - Ibid, vol. 2, p. 269.

[^9]: - Ibid, p. 272.

[^10]: - Ibid, p. 270.

[^11]: - Surah Nisa’ 4:19.

[^12]: - Surah Talaq 65:6.


