Women and Hijab
===============

*Hijab* literally means covering and is a type of clothing that covers a
woman’s body. Islam instructs women to cover their bodies (except their
hands and face) from non*-mahram*[^1] men.

The necessity of having *Hijab* can be extracted from Quranic verses and
various Hadith. Here three verses on this issue are presented.

First Verse
-----------

Allah, Most High, has stated in the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَغُضُّوا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَ يَحْفَظُوا
فُرُوجَهُمْ ذَلِكَ أَزْكَى لَهُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
يَصْنَعُونَ\* وَ قُل لِّلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَغْضُضْنَ مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِنَّ
وَ يَحْفَظْنَ فُرُوجَهُنَّ وَ لَا يُبْدِينَ زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلَّا مَا
ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا وَلْيَضْرِبْنَ بِخُمُرِهِنَّ عَلَى جُيُوبِهِنَّ وَ لَا
يُبْدِينَ زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلَّا لِبُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ آبَائِهِنَّ أَوْ
آبَاء بُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَائِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَاء بُعُولَتِهِنَّ
أَوْ إِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِي إِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِي
أَخَوَاتِهِنَّ أَوْ نِسَائِهِنَّ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُنَّ أَوِ
التَّابِعِينَ غَيْرِ أُوْلِي الْإِرْبَةِ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ أَوِ
الطِّفْلِ الَّذِينَ لَمْ يَظْهَرُوا عَلَى عَوْرَاتِ النِّسَاء وَ لَا
يَضْرِبْنَ بِأَرْجُلِهِنَّ لِيُعْلَمَ مَا يُخْفِينَ مِن زِينَتِهِنَّ
وَ تُوبُوا إِلَى اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا أَيُّهَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لَعَلَّكُمْ
تُفْلِحُونَ ‍‍
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Tell the believing men to cast down their eyes (from indecent looks)
and guard their modesty. This is purer for them. Surely Allah is aware
of all they do. And tell the believing women to cast down their eyes
(from indecent looks) and guard their modesty and refrain from revealing
their adornments save those that are (naturally) manifest and cast their
veils over their bosoms and not reveal their adornments save for their
husband, father,*** ***husband’s father, sons, husband’s sons, brothers,
brother’s sons, sister’s sons, their fellow women (in faith), their
bondservants, their dependants (such as dullards) who do not have sexual
desires, or children who do not know of women’s private parts; and they
must not stomp their feet in order to reveal their hidden ornaments. And
repent to Allah, O believers, haply you may attain bliss.”***[^2]

These verses pertain to the *Hijab* of women and contain several issues
that must be expounded:

First, they ask the faithful, men and women, to secure their eyes and
not leer. Men must not stare at women and women must not stare at men.

The word *Ghudh* [غض] means decreasing and closing. *Ghudha basar* means
shortening one’s gaze and not staring. Sometimes, persons look at others
and looking is not their purpose. At other times, people look lustfully
at others for sexual pleasure; this is called leering. Leering is a
cause for human corruption and thus it has been forbidden. However,
looking without hedonistic desires is not forbidden (*haram)*, because
it is necessary for sociability and communal living.

Next, these verses direct men and women to guard their private parts
[*furuj*]. *Furuj* is plural of *farj* which means pudendum [*‘aurat*].
Guarding one’s *farj* or covering it signifies preserving one’s chastity
and modesty by *ghudha basar*—meaning not staring—and observing *Hijab*.

Then, they address women and declare:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… لا یُبدِینَ زِینَتَهُنَّ إِلّا ما ظَهَرَ مِنها ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not reveal your adornments save those that are manifest.”***

*Zinat* means adornment. There are various types of adornment. First are
those that are detached from the body, such as earrings, necklaces,
rings, hairclips, bracelets, and decorative clothes. Second are those
that are applied to the body, such as eyeliner, nail polish, and hair
color. Adornment spoken of in this verse encompasses both these types.
Women are advised to eschew revealing their adornments for non*-mahram*
men and thus prevent drawing the attention of men and arousing their
sexual inclinations.

Next, the statement إلّا ما ظَهَرَ مِنها gives women permission to
refrain from hiding their evident adornments—that are naturally
obvious—such as *Surmah* (a specific type of natural eyeliner), eyebrow
coloring, henna, rings, veil coloring, robes, and shoes. Since women are
part of the society and have social responsibilities, naturally,
non*-mahram* men see will certainly see their face, hands, and obvious
adornments and covering these would be difficult. For this reason, Islam
gives them permission to perform their duties without covering these.

Correspondingly, various Hadith also interpret adornments mentioned in
this verse in this manner. Zurarah cited from Imam Sadiq (‘a) that he
interpreted the words of God, إلّا ما ظَهَرَ مِنها, in the following
manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زرارة، عن أبی عبدالله (ع) فی قول الله عزّوجلّ: {إِلّا ما ظَهَرَ مِنها}
قال: «الزینة الظاهرة الکحل و الخاتم.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Manifest adornments consist of *Surmah* and rings.”[^3]

Abubasir states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبوبصیر، عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: سألته عن قول الله عزّوجلّ {لا
یُبدِینَ زِینَتَهُنَّ إِلَّا ما ظَهَرَ مِنها} قال: «الخاتم و المسکة و
هی القلب.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

“I asked Imam Sadiq (‘a) for the interpretation of God’s words, لا
یُبدِینَ زِینَتَهُنَّ إِلَّا ما ظَهَرَ مِنها, he stated: Manifest
adornments consist of rings and bracelets.”[^4]

After speaking of *Hijab* the Quran states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَلْیَضْرِبْنَ بِخُمُرِهِنَّ عَلیٰ جُیُوبِهِنَّ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Khumur* (خُمُر) is the plural form of *khimar* (خِمار) which is a kind
of large veil or headscarf. Also, *juyub* is the plural form of *jayb*
which means shirt collar.

It is said that at the time of the Prophet of Allah (S) women wore
shirts that were open at the collar and revealed a portion of their
breasts. Additionally, they put the sides of their headscarves behind
their ears; therefore, their ears, earrings, neck, and a portion of
their breasts were bared. Consequently, this verse directs women to cast
their headscarves over their open neckline in order to cover their ears,
earrings, neck, and breasts.

Tabarsi interprets this verse thus:

“*Khumur* (خُمُر) is the plural form of *khimar* (خِمار) which is a kind
of veil or headscarf that falls over one’s neck and neckline. This verse
instructs women to cast their headscarves over their breasts in order to
cover their necks, since formerly, they would cast their headscarves
behind their heads, which caused their breasts to be revealed.”[^5]

Following this statement, the Quran states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَ لا یَضْرِبْنَ بِأَرْجُلِهِنَّ لِیُعْلَمَ ما یُخْفِینَ مِن
زِینَتِهِنَّ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

In order to completely observe modesty and prevent social corruption,
women are advised to refrain from walking heavily to keep non*-mahram*
men from hearing the sounds of their adornments. This is because such
sounds may cause men to become sexually aroused and hence cause problems
in the society, especially for youths and single men.

Several important ethical and Islamic issues can be derived from this
verse:

1. Men and women (who aren’t married to each other) must abstain from
visual indulgence and looking at each other in a lustful manner. People
must not look at one another for sexual pleasure.

2. Women must not reveal their hidden adornments to men.

3. Women are obligated to wear their veil or headscarf in such a manner
that their ears, earrings, their neck and the surrounding area, and
their breasts are completely covered.

4. In order to honor public modesty and counteract moral corruption,
women are advised to tread softly so the sounds of their steps do not
cause corruption in men.

5. Women are not required to cover their obvious adornments.

Second Verse
------------

Allah, the Exalted, has stated is the holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّبِيُّ قُل لِّأَزْوَاجِكَ وَ بَنَاتِكَ وَ نِسَاء
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ يُدْنِينَ عَلَيْهِنَّ مِن جَلَابِيبِهِنَّ ذَلِكَ
أَدْنَى أَن يُعْرَفْنَ فَلَا يُؤْذَيْنَ وَ كَانَ اللَّهُ غَفُورًا
رَّحِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Prophet! Tell your wives and daughters and believing women to draw
their veils (cloaks) close unto themselves. This is better so that they
may be recognized (as modest women) and therefore not be molested and
Allah is much-forgiving and merciful.”***[^6]

The dictionary of *Qamus* defines *jalbab* (جَلْباب) as a loose shirt or
garment for women or a garment worn on top of other clothes, which
covers the other clothes completely. It is also defined as a veil or
headscarf. *Raghib* has defined *jalbab* as a shirt and scarf in his
book, *Mufradat*. Moreover, in *Al-Munjid*, *jalbab* is defined as a
loose shirt or garment.

Therefore, this verse may be interpreted thus: Tell women to wear their
robe such that it covers the whole body and hides it from the eyes of
outsiders. If they do so, they will be known as chaste women. Thus, they
will avoid the attention of strangers and will not be molested.

This verse indicates that Muslim women must wear conservative,
concealing, and plain clothes when leaving their house and thus prevent
ethical and social corruption. Such conduct is advantageous to women,
men, and youths in general.

Third Verse
-----------

The Quran states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا نِسَاء النَّبِيِّ لَسْتُنَّ كَأَحَدٍ مِّنَ النِّسَاء إِنِ
اتَّقَيْتُنَّ فَلَا تَخْضَعْنَ بِالْقَوْلِ فَيَطْمَعَ الَّذِي فِي
قَلْبِهِ مَرَضٌ وَ قُلْنَ قَوْلًا مَّعْرُوفًا \* وَ قَرْنَ فِي
بُيُوتِكُنَّ وَ لَا تَبَرَّجْنَ تَبَرُّجَ الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O women of the prophet! You are not as other women, if you are
pious. So speak not tenderly to make those who have sickness in their
heart lustful, but speak in a normal manner. And stay in your homes and
do not flaunt yourselves as in the Age of Ignorance.”***[^7]

In this verse, women are given three recommendations:

1. That they not speak in a tender and soft manner since speaking in
this manner may incite the lusts of impure men

2. That they stay at home

3. That they not display themselves before outsiders without the
necessary covering and not flaunt themselves and show off their beauty
and cosmetics

Even though this verse addresses the wives and daughters of the prophet,
its instructions apply to all women.

It must be said that the statement قَرْنَ فی بُیُوتِکُنَّ does not mean
that the wives of the Prophet (S) and other women must always stay at
home and never leave the house; because, as I have previously stated,
women are true members of the society and have responsibilities that
necessitate leaving the house. Moreover, at the time of the Prophet (S)
women would exit their homes and they would present themselves at
mosques.

They would listen to the words of the Prophet (S) and would ask their
religious questions. Indeed, many women are narrators of Hadith and many
narrators transmit Hadith from them. They would participate in battles
and would treat and minister to the wounded. The Prophet’s (S) wives
would also participate in battles, although they were not commissioned
to fight.

It was not the manner of the Prophet (S) and his followers to confine
women to their homes, nor does this verse intend such; rather, it means
that women must be devoted to their homes and regard it as their true
place. Moreover, they should favor household management, parenting, and
caring for their husband. They must feel responsible for household
issues and eschew loitering, walking aimlessly in the streets,
unrestraint, and imprudence.

Maharim
-------

**Maharim**[^8]

There are two types of men in regard to each woman: *mahram* and
non-*mahram*.

That which has been stated regarding the *Hijab* of women pertains to
non-*mahram* men. Observing *Hijab* is not obligatory before *mahram*
men. *Mahram* men consist of:

1. One’s father’s father, grandfather, and all direct paternal ancestors

2. One’s mother’s father, grandfather, and all direct maternal ancestors

3. One’s brother and his children and descendants

4. Children of one’s sisters and their descendants

5. One’s paternal uncle, his paternal uncle, and so on

6. One’s maternal uncle, his maternal uncle, and so on

7. One’s husband and father-in-law

8. One’s father-in-law’s and mother-in-law’s father, grandfather, and so
on

9. One’s husband’s sons and their descendants

10. One’s sons and all their descendants

11. One’s daughter’s descendants

12. One’s sons-in-law and their sons-in-law, and so on

These individuals may see a woman’s body[^9] and women are not obliged
to cover themselves in front of them. Of course, this is only on the
condition that they do not look upon her for sexual pleasure; otherwise,
one cannot even look upon one’s *maharim* or children. Moreover, if it
is for pleasure, women must not even look at other women, and men must
not look at other men.

The Limits of Hijab
-------------------

The necessity of *Hijab* is one of the indisputable commandments
[*ahkam*] of Islam and all religious jurisprudents [*fuqaha*] are
unanimous in this issue. Women are required to cover their bodies from
non-*mahram* men using chadors,[^10] abas,[^11] long shirts, robes,
overcoats, loose coveralls, montoes, veils, headscarves, or any other
means that can cover the whole body. Islam does not enforce any specific
form of covering.

There is no disagreement regarding the necessity of observing *Hijab*.
However, there is dispute among religious jurisprudents regarding
covering the face and the hands up to the wrists. Some religious
jurisprudents regard covering these obligatory or at least advise
precaution [*ihtiyat*]. Even so, most religious jurisprudents do not
consider covering these areas obligatory and cite various rationales for
its superfluity:

### Reason One

Hadith that directly and explicitly refute the necessity of covering the
face and hands:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مسعدة بن زیاد قال سمعت جعفراً علیه السلام و سئل عمّا تظهر المرأة من
زینتها قال: «الوجه و الکفین».
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mas‘adah ibn Ziyad said: “I heard from (Imam) Ja‘far (‘a) that in answer
to a question about the apparent adornments of women he replied: ‘The
face and two hands.’”[^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مروک بن عبید، عن بعض أصحابنا، عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: ما یحلّ للرجل أن
یری من المرأة إذا لم یکن محرماً؟ قال: «الوجه و الکفّان و القدمان.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

In answer to a person who asked, “Which parts of a woman can a man who
is not *mahram* look at?” the noble Imam Sadiq (‘a) answered, “The face,
two hands, and two feet.”[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علیّ بن جعفر، عن أخیه موسی (ع)، قال: «سألته عن الرجل ما یصلح أن ینظر
إلیه من المرأة إذا لم یکن محرماً؟» قال: «الوجه و الکفّ و موضع السوار.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali ibn Ja‘far said, “I asked my brother, Musa ibn Ja‘far (‘a), ‘Which
parts of a non-*mahram* woman can a man look at?’ he replied, ‘The face,
hands, and the area of a bracelet.’”[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علیّ بن سوید، قال: قلتُ لأبی الحسن (ع): إنّی مبتلی بالنظر إلی المرأة
الجمیلة یعجبنی النظر إلیها. فقال لی: «یا علیّ! لا بأس إذا عرف من نیّتک
الصدق: و إیّاک و الزنا: فإنّه یمحق البرکة و يهلک الدین.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ali ibn Sawid said, ‘I said to Musa ibn Ja‘far (‘a), ‘I have been
afflicted with looking at a beautiful woman and I like to look at her at
all times, what should I do?’ He answered, ‘O ‘Ali! It has no problem if
you have good intentions, but I warn you of fornication because it
repels blessings and destroys one’s religion.’”[^15]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مفضّل بن عمر، قال: قلتُ لأبی عبدالله (ع): جعلتُ فداک، ما تقول فی
المرأة تکون فی السفر مع الرجال لیس فیهم لها ذو محرم، و لا معهم امرأة،
فتموت المرأة، ما یصنع بها؟ قال: «یُغسَل منها ما أوجب الله علیه التیمم،
و لا تمسّ، و لا یُکشف لها شیء من محاسنها التی أمر الله بسترها.» قلت:
فکیف یصنع بها؟ قال: «یغسل بطن کفّیها، ثمّ یغسل وجهها، ثمّ یغسل ظهر
کفّیها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mufadhdhal stated, “I said to Imam Sadiq (‘a), ‘May I be sacrificed for
you! What must be done regarding a woman who traveled with non-*mahram*
men and died with no accompanying women?’ He answered, ‘They must wash
[*ghusl*] the areas of *Tayammum*, but they must not touch her and must
not expose that which Allah has appointed to be covered.’ Mufadhdhal
said, ‘Then what should be done?’ He replied, ‘First, one must wash the
inner surface of her hands, then her face, then the outer surface of her
hands.’”[^16]

### Reason Two

Some Hadith do not plainly mention the face and hands although they
indirectly denote the fact that covering the face and hands is not
obligatory.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
احمد بن محمد بن أبی نصر، عن الرضا (ع)، قال: سألته عن الرجل یحلّ له أن
ینظر إلی شعر أخت امرأته؟ فقال: «لا، إلّا أن تکون من القواعد.» قلت: أخت
امرأته و الغریبة سواء؟ قال: «نعم». قلت: فما لی من النظر إلیه منها؟
فقال: «شعرها و ذراعها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abinasr said, “I asked Imam Ridha (‘a) if a man
can look at the hair of his wife’s sister. He answered, ‘No, unless his
wife’s sister is old and decrepit.’ I then said, ‘A wife’s sister and
non-*mahram* women are the same?’ He answered, ‘Yes.’ I said, ‘So what
parts of an old woman may I look at?’ He answered, ‘Their hair and
arms.’”[^17]

The fact that the narrator of this Hadith asks about the permissibility
of looking at the hair of one’s wife’s sister but does not ask about
looking at her face shows that he regarded its permissibility certain,
or else asking about looking at her face had precedence. Additionally,
from the fact that in reply to the question regarding the extent one can
look at an old woman, the Imam answered, ‘her hair and arms’ and did not
add her face, shows that he too regarded the permissibility of looking
at a woman’s face an obvious fact that did not need explaining,
otherwise, he should have mentioned it.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
احمد بن محمد بن أبی نصر، عن الرضا (ع)، قال: «یؤخذ الغلام بالصلاة و هو
ابن سبع سنین، و لا تغطّی المرأة شعرها منه حتی یحتلم.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abinasr cited from Imam Ridha, “A boy is made to
pray at seven years of age but women cover their hair from him when he
starts having involuntary ejaculations of semen during sleep
[*ihtilam*].”[^18]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبدالرحمن بن الحجّاج، قال: سألت أبا إبراهیم (ع) عن الجاریة التی لم
تدرک متی ینبغی ألا تغطّی رأسها ممّن لیس بینها و بینه محرم؟ و متی یجب
علیها أن تقنّع رأسها للصلاة؟ قال: «لا تغطّی رأسها حتی تحرم علیها
الصلاة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abd ur-Rahman ibn al-Hajjaj said, “Regarding a girl who is not yet
mature, I asked Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far (‘a), ‘When must she cover her head
from non-*mahram* men and when must she veil her head for *salat*?’ He
answered, ‘She need not cover her head until the age that prayer becomes
prohibited for her [due to menstruation].”[^19]

These two Hadith indicate that the necessity of covering one’s head and
hair is an effect of physical maturity; however, nothing is said of the
necessity of covering the face. If it was truly obligatory, stating this
fact would have precedence. Thus, it is demonstrated that covering one’s
face is not obligatory for women.

### Reason Three

As I have indicated, it can be discerned from the statement لا یُبدِینَ
زِینَتَهُنَّ إِلّا ما ظَهَرَ مِنها that covering the hands and face is
not obligatory since various Hadith of the *Ahl ul-Bayt* state that
applying *Surmah* and wearing rings are instances of إِلّا ما ظَهَرَ
مِنها and need not be covered. Hence, covering the face and hands, which
are the locations of these adornments, must not be necessary.

Moreover, the statement وَلْیَضْرِبْنَ بِخُمُرِهِنَّ عَلیٰ جُیُوبِهِنَّ,
which is mentioned in this same verse, also indicates the inessentiality
of covering the face because it advises women to cast their veil or
headscarf over their necks and breasts and says nothing about covering
their face, which shows that it is not necessary. Additionally, in the
Hadith from Mas‘adah ibn Sadaqah, which was previously mentioned in this
discussion, the face and two hands were enumerated as instances of إِلّا
ما ظَهَرَ مِنها.

### Reason Four

Various Hadith and historical facts reveal that at the time of the
Prophet of Allah (S), it was not traditional for women to cover their
face and they would go about in public places with their faces
uncovered. Men would see their faces, they would talk to each other,
socialize and barter, and women would listen to Hadith from the Prophet
(S) and cite them to men.

There are hundreds of female narrators of Hadith, including even the
wives and daughters of the Prophet (S). ‘Ayishah, Hafsah, Umm Salamah,
and Fatimah (‘a) have cited hundreds of Hadith and this necessitates men
seeing women’s faces and hearing their voices. The Prophet of Allah (S)
neither commanded women to cover their faces, nor did he forbid men from
looking at their faces and hearing their voices, unless it was with
sexual and lewd intentions.

Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah Ansari has said: One day the Prophet of Allah (‘a)
went to see Fatimah (‘a) while I was with him. When he came to the door
of her house, he knocked and declared, ‘as-Salamu ‘Alaykum.’ From within
the house, Fatimah (‘a) said, ‘Alayk as-Salam, O Prophet of Allah!’ The
Prophet (S) said, ‘May I enter your home?’ Fatimah (‘a) replied, ‘You
may.’ The Prophet of Allah (S) said, ‘Shall I enter with my companion?’
Fatimah (‘a) replied, ‘O Prophet of Allah! I do not have on my
headscarf.’ The Prophet (S) said, ‘Cast the extras of your cloak on your
head.’ Fatimah (‘a) did so. Then the Prophet of Allah (S) said,
‘as-Salamu ‘Alaykum.’ Fatimah (‘a) replied. Then the Prophet (S) said,
‘Shall I enter with my male companion?’ She answered, ‘Please enter.’

“The Prophet of Allah (S) entered the house and I too entered.

“My eyes came across the face of Fatimah (‘a), which was yellow like
turmeric. The Prophet of Allah (S) declared, ‘O daughter! Why is your
face yellow so?’ She replied, ‘O Prophet of Allah! It is from intense
hunger.’ The Prophet of Allah (S) prayed, ‘O Lord who satiates the
hungry, satiate Fatimah daughter of Muhammad!’ I swear by Allah! After
the prayer of the Prophet of Allah (S), I looked at the face of Fatimah
(‘a). Blood flowed into her face and it became red and after that she no
longer felt hungry.[^20]

This narrative shows that Fatimah’s (‘a) face was uncovered in such a
way that Jabir first saw its yellowness and after the prayer of the
Prophet (S), its redness.

Sa‘d Iskaf cites from Imam Baqir (‘a), “A young man of the *Ansar*[^21]
encountered a woman in the streets of Madinah. In those times, women
would cast their headscarves behind their ears. The *Ansari* youth
stared at her until he came to her and passed her, and then he looked at
her from behind. Suddenly, his head hit piece of sharp bone or glass
that was sticking out of the wall. His face was cut and blood flowed
upon his chest and clothes. The youth said, ‘I swear to God! I shall
complain about this woman before the Prophet of Allah (S).’

The youth came into the presence of the Prophet of Allah (S). The
Prophet asked, ‘Why are you thus bloody?’ The youth recounted the tale.
Just then, Gabriel came upon the Prophet (S) and revealed unto him verse
30 of Surah Nur (This verse and its subsequent verse were explicated in
detail at the beginning of this chapter).

This account shows that at the time of the Prophet (S) and the advent of
Islam, not only did women leave their faces uncovered, they also cast
their headscarves behind their ears. Consequently, their ears, earrings,
necks, and breasts were apparent. The affair of this *Ansari* youth took
place in this period, which was when he took his complaint to the
Prophet (S) and the verse of Hijab was revealed unto the Prophet (S).

This verse advises women to cast the fringes of their headscarves around
their necks so that their ears, earrings, necks, and breasts are
covered. However, interestingly, no instruction was given regarding
covering the face and this demonstrates its inessentiality. In order to
prevent ethical and social corruption and the recurrence of incidents
similar to the affair of the *Ansari* youth, the verse of Hijab counsels
men and women to cut off their stares and shun leering and
lecherousness.

Philosophy of Hijab
-------------------

As previously stated, one of the certain commandments of Islam is the
necessity of covering. However, an important question is, ‘What is the
philosophy of Hijab? Why has Islam thus taken away the freedom of women?
And, is not this an injustice?’

In reply, it must be said that the object of Islam in legislating Hijab
is fortifying the holy foundations of family, preventing sexual
deviations and their detrimental consequences, ensuring social health
and security, facilitating the cleansing of the social environment, and
decreasing moral corruption. Moreover, not only is this amount of
limitation not disadvantageous to women, it is in the overall interests
of women, their children, husbands, and all members of the society.

In order to clarify this issue, I shall state several premises.

### First Point

We must bear in mind that women and men are two pillars of the society,
and that individual welfare, tranquility, and comfort is greatly based
upon the health, security, and purity of our living environment. Thus,
assuring the health, security, and purification of the environment from
corruption is our mutual responsibility and we must cooperate and work
together to attain these goals.

### Second Point

Women are delicate and exquisite creatures and are naturally fond of
make-up, adornments, beauty, flaunting, ostentation, and charming
others. They wish to take over the hearts of men with their allure;
however, men crave variety and are very weak against their sexual
desires. Their sexual desires are easily excited and they eventually
lose control. When these unruly and rebellious desires are aroused, even
reason, law, and religion are generally useless in harnessing them.

Everything about women is arousing to men—especially young men: their
adornments, their pretty clothes, their delicate voices, their allure
and coyness, their bodies, hair, and even the warmth of their bodies can
kindle this wild instinct.

### Third Point

There are many men in the society that cannot marry due to poverty,
unemployment, low income, continuing education, military service, and a
large number of other reasons. The tally of these individuals, who are
at the juncture of adulthood and the outburst of sexual instincts, is
rather high. The regretful situation of these people who are part of the
society cannot be disregarded.

**Considering the previous points, the following question arises:** What
is in the best interests of women—uninhibitedness and absolute freedom
in dress and behavior or observing Hijab and enduring some
restrictions?”

In order to arrive at a correct answer, it is better that we consider
two hypothetical communities and compare their pros and cons.

### Community A

In this community, women have complete freedom regarding their apparel
and their association with men. In order to satisfy their natural
tendencies, they are flamboyant and gaudy, they leave their homes
made-up, half-bare, and with beautiful, colorful, and voguish clothes.
With absolute liberty, they socialize and consort with all sorts of men
in public places.

They ravish the hearts of every male, intentionally, and
unintentionally, with their scanty clothes, their beauty, and their
allure and wherever they go, they drag behind themselves a caravan of
hearts. Those that are not married inhabit cinemas, cabarets, dance
parties, parks, and the streets until midnight hours in complete
freedom. Furthermore, those who are married go wherever they want with
or without their spouses with the excuse of freedom as their right.

In this community, boys and girls are free to associate with one
another, become close friends, and even have sexual relationships. Men
are also completely free to consort with women as they please. They can
have relations with any willing woman or anyone they are able. Together
they can go to theatres, nightclubs, parties, wander the streets and
places of ill repute, and indulge in all sorts of debauchery.

The women of such communities are free in adornment, degeneracy, exiting
their homes, associating with any men, and having sexual relations;
however, these freedoms come with a price and have the following
consequences:

Instability of the sacred foundations of family; indifference of men and
women toward the home and family; suspicion of spouses towards one other
and trying to police one another; family conflicts; abundance of
illegitimate or vagrant children with no guardians; accruement of mental
illnesses; increase of murder, crime, and suicide; escalation of the
number of unmarried women and men; postponement of the age of marriage;
indifference of young men and women toward establishing families;
inclination of youths toward various moral corruptions and sexual
deviations; upsurge of divorce statistics; and superabundance of men and
women who must inevitably live alone and suffer loneliness.

Cases of such societies with disrupted families are evident in the West.
Put aside raw emotions and thoroughly contemplate the matter. Is such a
community truly in the interests of women, men, youths?

### Community B

In this society, women have an active role on the stage of life. They
occupy suitable jobs with necessary facilities and in this way perform
their duties to the society. Like men, women have a great presence in
schools, colleges, universities, research centers, hospitals, clinics,
laboratories, legislative offices, government departments, and other
important and suitable offices. They completely observe Hijab and
covering—except their hands and faces. They do not apply make-up and
adornments before entering public places and their place of work. They
leave their homes covered, plain, and without cosmetics and they make
their adornments, cosmetics, and allure exclusive to their husbands and
use them in the privacy of their own home.

They accept these restrictions selflessly and in good will in order that
the environment is free of deviation and corruption. They do this with
regard to the state of youths and men who do not have the power to
marry. They observe Hijab so that men do not become indifferent towards
their own wives due to seeing the beauties of other women, and so that
these men do not turn their hearty families into a scene of a
battlefield with excuses and quarrels.

They accept this limitation so that young men and women—who are the
children of these same women—are safe from corruption, sexual
deviations, and mental illnesses; and so they may marry and establish a
family at a suitable time and with the availability of necessary
resources and facilities.

They accept this limitation to help fortify the foundations of family—a
thing of which they are also a part—and thus reduce the tally of
divorce, living single, and distressed and guardianless children.

In this community, most families have good interrelations, the
relationships of spouses are relatively genial, and there are fewer
disputes. Moral corruption and sexual deviations are comparatively low
among youths. Young men and women are interested in marriage and
establishing the holy institution of family. The amount of divorces and
single men and women is not high. There are fewer vagrant youths and
children without guardians.

In this society, parents feel more assured of the purity of their
children from immorality, sexual divergence, and mental disorders.

Is living in such a community in the better interests of women or the
first? Any thoughtful person would regard the second community superior.

Islam also regards living in the second community better and healthier.
This is why it has legislated Hijab and has asked women to observe it
and cover their adornments and beauties from non-*mahram* men.[^22]

The Prophet (S) has forbidden women to beautify themselves for males
other than their husbands and has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن النّبي (ع) فی حدیث المناهي، قال: «و نهی أن تتزیّن لغیر زوجها، فإن
فعلت کان حقّاً علی الله أن یحرقها بالنار.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

A woman must not adorn herself for any save her spouse, and if she were
to do so, it would be a just reward for Allah to burn her in the Fires
[of Hell].[^23]

Imam Muhammad Baqir (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جابر بن یزید، قال: سمعت أبا جعفر محمّد بن علیّ الباقر (ع) یقول: «و لا
یجوز لها أن تتطیّب إذا خرجت من بیتها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

A woman must not perfume herself when she wants to exit her house.[^24]

He has also stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جابر بن یزید الجعفی، قال: سمعت أبا جعفر محمّد بن علیّ الباقر (ع) یقول:
«و لا یجوز للمرأة أن تصافح غیر ذی محرم إلّا من وراء ثوبها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is not permissible for a woman to shake hands with a non-*mahram*
save over her clothing.[^25]

In order to cleanse the social environment, Islam does not suffice with
legislating Hijab. In addition to this, it enjoins men to shun leering
and to cast their eyes away from watching non-*mahram* women.

The Quran states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُل لِّلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَغُضُّوا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَيَحْفَظُوا
فُرُوجَهُمْ ذَلِكَ أَزْكَى لَهُمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ خَبِيرٌ بِمَا
يَصْنَعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Tell the faithful men to shorten their glances and guard their
private parts; this is purer for them (it helps keep their purity).
Surely, Allah knows all they do.”***[^26]

Imam Sadiq (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علیّ بن عقبة، عن أبیه، عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: سمعته یقول: «النظرة سهم
من سهام إبلیس مسمومّ، و کم من نظرة أورثت حسرة طویلة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Looking at non-*mahram* persons is a poisonous arrow of the arrows of
Satan and many (such) gazes entail lingering regret.[^27]

He has also stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عقبة، عن أبی عبدالله (ع)، قال: «النظرة سهم من سهام إبلیس مسمومّ، من
ترکها لله عزوجل لا لغیره أعقبه الله أمناً و ایماناً یجد طعمه.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Looking at non-*mahram* persons is a poisonous arrow of the arrows of
Satan and to whoever abandons it for Allah and none save Him, God shall
bestow the pleasure of security and faith.[^28]

Again he has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الکاهلي، قال: قال أبوعبدالله (ع): «النظرة بعد النظرة تزرع فی القلب
الشهوة، و کفی بها لصاحبها فتنة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

A look after a look nourishes lust in one’s heart and is enough to cause
strife (or temptation) for its owner.[^29]

Noble Sadiq (‘a) has also stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق (ع): «من نظر إلی امرأة فرفع بصره إلی السماء، أو غضّ بصره لم
یرتدّ إلیه بصره حتّی یزوّجه الله من الحور العین.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who looks at a woman and immediately looks up to the sky or casts
down his eyes, Allah will wed him to a houri (in paradise) before his
gaze levels again.[^30]

The Prophet of Allah (S) has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن رسول الله (ص) قال: «من صافح امرأة حراماً جاء یوم القیامة مغلولاً،
ثمّ یؤمر به إلی النّار.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who shakes hands with a non-*mahram* woman shall come chained on the
Last Day and will then be cast into the Fire.[^31]

He stated elsewhere:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص): «من فاکه امرأة لا یملکها، حبسه الله بکلّ کلمة
کلّمها فی الدنیا ألف عام.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who jests with a woman who is not his, for every word he has spoken
to her in the world, Allah shall imprison him for one thousand
years.[^32]

Amir al-Mu’minin, ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن علیّ (ع) قال: «لا یخلو بامرأة رجلٌ، فما من رجلٍ خلا بامرأة إلّا کان
الشیطان ثالثهما.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

A man must not go into a secluded place with a woman, because no man
goes into a private place with a woman save that the third of them is
Satan.[^33]

Musa ibn Ja‘far has cited from his forefathers from the Prophet of Allah
(S) who stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موسی بن جعفر، عن آبائه (ع)، عن رسول الله (ص) قال: «من کان یؤمن بالله و
الیوم الآخر، فلا یبیت فی موضع یسمع نفس امرأة لیست له بمحرم.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who has faith in Allah and the Last Day shall not sleep in a place
where he hears a woman breathing who is not *mahram* to him.[^34]

[^1]: - The word non-mahram denotes males that are not close family
members in front of whom women must cover themselves and behave
modestly. The relationships of mahram men (close family members) are
explained in more detail and mentioned in verses in ensuing sections.
[trans.]

[^2]: - Surah Nur 24:30-31.

[^3]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 201.

[^4]: - Ibid.

[^5]: - Majma‘ ul-Bayan, vol. 7, p. 138.

[^6]: - Surah Ahzab 33:59.Ḥ

[^7]: - Surah Ahzab 33:32-33.

[^8]: - Maharim is the plural form of mahram. Maharim are close
relatives with whom one cannot be married. Additionally, one’s spouse is
a closer form of mahram. Women are only obliged to cover their private
parts before maharim and before their spouse they are not required to
cover at all. [trans.]

[^9]: - They may see her entire body save her private parts; even so,
modesty is always a rule of thumb. Naturally, one’s husband may look at
any part of his spouse’s body for pleasure or otherwise. [trans.]

[^10]: - A chador is a type of loose cloth that covers the whole body
except the face and hands. [trans.]

[^11]: - An aba is a type of robe traditionally worn by Arabs. [trans.]

[^12]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 212.

[^13]: - Ibid, vol. 20, p. 201.

[^14]: - Nur uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 590.

[^15]: - Ibid.

[^16]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 2, p. 522.

[^17]: - Ibid, vol. 20, p. 199.

[^18]: - Ibid, vol. 20, p. 229.

[^19]: - Ibid, vol. 2, p. 228.

[^20]: - Tafsir-e Nur uth-Thaqalayn, vol. 3, p. 587.

[^21]: - Ansar literally means helpers. It is the denomination of the
new Muslims of Madinah (then called Yathrib) who invited the Prophet (s)
and his followers to live in their city away from the persecutions of
the idolaters of Mecca. [trans.]

[^22]: - Surah Nur 24:31.

[^23]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 212.

[^24]: - Ibid, p. 220.

[^25]: - Ibid, p. 222.

[^26]: - Surah Nur 24:30.

[^27]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 191.

[^28]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, p. 192.

[^29]: - Ibid, p. 192.

[^30]: - Ibid, p. 193.

[^31]: - Ibid, p. 198.

[^32]: - Ibid, p. 198.

[^33]: - Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 14, p. 265.

[^34]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 185.


