Marriage and its Merits
=======================

The family is a small social unit that begins with the union of husband
and wife and is fortified with the birth of children. Marriage is a
natural need for humans, which is sanctioned by pronouncing the formula
of the marriage contract (the marriage vows).

Islam assigns great importance upon establishing the family and regards
it as a holy event. Various Hadith consider family the finest
institution in existence. Imam Muhammad Baqir (‘a) has cited from the
Prophet of Allah (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی جعفر (ع) قال: رسول الله (ص): «ما بُنِي بناء فی الإسلام أحبّ إلی
الله عزوجل من التزویج.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

No institution has been established in Islam that is more loved by
Allah, the Honored, the Glorified, than marriage.[^1]

Imam Sadiq (‘a) has cited from the Prophet of Allah (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: قال رسول الله (ص): «ما من شیء أحبّ إلی الله من
بیت یعمر فی الإسلام بالنکاح، و ما من شیء أبغض إلی الله من بیت یخرب فی
الإسلام بالفرقه، یعنی الطلاق.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Nothing is more loved by Allah than a house that is populated through
marriage and nothing is more hated by Allah than a house that is broken
through separation (i.e. divorce).[^2]

Marriage is an invaluable Islamic tradition, the necessity of which the
Holy Prophet (S) and Immaculate Imams (‘a) have emphasized. Amir
al-Mu’minin (‘a) has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أمیر المؤمنین (ع): تزوّجوا فإنّ رسول الله (ص) قال: «من أحبّ أن
یتّبع سنّتي فإنّ من سنّتي التزویج.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Marry because the Prophet of Allah (S) has stated: Those who wish to
follow my traditions must know that marriage is one of them.[^3]

The Prophet of Allah (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص): «النکاح سنّتي فمن رغب عن سنّتي فليس منّی.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Marriage is my tradition and whoever forsakes my tradition is not of
me.[^4]

Islam does not regard marriage (and procreation) as an animalistic deed
and it does not enjoin its followers to monastic existence and
abandonment of marriage. On the contrary, it regards it as a way of
purification [*tazkiyah*] and edification [*tahdhib*] of the soul,
abstinence from sin, and proximity to Allah. Imam Sadiq (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أبوعبدالله (ع): «رکعتان یصلّیهما المتزوّج أفضل من سبعین رکعة
یصلّیها عزب.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Two *rak‘ats*[^5] prayer of a married person is superior to seventy
*rak‘ats* prayer of an unmarried person.[^6]

The Holy Prophet (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النّبی (ص): «رکعتان یصلّیهما متزوّج أفضل من رجل عزب یقوم لیله و
یصوم نهاره.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Two rak‘ats prayer of a married person is superior to the worship of an
unmarried man who spends his nights in prayer and his days in fast.[^7]

Imam Sadiq has cited from the Prophet of Allah (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: قال رسول الله (ع): «رُذّال موتاکم العزّاب.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

The worst of your dead are those who die without marrying.[^8]

Marriage and establishing a family is valuable according to Islam and
has many merits, some of which are explained below.

1. Instrument of Love and Friendship
------------------------------------

In this turmoil imbued life we humans require peace, tranquility, and
love. We all need a sympathetic confidant, supporter, and well-wisher
who we can love and enjoy his or her sincere love, aid, and support in
return. We each need a person who can be our partner in life—someone who
is loyal, kind, and sympathetic in health and sickness, in prosperity
and hardship, in happiness and despondency, in wealth and poverty, and
by and large in all circumstances.

Who is better for meeting this need than a spouse and what place is
better than the warm camaraderie of family. Allah, the Exalted, states
in the Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُم مِّنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
لِّتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُم مَّوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً إِنَّ
فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And of His signs is that He has created for you, from yourselves,
spouses that you may gain peace through them and He has set among you
love and compassion. Surely in this there are signs for thoughtful
people.”***[^9]

2. Instrument of Continence and Immunity from Sin
-------------------------------------------------

Humans naturally require sexual relations and release. Controlling
sexual desires is challenging if they are not satisfied legitimately and
they draw a person to deviation and sin. Thus, marriage is the best and
healthiest implement for satisfying natural sexual instincts and
immunization against deviation. The Prophet of Allah (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص): «من أحبّ أن یلقی الله طاهراً مطهراً فلیَلْقَه
بزوجةٍ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever wishes to meet Allah pure and immaculate must marry.[^10]

The noble Imam Sadiq (‘a), has cited from the Prophet of Allah (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: قال رسول الله (ص): «من تزوّج أحرز نصف دینه.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever gets married has guarded half of their religion.[^11]

Noble Musa ibn Ja‘far (‘a) has cited from his forefathers who cited from
the Prophet of Allah (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موسی بن جعفر (ع)، عن النبیّ (ص)، قال: «ما من شابّ تزوّج فی حداثة سنّه
إلّا عجّ شیطانه: یا ویلاه، یا ویلاه، عَصَم منّي ثلثي دینه، فلیتّق الله
العبد في الثلث الباقي.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

When someone marries when they are young, their devil cries: ‘Woe unto
me! Woe unto me! This youth has protected two thirds of their religion
from me. So for the remaining third this person must fear Allah and be
His devout servant.’[^12]

3. Instrument of Physical and Mental Health
-------------------------------------------

Sexual desires and release are natural needs that bring about physical
and mental health. Control and suppression of these needs strain the
psyche and damage one’s equilibrium. The origin of many mental disorders
such as depression, despair, anxiety, phobia, pessimism, nihilism,
distrust, and anger may be suppression of sexual instincts. Thus, timely
marriage and legitimate sexual fulfillment can be considered a key
factor in physical and mental health. The Prophet of Allah (S) has
stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص): «زوّجوا أیاماکم؛ فإنّ الله یحسن لهم أخلاقهم، و
یوسّع لهم فی أرزاقهم، و یزیدهم فی مروّاتهم.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Wed unto each other your unmarried men and women; for then surely Allah
shall improve their behavior, expand their livelihood, and increase
their humaneness.[^13]

4. Increase in the Well-being of the Social Environment
-------------------------------------------------------

If individuals marry at the outset of their maturity, they shall love
and depend on their families and become immune to many types of moral
corruption. As a result, the statistics relating to rape, taking
advantage of girls and women, fornication, sexual acts with members of
the same sex, masturbation, and even addiction, murder, theft, and many
other crimes will plummet. Timely marriage has a great effect upon the
health and security of the environment. This is why Islam advises
parents and caregivers to prepare the means of marriage for those who
have not yet married. The Quran states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنكِحُوا الْأَيَامَى مِنكُمْ وَالصَّالِحِينَ مِنْ عِبَادِكُمْ
وَإِمَائِكُمْ إِن يَكُونُوا فُقَرَاء يُغْنِهِمُ اللَّهُ مِن فَضْلِهِ
وَاللَّهُ وَاسِعٌ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And join your single men and women and your righteous bondservants
in matrimony. If they are poor, Allah will enrich them of His bounty.
And Allah is the Facilitator, the Omniscient.”***[^14]

The Prophet of Allah (S) has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن النبیّ (ص) قال: «من حقّ الولد علی والده ثلاثة: یُحسِّن اسمه، و
یعلّمه الکتابة، و یزوّجه إذا بلغ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

A father has three duties toward his children: he must give them worthy
names, teach them literacy, and wed them when they mature.[^15]

5. Procreation
--------------

Islam favors procreation and regards it as an important objective of
marriage. Imam Muhammad Baqir (‘a) has cited from the Prophet of Allah
(S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی جعفر (ع)، قال: قال رسول الله (ص): «ما یمنع المؤمن أن یتّخذ
أهلاً؛ لعلّ الله یرزقه نسمة تثقل الارض بلا اله الّا الله.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

What is wrong with a believer taking a spouse; it may be that Allah
provides them with a child that vitalizes the world with (speakers of
the adage of monotheism:) la ilaha illallah.[^16]

The Prophet of Allah (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبیّ (ص): تناکحوا تکثروا؛ «فإنّي أباهي بکم الأمم یوم القیامة و
لو بالسقط.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Marry so you increase because surely I shall take pride in you, among
the civilizations, on the Day of Judgment, even (counting)
miscarriages.[^17]

6. Pleasure and Sensuality
--------------------------

An important merit of marriage is legitimate sexual pleasure and
gratification. Sexual acts bring about one of the highest of worldly
pleasures and, according to Islam, are not only decent and legitimate
acts if done with the intention to become closer to Allah [*qasd-e
qurbat*] but also good deeds that have rewards [*thawab*]. Furthermore,
sexual relations are even obligatory in some circumstances.

Conditions of the Marriage Contract
-----------------------------------

Marriage is a sacred contract that is realized with the synthesis of
several factors:

1. Consent of the man and woman

2. Permission of the woman’s father or grandfather (assuming that she is
previously unwed)

3. Determination of the *Mahr* (*Mahr* can be real estate, cash, credit,
or any other type of property, whether abundant or meager)[^18]

4. Vocalization of the marriage formulas (by the man and woman or their
representative—someone who is acquainted with the Arabic language)

After vocalization of the marriage formulas (marriage vows), the
individual lives of the woman and man turn into familial life, and thus
the man and woman gain new responsibilities.

[^1]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 15.

[^2]: - Ibid, p. 16.

[^3]: - Ibid, p. 17.

[^4]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 220.

[^5]: - Rak‘at is the basic unit of Salat, the compulsory daily Islamic
prayer. [trans.]

[^6]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 18.

[^7]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, p. 19.

[^8]: - Ibid, p. 19.

[^9]: - Surah Rum 30:21.

[^10]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 18.

[^11]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 17.

[^12]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 221.

[^13]: - Ibid, p. 222.

[^14]: - Surah Nur 24:32.

[^15]: - Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol.1, p. 253.

[^16]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 14.

[^17]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 220.

[^18]: - Mahr is a specified (at time of marriage) amount that a man
must pay his wife as a wedding gift. [trans.]


