Mutual Rights and Responsibilities of Spouses
=============================================

According to Islam, the family is a small social unit that makes up the
society. This small unit is formed of a woman and a man and is extended
by producing children. Members of a family have a close relationship and
common goals and interests. The happiness of each member depends on the
happiness of the whole family. After marriage, men and women must
consider all the members of the family not only their individual selves.

The relationship between a husband and wife is not like that of
neighbors or friends; it is much more extreme—on the verge of unity. The
Quran expresses this nicely:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُم مِّنْ أَنفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
لِّتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُم مَّوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً إِنَّ
فِي ذَلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِّقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And of His signs is that He has created for you, from yourselves,
spouses that you may gain peace through them and He has set among you
love and compassion. Surely in this there are signs for thoughtful
people.”***[^1]

The statement, ‘*He has created for you, from yourselves, spouses*’,
indicates the intensity of the connection and relationship. In another
verse regarding husbands and wives it states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...هُنَّ لِبَاسٌ لَّكُمْ وَأَنتُمْ لِبَاسٌ لَّهُنَّ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They (women) are a garment for you (men) and you are a garment for
them.”***[^2]

Portrayal of wives and husbands as one another’s clothing reflects their
close connection and relationship since clothes are the closest of
things to one’s body and are greatly needed in order to protect one from
heat and cold, to cover imperfections, and confer tranquility and
beauty. Husbands and wives are also such in respect with each other and
must necessarily be so.

Islam greatly favors fortification of the structure of family and decent
relations between spouses, and thus it has designated specific rights
and responsibilities for each. These rights and responsibilities may be
summarized within two main categories: *common* and *exclusive*. Both of
these categories will be elucidated in the succeeding sections.

Common Rights and Responsibilities
----------------------------------

The rights and responsibilities that pertain to both husband *and* wife
are as follows:

### 1. Sociability

Wives and husbands must behave properly with one another and observe
fine etiquette. The Quran declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
...وَعَاشِرُوهُنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And consort with them (your wives) in honor and equity***
**[*****ma‘ruf*****]*****.”***[^3]

The word *ma‘ruf*, which has been used in this sentence, is the opposite
of *munkar* (meaning wicked) and means behavior that is approved by both
reason and religion. Even though this verse is addressed to men, women
also hold this obligation.

Husbands and wives must be kind, well-mannered, cordial, cheerful,
compassionate, helpful, sympathetic, courteous, just, truthful,
supportive, trustworthy, loyal, well-wishing, and polite with one other.
Various Hadith also emphasize sociability and geniality between spouses.
The Prophet of Islam (S) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن النبیّ (ص)، قال: «أکمل المؤمنین إیماناً، احسنهم خلقاً، و خیارکم
خیارکم لنسائه.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

The most complete persons in faith are those who have the best manners
and the good among you are those who are good with their wives.[^4]

### 2. Attracting the Attentions of One’s Spouse

Husbands and wives must observe each other’s desires in cleanliness,
clothing, the style of their hair and beard, etc. Islam advises women at
home to apply cosmetics and adorn themselves for their husbands, wear
their best clothes, be neat and clean, and apply fragrant perfumes. Imam
Sadiq (‘a) has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: «جاءت امرأة إلی رسول الله (ص)، و قالت: یا رسول
الله! ما حقّ الزوج علی المرأة؟»—فی حدیث إلی أن—قال: «و علیها أن تتطیّب
بأطیب طیبها، و تلبس أحسن ثیابها، و تتزیّن بأحسن زینتها، و تعرض نفسها
علیه غدوة و عشیّة، و أکثر من ذلک حقوقه علیها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

A woman came to the Prophet of Allah (S) and asked, ‘What are the rights
of a husband regarding his wife?’ He replied, ‘Her duty is to perfume
herself with the best scenting of her perfumes, and to dress in the
nicest of her attires, and adorn herself with the finest of her
adornments, and thus offer herself to her husband morning and night; and
more than these are his rights regarding her.[^5]

A man also has these responsibilities toward his wife; he must be neat
and clean, perfumed and well-dressed, he must style his hair and face
regularly, and make himself handsome for his wife. Imam Ja‘far ibn
Muhammad (‘a) has cited the Prophet of Allah (S) through his fathers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جعفر بن محمد، عن أبیه، عن جدّه علی بن الحسین، عن علیّ (ع)، قال: قال
رسول الله (ص): «لیتهیّأ أحدکم لزوجته کما تتهیّأ زوجته له»—قال جعفر بن
محمّد (ع):—«یعنی یتهیّأ بالنظافة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Each of you must prepare yourselves for your wives; just as your wives
prepare themselves for you.’ Then Imam Ja‘far (‘a) stated, ‘This means
that each of you must be neat and clean.’[^6]

The Prophet of Allah has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبیّ (ص): «حقّ المرأة علی زوجها أن یسدّ جوعتها، و أن یستر
عورتها، و لا یقبح لها وجهاً، فإذا فعل ذلک فقد و الله أدّیٰ حقّها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

The rights of a wife regarding her husband are that he must provide her
nourishment and clothing and must not appear to her with an ugly
appearance. If he does these, by Allah, surely he has satisfied her
rights.[^7]

Hasan ibn al-Jahm has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن بن الجهم، قال: رأیت أبالحسن (ع) اختضب، فقلت: —جعلت فداک—أختضبت؟
فقال: «نعم، إنّ التهیئة ممّا یزید فی عفّة النساء، و لقد ترک النساء
العفّة بترک أزواجهنّ التهیئة»،—ثمّ قال: —«أيسرّک أن تراها علی ما تراک
علیه إذا کنت علی غیر تهیئة؟» قلت: لا. قال: «فهو ذلک.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

I saw Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far (‘a) who had dyed his hair. I said, ‘May I be
sacrificed for you! You have dyed your hair!?’ He replied, ‘Yes. Surely
the preparations of a husband for his wife increases her modesty
[*‘iffat*]. Truly some women have abandoned their modesty because their
spouses abandoned preparation.’ Then he asked, ‘Do you like to see your
wife the way you appear to her when you have not prepared yourself?’ I
answered, ‘No.’ He declared, ‘She feels the same.’[^8]

### 3. Pleasure and Gratification

Even though seeking pleasure and sexual gratification is not the whole
aim of marriage, it is one of the chief goals and initial motivators for
marriage and has a considerable effect in strengthening the structure of
the family and preserving a good relationship between spouses. Hence,
gratification is one of the responsibilities of husbands and wives.
Husbands and wives must be prepared to give each other sexual pleasure
and gratification. Whenever one party is inclined to sexual acts, the
other must prepare themselves and not bring excuses. The Prophet of
Islam (S) would instruct women as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو بصیر عن أبی جعفر (ع) قال: قال رسول الله (ص) للنساء: «لا تطولنّ
صلاتکنّ لتمنعنّ ازواجکنّ.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not lengthen your *Salat* to forestall your husbands (from sexual
pleasure).[^9]

Husbands and wives must not only think about their own pleasure in
lovemaking; rather, they must also consider their partner’s pleasure and
gratification. This is because regular sexual satisfaction has a
significant effect on good relations between spouses and bolsters the
constitution of their family. Addressing men, Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) has
declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن علیّ (ع) قال: قال رسول الله (ص): «إذا أتی أحدکم امرأته فلا یعجلها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whenever you approach your wives, do not hurry (in lovemaking).[^10]

According to a Hadith, Imam Ridha (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الرضا (ع) —فی حدیث إلی أن—قال: «و اشتهت منک مثل الذی تشتهیه منها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Your wives expect from you similar to that which you expect from
them.[^11]

### 4. Rearing and Edifying Children

Caring for children, providing for their health, training their bodies
and souls, and educating them in knowledge and morality are shared
duties of fathers and mothers. This necessitates their cooperation and
mutual deliberation and diligence. A father has a greater responsibility
in this matter, but the role of a mother is more sensitive and
constructive.

Exclusive Duties of Husbands and Wives
--------------------------------------

### a. Men’s Obligations

In addition to their common duties, due to their particular genesis, men
have specific responsibilities, some of which are enumerated herein:

#### 1. Supervision of the Family

In Islam, the responsibility of guardianship, supervision, and
management of the family have been set on the shoulders of men. Allah,
the Exalted, has stated in the Holy Quran:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرِّجَالُ قَوَّامُونَ عَلَى النِّسَاء بِمَا فَضَّلَ اللّهُ بَعْضَهُمْ
عَلَى بَعْضٍ وَبِمَا أَنفَقُواْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ فَالصَّالِحَاتُ
قَانِتَاتٌ حَافِظَاتٌ لِّلْغَيْبِ بِمَا حَفِظَ اللّهُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Men are the protectors and supervisors of women because of the
advantage Allah has given some over others and because they support them
from their means. Therefore righteous women are those who are humble and
who guard (in their husband’s presence and absence) his rights and
secrets, which Allah has ordained to be guarded.”*[^12]

Family affairs must be performed by mutual agreement, consultation, and
cooperation of the husband and wife; however, this small society, like
any other society, cannot run well without a prudent and influential
supervisor and manager. Most families that lack a manager do not have a
desirable situation. Hence, either the wife must take on the
responsibility of supervising and safeguarding the family or the
husband.

Again due to the particular genesis of men and women, since most men are
generally more rational, as opposed to emotional, than women; are more
prepared to manage and supervise the family; and are better equipped to
bear hardships, the burden of supervising the family has been set on
their shoulders. Conversely, women are more emotional and passionate
than men. Therefore, it is in the best interests of the family that
women accept the supervision of men and perform important affairs after
consulting with their husbands and, in the event of a disagreement,
accept their husbands’ judgment.

It must be noted that male supervision does not mean that the man can
selfishly manage the family by exploiting his power and do whatever he
wants and prohibit other members of the family from expressing their
opinions. This is because a prudent manager and supervisor knows very
well that no institution, great or small, may be administrated by force
and selfishness; especially in view of the fact that the household must
be a place of peace, tranquility, and nurturing for the children who are
to be the future architects of the society.

In point of fact, the intent of male supervision is that correct
planning for administrating the family must be first and foremost and
these plans must be made through consultation and an exchange of views
of other members of the family; through procuring their cooperation in
managing affairs; through coming to a mutual understanding in decisions
and resolving problems; and finally, having the last word in
disagreements.

The supervisory duties of men may be summarized in three categories:

1. Providing for the expenses of the family, making plans through
consultation, and managing the incomes and expenditures of the family

2. Safeguarding, protecting, and looking after all members of the family

3. Overseeing religious, moral, and cultural issues of family members,
guiding them towards improvement and spiritual and physical development,
and preventing social and ethical corruption within the family

#### 2. Providing Financial Support [nafaqah]

In Islam, it is a man’s duty to provide for all living expenses of the
family. Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar asked the noble Imam Sadiq (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سأل إسحاق بن عمّار أباعبدالله (ع) عن حقّ المرأة علی زوجها قال: «یشبع
بطنها، و یکسوها، و إن جهلت غفر لها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘What are the rights of a wife upon her husband?’ He replied, ‘He must
fill her stomach and provide her clothing and if she makes a mistake, he
must forgive her.’[^13]

#### 3. Honor, Gentleness, and Lenience

A man must be appreciative of his wife and regard her as a blessing from
God. He must honor her, be gentle with her, forgive her mistakes, and
refrain from strictness and stubbornness. Islam regards this attitude a
wife’s right and a husband’s duty. Imam Sajjad (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال علیّ بن الحسین (ع): «و أمّا حق الزوجة: فأن تعلم أنّ الله جعلها
سکناً و أُنساً، فتعلم أنّ ذلک نعمة من الله علیک فتکرمها و ترفق بها، و
إن کان حقّک علیها اُوجب، فإنّ لها عليک أنّ ترحمها؛ لأنّها أسيرتک، و
تطعمها و تکسوها، و إذا جهلت عفوت عنها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

The rights of a wife are that you must know that Allah has made her (an
instrument of) peace and friendship; then you must know that she is a
blessing from Allah upon you, so honor her and be lenient and gentle
with her. Even though you also have rights upon her, you must be kind
and forgiving toward her because she is captivated by you. And you must
provide her food and clothing and when she makes a mistake, you must
forgive her.[^14]

#### 4. Religious and Moral Guidance

Men are obligated to make provision for religious, ethical, and belief
related issues of their wives. Either they must help them in this matter
themselves, or they must provide the instruments for their learning. A
man must be careful of his wife’s morality and conduct. He must
encourage her to virtuous deeds and praiseworthy behavior and dissuade
her from evil deeds and indecent behavior. In short, he must free her
from the fires of Hell and invite her to Heaven.

This is one of the results and requirements of supervision, which is the
responsibility of men. The Quran proclaims:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قُوا أَنفُسَكُمْ وَأَهْلِيكُمْ نَارًا
وَقُودُهَا النَّاسُ وَالْحِجَارَةُ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O people of faith! Save yourselves and your families from the Fire
whose fuel is humans and stones.”***[^15]

### b. Women’s Obligations

Women also have heavy responsibilities towards their husbands, some of
which have been indicated in various Hadith. All these responsibilities
can be epitomized in one phrase: taking good care of one’s husband. Amir
al-Mu’minin (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال علیّ (ع): «جهادُ المرأة حُسن التّبعُّل.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

The jihad of a woman is taking good care of her husband.[^16]

The phrase حُسن التّبعُّل (taking good care of one’s husband) in this
Hadith is a concise term, however, it has an extensive meaning and
encompasses all virtues. Regarding a woman who takes good care of her
husband, it can be said:

She accepts the supervision and administration of her husband and
defends and supports it. She guards her husband’s station in the family
and among the children. She consults with him in important issues. She
obeys his commands. If in some circumstances he deems it unwise that she
leaves the house and does not permit it, she acquiesces.

With good manners, virtuous behavior, and kindness she heartens her
husband and turns her home into a focus of serenity and love. In times
of trouble and difficulty she aids her husband and consoles and
encourages him. She is trustworthy of her husband’s property and avoids
waste, extravagance, and thriftlessness.

She encourages him to do good deeds. At home she wears her best and most
attractive clothes; she adorns herself and applies cosmetics as her
husband wishes, and shows her willingness and inclination openly and at
all times. She works hard to manage the household and train the children
well. She to faithful in her husband’s secrets, trustworthy, loving,
compassionate, etc.

It can be said regarding such a woman that she takes good care of her
husband and her actions are on the same tier as Holy Jihad.

In Hadith several issues are greatly emphasized:

1. Obeying one’s husband in religiously permissible issues

2. Submission to one’s husband in sleeping together, sexual pleasure,
and lovemaking; except where religiously prohibited

3. Trustworthiness and preservation of the property of one’s husband

4. Preserving one’s modesty and chastity

5. Getting permission from one’s husband in exiting the house

Imam Sadiq (‘a) has cited the Prophet of Allah (S) through his fathers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی عبدالله (ع) عن آبائه (ع) قال: قال النبیّ (ص): «ما إستفاد امرئ
مسلم فائدة بعد الإسلام أفضل من زوجة مسلمة تسرّه إذا نظر إلیها، و تطیعه
إذا أمرها، و تحفظه إذا غاب عنها فی نفسها و ماله.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

No Muslim man has gained more benefit after becoming Muslim than through
a Muslim wife who gives him a feeling of happiness when he looks at her,
and obeys him when he gives her a command, and guards herself and his
property when he is absent.[^17]

Imam Muhammad Baqir (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی جعفر (ع) قال: جاءت امرأة إلی النبیّ (ص) فقالت: یا رسول الله! ما
حق الزوج علی المرأة؟ فقال لها: «أن تطیعه، و لا تعصیه، و لا تصدّق من
بیته إلّا بإذنه، و لا تصوم تطوّعاً إلّا بإذنه، و لا تمنعه نفسها و إن
کانت علی ظهر قتب، و لا تخرج من بیتها إلّا بإذنه.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

A woman came to the Prophet (S) and said, ‘O Messenger of Allah! What
are the rights of men upon their wives?’ He replied, ‘She must obey him
and not be disobedient. She must not give charity from his house without
his permission. She must not perform voluntary fasts without his
permission. She must not deny him her body, even if she is on the back
of a camel. And she must not exit her home without his permission.[^18]

[^1]: - Surah Rum 30:21.

[^2]: - Surah Baqarah 2:187.

[^3]: - Surah Nisa’ 4:19.

[^4]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p. 389.

[^5]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 158.

[^6]: - Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 14, p. 296.

[^7]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 254.

[^8]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 246.

[^9]: - Ibid, vol. 20, p. 164.

[^10]: - Mustadrak al-Wasa’il, vol. 14, p. 221.

[^11]: - Ibid.

[^12]: - Surah Nisa’ 4:34.

[^13]: - Makarim al-Akhlaq, vol. 1, p. 248.

[^14]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, p. 5.

[^15]: - Surah Tahrim 66:6

[^16]: - Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 103, p. 252.

[^17]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 20, p. 41.

[^18]: - Ibid, p. 158.


