The Mahr of Women and its Philosophy
====================================

When the marriage vows are recited, the husband gives his wife a gift
that is called *Mihr* or *Sadaq*. The word *Mihr* does not appear in the
Holy Quran, however, the word *Sadaq* has been employed. The Quran
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ آتُواْ النَّسَاء صَدُقَاتِهِنَّ نِحْلَةً فَإِن طِبْنَ لَكُمْ عَن
شَيْءٍ مِّنْهُ نَفْسًا فَكُلُوهُ هَنِيئًا مَّرِيئًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And give unto women their Sadaq willingly and if they freely remit
any part of it to you, consume it in pleasure and delight.”***[^1]

No specific amount has been determined for *Sadaq*—it is a matter that
is decided by mutual agreement between the woman and man. Imam Baqir
(‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو جعفر (ع): «الصداق ما تراضیا علیه من قلیل او کثیر، فهذا
الصداق.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sadaq* is something that the betrothed agree upon, whether slight or
considerable.[^2]

There is no minimum amount set for *Mahr* although various Hadith
suggest that it not be excessively low. Imam Sadiq (‘a) has cited Imam
‘Ali (‘a) through his forefathers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جعفر بن محمّد، عن آبائه، عن علیّ (ع) قال: «إنّی أکره أن یکون المهر
أقلّ من عشرة دراهم؛ لئلّا یشبه مهر البغی.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

I do not like *Mahr* to be less than ten dirham, so it does not resemble
the payment of a prostitute.[^3]

Additionally, no maximum amount has been specified for *Sadaq*. Even
though a high *Mahr* is not forbidden, Islam does not regard setting
high *Mahr* and competing in *Mahr* to be prudent and has advised
against it. Amir al-Mu’minin (‘a) has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن علیّ (ع) قال: «لاتغالوا بمهور النساء فتکون عداوة.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Do not set substantial *Mahr* for women and do not compete in its excess
for this causes enmity.[^4]

We must not be so uncompromising in determining *Mihr* so as to hamper
the marriage of young adults. We must refrain from excess and determine
an appropriate and moderate *Mahr* that befits the standing of engaged
couples and the social station of their families and is also compatible
with the financial means of the husband-to-be.

Furthermore, there is no limitation in the type of *Mahr*—it can be any
type of property; such as gold, silver, real estate, currency, domestic
appliances, carpets, dishes, cars, clothes, and any other thing that can
be owned. However, it is in the good interests of the woman that, if
feasible, she sets her *Mahr* to be real estate, gold, silver, and such.
This is so its worth does not decrease over time and can be her reserve.

*Mahr* can be either granted immediately or be given on credit. It can
be the responsibility of the husband or any other person who agrees to
pay it, and depends on the mutual agreement of the couple.

If the *Mahr* was agreed to be paid on demand, the woman may request it
before consummation of her marriage. If the husband has the means to pay
it, he must do so. If he declines, the wife may abstain from sexual
relations. This refusal is not considered *nushuz*[^5] and thus her
husband cannot withhold her financial support.

If the *Mahr* is on credit and a specific time has been agreed for
reimbursement, the woman may not demand it before its time and if no
date has been set, the wife may ask for it at any time. If the husband
has the means to pay, he must immediately do so.

The true owner of *Mahr*, regardless of the type of property, is the
wife. No one has the right to use or take possession of her property
without her consent; even her father, mother, or husband. The profits of
a woman’s properties also belong to herself. The Prophet of Allah (S)
has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص): «إنّ الله لیغفر کلّ ذنب یوم القیامة إلّا مهر إمرأة،
و من اغتصب أجیراً أجره، و من باع حراً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

Surely Allah will forgive any sin on the Day of Resurrection save the
sin of one who misappropriates the *Mahr* of a woman or the wages of a
hired person, or who sells a free person (as a slave).[^6]

It was asked of Imam Musa ibn Ja‘far (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
احمد بن ابی نصر قال سأل ابوالحسن الاول (ع) عن الرجل یزوج ابنته، اله ان
یأکل صداقها؟ قال: «لا، لیس ذلک له.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘May a father consume the *Mahr* of his daughter?’ He replied, ‘No, he
does not have such right.’[^7]

If *Mahr* is on credit and the responsibility of the husband, he must
pay it on demand and as soon as possible.

Regarding a man who had married a woman but did not intend to pay her
*Mahr*, Imam Sadiq (‘a) declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فضیل بن یسار، عن أبی عبدالله (ع) في الرجل یتزوّج المرأة و لا یجعل فی
نفسه أن یعطیها مهرها: فهو زنا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

This is [considered] fornication.[^8]

Imam Sadiq (‘a) has also declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن أبی عبدالله (ع) قال: «من أمهر مهراً ثمّ لا ینوی قضاءه کان بمنزلة
السارق.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who designates *Mihr* for his wife but does not intend to honor it is
equivalent to a thief.[^9]

The noble Imam Sadiq (‘a) thus cited the Prophet of Allah through his
forefathers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الصادق، عن آبائه (ع) عن النبیّ (ص) – فی حدیث المناهي – قال: «من ظلم
امرأة مهرها فهو عند الله زنا، یقول الله عزّوجلّ یوم القیامة: عبدی!
زوّجتک أمتي علی عهدي فلم توف بعهدي، و ظلمت أمتی. فیؤخذ من حسناته فیدفع
إلیها بقدر حقّها، فإذا لم تبق له حسنة، أمر به إلی النار بنکثه للعهد،
إنّ العهد کان مسؤلاً.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

He who wrongs his wife regarding her *Mahr* is considered by Allah a
fornicator. On the Day of Judgment, Allah, the honored, the glorified,
shall say unto him: ‘O servant! I married My servant unto you according
to My covenant; however, you were not faithful to My covenant and
oppressed My servant.’ Therefore, He shall take his benefactions and
good deeds [*hasanat*] as much as is her right and give them unto her
and if he is left with no benefactions, He will order him cast into the
Fire because he did not honor his pledge and surely all will be
questioned regarding their pledges.[^10]

The Philosophy of Mahr
----------------------

Some may question the legislation [*tashri‘*] of *Mihr* and declare:
‘Men and women physically and instinctually need each other. Because of
this they are attracted to one another and consequently get married.
Taking this into consideration, what is the reason for *Mahr*? With the
legislation of *Mahr* women are debased and downgraded to the level of a
trade commodity. Men buy women with *Mihr* like one buys a slave.’

In answer, it must be said: In Islam neither are women considered
commodities or slaves, nor is *Mahr* deemed a trade price; rather,
*Mihr* is a gift or endowment that a husband bestows upon his wife in
order to revere her and demonstrate his devotion to her.

In order to explicate the issue and further clarify the philosophy of
the legislation of *Mihr* two points shall be enumerated.

**First point:** Even though men and women physically need each other
and naturally desire one another, each of them has special
characteristics:

One characteristic of women is their delicacy and beauty which is one
aspect of men’s attraction to them. The most important factor of women’s
influence is their beauty; something for which men have a unique regard.
A woman intrinsically [*fitri*] understands this and thus utilizes
various means of beautification and adornment in order to appear more
beautiful and penetrate deeper into a man’s heart.

A second quality of women is that even though they have sexual needs
similar to men, they are stronger in masking their instinctive desires.
They appear free from desires and usually do not propose to men. A woman
prefers to permeate the heart of a man and cause him to become enamored
with her so that he asks for her hand in marriage. Makeup,
flirtatiousness, coyness, and coquettishness of women originate from
this issue. Thus, a woman deeply desires to enthrall the heart of a man
and capture his love and devotion.

However, men are weak against their desires and cannot conceal their
inner passions. This is why they propose to women. Men desire and yearn
for women and pursue them. When a man realizes that a woman desires his
devotion, he reveals his adoration and welcomes her coyness and
coquetry. In order to prove his love, he uses any means necessary: he
spends money, buys her gifts, and holds marriage and wedding parties.

The contract of *Mahr* is one such means. In order to prove his
affection, honor his wife, and attain her heart, he bestows upon her a
gift called *Mahr*.

The Quran also expresses *Mahr* in this manner, as it is called
صَدُقاتِهِنَّ and introduces it as a *Nihlah*, which means gift or
endowment. This is one of the advantages and philosophies for the
legislation of *Mahr*.

**Second Point:** The contract of *Mahr* gives the woman a relative
amount of peacefulness and ease of mind, so that she may perform the
duties that genesis has placed upon her. Even though when a man and
woman are married they pledge to be faithful to one another and
collaborate and cooperate in fostering and training their children,
contrary instances have been observed where the man does not perform his
duties and refrains from providing living expenses and helping to
correctly rear their children whereas nature has put specific
responsibilities upon women in childrearing that cannot be avoided.

This issue can be elucidated with an analogy: men are like the planter
and women, the plantation. He plants his seed in the woman’s womb and
subsequently he is technically free to go his own way. Canonically,
legally, and morally, men are responsible toward their wives and
children. However, because *nature* has not given the man any immediate
responsibilities, he can leave his wife with the child in her womb and
“fly free”. Of course, most men are not this way; but even so, it is
possible and this happens on occasion.

However, a woman is not free in this manner and is obliged to endure her
arduous term of pregnancy, delivery, and the ensuing convalescence.
After giving birth, she cannot cast aside her feeble and blameless child
or leave it hungry. She is compelled to nurse and nurture her baby. Due
to her intense maternal affection and the bond that is then created, she
cannot leave her child after the nursing phase and has no option but to
care for her child.

During this time, she needs a means of livelihood—home, food, clothes,
etc. What can this hapless woman do in such a situation? Naturally,
women should be apprehensive about such possibilities. It might be that
one reason for the divine legislation of *Mihr* is to foster in women a
reasonable amount of security and ease as regards such likelihoods. If
*Sadaq* is real estate or hard cash women can take it and use it when in
need and if it is on credit she may demand it at any time.

In short, *Mihr* may be described as an instrument of assurance and
backup for marriage.

Imam Sadiq (‘a) has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الصادق (ع) قال: «إنّما صار الصداق علی الرَّجُل دونَ المرأة-و إن کان
فعلهما واحداً-لانّ الرجل إذا قَضَی حاجته منها قام عَنها و لَم یَنتَظر
فراغها فَصار الصداق عَلَیه دونُها لذلک.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

The reason that [the responsibility of] *Sadaq* has been placed upon the
man not the woman—even though their actions are the same—is that when
the man’s needs are satisfied he rises from her and does not await her
release; for this reason *Sadaq* is his responsibility not hers.[^11]

[^1]: - Surah Nisa’ 4:4.

[^2]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 21, p. 240.

[^3]: - Ibid, p. 253.

[^4]: - Ibid, p. 266.

[^5]: - Nushuz is when a spouse does not perform his or her obligatory
marital duties toward the other. These duties have been enumerated in
the previous chapter. [trans.]

[^6]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, p. 266.

[^7]: - Ibid, p. 272.

[^8]: - Ibid, p. 266.

[^9]: - Ibid, p. 266.

[^10]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, p. 276.

[^11]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, vol. 21, p. 268.


