Nafaqah (Financial Support) and its Philosophy
==============================================

According to Islam providing for the expenses of the family, including
the expenses of his spouse, is a husband’s duty. A man must finance all
his partner’s expenses, even if she is wealthier than he. The necessity
of *nafaqah* is one of the certain commandments of Islam. It is the
right of a wife. If a husband does not pay it, it remains a debt upon
him and must be paid on demand. If he refuses to pay *nafaqah*, an
Islamic religious magistrate may divorce them at the wife’s request.

Imam Muhammad Baqir (‘a) has declared:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبوبصیر، قال: سمعت أباجعفر (ع) یقول: «من کانت عنده امرأة فلم یکسها ما
یواري عورتها، و یطعمها ما یقیم صلبها کان حقّاً علی الإمام أن یفرّق
بینهما.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

[Regarding] he who has a wife but does not provide her adequate clothing
and food, it is the duty of an Imam to separate them.[^1]

Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar has stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسحاق بن عمّار، قال: قلت لأبی عبدالله (ع): «ما حق المرأة علی زوجها
الذی إذا فعله کان محسناً؟ قال: یشبعها، و یکسوها، و إن جهلت غفر لها.»
  </p>
</blockquote>

I asked Imam Sadiq (‘a), ‘What rights does a wife have upon her husband,
which if he fulfills he will be virtuous in this respect?’ He replied,
‘He must provide her food and clothes and forgive her
indiscretions.’[^2]

*Nafaqah* consists of all needs of a family, with regard to available
resources and conventions [*‘urf*] of the time, place, and social level
of the family. Some of these needs are enumerated below:

1. Food, fruit, and other such needs according to standard requirement

2. Seasonal clothing according to the needs and social level of the
family

3. Carpeting and beds

4. Cooking, eating, and drinking utensils

5. Cooling and heating appliances

6. Living quarters that provides comfort for the family and is in
accordance with the social standing of the family

7. Personal care and medical expenses

8. Hygienic and cosmetic products

Criticism
---------

The issue of *nafaqah* has been criticized such: Legislation of this
commandment has dishonored women and through it, they are considered
stipendiary servants who are given food, board, and clothing for their
round the clock exertions and onerous housework.

### Response

In answer, it must be argued that this criticism is derived from the
enmity or benightedness of the critic because, according to Islam,
housework is not the duty of a wife; even regarding fostering, tending,
and nursing children, no responsibility has been placed upon a wife. She
can choose to do nothing and ask for a servant or she can ask for wages
for performing housework and fostering and nursing her children. Even
so, her *nafaqah* has been placed upon her husband.

According to this, how can one say that women are dishonored and have
been considered stipendiary servants?

It is worthy of note that even though housework and house management is
not the duty of women according to the law of Islam, it is considered
morally crucial and essential for familial affection and intimacy. It is
mentioned in Hadith as حُسن التّبعُّل (taking good care of one’s
husband) which was mentioned previously, in chapter five. A mistress of
the house who is interested in the endurance and warmth of the family
endeavors as far as she is able to foster and edify her children and
efficiently manage her home; albeit in willingness and relish not due to
legal compulsion and coercion. The wives of the Prophet (S), his
daughter Zahra, and the wives of the Immaculate Imams and Saints of
Islam were such.

Criticism
---------

Even though men and women need each other to satisfy their ardor, have
children, and raise them, why are all of the family’s expenses, even the
wife’s personal expenditures a husband’s responsibility? Why should
husbands work and toil while wives eat and sleep and do not even do
housework? Is this not unfair to husbands? Why should women be their
husbands’ dependants so they are forced to obey them and tolerate their
bullying and restrictions? Is it not better for both women and men to
work and jointly pay for the family expenses?

### Response

Several points must be expounded in order to refute this criticism.

1. Nature and genesis has placed heavy burdens of responsibility upon
women, who are compelled to carry them out; such as pregnancy, giving
birth, nursing their babies, nurturing, fostering, and training and
edifying their young. These demanding responsibilities require great
time and effort to be performed well, and are not compatible with
working extensively outside one’s home.

2. Women have monthly cycles and require rest during these periods.

3. Housework and child care are not women’s duties either canonically or
legally; however, according to ethics and mores, they cannot eschew
these desiderata because they are considered essential to familial life
and greatly affect the beauty and repose of the home and hearten
husbands.

4. Women are delicate, elegant, and beautiful beings and these are their
most important instruments of attraction and charm for their husbands.
Working in difficult and tiresome jobs outside their homes harms the
elegance and loveliness of women, which in turn decreases their
attractiveness for their husbands; this is neither to women’s nor men’s
benefit. If both men and women work to pay for living expenses, they
will have to compete with men and therefore might be required to accept
arduous jobs such as laboring in mines, ironworks, and automobile,
petrochemical, and cement industries, civil engineering, railroads,
trucking, and grueling graveyard shift jobs.

If women and men were equally obligated to work and provide living
expenses, naturally, such problems could arise.

Accordingly, it is clear that women cannot be forced to work like men in
order to pay for expenses. Thus, Islam has made men accountable for the
family’s livelihood, so that women may fulfill their genetic duties at
their own leisure and with ease of mind, endeavor in fostering and
edifying their children, preserve their cheeriness and attraction,
maintain their place in their spouse’s hearts, and make their home a
place of love and tranquility.

Hence, with love of wife and children, peace of mind, and gratified with
their lives, men endeavor more diligently to produce the family’s
livelihood and bestow it upon their partners with willingness and
genuine sincerity.

In consequence, pragmatically, with true regard to the interests of men,
women, and their children, and to fortify the cornerstones of married
life, Islam has given men the duty of providing for the family’s
*nafaqah* and has not irrationally sided with one party and imposed on
the other.

It is in the interests of both women and men that *nafaqah* be the
charge of men and women be the dependants of men. Because men are
attracted to and fond of women, they desire to spend for them, and not
only are they without resent, they are completely satisfied and feel
good about themselves when they behave in this way. The financial
dependence of women is not a drawback and it does not make them
stipendiary servants; rather, it strengthens the backbone of marriage.
Basically, in familial life, a man’s earnings belong to the family, they
are utilized for acquiring necessities; therefore, financial
independence or the lack thereof is not an issue.

Here, it must be pointed out that the aim of Islam in making men
responsible for *nafaqah* is not to thwart employment of women, make
them consumers and ‘stay-at-homers’, and obstruct them from having jobs
and responsibilities outside their homes. Instead, Islam intends that
women *not be* *forced* to work and provide living expenses; however,
with regard to her abilities, preferences, and facilities, and the
mutual agreement of spouses, a wife can choose an acceptable job and
perform her responsibilities outside her home, and thus have an
independent income.

Naturally, her income belongs to herself and she need not use it for
family expenditures. A virtuous woman would, however, with purity of
heart, like her husband, prefer to donate it to the family so that it
would have a part in managing and improving familial life and increase
serenity and love within the entire family.

[^1]: - Wasa’il ush-Shi‘ah, p. 509.

[^2]: - Ibid, p. 510.


