Self-Denial And Piety
=====================

A question comes up for discussion about those, who deny themselves and
go on without everything though some of them are able to be in easy
circumstances and take pleasure in easy life, but they fall into habit
with containment and keep aloof from a luxury life.

From immemorial time secession from worldly pleasure had been regarded
as a means of purification of spirit and improvement of inner serenity.

Those, who wanted to keep aloof from the worldly attachments, used to go
out of cities and stay in the forests or take refuge in the caves of
mountains to worship God according to their own principles. They would
pass their life with bare subsistence, if the inhabitants of the nearby
villages gave them something to eat or they could find some fruits of
wild trees of forests.

At first some people were under necessity of leaving their houses
because of the oppression of the rulers but later on whoever determined
on saving himself from worldly ties adopted this way of worshiping God
and usually took the consequences. But their actions were not governed
by a divine law; therefore passions and desires might have overcome them
and would break all moral fetters.

Of course Islam does not permit the Muslims to adopt this way of worship
nor it does approve leaving their houses to seclude and pray in such
fashion, but it has incidentally recommended them to put to use all
possibilities of time and place in moderation.

A Muslim should be responsible for his wife and children. He should earn
his livelihood through lawful means. He should not trespass against the
others' rights and should follow virtues and piety, and behave in
opposition to carnal desires. These characteristics are the principles
of worship in Islam. Such worship brings up in the individuals courage,
devotion and generosity.

It is evident that a person is deeply impressed with customs and
conditions of his environment and his hereditary particulars. Of course
the scientific and religious learning and the spiritual and physical
specifications are of great importance too.

Persons do not bear any resemblance in attitude of mind, the reflective
faculty and nature and consequently their reactions are not the same
towards hardships and difficulties.

Great men are not only praised on account of highness of position or by
their extraordinary power, but under the title of greatness they have to
hold some attainments and show manly behaviors that are the essential
conditions of greatness.

Undoubtedly courage and moral heroism are the best qualities, not only
that kind of courage, which someone runs to risk carelessly, but what is
acceptable is the bravery of some great leaders, who stand against the
heart's desires of the close friends and are patient of unbearable
oppositions of the kinsmen or the internal enemies.

In some particular cases, it happens that a man of lacking necessary
morals shows an unexpected courage, but to our understanding it cannot
be called real courage because this kind of courage is neither true nor
dependable. Certainly courage is an admirable quality in itself but it
is not separated from the other attributes.

It is linked with the other high qualities like honesty, chastity,
truthfulness, abiding by one's word, steadfastness and generosity. It is
an undeniable fact that people usually prefer morality to vastness of
knowledge because so many big cities were destroyed by the command of
educated generals (educated in the European universities) especially
during the Second World War.

When we inquire into the biographies of some great men and leaders we
come across much sincerity, self- sacrifice and purity that will be
pleasing to us. It can safely be said that the continuance and duration
of the world is indebted to the devotion of Socrates, the philosopher of
ancient Greece, who drank water of hemlock to show his astray
fellow-citizens the unreliability of the material things and to prove
the eternity of the soul forever.

Jesus Christ used to have a piece of dried bread and to rest on the
floor to keep him-self pure from implications of the world and also to
show the Jews the instability of luxuries.

Many people, trying to achieve their goals, are concerned with
materiality and unessential things. They usually plan to earn money as
much as possible. They often are intolerant of justice and they try to
rob people of their rights, in spite of the fact that the material
things are destructible and unreliable.

Now all crimes and murders, which occur frequently all over the world,
are arisen from Mammonism and unlawful abuses.

It is much unpleasant when we study the pitiful situation of many
injured nations, who were ruled by some unjust rulers, so that their
natural resources and the products of their labors were looted by
foreign exploiters and in addition to it that their national feelings
were also trampled upon. Unfortunately those customs linger in many
places of the world.


