Advent of Islam and the Role of Imam ‘Ali (as)
==============================================

The matter in hand is about Imam ‘Ali (as), whose life was closely bound
up with the first age of the history of Islam. All the necessary
conditions gathered together and consequently made him a prodigy of
learning.

He, who wishes to know and understand Islam, has to be familiar with
Imam ‘Ali’s particulars because he was really the mirror, the echo and
also the voice of Islam. His every word and deed was quite in accordance
to the Holy Qur’an's injunctions.

It is likely that many of the readers know a little about Islam,
therefore I have to give them an account of a short history about it
with the intent of making them acquainted with Imam ‘Ali. Then I shall
explain some of his characteristics and to show you how he resisted
difficulties and how he stood against unjust discriminations and
partiality especially during his incumbency when he faced many problems.

After a great deal of time, 621 years after Christ, God gave a mission
to Muhammad, His last Messenger, to guide people in the right way.

Muhammad (S), that great lawgiver, brought into existence a sudden and
basic change in Arabia that was the most fundamental of all other social
or religious movements, which have ever arisen all over the world.

He managed to lay the foundation of a new systematic ordinance that,
within fifty years, gained supremacy over the great civilizations of
Rome and Iran and it also had a great influence over the original rules
of the Christian Europe, which is still new and novel until nowadays.

At an early part of the 20th century, a declaration was issued by the
U.N. Organization concerning liberty and equality of mankind, whereas
Islam had given women and girls the legal rights and independence in the
economic matters fourteen centuries ago when they were buried alive
because they were considered as troublesome and superfluous objects.

They were empowered to deal with their affairs independently and finally
were entitled to ownership at the same time, whereas in France, the
cradle of liberty, women could not sell their properties without
permission of their husbands until 1938.

According to the laws of ancient Iran and Rome a system of rights and
privileges kept the casts separate from each other. A merchant could not
marry a daughter of a nobleman and a nobleman could not marry a
princess. Slaves and ordinary people could not mix with the noblemen as
well.

But Muhammad, the Prophet of Islam (S), offered people a perfect and
applicable religion that responded to the subjects of theological
matters, social justice, economic affairs, equality and the rights of
women in general and in detail.

It was rumored that there was a drought in Mecca and that Muhammad (S)
went to his uncles Abbas and Hamzah with a proposal. He said to them,
“Look, your brother Abu-Talib has a big family. Let us go to him and ask
him to permit us adopting some of his children.”

Finally Ja’far and Talib were adopted by Hamzah and Abbas whereas ‘Ali
(as) was brought up under the care of Muhammad when he was at the age of
six. In this manner the foundation of the moral and spiritual education
of this intelligent child was based near the Prophet of Islam, the
greatest educator of mankind.

His mental faculties was to that extent that he believed in the Prophet
at the age of 8, therefore he, on the contrary of the other companions
of the Prophet, had never worshipped idols and never shared in
unreasonable demands, oppressive treatments and unfair acts of
chieftains.

A new religion with its rule of equity and brotherly love came severely
in contact with the previous customs. The unbelievers closed all the
doors of livelihood in front the believers. They left no deficiency in
creating difficulties for them; therefore the Prophet had to invite
people to theism in concealment.

The secret invitation took three years of time and then a verse came
down from the Heaven:

***“And warn your nearest relations and be kind to him who follows you
of the believers***” (26:214-215)

The Prophet's relations (Quraysh family) were the most obstinate
opponents of him. They were also of property and influence. They were
called to gather together in the house of the Prophet's uncle,
Abu-Talib.

The Prophet decided to unveil what was concealed. After a primal speech
about God and His attributes and after reproaching the idols and
idolatry, he said:

“The first one among you, who believes in the unique God and adopts me
as His Messenger, will be my successor.”

No one of those, who were present, gave his adhesion except ‘Ali ibn
Abu-Talib (S).

As some of the great Sunni scholars mentioned that the proposal was
repeated three times and there was only ‘Ali, who answered affirmatively
and said: “O the Prophet of Allah, I believe in Allah and His messenger
and I will be your assistant towards difficulties”.

The Prophet said: “I notify you of this fact that ‘Ali ibn Abu-Talib
will be my successor after my death”[^1]

It is memorable to be said that their paternal relation (Muhammad and
‘Ali) was not the reason in accepting the new law by ‘Ali (as).

Many other relatives were persistently faithful to their ancestral
customs like Aqil, ‘Ali's elder brother, who was with the enemies in the
first war between the Muslims and the unbelievers of Quraysh (Badr
battle).

But ‘Ali ibn Abu-Talib on account of his natural genius, which he was
gifted with by God, his education acquired from the Prophet (S) at the
early part of his life and because of the influence of the Prophet's
manner and behavior, all these factors, made him to meditate on the
subject and believe in God.

After this meeting, the heathens, for the sake of safekeeping their
position among people and their estates and also for stopping the
development of Islam, made many troubles for the Muslims many times. All
the devilish forces became armed to suppress this heavenly mission.

Not only the believers were put to torture, but also the Prophet himself
was not accepted.

It was mentioned that the Prophet had said: “No Prophet has ever got
hurt so much as I got”.

In spite of many sufferings and restrictions, the Prophet would
gradually gain power over the people by moral injunctions of the Holy
Qur’an with his high- toned eloquence, his good humor and his laudable
qualities.

The idolaters tried hard to dispense and dispirit the believers around
the Prophet by force but their efforts were of no avail and the Muslims
were regularly increasing.

Now the heathens' harshness got to that extent that many Muslims, by the
permission of the Prophet, determined on emigrating towards Abyssinia to
live in safety under the care of the king Negus.

Although the heathens did their best to dissuade the king from
supporting the Muslims, they came to nothing.

Now thirteen years passed away in this manner until the notables of
Mecca put their heads together to slay the Prophet because they denied
Islam to be true. Forty persons of their great men gathered in a place
and decided that one person should be selected from each tribe and that
men should, altogether, attack the Prophet.

In this way the Hashemites (the Prophet's family) would not be able to
face all the tribes and the matter would be settled down with payment of
blood money and at the end they would get rid of this trouble.

Muhammad was informed of the plot by revelation and then he introduced
the matter before ‘Ali (as), who was the nearest to his heart, for
seeking a remedy.

‘Ali (as) volunteered to lie in the Prophet's bed even though there were
great dangers impended over him. At last he did that risking his life
and consequently the Prophet's life was saved.

When the plotters attacked the Prophet's bed and unsheathed their swords
they found ‘Ali (as) sleeping in the bed.

They asked: “Where is Muhammad (S)”. ‘Ali replied: “Had you entrusted me
with him that you are asking me now”.

They had no reply to this. They left seeking after the Prophet.

Imam ‘Ali was highly praised by God on account of this devotion. The
Holy Qur’an says:

***“And among men is one who sells himself to seek the pleasure of Allah
and Allah is affectionate to the servants”.*** (2:207)

Many of the Sunni commentators[^2] confessed that the mentioned verse
was due to ‘Ali's dignity.

The Prophet emigrated towards Medina at the same night accompanied by
Abu-Bakr.

This event made an epoch in the history of Islam and it was fixed as the
Islamic date by the second caliph ‘Umar (The Hijrah).

Imam ‘Ali (as) after managing the Prophet's home affairs decided to
migrate to Medina with Muhammad's household and other companions of the
Prophet, who gave up their concerns and gradually set out to join the
Prophet (S).

Following troubles and oppressions that were imposed on the Prophet in
Mecca, the idolaters would incite the Jews and the nomads about Medina
to kill and pillage the animals and the properties of the Muslims.

Several encounters took place in order to create disorder about Medina
but the doers were chased by the companions of the Prophet and they fled
away to the mountains and sheltered into the caves until the second year
of Hijrah when the great men of Mecca decided to uproot the new
ordinance and the believers totally.

The Battle of Badr
------------------

Now a well-appointed army including nine hundred and fifty men of
experienced warriors made preparations to fight the Prophet. Among them
were many of the most obstinate enemies of Islam who were of Muhammad's
(S) cousins.

The Prophet was not ready for such a war. He sent them a message saying:
“We have descended from one family and most of you are my paternal
uncles and cousins. Leave me alone to encounter the Arabs. It will be
your credit if I gain victory against them, but if I fail you will
obtain your desire”. He received no answer except a warlike reply and
the Muslims were finally involved in the war.

Although the Prophet's army consisted of three hundred and thirteen men
but they were more powerful than one thousand persons because of their
faith in God and steadfastness in belief. These men of iron came before
the enemy.

Three men of the most revengeful enemies of Islam; Utbah, his son
Shaybah and his brother Waleed made an inroad, boasting about their
riches and chieftaincy. They challenged three fighters of their rank
because it would not fit them to fight common fighters as they thought.

‘Ali (as), his uncle Hamzah and his cousin Ubaydah confronted them. ‘Ali
(as) encountered Waleed and inflicted a blow on his shoulder so that as
the sword came out of his armpit and he ran away towards his father
Utbah to seek refuge. ‘Ali (as) chased him and, by another stroke on his
thigh, killed him.

Then he went to help his uncle Hamzah, who was facing Shaybah. They had
crossed swords with each other for some time to that extent that their
swords broke and had started to grapple and punch each other.

Hamzah was a strapping man so that his enemy was not seen behind his
back.

‘Ali (as) said: “Mind your head, uncle”. He immediately threw the enemy
(Shaybah) down on the ground by a dint of his sword.

Utbah and Ubaydah both were brave and dauntless. When they were crossing
swords with one another and the quarrel was still raging when Utbah was
killed by a sudden attack but Ubaydah's leg was seriously injured. He
died on his way back to Medina.

At last the two armies attacked each other by swords. High morale and
spirit of self-sacrifice were seen among the Muslim so that when the
dazzling and lightening of the swords finished, the killed warriors of
the enemy were seventy. The history mentioned that half of them were
killed by ‘Ali's sword.

The enemy fled away from the field and seventy persons were taken as
captives by the Islamic army.

Although the Muslims won the battle but the fate would be different if
‘Ali (as) had not come to the field.

Most of the captives knew reading and writing. The Prophet's ordered to
set free any captive, who would teach ten Muslims how to write and read.

Fraternization Among The Muslims
--------------------------------

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“The believers are but brethren, therefore make peace between your
brothers and be careful of (your duty to) Allah that mercy may be had on
you.”*** (49:10).

Therefore the Prophet (S) directed the believers to brotherly, two by
two, in an agreement of fraternization. The Prophet (S) fraternized
between every two Muslims except ‘Ali, who remained alone. He became
depressed for that.

The Prophet said to him: “You are but my own brother and you are to me
as Aaron was to Moses, but no Prophet will come after me”. This is
mentioned by many historians.[^3]

This reliable tradition was an essential argument of the Shia to prove
the immediate succession of Imam ‘Ali (as) after the Prophet's death.

In the second year of Hijrah Imam ‘Ali (as) got married to Fatima, the
only daughter of the Prophet. She, because of her steady belief in God,
her chastity and her virtuousness was unique among all classes of
people.

The Prophet (S) had a great respect for her. She was requested to give
her hand for marriage by some men of importance but Muhammad would not
accede to their requests. In reply to the suitors, he used to say: “I am
waiting for a call from the Heaven in regard to her marriage”.

Eventually this glory was won by ‘Ali (as).

The Battle Of Uhud
------------------

In the third year of Hijrah, the battle of Uhud took place. Many
encounters happened after the battle of Badr and the Muslims drove the
enemy back.

But the clan of Quraysh was always planning to take vengeance on
Muhammad (S), therefore an army of five thousand strong warriors headed
by Abu-Sufyan left Mecca to attack Medina.

The Prophet's army in consultation with the companions flew to arms and
came out of Medina.

The two armies met near Uhud Mountain six kilometers far away from the
city.

The bearer of the idolaters’ banner was a brave man named Talhah ibn
Abu-Talhah, who was continuously challenging. ‘Ali (as) came forward and
as soon as Talhah saw Imam ‘Ali he said: “Nobody else had courage to
fight me except you”.

The historians mentioned that ‘Ali had killed him in the turning of a
hand and then his brother lifted the banner and was killed by ‘Ali too.
Some other fighters of the same family were killed one by one and
finally a huge slave with the intent of avenging his owners challenged.
The historians mentioned that ‘Ali (as) had divided him into two halves
by the first strike of his sword as his body was still standing on the
ground for a few moments.

The enemy, struck with terror, fled away from the field but suddenly an
accident drew their attention.

A good few of the Muslims, about fifty persons, were keeping watch on a
hilly narrow pass where the enemy might cross the hill and attack from
behind the Muslims' back.

In spite of the Prophet's recommendations, they left the place to
collect spoils when the enemy was running away.

Suddenly they saw that the place was without guardians and then the
enemy seized the opportunity and passed along the mountain and made an
attack upon the Muslims at the rear. In the meantime somebody cried
loudly: “Muhammad was killed”.

Soon after spreading this dreadful rumor the Muslims became struck with
terror and drew swords among themselves. They left Muhammad (S) alone
and ran away to the mountains except four or six persons, who remained
to defend him.

Some of the Sunni historians mentioned: “All of the Prophet's army, even
the great companions, escaped except ‘Ali (as), Al-Zubayr, Talhah and
Abu-Dajanah.

‘Ali's sword was broken because of the sternness of the war. It was said
that the sword named Thu’l-Fiqaar was put in his hand by an angel from
the invisible world and then an unknown voice proclaimed: “There is no
manly youth except ‘Ali and there is no sword like Thu’l-Fiqaar”.[^4]
One of the great fighters of Islam named Hamzah the Prophet's uncle was
killed in this war. This bereavement left a deep impression on the
Prophet's heart.

At last the Muslims were defeated in this battle but the enemy did not
continue the war and left for Mecca without occupying the supportless
Medina.

It was said that ‘Ali (as) had received ninety sword cuts in this field
and in spite of the much tiredness he did not stop his support to the
Prophet (S) for an instant.

In the meanwhile Gabriel came down from the Heaven and said to Muhammad:
“Look there, how ‘Ali (as) fights in high spirit of sacrifice”. The
Prophet answered: “‘Ali (as) is from me and I am from him”. (We both
have been brought into existence from the same (one) nature.)

This tradition was mentioned by many Sunni scholars.[^5]

The Battle of Khandaq
---------------------

During the ten years, in which the Prophet was living in Medina, the
Muslims received much harm from the idolaters of Mecca. The enemy did
not let them rest in peace of mind as they had to endure many troubles
and difficulties, because they were involved in more than seventy wars
big or small at all times.

In the fifth year of Hijrah an army of ten thousand warriors set out
towards Medina. The commander of this strong army was Abu-Sufyan, who
had grudge against Muhammad. He had a family feud with him. Prophet,
after consultation with his companions, was determined on digging a
ditch around Medina to hold back the enemy.

Amr ibn Abd-Widd, whose heroic fame was trumpeted throughout Arabia, in
concert with four other fighters, leaped on the hither side of the moat
by horse. Amr, exclaiming in a bad state of anger, challenged loudly.

The Muslims were too much frightened when this fearless hero appeared in
the field. Nobody was ready to fight him. Amr said: “Where is that
paradise you desire to go to and take pleasure forever? I am seeking
after a man, who can manage me”.

There was no any answer except by ‘Ali (as), who proclaimed his
readiness. “Be seated ‘Ali, he is Amr”. The Prophet said and turned his
face towards his companions saying: “Who is ready to get us rid of this
wicked man”.

As often as Amr challenged, ‘Ali (as) was in readiness to face him. At
last he obtained permission from the Prophet and was as happy to fight
the enemy as a prisoner getting released from jail.

‘Ali (as), at the age of 25, faced the robust hero of Arabia, who was an
old hand in fighting. He was awkwardly despised by Amr. But Amr did not
know that this young fellow might be more courageous than him.

Amr, at first, was sympathetic for ‘Ali, who had come to meet death at
the beginning of his life as he thought. He said to him: “You are too
young to combat me. Who are you?” “I am ‘Ali ibn Abu-Talib.” He replied.

As soon as Amr heard this name he became a little shocked and with
disappointment said: “Your father was my close friend and I dislike
shedding blood of a young man like you. It would be better if one of
your uncles came to the field”.

‘Ali (as) said: “Leave off the silly talks. I regard it as a duty to
kill you for the sake of Allah.” He added: “As I know, you grant one of
the three requests of your opposite combatant in the battlefield. Now
you grant one of my three wishes. Firstly leave off idolatry and come to
be a Muslim.”

Amr replied: “I will never believe in Muhammad. What is the next
request?”

‘Ali (as) said: “Change your mind and desist from fighting or come down
from your horse because I am on foot.”

Amr said: “It will be disgraceful for my family if the people say that
Amr is frightened by an inexperienced young man.” He dismounted and
rushed towards ‘Ali (as) with a drawn sword. ‘Ali (as) covered his head
with a shield. The stroke was so strong that the shield was torn and his
blessed head got a little hurt.

‘Ali (as) struck Amr’s thigh and the illustrious hero fell down on the
ground.

When the battlefield was cleared of dusts, the Muslims became so
delighted when they saw ‘Ali (as) sitting on the chest of Amr and was
going to cut off his head from the body.

Amr, at his last gasp, made his will that his valuable cloths and
weapons not to be taken up.

‘Ali acceded to his request and said: “It is too easy for me to forget
it.”

Then those four men who had escorted Amr ran away to pass over the
ditch. One of them, when trying to escape, fell down into the ditch. The
Muslims began to stone him but he bade defiance to a man to fight him.

‘Ali (as) came into the ditch and killed him with one stroke of his
sword.

Some Sunni historians[^6] mentioned that the Prophet had said: “The
value of ‘Ali's stroke, before God, on the day of the ditch is more than
the obedience of the two world's creatures (the angels and the human
beings).”

Amr, who was the only hope of the idolaters of Quraysh, was unexpectedly
killed and consequently they were seized with deep fright. Abu-Sufyan
was surprised how to help the situation. At the same time a bad storm
arose and he decided to go back to Mecca. He delivered a short speech
and following the whole army left the place.

This battle was also called the battle of al-Ahzab (the parties) because
many groups of the Jews and the nomads of about Mecca and Medina had
taken part in this war.

Although the Jews had signed previously a defensive contract to guard
Medina against dangers, they, as always, had broken their promises and
used to send arms to Mecca secretly. They were regularly in treaty with
the idolaters; therefore the Muslims could not find peace of mind.
Muhammad (S) decided to bring them down to their knees and eventually
declared the war against them in the year 7 A.H.

The Jews were afraid of the Islam's progress because they were blinded
by prejudice and it also was contrary to their great interests.

There was a habitable and fortified place at a distance of 86 Km from
Medina named Khaybar. The Jews cultivated the lands around the forts.

The Muslims, headed by the Prophet, got at Khaybar and encamped opposite
to the forts. When the Jews knew the matter they ran away into the forts
to prepare for the war.

There was a fortified castle, named Qamus, where all the Jews gathered
into it.

The Muslims were kept on waiting for three weeks to open the fort but
they succeeded in nothing.

Abu-Bakr and ‘Umar started their fight but they were defeated[^7] by the
Jews.

At-Tabari, a Sunni historian, had recorded that when ‘Umar came back
from the field he frightened the Muslims of the bravery of Marhab the
commander of the Jews.

The Prophet said: “Tomorrow I will give the banner to a man, who loves
God and His messenger and God and His messenger love him too.”[^8]

On the next day the Prophet sought after ‘Ali (as), who was suffering
from a sore-eye. The Prophet prayed Allah so that Imam ‘Ali’s eyes might
be recovered. Imam ‘Ali became well immediately. At last the banner was
given to him and he set out for the war.

Marhab was the bravest of all the fighters among the Jews. He was
well-known for his valor. ‘Ali (as) paced towards the forts and,
suddenly the big gate of Qamus was opened and a few combatants came out.

Harith, the brother of Marhab, suddenly cried a terrific cry that the
companions of ‘Ali (as) went back a little, but ‘Ali (as) stood against
him. They fought each other and finally Harith was killed by ‘Ali's
sword.

Now ‘Ali (as) faced Marhab. And as it was at those days Marhab began to
recite some epic verses.

He said: “As long as Khaybar remembers that I am an experienced man in
the war and those, who encounter me, will be stained by their own
blood.''

‘Ali (as), in reply to him, said: “I am a man, whose name is Haydar
(that is to say: a lion that attacks repeatedly and will never escape
from the hunting- ground).”

Marhab turned about with his horse to run away because he had heard his
Jewish rabbi saying that he would be killed by a man named Haydar.

But he came back towards ‘Ali (as) talking with himself: “There are many
"Haydars" in the world. It is not certain that this is the very one.”

Anyhow he was furious because of his brother's death and he wanted to
revenge upon ‘Ali (as) but ‘Ali (as) killed him by a sudden push. The
Jews fled away into the fort and closed the door from inside. At last
‘Ali went towards the door and pulled at it by all of his might and
threw it aside.

In this manner he opened the way for his men to rush into the fort. All
castles were opened and many of the Jews were captured. The godly men
and the great leaders treated the powerless and defeated enemy kindly
and dispensed them with vengeance.

The Prophet of Islam acceded the Jews’ request when they asked him to
let them remain in the place, provided that they became disarmed, and
not to assist the idolaters of Mecca and to pay the half of their
production to the Muslims.

There was a productive area near Khaybar called Fadak, about 140 km. far
from Medina, where the Jews made a good living by farming. They were in
ease and comfort.

The Prophet, intending to frustrate any scheme against Islam, sent a
word to the dean of the area to be put under the protection of Islam
against the invaders. On condition that he would not make any plot
against the Muslims and that he would pay the half of the income of
their fields to the Islamic government, the Prophet would guarantee the
security of the area.

As the religious laws provided, the regions, which were conquered by
military forces belonged to the Muslims in general as public purse, but
the lands which were taken without expedition and bloodshed belonged to
the Prophet himself and then to his rightful successors.

The Prophet might donate his properties to everyone he liked.

Some of the Muslim interpreters[^9] mentioned that when the verse:

***“And give to the near of kin his due and to the needy and the
wayfarer and do not squander wastefully”***[^10]

Was revealed, the Prophet called for his daughter Fatima and gave her
Fadak.

At a later period, she was dispossessed from it at the day of the first
caliph Abu-Bakr for certain reasons of political purpose.[^11]

Of course the object of the author's intent is not historiography, since
this book is about a man of a high rank in Islam, whose deeds and words
were governed by the Islamic principles and Qur’an and he also was
attendant with the Prophet step by step since childhood, therefore I
have to give the readers some passages of the Islamic history to depict
his personality as far as possible.

The Battle of Thaat As-Salasil
------------------------------

In the eighth year A.H., a force of twelve thousand men united in a
league to attack Medina at night. Their decision was only to kill the
Prophet and his minister ‘Ali. Some of the Muslim scholars were under
impression that the Prophet was acquainted with the situation by
revelation but in the meanwhile the plot was reported to him by some
spies, who lived about Mecca.

The Prophet put the matter before the crowd in the mosque for discussion
and then Abu-Bakr was ordered to fight against them with an army of four
thousand strong warriors.

Abu-Bakr advanced with his men slowly until they came into view of the
enemy. Now two hundred horsemen came before Abu-Bakr and said: “We have
prepared for this war just to kill Muhammad or his cousin ‘Ali. What do
you mean by bringing this army?”

Abu-Bakr said: “I have been ordered to propose Islam to you and if you
refuse it I will fight you.''

They reviewed their army with its high power and ability and hereby
Abu-Bakr was frightened and decided to go back to Medina.

The return of the army, in that bad state, depressed the Prophet deeply.
Then ‘Umar was appointed as commander. He also succeeded in nothing and
came back in the same state as Abu-Bakr did.

At last ‘Ali ibn Abu-Talib was called upon and after a short discussion
with the Prophet he was ordered to face the enemy.

‘Ali (as), on the contrary to the two previous commanders, carried his
men through a short cut with all speed to go unexpectedly upon them. He
used to move at night until he came into sight of the enemy.

Again two hundred knights came and asked him:

“Who are you?”

He replied: “My name is ‘Ali, the son of Abu-Talib. I invite you to
resign yourselves to Islam.”

They said: “You are our aim. We will kill you and your men by all means.
The fixed time for meeting will be tomorrow at noon.”

‘Ali (as) said: “What ails you, woe be to you. You threaten me with
killing. I will fight you tomorrow at the time.”

In the same evening, according to ‘Ali’s command, the Muslims fed their
horses and prepared their defensive position to fight the obstinate
enemy. When daybreak appeared, the Muslims offered the prayer with the
leadership of ‘Ali (as) and then they made a sudden attack upon the
enemy while it was still dark.

The rear guards had not yet entered into the field when a great number
of the enemy was killed by the vanguard and many of them were bound with
ropes and chains.

The captives with their cattle were carried to Medina. The Prophet,
accompanied by the believers, went out of the city to meet ‘Ali (as) and
his honored army.

‘Ali (as) arrived at Medina, amid acclamation of the crowd, with a great
deal of spoils of war. The above tradition was quoted from the reliable
sources of the Shia. It was somehow different from what the Sunni
scholars had mentioned.

The residential quarters of the enemy were stony places that there were
sparks arising when the horses' hooves hit the stones. The horses were
gasping too.

This self-sacrifice was so worthy of praise that a surah was revealed
from the Heaven about this feat and other devoted soldiers. The Holy
Qur’an says:

***“I swear by the runners breathing pan tingly, then those that produce
fire striking, then those that make raids at morn, then thereby raise
dust, then rush thereby upon an assembly. Most surely man is ungrateful
to his Lord”.*** (100:1-6).

Most of the commentators believed that this surah was revealed to praise
‘Ali (as) .

The Battle of Mu’tah
--------------------

There was somewhat a peaceful time all over Arabia at the beginning of
the eighth year of Hijrah. Neither the Jews in the north nor the
idolaters of Mecca caused any threat to the Muslims.

At the same time something happened that made the Prophet (S) dispatch a
force towards the frontier countries of Syria.

The Prophet had sent to Damascus a man for preaching but before getting
there he was killed by a frontier official. At the same time sixteen
persons, who had gone there for the same purpose, were killed in that
area. The place where they were killed in was called Mu’tah.

A host of three thousand men set out to Mu’tah to avenge the murder of
the killed persons under the command of Ja’far the full brother of ‘Ali
(as).

The Prophet delivered a short speech in the camp. He said: “You are
going to the same place where your brothers have been killed. You go
ahead and invite them to believe in God. If they do not refuse you
should dispense with the revenge, otherwise you fight them for the sake
of Allah to punish God's enemies. But remember that you are not to
disturb the monks and nuns, who live away from the social life in
monasteries. You are not to kill children, women and old men. Be careful
not to ruin houses and farms”.

The Syrian government was well-informed of the Muslim’s bravery and
self-sacrifice and also their success in the war against the Arab
tribes.

In spite of the fact that these two armies (the Romans and the Muslims)
were incomparable in equipment’s and persons but the Muslims showed an
extra sacrifice and took toll from the enemy.

Now some groups of Muslims left the battlefield for a farther place at
midnight and decided to call out with the motto of “*la ilaha illa
(A)llah*” (there is no any God but Allah).They hereby made the enemy
think that an auxiliary force would come to help the Muslims and
consequently the Syrians stopped attacking the Muslims for two days.
This wise tactic helped them to seize the opportunity and to leave the
field for Medina.

Although the Muslims did not get a good result in this battle, but the
fame and reputation of Islam was trumpeted abroad and it opened a way
for next publicities.

The Great Conquest of Mecca
---------------------------

In the same year the Prophet conquered Mecca by his good management
without killing or bloodshed. Mecca was the place where Muhammad and his
companions were badly harmed by the idolaters of Quraysh since the
beginning of the Prophet Hood and it was a safe place for his enemies to
plot against him for more than ten years. Now it became in the Prophet’s
control.

According to the agreement made before, neither the Muslims nor the
idolaters should assist or interfere in the internal affairs of the
confederate tribes of each other but they had helped their confederates
against the Prophet's allies and consequently many of them were killed.

They asked the Prophet for help to avenge themselves upon the idolaters.

On the other hand the people of Quraysh had repented of their behavior
because their acts were opposite to the agreement between them.

Therefore in order to restrain the Prophet's anger and to strengthen the
previous relations, Abu-Sufyan, the chief of Quraysh, whose hostile
behavior had troubled the Muslims more than ten years, made his mind to
go towards Medina to apologize in the presence of the Prophet and
meanwhile to give the Muslims a guarantee against any attack.

The Prophet (S) remained silent and did not show any response. Then
Abu-Sufyan came out of the mosque and set out straight to Mecca.

Now the Prophet, with the intent of conquering, Mecca had to notify the
Muslims of a public mobilization and for this purpose he sent a word to
them saying: “Every one, who has faith in God, has to arm himself
secretly and to be ready for the war.”

Thereafter many watchmen were put in some places to have control over
the roads so that nobody could carry news to Mecca.

Four thousand well-armed men gathered in Medina and a force of six
thousand men from different tribes joined them along the way.

The people of Mecca were quite unaware of such an army that was headed
by the Prophet himself and was going to occupy there.

Now Abbas, the Prophet's uncle, who was so respected by Quraysh, had
left Mecca towards Medina. It happened that he met the Prophet in the
midway. He had to be in Mecca because would spy for the Prophet and
thereafter he went along with the Prophet.

The Prophet led the Muslims forward until they became near Mecca. In
order to frighten the people of Mecca the Prophet ordered his soldier to
set fire to some firewood on the hills.

Abbas separated from the Prophet to seek after someone, who could alarm
the people of Quraysh about the powerfulness and greatness of the
Prophet's army and to report to them that submission would be the only
remedy.

At the same time Abu-Sufyan was out of Mecca for inquiring into the
circumstances of the town. Abbas recognized his voice when he was
talking with another man. Abbas called him and said to him quietly:
“There are ten thousand armed and armored persons escorting the Prophet.
They are at call and ready to devote themselves heartily for the sake of
Muhammad. Surely Quraysh is not able to stand against them. As you see
many dangers impend upon your tribe. You would better go to declare the
shahada before the Prophet now.”

Abu-Sufyan accepted it reluctantly but he began to shudder with fear all
this while. Abbas, in order to terrify him, took him through the crowd
to see the greatness and the glory of the Prophet's army. Finally they
were admitted to meet the Prophet. After some words between them
Abu-Sufyan eventually submitted.

Hereupon the Prophet declared: “Whoever takes refuge in Kaabah or in
Abu-Sufyan’s house will be safe. Those, who lay down their arms and
announce their impartiality, will be in safeguard by the Muslims.”

Although Abu-Sufyan pretended that he was a Muslim, but in fact he had
no faith in Islam. The Prophet made use of that to conquer Mecca without
bloodshed because the idolaters of Quraysh would never take any decision
independently without Abu-Sufyan’s consultation.

At any rate he went on the errand to put up his perceptions for
discussion with Quraysh. At first, they did not think that it was true
and they reproached him. They insisted on standing against the Muslims
but when they received the same news from the others, they submitted to
the truth.

At last the Prophet (S) rode on his camel, surrounded by five thousands
armed men, and arrived at Mecca with magnificence beyond description.

The people of Mecca had such weak morale that no one could resolve on
standing against the Muslims.

Now the Muslims occupied the town, which was the center of polytheism
and idolatry for a long time. The Prophet, after a short rest, proceeded
on pilgrimage to the great mosque of Kaabah (al-Masjid al-Haram). He, at
the first instance, broke up the idols one by one by his lance. ‘Ali
(as) helped him all the while. Some big idols were planted above the
Kaabah. ‘Ali (as) was ordered to stand up on the blessed shoulders of
the Prophet to throw them down.

Certainly ‘Ali was the only one, who won the honor of standing on the
shoulders of the Prophet (S). Then the Prophet faced the people and
said: “You did evil to me. You denied my mission. You brought me many
troubles and forced me to leave my home for Medina. You very often did
not let me be safe. You incited different tribes as well as the Jews to
fight the Muslims and many of them were killed before my eyes”.

Now those present people began to recall their offences. They were
talking to themselves: “Certainly he will put us all to the sword or we
may be jailed and our wives and children may be taken as captives.”

They were immersed in such thoughts when suddenly the Prophet (S) broke
the silence and said: “How do you think about me and what do you say
now?”

The whole people, as one man, replied: “We think highly of you and we do
not know anything except goodness and favor of you. You are our great
and dear brother”.

The Prophet, who was kind by nature, said: “Now I say just what my
brother Josef (the prophet) said to his cruel brothers (as the Holy
Qur’an says):

***“He said: (There shall be) no reproof against you this day; Allah may
forgive you, and He is the most Merciful of the merciful”.***[^12]

I already notify you to go on your living. Now all of you are free.

In order to beware that his relatives and kinsmen might misuse his
position, the Prophet delivered a short speech among the members of his
family. He condemned injustice and unjust discriminations and alluded to
the necessity of spreading justice and equity among all the classes of
people. He said: “O sons of Hashim,[^13] I am the messenger of God to
all human beings. No family relation has any effect on one’s punishment
on the Day of Resurrection. Everybody will be answerable for his own
acts. Being of my relatives won’t be of any use for you.”

The Prophet’s Historical Speech In Kaabah
-----------------------------------------

A great crowd of the people of Mecca and the new comers had been
gathered in the mosque when the Prophet (S) determined on giving a
lecture to show the people a glimpse of Islam.

At that time one of the greatest and rooted bigotry of the Arab society
was self-glorification or being related to a well-known tribe such as
Quraysh. The Prophet, in order to overthrow these bad traditions, said
to the people: “O people, God wanted to remove haughtiness, selfishness
and self-glorification among you by revealing Islam. Verily you were
descended from Adam and Adam was created of mud. The best of you is
that, who avoids sins.”

This saying meant that the bases of superiority and personality were
virtue and purity.

Then he added: “O people, being Arab is not the ground of personality
and it is not an integral part of your nature but it is only a speaking
language. It doesn’t benefit you in the afterlife if you leave your
duties. You will never attain your personal merit by self- glorification
of being related to certain ancestors but by spreading equity and
justice among mankind.

In order to spread equality between the blacks and the whites, the
Prophet added: “In fact people are like the teeth of a comb. There is no
superiority for the Arabs to the non- Arabs or for the whites to the
blacks. The basis of supremacy is virtuousness. The whole human beings
are identical with each other before God. The best one is that, who
renounces disobeying God.”

The Prophet thereby cancelled all formal distinctions and being proud of
parentage. He said: “The whole human beings are descended from Adam and
Adam had been created of mud by The Supreme creator.”

The Battle of Hunayn
--------------------

Now the most tribes of Arabia had turned Muslims except two tribes;
Thaqeef and Hawazin. They were strong enough and had resided about
Ta’if, a country place in the east and north east of Mecca. When they
knew that the Muslims had conquered Mecca, they decided to attack it
before the Prophet would declare war against them. The matter was
reported to the Prophet (S) by the spies; therefore he set out towards
them with a strong army of twelve thousand men.

Some other Arab families joined Thaqeef and Hawazin. They were about
thirty thousand men accompanied by their households and cattle. They
came to a wide area named Hunayn. The Muslims had to pass a narrow
valley to get to Hunayn. The enemy came down from the rear mouth of the
valley and hid themselves behind big stones and rocks in the slopes.

When the Muslims came in sight, the enemy attacked them by a shower of
stones and arrows.

Consequently the Muslims were frightened. They escaped and left the
Prophet alone.

Only a few ones; ‘Ali (as), Abbas, the Prophet’s uncle, ibn Harith, the
Prophet's cousin, Al-Fadhl ibn Abbas and Abdullah ibn Mas’ud stood
against the enemy before the Prophet (S). The historians mentioned that
forty warriors had been killed by ‘Ali(S).

A gigantic man, mounting on a red camel and trying from behind to send
the Muslims into troubles, came to face ‘Ali (as). ‘Ali (as) at first
cut off his camel's leg and then halved him into two by his sword.

The Prophet (S) and his uncle Abbas called repeatedly upon the runaways
to come back to the field. They came back and forced the enemy to
retreat and to run away towards Ta’if.

The Muslims gained great spoils; forty thousand sheep, twenty-four
thousand camels, a good quantity of silverwares and six thousand persons
as captives.

The Muslims chased the runaway enemy unto Ta’if but they had to waste a
long time in order to conquer its strong fort. Hereon, they, according
to the Prophet's command, went back to Medina for performing other
essential affairs.

The Battle of Tabouk
--------------------

When Islam appeared there were two great powers on this side of the
earth; the Romans and the Persians.

The Roman soldiers were well experienced in the wars and at the same
time, they had won the war against Iran. Syria and the eastern parts of
the Mediterranean were the colonies of Rome, under the Byzantine rule.
There was a fortress at the boundary between Syria and the land of Hijr
named Tabouk, which the Prophet of Islam had come to conquer it.

The quick growth and the splendid conquests of the Muslims in Arabia had
made the Emperor of Rome seek a remedy to stem the tide of Islam's
progress. He was afraid especially of Muhammad's influence upon people.
Therefore the Romans decided to harass the Muslims in order to be safe
from their troubles. Such news was carried to Medina by some commercial
caravans.

The Prophet sent someone to Mecca and about Medina to call every one,
who had faith in God, to gather in Medina in order to be ready for the
war. This invitation gained ready acceptance of the Muslims. About
thirty thousand persons gathered to fight the enemy.

This expedition was very difficult for the Muslims because the weather
was too hot and they had to go for a long distance through a torrid zone
to Tabouk where the Romans encamped. It was also the time of harvest and
they would have to harvest their farms’ products.

There were some hypocrites among the Prophet's companions, who used to
injure the Muslims by sabotage. They tried to discourage people with
various excuses, like the hotness, the too far distance and the huge
numbers of the enemy, but their attempt was in vain.

When they knew that the Prophet had decided to set out to the
battlefield, they planned to rush upon his house in Medina during his
absence. The Prophet (S) perceived their plan and determined to leave
‘Ali (as) as his successor in Medina to safeguard his family. The
Prophet got ready for the task of Tabouk.

The hypocrites were displeased with the stay of ‘Ali (as) in Medina;
therefore they began to spread false rumors such as that ‘Ali was
ordered to take part in this troublesome war but he refused because this
war was really insupportable and that the Prophet (S) was displeased
with him.

‘Ali (as), in order to rebut this accusation, told the Prophet (S) of
what they rumored and asked him to let him go to the war.

The Prophet said to ‘Ali (as): “O my brother, go back to Medina because
nobody else is well-qualified to keep Medina safe except I and you. You
are to take care of my house during my absence.” Then he added: “Are you
not satisfied to be to me as Aaron was to Moses? But there will be no
prophet after me.”

This Prophet's word is also one of the main arguments of the Shia in
proving the immediate succession of Imam ‘Ali after the Prophet's death.

Finally the Prophet's men, with troubles beyond endurance, arrived at
Tabouk. It was a surprise to them when they saw no enemy soldiers in and
about Tabouk.

They thought that that the enemy might go back or that the whole
information that the Prophet was told of was false.

The Prophet (S) stopped there about twenty days and received no news
about the enemy. At the same time he was in contact with the chieftains
of various tribes and he made treaty with them, because they were mostly
Christians and it was possible that the Romans would make use of them in
the future.

The Prophet, after consulting with his companions, came back towards
Medina.

Although some hypocrites resolved upon killing him on his way back by
stampeding his camel in the slope of a valley, their plan was surfaced
and the Prophet saved his life.

Although this expedition did not get any result but it made everyone
understand that the power of Islam had got to an extent that the Muslims
could fly to arms and defy the great powers like the Romans.
Consequently many headstrong chiefs of the Arab tribes came near the
Prophet and resigned themselves to God and believed in him.

On the other hand the Muslims proved by experience that they could
resist difficulties when they would set out to conquer Syria in the
future.

Declaration of Immunity For The Idolaters
-----------------------------------------

At the end of the ninth year of Hijrah, Gabriel came down from the
Heaven with some verses of the Holy Qur’an and hereby the Prophet was
ordered to send someone to Mecca in order to inform the people of the
purport of the verses, which had four orders to be declared.

The verses are:

1***-“(This is a declaration of) immunity by Allah and His apostle
towards those of the idolaters with whom you made an agreement”.***

2***-“So go about in the land for four months and know that you cannot
weaken Allah and that Allah will bring disgrace to the unbelievers”.***

3***-“And an announcement from Allah and His apostle to the people on
the day of the greater pilgrimage that Allah and His apostle are free
from liability to the idolaters; therefore if you repent, it will be
better for you, and if you turn back, then know that you will not weaken
Allah; and announce painful punishment to those, who disbelieve”.***

4***-“Except those of the idolaters with whom you made an agreement,
then they have not failed you in anything and have not backed up any one
against you, so fulfill their agreement to the end of their term; surely
Allah loves those who are careful (to their duty)”.***

5- ***“So when the sacred months have passed away, then slay the
idolaters wherever you find them and take them captives and besiege them
and lie in wait for them in every ambush, then if they repent and keep
up prayer and pay the poor-rate, leave their way free to them, surely
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful”.***

The Charter was as follows:

1-It was forbidden for the idolaters to go nakedly around the Kaabah.

2-The idolaters would not have the right to enter into the sacred
places.

3-No one of the idolaters would have the right to take part in the
ceremonies of the greater Hajj.

4-The lives and the wealth of those, who have concluded the peace
contract and have not broken their promises, would be protected until
the end of the contract.

The Prophet sought after Abu-Bakr and gave him the verses of the Holy
Qur’an enclosed with the charter to announce them to the unbelievers of
Mecca. He set out towards Mecca with forty persons. Then Gabriel came
down and said to the Prophet: “O Muhammad, either you yourself or the
nearest one to you of your family ought to perform this task.”

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Nor does he (the Prophet) speak out of desire. It is naught but
revelation that is revealed, the Lord of Mighty Power has taught
him”.*** (53:3-5)

Imam ‘Ali (as) was ordered by the Prophet to set out to Mecca to follow
after Abu-Bakr in order to take the verses from him and that he (Imam
‘Ali) himself should inform of the declaration on the day of the greater
Hajj.

The task was fulfilled well by Imam ‘Ali (as) in the place where many
houses had lost one or two persons in the wars by his sword.

Many groups of the idolaters were directed to godliness by this
declaration as the idolatry was rooted up all over Arabia before the end
of the tenth year A.H.

The First Meeting With The Christians
-------------------------------------

There was a flourishing country between Arabia and Yemen named Najran
where the Christians were living at that time. The Prophet of Islam sent
a letter to them for preaching purposes like the letters that had been
sent to the rulers of the adjoining countries formerly. The bishop of
Najran named Abu Harithah put the matter for discussion before the great
religionists.

A man of mind and intelligence named Shurahbeel in reply to the bishop
said: “We have heard our religious leaders saying that someday the
Prophethood would be transferred from Isaac’s generation to the sons of
Ishmael and we should not be surprised that Muhammad (S), who was one of
descendants of Ishmael, might be the very Prophet, whom our fore great
religionists had informed of. I propose that a mission of some wise men
is to be sent to Medina to consider what Muhammad (S) claims. It seems
to be reasonable.”

The mission arrived at Medina and went straight to the mosque. The
Prophet, contrary to his custom that was accessible to everyone, did not
pay attention to them because they had dressed up in expensive cloths
inlaid with gold.

They had golden rings and chains on their fingers and necks. They were
directed to Imam ‘Ali (as) to answer their questions. Imam ‘Ali (as)
advised them to change their clothes and to take off the golden
ornaments and then they might have the honor of meeting the Prophet.

On the next day the Prophet welcomed them warmly and then they began
their negotiation. The argument was as the following:

**The Prophet**: I just summon you to monotheism and I want you to obey
God and to put His commandments into practice.

**The mission**: If Islam invited people to godliness recently, it was a
long time that we have worshipped God and His obedience was obligatory
on us.

**The Prophet**: How do you obey the unique God whereas you pay homage
to the cross and you pretend that God has begotten a son?

**The mission**: We worship Jesus as a God because he had restored dead
persons to life and he had cured sick and paralytic people. He made some
birds of mud and made them fly. He could do all these things.

**The Prophet**: No, it is not right. Jesus Christ was a sincere servant
of God and he was put into the womb of Holy Mary. This miracle was done
by the Divine will to make people believe in Him.

**The mission**: Since nobody had married his mother, hereon God would
certainly be his father.

A Qur’anic verse was revealed at this moment;

***“Surely the likeness of Issa (Jesus) is with Allah as the likeness of
Adam; He created him from dust, then He said to him: Be, and he was”.***
(3:59)

**The Prophet**: The situation of Holy Christ is similar to Adam, whom
Allah has created him without parents. If non-existence of the father is
the reason of Godhead, so Adam must be obeyed as God since long ago.

Anyhow this disputation did not come to a conclusion and they resolved
that both sides should pray God that curse be upon the obstinate side.

At the same time the Prophet was inspired by a verse:

***“But whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say: Come let us call our sons and your sons and
our women and your women and our near people and your near people, then
let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the
liars”.*** (3:61)

The two parties made ready to determine the matter of praying for the
curse of Allah to be on each other next day to show which party was
right.

The heads of the Christians said to each other: “Before we face the
Prophet let us see that if he comes with his companions and chief
commanders of his army, surely he is a liar but if he brought his dear
relatives, he has confidence in God and he is really a truthful person
in his claims because he is ready to take his nearest kinfolk towards
mortality.”

The Prophet of Islam selected four persons from his own family, who were
the elects among all the Muslims; Fatima his honorable daughter as his
woman, and her two sons Hasan and Hussein as his own sons, and her
husband Imam ‘Ali (as) as the nearest man to him.

Next day when the Christians saw the Prophet coming with his family,
they were surprised at the full and were convinced that God would
respond to his prayer.

At last the Christians did not agree to damn each other and it was
decided that they were to pay a tribute to the Muslims in lieu of
protecting their lives and wealth by the Islamic government from foreign
aggressions.

Many of Islamic scholars mentioned the said tradition and concluded that
God has created them both Muhammad (S) and ‘Ali from one essence
(nature).

The Last Prophet’s Pilgrimage To Mecca
--------------------------------------

Hajj is a collective ritual that is fulfilled by the Muslims with the
intent of achieving unity and accord among them.

This Islamic congress is effective on strengthening the relations among
the Muslims to solve the difficulties by cooperation and helping each
other to better their political economic relations. But, regretfully,
nowadays the Muslims do not get the benefit of what the Holy Lawgiver
willed for them. It is because of the negligence of some leaders of the
Islamic countries.

At any rate, according to the Prophet's command, all the tribes of
Arabia were informed that if they wished to take part in hajj with the
Prophet they should gathered in Medina.

It was a didactic journey, neither military nor politico-economic. The
Prophet gave his noteworthy lecture to the people when he arrived at
Arafat (a sacred place in Mecca).

I think it is necessary to show the readers some passages of it because
it indicates the rights and the duties of people towards each other. It
is still new after fourteen centuries.

The Prophet said: “O people listen to me; you will never see me here
again. Be careful not to trample upon other's rights. You have to regard
the lives and the properties of people. You have not to pursue anybody
for spite and vengeance. Killing and marauding, which occurred
frequently before the advent of Islam must be forgotten forever. It is
important for you to know that usury is an ill-gotten profit in Islam
and the wealth which has been obtained by this way should be paid back
to their owners. Surely the usurer will be punished hard on the Day of
Resurrection.”

Then he added: “You have to note that husbands have a prerogative upon
their wives that should be considered by women and husbands ought to
treat their wives kindly. Wives are a deposit from God near husbands.
You have to administer justice among them and be true to your promise in
regard to your wives.

You, men, have also the rights on your wives. They are not to receive
any one in their houses without your permission. They must not commit
any offence in the absence of their husbands. You, the husbands, have to
provide for your wives safety and welfare if they turned back from the
wrong way. You are hereby notified that all the queer habits and
opinions of the pagan age are cancelled and I do warn you of their
falseness.”

Finally the rite of hajj came to an end and the Muslims learnt its
formalities, in general and particular, at the presence of the Prophet.
They determined on going back towards Medina.

The Story of Ghadir Khumm
-------------------------

The Prophet, on his way back, got at a place named Ghadir Khumm where
the Arab tribes separated from each other to start off towards their
dwellings.

At this time a verse was revealed to the Prophet saying:

***“O Apostle, deliver what has been revealed to you from your Lord; and
if you do it not, then you have not delivered His message, and Allah
will protect you from the people; surely Allah will not guide the
unbelieving people”.*** (5:67)

The verse purported that the Prophet (S) had been charged with a great
duty previously but he was afraid of people's mischief to reveal it.

The Prophet ordered that those, who had gotten ahead, to come back and
those, who were late to hurry to the place.

When all the pilgrims gathered, the Prophet went up a pulpit, which was
made of camels' saddles. After praising God he said: “Am I not closer to
you than you to yourselves?” These saying indicated to the Holy Qur’anic
verse:

***“The Prophet is closer to the Believers than their own selves”.***
(33:6).

The present people said: “Yes, you are.”

Afterward the Prophet grabbed ‘Ali (as) by the arm and said: “Whomsoever
I am his guardian, here is ‘Ali to be his guardian.”

Then he prayed to God and said: “O Allah, be a supporter of whoever
supports him (‘Ali) and an enemy of whoever opposes him”. He added: “I
and ‘Ali have come into being from the same origin but the others have
come from different origins.”

Imam ‘Ali (as) was hereby introduced as the Prophet's successor and all
those present people, who were more than one hundred thousand,
congratulated him and shook hands with him especially ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab, rejoiced more than the others. He said to ‘Ali: “\`Well-
done, well-done! You became my guardian and the guardian of every
believing man and believing woman.”

More than three hundred and fifty great Sunni scholars[^14] mentioned
this tradition. Some of them researched this subject in independent
books.

When those formalities of allegiance were finished, a verse was
revealed:

***“This day have those who disbelieve despaired of your religion, so
fear them not, and fear Me. This day have I perfected for you your
religion and completed. My favor on you and chosen for you Islam as a
religion”.*** (5:3)

Some scholars thought that this verse was revealed when the hajj was all
over in Mecca but some others[^15] thought that it was revealed in
Ghadir Khumm to show the willingness of God in appointing Imam ‘Ali (as)
as the leader of the believers after the Prophet.

According to the Shia opinion, the imamate (caliphate after the Prophet)
is a divine rank and as the prophets were chosen among the best and
wisest people, the imam also should be chosen in the same way among the
innocent and pious men.

The caliph must be able to clarify the vague problems and could answer
the scientific questions of religion, which were brought forth for
discussion, without falling into error, because the caliphate was indeed
an integral part of the prophet hood.

Therefore God knew better which one was well- qualified to the task.

The said tradition and the following short story are convincing
evidences for the Shia to prove the immediate succession of Imam ‘Ali
(as) after the Prophet's death.

One day a beggar came into the mosque of Medina and asked for alms. He
repeated his request several times but no one granted him anything. Imam
‘Ali (as) stretched his finger out while he was kneeling in offering
prayer so that the beggar would take Imam ‘Ali’s ring off his finger.

Just then a verse was revealed:

***“Only Allah is your lord and His apostle and those who believe, those
who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow”.***[^16]
(5:55)

Now by taking into consideration this Qur’anic verse and the Prophet's
clear and decisive words in Ghadir Khumm, we knew that Imam ‘Ali (as)
was the rightful heir and legal successor of the Prophet (S).

Of course there are many other crucial evidences in this regard through
the Holy Qur’an and the other reliable sources but this matter cannot be
contained by this book and it needs an independent book by itself.

The Prophet Becomes Ill
-----------------------

After the battle of Tabouk, the Prophet always felt that there was a
danger coming from the Roman Empire and that he was about to fight them;
therefore he got ready for the war and ordered the Muslims; Muhajirun
and Ansar,[^17] to encamp out of Medina under the leadership of Usamah
ibn Zayd.

Some of the great companions, like Abu-Bakr, ‘Umar and Abu Ubaydah ibn
al-Jarrah, were specially ordered to join the camp but the Prophet was
suddenly attacked by fever and had to be confined to bed.

The commandership of Usamah was insupportable to some great companions
because he was a young man of twenty years old but his prudence and
wisdom was confirmed by the Prophet.

The social positions in Islam depended upon prudence and personal
ingenuity and not on eldership and seniority.

In spite of the Prophet’s insistence on them to set out to Syria they
did not do. It seemed that some secret hands interfered to stop the
movement of the army because as soon as they knew that the Prophet was
bedridden, they all left the camp with the pretext of visiting him.

As it was said before that the Prophet did not present Imam ‘Ali as his
successor for fear of people's mischief until a verse to be revealed
that God would guarantee his security.

He anticipated that some of his companions might put obstacles in the
way of Imam ‘Ali; hereon he ordered them strictly to set out towards
Syria. But a few politicians would not obey him under various pretexts.

They even tried to make the Prophet change his mind with regard to Imam
‘Ali (as). The future events would justify this matter.

One day when some of the believers gathered around his bed, the Prophet,
after pondering, said to his companions: “Bring me an inkpot with a
piece of paper to write you a decree. If you keep to it, you will never
go astray after me at all.”

‘Umar, who became a caliph later on, said: “Illness has overcome him and
he is just raving. The Holy Qur’an is sufficient to us.”[^18]

Then a quarrel happened among the companions. Some of them said that it
was necessary to bring a piece of paper and an inkpot but the others,
who were on ‘Umar’s side, refused.

It is too indecent to mention the words that were exchanged among them.
It was enough that some bad words were heard by the Prophet that he
turned his face away from his companions.

The Prophet, in order to put an end to this jangle, decided to go to the
mosque to say to the people orally about the decree he ordered them to
write.

He got at the mosque infirmly as he had leaned on the shoulders of Imam
‘Ali (as) and his cousin al-Al-Fadhl ibn al-Abbas and his feet were
dragging on the earth. The people were impatiently waiting for hearing
his last words.

After praising God he said: “I leave two great and dear things among
you; the Holy Qur’an and my family. If you keep to them, you will never
go astray.”[^19]

It was mentioned by al-Asqalani that the Prophet turned his face to his
followers, who had formed a circle around his bed and said; “My death is
coming soon and I just leave two profound things among you; the first is
the Qur’an and the second is my family.”

Then he raised ‘Ali’s hand and said: “‘Ali (as) keeps to the Qur’an and
the Qur’an will never be separated from him.” (They are correlative with
each other).

While the Prophet was sick he advised people to keep to prayers and
recommended them to be fair dealing with the slaves and their rights.
Then he added that his traditions and Sunnah should not be forgotten
after him and the Muslims, when having problems and difficulties, should
turn to his family.

Obeying his family was obligatory for the Muslims. Then he continued:
“They (his family) are the wisest among all of you and be careful not to
try to teach them anything. Know that ‘Ali (as) will be my successor
after my death.”[^20]

At last he sought after ‘Ali (as) and whispered to him for a while and
then he went to the better world while his blessed head was in ‘Ali’s
lap.[^21]

Later on Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “The Prophet, at the last moments of his
life, whispered and taught me one thousand chapters of science; each one
of them contained one thousand chapters. The above mentioned matters
indicated that Imam ‘Ali (as) was well-qualified for the task of the
caliphate.

The generalities of the Qur’an just explain precepts and religious
jurisprudence in general and ordinary people cannot interpret them
easily. The Prophet said: “‘Ali is the best and the wisest of you all
and he is the best of you in judgment. Rejecting his sayings means
rejecting my sayings. Refuting my sayings means denying God's
precepts”[^22]

The Disputes In The Saqeefah
----------------------------

Saqeefah[^23] was a big shed where the Ansar (the local citizens of
Medina) would gather to discuss the public affairs and occasionally they
would appoint chieftains of local families.

After the Prophet's death, the Ansar formed a meeting to discuss the
subject of his successor.

Sa’d ibn Ubadah, who was one of the Prophet’s great companions and an
important man in his tribe, was nominated by his tribe the Khazraj.

There was another tribe in Medina named Aws. A state of war was between
these two tribes since a long time ago. There was still a great enmity
between them at this time.

The Aws naturally did not show any favor for this candidate and they
opposed they Khazraj.

While they were arguing with each other, suddenly three men of
Muhajirun; Abu-Bakr, ‘Umar and Abu Ubaydah ibn al-Jarrah came into the
Saqeefah.

At first ‘Umar stood up to speak but Abu-Bakr prevented him and he
himself said: “We, the Muhajirun, believed in Muhammad and worshipped
God before all of you. We are Muhammad’s friends and relatives;
therefore these privileges and attributes are quite enough for us to
take the reins of government.”

Then a man from the Ansar, named Habbab, turned towards his family and
said: “O people of Ansar, do not surrender to them. We, the Ansar, have
also some other precedence over them. We are men of wealth, honor and a
great tribe. We gave them shelter in our homes. Islam progressed by our
sword. You should stick to your right severely. One emir is to be from
us and one is to be from them.”

‘Umar stood up and said: “It is not possible to have two rulers in the
same time. By Allah, the Arabs will not be contented to have a ruler
from you, the Ansar, whereas the Prophet (S) is not from your family;
therefore the caliph must be from his own family. Whoever opposes us,
will do wrong and will commit a sin, which leads to perdition.”

Habbab stood up again and repeated the same words as before but he was
scolded by ‘Umar severely.

Then Abu Ubaydah stood up and said; “You, the Ansar, helped and
supported us in different ways and now we expect that you do not change
your behavior.” But the Ansar did not accord to the Muhajirun.

The situation was going to an end in the interest of the Ansar, but
suddenly Basheer, one of the Khazraj, stood up and said: “Although we
reinforced Islam and supported you, Muhajirun, but our purpose was
obeying Allah and His apostle. It does not make us put obstacles in the
way of the caliphate. Muhammad (S) was from Quraysh. Quraysh has the
right to get this position and Quraysh suffices for it.”

When Basheer finished his speech, the dispute reached a high point among
the Ansar. The Muhajirun took advantage of this tumult and seized the
opportunity. ‘Umar and Abu Ubaydah ran towards Abu- Bakr and paid homage
to him as caliph, and then Basheer al-Ansari and his family resigned
themselves to Abu-Bakr. In this way Abu-Bakr became the caliph after the
Prophet (S).

Surprising it is! The Muhajirun, because of their precedence in Islam
and worshipping God and their kinship with the Prophet as they
pretended, disqualified the Ansar but they did not talk about Imam ‘Ali
(as), who was the true successor for the same reasons. He was the first
man, who believed in Muhammad, the first one, who offered prayer behind
the Prophet and him, on the contrary to the other Prophet’s companions,
had never worshipped idols.[^24]

It was surprising indeed when the Ansar were beaten in the debate of
kinship with the Prophet and submitted to the Muhajirun whereas Abu-Bakr
related to the Prophet through his seventh great grandfather and ‘Umar
related to the Prophet through his ninth great grandfather but they
ignored Imam ‘Ali (as), who was so closer to the Prophet that he was a
full- blood cousin.

Imam ‘Ali (as) Stays At Home
----------------------------

It was said beforehand that many great men of Mecca, especially those
who had grudge against Muhammad (S) obstinately, were killed in the
battle of Badr by the sword of Imam ‘Ali (as) and that there were a few
houses that did not lose a relative by ‘Ali’s sword; therefore they were
not so pleased with him.

On the other hand, many notable companions of the Prophet (S) were
jealous of him because of his great valor for Islam, especially because
that he was highly esteemed by the Prophet. Therefore these reasons made
him stay at home.

Abu-Sufyan was the leader of the commercial caravans of Quraysh before
the advent of Islam. He carried on trade between Mecca and Syria. After
the battle of Badr he was the commander of all the expeditions that
moved towards Medina fighting against Islam.

Finally, in order to save his life, he became a Muslim before the
Prophet when Mecca was going to be conquered by the Muslims. He was too
much proud and obstinate and he would look down on everybody.

He was out of Medina when the Prophet died and as soon as he knew that
the Muslims paid homage to Abu-Bakr, he became furious and went, having
a proposal, to meet Abbas, the Prophet an ‘Ali’s uncle. He said to him:
“The people have entrusted the caliphate to Taym (Abu- Bakr's family)
neglectfully and they have deprived the Hashemites (the Prophet's
family) of their right and then ‘Umar, this hot-tempered of Adiy
(‘Umar’s family) will rule over us. Let us go to ‘Ali and ask him to
come out and get his legal right.”

They came to Imam ‘Ali (as). Abu-Sufyan said to him: “Give me your hand
to pay homage to you and if anyone disagrees, I will fill all the
streets of Medina with cavalrymen.”

This was the best opportunity for Imam ‘Ali (as) if he was greedy for
the authority (on the contrary to ‘Umar's saying that ‘Ali was greedy
for the caliphate) or if he would have liked to submit to his own whim,
when Abu-Sufyan, a man of power with the support of his crowding tribe,
he would have agreed with him. But Imam ‘Ali (as) did not accede to
Abu-Sufyan's request because:

1. His proposal was not based on religious feelings and what had made
him to offer this proposition was only partisanship for his family and
tribe. He was, by nature, a wicked man and Imam ‘Ali (as) knew him well.

2. In this present situation if Medina became the center of a civil war
and the place of a dispute for the caliphate, then most people, very
likely, would apostatize and consequently the name of Islam would be
forgotten forever.

3. The dissent which arose between the Ansar and the Muhajirun
concerning the caliphate was an occasion for the hypocrites to abolish
Islam by mischief and tale bearing.

Therefore Imam ‘Ali (as) preferred to wait for a good opportunity when
the circumstances would become suitable. For this reason he did not give
his hand to receive homage and Abu-Sufyan was reasoned into compliance.

The silence and renouncement of Imam ‘Ali indicated his wise policy to
prevent dissent and apostasy among the Muslims.

Recently some of Egyptian writers[^25] have stated an opinion that,
undoubtedly, Imam ‘Ali had preference over all of the other companions
from all points of view and they have added that: “If Imam ‘Ali (as) had
assumed the rein of government immediately after the Prophet (S), the
fate of the Muslims would have been much better than what it is today.”

Mahmood Al-Aqqad wrote in his book Abqariyyatul Imam: “Although the
virtuousness, purity, science and merits of Imam ‘Ali (as) was superior
to all other companions, the Prophet (S) did not present him clearly as
his successor and he granted the authority to the Muslims to choose the
caliph.”

But al-Aqqad ignored that ‘Umar received the caliphate by the will of
Abu- Bakr and ‘Umar himself vested this authority with a committee of
six persons.

The Islamic scholar, Dr. Kiali Halabi, in his letter to al-Ameeni, the
author of al-Ghadir, said: “The history of Arabia is nothing except the
history of Islam. The Arabs have neglected their duty to compose and
teach their history (Islamic history) because what is taught under the
name of Islamic history is neither scientific nor free from partiality
and it is full of private motives.

That, which had been written by the historians at the time of the
Umayyads and the Abbasids, was not free from showing partial views and
most of it had deviated from the truth, because of material interests or
for fear of being suppressed by the authority.

Moreover, the modern critics are not able to unveil the facts and the
real causes of the events and to discover the historical connections
among them, whereas the aim and the required result of history is to
discover such causes and connections.

The world of Islam is always in need of the scientific study of history
in order that the Muslims may know what events were behind the great
victories achieved at the first part of the Islamic history and what
motives moved them.

The Muslims have to know what services the Muslim *wali*s had rendered
to the Islamic civilization or what blows they had inflicted upon it.
Before all we should know what happenings made the Muslims dissent after
the Prophet's death and which party was right in this discord.

What happened to make the Hashemites be deprived of their right? What
was the effect of Imam  
 ‘Ali’s seclusion and satisfaction of educating the Muslims only?

When these questions are clarified then what is to be done to achieve
the union of the Muslims and to achieve the scientific and
politico-economic improvement in the Islamic countries and to make use
of this improvement?

Consequently the new generation can clear up what is dark and vague on
the pages of the books history and then to follow the example of the
policy and behavior of Imam ‘Ali (as), the prime example of humanity,
and of his dear sons and followers.

I think that it is necessary for the Islamic scholars to fulfill this
duty. The book al-Ghadir is one of those books that have cleared up the
dark corners and the ambiguous sentences of the previous careless
writers.

It is too regretful that many of the previous historians have turned the
historical facts upside down and that they have led the contemporary
youths astray in connection with the truths. The new generation should
know that the honorable Apostle of Islam had definitely presented Imam
‘Ali (as) as his successor and executor of his will, but his companions
forgot it and disregarded the Prophet's orders.

If they had submitted to his command, the fate of the Islamic world
would have been more ordered than what it is now and that the Muslims
would have never been involved in dissent and that their unity and
consensus would protect them against calamities. Muhammad, the great
educator of mankind, wanted successors having efficiency and power of
understanding and having courage and prudence.

He wanted such men, who were able to be moderate between worldliness and
religiousness with the same spirit as the Prophet had. They should
direct the people to the right path of the Qur’an and their conduct must
be as that of peacemakers.

The guardian of the Prophet must be a man, who would never forget
rightfulness and the way of God when judging; a man, who would never be
feeble when walking in the right way and in achieving justice whether
towards his relatives or the others, a man, who-at the time of failure
or prevalence-would be masterful against the oppressors and very kind to
the helpless, a man, who would be able to decide upon any subject
according to wisdom and rightfulness and to be far away from his own
desires.

But regretfully, it must be said that the Arabs missed the only
historical opportunity they had and they did opposite to the Prophet's
will; therefore Islam's losses were great and beyond description.

Islam, at the beginning of its growth, missed all creative power because
of disputes and fights, whereas the Muslims could conquer the entire
world during a half of the first century of Islam’s inception if they
had not struggled against each other.

Now it is necessary for the Islamic scholars to unveil the historical
facts and to define the causes of the events and after coming to a
reasonable conclusion, they must show the unaware Muslims the deeds, the
conduct and the speeches of Imam ‘Ali(S), the best example of humanity.
They have to state properly the life and guardianship of the Prophet’s
successor and cousin.

Which story is more pleasant than the biography of a man, who lived for
the divinity and for spreading the religion of God and who did his best
to direct his fellow men to the right path and in the meantime he did
not refuse to guide the men of authority (the caliphs Abu-Bakr and
‘Umar) sincerely.

His manly qualities and morals should be emphasized because he was the
prime example of Mohammedanism. God had granted him science, ability of
interpreting the divine laws and eloquence. He was really the sword of
the Prophet against the enemies. He was a man of iron, whose stability
and firmness would not become shaky by greed or threat.

He is the Imam, whom we are bound to love and follow. The Holy Qur’an
says:

***“Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives”.*** (42:23)

God had purified Imam ‘Ali and his dear sons of every sin.

Nowadays, the world of Islam is seriously in need of knowing the
characteristics of this great personage to be taken as a guide and an
example. The Muslims have to know that the peerless qualities and
spiritual particulars of Imam ‘Ali (as) are the best stimulus for the
youths all over the Islamic countries to solve their problems and
corruptions.

It is the duty of the Islamic scholars to imitate the writer of
al-Ghadir to purify history of the blemishes those previous historians
stained it with and to show the glorious life of the Prophet’s
successor.”

The Caliphate of Abu-Bakr
-------------------------

Abu-Bakr was one of the Prophet’s great companions. He was the prophet’s
pal in the cave at the night of emigration. He controlled all the
affairs of the state as it was mentioned before. Some of the great
companions, who were about nine persons, remonstrated against but he did
not heed.[^26]

On the next day, nineteen persons made a protest against him in the
mosque but he had no any evidence from the Prophet to go upon.[^27]

It is to be noted that Abu-Bakr decided to deprive Fatima, the holy
daughter of the Prophet, of her property of Fadak.[^28] Fadak was
donated to Fatima by her father when a Qur’anic verse was revealed.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Whatever Allah has restored to His Apostle from them, you did not
press forward against it any horse or a riding camel, but Allah gives
authority to His Apostle against whom he pleases, and Allah has power
over all things. Whatever Allah has restored to His Apostle from the
people of the towns, it is for Allah and for the Apostle and for the
near of kin and the orphans and the needy and the wayfarers, so that it
may not be a thing taken by turns among the rich of you ...”*** (59:6-7)

After the revelation of this verse, the Prophet donated Fadak to
Fatima.[^29]

The caliphate of Abu-Bakr lasted for two years and four months. Syria
was conquered by the Muslims at his days.

The Caliphate of ‘Umar
----------------------

‘Umar, according to the will of Abu-Bakr, dressed himself with the
caliphate. He was a severe man. He would put the religious punishments
into practice carefully and he had, personally, a careful control over
the state affairs.

No one of his officers dared to misappropriate funds in his
administrative charge or to make use of their positions unlawfully
because he was too strict with the expenses of *Bayt al-Mal* (public
treasury).

The Islamic conquests began to expand on all sides and consequently
spoils and wealth were brought to Medina. The caliph used to keep the
companions in Medina not to let them be affected by bad habits.

He always opposed bringing books from the conquered countries. He said:
“These books are surplus to our requirements while the Qur’an is with
us.” He ordered to burn those books.

But Imam ‘Ali (as) often said to his followers: “Bring knowledge home
even if it is in remote places.”

I just quote a wise saying of Imam ‘Ali (as) from Nahj al-Balaghah where
he says: “It is odd to the character of a liberal man to flatter or to
be envious of the others except in searching for knowledge.”

Of course these two ideas of the two caliphs are so contrary to each
other.

Although the people were kept away from Imam ‘Ali's teachings and
attainments but he was often asked for giving legal advices by the
caliphs, in order to put the state affairs in good order or to correct
their judgments about the religious laws.[^30]

When Khuzestan (the southern part of Iran) was conquered by the Muslims,
the *wali* named Hormozan and his slave Abu-Lu’lu’ were brought to
Medina as captives.

‘Umar donated the slave to al-Mugheerah, who was a versed politician
among the Arabs and he was close to the rulers. Abu Lu’lu’, as a
functionary, was not paid his wages by his master. He complained to the
caliph ‘Umar about it but the caliph did not pay any attention to him.
He pleaded with justice repeatedly over and again but ‘Umar did not take
it seriously.

It reminds of a saying of Imam ‘Ali (as), who often said to his
followers: “You have to pay the laborer his wages before his sweat
dries.” He also said: “Receive people humbly. Be kind and pitiful to
them. Deal with them cheerfully and respectfully.”

At any rate Abu Lu’lu’ did not receive a convincing reply. Then he
determined on avenging himself on the caliph and finally ‘Umar was
wounded by his dagger in the mosque and that fatal wound made him die.

When ‘Umar knew that his end was coming soon, he formed a council and
appointed six persons; ‘Ali ibn Abu-Talib, Abd-al-Rahmaan ibn Awf,
Talhah ibn Abdullah, Al-Zubayr ibn al-Awwam, Sa’d ibn Abu- Waqqas,
Uthman ibn Affan as the main members and his own son as a substitute
member.

At the caliph’s command, these six had to elect one of themselves as the
caliph during three days after his death.

In the meantime he stated his opinion about each one of the members. He
about Imam ‘Ali (as) : “Although ‘Ali is eager for the caliphate but I
know that he is the only one, who can manage it in the right way.”

In spite of this confession, the members of the committee did not give
their votes to Imam ‘Ali and held the position because all of the
members were Uthman’s relatives except Al-Zubayr.

Anyone could understand it guessing that Imam ‘Ali (as) was with
minority and Uthman would eventually the successor of ‘Umar. In briefly
speaking that Abd-al- Rahmaan was given the right by the majority to
choose the caliph between two persons, ‘Ali (as) and Uthman. He said to
‘Ali (as): “I pay homage to you on the condition that you will follow
the book of Allah (the Qur’an), the Sunnah of the Prophet and the policy
of the two previous caliphs Abu-Bakr and ‘Umar.

Imam ‘Ali (as) replied: “I will follow the Qur’an and the Sunnah of the
Prophet (S) but I act according to my own judgments.

The proposal was repeated thrice and the answer was the same. Then
Abd-al-Rahmaan turned to Uthman and asked him if he would accept the
condition. Uthman agreed to follow the terms the condition and they paid
homage to him.

Now it is important to know why the members of the committee ignored the
Prophet's statements concerning ‘Ali (as) again.

The Prophet said: “‘Ali is the wisest and superior to all of you. He is
the best judge among all.”[^31]

When Imam ‘Ali saw his right being suppressed in this way, he said:
“This is not the first time you wrong me, but patience is my only way. I
swear by Allah that you have not paid homage to him (Uthman) but you
expect of him to give you the caliphate later on when he is about to
leave.”

The Politico-Economic State Of The Muslims At The Days Of The Caliphs
---------------------------------------------------------------------

At the time of the Prophet, the Muslims were inspired with feelings of
liberty and freedom by canceling partisanship and racial feelings. The
Holy Qur’an addressed the Prophet by saying:

***“Say: I am only a mortal like you; it is revealed to me that your god
is one God”.*** (18:110).

Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “Ruling over you means suffering the heaviest
burden on my shoulders.”

The Prophet of Islam had implanted in the minds of the nomads of Arabia
the concept of unification and equality that, later on, the caliph ‘Umar
traveled to Jerusalem by his only camel and if he rode the camel for a
distance, he mounted his slave in the next distance and he went on foot.

Many of those principles, which arose from theism and equity, were
observed during the time of Abu-Bakr and ‘Umar. They protected and
followed these customs because the Prophet's advices passed mouth to
mouth by people and virtue and piety were still the cause of superiority
and greatness.

At the same time the Islamic victories began to expand and finally the
wide government of Islam was established at the last part of ‘Umar's
caliphate and consequently valuable spoils and many riches were brought
to Medina from every side.

‘Umar would not permit the great companions to go away from the center
of the government for fear that it would be possible for them to make
money and go back to their bad habits.

The first caliph (Abu-Bakr), in his will, commanded ‘Umar: “Watch over
the companions not to be concerned with money or position, otherwise
disputes and struggles will rise among them and consequently the common
people will be divided into many groups fanatically and in this case the
public power will be weak.”

‘Umar always tried to keep the companions separate from the worldly
ties. Abu-Bakr said to Abd-al- Rahmaan ibn Awf (a very rich influential
man): “Now you have received wealth so much that you have got used to
silk clothes and some of you are not content with sleeping on woolen
stuff.”

But as soon as Uthman attained his aim he ignored these regulations. As
a result of his weakness and infirmity of will, many personages and
great companions became wealthy as he himself had one hundred and fifty
thousand dinars and one million dirhams besides the other properties
when he was killed.

He even broke his promises with regard to the proposed conditions of the
consultative committee. His actions were contrary to the policy of the
Prophet and the two previous caliphs. Al-Hakam ibn al-Aass, who had been
banished from Medina by the Prophet and the two previous caliphs had not
allowed him to come back, was allowed by Uthman to come back.

Uthman’s daughters got married to Marwan and Harith, the sons of
al-Hakam. Uthman paid them a lot of money from the treasury (Bayt
al-Mal). Al-Waleed ibn Aqaba, an infamous and slanderous man and had
been cursed by the Qur’an, was sent to Kufa as the *wali*. His misdeed
and disgrace reached an extent that he led the Morning Prayer in four
rak’as[^32] instead of two while he was drunk.

Also other major cities were ruled by his relatives who were of no
principles.[^33] The people were displeased with Uthman's officers
because they were indifferent to the religious matters and they often
did what they liked without fearing any punishment from the government.

Consequently a new class of people appeared whose aim was to heap up
wealth that required oppressing the weak, and violating the people's
rights. Deposing and posting *wali*s depended upon the basis of whim and
desires. Anyone of good and peaceful people, who complained or
criticized, would receive a harsh reaction from the *wali*s. Corruptions
were the order of the day.

On the other hand, the hostile behavior of Uthman towards some of the
great companions like Abu-Tharr, Ammar ibn Yasir and Abdullah ibn Mas’ud
had roused a wave of grief and anger among the Muslims.

Abu-Tharr was the third or the fourth person, who became a Muslim
whereupon the idolaters of Quraysh tortured him with different kinds of
tortures but he remained faithful to God.

The Prophet (S) said: “Among all people Abu-Tharr is like Christ, son of
Mary, in self-denial and piety.”

The Prophet also said: “No one under the sky is more truthful than
Abu-Tharr.”

Abu-Tharr left Medina for Syria where Mu’awiyah was the *wali* since the
age of the second caliph ‘Umar. Mu’awiyah was a clever man. He had
become strong during twenty years of rule.

During Uthman's reign he was trying to get the caliphate for himself by
all means, whereas he would never think that it was possible at the days
of ‘Umar's caliphate. He was gifted with wit and he knew well how to
quiet those, who were opposing his aim. He used to loosen the strings of
the purse for the worldly persons to make them collaborate with him.

Abu-Tharr was the partisan of Imam ‘Ali (as) and he acquainted the
people with the greatness of the members of the Prophet's family and
guided them to the rightful path. He often criticized Mu’awiyah and
Uthman openly. He mentioned their making money and the other wrongful
activities.

He could not help speaking out and his critical words against the unjust
discrimination and the outrages against justice encouraged the poor to
ask for their lost rights.

Mu’awiyah knew that if he gave Abu-Tharr the opportunity, the foundation
of his state would collapse. He determined to untie this knot by
satisfying his need with a bag full of gold coins.

Abu-Tharr, this generous man, divided the coins among the needy whereas
he himself was in need badly.

Finally Mu’awiyah reported Abu-Tharr's doings to Uthman and got
permission to send him towards Medina by an unsaddled camel with a
hot-tempered slave. When he got to Medina his thighs were badly wounded
and injured.

Abu-Tharr would speak harshly to Uthman in Medina too criticizing his
conducts. Uthman, who could not endure criticism, exiled this dear and
good old man to an arid and lifeless place named al-Rabathah. It was his
birthplace. Abu-Tharr, finally, died in an intolerable remote place
after suffering too much.

In the meanwhile two other companions of high rank were beaten hard by
Uthman's slaves because of their remonstration against his bad
treatment.

The people of the big cities of Kufa, Egypt and Basra gathered in Medina
to protest against the offending rulers to plead for justice. Their aim
was just to improve their situations but regretfully it led to killing
and bloodshed. If their complaints had been heard in time, such
unexpected events would not have happened.

They had requested Uthman to replace some of his officers. Some of the
great companions had given Ammar ibn Yasir a letter so that Ammar would
notify the caliph of the truth. When he saw Uthman at his doorway and
gave him the letter, he at first received an abrupt answer and then he
was mercilessly beaten and injured seriously by Uthman’s slaves that
caused hernia to him.

The Caliphate of Uthman
-----------------------

It was concluded according to the Islamic history that Uthman was a man
of feeble will and credulous. His counselor Marwan, who was
disrespectable and mean among the Muslims, used his undue influence upon
the caliph. Time and again he promised the people to improve their
affairs and time and again he broke his promise.

Consequently the people gathered before his house and repeated their
demands.

When he saw the matter became so serious he asked Imam ‘Ali (as)
imploringly to quiet the people and to find a suitable way for rescuing
him. At the same time he authorized Imam ‘Ali to bring the mater to an
end by negotiating with the people.

The Egyptians insisted on Uthman to appoint Muhammad ibn Abu-Bakr
instead of ibn Abu Sarh, the *wali* of Egypt. Imam ‘Ali (as) put their
lawful demand before Uthman. Uthman accepted but asked for a three- day
deadline to manage it. For the other cities, more time was necessary
until the caliph's decision would reach there.

Imam ‘Ali (as) came back and talked to the Egyptians. They agreed to get
back on the condition that their demands should be carried out and
Muhammad ibn Abu-Bakr should become the *wali* after deposing ibn Abu
Sarh.

Uthman, by the mediation of Imam ‘Ali, accepted this without any
hesitation. The Egyptians dispersed when Imam ‘Ali (as) accepted the
responsibility for doing that. Then some of them went to Egypt with
Muhammad ibn Abu-Bakr and some went to stay in a valley near Medina for
a while.

On the next day Marwan said to Uthman: “It is alright now. The Egyptians
have left. In order to stop people to come from the other cities, you
have to issue a decree saying that there was some misunderstanding but
when the Egyptians knew that whatever they had heard was wrong, the
whole matter ended and they were satisfied and left here for Egypt. In
this way the people of the other cities will not come here and they will
be quiet at their places.”

Uthman did not want to tell such a lie but Marwan persisted in that
until he accepted. Then he went straight to the Prophet's mosque. As
soon as he expressed his thought, the people began to shout at Uthman:
“Fear Allah! What is this lie? You have to repent.”

At last he had to repent. He turned to Kaabah and repented groaningly
and went back to his house.

Imam ‘Ali (as), in order to make these uprisings subside, advised Uthman
to repent of his past misdeeds before people in the mosque again,
otherwise if the next day some other people came, Uthman would again
cling to Imam ‘Ali’s neck to rescue him from them.

Therefore Uthman made repentance in the mosque and swore to be more
adequate in the future. He promised the people that when their
representatives met him, he would solve their problems and would satisfy
their demands as soon as possible.

When he got back home, Marwan wanted to say something but Uthman's wife
interfered and said to Marwan: “For the sake of God; keep quiet! You
will cause him to be killed for such sayings.”

Marwan said with fury: “You have no right to interfere in these matters.
You are the daughter of that man, who did not know how to perform his
ablution till the end of his life.”

She said: “You are wrong ...”

The dispute became more serious between them but Uthman stopped them and
asked Marwan: “What did you want to say?” He said; “What was that you
said in the mosque and what repentance you made? In my opinion,
committing a sin is much better than making repentance by force. The
result of this notification is the crowding of people before your house.
Now go forward and perform their demands.”

Uthman said: “I am not able to deal with the people. Now you go and
fulfill their demands. Marwan came out and spoke out: “Why have you
gathered here? Do you want to attack or to plunder? You know you cannot
take the authority from our hands and no one can defeat us. Take your
black faces away from here. Allah may damn you.”

When the people saw this double-dealing, they got angry and went to meet
Imam ‘Ali (as) and explained to him the whole story. Imam ‘Ali went
straight to Uthman's house and said to him angrily: “Good heavens! Why
did you misbehave towards the Muslims? You broke your promise for the
sake of a faithless man (Marwan) and lost all your wit. At least you
should respect your own promise. You know that Marwan will throw you in
such a deep hell that you will never be able to come out form it. He has
ridden on you and pulled you to wherever he wished. I shall neither
interfere in your affairs nor tell the people anything.”

Na’ila (Uthman's wife) confirmed Imam ‘Ali's words and asked her husband
to follow Imam ‘Ali’s advices. She said: “Neither you nor your counselor
can restore the bad state.” Then Uthman sought after Ameer-al-Mu’mineen
(Imam ‘Ali) but he refused to meet him. Uthman himself went to Imam
‘Ali's. He expressed his loneliness and helplessness and asked him for
help again.

Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “So many times you made promises in the mosque
before the people to perform their demands but you broke your promises
and when people came to you, they did not receive attention; moreover
that your men insulted them. How can I trust in your words in the
future? Therefore do not expect anything from me. The ways are clear
before you. You can choose the one you like to deal with the people.”

This was the result of Uthman's repentance. Now let's see what happened
on the other side.

When the Egyptians caravan reached the coast of the Red Sea, they saw a
camel rider crossing with all speed. As he instilled doubts into their
minds, they stopped him and asked who he was. He said that he was the
slave of Uthman.

They enquired where he was going to. He said that he was going to Egypt.
They enquired what his aim was of this journey. He said that he was to
meet the *wali* of Egypt. The people said that the *wali* of Egypt was
with them. (According to Uthman's promise it was decided that Muhammad
ibn Abu-Bakr would be instead of ibn Abu Sarh). The slave was enquired
if any letter was with him. He denied.

They decided to search his clothes but they found nothing with him. They
wanted to leave him alone but someone said: “Search his flask on the
back of the camel.”

They found a lead pipe in the water skin. There was a letter enclosed in
the pipe. The caliph Uthman had commanded the *wali* ibn Abu Sarh as the
following: “When Muhammad and his companions get to you, from among them
kill so and so and arrest so and so and put so and so in jail. You are
reinstated in your position.”

It was a surprise to them. They looked at one another in astonishment.
They returned to Medina immediately and put the letter before the
Prophet’s companions. Whoever heard about this event was filled with
wonder because it was a great surprise.

This conduct disgusted every one against Uthman. Thereupon some of the
companions accompanied by this people went to meet Uthman to ask him
whose seal was stamped on the letter.

He answered that it was his own seal. They asked who had written the
letter. He said it was his clerk's handwriting. They enquired whose
slave was that man. He replied that he was his. They asked whose camel
it was with the slave.

He answered that the camel belonged to the government. He was enquired
who had sent it. He said he did not know. They said: “Everything is
yours. How do you not know who has sent the letter? You would better
leave the caliphate off until another man comes to manage it.”

He said: “I will never put off the dress of the caliphate, which Allah
has put on me. I will make repentance again.” They said: “Do not talk
about repentance. Your repentance had already been considered as nothing
since that day when Marwan talked on behalf of you at your door. Now we
are not going to be cheated by these bluffs. You have to leave the
caliphate and if your men stand in our way we will keep them away and if
they prepare for a war we will fight too.

If you regard all the Muslims equally and if you are going to administer
justice, then hand Marwan over to us to ask him by whose power and
support he wanted to bring about the killing of many Muslims by writing
this letter.” But Uthman refused to submit Marwan to them. The three-day
deadline was finished but everything was as it had been before.

When the people saw the result of the repentance, they surged and spread
over the streets of Medina and finally surrounded Uthman's house from
every side.

During these days one of the Prophet’s companions went to Uthman’s house
and shouted: “O Uthman, give up this caliphate and for the sake of Allah
save the Muslims from any bloodshed.” Suddenly one of Uthman's men aimed
at him with an arrow and killed him. This action goaded the people into
fury. They shouted: “The killer must be handed over to us.”

Uthman said: “It is not possible to hand over anyone, who supports me.”
Then the people, furiously, set fire to Uthman’s house and tried to
enter into the house but Uthman's men confronted the people and kept
them away from the door.

At last the people entered into the house of Uthman from adjacent houses
drawing their swords.

Those who were guarding the house ran away and those who were defending
Uthman were killed with him.

Let it not remain unsaid that Mu’awiyah, the *wali* of Syria, was
previously ordered by Uthman to help him during the days of the siege
but he rejected his order pretending that he would not interfere in the
affairs of the Prophet’s companions. He did not pay attention to
Uthman’s order because he himself, heart and soul, intended to take the
reins of the caliphate.

I had to explain the events of Uthman's end in details because, later
on, Talhah, Al-Zubayr, (the two members of the consultative committee,
which was formed by ‘Umar to select Uthman for the caliphate) and
Mu’awiyah in particular accused Imam ‘Ali of Uthman’s bloodshed.
Consequently they raised many disturbances and created civil wars that
their bad results have still remained among the Muslims until today.

If Uthman had heeded the advices of Imam ‘Ali (as) or at least he had
handed Marwan over to the people, he would never have been killed. But
it was the fate otherwise.

The Caliphate of Imam ‘Ali (as)
-------------------------------

Now the Muslims laid their heads together to select a competent person
who could run the caliphate in the right path and could restore their
lost rights.

They thought of Imam ‘Ali (as), whose conduct was very reasonable during
this long period since the Prophet's death.

In the end they came to a conclusion that nobody else was well qualified
for that task except ‘Ali ibn Abu-Talib. They rushed towards his house
to pay homage to him as he had said in one of his speeches: “They leapt
upon me as camels leaping upon each other going to drink water ... in a
way that I thought they would kill me or would kill another one before
me.”

Imam ‘Ali said to them: “Leave me alone and look for another one. It is
important for you to know that the Qur’an and the Prophet's Sunnah will
guide my actions and I will never turn back from the right path in order
to satisfy the interests of some certain groups or to assure someone’s
worldly wishes. Therefore, you cannot tolerate my evenhanded policies
and judgments. I will be as counselor for you better than to be a chief.
Do not urge me to be the caliph.”

The people began to cry and shout loudly. They said: “O
Ameer-al-Mu’mineen (the master of believers) do you not see what
complicated problems the Muslims are facing? Do you not see that Islam
is going to collapse?”

But Imam ‘Ali refused to accept the offer because he knew that people
would like to play with divine caliphate as a means to gain their
worldly desires and that it was impossible to restore the present
circumstances as they were at the Prophet's time.

When the people insisted on him importunately, Imam ‘Ali (as) delivered
a speech to clear away all the excuses they might cling to. He said: “If
you want me for your worldly desires, leave me alone and choose another
one who may realize your wishes. I will not give up the principles of
Islam (equity, reverence for the law, human rights and the like) to
secure neither my authority nor the interests of the others. With regard
to the subject of the rights and privileges enjoyed by every one, I do
not care for the influential people because all the peoples are equal
before God. If you have decided to pay homage to me, think it over and
over because after the homage if you protest against me or put
obstructions in my way, I will force you to come back to the right path.
Bear in mind these conditions, and then you can reach your heart's
desires.”

Of course the previous ruling class and the rich, especially Talhah and
Al-Zubayr, would not be content with the caliphate of Imam ‘Ali (as) but
the glory and the greatness of the revolution made them keep silent.
Since they (Talhah and Al-Zubayr) were appointed as members of the
council established by ‘Umar to select the caliph after his death, they
considered themselves as Imam ‘Ali's equivalents, but they had to pay
homage to him unwillingly.

Next day Imam ‘Ali (as) said in his speech regarding the government's
plan: “The public are hereby notified that a decree will be issued
against those who have made money in unlawful ways and their monies will
be requisitioned. The offenders will be soon prosecuted ...”

Those, who had misappropriated certain things from the public treasury,
were irritated when they heard Imam ‘Ali’s speech and felt sorry for
paying the homage.

Imam ‘Ali believed that all classes of people, whether Arab or non-Arab,
black-skinned or white- skinned, were equal to each other before the
law. He would never want a minority to act according to what they liked
and to heap what they took from the majority by force. He would never be
content with a minority to be offensive against the majority of helpless
and miserable people, who groaned under injustice with no rescue.

Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “Achieve equality among yourselves and do not
discriminate against one another because hearts are always ready to make
mischief and dispute among you.” He also said: “I cannot tolerate such
injustice that a group of people, under the pretense of noble descent
and lineage, takes the products of common people's labor and then scorn
them.”

When the ceremonies of the homage were finished, Talhah and Al-Zubayr,
contrary to their expectation, were not invited by Imam ‘Ali (as) to
co-operate in the affairs of the state. They determined on going to meet
him and request the rule of Kufa and Basra. As Soon as they came into
the caliphate house, Imam ‘Ali (as), who was busy with official works,
suddenly blew out the  
 candle and lighted another one at once. When they asked about the
reason, he replied: “The first candle belongs to Bayt al-Mal (public
treasury) and I was busy with the caliphate affairs and since you have
come here for a private business, so I lighted my own candle.” They
looked at each other and left hopelessly.

Many politicians, long ago, criticized Imam ‘Ali (as) by saying that it
was not expedient to rouse the great influential companions by his
decisions. Furthermore they said that why he did not humored the
previous *wali*s that caused them to make troubles for him. Was it not
tactful for him to wait until he overcame the state affairs and then to
change the situation according to his desired plan?

These objections are not acceptable because the Shia believe that Imam
‘Ali (as) was the representative of God and His Apostle on the earth and
he was not of those who told people lies and deceived them to secure
their own power.

As a matter of fact, the polity of the divine religions is not
comparable to the other systems of rule.

Islam is based on humanity, equity, justice and other good qualities.
Its main purpose is to direct people to monotheism and godliness. The
Imamate is an infallible position. Consequently Imam ‘Ali (as) would be
responsible to God if he himself or one of his officers offended against
the law. His natural morality and his religious duty would require him
to ensure the enforcement of the divine law; therefore he always would
speak out what was rightful and he would not care whether people were
pleased or displeased.

Those who had misused certain things from Bayt al-Mal at the days of
Uthman expected that Imam ‘Ali (as) would give them free rein in the
state affairs or, at least, he would counsel with them about the general
decisions.

Imam ‘Ali (as) was well-known as a practical man and people respected
him so highly. However, a few of them hated his righteousness as he
himself had said: “How do those, whom my justice is annoying, endure
injustice?”

On the other hand there was a dispute between Imam ‘Ali (as) and
A’ishah, the Prophet's wife, because of some misunderstanding. She
always had a grudge against him.

She previously used to excite the people against Uthman because she was
sure that Al-Zubayr, her sister's husband, or Talhah, her cousin, would
be the successor of Uthman; therefore she often said the people: “Kill
this old hyena! God may kill him. He has become apostate
indeed.”[^34]When she knew that the people had paid homage to Imam ‘Ali
(as), she decided to defy.

In order to carry out her intention, she left Medina for Mecca to stay
there in order to incite people against Imam ‘Ali. She would say
pityingly: “Uthman was oppressively killed and I would take vengeance on
his killer. O people, rise and help me!”

On hearing this, Talhah and Al-Zubayr went to meet Imam ‘Ali (as) to
take leave of him to go to Mecca under the pretence of pilgrimage. Imam
‘Ali (as) said: “I am sure that you have plots against me, but I do not
bother you as long as you have not disturbed the public peace.” They
really wanted to take part in the plot, which was developed against Imam
‘Ali (as) by A\`ishah.

In spite of the fact that Imam ‘Ali knew their designs, he did not
restrain them because in Imam ‘Ali's opinion it was not allowable to
arrest one, who had just designed to commit a crime but had not put it
in practice yet because one might repent before committing the crime.

Have you ever heard that a commander ignores a probable danger for the
sake of the law?

History often mentions that as soon as any ruler gets a hint of a plot
against himself, he will immediately get rid of those who have hatched
the plot either by killing or imprisoning them.

But Imam ‘Ali said to them: “You are free to go wherever you wish but be
careful not to disturb the public peace.” The Holy Qur’an says:

***“There is no compulsion in religion; truly the right way has become
clearly distinct from error ...”*** (2:256).

Hereon Imam ‘Ali (as) gave the Muslims the maximum freedom to the extent
that they would not encroach on the others’ freedom.

All the companions and the ex-*wali*s had paid homage to Imam ‘Ali (as)
except Mu’awiyah, the *wali* of Syria, Abdullah ibn ‘Umar, the son of
the second caliph, and Sa’d ibn Abu Waqqass. The last two persons were
good for nothing but Mu’awiyah was a sagacious man, who was in no way
bound by morality and he did not heed the religious laws. He always had
enmity towards Imam and his utmost desire was to attain the position of
caliphate.

When he took over Kufa at during the time of Imam Hasan, he said to the
people: “I have not come here to correct your religious problems. I have
come to rule over you and to manage you.” He became very powerful during
twenty years of rule and especially at the reign of Uthman.

Imam ‘Ali (as), in conformity to religious standards, decided to depose
Mu’awiyah. Someone said to him: “It is not wise to discharge Mu’awiyah
so soon. It requires careful handling. Wait a bit until your rule gets
strong then you do what you like?”

Imam ‘Ali replied: “This doesn't conform to my belief because I will be
responsible to God if Mu’awiyah offends against law and deprives people
of their rights during my ruling. I will be answerable on the Day of
Resurrection.”

Now let us see what was going to take place in Mecca. Some of the rich
and ex-officers believed A’ishah's pretenses. They came to an agreement
to incite the people of Iraq against Imam ‘Ali (as) especially the
people of Basra because their tribes were living there and they might be
of some help.

At last an army of three thousands men, whose expenses were paid by the
previous *wali*s, marched towards Basra.

When A’ishah was about to leave Mecca, she went to meet Ummu-Salamah
(another wife of the Prophet) asking her to accompany her in this
journey.

Ummu-Salamah was a good and kind woman. She tried to remind A’ishah of
some of the Prophet's sayings about Imam ‘Ali (as). She said to her:
“One day, if you remember, the Prophet and I came into your room and at
the same time ‘Ali (as) came in and whispered with the Prophet for a
long time. You wanted to interrupt him and said to ‘Ali: “It is my turn
today to be with the Prophet after nine days. Now you came here to turn
his attention from me to some other things.”

I saw that the Prophet's face reddened with anger and he said: “Be quiet
A’ishah! By God, whoever displeases ‘Ali and bears him a grudge, is not
one of the believers.” Then you came back feeling sorry.”

A’ishah said: “Yes, I remember.’

Ummu-Salamah added: “Do you remember that one day you were washing the
blessed head of the Prophet (S) and I was cooking Hiss (a kind of
Arabian soup), suddenly the Prophet raised his head and said: “I wish I
knew at which of you the dogs of Haw’ab[^35] would bark.

She certainly will be damned on the Day of Resurrection.” Then I said:
“I seek refuge in God and His Apostle if I would be that one.” Then the
Prophet pointed to you and said: “Beware if you would be that one.”

A’ishah said: “Yes, I remember.”

Ummu-Salamah said: “I remind you again that one day I and you were with
the Prophet (S) in a trip when Abu-Bakr and ‘Umar joined us to rest
under a tree while ‘Ali (as) was busy mending the Prophet's shoes. They
said to the Prophet (S): “May we ask you about who will be your
successor and to whom we will resort after you?” The Prophet replied: “I
know who he is and I show the evidence of his dignity and prudence, but
if I inform you of his name, you will keep off him as the Israelites
when they kept off Aaron.” Then I asked the Prophet: “Who would be our
Imam after you?” He said: “It is that man who is mending my shoes.” Then
I and you ourselves saw that ‘Ali was patching the shoes.”

A’ishah said; “Yes, I remember.”

Ummu-Salamah said: “If it was so then why are you instigating people to
revolt against ‘Ali (as) under the pretext of avenging Uthman's blood?”
She said: “I want to reform the Muslims’ affairs.”[^36]

As the Prophet had said, A’ishah on her way to Basra got at a place
where some dogs barked at her. It reminded her of the Prophet's
admonition. She asked her camel driver about the name of that place.
When she knew that it was Haw’ab and that she was the one, whom the
Prophet had talked about, she refused to proceed further.

Talhah and Al-Zubayr gave a perjured witness that the place is not
Haw’ab and they brought fifty persons to witness falsely that it was not
Haw’ab.

Finally she determined to proceed forward to Basra. It was a surprise to
the people when they saw her riding a camel to the battlefield.

The Holy Qur’an, addressing the Prophet's wives, says:

***“And stay in your houses and do not display your finery like the
displaying of the ignorance of yore”*** (33:33).

She, in this manner, had missed her stateliness and honor.

When they arrived at the gate of Basra, Uthman ibn Hunayf, the *wali*,
came out with his men and stopped in their way being ready for the war.
They took the field and before long some were killed from both sides.
A’ishah intervened and stopped the fighting. They came to an agreement
that the actual situation would remain as it was until Imam ‘Ali (as)
arrived at Basra.

But after less than forty-eight hours they made a nightly attack on the
*wali* of Basra and killed forty innocent men of his. Uthman was badly
beaten and his beard was plucked. Then they looted the public treasury
and the grain stores and they also killed twenty guards.

A noble man of Basra named Hakim ibn Jabalah met the chiefs of the
invaders trying to convince them to stop the attack but the war raged
between them and at last Hakim and Seventy persons of his companions
were killed.

When Imam ‘Ali (as) knew about the march to Basra he, accompanied by
five hundred of the Prophet’s companions, left Medina for Basra.

When he got at Thi-Qar, a place between Kufa and Basra, he sent his dear
son Imam Hasan and Ammar ibn Yasir to Kufa to call the people for the
war. Although Abu Musa, the *wali*, Opposed and created many
difficulties for dispatching the forces, seven thousand fighters joined
Imam ‘Ali's army. Some other soldiers under various standards united
with Imam ‘Ali before he reached the field near Basra.

There were many great companions, many youths of the Hashemites and Imam
‘Ali’s sons; Imam Hasan, Imam Hussein and Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyah
among the army.

Imam ‘Ali (as) dismounted from his horse and offered a four rak’as
prayer and then he prostrated himself on the ground. He was heard
praying for his enemy and saying: “O God, the Sustainer of the earth,
grant us their good and protect us from their evil!”

At first he ordered that no one of his men should attack the enemy
before they made an attack on them. Then he, unarmed, came forward and
called Talhah and Al-Zubayr to witness when saying: “Both of you and
A’ishah know that I am free from the guilt of Uthman's blood and I would
never say what you used to say about him. Did I force you to pay homage
or you did willingly?”

Al-Zubayr was affected by these words but Talhah got angry and began to
growl.

A young man got permission to go before the enemy with a copy of the
Qur’an but he was killed by an arrow. Thus they declared war.

Ammar ibn Yasir, the great Prophet’s companion, went to warn them of the
consequences of the war but they were impervious to his arguments and he
also was answered by arrows.

Imam ‘Ali ( s ) did not allow his men to attack the enemy yet. He
believed in negotiation between the both parties before beginning the
war. He thought it was the only way to solve the quarrels; therefore his
men were not allowed to start the war before the enemy.

The opposite army went on sending arrows like the rain. Some brave
combatants of Imam ‘Ali's men were killed.

Imam ‘Ali came in front of the enemy without wearing armor and called
out: “Where is Al-Zubayr?” When Al-Zubayr saw Ameer-al-Mu’mineen
unarmed, he came out and stood before him. Imam ‘Ali said: “O Al-Zubayr,
do you remember one day when the Prophet said to you that you would
fight against me and that your side would be wrong?”

Al-Zubayr replied: “Yes, he had said so.”

Then Imam ‘Ali (as) asked him: “Why have you come then into the
battlefield?” He replied: “I have forgotten what the Prophet had said. I
would not have come here if I had recalled it.” Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “It
is well that now you recall it.” He said: “Yes.” After saying this, he
went straight to A’ishah and after a short conversation he turned the
reins of his horse and left the field.

When Imam ‘Ali (as) returned to his army, he noticed that the enemy has
attacked the right and left flanks of his army. He said: “Now the excuse
is null.” He called for his son Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah and said to
him: “Attack the enemy now.” But the shower of the enemy's arrows made
him stop.

Imam ‘Ali (as) Shouted: “Risk yourself and go ahead through the arrows
and spears.” But he hesitated to attack because of a storm of arrows
coming from the enemy. Imam ‘Ali (as) said to him: “Why do not you go
ahead.” He said: “Father, I do not find a way to proceed through these
showering arrows.”

When Imam ‘Ali (as) saw this irresolution of his son Muhammad, he took
the sword and the banner from him and made such an attack upon the enemy
that disturbance and fright covered their ranks. Whichever side he
attacked, it became clear. Heads and bodies were falling under the
hooves of the horses. Then he returned and said to his son: “You must
fight like this.” Muhammad took his sword and attacked the enemy with a
group of Ansar. They left heaps of dead bodies on the field.”

On the other side of battlefield the men were sacrificing their lives
around the camel (of A’ishah) devotedly in spite of the falling heads
and bodies one over the other.

Imam ‘Ali (as) ordered his men by saying: “Cut off the camel's leg. It
is a devil.” Then he made a severe attack again and finally cries of
“peace” were heard here and there.

As soon as the camel fell down, the enemy ran away towards the desert
and leaving A’ishah alone in the heat of the fight. But thousands of
fighters were killed for the sake of holding the rein of the camel.

A’ishah was escorted by her brother Muhammad ibn Abu-Bakr to the house
of Safiyya bint[^37] Harith in Basra and then she was sent to Medina
respectfully.

This war began at an afternoon and finished in the same evening. One
thousand and seventy men were killed from Imam ‘Ali's army of twenty-two
thousand persons, whereas seventeen thousand persons were killed from
the enemy out of thirty thousands.

When Imam ‘Ali captivated A’ishah, instead of reproaching her, he was
kind enough to her. He also overcame his most revengeful and obstinate
enemies like Marwan, Abdullah ibn Al-Zubayr and others in this battle
but they were forgiven permitted to go wherever they like.

In the same way the idolaters of Quraysh tribe were formerly forgiven
when the Prophet (S) had conquered Mecca.

During his praying for the killed men, Imam ‘Ali was heard praying for
the enemy: “O God, if they fought against me unknowingly or with
intention of setting up the rightness and justice, they were innocent (I
hope them to be remitted).”

Throughout the history's memory, no commander would ever act so
generously when he won a victory. Imam ‘Ali’s generosity and clemency
were much more than to be counted.

He wrote in his famous epistle to Malik al-Ashtar, the *wali* of Egypt:
“People are usually subjected to weakness and they may do wrong things
on purpose or by mistake. You should forgive them if you would like to
be forgiven by God. Do not regret your forgiving someone and do not be
pleased when punishing someone.”

Deposal of Mu’awiyah
--------------------

Neglecting the other troubles, the ruling of Mu’awiyah in Syria was the
most complicated matter that Imam ‘Ali (as) confronted at the beginning
of his caliphate.

When Syria was conquered by the Muslims, Yazid, the elder brother of
Mu’awiyah, was appointed as the *wali* by Abu-Bakr and then Mu’awiyah
took it over at the reign of ‘Umar. Therefore the Umayyads (Mu’awiyah's
family) had ruled over Syria for twenty- four years before the caliphate
of Imam ‘Ali (as).

This time was quite long enough for a clever and sagacious man like
Mu’awiyah to prepare the first steps for ruling as a caliph over the
Muslims and he succeeded to do it at last.

Mu’awiyah, by nature, had a great skill to put down his opponents’
claims and he knew their hopes and wishes well.

On the other hand, Syria was the richest country among the other Islamic
territories and Mu’awiyah, who was careless about how to spend the
public monies, could weather every difficulty easily. Those, who wanted
to impose themselves upon people, gathered in Syria and did their best
to form the foundation of his rule.

Some critics criticized Imam ‘Ali (as) and thought that he was unable to
handle the state affairs and did not know how to manage the task. But
they did not know that there was a great difference between the
religious government and the other kinds of governments.

The difference was that according to the religious laws, dishonesty,
deception and even white lies were not acceptable. In this respect Imam
‘Ali (as) could not agree with Mu’awiyah, who was indifferent to the
religious matters. Furthermore he had refused to pay homage to Imam ‘Ali
(as) in spite of the fact that all the Muslims and the great companions
of the Prophet had submitted to him willingly.

At any rate a few letters were exchanged between Imam ‘Ali and Mu’awiyah
but regretfully Mu’awiyah was impervious to Imam ‘Ali’s advices. Finally
the battle of Siffeen took place.

The Battle of Siffeen
---------------------

Mu’awiyah made preparations for the war and set off towards Imam ‘Ali's
area with forty thousand soldiers. They got at a place called Siffeen
between Syria and Iraq. Mu’awiyah arrived there earlier than Imam ‘Ali
(as) and occupied the bank of the river. He closed the way to the
watering place that no one else could get water except his followers.

Imam ‘Ali's army reached the place and they were badly thirsty. They
found that there was no any drinking place for them to get water. The
enemy controlled the water carefully that getting water was not possible
easily.

Imam ‘Ali (as) sent word to Mu’awiyah but he refused to open the way to
the watering place. Imam ‘Ali (as) was obliged to say to his men: “Get
up and get water by sword.” Those thirsty soldiers attacked the guards,
dispersed them away and occupied the watering place.

Now the Iraqis wanted to pay the Syrians in their own coin but Imam ‘Ali
(as) did not want to requite evil with evil and said: “Do not prevent
anyone from getting water.” Hence every one could take water freely.

Then Imam ‘Ali (as) sent some persons to warn Mu’awiyah of the
consequences of the war and to reason with him the homage. Some other
groups also acted as intermediary to prevent bloodshed but Mu’awiyah
used every excuse to declare the war.

He pretended that he would not let Uthman's blood be lost. He had hung
the bloodstained shirt of Uthman on the pulpit of the great mosque of
Damascus, around which thousands of Syrians used to weep for Uthman's
innocence and then they had sworn to avenge his blood.

Since Mu’awiyah had accused Imam ‘Ali of Uthman’s murder, the Syrians
were in favor of Mu’awiyah to fight against the Iraqis.

Mu’awiyah was really an autocrat in Syria since the reign of the second
caliph ‘Umar and he would never submit to Imam ‘Ali (as) to lose the
position. Hereon he involved the Muslims in a war that its bad effect
has still remained till the present time.

At last the battle raged and Imam ‘Ali's army of ninety thousand
soldiers confronted the Syrian army of one hundred thousand soldiers.
During the first week some fighters of both parties came forward day
after day and fought each other. Some of both sides were killed. In this
manner the battle became more widespread and bloodshed increased.

In the eighth day ibn Abbas (the Prophet's cousin) and Malik al-Ashtar,
the two courageous men, attacked the enemy's right and left flanks that
Mu’awiyah’s forces had to retreat from the field several times.

In the ninth day Imam ‘Ali (as) himself came forward with his men and
made such an attack that the whole battlefield rocked and the enemy’s
rows broke off under storms of arrows and spears. Imam ‘Ali came and
stood where Mu’awiyah could be seen. Imam ‘Ali challenged him saying:
“Come towards me. Let the winner of the fight be the ruler.”

Although Amr ibn al-Aas, Mu’awiyah’s counselor, encouraged Mu’awiyah but
he began to go back.

The historians mentioned that Imam ‘Ali (as) had showed such bravery in
Siffeen, that you seldom see it’s like in the history. Everywhere he
appeared, the enemy's lines were confused and they scattered before his
sword like ants and locusts. No one dared to face him unless he was
killed in the first rush. Therefore he occasionally changed his dress
and horse.

Suddenly, in the thick of the fight, a man leaped forward and assaulted
Imam ‘Ali (as), who evaded the danger. Then Imam ‘Ali hit the man upon
his back with his sword. The man was split into two halves. The people
thought that Imam ‘Ali’s hit had missed the man but when his horse
jumped two separated halves fell down on the ground. The enemy knew
later that he was Imam ‘Ali (as) in disguise.

Some days passed in this manner and the Iraqi army had the advantage
over the enemy many times because of the continuous and break-neck
attacks. At the night of al-Hareer[^38] when the successive rushes of
Imam ‘Ali's men reached the highest point and continued till the
morning, the killed were more than thirty thousand ones.

In the tenth day Malik al-Ashtar and Ibn Abbas again assaulted the enemy
severely and their men showed a high spirit of sacrifice. The spirit of
the Syrians was broken and signs of defeat appeared among them.

While the battle was still raging the, enemy found that winning a
victory by sword was impossible. Amr ibn al-Aass, who was prone to
mischief and was famed for shrewdness, planned to play a trick.

He suggested to Mu’awiyah by saying: “Let us raise some copies of the
Qur’an on the spears and then the armies of the two sides are to be
called to make the Qur’an as arbitrator. This act will create separation
among them. Consequently many soldiers will stop fighting and many
others will like to keep on it. The result will be to our privilege
because, in this way, we can put off the war for a while to get rid of
this distress.

Some pages of the Holy Qur’an were raised on the spears and consequently
the form of the war was changed.

When Imam ‘Ali (as) saw that the Holy Qur’an had become the device of
their trickery, he said: “Be careful and do not be deceived. They
invented this trickery just to get rid of defeat. They are neither
interested in the Holy Qur’an nor connected with the religion. We are
fighting against them to follow the Holy Qur’an's principles. Keep on
the war to obtain the victory over the dying enemy.”

But unfortunately a large number of his army began to shout and cry.
They said to Imam ‘Ali: “We prefer the verdict of the Qur’an and if you
do not respond to the call of Qur’an, we will deal with you as we did
with Uthman. You have to stop the war at once.”

Imam ‘Ali (as) did his best to make them understand the trick but they
were impervious to his arguments. They had forgotten the Prophet's
saying: “‘Ali is always with the Qur’an and the Qur’an is with ‘Ali.
They will never separate until they come to me at Kawthar River (a river
in paradise).”[^39]

The battle still raged but they made Imam ‘Ali (as) send a word to Malik
al-Ashtar[^40] asking him to come back from the field. When Malik
received the order, he was surprised.

He said: “This is not the time to leave the battle. Tell Imam ‘Ali (as)
to wait a little until I come back with the tidings of victory.” The
message was delivered to Imam ‘Ali (as) but many soldiers shouted and
urged upon him that Malik must come back as soon as possible. The
messenger came back to Malik and said: “They are all in chaos. If Imam
‘Ali's life is dear to you, go back to him at once.”

Malik was obliged to go back to Imam ‘Ali (as). After scolding the
rebellious soldiers he said: “According to the homage you paid to him,
obeying him would be obligatory for you.” But regretfully they paid no
attention to his saying.

Then it was agreed that each party should nominate an arbitrator to
decide the matter of the caliphate according to the Holy Qur’an. Amr ibn
al-Aass was nominated by Mu’awiyah’s followers and Abu Musa al-Ash’ari
was chosen by Imam ‘Ali’s followers as arbitrators. Imam ‘Ali (as) had
in mind to appoint ibn Abbas or Malik al-Ashtar as his agent but army
did not listen to him and they stuck to Abu Musa.

Some spies of Mu’awiyah were in rapport with a few heads of Imam ‘Ali's
army. They used to aggravate the condition.

The historians mentioned that Abu Musa was a stupid man and that he had
not shown confidence and trust in Imam ‘Ali (as). He even prevented the
people from joining Imam ‘Ali’s army.

When the rebels insisted on that Abu Musa should be the arbitrator, Imam
‘Ali (as) said: “Now you do not listen to me. Well, choose your own way!
It is not far when you will bite your fingers regretting your misdeed.”

Finally Abu Musa and Amr were chosen as arbiters. They put their heads
together and decided to depose Mu’awiyah and ‘Ali (as) from the seat of
the caliphate and then to let the people choose an adequate person for
that rule. They were to announce their decision to the people.

After some formalities, Amr said to Abu Musa: “It is impolite that I
precede you. You are older than me. You announce first.” Abu Musa became
proud after this flattery and came before the crowed and saying: “We
both determined on deposing Mu’awiyah and ‘Ali ibn Abu-Talib and
hereupon the Muslims have the right to choose a caliph as they like.”

Then it was Amr's turn. He said: “O people, you heard just now that Abu
Musa deposed ‘Ali (as) from his position and I approve it. But there is
no reason that makes me depose Mu’awiyah so I appoint him as the
caliph.”

As soon as Amr ended his words, the Muslims made a protest against the
verdict of the arbitrators but no attention was paid to their protest.

Abu Musa cried hoarsely and said to Amr: “You deceived me. You are like
a dog. If you attack it, it will bark and if you leave it alone, it will
bark.” Amr said to him: “You are like the ass, which bears books.”

However Amr's trick firmed the authority of Mu’awiyah to some extent
more than before.

The simple-minded people, who forced Imam ‘Ali to accept the
arbitration, thought highly of the two arbitrators and thought that
their verdict would be according to the Holy Qur’an but they had not
paid attention to the Holy Qur’an, whereas some verses of the Holy
Qur’an had praised Imam ‘Ali and had urged the Muslims to follow him.
The Holy Qur’an says:

***“O you, who believe! Be careful of (your duty to) Allah and be with
the true ones”*** (9:119).

Many of the great Sunni commentators mentioned that “the true ones” were
Muhammad (S) and ‘Ali (as) and “be with them” meant that the Muslims
should follow them.[^41]

The arbitrators had forgotten the Prophet's words: “‘Ali (as) is the
wisest, the best judge and the most superior to all of you. Opposing his
sayings and judgments is opposing me and opposing me is opposing Allah
and that is blasphemy.”[^42]

Could this short sketch of arbitration be a guide to the Muslims or the
Qur’an and the Prophet's Sunnah in order not to be trapped by the
enemy’s tricks and not to go after the worldly transient desires?

It is much regrettable that some authorities make use of deceitful
devices to exploit the poor nations unfairly under the name of humanism.

Imam ‘Ali (as) believed that both science and religion should be adopted
to serve the human beings. He said: “Allah has not made it obligatory
for the ignorant to learn until He has made it obligatory for the
learned to teach.” He also said: “Whoever trades and does not know the
rules of religion, will fall in usury.”

The Battle of Nahrawan
----------------------

After appointing the arbitrators, the people, who insisted on Imam ‘Ali
(as) to accept arbitration, began to say that it was heresy to appoint
someone as arbitrator except Allah. The Holy Qur’an says:

***“The judgment is only Allah's; He relates the truth and He is the
best of deciders”***[^43]

And since Imam ‘Ali (as) had accepted the arbitration then he turned
heretic. Of course they have distorted the meaning of the verse and
hereby they caused the simple-minded people to separate from Imam ‘Ali's
army.

When Imam ‘Ali knew the conspiracies, he sent some of the great
companions towards them and then he himself went to their camp and
finally they dispersed after hearing convincing evidences.

When they arrived at Kufa they began to tell a lie again that Imam ‘Ali
(as) had broken the agreement of arbitration and that he was going to
fight against the Syrians once again.

Imam ‘Ali (as) refuted their allegation and hereupon these people
rebelled against him. They encamped in a place named Nahrawan near
Baghdad. These people were called (Khawarij) the Kharijites.

When Imam ‘Ali (as) heard the verdict of the two arbitrators, he wrote
to the Kharijites that the verdict was according to the arbitrators’ own
wishes and not according to the Holy Qur’an. He said that he had not
accepted it; therefore he had decided to fight the Syrians and that the
Kharijites should support him this jihad.

They replied: “Since you had accepted the arbitration, you turned
heretic. If you confess your fault and repent, we will think over the
matter and then we will inform you of what we will do.” This letter
indicated their insisting on rebellion.

Imam ‘Ali (as) had formerly prepared and equipped an army to march
towards Syria, but his men expressed their desire to deal with the
Kharijites first because they had killed the *wali* of Nahrawan and his
maid, who was pregnant, and they also had butchered three other innocent
women. Another man, who was sent for investigation, was killed too.

Consequently Imam ‘Ali (as) turned towards Nahrawan and sent the
Kharijites a word that the murderers of the *wali* and the killed women
should be handed over to him to be punished. They replied: “We
altogether killed them.”

Imam ‘Ali (as), as usual, did not want to begin the war; therefore he
sent a man with a word of peace to them. As a result of this meeting,
many groups separated from the Kharijites and joined Imam ‘Ali's army.
Those, who remained, were four thousand persons. They did not care for
killing or being killed.

Imam ‘Ali prevented his men from beginning any attack but they put their
arrows in the bows and drew out their swords from the sheaths. In this
critical situation Imam ‘Ali (as) warned the Kharijites that the war
would be hard for them, but they were so enthusiastic that they rushed
suddenly against Imam ‘Ali's men and caused a bloody fight.

As Imam ‘Ali (as) had foreseen formerly, they all were killed except
nine persons, who fled away to save their lives. Only eight persons of
Imam ‘Ali's army were martyred.

Surprising it was! Who had suffered from oppression more than Imam ‘Ali
(as)? Those who encouraged people to kill Uthman, after killing him,
they accused Imam ‘Ali of being the guilty and tried their best to
avenge.

Those, who insisted on him to stretch his hand to pay homage, broke
their homage and waged the battles of al-Jamal (the camel) and Nahrawan.

They even threatened him with death if he would not accept the
arbitration and when he accepted it, he was charged with heresy and then
they wanted him to repent. Above all, he was the first man in Islam,
whose certain right was usurped by political collusions.

At the same time Mu’awiyah decided to extend his domain; therefore he
sent his armies to different cities of Imam ‘Ali's domination. He,
hereby, created disorder and confusion so that Imam ‘Ali (as) could find
no peace of mind. He sent many groups of marauders and killers to put
down the opposition and to obtain homage by force.

The Prophet (S) had said to Imam ‘Ali before: “After me you will fight
against the perfidious (those who fought in the battle of al-Jamal), the
oppressors (Mu’awiyah’s followers) and the apostates (the Kharijites).”

Muhammad, the great educator, trained the people of that time so that
they could make the civilized world of those submit to them days within
half a century because they could control their personal desires easily
by virtue and abstinence.

As a result of the social and moral education, those people never
thought of achieving their own aims. They just thought of the benefit of
the ummah. Really, the successive victories of the Muslims at the first
age of the Islamic state were due to their principles and morals.

At the days of Abu-Bakr and ‘Umar these principles were still protected
but at the reign of Uthman, the people did not pay much attention to
those principles. On the other hand, the Muslims obtained victory over
many countries and consequently they gained a lot of goods and spoils
which led them to laze in luxury.

They practiced the luxurious and splendid life of the Romans and the
Persians and made the new generation understand that no one could live
at ease without riches. Hereupon the policy of the Islamic caliphate was
changed into monarchy and tyranny.

This atmosphere was quite favorable for a man like Mu’awiyah, who was
ambitious and wanted to found a hereditary sultanate instead of the
Islamic caliphate. But Imam ‘Ali (as) wanted to restore the Prophet's
Sunnah and the simplicity of the life during the time of the two
caliphs; Abu-Bakr and ‘Umar and this made him face troubles that at
least he was martyred.

The people gathered in Syria to firm Mu’awiyah's rule.

The historians mentioned that Imam Hasan, the elder son of Imam ‘Ali
(as), who defended the religion, declared the war against Mu’awiyah. In
the thick of the battle, some commandants of Imam Hasan’s army received
a bribe from Mu’awiyah. They left Imam Hasan and joined Mu’awiyah.

Imam Hasan, facing many difficulties, was obliged to come to terms with
Mu’awiyah. Contrary to the agreement, Mu’awiyah decided to appoint his
son Yazid as his successor. Yazid was dissolute and ignominious.

He was a mass of sins and faults. Mu’awiyah poisoned Imam Hasan to clear
clearing the way for his son. Finally he managed to appoint Yazid by
force or by bribing the oppositionists when necessary.

The brave rising of Imam Hussein, the other son of Imam ‘Ali(S), which
had a regretful consequence, was also the result of immorality spread
among the people and the loss of the favorable atmosphere of the divine
caliphate. It showed that people would prefer material concerns to
principles.[^44]

Since Imam Hussein (S) was the greatest fighter against tyranny, I deem
it my duty to remind the readers briefly how he sacrificed himself for
defeating injustice and oppression.

The death of Mu’awiyah, all the Muslims, willy-nilly, paid homage to
Yazid except four persons.Imam Hussein was one of them.

The people of Kufa invited Imam Hussein to reform the bad political and
social situations and to guide them to the right path. They sent him
more than twenty-five thousand letters inviting him to set out towards
Kufa.

In the meanwhile he was offended by the *wali* of Medina to force him to
pay homage to Yazid but he left Medina for Mecca at night with his
household. The Umayyads pursued their adversary even in Mecca. They
intended to remove this obstacle by killing Imam Hussein. Imam Hussein,
because of the reverence of Kaabah and that he did not want any
bloodshed to be committed inside it, left Mecca towards Kufa.

He confronted a host of one thousand soldiers on the way to Kufa. The
commander of them asked Imam Hussein to pay homage to Yazid; otherwise
he would not be allowed to enter the city. He refused the proposal and
then he had to pitch tents in a torrid place named Karbala.

The *wali* of Kufa dispatched an army of thirty thousand persons to
Karbala within four days to surround Imam Hussein and his household.
They occupied the watering places in order to force Imam Hussein to
surrender when suffering thirst. They were so hard-hearted that they did
not pay any attention for the children’s crying because of thirst.

There were one thousand persons with Imam Hussein when he got at
Karbala. He told them that they had the option to leave or to stay,
because he would be killed in that journey. They left him in groups and
only seventy-two persons, including his sons, brothers and nephews
accompanied by their wives and children, remained to support him. Every
one of those devoted men made a short speech showing his sincerity.

At any rate they all were terribly thirsty. The worse of it was that the
enemy did not have any pity even for the suckling babies and the old
persons. It was three days that water was not found in the tents and the
all were terribly thirsty especially the children.

Next day early in the morning, the enemy put arrows in the bows and shot
at Imam Hussein’s tents. They hereby declared the war.

Some of Imam Hussein's companions were martyred in this attack. The
companions then began, one by one, to attack the enemy and each one
killed a good few of the enemy.

Then it was Imam Hussein’s turn to sacrifice himself. It was the
sacrifice that made the world think with great respect and admiration of
this nonesuch hero.

Try to think about a man, who was thirsty, tired and faced many terrible
difficulties since early in the morning till the noon. He mounted and
dismounted his horse many times to bring the dead bodies of the martyrs
to the tents and exactly at this critical moment the enemy proposed
again that he had no option but to be killed or pay homage to Yazid.

Imam Hussein said: “That bastard (ibn Ziyad, the *wali* of Kufa) made me
choose one of two things, the death or the shame of submission. I will
never prefer living with ignobility to being killed for the sake of God.
Martyrdom is an honor in our family.”

Then he came towards the women's tents to say goodbye for the last time.
They surrounded him and mourned over his forlornness and loneliness. He
heartened them with soft words and said to them that they should be
patient with calamities. Then he set to the battlefield.

According to the traditions of fighting in those days, it was man to man
challenge. When Imam Hussein killed many of their brave heroes, no one
else dared to fight him alone.

The enemy altogether made assaults. Imam Hussein beat them constantly.
When they saw that they were not a match for him, they began to shoot at
him with showers of arrows and spears.

Thurayh ibn Shurayk struck his right shoulder with a sword. A poisoned
arrow hit his heart and then he fell down on the ground.

The enemy began to rush towards the women's tents. Imam Hussein shouted
at them loudly: “If you have no faith, be at least freemen in this world
according to your tribal traditions.” They returned and martyred him.

There is an article, written by an English learned woman under the title
of "Three Martyrs". She says briefly: “In the history there were three
praiseworthy men, who sacrificed themselves for exalting the word of
"rightness" and for spreading justice and liberty among the people. They
excelled all the other devotees in the world. The first one was
Socrates, the philosopher of ancient Greece. The second one was Jesus
Christ and the third was Imam Hussein, the son of Imam ‘Ali (as) and the
Prophet's grandson from his daughter.”

She added: “If you study their lives deeply, you will know that Imam
Hussein’s devotion is more important than the first two persons. He was
forced to emigrate and was involved in many difficulties. His companions
were killed, while being thirsty, before his eyes. He himself was put to
death tragically, while he knew that his wives and children would be
taken as captives to Kufa.”

That was a summary of the sad story of the greatest fighter, who fought
against tyranny and autocracy and who denied himself before all the
pleasures and he did not want to submit to abjectness and debasement.

Let us return to the main subject.

After the process of the arbitration, Mu’awiyah began to attack various
places of Imam ‘Ali's domination. He spread killing and marauding all
around and caused fear for the people of the far quarters of Kufa.

Imam ‘Ali (as) summoned the people to chase the enemy but the people did
not respond to him. It seemed that the people were unwilling to fight.
He encouraged them again to take part in the war at least for protecting
their country.

At last a force of four thousands, headed by Hijr ibn Adiy, rose to
chase the enemy. There was a short encounter between the two parties but
the enemy ran away.

A few days before his martyrdom, Imam ‘Ali summoned the commanders and
after scolding them for their idleness and listlessness, he said: “I
have decided to fight against Mu’awiyah. If no one comes to help me, I
will go to Siffeen with my own relatives only.”

They knew that he would practice what he said. Hereon they collected the
people and said: “It will be disgraceful for us, if he is killed alone.”

In order to avoid this public disgrace, forty thousand persons flew to
their arms and got ready for the battle. They promised to fight against
Mu’awiyah to the bitter end, but unfortunately the criminal hand of ibn
Muljim ended the life of the great leader of the believers.

It was to be regretted too much that his life failed him to reach his
goal. When his beard was colored with his head's blood, he said: “I
swear by the god of Kaabah that I won.”

Yes, he was troubled with a train of events that he could do nothing but
to grieve.

Although many people were fascinated by his high characteristics, some
others, who had heaped monies during the reign of Uthman, could not
endure his justice. They often caused seditions and plotted to overthrow
his government.

On the other hand, Imam ‘Ali couldn’t be indifferent to the misdeeds of
his officers or to the expenditure of the public money for private
motives and political purposes. And, above all, he had to resist his
relatives' unlawful desires lest they would weaken the pillars of the
religion.

Some critics criticized Imam ‘Ali and said that it would be much better
if he did not accept the caliphate after Uthman in order not to be
involved in so many difficulties or at least he should have resigned his
post and had left the people alone especially when the spies misguided
the people to wrong him in Siffeen.

They ignored that the Muslims themselves rushed towards him and begged
him insistently to stretch his hand in order to pay homage to him as the
caliph.

The people knew well that he was that fair man, who would never ignore
the interests of the Muslims for the sake of his own interests.

Furthermore, according to the divine law when there were enough numbers
ready to support the right, then the religious leaders had to rise to
get back the lost rights of the oppressed ones from oppressors.

He said: “By Allah, who split grains to grow and created all the
creatures, unless the people had not paid homage to me and unless Allah
had not put the ulema under obligation that they had not to be silent in
front of the oppressors and had not to be away from supporting the
oppressed, I would have slackened the reins of the caliphate and I would
have done what I had done the first day after the Prophet's death”

In another part of the same sermon he said: “The crowd of people leapt
upon me as thirsty Camels when leaping upon each other at the watering
place. They wanted to pay homage to me importunately. They crowded
around me from every side in a way that Hasan and Hussein were about to
be crushed under feet.”

On the other hand, if Mu’awiyah ruled over an army like the Iraqis, he
would have become involved in many troubles, as he himself said to his
friends: “I am ruling upon such stupid people, who obey me blindly, but
Imam ‘Ali's followers strive hard for the sake of the religious matters
and they think over the problems diligently and sometimes they dispute
with Imam ‘Ali (as) . Consequently there is no secrecy about the state
affairs. Imam ‘Ali discloses all the affairs before people but I conceal
my affairs. This is the secret of my success.”

Imam ‘Ali ( s ) said: “Mu’awiyah is not more intelligent than me. He
flatters and cheats.”

[^1]: Refer to Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal’s Musnad vol.1 p.p.111,159,333,
ath-Tha’labi’s Tafseer, al-Khawarizmi’s Manaqib, Nooruddeen as-Sabbagh
al-Maliki in his book al- Fusool al-Muhimma p.p.14, Abu Na’eem
al-Isfahani in his book Hilyatul Awliya’ and many others.

[^2]: Abu Ishaq ath-Tha’labi, Fadhil an-Nayshaboori, al-Fakhr ar-Razi,
Jalaluddeen as-Sayooti, Abu Na’eem al-Isfahani, al- Khawarizmi, Muhammad
ibn Yousuf al-Ganji, Imam Muhammad al-Ghazali and many others.

[^3]: Refer to al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.3 p.p.54, Muslim’s Sahih, vol.2
p.p.236-237, Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.1 p.p.98,118-119, Jalaluddeen
as-Sayooti’s Tareekh al-Khulafa’, al-Mas’oodi’s Murooj ath-Thahab,vol.2
p.p.49 and Abu Abdullah an- Nayshaboori in his Mustadrak, vol.3 p.p.9.

[^4]: Refer to Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by ibn Abul Hadeed, vol.3 p.p.276,
al-Fusool al-Muhimma by Nooruddeen al-Maliki p.p.43 and as-Seera
al-Halabiyya by al-Halabi, vol.3 p.p.123.

[^5]: Refer to Ahmad’s Musnad, Ibnul Maghazili’s Manaqib, Muwaffaq ibn
Ahmad’s Manaqib, at-Tarmithi’s Sahih, ibn Maja’s Sunan p.p.92, Muhammad
ibn Yousuf al-Ganji in his book Kifayatut Talib and many others.

[^6]: Al-Hakim an-Nayshaboori in his Mustadrak, vol.3 p.p.32,
al-Mas’oodi in his Murooj ath-Thahab and at-Tabari in his Tareekh.

[^7]: Abu Na’eem al-Isfahani in his book Hilyatul Awliya’, vol.1 p.p.62,
Muhammad ibn Talhah ash-Shafi’ei in his book Matalib as-Su’al p.p.4,
Muhammad ibn Yousuf ash-Shafi’ei in his book Kifayatut Talib chap.14,
al-Bukhari in his Sahih p.p.100 and ibnul Hajjaj in his Sahih, vol.2
p.p.324.

[^8]: Ahmad’s Musnad, ibn Maja’s Sunan, Muhammad ibn Yousuf al-Ganji in
his Kifayatut Talib chap.14, Sheikh Sulayman al-Balkhi al-Hanafi in his
book Yanabee’ul Mawadda chap.6 and ibn Hajar in his Issaba, vol.2
p.p.508.

[^9]: Refer to Ath-T ha’labi’s Kashful Bayan, Jalaluddeen as - Sayooti’s
Tafseer, vol.4 p. p.177 (ad-Durr al-Manthoor), Abul Qassim al-Hasaqani’s
Tareekh, ibn Katheer‘s Tareekh, Sheikh Sulayman al-Balkhi’s Yanabee’ul
Mawadda and ibn Mar dwayh’s Tafs eer.

[^10]: Qur’an 17:26.

[^11]: ‘Ali ibn Burhanuddeen ash-Shafi’ei in his book as-Seera al-
Halabiyya, vol.3 p.p.391, ibn Abul Hadeed in his Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah,
Yaqoot al-Hamawi in his Mu’jam ul Buldan and as-Samhoodi in Tareekh
al-Medina.

[^12]: The Holy Qur an 12:92.

[^13]: It was the great grandfather of the Prophet (S).

[^14]: Al-Fakhr ar-Razi in his book Mafateeh al-Ghayb, ath- Tha’labi in
his Kashful Bayan, Jalaluddeen as-Sayooti in his ad-Durr al-Manthoor,
Abu Na’eem al-Isfahani in his Hilyatul Awliya’, Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his
Musnad, ibnul Maghazili in his Manaqib, at-Tabari in his al-Wilaya,
Ahmad ibn Muhammad al-Koofi (ibn Oqda) in his al-Wilaya, ibn Haddad
al-Hasakani in his al-Wilaya and many others.

[^15]: Abul qassim al-Hasakani in his book Shawahid at-Tanzeel, sibt ibn
aj -Jawzi in his Khawass al-Umm a and Abu Sa’eed as- Sajistani in his
al-Wilaya.

[^16]: Al-Fakhr ar-Razi in his Tafseer, vol.3 p.p.431, Abu Ishaq
ath-Tha’labi in his Kashful Bayan, az-Zamakhshari in his Kashshaf, vol.1
p.p.422, at-Tabari in his Tafseer vol.6 p.p.186, ibn Abu Shayba al-Koofi
in his Tafseer, an-Nassa’ie in his Sahih, Muhammad ibn Yousuf al-Ganji
ash-Shafi’ei in his Kifayatut Talib, ibn as-Sabbagh al-Maliki in his al-
Fussool al-Muhimma p.p.123 and many others.

[^17]: Muhajirun: the first Muslims, who emigrated from Mecca to Medina
at the beginning of the Islamic mission. Ansar: the people of Medina,
who believed in the Prophet and assisted him and his companions.

[^18]: Refer to al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.12 p.p.178, Muslim ibn al-
Hajjaj‘s book al-Wassiyya, Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.1 p.p.122, Imam
al-Ghazaly in his Sirrul Aalameen, ibn H ajar in his Sawa’iq and many
others.

[^19]: Refer to Muslim’s Sahih, vol.7 p.p.122, at-Tarmithi’s Sunan,
vol.2 p.p.307, an-Nassa’ie’s Khassa’iss, Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.1,3,4,5
p.p. 14, 26, 59, 182 and m any others Sunni scholars.

[^20]: Refer to al-Bayhaqi’s Manaqib, al-Khawar izm i’s Manaq ib and
ibnul Maghazili’s Manaq ib.

[^21]: Refer to al-Hak im an-Nayshaboori’s Manaq ib vol.3 p.p.139, Ahmad
ibn Hanbal’s Musnad vol.3 and Abu N a’eem al- Isfahani’s H ilyatul
awliya’.

[^22]: Refer to Ahmad’s Musnad, al-Khawarizmi’s Manaqib and sayyid ‘Ali
al-Hamadani’s Mawaddatul Qurba.

[^23]: Saqeefah means ashed.

[^24]: It was mentioned by Abul Qassim al-Hasakani, Ahmad in his Musnad,
al-Khawarizmi in his Manaqib, Sulayman al- Balkhi al-Hanafi in his
Yanabee’ul Mawadda chap.12, ibn Abul Hadeed in Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah,
p.p.375-377,388, an-Nassa’ei, Abu Na’eem al-Isfahani, ath-Tha’labi,
ibnul Maghazili and many other Sunni scholars in their books.

[^25]: Abdul Fattah Maqsood and Ala’uddeen Kar aka, the professors of
al-Azhar University, as it was published in Sa’d Magazine and al-Ahram
Newspaper.

[^26]: Refer to al-Fakhr ar-razi in his Tafseer, Jalaluddeen as- Sayooti
in his Tareekh al-Kulafa’, ibn Abul Hadeed in Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah,
at-Tabari in Tareekh al-Islam, Muhammad Khawand Shah in his Rawdhatus
Safa, ibn Abdul Birr in al- Istee’ab, Muslim, al-Bukhari, al-Asqalani
and al-Balathiri.

[^27]: Ibid.

[^28]: It was a village near Medina, which the Prophet had donated to
his daughter Fatima.

[^29]: Refer to ath-Tha’labi’s Kashful Bayan, Jalaluddeen as-Sayooti’s
Tafseer, vol.4, ibn Katheer‘s Tareekh, al-Balkhi’s Yanabee’ul Mawadda,
al-Hakim al-Hasakani’s Tareekh, ibn Mar dwayh’s Tafseer and al-Muttaq i
al-Hindi’s Kanzul Ummal.

[^30]: Refer to Fadhlullah Roozbahan’s Abtal al-Battil, ibn Haj ar
al-Asqalani’s Tahtheeb at-Tahtheeb, ibn H ajar al-Makki’s Sawa’iq
p.p.78, as-Sayooti’s Tareekh al-Khulafa’ p.p.66, Noor uddeen as-Sabbagh
al-Malik i’s al-Fussool al-Muhimma p.p.18, Ahmad ibn Hanbal’s Musnad and
Fadha’il and it was mentioned by many other Sunni scholars.

[^31]: Refer to Ahmad’s Musnad, al-Khawarizmi’s Manaqib, Meer sayyid
‘Ali Hamadani’s Mawaddatul Qurba and Abu Bakr al- Bayhaqi’s Sunan.

[^32]: Rak’a is a section of the prayer.

[^33]: Murooj ath-Thahab, vol.1 p.p.435.

[^34]: Refer to Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by ibn Abi’l-Hadeed, vol. 2
p.p.77, Akhbar az-Zaman by al-Mas’oodi, Khawass al-Umma by Sibt ibn
aj -Jawzi and m any other Sunni historians.

[^35]: A place near Basra.

[^36]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by ibn Abul Hadeed.

[^37]: “Bint” means the daughter of and “ibn” means the son of.

[^38]: Hareer is an Arabic word. It means “to howl” and “to whine”. The
fallen and wounded soldiers were howling in that livelong night.

[^39]: Refer to ibn Mardwayh’s Manaqib, al-Haythami’s Majma’a, vol.1
p.p.236, al-Hakim’s Mustadrak, vol.3 p.p.134 and al- Fakhr ar-Razi’s
Tafseer, vol.1 p.p.111.

[^40]: Malik was a very close companion of Imam ‘Ali because of his
sincerity and steadfastness in faith. Imam ‘Ali showed great confidence
and trust in him. He was Imam ‘Ali’s right hand in all the difficulties.
In addition to his bravery, he had a great ability to organize and to
administer the state affairs. Suffice it to say that Imam ‘Ali had said
about Malik: “He was to me as I was to the prophet.”

[^41]: Ath-Tha’labi in his book Kashful Bayan, Jalaluddeen as- Sayooti
in his ad-Durr al-Mathoor, Abu Na’eem al-Is fahani in his H ilyatul
Awliya’, Sheik h Sulayman al-Hanafi in his yanabee’ul Mawada and Muhamad
ibn Yous uf al-Ganji in his Kifayatut Taib.

[^42]: Refer to Amad’s Musnad, al-Khawar izm i’s Manaqib, Mir Said ibn
‘Ali H amadani’s Mawaddat al-Qur ba and Abu Bakr al-Bayhaqi’s Sunan.

[^43]: Qur’an 6:57.

[^44]: Nowadays the same condition is prevailing all over the world. The
racial discrimination has caused many vagrancies and miseries among the
peoples of the world. All these aroused from the unprincipled conducts
that became far from morals. Hence many small countries fall victims to
the political whims of the great countries.


