The Humane Qualities Of Imam ‘Ali (as)
======================================

Quraysh was the strongest tribe throughout Arabia and it was divided
into some branches, of which the Hashemites and the Umayyads were. These
two families were well-known of having courage, generosity, bravery and
eloquence. But the Hashemites were preferred with virtue and purity
because Muhammad (S), the Prophet of God, related to the Hashemites.

All above mentioned qualities were gathered in the personality of Imam
‘Ali (as) because both of his parent's descended from Hashim.[^1]

The historians mentioned that ‘Ali (as) was put under the guardianship
of the Prophet (S) since his childhood. He was a gifted child. His
natural capabilities began to grow by the Prophet’s teachings.

His mental faculties and comprehension was so sharp that he believed in
Muhammad at the age of nine, at which it was not easy for one to be able
to distinguish belief from unbelief. No one else had got such a chance
like what ‘Ali had got at that time.

The main purpose of the Prophet's teachings was to worship God, the One
and only and the source of endless mercies.

There is no distinction between two persons except for virtue and
knowledge. The people, whether white or black, are all equal before God.
They all have been created from mud and eventually they return into
earth.

Hereon, man is to worship God only and believing in other than Him is
away from reason. No one has the right to control the others because of
one’s noble birth, descendance or lineage. Nobody is to bow to the rich
for their riches.

Imam ‘Ali was educated in the Prophet's school with teachings that
governed all his actions since then. One of his high qualities was
self-reliance.

It seemed that as if it was fated for him to succeed the Prophet in
order to continue his Prophetic mission but regrettably he, who was the
only one who could carry out this divine duty, became confined to home
and the Muslims were kept away from his teaching.

Of course self-reliance is inclusive of all admirable qualities like
courage, bravery, fearlessness, generous disposition, remission etc.
Imam ‘Ali, when he was ten years old, said to the Prophet: “I believe in
you and try my best to support you.”

He said so while the great men of Quraysh became angry to the full when
they heard of the new religion. History confirmed that Imam ‘Ali did all
what he had said.

Many signs of courage and bravery had been realized throughout his life,
whether through his deeds or speeches. He slept in the Prophet's bed in
the night of emigration to save the prophet’s life when the polytheists
decided to assassinate him. In spite of that he might face great
dangers; he did it at risk of losing his life.

Since the first war between the Muslims and the idolaters until his last
fight against the Kharijites in Nahrawan, all the combatants, who fought
him, were killed or ran away for saving their lives.

He attacked his enemy so fearlessly that it seemed as if he went to meet
death or that death fled away fearing his greatness.

The story of ‘Ali’s man-to-man combat with Amr ibn Abd Widd when ‘Ali
was just a very young man and Amr was a very brave experienced warrior
was not fiction. When ‘Ali knocked Amr down and sat on his chest to cut
his head, Amr spat at him.

Imam ‘Ali suppressed his anger, got up and began to walk some steps
about the field before killing Amr. When he was asked about what made
him do so, he replied: “I got angry from his immodest act and if I had
killed him at that moment, I would have avenged myself on him, but I
quenched my anger so that my killing him would be purely for the sake of
God.”

It was suggestive of his immaculate feelings towards God. He always
suggested making peace before beginning the war, but when he became
despaired of peace, he started out to fight, because in his opinion that
one, who started the fight would be really an oppressor and standing up
to him would be lawful.

For this purpose he came forward unarmed in the battle of al- Jamal and
called for Talhah and Al-Zubayr, who were armed, to negotiate with them.

In this battle he overcame his most obstinate enemies and then he
remitted their offences and let them go wherever they wished. They had
attacked the *wali* of Basra at night and had put him to torture and
they also had killed many innocent people.

When Imam ‘Ali (as) went to comfort A’ishah, at the end of the battle,
the housekeeper, named Saffiyyah, came and abused Imam ‘Ali because she
was bereaved of her husband in the battle. Some of his men wanted to
punish her, but Imam ‘Ali prevented them and said: “She abused me and it
is up to me whether to punish her or to forgive her.”

Instead of blaming A’ishah for what she had committed against him, Imam
‘Ali sent her back to Medina respectfully.

When Mu’awiyah controlled the watering places in Siffeen, he prevented
Imam ‘Ali's army from getting water to cause them to thirst in order to
surrender.

When Imam ‘Ali’s army controlled the watering places by force later on,
they wanted to do the same as Mu’awiyah and his army did. Imam ‘Ali (as)
said to them: “Do not require evil for evil. This is far away from
humanity.”

His enemies (the Kharijites) could come and go through Kufa freely where
they frequently caused many troubles for him and in spite of this, they
were paid their salaries from the treasury (Bayt al-Mal).

One day Imam ‘Ali was passing by the streets of Kufa when he came across
a woman carrying a pot of water on her shoulder and she was out of
breath. He asked if he could help her.

When he knew that her husband had been killed in the battle and that she
and her four children had been left without a breadwinner, he went to
help her in ding some of her domestic affairs although he was the
caliph.

It was mentioned that he had seen an old Christian carrying a heavy load
on his back and he was troubled with it. It seemed that he was obliged
to work so hard in this age for making his living. Imam ‘Ali ordered
that this old Christian would receive his monthly expense from the
treasury of the Muslims. In this way he had founded the social insurance
of today.

One day Imam ‘Ali was on a trip about Kufa. On his way back, a Jew man
joined him. They discussed some various subjects. When the Jew wanted to
leave, Imam ‘Ali (as) escorted him to some distance.

He asked why Imam ‘Ali (as) had done so. Imam ‘Ali said: “We enjoyed our
companionship and friendship requires me to escort you to some distance
to see you off.” Consequently the man resigned himself to Islam after
seeing so much humility and politeness from Imam ‘Ali (as) .

Have you ever heard of somebody recommending his successors to treat his
murderer well? Certainly not but ‘Ali! He said to his son Imam Hasan:
“Look at him (ibn Muljim, Imam ‘Ali’s murderer) how upset he is!

Give him from the same milk that I used to drink and feed him from what
you you eat. If I restore to health, I myself know better how to deal
with him and if not, forgive him if you can endure to see him, otherwise
kill him with only one stroke of sword.

Be careful not to mutilate him because I heard the Prophet saying:
“Avoid mutilation even with a rabid dog.” He made a little pause and
then said: “My dear sons, be careful not to punish anyone else and not
to make any bloodshed in avenging the caliph's murder.”

Recently we heard that many people were imprisoned, tortured or killed
on the charge of being accomplices in the murder of Anwar as-Sadat (the
ex- president of Egypt).

When the southern part of Iran was conquered by the Muslims during the
reign of the second caliph ‘Umar, Hormozan with his young slave Abu
Lu’lu’ were sent to Medina as captives. This young slave was given to
al-Mugheerah, who was of influence and was well- known as politician
throughout Arabia.

Abu Lu’lu’ had a grievance against his master. He complained against his
master to the caliph ‘Umar. ‘Umar did not pay attention to his petition.
At last he killed ‘Umar by a dagger. Ubaydullah, ‘Umar’s son, killed
Hormozan on the charge of having a hand in his father's murder without
hearing his protestations.

Imam ‘Ali (as) got angry and insisted on Uthman, the caliph at that
time, to avenge the murder of Hormozan on the murderer but Uthman
pretended that ‘Umar's family was bereaved of their father and it was
unbearable for them to be bereaved again.

But Imam ‘Ali (as) declared himself against the son of ‘Umar and said:
“I cannot such injustice. If I have control over him, he will be duly
punished according to the law.’

Uthman thought that Islam was the supremacy of the Arabs over the
non-Arabs especially the Persians. On the contrary, Imam ‘Ali (as)
believed that Islam was an ideal religion for all the human beings and
it was a herald of equity.

Usually the fearless commanders are pitiless. We have seen that when a
commander conquers a city, he sets fire to it and flattens it without
having any regard for the old people and the infants. But Imam ‘Ali
(as), whose bravery was to that extent that no combatant dared to stand
up to him, had pity on a woman carrying a heavy load on her shoulder or
on an old man laboring to earn his livelihood.

Imam Hasan and some of his companions were passing by a ruined place
about Kufa when they heard a whimper. They went into the ruins. They saw
an old paralytic man. He was starving. He told them that a good-humored
man used to come here every day to feed him but for the last three days
he did not come. Imam Hasan said: “That good-humored man was my father
Imam ‘Ali. He was martyred three days ago.”

Yes, besides that he was so intrepid, he was too kind and pitiful to the
poor. This fact was confirmed even by his enemies and on several
occasions.  
 Imam ‘Ali (as) had contradictory qualities like greatness with
humility, courage with precaution, bravery with remission, generosity
with moderation, forgiveness with ability and intrepidity with wisdom.
And above all he would not say anything, unless he himself had done it.

He said: “Whatever I ask you to do; I do it before you and whatever I
forbid you from; I leave it before forbidding you from it.”

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“O you who believe! why do you say that which you do not do? It is
most hateful to Allah that you should say that which you do not do”***
(61:2-3).

Yes, he practiced whatever he said. He said in one of his sermons: “I
dressed you in the cloths of safety with my justice and spread for you
the carpet of virtue with my sayings and deeds.”

There was a true tradition about his high qualities that deserved a high
praise by God. Imam Hasan and Imam Hussein were attacked by fever during
their childhood. Their parents; Imam ‘Ali ( s ) and Fatima (s) and their
maid Fiddha made a vow to God to fast for three days hoping that the
children might restore to health.

At the first night when they wanted to break their fast in time, a poor
man knocked at the door and asked for alms. They gave him the slight
food, which they themselves were greatly in need of. In the second night
an Orphan came asking for alms and in the third night a captive came
asking for alms and they were given the food that ‘Ali’s family had to
break their fast with.

Hence some Qur’anic verses were revealed to the Prophet (S):

***“They fulfill vows and fear a day the evil of which shall be
spreading far and wide. And they give food out of love for Him to the
poor and the orphan and the captive ...... therefore Allah will guard
them from the evil of that day and cause them to meet with ease and
happiness; and reward them, because they were patient, with garden and
silk”*** (76:7-8,11-12).

It is to be noted that all the Islamic commentators; the Sunni and the
Shia, have mentioned that these verses concerned ‘Ali and his family.

‘Ali always ordered his men neither to pursue the runaway soldiers nor
to kill the wounded.

One day he was enthusiastically exhorting people in high eloquence.
Suddenly one of his enemies said in wonder: “Alas! How wise is this
infidel!” Some of Imam ‘Ali's followers wanted to punish him but Imam
‘Ali prevented them and said: “He abused me. I am to punish him or to
forgive him.”

Abstinence And Piety Of Imam ‘Ali (as)
--------------------------------------

‘Umar ibn Abd-al-Aziz, the Umayyad caliph, had said: “No one at all
throughout the world will be like Imam ‘Ali in piety and devotedness.”
All of the Islamic researchers confirmed Imam ‘Ali’s asceticism in food
and dress.

One of his companions said: “Once I went to visit Imam ‘Ali (as) in his
house when he was the caliph. He was eating a piece of dried bread with
a little milk. I said: O Ameer-al-Mu’mineen, how do you live with this
scanty food? He replied: The Prophet ate staler bread than this and his
dress was coarser than mine.”

It is beyond bravery when one can afford to better his livelihood but he
denies himself and becomes content with a simple subsistence.

Those, who disagreed with Imam ‘Ali and were intolerant of his justice,
were searching for ease and luxury. They oppressed people to deprive
them of their rights for the sake of their own pleasures in this worldly
life.

Imam ‘Ali was far above all these bad conducts. Once he wrote to the
*wali* of Basra: “Remember that every follower usually follows his
leader and imitates him. You know that your imam is contented with two
pieces of bread as his victual and two rags as his cloths. Certainly you
cannot do so but at least try to help me with piety and uprightness. By
Allah, I have neither treasured gold nor collected money out of this
world ...”

He often said: “How can I be satisfied to be called Ameer-al-Mu’mineen
(the commander of the believers) by people and do not share in their
hardships or I do not become an example for them in the difficulties.
Shall I be comfortable with a full stomach and there are hungry stomachs
around me? I must live in the lowest level so that the poor may be able
to endure poverty easily.”

Imam ‘Ali (as) went to visit his companion Ala’ ibn Ziyad, when he saw
his large house, he said to him: “You are in need of such house in the
afterworld more than in this world. But if you want so, you are to
receive guests in it, to take care of your relatives and to pay
poor-rate and alms.”

Then Ala’ said to him: “O Ameer-al-Mu’mineen, I complain about my
brother Aassim, who has left his family to worship God.” Imam ‘Ali (as)
sent for him.

When he came, Imam ‘Ali said to him: “O enemy of yourself, surely Satan
has misled you. Do not you feel pity for your wife and children? Do you
think that if you practice what Allah has made lawful for you, He will
dislike you? You will be unthankful to Allah in doing so.”

He said: “O Ameer-al-Mu’mineen, you yourself put on coarse dress and eat
single food.”

Imam ‘Ali (as) replied: “Woe unto you! You are not like me. Certainly
God has made it obligatory for the just leaders to live like the poor
people so that the poor grouch their poverty and indigence.” Therefore
he himself repaired his shoes with his hand and he himself patched his
clothes.

Imam ‘Ali used to sell the yields of his garden of date-palms to spend
its money for charity. The poor of Medina often surrounded him in the
mosque. He divided the whole money among them to go home empty-handed
while his family was in need badly.

The excellences of Imam ‘Ali (as) and his upright policy realized
through his words and deeds was the very civilized Islam we tried to
research on.

The Vastness Of Imam ‘Ali's Knowledge
-------------------------------------

The Shia, think that the knowledge of the prophets is covert and that
God has revealed it to him by inspiration and then they vest it in their
successors at the last gasp.

Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “The Prophet, in his deathbed, whispered to me and
taught me one thousand chapters of knowledge; each one of them contained
one thousand chapters.”

Of course Imam ‘Ali’s scientific theories about monotheism, the creation
of man, heavens, earth, stars, suns, mountains, clouds thunder, plants,
philosophy of history, phylogeny and even the creation of the peacock
and the bat. The interpretation of the Qur’an confirmed what he had said
about the mentioned above items.

His speeches, his letters to his officers and his scientific sayings
(except jurisprudential traditions) had been compiled in a book named
Nahj al-Balaghah, which was really next to the Qur’an.

The Holy Qur’an is the words of God. The great part of it deals with
many branches of knowledge like theology, sociology, economy and others.
This holy book needed to be interpreted by a pious and learned man. Nahj
al-Balaghah was the great work of Imam ‘Ali (as) in this concern.

It was below the speech of God and higher than man's speech. Imam ‘Ali
was the father of gnosis and many Islamic mystics have based their
principles on his teachings.

His religious decrees and judgments were followed and obeyed by the
previous caliphs as the second caliph ‘Umar often said: “I would have
gone astray if ‘Ali (as) had been not here.”[^2]

Once he was asked what number was to be divided by 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 and
10 without fraction. He answered quickly: “Multiply the number of the
days of a year by the number of the days of a week to get the result.”

360 x 7 = 2520.

Once again three persons came to him and said: “There are 17 camels that
must be divided among us in this manner; half of them for one of us, a
third of them for the other and a ninth of them for the last one. How
can we divide live camels among us?”

Imam ‘Ali (as) added to them one of his own camels and then he said:
“Now the half of the camels is 9 heads, the third is 6 and the ninth is
2 heads.”

9+6+2=17. He answered their problem and then he took back his own camel.

In fact this was really a scientific masterpiece but the most important
thing was his deep knowledge of monotheism, which had given him much
importance. Certainly monotheistic knowledge is connected with morality
and it is affected by the call of conscience.

It consequently brings peace and comfort. It is neither destructive nor
ruinous because it is not based on material concerns. Of course Islam
provides such liberal education. At first, a person is purified from
evilness and then is taught science and wisdom to do good for mankind.

Recently some news came from America saying that some 14 or 15 years old
students attacked their fellow students by gun and consequently a number
of them were killed. Thereupon the public prosecutor asked the local
clergyman to think of a remedy and to restrain the present situation
because men of authority could not do anything.

Although it is a bit late to stem the tide of prostitution, drunkenness
and licentiousness among the people, it is much better doing nothing at
all.

In order to put down such wicked acts among the youngsters, firstly, the
educationists should gradually insert the religious teachings in
school's programs and, secondly, papers and film editors should
reconsider making erotic films and writing deviational stories, because
T. V and magazines are the real educators of people. They play an
important role in teaching them.

Just as Europe had obtained many benefits from the civilization of Islam
during the Crusades, the west, at the present time, needs to be in
contact with the spiritual centers in the Islamic Republic of Iran to
seek remedy for its shortcomings.

Now it is the outset of exchanging views among the civilizations and it
can audaciously be said that the words and deeds of Imam ‘Ali (as) are
good guides to find the way of establishing peace and securing the human
rights all over the world.

Here I quote some of Imam ‘Ali’s scientific and sententious words to
shed more light upon his personality. Imam ‘Ali said:

1-Everyone, who is in charge of the Muslim's affairs, neglects his
charge, God will neglect him.

2-The worst men of all are the treacherous businessmen.

3-Destitution is the greater death. Having few children is relief.
Practicing moderate economy is half of the living. One, who controls his
economy, will not face poverty.

4-Avoid gluttony for it causes diseases and illnesses.

5-Weakness and listlessness are the calamity of the nations. Being
patient with sufferings and struggling against hardships are courage.

6-Purify yourselves of dirty passions to reach high ranks before God.

7-Keep equality among the all and do not add fuel to the fire of discord
because the hearts are always ready to differ from each other.

8-Receive people willingly, deal with them cheerfully and trustfully and
be humble before them.

9-The ignorant is known by six characteristics: being angry without
having virtue, talking idle talk, generosity out of its suitable place,
unable to distinguish the friend from the enemy, disclosing the secrets
and trusting in every body.

10- Pay the worker his due wages before his sweat is dried.

11- The greatest sin is aggression and violation.

12- The highest virtue of man is to avoid persecuting people and to be
kind to them.

13- The one who believes in resurrection won’t be greedy for the worldly
wealth.

14- Everything can be changed except habits.

15- The one, who becomes idle, will miss his personal and social rights.

16- Religion does not agree with caprice. Caprice is foe prevailing over
reason.

17- He was asked: “What is good?” He said: “Good is not muchness of
money and children but muchness of knowledge.”

18- Injustice of judges is the most disgraced act.

19- The highest compassion is to share the brothers in sorrow and in
joy.

20- Where are the tyrants and the sons of the tyrants? (He meant that
they had perished without taking anything from this world with them).

21- Wealth is the fountain of the sins.

22- Whoever warns you of fault is like one who gives you good tidings.

23- The one, who becomes a leader of the people, has to educate himself
before educating the others. His educating must be by his doings before
his sayings. The one, who educates and instructs himself, is more
estimable than those, who teach and instruct the others.

24- No wealth is more profitable than wisdom.

25- No loneliness is sadder than haughtiness.

26- No intellect is better than tact.

27- No greatness is like abstinence. No courage is like avoiding sins.

28- No compassion is like good humor.

29- No inheritance is like politeness.

30- No guide is like God's favor to grant prosperity.

31- No trade is like beneficence.

32- No profit is like divine reward.

33- No virtuousness is like reluctance to do doubtful things.

34- No knowledge is like meditation.

35- No worship is like performing religious decrees.

36- No belief is like modesty and fortitude.

37- No greatness is like humility.

38- No honor is like knowledge and no aid is like consulting with wise
friends.

39- The value of every man is due to his goodness.

40- Take knowledge from everywhere as possible as you can.

41- Every material thing passes away and every expected thing is to come
at last.

42- Woman is as a scorpion but her sting is honey.

43- Wealth is the basis of every sin.

44- Being loose-tongued is like being a beast.

45- Death is near and the company of the friends is short.

46- Avoiding sins is easier than repenting afterward.

47- He, who looks for riches, denies everything else and he, who acts
according to his mind only, will be ruined. He, who consults the others,
participates with them in their minds.

48- For me the thinking of an experienced (old)

man is more admirable than of a dexterous young man.

49- I knew Allah by the changing of decisions, the breaking of wills and
the resolving of problems by themselves. (There is a metaphysical power
above us that controls our affairs).

50- Be careful not to waste the blessings of Allah because everything
you waste, does not come back again.

51- It is a surprise to me how a miser hurries to poverty, from which he
runs away and he misses the wealth, which he looks for. He lives like
the poor in this and he will be punished like the rich in the
afterworld. I wonder about the selfish and haughty man, who was a sperm
yesterday and will be a rotten carcass tomorrow (why he is so proud). I
wonder at one, who doubt about the existence of God while he sees His
creation. It is also surprising when one sees that people die before him
but he forgets that he himself will die. I wonder at one, who denies the
afterworld whereas he has seen the first world and I wonder at one, who
is busy heaping wealth in this transient world but is ignorant of the
everlasting world.

52- Protect yourself against cold when it comes (at its beginning) and
receive it without worry when it is about to go because its effect on
bodies is like its effect on trees. In the beginning it ruins and in the
end it refreshes.

53- I explain Islam in a way that no one else has explained it before.
Islam is submission; submission is steadfastness in religion;
steadfastness in religion is spreading one’s belief; spreading one’s
belief is acknowledging doing the obligations of God and doing the
obligations means action.

54- Missing an opportunity causes grief.

55- He, who follows a moderate course in life, will never become poor.

56- When Allah wants to degrade someone, He deprives him of knowledge.

57- People are enemies of that which they do not know.

58- He, who receives several opinions (in consulting the others),
understands the incorrect situations.

59- Displease the evil doer by doing good to the good doer.

60- Obstinacy destroys counsel.

61- The result of carelessness is regret and the result of prudence is
safety.

62- If there are two different invitations; one of them is to mislead.

63- I did not doubt about rightness since I had been shown it.

64- Whoever turned away from rightness got ruined.

65- If patience does not relieve a man, impatience will kill him.

66- O son of Adam, whatever you earn more than your necessary need, you
will only guard it for the heirs.

67- Every container narrows with what is put in it except the container
of knowledge; it expands continuously.

68- The tree, whose trunk is soft, has thick branches.

69- Envying a friend is because of untrue love.

70- It is no justice to judge through probabilities.

71- The worst provision for the Day of Judgment is oppressing people.

72- The best act of a generous person is to overlook what he knows (to
cover the defect of people).

73- Long Silence leads to dignity. Justice increases connections and
communications. Generosity raises esteem. Humility brings blessings.
Tolerating hardship leads to supremacy. Good behavior defeats the enemy.
Forbearance towards a fool increases supporters against him.

74- Kumayl ibn Ziyad was one of the closest companions of Imam ‘Ali(S).
He said: “One day Imam ‘Ali took me out of the city. After taking a deep
breath, he said: “O Kumayl, hearts are the containers of knowledge. The
best of them is that which preserves its contents well. Take care of
what I say to you. People are of three types;

One is the divine scholar, who has set himself free from carnalities.
The other is that, who seeks knowledge and he is also on the way of
salvation. The third is the common people, who run after every caller
and follow every sound. They do not seek the light of knowledge and do
not provide any reliable support.

O Kumayl, know that knowledge is surely preferred to wealth. You are
guarded by knowledge but you have to guard wealth. Wealth will decrease
by expending but knowledge will increase by spending. One, who grows up
in a rich family, cannot endure hardships when the wealth disappears.

O Kumayl, acquiring knowledge is one of the bases of religion and
religion turns round the circuit of knowledge. A learned man steps in
the way of religion with knowledge, with which he wins fame during his
lifetime and after his death. Knowledge commands but wealth is
commanded.

O Kumayl, men of property will die even though they live for a long time
but learned men remain as long as there is a life on the earth. Their
bodies turn to dust but their images are placed in the hearts forever.

Then he pointed to his chest and said: “This is full of knowledge and I
wish I could find someone to bear its burden. Even if I can find
someone, I cannot confide in him because he may misuse it in the way of
his worldly desires and he may use God's favor against His servants or
he hereby dominates over people, or he may seek rightness and
truthfulness but there may be no any insight in his heart. Consequently
doubts will be instilled into his mind and he will follow the doubts. He
will be affected by passions and will be greedy for wealth. Thus
knowledge dies away by the death of its bearers.

Yes, but the earth will never be void of those, who guard God's
evidences and laws; either they are well- known and famous or they are
unknown and hideaways in order that the Sharia of Allah not to be
cancelled or vanished.

How many persons are they or where are they? Although they are few in
number but they are highly esteemed by Allah. Allah guards His evidences
and reasons by them and they entrust these evidences to others like
themselves to sow the seeds of knowledge in their hearts. Knowledge has
taken them to the real understanding and hereupon they will be the guide
of the compact faith in God.

They deem easy what the unbelievers think as difficult and they become
familiar with what the ignorant consider as strange. They live with
their bodies in this world but their souls live high with the Beneficent
Creator. They represent Allah on the earth and they invite people to His
religion.

How I am fond of seeing them. Now go wherever you want, Kumayl.

75- He, who glorifies a rich man for his wealth, loses one third of his
religion. (One, who worships God sincerely, ought not to bend before
other than Him for the sake of wealth or any other thing because all
people are free and equal). If a man reads the Holy Qur’an and is to be
put into Hell after death, he is of those, who treat the verses of
Qur’an with mockery. If a man's heart gets attached to this world, he
will be afflicted with three things; continuous worry that will never
let him be comfortable, an unending greed and an unachievable desire.

76- Contentment is as good as wealth and good humor is as good as
blessing of God.

77- Imam ‘Ali was asked about the meaning of Allah's saying after
praising a virtuous man or woman: (And we will most certainly make him
live a happy life). He answered: “It means those who are content.”

78- Participate with one, who has abundant livelihood because he is
luckier for getting more riches and he is expected to increase your
share therein.

79- About the meaning of the Qur’anic verse:

***“Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and benevolence”*** he
said: “Do not oppress the others (be kind to the people).”

80- He said to his son Imam Hasan (S): “Do not be the first to declare a
war, but if you are called for it, give a contentful answer; because the
caller for a war is a rebellious and the rebellious is to be ruined.”

81- Imam ‘Ali (as) was asked to define the wise man and he said: “A wise
man is he, who puts things in their proper positions.” Then he was asked
to describe the ignorant. He said: “I have already done so.” (The
ignorant is one, who does not put things in their proper positions).

82- Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “By Allah, your world (in which you quarrel
with one another like vultures and dogs), in my point of view, is meaner
than a piece of a hog’s bone in a leper’s hand.”

83- “Woman is evil; from which man cannot escape

(He is in need of her).”

84- “One, who acts carelessly, loses his rights and one, who believes
the storytellers, misses his friends.”

85- “An extorted piece of stone in a house (to be within its structure)
is a cause of its ruination.”

86- “The day of the oppressed over the oppressor will be severer than
the day of the oppressor over the oppressed.” (Bearing oppression in
this world is easier than bearing it in the next world.)

87- “When responses are numerous the truth remains unknown.”

88- “When the possibilities increase, desires decrease.”

89- “Try to make one’s good idea about you remain as it is.”

90- “The most preferable doings are those that you are obliged to do
them (God's obligations).”

91- “I knew Allah through the breaking of determinations, change of
intentions and when problems are resolved by themselves.”

92- “The affliction of this world leads to the cheer of the afterworld
and the cheer of this world leads to the affliction of the afterworld.”

93- “Anger is a kind of madness because when a mad one returns to his
senses, he does repent. If he does not repent, his madness is
certified.”

94- “Good health comes from lack of envy (an envious person melts away
in the heat of envy).”

95- “If the wise man's word is reasonable, it will be as cure but if it
is not, it will be as illness.”

96- “A little job continued carefully is better than a big job done
carelessly.”

97- “Between you and the advice there is a curtain of pride and
haughtiness.”

98- “When the learned becomes lazy, the ignorant exceeds the limits.

99- “Knowledge closes the way of those, who claim baseless excuses.”

100- Imam ‘Ali (as) was asked about destiny and he replied: “It is a
dark path; do not tread upon it. It is a deep ocean; do not dive in it
and it is the secret of Allah; do not trouble yourselves for knowing
it.”

101- “I had a close friend, whom I respected him very much because he
did not pay any attention to this worldly life. He was not gluttonous
and he did not wish what he couldn’t find. He did not ask for more than
what he would get. He kept quiet most of his time. If he spoke, he would
quiet the other speakers. He often quenched the questioners. He was
modest but he was like the lion in the war. He would not adduce any
argument unless the judge was present. He would not blame anyone for an
excusable matter until he heard his excuse. He would not complain of any
trouble except after abatement of nuisance. He would say what he would
do and he would not say what he would not do. Even if he was dominant in
speaking, he could not be defeated in silence. He would like to keep
quiet more than to speak. If he would face two things, he would reject
the one that was nearer to fancy. You have to acquire these good
qualities but if you cannot acquire them, you know that acquiring a part
is better than to leave the whole.”

102- Imam ‘Ali (as) was asked about the distance between the east and
the west. He said: “One day's traveling of the sun.”

103- “Do not keep company with a fool because he approves his doings
before you and likes you to be like him.”

104- “Your friends are of three kinds and your enemies are of three
kinds too. Your friends are; your friend, your friend's friend and your
enemy’s enemy. And your enemies are; your enemy, your friend's enemy and
your enemy’s friend.”

105- Imam ‘Ali (as) saw a man busy striving against his enemy but he
would harm himself. He said to him:

“You are like that who thrusts a spear through his chest to kill the
person sitting behind him (on the horse).”

106- “How many examples there are but how few are those, who learn from
them.”

107- “He, who insists on quarrelling, falls in sin. If he falls in sin,
he will be under the effect of that sin. It is difficult for a quarreler
to abstain from sin.

108- “Your messenger is the translator of your mind and your letter is
the most eloquent thing that expresses your thoughts.”

109- “The indigent is the messenger of God to you. Whoever denies him,
denies God and whoever grants him, grants God.”

110- “A self-respecting man will never commit adultery.”

111- “A man can fall asleep when he loses his child, but he cannot when
he loses his property.”

112- “The kings are the watchmen of Allah on the earth.”

113- “The least right of Allah on you is that you are not to make use of
His blessings in committing sins.”

114- “Not being in need of asking pardon is better than putting forth
true excuse.”

115- “The greatest wealth is not look forward to what the others have in
their possession.”

116- “A time will come when nothing will remain of the Qur’an except its
writing and nothing of Islam except its name. The mosques will be
flourishing with building but empty of guidance. Their builders and
inhabitants will be the worst of the all on the earth. Seditions will
appear from them and all sins will turn towards them. If anyone keeps
himself aloof from sins, they would bring him back to them and if any
one falls behind, they push him towards them. Allah, the Glorified,
says: ***“I swear by myself that I shall send upon them an evil wherein
the wise will be puzzled over it (how he can save himself from the
perdition) and He will do so. We ask Him to forgive our mistakes during
negligence.”***

117- “O people, fear Allah (avoid sins) because man has not been created
in vain to busy himself with amusement nor he has been set free to do
nonsense.”

118- “Words are under your control as long as you do not utter them yet,
but when you utter them you will be under their control. Therefore take
care of your tongue as you take care of your gold and money, because
sometimes a saying may take a blessing away and put you to trouble.”

119- “Do not say what you do not know and do not say all what you know.”

120- “He, who engages himself in various affairs, will be obliged to
seek remedies how to get out of them.”

121- “Take from this worldly life whatever comes to you and keep away
from whatever refrained from you. If you do not do so, be moderate in
your quest.”

122- “A statement may be more effective than an attack.”

123- “He, who opposes rightness, will be knocked down by it."

124- Imam ‘Ali (as) wrote to his officer, Ziyad ibn Abeeh: “Be just with
the people and avoid violence and injustice because violence leads them
to wander and injustice leads them to insurge.”

Of course, those who accustom themselves to a simple life, leave without
getting anything and oppose their fancies, God pours the light of
knowledge into their hearts, especially if the simplicity was linked
with avoiding sins. To prove this statement, I point out the manner of
the ascetics’ lives, who deny themselves for a time and consequently
they can foretell the happenings of nature which are going to occur.

Imam ‘Ali was a paragon of simplicity and virtue and the things
mentioned above were quite applicable to him. (Those who accustom
themselves to simplicity, God pours knowledge into them.) There are
enough sayings to be said but let me point out some of the Prophet's
sayings about the scientific position of Imam ‘Ali (as) to end this
matter.

The Prophet said: “I am the city of knowledge and ‘Ali (as) is its gate.
Anyone, who likes to enter the city, has to come in through its
gate.”[^3] He also said: “‘Ali is the wisest of all of you.”[^4]

The Justice Of Imam ‘Ali (as)
-----------------------------

Imam ‘Ali's life and justice are closely bound up with the history of
Islam. This appeared especially during his caliphate. Whenever his name
is mentioned the word of justice comes to mind.

At the beginning of his life he fought against injustice and oppression
of Quraysh to spread justice of Islam. In the last days of his life he
confronted terrible difficulties in order to realize justice among
people and at last he was martyred for it.

He regarded people with reverence, whether they were Muslims or
non-Muslims. He did his best to distribute wealth and spoils among them
justly. Some great Arab men stated their grievance openly because that
their share from Bayt al-Mal was equal to that of the poor.

At the beginning of his rule Imam ‘Ali said: “I will summon those who
have deprived people of their rights to the court and I will apply the
law to them even though it doesn't please them.”

Those, who enjoyed from the public treasury during the reign of Uthman,
expected that Imam ‘Ali (as) would never refuse to employ them in the
state affairs, but he in the first day of his caliphate said: “I will
get back all the wealth gifted to this and that even if they have paid
them to their wives as dowry.”

He was too strict about the public money to the extent that he
displeased his older brother Aqil, who was blind and troubled with
having a large family, when he had requested more than his share from
the treasury.

Once when his daughter had borrowed a necklace from Bayt al-Mal for a
short time, Imam ‘Ali (as) got angry when he knew about it and he
threatened the treasurer to be punished for his carelessness. He said to
his daughter: “I would have punished you if you had not guaranteed it
against risk.”

He was very adequate in distributing the wealth and the grains among the
people so that the all, far or near, could enjoy their shares equally.

Nowadays the world's population is divided into two classes; a group
living in extreme poverty that a bit of food is not possible for them
and another group surrounded with affluence and riches living at ease
and luxury.

The Islamic civilization does not allow such distinction of classes;
therefore Imam ‘Ali (as) in his famous epistle to the governor of Egypt
wrote: “There are many indigents among people, who do not request for
more than their share when they are badly in need of more.

For God's sake, safeguard their rights because the responsibility lays
on you before God. Assign a portion from the treasury for their living
and education wherever they are, whether near at hand or far from you.
The rights of the all ought to be protected by you.”

He often said: “Wherever there are palaces and affluences there are
surely many lost rights beside them.”

This is really the civilized Islam, which calls for argument among the
civilizations.

It is clear that social justice is based on righteous judgments of the
judges. Therefore Imam ‘Ali (as) had instructed the judges with many
legal instructions in order to spread justice everywhere.

According to Imam ‘Ali’s instructions, every judge ought to treat the
litigants equally in looking at them, talking with them and in seating
them so that the judge’s relative would not exploit the opportunity to
gain illegal benefits and that the judge’s enemies would not despair of
justice.

Once he said to the second caliph ‘Umar: “There are three things that if
you put in practice, you won’t be in need of other thing;

1-Enforcement of the religious law upon the stranger and acquaintance
equally.

2-Judging according to the book of Allah (Qur’an) in state of anger or
consent.

3- Just division of the spoils between the lowly people and the nobles
and between the black and the white.”

Nowadays, in some civilized countries of the world a black-skinned boy
or girl is not admitted in whites' schools. Regretfully in the hospitals
of the U.S.A., even in the northern part where people used to fight
against slavery, the wards and surgeries of the whites differ from those
of the blacks.

Young and inexperienced doctors have no right to visit the white
persons, whereas the various tests are performed in the blacks’ section.

Now we go back to dry and sandy Arabia of fourteen centuries ago where
ignorance and party spirits were spread. The noble privilege and
grandness were too much hateful and the ordinary people could never look
forward to the positions that were held by the nobles. Imam ‘Ali (as)
proclaimed freedom and equality and those, who were entitled to virtue,
became high- ranking officials during his government. He urged people to
behave fairly towards each other without letting differences trouble
their life.

Although such privileges were cancelled by the charter of the Human
Rights organization under the name of freedom and equality, it took a
long time until the west got rid of the gloom of the ignorance of the
middle Ages.

In spite of this declaration of the Human Rights, we regretfully see the
racial feelings and supremacy over other nations and bloody wars
throughout the world.

The shameful act of killing the Palestinians in Sabra and Shatilla camp
and the felony of the Sorbs in Kosovo and Herzegovina are not just
stories. These ugly and hateful events are written down in the pages of
history like a stain on man's forehead.

Imam ‘Ali (as) used to keep the Muslims away from clinging to
party-spirit and vanity. He says in his sermon al-Qasi’ah: “Praise be to
Allah, Who puts on the dress of exaltedness and dignity and has
allocated them to Himself. He has made them for Himself and has
forbidden His creatures from them.”

Then after reciting a few Qur’anic verses he said:

***“When your Lord said to the angels: surely I am going to create a
mortal from dust: So when I have made him complete and breathed into him
of My spirit, then fall down making obeisance to him. And the angels did
obeisance, all of them. But not Iblis: he was proud and he was of the
unbelievers. He said: O Iblis, what prevented you from doing obeisance
to him whom I created with My two hands? Are you proud or are you of the
exalted ones? He said: I am better than he; Thou hast created me of
fire, and him Thou didst create of dust. He said: Then get out of it,
for surely you are driven away. And surely My curse is on you to the Day
of Judgment”*** (38:71-78).

Then Imam ‘Ali (as) kept on his speech and saying: “The vanity of Iblis
(Satan) and his feeling proud of his being created of fire made him be
cursed by Allah. And so he arrives at a good conclusion that this enemy
of God (Satan) is the leader of those who boast and feel proud towards
others by virtue of their origin and descent and they, consequently, are
subject to disfavor and curse of Allah.”

There were many Jews and Christians living under Imam ‘Ali's domination.
They were free to practice their rituals and their rights were secured
by the government.

One day when Imam ‘Ali was exhorting people to jihad, he said: “It is
reported that the enemy has taken ornaments off the legs and the ears of
two Christian women, who were under the Islamic rule. And then he said:
“One, who hears this startling news and dies, is not to be blamed.”

But regretfully today, in the twentieth century, the Muslims are treated
inhumanely in many countries and more terribly in places where the
people were ruled previously by colonial policy like India, Somalia,
Guinea and others under the pretense of reforming the civil
organizations and sometime, under the pretense of administering justice
or settling discipline and peace.

Whenever the unlawful interests of the colonial powers were encroached
upon, they did not keep to their promises about the social justice and
tolerance and they would tread upon the Muslims' rights.

For example, Ethiopia was formerly ruled by the church of Egypt, which
was under the British authority. Its inhabitants were 35% Muslims and
65% Christians and others. There was not any government school for the
Muslim youths. Whenever the Muslims instituted a school on their own
expense, it was closed because of the heavy taxes enacted by the high
authorities. This hostile behavior continued so severely that no one
else could build a school.

If a Muslim was indebted to a Christian and was not able to pay his
debt, he would become automatically a slave for the creditor without
hearing his petition. Such debtor became the object of buying and
selling before the eyes of people and no one said: “Oh, he is a human
being too.”

No Muslim was employed by the government departments in spite of that
the Muslims formed one third of the population of this country.

On the other hand, if the *wali* wanted to make an effort in the
interest of the Muslims, he would not have the authority to do it
because the church had the control over all the state affairs and
Ethiopia had to obey the commands issued by the church.

Have the Christians ever faced such annoyance from the Muslims along the
history? Are they ready to be treated like their own treatment?
Certainly not!

Therefore, it indicates a ruinous party-spirit that the Christians
(colonial countries) accept it satisfactorily.

Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “It is sufficient for you to educate yourself that
you avoid what you dislike from the others.”

History mentioned that the independence of the local Churches was
respected by the Muslims when they occupied Spain. The Muslims
associated with the Christians in a friendly manner, but after a time
when the Spaniards got their country back, they established many courts
to inquire about the people's beliefs.

The main duty of those courts was to inquire about the Muslims in order
to accuse them of a bad precedent to be used later as a cause of
condemnation. They used the most shameful acts of torture to suppress
the Muslims in a way that history had not mentioned it’s like at all.

In a word, many hardships were imposed upon the Muslims to force them to
turn Christians.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Allah does not forbid you respecting those who have not made war
against you on account of (your) religion, and have not driven you forth
from your homes, that you show them kindness and deal with them justly,
surely Allah loves the doers of justice”*** (60:8).

And: ***“This day (all) the good things are allowed to you, and the food
of those who have been given the Book (the Jews and the Christians) is
lawful for you and your food is lawful for them; and the chaste from
among the believing women and the chaste from among those who have been
given the Book before you (are lawful for you) when you have given them
dowries*** ...” (5:5).

It is clear by these Qur’anic verses that Islam has given a chance to
the followers of the other religions to associate with the Muslims
freely and that the Muslims should deal with them peacefully.

Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “When you overcome your foe, forgive him as a way
of thanking God that He enables you to overcome him.”

Considering this truth, Imam ‘Ali (as) recommended people, especially
his officers, to be just to everyone, whether acquainted or not, and to
fulfill their promise when they are in treaty with foreigners.

Many of his men insisted on him to break his promise concerning the
agreement of the arbitration. Although he was obliged to accept it, he
did not pay attention to them and said: “It is not of justice to break
my promise.”

A Christian woman was attacked by the enemy in a frontier locality and
they had snatched her ornaments from her ears and hands. When Imam ‘Ali
knew about it, he exclaimed from on the pulpit and said angrily: “If one
hears this and dies with grief, he won’t be blamed.”

Islam is the only religion that calls for human beings to associate with
each other peacefully and with mutual respect.

The Value Of Man In Imam ‘Ali’s Thought
---------------------------------------

Imam ‘Ali (as) wanted to revive all the human values that were granted
to people by the Prophet of Islam and they were declined during the
reign of the third caliph Uthman.

Once, Imam ‘Ali set out to Syria. The people of Anbar (a place between
Syria and Iraq) met him. They had come out from the city to welcome him.
When they saw Imam ‘Ali, they began to prostrate themselves on the
ground and then they ran in front of him. When he asked why they did so,
they replied that they respected their chiefs in this manner.

Imam ‘Ali said: “By Allah, this action does not benefit your chiefs but
it makes them be proud and haughty. We all are the servants of God. I do
not have any preference to you, except that my responsibility is more
than you since I have accepted the tenure of the caliphate. By doing
this you trouble yourselves in this world and you will get misery in the
afterworld.”

Once, Imam ‘Ali (as) was going back to Kufa. He met one of his
followers, who was of nobility in his town. He began to walk with him
while Imam ‘Ali was on the horseback. Imam ‘Ali (s ) said to him: “Get
back! Going on foot by a man like you with one like me is misfortune for
the ruler and insult for the believer.”

Imam ‘Ali (as) said: “The worth of a man is as much as his courage. His
valor is due to his self-respect ...”

As it was said earlier that courage consisted of virtue, self-reliance,
patience before terrible difficulties and such qualities of magnanimity.

In Imam ‘Ali’s thought, the value of a man was according to his humanity
and kindness to people. He pointed it out in his letters to his
officers. The most famous of them was his epistle to the *wali* of
Egypt.

He said in his letter: “\`Fill up your heart with affection and kindness
towards people. Do not treat them fiercely like the greedy beasts, which
feel satisfied by devouring each other. Be careful not to appropriate
what belongs to the others. Remember that people are of two kinds; they
are either your brothers in religion or your brothers in mankind. They
are usually subject to mistakes but you have to forgive their
inadvertent slips, if you would like to be forgiven by God. You are
their chief as I am your chief and God watches both of us. He wants you
to manage their affairs...”

He wrote to the tax collectors: “Deal with people justly and do your
best regarding their needs, because you are treasurers of the people,
delegates of the community and the envoys of the Imam. Do not prevent
anyone from getting his needs. Try your best to secure the people’s
requirements. Do not force them to sell their winter or summer clothes
or their cattle in order to pay the taxes. Be careful not to whip anyone
for tax collecting. Do not touch any property of anyone, whether Muslim
or non-Muslim, who are under the protection of Islam.”

At any rate, he honored people without making a difference between
familiars and strangers.

Imam ‘Ali (as) was grieved with all his heart for the poor, because he
thought that poverty and destitution would never give people a chance to
better themselves. He said: “God has not chastened his servants with
harder than poverty.”

He, in order to compensate this deficiency, tried to do two things;
first to improve the production in large quantities and then to
distribute it justly among the people all in all. On the other hand, he
thought that a starving man was usually angry that his income would not
be enough to earn his livelihood and he had to struggle to feed his
family.

Surely, such a man, who struggled against poverty, would not be able to
withstand difficulties and would not show any reaction when his rights
were trodden upon.

Therefore Imam ‘Ali sent a decree to everywhere saying: “Try the best to
develop and improve the farms. Prepare the agricultural implements for
the farmers and be careful not to ruin the countryside or the countrymen
because development and consistency of a state is due to the unneedy
farmers. This duty is to precede all the others.”

Although ownership was allowed for everyone in Islam, but there was such
a limit that it would never lead to capitalism. It prevented the
appearance and growth of capital and capitalism by prohibiting usury,
monopoly, extortion, overcharging prices and using gold and silver
dishes.

On the other hand it stopped the rising of poverty by taking zakat and
alms from the rich and giving them to the poor and spending them for the
commonweal.

Freedom In Imam ‘Ali’s Thought
------------------------------

All the politicians and the cruel powerful men usually created an
atmosphere of distress among people to frighten them in order to submit.
For this purpose, they built many houses of detention and prisons to put
the opponents in them and if someone made a protest against such an
action, he would be put to torture on a charge of rebellion. Hence no
one dared to defend someone's right.

But the Prophet of Islam charged the Muslims with a duty to advise the
*wali*s and to show them the right way to realize justice if they
behaved unjustly. He said: “The best kind of jihad is saying a word of
rightness before an unjust ruler.”

How great it was that the Prophet of Islam had granted such free will to
the people fourteen centuries ago, so that they could debate with the
rulers.

Abu-Bakr, the first caliph, said: “If I disobey Allah and His apostle, I
have no right to govern on you and you do not have to obey me.”

One day ‘Umar the second caliph, said: “You, people, should guide me to
the right way if you saw me going in a wrong way.”

An ordinary man stood up and said: “If you follow the curved way, we
will bring you back to the straightway by this curved sword.”

Once more ‘Umar said: “I am the Prophet's caliph and a man of authority.
You have to obey me to spread the goals of Islam.”

One of present people said: “If you told us wherefrom you have got your
shirt, of course we would obey you.”

During ‘Umar’s reign no one dared to misappropriate anything of Bayt
al-Mal (the treasury) because of his severity in practicing justice.

Imam ‘Ali (as) always enlightened the Muslims to defend their rights and
to interfere in the state affairs. Therefore, in order to grant some
privileges to people, Imam ‘Ali (as) ordered his officers to read the
items of the constitution of his rule before the people in the mosque to
make them know their duties and the *wali*'s duties.

Consequently the *wali*s would not dare to rule out of the law and the
people, if the *wali*s did something wrong, were not to obey them and
were to report about their offences to Imam ‘Ali.

During Imam ‘Ali’s reign no one had the right to exploit any other by
force. He wrote to the *wali*s: “Although excavating canals and cleaning
out rivers are necessary a progressive state but you have no right to
force anyone to do it unwillingly.”

Imam ‘Ali himself never forced any one to join his army even at the
critical situations in his various battles in spite of that they had
paid homage to him and obeying him was obligatory for them.

When the *wali* of Medina tried to seek for some men, who fled from
Medina to join Mu’awiyah in Sham,[^5] Imam ‘Ali wrote to him: “Do not
worry if some people did not like to remain under my just rule. Let them
go wherever they like.”

At the first days of Imam ‘Ali’s caliphate, some of his close friends
were angry because of that two (Sa’d ibn Abu Waqqass and Abdullah ibn
‘Umar) had not paid homage to Imam ‘Ali. Imam ‘Ali said: “Those, who do
not like to co-operate with me, are free as long as they do not excite
sedition against people.''

He believed that a human being was free and independent in thinking,
deciding and in practicing.

He had expressed himself in his will to his son Imam Hasan by saying:
“You have to investigate and think over what has descended to you from
your ancestors and then to beg God’s help in order not to fall into
doubts.”

There is a general rule in Islam that the believers have to fight
against oppression and injustice. The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Permission (to fight) is given to those upon whom war is made
because they are oppressed, and most surely Allah is well able to assist
them.”*** (22:39).

Imam ‘Ali encouraged people to get back their rights by force as
possible as they could.

He thought that nobody should tolerate injustice; therefore he had said:
“Be against the oppressor and support the oppressed.” The oppressors
always rule according to their minds instead of the law. They always
cause misfortunes and distresses by spreading injustice with its undue
influences.

Nowadays the colonial countries exert pressure inhumanely upon the
backward nations and, in order to keep their illegal interests, they
keep them pauper by spoiling their natural resources and preventing them
from the scientific development.

Regretfully they pretend themselves the champions of freedom and the
defenders of the human rights.

Imam ‘Ali (as) would never give an opportunity to his officers to abuse
their power to violate people's rights, because he esteemed man in all
respects.

He had instructed the tax collectors by saying: “Do not walk through the
people’s farms because it destroys their efforts and it makes them feel
unhappy. Do not take from them more than the legal share. When you
arrive at a village, you are to go to their watering places and not to
go in front of their houses. First of all, you are to greet them and to
talk with them kindly.

You say: “O servants of God, the caliph of God has sent us to you to
collect the zakat and the alms from you.” If the answer was no, you are
not to be sever with them and then you are not to repeat your demand.
But if they respond and wanted to apportion their yields, let them take
the share that they have set aside for themselves. Be careful not to
enter their cattle-pens without their permission and take care not to
browbeat or frighten any Muslim.”

He said in another letter: “This is my instructions to you; fear Allah
(avoid sins) in your secret matters and hidden actions, where no one is
present except Allah and no one watches except Him. You have to obey
Allah in the same way when openly or secretly. You are not to harm
people. You are not to be rough to them and you are not to turn your
faces away from them proudly because of your positions. They are your
brethren in faith and you are in need of their help in achieving your
job. Of course you have certain shares and rights in this poor-rate and
the poor, the weak and the indigents have other shares. We shall pay you
your rights and you too have to care for their demands.”

He always asserted people's rights, small or big, secretly or openly.

He wrote to one of his officers saying: “Do not say to the people that
you are their master or a man of authority and that they have to obey
you. This will spoil your heart and weaken your faith in religion and
furthermore it creates anarchy in the state.”

He himself controlled everything of the state affairs so that no one
could infringe on others' rights at his time.

It was reported to him that the *wali* of the districts had
misappropriated the treasury. He wrote to him: “The goodness of your
father cheated me to think that you will follow his right manner and you
will imitate him, but according to what was reported to me, you have
followed your own passions. You leave the religion and morality behind
by doing your relatives favors. You better your life by spoiling your
afterlife. (His saying was in compliance with the Holy Qur’an when
saying:

***“Then as for him who is inordinate, and prefers the life of this
world, then surely the hell, that is the abode”*** (79:37-39).

A man like you is good for nothing. You are not able to drive the harm
away nor worthy of being given a promotion, nor trustworthy against
misappropriation..... Come to me as soon as this letter reaches you
inshallah.”

Imam ‘Ali, in one of his sermons, said: “By Allah, if I sleep on the
Sa’dan[^6] wakefully or I will be pulled bound in chains, is better to
me than to meet Allah and His apostle on the Day of Judgment wronging
some people or extorting something of the vanities of the world.”

Imam ‘Ali (as) had given a right to the government to punish the
offenders to be as a warning for the others.

A man was heard crying for help about Hamadan (a city in the west of
Iran). It appeared that someone had bought a shirt and paid the seller
some spotted coins and slapped him on the face. They were disputing with
each other when Imam ‘Ali (as) got there.

At last the buyer was forced to change the forged money. It was decided
that the seller avenge himself on buyer by slapping him on the face.
Although the buyer was forgiven by the seller but Imam ‘Ali (as) slapped
the buyer on the face and said: “This is the right of the government
too.”[^7]

Imam ‘Ali wrote in his will for his son Imam Hasan: “O my son, make
yourself the judge between you and the others. Like for the others what
you like for yourself and dislike for them what you dislike for
yourself. Do not oppress anyone as long as you do not want to be
oppressed. Whatever you think as being bad for the others to do, think
of it as being bad for you too to do. Deal with people in a way as you
like them to deal with you. Do not talk about what you do not know well.
Do not say to the others what you do not like to be said to you.”

Nowadays the eighth Islamic summit meeting will be held in Tehran to
find reasonable solutions for the difficult problems and tangled affairs
of the Muslims all over the world.

The presidents and the prime-ministers will attend the meeting, which
will be presided by President Muhammad Khatami. Among the main problems,
which will be discussed in the meeting, is the Zionist aggression
against Palestine and the civil war in Afghanistan. Some other problems
concerning the Islamic countries will be discussed too.

Imam ‘Ali (as) had instructed the Muslims with many advices in the field
of governing and dealing with different classes of society such as the
army, the merchants, the industrial community, the agricultural sect and
the poor.

He fixed the basic sides of the Islamic government; administration,
public services, judiciary, the financial affairs and the clerical
affairs. It was useful not only for the officials of the government but
also when dealing with the various problems and situations. Some of his
instructions were pointed out earlier but his most famous epistle to
Malik al-Ashtar, the *wali* of Egypt, included all the mention
instructions and a large number of highly regard able rules.

The letter is as the following: “In the name of Allah, the Beneficent,
the Merciful. This is what the servant of Allah, ‘Ali,
Ameer-al-Mu’mineen, has ordered Malik al-Ashtar, who is appointed as
*wali* of Egypt, ordering him to collect its revenue, to fight its
enemies, to manage its people's affairs and to improve the country.

He is ordered to fear Allah and to obey Him and to follow what Allah has
ordered in His book of obligations and norms, which no one will be
prosperous unless by following and no one will be wretched unless by
denying and missing, to support Allah (by supporting the rightness) with
his heart, hand and tongue, because Allah has promised to support
whomever support Him and to glorify whomever glorifies Him.

He is ordered to control his soul’s fancies and to subdue his soul if it
wants to recalcitrant, because the soul often incites towards evil
except for those, whom Allah has mercy upon.

O Malik, know that I have sent you to a country that had experienced
just and unjust rules before you. The people will think of your deeds as
you thought of the deeds of the *wali*s, who preceded you, and they will
talk about you as you talked about the *wali*s ruled before you.

The virtuous men will be known by what is said about them by the people
(by the favor of Allah). Let the loveliest provision to you be the
benevolent doing. Control your fancy and prevent yourself from what is
not legal to you because controlling one’s self is the very fairness
whether he likes or dislikes it.

Fill your heart with mercy, love and kindness towards your people and do
not be with them like the beast waiting for the opportunity to eat them,
because people are of two kinds; either your brothers in religion or
your brothers in humanity.

They fall into mistakes and may be incited by the slips. They may commit
sins on purpose or unknowingly. So you are to forgive them as you like
Allah to forgive you. You rule over them and the responsible guardian
rules over you and Allah is upon the one, who installed you.

Allah tries you by managing your people’s affairs so do not be in a war
against Allah (by trespassing His Sharia and by wronging His people)
because you are unable to put up with His wrath and you cannot do
without his forgiveness and mercy.

Do not regret when you forgive someone and do not boast when you punish
someone. Do not be angry about something that you may find an excuse for
it. Do not say: “I am the superior. I order and I must be obeyed” for it
corrupts the heart and destroys the religion and approaches to the
others (the opponents).

If your high position gives a sense of splendor or pride, you are to
think of the supreme power of Allah above you and His ability to act
upon you what you can never put up with. This will lessen your vanity,
prevent your sharpness and restore what is missed of your reason to you.

Beware not to compare yourself with Allah in His greatness or to imitate
Him in His supreme power because Allah degrades every arrogant and
demeans every haughty one.

Be fair before Allah and do not prefer yourself or your relatives and
close companions to the people. If you do not follow this, you will
wrong; and whoever wrongs the people, Allah will be his opponent and
when Allah becomes the opponent of someone, He refutes his excuses and
that he will be in a state of war against Allah until he desists from
oppression or he repents.

Nothing leads to change the blessings of Allah and to hasten His wrath
more than to persist in oppression, because Allah hears the prayer of
the oppressed and He always waylays the oppressors.

Let the loveliest thing to yourself be that which is moderate in
rightness, more general in justice and widely accepted by the people.
Know that the discontent of the public removes the content of the upper
class and that the discontent of the upper class will be excused by the
content of the public.

No one is more dependent upon the *wali* during the ease, less helpful
during the distress, more reluctant of justice, more insistent on gifts,
less grateful when gifted, less indulgent when prevented and less
patient during misfortunes than the upper class.

Whereas the pillar of the religion and the entire of the Muslims, who
are always ready to stand against the enemy, are the public of the
ummah, so let your tendency be with them and let your attention be to
them.

Let him, who looks for the defects of people, be the farthest one from
you and the most odious to you because people have defects that the
*wali* is the first one, who has to cover them. Do not try to disclose
what is hidden of those defects but you have to purify what is appeared
of them to you and Allah decides upon what is unknown for you.

Cover the defects (of people) as possible as you can and Allah will
cover of your defects as what you like to cover of your people’s
defects.

Remove every grudge from the people’s hearts by behaving fairly with
them and get rid of every enmity. Ignore whatever is not clear to you
and do not hasten to believe any slanderer because a slanderer is
deceitful even if he imitates the sincere people.

Let neither a miser participate in your consultation because he makes
you be away from virtue and frighten you of poverty if you want to
spend, nor a coward because he disheartens you nor a greedy one because
he graces greed for you with wrongfulness.

Miserliness, cowardliness and greed are different instincts but they
participate in one common thing, which is distrusting Allah.

The worst of your viziers are they, who were viziers of the wicked
rulers before you and who participated in their sins; so do not let them
be of your retinue because they were the supporters of the sinners and
the brothers of the unjust.

You will find better than them, who have the same experience but without
sins and guilts and who haven’t helped the unjust with their injustice
nor the sinners with their sins. They will be less burdensome on you,
more helpful for you, more kind-hearted to you and less intimate with
other than you (the opponents). So you depend on such people as your
retinue and then let the most preferable one to you that, who is the
most truthful in saying the bitter truth to you and the least helpful
when you do what Allah hates for His guardians to do whether it agrees
with your fancy or not.

Stick to the pious and truthful people and inure them not to praise you
or make you feel proud about something that you haven’t done because
much praise leads to vanity and arrogance.

Do not consider the benevolent and the evil as equal because you will
discourage the benevolent to do benevolence and courage the offensive to
commit more offenses. You have to reward every one according to his
doing.

Know that nothing makes the ruler think much of his people better than
to be kind to them and to lessen their burden and not to force them to
do what they are not able to do.

Let you, by doing that, cause a mutual trust between you and your people
because confidence will keep you away from many troubles. As long as you
do good to them they will confide in you and as long as you do evil to
them they will distrust in you.

Do not break a good tradition followed by the leaders of this ummah,
upon which the ummah agreed unanimously and was a cause of the people’s
virtuousness. Do not create a tradition, which will oppose some of those
previous traditions, so that the merit will be for those, who enacted
those traditions, and the sin will be upon you because you oppose them.

Always discuss with the ulema and the wise men to firm what improves the
affairs of your state and to revive what have rectified the people
before you.

Remember that the people are composed of different classes. The progress
of one is dependent on the progress of the other; and none can afford to
be independent of the other. We have the army formed of the soldiers of
God; we have our civil officers and their establishments, our judiciary,
our revenue collectors and our public relations officers. The general
public itself consists of Muslims and Thimmis[^8] and among them are
merchants and craftsmen, the unemployed and the indigent.

Allah has prescribed for them their several rights, duties and
obligations. They are all defined and preserved in the Book of Allah and
in the traditions of His Prophet.

The soldiers, by the grace of Allah, are like a fortress to the people
and they lend dignity to the state. They uphold the prestige of the
faith and maintain the peace of the country. Without them, the state
cannot stand and also they cannot stand without the support of the
state. Our soldiers have proved strong before the enemy because of the
privilege Allah has given them to

fight for Him; but they have their material needs to be fulfilled and
have therefore to depend upon the income provided for them from the
state revenue.

The military and the civil population, who pay revenue, both need the
cooperation of the others; the judiciary, the civil officers and the
clerks, who run the transactions and dealings among people, and the all
cannot do without the tradesmen, the merchants and the craftsmen, who
run the market and offer their services to the others who may not be
able to do by themselves.

And then, there is the class of the poor and the needy, whose
maintenance is an obligation on the other classes. Allah has given an
appropriate opportunity of living to the all; and then the rights of all
of these classes are to be under the charge of the *wali* and nothing
will acquit the *wali* of his charge except by carrying out his charge
fairly with full carefulness after praying Allah to support him.

Indeed, it is obligatory for him to undertake this duty and to bear with
patience the inconvenience and difficulties of the task.

Be particularly mindful of the welfare of those in the army, who, in
your opinion, are staunchly faithful to their God and His Apostle and
loyal to your imam, who, in the hour of passion, can restrain themselves
and listen coolly to the sensible remonstrance, and who can succor the
weak and smite the strong, who will not be incited by the violent
provocation and who will not falter at any stage.

Keep to those of good reputation, integrity and glorious past. Depend
upon those of courage and bravery and of magnanimity and generosity
because they are the base of liberality and the sources of benevolence.

Care for them as parents care for their children and do not exaggerate
what you have done to them. Do not leave any little kindness to them you
think it may be worthless because any kindness towards them will lead
them to confide in you and to offer you the sincere advice. Attend to
every bit of their wants.

Do not be content with general help that you may have given to them, for
sometimes, timely attention to a little want of theirs brings them
immense relief.

Let your commander in chief be the one, who helps his men and gives them
from his wealth what suffices them and suffices their families left
behind so that their intention will be the same in their jihad against
the enemy. Your being kind to them will turn their hearts towards you.

The best delight of the *wali*’s eye is by spreading justice in the
country and by the expression of the people’s cordiality.

They do not express their goodwill except when their hearts are
contented and they will not be sincere unless they are willing to
safeguard their *wali*s and are contented with their rule and are
hopeful of their aims so try to achieve their hopes and keep on praising
them and mentioning their good deeds because praising the good deeds
provokes the brave and incites the laggard inshallah.

Keep every one’s right and do not ascribe someone’s excellence to
another. Do not belittle one’s great deed. Do not let someone’s nobility
lead you to glorify his slight deed and do not let the meanness of
someone’s lead you to belittle his great deed.

Turn to Allah and to His Prophet for guidance whenever you feel
uncertain about what you have to do. Allah had said to some people, whom
He wished to guide:

***“O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Apostle and those in
authority from among you; then if you quarrel about anything, refer it
to Allah and the Apostle”.***

Referring to Allah is to obey His Book and referring to the Prophet is
to follow his Sunnah, which calls for unity and warns of separation.

Choose, for judging among people, the best of them to you, who is not
obsessed by distresses, doesn’t become importunate before the opponents,
doesn’t keep on mistakes, doesn’t miss reason, doesn’t hesitate to
follow the truth when he finds it, doesn’t think of greed, doesn’t
satisfy with the least perception without looking for the farthest, the
most pondering on the confused matters, the most dependent upon
evidences, the least bored in inspecting the opponents, the most
determined when the truth appears, who isn’t affected by praise, who
isn’t incited by any temptation and these are very few.

Observe his (the judge) judgments always and be openhanded to him to
satisfy his needs so that he won’t be in need of the people. Give him a
position in your court so high that none can even dream of coveting it
and so high that neither backbiting nor intrigue can touch him.

Think of this so much for this religion was captive under the control of
the evildoers. They used it according to their fancies and as a means to
obtain the vain pleasures of this worldly life.

Then think about your officials. Employ them after trying. Do not
appoint them favoringly or autocratically because they are full of
injustice and treason. Seek after the experienced and coy men of the
benevolent families and the previous in Islam because they are more
honest, less greedy and more prudent.

Then supply them with sufficient living for it helps them to purify
themselves and prevent them from seizing what is there under their
control and it will be an evidence against them if they break your order
or betray the trust.

Then check their jobs and send truthful and sincere inspectors to watch
them. Watching them secretly leads them to be honest and loyal in doing
their jobs and to be kind to the people. If one of them betrays the
trust, you will be informed of that by your spies and this will be
enough witness to let you punish him, disgrace him, defame him and girt
him with the shame of the guilt according to what he commits.

Take much care for the revenue so as to prosper the producers because
their prosperity leads to prosper the others. There is no prosperity
without them because all the people are dependent upon them.

Let you think of reclaiming the lands more than to think of getting the
revenue. Whoever seeks after revenue without reforming, will ruin the
country and destroy the people and his rule won’t last long. If they
(the farmers) complain of deficiency or lack of water (of the rivers or
the rains) or that their farms are damaged by floods, you have to aid
them with what may lessen their sufferings.

Do not be vexed about what you give them to relieve their distress
because they will, in return, recompense in prospering your country and
strengthening your rule besides getting their goodwill and being
delighted by spreading justice among them. They will join their power to
yours and will confide in you after doing them favors and being fair
with them.

One day if something happens, you may charge them with a heavy burden
and you find that they undertake it willingly. Prosperity bears whatever
you burden it with.

The desolation of the land comes out of the indigence of its people and
the indigence of the people comes out of the eagerness of the *wali*s
for heaping up monies for themselves, their distrust about remaining in
their positions and that they do not learn from the previous examples.

Then think about you clerks. Trust your affairs to the best of the
people. Trust your special books, in which you put your plans and
secrets, to the one, who is honest, who doesn’t pride upon his position
so that he may dare to stand against you in front of the people when
there is a disagreement between you and him, who doesn’t ignore to
inform you of the correspondences of your officials in the different
countries or to reply the received books correctly instead of you, who
doesn’t weaken a contract he concludes for you and won’t be unable to
cancel an ineffective contract, who isn’t ignorant of his ability in
dealing with the affairs because he, who ignores his own ability, is
more ignorant of the others’ abilities.

Let your choosing them not be according to physiognomy and confidence
because people feign before the *wali*s so that they may think well of
them but in fact there is nothing of truthfulness and fidelity behind
that.

You have to try them with what they did to the just *wali*s, who ruled
before you and then choose the best in serving the public and the most
loyal among them. This will show your sincerity to Allah and to him, who
entrusted you with the position you hold.

Appoint for each of your affairs one, who won’t be defeated before the
great difficulties nor will be lost among the many problems when facing
him. If you ignore any defect available in your clerks you will be
responsible for it.

Take much care for the merchants and the craftsmen; the residents and
the ones roving through the countries and take much care for the
laborers because they are the source of the welfare and the means that
brings devices and utensils from here and there, on the land and in the
sea, from the plain and the mountain where people cannot reach. They
(merchants and craftsmen) are peaceful people, who do not cause troubles
or calamities.

Care for their affairs in your country and about it. And
know-nevertheless- that many of them are cruel in dealing, with bad
stinginess, monopolizing the utilities and controlling the deals. This
is a disadvantage for the public and a defect for the *wali*s.

Prevent monopoly, because the Prophet had prohibited it. Let dealing be
lenient and fair and with fair prices for the two parties; the seller
and the buyer. If someone monopolizes something after being forbidden,
then you have to punish him severely but without exceeding the limit of
justice.

For the sake of Allah, take much care for the lower class; the poor, the
needy, the destitute and the handicapped who have no way to get their
living. Among this class there are the beggars and those, who are in
serious need but without begging.

Obey Allah with what He have entrusted you of their rights. Assign for
them something from the treasury and something from the yields of the
Muslims’ plundered lands in each country. The far and the near of them
have equal right and you are responsible for the right of every one of
them.

Do not be careless about them because you won’t be forgiven when wasting
the slight thing for the sake of achieving the great thing. Do not be
ignorant about their affairs and do not be proud before them. Seek for
those, whose news do not reach you because that people scorn them and
hate to look at them.

Order some of benevolent and humble people to seek for those destitute
ones and to inform you of their affairs and then you are to do to them
what Allah may forgive you for when you meet Him because this sect of
people is in need of fairness more than the others. Anyhow you have to
give everyone his right.

Attend to the orphans and the old people, who are helpless and do not
demean themselves by begging people. This is too heavy for the *wali*s
and the whole rightness is heavy but Allah may make it easy for those,
who hope for the good end by being patient and believe in what Allah has
promised them of.

Assign some of your time to the plaintiffs. You sit humbly with them in
a public meeting and keep your guards and soldiers away from them in
order that they may talk frankly without any fear.

I had heard the Prophet (S) saying more than a time: “A nation will not
be sanctified if the right of the weak is not taken back from the
powerful without threat or fear.” Tolerate their severity and
ineloquence. Do not show them intolerance and disdain so that Allah
spreads upon you his mercy and rewards you for your obeying Him. If you
give, give willingly and if you deny, deny kindly and apologizing.

There are certain things that you have to do yourself; you have to
answer your governors when your clerks are unable to, you have to answer
the people’s wants as soon as they reach you as your assistants may
delay them. Achieve every day’s duty in time because each day has its
own duties.

Choose for yourself the best time to be with Allah. Know that the
greatest of your doings, although that they all are to be for the sake
of Allah, are those that you do with good will and those you do for the
sake of your people.

Let the best thing, with which you worship Allah sincerely, be the
offering of his obligations, which are for Allah alone. Tire your body
for your God during your day and night. Approach to Allah sincerely with
all what you do for the sake of Him without any shortage or hypocrisy
whatever you become tired.

When you lead the people in offering the prayer, try neither to lengthen
it nor to lose anything of it because among the people there are some,
who are ill, and some, who have things to do.

Once I asked the Prophet (s), when he had ordered me to go to Yemen,
about how to lead people in offering the prayer and he said: “Offer it
like the prayer of the weakest of them and be kind to the believers.”

Do not hide too long from your people because the hiding of the *wali*s
from the people is a kind of distress and ignorance of their affairs.
Hiding from the people prevents them from knowing why they are kept away
and so the great thing will be insignificant for them and the
insignificant thing will be great, the good things will be bad and the
bad will be good and the truth will be confused with falsehood.

The *wali* is but a human being. He doesn’t know what is hidden of the
people’s affairs and the rightness has no signs that one can distinguish
between the truthfulness and the falsehood. You (the *wali*) are but one
of two; either you are a man with a liberal character following
rightness so why do you hide from a right duty that you are to do or a
deed of munificence you are to offer?

Or a man of stinginess and then you will find that how soon the people
will despair of asking you for anything in spite of that the most of
people’s wants are of complaining of wrongfulness or asking for fairness
of a conduct, which do not cost you anything.

The *wali* has a retinue and close companions, among whom there are some
selfish, impudent and unfair persons when dealing with people. Cut off
this thing by cutting off the reason that encourages them to be so.

Do not donate to anyone of your retinue or relatives a donation. Let
them not expect from you to possess any property, which will harm other
peoples of their watering or a shared act. They (the *wali*’s retinue or
relatives) enjoy it at the expense of the others and hence the benefit
will be for them whereas the blame will be upon you in this life and in
the afterlife.

Make every one submit to the rightness whoever he is whether your
retinue and relatives or not. Be patient and tolerant in applying that
whatever effect it has upon your relatives and close companions. Care
for its result whatever heavy it is to you because the result of that
will be good.

If the people suspect you of doing injustice, come out to them with your
evidence to refute their suspicion, because by this you will accustom
yourself to justice.

Be kind to your people when showing your evidences to achieve your aim
in rectifying them according to the rightness.

Do not refuse the peace your enemy invites you for if it pleases Allah
because peace will bring your soldiers comfort, make you safe from your
troubles and bring security for your country. But be extremely careful
of your enemy after the peace because the enemy may approach to you
under the pretense of peace in order to attack you unexpectedly. So be
resolute and doubt your enemy’s good will.

When you conclude an agreement with your enemy or you promise of
something, you have to keep your agreement with fidelity and to keep
your promise with loyalty. Make yourself as the safeguard of what you
have promised because nothing of Allah’s obligations that people agree
upon, in spite of their different thoughts and fancies, is better than
to glorify fulfilling the promises.

The polytheists, rather than the Muslims, kept to their promises among
them when they saw the bad results of perfidy. So do not betray your
agreement, do not break your promise and do not cheat your enemy for no
one dares to disobey Allah but the miserable ignorant. Allah made His
promise as safety that He spread between His people with His mercy and
made it as sanctum, to whose power people resorted and to whose
protection they hurried. So never let thwarting, cheating or forging be
with your promises.

Do not conclude an agreement that you may use confused statements in
order to find a way that you can cheat with it and do not depend upon a
solecism as an excuse after certifying your promise. Let no distress
lead you to annul your promise unfairly because tolerating a distress
that you expect its relief and good result is better than cheating that
you fear its bad consequence besides that Allah will ask you about His
right of fidelity you break and then He will bless neither your life nor
your afterlife.

Avoid and avoid shedding blood unjustly and without any right cause
leading you to. Nothing leads hurriedly to wrath, to evil consequence,
to transience of blessings and cessation of life worse than shedding
bloods unrightfully. Allah the Almighty will judge among His people,
first of all, about shedding bloods on the Day of Resurrection.

Do not try to firm your rule by shedding haram blood because this will
weaken and enfeeble your rule or indeed it will remove your rule and
transfer it to others. Neither Allah nor I will forgive you for an
intended killing because it must have a penalty.

If you face a wrong doing, let your whip, sword or hand not exceed in
punishment because a blow may cause a killing. Let your rule not make
you proud that you do not give the guardians of the killed one their
right.

Avoid self-conceit; do not confide in what you like of yourself and do
not wish to be praised because this is the best opportunity for the
Satan to crush the benevolence from inside the benevolent.

Do not mention the favors you do to your people.

Do not exaggerate your deeds and do not promise your people and then you
break your promise, because mentioning the favors done by you void
benevolence, exaggeration puts out the light of rightness and breaking
the promise brings detestation of Allah and the people. Allah said:

***“It is most hateful to Allah that you should say that which you do
not do”.***

Do not give your judgment about the matters before their time and do not
be indifferent when they occur.

Do not insist upon dispute when the matters are not clear and do not be
indifferent when they become clear.

Put everything in its place and every order in its concernment.

Do not distinguish yourself with what the people are equal in and do not
ignore your duties when they become clear for the people because what
you take unrightfully, will be taken from you to the others and how soon
your affairs will be uncovered and then the rights of the wronged ones
will be extracted from you.

Control your passion, intensity, power and sharpness of your tongue. Be
away of all that by preventing your tongue from setting about and by
delaying your power until your rage calms down and then you have the
option to decide.

You won’t control yourself until you worry yourself with recalling that
you will meet your God in the afterworld.

You have to remember what preceded you of a just government, a virtuous
norm, a tradition of our Prophet (S) or an obligation in the Book of
Allah and then you have to imitate what we have done according to that
and to try your best to follow what I have entrusted you with in this
charter.

I have quitted myself from anything you may protest with later on and
lest you find any excuse when you hasten after your fancy.

I pray Allah, with His infinite mercy and great power of granting every
wish, to grant me and you success to do what pleases Him and His people
with the rightful conduct and to make us worthy of people’s good will
and to offer beneficial achievements to the country.

I pray Allah to grant us blessing, dignity and to conclude my life and
yours with happiness and martyrdom. To Allah we will return. Peace be
upon the messenger of Allah and Allah may bless him and his pure progeny
with great peace and blessing. With salaam.”

This letter, which really represented the charter of the Islamic
government, had been written by Imam ‘Ali (as), who was a prodigy of
science.

He applied whatever he had said in it. The letter showed that his aim
was only to execute the divine law and to improve the social conditions
without disturbing the public peace and no to give any chance to the
plunderers to misappropriate the public funds.

It comprised all the Islamic principles calling for spreading justice,
protecting the human  
 rights without differentiating between the blacks and the whites or
Muslims and non - Muslims. It was really a good guide to civilized
Islam.

He had declared the duties of the *wali* and the people, the duty of the
rich towards the poor and the fulfillment of the obligations of Allah.
Furthermore he pointed out the particulars of an Islamic government and
he had paved the way for the Islamic organizations and administrations
to follow the best bases.

In order to spread justice and to fight against oppression, he used to
rouse the feeling of freewill and freedom among the people by exhorting
them to seek their rights and to stand up to the aggressors.

In this concern he said: “By Allah, I will take the right of the
oppressed from the oppressor and I will guide the oppressor with his
nose to the way of rightness even if he is unwilling.” He also said: “Be
an enemy of the oppressor and a helper to the oppressed.”

He said: “Allah may have mercy upon him, who supports rightfulness when
he sees it and rejects wrongfulness when he sees it and who supports the
oppressed against the oppressor.”

But the worldly governments try to change the law for the benefit of
them and hence they cause harms to their peoples because they are cruel
and merciless and they have no faith in the merciful God; consequently
they violate the principles of the law and then they run after the
pleasures of their short life.

Hence the private and individual interests come forth and the rule of
struggle for getting benefits and avoiding losses start to run and the
human beings are involved in quarrels and competitions.

Then the human affection and the sense of friendship and brotherhood
disappear and man falls into laziness and carnality at last whereas the
faith in God and believing in the afterworld gives man the security and
peace of mind; that peacefulness which causes man to be attentive to
God, to undertake the responsibility of his own doings, to fight against
evils for the sake of God and does his best to build and make the world
habitable and consequently he will be expectant of good rewards in the
future life.

Such faith in God with the aim of being friend and brother with the
others and fighting against oppression for the sake of spreading justice
and defending goodness to honor of goodness itself is the very faith
that takes man to welfare and peacefulness.

Therefore the Jews and the Christians are highly recommended to resign
themselves to the Mosaic Law and the gospel and to adopt them as a
belief to be saved from worries and anxieties.

But Islam is different from the other religions. It directs man to the
Most High and the One and Only God, Who has the control over all the
circumstances, and to believe that He has created the whole creatures
and all people are His servants.

He deserves the real sovereignty and no human being can secure his
benefit or avoid harm without His will. Consequently a freehearted
Muslim doesn’t worry about the quarrels of the world and doesn’t deem it
necessary to injure the others.

From a study of Imam ‘Ali's words through Nahj al-Balaghah we conclude
that Islam, in the first step, purifies people from bad qualities and in
this way it makes them free from all passions and fancies. Such people
will never submit to abjection and will never leave the field of
fighting against cruelty and oppression because they are not captured by
passions.

And for this reason Islam looks kindly to those people, who are free of
passions, and ranks them with the mujahidin and not with the wretched
and hypocrites.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Say: If your fathers and your sons and your brethren and your mates
and your kinsfolk and property, which you have acquired, and the
slackness of trade which you fear and dwellings which you like, are
dearer to you than Allah and His Apostle and striving in His way, then
wait till Allah brings about His command; and Allah does not guide the
transgressing people”***(9:24).

What a worthy proclamation it is! All the worldly passions have been put
in a scale-pan of the balance and loving God and His Apostle and
striving in the way of Him in the other scale-pan. Of course the pan of
godliness is heavier because of the moral distinction of the faith in
God.

Islam, in its first steps, tried to free man from superstitions and
false imaginations, because the world was immersed in superstitions and
delusions before the advent of Islam.

Some of those superstitions were innovated by people and some others
were attributed to God by some distinguished religious men and all of
those superstitions arouse from ignorance that people were afflicted
with from old times.

It was mentioned in Nahj al-Balaghah that when Imam ‘Ali (as) determined
on setting out to Siffeen, one of his companions said to him: “According
to astrology, you will not be successful in your aim if you set out at
this moment.”

Imam ‘Ali (as) exclaimed with anger and said: “Do you think that you can
tell which moment one may go out without facing any evil or can you
bring good news of which moment one may go to obtain good?” Then he
turned towards his men and said: “O people, avoid learning astrology[^9]
except that by which you are to be guided on the land or in the sea,
because it leads you to divining. An astrologer is a diviner and the
diviner is like the sorcerer, the sorcerer is like the unbeliever and
the unbeliever would be in hell.”

Anyhow Islam came to release the nations from the false imaginations
that were engraved in the figures of the idols. Islam invited people to
worship the One and Only God, who is free from false delusions, and
called them to use their mental faculties as a guide towards the truths
of life and to depend upon the scientific facts to be certain about the
truth of the existence of Allah

It is undeniable to say that when Islam appeared, the world was immersed
in corruption and oppression and people had submitted themselves to
debauchery and carnality.

The two empires of Rome and Iran were involved awkwardly in immoral
habits, the people were treated inhumanely and unjustly and the rulers
used to encroach upon the other's rights. Then Islam came and reformed
the corrupted conditions and changed that disgraceful situation into a
peaceful life full of delight and motion and it prepared people to live
morals and virtues.

Hence the world of Islam became the source of learning and instruction
for a long time, so the Muslims were known as an obvious example of
humanity, but as a result of the undue influence of the colonial policy
of the West and because of the ignorance of the Islamic statesmen the
Islamic morals and ideals began to disappear gradually throughout this
nation.

Consequently the Muslims were captured by passions and laziness and they
fell into the actual misfortune at last. The colonial policy of the
West, in the last two centuries, was based on creating discords and
splitting among the people of the backward countries. Those political
conspiracies led those people to live in poverty.

The new rising, which is going to be powerful throughout the Islamic
countries and to be active again, is really a great rising especially in
Iran. It is inspired from the past experience. All the material and
ideal powers are prepared for its advancement. Therefore it is clear
that this lively rising can easily perform the same miracles that Islam
did at its first days to uproot the corruptions of today.

Islam can order the individual and social requirements of people that no
one may violate the others’ and no race may oppress another race or a
nation may overcome other nations. Islam can prevent quarrels and
disputes. Islam invites everyone to compromise and mutual assistance for
the sake of man's welfare.

Many demonstrations formed in some of the Islamic countries in favor of
the mentioned rising. It indicated that the people really wanted an
Islamic government but unfortunately they were suppressed by their
rulers cruelly. Certainly the colonial countries had a hand in these
problems.

Now there is a fanatic war against Islam and its philosophy all over the
world. Some rulers of the Islamic countries, who commit treasons against
their countries, are really more dangerous than the foreigners and they
support the colonial policies knowingly or unknowingly.

[^1]: Hashim was the great grandfather of the Hashimites.

[^2]: Refer to the judge Fadhlullah ibn Roozbahan in his book Ibtl
al-Battil, ibn Hajar al-Asqalani in his at-Tahtheeb p.p.337, ibn Hajar
in his al-Issaba, vol.2 p.p.509, Hajji Ahmad Afandi in his Hidayatul
Mutab p.p.146, 152, Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his Musnad and Abu Na’eem
al-Isfahani in his Hilyatul Awliya’.

[^3]: It was mentioned by al-Hakim an-Nayshaboori, at-Tha’labi, Muhammad
aj-Jazayiri, Muhammad ibn Yousuf al-Ganji, al- Khwarizmi and many other
Sunni scholars.

[^4]: Refer to Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by ibn Abul Hadeed, vol.3 p.p.40,
Mawaddatul Qurba by Meer sayyid ‘Ali al-Hamadani and many others.

[^5]: Sham is the old name of Syria, Jordan, Lebanon and Palestine.

[^6]: A kind of thorny plants of Arabia.

[^7]: It was mentioned by at-Tabari in his Tareekh.

[^8]: The free non-Muslims, who live under the Islamic rule by paying
jizya (tribute).

[^9]: Here I am ‘Ali meant fortune-telling or divination and not
astronomy.


