How And By Which Way Can We Reach The Truth Of Islam?
=====================================================

Imam ‘Ali (as) wrote in his will to Imam Hasan: “O my son, know that ...
(if you do not like to follow your ancestors and virtuous people), first
you have to preach the truth by the way of understanding and perceiving
so that you do not fall into doubts or become involved in disputes...”

Nowadays man has progressed in the field of science vastly and is able
to think over the whole social problems.

On the other hand we understand from the history the cause of the
decline of a great civilization by a small one and for what reason a
small nation can obtain a victory over a great nation. We can say that
the real cause is believing in the goal and steadfastness in the belief.

Now the world is in the same situation that the Muslims were facing at
the beginning of Islam. They confronted many widespread corruptions and
crimes so that we have to confront them at the present time too.

Although the Muslims were few in number, but they encountered the
greatest empires in the history, whose force; men, equipment’s and
wealth were incomparable to the force of the Muslims. In spite of the
great difference in force, the Muslims could overcome those empires in
less than fifty years and the Muslims took the reins of the two great
governments of the world.

Therefore we have to study how this miraculous advancement took place.

Neither the material powers nor the economic schools can justify this
wonderful happening. The only thing that can be said is that the reason
behind that was the steadfastness in belief; the same belief that made
every Muslim say to the enemy, as the Holy Qur’an says:

***“Say: Do you await for us but one of two most excellent things?
(Victory or martyrdom in the way of God and eventually the Garden of
Eden) And we await for you that Allah will afflict you with punishment
from Himself or by our hands. So wait; we too will wait with you”***
(9:52).

Then they attacked the enemy's line fearlessly to get one of the two
honors. Yes, the only way to this holy aim is the faith in God and
nothing else. There may be some people, compassionately or in order to
destroy the morale of the Muslims, may say that the only way to reach
our goals is material tools and specially armaments.

Of course we are in need of arms of different kinds but it is of
secondary importance. First we have to strengthen our faith and then to
stand up to the oppressors of the East and the West. We do not have to
expect unreal dangers but we have to devote ourselves to the progress
and to withstand the colonial policies in order to secure the public
welfare throughout the world.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“And prepare against them what force you can and horses tied at the
frontier, to frighten thereby the enemy of Allah and your enemy and
others besides them, whom you do not know (but) Allah knows them; and
whatever thing you will spend in Allah's way, it will be paid back to
you fully and you shall not be dealt with unjustly***” (8:60).

The Islamic revolution that will bring down the oppressors and shake the
foundation of the tyrants is going to take form to spread its holy aim
widely by the help of material and moral forces. The aim is to spread
the social justice.

The Muslims bear glad tidings of a new world that humans will not be
cornered by material forces or be captured by economical necessities.

As it was said before that some Islamic groups are fighting now against
the devilish forces in their own countries for the sake of freedom and
social justice but unfortunately they are suppressed by some internal
xenophiles, who are more dangerous than the foreigners.

Imam ‘Ali said:

“Jihad is one of the doors of Paradise that Allah has opened for His
close saints. It is the dress of piety and the protective armor of Allah
and His firm shield. Whoever turns away from it (jihad), Allah will
clothe him with a dress of disgrace and distress, his heart is covered
with a curtain of ignorance, rightfulness is hidden from him, he is to
live in abjection and he is prevented from justice because he refused to
go to Jihad.”

Anyhow these xenophiles have to know that since these movements support
Allah's religion, Allah will support them too and eventually they will
achieve their aim.

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways; and Allah is most surely with the doers of
good”*** (29:69).

Of course it is necessary for the Islamic ummah to be self-sacrificing
and devoted to reach their goals as the first Muslims did during the
time of the Prophet and made the peoples hear that the world of Islam is
full of goodness and welfare.

The Muslims also have to know that these self-sacrifices will never be
in vain, and that they will be guaranteed on the earth by Allah the
Almighty.

Imam ‘Ali (as) always exhorted the people to seek their rights and to
stand up to the oppressors. He said: “I will never show any indolence in
fighting against one, who opposes the rightness or leads people
astray...”

The Holy Qur’an says:

***“And be not infirm and be not grieving, and you shall have the upper
hand if you are believers” (***3:139).

Imam ‘Ali said again:

“O people, help me to cleanse your hearts. By Allah, I will revenge the
oppressed on the oppressor and I will pull the oppressor with (his
halter) to the fountain of rightfulness even if he is unwilling.”

Nowadays, it is suggested to start arguments among the civilizations and
so it is necessary for the intellectuals and the sociologists of the
different countries to attend conferences and assemblies to find
suitable answers for the politico-social crisis of the world and to
treat the moral deviation and confusion among the youths.

The Europeans acquired different sciences from the Muslims during the
Crusades. Those sciences enlightened them and then led to the
Renaissance of Europe. Now the Western and the Islamic civilizations
have to communicate with each other to follow the best examples of both
sides and to find the right way to achieve a lasting peace.

Now the Islamic countries have to follow the policies of their own great
leaders and to practice the wise laws of the Holy Qur’an and to seek
inspiration from the outstanding personalities of Islam.

Although all the Islamic statesmen and executors of the divine law were
worthy personalities and they acted according to the spirit of Islam,
but the most famous of them was Imam ‘Ali (as), whose sayings and deeds
were given an account in this book to be a guide to civilized Islam.

We argue with the other civilizations by virtue of this great
personality with mutual respect and without interfering in the civilian
affairs of each other.

On the other hand the Islamic countries are greatly recommended to unite
with each other as the Holy Qur’an says:

***“And hold fast by the covenant of Allah together and be not
disunited”*** (3:103).

The Muslim countries have to suffice their needs themselves as far as
possible so that whenever an enemy made an attack against one of them,
the other Muslim countries can cut off the political and economic ties
with the aggressive enemy.

All of us must know that the only way of protecting our independence and
regaining our initial glory is to be united and to follow the principles
of the civilized Islam.


