8. Hadith Al-Qadha, An Age Of Jungle Justice V
==============================================

As the chief law enforcement officer of the *Ummah*, the *khalifah* has
the authority to arrest and prosecute anyone who commits an offence in
his presence. There is no requirement anywhere that the crime must be
reported to him by someone else before he could arrest and prosecute.
Imam ‘Abd al-Razzaq (d. 211 H) records an instance where ‘Umar, as the
*khalifah*, invoked this authority:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا عبد الرزاق قال: أخبرنا عبيد الله بن عمر عن نافع عن صفية ابنة
أبي عبيد. ومعمر عن نافع عن صفية قالت: وجد عمر في بيت رجل من ثقيف خمرا،
وقد كان جلده في الخمر فحرق بيته، وقال: ما اسمك؟ قال: رويشد، . قال: بل
أنت فويسق
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzaq – ‘Ubayd Allah b. ‘Umar AND Ma’mar – Nafi’ – Safiyyah b.
Abi ‘Ubayd:

**‘Umar discovered alcohol in the house of a man** from (the tribe of)
Thaqif. He (the man) had already been lashed for alcohol consumption in
the past. **Therefore, he (‘Umar) burnt his house**, and asked, “What is
your name?” He (the man) replied, “Ruwayshid.” He (‘Umar) retorted,
“Rather, you are *Fuwaysiq* (an abusive word)”.[^1]

Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) states about the first narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الرزاق بن همام بن نافع الحميري مولاهم أبو بكر الصنعاني ثقة حافظ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hammam b. Nafi’ al-Humayri, their freed slave, Abu
Bakr al-San’ani: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy),** ***hafiz*** **(a**
***hadith*** **scientist)**.[^2]

There are two second narrators. So, this is what al-Hafiz has to say
about *Second Narrator A*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبيد الله بن عمر بن حفص بن عاصم بن عمر بن الخطاب العمري المدني أبو
عثمان ثقة ثبت
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ubayd Allah b. ‘Umar b. Hafs b. ‘Asim b. ‘Umar b. al-Khaṭṭab al-‘Umari
al-Madani, Abu ‘Uthman: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy),** ***thabt***
**(accurate)**.[^3]

He also says about *Second Narrator B*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
معمر بن راشد الأزدي مولاهم أبو عروة البصري نزيل اليمن ثقة ثبت فاضل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ma’mar b. Rashid al-Azdi, their freed slave, Abu ‘Urwah al-Basri, he
lived in Yemen: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy),** ***thabt***
**(accurate),** ***fadhil*** **(meritorious)**.[^4]

Both second narrators transmitted from Nafi’, about whom al-Hafiz
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نافع أبو عبد الله المدني مولى ابن عمر ثقة ثبت فقيه مشهور
  </p>
</blockquote>

Nafi’, Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Madani, freed slave of Ibn ‘Umar: ***Thiqah***
**(trustworthy),** ***thabt*** **(accurate)**, a well-known jurist.[^5]

Al-Hafiz seals it with these comments about the last narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صفية بنت أبي عبيد بن مسعود الثقفية زوج بن عمر قيل لها إدراك وأنكره
الدارقطني وقال العجلي ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Safiyyah b. Abi ‘Ubayd b. Mas’ud al-Thaqafiyyah, the wife of Ibn ‘Umar.
It is said that she met the Prophet, but al-Daraquṭni denies that.
Al-‘Ijli said: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**.[^6]

Safiyyah is also a narrator of *Sahih Muslim*.[^7]

In summary, the above chain is impeccably *sahih*. Elsewhere, ‘Abd
al-Razzaq has recorded the exact same report with this chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا عبد الرزاق قال: أخبرنا معمر عن أيوب عن نافع عن صفية
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzak – Ma’mar – **Ayub** – Nafi’ - Safiyyah[^8]

The only new name is Ayub. So, who is he? Al-Hafiz answers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أيوب بن أبي تميمة جلس السختياني …. أبو بكر البصري ثقة ثبت حجة من كبار
الفقهاء العباد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ayub b. Abi Tamimah al-Sakhtayani, Abu Bakr al-Basri: ***Thiqah***
**(trustworthy),** ***thabt*** **(accurate),** ***hujjah*** **(an
authority in** ***hadith*****)**, from the greatest jurists and
worshippers of Allah.[^9]

In other words, the *athar* about ‘Umar is doubly *sahih*!

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) also has some further words:

> روى الدولابي في الكنى " (1 / 189) عن إبراهيم بن عبد الرحمن بن عوف قال:
> رأيت عمر أحرق بيت رويشد الثقفي حتى كأنه جمرة أو حمة وكان جارنا يبيع
> الخمر. وسنده صحيح. ورواه عبد الرزاق عن صفية بنت ابي عبيد كما في "
> الجامع الكبيرة " (3 / 204 / 1) وأبو عبيد في " الأموال " (ص 103) عن ابن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عمر وسنده صحيح أيضا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Dawlabi reported in *al-Kuni* (1/189) on the authority Ibrahim b.
‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Awf that he said: “I saw ‘Umar burning the house of
Ruwayshid al-Thaqafi until it became like firebrand or a hot spring.
**He was our neighbour who sold alcohol.**” **Its chain is**
***sahih***.

‘Abd al-Razzaq also narrated on the authority of Safiyyah bint Abi
‘Ubayd, as stated in *al-Jami’ al-Kabirah* (3/204/1) as well as Abu
‘Ubayd in *al-Amwal* (p. 103) on the authority of Ibn ‘Umar, **and its
chain is** ***sahih*** **too**.[^10]

Interestingly, this Ruwayshid was one of the Sahabah! Al-Hafiz states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رويشد الثقفي أبو علاج الطائفي ثم المدني له إدراك وله قصة مع عمر بسبب
بيعه الشراب قال بن أبي ذئب انا سعد بن إبراهيم بن عبد الرحمن بن عوف عن
أبيه ان عمر أمر باحراق بيت رويشد وكان يبيع فيه الشراب فنهاه عمر فلم
ينته
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ruwayshid al-Thaqafi, Abu ‘Alaj al-Taifi al-Madani: **He met the
Prophet. He also had a story with ‘Umar due to his selling of alcoholic
drinks.** Ibn Abi Dhaib said: Sa’d b. Ibrahim b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Awf
narrated to us from his father that ‘Umar ordered that the house of
Ruwayshid be burnt down. **He used to sell alcoholic drinks in it.**
**‘Umar had warned him to desist, but he never desisted**.[^11]

Elsewhere, he reiterates:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رويشد .... الثقفي .... وله قصة مع عمر في شربه الخمر .... وإنما ذكرته
في الصحابة لأن من كان بتلك السن في عهد عمر يكون في زمن النبي صلى الله
عليه وسلم مميزا لا محالة ولم يبق من قريش وثقيف أحد إلا أسلم وشهد حجة
الوداع مع النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ruwayshid ... al-Thaqafi.... He had a story with ‘Umar concerning his
consumption of alcohol.... **I have mentioned him among the Sahabah**
only because whosoever was of that age (as Ruwayshid) during the time of
‘Umar must certainly have been matured during the time of the Prophet,
peace be upon him. Also, there was no one from the tribes of Quraysh and
Thaqif except that he had accepted Islam and had witnessed the Farewell
*Hajj* with the Prophet, peace be upon him.[^12]

To summarize:

Ruwayshid was one of the Sahabah of the Prophet, from the tribe of
Thaqif.

He accepted Islam during the Prophet’s lifetime, met the latter, and did
the Farewell *Hajj* with him.

During the rule of ‘Umar, Ruwayshid was convicted for alcohol
consumption and punished.

However, after his conviction and punishment, Ruwayshid went ahead to
sell alcohol in his house.

‘Umar warned him to desist from selling alcohol, but he refused to stop.

So, ‘Umar burnt his house where he was selling the alcohol.

The story of Ruwayshid flies in the face of repeated Sunni claims about
the piety and righteousness of all the Sahabah!

It is a bit unclear on what ground ‘Umar burned Ruwayshid’s home. Was it
to punish him for selling alcohol? Or, was it only an effort to disable
him from further trading in alcohol?

One scenario is that the house-burning was inflicted as a judicial
punishment. In other words, Ruwayshid was summarily tried, convicted and
penalized for trading in alcohol. ‘Umar’ judicial sentence was that his
house should be burnt to ashes. However, where did ‘Umar get that idea
from? Was it from the Qur’an? Was it from the Sunnah? Imam Muslim
records the standard procedure in a case like this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أحمد بن عيسى حدثنا ابن وهب أخبرني عمرو عن بكير بن الأشج قال بينا
نحن عند سليمان بن يسار إذ جاءه عبدالرحمن بن جابر حدثه فأقبل علينا
سليمان فقال حدثني عبدالرحمن ابن جابر عن أبيه عن أبي بردة الأنصاري: أنه
سمع رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم يقول لا يجلد أحد فوق عشرة أسواط إلا
في حد من حدود الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. ‘Isa – Ibn Wahb – ‘Amr – Bukayr b. al-Ashja’ Sulayman b. Yasar
– ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Jabir – his father – Abu Bardah al-Ansari:

I heard the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, saying: “None is to
be given more than ten strokes of the cane (in punishment) except in the
case of punishments immutably fixed by Allah.”[^13]

So, the question is whether Allah has immutably fixed the punishment for
alcohol sales business or not. Without an iota of doubt, there is no
such fixed penalty for it. Therefore, the maximum sentence that can be
inflicted upon an alcohol seller is ten lashes. Apparently, ‘Umar did
not follow the instructions of Allah in this regard. This brought him
face-to-face against this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن لم يحكم بما أنزل الله فأولئك هم الكافرون
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever does NOT give rulings, verdicts, judgments, or commands based
upon what Allah has revealed, **such people are the infidels**.[^14]

Another scenario is that ‘Umar actually burnt the house down only to
forcefully put Ruwayshid out of business, without any intention to touch
the latter himself personally for breaking the law. This theory is
further strengthened by the fact that ‘Umar had earlier warned Ruwayshid
to desist (thereby confirming his full knowledge of the alcohol trade).
However, he made no effort whatsoever to arrest or prosecute him. When
the latter would not listen to him, he burnt down his house – which also
served as his brewery and alcohol store – solely to shut down his
business. Normally, a caring government closes or destroys illegal
ventures within its control. This is usually to protect the public. In
addition to that, the same government proceeds to prosecute the owner of
the illegal business for his crime. In the case of Ruwayshid, ‘Umar
merely burnt his alcohol store, but allowed him to go scotfree!

A baffling twist to this whole saga is that when another Sahabi was
discovered, also engaging in alcohol business, ‘Umar simply let him be!
He did not arrest him. He did not prosecute him. He did not burn his
house! Imam Muslim records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو بكر بن أبي شيبة وزهير بن حرب وإسحاق بن إبراهيم (واللفظ لأبي
بكر) قالوا حدثنا سفيان بن عيينة عن عمرو عن طاوس عن ابن عباس قال: بلغ
عمر أن سمرة باع خمرا فقال قاتل الله سمرة ألم يعلم أن رسول الله صلى
الله عليه و سلم قال لعن الله اليهود حرمت عليهم الشحوم فجملوها فباعوها
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr b. Abi Shaybah, Zuhayr b. Harb and Ishaq b. Ibrahim – Sufyan b.
‘Uyaynah – ‘Amr – Tawus – Ibn ‘Abbas:

‘Umar was informed that **Samrah sold alcohol**. So, he said, “May Allah
curse Samrah! Does he not know that the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him, said: ‘May Allah curse the Jews. The fat of animals was made
*haram* for them. But they melt it and sold it.’”[^15]

Imam Abu Ya’la (d. 307 H) also documents:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو خيثمة و أبو سعيد قالا : حدثنا سفيان بن عيينة عن عمرو عن
طاووس عن ابن عباس قال : باع سمرة خمرا فقال عمر : قاتل الله سمرة ألم
يعلم أن رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم قال : لعن الله اليهود حرمت عليهم
الشحوم فباعوها وأكلوا أثمانها ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Khaythamah and Abu Sa’id – Sufyan b. ‘Uyaynah – ‘Amr – Tawus – Ibn
‘Abbas:

**Samrah sold alcohol**. So, ‘Umar said, “May Allah curse Samrah! Does
he not know that the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, ‘May
Allah curse the Jews. The fat of animals was made *haram* for them. So,
they sold it and ate its price.’”[^16]

Shaykh Dr. Asad comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^17]

Samrah was a prominent Sahabi. He too traded in alcohol. But, what was
‘Umar’s response? He merely cursed him *by name*, and that was it! There
was no arrest, and no prosecution! Samrah’s house was equally left
intact.

[^1]: Abu Bakr ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Ṣa’nani, al-Musannaf
[annotator: Habib al-Rahman al-A’zami], vol. 6, p. 77, \# 10051

[^2]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 599, \# 4078

[^3]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 637, \# 4340

[^4]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 202, \# 6833

[^5]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 239, \# 7111

[^6]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 647, \# 8669

[^7]: See for instance Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri
al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi)
[annotator: Muhammad Fuad ‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 2, p. 1126, \# 1490
(63-64)

[^8]: Abu Bakr ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Ṣa’nani, al-Musannaf
[annotator: Habib al-Rahman al-A’zami], vol. 9, p. 230, \# 17036

[^9]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 116, \# 606

[^10]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, Tahzir al-Sajid min Itikhaz
al-Qubur Masajid (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 4th edition). p. 49,
footnote \# 47

[^11]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Ta’jil Munfa’at
bi Zawaid Rijal al-Aimah al-Arba’at (Beirut: Dar al-Bashair; 1st
edition, 1996 CE) [annotator: Dr. Ikram Allah Imdad al-Haqq], vol. 1, p.
539, \# 328

[^12]: Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Isabah fi
Tamyiz al-Ṣahabah (Beirut: Dar al-Jil; 1412 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad
Bajawi], vol. 2, p. 500, \# 2699

[^13]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 3, p. 1332, \#1708 (40)

[^14]: Qur’an 5:44

[^15]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 3, p. 1207, \#1582 (72)

[^16]: Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, Musnad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad], vol. 1, p. 178, \# 200

[^17]: Ibid


