10. Hadith Al-Qadha, An Age Of Jungle Justice VII
=================================================

No one ever knew that looking handsome could become a criminal offence
until the rule of ‘Umar b. al-Khaṭṭab. The grand Sunni *muffasir*, Imam
al-Alusi (d. 1270 H), proclaims:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صح أن عمر بن الخطاب رضي الله تعالى عنه غرب نصر بن حجاج إلى البصرة بسبب
أنه لجماله افتتن بعض النساء به
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is **authentically transmitted** that ‘Umar b. al-Khaṭṭab, may Allah
the Most High pleased be pleased him, banished Nasr b. Hajjaj to Basra
because - due to his good looks, some women were obsessed with him.[^1]

Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) also submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد أخرج بن سعد والخرائطي بسند صحيح عن عبد الله بن بريدة قال بينما عمر
بن الخطاب يعس ذات ليلة في خلافته فإذا امرأة تقول هل من سبيل إلى خمر
فأشربها أو من سبيل إلى نصر بن حجاج فلما أصبح سأل عنه فأرسل إليه فإذا
هو من أحسن الناس شعرا وأصبحهم وجها فأمره عمر أن يطم شعره ففعل فخرجت
جبهته فازداد حسنا فأمره أن يعتم فازداد حسنا فقال عمر لا والذي نفسي
بيده لا تجامعني ببلد فأمر له بما يصلحه وصيره إلى البصرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Sa’d and al-Kharaiṭi have recorded **with a** ***sahih*** **chain**
from ‘Abd Allah b. Buraydah who narrated:

While ‘Umar b. al-Khaṭṭab was on patrol one night during his *khilafah*,
there was a woman (he overheard) saying, “Is there a way to get to
alcohol to drink, or a way to get to Nasr b. Hajjaj?” In the morning, he
(‘Umar) asked about him (Nasr), and summoned him. **He was one of the
most beautiful of mankind in terms of the hair, and one of their most
good-looking**. So, he (‘Umar) ordered him to collect his hair. He did
so, and his forehead appeared. As a result, he became even more
handsome. He (‘Umar) ordered him (again) to wear a turban. But, his
beauty increased (nonetheless). So, ‘Umar said, “**No! I swear by the
One in Whose Hand my life is, you cannot stay WITH ME in the same
town**”. Therefore, he ordered what befitted him and relocated to
Basra.[^2]

Nasr b. al-Hajjaj, one of the Sahabah, committed no other “crime” than
that he looked *very* handsome. For that, he was summarily tried and
penalized, forcibly “relocated” to Basra. ‘Umar was the first human
being to do this throughout history. However, in April 2013, the Saudi
authorities followed his precedent in a very famous, severely
embarrassing case[^3] that caused widespread worldwide mockery of Islam
over the internet. Three Emirati men were deported by Riyadh to the
United Arab Emirates literally for being “too handsome”!

‘Umar’s reason for banishing Nasr seems even weirder than the
“punishment” itself. If we assumed that the *khalifah* expelled him
because “women were obsessed with him”, were there no women in Basra?
Apparently, no matter the claims, the true motive behind ‘Umar’s action
had nothing to do with women. In fact, the *khalifah* himself outlined
his justification in very clear words: he could not tolerate living in
the same city with Nasr. So if ‘Umar had later moved to Basra he would
still have re-banished Nasr to another faraway town. From all
indications, it seems that the *khalifah* was only very bitter about the
latter’s good looks.

In any case, it is pretty obvious that ‘Umar would never have tolerated
the presence of Prophet Yusuf, *‘alaihi al-salam*, in Madinah had the
latter lived during the former’s rule. These are Allah’s Words
concerning His prophet:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال نسوة في المدينة امرأت العزيز تراود فتاها عن نفسه قد شغفها حبا إنا
لنراها في ضلال مبين فلما سمعت بمكرهن أرسلت إليهن وأعتدت لهن متكأ وآتت
كل واحدة منهن سكينا وقالت اخرج عليهن فلما رأينه أكبرنه وقطعن أيديهن
وقلن حاش لله ما هذا بشرا إن هذا إلا ملك كريم
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the women in the city said, “The Queen is seeking to seduce her
young man (i.e. Yusuf, her slave then). Indeed, she loves him violently.
Verily, we see her in plain error.” So when she (the queen) heard of
their (the women’s) accusation, she sent for them and prepared a banquet
for them; she gave each one of them a knife (to cut the foodstuff with),
and she said (to Yusuf), “Come out before them.” **Then, when they saw
him, they exalted him AND CUT THEIR HANDS. They said, “Allah forbid!
THIS IS NOT A MAN! This is none other than a noble angel!**”[^4]

These were the women of ancient Egypt. Prophet Yusuf was so handsome
that they could not believe that he was even a man! So, one can safely
conclude that the noble prophet had superhuman beauty. What strengthens
this submission is that these women, in their trance over the sight of
him, were absentmindedly cutting their hands with knives, without
flinching! With these facts, Nasr b. al-Hajjaj was apparently a *very*
ugly duckling compared to Yusuf b. Ya’qub, the prophet of Allah.
Interestingly, the pagan king of Egypt tolerated and honoured Prophet
Yusuf in his city, even in his palace! By contrast, if it had been
during ‘Umar’s *khilafah*, he would have banished the prophet to a very
distant land! The *khalifah* simply could not accommodate in his city
any man like Nasr or Yusuf.

[^1]: Abu al-Fadhl Mahmud al-Alusi, Ruh al-Ma’ani fi Tafsir al-Qur’an
al-‘Azim wa Sab’ al-Mathani (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi), vol.
18, p. 81

[^2]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Isabah fi Tamyiz
al-Ṣahabah (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H)
[annotators: Shaykh ‘Ādil Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Shaykh ‘Ali
Muhammad Ma’udh], vol. 4, pp. 382-383, \# 8862

[^3]: Rob Williams, “Omar Borkan Al Gala: Is this one of the three men
who are ‘too sexy’ for Saudi Arabia”, The Independent, Friday 26 April
2013
[http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/omar-borkan-al-gala-...

[^4]: Qur’an 12:30-31


