11. Hadith Al-Qadha, ‘Ali Versus ‘Umar
======================================

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) launches a spirited campaign to bring
down ‘Ali’s status as the best judge in the *Ummah* in order to place
‘Umar above him. He simply cannot stomach the possibility of Amir
al-Muminin ‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*, surpassing the second Sunni
*khalifah* in anything, especially in such highly sensitive,
knowledge-based areas as justice dispensation. The reason for these
panicky moves can be discerned from these words of our dear Shaykh:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و في الترمذي و غيره عنه عليه الصلاة و السلام انه قال لو لم ابعث فيكم
لبعث فيكم عمر و لفظ الترمذي لو كان بعدي نبي لكان عمر قال الترمذي حديث
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

In (*Sunan*) al-Tirmidhi and others, it is narrated from him, peace and
blessings be upon him, that he said, “**If I had not been sent as a
messenger among you, ‘Umar would have been sent as a messenger among you
instead**.” The text of al-Tirmidhi reads, “**If there were to be a
prophet after me, it would have been ‘Umar**”. Al-Tirmidhi says: *A
hasan hadith*.[^1]

Elsewhere, he reiterates this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي الترمذي لو لم أبعث فيكم لبعث فيكم عمر ولو كان بعدي نبي لكان عمر
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is recorded in (*Sunan*) al-Tirmidhi: “If I had not been sent as a
messenger among you, ‘Umar would have been sent as a messenger instead
and if there were to be a prophet after me, it would have been
‘Umar”.[^2]

Those two one-sided, sectarian reports establish two realities:

1. ‘Umar and the Messenger of Allah, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*, had
*equal* credentials and abilities to be the master of the prophets, sent
to the entirety of mankind till the Hour. Therefore, ‘Umar was a perfect
replacement for the Prophet.

2. Due to ‘Umar’s status as the sole match – in qualification – to the
Messenger, he was the only one qualified to be the first prophet after
Muhammad, had prophethood not ceased.

The bottom-line is that ‘Umar was far better than Abu Bakr in all ways
and in all things! So, if ‘Ali were superior to ‘Umar, then he was the
master of both the first and the second *khalifahs*. In any case, those
two *hadiths* are one-sided (and therefore of no probative value in our
research), and contradict the Verse of *Istafa*, the Verse of *Taṭhir*
and several *sahih* and *mutawatir ahadith* (such as *Hadith al-Ghadir*,
*Hadith al-Manzilah*, *Hadith al-Tayr*, *Hadith al-Thaqalayn*, etc). The
most important part is that both reports about ‘Umar go against
well-established historical facts about him, his knowledge and his
abilities. From all angles, both *hadiths* were motivated by polemical
motives, and manufactured to “raise the stakes” for the second
*khalifah*.

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah makes an interesting strike:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
و قد وجد لعمر و علي و غيرهما فتاوى كثير ة تخالف النصوص حتى جمع الشافعي
مجلدا في خلاف علي و ابن مسعود و جمع محمد بن نصر المروزي كتابا كبيرا في
ذلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

There were LOTS of *fatwas* from ‘Umar, ‘Ali and others that
contradicted the revealed texts (i.e the Qur’an and Sunnah), such that
**al-Shafi’i compiled a whole volume on the contradictions of ‘Ali and
Ibn Mas’ud (to the Qur’an and Sunnah), and Muhammad b. Nasr al-Maruzi
compiled a huge book on that**.[^3]

He concedes that both ‘Umar and Ibn Mas’ud contradicted the Qur’an and
Sunnah *massively* in their verdicts. We agree with him, as there exists
solid evidence from both Sunni and Shi’i sources confirming that. It is
a wonder then how our dear Shaykh manages to believe that ‘Umar was
perfectly fit for prophethood despite this embarrassing fact! What else
would he have been other than a prophet who would have opposed the
Qur’an and the Sunnah on “lots” of occasions?! This reality reveals that
the purely one-sided, sectarian *hadiths* could not have genuinely
originated from the Messenger of Allah. He *never* uttered anything that
falls out of line with simple logic.

But then, did Imam al-Shafi’i and al-Maruzi really compiled books
detailing Amir al-Muminin Ali’s “contradictions” to the Qur’an and
Sunnah? Well, there is no evidence of *any* such books in our times!
Besides, our dear Shaykh seems confused on the exact authorship of those
“books”. First, he claims that both al-Shafi’i and al-Maruzi wrote
*separate* books. However, this is a contrary submission he also makes:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد جمع الشافعي ومحمد بن نصر المروزي كتابا كبيرا فيما لم يأخذ به
المسلمون من قول علي لكون قول غيره من الصحابة أتبع للكتاب والسنة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Shafi’i AND Muhammad b. Nasr al-Maruzi compiled a huge book about
what the Muslims rejected from the statement of ‘Ali, because the
statement of others from the Sahabah were more in compliance with the
Qur’an and Sunnah.[^4]

So, it was after all a *joint* authorship! What exactly do we believe
now? Moreover, where exactly *is* this book? Has anyone in history
*ever* quoted it? Has anyone in history *ever* referenced it? The
reality is that no such book *ever* existed! Imam al-Subki (d. 773 H)
reveals the truth about the book of al-Maruzi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال أبو ذر محمد بن محمد بن يوسف القاضى كان الصدر الأول من مشايخنا
يقولون رجال خراسان أربعة ابن المبارك ويحيى بن يحيى وإسحاق بن راهويه
ومحمد بن نصر المروزى وقال أبو بكر الصيرفى لو لم يصنف المروزى إلا كتاب
القسامة لكان من أفقه الناس فكيف وقد صنف كتبا سواها وقال الشيخ أبو
إسحاق الشيرازى صنف محمد هذا كتبا ضمنها الآثار والفقه وكان من أعلم
الناس باختلاف الصحابة ومن بعدهم فى الأحكام وصنف كتابا فيما خالف فيه
أبو حنيفة عليا وعبد الله رضى الله عنهما
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Dharr Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Yusuf al-Qadhi said, “The pioneers
among our Shaykhs used to say that the scholars of Khurasan (in Iran)
were four: Ibn al-Mubarak, Yahya b. Yahya, Ishaq b. Rahwayh **and
Muhammad b. Nasr al-Maruzi**.” Abu Bakr al-Sayarfi said, “If al-Maruzi
had never authored any book except *Kitab al-Qasamah* alone, he would
nonetheless have been among the most knowledgeable of mankind.
Meanwhile, he wrote many books other than it.” Shaykh Abu Ishaq
al-Shirazi said, “Muhammad (b. Nasr al-Maruzi) wrote books which
contained reports and Islamic jurisprudence, and was one of the most
knowledgeable of mankind concerning the differences of the Sahabah and
those after them on *al-ahkam* (jurisprudence). **He wrote a book
concerning the contradictions of Abu Hanifah to ‘Ali and ‘Abd Allah (b.
Mas’ud)**, may Allah be pleased with them both.[^5]

So, the book – in reality - was only about Abu Hanifah’s contradictions
to ‘Ali and Ibn Mas’ud! We leave the judgment to the esteemed reader.

There are authentic Sunni reports which further expose the fallacy of
the allegations of Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah against Amir al-Muminin. For
instance, Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي حدثني يحيى عن الأعمش عن عمرو بن مرة عن أبي
البختري عن على رضي الله عنه قال: بعثني رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم
إلى اليمن وأنا حديث السن قال قلت تبعثني إلى قوم يكون بينهم أحداث ولا
علم لي بالقضاء قال ان الله سيهدى لسانك ويثبت قلبك قال فما شككت في قضاء
بين أثنين بعد
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yahya – al-A’mash
– ‘Amr b. Marrah – Abu al-Bakhtari – ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased with
him:

I was sent by the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, to Yemen, and I
was young of age. I said, “You are sending me to a people among whom
exist disputes, and I have no knowledge in justice dispensation.” He
replied, “**Verily, Allah will guide your tongue and make your heart
firm.” I never have doubt while dispensing justice between** ***any***
**two people ever after**.[^6]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح رجاله ثقات رجال الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*, its narrators are trustworthy, narrators of the two Shaykhs[^7]

Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) also records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني علي بن حمشاد ثنا العباس بن الفضل الأسفاطي ثنا أحمد بن يونس ثنا
أبو بكر بن عياش عن الأعمش عن عمرو بن مرة عن أبي البختري قال علي رضي
الله عنه: بعثني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم إلى اليمن قال : فقلت : يا
رسول الله إني رجل شاب وأنه يرد علي من القضاء ما لا علم لي به قال :
فوضع يده على صدري وقال اللهم ثبت لسانه واهد قلبه فما شككت في القضاء أو
في قضاء بعد
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Hamshad – al-‘Abbas b. al-Fadhl al-Asfaṭi – Ahmad b. Yunus – Abu
Bakr b. ‘Ayyash – al-A’mash – ‘Amr b. Marrah – Abu al-Bakhtari – ‘Ali,
may Allah be pleased with him:

The Messenger of Allah, may Allah be pleased with him, sent me to Yemen.
So, I said, “O Messenger of Allah, I am a young man, and disputes will
be brought to me for judgment, of which I have no knowledge.” Therefore,
he placed his hand on my chest, and said, “**O Allah, make firm his
tongue and guide his heart.” I never have doubt while dispensing justice
ever after**.[^8]

Al-Hakim comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs[^9]

Al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على شرط البخاري ومسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

(*Sahih*) upon the standard of al-Bukhari and Muslim[^10]

Imam Abu Dawud (d. 275 H) documents a *mutaba’ah* for the report of Abu
al-Bakhtari:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عمرو بن عون قال أخبرنا شريك عن سماك عن حنش عن علي عليه السلام
قال :بعثني رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم إلى اليمن قاضيا فقلت يارسول
الله ترسلني وأنا حديث السن ولا علم لي بالقضاء ؟ فقال " إن الله سيهدي
قلبك ويثبت لسانك فإذا جلس بين يديك الخصمان فلا تقضين حتى تسمع من الآخر
كما سمعت من الأول فإنه أحرى أن يتبين لك القضاء " قال فما زلت قاضيا أو
ما شككت في قضاء بعد .
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Amr b. ‘Awn – Sharik – Simak – Hanash – ‘Ali, peace be upon him
(*‘alaihi salam*):

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, sent me to Yemen *as a
judge*. So, I said, “O Messenger of Allah, you are sending me while I am
young of age and have no knowledge of justice dispensation.” Therefore,
he said, “**Verily, Allah will guide your heart and will make firm your
tongue**. Whenever two disputants sit in front of you, do not give
judgment until you have heard both parties. This will make clear to you
the (correct) judgment.” **I never cease to be a judge, or never have
doubt while dispensing justice, ever since**.[^11]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*[^12]

Imam Ahmad also records this *shahid*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا يحيى بن آدم ثنا إسرائيل عن أبي إسحاق عن
حارثة بن مضرب عن على رضي الله عنه قال: بعثني رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم إلى اليمن فقلت إنك تبعثني إلى قوم وهم أسن مني لأقضي بينهم فقال
اذهب فإن الله سيهدي قلبك ويثبت لسانك
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yahya b. Adam –
Israil – Abu Ishaq – Harithah b. Mudhrab – ‘Ali, may Allah be pleased
with him:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, sent me to Yemen. So, I said,
“You are sending me to a people who are older than me that I should
judge between them.” He replied, “**Go, for Allah will guide your heart
and make firm your tongue**.”[^13]

Shaykh al-Arna’uṭ states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^14]

Whenever Amir al-Muminin set out to judge on any matter, Allah would
always guide both his heart and his tongue, and would also make them
firm. This removes the possibility of error or misguidance in whatsoever
judgments he ever gave:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن يهد الله فما له من مضل
  </p>
</blockquote>

And whomsoever Allah guides, **for him there can be NO misleader**.[^15]

With this in mind, it is apparent that whosoever attributes errors to
the judgments and verdicts of ‘Ali is actually attributing them to Allah
as well! So, we ask Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah and his followers: was it Allah
Who was “guiding” his heart and his tongue to those “contradictions” to
the Qur’an and Sunnah? We seek His refuge from such blasphemy. No truth
– whether in narrations or mere submissions – can be in *anything* that
denigrates the Almighty Lord.

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 508

[^2]: Ibid, vol. 8, p. 303

[^3]: Ibid, vol. 7, p. 502

[^4]: Ibid, vol. 8, p. 281

[^5]: Taj al-Din b. ‘Ali b. ‘Abd al-Kafi al-Subki, Ṭabaqat
al-Shafi’iyyah al-Kubra (Hajr li al-Ṭaba’at wa al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’;
2nd edition, 1413 H) [annotators: Dr. Mahmud Muhammad al-Ṭanahi and Dr.
‘Abd al-Fattah Muhammad al-Halwi], vol. 2, p. 247

[^6]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 1, p. 83, \#
636

[^7]: Ibid

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
145, \# 4658

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Ibid

[^11]: Abu Dawud Sulayman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijistani, Sunan Abi Dawud
(Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din
al-Albani], vol. 3, p. 327, \# 3584

[^12]: Ibid

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 1, p. 156, \#
1341

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Qur’an 39:37


