12. Hadith Al-Tafdhil, Investigating Its Authenticity
=====================================================

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا نسلم أن عليا أفضل أهل زمانه بل خير هذه الأمة بعد نبيها أبو بكر ثم
عمر كما ثبت ذلك عن علي وغيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

We do not agree that ‘Ali was the overall best of his time. Rather, the
best of this Ummah after its Prophet are Abu Bakr, then ‘Umar, as is
authentically narrated from ‘Ali and others.[^1]

It is true that our Sunni brothers consider Abu Bakr to be the best of
our Ummah, followed only by ‘Umar. However, during the lifetime of the
Messenger of Allah, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*, it was a different
story entirely. There is irrefutable evidence in the Sunni books
establishing that the Sahabah used to consider Amir al-Muminin, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, to be their best during the lifetime of the Messenger. Imam
Ahmad (d. 241 H) presents one of such proofs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله قال حدثني أبي قثنا محمد بن جعفر نا شعبة عن أبي إسحاق عن
عبد الرحمن بن يزيد عن علقمة عن عبد الله قال : كنا نتحدث ان أفضل أهل
المدينة علي بن أبي طالب
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad b. Hanbal) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Muhammad
b. Ja’far – Shu’bah – Abu Ishaq – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yazid – ‘Alqamah –
‘Abd Allah (b. Mas’ud):

“We used to say that **the overall best** of the people of Madinah was
‘Ali b. Abi Talib.”[^2]

“We” (in the *hadith*)[^3] apparently refers to the Sahabah generally,
and more specifically to the most senior of them living in Madinah. Ibn
Mas’ud was obviously making a reference to a past which was then
different from the present. This was why he said “we USED TO”. In other
words, at that point in time when he was making his statement, things
had become different. People were now giving ‘Ali’s place to another
person. Ibn Mas’ud was, no doubt, speaking about the time of the
Prophet. All the most senior Sahabah and their neighbours were living in
Madinah with the Messenger of Allah. The phrase “people of Madinah”
originally referred to them (excluding only the Prophet, of course).[^4]
These, needless to say, included Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthman.

So, is the above report authentic? Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) says about the
first narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الله بن أحمد بن محمد بن حنبل الشيباني أبو عبد الرحمن ولد الإمام
ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Abu ‘Abd
al-Rahman: son of the Imam, ***thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**.[^5]

What about his father? Al-Hafiz answers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحمد بن محمد بن حنبل بن هلال بن أسد الشيباني المروزي نزيل بغداد أبو
عبد الله أحد الأئمة ثقة حافظ فقيه حجة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Hanbal b. Hilal b. Asad al-Shaybani al-Maruzi, a
Baghdad resident, Abu ‘Abd Allah: One of the Imams, ***thiqah***
**(trustworthy)**, *hafiz*, jurist, *hujjah* (an authority).[^6]

Al-Hafiz also has these comments about the third narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن جعفر الهذلي البصري المعروف بغندر ثقة صحيح الكتاب إلا أن فيه
غفلة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ja’far al-Hazali al-Basri, better known as Ghandar:
***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**, *sahih al-kitab* (i.e. *ahadith* from
his books are *sahih*) except that there was some negligence in him.[^7]

Whatever negligence he had does not affect his *ahadith* from Shu’bah at
all. He used to accurately record the latter’s reports. So, he narrated
them from his books with perfect precision. Al-Hafiz provides further
information in this respect:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقال ابن مهدي كنا نستفيد من كتب غندر في شعبة وكان وكيع يسميه الصحيح
الكتاب .وقال أبو حاتم عن محمد بن ابان البلخي قال ابن مهدي غندر أثبت في
شعبة مني وقال ابن المبارك إذا اختلف الناس في حديث شعبة فكتاب غندر حكم
بينهم وقال ابن أبي حاتم سألت أبي عن غندر فقال كان صدوقا وكان مؤدبا وفي
حديث شعبة ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Mahdi said: “We used to benefit from the books of Ghandar on
Shu’bah. Waki’ named him *sahih al-kitab*.” Abu Hatim narrated from
Muhammad b. Aban al-Balakhi that Ibn Mahdi said: “Ghandar is more
accurate than me as far as Shu’bah is concerned.” Ibn al-Mubarak said,
“**When the people disagree about the** ***hadith*** **of Shu’bah, the
book of Ghandar used to judge between them**.” Ibn Abi Hatim said: “I
asked my father about Ghandar and he replied, ‘He was *saduq* (very
truthful), and was a teacher and **in the** ***hadith*** **of Shu’bah,
he is** ***thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**.’”[^8]

The fourth narrator, Shu’bah, is a pillar of Sunni *ahadith*. Al-Hafiz
gives the catch-phrases about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شعبة بن الحجاج بن الورد العتكي مولاهم أبو بسطام الواسطي ثم البصري ثقة
حافظ متقن كان الثوري يقول هو أمير المؤمنين في الحديث
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shu’bah b. al-Hajjaj b. al-Ward al-‘Atki, their freed slave, Abu Busṭam
al-Wasiṭi, al-Basri: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**, *hafiz*,
**extremely precise**. Al-Thawri used to say: “**He was the** ***amir
al-muminin*** **(the supreme leader) in** ***al-Hadith***.”[^9]

Abu Ishaq al-Sabi’i is the fifth narrator, and al-Hafiz has this to say
about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عمرو بن عبد الله بن عبيد …. أبو إسحاق السبيعي بفتح المهملة وكسر
الموحدة ثقة مكثر عابد من الثالثة اختلط بأخرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Amr b. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Ubayd .... Abu Ishaq al-Sabi’i: ***Thiqah***
**(trustworthy)**; narrated a lot (of *ahadith*), a great worshipper (of
Allah), from the third (*ṭabaqat*). He became confused (in his
narrations) during the end part of his lifetime.[^10]

Of course, Shu’bah heard from him before the memory loss. ‘Allamah
al-Albani (d. 1420 H) explains:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وتابعهم سفيان الثوري وشعبة عن أبي إسحاق، ولكنهما لم يذكرا النزول،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وروايتهما أصح، لأنهما سمعا منه قبل الاختلاط
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sufyan al-Thawri **and Shu’bah** also narrated from Abu Ishaq, although
both did not mention the Descent. The reports of both of them (from Abu
Ishaq) are more authentic, **because they both heard from him BEFORE he
became confused**.[^11]

Another relevant point is that Abu Ishaq is a *mudalis* and has, on the
surface, narrated the report of Ibn Mas’ud above is an *‘an-‘an* form
from ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yazid. However, the *tadlis* does NOT, in
reality, affect the *‘an-‘an* reports of Abu Ishaq – among others - as
long as it is Shu’bah narrating from him. Allamah al-Albani states
further:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الترمذي: " حديث حسن صحيح، رواه الثوري وشعبة عن أبي إسحاق ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهو كما قال، وهما قد رويا عنه قبل اختلاطه، وشعبة لا يروي عنه إلا
ما صرح فيه بالتحديث كما هو مذكور في ترجمته، فبروايته عنه أمنا شبهة
تدليسه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Tirmidhi said: “A *hasan sahih hadith*, al-Thawri and Shu’bah
narrated it from (*‘an*) Abu Ishaq.”

I say: It is (truly *hasan sahih*) as he (al-Tirmidhi) has stated, and
both of them (i.e. al-Thawri and Shu’bah) narrated from him (i.e. Abu
Ishaq) before his confusion. **As for Shu’bah, he never narrated
anything from him (i.e. Abu Ishaq) except what he (Abu Ishaq) explicitly
stated to have directly heard from the person he is narrating from
(i.e.** ***tahdith*****)**, as stated in his t*arjamah* (biography).
**Due to his (Shu’bah’s) narration from him (i.e. Abu Ishaq), the
problem of his** ***tadlis*** **is removed**.[^12]

In a clearer word, whenever Shu’bah narrates from Abu Ishaq (as in this
case of Ibn Mas’ud’s *hadith*), all the problems associated with the
latter’s reports are removed. The former narrated from him before his
confusion in his *ahadith*, and never transmitted any *tadlis*-infested
reports from him. So, whenever Shu’bah narrates an *‘an-‘an* report from
Abu Ishaq, there actually is *tahdith* by the latter from his Shaykh.
The *‘an-‘an* form is only Shu’bah’s convenience style. No wonder, Imam
al-Bukhari (d. 256 H) includes this *sanad* in his *Sahih*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا سليمان بن حرب حدثنا شعبة عن أبي إسحاق عن عبد الرحمن بن يزيد
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sulayman b. Harb – **Shu’bah** – **Abu Ishaq** – **‘Abd al-Rahman b.
Yazid**.[^13]

This is an *‘an-‘an* report by Abu Ishaq from ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yazid
(the same Shaykh as in the *athar* of Ibn Mas’ud). Nevertheless, Imam
al-Bukhari considers the chain to be *sahih*.

Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal has also documented a similar *‘an-‘an* chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي قال حدثنا يزيد قال أنا شعبة عن أبي إسحاق عن
أبي ميسرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad b. Hanbal) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yazid –
**Shu’bah** – **Abu Ishaq** – Abu Maysarah.[^14]

Al-Arnauṭ comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Its chain is** ***sahih*** upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^15]

‘Allamah al-Albani too authenticates yet another *‘an-‘an* chain of Abu
Ishaq:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده: حدثنا حفص بن عمر: ثنا شعبة عن أبي إسحاق عن الأسود عن عبد الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا إسناد صحيح على شرط البخاري
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain: Hafs b. ‘Umar – **Shu’bah** – **Abu Ishaq** – al-Aswad – ‘Abd
Allah.

I say: **This chain is** ***sahih*** upon the standard of
al-Bukhari.[^16]

Imam Abu Ya’la (d. 307 H) also documents an *‘an-‘an* chain by Abu
Ishaq, from ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yazid, like al-Bukhari:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا إسحاق حدثنا عبد الصمد حدثنا شعبة عن أبي إسحاق عن عبد الرحمن بن
يزيد عن الأسود
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ishaq – ‘Abd al-Samad – **Shu’bah** – **Abu Ishaq** – **‘Abd al-Rahman
b. Yazid** – al-Aswad[^17]

Shaykh Dr. Asad gives this verdict:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^18]

Let us now move to the sixth narrator in the *sanad* of Ibn Mas’ud’s
*athar*: ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yazid. The status of ‘Abd al-Rahman as a
*thiqah* (trustworthy) narrator of *Sahih al-Bukhari* is already
well-known. Nonetheless, we are pleased to present this further
confirmation by al-Hafiz:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الرحمن بن يزيد بن قيس النخعي أبو بكر الكوفي ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Rahman b. Yazid b. Qays al-Nakha’i, Abu Bakr al-Kufi:
***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**.[^19]

Finally, concerning the seventh and last narrator (‘Alqamah), al-Hafiz
al-‘Asqalani proclaims with full strength:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
علقمة بن قيس بن عبد الله النخعي الكوفي ثقة ثبت فقيه عابد
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Alqamah b. Qays b. ‘Abd Allah al-Nakha’i al-Kufi: ***Thiqah***
**(trustworthy)**, *thabt* (accurate), *faqih* (a jurist), *‘abidun* (a
great worshipper of Allah).[^20]

With this, it is absolutely clear and undeniable that Ibn Mas’ud’s
report that the Sahabah used to consider ‘Ali as the overall best among
them has an impeccably *sahih* chain. All the narrators are *thiqah*,
and the chain is fully and perfectly connected.

Even then, the same *athar* has been recorded with a second *sahih*
chain in that same *Fadhail al-Sahabah*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله قال حدثني جدي قثنا أبو قطن قثنا شعبة عن أبي إسحاق عن
عبد الله بن يزيد عن علقمة عن عبد الله وهو بن مسعود قال : كنا نتحدث ان
أفضل أهل المدينة علي بن أبي طالب
  </p>
</blockquote>

**‘Abd Allah** (b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Baghwi) – **my
grandfather** (Ahmad b. Muni’ al-Baghwi) – **Abu Qaṭan** – Shu’bah – Abu
Ishaq – **‘Abd Allah b. Yazid** – ‘Alqamah – ‘Abd Allah b. Mas’ud:

“We used to say that **the overall best** of the people of Madinah was
‘Ali b. Abi Talib.”[^21]

We already know the status of Shu’bah, Abu Ishaq and Alqamah. So, let’s
find out about these new names.

This is al-Hafiz’s verdict on the first narrator of this new *sanad*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الله بن محمد بن عبد العزيز أبو القاسم البغوي الحافظ الصدوق مسند
عصره ….قلت وقد وثقه الدارقطني والخطيب وغيرهما قال الخطيب كان ثقة ثبتا
مكثرا فهما عارفا …. قلت الرجل ثقة مطلقا
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, Abu al-Qasim al-Baghwi:
*Al-hafiz*, ***al-saduq*** **(the extremely truthful)**, the top scholar
of his time.... **I (al-‘Asqalani) say: He has been declared**
***thiqah*** **(trustworthy) by al-Daraqutni, al-Khatib and others**.
Al-Khatib said, “He was *thiqah* (trustworthy), accurate, and narrated a
lot (of *ahadith*)”.... **I (al-‘Asqalani) say: The man is absolutely**
***thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**.[^22]

Concerning his grandfather, al-Hafiz further submits:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحمد بن منيع بن عبد الرحمن أبو جعفر البغوي ….ثقة حافظ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Muni’ b. ‘Abd al-Rahman, Abu Ja’far al-Baghwi....: ***Thiqah***
**(trustworthy)**, *hafiz*.[^23]

Abu Qaṭan too is *thiqah* (trustworthy), as confirmed by al-Hafiz:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عمرو بن الهيثم بن قطن … أبو قطن البصري ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Amr b. al-Haytham b. Qaṭan ... Abu Qaṭan al-Basri: ***Thiqah***
**(trustworthy)**.[^24]

Of course, ‘Abd Allah b. Yazid was a junior Sahabi, and therefore needed
no investigation. He is automatically *thiqah* (trustworthy). Al-Hafiz
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الله بن يزيد بن زيد بن حصين الأنصاري الخطمي بفتح المعجمة وسكون
المهملة صحابي صغير ولي الكوفة لابن الزبير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Yazid b. Zayd b. Husayn al-Ansari al-Khaṭmi: **a junior
Sahabi**. He was the *wali* (ruler) of Kufah for Ibn al-Zubayr.[^25]

So, we have a second impeccable *sanad* for the *hadith*.

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 6, p. 475

[^2]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Fadhail al-Ṣahabah
(Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1403 H) [annotator: Dr. Wasiyullah
Muhammad ‘Abbas], vol. 2, p. 604, \# 1033

[^3]: We are calling it a hadith, rather than an athar, because it lays
down a consensus of the Ṣahabah, which they had during the lifetime of
the Prophet of Allah. It is our firm belief that they could not have
formed such a consensus except on the basis of what they had learnt from
the Messenger.

[^4]: See Qur’an 9:101 and 9:120

[^5]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 477, \# 3216

[^6]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 44, \# 96

[^7]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 63, \# 5805

[^8]: Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H), vol. 9, p. 85, \# 129

[^9]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 418, \# 2798

[^10]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 739, \# 5081

[^11]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Ṣahih Abi Dawud (Kuwait: Muasassat
al-Gharas li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1423 H), vol. 7, p.
410, \# 2387

[^12]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Ṣahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 5, p. 481, \# 2366

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-J’ufi, al-Jami’ al-Ṣahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
3, p. 1373, \# 3551

[^14]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 6, p. 182, \#
25532

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Ṣahih Abi Dawud (Kuwait: Muasassat
al-Gharas li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1423 H), vol. 5, p.
150, \# 1267

[^17]: Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, Musnad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad], vol. 8, p. 35, \# 4541

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 596, \# 4057

[^20]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 687, \# 4697

[^21]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Fadhail al-Ṣahabah
(Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1403 H) [annotator: Dr. Wasiyullah
Muhammad ‘Abbas], vol. 2, p. 646, \# 1097

[^22]: Shihab al-Din Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani,
Lisan al-Mizan (Beirut: Manshurat Muasassat al-A’lami li al-Matbu’at;
2nd edition, 1390 H), vol. 3, pp. 338-339, \# 1339

[^23]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 47, \# 114

[^24]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 748, \# 5146

[^25]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 547, \# 3715


