16. Hadith Saluni, Implications Of The Reports
==============================================

The first and only creature to have *ever* made claims and offered
challenges similar to those in *Hadith Saluni* was the Messenger of
Allah, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa wa alihi*. Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحدثني حرملة بن يحيى بن عبدالله بن حرملة بن عمران التجيبي أخبرنا ابن
وهب أخبرني يونس عن ابن شهاب أخبرني أنس بن مالك أن رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم خرج حين زاغت الشمس فصلى لهم صلاة الظهر فلما سلم قام على
المنبر فذكر الساعة وذكر أن قبلها أمورا عظاما ثم قال من أحب أن يسألني
عن شيء فليسألني عنه فوالله لا تسألوني عن شيء إلا أخبرتكم به ما دمت في
مقامي هذا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أنس بن مالك فأكثر الناس البكاء حين سمعوا ذلك من رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم وأكثر رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم أن يقول سلوني فقام
عبدالله بن حذافة فقال من أبي ؟ يا رسول الله قال أبوك حذافة فلما أكثر
رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم من أن يقول سلوني برك عمر فقال رضينا
بالله ربا وبالإسلام دينا وبمحمد رسولا قال فسكت رسول الله صلى الله عليه
و سلم حين قال عمر ذلك ثم قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم أولى والذي
نفس محمد بيده لقد عرضت علي الجنة والنار آنفا في عرض هذا الحائط فلم أر
كاليوم في الخير والشر
  </p>
</blockquote>

Harmala b. Yahya b. ‘Abd Allah b. Harmala b. ‘Imran al-Tajibi – Ibn Wahb
– Yunus – Ibn Shihab – Anas b. Malik:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, came out when the sun had
passed the meridian, and led them in *Salat al-Ẓuhr*. When he said the
*salam*, he stood upon the pulpit, and mentioned the Hour, and mentioned
great affairs that would occur before it. Then he said, “**Whosoever
wishes to ask me about** ***ANYTHING*****, let him ask me. I swear by
Allah, you will not ask me about** ***ANYTHING*** **except that I will
inform you of it as long as I remain in this position of mine**.” So,
the people wept a lot when they heard that from the Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him. **Then the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
repeatedly said “Ask me!” several times**. So, ‘Abd Allah b. Hudhafah
stood up and said, “Who is my father, O Messenger of Allah?” He (the
Prophet) replied, “Your father is Hudhafah.” When the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, continuously repeated “Ask me!” several times,
‘Umar knelt down and said, “We are well-pleased with Allah as Lord, and
with Islam as religion, and with Muhammad as Messenger.” So, the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, kept quiet so long as ‘Umar was
saying that. Then the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “It
is near. I swear by the One in Whose Hand the life of Muhammad is, there
was presented to me the Paradise and the Hellfire in the nook of this
enclosure, and I did not see as much good and evil as I have seen
today.”[^1]

Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) also records:

> حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا بن أبي عدي عن حميد عن أنس قال قال رسول
> الله صلى الله عليه و سلم Y لا تسألوني عن شيء إلى يوم القيامة الا
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثتكم قال فقال عبد الله بن حذافة يا رسول الله من أبي قال أبوك حذافة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Ibn Abi ‘Adi –
Hamid – Anas:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “**You will not ask me
about** ***ANYTHING*** **(that will occur) up till the Day of
Resurrection except that I will tell you**.” So, ‘Abd Allah b. Hudhafah
said, “O Messenger of Allah, who is my father?” He replied, “Your father
is Hudhafah”.[^2]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^3]

These were momentous words. He offered them a challenge that was clearly
beyond human capability. The Sahabah were awed. They never fathomed the
existence of a man who could answer *any* question about *anything* –
*any* verse in *any* revealed scripture, *any* Sunnah of *any* prophet,
*any* private secrets of anyone, science, medicine, technology,
astronomy, and so on. Anything! Nothing whatsoever was excluded. They
were challenged to ask *anything* about *anything*! ‘Abd Allah b.
Hudhafah exploited the opportunity to verify his paternity – which, of
course, was part of “anything”. The other Sahabah were too overwhelmed
with awe to ask any question. The Prophet kept challenging them. But,
all that they could do was weep. If anyone makes a similar challenge
today, he would be humiliated immediately with very simple questions.
The only creature that was capable of making the same challenge as the
Messenger of Allah had done was none other than Amir al-Muminin,
*‘alaihi al-salam*.

This relevant *athar* is documented in *Fadhail al-Sahabah* of Imam
Ahmad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله نا عثمان بن أبي شيبة نا سفيان عن يحيى بن سعيد قال أراه
عن سعيد : قال لم يكن أحد من أصحاب النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم يقول سلوني
الا علي بن أبي طالب
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad b. Hanbal) – ‘Uthman b. Abi Shaybah – Sufyan –
Yahya b. Sa’id – Sa’id: “There was never anyone among the Sahabah of the
Prophet, peace be upon him, who used to say “Ask me!” except ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib.[^4]

Dr. ‘Abbas comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^5]

As for Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, both of them did not even have sufficient
knowledge of either the Qur’an or Sunnah – much less anything else! For
instance, ‘Umar did not know the basic Islamic ruling on *tayammum*.
Imam Muslim records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني عبدالله بن هاشم العبدي حدثنا يحيى (يعني ابن سعيد القطان) عن شعبة
قال حدثني الحكم عن ذر عن سعيد بن عبدالرحمن بن أبزي عن أبيه أن رجلا أتى
عمر فقال :إني أجنبت فلم أجد ماء فقال لا تصل
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Hisham al-‘Abdi – Yahya b. Sa’id al-Qaṭṭan – Shu’bah –
al-Hakam – Dharr – Sa’id b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abza – his father:

A man came to 'Umar and said: “I have seminal discharges and I cannot
find water (to do the *ghusl*)”. **He (‘Umar) said, “Do not perform**
***Salat*****.”**[^6]

Meanwhile, this is the answer to that question in the Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإن كنتم مرضى أو على سفر أو جاء أحد منكم من الغائط أو لامستم النساء
فلم تجدوا ماء فتيمموا صعيدا طيبا فامسحوا بوجوهكم وأيديكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

And if you are ill, or on a journey, or one of you comes after answering
the call of nature, or **you have had sexual intercourse with women and
you cannot find water, perform** ***tayammum*** **with clean soil** and
rub therewith your faces and hands.[^7]

‘Umar apparently did not know the verses, or even the explicit Prophetic
traditions which also explain the matter. As such, it was naturally
impossible for him to have issued *any* challenge to *any* people to ask
him *anything*! He completely lacked the capability, and would have been
instantly humiliated with such beginner’s topics as *tayammum*.
Moreover, as Imam al-Bukhari (d. 256 H) records below, ‘Umar also lacked
knowledge of some other topics in Islamic jurisprudence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أحمد بن أبي رجاء حدثنا يحيى عن أبي حيان التيمي عن الشعبي عن ابن
عمر رضي الله عنهما قال :خطب عمر على منبر رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم
فقال إنه قد نزل تحريم الخمر وهي من خمسة أشياء العنب والتمر والحنطة
والشعير والعسل والخمر ما خامر العقل . وثلاث وددت أن رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم لم يفارقنا حتى يعهد إلينا عهدا الجد والكلالة وأبواب من
أبواب الربا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad b. Abi Rajah – Yahya – Abu Hayyan al-Tamimi – Shu’bi – Ibn ‘Umar,
may Allah be pleased with them both:

‘Umar delivered a sermon on the pulpit of the Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him, saying, “Verily, there was revealed an order making alcohol
*haram*, and it is made from five things: grape, date, wheat, barley and
honey. Alcohol is whatsoever clouds the mind. **I wish the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, had not left us before he could explain three
matters to us: the inheritance of the grandfather,** ***kalalah*** **and
various types of** ***riba*** **(usury)**.”[^8]

But, it was not only ‘Umar. Abu Bakr too, as the *khalifah* – and
therefore the chief religious authority of the Muslims, was asked a
beginner’s question by one of his subjects. It however turned out that
the *khalifah* actually had no clue! Allah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلينظر الإنسان إلى طعامه أنا صببنا الماء صبا ثم شققنا الأرض شقا
فأنبتنا فيها حبا وعنبا وقضبا وزيتونا ونخلا وحدائق غلبا وفاكهة وأبا
متاعا لكم ولأنعامكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

That We pour forth water in abundance, and We split the earth in clefts,
and We cause therein the grain to grow, and grapes and clover plants,
and olives and date-palms, and gardens, dense with many trees, and
fruits and **herbage**, a benefit for you and your cattle.[^9]

The above verse is in plain Arabic. Allah reveals about His Book:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا لسان عربي مبين
  </p>
</blockquote>

This (Qur’an) is a **clear** Arabic tongue.[^10]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنا أنزلناه قرآنا عربيا لعلكم تعقلون
  </p>
</blockquote>

We have sent it down as **an Arabic Qur’an in order that you may
understand**.[^11]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنا جعلناه قرآنا عربيا لعلكم تعقلون
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, We have made it a Qur’an **in Arabic that you may be able to
understand**.[^12]

Therefore, anyone with a proficient knowledge of the Arabic language
will always understand the verses of the Qur’an – at least in their
literal senses – perfectly. During the *khilafah* of Abu Bakr, a man
came to him about the word “herbage” in the above passage. He did not
understand what it meant. Perhaps, the man was a Persian, Roman or
African. It is also possible that he was an Arab, but one without a
sound knowledge of his native language. So, how did the *khalifah*
explain to him?

Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani (d. 852 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن وجه آخر عن إبراهيم النخعي قال قرأ أبو بكر الصديق وفاكهة وأبا فقيل
ما الأب فقيل كذا وكذا فقال أبو بكر ان هذا له التكلف أي أرض تقلني أو أي
سماء تظلني إذا قلت في كتاب الله بما لا أعلم وهذا منقطع بين النخعي
والصديق وأخرج أيضا من طريق إبراهيم التيمي ان أبا بكر سئل عن الأب ما هو
فقال أي سماء تظلني فذكر مثله وهو منقطع أيضا لكن أحدهما يقوي الآخر
  </p>
</blockquote>

And it is narrated from another chain on the authority of Ibrahim
al-Nakha’i:

Abu Bakr al-Siddiq recited “and fruits and herbage”. So, someone asked,
“What is herbage?” Another person answered, “It is so-and-so”.
Therefore, Abu Bakr said, “**This one (i.e. this question) is
overburdensome. Which earth will carry me and which sky will shield me
if I say concerning the Book of Allah THAT WHICH I HAVE NO KNOWLEDGE
OF**.”

This is *munqati’* (disconnected) between al-Nakha’i and al-Siddiq. It
is also recorded through the route of Ibrahim al-Tamimi that **Abu Bakr
was asked about herbage, what it was**, and he replied, “Which sky would
shield me....” and he mentioned the like of it (i.e. what Ibrahim
al-Nakha’i narrated). This one too is *munqati’*. **However, each one of
the two (reports) STRENGTHENS the other**.[^13]

So, Abu Bakr, despite being from Quraysh – who spoke the purest Arabic
dialect – did not know what “herbage” meant in the Qur’an! Apparently,
though an Arab, the first Sunni *khalifah* had deficient knowledge of
his own native language. Considering that the Book of Allah was revealed
in “clear” Arabic, that fact alone naturally made him an incompetent
interpreter of the divine Scripture.

‘Umar too had a similar condition. Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو عبد الله بن يعقوب ثنا إبراهيم بن عبد التميمي أنبأ يزيد بن
هارون أنبأ حميد عن أنس وحدثنا أبو عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا إسحاق أنبأ
يعقوب بن إبراهيم بن سعد ثنا أبي عن صالح عن ابن شهاب أن أنس بن مالك رضي
الله عنه أخبره أنه سمع عمر بن الخطاب رضي الله عنه يقول ـ { فأنبتنا
فيها حبا \* وعنبا وقضبا \* وزيتونا ونخلا \* وحدائق غلبا \* وفاكهة وأبا
} قال : فكل هذا قد عرفناه فما الأب ثم نقض عصا كانت في يده ؟ فقال : هذا
لعمر الله التكلف اتبعوا ما تبين لكم من هذا الكتاب
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu ‘Abd Allah b. Ya’qub – Ibrahim al-Tamimi – Yazid b. Harun – Hamid –
Anas:

And Abu ‘Abd Allah – my father – Ishaq – Ya’qub b. Ibrahim b. Sa’d – my
father – Salih – Ibn Shihab – Anas b. Malik, may Allah be pleased with
him:

I heard ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, reciting {And We cause
therein the grain to grow, and grapes and clover plants, and olives and
date-palms, and gardens, dense with many trees, and fruits and
**herbage**}. He said, “**We have known all of this. But, what is
“herbage”**? Then, he broke a stick which was in his hand. So, he said,
“**This, I swear by the Life of Allah, IS OVERBURDENSOME. Follow (only)
what is clear to you from this Book**.”[^14]

Al-Hakim says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^15]

Al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على شرط البخاري ومسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

(*Sahih*) upon the standard of al-Bukhari and Muslim[^16]

For Allah’s sake, was it possible for Abu Bakr or ‘Umar to issue a
challenge like this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لا تسألوني عن آية في كتاب الله ، ولا عن سنة عن رسول الله ، إلا أنبأتكم
بذلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

You will not ask me about *ANY* verse in the Book of Allah, or about
*ANY* Sunnah from the Messenger of Allah, except that I will inform you
of that.

[^1]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 4, p. 1832, \# 2359 (136)

[^2]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 3, p. 107, \#
12063

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Fadhail al-Ṣahabah
(Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1st edition, 1403 H) [annotator: Dr.
Wasiyullah Muhammad ‘Abbas], vol. 2, p. 646, \# 1098

[^5]: Ibid

[^6]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 1, p. 280, \#112

[^7]: Qur’an 4:43 and 5:6

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah
al-Bukhari al-J’ufi, al-Jami’ al-Ṣahih al-Mukhtasar (Beirut: Dar Ibn
Kathir; 3rd edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Dib al-Bagha], vol.
5, p. 2122, \# 5266

[^9]: Qur’an 80:25-32

[^10]: Qur’an 16:103

[^11]: Qur’an 12:2

[^12]: Qur’an 43:3

[^13]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Ṣahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Ṭaba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 13, pp. 229-230

[^14]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 2, p.
559, \# 3897

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Ibid


