25. Hadith Al-Rayat, Investigating Its Authenticity
===================================================

Before Hunayn (8 AH), ‘Umar b. al-Khaṭṭab ran away from the battlefield
at least twice – during Khandaq (5 AH) and at Khaybar (7 AH). It was at
Khaybar that *Hadith al-Rayat* was declared by the Messenger of Allah,
*sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*. We will therefore briefly examine what
the second *khalifah* did during the Khandaq battle before moving on to
Khaybar. Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا يزيد قال انا محمد بن عمرو عن أبيه عن جده
علقمة بن وقاص قال أخبرتني عائشة قالت خرجت يوم الخندق أقفوا آثار الناس
قالت فسمعت وئيد الأرض ورائي يعني حس الأرض قالت فالتفت فإذا أنا بسعد بن
معاذ ومعه بن أخيه الحارث بن أوس يحمل مجنة قالت فجلست إلى الأرض فمر سعد
وعليه درع من حديد قد خرجت منها أطرافه فأنا أتخوف على أطراف سعد قالت
وكان سعد من أعظم الناس وأطولهم قالت فمر وهو يرتجز ويقول (ليت قليلا
يدرك الهيجا جمل ... ما أحسن الموت إذا حان الأجل) قالت فقمت فاقتحمت
حديقة فإذا فيها نفر من المسلمين وإذا فيهم عمر بن الخطاب وفيهم رجل عليه
سبغة له يعنى مغفرا فقال عمر ما جاء بك لعمري والله إنك لجريئة وما يؤمنك
أن يكون بلاء أو يكون تحوز قالت فما زال يلومني حتى تمنيت أن الأرض انشقت
لي ساعتئذ فدخلت فيها قالت فرفع الرجل السبغة عن وجهه فإذا طلحة بن عبيد
الله فقال يا عمر ويحك انك قد أكثرت منذ اليوم وأين التحوز أو الفرار إلا
إلى الله عز و جل
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yazid – Muhammad
b. ‘Amr – his father – his grandfather ‘Alqamah b. Waqqas – ‘Aishah:

I went out on the Day of al-Khandaq **and I stood behind the people**.
So, I heard footsteps coming from behind me. I turned around and saw
Sa’d b. Mu’adh, and his nephew al-Harith b. Aws was carrying his armour.
Therefore, I sat down on the ground and Sa’d passed by, wearing an iron
armour from which his limbs had come out. I was afraid of Sa’d’s limbs.
Sa’d was one of the most huge and tallest people. Sa’d passed by,
singing a battle song, saying: “Very soon the battle will meet a camel
... What a good death it is when the time has come.”

**Then I stood up and entered a garden. There was a small group of
Muslims** **there, and ‘Umar b. al-Khaṭṭab was amongst them and there
was another man who was wearing a mask**. ‘Umar said: “What brought you
here? I swear by my life and I swear by Allah, you are a reckless woman!
What assures you against the occurrence of a disaster or capture?” He
kept blaming me so much until I wished that the earth would split open
for me so that I could enter into it. Then the (masked) man removed the
mask from his face, and he was Talhah b. ‘Ubayd Allah. So he said, “Woe
to you, O Umar! You have said too much today! And where is the writhing
movement or the flight except to Allah the Almighty?”[^1]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) has copied the exact same narration in
his *Sahihah*, and states:

> أخرجه الإمام أحمد (6 / 141 - 142) عن محمد بن عمرو عن أبيه عن علقمة ابن
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقاص، قال: أخبرتني عائشة قالت....
  </p>
</blockquote>

> قلت: وهذا إسناد حسن. وقال الهيثمي في " مجمع الزوائد " (6 /128):" رواه
> أحمد وفيه محمد بن عمرو بن علقمة وهو حسن الحديث، وبقية رجاله ثقات".
> وقال الحافظ في " الفتح " (11 /43): " وسنده حسن".

Imam Ahmad (6/141-142) recorded it from Muhammad b. ‘Amr - his father -
‘Alqamah b. Waqqas – ‘Aishah....

I (Al-Albani) say: **This chain is** ***hasan***. Al-Haythami said in
*Majma’ al-Zawaid* (6/128): “Ahmad recorded it and in the chain is
Muhammad b. ‘Amr b. ‘Alqamah, and his *hadith* is *hasan*, and the other
narrators in the chain are trustworthy”. Al-Hafiz also said in *al-Fath*
(11/43): “**And its chain is** ***hasan***”.[^2]

Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354 H) too has documented the report in his
*Sahih*[^3]. ‘Allamah al-Albani says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*[^4]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ confirms this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حديث حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

A *hasan hadith*[^5]

The question is: what was ‘Umar and his few colleagues doing in a
garden, hidden from view, while the Messenger of Allah and the other
Sahabah were actively in battle against the allied forces of the pagans?
The people, as testified by Umm al-Muminin ‘Aishah, were at the
warfront. She was standing *behind* the fighting soldiers. So, ‘Umar and
his small band were completely away from the front, *at the back* of
everyone else. Was it a tactical *land* ambush by them?

But, that was not possible! Firstly, it was a *trench* war. If anything,
‘Umar and his colleagues should be standing with the Prophet *at the
front* - by the trench - preventing the enemies of Allah from
successfully crossing over. Secondly, the Messenger did not permit any
Sahabi to leave his presence, as reported by the Qur’an about the Battle
of Khandaq:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإذ قالت طائفة منهم يا أهل يثرب لا مقام لكم فارجعوا ويستأذن فريق منهم
النبي يقولون إن بيوتنا عورة وما هي بعورة إن يريدون إلا فرارا ولو دخلت
عليهم من أقطارها ثم سئلوا الفتنة لآتوها وما تلبثوا بها إلا يسيرا ولقد
كانوا عاهدوا الله من قبل لا يولون الأدبار وكان عهد الله مسئولا قل لن
ينفعكم الفرار إن فررتم من الموت أو القتل وإذا لا تمتعون إلا قليلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And when a party of them said, “O people of Yathrib! You do not stand
any chance. Therefore, return”. And a band of them asked for permission
of the Prophet, saying: “Truly, our homes are vulnerable!” But they
(i.e. their houses) were not vulnerable. **They (i.e. those soldiers)
only wished to flee**! And if the enemy had entered upon them from its
(i.e. Madinah’s) borders, and they had been asked to commit sedition
(against Islam), they would surely have committed it and would have only
hesitated a little.

And indeed they had already made a covenant with Allah not to flee, and
a covenant with Allah must be answered for. **Say: Running away will not
benefit you** if you flee from death or killing, and then you will enjoy
no more than a little while!”[^6]

The verses confirm that the enemy never breached the borders of Madinah.
They further establish that the homes of the people of the city were
safe. Of course, it was the Battle of Khandaq (i.e. the Battle of the
Trench). Therefore, all the fighting was supposed to be done *at the
trench*, not within the boundaries of Madinah. Lastly, there is zero
evidence of any deployment of anyone by the Prophet, during the battle,
to mount any ambush in any garden in the city!

As such, the presence of ‘Umar and his colleagues in a safe garden had
absolutely no military value or legitimacy. Moreover, one of them was
masking his face to conceal his identity. Meanwhile, he too had no
tactical or strategic reason to use a mask. It is obvious, from the
circumstances and his conduct, that he felt shame for what they were
doing in the garden, and would not like anyone to identify him with it,
if they were detected. But, Umm al-Muminin ‘Aishah knew his voice very
well, being his relative. So, it was pointless for him to conceal his
identity before her while criticizing ‘Umar.

‘Umar and his colleagues were, without doubt, hiding from battle. They
had fled! While the other Muslims were busy preventing the collapse of
Madinah by blocking any crossover of the trench by the enemy, he and his
colleagues were breathing safely in their hideout. Judging from the
panic and instinctive outbursts of ‘Umar, one could also say that he was
not aware of the real situation of things in the city. He apparently
thought that the enemy had entered it, and that it was extremely risky
to move around. That explains why he moved into, and remained in, the
garden in the first place.

At Khaybar, our second *khalifah* repeated his old feat. Imam al-Hakim
(d. 403 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو العباس محمد بن أحمد المحبوبي بمرو ثنا سعيد بن مسعود ثنا
عبيد الله بن موسى ثنا نعيم بن حكيم عن أبي موسى الحنفي عن علي رضي الله
عنه قال : سار النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم إلى خيبر فلما أتاها بعث عمر رضي
الله تعالى عنه وبعث معه الناس إلى مدينتهم أو قصرهم فقاتلوهم فلم يلبثوا
أن هزموا عمر وأصحابه فجاءوا يجبنونه ويجبنهم فسار
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-‘Abbas Muhammad b. Ahmad al-Mahbubi – Sa’id b. Mas’ud – ‘Ubayd
Allah b. Musa – Na’im b. Hakim – Abu Musa al-Hanafi – ‘Ali, may Allah be
pleased with him:

The Prophet, peace be upon him, journeyed to Khaybar. When he arrived
there, he appointed ‘Umar (as commander) and appointed some people with
him (as his troops) to conquer their city or castle. So, they (‘Umar and
his troops) fought them (i.e. the people of Khaybar). **But ‘Umar and
his troops did not hesitate before fleeing**. So, they came back **and
they (the troops) accused him (‘Umar) of COWARDICE** while he too
accused them of cowardice.[^7]

Al-Hakim says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain[^8]

Al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) HHconfirms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^9]

Imam al-Hindi (d. 975 H) copies a fuller version:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن علي قال : سار رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم إلى خيبر فلما أتاها
رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم بعث عمر ومعه الناس إلى مدينتهم وإلى
قصرهم فقاتلوهم فلم يلبثوا أن هزموا عمر وأصحابه فجاء يجبنهم ويجبنونه
فساء ذلك رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم فقال : لأبعثن عليهم رجلا يحب
الله ورسوله ويحبه الله ورسوله يقاتلهم حتى يفتح الله له ليس بفرار
فتطاول الناس لها ومدوا أعناقهم يرونه أنفسهم رجاء ما قال فمكث رسول الله
صلى الله عليه و سلم ساعة فقال : أين علي ؟ فقالوا : هو أرمد قال : ادعوه
لي فلما أتيته فتح عيني ثم تفل فيها ثم أعطاني اللواء فانطلقت به سعيا
خشية أن يحدث رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم فيها حدثا أو في حتى أتيتهم
فقاتلتهم فبرز مرحب يرتجز وبرزت له أرتجز كما يرتجز حتى التقينا فقتله
الله بيدي وانهزم أصحابه فتحصنوا وأغلقوا الباب فأتينا الباب فلم أزل
أعالجه حتى فتحه الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Narrated ‘Ali:

The Messsenger of Allah, peace be upon him, journeyed to Khaybar. When
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, arrived there, he appointed
‘Umar (as commander) and with him some people (as his troops) to conquer
their city or castle. So, they (‘Umar and his troops) fought them (i.e.
the people of Khaybar). **But ‘Umar and his troops did not hesitate
before fleeing**. So, they came back and he accused them of cowardice
**while they too (the troops) accused him (‘Umar) of COWARDICE**. The
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, roundly condemned that and said,
“I will certainly appoint over you a man who loves Allah and His
Messenger, and Allah and His Messenger too love him. He will fight them
until Allah grants him victory. **He is not someone who flees**.”

So, the people longed for it (i.e. the expedition) and extended their
necks, each of them wishing that he be the chosen one. The Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, remained silent for a while and then said:
“**Where is Ali?**” They said: “He is sore-eyed.” He said: “Summon him
for me.” When I came to him, he opened my eyes and put his saliva on
them. Then, he gave the flag to me and so I proceeded fast, fearing that
the Messenger of Allah might make a new decision concerning it (i.e. the
expedition), or me, until I reached them (i.e. the people of Khaybar).
So, I fought them. Then Marhab (the warrior of Khaybar) offered a duel
challenge, reciting war poetry and I accepted his duel challenge,
reciting war poetry like people do, until we clashed and Allah killed
him through my hand. As a result, his companions fled away into their
castle, and locked the door. We went to the door and I did not stop
trying to break it until Allah opened it.[^10]

Al-Hindi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والبزار وسنده حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

Recorded by al-Bazzar **and its chain is** ***hasan***.[^11]

‘Ali’s encounter with Marhab is documented by Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) as
well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو بكر بن أبي شيبة حدثنا هاشم بن القاسم ح وحدثنا إسحاق بن
إبراهيم أخبرنا أبو عامر العقدي كلاهما عن عكرمة ابن عمار ح وحدثنا
عبدالله بن عبدالرحمن الدارمي وهذا حديثه أخبرنا أبو علي الحنفي عبيدالله
بن عبدالمجيد حدثنا عكرمة ( وهو ابن عمار ) حدثني إياس بن سلمة حدثني أبي
قال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
....ثم أرسلني إلى علي وهو أرمد فقال لأعطين الراية رجلا يحب الله ورسوله
أو يحبه الله ورسوله قال فأتيت عليا فجئت به أقوده وهو أرمد حتى أتيت به
رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم فبسق في عينيه فبرأ وأعطاه الراية وخرج
مرحب فقال قد علمت خيبر أني مرحب ... شاكي السلاح بطل مجرب إذا الحروب
أقبلت تلهب فقال علي أنا الذي سمتني أمي حيدره ... كليث الغابات كريه
المنظره أوفيهم بالصاع كيل السندره قال فضرب رأس مرحب فقتله ثم كان الفتح
على يديه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr b. Abi Shaybah – Hashim b. al-Qasim – Ishaq b. Ibrahim – Abu
‘Amir al-‘Aqdi – ‘Ikrimah b. ‘Amir AND ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abd al-Rahman
al-Darimi – Abu ‘Ali al-Hanafi ‘Ubayd Allah b. ‘Abd al-Majid – ‘Ikrimah
b. ‘Amir – Iyas b. Salamah – my father (Salamah):

.... Then he (the Messenger) sent me to ‘Ali, and he (‘Ali) was
sore-eyed. So, he (the Prophet) said, “I verily will give the flag to a
man who loves Allah and His Messenger or whom Allah and His Messenger
love.” So, I went to ‘Ali and brought him, and he was sore-eyed , until
I brought him to the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, who applied
his saliva to his eyes and he got well.

So, he (the Prophet) gave him the flag and Marhab (at the Khaybar battle
ground) came out and said (during the duel), “Khaybar has already known
that I am Marhab, a fully-armed and well-tried valorous warrior whenever
war comes, spreading its flames.” ‘Ali replied, “I am the one whose
mother named him Haydar, like a lion of the forest with a
terror-striking countenance. I give them (i.e. my opponents) the measure
of *sandara* (i.e. a heavy blow) in exchange for *sa’* (i.e. a small
punch).” **‘Ali struck the head of Marhab and killed him. So, the
victory was through his hands**.[^12]

Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H) has recorded the same report[^13], and Shaykh
al-Arnauṭ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط مسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of Muslim.[^14]

The Prophet of Allah testified that Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, was NOT a person who fled in *any* circumstance, however
difficult. He too demonstrated that by accepting the challenge of Marhab
in a mortal combat. As such, while all the other Sahabah – including Abu
Bakr and ‘Umar – were repeatedly fleeing the battlefields, ‘Ali always
stayed till the end. The matter, apparently, was *very* well-known among
the Sahabah, which was why some of them did not bother mentioning his
name while listing the firm ones at each battle. He made every list by
default, and it might be pointless repeating his blessed name while
everyone was already aware of this unique status of his.

Imam Ahmad further records another report, with an interesting
additional detail:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا زيد بن الحباب حدثني الحسين بن واقد حدثني
عبد الله بن بريدة حدثني أبي بريدة قال حاصرنا خيبر فأخذ اللواء أبو بكر
فانصرف ولم يفتح له ثم أخذه من الغد عمر فخرج فرجع ولم يفتح له وأصاب
الناس يومئذ شدة وجهد فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم انى دافع
اللواء غدا إلى رجل يحبه الله ورسوله ويحب الله ورسوله لا يرجع حتى يفتح
له فبتنا طيبة أنفسنا ان الفتح غدا فلما ان أصبح رسول الله صلى الله عليه
و سلم صلى الغداة ثم قام قائما فدعا باللواء والناس على مصافهم فدعا عليا
وهو أرمد فتفل في عينيه ودفع إليه اللواء وفتح له قال بريدة وأنا فيمن
تطاول لها
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Zayd b. al-Habab –
al-Husayn b. Waqid – ‘Abd Allah b. Buraydah – Abu Buraydah:

We besieged Khaybar. **So, Abu Bakr took the flag and went. But, he did
not achieve victory**. Then, the next day, ‘Umar took it (i.e. the
flag), and went and returned without achieving victory. On that day, the
people encountered hardship and fatigue. Therefore, the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, said, “I will tomorrow give the flag to a man
who loves Allah and His Messenger, and Allah and His Messenger love him
too. **He will not return unless he has achieved victory**.” So, we
became absolutely certain that victory would be achieved the next day.

When it was morning, the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
performed the morning *Salat*. Then he stood and asked that the flag be
brought to him. The people were on their lines. So, he summoned ‘Ali and
he (‘Ali) was sore-eyed. Then he spit into his eyes and gave him the
flag, **and he (‘Ali) achieved victory**. I was one of those longing for
it (i.e. the flag).[^15]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حديث صحيح وهذا إسناد قوي من أجل حسين بن واقد المروزي
  </p>
</blockquote>

**It is a** ***sahih hadith***, and this chain is strong (*qawi*) due to
Husayn b. Waqid al-Maruzi.[^16]

Apparently, Abu Bakr was the first to flee the battlefield at Khaybar,
and then ‘Umar. Marhab must have offered both of them duel challenges –
as he did to Amir al-Muminin - which they obviously declined and then
sped away. The only way to conquer Khaybar was to kill Marhab, who was
their legendary warrior, as ‘Ali demonstrated. The fact that Abu Bakr
and ‘Umar returned without victory is evidence that both of them, as
army commanders, feared Marhab and therefore avoided him.

Imam al-Hindi copies a related report:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن عبد الرحمن بن أبي ليلى قال : كان علي يخرج في الشتاء في إزار ورداء
ثوبين خفيفين و.... قال : أو ما كنت معنا يا أبا ليلى بخيبر ؟ قلت : بلى
والله قد كنت معكم قال : فإن رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم بعث أبا بكر
فسار بالناس فانهزم حتى رجع إليه وبعث عمر فانهزم بالناس حتى انتهى إليه
فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم : لأعطين الراية رجلا يحب الله
ورسوله ويحبه الله ورسوله يفتح الله له ليس بفرار فأرسل إلي فدعاني
فأتيته وأنا أرمد لا أبصر شيئا فتفل في عيني
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Layli:

‘Ali used to come out in winter wearing light clothes and ... he (‘Ali)
said (to me), “Were you not with us, O Abu Layli, at Khaybar?” I said,
“Yes, by Allah, I was with you.” He said, “Verily, the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, appointed Abu Bakr as commander and he
despatched with (some) people. **BUT HE (ABU BAKR) FLED** until he
returned to him (i.e. the Prophet).

And he appointed ‘Umar too as army commander, and HE (‘UMAR) TOO FLED
with the people (i.e. his troops) until he got back to him (i.e. the
Messenger). So, the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, ‘I
certainly will give the flag to a man who loves Allah and His Messenger,
and Allah and His Messenger love him too. Allah will grant him victory.
**He is not someone who flees**.’ Therefore, he sent for me, and I got
to him. I was sore-eyed, and could not see anything. So, he spit into my
eye.”[^17]

Al-Hindi comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والبزار وابن جرير وصححه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Bazzar recorded it, as well as **Ibn Jarir (al-Tabari) WHO DECLARED
IT** ***SAHIH***[^18]

At this point, let us do some mathematics:

1. Abu Bakr and ‘Umar used to flee from battlefields. Ali never fled,
not even once.

3. ‘Ali accepted and won at least the duel challenge at Khaybar. Abu
Bakr and ‘Umar ran away from the same duel challenge.

5. Ali was never accused of cowardice by anyone. Rather, the Prophet
testified in favour of his absolute bravery and military doggedness. By
contrast, ‘Umar was charged with cowardice by his own troops!

7. Abu Bakr and ‘Umar returned from the battlefield, defeated and
humiliated. Meanwhile, ‘Ali never left the battlefield until he had
achieved victory.

9. The Messenger of Allah had absolute confidence in ‘Ali’s military
prowess, and was completely certain that the latter would never fail in
his expeditions. On the other hand, both Abu Bakr and ‘Umar disappointed
him in their military assignments, and he apparently did not have full
confidence in their military abilities.

The question is: who was braver? Was it Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi
Talib? Or, were Abu Bakr and ‘Umar braver than him, as claimed by Shaykh
Ibn Taymiyyah? Even if we accepted our Shaykh’s re-definition of
“bravery” as fearlessness of the heart, how can anyone still claim that
Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthman were “brave” *at all* despite that they used
to flee the battlefield? Can a person who runs away from battle be said
to have a fearless heart? Moreover, what made Amir al-Muminin so firm on
the battlefield? Was it not his fearless heart? From whatever angle we
look at it, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthman were timid cowards, while ‘Ali
was a true warrior, with a completely fearless heart.

Our Shaykh is well aware that with the above facts, his theory can never
stand. So, he goes on a voyage of historical revisionism:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم قبل قدومه لأعطين الراية رجلا يحب الله و
رسوله و يحبه الله و رسوله يفتح الله علي يديه و لم تكن الراية قبل ذلك
لأبى بكر و لا لعمر و لا قربها واحد منهما بل هذا من الأكاذيب
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Prophet, peace be upon him, said before his (‘Ali’s) arrival, “I
verily will give the flag to a man who loves Allah and His Messenger,
and Allah and His Messenger too love him. Allah will grant victory
through his hands.” **The flag was never given before that to Abu Bakr
or ‘Umar**, and neither of them even moved near it. **Rather, this (i.e.
the claim that Abu Bakr and ‘Umar were given the flag before ‘Ali) is**
**one of the lies**.[^19]

But, does that *really* help him or his two *khalifahs*?

[^1]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 6, p. 141, \#
25140

[^2]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Ṣahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 1, pp. 143-145, \# 67

[^3]: Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b.
Ma’bad al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, Ṣahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn
Balban (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 15, pp.
498-501, \# 7028

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Ibid

[^6]: Qur’an 33:13-16

[^7]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p. 40,
\# 4340

[^8]: Ibid

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: ‘Ali b. Husam al-Din al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal fi Sunan
al-Aqwal wa Af’al (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1989 H), vol. 10, p.
743, \# 30119

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 3, p. 1433, \# 1807 (132)

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 4, p. 51, \#
16586

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Ibid, vol. 5, p. 353, \# 23043

[^16]: Ibid

[^17]: ‘Ali b. Husam al-Din al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, Kanz al-‘Ummal fi Sunan
al-Aqwal wa Af’al (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1989 H), vol. 13, p.
104, \# 36388

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 366


