26. Hadith Al-Tair, Investigating Its Authenticity
==================================================

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حديث الطائر من المكذوبات الموضوعات عند أهل العلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hadith al-Tair* is one of the fabricated lies in the opinion of the
people of knowledge.[^1]

Meanwhile, Imam Ibn Asakir (d. 571 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا أبو غالب بن البنا أنا أبو الحسين بن الأبنوسي أنا أبو الحسن
الدارقطني نا محمد بن مخلد بن حفص نا حاتم بن الليث نا عبيد الله بن موسى
عن عيسى بن عمر القارئ عن السدي نا أنس بن مالك قال أهدي إلى رسول الله
صلى الله عليه وسلم أطيار فقسمها وترك طيرا فقال اللهم ائتني بأحب خلقك
إليك يأكل معي من هذا الطير فجاء علي بن أبي طالب فدخل يأكل معه من ذلك
الطير
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Ghalib b. al-Bana – Abu al-Husayn b. al-Abnusi – Abu al-Hasan
al-Daraquṭni – Muhammad b. Mukhlid b. Hafs – Hatim b. al-Layth – ‘Ubayd
Allah b. Musa – ‘Isa b. ‘Umar al-Qari – al-Suddi – Anas b. Malik:

Birds were given as gifts to the Messenger of Allah. So, he distributed
them and left a bird. Then he said, “O Allah, bring to me **the most
beloved to You of Your creation** to eat with me from this bird. **So,
‘Ali b. Abi Talib came** and entered and ate with him from that
bird.[^2]

Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) states about the first narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أبو غالب ابن البناء الشيخ الصالح الثقة، مسند بغداد، أبو غالب أحمد بن
الإمام أبي علي الحسن بن أحمد بن عبد الله بن البناء البغدادي الحنبلي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Ghalib b. al-Bana: The righteous Shaykh, **the** ***thiqah***
**(trustworthy) narrator, the** ***hadith*** **transmitter of Baghdad**,
Abu Ghalib Ahmad b. Imam Abu ‘Ali al-Hasan b. Ahmad b. ‘Abd Allah b.
al-Bana al-Baghdadi al-Hanbali.[^3]

Concerning the second narrator, he further says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ابن الآبنوسي الشيخ الثقة، أبو الحسين، محمد بن أحمد بن محمد بن علي، ابن
الآبنوسي البغدادي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn al-Abnusi: **The** ***thiqah*** **(trustworthy) Shaykh**, Abu
al-Husayn, Muhamamd b. Ahmad b. Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Ibn al-Abnusi
al-Baghdadi.[^4]

The third narrator, Imam al-Daraquṭni, needs no introduction.
Nonetheless, let us get al-Dhahabi’s words about him anyway:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدارقطني :الامام الحافظ المجود، شيخ الاسلام، علم الجهابذة، أبو الحسن،
علي بن عمر بن أحمد بن مهدي بن مسعود بن النعمان بن دينار بن عبد الله
البغدادي المقرئ المحدث
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Daraquṭni: **The Imam, the excellent** ***hafiz*** **(*****hadith***
**scientist), Shaykh al-Islam**, the signpost of the pundits, Abu
al-Hasan ‘Ali b. ‘Umar b. Ahmad b. Mahdi b. Mas’ud b. al-Nu’man b. Dinar
b. ‘Abd Allah al-Baghdadi al-Maqri, **the** ***hadith*** **expert**.[^5]

Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) says about the fourth narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
محمد بن مخلد بن حفص ... وهو ثقة ثقة ثقة مشهور
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Muhklid b. Hafs ... **He is** ***thiqah***
**(trustworthy),** ***thiqah*** **(trustworthy),** ***thiqah***
**(trustworthy)**, well-known.[^6]

Imam al-Dhahabi tells us about the fifth narrator as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حاتم بن الليث الحافظ المكثر الثقة، أبو الفضل، البغدادي الجوهري.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hatim b. al-Layth: The *hadith* scientist, the prolific *hadith*
narrator, **the** ***thiqah*** **(trustworthy) narrator**, Abu al-Fadhl,
al-Baghdadi, al-Jawhari.[^7]

Al-Hafiz returns to inform us about the sixth narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبيد الله بن موسى بن أبي المختار باذام العبسي الكوفي أبو محمد ثقة كان
يتشيع
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ubayd Allah b. Musa b. Abi al-Mukhtar al-‘Ubsi al-Kufi, Abu Muhammad:
***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**, he was a Shi’i.[^8]

Al-Hafiz proceeds about the seventh narrator too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عيسى بن عمر الأسدي الهمداني بسكون الميم أبو عمر الكوفي القارئ ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Isa b. ‘Umar al-Asadi al-Hamdani, Abu ‘Umar al-Kufi al-Qari:
***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**[^9]

Finally, ‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) grades the last narrator,
al-Suddi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذا سند حسن، رجاله ثقات غير السدي وهو إسماعيل بن عبد الرحمن وهو صدوق
يهم. كما في " التقريب ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

**This chain is** ***hasan***. Its narrators are trustworthy apart from
**al-Suddi**, and he is Isma’il b. ‘Abd al-Rahman. **He was**
***saduq*** **(very truthful)**, and he hallucinated, as stated in
*al-Taqrib*.[^10]

He adds about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهو ثقة احتج به مسلم واسمه إسماعيل بن عبد الرحمن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**He is** ***thiqah*** **(trustworthy). (Imam) Muslim has relied upon
him as a** ***hujjah*** **(in his** ***Sahih*****)**, and his name is
Isma’il b. ‘Abd al-Rahman.[^11]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده حسن لأجل السدي - وهو إسماعيل بن عبد الرحمن بن أبي كريمة - وباقي
رجاله ثقات
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Its chain is** ***hasan*** **due to al-Suddi** – and he is Isma’il b.
‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Karimah – and the other narrators are
trustworthy.[^12]

Shaykh Dr. Asad has the same grading for him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو همام حدثنا أبي عن زياد بن خيثمة عن إسماعيل السدي عن عكرمة عن
ابن عباس ... إسناده حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Hammam – my father – Ziyad b. Khaythamah – **Isma’il al-Suddi** –
Ikrimah – Ibn ‘Abbas .... **Its chain is** ***hasan***.[^13]

Shaykh Dr. Al-A’zami is not left out either:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا علي بن شعيب حدثنا أبو النضر حدثنا الأشجعي عن سفيان عن السدي عن
البهي عن عائشة.... إسناده حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Shu’ayb – Abu al-Nadhar – al-Ashja’ – Sufyan – **al-Suddi** –
al-Bahi – ‘Aishah .... **Its chain is** ***hasan***.[^14]

Interestingly, Imam Ibn al-Jawzi (d. 597 H) has documented a similar
report of *Hadith al-Tair* as Imam Ibn Asakir:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال المؤلف وقد انبأنا ابو القاسم الحريري قال انبأنا ابو طالب العشري
قال انا الدارقطني قالنا انا محمد بن مخلد قال انا حاتم بن الليث قال انا
عبيد الله بن موسى عن عيسى بن عمر القاري عن السدي قال انس اهدي رسول
الله صلى الله عليه و سلم أطيار فقسمهن فقال اللهم ائتني بأحب خلقك اليك
يأكل معي من هذا الطير فجاء علي بن ابي طالب فدخل فأكل معه من ذلك الطير
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu al-Qasim al-Hariri – Abu Talib al-‘Ashri – al-Daraquṭni – Muhammad
b. Mukhlid – Hatim b. al-Layth – ‘’Ubayd Allah b. Musa – ‘Isa b. ‘Umar
al-Qari – al-Suddi – Anas:

Birds were given as gifts to the Messenger of Allah. So, he distributed
them. Then he said, “O Allah, bring to me **the most beloved to You of
Your creation** to eat with me from this bird. **So, ‘Ali b. Abi Talib
came** and entered and ate with him from that bird.[^15]

This chain is basically the same as that which we have verified above in
this chapter. ‘Allamah al-Albani also has this comment about this
report:

> فقد رواه ابن الجوزي (363) بإسناده من طريق الدارقطني: نا محمد بن مخلد:
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نا حاتم بن الليث قال: نا عبيد الله بن موسى به.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وهذا إسناد رجاله كلهم ثقات، إلا ما في (السدي) من الخلاف - وهو (السدي
الكبير) ، واسمه: إسماعيل بن عبد الرحمن
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn al-Jawzi (363) has recorded it with his chain from the route of
al-Daraquṭni – Muhammad b. Mukhlid – Hatim b. al-Layth – ‘Ubayd Allah b.
Musa with it (i.e. the full chain with the *hadith*).

**All the narrators of this chain are trustworthy**, except for the
difference of opinions concerning al-Suddi, and he is al-Suddi al-Kabir,
and his name is Isma’il b. ‘Abd al-Rahman.[^16]

Since al-Suddi too is *thiqah* (trustworthy), or at least *saduq* (very
truthful) due to the disputes about him, the *sanad* is therefore either
*sahih* or *hasan*. We go with the stricter ruling. As such, we declare
that chain of the *hadith* is *hasan* due to al-Suddi. All its narrators
are reliable, and there is no disconnection whatsoever in the *sanad*.

Meanwhile, the *hadith* itself is absolutely *sahih* due to the
existence of massive, overwhelming corroboration (*mutaba’at*) for
al-Suddi. Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H), for instance, declares about *Hadith
al-Tair*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد رواه عن أنس جماعة من أصحابه زيادة على ثلاثين نفسا
  </p>
</blockquote>

It has been narrated from Anas by a group of his companions, numbering
**more than thirty** individuals.[^17]

This establishes the *tawatur* of the *hadith* from Anas, and shoots the
report of al-Suddi from the level of *hasan* to the highest *sahih*
grade.

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 371

[^2]: Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn
Asakir al-Shafi’i, Tarikh Madinah Dimashq (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri], vol. 42, p. 254

[^3]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1413 H) [annotator: Shu’ayb
al-Arnaut], vol. 19, p. 603, \# 352

[^4]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1413 H) [annotators of the
eighteenth volume: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut and Muhammad Na’im al-Arqisusi],
vol. 18, p. 85, \# 38

[^5]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1413 H) [annotators of the
sixteenth volume: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut and Akram al-Bushi], vol. 16, p.
449, \# 332

[^6]: Shihab al-Din Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani,
Lisan al-Mizan (Beirut: Manshurat Muasassat al-A’lami li al-Matbu’at;
2nd edition, 1390 H), vol. 5, p. 374, \# 1218

[^7]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 4th edition, 1406 H)
[annotators of the twelfth volume: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut and Ṣalih
al-Samar], vol. 12, p. 519, \# 195

[^8]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 640, \# 4361

[^9]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 773, \# 5330

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Ṣahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 1, p. 802, \# 440

[^11]: Ibid, vol. 1, p. 622, \# 311

[^12]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 3, p. 217, \#
13301

[^13]: Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, Musnad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad], vol. 4, p. 396, \# 2518

[^14]: Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ishaq b. Khuzaymah al-Salami al-Naysaburi,
Ṣahih (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 1390 H) [annotators: Muhammad Nasir
al-Din al-Albani and Dr. Muhammad Mustafa al-A’zami], vol. 3, p. 270, \#
2049

[^15]: ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali b. al-Jawzi, al-‘Ilal al-Mutanahiyyah fi
al-Ahadith al-Wahiyyah (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition,
1403 H) [annotator: Khalil al-Mays], vol. 1, p. 230, \# 363

[^16]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Ṣahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 14, p. 174, \# 6575

[^17]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
141, \# 4650


