Preface
=======

The question of who the best of the Sahabah, *radhiyallah ‘anhum*, was
has always been a thorny issue within the Ummah, especially among the
Ahl al-Sunnah wa al-Jama’ah. Even the Sahabah disputed with one another
over the topic. Specifically, the debate often revolves around Abu Bakr
and ‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*, only. It is very difficult to see anyone -
whether Sunni or Shi’i – arguing that ‘Umar, ‘Uthman, Talhah, Zubayr or
some other Sahabi – was the best of the Sahabah. Rather, the exact point
of contention is, and always was: was Abu Bakr their best or ‘Ali?

Expectedly, most of the Ahl al-Sunnah consider Abu Bakr to have been the
best of the Sahabah, then ‘Umar, then ‘Uthman, and then ‘Ali. By
contrast, the Shi’ah believe that Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali was the best,
then al-Hasan, then al-Husayn, and then Sayyidah Faṭimah, *‘alaihim
al-salam*. There is a minority among Sunnis – including some Sahabah and
a lot of Sufis – who share the Shi’i view on the matter.

Ordinarily, the debate over who was the best should have been a mere,
healthy academic exercise. However, it is linked with *Imamah* and
*khilafah* in the Ummah. So, it is a very big issue, and provokes the
deepest emotions of some people. In fact, countless Shi’is and others
have been murdered for more than a millenium by Sunni extremists, only
for their belief in the superiority of ‘Ali. The best of the Ummah at
each point in time is the only one qualified for the *khilafah*. This is
the Command of Allah and His Messenger, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*.
Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) confirms:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ففي هذا الخبر إخبار عمر بين المهاجرين والأنصار أن أبا بكر سيد المسلمين
وخيرهم وأحبهم إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم ذلك علة مبايعته فقال
بل نبايعك أنت فأنت سيدنا وخيرنا وأحبنا إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم ليبين بذلك أن المأمور به تولية الأفضل وأنت أفضلنا فنبايعك
  </p>
</blockquote>

In this report is the declaration of ‘Umar among the Muhajirun and the
Ansar that Abu Bakr was the *sayyid* of the Muslims and the best of
them, and the most beloved of them to the Messenger of Allah. This is
the reason for following him. So, he (‘Umar) said, “Rather, we will
follow you because you are our *sayyid*, and the best of us, and the
most beloved of us to the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him”. He
wanted to make clear through it that: **WHAT IS ORDAINED IS TO GIVE
AUTHORITY TO THE BEST**, and you are the best of us. So, we will follow
you.[^1]

The bottomline here is that *khilafah* by anyone who is not the best of
his time is contrary to the Order of Allah and the Sunnah of His
Messenger, and is therefore both illegal and a *bid’ah*. That makes the
*khalifah* himself and all his supporters ringleaders of a *bid’ah*, as
long as they are aware of his deficiency and still uphold his
*khilafah*. In that way, they would be guilty of creating a new
provision in the religion to supplant that of Allah. The grave danger of
all this is captured perfectly in these words of the Messenger of Allah,
documented by Imam al-Nasai (d. 303 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شر الأمور محدثاتها وكل محدثة بدعة وكل بدعة ضلالة وكل ضلالة في النار
  </p>
</blockquote>

The worst of the (religious) affairs are their innovations, and every
innovation is a *bid’ah*, **and every** ***bid’ah*** **is misguidance,
and every misguidance ends to the Fire**.[^2]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^3]

The Command of Allah and His Messenger is that the best of the Ummah
should *always* be their *khalifah*, as testified by ‘Umar b.
al-Khaṭṭab. Meanwhile, the innovation in this matter is to make or allow
*any* inferior individual as the *khalifah*. This innovation is a
*bid’ah*, and will land whosoever leads, practices or recognizes it in
Hellfire. It is understandable then why some of our Sunni brothers are
so hell-bent upon emphasizing the superiority over Abu Bakr over the
whole Ummah, followed by ‘Umar and ‘Uthman, by all means – even to the
extent of committing massacres. The survival of their *madhhab* depends
very heavily on it. Should Abu Bakr, ‘Umar or ‘Uthman fall, Sunnism
itself ceases to exist as a valid entity!

So, certain drastic steps were taken to address the challenge. First, a
very wide re-definition was issued for Shi’ism. This, apparently, was to
scare Sunnis away from researching into the issue. Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar
al-‘Asqalani (d. 852 H) takes the podium:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والتشيع محبة على وتقديمه على الصحابة فمن قدمه على أبى بكر وعمر فهو غال
في تشيعه ويطلق عليه رافضي وإلا فشيعي فإن انضاف إلى ذلك السب أو التصريح
بالبغض فغال في الرفض وإن اعتقد الرجعة إلى الدنيا فأشد في الغلو
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Shi’ism is love of ‘Ali and the placing of him over the Sahabah
(except Abu Bakr and ‘Umar only). Whoever places him above Abu Bakr and
‘Umar, such is an extremist in his Shi’ism, and he is called a Rafidi**.

If he does not (place ‘Ali over the two), then he is only a Shi’i. If he
added to that (i.e. preference of ‘Ali over Abu Bakr and ‘Umar) abuse,
cursing or open hatred (of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar), he is then an extremist
in *Rafdh*. If he believes in *Raj’ah* into this world, then he is
severe in (Rafidhi) extremism.[^4]

Therefore, a Sunni is only someone who considers ‘Ali as inferior to Abu
Bakr, ‘Umar AND ‘Uthman. Whosoever places him above ‘Uthman is a Shi’i,
and whosoever views him as superior to Abu Bakr or ‘Umar is a Rafidhi.
In the Sunni creed, being a Shi’i is a *bid’ah*. Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748
H) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أن البدعة على ضربين: فبدعة صغرى كغلو التشيع، أو كالتشيع بلا غلو ولا
تحرف، فهذا كثير في التابعين وتابعيهم مع الدين والورع والصدق. فلو رد
حديث هؤلاء لذهب جملة من الآثار النبوية، وهذه مفسدة بينة. ثم بدعة كبرى،
كالرفض الكامل والغلو فيه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Bid’ah* has two types:

**The minor** ***bid’ah*****: like extreme Shi’ism, or like moderate
Shi’ism**, for this was widespread among the Tabi’in and their
followers, despite their devotion, piety and truthfulness. If the
*ahadith* of these people were rejected, part of teachings of the
Prophet would be lost, and that would be a clear evil.

Then **the major** ***bid’ah*****: like complete** ***rafdh*** and
extremism in it.[^5]

By classifying the placing of ‘Ali above ‘Uthman as a *bid’ah* – which
leads to Hellfire – the classical Sunni *‘ulama* hoped to put a firm lid
on all threats to their *madhhab*. However, their action has produced
some horrible unintended consequences. Many of the Sahabah were
*Rawafidh* by Sunni definition, and therefore heretics who will burn
forever in the Fire! Imam Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr (d. 463 H) identifies some of
these Rafidhi Sahabah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وروى عن سلمان وأبي ذر والمقداد وخباب وجابر وأبى سعيد الخدري وزيد بن
الأرقم أن علي بن أبي طالب رضي الله عنه أول من أسلم وفضله هؤلاء على
غيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

Salman, Abu Dharr, al-Miqdad, Khabab, Jabir, Abu Sa’id al-Khudri and
Zayd b. Arqam narrated that ‘Ali b. Abi Talib, may Allah be pleased with
him, was the first to accept Islam, **and they considered him the most
superior (among the Sahabah)**.[^6]

These senior Sahabah considered ‘Ali as superior to Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and
‘Uthman! By Sunni standards, their *bid’ah*, therefore, was of the
*major* type! They were complete Rafidhis. Another well-known Sahabi
like them was Abu al-Tufayl, *radhiyallah ‘anhu*. Imam al-Dhahabi states
about him:

واسم أبي الطفيل، عامر بن واثلة بن عبد الله بن عمرو الليثي الكناني
الحجازي الشيعي. كان من شيعة الإمام علي.

The name of Abu al-Tufayl was ‘Amir b. Wathilah b. ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Amr
al-Laythi al-Kanani al-Hijazi, **the Shi’i. He was from the**
***Shi’ah*** **of Imam ‘Ali**.[^7]

Imam Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr adds:

وكان متشيعا في علي ويفضله ويثني على الشيخين أبي بكر وعمر ويترحم على
عثمان

**He was a Shi’i of ‘Ali and considered him the most superior**. He used
to extol the two Shaykhs, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar, and would ask for Allah’s
mercy upon ‘Uthman.[^8]

Al-Hafiz explains the words of Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr above:

قال أبو عمر كان يعترف بفضل أبي بكر وعمر لكنه يقدم عليا

Abu ‘Umar said: He accepted the merit of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar **but he
considered ‘Ali to be the most superior**.[^9]

This creates an impossible dilemma for Sunni Islam. If Sunnis stick with
their view that Shi’ism – as defined by them – is a *bid’ah*, then they
must agree that all these fine Sahabah were heretics with no hope of
salvation in the Hereafter. By contrast, if they free the Shi’i Sahabah,
then they must equally free all other Shi’ah and Rawafidh! What is good
for the goose is equally good for the gander. Besides, the Sahabah, who
met the Prophet, are in an even more accountable position on any Islamic
matter than all the generations after them. It gets scary when one
considers the possibility that the Messenger of Allah could have been of
the same opinion as the Shi’i Sahabah! If he did, then it would have
been Sunnah to place ‘Ali over Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthman. In that
case, the majority view of the Ahl al-Sunnah on the matter would have
been a *bid’ah* - in fact, a compounded *bid’ah*.

The other step taken by the Sunni *‘ulama* was to confuse their
followers on the status and meanings of explicit *ahadith* indicating
the overall superiority of Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi Talib over all
Sahabah. The most guilty individual in this regard was none other than
“Shaykh al-Islam” Ibn Taymiyyah. Others, such as Imam al-Mubarakfuri (d.
1282 H), ‘Allamah al-Albani, Shaykh al-Arnauṭ and others, have also
followed his steps, albeit at a much lower level. In this book, we will
be examining some of such *ahadith*, proving their authenticity
absolutely, and analyzing their texts in the light of the Qur’an and
*mutawatir* Sunnah. Our *manhaj* in this regard is open, transparent,
mathematical and precise. For instance, we have relied very heavily upon
the verdicts concerning the individual narrators by al-Hafiz
al-‘Asqalani in his legendary reference work, *al-Taqrib*. The reasons
for this approach are two. First, al-Hafiz Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, often
fondly referred to simply as al-Hafiz, is one of the greatest Sunni
scholars of *rijal* and *hadith*. ‘Allamah al-Albani says about him:

لكن من كان في ريب مما أحكم أنا على بعض الأحاديث فليعد إلى فتح الباري
فسيجد هناك أشياء كثيرة وكثيرة جداً ينتقدها الحافظ أحمد بن حجر العسقلاني
الذي يسمى بحقٍ أمير المؤمنين في الحديث والذي أعتقد أنا وأظن أن كل من كان
مشاركاً في هذا العلم يوافقني على أنه لم تلد النساء بعده مثله.

But, whoever is in doubt concerning the verdicts I have given concerning
some *ahadith* (in *Sahih al-Bukhari*), let him refer to *Fath al-Bari*,
and he will find there lots and lots of things (in *Sahih al-Bukhari*)
which have been criticized by **al-Hafiz Ahmad b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani,
who is rightly named the Amir al-Muminin in** ***Hadith*****, and whom I
believe – and I suppose that anyone who has this knowledge (i.e. science
of** ***hadith*****) would agree with me – that no woman has ever given
birth to anyone like him after him**.[^10]

The phrase “amir al-muminin” is of course a reference to the supreme
master.

Secondly, al-Hafiz himself states in the Introduction to *al-Taqrib*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنني أحكم على كل شخص منهم بحكم يشمل أصح ما قيل فيه، وأعدل ما وصف به
  </p>
</blockquote>

I have graded every individual among them with a verdict that contains
the most correct of what is said about him, and the most just of the
descriptions given for him.[^11]

In other words, a lot of things have been said about each of the
narrators. But, not everything said about them is authentically
transmitted, correct or accurate. So, al-Hafiz, who is a king in the
Sunni science of *hadith*, has compiled only “the most correct” and “the
most just” of the statements made about them. No wonder, top Sunni
*hadith* scientists like ‘Allamah al-Albani and others have relied
*very* heavily upon this *al-Taqrib* in all their works. We will be
doing the same throughout this book and others. There are two clear
advantages in doing this. One, it would ensure the accuracy of our
conclusions on the various narrators. Two, it would keep our book
concise and neat. As such, we will firstly quote the criticisms of a
Sunni scholar, mostly Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah, against a particular
*hadith* - which establishes ‘Ali’s superiorty over all the Sahabah –
and then examines the trustworthiness of all its narrators, primarily
through *al-Taqrib*. Where the name of the narrator is not present in
*al-Taqrib*, then we go for the books of Imam al-Dhahabi, who is equally
a superweight in Sunni *hadith* sciences, as well as others like
‘Allamah al-Albani and Shaykh al-Arnauṭ.

This humble author has adopted a very strict *takhrij* style throughout
the book. This is why he has excluded *ahadith* which he believes to be
true, but which do not meet the strict standards of authenticity in the
Sunni *hadith* sciences. In particular, we focus on the reliability of
the narrators and the full connectivity of the chains. We also seek if
there are corroborative supports for either the chains or the texts of
the *ahadith*. Most importantly, we also investigate any possible hidden
defects in the chains, such as *tadlis*, poor memory and *irsal* of the
narrators and present detailed researches to make clarifications
wherever necessary. Sometimes, in order to save space, we do simply rely
upon explicit authentications of chains and *ahadith* by the topmost
Sunni *hadith* scientists. Through this methodology, we hope to give the
full opportunity to whoever is researching the topic in order to
determine the real truth.

Meanwhile, we do not neglect Sunni arguments and reports in favour of
the superiority of Abu Bakr and ‘Umar either. We query their
authenticity too, in line with strict standards of Sunni *rijal* and
further test their compatibility with the Qur’an and undisputed history.
The full details of our investigations are provided in our book, so that
our esteemed reader can verify, reason and make his independent
conclusions too.

Throughout our book, we have relied upon Sunni books only, and
specifically those of the highest standing in their respected
categories. This way, we aim ensure full accuracy in everything. We
implore Allah to forgive us all our mistakes, and to accept this as a
worthy act of *‘ibadah*.

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 8, p. 565

[^2]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, al-Mujtaba min
al-Sunan (Halab: Maktab Matbu’at al-Islamiyyah; 2nd edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 3, p. 188, \# 1578

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani
al-Shafi’i, Hadi al-Sari Muqaddimah Fath al-Bari (Beirut: Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H), p. 460

[^5]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Mizan
al-I’tidal fi Naqd al-Rijal (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah; 1st edition, 1382
H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi], vol. 1, pp. 5-6, \# 2

[^6]: Abu ‘Umar Yusuf b. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Barr b. ‘Āsim
al-Nimri al-Qurtubi, al-Isti’ab fi Ma’rifat al-Ashab (Beirut: Dar
al-Jil; 1st edition, 1412 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi], vol.
3, pp. 1090, \# 1855

[^7]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 9th edition, 1413 H)
[annotators: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut, Muhammad Na’im al-‘Arqisusi and Mamun
Ṣaghirji], vol. 3, p. 468, \# 97

[^8]: Abu ‘Umar Yusuf b. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Barr b. ‘Āsim
al-Nimri al-Qurtubi, al-Isti’ab fi Ma’rifat al-Ashab (Beirut: Dar
al-Jil; 1st edition, 1412 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi], vol.
4, p. 1697, \# 3054

[^9]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, al-Isabah fi Tamyiz
al-Ṣahabah (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H)
[annotators: Shaykh ‘Ādil Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Shaykh ‘Ali
Muhammad Ma’udh], vol. 7, p. 193, \# 10166

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Fatawa (Cairo: Maktabah al-Turath
al-Islami; 1st edition, 1414 H), p. 525

[^11]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 24


