27. Hadith Al-Tair, Examining Some Shawahid
===========================================

The *hadith* proves that Amir al-Muminin, *‘alaihi al-salam*, is the
most beloved of all creatures to Allah after His Messenger, *sallallahu
‘alaihi wa alihi*. This goes directly counter to the claims of the
majority of the Ahl al-Sunnah that Abu Bakr, after the Prophet, is the
most beloved to Allah in this Ummah. Therefore, a lot of their *‘ulama*
struggle hard to bring down *Hadith al-Tair* in order to salvage their
sect from collapse or confusion. So, they bring up a lot of “ifs” and
“maybes” without ever presenting any explicit, *positive* evidence for
their claims. Meanwhile, apart from the *hadith*, there are numerous
other proofs which nullify the Sunni position. Let us have a look at
some of them.

We start with the Verse of *al-Mubahala*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فمن حاجك فيه من بعد ما جاءك من العلم فقل تعالوا ندع أبناءنا وأبناءكم
ونساءنا ونساءكم وأنفسنا وأنفسكم ثم نبتهل فنجعل لعنت الله على الكاذبين
  </p>
</blockquote>

And whoever disputes with you concerning him after what has come to you
of knowledge, then say: “Come, let us call *our* sons and your sons,
*our* women and your women, *our*selves and yourselves, then we place
the Curse of Allah upon the liars.”[^1]

It is clear from the verse that some people were debating with the
Prophet, opposing what had been revealed to him from his Lord. The
Qur’an is explicit: the debate was with the Messenger of Allah *alone*.
It was not with the Ummah. The “yous” in the verse, as well as the
phrase “say”, are all singular. Therefore, all the “ours” in it are
exclusive to the Prophet. “Our sons”, for instance, do not mean the
“sons of the Ummah”.

Rather, they were *his* sons. His opponents were refusing to accept the
Truth which he had brought from his Lord. So, he was commanded to
challenge them to a *mubahala*, where each side would invoke the Curse
of Allah upon “whoever” was lying in his claims between the two sides. A
condition of the *mubahala* was that each party must participate in it
with his sons and women. As such, the effect of the curse would affect
the wrong disputant along with his sons and women.

The question is – why did the Qur’an name the “sons” and “women” as
compulsory participants? The reason is apparent. A man usually cares
most for himself, his sons, his daughters and his wives. He would not
want any harm to come their way. Therefore, if he must involve himself
*and* them together in a *mubahala*, he is most likely to think twice,
and to withdraw from it if he has the slightest doubt in his claims.
Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والنفوس تحنوا على أقاربها مالا تحنوا على غيرهم وكانوا يعلمون انه رسول
الله صلى الله عليه و سلم ويعلمون انهم أن باهلوه نزلت البهلة عليهم وعلى
أقاربهم واجتمع خوفهم على أنفسهم وعلى أقاربهم فكان ذلك أبلغ في امتناعهم
و إلا فالإنسان قد يختار أن يهلك ويحيا ابنه والشيخ الكبير قد يختار
الموت إذا بقى أقاربه في نعمة ومال وهذا موجود كثير
  </p>
</blockquote>

**The hearts (lit: the souls) care for their closest people what they do
not care for others**. They (the non-Muslim disputants) knew that he was
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, and they knew that if they
did *mubahala* with him, curse would descend upon them and upon their
closest people. So, their fear over themselves became combined with
their fear over their closest people.

This caused their withdrawal (from the *mubahala*). Otherwise, the human
being prefers to lose his life in order to save his son from death (if
the need arises). Moreover, the old man prefers death if his closest
people will be in comfort and wealth. And this is very common.[^2]

In simple words, each party in the *mubahala* was to involve in it the
people *closest* to his heart, those people whom he cared most for. So,
who were the *closest* persons to the heart of the Messenger of Allah
during his lifetime? This is where trouble sets in for our dear Shaykh:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فعلم انه أراد الأقربين إلينا من الذكور والإناث من الأولاد والعصبة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولهذا دعا الحسن والحسين من الأبناء ودعا فاطمة من النساء ودعا عليا من
رجاله ولم يكن عنده أحد أقرب إليه نسبا من هؤلاء وهم الذين أدار عليهم
الكساء والمباهلة إنما تحصل بالأقربين إليه و إلا فلو بأهلهم بالابعدين
في النسب وان كانوا أفضل عند الله لم يحصل المقصود فان المراد انهم يدعون
الأقربين كما يدعوا هو الأقرب إليه
  </p>
</blockquote>

Know that He (Allah in the Verse of *al-Mubahala*) intended the closest
people to us - males and females – from the children and the blood
relatives. **This was why he called** **al-Hasan and al-Husayn from the
sons and called Faṭimah from the women and called ‘Ali from his men.
There was no one else who was closer to him, in terms of blood
relationship, than these people**.

They were those over whom he spread the *kisa* (cloak), **AND THE**
***MUBAHALA*** **WOULD ONLY SUCCEED THROUGH THE CLOSEST OF PEOPLE TO
HIM**. Otherwise, if they (both parties) had done it with their distant
blood relatives, even if such had been superior in the Sight of Allah,
its purpose would have been defeated. **This was because the intention
was that they (the non-Muslim party) should call their closest people,
as he (Muhammad) should also call the closest people to him**.[^3]

So, ‘Ali, Fatimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, *‘alaihim al-salam*, were the
closest people to the Prophet’s heart. He cared for them more than he
did for anyone else on the face of the earth. At the practical level,
the Messenger of Allah, for instance, cared more for ‘Ali than he did
for Abu Bakr and ‘Umar! He equally cared more for *Umm Abiha* Faṭimah
than he did for Umm al-Muminin ‘Aishah. If this had not been the case,
then the *mubahala* challenge would have been worthless, as the
non-Muslim opponents were directed to summon people closest to their
hearts. For a proper *mubahala*, things had to be equal on both sides.

Our Shaykh asserts that the Messenger’s care for ‘Ali, Faṭimah, al-Hasan
and al-Husayn was based upon their blood relationship to him. He however
misses the fact that al-‘Abbas was legally a *closer* blood relative to
the Prophet than ‘Ali! This is why the right of the uncle to inherit
overrules that of the cousin, as Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولا خلاف بين أهل العلم إن ابن العم لا يرث مع العم
  </p>
</blockquote>

There is no difference of opinion among the scholars that the cousin
cannot inherit with the presence of the uncle.[^4]

Therefore, if the Prophet was choosing people on the basis of their
blood closeness to him, he would have picked al-‘Abbas – who was already
a practising Muslim then - and not ‘Ali. Alternatively, he could have
selected both al-‘Abbas and ‘Ali, and possibly some other cousins like
Ibn ‘Abbas. Sensing the frailty of his own submission, Shaykh Ibn
Taymiyyah attempts to apply some cosmetics to it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وآية المباهلة نزلت سنة عشر لما قدم وفد نجران ولم يكن النبي صلى الله
عليه و سلم قد بقي من أعمامه إلا العباس والعباس لم يكن من السابقين
الأولين ولا كان له به اختصاص كعلي و أما بنو عمه فلم يكن فيهم مثل علي
وكان جعفر قد قتل قبل ذلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Verse of *al-Mubahala* was revealed in 10 AH when the delegation of
Najran arrived. The Prophet, peace be upon him, had no other uncle other
than al-‘Abbas then, and al-‘Abbas was not among the early converts to
Islam, and did not have the exclusive qualities of ‘Ali. As for his
(i.e. the Prophet’s) cousins, none of them was like ‘Ali, and Ja’far had
been killed before then.[^5]

Here, our Shaykh contradicts his other position. Was the choice of the
Prophet for the participants in the *mubahala* from his side based
solely upon their blood relationship to him or upon their individual
merits? A question also arises as to why ‘Aishah and all other wives of
the Prophet were excluded. After all, the word used in the Verse of
*al-Mubahala* is *nisa*, which literally means “women”.

As such, it covered *both* wives and daughters. In fact, everywhere else
in the Qur’an, the phrase “women (*nisa*) of the Prophet” *always*
referred to his wives[^6]! In addition, in over 90% of cases, the word
“women (*nisa*)” in the Book of Allah means “wives”[^7]. So, it is safe
to conclude that the phrase “our women” in the Verse of *al-Mubahala* is
addressed *first* to the wives, and *then* to the daughters. Our Sunni
brothers have never been able to explain why the wives were not called
to join in the *mubahala*.

In any case, none of the wives of the Prophet – and they were also his
primary “women” - was from his closest blood relatives. That would have
been incest anyway, and therefore impossible. The fact that the word
“women” has been used in the verse, and not “daughters”, strengthens the
theory that the selection process was NOT based upon blood relationship.
Allah Himself selected the people whom He knew to be the closest to the
heart of His Messenger to participate with him in the *mubahala*. He
mentioned the categories to which they belonged, deliberately leaving
them open *for a clear point*. Then the Prophet filled in the names.
Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وقد تواترت الاخبار في التفاسير عن عبد الله بن عباس وغيره أن رسول الله
صلى الله عليه وسلم أخذ يوم المباهلة بيد علي وحسن وحسين وجعلوا فاطمة
وراءهم ثم قال هؤلاء أبناءنا وأنفسنا نساؤنا فهلموا أنفسكم وأبناءكم
ونساءكم ثم نبتهل فنجعل لعنة الله على الكاذبين
  </p>
</blockquote>

There have been *mutawatir* reports in the *tafsir* books from ‘Abd
Allah b. ‘Abbas and others that the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him, on the Day of *al-Mubahala*, held the hands of ‘Ali, Hasan and
Husayn, and they positioned Faṭimah behind them. Then he said, “**These
are our sons,** ***ourselves*** **and our women**. So, bring yourselves,
your sons and your women. Then we do *mubahala* and place the Curse of
Allah upon the liars (among us).”[^8]

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah corroborates him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأما اية الابتهال ففي الصحيح أنها لما نزلت أخذ النبي صلى الله عليه و
سلم بيد علي وفاطمة وحسن وحسين ليباهل بهم لكن خصهم بذلك لأنهم كانوا
أقرب إليه من غيرهم فإنه لم يكن ولد ذكر إذ ذاك يمشي معه ولكن كان يقول
عن الحسن إن ابني هذا سيد فهما ابناه ونساؤه إذ لم يكن قد بقى له بنت إلا
فاطمة رضي الله عنها
  </p>
</blockquote>

As for the Verse of *al-Ibtihal* (another word for *al-Mubahala*), what
is narrated **in the** ***sahih*** **(*****hadith*****)** is that when
it was revealed, the Prophet, peace be upon him, held the hand of
**‘Ali, Faṭimah, Hasan and Husayn** to do *mubahala* with them (against
the Najranis). **However, he limited that to them because they were the
closest of all people to him**.

This was because he did not have a son who would have walked with him.
However, he used to say about al-Hasan, “This son of mine is a master”.
Therefore, both of them (i.e. al-Hasan and al-Husayn) were his sons. As
for his women, he had no other surviving daughter except Faṭimah, may
Allah be pleased with her.[^9]

Well, the Prophet had other “women”, such as ‘Aishah, Hafsah, Umm
Salamah, and several others. Why did he not call them?

No doubt, the people that the Messenger of Allah cared most for were
‘Ali, Faṭimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn. Luckily, by Allah’s Mercy, these
people - who were the closest to his heart - fell into the same
categories as what obtains in most similar cases. Therefore, it was
possible to organize a *mubahala* with the Najrani delegation on the
same terms. There is a particular point on the word “ourselves”.

It is represented by two people, namely the Prophet and Amir al-Muminin,
in the *mubahala*. The obvious implication of this is that the Messenger
of Allah cared of ‘Ali at the same level as he cared for himself. In
other words, Imam ‘Ali was as close to the heart of the Prophet as the
latter himself was to his own heart. This was why it was possible for
Amir al-Muminin to fit into the same category as the Messenger in the
*mubahala*.

Of course, when someone is close to your heart and you care for them,
that is love! So, the most beloved of mankind to the Prophet of Allah
were ‘Ali, Faṭimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn, and this is confirmed by the
Qur’an. Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah would have us believe that this love was
based only upon blood relationship. However, Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H)
records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا إسماعيل ثنا ليث عن عمرو بن مرة عن معاوية
بن سويد بن مقرن عن البراء بن عازب قال كنا جلوسا عند النبي صلى الله
عليه و سلم فقال ... ان أوسط عرى الإيمان ان تحب في الله وتبغض في الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Isma’il – Layth –
‘Amr b. Marrah – Mu’awiyah b. Suwayd b. Muqarran – al-Bara b. ‘Azim:

We were sitting with the Prophet, peace be upon him, and he said ...
“Verily, **the central handhold of faith (*****iman*****) is that you
love for the sake of Allah** and that you hate for the sake of
Allah.”[^10]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حديث حسن بشواهده
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is a *hadith* that is *hasan* through its witnesses.[^11]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) also records this *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن أوثق عرى الإسلام: أن تحب في الله و تبغض في الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, **the strongest handhold of Islam is that you love for the sake
of Allah** and hate for the sake of Allah.[^12]

The ‘Allamah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*[^13]

Is there anyone with a better faith (*iman*), or who is a better Muslim,
than the Messenger of Allah? Of course, there is none! Therefore, his
love for ‘Ali, Faṭimah, al-Hasan and al-Husayn was purely *for the sake
of Allah*. They were the most beloved creatures to Allah after His
Messenger. So, he loved them too more than everyone else. Our Lord also
loves Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi Talib more than Faṭimah, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn. As such, His Prophet loved ‘Ali as he loved himself. These
facts were *very* widely known throughout the Islamic world during the
Messenger’s lifetime.

Even non-Muslims were aware of the names of the most beloved human
beings to Muhammad. This was why the Najrani delegation raised no
objection whatsoever to anyone in the Prophet’s team for the *mubahala*.
They knew that those were the closest people to his heart, whom he cared
for most, above everyone else. As such, they were the perfect and the
only valid selection for the *mubahala* from his side.

The Messenger was absolutely trustworthy. He never would have cheated.
Since he expected the other side to involve their most beloved people in
the *mubahala* – in line with the rules of the game, he too would
certainly have done like that. Moreover, if it had been known that there
had been other people more beloved to him than his team, his own
followers would have suspected the truth of his prophethood and his
personal honesty. Otherwise, why would he need to cheat if he was
correct in his claims? What would he have been afraid of?

Besides, the Najrani delegation too would have objected to his
selection. They would have firmly demanded for an equal playing field.
Since all parties were required to bring the most beloved of people to
them into the *mubahala*, why should the Prophet do otherwise? In fact,
it was most probably what convinced them to opt out of the *mubahala*.
Muhammad would *never* have involved his team in it – knowing the
implications - unless he was absolutely truthful in his claims. The
Najrani delegation, on their part, never dared involve their own teams,
since they had doubts about their submissions!

As expected, Umm al-Muminin ‘Aishah was not happy about the state of
things, and did challenge the Messenger of Allah on it. Al-Hafiz (d. 852
H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأخرج أحمد وأبو داود والنسائي بسند صحيح عن النعمان بن بشير قال استأذن
أبو بكر على النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم فسمع صوت عائشة عاليا وهي تقول
والله لقد علمت أن عليا أحب إليك من أبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad, Abu Dawud and al-Nasai have recorded **with a** ***sahih***
**chain** from al-Nu’man b. Bashir:

Abu Bakr sought permission to enter the house of the Prophet, peace be
upon him, and heard the voice of ‘Aishah, very loud, and she was saying
(to the Prophet), “**I have known that ‘Ali is more beloved to you than
my father**.”[^14]

Imam Ahmad also has this:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا أبو نعيم ثنا يونس ثنا العيزار بن حريث قال
قال النعمان بن بشير قال استأذن أبو بكر على رسول الله صلى الله عليه و
سلم فسمع صوت عائشة عاليا وهى تقول والله لقد عرفت ان عليا أحب إليك من
أبي ومنى مرتين أو ثلاثا فاستأذن أبو بكر فدخل فأهوى إليها فقال يا بنت
فلانة الا أسمعك ترفعين صوتك على رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Abu Na’im – Yunus
– al-‘Ayzar b. Hurayth – al-Nu’man b. Bashir:

Abu Bakr sought the permission of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him, to enter his house, and heard the voice of ‘Aishah, very loud. She
was saying, “**I swear by Allah, I have discovered that ‘Ali is more
beloved to you than my father and me**.” She said it twice or thrice.
So, Abu Bakr sought permission (again) and entered, and reached for her,
and said, “O daughter of such-and-such woman! Did I hear you raising
your voice upon the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him?”[^15]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^16]

Apparently, the Prophet had tried to conceal the matter from her due to
her notorious jealousy. But, it was too obvious, especially after the
Incident of *al-Mubahala*. So, she went on the offensive, and never
relented thereafter. Eventually, she commanded a very bloody armed
insurrection against Amir al-Muminin during his *khilafah*, and
thousands of Muslims died tragically as a result. It is very significant
that the Messenger of Allah did not deny her claim. If she was wrong, he
would have told her.

Yet, despite that, Umm al-Muminin ‘Aishah continued to re-write history
after the death of the Messenger. ‘Allamah al-Albani reports her:

> فقال الإمام أحمد (6/241) : حدثنا عبد الواحد الحداد عن كهمس عن عبد الله
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بن شقيق، قال: قلت لعائشة: أي الناس كان أحب إلى رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم؟ قالت: عائشة، قلت: فمن الرجال؟ قالت: أبوها ".
  </p>
</blockquote>

Imam Ahmad (6/241) records: ‘Abd al-Wahid al-Hadad – Kahmas – ‘Abd Allah
b. Shaqiq:

I said to ‘Aishah, “**Which of mankind was the most beloved to the
Messenger of** **Allah**, peace be upon him?” ‘Aishah said,
“’**Aishah**”. I said, “What about among the men?” She replied, “Her
father.”[^17]

The ‘Allamah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا إسناد صحيح رجاله كلهم ثقات رجال الصحيح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: **This chain is** ***sahih***. Its narrators are trustworthy,
narrators of the *Sahih*.[^18]

Is that not strange? Despite “knowing” and “discovering” what she did,
she still went ahead to claim this! Meanwhile, was she really the best
of *mankind* after the Messenger of Allah as she was telling people?
Besides, why did the Prophet exclude her from the *mubahala* despite
that she was one of his “women”? Was ‘Aishah telling the people that the
Messenger cheated?!!

[^1]: Qur’an 3:61

[^2]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 126

[^3]: Ibid, vol. 7, p. 125

[^4]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
136, \# 4634

[^5]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 126

[^6]: See for instance, Qur’an 33:30, 33:32

[^7]: The word nisa (women) has been used in the following verses: 2:49,
2:187, 2:222-223, 2:226, 2:231-232, 2:235-236, 3:14, 3:42, 3:61, 4:1,
4:3-4, 4:7, 4:11, 4:15, 4:19, 4:22-24, 4:32, 4:34, 4:43, 4:75, 4:98,
4:127, 4:129, 4:176, 5:6, 7:81, 7:127, 7:141, 12:30, 12:50, 14:6, 24:31,
24:60, 27:55, 28:4, 33:30, 33:32, 33:52, 33:55, 33:59, 40:25, 48:25,
49:11, 58:2-3, 65:1 and 65:4.

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hafiz al-Naysaburi, Kitab
Ma’rifah ‘Ulum al-Hadith (Beirut: Manshurah Dar al-Āfaq al-Hadith; 4th
edition, 1400 H) [annotator: Sayyid Mu’zam Husayn], p. 50

[^9]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 4, p. 27

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 4, p. 286, \#
18547

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Ṣahih al-Jami’ al-Ṣaghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(Al-Maktab al-Islami), vol. 1, p. 342, \# 883 (2009)

[^13]: Ibid

[^14]: Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Fath al-Bari Sharh Ṣahih
al-Bukhari (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Ṭaba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition), vol. 7, p. 19

[^15]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 4, p. 275, \#
18444

[^16]: Ibid

[^17]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, Silsilah
al-Ahadith al-Ḍa’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi
al-Ummah (Riyadh: Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H), vol. 3, p. 254,
\# 1124

[^18]: Ibid


