30. Hadith Al-Tashbih, Establishing Its Authenticity
====================================================

Shaykh Ibn Taymiyyah (d. 728 H) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بل حمله على ذلك ممتنع لان أحدا لا يساوي رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم
لا عليا ولا غيره
  </p>
</blockquote>

Rather, interpreting it like that is impossible, because there is none
who is equal to the Messenger of Allah, neither ‘Ali nor any other
person.[^1]

We agree with our Shaykh that neither Abu Bakr nor ‘Umar was like,
similar or equal to, the Messenger of Allah, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa
alihi*, in absolutely *any* way or form. However, it seems that the
Shaykh has not properly understood the Shi’i position. We never claim
*total* equality between the Prophet and the Amir.

What we profess, instead, is that ‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*, reached the
level of the Messenger in *many* of his merits. In other words, in a lot
of qualities, ranks and statuses, both the Prophet and the Amir were,
and are, *equal*. However, in all others, the Messenger of Allah was,
and is, infinitely superior to ‘Ali. Overall, the Prophet was, and is,
the master, teacher and saviour of ‘Ali in both this world and the next.

Imam al-Nasai (d. 303 H) records an authentic *hadith* that confirms
just that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا العباس بن محمد قال حدثنا الأحوص بن جواب قال حدثنا يونس بن أبي
إسحاق عن أبي إسحاق عن زيد بن يثيع عن أبي ذر قال قال رسول الله صلى الله
عليه و سلم لينتهين بنو وليعة أو لأبعثن إليهم رجلا كنفسي ينفذ فيهم أمري
فيقتل المقاتلة ويسبي الذرية فما راعني إلا وكف عمر في حجزتي من خلفي من
يعني فقلت ما إياك يعني ولا صاحبك قال فمن يعني قلت خاصف النعل قال وعلي
يخصف نعلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-‘Abbas b. Muhammad – al-Ahwas b. Jawab – Yunus b. Abi Ishaq – Abu
Ishaq – Zayd b. Yathi’ – Abu Dharr:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “If the Banu Wali’ah do
not desist, I will appoint over them **a man who is exactly like
myself** to implement my command among them. So, he will execute the
combatants and take the offspring as war captives.”

I had not even moved when ‘Umar held my cloth and asked, “Who is he
referring to?” I replied, “He is not referring to you or your companion
(i.e. Abu Bakr).” He said, “In that case, who is he referring to?” So, I
said, “(He is) referring to the one repairing the shoe.” And ‘Ali was
repairing a shoe.[^2]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) says about this report:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا إسناد رجاله ثقات؛ لكن أبا إسحاق - وهو السبيعي - مدلس، وكان
اختلط، وابنه يونس روى عنه بعد اختلاطه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: **This chain, all its narrators are trustworthy**. However, Abu
Ishaq – and he is al-Sabi’i – was a *mudalis*, and he became confused,
and his son Yunus narrated from him after he had become confused.[^3]

So, all the narrators are trustworthy. However, Abu Ishaq was a
*mudalis*, and has narrated in an *‘an-‘an* manner. Moreover, his son,
Yunus, allegedly narrated from him only after he (Abu Ishaq) had become
confused. These are ‘Allamah al-Albani’s only objections to the
authenticity of the *hadith*.

The arguments of our ‘Allamah are a bit disappointing. While it is true
that Abu Ishaq was a *mudalis*, his *tadlis* was largely of the harmless
grade. Therefore, his *‘an-‘an* reports are accepted without objection.
Let us briefly examine how the *muhadithun* of the Ahl al-Sunnah have
treated a well-known, strictly *‘an-‘an* narration of Abu Ishaq. Imam
Muslim (d. 261 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبدالله بن مسلمة بن قعنب حدثنا معتمر بن سليمان عن أبيه عن رقبة
بن مسقلة عن أبي إسحاق عن سعيد بن جبير عن ابن عباس عن أبي بن كعب قال
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم إن الغلام الذي قتله الخضر طبع كافرا
ولو عاش لأرهق أبويه طغيانا وكفرا
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Musalamah b. Qa’nab – Mu’tamir b. Sulayman – his father –
Raqabah b. Masqalah – **Abu Ishaq** – Sa’id b. Jubayr – Ibn ‘Abbas –
Ubayy b. Ka’b:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “Verily, the boy killed
by al-Khidhr was created an unbeliever. If he had lived, he would have
grieved his parents with his obstinate rebellion (against Allah) and
disbelief (in Allah)”.[^4]

Abu Ishaq has narrated it *‘an-‘an*, and Imam Muslim has nonetheless
accepted the *hadith* as *sahih*. Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 241 H) has
also included the same *riwayah* with the same *‘an-‘an* chain in his
*Musnad*[^5]. Shaykh al-Arnauṭ comments about it this way:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^6]

Imam al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H) has equally documented it with Abu Ishaq’s
*‘an-‘an* narration[^7]. Al-Tirmidhi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث حسن صحيح غريب
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *hasan* *sahih* *gharib*.[^8]

Interestingly, even ‘Allamah al-Albani accepts its authenticity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^9]

Elsewhere, the ‘Allamah explains his decision:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا محمد بن أبي بكر المقدمي ثنا معتمر بن سليمان عن أبيه عن رقبة بن
مسقلة عن أبي إسحاق عن سعيد بن جبير عن ابن عباس ‏عن أبي بن كعب عن النبي
صلى الله عليه وسلم قال‏:‏ الغلام الذي قتله الخضر طبع كافرا‏.‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

> إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين مع ما في النفس من عنعنة أبي إسحاق وهو عمرو
> ابن عبد الله السبيعي فإني لم أجد تصريحه بالتحديث في شيء من الروايات
> عنه مع أنه كان اختلط لكن لعل رقبة بن مسقلة سمعه منه قبل الاختلاط فإنه
> قديم الوفاة فقد مات سنة 129 وهي السنة التي مات فيها ابو إسحاق نفسه فهو
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أقرانه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Abi Bakr al-Muqaddami – Mu’tamir b. Sulayman – his father –
Raqabah b. Masqalah – **Abu Ishaq** – Sa’id b. Jubayr – Ibn ‘Abbas –
Ubayy b. Ka’b – the Prophet, peace be upon him:

“The boy killed by al-Khidhr was created an unbeliever.”

**Its chain is** ***sahih*** **upon the standard of the two Shaykhs**,
despite what is in the heart concerning its *‘an-‘an* narration by Abu
Ishaq, and his real name was ‘Amr b. ‘Abd Allah al-Sabi’i. **I have NOT
found any explicit** ***tahdith*** **(i.e. non-*****‘an*****-*****‘an***
**transmission) of it by him in the reports**, despite that he also
became confused. However, maybe Raqabah b. Masqalah heard it from him
before he became confused because he (Raqabah) died early (in history).
His (i.e. Raqabah’s) death was in 129 H, and it was the year of Abu
Ishaq’s death too. Therefore, they both were contemporaries.[^10]

So, the *‘an-‘an* report of Abu Ishaq is accepted as *sahih* upon the
standard of both al-Bukhari and Muslim by the leading *muhadithun* of
the Ahl al-Sunnah, including ‘Allamah al-Albani himself. But then,
al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) documents a rather interesting dissenting viewpoint
concerning Abu Ishaq’s *‘an-‘an* reports:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال شعبة وكان أبو إسحاق إذا أخبرني عن رجل قلت له هذا أكبر منك فإن قال
نعم علمت أنه لقى وإن قال انا أكبر منه تركته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shu’bah said: “Whenever Abu Ishaq narrated to me in an *‘an-‘an* form
from any person, I used to say to him, ‘Is he older than you?’ If he
answered, ‘Yes’, then I would know that he met (the narrator) [i.e.
there was no *tadlis* in the report]. But, if he said, ‘I am older than
him’, I would abandon him.”[^11]

In other words, Shu’bah assured us that *wheneve*r Abu Ishaq transmitted
from people older than him, he never did *tadlis*, even if he narrated
in an *‘an-‘an* manner from them. This is *very* crucial. Shu’bah was of
an ultra-strict attitude towards Abu Ishaq’s *tadlis*. So, he would not
accept even the above *hadith* of the boy, since Sa’id b. Jubayr was far
younger than Abu Ishaq[^12]. Yet, despite this, *Hadith al-Tashbih*
passes his ultra-strict standards and is covered by his expert
assurance. Zayd b. Yathi’ was much older than Abu Ishaq. Al-Hafiz
states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد بن يثيع … الهمداني الكوفي ثقة مخضرم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zayd b. Yathi’.... al-Hamadani al-Kufi: *Thiqah* (trustworthy). **He
witnessed both the** ***Jahiliyyah*** **and the Islamic era**.[^13]

Therefore, Zayd b. Yathi’ was born even before any verse of the Qur’an
was revealed! This means that he was even older than a lot of the
Sahabah. Meanwhile, al-Hafiz further records this about Abu Ishaq:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعن أبي بكر بن عياش قال مات أبو إسحاق وهو ابن مائة سنة أو نحوها
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Bakr b. ‘Ayyash said: Abu Ishaq died while he was 100 years old or
thereabout.[^14]

Since he died in 129 AH, that means he was born in 29 AH. As such, Zayd
b. Yathi’ was decades older than him. Based upon the testimony of
Shu’bah, the *‘an-‘an* reports of Abu Ishaq from him were, without
doubt, free from *tadlis*. But, even if we ignored Shu’bah’s assurance,
*Hadith al-Tashbih* would still pass through, considering the lenient
attitude of Sunni *muhadithun* to Abu Ishaq’s patently *‘an-‘an* reports
generally. With these facts, the first leg of ‘Allamah al-Albani’s
criticism against *Hadith al-Tashbih* is cut off from its root
completely.

The ‘Allamah further asserts that Yunus heard from his father, Abu
Ishaq, only after the latter had become confused due to memory loss. The
question is: where is the evidence? There is none! In fact, this
submission of our ‘Allamah is more farfetched statement than the other.
Yunus was largely contemporaneous with his father. He even met Anas, one
of the senior Sahabah! Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) states about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يونس بن أبي إسحاق عمرو بن عبد الله الهمداني السبيعي الكوفي. عن أنس ...
قلت: مات يونس سنة تسع وخمسين ومائة، وهو في عشر التسعين، إن لم يكن
تجاوزها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yunus b. Abi Ishaq ‘Amr b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hamdani al-Sabi’i al-Kufi: **He
narrated from Anas** ... I say: Yunus died in 159 AH, and he was close
to 90, if not older.[^15]

So, when Abu Ishaq died in 129 AH, Yunus was already about 60 years old.
Does it make sense to claim that such a person narrated from Abu Ishaq
only during the latter’s last days when his memory deteriorated?[^16] He
even narrated from Anas who apparently died decades before his
father![^17] Al-Hafiz tells us more why ‘Allamah al-Albani’s submission
was completely out-of-touch with reality, while writing about Abu Ishaq:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعنه ابنه يونس وابن ابنه إسرائيل بن يونس وابن ابنه الآخر يوسف بن إسحاق
  </p>
</blockquote>

His son (Yunus) narrated from him, **as well as his grandson** Israil b.
Yunus and his other grandson Yusuf b. Ishaq.[^18]

If Yunus could not hear any *ahadith* from his father until the latter’s
last period on earth, when exactly did the grandsons take from Abu
Ishaq? Obviously, Yunus heard *ahadith* from Abu Ishaq long before the
latter lost his memory. No wonder, Imam Ibn Khuzaymah has included a
chain in which Yunus has narrated *‘an-‘an* from Abu Ishaq, who in turn
has also transmitted *‘an-‘an* from the Sahabi, in his *Sahih*[^19]
while Shaykh Dr. al-A’zami further declares that *sanad* to be
*sahih*.[^20]

Shaykh Dr. Asad has equally graded an exactly similar chain as
*sahih*.[^21] Meanwhile, Shaykh al-Arnauṭ prefers to class an identical
*sanad* only as *hasan*.[^22] Basically, ‘Allamah al-Albani has no valid
objection to *Hadith al-Tashbih*. It has a *sahih* chain. The narration
(including *‘an-‘an*) of Yunus from his father, Abu Ishaq, is *sahih*.
Furthermore, the *‘an-‘an* transmission of Abu Ishaq from Zayd b. Yathi’
is equally of the perfectly *sahih* grade, in any circumstance.

*Hadith al-Tashbih*, as narrated by Abu Dharr, is supported by this
*shahid* documented by Imam ‘Abd al-Razzaq (d. 211 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرنا عبد الرزاق عن معمر عن ابن طاووس عن أبيه عن المطلب بن عبد الله
بن حنطب قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم لوفد ثقيف حين جاءوا:
لتسلمن أو لنبعثن رجلا مني - أو قال: مثل نفسي فليضربن أعناقكم، وليسبين
ذراريكم، وليأخذن أموالكم، فقال عمر: فوالله ما تمنيت الامارة إلا يومئذ،
جعلت أنصب صدري رجاء أن يقول: هو هذا، قال: فالتفت إلي علي، فأخذ بيده ثم
قال: هو هذا، هو هذا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzaq – Ma’mar – Ibn Tawus – his father – al-Muṭalib b. ‘Abd
Allah b. Hanṭab:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, when the delegation of (Banu)
Thaqif came (to him), said (to them), “You either submit or **I appoint
a man from me or who is my similarity**, and he will hit your necks and
take your offspring as war prisoners, and will confiscate your
properties.” So, ‘Umar said, “I swear by Allah, I never wished for power
except on that day. I volunteered for it, wishing that he would say,
“This is the one”. But, he instead looked towards ‘Ali, and held his
hand and said, “This is the one. This is the one.”[^23]

‘Allamah al-Albani comments about this report:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت: وهذا إسناد صحيح؛ ولكنه مرسل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: **This chain is** ***sahih***. However, it is *mursal*.[^24]

There is no doubt that this is an effective strengthening *shahid* for
the report of Abu Dharr. So, even if, for the sake of argument, the
invalid submissions of ‘Allamah al-Albani concerning Abu Dharr’s
*hadith* are accepted, the above narration of al-Muṭalib nonetheless
raises its grade to at least *hasan*.

[^1]: Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani,
Minhaj al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah (Muasassat Qurtubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim], vol. 7, p. 123

[^2]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, Sunan al-Kubra
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Dr.
‘Abd al-Ghaffar Sulayman al-Bandari and Sayyid Kasrawi Hasan], vol. 5,
p. 127, \# 8457

[^3]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, Silsilah
al-Ahadith al-Ḍa’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi
al-Ummah (Riyadh: Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H), vol. 10, p. 678,
\# 4960

[^4]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 4, p. 2050, \# 2661 (29)

[^5]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 5, p. 118, \#
21156

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Abu ‘Īsa Muhammad b. ‘Īsa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, al-Jami’ al-Ṣahih
Sunan al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 5, p. 312, \# 3150

[^8]: Ibid

[^9]: Ibid

[^10]: Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Āsim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-Ḍahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, Kitab al-Sunnah (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400 H)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 1, p. 86, \# 194

[^11]: Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H), vol. 8, p. 59, \# 100

[^12]: Sa’id b. Jubayr was 49 years old when he was murdered by
al-Hajjaj in 95 AH. See Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar
al-‘Asqalani, Tahdhib al-Tahdhib (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H),
vol. 4, p. 12, \# 14. As such, Sa’id was born in 46 AH, decades after
Abu Ishaq.

[^13]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 332, \# 2166

[^14]: Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H), vol. 8, p. 58, \# 100

[^15]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Mizan
al-I’tidal fi Naqd al-Rijal (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah; 1st edition, 1382
H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi], vol. 4, pp. 482-483, \# 9914

[^16]: Abu Ishaq’s memory weakened only during the tail-end of his
lifetime. See Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib
(Beirut: Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator:
Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 739, \# 5081

[^17]: Abu al-Ṭufayl was the last of the Ṣahabah to die, and he died in
110 AH. See Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib
(Beirut: Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator:
Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 464, \# 3122

[^18]: Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Tahdhib
al-Tahdhib (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H), vol. 8, p. 57, \# 100

[^19]: Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ishaq b. Khuzaymah al-Salami al-Naysaburi,
Ṣahih (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 1390 H) [annotators: Muhammad Nasir
al-Din al-Albani and Dr. Muhammad Mustafa al-A’zami], vol. 1, p. 326, \#
647

[^20]: Ibid

[^21]: Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, Musnad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad], vol. 12, p. 97, \# 6731

[^22]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 4, p. 375, \#
19367

[^23]: Abu Bakr ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Ṣa’nani, al-Musannaf
[annotator: Habib al-Rahman al-A’zami], vol. 11, p. 226, \# 20389

[^24]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, Silsilah
al-Ahadith al-Ḍa’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi
al-Ummah (Riyadh: Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H), vol. 10, p. 677,
\# 4960


