31. Hadith Al-Tashbih, Instances Of Equality
============================================

When the Prophet, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*, described Amir
al-Muminin, *‘alaihi al-salam*, as being “exactly like” himself, or his
own “similarity”, what was he saying? Was he talking about physical
identicalness? Or, was it about tribal affiliations? What was it
exactly?

Basically, those statements have deliberately been made general and left
open by the Messenger of Allah. As such, everything is the same between
them both except whatever has been excluded as exceptions. In other
words, the only differences between the Nabi and the Amir are those that
have been proved through the Qur’an or authentic *ahadith*. In
everything else, they were, and are, the same.

Meanwhile, it would not be inappropriate to cite a few examples of
equality between the Messenger of Allah and Imam ‘Ali. ‘Allamah
al-Albani (d. 1420 H), for instance, records that the Prophet said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أحب عليا فقد أحبني ومن أبغض عليا فقد أبغضني
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever loves ‘Ali has loved me, and whosoever hates ‘Ali has hated
me.[^1]

The ‘Allamah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^2]

In simple terms, the obligations to love the Messenger, and to love Amir
al-Muminin, are the same. Love or hatred of either of them attracts the
*same* recognition, reward or punishment from Allah the Almighty.
Interestingly, Imam ‘Ali was not the only one with this status. Imam Abu
Ya’la (d. 307 H) further records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو هشام الرفاعي حدثنا ابن فضيل حدثنا سالم بن أبي حفصة عن أبي
حازم عن أبي هريرة قال : قال رسول الله ـ صلى الله عليه و سلم :من أحب
الحسن والحسين فقد أحبني ومن أبغضهما فقد أبغضني
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Hisham al-Rufa’i – Ibn Fudhayl – Salim b. Abi Hafsah – Abu Hazim –
Abu Hurayrah:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: “Whosoever loves
al-Hasan and al-Husayn has loved me, and whosoever hates them has hated
me.”[^3]

Shaykh Dr. Asad says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *hasan*.[^4]

Imam Ibn Majah (d. 273 H) has also recorded the *hadith* through a
different *ṭariq* (route):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا علي بن محمد حدثنا وكيع عن سفيان عن داود بن أبي عوف أبي الجحاف
وكان مرضيا عن أبي حازم عن أبي هريرة قال قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه
وسلم من أحب الحسن والحسين فقد أحبني ومن أبغضهما فقد أبغضني
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Ali b. Muhammad – Waki’ – Sufyan – Dawud b. Abi ‘Awf Abi al-Jihaf – Abu
Hazim – Abu Hurayrah:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “Whosoever loves
al-Hasan and al-Husayn has loved me, and whosoever hates them has hated
me.”[^5]

‘Abd al-Baqi states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح، رجاله ثقات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*. Its narrators are trustworthy.[^6]

‘Allamah al-Albani also comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حسن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hasan*[^7]

So, the Prophet, Amir al-Muminin, Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn,
*‘alaihim al-salam*, were, and are, all *equal* in terms of love and
hatred from *any* others among the creation. Moreover, their love has
been umbilically fused by Allah. Therefore, just as there can *never* be
an excuse – including even ignorance or mistake - for hating the
Prophet, there can be none either with regards to *any* other among
them. Their love is one indivisible entity, and so is their hatred.

The significance of the above reports is better reflected in this
*hadith*, copied by ‘Allamah al-Albani:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من أحب عليا فقد أحبني ومن أحبني فقد أحب الله عز وجل ومن أبغض عليا فقد
أبغضني ومن أبغضني فقد أبغض الله عز وجل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever loves ‘Ali has loved me. And whosoever loves me has loved
Allah the Almighty. Moreover, whosoever hates ‘Ali has hated me**. And
whosoever hates me** **has hated Allah the Almighty**.[^8]

The ‘Allamah comments:

> رواه المخلص في " الفوائد المنتقاة " (10 / 5 / 1) بسند صحيح

Al-Mukhlis recorded it in *al-Fawaid al-Muntaqat* (10/5/1) **with a**
***sahih*** **chain** from Umm Salamah.[^9]

In other words:

1. Love of Muhammad is love of Allah, and hatred of Muhammad is hatred
of Allah.

3. Love of ‘Ali is love of Allah, and hatred of ‘Ali is hatred of Allah.

5. Love of al-Hasan is love of Allah, and hatred of al-Hasan is hatred
of Allah.

7. Love of al-Husayn is love of Allah, and hatred of al-Husayn is hatred
of Allah.

So, Amir al-Muminin, Imam al-Hasan and Imam al-Husayn are *equal* with
the Messenger of Allah in terms of the love or hatred of any of them.
Our focus at this point, of course, is only Amir al-Muminin.

Another area of equality between the Prophet of Allah and Imam ‘Ali is
indicated in this *hadith* documented by Imam Ahmad (d. 241 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبى ثنا يحيى بن أبى بكير قال ثنا إسرائيل عن أبى
إسحاق عن أبي عبد الله الجدلي قال دخلت على أم سلمة فقالت لي أيسب رسول
الله صلى الله عليه و سلم فيكم قلت معاذ الله أو سبحان الله أو كلمة
نحوها قالت سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم يقول من سب عليا فقد سبني
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – Yahya b. Abi
Bukayr – Israil – Abu Ishaq – Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Jadali:

I entered upon Umm Salamah and she said to me, “Is the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, being cursed among you?” I said, “Allah
forbid!” or “Glory to Allah!” or a similar statement. She said, “I heard
the Messenger of Allah saying: ‘**Whosoever curses ‘Ali has cursed
me**.’”[^10]

Shaykh al-Arnauṭ comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*.[^11]

Imam al-Haythami (d. 807 H) also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رواه أحمد ورجاله رجال الصحيح غير أبي عبد الله الجدلي وهو ثقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad recorded it, and its narrators are narrators of the *Sahih*, apart
from Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Jadali and he was trustworthy.[^12]

Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) too has this verdict upon the exact same
*hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain[^13]

And Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) agrees with him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^14]

It is natural logic, anyway. Cursing is an act of hatred. So, whosoever
curses ‘Ali apparently hates him. By that very token, such a person is
guilty of hating Allah. Looking further, there is yet another point of
equality between the Nabi and the Amir. ‘Allamah al-Albani documents
this *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من آذى عليا فقد آذاني
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever hurts ‘Ali has hurt me.[^15]

The ‘Allamah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^16]

Imam al-Hakim also comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain.[^17]

Imam al-Dhahabi affirms the verdict:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^18]

Imam al-Haythami also declares about this *hadith*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رواه أحمد ... ورجال أحمد ثقات
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ahmad recorded ... and the narrators of Ahmad are trustworthy.[^19]

In Islam, to hurt someone means to do anything that causes physical or
emotional discomfort to them. For example, notice what Allah has said
here:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واللذان يأتيانها منكم فآذوهما
  </p>
</blockquote>

And the two persons among you who commit it (i.e. fornication), hurt
them both.[^20]

This is clearly about physical hurt. Let us compare that with this noble
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا أيها الذين آمنوا لا تكونوا كالذين آذوا موسى فبرأه الله مما قالوا
وكان عند الله وجيها
  </p>
</blockquote>

O you who believe! Do not be like those who hurt Musa, but Allah cleared
him of that which they said, and he was honourable before Allah.[^21]

They made incorrect statements about Musa, *‘alaihi al-salam*. Such
statements apparently hurt the feelings and image of this noble prophet.
Therefore, to Allah, they had thereby hurt him. Another example is given
in this *hadith* documented by Imam al-Hakim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرني محمد بن أحمد بن تميم القنطري ثنا أبو قلابة الرقاشي ثنا أبو عاصم
عن عبد الله بن المؤمل حدثني أبو بكر بن عبيد الله بن أبي ملكية عن أبيه
قال جاء رجل من أهل الشام فسب عليا عند ابن عباس فحصبه ابن عباس فقال :
يا عدو الله آذيت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم إن الذين يؤذون الله
ورسوله لعنهم الله في الدنيا والآخرة وأعد لهم عذايا مهينا لو كان رسول
الله صلى الله عليه وسلم حيا لآذيته
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Ahmad b. Tamim al-Qanṭari – Abu Qilabah al-Raqashi – Abu
‘Asim – ‘Abd Allah b. al-Mu-mal – Abu Bakr b. ‘Ubayd Allah b. Abi
Malikah – his father:

A Syrian man came and cursed ‘Ali in the presence of Ibn ‘Abbas. So, Ibn
‘Abbas threw pebbles at him and said, “O enemy of Allah! You have hurt
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him. Verily, those who hurt Allah
and His Messenger, Allah has cursed them in this world, and in the
Hereafter, and has prepared for them a humiliating torment. If the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, had been alive, you would have
hurt him.”[^22]

Al-Hakim declares:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain.[^23]

Imam al-Dhahabi also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^24]

There is a lot of *fawaid* in this *hadith*. Some of them are listed
below:

1. Cursing ‘Ali b. Abi Talib falls under the act of hurting him.

3. Whoever hurts ‘Ali is an enemy of Allah.

5. Whoever hurts ‘Ali falls under Qur’an 33:57

7. ‘Ali b. Abi Talib does not need to be physically present before the
hurt is done. As long as the act would have hurt him had he been present
or would have hurt his name, the crime is completed.

9. Whatsoever hurts ‘Ali also hurts the Messenger of Allah, and by
extension Allah.

11. Therefore, whoever hurts ‘Ali has hurt Allah and His Messenger.

There is no doubt that if Amir al-Muminin had been physically present
when the Syrian man was cursing him, his feelings would have been hurt.
Since whatsoever hurts ‘Ali also hurts the Prophet, it is then the case
that the feelings of the latter too would have been hurt. This is what
matters in the Sight of Allah. Would the feelings of ‘Ali have been hurt
if he were present? If the answer were positive, then indeed the treason
is committed.

Ibn ‘Abbas, *radhiyallahu ‘anhu*, quoted this verse as applying to all
cases where ‘Ali has been hurt:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إن الذين يؤذون الله ورسوله لعنهم الله في الدنيا والآخرة وأعد لهم عذابا
مهينا
  </p>
</blockquote>

Verily, those who hurt Allah and His Messenger, Allah has cursed them in
this world, and in the Hereafter, and has prepared for them a
humiliating torment.[^25]

This is the case with ‘Ali. Whoever hurts the Prophet has hurt Allah.
Therefore, Allah will curse such a person in both this world and the
next, and will throw him into Hellfire. The same is exactly the case
with ‘Ali. Whosoever hurts Amir al-Muminin has hurt Allah too. As such,
the same punishments that apply in the case of the Messenger also apply
in the case of the Amir.

By contrast, if any believer - other than ‘Ali - had been hurt, the
applicable laws are different! Our Creator states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والذين يؤذون المؤمنين والمؤمنات بغير ما اكتسبوا فقد احتملوا بهتانا
وإثما مبينا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And those who hurt the believing men and women undeservedly bear on
themselves the crime of slander and plain sin.[^26]

This verse proves the absolute superiority of Amir al-Muminin over the
entire Ummah. If any Muslim is hurt – whether physically or emotionally
– the first question to ask is: did he deserve the hurt? In other words,
there are cases when the body or feelings of a believer can be
deservedly hurt. In such cases, there is no retribution against the
person causing the hurt. Even then, where the hurt was undeserved, the
offender is only guilty of slander and sin. Therefore, the punishment is
different from what is applicable in the cases of the Messenger of Allah
and Amir al-Muminin. Allah has conjoined hurt of Himself with hurt of
His Messenger with *waw* *al-musharikah* – the conjunction of
partnership. In other words, whatsoever applies for Allah, in any case
that He is hurt, also applies for His Messenger in any similar
circumstance. So, since Allah never deserves to be hurt, then His
Messenger too is of the same status. By extension, Amir al-Muminin as
well can *never* be justifiably hurt. Allah has protected both the Nabi
and the Amir from ever deserving to be hurt, either physically or
emotionally.

[^1]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Ṣahih al-Jami’ al-Ṣaghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(Al-Maktab al-Islami), vol. 2, p. 1034, \# 5963

[^2]: Ibid

[^3]: Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, Musnad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad], vol. 11, p. 78, \# 6215

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Ibn Majah Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Yazid al-Qazwini, Sunan (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad ‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 1, p. 51, \# 143

[^6]: Ibid

[^7]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Ṣahih al-Jami’ al-Ṣaghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(Al-Maktab al-Islami), vol. 2, p. 1033, \# 5954

[^8]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Ṣahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 3, pp. 287-288, \# 1299

[^9]: Ibid, vol. 3, p. 288, \# 1299

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 6, p. 323, \#
26791

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Nur al-Din ‘Ali b. Abi Bakr al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawaid
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1412 H), vol. 9, p. 175, \# 14740

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
130, \# 4615

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Ṣahih al-Jami’ al-Ṣaghir wa Ziyadatuhu
(Al-Maktab al-Islami), vol. 2, p. 1029, \# 5924

[^16]: Ibid

[^17]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
131, \# 4619

[^18]: Ibid

[^19]: Nur al-Din ‘Ali b. Abi Bakr al-Haythami, Majma’ al-Zawaid
(Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1412 H), vol. 9, p. 174, \# 14736

[^20]: Qur’an 4:16

[^21]: Qur’an 33:69

[^22]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 3, p.
131, \# 4618

[^23]: Ibid

[^24]: Ibid

[^25]: Qur’an 33:57

[^26]: Qur’an 33:58


