33. Hadith Al-Ikhtiyar, ‘Ali: The True Second Of Two
====================================================

In the cave, the Messenger of Allah, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*,
*repeatedly* assured Abu Bakr of Allah’s Presence. But it did not work:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذ يقول لصاحبه لا تحزن إن الله معنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

When **he was saying** to his companion: “**Do not fear**, surely Allah
is with us.”

Al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H) comments about this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عام الهجرة ، لما هم المشركون بقتله أو حبسه أو نفيه ، فخرج منهم هاربًا
صحبة صدِّيقه وصاحبه أبي بكر بن أبي قحافة ، فلجأ إلى غار ثور ثلاثة أيام
ليرجع الطَّلَبُ الذين خرجوا في آثارهم ، ثم يسيرا نحو المدينة ، فجعل
أبو بكر ، رضي الله عنه ، يجزع أن يَطَّلع عليهم أحد ، فيخلص إلى الرسول
، عليه السلام منهم أذى ، فجعل النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم يُسَكِّنه
ويَثبِّته ويقول : " يا أبا بكر ، ما ظنك باثنين الله ثالثهما"
  </p>
</blockquote>

During the year of the *Hijrah*, the pagans tried to kill, imprison or
expel him (i.e the Prophet). So, he escaped with his friend and
companion, Abu Bakr b. Abi Quhafah, to the *Thawr* Cave. They remained
in there for three days. So the scouts who were sent in their pursuit
returned, and they proceeded to Madinah. (While in the cave), Abu Bakr,
may Allah be pleased with him, was afraid that they might be discovered
by someone, that some harm might come to the Messenger, peace be upon
him, from them.

**Therefore, the Prophet, peace be upon him, kept reassuring him and
strengthening his resolve**, saying, “O Abu Bakr! What do you think of
two, the *third* of whom is Allah?”[^1]

Apparently, one word was *not* enough for Abu Bakr. When the Prophet
mentioned the presence of Allah the first time, he obviously noticed
that his companion was not convinced. So, he kept repeating it, telling
him not to fear. The Sunni argument is that Abu Bakr only had great,
uncontrollable fears for the life and safety of the Messenger of Allah.
Well, there is nothing in the verse or *hadith* remotely suggesting
that.

By contrast, the words of the Prophet, “Allah is with *us*”, suggest
that Abu Bakr’s fears were about both of them together in the cave.
Otherwise, he would have said, “Allah is with *me*”, placing the
emphasis upon himself. Abu Bakr’s fears about the Prophet could also
have actually been self-serving! Their fates were interconnected in that
dire situation. If the Messenger fell into any danger, Abu Bakr was sure
to have a good taste of it too. So, he wanted the Prophet safe, so that
he too could be safe.

What support our contention – that Abu Bakr did not really care about
the Prophet’s life – are his latter actions on the battlefields. For
instance, he abandoned the Messenger of Allah to the mercy of the pagans
on different days of battle, and fled away, again and again, with his
life from *jihad*. Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمد بن أبي بكر المقدمي وحامد بن عمر البكراوي ومحمد بن عبدالأعلى
قالوا حدثنا المعتمر (وهو ابن سليمان) قال سمعت أبي عن أبي عثمان قال لم
يبق مع رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم في بعض تلك الأيام التي قاتل فيهن
رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم غير طلحة وسعد عن حديثهما
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Abi Bakr al-Muqaddami, Hamid b. ‘Umar al-Bakrawi and
Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-A’la – al-Mu’tamar (and he is Ibn Sulayman) – father
– Abu ‘Uthman:

“**None remained** with the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, **on
some of the days** in which the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him,
was fighting **apart from Talhah and Sa’d**. They both (i.e. Talhah and
Sa’d) narrated that to me.”[^2]

On several expeditions of the Prophet, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthman fled
and escaped from battle! They ran way, and did not look back, knowing
fully well that their actions could get the Prophet killed, injured or
imprisoned.

In any case, what matters to our discussion in this chapter is that Abu
Bakr *doubted* the assurances of the Messenger of Allah while they both
were in danger, in the cave. He was unconvinced by them. Therefore, when
Allah sent down His *sakinah*, He excluded him. The same thing happened
with ‘Umar later on the Day of al-Hudaybiyyah. Imam Ibn Hibban (d. 354
H) records his own words concerning what he did on that day:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فقال عمر بن الخطاب رضوان الله عليه والله ما شككت منذ أسلمت إلا يومئذ
فاتيت النبي صلى الله عليه وسلم فقلت ألست رسول الله حق
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, ‘Umar b. al-Khaṭṭab, may Allah be pleased with him, said (about the
Day of al-Hudaybiyyah): “By Allah! **I never doubted since I accepted
Islam EXCEPT on that day**. So, I went to the Prophet, peace be upon
him, and said, ‘**Are you not truly the Messenger of Allah**?’”[^3]

‘Allamah al-Albani (d. 1420 H) comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^4]

Moreover, Shaykh al-Arnauṭ agrees:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حديث صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is a *sahih hadith*[^5]

He doubted the *nubuwwah* of Muhammad on that day! This removed him from
the ranks of believers. So, when Allah sent down His *sakinah*, He
excluded ‘Umar, and whoever was like him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فأنزل الله سكينته على رسوله وعلى المؤمنين
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, Allah sent down His *sakinah* upon His Messenger **and upon the
believers**.[^6]

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لقد رضي الله عن المؤمنين إذ يبايعونك تحت الشجرة فعلم ما في قلوبهم
فأنزل السكينة عليهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

He knew what was in their hearts. Therefore, He sent down *sakinah* upon
them.[^7]

At this point, it is apposite to quote this verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إنما المؤمنون الذين آمنوا بالله ورسوله ثم لم يرتابوا وجاهدوا بأموالهم
وأنفسهم في سبيل الله أولئك هم الصادقون
  </p>
</blockquote>

The believers are only those who have believed in Allah and His
Messenger, **and do not doubt afterwards**, and they do *jihad* with
their wealth *and with their lives*, for the Cause of Allah. They are
the truthful ones.[^8]

Did Abu Bakr and ‘Umar ever doubt Allah or His Messenger after they had
accepted Islam? Did Abu Bakr and ‘Umar ever shield their lives from
*jihad* by running away? Were they true believers then? Can people like
them really be the best ones in this Ummah after our Prophet? What about
those of the Sahabah, like Imam ‘Ali, *‘alaihi al-salam*, and perhaps
others, who never doubted after their acceptance of Islam, and who never
fled the battlefield? How could they have been inferior?

How can a doubter be superior to a firm, unshakable believer? How can
someone who escapes with his life from *jihad* be better than someone
who completely sold his life to Allah? How can someone who abandoned the
Messenger of Allah in fatal danger and ran to save his own life be more
valuable than another who placed his life in the midst of pagan swords
so that the Prophet could live?

Most importantly, the Messenger also specifically named the second best
of the entirety of this Ummah – during his lifetime – after himself. It
is in *Hadith al-Ikhtiyar*, recorded by Imam al-Tabarani (d. 360 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا محمد بن جابات الجند نيسابوري و الحسن بن علي المعمري قالا : ثنا
عبد الرزاق عن معمر عن ابن أبي نجيح عن مجاهد عن ابن عباس قال لما زوج
النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم فاطمة عليا قالت فاطمة : يا رسول الله زوجتني
من رجل فقير ليس له شيء فقال رسول الله صلى الله عليه و سلم : أما ترضين
يا يا فاطمة أن الله عز و جل اختار من أهل الأرض رجلين أحدهما أبوك
والآخر زوجك
  </p>
</blockquote>

Muhammad b. Jabat al-Jund Naysaburi AND al-Hasan b. ‘Ali al-Ma’mari –
‘Abd al-Razzaq – Ma’mar – Ibn Abi Najih – Mujahid – Ibn ‘Abbas:

When the Prophet, peace be upon him, married Faṭimah to ‘Ali, Faṭimah
said, “O Messenger of Allah! You are marrying me to a poor man who has
nothing.” So, the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said, “Are you
not pleased, O Faṭimah, that **Allah the Almighty the Most Glorious
chose, from the people of the earth, two men**: one of them is your
father and the other is your husband?”[^9]

Concerning the *First Narrator B*, ‘Allamah al-Albani states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسن بن علي المعمري ... هو صدوق حافظ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Hasan b. ‘Ali al-Ma’mari ... **He is** ***saduq*** **(very truthful),
a** ***hafiz*** **(*****hadith*** **scientist)**.[^10]

Al-Hafiz (d. 852 H) says something similar:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الحسن بن علي بن شبيب المعمري الحافظ واسع العلم والرحلة
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Hasan b. ‘Ali b. Shabib al-Ma’mari: **the** ***hafiz***
**(*****hadith*** **scientist), very knowledgeable** and widely
travelled (in search of knowledge).[^11]

And Imam al-Dhahabi (d. 748 H) corroborates them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المعمري :الامام، الحافظ، المجود، البارع، محدث العراق، أبو علي، الحسن
بن علي بن شبيب البغدادي المعمري.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Ma’mari: **the Imam, the** ***hafiz*** **(*****hadith***
**scientist)**, the generous, the pious, **the** ***hadith*** **master
of ‘Iraq**, Abu ‘Ali al-Hasan b. ‘Ali b. Shabib al-Baghdadi
al-Ma’mari.[^12]

Imam al-Hakim (d. 403 H) has equally documented his chain in his
*Mustadrak*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا أبو سعيد أحمد بن يعقوب الثقفي ثنا الحسن بن علي المعمري ثنا أبو
مصعب الزهري ثنا هشام بن عمار السلمي ....
  </p>
</blockquote>

Abu Sa’id Ahmad b. Ya’qub al-Thaqafi – **al-Hasan b. ‘Ali al-Ma’mari** –
Abu Mus’ab al-Zuhri - Hisham b. ‘Ammar al-Sulami....[^13]

Al-Hakim says about the chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح الإسناد
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* has a *sahih* chain.[^14]

And al-Dhahabi corroborates him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^15]

This proves that al-Ma’mari was *thiqah* (trustworthy).

Al-Hafiz also states about the second narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الرزاق بن همام بن نافع الحميري مولاهم أبو بكر الصنعاني ثقة حافظ
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hammam b. Nafi’ al-Humayri, their freed slave, Abu
Bakr al-San’ani: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy),** ***hafiz*** **(a**
***hadith*** **scientist)**.[^16]

He further says about the third narrator:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
معمر بن راشد الأزدي مولاهم أبو عروة البصري نزيل اليمن ثقة ثبت فاضل
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ma’mar b. Rashid al-Azdi, their freed slave, Abu ‘Urwah al-Basri, he
lived in Yemen: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy),** ***thabt***
**(accurate),** ***fadhil*** **(meritorious)**.[^17]

The fourth narrator is like him, as confirmed by Imam al-Dhahabi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الله بن أبي نجيح المكي، صاحب التفسير. أخذ عن مجاهد، وعطاء، وهو من
الأئمة الثقات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Abi Najih al-Makki: the scholar of *tafsir*. He learnt
from Mujahid and ‘Aṭa **and was one of the** ***thiqah***
**(trustworthy) Imams**.[^18]

Al-Hafiz adds:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عبد الله بن أبي نجيح يسار المكي أبو يسار الثقفي مولاهم ثقة رمي بالقدر
وربما دلس
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Abi Najih Yasar al-Makki, Abu Yasar al-Thaqafi, their
freed slave: ***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**, accused of believing in
fatalism, **and** ***maybe*** **he practised** ***tadlis***.[^19]

There is a *probability* that he practised *tadlis*. It is not definite.
In any case, his *‘an-‘an* reports from Mujahid are accepted as *sahih*.
For instance, Imam Muslim records this chain in his *Sahih*:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وحدثني حسن بن علي الحلواني حدثنا زيد بن الحباب حدثني إبراهيم بن نافع
حدثني عبدالله بن أبي نجيح عن مجاهد عن عائشة رضي الله عنها
  </p>
</blockquote>

Hasan b. ‘Ali al-Halwani – Zayd b. al-Habab – Ibrahim b. Nafi’ – **‘Abd
Allah b. Abi Najih** – **Mujahid** – ‘Aishah, may Allah be pleased with
her.[^20]

Imam Ahmad b. Hanbal (d. 241 H) also records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا عبد الله حدثني أبي ثنا عبد الرزاق ثنا معمر عن بن أبي نجيح عن
مجاهد عن عبد الرحمن بن أبي ليلى عن كعب بن عجرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah (b. Ahmad) – my father (Ahmad b. Hanbal) – **‘Abd al-Razzaq**
– **Ma’mar** – **Ibn Abi Najih** – **Mujahid** – ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi
Layli – Ka’b b. ‘Ujrah.[^21]

And Shaykh al-Arnanuṭ comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Its chain is** ***sahih*** upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^22]

Imam al-Hakim is not left out:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخبرني عبد الرحمن بن الحسن القاضي بهمدان ثنا إبراهيم بن الحسين ثنا آدم
بن أبي إياس ثنا ورقاء عن ابن أبي نجيح عن مجاهد عن ابن عباس رضي الله
عنهما
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd al-Rahman b. al-Hasan al-Qadi – Ibrahim b. al-Husayn – Adam b. Abi
Iyas – Waraqa – **Ibn Abi Najih** – **Mujahid** – Ibn ‘Abbas, may Allah
be pleased with them both.[^23]

Al-Hakim states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث صحيح على شرط الشيخين
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *sahih* upon the standard of the two Shaykhs.[^24]

Imam al-Dhahabi concurs:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
على شرط البخاري ومسلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

(*Sahih*) upon the standard of al-Bukhari and Muslim.[^25]

Imam al-Tirmidhi (d. 279 H) has documented a similar chain:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا ابن أبي عمر حدثنا سفيان عن ابن أبي نجيح عن مجاهد عن أبي معمر عن
ابن مسعود
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ibn Abi ‘Umar – Sufyan – **Ibn Abi Najih** – **Mujahid** – Abi Ma’mar –
Ibn Mas’ud[^26]

Al-Tirmidhi says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا حديث حسن صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

This *hadith* is *hasan* *sahih*.[^27]

‘Allamah al-Albani agrees too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sahih*[^28]

Imam Abu Ya’la (d. 307 H) records as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا زهير أخبرنا يزيد بن هارون أخبرنا محمد بن إسحاق عن عبد الله بن
أبي نجيح عن مجاهد عن ابن عباس
  </p>
</blockquote>

Zuhayr – Yazid b. Harun – Muhammad b. Ishaq – **‘Abd Allah b. Abi
Najih** – **Mujahid** – **Ibn ‘Abbas**.[^29]

Shaykh Dr. Asad comments:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*[^30]

And finally, Imam Ibn Khuzaymah (d. 311 H) has documented this chain in
his *Sahih* too:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثنا الفضل بن يعقوب الجرزي ثنا عبد الأعلى عن محمد عن عبد الله بن أبي
نجيح عن مجاهد عن ابن عباس
  </p>
</blockquote>

Al-Fadhl b. Ya’qub al-Hirzi – ‘Abd al-A’la – Muhammad – **‘Abd Allah b.
Abi Najih** – **Mujahid** – **Ibn ‘Abbas**.[^31]

Shaykh Dr. al-A’zami states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إسناده صحيح
  </p>
</blockquote>

Its chain is *sahih*.[^32]

At this point, it is needless to prove that Mujahid, the last narrator
of *Hadith al-Ikhtiyar* – was also *thiqah* (trustworthy). However, we
shall still do so, in case there is someone who prefers that. Al-Hafiz
says about him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مجاهد بن جبر بفتح الجيم وسكون الموحدة أبو الحجاج المخزومي مولاهم المكي
ثقة إمام في التفسير وفي العلم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Mujahid b. Jabr, Abu al-Hajjaj al-Makhzumi, their freed slave, al-Makki:
***Thiqah*** **(trustworthy)**, an Imam in *tafsir* and in (religious)
knowledge.[^33]

With this, it becomes absolutely proven that *Hadith al-Ikhtiyar* is
*sahih*. All its narrators are *thiqah* (trustworthy), and there is no
disconnection whatsoever in the chain. The *hadith* establishes that
Allah chose only Muhammad and ‘Ali – in a special selection - out of all
the people of the earth. It is clear from the text that Allah had not
chosen anyone else among them before He chose the two. As such, whatever
other selections were made by Him, apparently, came *after* this first,
unique selection.

The Qur’an makes it absolutely clear that creation and choosing are
*exclusive* divine functions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وربك يخلق ما يشاء ويختار ما كان لهم الخيرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

And your Lord creates whatever He wills, **and He chooses**. They have
no right to choose.[^34]

Among those He chose was His Messenger, Musa:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأنا اخترتك فاستمع لما يوحى
  </p>
</blockquote>

**And I have chosen you**. So listen to that which is inspired to
you.[^35]

He equally chose the Israelites:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولقد اخترناهم على علم على العالمين
  </p>
</blockquote>

And We had knowingly **chosen them above the worlds**.[^36]

The chosen ones, of course, are also the best:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإنهم عندنا لمن المصطفين الأخيار
  </p>
</blockquote>

And with Us, they are verily from **the chosen ones, the best**.[^37]

So, when Allah chose His Messenger and Amir al-Muminin out of all the
people of the earth, He was basically declaring them both as the best of
all. Since Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Uthman were alive at that time, it is
obvious that both Muhammad and ‘Ali were better than them, by Allah’s
Own Decree. These facts are *very* uncomfortable to mainstream Sunni
teachings, and pose an existential threat to Sunni Islam as a whole.

If the *khilafah* of Abu Bakr collapses, nothing else can survive from
the Sunni *madhhab*. This is why Sunnis generally feel very uneasy about
*Hadith al-Ikhtiyar*. Perhaps, it is also why ‘Allamah al-Albani grades
the authentic *hadith* in this manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
موضوع
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Mawdu’* (fabricated)[^38]

Fabricated?! By who? By the *thiqah* (trustworthy) narrators?! Then, our
‘Allamah states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
روي من حديث أبي هريرة، وعبد الله بن عباس، وأبي أيوب الأنصاري، وعلي
الهلالي، ومعقل بن يسار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

It is narrated by Abu Hurayrah, ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abbas, Abu Ayub
al-Ansari, ‘Ali al-Hilali and Ma’qil b. Yasar.[^39]

Five Sahabah! That is enough to make it *mutawatir* by the standards of
some Sunni *muhadithun*! What exactly is the problem with our dear
‘Allamah al-Albani? The worst part of it all is that the ‘Allamah –
whether deliberately or by mistake – omits the *sanad* of al-Ma’mari
above in his extensive discussion against the authenticity of the
*hadith*!

This, of course, makes it possible for him to reject it! However, if he
had included that *sahih* chain in his analysis, the story would have
been far different. It is unclear how the ‘Allamah misses that *sanad*
of al-Ma’mari, despite that he has quoted other chains of the same
*hadith* from the same *Mu’jam al-Kabir* of al-Tabarani! In any case,
‘Allamah al-Albani’s verdict upon the *hadith* is based upon incomplete
research. As such, it is void.

Sadly, our ‘Allamah takes things even more disturbing levels – to an
all-time low - with this comment of his over a chain that has some
common names with that of al-Ma’mari:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ولو أنه ثبت عنه؛ لبقي فيه علة أخرى تقدح في صحته، وهي احتمال أن يكون
هذا الحديث أيضاً مما أدخله ابن أخي معمر في كتب معمر؛ فإنه كان رافضياً
  </p>
</blockquote>

Even if it is established from him (i.e. ‘Abd al-Razzaq), there is still
another defect in it which discredits its authenticity. It is the
*possibility* that this *hadith* too is one of those things which the
nephew of Ma’mar inserted into the books of Ma’mar, for he (that nephew)
was a Rafidhi.[^40]

Possibility?! Mere conjecture? So, there is no concrete evidence? But
even then, no such possibility *ever* exists, to begin with! We will
simply round off this chapter with this angry reply of the Sunni
*hadith* master, ‘Allamah al-Maghribi:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قلت : هذا كلام باطل جدا ، وبيان ذلك : أن ابن أخي معمر، شخص وهمي لا
وجود له ، ولا يعرف أخ لمعمر . وكيف يوجد ابن بدون أب غير عيسى عليه
السلام ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

I say: This is complete nonsense! The reason for this is: **That nephew
of Ma’mar was only an imaginary figure. He never existed!** Ma’mar was
not known to have any brother. How could a son exist without a father,
apart from ‘Isa, peace be upon him?[^41]

[^1]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurshi al-Dimashqi,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim (Dar al-Ṭaybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah], vol. 4, p. 155

[^2]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 4, p. 1879, \# 2414 (47)

[^3]: Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b.
Ma’bad al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, Ṣahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn
Balban (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 11, p. 216,
\# 4872

[^4]: Ibid

[^5]: Ibid

[^6]: Qur’an 48:26

[^7]: Qur’an 48:18

[^8]: Qur’an 49:15

[^9]: Abu al-Qasim Sulayman b. Ahmad b. Ayub al-Ṭabarani, Mu’jam
al-Kabir (Mosul: Maktabah al-‘Ulum wa al-Hukm; 2nd edition, 1404 H)
[annotator: Hamadi b. ‘Abd al-Majid al-Salafi], vol. 11, p. 93, \# 11153

[^10]: Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati
b. Ādam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Ṣahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H), vol. 6, pp. 59-60, \# 2520

[^11]: Shihab al-Din Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani,
Lisan al-Mizan (Beirut: Manshurat Muasassat al-A’lami li al-Matbu’at;
2nd edition, 1390 H), vol. 2, p. 221, \# 975

[^12]: Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah;9th edition, 1413 H) [annotators
of the thirteenth volume: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut and ‘Ali Abu Zayd], vol. 13,
pp. 510-511, \# 254

[^13]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 2, p.
279, \# 3005

[^14]: Ibid

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 599, \# 4078

[^17]: Ibid, vol. 2, p. 202, \# 6833

[^18]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, Mizan
al-I’tidal fi Naqd al-Rijal (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah; 1st edition, 1382
H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi], vol. 2, p. 515, \# 4651

[^19]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 1, p. 541, \# 3673

[^20]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 2, p. 870, \# 1211 (133)

[^21]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, Musnad (Cairo:
Muasassat Qurtubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut], vol. 4, p. 242, \#
18138

[^22]: Ibid

[^23]: Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Ṣahihayn (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 2, p.
527, \# 3802

[^24]: Ibid

[^25]: Ibid

[^26]: Abu ‘Īsa Muhammad b. ‘Īsa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, al-Jami’
al-Ṣahih Sunan al-Tirmidhi (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi)
[annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani], vol. 5, p. 303, \# 3138

[^27]: Ibid

[^28]: Ibid

[^29]: Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, Musnad
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad], vol. 5, p. 106, \# 2718

[^30]: Ibid

[^31]: Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ishaq b. Khuzaymah al-Salami al-Naysaburi,
Ṣahih (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 1390 H) [annotators: Muhammad Nasir
al-Din al-Albani and Dr. Muhammad Mustafa al-A’zami], vol. 4, p. 286, \#
2897

[^32]: Ibid

[^33]: Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, Taqrib al-Tahdhib (Beirut:
Dar al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa
‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Ata], vol. 2, p. 159, \# 6501

[^34]: Qur’an 28:68

[^35]: Qur’an 20:13

[^36]: Qur’an 44:32

[^37]: Qur’an 38:47

[^38]: Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, Silsilah
al-Ahadith al-Ḍa’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi
al-Ummah (Riyadh: Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H), vol. 10, p. 530,
\# 4898

[^39]: Ibid

[^40]: Ibid, vol. 10, p. 533, \# 4898

[^41]: Abu al-Fadhl ‘Abd Allah b. al-Ṣiddiq al-Maghribi, al-Qawl
al-Muqni’ fi Radd ‘ala al-Albani al-Mubtadi’, p. 8


