Bibliography
============

Abu Bakr Muhammad b. Ishaq b. Khuzaymah al-Salami al-Naysaburi, *Sahih*
(Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 1390 H) [annotators: Muhammad Nasir al-Din
al-Albani and Dr. Muhammad Mustafa al-A’zami]

‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. Abi Shaybah Ibrahim b. ‘Uthman b. Abi Bakr b.
Abi Shaybah al-Kufi al-‘Ubsi, *Musannaf Ibn Abi Shaybah fi al-Ahadith wa
al-Athar* (Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1409 H) [annotator: Prof. Sa’id
al-Laham]

‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali b. al-Jawzi, *al-‘Ilal al-Mutanahiyyah fi
al-Ahadith al-Wahiyyah* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition,
1403 H) [annotator: Khalil al-Mays]

‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Sana’ani, *Tafsir al-Qur’an* (Riyadh:
Maktabah al-Rushd; 1st edition, 1410 H) [annotator: Dr. Mustafa Muslim
Muhammad]

‘Ali b. Husam al-Din al-Muttaqi al-Hindi, *Kanz al-‘Ummal fi Sunan
al-Aqwal wa Af’al* (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1989 H)

Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, *Fadhail al-Sahabah*
(Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1403 H) [annotator: Dr. Wasiyullah
Muhammad ‘Abbas]

Abu ‘Abd Allah Ahmad b. Hanbal al-Shaybani, *Musnad* (Cairo: Muasassat
Qurṭubah) [annotator: Shu’ayb al-Arnaut]

Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hafiz al-Naysaburi, *Kitab
Ma’rifah ‘Ulum al-Hadith* (Beirut: Manshurah Dar al-Afaq al-Hadith; 4th
edition, 1400 H) [annotator: Sayyid Mu’zam Husayn]

Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. ‘Abd Allah al-Hakim al-Naysaburi,
*al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-’Ilmiyyah; 1st
edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd al-Qadir ‘Aṭa]

Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Mizan
al-I’tidal fi Naqd al-Rijal* (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah; 1st edition, 1382
H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi]

Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Isma’il b. Ibrahim b. Mughirah al-Bukhari
al-J’ufi, *al-Jami’ al-Sahih al-Mukhtasar* (Beirut: Dar Ibn Kathir; 3rd
edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Musṭafa Dib al-Bagha]

Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, *al-Mujtaba min al-Sunan*
(Halab: Maktab Maṭbu’at al-Islamiyyah; 2nd edition, 1406 H) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Ahmad b. Shu’ayb al-Nasai, *Sunan al-Kubra* (Beirut:
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1411 H) [annotator: Dr. ‘Abd
al-Ghaffar Sulayman al-Bandari and Sayyid Kasrawi Hasan]

Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Fatawa* (Cairo: Maktabah al-Turath
al-Islami; 1st edition, 1414 H)

Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah wa Shayhun
min Fiqhihah wa Fawaidihah* (Riyadh: Maktabah al-Ma’arif li al-Nashr wa
al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1415 H)

Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Sahih al-Jami’ al-Saghir wa Ziyadatuhu*
(Al-Maktab al-Islami)

Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh b. Tajati b.
Adam al-Ashqudri al-Albani, *Sahih Abi Dawud* (Kuwait: Muasassat
al-Gharas li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 1st edition, 1423 H)

Abu ‘Isa Muhammad b. ‘Isa al-Sulami al-Tirmidhi, *al-Jami’ al-Sahih
Sunan al-Tirmidhi* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

Abu ‘Umar Yusuf b. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Barr b. ‘Asim
al-Nimri al-Qurṭubi, *al-Isti’ab fi Ma’rifat al-Ashab* (Beirut: Dar
al-Jil; 1st edition, 1412 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad al-Bajawi]

Abu ‘Uthman ‘Amr b. Bahr al-Jahiz, *al-‘Uthmaniyyah* (Egypt: Dar
al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1374 H) [annotator: ‘Abd al-Salam Muhammad Harun]

Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Halim b. Taymiyyah al-Harrani, *Minhaj
al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah* (Muasassat Qurṭubah; 1st edition, 1406 H)
[annotator: Dr. Muhammad Rashad Salim]

Abu al-‘Abbas Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Muhammad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-Haytami,
*al-Sawaiq al-Muhriqah ‘ala Ahl al-Rafdh wa al-DHalal wa al-Zindiqah*
(Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 1st edition, 1997 CE) [annotators: ‘Abd
al-Rahman b. ‘Abd Allah al-Turki and Kamil Muhammad Khuraṭ]

Abu al-Fadhl ‘Abd Allah b. al-Siddiq al-Maghribi, *al-Qawl al-Muqni’ fi
Radd ‘ala al-Albani al-Mubtadi’*

Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *al-Isabah fi Tamyiz
al-Sahabah* (Beirut: Dar al-Jil; 1412 H) [annotator: ‘Ali Muhammad
Bajawi]

Abu al-Fadhl Mahmud al-Alusi, *Ruh al-Ma’ani fi Tafsir al-Qur’an
al-‘Azim wa Sab’ al-Mathani* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi)

Abu al-Faraj Jamal al-Din ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad al-Jawzi
al-Qurshi al-Baghdadi, *Zad al-Masir fi ‘Ilm al-Tafsir* (Beirut: Dar
al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Rahman
‘Abd Allah]

Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurshi al-Dimashqi, *Tafsir
al-Qur’an al-‘Azim* (Dar al-Taybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah]

Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. Kathir al-Dimashqi, *al-Bidayah wa al-Nihayah*
(Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H) [annotator: ‘Ali
Shiri]

Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali b. ‘Umar b. Ahmad b. Mahdi b. Mas’ud b. al-Nu’man b.
Dinar al-Baghdadi al-Daraquṭni, *al-‘Ilal al-Waridah fi Ahadith
al-Nabawiyyah* (Damam: Dar Ibn al-Jawzi; 1st edition, 1427 H)
[annotators: Muhammad b. Salih b. Muhammad al-Dabasi and Mahmud Khalil]

Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, *Sahih
Muslim* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi]

Abu al-Qasim ‘Ali b. al-Hasan b. Habat Allah b. ‘Abd Allah, Ibn Asakir
al-Shafi’i, *Tarikh Madinah Dimashq* (Beirut: Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: ‘Ali Shiri]

Abu al-Qasim Sulayman b. Ahmad al-Tabarani, *Kitab al-Awail* (Beirut:
Muasassat al-Risalah; 3rd edition, 1408 H) [annotator: Muhammad Shakur
b. Mahmud al-Haji]

Abu al-Qasim Sulayman b. Ahmad b. Ayub al-Tabarani, *Mu’jam al-Kabir*
(Mosul: Maktabah al-‘Ulum wa al-Hukm; 2nd edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Hamadi b. ‘Abd al-Majid al-Salafi]

Abu Bakr ‘Abd al-Razzaq b. Hamam al-Sa’nani, *al-Musannaf* [annotator:
Habib al-Rahman al-A’zami]

Abu Bakr Ahmad b. al-Husayn b. ‘Ali b. Musa al-Bayhaqi, *Sunan al-Kubra*
(Makkah: Maktabah Dar al-Baz; 1414 H) [annotator: Muhammad ‘Abd al-Qadir
‘Aṭa]

Abu Bakr b. Abi ‘Asim, Ahmad b. ‘Amr b. al-DHahhak b. Mukhlid
al-Shaybani, *Kitab al-Sunnah* (al-Maktab al-Islami; 1st edition, 1400
H) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

Abu Dawud Sulayman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijistani al-Azdi, *Sunan* (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani]

Abu Dawud Sulayman b. al-Ash’ath al-Sijistani, *Sunan Abi Dawud*
(Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Nasir al-Din
al-Albani]

Abu Hamid Muhammad b. Muhammad al-Ghazali, *Ihya ‘Ulum al-Din* (Beirut:
Dar al-Ma’rifah)

Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad al-Tamimi al-Busti, *Kitab
al-Thiqat* (Hyderabad: Majlis Dairat al-Ma’arif al-‘Uthmaniyyah; 1st
edition, 1393 H)

Abu Hatim Muhammad b. Hibban b. Ahmad b. Hibban b. Mu’adh b. Ma’bad
al-Tamimi al-Darimi al-Busti, *Sahih Ibn Hibban bi Tartib Ibn Balban*
(Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 2nd edition, 1414 H) [annotators:
Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani and Shu’ayb al-Arnaut]

Abu Ja’far Ahmad b. Muhammad b. Salamah b. ‘Abd al-Malik b. Salamah,
*Sharh Ma’ani al-Athar* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition,
1399 H) [annotator: Muhammad Zuhri al-Najjar]

Abu Ja’far Muhammad b. Jarir b. Yazid b. Kathir b. Ghalib al-Amuli
al-Tabari, *Jami al-Bayan fi Tawil al-Qur’an* (Dar al-Fikr; 1415 H)
[annotator: Sadafi Jamil al-‘Aṭṭar]

Abu Muhammad ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Abd al-Rahman al-Darimi, *Sunan* (Beirut:
Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Husayn Salim
Asad]

Abu Muhammad ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abi Hatim al-Razi, *Tafsir Ibn Abi Hatim*
(al-Maktabah al-‘Asriyyah) [annotator: As’ad Muhammad al-Tayyib]

Abu Ya’la Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muthanna al-Mawsili al-Tamimi, *Musnad*
(Damascus: Dar al-Mamun li al-Turath; 1st edition, 1404 H) [annotator:
Dr. Husayn Salim Asad]

Abu Zayd ‘Umar b. Shabah al-Numayri al-Basri, *Tarikh al-Madinah
al-Munawwarah* (Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1417 H) [annotators:
‘Ali Muhammad Dandal and Yasin Sa’d al-Din Bayan]

Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *al-Isabah fi Tamyiz al-Sahabah*
(Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyyah; 1st edition, 1415 H) [annotators:
Shaykh ‘Adil Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Mawjud and Shaykh ‘Ali Muhammad Ma’udh]

Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Taqrib al-Tahdhib* (Beirut: Dar
al-Maktabah al-‘Ilmiyyah; 2nd edition, 1415 H) [annotator: Mustafa ‘Abd
al-Qadir ‘Aṭa]

Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Ta’jil Munfa’at bi
Zawaid Rijal al-Aimah al-Arba’at* (Beirut: Dar al-Bashair; 1st edition,
1996 CE) [annotator: Dr. Ikram Allah Imdad al-Haqq]

Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. Muhammad b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani al-Shafi’i,
*Hadi al-Sari Muqaddimah Fath al-Bari* (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath
al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1408 H)

Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Muhammad, Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Ta’rif Ahl al-Taqdis
bi Maratib al-Mawsifin bi al-Tadlis* (Jordan: Maktabah al-Manar; 1st
edition) [annotator: Dr. Asim b. ‘Abd Allah al-Qaryuni]

Al-Muwaffaq b. Ahmad al-Bakri al-Makki al-Hanafi al-Khawarazmi,
*al-Manaqib* (Qum: Muasassat al-Nashr al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1411 H)
[annotator: Shaykh Malik al-Mahmudi]

Ibn al-Athir, Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali b. Muhammad b. ‘Abd al-Karim b. ‘Abd
al-Wahid al-Shaybani al-Jazari, *Usd al-Ghabah* (Beirut: Dar Ihya
al-Turath al-‘Arabi; 1st edition, 1417 H) [annotator: ‘Adil Ahmad
al-Rufa’i]

Ibn Majah Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Yazid al-Qazwini, *Sunan* (Dar
al-Fikr) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad ‘Abd al-Baqi]

Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, *Irwa al-Ghalil fi Takhrij Ahadith
Manar al-Sabil* (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 2nd edition, 1405 H)

Muhammad Nasir al-Din al-Albani, *Tahzir al-Sajid min Itikhaz al-Qubur
Masajid* (Beirut: al-Maktab al-Islami; 4th edition)

Muhammad Nasir al-Din b. al-Hajj Nuh al-Albani, *Silsilah al-Ahadith
al-DHa’ifah wa al-Mawdhu’ah wa Atharihah al-Sayyiah fi al-Ummah*
(Riyadh: Dar al-Ma’arif; 1st edition, 1412 H)

Nur al-Din ‘Ali b. Abi Bakr al-Haythami, *Majma’ al-Zawaid* (Beirut: Dar
al-Fikr; 1412 H)

Nur al-Din ‘Ali b. Abi Bakr al-Haythami, *Mawarid al-Zaman ila Zawaid
Ibn Hibban* (Damascus: Dar al-Thaqafah al-‘Arabiyyah; 1st edition, 1412
H) [annotators: Husayn Salim Asad al-Darani and ‘Abd ‘Ali al-Kushk]

Prof. Dr. Hikmat b. Bashir b. Yasin, *Mawsu’at al-Sahih al-Masbur min
al-Tafsir bi al-Mathur* (Madinah: Dar al-Mathar li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’
wa al-Taba’at; 1st edition, 1420 H)

Rob Williams, “Omar Borkan Al Gala: Is this one of the three men who are
‘too sexy’ for Saudi Arabia”, *The Independent*, Friday 26 April 2013
[[http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/omar-borkan-al-gala-...](http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/omar-borkan-al-gala-is-this-one-of-the-three-men-who-are-too-sexy-for-saudi-arabia-8590104.html%5D)

Shams al-Din Abu ‘Abd Allah Muhammad b. Ahmad b. al-Dhahabi al-Dimashqi,
*al-Kashif fi Ma’rifat Man Lahu Riwayat fi al-Kutub al-Sittah* (Jeddah:
Dar al-Qiblah li al-Thaqafat al-Islamiyyah; 1st edition, 1413 H)

Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala* (Beirut: Muasassat al-Risalah; 9th edition, 1413 H)

Shams al-Din Muhammad b. Ahmad b. ‘Uthman al-Dhahabi, *Tarikh al-Islam
wa Wafiyat al-Mashahir wa al-A’lam* (Beirut: Dar al-Kitab al-‘Arabi; 1st
edition, 1407 H) [annotator: Dr. ‘Umar ‘Abd al-Salam Tadmuri]

Shihab al-Din Abu al-Fadhl Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Lisan
al-Mizan* (Beirut: Manshurat Muasassat al-A’lami li al-Maṭbu’at; 2nd
edition, 1390 H)

Shihab al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Ali b. Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Tahdhib al-Tahdhib*
(Dar al-Fikr; 1st edition, 1404 H)

Shihab al-Din Ibn Hajar al-‘Asqalani, *Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih
al-Bukhari* (Beirut: Dar al-Ma’rifah li al-Taba’ah wa al-Nashr; 2nd
edition)

Taj al-Din b. ‘Ali b. ‘Abd al-Kafi al-Subki, *Tabaqat al-Shafi’iyyah
al-Kubra* (Hajr li al-Taba’at wa al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd edition,
1413 H) [annotators: Dr. Mahmud Muhammad al-Tanahi and Dr. ‘Abd
al-Fattah Muhammad al-Halwi]


