3. Hadith Al-Qadha, ‘Ali’s Superior Knowledge Of The Qur’an And Sunnah
======================================================================

There is no dispute about the fact that Amir al-Muminin, *‘alaihi
al-salam*, was the most competent in justice dispensation among all the
Sahabah. In fact, he is the best judge in our whole *Ummah* till the Day
of *al-Qiyamah* after its Prophet, *sallallahu ‘alaihi wa alihi*. On a
specific level, he was better - in terms of justice dispensation - than
Abu Bakr, ‘Umar and ‘Uthman. So, what is the direct implication of this?

In Islam, justice dispensation is based squarely upon the Qur’an and
Sunnah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فاحكم بينهم بما أنزل الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

So, judge between them **by what Allah has revealed**.[^1]

The Qur’an itself, in its entirety, is described as “a judgment” by its
Master:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وكذلك أنزلناه حكما عربيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

And thus We have sent it down as **a judgment** in Arabic[^2]

As such, complete knowledge of everything in it is required for
effective justice dispensation.

Moreover, the Sunnah is the divinely inspired explanations of this
“judgment” called al-Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وأنزلنا إليك الذكر لتبين للناس ما نزل إليهم
  </p>
</blockquote>

And We have sent down unto you (Muhammad) *al-Dhikr* (i.e. the Qur’an)
**that you may explain clearly** to mankind what is sent down to
them.[^3]

Apparently, a person does not know the Book of Allah until he has known
its explanations by the Messenger of Allah. These explanations,
according to the same Book, only originated from the Lord as well:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما ينطق عن الهوى إن هو إلا وحي يوحى
  </p>
</blockquote>

He (Muhammad) never speaks of (his own) desire or caprice. **It is
nothing but a** ***wahy*** **that is revealed (to him)**.[^4]

It is obvious. If anyone were more knowledgeable of the Qur’an and
Sunnah than ‘Ali in this *Ummah*, he (‘Ali) would not have been its best
judge. It is simply unfathomable that Allah and His Messenger would have
conferred upon him such a rank while there was/is another – in the
*Ummah* as a whole - who was/is more competent with the tools of justice
dispensation than he was!

It is noteworthy that knowledge of the revelations of Allah surpasses
mere knowledge of *al-halal* (the permissible) and *al-haram* (the
prohibited). It covers everything from the Lord to humanity. Most
importantly, merely knowing the legal status of a thing is not enough
for justice dispensation. The judge must equally be fully aware of the
penalties (if any) prescribed for it, and the best ways and
circumstances to exercise personal discretion in different cases in line
with the Wish of Allah. None, apparently, is as competent in these
fields as ‘Ali.

At this point, it is apposite to quote this groundbreaking *riwayah*
referenced by al-Hafiz Ibn Kathir (d. 774 H):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال شعبة بن الحجاج ، عن سِمَاك ، عن خالد بن عَرْعَرَة أنه سمع عليا
وشعبة أيضًا ، عن القاسم بن أبي بزَّة ، عن أبي الطُّفَيْل ، سمع عليًا.
وثبت أيضًا من غير وجه ، عن أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب : أنه صعد
منبر الكوفة فقال : لا تسألوني عن آية في كتاب الله ، ولا عن سنة عن رسول
الله ، إلا أنبأتكم بذلك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Shu’bah b. al-Hajjaj, from Simak, from Khalid b. ‘Ar’arah that he heard
‘Ali; and Shu’bah again narrated from al-Qasim b. Abi Barrah from Abu
al-Tufayl that he heard ‘Ali; and IT IS ALSO AUTHENTICALLY TRANSMITTED
through many chains that Amir al-Muminin ‘Ali b. Abi Talib climbed the
pulpit of Kufah and said, “**You will not ask me about** ***ANY***
**verse in the Book of Allah, or about** ***ANY*** **Sunnah from the
Messenger of Allah, except that I will inform you about that**.”[^5]

None of the Sahabah was *ever* able to make a similar claim!

Secondly, justice must be administered with utmost fairness and equity:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإن حكمت فاحكم بينهم بالقسط
  </p>
</blockquote>

If you judge, judge between them with fairness and equity.[^6]

This verse allows the use of personal discretion in the administration
of justice, especially in all cases where no divinely fixed penalties or
judgments are available. But even then, it also reiterates the notion
that the judge must know everything in the Qur’an and the Sunnah! Full
knowledge of both is required to determine whether or not there is a
fixed penalty or judgment concerning a particular case. If there is
none, then the judge uses his discretion. Where the judge does not know
whether Allah has already fixed the judgment for the issue before him –
due to an insufficient knowledge of the Book and the Tradition - he is
most likely to effect a miscarriage of justice, without even realizing
it!

Moreover, the judge must give his judgments with the best interests of
fairness and equity at heart. This is the second message of the above
verse. Where there is a divinely fixed penalty or judgment, he must
apply it in the fairest and most equitable manners. Where there is no
such fixed penalty or judgment, then he equally must adopt his personal
discretion in ways that best ensure a completely fair and equitable
dispensation of justice.

Amir al-Muminin has been declared the best judge by Allah and His
Messenger. Apparently, he is the one, within Islam, with the best
knowledge and practice in justice dispensation. Most importantly, he is
the fairest and the most equitable among us all – including the
Sahabah - in the application of Allah’s Fixed Verdicts and in the just
administration of personal discretion.

The most crucial part of this discourse, probably, is stated in this
verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا داوود إنا جعلناك خليفة في الأرض فاحكم بين الناس بالحق
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Dawud! We have appointed you a *khalifah* over the earth. Therefore,
judge between mankind with the truth.[^7]

First and foremost, it is clear from this verse that justice
dispensation is the job of the *khalifah*, to the exclusion of all
others. He is the judge of “mankind”. Every single other human beings
comes under his juridical authority. Of course, he might appoint
subordinate judges to assist him, under his close supervision. However,
the job belongs to him alone. Therefore, whoever is the most qualified
to be judge is also the most qualified for the *khilafah*!

Besides, the competent judge is he who is able to discern the truth, and
who judges with the truth. Judgment with the truth involves the
objective application of Allah’s Fixed Verdicts over relevant issues, as
well as the selfless administration of personal discretion in deserving
cases. The judge therefore must be very intelligent and completely
truthful. Application of personal discretion to reach true justice
requires an extremely high level of intelligence, selflessness,
sincerity and honesty. An unintelligent person cannot be expected to
skillfully detect the truth from a clog of complex arguments and proofs
before him. Moreover, a corrupt or self-serving fellow cannot be
expected to judge others with the truth, or to apply his personal
discretion fairly. With these facts in mind, one can then safely
conclude and proclaim that Amir al-Muminin - being the best judge in
this *Ummah* - was the most qualified for the *khilafah* immediately
after the Prophet. In addition, he is the most truthful, the most
intelligent, the most selfless, the most sincere, the most honest, and
the best in recognizing and applying the truth in this *Ummah* after the
Messenger.

[^1]: Qur’an 5:48

[^2]: Qur’an 13:37

[^3]: Qur’an 16:44

[^4]: Qur’an 53:3-4

[^5]: Abu al-Fida Isma’il b. ‘Umar b. Kathir al-Qurshi al-Dimashqi,
Tafsir al-Qur’an al-‘Azim (Dar al-Ṭaybah li al-Nashr wa al-Tawzi’; 2nd
edition, 1420 H) [annotator: Sami b. Muhammad Salamah], vol. 7, p. 413

[^6]: Qur’an 5:42

[^7]: Qur’an 38:26


