6. Hadith Al-Qadha, An Age Of Jungle Justice III
================================================

The *khalifah* of Muslims is their supreme judge on every aspect of
their religion, like the Messenger of Allah. As such, Muslims are
required to refer all their religious problems and disputes to him for
judgment, and his verdicts are binding over them. This function
necessitates that the *khalifah* be the most knowledgeable of the
*Ummah* throughout his administration. Otherwise, he would be unfit for
the grand office. Issuing correct religious verdicts on all types of
religious questions and disputes, from all persons of all calibres,
certainly requires unparalleled knowledge.

During his rule, a man came to ‘Umar b. al-Khaṭṭab with his personal
religious problem. Imam Muslim (d. 261 H) records about how the
*khalifah* handled it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثني عبدالله بن هاشم العبدي حدثنا يحيى (يعني ابن سعيد القطان) عن شعبة
قال حدثني الحكم عن ذر عن سعيد بن عبدالرحمن بن أبزي عن أبيه أن رجلا أتى
عمر فقال :إني أجنبت فلم أجد ماء فقال لا تصل فقال عمار أما تذكر يا أمير
المؤمنين إذ أنا وأنت في سرية فأجنبنا فلم نجد ماء فأما أنت فلم تصل وأما
أنا فتمعكت في التراب وصليت فقال النبي صلى الله عليه و سلم إنما كان
يكفيك أن تضرب بيديك الأرض ثم تنفخ ثم تمسح بهما وجهك وكفيك فقال عمر اتق
الله يا عمار قال إن شئت لم أحدث به
  </p>
</blockquote>

‘Abd Allah b. Hisham al-‘Abdi – Yahya b. Sa’id al-Qaṭṭan – Shu’bah –
al-Hakam – Dharr – Sa’id b. ‘Abd al-Rahman b. Abza – his father:

**A man came to 'Umar and said: “I have seminal discharges and I cannot
find water (to do the** ***ghusl*****)”. He (‘Umar) said, “Do not
perform** ***Salat*****.”** So, ‘Ammar said, “Do you remember, O *Amir
al-Muminin*, when I and you were in a military detachment and **we had
seminal discharges and could not find water and you (‘Umar) did not
perform the** ***Salat***. As for me, I rolled myself in dust and
performed the *Salat*. So, the Prophet, peace be upon him, said, “It was
enough for you to strike the soil with your hands and then blow and then
wipe your face and palms”. **Umar said: “Fear Allah, O Ammar!”**
Therefore, he (‘Ammar) replied, **“If you so like, I would** **not
narrate it”**.[^1]

There are some really interesting facts in this narration:

‘Umar and Ammar, *radhiyallahu ‘anhu*, were both together in a military
detachment, and they had seminal discharges.

Ammar rolled himself in the soil in order to cleanse himself for
*Salat*, due to a lack of water. He had no divine guidance for the act.
It was only his intuition.

‘Umar, on his part, completely refrained from offering any *Salat* as
long as he could not find water.

Both recounted their experiences to the Messenger of Allah, *sallallahu
‘alaihi wa alihi*, who taught them *tayammum* as the correct step should
they encounter a similar situation.

During ‘Umar’s rule, a man came to him with the same problem that he
personally had gone through. But, rather than offer to him the solution
of *tayammum* as taught by the Prophet, ‘Umar instructed the man with
his own initial wrong step!

‘Ammar attempted to remind ‘Umar of the Sunnah in such situations. But,
the latter simply did not want to hear about it!

There are a number of questions here. First and foremost, did ‘Umar
deliberately reject the Sunnah or not? This depends upon whether he
actually remembered the incident involving him and ‘Ammar. If he did,
and still gave the ruling that he gave, then he would have been
contemptuous of the Sunnah. Moreover, even if he had completely
forgotten it, why did he not act on ‘Ammar’s reminder? From the look of
it, he was not convinced by ‘Ammar’s narration. He most probably had
very serious doubts about the accuracy of ‘Ammar’s *hadith*. Therefore,
he saw no real reason to alter his decision on the matter.

So, the best-case scenario is that ‘Umar had absolutely forgotten the
incident of *tayammum*, which involved him personally and directly. In
addition, when ‘Ammar attempted to revive his memory of the event, he
had grave trust issues with the latter’s report. Therefore, he did not
remember, and there was no other reliable source to bring back his
memories of the incident. The worst-case scenario is that ‘Umar actually
remembered the *hadith*, or was at least successfully reminded of it by
‘Ammar. Yet, he thought that his personal solution to the issue before
him outweighed the Sunnah of the Messenger of Allah. As such, he was in
contempt of Muhammad and his teachings.

We will go with the best-case scenario. ‘Umar had completely forgotten,
and was not successfully reminded. This fact casts a mammoth shadow of
doubt over ‘Umar’s memory power. Since he forgot the incident of
*tayammum* so completely and absolutely, it is extremely uncertain that
he was able to remember many – if not most - other teachings of the
Prophet that were necessary in his discharge of his day-to-day judicial
functions. The end result is that he lacked the requisite scholarly
prowess for the office. The natural product of absolutely forgetting
anything is complete ignorance of it.

Something that baffles the mind is how ‘Umar came to the conclusion that
he could issue rulings in the *Shari’ah* with his *personal* opinions
simply because he had forgotten, or did not know, the correct positions.
Is ignorance an excuse for the adoption of personal opinions in the Law
of Allah? The Qur’an answers:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ومن لم يحكم بما أنزل الله فأولئك هم الكافرون
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whosoever does NOT give rulings, verdicts, judgments, or commands based
upon what Allah has revealed, **such people are the infidels**.[^2]

Therefore, giving a ruling by personal opinion amounts to disbelief
(*kufr*), according to Allah. Why did ‘Umar take such an extreme risk?
He should have simply remained silent, or sought the advice of superior
jurists like Amir al-Muminin, *‘alaihi al-salam*, Ibn ‘Abbas,
*radhiyallahu ‘anhu*, and others. His reliance upon personal opinion in
issuing a ruling in the *Shari’ah* of Allah was a *very* wrong step. It
saved neither him, nor the man who came to him for judgment.

Perhaps, the most disturbing part is that the ruling of *tayammum* is
explicitly stated at two different places in the Book of Allah:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وإن كنتم مرضى أو على سفر أو جاء أحد منكم من الغائط أو لامستم النساء
فلم تجدوا ماء فتيمموا صعيدا طيبا فامسحوا بوجوهكم وأيديكم
  </p>
</blockquote>

And if you are ill, or on a journey, or one of you comes after answering
the call of nature, or you have had sexual intercourse with women **and
you cannot find water, perform** ***tayammum*** **with clean soil** and
rub therewith your faces and hands.[^3]

It is apparent. Despite the double presence of the ruling of *tayammum*
in the Qur’an, ‘Umar did NOT know it. This raises a blood-red flag on
‘Umar’s knowledge of the Book of Allah. Obviously, he was not a *hafiz*
(memorizer) of the Qur’an. Secondly, his knowledge of its verses, and of
*al-Fiqh*, must have been extremely deficient, as *tayammum* is only one
of the beginner’s courses in Islamic jurisprudence!

‘Umar’s controversial judgment expectedly split the *Ummah*. There were
his loyalists who thought that his clearly invalid ruling was more
correct than the Qur’an and Sunnah! There were also his opponents who
sided with Allah and His Messenger. One of the staunchest loyalists of
‘Umar was ‘Abd Allah b. Mas’ud, a very senior Sahabi. Imam Muslim
records:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حدثنا يحيى بن يحيى وأبو بكر بن أبي شيبة وابن نمير جميعا عن أبي معاوية
قال أبو بكر حدثنا أبو معاوية عن الأعمش عن شقيق قال كنت جالسا مع عبد
الله وأبي موسى فقال أبو موسى ثم يا أبا عبد الرحمن أرأيت لو أن رجلا
أجنب فلم يجد الماء شهرا كيف يصنع بالصلاة فقال عبد الله لا يتيمم وإن لم
يجد الماء شهرا قال أبو موسى فكيف بهذه الآية في سورة المائدة فلم تجدوا
ماء فتيمموا صعيدا طيبا فقال عبدالله لو رخص لهم في هذه الآية لأوشك إذا
برد عليهم الماء أن يتيمموا بالصعيد فقال أبو موسى لعبد الله ألم تسمع
قول عمار بعثني رسول الله صلى الله عليه وسلم في حاجة فأجنبت فلم أجد
الماء فتمرغت في الصعيد كما تمرغ الدابة ثم أتيت النبي صلى الله عليه
وسلم فذكرت ذلك له فقال إنما كان يكفيك أن تقول بيديك هكذا ثم ضرب بيديه
الأرض حصول واحدة ثم مسح الشمال على اليمين وظاهر كفيه ووجهه فقال عبد
الله أو لم تر عمر لم يقنع بقول عمار
  </p>
</blockquote>

Yahya b. Yahya, Abu Bakr b. Abi Shaybah and Ibn Numayr – Abu Mu’awiyah –
al-A’mash – Shaqiq:

I was sitting with ‘Abd Allah (b. Mas’ud) and Abu Musa (al-Ash’ari). So,
Abu Musa asked: “O Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman, what is your opinion: if a man
had a seminal discharge and could not find water for one month, how
should he do about the *Salat*? ‘Abd Allah replied, “**He should NOT
perform** ***tayammum*** **even if he cannot find water for a month**”.

Abu Musa then said, “**What about this verse in Surat al-Maidah said,
‘And you cannot find water, then perform** ***tayammum*** **with clean
soil**’?” ‘Abd Allah replied, “If they were allowed on the basis of this
verse, there is a possibility that they would perform *tayammum* with
soil even if water were available but cold.” So, Abu Musa said to ‘Abd
Allah, “Have you not heard the statement of ‘Ammar: ‘The Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him, sent me on an errand and I had a seminal
discharge, but could not find water. So I rolled myself in the soil just
as a beast rolls itself. Then, I came to the Prophet, peace be upon him
then and mentioned that to him and he (the Messenger) said: “It would
have been enough for you to do thus”. Then he struck the earth with his
hands once and wiped his right hand with the help of his left hand and
the exterior of his palms and his face’.” ‘Abd Allah replied: “**Didn't
you see that ‘Umar was NOT satisfied with the statement of
‘Ammar?**”[^4]

Abu Musa was on the side of the Qur’an and Sunnah, and sought to correct
Ibn Mas’ud on his diehard ‘Umarist stance on *tayammum*. The former
quoted the Book of Allah and the explicit teaching of His Messenger. Ibn
Mas’ud however rejected both, citing excuses. He could not allow the
people to follow the Qur’an, because there was a “possibility” that they
would abuse its ruling. Well, this same logic could be employed to turn
down *everything* that Islam teaches! Moreover, Ibn Mas’ud equally
refused the Sunnah of the Prophet only because ‘Umar was not satisfied
with ‘Ammar’s *hadith*!

[^1]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 1, p. 280, \#112

[^2]: Qur’an 5:44

[^3]: Qur’an 4:43 and 5:6

[^4]: Abu al-Husayn Muslim b. al-Hajjaj al-Qushayri al-Naysaburi, Ṣahih
Muslim (Beirut: Dar Ihya al-Turath al-‘Arabi) [annotator: Muhammad Fuad
‘Abd al-Baqi], vol. 1, p. 280, \#110


