On Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s intention on proceeding towards Makkah (from Madina) and the letters addressed to him by the people of Kufa
===================================================================================================================================

When Imam Husayn (a.s.) intended going towards Makkah, Abdullah bin
Muti’ came to meet him and said, “May I be your ransom! Where do you
intend going”? Imam replied,

*“Presently I have decided to go to Makkah, after that I shall seek
consultation from the Almighty.”*

Abdullah said, “May Allah destine goodness for you! You may go to
Makkah, but lest you go to Kufa for it is an ill-omened city. Your
father was assassinated therein and your brother was rendered helpless,
was forsaken and wounded by a spear and it was near that he would
succumb to that wound.

You may remain attached to the Ka’bah for you are the Master of the
Arabs and the people of Hijaz (region of West Arabia, the barrier land,
running parallel to the Red Sea and wherein lies the dual holy cities of
Makkah and Madina) do not regard anyone else as your equal. The people
therein will exert themselves to hasten to your aid, may I be your
ransom, for if you are killed we shall be enslaved and conquered after
you.”

Shaikh Mufeed says that Imam Husayn (a.s.) proceeded towards Makkah
taking the main roads reciting the following verse of the Qur’an:

***“So he went forth in fear, apprehending.” (Surah al-Qasas, 28:21)***

Someone told him, “It would be better if we take a crooked road as
Abdullah bin Zubayr and avoid the main road, so that those in our
pursuit might not reach you.” Imam re­plied,

*“No by Allah! I shall not forsake this road, until Allah commands me
further.”*

Imam Husayn (a.s.) entered Makkah on Friday the third of the month of
Sha’ban reciting the following verse:

***“And when he (Prophet Moosa) turned his face towards (the land of)
Madyan, said: Maybe my Lord will guide me in the right path.” (Surah
al-Qasas, 28:22)***

When Imam Husayn (a.s.) settled in Makkah, the people therein and those
who had come for the Hajj (Annual Pilgrimage to Makkah), and people from
other towns came to meet him. Abdullah bin Zubayr too was in Makkah and
had taken asylum near the Ka’bah and prayed and circumambulated it. He
too accompa­nied by other people came to offer his salutations to Imam
Husayn (a.s.) once in every two days consequently or often more.

Imam’s presence in Makkah made him uneasy, for he knew that till the
time Imam remained in Makkah, the people therein would not pledge their
oath of allegiance to him (for he too eyed the Caliphate). Because they
held the Imam dear and con­sidered him more worthy to rule over them.”

As regards the people of Kufa, when they received the news of the death
of Mu’awiyah they started vilifying Yazid. Besides they were informed
that Imam Husayn (a.s.) had refused to swear the oath of allegiance to
Yazid and had gone to Makkah. While Abdullah bin Zubayr too had fled to
Makkah with him and competed with him.

The followers (Shi’ah) of Imam gathered at the house of Sulayman bin
Surad Khuza’i and discussed about the death of Mu’awiyah and praised and
glori­fied Allah. Sulayman arose and said,

*“Mu’awiyah is dead, and Imam Husayn (a.s.) has refused to swear the
oath of allegiance to Yazid and has pro­ceeded towards Makkah. You are
his and his father’s followers (Shi’ah), then if you desire assisting
him and fighting his enemies, write to him and inform him about it. But
if you fear lest you would turn sluggish and retreat, then do not betray
him (by inviting him here).”*

Everyone una­nimously swore that they would support him and fight his
enemies under his command and offer their lives for sacrifice. When
Sulayman heard this he invited them to write letters addressing to the
Imam and they wrote as follows:

Letters of the people of Kufa to Imam Husayn (a.s.)
---------------------------------------------------

*“In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful. To Husayn bin Ali
(a.s.) from Sulayman bin Surad, Musayyab bin Najabah, Rufa’ah bin
Shaddad, Habib bin Mazahir and other followers from the citizens of
Kufa, the be­lievers and Muslims. Peace be upon you! We praise and
glorify Allah before you, besides Whom there is no other Deity. Now
then!*

*Praise be to Allah that He has destroyed your obstinate enemy. The one
(referred to Mu’awiyah) who had leapt upon the Islamic nation and
snatched their affairs into his own hands and grabbed their booty and
seized control of it without their consent. He killed the virtuous and
spared the wicked ones. And he scat­tered the wealth of Allah among the
tyrants and the wealthy people, thus he was annihilated as (the people
of) Samood were destroyed, and we have no Imam left with us (except
you).*

*We request you to come to us so that Allah may unite us upon the truth.
Nu’man bin Basheer is alone present in the palace, but we do not gather
with him on the Friday (Prayers), nor do we go to him on the day of Eid.
If we learn that you have proceeded to come to us, we shall drive him
out from here until we pursue him to Syria, Allah willing. Allah’s Peace
and Blessings be upon you.”*

They gave this letter to Ubaydullah bin Musme’ Hamadani and Abdullah bin
Wal Taymi and told them to hasten. They rushed until they reached Makkah
on the tenth of the month of Ramazan. Then the people of Kufa waited for
two days and again sent Qays bin Mus-hir Saydawi, Abdul Rahman bin
Abdullah bin Shaddad Arhabi, and Ammarah bin Abdullah Saluli with
hundred and fifty letters written by one, two, three or four people.

Then again after a lapse of two days they sent Hani bin Hani Sabee’i and
Sa’eed bin Abdullah Hanafi with a letter whose contents were as follows:

*“In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful. To Husayn bin Ali
(a.s.) from his followers, believers and Muslims. Now then! Make haste,
for people are awaiting you and hold no other opinion, hence hasten,
has­ten. Peace be upon you.”*

Another letter was written by Shabas bin Rab’ee, Hajjar bin Abjar Ajali,
Yazid bin Haris bin Ruwaym Shaybani, Urwa bin Qays Ahmasi, ‘Amr bin
Hajjaj Zubaydi, and Muhammad bin ‘Amr Tamimi which read as follows:

*“Now then! The gardens have turned green and the fruits have ripened.
If you desire, you may arrive here, the army is ready to defend you.”*

When all the mes­sengers gathered together, Imam read the letters and
inquired from them about the people.

Sayyid ibn Tawoos says that Imam Husayn (a.s.) arose and recited Prayers
between Rukn and Makan (in the Ka’bah) and desired goodness from the
Almighty. Then he called for Muslim bin Aqeel bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and
apprised him about the situation and wrote a letter in reply to the
people of Kufa.

Shaikh Mufeed says that Imam Husayn (a.s.) sent the following reply with
Hani bin Hani Sabee’i and Sa’eed bin Abdullah Hanafi, who were the last
messengers (from Kufa):

*“In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merci­ful. From Husayn bin
Ali to the noblemen among the Muslims and believers.*

*Now then! Hani and Sa’eed have brought me your letters, they being your
last messengers. I have realized your opinions through them and your
judgment is that: There is no Imam over us. You come towards us, perhaps
Allah will unite us through you upon the truth and righteousness.*

*I send to you my cousin, my brother and a trustworthy person from among
my family Muslim bin Aqeel. And I have instructed him to inquire about
your affairs and write to me regarding it. And if he writes to me that
your elders, the wise and the learned men hold the same opinion as your
messengers have conveyed to me and as written in your letters, then I
shall come to you quickly, Allah willing.*

*I swear by my life, that he is not an Imam and guide except he who
judges in accordance to the Book of Allah, and establishes justice, and
professes the True Religion and dedicates himself to the will of
Almighty Allah. Greetings.”*

Then Imam Husayn (a.s.) called Muslim bin Aqeel bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and
dispatched him to Kufa with Qays bin Mushir Saydawi, Ammarah bin
Abdullah Arjee and Abdul Rahman and Abdullah, the sons of Shaddad
Arhabi. He en­joined them with fear of Allah to conceal their mission,
besides advising them to be merciful, and that if they find people to be
firm and resolute then they should immediately inform him.[^1]

[^1]: Imam Husayn (a.s.) sent his representative to Kufa declaring his
authority to be assured of the seriousness of the Kufans. Any opposition
or support to his representative would be considered an opposition or
support to the Imam himself. Only after that, would their claims and
pleas come to light, for they had invited him, pledged to support him
and had literally blackmailed him saying that, “We have no Imam left
with us (except you)...” This representative had to be a man of great
trust, faith, and steadfast­ness. In addition he had to have a powerful
personality capable of execut­ing this important obligation. This was
not a mission of secondary impor­tance but involved representation from
a revolutionary leader, who was also a guardian of Religion, upholder of
faith and a refuge for humanity. It needed a man of great foresight and
experience with complete grasp of the political situation of the time as
well as the principles of the sacred teachings of Islam. It needed a man
of firm moral standing and integrity, who would be a true representative
from such a sacred person as Husayn bin Ali (a.s.). Imam Husayn (a.s.)
chose Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.), his cousin and brother in law, the
husband of his sister Ruqayya, the daughter of Imam Ali (a.s.) through
his marriage with Ummul Baneen (mother of Abbas), for this import­ant
mission. In the eyes of Husayn, Muslim possessed all those requisite
qualities that were desirable for such an assignment. He was a man of
great courage who would not lose himself in times of victory and would
remain steadfast and patient at times of defeat and opposition, a man of
all seasons. Thus, those who would assist him (like Hani bin Urwah)
would be the ones firm in their faith and obedience to Islam and Imam,
while those who would not be able to help him for whatsoever reason,
although being ardent be­lievers (like Habib bin Mazahir, Muslim bin
Awsaja, Abu Samamah), they would hasten to assist the Imam at Karbala in
compensation for being unable to defend his envoy (Muslim). While those
who would deliberately and impo­tently withdraw their support of Muslim,
but would prefer to remain silent spectators, their faltering faith and
hypocrisy would be apparent; hence it would act as a litmus test for
faith and steadfastness. Muslim would commu­nicate the Imam’s objectives
to the people and prepare them for the ul­timate occurrence, as can be
observed, that after the martyrdom of Muslim, many Kufans hastened to
Karbala to assist the Imam, thus proving the suc­cess of Muslim’s
mission. Muslim’s attachment and obedience to the Imam is apparent
through his will (made to Umar bin Sa’ad) apprising Imam of the treason
of the Kufans and stopping him from coming there besides dispatching his
two infant sons towards Imam to convey the message.


