Muslim bin Aqeel’s departure from Makkah in mid-Ramazan according to the discourse by Mas’oodi
==============================================================================================

(Irshad) As quoted by Mas’oodi, Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.) reached Madina
and offered Prayers at the Masjide Nabawi and bade farewell to his
household. He took along with him two people from Bani Qays as guides to
direct the way and left. They took a wrong road and hence lost the way.
They became thirs­ty and could no longer walk further. The two men who
had escorted Muslim died due to severe thirst, but they directed him to
the way before dying.

Muslim advanced further and stopped at a renowned halting place called
Mazeeq and dispatched Qays bin Mus-hir Saydawi with a letter to Imam
Husayn (a.s.) which read as follows: “Now then! I left Madina
accompanied by two escorts as guides, but we lost the way and became
intense thirsty and the two associates died because of it. We proceeded
further until we found water and hence saved ourselves and this place
called Mazeeq in Batne Jannat. I consider this to be an ill omen, if you
deem fit please relieve me and dispatch someone else to pursue this
task. Salutations.”

Imam Husayn (a.s.) replied to him:

*“Now then! I fear regarding your excuse to relieve you from the task
for which I sent you is due to fright. Therefore proceed further towards
what I sent you. Salutations.”*

When Muslim read the letter, he said that he did not fear anything for
him­self and proceeded further. He reached a water place, which was of
Bani Tayy and dismounted there and then proceeded further. Suddenly
Muslim saw a hunter shoot an arrow towards a Gazelle, who came into his
sight and killed it. Thus Muslim said, “Allah willing, we too shall kill
our enemies thus”, and then proceeded further.

As is written in Murujuz Zahab, that he (Muslim) entered Kufa on the
fifth of the month of Shawwal. According to the narration of Tabari, he
resided at the house of Mukhtar bin Abi Ubaydah and the Shi’ah came to
visit him. Then when a group of people gathered, he read the letter of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) to them, hearing which they started weeping. Then
Abis bin Abi Shabeeb Shakiri arose and after Praising and Glorifying
Allah said, “Now then! I do not speak for the people, nor am I aware as
to what is con­cealed in their hearts, and thus I do not want to deceive
you. By Allah! I only say that which is in my heart. By Allah! I shall
respond to you whenever you call out, and shall fight your enemies by
your side. And in your presence I shall strike them with the sword until
I meet Allah, and I do not intend anything except Allah’s favor (in lieu
of all this).”

Then Habib bin Mazahir Faq’asi stood up and said, “May Allah’s blessings
be upon you! You have revealed concisely whatever you had in your mind.
I swear by Allah, besides Whom there is no other Deity, that I too am of
the same belief as of this man (referring to Abis who preceded him)”,
and then he repeated what Abis had said.

Hajjaj bin Ali says that I asked Muhammad bin Bashr that, “Did you not
reply to him (Muslim)”? He replied, “I desired that Allah would grant
success and esteem to my friends, but I did not appreciate being killed
nor did I like to utter a lie.”

(Irshad) Eighteen thousand men swore the oath of allegiance to Muslim
and hence he wrote to Imam Husayn (a.s.) informing him about their oath,
and invited him to come to Kufa. This letter was written by Muslim some
twenty seven days before his martyrdom. The Shi’ah visited Muslim quite
frequently and the place of his whereabouts became known.

Nu’man bin Basheer issues warning to the people of Kufa
-------------------------------------------------------

This news reached Nu’man bin Basheer, who was made the governor of Kufa
by Mu’awiyah and Yazid too had let him remain in his place. He ascended
the pulpit and after Praising and Glorifying Allah said,

*“Now then! O slaves of Allah! Fear Allah and do not make haste in
spreading mischief and discord, for it will result in the murder of men,
bloodshed and confisca­tion of wealth. I do not fight the one who does
not confront me, nor do I advance towards the one who does not advance
towards me. I do not vilify you nor do I call for account anyone by mere
suspicion or accusation. But if you turn your face away from me and
break the oath of allegiance or try to oppose your Imam, then by Allah,
besides Whom there is no other Deity, I shall then strike you with my
sword until it’s hilt remains in my hand even if there does not remain
my supporter among you. Yet I hope that those among you who know the
truth are numerous than those whom falsehood will (ultimately)
destroy.”*

Abdullah bin Muslim bin Rabi’ah Hazrami, who was an ally of the Bani
Umayyah stood up and said,

*“This mischief which you now see will not cease except by the use of
force, and this attitude which you have towards the enemies is that of
the timid ones.”*

Nu’man replied,

*“If I remain timid while obeying Allah, then I cherish it than
remaining mighty while disobey­ing Him”,*

saying this he alighted from the pulpit and left. Abdullah bin Muslim
came out and then wrote a letter to Yazid bin Mu’awiyah saying,

*“Muslim bin Aqeel has come to Kufa and the Shi’ah have pledged the oath
of allegiance to him on behalf of Husayn bin Ali. Then if you desire
that Kufa should remain under your domain, dispatch a powerful man who
would imple­ment your orders and act according to your command. For
Nu’man bin Basheer is a feeble man or is deliberately showing as weak.”*

Ammarah bin Uqbah and Umar bin Sa’ad bin Abi Waqqas too wrote similar
letters to Yazid. When these letters reached Yazid he called for
Sarjoon, the slave of Mu’awiyah and said,

*“Husayn has sent Muslim bin Aqeel to Kufa and people have started
pledging their oath of allegiance to him, while Nu’man is a feeble man
and there are other bad reports regarding him. According to your opinion
whom should I nominate as the governor of Kufa in his stead”?*

During that period Yazid was annoyed with Ubaydullah bin Ziyad. Sarjoon
replied,

*“If today Mu’awiyah becomes alive would you listen to his counsel”?*

Yazid replied in the affirmative. Sarjoon produced a letter of Mu’awiyah
appointing Ubaydullah bin Ziyad as the governor of Kufa, and then said,

*“This is the advice of Mu’awiyah, for when he was about to die, he
intended bestowing the governorship of Kufa and Basra both to
Ubaydullah.”*

Yazid agreed and sent a message to Ubaydullah. Then he called for Muslim
bin ‘Amr Bahilee, the father of Qutaybah, and handed over a letter in
the name of Ubaydullah whose contents were as follows:

*“Now then! My follow­ers in Kufa have written to me that the son of
Aqeel is gathering troops to spread rebellion among the Muslims. Then
when you read my letter, hasten towards Kufa and search for the son of
Aqeel as if you were looking for a bead, until you find him. Then bind
him (in chains), either kill him or banish him from the city.
Salutations.”*

Yazid also gave him the authority for the Governorship of Kufa. Muslim
bin ‘Amr proceeded until he reached Ubaydullah at Basra. As soon as
Ubaydullah received the command and author­ity, he ordered to prepare
for the journey scheduled for the next day.

An account of the personality of Nu’man bin Basheer
---------------------------------------------------

It is appropriate that here we discuss in brief about Nu’man bin
Basheer. He name is Nu’man bin Basheer bin Sa’ad bin Nasr bin Sa’labah
Khazraji Ansari. His mother is Umrah bint Ruwahah, the sister of
Abdullah bin Ruwahah Ansari who was martyred along with Ja’far bin Abu
Talib (a.s.) in the battle of Mutah. It is said that Nu’man was the
first child among the Ansar (helpers of Madina) to be born after the
Prophet entered Madina, just as Abdullah bin Zubayr was the first child
to be born among the emi­grants after the Prophet’s entry into Madina.

His father Basheer bin Sa’ad was the first person to swear the oath of
allegiance to Abu Bakr in Saqifa, and like wise the other Ansar followed
suit. Basheer was killed in the battle of Aynut Tamar[^1] along with
Khalid bin Waleed.

Nu’man was from the family of poets and being a follower of Caliph
Usman, hated the Kufans because of their love for Imam Ali (a.s.). He
was the only Ansar who had accompanied Mu’awiyah in the battle of
Siffīn. He was considered respect­ful and of high regard in the eyes of
Mu’awiyah, thus Yazid too liked him.

Nu’man remained alive till the Caliphate of Marwan bin Hakam and was the
governor of Hamas. When people started swearing the oath of allegiance
to Marwan, he invited people towards Abdullah bin Zubayr and opposed
Marwan. And this incident occurred when Zahhak bin Qays was killed in
Marje Rahit.[^2] But the people of Hamas did not pay attention to his
call and thus he fled from there, they pursued him until they found him
and ultimately killed him. This happened in the year 65 A.H.

As regards Yazid calling him a feeble man and a slanderer, it has been
quoted by Ibn Qutaybah Deenawari in his book Al Imamah was Siyasah that,
it was so because Nu’man bin Basheer had said that, “The grand­son of
the Prophet is more dear to me than the grandson of Bahdul.” The
grandson of Bahdul was none other than Yazid bin Mu’awiyah whose mother
Maysoon was the daughter of Bahdul Kalbiyyah. Ibn Qutaybah is Abu
Muhammad Abdullah bin Muslim bin Qutaybah bin Muslim bin ‘Amr Bahili,
and this Muslim bin ‘Amr is the same person who was sent by Yazid to
Ubaydullah nominating him as the governor of Kufa.

[^1]: Aynut Tamar - A campaign carried out during the Caliphate of Abu
Bakr, in a view to expand his dominion.

[^2]: Marje Rahit - A battle fought between the followers of Abdullah
bin Zubayr and Marwan bin Hakam, Marwan won the battle and thus his
caliphate was secured.


