Imam’s letter to the noblemen of Basra
======================================

It is quoted by Sayyid ibn Tawoos in Malhoof that Imam Husayn (a.s.)
sent a letter to a group of righteous noblemen of Basra through his
retainer named Sulayman, whose agnomen was Abu Razeen, inviting them for
assistance and obedience to him. Those included therein were Yazid bin
Mas’ood Nahsha­li and Manzar bin Jarood Abadi.

Yazid bin Mas’ood then gathered the people of Bani Tameem, Bani Hanzalah
and Bani Sa’ad. When they came he said, “O people of Bani Tameem! What
is my position and descent in your eyes”? They replied, “It is fair. By
Allah! You are a support of our backs and the prime of nobility, and
hold a place in noble presence and you take lead in it.” Then he said,
“I have gathered all of you here so that I may ask your opinion
regarding a matter and invite your assistance for it.” They said, “By
Allah! We are your well-wishers and we shall not be reluctant to counsel
you sincerely. You may say, so that we may know what it is.”

Yazid bin Mas’ood said, “Mu’awiyah has died, and we do not grieve nor
regret his death, because the doors of injustice and tyranny have
cracked and the pillars of oppression have been given a severe blow. He
has made innova­tions in the form of (demanding) allegiance for his son
(Yazid) and he was adamant about it, when how far from right is it what
he had decided. He endeavored but was weakened and he asked for counsel
and opinion from his friends, but they betrayed him.

Then his son Yazid who drinks wine and is wicked has arisen and has
claimed to be the Caliph of the Muslims. He rules over them without
their consent in spite of being an ignorant and foolish man, he cannot
even recognize his own footsteps. I swear by Allah, that fighting Yazid
is more worthy than fighting with the polytheists. And this is Husayn
bin Ali, the grandson of Prophet Muhammad (S).

He is of genuine dignity, an honest counselor, a great intellectual, and
is more worthy and rightful for the Caliphate. For he is an antecedent
among the emigrants, a senior, and foremost in Religion, he is attached
in proximity to the Prophet. He is affectionate towards the young and
sympathetic to­wards the elders while being kind to others. He is a
thorough Leader, and Paradise is attained through his medium, while he
propagates through preaching and counsel. Hence do not close your eyes
against the Light of Truth and do not fall into the pit of falsehood.

Sakhr bin Qays misled you on the day of (the battle of) Jamal and
disgraced you, hence wash off the stains of disgrace from yourselves by
assisting the grandson of the Proph­et. By Allah! None will withhold
their hands from assisting him except that their progeny will be
humiliated, deprived and abandoned. I have now worn the helmet for the
battle and have fastened the armor. For the one who is not killed will
ultimately die, and the one who flees from it will not escape it. Thus
answer me well, may Allah’s blessings be upon you.”

Hearing this the Bani Hanzalah said, “O Aba Khalid! (referring to Yazid
bin Mas’ood) We are the quiver of your arrows and the champions of the
clan. If you hurl us (towards the enemy) we shall fall upon the target,
and if you accompany us in the battlefield you shall emerge a victor. If
you enter the depths of the sea we too shall accompany you, and turn to
whichev­er side you turn to. We shall defend you with our swords and our
bodies shall be your shield. We are at your disposal whenever you need
us.”

Then Bani Sa’ad bin Yazid said, “O Aba Khalid! The most abhorred thing
in our sight is opposing you and failing to accept your command. Verily
Sakhr bin Qays had forbade us to fight (on the day of the battle of
Jamal) and we were pleased by this act of ours and our dignity remained
intact. You may give us respite so that we may counsel among ourselves
and let you know our opinions regarding it.”

While the Bani Amir bin Tameem said, “O Aba Khalid! We are the children
of your father and your confederates. If you are displeased, we shall
not remain satisfied, and if you leave, we shall not linger behind.
Hence com­mand us so that we may respond, and call us so that we may
obey you. Verily command is with you.”

Then he told the Bani Sa’ad, “O Bani Sa’ad! By Allah! Then if you are in
doubt and you shall side with the Bani Umayyah (and fail to assist
Husayn), Allah will never lift the sword away from your necks, while you
still hold your swords.”

Then he (Yazid bin Mas’ood) wrote a reply to Imam Husayn (a.s.), “Now
then! We have received you letter and have pondered over that which you
have invited, that we may have our share of obedience to you and we may
attain the excellence of assisting you. Allah never lets the earth to
remain empty of His Vicegerent, who is benevolent and the guide to the
path of salva­tion. Verily you are Allah’s proof over His creation and
His trust upon the earth. You are a branch of the olive tree of Muhammad
(S). He was the origin while you are the branch. Hasten to us with
felicitations, for I have brought the necks of Bani Tameem under your
command and they shall excel each other in your obedience like the
thirsty Lions who make haste to drink water. Besides I have brought the
Bani Sa’ad under your submission and have washed the filth from their
hearts with (rain) water falling from the clouds.”

When Imam Husayn (a.s.) read the contents of the letter he said,

*“What else do you desire. May Allah grant you security on the day of
fright (Qiyamah) and quench your thirst on the day of extreme thirst and
endear you.”*

When Yazid bin Mas’ood was just preparing to proceed towards the Imam,
he re­ceived the news of his martyrdom. Hence he lamented over the loss
of this grace (of Martyrdom).

As regards Manzar bin Jarood, when he received the letter of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) he brought it along with Imam’s messenger to the presence of
Ubaydullah bin Ziyad, for he feared that it might be a conspiracy by
Ubaydullah himself, while his daughter Bahriyah was the wife of
Ubaydullah. Ubaydullah sent the messenger of Imam to the gallows and
ascended the pulpit and recited a sermon, in which he admonished the
people of Basra against oppo­sition and revolt. That night he spent in
Basra and the next morning he appointed his brother Usman bin Ziyad his
Vicegerent and hastened towards Kufa.

Tabari says that Hisham said that Abu Makhnaf related to me from Sa’qib
bin Zuhayr, from Abu Usman Nahdi that Imam Husayn (a.s.) wrote a similar
letter to the noblemen of the five divisions of Basra and their chiefs
through his retainer named Sulayman. The letters with similar contents
were addressed to Malik bin Musme’ Bakri, Ahnaf bin Qays, Manzar bin
Jarood, Mas’ood bin ‘Amr, Qays bin Haysam and Umar bin Abdullah bin
Mu’ammar,

*“Now then! Verily Allah has chosen Prophet Muhammad (S) above all His
creatures and granted him (the prestige of) Prophethood and chose him
for the Apostleship. Then the Almighty took him towards His mercy
(death) after the Prophet having guided all people towards the truth,
and after having propagated the message for which he was sent. Thus we
are his Household (Ahlul Bayt), friends, vicegerents and his successors
and are more worthy of succeeding him than anyone else. Then the nation
has tried to precede us in this matter and we helplessly withdrew to
avoid dissentions. We cherish peace although we consider ourselves more
worthy and deserving of it (Caliphate) than them. I have sent towards
you my messenger and I invite you to the Book of Allah and the tradition
(sunnah) of the Prophet, for I see that the traditions (sunnah) have
been destroyed and innovations have crept up. Hence if you pay heed to
my words and obey my command, then I shall guide you to the Righteous
path. And peace be upon you and Allah’s blessings and mercy.”*

Whoever read this letter among the noblemen, they kept it concealed
except Manzar bin Jarood who feared that this might be a conspiracy of
Ubaydullah. Hence he took the messenger to Ubaydullah on the same night
of the morning on which Ubaydullah left for Kufa. He gave the letter to
Ubaydullah so he could read it. After reading the letter Ubaydullah gave
ordered the execu­tion of the messenger and himself went on the pulpit
of Basra and after praising and glorifying Allah said,

*“Now then! By Allah! A ravished Camel is not at par with me, nor do I
flee from the sound of an empty water-skin. I myself am a wrath for my
adversaries and a fatal poison for those who oppose me. The one who
flings a clod of mud towards me shall have the reward of a stone (I
shall deal severely with the one who even minutely opposes me).*

*O people of Basra! The commander of the faithful (referred to Yazid)
has bestowed me the guardianship of Kufa and tomorrow I shall leave for
there. I appoint my brother Usman bin Ziyad bin Abu Sufyan as my
Vice­gerent upon you. Beware, remain away from opposition and mischief,
for by Allah, besides Whom there is no other Deity, if I hear regarding
the oppo­sition of anyone amongst you, I shall surely kill him along
with the chief of his clan, and his guardians.*

*I hold the present ones responsible for those who are absent until
stability is restored, and none of those oppos­ing or disliking me
remains among you. I am the son of Ziyad, and am more similar to my
father than anyone who has ever set his foot upon the earth, and am not
like my maternal or paternal uncle.”*

Then he left Basra and proceeded towards Kufa leaving behind his brother
Usman in his place.

Azdi relates that Abul Makhariq Rasbee says that some of the Shi’ah of
Basra gathered at the house of a woman of the tribe of Abdul Qays. The
name of the woman was Mariya, daughter of Sa’ad or Manqaz, who was a
Shi’ah. Her house was a place of gathering for them and they associated
with one another.

When Ubaydullah bin Ziyad was informed that Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
proceeding towards Iraq, he wrote to his superintendent that he should
appoint guards and block the roads. Yazid bin Nabeet, who was from the
clan of Abdul Qays, decided to go to defend Imam Husayn (a.s.). He had
ten sons whom he asked as to who would accompany him. Two of his sons
viz. Abdullah and Ubaydullah agreed to come. When the Shi’ah had
gathered at the house of Mariya, he disclosed his intention to leave in
the presence of his com­rades. His friends said that they feared
Ubaydullah’s men against him. To which he replied that,

*“When the hooves of my Camel sets upon the deserts, I do not fear their
pursuit”*,

and he left and paved the way of success until he reached Imam Husayn
(a.s.) at Makkah. He went to the tent of Imam Husayn (a.s.) at Abtah.
When Imam Husayn (a.s.) received news of his arri­val, he arose to
receive him. When he came near the Imam’s tent he was told that Imam had
already left to meet him at his place. He returned back and saw Imam
sitting at the door waiting for him and he (a.s.) said,

***“In the Grace of Allah and His Mercy, in that they should rejoice.”
(Surah al-Yunus, 10:58)***

He then saluted him and sat down. Then he related his intention to the
Imam, who prayed for his well-being. He remained with the Imam till
Karbala and fought there and was martyred along with both of his sons.


