Ubaydullah bin Ziyad’s exit from Basra towards Kufa
===================================================

When Ubaydullah received the letter of Yazid, he selected five hundred
people from Basra, which included Abdullah bin Haris bin Nawfal, Shareek
bin A’awar, both of whom were Shi’ah, and accompanied by them and Muslim
bin ‘Amr Bahili and his retinue and family, left for Kufa.

(Irshad) When he reached Kufa, Ubaydullah had worn a black turban and
had covered his face. People there had received news that Imam Husayn
(a.s.) was due to arrive to Kufa hence they waited his arrival.

They mis­took him to be Imam Husayn (a.s.), and from the midst of
whichever group he passed they saluted him saying, “Welcome O son of the
Prophet”! When Ubaydullah saw them rejoicing at the arrival of Imam
Husayn (a.s.), he was troubled. When people started increasing, Muslim
bin ‘Amr called out, “Get away, this is the commander Ubaydullah bin
Ziyad.” He then reached the palace at night surrounded by a group of
people who still thought that he was Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Nu’man bin Basheer shut the door on him and his comrades (mistaking him
to be Imam Husayn) when one of his people called out to him to open the
door. Nu’man mistaking him to be Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

*“I request you in the Name of Allah to get away from here. For by
Allah, I shall not hand over the trust to you, nor do I intend fighting
you.”*

Ubaydullah remained silent and then came closer, when Nu’man was
speaking with him while hanging from atop the balcony. Ubaydullah said,

*“Open the door, you have not opened yet, and your nights have become
pro­longed (in which you have slept instead of governing).”*

These words of Ubaydullah were heard by a man behind him, who turned to
the people stand­ing behind mistaking him to be Imam Husayn (a.s.), and
said,

*“O people! By Him besides Whom there is no other Deity, this is Ibn
Marjanah (referring to Ubaydullah).”*

Mas’oodi says that when the people recognized him, they started throwing
stones at him, but he got away. (Irshad) Then Nu’man opened the door for
him and he entered therein and closed the door on the people and they
dispersed away.

In the morning he announced for the congregation Prayers and people
gathered. Ubaydullah bin Ziyad praised and glorified Allah and then
said,

*“Now then! The Commander of the faithful (referring to Yazid) has given
me the charge of your city and your frontiers, while your booty is under
my control, and he has ordered me to assist the oppressed and bestow
upon the deprived. And has also commanded me to be fair to the obedient
ones and take severe action against the suspicious and the rebels
amongst you. Then I shall fulfill his command regarding you and shall
put to practice his or­ders. I shall be like a merciful father for the
obedient and good people among you, and my spear and sword will be upon
the head of those who diso­bey my command and oppose my rule. Let each
man fear himself, let right warn you and not threat.”*

In another narration it is quoted that he said,

*“Take my words to that Hashemi (referring to Muslim bin Aqeel) that he
should guard himself again­st my wrath.”*

(Irshad) Then he alighted from the pulpit and dealt strictly with the
chiefs and commanded that,

*“Note down the names of the guarantors (of men), and the followers of
Yazid, while also those of the rebels and the suspi­cious who might
revolt or cause disturbances. All these people should be brought to me
so that I may decide about them. Then the chiefs who do not write down
their names should stand surety that none among them would oppose us nor
revolt. The one who does not do so, will be denied immunity and his
blood and wealth will be lawful for us. And if a rebel of Yazid is ever
found in any area under the control of a chief and he does not report to
us about him, he shall be hanged on the door of his house and his
sti­pends will be stopped and he will be fed to the Lions.”*

In Fusulul Muhimmah it is quoted that a group of people of Kufa were
im­prisoned by him and executed at that very moment (Kamil, Muhammad bin
Abi Talib, Tabari)

When Muslim bin Aqeel was informed regarding the arrival of Ubaydullah
and heard his words, he left the house of Mukhtar and went to the door
of Hani bin Urwah Muradi and called out to him. When Hani came out he
looked dis­pleased and Muslim said,

*“I have come to your door to seek shelter and as a guest.”*

Hani replied,

*“You have put me in trouble, and if you had not entered my house and
had confided in me, I would be pleased to tell you to go away. But your
entering into my house has bound me in responsibility, hence do come
in.”*

Thus Hani gave him residence and the Shi’ah started visiting him in
secret while safeguarding from Ubaydullah ibn Ziyad.

(Manaqib) People started swearing the oath of allegiance at the hands of
Muslim until the number reached twenty five thousand. Then they decided
to revolt, but Hani advised that they should wait further.

Ubaydullah called his retainer Ma’qal and gave him three thousand
dirham[^1] (Kamil) and told him to find the whereabouts of Muslim bin
Aqeel and his associates and intermingle with them. Then he should
partake that wealth with them and thus show them that he too was among
their own people and hence remain aware of their intentions and report
to him. Ma’qal entered the Mosque and heard that Muslim bin Ausaja Asadi
was taking the oath of allegiance in the name of Imam Husayn (a.s.).
Muslim at that moment was busy in Prayers, when he finished his Prayers
Ma’qal came up to him and said,

*“O slave of Allah! I am a native of Syria, a slave of Zil Kila, who has
been favored by Allah with the love of the Household (Ahlul Bayt) (a.s.)
of the Prophet (S). These are three thousand dirham, and I desire to
give it to the person regarding whom I have heard that he has come to
Kufa and is accepting the oath of allegiance in the name of the grandson
of the Prophet. I have heard from some people that you are acquainted
with the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) hence I have come to you. I request you to
accept this wealth and take me to your chief so that I may swear the
oath of allegiance to him, and if you desire I should swear fealthy at
your hands before meeting him.”*

Muslim replied,

*“I am delighted to meet you and happy upon your desire to reach your
destination, and may Allah aid the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) with your
assistance. But I do not like that people should be aware of that issue
before its completion and I fear the oppressor and his power.”*

Then Muslim accepted his allegiance with firm promises to remain
faithful and to keep it concealed. Ma’qal started coming to him for some
days until Muslim took him to the presence of Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.).

[^1]: Islamic Silver currency weighting approximately 3.12 grams. And
equivalent to approximately 2 dollars.


