Ubaydullah in Kufa
==================

In the preceding chapter we have seen that when Ubyadullah bin Ziyad
intended to go to Kufa from Basra, Shareek bin A’awar was along with
him. Shareek had a very strong inclination towards Shi’aism. He was
along with Ammar bin Yasir (a.s.) in the battle of Siffīn (Kamil,
Tabari) and his debate with Mu’awiyah (Manaqib) is quite renowned.

When Shareek left Basra (with Ubaydullah), on the way he pretended to be
exhausted and uneasy. He intended that Ubaydullah might stop along with
him and thus Imam Husayn (a.s.) may reach Kufa before him, but
Ubaydullah paid no heed to him and proceeded further.

When Shareek reached Kufa he resided at the house of Hani bin Urwah and
constantly encouraged him to support the cause of Muslim bin Aqeel and
his leadership. Shareek fell ill, and because Ubaydullah (Kamil,
Muhammad bin Abi Talib) and the other nobles respected him, he sent him
a message that he would come to meet him that night. Shareek told
Muslim,

*“Tonight the wicked man will be coming to meet me, and when he sits
down you may come from behind and kill him. Then you may go to the
palace and take the reins into your hands while no one* *will stop you
from doing so. And if I am cured of this illness, I shall go to Basra
and straighten the affairs for you there.”*

(Abul Faraj) At night Ubaydullah came to visit Shareek. Earlier Shareek
had told Muslim,

*“When that man enters herein, let him not escape from your clutches.”*

Hani stood up and said,

*“I do not consent to it that Ubaydullah should be killed in my house”*

and despised this idea. Thus, Ubaydullah came and sat down and inquired
from Shareek regarding his health and asked him as to what illness was
he inflicted with. When their conversation became lengthy, Shareek noted
that no one had come out, and fearing that the desired objective may not
be achieved started reciting the following cou­plet:

*“Why anticipate in bestowing gifts to Salama, to him and to the one who
bestows upon him, spill the cup of death into his throat.”*

He repeated it twice or thrice. When Ubaydullah heard it he could not
understand and said that he was uttering vain under the influence of
ill­ness. Hani said,

*“Yes it is true, may Allah amend you, he has been in this state since
yesterday.”*

Ubaydullah arose and left.

(Tabari) Furthermore it is said that Ubaydullah had come accompanied
with his retainer Mehran. While Shareek had told Muslim that when he
would ask for water, Muslim should come and strike a blow at Ubaydullah.
Ubaydullah came and sat near Shareek on his bed and his retainer Mehran
stood behind him near his head. Shareek asked for water, and when the
maid was bringing water, her sight fell on Muslim who was hiding in
ambush and she moved away.

He again asked for water but with no response, and for the third time he
asked and said,

*“Woe to you! You do not give me water. Give me the water even if it
results in my death.”*

Mehran understood and he signaled Ubaydullah, to which he too arose to
leave. Shareek said that he desired to will to Ubaydullah, to which he
replied that he would come some other time and left. Mehran took him
away hurriedly and said,

*“By Allah, they had desired to kill you.”*

Ubaydullah replied,

*“How could they do this when I respect and am kind to Shareek, and that
too in the house of Hani, whom my father had favored”?*

Mehran said,

*“Whatever I have said is true.”*

(Kamil) When Ubaydullah left, Muslim came out of his hiding and Shareek
asked him as to what stopped him from killing Ubaydullah. Muslim
replied,

***“Two things stopped me from doing so. First because Hani does not
approve that Ubaydullah should be killed in his house, and second
because of the Tradition related by the Holy Prophet (S) that, “Islam
stops from killing anyone unawares and a believer refrains himself from
it.”***

Shareek said,

*“If you had killed him, you would in fact have killed a transgressor,
wicked and a crafty unbeliever.”*

Ibn Nima says that when Ubaydullah went away and Muslim came to Shareek
sword in hand, Shareek asked him as to what stopped him from performing
the deed. Muslim replied that,

*“I was just coming out when the wife of Hani pleaded with me not to
kill Ubaydullah in their house and started weeping. Then I threw away my
sword and sat down.”*

Hani said,

*“Woe be to that woman! She has killed herself and myself and from what
I fled has ultimately taken place.”*

(Kamil) Shareek remained alive for three more days and then died.
Ubaydullah lead his funeral Prayers, and later when he was informed that
Shareek had plotted to kill him, he said,

*“By Allah! From now on I will never lead the funeral Prayer of any of
the Iraqis, and if (my father) Ziyad would not have been buried
alongside him, I would certainly have exhumed the grave of Shareek.”*

After the death of Shareek, Ma’qal the retainer of Ubaydullah, who was
ap­pointed to spy upon them with his wealth, came often to Muslim bin
Ausaja. Muslim took him to meet Muslim bin Aqeel who accepted the oath
of alle­giance from him. Then he ordered Abu Samamah Saedi, who looked
after all the financial transactions, to accept the amount from him. Abu
Samamah was in charge of buying the ammunitions, he was a renowned brave
man among the Arabs and a man of distinction among the Shi’ah. (Kamil)

Ma’qal started coming to them, heard their conversations and after being
aware of their secrets would convey it to Ubaydullah. While Hani had
distanced himself from Ubaydullah with an excuse of being unwell.

Ubaydullah called Muhammad bin Ash’as and Asma bin Kharejah and ‘Amr bin
Hajjaj Zubaydi too, whose daughter Ruwayhah was the wife of Hani and the
mother of his son Yahya. Ubaydullah inquired about Hani and his
remaining aloof from them (Kamil) and was told that he was unwell.

Ubaydullah said,

*“I have heard that he is well and sits at his door. Go and meet him and
tell him not to avoid that what is mandatory and obligatory upon him.”*

They came to Hani and told him that,

*“Ubaydullah has inquired about you, and he says that if you are unwell
he would come to meet you. And people have told him that you frequently
sit at your door. He is determined to know why you have kept yourself
aloof from him, while the commander will not tolerate this distancing
and ungratefulness, hence we request you to come along with us.”*

Then Hani called for his dress and wore it and sat on the mule and when
he reached near the palace, a fear crept his heart that there might be
trouble further. Hani told Hisan bin Asma bin Khareja,

*“O my nephew! I fear that man, what do you think about it”?*

He replied,

*“I do not see any reason for you to fear, thus remove any sorrow from
your heart”,*

and Asma (or Hisan bin Asma) was not aware of the trap, but Muhammad bin
Ash’as was very much aware of it. Then they entered the court of
Ubaydullah along with Hani. When Ubaydullah saw Hani, (Irshad) he said,

*“The traitor has come in walking on his own feet.”*

When Hani was brought near Ubaydullah, Shurayh was sitting next to him,
and Ubaydullah recited the couplets:

*“I desire him to remain alive, but he desires to kill me.”*

(Kamil) Ubaydullah had been kind to Hani and hence he told him as to
what had happened. Ubaydullah said,

*“Woe O Hani! What is this mischief which has crept up in your house
against the commander of the faithful (referred to Yazid) and for the
Muslims? You have brought Muslim and have sheltered him in your house
and are gathering manpower and arms for him, and you think that I am
unaware of these things”?*

Hani replied,

*“I have not done any thing.”*

Ubaydullah said that he had done it, then when their argument increased,
Ubaydullah called the retainer (Ma’qal) whom he had sent as his spy. He
came and stood facing Hani, and Ubaydullah asked him if he knew him to
which he replied in the affirmative and Hani under­stood that he was
Ubaydullah’s spy and had conveyed to him all their re­ports.

When he regained his mind he said,

*“Listen to me and believe me that by Allah I am not lying to you. I
have not invited Muslim nor was I aware of his intentions. Then he came
to my house and asked my permission to reside therein and I felt ashamed
to refuse it to him. Thus this respon­sibility fell upon me that I
sheltered him and you know what happened thereafter. And if you wish I
shall pledge at your hands and deposit secur­ity with you. And I promise
that after returning I shall turn him away from my house and shall
return back to you.”*

Ubaydullah said,

*“No by Allah! You shall not leave until you bring him (Muslim) to me.”*

Hani said,

*“I shall not bring my guest to you so that you may kill him.”*

(Irshad) Ubaydullah said,

*“By Allah! You will have to bring him to me”,*

and Hani replied,

*“By Allah! I shall never do so.”*

It is related by Ibn Nima that Hani said,

*“By Allah! Even if he is under my feet, I shall not lift them up and
hand him over to you.”*

When their argument increased, Muslim bin ‘Amr Bahili (there was no
other Basran or Syrian in Kufa except him) saw that when Hani had turned
ob­stinate he told Ubaydullah to leave him so that he may speak to him.
He took Hani in a corner where Ubaydullah could see them and said,

*“O Hani! I request you in the Name of Allah not to kill yourself nor
put your tribe to hardship. This man (referring to Muslim bin Aqeel) is
their cousin and they will not kill him nor inflict any trouble upon
him. Hence hand him over to Ubaydullah and there will be no shame and
perdition in it for you, because you would only be handing him over to
the commander.”*

Hani replied,

*“By Allah! There is shame and disgrace in it for me, I will not hand
over my guest to him when I am strong and my arms are powerful and have
numerous supporters with me. And even if I would have been alone and had
no helper, I would not have handed him over to him, rather I would die
supporting him.”*

Ubaydullah heard his words and commanded that he be brought to him. When
Hani was brought he said,

*“By Allah! Either you bring him to me or I shall behead you.”*

Hani replied,

*“If you do so, by Allah, many swords will be unsheathed around your
house.”*

Hani had thought that the people of his clan would support him.

Ubaydullah said,

*“Do you make me fear the swords of your clans”?*

Then he ordered Hani to be brought closer to him. When he was brought,
Ubaydullah started striking with his cane on his nose, forehead and
cheeks until his nose was fractured and blood gushed out and was smeared
on his clothes. The flesh of his forehead and cheeks fell upon his beard
and the cane broke.

Tabari says that when Ubaydullah told Asma bin Kharejah and Muhammad bin
Ash’as to call Hani, they said that he would not come until Ubaydullah
offers him security.

Ubaydullah said,

*“He does not require any security, but he has surely deviated. Bring
him to me, and if he refuses to do so without my granting him (promise
of) security, then do so.”*

They went to Hani and informed him to which he said,

*“If he gets hold of me, he shall surely kill me.”*

But they urged him and brought him to Ubaydullah. At that moment
Ubaydullah was seated in the Mosque delivering the Friday sermon when
Hani arrived with his hair hanging on both sides upon his shoulders.
When Ubaydullah finished leading the Prayers he signaled Hani, who
followed him until they reached the palace. They entered therein and
Hani saluted him. Ubaydullah said,

*“O Hani! Do you not remember that when my father (Ziyad) came to this
town (Kufa), he did not spare a single Shi’ah here until he killed them,
except your father and Hujr, and you are aware of what befell Hujr
later. He (Ziyad) was always grateful towards you and he also wrote to
the commander of Kufa that he expected him to be fair to you.”*

Hani replied that he remembered it. Ubaydullah continued,

*“And in return for these favors you have sheltered a man in your house
to kill me”?*

Hani replied that he had not done so. Then Ubaydullah ordered the Tamimi
retainer to be brought forward and Hani understood that he was
Ubaydullah’s spy and had conveyed the reports to him. Hani replied,

*“O commander! The news which has reached you is verily true, but I
shall not annul your favors. Your family is under my protection, hence
you may go away safely wherever you wish.”*

Mas’oodi says that Hani told Ubaydullah that,

*“Your father has surely favored and obliged me, I am wealthy and thus I
desire to compensate you (because of him). Then do you desire that I
should propose goodness to you”?*

Ubaydullah asked him as to what it was. Hani replied,

*“You and your family may take all your provisions and wealth and return
to Syria, for the man who is more worthy and deserving of this honor
than yourself and Yazid, has come.”*

Tabari and Ibn Aseer Jazari relate that hearing his words Ubaydullah
bowed his head. His retainer Mehran who was standing behind his head
holding a thorny staff said,

*“What a shame and disgrace it is that a nomad slave is rendering
protection to you in your own dominion.”*

Ubaydullah yelled that Hani should be imprisoned. Mehran threw his staff
and caught hold of Hani’s hair and lifted his face towards Ubaydullah.
Ubaydullah lifted up the staff and started striking it on the face of
Hani. The thorns of the staff start­ed flying away due to excessive
force of striking and penetrated the walls. He hit Hani with such
severity that his nose and forehead were fractured.

Ibn Aseer Jazari says that Hani extended his hands towards the sword of
a soldier standing nearby but he moved back. When Ubaydullah saw this,
he said,

*“You have rebelled and have thus made the shedding of your blood impune
for us.”*

(Irshad) Ubaydullah ordered that he should be arrested. Hani was taken
away and imprisoned in one of the rooms of the palace. The door was
locked on him and Ubaydullah ordered that guards be deputed on him.

(Kamil) When Asma bin Kharejah saw this, he stood facing Ubaydullah and
said,

*“O you deceiver! Release Hani. You had promised us that you would
protect him and when we brought him, you injured his face and shed his
blood, and now you intend killing him.”*

Ubaydullah ordered him to be pound­ed. It was done and he was silenced.
Then they left him in a wretched state and he sat down. Then Muhammad
bin Ash’as (who was also sent to fetch Hani along with Asma) said,

*“We are in total conformity with the command of the chief, whether it
be profitable for us or no.”*

‘Amr bin Hajjaj (Hani’s father-in-law) received news that Hani is
killed, and hence he along with the clan of Mazhaj, came and surrounded
the palace from all sides and called out,

*“I am ‘Amr bin Hajjaj, and along with me are the valours and noblemen
of Mazhaj. We have not disobeyed nor have we abandoned our group.”*

At that time Shurayh Qazi was sitting near Ubaydullah, and Ubaydullah
told him to go to Hani and inquire and tell them (‘Amr and his
companions) that he is alive. When Shurayh went, Hani asked,

*“O Muslims come to my aid! (Has) my clan been killed? Where are the
virtuous ones and where are my companions? Will this enemy and son of an
enemy frighten me?”*

Then when he heard the voices of the people he said,

*“I presume that the voice is of (the people of) my clan of Mazhaj and
my noble Muslims. And if only ten of them enter herein, they will surely
rescue me from here.”*

Shurayh, who was accompanied by the guards of Ubaydullah, left and later
said that,

*“If the guards of Ubaydullah would not have been along with me, I would
surely have conveyed the message of Hani to them.”*

Shurayh came outside and said,

*“I have seen your friend with my own eyes, he is alive and has not been
killed.”*

‘Amr and his companions said,

*“Praise be to Allah that he is not killed.”*

Tabari relates that when Shurayh came to Hani, he said,

*“O Shurayh! Do you see what they have done to me.”*

Shurayh replied,

*“I see that you are alive.”*

Hani said,

*“Do I look alive in this wretched state? Then go and tell my people
that if they return back, he (Ubaydullah) will surely kill me.”*

Shurayh returned to Ubaydullah and said,

*“I have seen that Hani is alive but the marks of the torture is visible
upon him.”*

Ubaydullah re­plied,

*“I consider it befitting that a king may torture and punish his
subjects. Go to these people and inform them.”*

Shurayh came out and Ubaydullah signaled Mehran to accompany him.
Shurayh called out,

*“Why is this vain hue and cry, Hani is alive, but the commander has
chastised him which is not fatal for his life, hence go away and do not
put your lives and the life of your companion in danger.”*

Hearing this they returned back.

Shaikh Mufeed and some others say, that Abdullah bin Khazin says, that I
was appointed by Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.) as a spy in the palace so as to
inform him of the treatment being meted out to Hani. When I saw that
they had beaten Hani and later imprisoned him, I mounted my horse and
hastened to inform Muslim regarding it. And I saw some women of the clan
of Bani Murad calling out amidst one another “O grief for him! O
bereavement of him!”

I came to Muslim and informed him about the happenings. Muslim told me
to go and call out in a loud voice to his supporters. And he had
gathered four thousand men in the adjoining houses. I went and called
out to them, “O defenders of the nation!”, (Kamil) this being their
slogan. Then they informed one another and gathered near Muslim.

Jazari says that Muslim gave the charge of the clan of Bani Kindah to
Abdullah bin Aziz Kindi and told him to walk in front of him. Then he
gave the charge of the clans of Mazhaj and Asad to Muslim bin Awsaja
Asadi, the charge of the clans of Tameem and Hamadan to Abu Samamah
Saedi, and the charge of (the battalion of) Madina to Abbas bin Ja’dah
Jadali, and pro­ceeded towards the royal palace.

When the news reached Ubaydullah he hid inside the palace and closed
it’s doors. Muslim surrounded the palace from all sides while the
streets and the Mosque became full of people, and they started gathering
until the evening. The situation became tense for Ubaydullah and there
was none with him except thirty guards and twenty people from among the
noblemen, his family and retainers. While the noblemen came to meet
Ubaydullah from the second door adjoining the building of the Romans,
while the people were abusing Ubaydullah and his father (Ziyad).

Ubaydullah called Kaseer bin Shihab Harisi and ordered him to take along
with him, a man from among the clan of Mazhaj and roam in the streets,
admonishing the people to desert Muslim. Besides he told Muhammad bin
Ash’as to go, and with the help of his supporters among the Bani Kinda
and Hazramawt, pitch a standard into the ground and to call out that
whoever comes under the standard would remain safe.

In the same way he instructed Qa’qa’ bin Shaur, Shabas bin Rab’ee
Tamimi, Hajjar bin Abjar Ajali and Shimr bin Ziljawshan Zababi to do the
same. He kept the chiefs and noblemen along with him not wishing to be
without them because of the few people left with him.

They went out and started admonishing people from supporting Muslim bin
Aqeel (a.s.). Then Ubaydullah told the noblemen and chiefs who were with
him to deceive those people who were subservient to them with false
promis­es, and admonish and warn those who were disobedient to them.
They did as directed, with the effect that when people heard the words
of their noble­men, they started moving away and scattered.

Until the situation reached such a stage that women started coming to
their sons and brothers and telling them to return, for the other people
who were left were sufficient for the task (of supporting Muslim).
Likewise men too started coming (to take their relatives) and people
started moving away. Ultimately Muslim was left with only thirty men.
When he recited the Prayers of Maghrib in the Mosque, thirty people
followed him.

When he saw this situation he turned towards the door of the Bani
Kindah. (Irshad) Only ten people remained with him until he reached the
door, but when he stepped out no one was left. Then he turned around and
saw that no one was left to guide him or offer him shelter in their
house or defend him from the enemy. Hence Muslim wandered in the lanes
of Kufa (Irshad).

Mas’oodi relates that then Muslim stepped down from his Horse and
wandered in the streets of Kufa. He was unaware as to which way he was
going until he passed from near the houses of Bani Jabala, a branch of
the clan of Kindah. He passed from near the house of a woman named
Taw’ah, who was a slave girl of Ash’as bin Qays, who had freed her.

Later Usayd Hazrami had married her from whom she had a son named Bilal.
Bilal had gone out with some people and Taw’ah was waiting for him at
the door. When Muslim saw her he saluted her and requested her for some
water. The woman brought water for him. After drinking Muslim sat at the
door. When the woman returned back after keeping the cup in the house,
she saw Muslim and asked,

*“O servant of Allah! Did not you drink the water”?*

Muslim replied in the affirmative. She continued,

*“Then go back to your family.”*

When Muslim heard this he became silent. The woman repeated her sentence
but Muslim did not answer. The woman said for the third time,

*“Glory be to Allah! O servant of Allah! Arise, may Allah give you
strength. Then return back to your family, for it is not appropriate for
you to sit at my door, nor do I permit you to do so.”*

Muslim stood up and said,

*“O maid of Allah! I do not have a house nor my clan in this town. You
are among the generous and favorable ones. Perhaps I could compensate
you for it in the future.”*

The woman asked him as to what could she do for him. Muslim answered,

*“I am Muslim bin Aqeel, these people have deceived me and committed
fraud and have brought me out of the place of my safety.”*

The woman asked (in aston­ishment) whether he was really Muslim bin
Aqeel, to which he answered in the affirmative. She then told him to
enter her house, which Muslim did. The woman gave him a separate room,
not the one which she used, and spread a sheet for him and gave him food
to eat, but Muslim could not eat.

Suddenly Taw’ah’s son returned back (Kamil) and noticed that his mother
entered the room frequently. He inquired of her as to what concern she
had in the room, she did not answer as much as he inquired. The boy
forced her and ultimately she revealed to him on oath to keep it a
secret and not to reveal it to anyone, hence the boy remained silent.

As regards Ubaydullah, when the voices of screaming and yelling ceased,
he told his supporters to see whether anyone was left. They saw that no
one was left and informed him accordingly. Then Ubaydullah came to the
Mosque before the Isha Prayers and made his supporters sit around his
pulpit. Then he ordered that it should be proclaimed that,

*“The blood of every general, chief of clans and warrior is lawful for
us, who does not remain present for the Prayers of Isha.”*

Thus the Mosque became full of people and Ubaydullah lead the Isha
Prayers. Then he ascended the pulpit and after Prais­ing Allah said,

*“Now then! Verily the son of Aqeel, an ignorant and illit­erate person,
has come to spread dissension and discord as you all have seen. Thus the
blood of whosoever offers him refuge in his house shall be lawful upon
us. And we shall offer money of his compensation to the one who brings
him to us.”*

Then he advised people to remain obedient and attend to him. Then he
ordered Haseen bin Nameer to seal all the streets and to search the
houses. Haseen was in charge of the Police force and was from the clan
of Bani Tameem.

Abul Faraj says that Bilal the son of the old woman (Taw’ah), who had
of­fered refuge to Muslim, woke up in the morning and informed Abdul
Rahman bin Muhammad bin Ash’as that Muslim was in his house as his
mother’s guest.

Abdul Rahman rushed to his father Muhammad bin Ash’as, who at that
moment was seated with Ubaydullah. He narrated the entire incident in a
hush voice to his (step) father. Ubaydullah inquired as to what he was
saying. Muhammad replied that,

*“He has brought the news that the son of Aqeel (Muslim) is present in
one of our houses.”*

Ubaydullah, pricking him on the side with his staff, said,

*“Go immediately and bring him to me.”*

Abu Makhnaf says that Qudamah bin Sa’ad bin Zaedah Saqafi related to him
that Ubaydullah dispatched sixty or seventy people from the clan of
Qays, under the command of Abdullah bin Abbas Salami with Muhammad bin
Ash’as, and they came to the house where Muslim was present.

In Kamile Bahai it is stated that when Muslim bin Aqeel heard the voice
of the neighing of the horses, he recited the supplications speedily.
Then he wore his armor and told Taw’ah,

*“Verily you have done goodness and have favored me, and you have earned
your share of intercession of the Holy Prophet of Allah (S) who is the
Master of men and genie. Last night I had seen my uncle, the Commander
of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.), in a dream, who told me that tomorrow I
would be alongside him.”*

In one of the books of Martyrdom (Maqatil), it is stated that when the
time of morning Prayers drew near, Taw’ah brought some water for Muslim
so that he may perform his ablutions and said,

“*O my master! Haven’t you slept the previous night”?*

Muslim replied,

*“I slept for sometime and I saw my uncle, the Commander of the Faithful
(a.s.), commanding me to hasten and finish speedily, hence I have
concluded that today is the last day of my life.”*

In Kamil Bahai it is stated that when the troops of the enemies reached
the house of Taw’ah, Muslim feared lest they would burn her house and
hence came outside and slew forty-two men.

Sayyid Ibn Tawoos and Shaikh Ja’far Ibn Nima says, that Muslim wore his
armor and mounted his horse and striking them with his sword pushed them
away from the house.

Regarding the mounting of Muslim upon his horse has been narrated by
Sayyid ibn Tawoos and Ibn Nima only, and I have found no one else
stating it, while all other statements bear testimony to it. It has been
specifically mentioned by Mas’oodi in Murujuz Zahab, that before
entering the house of Taw’ah, Muslim had mounted his horse, and that
then he alighted from his horse and started wandering in the streets of
Kufa.

He did not know as to which way he was going until he reached the house
of a slave girl of Ash’as bin Qays and asked for water. She gave him
water to drink and asked him as to who his was. Muslim introduced
himself to her, and she was moved and invited him to be her guest.

Abul Faraj says that when Muslim heard the sound of the hooves of the
horses and voices of the people, he perceived that they had come for him
and he unsheathed his sword. The people had entered the house and
scattered therein, seeing this he attacked them fiercely. When they saw
this, they ran up to the roof and started hurling stones and burning
wood upon his head. When Muslim saw this he muttered to himself,

*“Verily this struggle is for the sake of the murder of the son of
Aqeel. O my self! Go forth to­wards the inevitable death.”*

Then he drew his sword and confronted them in the streets.

Mas’oodi and others say that when combat ensued between Muslim bin Aqeel
(a.s.) and Bukayr bin Humran Ahmari, Bukayr struck the mouth of Muslim
bin Aqeel with his sword, which cut the upper lip and landed on the
lower one cutting it too. Muslim dealt a terrible blow upon his head and
another on his shoulder, which reached his stomach. Muslim was reciting
the following Rajaz:[^1]

*“I swear, I will only be killed as a free man, although I consider
death as something horrible, every man one day will meet an evil, I fear
that I will be cheated and deluded.”*

When Muhammad bin Ash’as saw this, he went up to him and said,

*“We shall not lie to you nor commit deceit.”*

Then he offered Muslim protection, hence Muslim accepted his offer. They
mounted him on a mule and took him to the presence of Ubaydullah bin
Ziyad. When Muhammad ibn Ash’as offered protec­tion to Muslim, he took
away the sword and other arms from him. A poet points out to Muhammad’s
satire in these words:

*“You abandoned your uncle and were sluggish in assisting him, Alas! he
would have acquired a secured place if you had not been there, Alas! you
killed the one sent by the Progeny of Muhammad (S), you shamelessly
pulled away the sword and shield off him.”*[^2]

While the above couplet refers to the incident of Hujr bin Adi regarding
whom it shall be discussed later.

He killed forty-one people out of them. Muhammad bin Abu Talib says that
when Muslim had killed numerous men, and this news reached Ubaydullah,
he dispatched someone to Muhammad bin Ash’as with a message that,

*“We have sent you to (fight) a single man and commanded you to bring
him to us, while a severe crack is visible among your men. Then what
would be your state if we sent you to someone other than him”?*

Muhammad replied back,

*“O commander! Do you think that you have sent us in pursuit of a
vegetable vendor of Kufa or a foreign refugee? Do you not know that you
have sent us against a ferocious lion, a swordsman, and a renowned
champion, who is from the family of the best of creations.”*

Ubaydullah sent a reply saying,

*“Offer protection to him until you gain control over him.”*

In some books it is stated that Muslim was like a lion, and the strength
of his arms was such that he lifted up people with his hands and threw
them on top of the roofs.

Sayyid Ibn Tawoos in his Malhoof writes, that when Muslim (a.s.) heard
the sound of the hooves of the horses, he wore his armor and mounted his
horse. Then he attacked the army of Ubaydullah until he had killed
numerous among them. Muhammad bin Ash’as called out to him in a loud
voice,

*“O Muslim! There is protection for you.”*

When Muslim heard him he said,

*“How can one rely upon the promise of deceptors and evil doers”?*

Then he turned towards then and started fighting while reciting the
Rajaz of Humran bin Malik Khas’ami:

*“I swear, I will only be killed as a freeman, although I consider death
as something horrible. Or it turns the cold into a bitter heat and
deflects the rays of the sun (forever). Every man one day will meet an
evil, I fear that I will be cheated and deluded.”*

Then the army raised a hue and cry and called out,

*“No one shall lie to you nor deceive you”*,

but he did not pay any heed to their words. Then a large battalion
attacked him, he received numerous wounds on his body and a man dealt a
blow from behind with his lance. Muslims fell off his horse and was
arrested.

In Manaqib of Ibn Shahr Ashob it is written that Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.)
was wounded such severely with the arrows and stones, that he was
exhausted and sat with his back leaning against a wall. Then he said,

*“What is the matter that you have been hurling stones at me as is done
to an infidel, while I am from the Household of the ethical Prophet. Do
you not have regard for the Household (Ahlul Bayt) of the Prophet due to
his right”?*

Then Muhammad bin Ash’as said,

*“Do not kill yourself, verily you are under my protection.”*

Muslim replied,

*“I shall not surrender to be imprisoned by you until the strength
remains within me, by Allah, this will never happen.”*

Saying this he attacked them and they fled away. Then Muslim said,

*“O Allah! Thirst is killing me.”*

Then they attacked him from all sides and Bukayr bin Humran Ahmari cut
off his upper lip with a stroke of his sword. Then Muslim dealt him a
blow with his scimitar, which pierced his stomach and killed him. Then
someone attacked him from behind with a spear and he fell down from his
horse and was thus arrested.

Shaikh Mufeed, Jazari and Abul Faraj say that Muslim was utterly wounded
and was exhausted while fighting. Then, breathing heavily, he came and
sat with his back (leaning) towards the wall of a house. Muhammad bin
Ash’as came near him and said that he would give him protection. Muslim
turned towards the people and asked whether they all agreed to it and
they an­swered in the affirmative except Ubaydullah (or Abdullah) bin
Abbas Salami, who said that,

*“I have nothing to do with it”,*

saying this he stepped aside. Muslim replied,

*“By Allah! If you do not grant me security, I will never place my hand
in yours.”*

They brought a mule and mounted him on it. They surrounded him from all
sides and took away his sword. Muslim was now utterly disappointed,
tears started flowing from his eyes. He realized that these people would
ultimately kill him and hence said,

*“This is the first betrayal.”*

Muhammad bin Ash’as said,

*“I hope that there will be no danger for you.”*

Muslim said,

*“Is there only a hope? Then where is your promise of protection? Verily
we are Allah’s, and verily unto him shall we return.”*

Then he started weeping, and Ubaydullah bin Abbas Salami said,

*“The person who desires what you have desired and when he comes in a
state in which you are now, he should not weep.”*

Muslim replied,

*“I do not weep for myself nor do I fear being killed, even though I do
not befriend being killed, but I weep for my relatives and the people of
my household, who would be reach­ing here shortly, and I weep for Husayn
and his family.”*

Then Muslim turned towards Muhammad bin Ash’as and said,

*“I believe that you are unable to fulfill the promise of security.”*

Then he desired that a messenger be sent to Imam Husayn (a.s.) to
apprise him of the situation so that he may not come there.

Shaikh Mufeed relates that Muslim told Muhammad bin Ash’as that,

*“O slave of Allah! I see that you are unable to fulfill the promise of
security that you have given me, then you may perform a good act.
Dispatch someone to­wards Imam Husayn (a.s.), who would narrate my words
to him. For I think that today or tomorrow he might proceed to come here
with his household. The messenger should convey to him that he has been
sent by Muslim bin Aqeel, who has been arrested by them, and he presumes
that before today evening he might be killed. He sends message that: May
my parents be your ransom! You along with your Household may retreat
back, do not let the people of Kufa deceive you. These are the very same
companions of your father, regarding whom your blessed father (Imam Ali)
desired that he would die and thus be relieved of them. The people of
Kufa have lied to you, and the one who has been lied has no judgment.”*

Hearing this Muhammad bin Ash’as replied,

*“By Allah! I shall surely convey your message.”*

Azdi relates from Ja’far bin Huzayfa that Muhammad bin Ash’as called
Ayas bin Atal Tai, who was from the children of Malik bin ‘Amr bin
Samamah. Ayas was a poet and was the confidante of Muhammad, who told
him,

***“Go to the presence of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and present him this
letter.”***

Then he wrote down the contents, which Muslim had told him and said,

***“These are the provisions for your journey and these are expenses for
your family (in your absence).”***

Ayas replied,

***“I am in need of a mount, for my Camel has turned feeble.”***

Muhammad replied,

***“Take this saddled Camel of mine and go.”***

Ayas left and after a lapse of four nights reached Imam Husayn (a.s.) at
Zubalah and conveyed the message to him and handed him the letter of
Muslim. After hearing him Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

*“Whatever has been destined shall occur, and we desire from Allah to
judge between ourselves and the mis­chief of the people.”*

When Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.) had taken shelter in the house of Hani bin
Urwah and eighteen thousand people had taken the oath of fealthy to him,
Muslim dispatched Abis bin Abi Shabeeb Shakiri with a letter to Imam
Husayn (a.s.) which read as follows:

*“Now then! The one who goes in search of water does not lie regarding
it to his family. Eighteen thousand men from among the people of Kufa
have sworn the oath of fealthy to me, hence hasten as soon as you
receive my letter, for all the people are with you while their view and
desire are not with the progeny of Mu’awiyah. Greetings.”*

The above-referred letter has also been quoted in Museerul Ehzan, which
was dispatched along with Abis bin Abi Shabeeb Shakiri and Qays bin
Musah­hir Saydawi,

*“Now then! The one who goes in search of water does not lie regarding
it to his family. All the people of Kufa are on your side and eighteen
thousand men from among them have taken the oath of allegiance to me. As
soon as you read my letter, hasten, peace be upon you and Allah’s Mercy
and Blessings.”*

Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.) taken to the presence of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad
---------------------------------------------------------------------

As regards Muslim, Muhammad bin Ash’as took him to the palace of
Ubaydullah bin Ziyad. Muhammad entered therein alone and told him that
he had arrested Muslim but had given him the promise of protection too.
Ubaydullah replied,

*“You do not have the right to do so, rather I had sent you to bring him
to me.”*

Hearing this Muhammad became silent. When Muslim was seated at the gate
of the palace, he saw a jug filled with cold water and asked for some.
Muslim bin ‘Amr Bahili said,

*“Do you see how cold this water is? By Allah! You will not get even a
single drop from this until (Allah’s refuge) you drink the boiling water
(Hameem) in hell.”*

Muslim asked him as to who he was, to which he replied that,

*“I am the one who has recognized the truth while you have abandoned it,
I am the one who is a well-wisher of the nation and the Imam while you
have desired evil for him, and am obedient to him whereas you have
disobeyed him. I am Muslim bin ‘Amr Bahili.”*

Muslim replied,

*“May your mother weep over you! How cruel, unsympathetic and a harsh
man are you. O son of Bahila! Verily you are more worthy than me to
taste the boiling water (Hameem) and abide eternally in hell.”*

Then Ammarah bin Atbah called for water to give it to him.

In Irshad and Kamil of Ibn Aseer it is narrated, that ‘Amr bin Hurays
sent his retainer to fetch water. The retainer returned with a jar of
water along with a napkin and a cup, and gave the water to Muslim to
drink. (Kamil) When Muslim took the cup to drink water, it became full
with his blood thus he could not partake it. Thrice the cup was filled
with water, and when water was filled for the third time, his front
teeth fell in it. Muslim said,

*“Praise be to Allah! If this water would had been destined for me, I
could have drank it.”*

Muslim was then taken to the presence of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad and he did
not greet him. A guard told him, “Why do you not greet the commander”?

Muslim replied,

*“Why should I greet him when he desires to kill me, and if he does not
desire my death, then I have abundant greetings for him.”*

Ubaydullah said, “By my life! You shall surely die.” Muslim said, “So be
it”? To which Ubaydullah answered in the affirmative. Then Muslim said,
“If this is the case then give me respite so that I may will to someone
among my kinsmen”, to which Ubaydullah agreed. Muslim turned towards
Umar bin Sa’ad and said, “There exists kinship between us, I desire that
I may relate to you something in confidence.” Umar refused to yield, to
which Ubaydullah said, “Do not refuse to fulfill the desire of your
cousin”. Hearing this Umar stood up (Irshad) and sat with Muslim at a
place where Ubaydullah could see them. (Kamil)

Muslim said,

*“I have become indebted in Kufa for a sum of seven hundred dirhams, so
please pay it off by selling the property of mine which is in Madina.”
(Kamil) “And take my corpse after my death from Ubaydullah and bury it.
Besides send someone to Imam Husayn (a.s.) who would return him back.”*

Umar went to Ubaydullah and revealed whatever Muslim had told him.
Ubaydullah said,

*“A trustworthy man does not commit treachery, but sometimes a traitor
fulfils a trust. As regards his (Muslim’s) wealth, do whatever you
desire to do with it. And as for Husayn, if he does intend towards us,
we will not intend towards him. But if he challenges us, we shall not
refrain ourselves from (harming) him. Regarding his corpse, we shall
certainly not accept your intervention in that matter.”*

While others quote him saying that,

*“As regards his corpse, after we have killed him it is not our concern,
you may do what you desire with it.”*

Then he turned towards Muslim and said,

*“O son of Aqeel! The people were unified and in accordance with one
another, but you came and divided them and created discord.”*

Muslim replied,

*“It is not so, but the people of this town are of the opinion that your
father (Ziyad) killed many of their virtuous men. He shed their blood
and followed the footsteps of the Choesroes (the rulers of ancient
Persia) and Caesers (the rulers of ancient Rome). We have come to enjoin
justice and invite towards the Holy Book and Traditions (of the
Prophet).”*

Ubaydullah said,

*“O transgressor! What relation you hold with these? And why did you not
do that among the people, while you were busy drinking wine (Allah’s
refuge) in Madina”?*

Muslim replied,

*“Did I drink wine? By Allah! He knows that you are not speaking the
truth, nor am I similar to what you have ascribed to me. While drinking
wine is a practice of those (referring to Ubaydullah and his father
Ziyad) who in rage and enmity spill the blood of the Muslims, and who
rejoices and delights as if he has never ever committed any indecency
(referred to Yazid).”*

Ubaydullah was infuriated and said,

*“May Allah kill me if I do not kill you in a manner as no one else has
ever been killed in Islam.”*

Muslim replied,

*“It is befitting you that you introduce such innovations in Islam which
have never taken place. You are an evil murderer, wicked chastiser, ill
natured, and a degraded person than all those who preceded you.”*

Then Ubaydullah started abusing him, Imam Husayn (a.s.), Imam Ali (a.s.)
and Hazrat Aqeel (a.s.) while Muslim did not speak to him.

Martyrdom of Muslim bin Aqeel bin Abi Talib (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------

Mas’oodi says that when their speech concluded and Muslim spoke harshly
to Ubaydullah, he ordered that Muslim should be taken to the roof of the
palace and it was said to Bukayr bin Humran Ahmari to behead him and
take his revenge.

Jazari says that Muslim (a.s.) told Muhammad bin Ash’as,

*“By Allah! I would never have surrendered if you had not given me the
promise of protec­tion. Then defend me with your sword for your promise
has been broken.”*

Then they took him on top of the palace when he was asking forgiveness
from Allah and praising and glorifying Him. Then they took him to the
place overlooking the shoe-makers and severed his blessed head which
fell down.

(May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him). His murderer was Bukayr
bin Humran, whom Muslim had previously wounded. Then his body too was
thrown down. When Bukayr came down, Ubaydullah asked him, “What was
Muslim utter­ing when you took him to the roof”?.

He replied that,

**“Muslim was glorifying Allah and seeking His forgiveness.”**

When I intended to kill him, I told him to come near and then I said:

*“Praise be to Allah who has given me an upper hand over you and thus I
have taken the revenge from you.”*

Then I struck a blow, which went waste. Then Muslim said:

*“O slave! Haven’t you taken your revenge by inflicting this wound upon
me”?*

Ubaydullah said,

*“Such dignity even at the verge of death”?*

Bukayr said,

*“Then I struck him a second blow and killed him.”*

Tabari says that Muslim was taken on the roof of the palace and his neck
was severed and body thrown down to the people. An order was issued that
his corpse be taken to that place where garbage is thrown and to be
hanged there.

Martyrdom of Hani bin Urwah Muradi
----------------------------------

Mas’oodi says that Bukayr bin Humran Ahmari severed the head of Muslim
and threw it down followed by his body. Then Ubaydullah ordered that
Hani be taken to the market-place and beheaded with hands fastened
together. Hani was calling out to the people of Murad, whose chief and
spokesman he was, to assist him.

When Hani would mount, four thousand armored men of the Bani Murad along
with eight thousand men on foot would accompany him. And if those who
were under the agreement with him among the people of Kinda and others
would be with him, then thirty thousand armored men would accompany him.
Even then at the need of the hour no one responded to him due to
slackness and deceit.

Shaikh Mufeed says that Muhammad bin Ash’as came to Ubaydullah and
inter­ceded on behalf of Hani saying, “You are aware of the honor that
Hani holds in this town while also his family in the tribe. His people
know that myself and my colleague have brought him to your presence,
hence I request you in the name of Allah to hand him over to me, for I
do not desire enmity with the people of this town.”

Ubaydullah promised to do so but later regretted and immediately ordered
that Hani should be taken to the market and beheaded. They took him to
the market, where the sheep were sold, with hands bound together, while
he was calling out, “O Mazhaj! There is no one from the Mazhaj for me
today! O Mazhaj! Where is Mazhaj”? When Hani sensed that no one came
forward to render him assistance, he pulled away his hand from the rope
and started yelling, “Isn’t there a stick, a knife, a stone or even a
bone by which a man may defend himself”?

The guards leapt upon him and tied his hands tightly and told him to
extend his neck (so that they may behead him), to which he replied that,
“I am not generous in this regard and shall not help you in the matter
of my murder.” Then Rasheed, a Turkish retainer of Ubaydullah, dealt a
blow with his sword upon Hani, which went waste, and Hani said, “Verily
retreat is towards Allah. O Allah! (I come) towards Your Mercy and Your
Paradise.” Then he dealt a second blow by which Hani was martyred. (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

It is written in Kamil of Ibn Aseer that Abdul Rahman bin Haseen Muradi
once met the Turkish retainer (who had killed Hani) traveling along with
Ubaydullah and killed him.

Abdullah bin Zubayr Asadi said regarding the murder of Hani bin Urwah
and Muslim bin Aqeel (while some attribute it to Farazdaq, the poet):

*“If you do not know what death is, then look at Hani in the marketplace
and the son of Aqeel, a hero whose face was covered with the wounds of
sword, and another who fell to death from the roof, the wrath of Ibn
Ziyad struck them both, and they became legends for every traveler on
road, you see a beheaded corpse whose color death has changed, and his
blood flowed abun­dantly like a river, a young man who was more shy than
a young woman, was more incisive than a sharp edged sword, is Asma
riding in safety a mount which moves at walking pace, while Mazhaj urged
him to seek revenge, and Murad wander around him? And all of them in
fear of the questioner and the questioned, then if you do not avenge
(the death of) your two masters, then you are illegitimate (sons), lowly
and degraded.”*

Ubaydullah dispatched both, the heads of Muslim and Hani to Yazid, who
sent him a thanksgiving letter as follows:

*“I have received news that Husayn is coming towards Iraq, deploy guards
over the roads, gather provisions, and keep alert. Imprison and detain
the dubious ones and kill those who fight you.”*

It is stated in Irshad that Yazid said,

*“And arrest people on grounds of suspicion and kill the accused, then
keep me informed of the happenings.”*

Mas’oodi says that Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.) revolted in Kufa on Tuesday,
the eighth of the month of Zilhaj 60 A.H., this being the same day when
Imam Husayn (a.s.) left Makkah to come to Kufa, and (Muslim) was
martyred on Wednesday ninth Zilhaj, i.e., the day of Arafah. Then
Ubaydullah ordered that Muslim’s body be hanged and his head was
dispatched to Damascus. This being the first body among the Bani Hashim,
which was hanged upon the (city) door, and the first head among them,
which was sent to Damascus.

It is written in Manaqib that both the heads were sent to Damascus with
Hani bin Habooh Wade’ee and were hung at the gate of (the city of)
Damas­cus.

In the Maqtal of Shaikh Fakhruddin it is quoted that the bodies of
Muslim and Hani were being dragged in the market. When the people of the
tribe of Mazhaj were informed about it, they mounted on their horses and
fought with them until they took the bodies of Muslim and Hani from
them. Then they gave the dead body bath and shrouded and buried them.
May Allah’s Mercy be upon them and may Allah’s wrath befall their
murderers, a severe wrath.

Appendix
--------

As has been quoted in Habibus Siyar, Hani bin Urwah was a notable of
Kufa and an outstanding Shi’ah, and besides it has been related that he
met the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) and was blessed with his
companionship. He was eighty-nine years old when he was martyred and his
dignity and eminence can be proven from his bold speech with Ubaydullah
as quoted above.

Mas’oodi says that he was a Shi’ah and chief of the (clan) of Murad, and
four thousand armored horsemen and eight thousand on foot would
accompany him. When Imam Husayn (a.s.) was informed about the martyrdom
of Muslim and Hani, he said,

*“Verily we are Allah’s and verily unto Him shall we return”,*

and repeated,

*“Allah’s Mercy be upon both of them.”*

Moreover he read a letter in the presence of the people,

*“In the Name of Allah, the Benefi­cent, the Merciful. A heart rending
news has reached us that Muslim, Hani and Abdullah bin Yaqtoor have been
martyred.”*

Pilgrimage to the grave of Hani bin Urwah Muradi
------------------------------------------------

It is quoted in the Mazar of Muhammad bin Mashhadi, Misbahuz Zaer of
Sayyid Ibn Tawoos, Mazar of Shaikh Mufeed, and Mazar of Shaikh Shaheed
(may Allah sanctify their souls) in context to the supplications of the
Mosque of Kufa that: Stand near his (Hani bin Urwah’s) grave and send
salutations upon Muhammad (S) and his Progeny and then say,

*“Allah’s Sublime Peace and His Benediction be upon you, O Hani bin
Urwah! Peace be upon you O (the) devout and sincere slave of Allah and
His Prophet ...... (till the end).”*

Then recite two units of Prayers as gift and pray for him and bid
farewell.

Besides, Hani was among those who had fought alongside Imam Ali (a.s.)
in the battle of Jamal. It is quoted in Manaqib of Ibn Shahr Ashob, that
he recited the following Rajaz in that battle “It is a battle in which
the guide is a Camel, their woman, the chief of misguidance, is in the
fore­front, while Ali is the Master of the masters and a Master.”

Sayyid Mohsin Kazmi in his Takmelah writes that, “Hani was included
among the praiseworthy men and whatever we have quoted (of his virtues)
proves it.” Then he says, “Formerly Sayyid Mahdi Bahrul Uloom was in
doubt regard­ing (the sincerity of) Hani. Then when he investigated the
reports, he repented and in apology compiled a couplet in praise of
Hani.”

The author (Shaikh Abbas Qummi) says that the above-referred Sayyid
Mahdi Bahrul Uloom in his Rijal has discussed in detail on the subject
of Hani, and then states that, “These different reports unanimously
agree that Hani bin Urwah offered shelter to Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.) in
his house.

He took necessary steps for him and organized manpower and ammunitions.
He refused to hand over Muslim to Ubaydullah, and was even ready to
sacrifice his life for it, until he was harassed, beaten, tortured and
imprisoned, and was ultimately killed with his hands bound together.
While this being a clear proof of his virtue and a fruitful end. He is
included among the companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his Shi’ah, who
laid down their lives for him. The words which he spoke to Ubaydullah is
enough proof of (his sincerity) that,

*“The man has come who is more worthy of Caliphate than yourself and
your master (Yazid)”*

besides that which is quoted in Muntakhab of Shaikh Fakhruddin Turayhi
that he said,

*“Even if a child of the family of Muhammad (S) is hiding below my feet,
I shall not lift it up until it is cut off.”*

And similar speeches which he delivered bear witness, that whatever he
did was due to his foresight and intelligence, and not due to prejudice
or pride or simply because he gave refuge to Muslim (and was thus bound
to protect him). The following words of Imam Husayn (a.s.) bear witness
to it.

When Imam received the news of his Martyrdom and that of Muslim, he
prayed for Allah’s Mercy for them and repeated it numerous times and
said, “A heart rending news has reached us that Muslim bin Aqeel, Hani
bin Urwah and Abdullah bin Yaqtoor have been martyred.”

It is quoted in Malhoof of Sayyid Ibn Tawoos that when the news of
Martyr­dom of Abdullah bin

Yaqtoor reached Imam Husayn (a.s.), whose Martyrdom occurred after that
of Muslim and Hani, his eyes were filled with tears and he said,

*“O Allah! Bestow a merciful status for us and our Shi’ah, and unite us
in the place of repose of Your Blessings. Verily You have power over all
things.”*

Our masters (the Ulama) (may Allah’s Benediction be upon them) have
quoted salutations for Hani and still visit his grave. They have
explicitly stated that he was among the felicitous martyrs, who were
devot­ed to (serve) Allah and His Prophet. They died in the way of Allah
and thus entered His Mercy and Benediction, the salutation being
“Allah’s immense Peace .........(till the end).”

Then it is said that the contents of this salutation is not textual or
mere reports, and even if it is so, then the contents itself prove that
he was a felicitous martyr, a noble dignitary and one whose end was
fair. I have witnessed our Shaikhs like Mufeed and other Ulama, who have
included Hani among the noblemen, and have added, “May Allah be pleased
with him”, or “May Allah have mercy upon him” after his name. And I have
not found any of our Ulama ever reproaching or criticizing him.

As regards the episode which is reported, that when Ubaydullah came to
Kufa, Hani went to pay his respects to him and with the other noblemen
kept visiting him until the time Muslim bin Aqeel came to his house.
This epi­sode does not in any way give way for suspicion regarding Hani,
for this was due to dissimulation (taqiyyah). Hani was a renowned person
and Ubaydullah considered him and held good relations with him.

Thus if under these circumstances, had he kept himself aloof and remote
from Ubaydullah, then his dissimulation would go waste, which formed the
basis of Muslim’s task. Hence it was necessary for him to keep contact
with Ubaydullah and visit him frequently so that he may not fall a prey
to his suspicion. But when Muslim came to his house, he lessened going
to Ubaydullah and pretended to be ill, but whatever he had not deemed,
took place.

As regards his desisting Muslim from revolting hastily, could be on
account of his foresight and he desired that more and more people may
gather and a great number of arms could be collected too. And so that
Imam Husayn (a.s.) himself would come to Kufa, hence the situation would
come under control and if fighting would ever occur, it would be under
the auspices of Imam himself. And as regards preventing the murder of
Ubaydullah in his house, it is already quoted that there is difference
in reports.

Some narrate that Hani himself had planned that he would pretend to be
ill, so that when Ubaydullah would come to visit him, he could be killed
by Muslim. And as is quoted that Muslim said, that a woman wept and
pleaded with him not to kill Ubaydullah in the house. Thus Sayyid
Murtaďa alone has quoted this reason in his Tanzeeyahul Ambiyah.

And as regards Ubaydullah’s question to Hani regarding his giving refuge
to Muslim, and Hani’s answer that, “By Allah! I have not invited Muslim
to my house, nor was I aware of his intentions. Then he came to my house
and asked me permission to reside therein and I could not refuse, thus
this responsibility fell upon me”, these words were uttered by Hani only
to save himself from the clutches of Ubaydullah, and in dissimulation,
and it is not possible that Muslim would have taken Hani’s protection
without in­forming him and taking an oath from him, and Hani would be
unaware of his intentions.

Again it is not possible that Hani, being a notable of the Shi’ah, would
be unaware of the intentions of Muslim. Thus it proves the unreliability
of whatever is quoted in Rawzatus Safa that Hani told Muslim that, “You
have put me great difficulty and pain, and if you had not en­tered into
my door, I would have sent you away”, is not sound, and this statement
is not quoted anywhere else.

Ibn Abil Hadeed, in his Sharhe Nahjul Balagha, quotes two narrations
re­garding Hani, one praising him, while the other vilifying him. The
one praising him is his statement regarding Imam Ali (a.s.), wherein he
says that, “I am the first one to confirm him, and shall not be the
first one to deny him.” Sayyid (may Allah’s Mercy be upon him) relates
the narration praising Hani and quotes the one vilifying him too (from
Sharhe Nahjul Balagha, the chapter of empowerment) that Imam Ali (a.s.)
said in his short Aphorisms,

*“The tool of kingship is a wide bosom”,*[^3]

and in refutation of this he (Sayyid) says that this is nothing more
than a fiction and does not contain grounds for being a narration, while
it does not even contain any chain of transmitters. Besides it is not
quoted from any other book nor from other historical or biographical
books. The historians have referred to the incident wherein Mu’awiyah
asked the people to take the oath of allegiance to his son Yazid and has
quoted regarding those who yielded and those who refused and other
matters, while the above incident is absent therein. Thus if this
incident would have been true, then it should have been quoted, for it
was certainly a novelty.

Furthermore, because Hani later broke off the allegiance of Yazid and
revolted in assistance of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and was killed for him.
They would then have quoted the above guilt of his if it would have been
true. While the case of Hani was similar to that of Hurr (Allah’s mercy
be upon him) who repented, and his repentance was accepted for what he
had done. And his case was more severe than that of Hani, thus Hani is
more liable to be forgiven (if he ever erred).

Abul Abbas Mubarrad says that Mu’awiyah gave the governorship of
Khurasan to Kaseer bin Shihab Mazhaji. There Kaseer misappropriated too
much wealth and ran away taking shelter in the house of Hani bin Urwah.
When the news reached Mu’awiyah, he issued orders that Hani’s blood
should be spilled with impunity.

Hence Hani left Kufa and went to seek refuge with Mu’awiyah. Mu’awiyah
did not recognize him, when all the people left, Hani remained seated in
his place. When Mu’awiyah inquired of him, he replied that he was Hani
bin Urwah. To which Mu’awiyah said, “This day of yours is not (the same)
as the other days, when your father boasted that: I comb my tresses and
I draw my cloak, my mount is a Bay Horse with a black tale and mane, and
I walk accompanied by the chiefs of Bani Ateef, and if oppression comes
my way, I roll away the heads.”

Hani replied, “Verily I am respected today more than yesterday.”
Mu’awiyah asked him the reason for it, to which Hani replied that it was
because of Islam. Mu’awiyah said, “Where is Kaseer bin Shihaab”? Hani
replied, “He is with me and among your group.” Mu’awiyah said, “Do you
see how much wealth he has misappropriated, then take away a part from
him and give him a part of it.”

Furthermore, it is related that the troops of Yazid arrested a man from
the helpers of Imam Husayn (a.s.) in Karbala, and took him to the
presence of Yazid. Yazid looked towards him and asked, “Are you the son
of the man who said: I comb my tresses.........?” The man replied in the
affirma­tive, hence Yazid ordered him to be killed. (Allah’s mercy and
Blessings be upon him).

[^1]: Rajaz - Epic poems recited by Arab warriors in the battlefield
while announcing their valour and virtues.

[^2]: The poet was Abdullah bin Zubayr Asadi, and his couplets are as
follows: “Did you not abandon Muslim and did not fight assisting him, in
fear of death and of being subdued, You shamelessly killed the one sent
by the Progeny of Muhammad (S), he would have remained safe if you would
have not been there, if you would have been from the (clan of) Bani
Asad, you would have recognized his esteem and would have earned the
inter­cession of Ahmad (S) in Qiyamah.”

[^3]: The explanation as given by Ibn Abil Hadeed in his Sharh Nahjul
Balagha with reference to the words “The tool of kingship is a wide
bosom”, reproaching Hani, is the incident at the time when the chiefs of
Iraq went to Mu’awiyah when he ordered the people to take the oath of
allegiance to Yazid. Hani, who was a representative of the chiefs of
Iraq, requested Mu’awiyah to appoint him in charge of taking the
allegiance for Yazid, but in the above incidents Hani clearly opposed
Mu’awiyah and this narrative is nothing but incongruous.


