Martyrdom of Meytham bin Yahya at Tammar
========================================

During the period of the martyrdom of Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.), the other
significant events, which occurred, are the martyrdom of Meytham at
Tammar and Rushayd al Hajari. Besides it is appropriate that we quote
here the mar­tyrdom of Hujr bin Adi and ‘Amr bin Humaq.

Meytham was one of the distinct and favorite companions of the Commander
of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.), rather he, ‘Amr bin Humaq, Muhammad bin
Abu Bakr and Oways Qarani were among his disciples. Keeping in mind
their merit and worthiness, Imam Ali (a.s.) had trained them with
concealed knowledge and mysteries, which would occasionally be apparent
from them.

Once Meytham told Abdullah bin Abbas, who was one of the students of
Imam Ali (a.s.) and had learnt the Qur’anic Exegeses from him, and whom
Muhammad bin Hanafiyah had referred to as “the Divine of the nation”
that, “O son of Abbas! Ask from me whatever you desire regarding the
interpretation of the Qur’an, as I have recited the revelations of the
Qur’an before Imam Ali (a.s.) and have received it’s interpretation from
him.” Abdullah bin Abbas addressed his maid servant saying, “Bring me a
paper and pen”, and started writing down.

It is narrated that when the order was issued to hang Meytham he called
out in a loud voice saying, “O people! Whoever desires to listen to the
mys­terious sayings of the Commander of the faithful Ali (a.s.), come
closer to me.” Hearing this people gathered around him and he started
narrating the astonishing traditions. While this dignified personality
(Allah’s Mercy be upon him), was among the abstinents and was such that
the skin of his body had dried due to excessive worship and abstinence.

In Kitab al Gharat it is related by Ibraheem Saqafi, that Imam Ali
(a.s.) had trained Meytham in abundant knowledge and concealed
mysteries, which he would occasionally relate to the people, after
hearing which the Kufans would fall in doubt and accuse Imam Ali (a.s.)
of sorcery and deceit (for they could not digest and comprehend it). One
day Imam Ali (a.s.), in the presence of a large gathering of some of his
genuine followers as well as the skeptical ones said,

*“O Meytham! After my death you will be seized and will be hanged. Then
on the preceding day blood shall ooze from your nose and mouth, which
will dye your beard. Then on the third day a weapon will be pierced in
your stomach, which will result in your death, thus look forward to that
day. The place where you shall be hanged is facing the house of ‘Amr bin
Hurays. You shall be the tenth one from among those people who shall be
hanged, while the timber of your gallow will be the shortest among all,
and it will be nearer to the ground. And I shall show you the palm-tree
on whose trunk you shall be hanged.”*

Then after two days he showed him the palm-tree. Thereafter Meytham
always came near the tree and recited Prayers and would say, “What a
blessed palm-tree you are, for you have been created and are growing up
for me “.

After the martyrdom of Imam Ali (a.s.), Meytham often went to visit the
palm-tree until it was cut down, then he looked after it’s trunks. He
would go to ‘Amr bin Hurays and say, “I will be your neighbor, thus
fulfill the rights of neighborhood well.” ‘Amr would not understand his
meaning and would ask, “Do you intend buying the house of Ibn Mas’ood or
Ibn Hakeem”?

In Kitabul Fazael it is written that Imam Ali (a.s.) often came out of
the Mosque of Kufa and sat near Meytham talking to him. One day as usual
he came to Meytham and said,

*“Should not I give you glad tidings”?*

Meytham asked him as to what it was. He said,

*“One day you shall be hanged.”*

He asked, “O my Master! Will I die the death of a Muslim”? Imam answered
in the af­firmative.

Aqiqi relates that Abu Ja’far Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) held Meytham
very dear, while Meytham was a believer, was grateful in prosperity and
forbearing in adversity.

Meeting between Habib bin Mazahir and Meytham at Tammar
-------------------------------------------------------

It is related in Manhajul Maqal from Shaikh Kashshi, who relates through
his chain of transmitters reaching Fazl bin Zubayr, who relates that one
day Meytham was mounted on his horse when he passed by Habib bin Mazahir
Asadi, who was near a group of the people of Bani Asad. They started
speak­ing to one another in a manner that the necks of their horses had
joined each other.

Habib said, “Verily I see an old bald man with a large belly who sells
watermelon near Darur Rizq. He shall be hanged because of his love for
the Prophet’s Household (Ahlul Bayt) (a.s.) and his stomach shall be
punctured on the gallows itself.”

Meytham said, “I too recognize a red-faced man who has two long tresses,
he shall go to defend and aid the grandson of the Prophet and shall be
killed, while his severed head will be paraded in Kufa.” Saying this
they both departed from one another. The people who were present there
and heard their conversation said, “We have never seen greater liars
than these two.”

Now they had not yet dispersed when Rushayd Hajari came to search them
(Meytham and Habib) and asked the people their whereabouts. The people
said that they had left and related to him their conversation. Rushayd
said, “May Allah’s blessings be upon Meytham, he forgot to say one
sentence, that the one who gets the severed head to Kufa will get a
reward of a hundred dirhams”, saying this he left.

When people heard him they said, “Verily he is a more greater liar than
them.” These people then say that after a lapse of some days we saw
Meytham on the gallows near the house of ‘Amr bin Hurays, and the
severed head of Habib bin Mazahir being paraded in Kufa after he was
martyred along with Imam Husayn (a.s.). Thus we witnessed with our own
eyes whatever those men had predicted.

Meytham says that one day Imam Ali (a.s.) called me and said,

*“What will be your state at that time O Meytham, when the man, whose
father is not known, but the Bani Umayyah have included him among them
(viz. Ubaydullah bin Ziyad) will call you and order you to disassociate
yourself from me?”*

I said, “O Commander of the faithful! By Allah! I shall never
disassociate myself from you.” He said,

*“In that case you shall be killed and hanged on the gallows.”*

I retorted, “By Allah! I shall forebear, while this is quite
insignificant in the way of Allah.” Imam said,

*“O Meytham! You shall then be along with me in my status (in
Paradise).”*

Saleh bin Meytham relates that Abu Khalid Tammar has narrated to me,
that one day I was with Meytham in the river of Euphrates on Friday,
when a storm started. Meytham, who was sitting in a boat called Ziyan,
came out and looking towards the storm said, “Tie the boats firmly, for
I see a fearful storm ensuing, while Mu’awiyah has just died.”

When next Friday dawned, a messenger came from Syria. I met him and
inquired about the reports there­in. He said that, “The people therein
are in a good state. Mu’awiyah has died and people are taking the oath
of allegiance to Yazid.” I asked him as to which day he died, to which
he replied that it was on the last Friday.

The Commander of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) reveals his mysteries to a well
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaheed al Awwal Shaikh Muhammad bin Maki has related that Meytham said:
One day my Master, the Commander of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.), took
me out of Kufa to the desert until we reached the Mosque of Ja’fi. Then
he turned towards the Qibla and recited four units of Prayers. After
finishing the Prayers he glorified Allah and stretched his hands saying,

*“O Lord! How shall I call upon You when I have disobeyed You. And how
shall I not call upon You when I recognize You and Your love is present
in my heart. I have stretched my hands full of sins in Your presence and
my eyes full of desires ...... (till the end of a long supplication).”*

Then he recited a supplication in a silent tone and fell into
prostration and repeated, “Al Afw” (O Pardoner) a hundred times. Then he
arose and came out of the Mosque and I started following him until we
reached a desert. Then Imam drew a line and said,

*“Beware, do not cross this line.”*

Saying this he went away from me. The night being dark I said to myself,
“You have left your Master alone in spite of several of his enemies,
what will be your excuse in the presence of Allah and His Prophet? By
Allah! I will follow him so as to inquire his condition in spite of
disobeying his orders.”

Hence I followed him and saw him bending his upper body with his head
into a well and talk­ing with it, while hearing to it too. He became
aware that someone was with him; hence he turned towards me and asked
who it was. I replied that I was Meytham. He said,

*“Did not I order you not to cross the line”?*

I replied, “O my Master! I was afraid lest your enemies might harm you,
thus I was uneasy.” He asked,

*“Have you heard whatever I said (to the well)”?*

I re­plied in the negative. He continued,

*“O Meytham! My heart contains myster­ies, and when it becomes narrow on
account of it, I dig the earth with my fists and bury the mysteries
under the stones, the Beeches grow from the earth, among my seeds this
tunes in.”*

Shaikh Mufeed writes in Irshad that Meytham was a retainer of one of the
women of Bani Asad. Imam Ali (a.s.) bought him from her and freed him.
He asked his name, to which he replied that his name was Salim. Imam
said,

*“The Holy Prophet Muhammad (S) informed me that the name your father
had kept in Persia was Meytham.”*

Meytham replied, “Verily the Prophet of Allah (S) and the Commander of
the faithful (a.s.) speaks the truth. By Allah! That is my name.” Imam
said,

*“Then return to the name by which the Prophet has addressed you and
leave the name Salim, while your agnomen (Kuniyah)*[^1] *should be Abu
Salim.”*

One day Imam Ali (a.s.) told him,

*“After my death you will be arrested and put to the gallows and a
weapon shall be pierced into your stomach. Then on the third day blood
will come forth from your nose and mouth, which will dye your beard,
thus await that dye. You shall be hanged at the door of ‘Amr bin Hurays,
you being the tenth (to be crucified among other nine), while the timber
of your gallow will be the shortest and will be the nearest to the
ground than others. Come, I shall show you the Palm-tree by whose trunk
you shall be hanged.”*

Then he showed him the Palm-tree. Meytham often visit­ed the tree and
Prayed below it and would say, “What a blessed palm-tree you are, that I
have been made for you and you have been made for me.” He often went
near the tree and took care of it until it was cut down. He knew that
place in Kufa where he would be hanged.

He often visited ‘Amr bin Hurays and would say, “I shall soon be your
neighbor, thus be a fair neighbor to me.” ‘Amr would say, “Are you
buying the house of Ibn Mas’ood or Ibn Hakeem”? For he was not aware as
to what Meytham meant.

The year, in which he was martyred, Meytham went for Hajj and thereafter
went to the presence of Umm Salama (a.s.). Umm Salama asked him as to
who he was and he replied that he was Meytham. She said, “By Allah! I
have often heard the Prophet remember your name at mid-night.”

Then Meytham inquired about Imam Husayn (a.s.) from Umm Salama, to which
she replied that he was in his garden. He said, “Please tell him that I
would have loved to offer my salutations to him, but Allah willing, we
shall meet one another in the presence of the Lord of the worlds.” Umm
Salama called for some scent and perfumed Meytham’s beard with it and
said, “Very soon it will be dyed with blood.”

Thereafter Meytham went to Kufa and was seized and taken to Ubaydullah.
Ubaydullah was told that, “This man is the most beloved of Ali.” He
said, “Woe be to you! This Persian man”? He was replied in the
affirmative. Then Ubaydullah asked Meytham, “Where is your Lord”?
Meytham replied, “In ambush of the oppressors, while you are one of the
oppressors.”

Ubaydullah said, “Even after being a Persian (non-Arab) you say what you
mean (your Arabic is eloquent). Tell me then, what your Master (Imam
Ali) predicted to you as to what I shall do to you”? Meytham replied,
“Yes, he did tell us that I will be the tenth one whom you shall put to
the gallows, and that the timber of my gallow would be the shortest, and
also that I shall be closer to the ground than them.” Ubaydullah said,
“By Allah! I shall do the opposite of what he said.” Meytham replied,
“How can you do the opposite, when by Allah, Imam Ali (a.s.) had heard
it from the Prophet (S), while he had heard it from Jibra’eel, who in
turn heard it from the Al­mighty. How can you oppose them? And I even
know the place in Kufa where I shall be hanged, and I shall be the first
in Islam to be bridled.”

Thus Meytham was imprisoned along with Mukhtar bin Abu Ubaydah Saqafi.
Meytham told Mukhtar, “You shall be freed from here and will rise to
avenge the blood of Imam Husayn (a.s.), and you shall kill him who will
kill us.” When Ubaydullah called for Mukhtar to be killed, a message
arrived from Yazid ordering him to free Mukhtar. He released him and
ordered Meytham to be crucified.

He came out of the prison and confronted a man who told him that, “Do
you not have the ability to free yourself from this”? Meytham smiled and
point­ing to the Palm-tree said, “I have been created for it and it has
been brought up for me.”

When Meytham was hanged on the gallows, people gathered around him at
the door of the house of ‘Amr bin Hurays who said, “By Allah! He often
said that he would be my neighbor.” When Meytham was crucified, ‘Amr
ordered his maid to sweep the ground beneath and sprinkle water and
fumigate it.” Meytham then started relating the virtues of Bani Hashim
on the gallows.

News reached Ubaydullah that the slave had insulted him to which he
ordered that a bridle should be put in his mouth; hence Meytham was the
first man in Islam to be bridled. Meytham was martyred ten days before
Imam Husayn (a.s.) came to Iraq. On the third day a weapon (probably a
spear) was pierced into his stomach and he exclaimed “Allaho Akbar”, and
at the end of the day blood oozed from his nose and mouth. (May Allah's
Mercy and Blessing be Upon him)

It is related that seven date-sellers pledged that they would take the
corpse of Meytham from there and bury him. During night they came there
when the guards had lightened a fire and could not see them. They took
him down from the gallows and buried him near the stream in the street
of Bani Murad, and threw away the gallow into the garbage. When morning
dawned the horsemen went in pursuit of them but failed to find them.

I (the author) say that among the progeny of Meytham is Abul Hasan
Meytham bin Ali bin Isma’il bin Shu’ayb bin Meytham at Tammar, who was a
Shi’ah Mutakallim (Scholastic) during the times of Mamoon and Mu’tasim.
He held debates with the atheists and opponents, and his contemporary
was Abu Huzayl Allaf, the chief of Mu’tazilah in Basra.

Shaikh Mufeed narrates that Ali bin Meytham once asked Abu Huzayl Allaf
that, “Do you not believe that Iblees (Shaitan) restrains from
performing all good deeds and that he invites towards the evil”? Abu
Huzayl replied in the affirmative. Ali said, “Then does he invite
towards evil without being unaware that it is evil, and he stops from
good without knowing that it is good”?

Abu Huzayl replied, “Yes, he knows all that.” Abul Hasan (Ali)
con­tinued, “Thus it is proved that Shaitan is aware of all that is good
or evil.” Abu Huzayl agreed to it, to which Ali said, “Then tell me
about the Imam (Caliph) after the Prophet whether he knew all that was
good or evil”? Abu Huzayl replied in the negative. Ali said, “Then
Shaitan is more learned than your Imam.” Hearing this Abu Huzayl was
dumb-founded.

It should be noted that frequently Meytham is pronounced with a Kisrah
(a vowel coming below an alphabet) below meen (as Meytham), but some
write the name of Maysam bin Ali Bahrani, the expounder of Nahjul
Balagha, with the Fatha (a vowel coming above an alphabet) of meem (as
Maysam).

Martyrdom of Rushayd al Hajari (May Allah sanctify his spirit)
--------------------------------------------------------------

Hajar is one of the cities, which is the governor’s seat of Bahrayn or
is its district. The commander of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) gave him
the name of Rushayd al Balaya (Rushayd of Trials) and trained him in the
Science of trials and death (Ilmul Balaya wal Manaya). Thus he predicted
how a person would die or how such and such person would be killed, and
whatev­er he said came out to be the truth. In the episode of Meytham we
have related how he predicted regarding (the Martyrdom of) Habib bin
Mazahir.

I recollect from the Ta’leeqah of Shaikh Bahai that Shaikh Kaf’ami has
included Rushayd among the porters of Imams (a.s.).

It has been related in Ikhtisas, that when Ziyad (the father of
Ubaydullah), was in pursuit of Rushayd, he went underground. One day he
came to Abu Arakah, who was sitting on the door of his house with some
of his friends, and entered therein. Abu Arakah was alarmed and followed
him in fright. Then he told Rushayd, “Woe be to you! You have killed me
and orphaned my children while spreading ruination.” Rushayd asked him
as to why he said that. Abu Arakah replied, “These people are in search
of you and you come to my house, when the people present here see you”?
Rushayd said, “None of them have seen me.” Abu Arakah said, “Are you
joking with me”? Then he caught hold of him, tied his hands, locked him
in a room and closed the door and came out to his friends and said, “I
sense that now an old man entered my house.”

They replied that they had not seen anyone entering therein. He repeated
his question and they replied in the negative and hence he became
silent. Then he feared lest someone else might have seen him, and hence
went to the court of Ziyad to investigate whether they discussed Rushayd
or no, and if they were aware (that Rushayd is in his house), he would
hand him over to them. Thus he went and saluted Ziyad and sat near him.
There was a cool atmosphere therein when suddenly he saw Rushayd, seated
on a mule, coming towards Ziyad.

As soon as he saw him, the color of his face changed and was bewildered
and was sure of his death. Rushayd entered therein and saluted Ziyad. On
seeing him Ziyad arose and embraced and kissed him. Then he welcomed him
and asked him as to how he was and inquired about his family and stroked
his beard affectionately. Rushyad sat there for sometime and then arose
and left. Abu Arakah asked Ziyad, “May your Lord reconcile you! Who was
this nobleman”?

He replied that the man was among his Syrian friends, who came to visit
him. Hearing this Abu Arakah arose and rushed towards his house. He
entered therein and saw Rushayd in the manner he had left him. Abu
Arakah said, “Now when you possess this art that I have just witnessed,
do as you wish and come to my house as and when you desire.”[^2]

An account of the personality of Abu Arakah
-------------------------------------------

The author says that the above referred Abu Arakah is from the clan of
Bajilah and is from among the companions of Imam Ali (a.s.). While Barqi
says that he was from Yemen and includes him among Imam’s companions
like Asbagh bin Nabatah, Malik Ashtar and Kumayl bin Ziyad.

The family of Abu Arakah is renowned among the Shi’ah biographers and
the transmitters of traditions of Imams (a.s.) like Basheer Nabbal and
Shajarah who were the sons of Maymoon bin Abu Arakah. While Ishaq bin
Basheer, Ali bin Shajarah and Hasan bin Shajarah were all among the
prominent and noblemen.

While the treatment of Abu Arakah with Rushayd was not due to his less
distinction but because of the fear of his life, and because Ziyad was
strongly in pursuit of Rushayd and other Shi’ah of Imam Ali (a.s.). He
persecuted them, as also those who befriended them, hosted them or gave
them shelter. Here the honor and manliness of Hani is apparent that he
hosted Muslim bin Aqeel (in site of such harsh prohibitions), and gave
him shelter in his house and sacrificed his life for him. May Allah
sanctify his grave and descent Paradise unto him.

Shaikh Kashshi relates from Abi Hayyan Bajali who relates from Qinwa,
the daughter of Rushayd. Abu Hayyan says that I told Qinwa to relate to
me all that she had heard from her father. She said: I heard my father
say that Imam Ali (a.s.) has informed me and said that,

*“O Rushayd! How will you forebear when the one (Ziyad), whom the Bani
Umayyah have included among themselves, will call upon you and amputate
your feet, hands, and tongue”?*

I asked, “O commander of the faithful! Will Paradise be the outcome of
this”? Imam replied,

*“O Rushayd! You are along with me in this world as well as the
hereafter.”*

Qinwa says that some days passed when Ubaydullah bin Ziyad, the
illegitimate one, (Ubaydullah is an error of the narrator, while the
correct one is his father Ziyad) called him. Then he told Rushayd to
disassociate himself from Imam Ali (a.s.) and the guard struck him to
utter this. The illegitimate (Ziyad) said, “You have been informed about
it, then how do you wish to die”? Rushayd replied, “My friend (Imam Ali)
had told me that I will be forced to disassociate myself from him, and
that when I refuse to do so, both of my hands, feet and my tongue shall
be cut.” Ziyad said, “Now by Allah! I shall belie his words.”

Then he ordered him to be brought forward, his hands and feet should be
amputated while his tongue should be left intact. I (Qinwa) caught hold
of his hands and feet and said, “O dear father! Do you feel the pain due
to what has befallen you”? He replied, “No, but similar to a person who
is trapped in the midst of people.” When they brought him out of the
palace people started gather­ing at a distance away from him. He said,
“Go and bring me ink and paper so that I may write down for you all that
is destined to occur till the Qiyamah.” Then a barber was sent who cut
off his tongue and he died the same night. (May Allah’s Mercy and
Blessings be upon him)

Fuzayl bin Zubayr says that one day Imam Ali (a.s.), accompanied with
his companions went to a garden named Barna and sat under the shade of a
Palm-tree. He called for some dates, which were plucked from the trees,
and brought to him. Rushayd Hajari said, “O Commander of the faithful!
How good these dates are.” He answered,

*“O Rushayd! You shall be crucified on the trunk of this Palm-tree.”*

Rushayd says that constantly in the morning as well as the evening I
watered the tree. After the demise of Imam Ali (a.s.), when I passed by
the tree, I saw that the branches of the tree had been cut down and I
said to myself, “Now my end has drawn near.” After some days a headman
came to me and said that the commander desired to see me. I went to the
palace and saw the timber of the Palm-tree gathered there. When I came
the other day I saw that the second part of the tree was made into a
ring and was bound on both the sides of the well to draw water from it.

I said to myself, “Verily my friend has not lied to me.” (Another day)
The headman came to me and said that the commander desired to see me.
When I entered the palace, I saw the timber kept therein and the ring
too was there. I went near the ring and striking it with my foot, said,
“You have been fostered and grown up for me.”

Then I went to Ubaydullah and he said, “Relate to me the lies which your
master has said.” I said, “By Allah! I am not a liar nor was he a liar.
My master has foretold me that you will cut off my hands, feet and
tongue.” He said, “Verily I shall belie his words. Take him away and cut
off his hands and feet.” When they took him outside near his people, he
started relating some important matters to them, then he said, “Ask me,
for I owe this nation one thing which they have not returned back.”
Hearing this a man went to Ibn Ziyad and said, “What have you done, you
have cut his hands and feet and he has started relating important
matters to the people.”

Ibn Ziyad ordered that he should be brought back. When he was brought
back, Ibn Ziyad ordered that his tongue should be cut off and then
crucified.

Shaikh Mufeed relates from Ziyad bin Nasr Harisi, who says that I was
with Ziyad when they brought Rushayd al Hajari. Ziyad asked him, “What
has Ali told you regarding that which we shall do to you”? Rushayd
replied, “That you will cut off my hands and feet and thereafter crucify
me.” Ziyad said, “By Allah! I shall falsify his prophecy, let him go
away.”

When Rushayd started going out Ziyad said, “By Allah! I do not consider
any other thing worst for him than what has been foretold by his master.
Then cut off his hands and feet and hang him on the gallows.” Hearing
this Rushayd said, “Far be it, another prophecy remains which has been
foretold to me by Imam Ali (a.s.).” Ziyad said, “Cut off his tongue”, to
which Rushayd said, “By Allah! This is the verification of the report of
the Commander of the faithful (a.s.).”

Martyrdom of Hujr bin Adi
-------------------------

Hujr was among the companions of Imam Ali (a.s.) and the one receiving
the allowances, he was called Hujr al Khayr (Hujr of goodness). He was
renowned for his abstinence, abundance of worship and Prayers. It has
been narrated that every day and night he recited a thousand units
(Rak’at) of Prayers (Salat) and was among the learned companions.

Although of a less age, he was included among their noble ones. In the
battle of Siffīn he was the standard bearer of the clan of Kinda, and in
the battle of Naharwan he was the commander of the right wing in the
left part (of the army of Imam Ali).

Fazl bin Shazan says that among the great noblemen, chiefs and pious
Ta­be’een[^3] were Jandab bin Zuhayrah the killer of magicians, Abdullah
bin Budayl, Hujr bin Adi, Sulayman bin Surad, Musayyab bin Najabah,
Alqamah, Ashtar, Sa’eed bin Qays and similar to them and more. Battles
had bought them and then they increased (in size) and were martyred
along with Imam Husayn (a.s.).

When Mugheerah bin Sha’bah was made the governor of Kufa, he ascended
the pulpit and abused Imam Ali (a.s.) and his Shi’ah. He cursed the
murderers of Usman and prayed for his forgiveness. Hujr arose from his
place and said,

***“O ye who believe! Do stand firmly with justice, (bearers of)
wit­ness for Allah’s sake, though it be against your own selves.”***[^4]

I bear witness that the man whom you have vilified, his merit is far
more worthy than the one whom you have praised. While the one whom you
applaud is worthy of vilification than the one whom you slander.”
Mugheerah said, “Woe be to you O Hujr! Restrain yourself from such
speech and keep yourself away from the wrath of the king, which would
increase until he kills you.”

But Hujr would be least effected and would always oppose him in this
matter until one day as usual Mugheera ascended the pulpit, and those
being the last days of his life, started cursing Imam Ali (a.s.) and his
Shi’ah. Suddenly Hujr sprang up and called out in a loud voice, which
could be heard by those who were present in the Mosque, saying, “O man!
You do not recognize the person whom you defy? You vilify the Commander
of the faithful and praise the culprits”?

In the fiftieth year of the Hijra, Mugheerah died and Kufa and the
enclo­sure of Basra came under the control of Ziyad bin Abeeh, who then
came to Kufa. Ziyad called for Hujr, who was his old friend, and said,
“I have heard how you treated Mugheerah and he endured it, but by Allah
I shall not tolerate it. I tell you that Allah erased off the friendship
and love of Ali from my heart and replaced it with enmity and envy (for
him). Besides Allah erased off the enmity and envy which persisted in my
heart for Mu’awiyah, replacing it with friendship and love (for him). If
you remain on the right path, your world as well as faith will remain
secure, but if you strike your hands to the left and right, then you
shall put yourself into damnation and your blood will be lawful for us.

I detest punishing before warning nor do I like to arrest without any
reason, O Allah be a witness.” Hujr replied, “Never will the commander
see me doing that what he dislikes and I shall accept his advise”,
saying this Hujr came out, thus he dissimulated and took precautions
thereafter. Ziyad cherished him and held him dear. The Shi’ah started
visiting Hujr (in secret) and listened to his address. Ziyad usually
spent the winter in Basra and sUmmr in Kufa and Samarah bin Jundab was
his Vicegerent in Basra and ‘Amr bin Hurays in Kufa (in his absence).

One day Ammarah bin Uqbah told Ziyad, “The Shi’ah have been visiting
Hujr and are under his influence, and I fear lest they rebel in your
absence.” Ziyad called Hujr and warned him and then left for Basra
leaving behind ‘Amr bin Hurays in his place. Shi’ah continued visiting
Hujr and when he sat in the Mosque, people came to listen to him.

They occupied half of the Mosque and those who came to watch them too
sat around them, until the entire Mosque became full of them. Their hue
and cry increased and they started vilifying Mu’awiyah and abusing
Ziyad. When ‘Amr bin Hurays was informed about it, he ascended the
pulpit, while the noblemen of the town sat around him, and he invited
them to obey and warned them from opposi­tion. Suddenly a group from
among the people of Hujr jumped up and started pronouncing the Takbeer
(Allaho Akbar). They went near him cursing and pelting stones at him.
‘Amr alighted from the pulpit and went to his palace and closed the
doors and wrote to Ziyad about it.

When Ziyad became aware of it, he recited the couplet of Ka’ab bin
Malik: “Since morning reached the village, our chiefs voiced their
refusal, (saying) else why should we sow our seeds, if we cannot defend
it (the field) with our swords.” Then he said, “I am void if I do not
make Kufa safe from Hujr and make him an example for others. Woe be to
your mother O Hujr! Your dinner has landed you upon the Fox.” This is a
proverb regard­ing which it is said that one night a man went in search
of dinner and himself became the food of a fox.

Then he left for Kufa and entered the palace. He came out wearing a robe
of silk brocade and a green fur coat and entered the Mosque. At that
moment Hujr was seated in the Mosque surrounded by his friends. Ziyad
mounted the pulpit and delivered a threatening speech. He said to the
noblemen of Kufa, “Summon to yourselves whoever of your relatives are
sitting with Hujr and those among your brothers, sons, or kinsmen who
would listen to you, until you separate them from him.” They did as
ordered and most of them dispersed, and when Ziyad saw that the
followers of Hujr had lessened, he called Shaddad bin Haysam Hilali, the
head of the police, and told him to bring Hujr to him. He came and told
Hujr to accept the call of the commander. Hujr’s companions said, “No,
by Allah! We do not accept this.”

Hearing this Shaddad ordered his police force to surround them from all
sides with their swords drawn, thus they surrounded Hujr. Bakr bin Ubayd
Amudi attacked ‘Amr bin Humaq on the head who fell down and two persons
from among the clan of Azd viz. Abu Sufyan and Ajalan lifted him up and
took him to the house of a man of Azd viz. Ubaydullah bin Malik where he
remained hidden until he left Kufa. Umayr bin Zayd Kalbi, who was among
the followers of Hujr, said, “No one among us has a sword except myself,
and is insufficient.”

Hujr replied, “Then what do you suggest”? He replied, “Arise and go to
the places of your relatives so that they might defend you.” Hujr arose
and left, Ziyad who was looking at them seated on the pulpit called out,
“O sons of the clans of Hamadan, Tameem, Hawazin, Bagheez, Mazhaj, Asad
and Ghatafan! Arise, and go to the houses of Bani Kinda towards Hujr and
get him here.”

When Hujr came to his house and saw the scarcity of his supporters, he
released them saying, “You may all return, for you do not have the
strength to resist these people and shall be killed.” When they tried to
return back, the horsemen of Mazhaj and Hamadan came and they confronted
them until Qays bin Zayd was arrested and others dispersed. Hujr went
towards the road of Bani Harb, a branch of Bani Kinda, and took refuge
at the house of Sulayman bin Yazeed Kindi. They ran in his pursuit until
they reached the house of Sulayman.

Sulayman unsheathed his sword to go out and defend him, when his
daughters started weeping and Hujr stopped him and left his house from a
chimney. He then went towards Bani Anbarah, another branch of Bani
Kinda, and took refuge in the house of Abdullah bin Haris, the brother
of Malik Ashtar Nakha’i. Abdullah welcomed him with a cheerful face.
Sud­denly Hujr was informed that, “The police have been searching you in
the street of Nakha’, for a black slave girl has informed them and they
are in your pursuit.” Hujr along with Abdullah came out in the darkness
of the night and took shelter at the house of Rabi’ah bin Najiz Azdi.

When the police force failed to find him, Ziyad called Muhammad bin
Ash’as and said, “Either bring me Hujr or I shall destroy all your
Palm-trees and shall ruin all your houses, and you shall not be able to
save yourself until I cut you to pieces.” Muhammad replied, “Give me
some respite so that I may search him.” Ziyad replied, “I will give you
three days time, if within that period you bring Hujr to me, then you
are free, or else count yourself among the dead.” The soldiers dragged
Muhammad towards the cell while the color of his face had changed. At
that moment Hujr bin Yazeed Kindi, who was from a branch of the clan of
Bani Murrah, stood surety for him and hence he was released.

Hujr remained in the house of Rabi’ah for one day and night, then he
sent a retainer named Rushayd, who was from Isfahan, to Muhammad bin
Ash’as with a message that, “I have been informed how the obstinate
tyrant has treated you. Do not fear for I shall come to you. Then you go
to Ziyad with some of your men and tell him to give me security and send
me to Mu’awiyah so that he may decide what is to be done to me.”

Thus Muhammad accompanied by Hujr bin Yazeed, Jareer bin Abdullah and
Abdullah brother of Malik Ashtar went to meet Ziyad and gave him the
message of Hujr. Ziyad heard it and agreed. They sent a messenger
towards Hujr to inform him and he came to Ziyad. Seeing him Ziyad
ordered him to be imprisoned. He was imprisoned for ten days and Ziyad
did no other work except pursue the other supporters of Hujr.

Ziyad remained in pursuit of the supporters of Hujr who had fled away,
until he had imprisoned twelve out of them. Then he summoned the chiefs
of the four districts of Kufa viz. ‘Amr bin Hurays, Khalid bin Arfatah,
Qays bin Waleed and Abu Burda, the son of Abu Moosa Ash’ari and said,
“All of you should bear witness regarding what you have seen of Hujr.”
And they bore witness that Hujr was forming factions and abusing the
Caliph and reproaching Ziyad.

And that he was exonerating Abu Turab (Imam Ali) and praying for
(Allah’s) Mercy on him and disassociating himself with his enemies and
opponents, while those along with him are the chiefs of his friends and
share the same views. Ziyad looked at their testimonies and said, “I do
not recognize this testimony and I presume it to be incomplete. I desire
that another letter with similar contents should be written.”

Hence Abu Burda wrote: “In the name of Allah the Beneficent, the
Merciful. This is the testimony, which is given by Abu Burda, the son of
Abu Moosa, for the Lord of the worlds, that Hujr bin Adi has disobeyed
and abandoned the group. He has cursed the Caliph and invited towards
mischief and bat­tle. He has gathered an army and urged them to break
the oath of allegiance and invited to depose Mu’awiyah from the
Caliphate. He has cultivated obscene disbelief in Allah.”

Ziyad said, “Affix your signatures, I shall try my best to see that the
foolish traitor is beheaded.” Then the noblemen of other three districts
bore witnesses in a similar manner. Then he called the people and said,
“You all may bear witness just as the people of all the four districts
have borne witness.” Thus seventy people bore witness which included the
following: Ishaq, Moosa and Isma’il the sons of Talha bin Ubaydullah,
Manzar bin Zubayr, Ammarah bin Uqbah, Abdul Rahman bin Hibaar, Umar bin
Sa’ad bin Abi Waqqas, Wa’el bin Hujr Hazrami, Zirar bin Hubayrah,
Shaddad bin Manzar, who was renowned by the name of Ibn Ba­zee’ah,
Hajjaj bin Abjar Ajali, ‘Amr bin Hajjaj, Lubayd bin Atarud, Muhammad bin
Umayr bin Atarud, Asma bin Kharejah, Shimr bin Ziljawshan, Zajr bin Qays
Jo’fi, Shabas bin Rab’ee, Simak bin Muhzima Asadi, the caretaker of one
of the four Mosques in Kufa constructed in rejoice over the Martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s.).

They included the names of two more men, but they refused to sign viz.
Shurayh bin Hars Qazi and Shurayh bin Hani. When Shurayh bin Hars was
asked regarding Hujr, he said, “He always fasted and remained engrossed
in Prayers throughout the night.” Shurayh bin Hani said, “I heard that
my name has been included in it (without my consent), thus I nullify
it.”

Ziyad then handed over the deed of witness to Wa’el bin Hujr and Kaseer
bin Shihab and dispatched them with Hujr bin Adi and his companions to
Syria. He ordered them at night to proceed accompanied by the police
outside Kufa and they were fourteen men. When they reached the graveyard
of Azram, a station in Kufa, Qabeesah bin Zabee’ah Abasi, who one of the
companions of Hujr, his sight fell upon his house. He saw his daughters
looking from the house and he requested Wa’el and Kaseer to take him
near his house so that he may bequeath. When they took him near his
house, his daughters start­ed weeping.

He remained silent for some time and then told them to remain quite and
they did so. Then he said, “Fear Allah and forbear, for in this journey,
I desire a fair end from my Lord in two matters that either I may be
killed, which is a better felicity, or I may be released and come back
to you in good health. The one who gave you sustenance and looked after
you is the Almighty Allah, Who is alive and will never die. And I desire
that He will not abandon you and consider me for your sake.” Saying this
he returned back and his people prayed for him.

Then they proceeded further and reached Marj Azra, which is some miles
before Syria, and they were imprisoned there. Mu’awiyah summoned Wa’el
bin Hujr and Kaseer to him. When they came he opened the letter and read
it in the presence of the Syrians, whose contents were as follows: To
the pres­ence of the slave of Allah, Mu’awiyah bin Abu Sufyan, from
Ziyad bin Abu Sufyan. Now then! Allah has brought forward a fair trial
for the Commander of the faithful and has removed his enemies, and has
crushed the anarchy of the rebels.

The rebels of Ali, the friend of the youth, have dispossessed the
Commander of the faithful under the leadership of Hujr bin Adi and have
separated from the group of Muslims, and have risen up to fight us. But
Allah has subdued their wrath and has given us dominance over them. Then
I have called the devout, noble and the wise men of Kufa, and they have
borne witness for whatever they saw. And I have sent them along with the
witnesses of the pious and virtuous men of the town, whose signatures
are affixed at the end of the letter.”

When Mu’awiyah read this letter he asked the opinion of the Syrians
regard­ing it. Yazeed bin Asad Bajali said, “Scatter them among the
villages of Syria so that the people of the book (viz. Christians and
Jews) may finish their task.” Hujr then sent a message to Mu’awiyah
saying that, “We still remain under the pledge of allegiance to the
Commander of the faithful. We have not abandoned it, nor do we protest.
Our enemies and ill-wishers have borne witnesses against us.”

When Mu’awiyah received this message of Hujr he said, “Verily Ziyad is
more reliable in our eyes than Hujr.” Then he dispatched Hadabah bin
Fayaz Quza’ee (who was blind with one eye) with two more persons to
bring Hujr and his companions to him at night. When Karim bin Afeef
Khas’ami saw him he said, “Half of us will be killed and the other half
released.” The messenger of Mu’awiyah came to them and released six
persons from them upon the mediation of some Syrians.

As regards the other eight men, the messenger of Mu’awiyah said,
“Mu’awiyah has sent orders that if you disassociate yourselves with Ali
and curse him, we shall release you, or else you shall be killed. And
the Commander of the faithful believes that shedding your blood is
lawful for us due to the witnesses of the people of your town, but the
Commander has shown kindness, while if you disassociate yourselves from
that man, you shall be released.” When they heard this they refused to
oblige, hence the ropes were untied from their hands and shrouds were
brought for them, thus they arose and spent the entire night in Prayers.

When it dawned, the companions of Mu’awiyah told them that, “O group (of
men)! Last night we observed that you have recited abundant Prayers and
supplications, now tell us so that we may know your belief regarding
Usman.” They replied, “He was the first person who ordered unjustly and
paved a wrong path.” They said, “The Commander of the faithful knows you
better.” Then they stood upon their heads and said, “Do you now
disasso­ciate yourself from that man (Imam Ali) or no”? They replied,
“No, rather we befriend him.” Hearing this each messenger of Mu’awiyah
caught hold of each one of them so as to kill them.

Then Hujr told them, “At least let me perform the ablutions and give us
some respite so that we may recite two units of Prayers, for by Allah,
whenever I have performed the ablutions, I have prayed.” They agreed to
it and they recited the Prayers, after com­pleting it Hujr said, “By
Allah! Never have I recited such a short Prayer, lest people might think
that I have done so fearing death.” Hadabah bin Fayaz A’awar advanced
towards him with a sword to attack him when Hujr started trembling.
Hadabah said, “You said you did not fear death, I still tell you to
disassociate yourself with your Master and we shall release you.” Hujr
said, “How should I not fear, when the grave is ready, the shroud worn
and the sword unsheathed. By Allah! Although I fear, I do not utter
those words which may invite the wrath of Allah.”

The author says that I recollect a tradition that when Hujr went to see
Imam Ali (a.s.), when he was wounded on the head by the sword of Ibn
Muljim. He stood facing the Imam and recited some couplets: “Alas upon
the abstentious master, (who is) pious, a brave Lion, and a virtuous
door.” When Imam Ali (a.s.) looked at him and heard his couplets, he
said,

*“What will be your state when you shall be ordered to disassociate
yourself from me, then what will you say”?*

Hujr replied, “O Commander of the faithful! Even if I be cut asunder to
pieces and thrown into the blazing fire, I prefer it than disassociating
myself from you.” Imam said,

*“May you succeed in accomplishing good deeds O Hujr! And may you be
amply rewarded by Allah for your love of the Progeny of your Prophet
(S).”*

Then the other six companions of Hujr were put to sword. Abdul Rahman
bin Hissan Anzee and Kareem bin Afeef Khas’ami were left out and they
said, “Take us to the presence of Mu’awiyah, so that we may relate to
him about that man regarding whom he has ordered us”, they were then
taken to the presence of Mu’awiyah.

When Kareem entered therein, he said, “Allah, Allah, O Mu’awiyah! Verily
you shall go from this mortal house to the house of eternity, then you
shall be asked as to why you shed our blood.” Mu’awiyah replied, “So
then what do you have to say about Ali”? He replied, “As you say. I
disassociate myself from the Religion of Ali through which we worshipped
Allah.” Then Shimr bin Abdullah Khas’ami arose and pleaded on his behalf
and hence Mu’awiyah forgave him but with a stipulation that for one
month he would be imprisoned, and till the time Mu’awiyah rules he would
not be allowed to leave Kufa.

Then he turned towards Abdul Rahman bin Hissaan and said, “O brother
from the clan of Rabi’ah! What do you have to say regarding Ali”? He
replied, “I bear witness that Ali was among those men who remembered
Allah the most and he invited towards good, forbade evil and forgave the
faults of others.” Mu’awiyah said, “Then what do you have to say
regarding Usman”? he replied, “He was the first man who opened the doors
of oppression and shut the doors of righteousness.” Hearing this
Mu’awiyah said, “Verily you have killed yourself.” He replied, “Rather I
have killed you.”

Mu’awiyah then sent him back to Ziyad with a message saying that, “He is
the worst among those whom you had sent to me. Torture him severely, for
he is worthy and then kill him in the worst possible manner.” When he
was sent to Ziyad, he sent him to Qays Natif who buried him alive.

The seven persons who were martyred were:

(1) Hujr bin Adi,

(3) Shareek bin Shaddad Hazrami,

(5) Saifee bin Fusayl Shaybani,

(7) Qabeesah bin Zabee’ah Abasi,

(9) Mahzar bin Shihab Minqari,

(11) Kudam bin Hayyan Anzi, and

(13) Abdul Rahman bin Hissan Anzi. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be
upon them)

The author says that the Martyrdom of Hujr had a great impact upon the
Muslims, who reproached Mu’awiyah for it. Abul Faraj Isfahani says that
Abu Makhnaf said that, Ibn Abi Zaedah related to me from Abu Ishaq, that
he said, “I remember people saying that the first disgrace which befell
Kufa was the Martyrdom of Hujr bin Adi, the acceptance of Ziyad as the
brother of Mu’awiyah and the Martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.).”

At the time of his death, Mu’awiyah said, “I shall be in deep trouble
be­cause of Ibnal Adbar.” Ibnal Adbar is referred to Hujr bin Adi for
his father was called “Adbar” because behind he had received a wound of
a sword. And it has been related that when Rabi’ bin Ziyad Harisi, the
gover­nor of Khurasan, heard the news of the martyrdom of Hujr and his
compan­ions, he wished for death. He lifted both his hands (towards the
heavens) and said, “O Allah! If you consider me, give me death at this
very moment”, then he died.

Ibn Aseer says in his Kamil that Hasan Basri said, that Mu’awiyah had
four such qualities in him, that each one of which was enough for his
damnation. First being that he forced himself upon the Muslim nation
with the power of his sword and did not (care to) take their opinions
regarding his Cali­phate, when there were present the companions of the
Prophet (S) and other notables and generous men among them.

The second being that he nominat­ed (as Caliph) his rebel son Yazid, the
wine-bibber, one who wore a silken dress, and beat the tambourine. The
third being that he accepted Ziyad as his brother when the Holy Prophet
had said, “A child is ascribed to the husband (of the woman), and for
the adulterer are stones”, and the fourth being that he killed Hujr and
his companions. Woe unto him as regards Hujr and his companions.

It is related that the people said, “The first disgrace which befell
Kufa was the martyrdom of Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), the Martyrdom of Hujr
bin Adi, and accepting Ziyad to be the son of Abu Sufyan.”

Hind bint Zayd Ansariyah, who was a Shi’ah woman, recited a couplet in
praise of Hujr.

The Author says that the historians have recorded some other reasons
re­garding the Martyrdom of Hujr. They say that once Ziyad was
delivering a sermon on Friday and he prolonged it, thus the Prayers were
postponed. Sensing it, Hujr bin Adi called out in a loud voice, “The
Prayers”, but Ziyad ignored him and continued. Hujr again repeated, “the
Prayers”, but he continued the sermon. Hujr feared lest the time of
Prayers would elapse, hence he lifted some sand in his hands and stood
up to offer Prayers.

Following suit the other people arose too. Seeing this Ziyad descended
from the pulpit and recited the Prayers. Then he wrote regarding this
matter to Mu’awiyah and exaggerated therein. Mu’awiyah wrote back that
Hujr be dispatched to him bound in chains. When Ziyad desired to arrest
him, the people of his clan stood up to defend him. Hujr stopped them
and was bound in chains and taken to Mu’awiyah. When he went to the
presence of Mu’awiyah, he said, “Peace be upon you O Commander of the
faithful!” Mu’awiyah said, “Am I the Commander of the faithful? By
Allah! I shall not forgive you nor shall I accept your plea. Take him
away and behead him.” Hujr said to those in charge of him that, “At
least give me time to recite two units of Prayers.”

He was given the time and he hurriedly performed it and said, “If I had
not feared (lest you might think that I fear death), then I would surely
have prolonged it.” Then he turned towards those who were present and
said, “Bury me along with the chains and the blood of my body, for I
desire to meet Mu’awiyah on the highway tomorrow in Qiyamah.”

It is written in Asadul Ghabah, that Hujr was among those who received a
stipend of two thousand five hundred, he was Martyred in the Year 51
Hijra and his grave is renowned at Azra and he was an executor of
desires.

The Author says that the letter which Imam Husayn (a.s.) wrote to
Mu’awiyah contained the following words:

*“Are you not the murderer of Hujr bin Adi al Kindi and other
worshipers, who resisted oppression and considered innovations to be
grave and who did not fear reproach in the way of Allah? You killed them
with oppression and injustice in spite of offering them refuge.”*

**$$SUB[-Martyrdom of ‘Amr bin Humaq]**

**Martyrdom of ‘Amr bin Humaq**

‘Amr bin Humaq, (as has been related earlier that he was present with
Hujr bin Adi in the Mosque) accompanied by Rufa’ah bin Shaddad fled from
Kufa and reached Madaen and from there, went to Mosul. They took shelter
in a huge mountain therein. When this news reached Ubaydullah bin
Balta’ah Hamadani, the governor of Mosul, he proceeded with the horsemen
and a group of the people of the town towards them. ‘Amr, who was
suffering from drop­sy, did not have the courage to confront them.

But Rufa’ah, who was a strong youth, mounted his horse and told ‘Amr
that he would defend him. ‘Amr replied, “What is the use? Save yourself
and go away.” Rufa’ah at­tacked them and they gave way, while his horse
fled away from their midst. The horsemen chased him but he wounded them
with his arrows, hence they re­turned back.

They arrested ‘Amr bin Humaq and asked him as to who he was? He replied,
“I am the one whom if you release, it will be better for you, and if you
kill me, you will be in great loss”, but he did not disclose his
identity. They took him to the ruler of Mosul, who was Abdul Rahman bin
Usman Saqafi, the nephew of Mu’awiyah, and renowned as Ibn Ummul Hakam.
He wrote to Mu’awiyah regarding him. Mu’awiyah replied that, “He is the
one who has acknowledged having inflicted Usman with nine wounds of a
spear, then have­n’t you punished him? He should be inflicted with nine
wounds of the spear.”

They brought him out and inflicted nine wounds of spears and ‘Amr
succumbed to the first or the second stroke of the spear, later he was
beheaded and his head was dispatched to Mu’awiyah. His being the first
head in Islam, which was sent from one place to another.

The Author says that this is what has been narrated by the commoners
(Ammah, non-Shi’ah) books of Islamic history (simply to justify his
murder by Mu’awiyah and alleging him to be the murderer of Caliph
Usman). As regards the distinguished (Khassah, Shi’ah) reports, it is
related from Shaikh Kashshi, that once the Holy Prophet Muhammad (S)
sent a group of people with the orders that,

*“At such and such time of the night you shall loose your way, then go
towards the left and you shall meet a man, who will be having a herd of
Sheep. You ask him the way, but he shall not show you the way until you
eat with him. Then he will sacrifice a sheep and prepare food for you
and eat along with you, then he will show you the way. You convey my
greetings to him and inform him about my appearance in Madina.”*

They left, and as predicted lost their way. One of them said, “Did not
the Prophet tell us to go to the left side”? They went towards the left
and met the man, regarding whom the Prophet had prophesied, and asked
him the way. The man being none other than ‘Amr bin Humaq, who asked
them, “Has the Prophet appeared in Madina”? They replied in the
affirmative and he accom­panied them. He went to the presence of the
Holy Prophet (S) and remained there until Allah willed, then the Prophet
told him,

*“Return to the place where you have come from, when the Commander of
the faithful Ali becomes in charge of Kufa, go to him.”*

‘Amr returned back until the time Imam Ali (a.s.) became the Caliph in
Kufa, and he came to him and resided there. Imam Ali (a.s.) asked him,

*“Do you have a house here”?,*

to which he replied in the affirmative. Imam continued,

*“Then sell your house and buy one in the midst of (the people of the
clan of) Azd. For tomorrow when I am gone from among your midst and some
people will be in your pursuit, the people of the clan of Azd will
defend you till you leave Kufa and find yourself in the fort of Mosul.
You will pass by a paralytic man, you will sit down besides him and ask
for water. He will give you water and then inquire about you, you then
relate your condition to him and invite him towards Islam. He will
accept Islam, and then place your hands upon his thighs and Allah will
cure him of his disease. Then arise and walk till you pass by a blind
man seated on the way. You ask for water and he will give it to you. And
then he will inquire about you, you then relate your condi­tion to him
and invite him towards Islam. He will accept Islam, and then you place
your hands upon his eyes and Allah the Honorable, the Glorified, will
grant him sight. He too will accompany you, and verily these men will be
the ones to bury you. Then some riders will pursue you and when you
reach such and such place near a fort, they shall come to you. Then you
dismount from your horse and enter the cave. Verily the worst men from
among the men and genie will unite to kill you.”*

Whatever Imam Ali (a.s.) had predicted occurred, and ‘Amr did exactly
what he was told to do. When they reached the fort, ‘Amr told those two
men to go on top and inform him what they saw. They went on top and said
that they saw some riders coming towards them. Hearing this ‘Amr
dismounted from his horse and entered the cave, while his horse fled
away. When he entered the cave a black serpent, who had taken shelter
therein, bit him.

When the riders reached near they saw his horse running and concluded
that ‘Amr should be somewhere near. They started searching for him and
found him inside the cave. And wherever they touched his body, the flesh
thereat came out (due to the lethal poison). Then they beheaded him and
took his head to Mu’awiyah, who ordered it to be placed on the lance,
this being the first head in Islam, which was placed on the lance.

As will be related later that Zahir, who was martyred with Imam Husayn
(a.s.) in Karbala, was the retainer of ‘Amr bin Humaq, he was the same
person who had buried him. It is related in Qamqaam, that ‘Amr bin Humaq
was from the progeny of Kahin bin Habeeb bin ‘Amr bin Qayn bin Zarrah
bin ‘Amr Rabi’ah Khuza’i. He came to the presence of Prophet Muhammad
(S) after the Peace Treaty of Hudaybiyah.

While some are of the opinion that he accepted Islam in the year of the
farewell Pilgrimage (Hajjatul Wida), but the first report seems to be
more reliable. He remained in the presence of the Prophet and memorized
numerous traditions. The author of the book (Qamqam) relates from ‘Amr
bin Humaq that he quenched the thirst of the Prophet who prayed for him
thus:

*“O Lord! Grant him a youthful life.”*

Thus he remained alive for eighty years but none of the hair of his
beard turned white. He was included among the Shi’ah of Imam Ali (a.s.)
and fought the battles of Jamal, Siffīn and Naharwan along with him.
Besides he was among those who stood up to support Hujr bin Adi and was
among his companions.

He left Iraq in fear of Ziyad and took refuge in the cave in Mosul. The
governor of Mosul sent his soldiers to arrest him. When they entered the
cave they found him to be dead because a snake bit him. His grave is
re­nowned in Mosul, and is a place for pilgrimage, and he holds a great
posi­tion. A dome is erected upon his grave. Abu Abdullah Sa’eed bin
Hamadan, the cousin of Saifud Dawla and Nasirud Dawla, started it’s
renovation in the month of Sha’ban 336 A.H. There ensued clashes between
the Shi’ah and the Sunni because of the building of his shrine. Shaikh
Kashshi relates that he was among the disciples of Imam Ali (a.s.) and
among the foremost who turned towards him.

In the book Ikhtisas it has been enumerated, regarding the preceding and
close companions of Imam Ali (a.s.), that Ja’far bin Husayn relates from
Muhammad bin Ja’far Mu’addab that he said, “Imam Ali (a.s.)’s four
pillars from among the companions of the Holy Prophet (S) are Salman,
Miqdad, Abu Zarr and Ammar. And among the Tabe’een are Owais bin Anees
Qarnee, who will intercede (in Qiyamah) for the people equal to the
tribes of Rabi’ah and Muzar, and ‘Amr bin Humaq.

Ja’far bin Husayn says that ‘Amr bin Humaq enjoyed the same status near
Imam Ali (a.s.) as Salman had near the Holy Prophet (S). Then there are
Rushayd al Hajari, Meytham at Tammar, Kumayl bin Ziyad Nakha’i, Qambar
the freed retainer of Imam Ali (a.s.), Muhammad bin Abu Bakr, Muzre’ the
freed retainer of Imam Ali (a.s.), and Abdullah bin Yahya regarding whom
on the day of Jamal, Imam said,

*“O son of Yahya! I give glad tidings that you and your father are among
the Shartatul Khamees.*[^5] *Allah has chosen you on the empyrean.”*

Then there are Janad bin Zuhayr Amiri, while all the progeny of Amir
were the Shi’ah of Imam Ali (a.s.), Habib bin Mazahir Asadi, Hars bin
Abdullah Aa’awar Hamadani, Malik bin Haris Ashtar, Alam Azdi, Abu
Abdullah Jadali, Juwayrah bin Musahhir Abadi.

In the same book it is related that ‘Amr bin Humaq told Imam Ali (a.s.)
that, “I have not come to you in pursuit of wealth or prestige of this
world, but have come to you for you are the cousin of the Prophet and
best among all men and the husband of Fatima (a.s.), the mistress of
women, and the father of the Prophet’s immortal Progeny, and your share
is more than any other Emigrant (Muhajir) or Helper (Ansar).

By Allah! If you command me to shift the mountains from their place and
pull out the water from the deep seas, I shall obey you until death
overtakes me. I will always strike your enemies with the sword in my
hand and shall assist your friends and may Allah elevate your position
and grant you victory. Even then I do not believe that I may have
accomplished what is due towards you.” Imam Ali (a.s.) prayed for him
thus:

*“O Allah! Illuminate his heart and guide him towards the Right Path. I
wish there were a hundred similar to you among my Shia’h.”*

In the same book it is related that at the beginning of Islam, ‘Amr bin
Humaq was a keeper of Camels of his tribe. His tribe was under the
pledge with Prophet Muhammad (S). Once some of the Prophet’s companions
passed by him, whom the Prophet had sent to propagate. They had asked
the Prophet that they did not have the provisions for their journey nor
knew the way. The Prophet replied that,

*“On the way you shall meet a handsome man who will feed you, quench
your thirst and guide you to the path, and he shall be of the people of
Paradise.”*

They reached ‘Amr, who fed them with Camel meat and milk, and his coming
to the presence of the Prophet and accepting Islam until the caliphate
reached Mu’awiyah (has already been discussed).

Then he remained aloof from the people in Zoor in Mosul. Mu’awiyah wrote
to him: “Now then! Allah extinguished the fire of battle and cooled down
the mischief, and Allah bestowed success to the pious. You are not
distant nor more guilty than your friends, they have bowed down their
heads in front of my command and have hastened to assist me in my task.
But you still remain withdrawn, thus come to assist me in my task so
that your past sins may be forgiven by it and your good deeds which have
worned out may ripen. Perhaps I may not be as bad as my predecessors. If
you are self-respecting, abstentious, obedient and well-behaved, then
enter the security of Allah and the Prophet of Allah in my refuge.
Cleanse your heart of envy and your soul from rancor. And Allah is a
sufficient witness.”

‘Amr refused to go to Mu’awiyah, hence he sent someone who killed him
and brought his head to Mu’awiyah. They sent his head to his wife, who
kept it in her lap, and said, “For a long time you had kept him away
from me, and now you have killed him and have brought him to me as a
gift. How fair is this gift which is my pleasure and who also liked me.
O messenger! Take my message to Mu’awiyah and tell him that Allah will
surely take revenge for his blood, and very soon His wrath and woe will
hasten. You have committed a grievous crime and killed a devout and
pious person. O Messenger! Convey to Mu’awiyah, whatever I have said.”
The messenger conveyed her message to Mu’awiyah, hence Mu’awiyah called
the woman to him and inquired of her, “Did you utter these words”?

She replied that, “Yes, I have said them, and I do not regret nor am
sorry for it.” Mu’awiyah told her to go away from his town, to which she
replied that, “I will surely do so, for your town is not my native place
and I consider it to be a prison, which has no place in my heart. Much
time has passed when I have not slept herein, while my tears are
(constantly) flowing. My debt has increased here, and I have not found
anything here which would illuminate my eyes.”

Abdullah bin Abi Sarh Kalbi told Mu’awiyah, “O commander of the
faithful! She is a hypocrite woman, let her follow her husband.” When
the woman heard this, she looked towards him and said, “O you ulcer of a
frog! Haven’t you killed the one who clothed you with blessings and
bestowed a cloak upon you? Indeed you have abandoned the Religion and
verily a hypo­crite is the one who pursuits unjustly and claims to be
one of the servants of Allah, and Allah has condemned his infidelity in
the Qur’an.”

Hearing this Mu’awiyah ordered his porter to throw her out. She said,
“Astonishment at the son of Hind, who has signaled by his finger, and
has (tried to) stop me from using a harsh tongue, by Allah! I shall
split open his belly with my harsh speech sharp as iron, if not I be
Amenah, the daughter of Rasheed.”

Abu Abdullah Imam Husayn (a.s.) in his letter to Mu’awiyah wrote:

*“Are you not the murderer of ‘Amr bin Humaq, the companion of the
Prophet (s.a.w.s), and a devout man, whose body had become slender and
whose color had turned pale due to excessive worship? With what face did
you give him (the promise of) security, and promised him in the name of
Allah, if similarly it would have been given to a bird, it would have
come down from the moun­tain in your lap. Then you confronted Allah and
deemed the promise to be low”?*

Martyrdom of the two infant sons of Muslim bin Aqeel bin Abi Talib (a.s.)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaikh Saduq has related in his Amali from his father (Ibn Babawayh
Awwal), from Ali bin Ibraheem, who relates from his father, from
Ibraheem bin Raja, from Ali bin Jabir, from Usman bin Dawood Hashmi,
from Muhammad bin Muslim, from Humran bin A’ayan from Abu Muhammad, one
of the noblemen of Kufa.

He says that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred, two infant boys from
his cantonment were arrested and taken to Ubaydullah bin Ziyad.
Ubaydullah called for the prison guard and said, “Take away these two
children and imprison them. Do not give them good food or cold water,
and harass them.”

The infants fasted during the day and when night came the guard brought
two breads of barley and a jar of water for them. When one year passed
in this manner, one of them said to the other, “We have spent quite a
long time in the prison and our lives are passing away, while our bodies
have worn out. When the old prison guard comes to us, we shall reveal to
him our status and ancestry, so that he might be compassionate towards
us.”

Thus during night as usual the old prison guard came with two breads of
barley and a jar of water. The younger one said, “O Shaikh! Do you know
Prophet Muhammad (S)”? He replied, “How should I not know him, for he is
my Prophet.” The child then said, “Do you then know Ja’far bin Abi Talib
(a.s.)”, to which he replied in the affirmative and said, “Allah has
be­stowed him with two wings, so he flies along with the Angels wherever
he desires.” The child then said, “Do you then know Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.)”? The old man said, “Yes I do know him, for he is the cousin and
brother of my Prophet.” The child retorted, “O Shaikh! We are from the
progeny of your Prophet and are the sons of Muslim bin Aqeel bin Abi
Talib (a.s.). We have been in prison under you for a long time. You do
not give us good food and you persecute us in the prison.”

The prison guard fell upon their feet and said, “May my life be your
ransom O progeny of the chosen Prophet of Allah! The doors of this
prison are open for you, you may go away to whichever place you desire.”
When night fell, he brought two bread of barley and a jar of water and
showed them the way, then said, “Travel during the night and hide during
the day till Allah grants you relief.”

The two children came out at night and went to the house of an old woman
and said, “We are small travelers and do not know the road, and the
dark­ness of the night has fallen. Give us refuge in your house for
today’s night, and we shall go away as soon as it dawns.” The woman
said, “Who are you my dear ones? I have never smelt a similar fragrance
which is emanat­ing from you.” They replied, “O woman! We are from the
progeny of the Prophet and have escaped from the prison of Ubaydullah
bin Ziyad having escaped death.”

The woman said, “O dear ones! My son in law is an evil man, who was
present in the massacre of Karbala among the faithfuls of Ubaydullah. I
fear lest he finds you here and kills you.” The children replied, “We
desire to halt here only for a night, and as soon as it dawns, we shall
go away from here.” The woman agreed and brought some food for them. The
children had food and water and went to sleep. The younger brother said
to the elder one, “O dear brother! I desire that we spend this night in
peace. Come closer so that we may embrace one another and go to sleep
and kiss each other, lest death might part us.” They embraced each other
and went to sleep.

When night advanced, the evil son in law of the old woman came and
slowly knocked at the door. The woman inquired as to who it was. He
replied that he was her son in law. The woman told him, “Why have you
come at this unearthly hour”? The man replied, “Woe be to you! Open the
door before I may turn insane and my bladder may burst due to pursuit
and due to what has befallen me.” The woman said, “Woe be to you! What
has befal­len you”?

He replied, “Two children have escaped from the clutches of Ubaydullah
bin Ziyad, and he has announced that whoever brings one of their heads
to him, he shall be rewarded one thousand Dirhams. While he shall give
two thousand dirhams for both their heads, and I have borne pains (in
pursuing them), while nothing has reached my hands.” The old woman said,
“Fear the wrath of the Holy Prophet on the day of Qiyamah.”

He replied, “Woe be to you! This world should certainly be desired.” She
said, “What will you do with this world when it is not accompanied by
the Hereafter”? The man answered, “Why do you defend them such
drastically as if you are aware of their whereabouts. Come, so that I
may take you to the commander.” The woman said, “What work does the
commander have with me, an old woman, who lives in a corner of the
desert”? He said, “I am in their pursuit. Open the door so that I may
relax a bit and during morning I may think what mode should I adopt to
seek them.” The woman thus opened the door and brought food for him. He
ate and slept.

At midnight he heard the voices of snoring of the children and advanced
towards it like a wanton Camel. He started howling like a Cow and hit
his hands on the wall, until his hand touched the side of the younger
one. The child asked him as to who he was? He replied that he was the
owner of the house and asked them as to who they were? The younger one
woke up his elder brother and said, “Arise O brother! For we have fallen
prey to that what we feared.” He again inquired of them as to who they
were, to which they replied, “O man! Do you promise our safety if we
reveal to you our identity”? He replied in the affirmative.

They said, “Do you swear protection and responsibility of Allah and His
Prophet”? to which he replied in the affirmative. They again said,
“Prophet Muhammad the son of Abdullah (S) is the witness”? He agreed.
They said, “Allah is the judge and witness upon whatever we shall tell
you now”? He accepted it. Then the children said, “We are from the
progeny of your Prophet Muhammad (S) and have escaped from the prison of
Ubaydullah bin Ziyad in fear of being killed.” He replied, “You have
escaped from death and have again fallen prey to it. Praise be to Allah
Who has given me victory over you.”

Saying this he arose and tied the hands of the children. The children’s
hands lay tied until morning. And when it dawned, the man called his
black slave named Faleeh, and said, “Take these two children to the
shore of Euphrates and strike off their heads and bring it to me, so
that I may take it to Ubaydullah and earn the reward of two thousand
dirhams.” The retainer lifted his sword and started walking with the
children. They had not reached far from the house, when one child told
him, “O black slave! You resemble Bilal the Mu’ezzin (the caller of
Prayer) of the Prophet of Allah (S).”

The retainer said, “My master has ordered me to kill you, but tell me as
to who you are”? They replied, “We are from the progeny of your Prophet
Muhammad (S), and have escaped from the prison of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad
in fear of death. The woman had offered us shelter in her house while
your master intends killing us.”

The retainer fell on their feet and kissing them said, “May my life be
your ransom, and may my face act as a shield for yourselves, O children
of Allah’s chosen Prophet! By Allah! I shall not perform the act which
would invite the wrath of Muhammad (S) on the day of Qiyamah.” Saying
this he threw away his sword and jumped into the sea and swam away to
the opposite shore. When his master saw it he screamed, “You have
disobeyed me.” To which he replied, “I have never disobeyed you until
you yourself disobeyed Allah. And now that you have disobeyed Allah, I
disown you in this world as well as the Here­after.”

Then the man called his son and said, “I have gathered for you through
lawful and unlawful means, while this world is such that it should be
acquired. Hence take these children to the shore of Euphrates and severe
their heads and bring them to me, so that I may take them to Ubaydullah
and get two thousand dirhams as reward for it.” His son lifted the sword
and started walking ahead of them. They had not reached far when one of
the child told him, “O youth! How I fear your youth being burnt in the
fire of hell.” The youth asked them as to who they were? They replied,
“We are from the progeny of your Prophet, and your father intends
killing us.”

Hearing this, the youth fell upon their feet and kissing them repeated
the words of the slave and jumped into the sea and swam to the opposite
shore. When his father saw this he called out, “You disobey me”? To
which he replied, “Allah’s obedience is more dear (to me) than your’s.”
Hearing this the accursed said, “No one will be ready to kill you except
myself”, saying this he lifted the sword and went towards them.

When they reached the shore of Euphrates, he unsheathed his sword. When
the infants saw the naked sword, their eyes became full of tears. Then
they said, “O Shaikh! Take us to the market and sell us and do not
invite the wrath of the Prophet in Qiyamah.” He replied, “No, verily I
shall kill you and take your heads to Ubaydullah and thereby earn reward
from him.” They said, “O Shaikh! Do you not consider the relation we
share with the Proph­et”? To which he said, “Verily you have no relation
with the Prophet as such.” They again said, “O Shaikh! Then take us to
the presence of Ubaydullah, so that he may decide what to do with us.”

He replied, “I do not have any other way, except that I may earn his
nearness by spilling your blood.” The children said, “O Shaikh! Do you
not have pity upon our infan­cy”? to which he replied that, “Allah has
not allotted mercy in my heart.” Then they said, “O Shaikh! Now that
there is no hope left, give us respite to recite some units of Prayers.”
He said, “Pray as much as you like if it benefits you.” The children
recited four units of Prayers, then lifted their eyes towards the
heavens and cried, “O Ever-Living! O Wise! O the Best of Judges! Judge
between us with righteousness.”

He stood up and severed the head of the elder brother and kept his head
in a bag. The younger brother, who had smeared his body in the blood of
his elder broth­er, said, “I desire to meet the Prophet of Allah (S) in
this very state drenched in the blood of my brother.” He said, “Do not
fear, for I shall soon join you with your brother”, saying this he
severed his head too and placed it in the bag. Then he threw their
bodies into the river of Eu­phrates.

He then brought the heads to Ubaydullah, who was seated on his throne
with a bamboo staff in his hands. He placed the heads of the children
facing Ubaydullah, who after seeing it arose and sat down thrice. Then
he said, “Woe be to you! Where did you find them”? He said, “A woman
from our family had given them refuge.” Ubaydullah said, “Then did you
not honor the right of guesthood”? He replied in the negative.
Ubaydullah asked, “What did they say to you”? He replied, “They said:
Take us to the market and sell us and tie our hands and do not earn the
wrath of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s) in Qiyamah.”

Ubaydullah said, “Then what did you reply”? He said, “I said: No, verily
I shall kill you and take your heads to Ubaydullah and thereby earn
reward of two thousand Dirhams from him.” Ubaydullah said, “Then what
did they reply”? He said, “They said: Then take us alive to the presence
of Ubaydullah, so that he may decide what to do with us.” “Then what did
you say”, asked Ubaydullah. He replied, “I said: No, but I seek to earn
his nearness by spilling your blood.” Ubaydullah asked, “Why did you not
bring them to me alive, so that I could have gifted you four thou­sand
dirhams”? He replied, “My heart did not give me respite except to earn
your nearness by spilling their blood.”

Ubaydullah then asked him as to what they then said. He replied, “They
said: At least honor the relation we have with the Prophet” and I said
“Verily you have no relation with the Prophet as such.” Ubaydullah said,
“Woe be to you! Then what did they say”? He said, “They then said, “Do
you not pity our infancy and I replied that Allah had not placed mercy
in my heart.” Ubaydullah said, “Woe be to you! What else did they tell
you”?

He replied, “Then they said: Give us some respite so that we may recite
some units of Prayers”, and I replied, “Pray as much as you like if it
benefits you. The children then recited four units of Prayers.”
Ubaydullah said, “What did the children say after ending their Prayers”?
He said, “They lifted their eyes towards the heavens and said, “O
Everliving! O Wise! O the Best of Judges! Judge between us with
righteousness.”

Hearing this Ubaydullah said, “Allah has verily judged between you. Who
shall come forth to kill this accursed man”, hearing this a Syrian came
forward. Ubaydullah said, “Take him to the same spot where he slayed the
children and strike his head, and spill his blood over theirs, and
hasten to bring his head to me.” The man did exactly as told and when
his head was brought, it was placed on a lance and children threw stones
and arrows at it and said, “This is the murderer of the progeny of the
Prophet.”[^6]

[^1]: The use of “Abu” (father of) or “Umm” (mother of) followed by the
name of the son, often as a prefix for one’s name.

[^2]: Ziyad was the son of a loose woman named Sumayyah, who in slavery
bore Ziyad to a Greek Retainer of the tribe Saqeef named Ubaid. This
fact was not generally known, and Ziyad’s parentage was generally
supposed to be uncertain, whence he was called “his father’s son” (Ibn
Abeeh). When Mu’awiyah became a candidate for the Caliphate and required
help, he endeavored to enroll among his adherents a number of the most
sagacious of the Arabs. Among these was Ziyad, whom he determined to
adopt. He therefore obtained an affidavit from a wine-dealer of Taif
named Abu Maryam Saluli, to the effect that Abu Sufyan had come to his
tavern and demanded a prosti­tute, that Sumayyah had been brought by him
to Abu Sufyan, and that she in consequence gave birth to Ziyad. The best
historians disbelieve this story, which they suppose to have been the
fabrication of Mu’awiyah got up with the intention of securing the
services of Ziyad, an intention which was realized. Ziyad in consequence
came to be called son of Abu Sufyan, after having been called son of
Sumayyah or his father’s son. (History of Islamic Civilization: Umayyads
and Abbasids - Jurji Zaydan). Mu’awiyah appointed him as the governor of
Iraq and Fars. Ziyad made a minute search of the Shi’ah of Imam Ali
(a.s.) and having seized them, amputated their hands and feet, blinded
them, hanged them on the branches of date-palm trees, exiled them and
killed them so that eventually the distinguished Shi’ah of Iraq were
eliminated. Thus he killed Rushayd Hajari, ‘Amr bin Humaq, Juwayrah bin
Mushir Abdi etc. and instigated the murder of Hujr bin Adi. It has been
related by prominent narrators (as quoted in this book) that one of the
disgraces which befell Kufa was including Ziyad (the illegitimate) among
the Bani Umayyah. Similar was his son Ubaydullah (born to a prostitute
Marjanah) who equated him with regard to despotism and bloodshed. He was
the chief instigator of the mass slaughter of the Prophet (S)’s family
at Karbala. Yazid, following the footsteps of his father Mu’awiyah made
him the governor of Kufa and Basra and incited him to murder Imam Husayn
(a.s.).

[^3]: Tabe’een - Those who had seen, met or accompanied for a good
period of time the companions of the Holy Prophet (S).

[^4]: Sura an Nisa: 135.

[^5]: It is narrated that it was asked to Asbagh bin Nabatah Majashe’i
as to why Imam Ali (a.s.) had referred to him and other men like him as
Shar­tatul Khamees, to which he replied that, “It is so because we had
covenant­ed with him, that we would fight on his side until we attain
victory or are killed. Then he too covenanted and stood surety that he
would send us to Paradise in reward of this struggle.” An army is also
referred to as Khamees, because it is comprised of five sections:
Muqaddamah (Front Wing), Qalb (Central Wing), Maymanah (Right Wing),
Maysarah (Left Wing), and Saqqah (Rear Wing). Thus those referred to as
Shartatul Khamees are those warriors (of the army) between whom and Imam
Ali (a.s.) a covenant (Shart) was entered into. (Ref. Muntahal Amal).

[^6]: As regards Ubaydullah’s putting to sword the murderer of these
children is not astonishing, for Ubaydullah was a shrewd and cunning
man. He distributed gifts among the murderers of Imam Husayn (a.s.), at
the same time he feared lest people might start killing one another in
greed for the gifts, claming that the one killed was the follower of
Imam Husayn (a.s.). In the above case, his motive (of killing the
infants) was already achieved, and thus simply to shift the blame off
his head, he punished their murderer. No mercy can ever be imagined from
the one who instigated the bloody coup at Karbala. His putting to death
Meytham at Tammar, Hani bin Urwah, Muslim bin Aqeel etc. and above all
his harsh treatment towards the imprisoned ladies and children of the
Prophet’s Household bear witness to his despotic character.


