Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s intention of proceeding towards Iraq from Makkah
=====================================================================

(Irshad) Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.)’s uprising in Kufa occurred on the
eighth of the month of Zilhajj 60 A.H., while he was martyred on the day
of Arafah i.e. the ninth of Zilhajj. Imam Husayn (a.s.) left for Iraq on
the day of Tarwiyah i.e. eight of Zilhajj, the day of Muslim’s uprising.
When Imam was in Makkah, a group of the people of Hijaz and Basra joined
him, his family and clientele.

When Imam intended going towards Iraq, he circumambulated the Ka’bah and
walked (Sa’ee) between Safa and Marwah, then he removed the pilgrim’s
garb (Ehram) and declared it to be a lesser pilgrimage (Umrah). He could
not halt to complete the major Pilgrimage (Hajj), for he feared lest he
might be arrested in Makkah and taken as captive to Yazid.

(Malhoof) It is related that on the day of Tarwiyah (eight of Zilhajj),
‘Amr bin Sa’eed bin As entered Makkah with a huge army. Yazid had
ordered him that if he confronted Imam Husayn (a.s.) he should attack
him, and if possible, to kill him. Thus Imam left Makkah on the same
day.

Ibn Abbas relates that I saw Imam Husayn (a.s.) standing near the door
of the Ka’bah with Jibra’eel’s hand in his, before he left for Iraq.
Jibra’eel was calling out,

*“Hasten to offer allegiance to (the Proof of) Allah, the Mighty, the
Glorified.”*

(Malhoof) Furthermore it is related that when Imam Husayn (a.s.)
intended going towards Iraq, he stood up and delivered the following
sermon:

*“Praise be to Allah! By Allah’s will only! There is no power but with
Allah! And Blessings of Allah be upon His Messenger! Verily death is
bound with the sons of Adam as a necklace around the neck of a maiden.
How I desire and long to meet my Ancestors similar to (Prophet) Ya’qoob
(a.s.), who was desirous of meeting (Prophet) Yusuf (a.s.). Verily I
proceed to­wards the place of my martyrdom, which has been selected for
me. It is as if I see the wolves of the desert (of Bani Umayyah)
separating each part of my body between Nawawees and Karbala, and
filling their empty bellies and utricles. There is no escape from that
which has been written down by the pen of destiny, and the pleasure of
our Household (Ahlul Bayt) lies in the pleasure of Allah. Verily we will
endure His trials and secure the reward due for the forbearing ones. The
cord of the Prophet (S) and his child cannot be separated from him, but
will all be united together with him near the Right (Allah). Thereby his
(the Prophet’s) eyes will be cooled due to us and thus Allah will
fulfill what He has promised through them. Then whoever desires to lay
down his life for us and strive in the way of Allah, should come out
with us, for I shall be leaving tomorrow morning, Allah willing.”*

Our Master, the Traditionist Mirza Noori, in his book Nafsur Rahman says
that Nawawees is a graveyard of the Christians, where presently the
grave of Hurr bin Yazid ar Riyahi stands in the north western side of
the town. As regards Karbala, it is a piece of land on the bank of a
stream which flows from the western direction towards the city and
passing besides the grave of Ibn Hamza. There are some gardens and
fields in it, while the town is in between them.

(Malhoof) It is related that on the night of the day in which Imam
Husayn (a.s.) left Makkah, Muhammad bin Hanafiyah came to his presence
and said, “O dear brother! You are very well aware as to who these
people of Kufa are. They committed treachery with your father (Imam Ali)
and brother (Imam Hasan), and I fear that they might do the same with
you. If you deem fit, do stay here, for you are the most respected and
safe herein.” Imam re­plied,

*“O brother! I fear lest Yazid bin Mu’awiyah assault me unawares in the
Sacred Sanctuary (Haram) itself, and thus the sanctity of the Sacred
Sanctuary and the House of Allah would be spoilt due to me.”*

Ibn Hanafiyah said, “Then go to Yemen if you fear this, or go away into
the corner of the desert, where you would be safe and no one would be
able to lay their hands on you.” Imam replied that he would think over
the proposal.

When it dawned, Imam prepared to go and the news reached Muhammad bin
Hana­fiyah. He came and caught hold of the reins of his camel, on which
the Imam was mounted and said, “O my brother! Had you not promised me
that you would consider my desire, then why do you leave in such haste”?
Imam re­plied,

*“After you left, the Holy Prophet (S) came to me and said: O Husayn!
Hasten towards Iraq, for Allah desires to see you martyred.”*

Muhammad bin Hanafiyah said, “Verily we are Allah’s and verily unto Him
shall we return.” Then Muhammad continued, “Then what is the need of
taking these women along with you in such a state”? He replied,

*“The Prophet told me that Allah desires to see them in captivity.”*

Then he greeted Muhammad and left.

The question put forward by Hamza bin Humran to Imam Ja’far as Sadiq
(a.s.) regarding Muhammad bin Hanafiyah’s keeping aloof, and Imam’s
reply thereat, has already been related in another place in the Section
3 “Dis­course of Allamah Majlisi in Biharul Anwar” of Chapter 2 in this
book.

Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) says that,

*“When Husayn bin Ali (a.s.) intended to go towards Iraq, he handed over
his books and testimony to Umm Salama (a.s.) as a trust, and when Imam
Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) returned back, Umm Salama handed over the same
to him.”*

Mas’oodi writes in his Isbatul Wasiyyah, that when Imam Husayn (a.s.)
in­tended to go to Kufa after writing a letter to the Kufans, and before
dispatching Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.) to Kufa, Umm Salama (a.s.) came up
to him and said, “I remind you not to go (there).” Imam asked her the
reason, to which she replied, “I have heard the Prophet of Allah (S) say
that ‘my son Husayn will be martyred in Iraq’ and he handed over to me a
bottle filled with earth, which I have preserved with me and (often)
inspect it.” Imam replied,

*“O dear mother! I shall be compelled to die. There is no refuge from
what has been decreed, and there is no other alternative for death. I
myself know the day, time and the place where I shall be martyred, then
I identify the spot of my martyrdom besides the mausoleum where I shall
be buried, as I recognize you. Then if you desire, I would show you my
burial place and that of the ones to be martyred along with me.”*

Umm Salama replied that she desired doing so. Imam Husayn (a.s.) uttered
the name of Allah and the ground (of Karbala) arose and he showed her
the burial place of himself and others. Then he took some earth from it
and told her to mix it with the former one (given to her by the
Prophet). Then he said,

*“I shall be martyred on the tenth (of Muharram) after the Zuhr Prayers.
Salutations upon you O dear mother! We are pleased with you.”*[^1]

Umm Salama preserved his report and awaited the tenth (Ashura’).

Mas’oodi, in his Murujuz Zahab writes that when Imam Husayn (a.s.)
decided to go towards Iraq, Abdullah bin Abbas came to his presence and
said, “O cousin! I have heard that you intend going towards Iraq, while
the people therein are treacherous and quarrelsome. Do not make haste,
and if you desire, fight these tyrants. And if you do not wish to reside
in Makkah, then go to Yemen, for it is located in a corner and you
possess numerous friends and brothers therein. Then halt there and
dispatch your envoys across and write to the Kufans and your followers
in Iraq, that they might depose their commanders from there. And if they
succeed in deposing them, and there remains no one to quarrel with you,
only then you enter therein, for I do not trust them. And if they do not
do so, remain where you are and wait for Allah’s command, for there are
numerous forts and valleys in Yemen.”

Hearing this Imam said,

*“O cousin! I know that genuinely you are my well wisher and are
sympathetic towards me, but Muslim bin Aqeel has written to me that the
Kufans have sworn the oath of allegiance to me, and have united to
support me, hence I have finally decided to go there.”*

Abdullah said, “You have tested the Kufans twice. These are the very
people who had been supporting your father and brother, while tomorrow
they might be among your murderers siding their commander. Then if you
go towards them and Ubaydullah bin Ziyad is informed about it, he will
send them to revolt against you. And the people who have written to you
inviting you there, will turn into your worst enemies. Then if you
disapprove my words, do not take the women and children along with you.
For by Allah! I fear lest you might be killed as Usman was murdered,
while his women and children were beholding.”

Imam replied to Ibn Abbas,

*“By Allah! I hold it dear to be killed in any other place, rather than
spoil the sanctity of the Ka’bah because of me (by being murdered
herein).”*

Then Ibn Abbas lost all hope to persuade him and arose and left. Then he
went to Abdullah bin Zubayr and recited the following couplet: “O Lark!
You have got a vacant place, then lay your eggs and raise your voice,
your seat is empty, strike your beak on the ground wherever you desire,
then Husayn is going towards Iraq and is leav­ing behind Hijaz for you.”

When Abdullah bin Zubayr heard that Imam is going to Kufa (he was
delight­ed). He was restless and aggrieved with Imam’s presence in
Makkah, for the people therein did not consider him equal to Imam Husayn
(a.s.), hence there was no greater news for him than that Imam was
leaving Makkah. Then he came to Imam and said, “O Aba Abdillah! What
have you decided? I fear Allah by not fighting against their cruelties
and their disrespect towards Allah’s virtuous slaves.”

Imam Husayn (a.s.) replied,

*“I have decided to go to Kufa.”*

Ibn Zubayr said, “May Allah grant you success! If I had friends like
you, I would have refused going there.” He feared lest Imam would accuse
him for it hence said, “Then if you stay back here and invite me and the
people of Hijaz to swear the allegiance at your hands, we shall agree to
it and will hasten towards you, for you are more worthy of the Caliphate
than Yazid and his father.”[^2]

Abu Bakr bin Haris bin Hisham came to the presence of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
and said, “Verily relation (with you) demands that I should be merciful
to you, and I do not know how you consider me in terms of being your
well-wisher.”

Imam replied,

*“O Abu Bakr! You are not a deceiver.”*

Abu Bakr said, “Your father was more able and people were more desirous
of him and considered him. They were more obedient and subservient to
him. They ral­lied around him in large numbers when he marched towards
Mu’awiyah, except the people of Syria, while he was more powerful than
Mu’awiyah. Even then they betrayed him and became a burden upon him with
their lust for the world. Then they made him swallow anger, and they
disobeyed him until the matter reached such that he went towards the
Grandeur and Pleasure of Allah. Then they did the same to your brother,
as your father, and you were a witness to all this.

Yet now you desire to go towards those who had revolted against your
father and brother and oppressed them? Then you like to fight along with
them against the Syrians, the Iraqis and the one who has prepared
himself and is more powerful, while people fear him and wish for his
success? Then if he receives news that you are proceeding towards him,
he might bribe them, and verily they are desirous of this world. Then
those very people who have promised to assist you will be ready to fight
you, and those very people who claim to love you will leave you devoid
of helpers and will go to their aid. Then remember Allah in respect of
yourself.”

Imam Husayn (a.s.) replied,

*“O Cousin! May Allah reward you favorably! You have advised me
sincerely. But Allah’s Decree shall surely occur.”*

Abu Bakr said, “O Aba Abdillah! I give you to Allah’s refuge.”

It is written in Tareekh of Tabari that Azdi says, that Abu Jabbab Yahya
bin Abu Hayyah relates from Adi bin Hurmala Asadi, who relates from
Abdullah bin Salim and Mazri bin Mashma’il Asadi. They said that, “We
went to Makkah from Kufa to perform the Haj, until we entered Makkah on
the day of Tarwiyah (8th Zilhajj). We saw Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
Abdullah bin Zubayr at the time of Zuhr, standing between the Ka’bah and
Hajarul Aswad. We went towards them and heard Ibn Zubayr telling Imam
Husayn (a.s.) that, “You may reside here if you desire so and be in
charge. We are your supporters, helpers, your well-wishers and your
obedient ones.”

Imam replied,

*“My father had told me that the blood of a man will be shed unjustly
here, and I do not desire to be that man.”*[^3]

Ibn Zubayr continued, “Then halt here and leave the matter to me. For I
shall obey you and will not deceive.”

Imam replied,

*“I do not desire to do so.”*

Then they started speaking in a whisper among themselves until we heard
people calling out to hasten to­wards Mina at the time of Zuhr. Then we
saw that Imam Husayn (a.s.) started circumambulating the Ka’bah, then he
performed the Sa’ee between Safa and Marwah, and cut some of his hair.
Then he ended his Umrah and left towards Kufa, while we went to Mina
with other people.

Sibt ibn Jawzi in his Tazkiratul Khawas, writes that when Muhammad bin
Hanafiyah received news of the departure of Imam Husayn (a.s.) towards
Kufa, he was performing the ablutions, and a jar was kept in front of
him. He wept profusely until the jar became full of his tears. Then
there was none in Makkah who was not grieved and afflicted by his
departure, for they had tried their best to dissuade him from doing so.
Then he recited the following couplets: “I will depart, for there is no
shame in death for a young man, whenever he intends (to do what is)
right and he strives like a Muslim, who has soothed righteous men
through (the sacrifice of) his life, who has scattered the accursed and
opposed the criminals. If I live, I will not regret (what I have done),
and if I die, I will not suffer. Let it be enough for you to live in
humiliation and be reviled.”

Then he recited the following verse of the Qur’an:

***“And the behest of Allah is a Decree, irrevocable.” (Surah al-Ahzaab,
33:38)***

[^1]: The devotion and love of Umm Salama (a.s.) for the Household
(Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)) of the Prophet is apparent from the above incident.
Her rever­ence of the true Vicegerent of the Prophet and the Imam of the
age is renowned since her support of Imam Ali (a.s.). Abul Fida in his
Tareekh says that before leaving Madina (towards Basra for the battle of
Jamal), Imam Ali (a.s.) called on Umm Salama, one of the widows of the
Prophet, and bade her farewell. Umm Salama said to him, “In the name of
Allah! I deliv­er you into His Protection. By His Power and His Majesty,
you alone are with the truth, and all your enemies are in error. If it
were not the command of Allah to the wives of His Prophet to stay at
home, I would have accompanied you in this campaign.” She had a son
named Umar bin Abi Salama, by her first marriage, whom she offered to
him saying, “He is my only child. He is all that I have in this world. I
offer him to you. He will, if necessary, sacrifice his life for you.”
(Tabari, Ibn Khaldoon, A’asam Kufi.) The words of Imam Husayn (a.s.) in
the above narration that “We are pleased with you” elucidates that she
was one of those who had earned the pleasure of the Allah and His Proof
(Hujjah).

[^2]: A martyr’s motivation is different from that of ordinary people.
His logic is that of a devout reformer and a zealous gnostic. If the two
logics, viz. the logic of an earnest reformer and the logic of a zealous
Gnostic are put together, the result becomes the motivation of a martyr.
People like Abdullah bin Abbas and Muhammad bin Hanafiyah tried to
dissuade him from going towards Kufa. Their argument was that his action
was not logical. They were right in their own way. It was not in
conformity with their logic, which was the logic of worldly wise men.
But Imam had a higher logic. His logic was that of a martyr which is
beyond the comprehension of ordinary men while theirs was based on the
consideration of personal interests and political gains. From their
point of view, Imam’s action was not discreet and prudent at all.
Abdullah bin Abbas made a proposal which was politically very sound. It
has been the usual practice of clever people to use others as their
tools. They push others forward and remain behind themselves. If others
succeed, they take full advantage of their success, otherwise they lose
nothing.

[^3]: Imam Ali (a.s.)’s prediction of the murder of Abdullah bin Zubayr
proved accurate. Abdullah bin Zubayr, after many years, took refuge in
Makkah. Yazid sent an army to Makkah which laid siege to it. The Ka’bah
was catapulted with stones and then set on fire. Once again Ibn Zubayr
was attacked and the Ka’bah was catapulted during the reign of Abdul
Malik bin Marwan’s rule. Ibn Zubayr was eventually killed in Makkah by
Hajjaj bin Yusuf. Here, Imam Husayn (a.s.) is telling Abdullah bin
Zubayr of his inevitable fate.


