Information to Hurr bin Yazeed ar Riyahi, his encounter with Imam Husayn (a.s.) and resisting him from going towards Kufa
=========================================================================================================================

(Irshad, Tabari) Then Imam Husayn (a.s.) started paving the way from
Sharaf until afternoon, and while they were proceeding, one of his
compan­ions called out “Allaho Akbar.” Imam Husayn (a.s.) repeated it
and asked him the reason for uttering it at that moment. He replied that
he saw palm-trees. A group of his companions said, “By Allah! We have
never seen palm-trees in this area.” Imam then asked them what they
thought, to which they replied, “In our opinion those are the ears of
the horses.” Imam said,

*“By Allah! I too see it.”*

Then he asked,

*“Is there a place of refuge here, so that we may turn our back towards
it and face them from the front”?*

They said, “Yes, there is a hill called Zu Husam at your side, then if
we hasten to the left, we shall reach there before them, and shall
achieve our goal.” Imam turned towards the left and they followed suit.
After some time the heads and necks of the horses became visible and
they were appraised. Imam and his companions changed their direction,
and when they saw this, they hastened towards them. The points of their
lances were like the honey-combs and their standards were like the
flapping wings of the birds.

Imam has­tened towards Zu Husam and reached there before them, then Imam
ordered the tents to be pitched. The people, who were numbered around
one thousand horsemen, were under the command of Hurr bin Yazid Tamimi.
They came and stood in the heat of Zuhr, facing Imam and his companions.
Imam and his companions had worn turbans on their heads and had
unsheathed their swords. Imam then told his companions,

*“Serve water to them and to their horses too.”*

They filled the bowls and cups with water and served to the Horses. Only
when the Horse drank three to four times, did they take it away from it
and give to the other one. They did thus until they had fed all of them.

Ali bin Ta’an Muharibi says, that on that day I was along with Hurr and
was the last one to reach there. When Imam Husayn (a.s.) saw my and my
Horse’s thirst he said,

*“Sit your Rawiyah down.”*

I thought, by Rawiyah he meant the water-skin. When Imam realized that I
could not understand he said,

*“Sit the Camel down.”*

When I did so, he told me to drink. I tried to drink the water, but the
water fell from the water-skin. Imam then told me,

*“Bend your water skin.”*

I could not understand what to do, when Imam himself arose and lifted
the water skin, I drank from it and gave my Horse to drink too.[^1]

Hurr had come from Qadsiyyah, where Ubaydullah bin Ziyad had designated
Haseen bin Nameer to be there on guard. Then he dispatched Hurr bin
Yazid with a thousand soldiers towards Imam Husayn (a.s.). Hurr remained
facing the Imam until the time of Zuhr Prayers, and Imam commanded
Hajjaj bin Masrooq to give the call for Prayers (Azan).

(Irshad) At the time of Iqamah Imam came out wearing a shirt, cloak and
shoes. He praised and glorified Allah and said,

*“O people! I did not come to you until I re­ceived your letters and
messengers urging me to come to you, for you had no Imam and you desired
that Allah may unite you through me towards (the path of) guidance and
truth. Then if you adhere to your promises, I have come to you, thus
admit your (promises) of covenants and testimonies so that I may find
relief. While if you do not agree to it and despise my arrival, I shall
go away to where I came from.”*

No one from them replied, then Imam asked the Muezzin to recite the
Iqamah. When the Muezzin did so, Imam Husayn (a.s.) turned towards Hurr
and said,

*“If you desire, you may recite the Prayers with your companions.”*

Hurr replied, “No, but we wish to Pray while you lead it.” Then Imam
lead the Prayers and they followed him. After the Prayers Imam returned
to his tent and his companions gathered around him. Hurr also went to
the tent, which his companions had pitched for him, and a group of his
companions sat around him, while others went into their ranks and
pulling the reins of their Horses closer, sat under it’s shade.

When the time of Asr came, Imam commanded his companions to ready
them­selves to leave and they conceded. Then he commended his muezzin to
say the Azan and Iqamah, which he did. Imam was again urged to lead the
Prayers, which he did. He recited the salutations and turned towards
them. He praised and glorified Allah and said,

*“Now then! O people! If you fear Allah and you recognize the dues of
the rightful, Allah will be pleased with you. And we are the Household
of Muhammad (S), and hold more authority upon this matter (the
Caliphate) than those who claim it. They have sown the seeds of
oppression and enmity amongst you. Then if you despise us and do not
recognize our rights, and if your opinions are averse to what you had
written to me in your letters and conveyed to me through your
messengers, then I shall go away from you.”*

Hurr replied, “By Allah! I do not know anything regarding the letters
nor the messengers as you say.” Then Imam called out to one of his
companions and said,

*“O Utba bin Sam’an! Bring to me the two saddle-bags containing their
letters.”*

He brought the bag full of letters and scattered the letters in front of
them. Hurr said, “We are not of those who had written to you. We have
been commanded not to part with you as soon as we find you, and then to
take you to Kufa to the presence of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad.” Imam replied,

*“Verily death is nearer to you than this.”*

Then he directed his companions to mount and they complied. When they
started proceeding, Hurr stopped their way to which Imam said,

*“O Hurr! May your mother mourn over your death, what do you intend”?*

Hurr replied, “If anyone else among the Arabs had said this in the same
position as you are, I would have answered him equally, whoever he might
be, but I cannot utter the name of your mother, except with fairness.”
Imam said,

*“Then what do you desire”?*

Hurr said, “I desire to take you to the commander Ubaydullah.” Imam
said,

*“By Allah! I shall not do so.”*

Hurr said, “By Allah! I too shall not leave you.” They repeated this
thrice, and when their conversation got heated, Hurr said, “I have not
been commanded to fight with you. I have been ordered to remain with you
until I take you to Kufa. Then now when you refuse to go to Kufa, take a
way, which does not go to Kufa nor Madina, while this being a compromise
between us. Then I shall write a letter to the commander and you write
to Yazid or Ubaydullah, and Allah should bring forth fairness, so that I
may not be entangled in your matter.” Imam turned his horse towards
Qadsiyah and Uzayb towards the left, and Hurr and his followers traveled
by their side.

Tabari relates from Azdi, that Uqbah bin Abu Eizar relates, that Imam
Husayn (a.s.) delivered a sermon at Bayzah amidst his companions and
that of Hurr’s. He praised and glorified Allah and said,

*“O people! The Prophet has said, that when you see an oppressive ruler
legitimizing that which has been prohibited by Allah and breaking His
covenant, and opposing the cus­toms of the Prophet, and he behaves
unjustly and oppressively with Allah’s servants, then if a person does
not oppose him through his word or deed, it is incumbent upon Allah to
place that person on the status of that oppres­sor. Beware that these
statesmen (of Bani Umayyah) have adhered to the commands of Shaitan and
disobeyed the orders of Allah, and have made corruption the custom of
the day. They have gathered the rights at one place and have reserved
the treasury of Muslims (Baytul Mal) for them­selves, and permitted the
prohibitions of Allah and forbade that which is allowed by Him.*

*I am more worthy among all the men to stop and oppose them. You sent
your letters to me, and your messengers too, saying that you have taken
the oath of fealthy to me and promised that you would not hand me over
to my enemies nor forsake me. Then if you (still) persist on your
allegiance, then you are on the right. I am Husayn, the son of Ali and
Fatima the daughter of the Prophet of Allah (S). My life is asso­ciated
with you and my family with yours, and you should be sympathetic towards
me. And if you do not do so and have committed breach of trust, while
having taken off the pledge of allegiance from your necks, then I swear
by my life, that this is nothing new from you. You have done the same
with my father, brother and cousin Muslim (bin Aqeel), the one who falls
prey to your deception turns helpless. You have let go your share from
your hands and have toppled up your fortunes. The one who committed
breach of trust shall himself face deceit, and very soon Allah will make
me independ­ent of you. Peace be upon you and Allah’s Mercy and
Abundance.”*

(Irshad) Uqbah bin Abu Eizar says, that Imam Husayn (a.s.) halted at Zee
Hasam, and after praising and glorifying Allah said,

*“Now then! You have seen what unrighteousness has come forth. The world
has changed color and has shown unacquaintance. Its righteousness has
parted and this has continued until the remnants of good in it amounts
to the thin sediment at the bottom of a drinking utensil. And life is
degraded like the grazing ground of death. Do you not see that truth is
not being practiced and wrong not being discouraged? The righteous
believer is the one who aspirers towards righteousness. I alone consider
death to be a prosperity, while living with the oppressors is nothing
but undesirable.”*

The narrator says that Zuhair bin Qayn Bajali arose and said, “Do you
desire saying something or you permit me to do so”? They told him to
say. Then he praised and glorified Allah and answered the Imam, “O son
of the Prophet of Allah! May your Allah be your guide! We have heard
what you said. By Allah! If this world would have been immortal and our
lives herein would have been eternal, and if we had to leave this world
as a result of your companionship and aid, we would consent to it,
rather than remain in this world without you.” Hearing this Imam praised
him and prayed for him.

In another narration it is related, that Nafe’ bin Hilal Bajali arose
from his place and said, “By Allah! We do not despise Allah’s
permanence, and we remain (firmly) upon your intentions and insight. And
we will befriend the one who befriends you, and will bear enmity towards
your adversaries.”

Burayr bin Khuzayr arose and said, “O son of the Prophet of Allah! Allah
had favored us through you, that we may fight in front of you and our
bodies be cut to pieces, so that on the day of Qiyamah your Grandfather
may intercede for us.”

(Kamil, Irshad) Hurr, who was traveling alongside the Imam (a.s.), came
up to him and said, “O Husayn! I request you in the name of Allah to
think about your life, and I am convinced that if you fight, you shall
surely be killed.” Imam replied,

*“Do you make me fear death? Could a worse disaster befall you than
killing me? I repeat the words of a brother of Aws, which he had said to
his cousin, when he intended assisting the Prophet of Allah (S).*

His cousin feared for him and said, “Where are you going, for you shall
be killed.” To which he answered:

*“I will depart, for there is no shame in death for a young man,
whenever he intends (to do what is) right and he strives like a Muslim,
who has soothed righteous men through (the sacrifice of) his life, who
has scattered the accursed and opposed the criminals. If I live, I will
not regret (what I have done), and if I die, I will not suffer. Let it
be enough for you to live in humiliation and be reviled.”*

When Hurr heard these words he parted from Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
started walking from the other way with his companions, while Imam paved
the other way with his companions.

(Tabari, Kamil) They reached Uzayb al Hijanat, which was a grazing
ground for the horses of Nu’man, hence the name Hijanat. Suddenly four
Camel-riders (viz. Nafe’ bin Hilal, Mujme’ bin Abdullah, Umar bin
Khalid, and Tirimmah bin Adi) appeared from Kufa towing the horse of
Nafe’ bin Hilal named Kamil, and Tirimmah bin Adi was their leader. They
came face to face with Imam Husayn (a.s.), and when Tirimmah’s sight
fell on Imam he recited the following Rajaz: “O my Camel! Do not fear my
clamor and reach us before sunrise to a good caravan, who is a best
traveler, until you reach a far sighted brave man, who is honorable and
munificent, who has been brought by Allah for a worthy cause, and is an
aid, and may Allah keep him alive till the end of the world. The Prophet
of Allah’s family is a family of prestige and honor, they are the
masters with fair and illuminated countenance, who attack their enemies
with brown spears and sharp-edged swords, O the One who has the power of
profit or loss! Help Husayn against such rebellious people, who are a
remnants of disbelief, the two sons of Sakhr (Abu Sufyan) viz. Yazid who
is a habitual drinker of wine, and Ibn Ziyad, who is an adulterer and an
illegitimate son.”

When these persons reached Imam Husayn (a.s.), Hurr proceeded towards
them and said, “These people are the natives of Kufa, I shall arrest
them or dispatch them back to Kufa.” Imam replied,

*“I shall defend them with my life, for these people are my companions
and hold the same right as the other fellow-companions of mine. Then if
you oppose the covenant which we share with them, I shall fight you.”*

Hearing this Hurr withdrew. Imam Husayn (a.s.) then turned towards them
and said,

*“Tell me regarding the people of Kufa.”*

Mujme’ bin Abdullah Aedi, who was one of them said, “Their chiefs have
accepted huge bribes and have filled their purses. The sovereign has
bought their souls and have made them their firm accomplices. While all
of them have united against you. As regards the other people, their
hearts are with you but tomorrow their swords shall be drawn forth in
front of your face.” Then Imam inquired about his messenger Qays bin
Mushir Saydawi, to which they replied, “Haseen bin Nameer had arrested
him and sent him to Ibn Ziyad, and he had ordered Qays to curse you and
your fa­ther.

Qays mounted the pulpit and sent salutations upon you and your father
and condemned Ibn Ziyad and his father. He invited the people to assist
you and informed them of your arrival. Then Ibn Ziyad ordered him to be
thrown down from the terrace of the palace.” Imam started weeping
uncontrollably and recited the following verse of the Qur’an:

***“Of them is he who has fulfilled his vow, and of them is he who
awaits (it’s fulfill­ment), and they have not changed the least.” (Surah
al-Ahzab, 33:23)***

*O Allah! Bestow us and them a place in Paradise, and unite us in the
place of repose of Your Beneficence and the treasure of Your reward.”*

Then Tirimmah bin Adi came up to him and said, “I see quite a few men
with you and if they (the enemies) fight your companions (who are quite
less) as I see, then they are enough for them. Before I left Kufa, a saw
a group of people in such large numbers as I had never seen anyone
gathered at one place. When I inquired as to what was the reason behind
this, I was told that they were being arrayed and would be sent to fight
you. I request you in the name of Allah not to move even a span towards
them, and go to a town which is fortified, then halt there until you
take a decision and think over your plan of action. Come along with me,
I shall halt you at the mountain of Aja, which is fortified. This
mountain has shielded us against the kings of Ghassan and Hameer, Nu’man
bin Manzar, and the red skinned and fair-skinned men (foreigners), and
we have (always) taken refuge in it. By Allah! We have never faced
disgrace, I shall come along with you and give you place therein. Then
you may dispatch your envoys to the people of the clan of Bani Tayy, who
reside in the mountains of Aja and Salami, until the horsemen and foot
soldiers rally around you. Ten days will not pass until twenty thousand
men of (the clan of) Tayy will be ready and will not let anyone reach
you until they have their lives within themselves.” Imam Husayn (a.s.)
replied,

*“May Allah reward you and your people favorably! We have entered into
an agreement with these people by which I cannot return, and we do not
know what shall befall us and them.”*

Abu Makhnaf says that Jameel bin Marsad has related to me from Tirimmah
bin Adi, that he said: I bade farewell to the Imam and said, “May Allah
grant you refuge from the evil of jinn and men! I have brought
provisions for my family from Kufa and their subsistence is with me, I
shall go back and hand it over to them. Then I shall come back to you
and join your compan­ions.” Imam replied,

*“Allah’s Mercy be upon you! Then hasten”!*

I realized that he needed more men hence told me to hasten. Tirimmah
says that I went to my people and handed over to them what I had with me
and bequeathed to them. They told me that, “We have never seen you do
(haste) so ever before.” I related to them my intention and passed from
the road of Bani Na’al, until I neared Uzaybul Hijanat. There I met
Sama’ah bin Badar, who gave me the news of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), hence I returned back.

The author (Shaikh Abbas Qummi) says that according to the narration of
Abu Ja’far Tabari, who quotes from Azdi, it proves that Tirimmah bin Adi
was not present in Karbala and was not among the martyrs therein. Rather
when he heard the news of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.), he
returned back.

But according to the renowned Maqtal of Abu Makhnaf, it is related from
Tirimmah that he says that, “I was wounded immensely and was lying among
the martyred ones in Karbala. I swear righteously that at that moment I
was not dozing off, I saw twenty horsemen coming .......” etc. Thus this
narra­tive cannot be relied upon and weakens the reports, and may Allah
bestow a righteous reward.

Then Imam proceeded further until he reached Qasre Bani Maqatil and
halted there. He saw a tent pitched there and inquired as to whose tent
it was. People replied that it was of Ubaydullah bin Hurr Jo’fi. Imam
said that he desired to meet him and sent someone to call him.

(Manaqib) Hajjaj bin Masrooq Jo’fi, the messenger of Imam, came up to
him and said, “Imam Husayn (a.s.), the son of Ali, desires to meet you.”
He said, “Verily we are Allah’s and verily unto Him shall we return. By
Allah! I did not leave Kufa, except to distance myself from Husayn bin
Ali. By Allah! I do not desire to see him or he should see me.” Hajjaj
returned back and conveyed his words to the Imam. Imam arose and left to
meet him. When he went to Ubaydullah, he saluted him and sat down. Then
Imam invited him to assist him, to which he repeated the words, which he
had uttered before and thus ex­cused himself.

Then Imam said,

*“Now when you have excused yourself from helping us, then do not fight
against us. By Allah! The one who listens to our cry and does not hasten
to respond to it will certainly be doomed.”*

Ubaydullah replied, “As regards siding with your enemies, Allah willing,
it shall not happen.” Then Imam Husayn (a.s.) arose and went towards his
tent.

It is relevant that here we relate regarding Ubaydullah bin Hurr Jo’fi:
Mirza (Muhammad Astarabadi) in his book Rijale Kabeer relates from
Naj­jashi, that Ubaydullah bin Hurr Jo’fi was a horseman and a poet. He
had a book related from the Commander of the Faithful Imam Ali (a.s.).
Then Mirza quotes through his chain of narrators that Ubaydullah asked
Imam Husayn (a.s.) about the dye he used. Imam replied,

***“It is not as you think, indeed it is Henna and Wasmah.”***

Furthermore, it is related in Qamqam that the above-mentioned Ubaydullah
was a follower (Shi’ah) of Caliph Usman. He was brave and a horseman
among the Arabs. He fought in the battle of Siffīn alongside Mu’awiyah
due to (his affection for) Usman. When Imam Ali (a.s.) was martyred he
returned back to Kufa and resided there. When the people prepared for
the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.), he left Kufa so that he may not be
a partner to his martyrdom.

Tabari relates from Azdi, who relates from Abdul Rahman bin Jandab Azdi,
that after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.), Ubaydullah bin Ziyad
in­spected the noblemen of Kufa. He could not find Ubaydullah bin Hurr,
and after some days when he came back he went to meet Ubaydullah bin
Ziyad. Ubaydullah asked him, “O son of Hurr! Where were you”? He said
that he was unwell. To which Ubaydullah asked, “Were you emotionally
unwell or physi­cally”? He replied, “My heart is not unwell, as regards
my body, Allah has favored me with health.” Ubaydullah said, “You lie,
in fact you were with our enemies.” Ubaydullah replied, “If I would have
been present with your enemies, it would have come to light, for a
person like me cannot remain concealed from sight.”

When Ibn Ziyad became negligent of him, he stole himself, mounted his
horse and left. Then Ubaydullah turned towards him and said, “Where is
the son of Hurr.” People said that he had just left. He ordered that he
should be brought back to him. The guards rushed after him and told him
to respond to the call of the commander.

He said, “Convey to him that I shall never come to him walking on my
feet”, saying this he turned back until he reached the house of Ahmar
bin Ziyad Taee. He gathered his companions and they went to the place of
Martyrdom at Karbala.

There he prayed to Allah for their forgiveness and went to Madaen. He
composed some couplets in this regard: “The deceptor and deceiver
commander, who is in fact a deceiver, says that why did I not fight
Husayn, the son of Fatima (a.s.), when I am abashed and regret as to why
did I not assist him, and the one who neglects performance of good deeds
is liable to be ashamed and should repent.”

It is related in the context of his couplets that he was ashamed for not
assisting Imam Husayn (a.s.), and he composed some couplets, which shall
be quoted in the Chapter of Eulogies in this book.

Furthermore, it is related that he clasped his hands together with
regret and said: “What have I done to myself”? Then he recited the
following cou­plets: “O regrets and O grief! and until the time I am
alive, this re­morse shall be upon my soul and my neck, when Husayn had
asked me to assist him against the misled and hypocrites at Qasre Bani
Maqatil, when he told me will you leave us and go away? then if I had
sacrificed my life defend­ing the Imam, the son of Mustafa (S), may my
life be his ransom, then I would have succeeded on the day of Qiyamah,
he (Imam) turned his back from me and bidding farewell returned back,
then if the heart of the one regretting could be ripped open, I wish my
heart would be teared, it is very much true that those who have
supported and assisted Husayn have succeeded and are righteous, while
those who were hypocrites are damned.”

Abu Hanifa Dinawari, after quoting some of these couplets says that
Ubaydullah bin Hurr was from among the noblemen and warriors of Kufa.

The Honorable, Sayyid Mahdi Bahrul Uloom says in his Rijal, that Shaikh
Najjashi has included Ubaydullah bin Hurr Jo’fi in the list of the
ancient devout Shi’ah. He is the same person, whom Imam passed after
meeting Hurr bin Yazid Riyahi and asked for his help but he declined.

Shaikh Saduq in his Amaali, relates from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.)
that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) reached Qatqataniyah, he saw a tent pitched
and inquired as to whose tent it was. People replied that it was of
Abdullah bin Hurr Hanafi (while the correct name is Ubaydullah bin Hurr
Jo’fi). Imam sent a messenger to him saying,

*“You are an evil and guilty person. Allah shall call you to account for
whatever you have done. Then if you now turn back to Allah and assist
me, my Grandfather will intercede for you in the audience of Allah.”*

He replied, “O son of the Prophet of Allah! If I come to assist you, I
shall be one of the first persons to sacrifice my life in front of you.
You may take my horse. I have never attended to any work seated on it,
except that I have attained what I desired, and no one has ever reached
me except that it has saved me, hence I present it to you, so take it.”
Hearing this Imam turned his face away from him and said,

*“Neither do I need you nor your horse. I do not desire to enter misled
people into my ranks. Run away from here and do not side with us or
against us, for the one who listens to the cry of us, the Household
(Ahlul Bayt), and does not hasten to assist us, Allah shall throw him
head-long into the fire of hell.”*

Shaikh Mufeed in his Irshad says, that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) reached
Qasre Bani Maqatil, he saw a tent pitched there…(till the end as quoted
earlier).

Then Sayyid Tabatabai Bahrul Uloom relates, that Shaikh Ja’far bin
Muhammad ibn Nima in his Sharhus Sar fee Ehwalil Mukhtar, writes that
Ubaydullah bin Hurr bin Mujme’ bin Khuzaym Jo’fi was among the noblemen
of Kufa. Imam Husayn (a.s.) came to him and invited him to join his
ranks, but he de­clined the offer.

Later he repented such that he wished he had died, and he recited the
couplets (as quoted above) The other renowned verses of his are: “The
lustful Bani Umayyah sleep in peace, while the family of the slain ones
of Taff are devoid of it, Islam has not been destroyed except at the
hands of a clan of foolish men, who are made commanders, and their airs
and graces are prevalent, the spears of the Religion are in the hands of
the oppressors, when one part of it bends, it is not straightened by
them, I have sworn that my soul shall always be aggrieved and sorrowful,
and my eyes full of tears, which will never dry in my lifetime, until
the chiefs of Bani Umayyah be disgraced till their death.”

Then he goes on to say, that this very Ubaydullah joined the forces of
Mukhtar and accompanied Ibraheem bin Malik Ashtar to fight with
Ubaydullah bin Ziyad. Ibraheem was uneasy because of his presence and
told Mukhtar, “I fear that at the time of need he might deceive us.”
Mukhtar said, “Favor him with wealth and blind his eyes.”

Thus Ibraheem proceeded accompanied by Ubaydullah until he reached
Takrit and halted there. He ordered the taxes to be collected and then
distributed it among his companions. He sent five thousand dirham for
Ubaydullah, to which he was infuriated and said, “You have kept ten
thousand dirhams for yourself, while I am not less (in sta­tus) than
you.” And as much as Ibraheem swore that he had not kept more than that,
he refused to accept.

Ibraheem sent him his own share but he was still not satisfied. Then he
revolted against Mukhtar and broke his promise of support. He looted the
villages of Kufa and killed Mukhtar’s men and taking away all the loot
went away to Basra to Mus’ab bin Zubayr. Mukhtar sent his soldiers
behind him, who destroyed his house.

Later Ubaydullah regretted as to why did he not assist Imam Husayn
(a.s.), and why he did not remain with Mukhtar and said: “When Mukhtar
invited people for revenge, the followers of the Household (Ahlul Bayt)
came for­ward, who had worn their hearts on top of their armors, they
went forward in every river of death and battlefield, they assisted the
grandson of the Prophet and his family, their motive being none other
than taking revenge of the blood, thus they entered Paradise and it’s
fragrance, and this is better than all the gold and silver, Alas! If
only I too had fought with the Indian and eastern swords, Regrets! If
only I had entered into the ranks of your supporters, I would have
killed each rebellious and trans­gressor.”

After quoting these couplets, Sayyid Bahrul Uloom says that according to
my opinion, under all circumstances, Ubaydullah bin Hurr Jo’fi was a
believer, but was an offender. You have seen that he declined to assist
Imam Husayn (a.s.) besides his attitude with Mukhtar too. But later he
repented and regretted.

We are astonished that Najjashi has included him among the virtuous ones
and given importance to him, and has given him place in the beginning of
his book. According to this (as has been quoted above), I hope the mercy
of Imam Husayn (a.s.), who ordered him to flee away, so that he may not
hear the cry so as to be thrown headlong into the fire of hell, that he
would intercede for him in Qiyamah near Allah. For he regretted it
severely and repented over what he had done. And Allah best knows his
state and his end. (Here ends the discourse of Allamah Tabatabai Bahrul
Uloom).

The author (Shaikh Abbas Qummi) says, that the family of the progeny of
Hurr Jo’fi were Shi’ah, which includes Adeem, Ayyub and Zakariyyah, who
were the companions of Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.). Najjashi has quoted
regarding them and says that Adeem and Ayyub were among the reliable
men, and he also ascribes a book to Zakariyyah.

[^1]: The above incident highlights Imam’s clemency and humane nature.
Even though being aware, that these very men would stop access to water
from him, his children and companions and ultimately kill them, he
quenched their thirst. This being the character of righteous men and the
virtuous slaves of Allah. Why would not one expect such character from
Imam Husayn (a.s.), for he is the son of Imam Ali (a.s.) who had done
the same in the battle of Siffīn. Upon arrival in Siffīn, Imam Ali
(a.s.)’s army found it’s excess to water front barred by a strong
contingent of the Syrian forces. Imam Ali (a.s.) sent Sa’sa’ bin Sawhan,
a companion of the Prophet (S) to Mu’awiyah, asking him to withdraw his
troops from the river and allow free access to water to everyone.
Mu’awiyah refused to do so, whereupon Imam ordered his troops to seize
the water front by force. His troops routed the Syrians and captured the
water front. Now there was panic in the camp of Mu’awiyah, they had no
way to reach the water. Imam Ali (a.s.)’s generals opined that they
should pay Mu’awiyah back in his coin and let the Syrian army perish of
thirst. But Imam gently reproved them for wishing to imitate an example,
which they themselves condemned, and he said, “The river belongs to
Allah. There is no embargo on water for anyone, and whoever wishes, may
take it.”


