Imam Husayn (a.s.) in Karbala’
==============================

It is written in Biharul Anwar, that Ubaydullah bin Ziyad kept
dispatching troops one after the other to Umar bin Sa’ad (in Karbala)
until he had thirty thousand horsemen and foot-soldiers with him. Then
Ubaydullah wrote to Umar: “I have not left any excuse for you with
respect to the (quantity of) army. Then remember to inform me, every
morning and evening, about your affairs.” Ubaydullah had started
inciting Umar (for battle) from the sixth of Muharram.

Habib bin Mazahir came to Imam Husayn (a.s.) and told him, “O son of the
Prophet of Allah (S)! Nearby there is a branch of the tribe of Bani
Asad. If you permit, I shall go to them and invite them to assist you,
perhaps Allah will defend you through them.” Imam gave him permission
and Habib, in the darkness of the night, disguised himself and went
towards them. They recognized him and inquired from him as to what he
desired. Habib replied, “I have brought the best gift for you. I have
come to you to invite you to assist the grandson of our Prophet. He is
here with a group of believers, each one of whom is better than a
thousand men, and they shall not leave him, betray him nor surrender him
(to the enemies).

Then Umar bin Sa’ad has surrounded them, you are my tribesmen, hence I
invite you towards welfare. Then today pay heed to my words and assist
him, so as to gain honor in this world as well as the Hereafter. I swear
by Allah! Whoever among you is martyred in the way of Allah along with
the grandson of the Prophet of Allah, then he will be in the lofty
station among the friends of Muhammad (s.a.w.s).”

Hearing this a man from among them, named Ubaydullah bin Basheer arose,
and said, “I am the first one to accept this invitation.” Then he
recited the following Rajaz: “The nation knows that when the horsemen
are ready to fight, I stand as a warrior, valorous, similar to a forest
Lion.” Then the men of the tribe gathered until ninety people prepared
to go to assist Imam Husayn (a.s.).

At that moment, a man from among them went and apprised Umar bin Sa’ad
about the situation and he sent Ibn Azraq with four hundred horsemen
towards Bani Asad. When they (Bani Asad) were coming towards the army of
Imam Husayn (a.s.), the horsemen of Umar bin Sa’ad stopped them on the
bank of the river Euphrates. A quarrel started between them which turned
into a fierce battle. Habib bin Mazahir called out to Azraq, “Woe be to
you! Lift your hands off us”, but Azraq refused to do so.

When the people of Bani Asad realized that they were incapable of
resisting them, they returned back to their tribe. They left their place
that very night fearing Umar bin Sa’ad. Habib returned to Imam (a.s.)
and apprised him of the situation and Imam said,

*“There is no Might and no Power except with Allah, the Most High, the
Most Great.”*

Umar bin Sa’ad’s horsemen retreated back and stopped the water supply
for Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his companions, and intense thirst troubled
them. Imam lifted up an arrow and went behind the tent of the ladies,
and measur­ing nine steps towards the West, started digging the ground.
Sweet water emerged from therein, which Imam and his companions drank
and filled their water skins, then the water disappeared and was never
traceable.

When this news reached Ubaydullah bin Ziyad, he sent someone to Umar bin
Sa’ad saying, “I have received information that Husayn digs wells and
drinks from therein along with his companions? Then when this letter
reach­es you, beware and try as much as possible to stop them from
digging the well and drinking water. Then pester them as was done with
(Caliph) Usman bin Affan.” When this letter reached Umar bin Sa’ad, he
increased his persecution upon them.

Muhammad bin Talha and Ali bin Isa Irbili relate, that when thirst
intensi­fied, a man from among Imam’s companions, named Yazid bin Haseen
Hamadani, who was a devout man, came to Imam Husayn (a.s.) and said, “O
son of the Prophet of Allah! Permit me to go to Umar bin Sa’ad and speak
to him regarding (blockage of) water, perhaps he may abstain from it.”

Imam agreed and Yazid bin Haseen Hamadani came to Umar bin Sa’ad but did
not salute him. Umar said, “O brother from Hamadan! Do you not consider
me to be a Muslim, for you have not saluted me”? Yazid replied, “If you
had been a Muslim, as you say, then you would not have come to kill the
progeny of the Prophet of Allah.

Then you would not have stopped the water of Euphrates from him, his
brothers, his women-folk and his family, the water, which the pigs and
the wild hogs drink, so that they may perish of thirst. You do not let
them partake from it and then claim that you recognize Allah and His
Prophet”?

Umar bin Sa’ad bowed his head (in shame) and said, “O brother from
Hamadan! I am well aware that persecuting them is unlawful. But
Ubaydullah, left the entire community, and chose me for a very
diffi­cult task and I left for it at that very moment. By Allah! I
cannot un­derstand, and am stopped at a dangerous turn, which I do not
hold dear. Should I leave the ruler ship of Ray, which I desire, or I
should return, with the blood of Imam upon myself, and his murder would
be a cause of entering the fire (of hell) which is unavoidable, and the
kingdom of Ray is the coolness of my eyes.”

Abu Ja’far Tabari and Abul Faraj Isfahani says that when the thirst of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his companions increased, he called for his
brother Abbas bin Ali (a.s.) and sent him with a group of thirty
horsemen and twenty foot soldiers with twenty water skins to the river.
They reached the water in the night and Nafe’ bin Hilal Bajali was in
the forefront carrying a stan­dard. ‘Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaydi saw him and
asked as to who he was. Nafe’ disclosed his identity, to which ‘Amr
said, “Welcome O brother! What have you come here for”?

Nafe’ replied, “I have come to partake the water which you have blocked
from us.” ‘Amr said, “Go ahead and drink it with pleasure.” Nafe’ said,
“By Allah! I shall not drink even a drop from it until Imam and his
companions (whom you see) are thirsty.”

Hearing this the men with ‘Amr bin Hajjaj turned towards them and ‘Amr
said, “There is no way, we have been appointed for this very reason so
as to stop them from reaching the water.” When the men of Nafe’ came
closer, he told the foot soldiers to fill their water skins. They filled
their water-skins quickly and ‘Amr bin Hajjaj and his men attacked them.

Then Abbas bin Ali (a.s.) and Nafe’ bin Hilal attacked them and pushed
them to their ranks. Then they said, “Go, we have stopped them.” ‘Amr
bin Hajjaj and his men returned back and some of them were driven back.
A man named Sada’, who was from among the men of ‘Amr, was wounded by
Nafe’ with a spear. He considered the wound to be minor and did not
attend to it, but later his wound opened up and he succumbed to it. Thus
the companions of Imam took the water skins to him.

(Tabari) Imam Husayn (a.s.) sent ‘Amr bin Qartah Ansari to Umar bin
Sa’ad saying, “Come to meet me tonight between the two armies.” Umar
came with twenty horsemen, while Imam too went accompanied with the same
amount of men. When they reached face to face, Imam told his companions
to move far away and Umar too ordered his companions to do so.

Both the groups moved away and they started talking to one another until
one part of the night passed away. Then they returned back to their
armies and no one knew as to what was discussed between them. But the
sane ones said that the Imam told Umar bin Sa’ad, “Accompany me in
revolting against Yazid and leave his ranks.” Umar replied, “My house
shall be destroyed (if I do so).”

Imam said,

*“I shall build it (back) for you.”*

He said, “My properties shall be confiscated”, and Imam said,

*“I shall give you better than that from my property in Hijaz.”*

But Umar was not pleased by it. And these reports were being discussed
among men, when they had heard and knew nothing.

Shaikh Mufeed relates that Imam sent someone to Umar bin Sa’ad saying
that he wanted to meet him. Then they met at night and spoke to each
other for a long time. Then Umar bin Sa’ad returned to his place and
wrote to Ubaydullah, “Now then! Allah has extinguished the fire (of
hatred) and united men on one opinion and has set right the affairs of
the Nation (Ummah).

Husayn has promised me that he will return back to the place where he
came from, or go away to an Islamic border-town and lead a life any
other normal Muslim. Or that he would go to Yazid and offer him his hand
and the dis­agreement between them may be straightened. And this
proposal is that what you like and wherein lies the straightness of the
Nation.”

Abul Faraj writes that Umar sent a messenger to Ubaydullah with the
propo­sal and informed him that, “If a Dailami had desired this from you
and you would not yield to it, you would have committed injustice.”

Tabari and Ibn Aseer relate from Uqba bin Sam’an that he says that: I
accompanied Imam Husayn (a.s.) from Madina to Makkah and from Makkah to
Iraq. And there was not a single speech of his which I had not heard,
whether in Madina, Makkah or on the way to Iraq, and among his ranks,
until he was martyred. By Allah! The report, which is renowned among men
that Imam Husayn (a.s.) had agreed to go to Syria and place his hand in
the hand of Yazid, or go away to any Islamic border-town, had never ever
been said by him. But he had said that, “Leave me so that I may go
around upon this extensive earth, until I witness where the state of
affairs of the people reaches.”


