Relating to the events of the day of Ashura’, the array of the two armies and Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s remonstration amidst the people of Kufa
==========================================================================================================================================

Imam Husayn (a.s.) recited the morning Prayers with his companions.
After finishing the Prayers he stood up and delivered a short sermon. He
praised and glorified Allah and said,

*“Verily Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime, has intended that you be
martyred as also myself, thus you should forebear.”*

This narrative has been quoted by Mas’oodi in Isbatul Wasiyyah.

(Malhoof) Then Imam called for the Prophet’s horse named Murtajaz and
mounted it and prepared his companions for battle and positioned
them­selves.

(Irshad) There were thirty two horsemen and forty foot-soldiers along
with him.

It is related from Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) that there were forty
five horsemen and a hundred foot-soldiers with him. Besides there are
others reports regarding it.

It is related in Isbatul Wasiyyah that, “The number of the people with
Imam on that day was sixty one. Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime, assisted
his Religion with a thousand men from the beginning until the end.” When
the Imam (a.s.) was questioned regarding its interpretation, he said
that from among them (the thousand) three hundred and thirteen were
among the companions of Taloot, three hundred and thirteen among the
Prophet’s companions in the battle of Badr, three hundred and thirteen
shall be among the com­panions of Imam al Mahdi (a.t.f.s.), while the
remaining sixty one were martyred along with the Imam Husayn (a.s.) (in
Karbala).”

(Irshad) Imam Husayn (a.s.) designated Zuhayr bin Qayn in charge of the
right wing and Habib bin Mazahir in charge of the left wing, and handed
over the standard of the army to his brother Abbas (a.s.). They
positioned themselves in front of the tents, with their backs towards
them. Then Imam commanded that the firewood, which was kept behind the
tents, be put in the moat dug at night behind the tents and set it on
fire, lest the enemies might attack from behind.

Umar bin Sa’ad arranged his troops on the morning of the tenth. (Kamil,
Tabari). He appointed Abdullah bin Zuhayr Azdi in charge of (the unit
of) Madina. Besides he designated Qays bin Ash’as in charge over the
(unit of the) tribes of Rabi’ah and Kinda, Abdul Rahman bin Abu Sabarah
Hanafi over Raba’, Mazhaj and Asad, Hurr bin Yazeed Riyahi over Tameem
and Hamadan.

All of them escorted Umar in the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) until
the end except Hurr, who went over to the Imam and attained martyrdom
along with him. Umar also designated ‘Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaydi in charge
of the right wing, Shimr bin Ziljawshan in charge of the left wing,
Urwah bin Qays Ahmasi as the chief of the horsemen, Shabas bin Rab’ee
Yarboo’ee as chief of the foot-soldiers, and handed over the standard of
the army to his retainer Durayd.

Abu Makhnaf relates from ‘Amr bin Murrah Jamali, who says that Abi Salah
Hanafi told him, that a retainer of Abdul Rahman bin Abd Rabbah Ansari
told him, that I was along with my master, when the army prepared
themselves for battle and turned towards Imam Husayn (a.s.). Then Imam
ordered a tent to be pitched and a water bag to be brought and a large
cup be filled with water. He entered the tent and applied the Noorah (an
admixture of lime and water used as a hair remover in the olden
days).[^1]

My master Abdul Rahman and Burayr bin Khuzayr Hamadani were standing on
the door of the tent of Imam besides one another and desired that each
one of them would get the opportunity to apply the Noorah immediately
after the Imam. Burayr joked with Abdul Rahman, to which he said, “Leave
me alone, for this is no time for vain speech.”

Burayr replied, “Those acquainted with me know well that by Allah I have
never resorted to vain gossips in my youth nor in my old age. But I am
rejoicing over what is to come forth upon me. By Allah! There is no
distance between us and the Hoorul Ein, except that the army might
pierce their swords unto us and I befriend to be killed by their
swords.”

Then when Imam completed applying, we went and applied the Noorah. Then
Imam Husayn (a.s.) mounted his horse and called for the Qur’an and
placed it in front of him. The companions of the Imam fought severely in
front of him, and when I saw them falling upon the ground, I ran away
(in fright) leaving them behind.

Abu Makhnaf relates from Abu Khalid Kabeli, and Shaikh Mufeed has
related from our master Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) that when the
army proceed­ed towards Imam Husayn (a.s.) in the morning, he raised his
hands towards the heavens and said,

*“O Allah! You are my support in all severities and are my hope in all
adversities. And You are my support and reservoir in all unpleasantaries
which befalls me. Whatever numerous grief comes to heart, remedies
blocked, and friends (having) deserted, and enemies rejoicing, I have
brought forth to You and complain to You regarding them, and I do not
turn to anyone except You. And You warded them off and sufficed. You are
the Master of all blessings and the Possessor of all virtues, and the
last Resort of all desires.”*

Then the army advanced towards Imam Husayn (a.s.) surrounding his tents.

(Tabari) Azdi says that Abdullah bin Asim has related from Abdullah bin
Zahhak Mashriqi that he said, that when the army advanced towards us and
saw the moat, which we had dug filled with fire, they could not attack
us from behind. Suddenly a man, riding a horse and well-equipped with
ammuni­tion, advanced towards us and without uttering a word inspected
the tents. Then he retreated back and called out, “O Husayn! You have
hastened to­wards the fire before the day of Qiyamah (Allah’s refuge).”
Imam said,

*“Is he Shimr bin Ziljawshan”?*

The companions replied in the affirmative. (Irshad) Imam said,

*“O son of a goat-herdess woman! You are more worthy of it.”*

Muslim bin Awsaja attempted to shoot an arrow at him but Imam stopped
him from doing so. Muslim said, “Please let me shoot at him, for this
wretched man is one of the great oppressors and Allah has made it
possible for me to kill him.” Imam replied,

*“Do not shoot your arrow, I do not befriend that the battle may begin
from my side.”*

(Tabari) Imam Husayn (a.s.) possessed a horse named Lahiq, which he had
given to his son Ali (Akbar) to ride. When the infantry advanced closer,
Imam called for his Camel and mounted it while calling out in a loud
voice, which was heard by most men:

*“O people! Listen to what I say and do not make haste, so that I may
fulfill the responsibility (to counsel you) which rests upon me and that
I may submit my plea regarding my arrival towards you. Then if you
accept my plea and believe my words while giving me jus­tice, then you
shall be fortunate and there will be no excuse for you to fight with me.
And if you do not accept my word and deal unjustly with me, then:
(Tabari, Kamil)*

***‘Muster therefore your designs and (gather) your accomplices, then
let not your designs be dubious, then execute on me and give no respite
(to me)’ (Surah al-Yunus, 10:71).***

***And ‘Verily my Protector is Allah Who sent down the Book (Qur’an) and
He guards the virtuous ones’ (Surah al-A’araaf, 7:196).”***

When his sisters heard his words, they started weeping and wailing,
along with his daughters. Imam sent his brother Abbas bin Ali (a.s.)
along with his son Ali (Akbar) to console and quite them. Then he said,

*“By my life! They still have a lot more to weep.”*

And when they became silent (Irshad) Imam praised and glorified Allah
and remembered Him as He aught to be remembered. Then he sent
salutations upon the Holy Prophet (S), Angels and the other Prophets
(a.s.). He spoke with such eloquence that no one had ever done so before
him nor after him. Then he said,

Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s sermon on the day of Ashura’
-------------------------------------------------

*“Now then! Consider my family, and ponder as to who I am and then
admonish yourselves. Then do you consider that killing me and plundering
my sanctity and respect is lawful for you? Am I not the grandson of your
Prophet and the son of his Vicegerent and cousin, who was the foremost
in believing and the bearer of witness upon everything that the Prophet
had brought from Allah? Was not Hamza, the chief of Martyrs, the uncle
of my father? Was not Ja’far, who flies with two wings in Paradise, my
Uncle? Did not the Tradition of the Prophet reach you in which he has
said about me and my brother that both of us are the chiefs of the youth
of Paradise?*

*Then if you agree to what I say, and verily what I have said is nothing
but the truth, then it is better, for by Allah, from the time I have
realized that Allah dislikes the liars, I have never ever spoken a lie.
Then if you do not believe to what I say, there are alive among you the
companions of the Prophet. Go to them and ask them and they shall bear
testimony to the truthfulness of my speech. Ask Jabir bin Abdullah
Ansari, Abu Sa’eed Khu­dri, Sahl bin Sa’ad Sa’edi, Zayd bin Arqam and
Anas bin Malik, they will tell you that they have heard this tradition
from the Prophet of Allah regarding me and my brother. Is not this
sufficient to refrain you from shedding my blood”?*

Then Shimr bin Ziljawshan, the accursed said, “I worship Allah (only) by
lips (half heartedly), and do not understand what you say.” Hearing this
Habib bin Mazahir said, “I can see that you worship Allah with seventy
types of doubts, and I bear testimony that you have spoken the truth and
you cannot understand what the Imam says, for Allah has placed a seal
(of ignorance) upon your heart.”

Imam continued,

*“Then if you doubt this, do you even doubt that I am the grandson of
the Prophet of Allah (S)? By Allah! There is no other grandson of the
Prophet in the east or the west except myself from among yourselves or
anyone else. Woe be to you! Have I killed anyone from among you whose
revenge you desire? Or have I usurped the wealth of anyone or hurt
anyone whose retribution you desire from me”?*

When no one answered him, he called out in a loud voice,

*“O Shabas bin Rab’ee! O Hajjar bin Abjar!* *O Qays bin Ash’as! O Yazeed
bin Haris! Have you not written let­ters to me saying that the fruits
had ripened and the surrounding earth had blossomed, and to come to a
huge army prepared for me”?*

They replied that they had not written any such letters. Imam said,

*“Glory be to Allah! Yes by Allah, you had written it.”*

Then he continued,

*“O people! Then now if you do not like my arrival, then leave me so
that I may go away to a place of refuge.”*

Qays bin Ash’as said, “We do not know what you say. Then submit
yourselves to your cousins (Bani Umayyah), they shall deal with you in a
manner which you like.” Imam replied,

*“By Allah! I shall not give my hands in yours like a base man, nor
shall I flee away like a slave.”*

Then he called out in a loud voice,

***“O servants of Allah! ‘And verily, I take refuge with my Lord and
yours, lest you stone me (to death)’ (Surah ad-Dukhaan, 44:20)*** ***and
I take refuge with my Lord and yours, from every arrog­ant, who does not
believe in the day of reckoning.”***

Then the Imam dismount­ed from his Camel and commanded Uqbah bin Sam’an
to fasten its legs.

Zuhair bin Qayn’s address amidst the people of Kufa
---------------------------------------------------

(Tabari) Azdi says that As’ad Shami related to me from one of his
tribes­man named Kaseer bin Abdullah Sha’abi, who was present in
Karbala, that when we laid siege upon Imam Husayn (a.s.), Zuhayr bin
Qayn came towards us riding a horse with a thick tail, and he was
well-equipped with arms.

He said, “Beware of the wrath of Allah. It is obligatory upon a Muslim
to advice his brother Muslim. We are still brothers of one another and
follow­ers of the same Religion. Until the swords have not separated us,
we are of the same creed, thus advising you is obligatory upon me. But
when the swords come in between us, the bond of brotherhood will break
off, then we will be another nation and you another one. Allah the
Almighty has tied us by means of the progeny of Prophet Muhammad (S) so
that He may be aware as to what you and we do. We now invite you to
assist him (Imam Husayn) and call upon you to abandon the unruly son of
the unruly father Ubaydullah bin Ziyad, from whom you have witnessed and
seen nothing except evil. They pierce rods into your eyes, amputate your
hands and feet, they hang you upon the gallows and cut off your ears and
nose. And they kill the virtuous and the intellectuals among you viz.
Hujr bin Adi and his compan­ions, Hani bin Urwah, and others similar to
them.”

The narrator says that when they heard this speech, they started abusing
Zuhayr and praising Ubaydullah and said, “By Allah! We shall not retreat
back from here until we have killed your master and all those who are
along with him or to dispatch him along with his companions to the
commander Ubaydullah in peace.”

Then Zuhayr said, “O servants of Allah! The son of Fatima (a.s.) is more
worthy for friendship and aid than the son of Sumayyah. If you do not
assist him, then by Allah give him refuge and do not kill him. Take him
to the presence of his cousin Yazid. By my life! Yazid will be pleased
with you if you do not kill him.” Hearing this Shimr shot an arrow at
him and said, “Be quite, may your voice be subdued! Verily you have
exhausted us through your excessive speech.”

Zuhayr replied, “O son of a nomad! I am not speaking to you. Verily you
are an animal and by Allah! I am of the opinion that you cannot even
recite two verses of the Qur’an accurately. Then I give glad tidings to
you of the disgrace and irksome wrath on the day of Qiyamah.” Shimr
said, “Very soon Allah will kill you and your mas­ter.”

Zuhayr said, “Are you frightening me by death? By Allah! Dying with the
Imam is more preferable in my eyes than immortality with you.” Then
Zuhayr turned towards the other people and said, “O slaves of Allah!
Beware lest these base oppressors and their accomplices may deceive you.
By Allah! The intercession of Muhammad (S) shall not reach them, who
will spill the blood of his Progeny and his family, and kill those who
assist them or defend their sanctity.” Then a person called out to him
saying, “Abu Abdullah (Imam Husayn) says that by my life O Zuhayr!
Return back. Verily you have advised and admonished like the believer of
the people of Fira’un had advised and admonished his community.”

Speech of Burayr bin Khuzayr
----------------------------

It is stated in Biharul Anwar that Muhammad bin Abu Talib says, that the
army of Umar bin Sa’ad mounted their horses and came forward. Imam too
mounted his horse, and accompanied with some of his companions, advanced
towards them. He told Burayr bin Khuzayr, who was riding in his
forefront, “You may speak with these people.” Thus Burayr came forward
and said, “O people! Fear Allah, verily the trust of Prophet Muhammad
(S) is present amongst you. They are his Progeny, Family, Daughters and
the House­hold (Ahlul Bayt). Then say as to what is in your hearts and
how do you desire treating them”?

They replied, “We desire that we hand him over to Ubaydullah bin Ziyad,
so that he may decide as to what is to be done with him.” Burayr said,
“Do you not agree to let them return to the place they came from? O
people of Kufa! Have you forgotten the letters which you addressed to
him, and the pledge which you had given him with Allah as the witness?
Woe be to you! You invited the Household of your Prophet and pledged to
sacrifice your life for him, and when they have come, you intend handing
them over to the son of Ziyad, and have stopped the access of water to
him? How badly have you treated the Progeny of your Prophet after his
death. What has happened to you? May Allah not quench your thirst on the
day of Qiyamah, for verily you are a band of thorough wicked men.”

Some men from among the people of Kufa said, “We do not understand as to
what you speak.” Burayr replied, “Praise be to Allah, Who has made me
fair-sighted among you. O Allah! I disassociate myself near You from
their affairs. O Allah! Instill fear in them until they come to Your
presence, thus You may be wrathful towards them.” Hearing this they
started shooting arrows at him and Burayr retreated back. Imam proceeded
further and stood in front of them and looked at their ranks as a calm
torrent. He saw Umar bin Sa’ad standing amidst the noblemen of Kufa and
said,

*“Thanks is due to Allah, Who has created this world, and has made it an
abode of mortality and decadence, and who changes it’s people from one
state to another. Be­guiled is the one who falls prey to the deceit of
this world, and he is unfortunate who is misled by it. Let this world
not beguile you, for it disappoints the one who relies upon it. The one
who covets in it, she changes it to empty-handedness. I observe that you
have gathered to accom­plish the task which invites the wrath of Allah
upon you. He has turned away His Face from you and has engulfed you in
His wrath, and has turned away His blessings away from you. Thus our
Lord is the best Lord, while you are the worst slaves. You have pledged
to obey Allah and have believed in His Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s), even
then you have attacked his Household and Progeny and intend killing
them. (Irshad) Shaitan has gained control over you and made you forget
Allah the Almighty. Woe be to you and your course and aims! Verily we
are Allah’s and verily unto Him shall we return. This is a nation that
has accepted infidelity after having accepted faith, thus be away O (men
of) the oppressive nation”!*

Then Umar bin Sa’ad said, “Woe be to you! Answer him, for he is the son
of Ali. Then if he stands for the entire day facing you, his speech will
not end nor will he be exhausted.” Then Shimr proceeded further and
said, “O Husayn! What is this that you speak, explain to us so that me
may under­stand.” Imam replied,

*“The essence of my speech is that I exhort you to fear Allah and do not
kill me. For my murder and destroying my sanctity is not valid upon you.
For I am the son of the daughter of your Prophet (S) and my grandmother
is Khadija (a.s.), the wife of your Prophet. You may have heard my
grandfather say, that ‘Hasan and Husayn are the chiefs of the youth of
Paradise.”*

It is stated in Biharul Anwar, that in Manaqib it is related through
chain of authorities, that Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Sulayman bin
Abdullah bin Hasan relates from his father, who in turn relates from his
father, from Abdullah that he said, that Umar bin Sa’ad prepared his
army to attack Imam Husayn (a.s.) and arrayed the ranks and arranged
them, and hoisted the standard at it’s appropriate places.

And after having selected persons to command the right and left wing, he
turned towards his army men and ordered them to remain firm upon their
places and get hold of Imam Husayn (a.s.). Then they surrounded Imam
(a.s.) from all sides, he came out and went near them and signaled them
to remain silent, but they refused to oblige. Then the Imam said,

*“Woe be to you! What has happened to you that you do not remain silent
and listen to what I say? I invite you to the path of righteousness. The
one who obeys me shall be wise, while the one who disobeys me shall face
perdition. All of you are disobeying me and not paying heed to my words,
this is because your belies have become full of unlawful, and your
hearts have been sealed. Woe be to you! Are you not just and are you
unable to listen”?*

Hearing this people started reprimanding each other for not keeping
silent. Then Imam arose and delivered a sermon which will, Allah
willing, be quoted hereafter (as has been related by Sayyid ibn Tawoos
in Malhoof).

Then he called out, “Where is Umar bin Sa’ad”? Someone called him, but
he disliked facing the Imam. Imam told him,

*“O Umar! Do you intend killing me so that the illegitimate son of an
illegitimate father will bestow the governorship of Ray and Jurjan to
you? By Allah! Your desire shall never be fulfilled, and this will
surely happen. Do whatever you desire, for you shall never gain delight
after (killing) me, neither in this world nor in the Hereafter. It is as
if I see your head over a lance in Kufa, and the children are throwing
stones while aiming at it.”*

Umar was highly enraged by the Imam’s words, then he turned his face
away from him and told his army, “What are you waiting for? Attack them,
for they are nothing more than a morsel.”

Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s address to the people of Kufa
--------------------------------------------------

Sayyid ibn Tawoos relates that Imam Husayn (a.s.) mounted his Camel
(while some are of the opinion that it was a horse) and signaled them to
remain silent. Then he praised and glorified Allah and extolled Him such
as was due to Him. He sent salutations upon the Angels, Prophets and
Apostles (a.s.) with great eloquence. Then he said,

*“O people! May you be ruined and afflicted. You enthusiastically
invited us to assist you, and we has­tened to do so. Then now you have
unsheathed those very swords, which we had given to you, and you have
kindled the fire for us which we ourselves had kindled for your enemies
and ours. You have sided with your own enemies and have proceeded to
fight your friends along with them, although they have not acted with
justice with you nor do you expect any kindness and fairness from them.
A hundred woes be upon you! You have betrayed us at the time when the
swords are still in their sheaths, the hearts in peace, opin­ions
rightly apparent and free from error. But you are like the locusts, who
have hastened towards battle, and are like the moths, who fall upon one
another. May you be ruined O adorers of female slaves, those you have
abandoned their ranks, those who have shun the Qur’an, those who have
modified the right speech, the pillars of evil, O the ones enticed by
Shaitan, and the severers of Divine codes! You side with them and betray
us? Yes, verily treachery and breach of trust has been your ancient
cus­tom, which had been established by your fathers and the branches
thereof have come forth from it. You are the filthy and unpleasant
fruits of it which suffocates it’s own grower and are pleasing to the
oppressors. Beware! Now this illegitimate son of the illegitimate father
(Ubaydullah bin Ziyad) has stationed me between unsheathing the swords
or then bear humil­iation, and far be it that we accept humiliation.
Verily Allah, His Proph­et, and the Sacred Laps which have nursed us,
the modest and those who abhor* *disgrace, disagree to it that we bow
down to the ignoble men, and they exhort us to exhaust being killed
mainly in the battlefield over it. Beware I shall fight you, even when
there are a few men with me, and although some have deserted me.”*

Here it seems appropriate to quote that which has been cited by Ibn Abil
Hadeed Mu’tazili in his Sharhe Nahjul Balagha. He says in context to
those who refuse to bow down in the face of tyranny and disgrace: “The
Noble Master, who has taught the lesson of ardor and has exalted being
honorably killed under the sword over humiliation is Abu Abdullah Husayn
bin Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.). Immunity was offered to him and his
companions, but he did not accept disgrace” (then he quotes the previous
sermon of Imam).

He (Ibn Abil Hadeed) continues that “I heard Abu Zayd Yahya bin Zayd
Alawi, the leader of Basra say, that the couplets which were compiled by
Abu Tamam in favor of Muhammad bin Hameed Ta’i fit well for Imam Husayn
(a.s.): It was easy to skip death, but he was sent back towards it by
the soul, who despised oppression, as if fear was apostasy, thus he
remained firm in the whirlwind of death, he told death that there is
resurrection under your sword, he wore the dress of death, the night had
not yet ap­peared when it turned into a green silk brocade dress.”

Sibt ibn Jawzee says, that my grandfather has quoted in Tabsirah, that
Imam Husayn (a.s.) went towards Kufa for he saw the Divine laws of Islam
being broken, hence he intended to make it’s basic laws firm and strong.
Then when they surrounded him from all sides and ordered him to bow down
to the command of (Ubaydullah bin) Ziyad, he refused to do so and
exalted Martyrdom over humiliation and disgrace, while the ardent souls
are thus.

Then he quoted some couplets: “When they saw that some lives are
humiliat­ing for them and honorable death is not unlawful, they refused
to taste the savor of such a life, which contains humiliation, then they
died a death which was free from reproach, there is no astonishment that
the accursed dogs of Arabs and non-Arabs devour the male Lion, for the
guile of Wahshi was the reason for Hamza’s death, while Ali was murdered
by the sword of Ibn Muljim.”

Here we quote some couplets composed in praise of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) by
Sayyid Hayder in lamentation of Imam Husayn (a.s.): “The nation coveted
and enticed that he should be oppressed, but Allah and the swift sword
refused it, how can he bow his head in front of baseness and
humiliation, who has never submitted to anyone except the Almighty, he
refused but to live a life of honor and to clean the battlefield so that
he may be cast upon it and lie down, he solely fought along with the
army, each component of his being a huge army itself, he married off the
people’s souls to the sword, whose dower was death and henna blood.”

Then Imam Husayn (a.s.) recited the couplets of Farwah bin Maseek
Muradi:

*“Should we defeat our enemy, we will go on defeating them, but should
we be defeated, it will be only once, tell those who rejoice in our
affliction: wake up, for you too will end up like us, when death lifts
it’s grip off the necks of some people, it surely will cling to others,
then by Allah! you will not remain on the earth longer than the time
needed to ride a horse, then the earth will wheel on you like a
millstone and turn like a pivot, this has been handed over to me by my
father (a.s.), who had got it from my grandfather (S),*

***‘Muster therefore your designs and (gather) your accomplices, then
let not your designs be dubious, then execute on me and give no respite
(to me).’ (Surah al-Yunus, 10: 71)***

***‘Verily I rely on Allah, my Lord and your Lord, there is no living
creature, but He holds it by it’s forelocks (is in His control)’*****,**

***‘Verily my Lord is on the Right Path.’ (Surah al-Hud, 11: 56)***

 ***O Allah! Hold back the rains of the heavens from them, and let them
be entangled in the drought (similar as the time) of Prophet Yusuf
(a.s.), and appoint a man of Bani Saqeeh (referred to Mukhtar bin Abu
Ubaydah Saqafi) over them, who would pour the bitter cup into their
throats. For they have belied and deserted us. You are our Lord, we rely
upon You and we return towards You, and Your Audience is the con­clusion
(of everything).”***

Then he alighted from his mount and sat on the horse of the Prophet,
named Murtajaz, and started arraying the group of his companions.

(Malhoof) Umar bin Sa’ad came forward and shot an arrow towards the army
of Imam and said, “Bear witness in the presence of the commander, that I
was the first person to shoot an arrow.” Then those under his command
started shooting arrows in large number which appeared like birds. Imam
turned towards his companions and said,

*“May Allah bestow His blessings upon you! Arise to face the inevitable
death, and these arrows are the messengers from the army, which is
proceeding towards you.”*

Then they attacked them in the part of the day and a group of the
companions of Imam were killed.

The narrators say that then Imam Husayn (a.s.) caught hold of his beard
and said,

*“Allah’s wrath became severe upon the Jews when they attributed a son
to Him, and His anger descended upon the Christians when they made Him
the third of the three gods, while His wrath descended upon the fire
worshippers (Magicians) when they worshipped the sun and the moon
instead of Him. And now the wrath of Allah shall befall this community,
who has united to kill the grandson of the Prophet. Beware! By Allah! I
shall not agree to their desires until I meet my Lord drenched in my
blood.”*

Our Master Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) relates, that I have heard from
my father Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) saying, that when Imam Husayn
(a.s.) and Umar bin Sa’ad (may Allah’s curse be upon him) came face to
face with one another and battle ensued, Allah sent victory (in the form
of Angels) for Imam Husayn (a.s.), who were flapping their wings over
his head. They gave him choice of victory over the enemies or Allah’s
Audience, and he gave preference to Allah’s Audience.

The Noble master and the author of numerous books, Sayyid Abdullah bin
Shubbar Hasani Kazmee has written in his book Jilaul Uyoon, that at that
moment a group of the genie came to assist Imam Husayn (a.s.) and asked
permission to fight, but he did not permit them and preferred Martyrdom
with honor over the life of humiliation of this world. Salutations be
upon him.

[^1]: Refer Note No. 52


