Praise of the battle of the companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and their Martyrdom (May Allah be pleased with them)
=================================================================================================================

Abul Hasan Sa’eed bin Hibatullah, renowned as Qutubuddin Rawandi,
relates through his chain of authorities from Imam Muhammad al Baqir
(a.s.), that before his martyrdom, Imam Husayn (a.s.) told his
companions that his grandfather the Holy Prophet (S) had told him,

*“O my dear son! You shall be killed at Iraq, and it is a place where
the Prophets, their suc­cessors and Apostles have met one another and it
is called Amoora. You shall be martyred at that place along with a group
of your companions. Your battle is frigid and serene.” Thus have glad
tidings that by Allah if they kill us, we shall go to the presence of
our Prophet (S).*

Abu Hamza Sumali, relates from Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) that he
said:

***On the night preceding his Martyrdom, my father gathered his family
and companions and said,*** ***‘O people of my family and my Shi’ah!
Consider this night, which has come to you as a mounting Camel and save
yourselves, for these people do not desire anyone else except me. Then
if they kill me, they shall not pursue you. May Allah have mercy upon
you! Save yourselves. Verily I lift the responsibility of the allegiance
and pledge which you have taken at my hands.’”***

Hearing this his brothers, relatives and compan­ions unanimously said,
“By Allah O our Master! O Aba Abdillah! We shall never betray you, so
that people may say that we had abandoned our Imam, our Chief and
Master, until he was martyred. Then we would seek excuses between
ourselves and Allah. And we shall not leave you until we ransom
ourselves upon you.” Imam said,

*“Verily I shall be killed tomorrow and everyone from among yourselves
too shall be killed with me, and none among you shall be spared.”*

To which they replied, “Praise be to Allah, that He has bestowed grace
upon us to assist you, and has offered distinction to us to get martyred
along with you. Then do we not endear that we should be along with you
in your elevated station (in Paradise) O son of the Prophet of Allah”?
Imam replied,

*“May Allah reward you favorably”*

then he prayed for them. When it dawned, all of them were martyred.

Shaikh Saduq relates from Salim bin Abu Ja’dah, who says that I heard
Ka’ab al Ehbar say that, “It is stated in our books that a man from
among the sons of Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.s) would be killed, and they
(the martyrs) would enter Paradise even before the sweat of the horses
of his companions dry, while the Hoories will fondle them.” Thus when
Imam Hasan (a.s.) passed by us, we asked him as to was he the one
referred to (regard­ing it in their books), and he replied in the
negative, and then when Imam Husayn (a.s.) passed by us, we asked him
the same question and he replied in the affirmative.

It is related that it was inquired from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.)
that, “Please relate to us the state and the self sacrifice of the
companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.).” Imam replied,

*“The veil had been lifted off their eyes and they saw their places in
Paradise. Hence they excelled one another in sacrificing their lives, so
as to hasten to meet the Hoories and be fondled by them and reach their
places in Paradise.”*

This has been referred to in Ziyarat-e-Nahiyah. After quoting the names
of the Martyrs, it is said,

*“I bear witness that Allah lifted the veils off your eyes and presented
you with spreaded beds and enormous gifts.”*

It is related through successive chain of narrators in Ma’aniyal Akhbar
from Imam Muhammad at Taqi (a.s.), who relates from his Blessed
Ancestors (a.s.) reaching Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), who says that:
When the matter of Imam Husayn (a.s.) turned severe, his fellow
travelers saw him in a different state, unlike others. For as much as
the severity increased, the color of their faces became pale and they
would shiver, while their hearts would be frightful. But Imam Husayn
(a.s.), and some of his distin­guished companions were cheerful, at
peace and tranquilled. They were telling one another, “Do you not see,
they do not fear death the least.”

Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

*“Forebear, O sons of noblemen! Death is nothing but a bridge, which
would take you from the place of hardship and severity to the spacious
Paradise and eternal bliss. Then who among you is such that does not
desire to be free from the prison and hasten towards the palaces? While
death for your enemies is such, that they shall be transferred from the
palace to the prison and fall prey to the wrath of Allah. I have heard
my father Imam Ali (a.s.), who relates from the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.s)
that he said, that this world is a prison for the believers and Paradise
for the disbelievers, while death is a bridge for them (believers) to
enter Para­dise and for them (disbelievers) to enter hell. I have not
lied nor have I been told a lie.”*

Regarding the pagans of Quraysh and their mutiny in astray and
perdition, Allah says,

***“And indeed has come unto them some of the tidings wherein is
restraint (from evil), Consummate wisdom, but (they) availed not (of)
the warnings.” (Surah al-Qamar 54:4-5)***

Similar was the case with the army of Umar bin Sa’ad. Then the repeated
speeches of our Master Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his companions, counseling
them, completing their proofs (to counsel them) and eliminating their
error, but they were not benefited.

Hurr joins Imam Husayn (a.s.)
-----------------------------

When Hurr saw that the people have resolved to kill Imam Husayn (a.s.),
and when he heard Imam calling out:

*“Is there none who would hasten to assist us in the name of Allah? Is
there none who would defend the Household of the Prophet”?*

Then Hurr told Umar bin Sa’ad, “O Umar! Then will you really fight this
man”? He replied, “Yes, by Allah! The battle, which if goes smoothly,
will result in the rolling of heads and cutting off the hands.” Hurr
said, “Then is his proposal unacceptable to you”? Umar replied, “If the
situation would have been in my hands, I would certainly have yielded to
his request, but your commander will not accept it.”

Hurr then left him and stood alone far away from others, while his
fellow traveler, named Qurrah bin Qays, was along with him. Hurr said,
“O Qurrah! Have you fed your horse today”? He replied in the negative.
Hurr said, “Then do you not desire quenching it’s thirst”? Qurrah says
that I doubted that perhaps he wanted to skip away from the battle and
did not like that I should see him going away, hence I said, “I shall
now be doing so.” Hearing this Hurr moved away from there. Qurrah says
that, “By Allah! If only Hurr had revealed to me what he intended, I too
would have accompanied him to the presence of Imam Husayn (a.s.).” Then
slowly Hurr started moving closer to Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Muhajir bin Aws told him, “O son of Yazid! What do you intend? Do you
intend to lay siege”? Hurr did not answer him but was shivering. Muhajir
said, “Verily your state seems dubious. I have never ever seen you in
any battle in a similar state in which you are now. If I would have been
ques­tioned as to who is the most valorous among the Kufans, I would not
hesi­tate to take your name. What is this state I presently see you in”?
Hurr replied, “I find myself between Paradise and hell. And by Allah! I
shall not exalt anything else over Paradise, even if I be cut into
pieces or burnt.” Then Hurr struck his horse (Malhoof) and turned to go
towards Imam Husayn (a.s.)

Hurr had kept his hands on his head (like a prisoner) and was saying, “O
Allah! I am returning towards You, thus You accept me, for I have put
fear into the hearts of Your friends and the children of the Prophet’s
grandson.”

(Irshad, Kamil) Tabari says that when he neared Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
his companions, he overturned his shield and saluted them. Then he went
to Imam Husayn (a.s.) and said, “May I be your ransom O son of the
Prophet of Allah! I am the one who had stopped you from returning back
and had accompanied you all along and had forced you to alight here. But
I had not known that these people would directly refuse your proposal
and bring you to this present state. By Allah! If I had known that they
would do to you such, I would not have undertaken that what I have done.
Hence now I apologize to Allah regarding that what I have done, then do
you think that my repentance would be accepted”?

Imam Husayn (a.s.) replied,

*“May Allah accept your repentance! Thus alight from your horse.”*

Hurr replied, “It is better for me to be mounted and serve you and fight
with them, thus ultimately I will have to alight from my horse (when I
am wounded).” Then Imam replied,

*“May your Lord have mercy upon you, do as you desire.”*

Then he stood in front of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and said, “O Kufans! May
your mothers be deprived of you! You invited the righteous slave of
Allah, then when he came to you, you handed him over to the enemy, when
you had intended to defend him with your lives? Then now you have begun
to fight him so as to kill him. You have taken hold of him and seized
his collar, and have surrounded him from all sides so that he may not be
able to escape to the vast towns of Allah.

He is now left as a prisoner amongst you, then he cannot benefit himself
nor can he ward off the evil from it. Then you have stopped him, along
with his women-folk, his children and family, from the waters of
Euphrates, which is open for the Jews, Christians and Sabians, and the
pigs and dogs of Iraq roll therein, while they would perish because of
thirst? How badly have you behaved with the Progeny of Muhammad (S)
after his death. May Allah not quench your thirst on the day of extreme
thirst (Qiyamah)!” Hearing this some of the soldiers attacked him and
started shooting arrows at him, then Hurr came and stood in front of
Imam Husayn (a.s.)

It is quoted in Tazkirah of Sibt ibn Jawzi, that Imam Husayn (a.s.) then
called out to Shabas bin Rab’ee, Hajjar bin Abjar, Qays bin Ash’as and
Yazeed bin Hars and said,

*“Did you not write letters to me”?*

They replied, “We do not know what you say.” Hurr bin Yazeed, who was
their leader, said, “Yes by Allah! We had written to you and we are the
ones who have brought you here. Thus may Allah keep away vain and the
vain-doers. By Allah! I shall not prefer this world over the Hereafter”,
saying this he turned his horse and entered the ranks of Imam Husayn
(a.s.). Imam said,

*“Welcome! You are at liberty in this world as well as the Hereafter.”*

(Ibn Nima) It is related that Hurr told Imam Husayn (a.s.) that, “When
Ubaydullah commanded me to come towards you and I came out from the
palace, I heard a voice calling out at me from behind saying: Have glad
tidings of goodness O Hurr! I turned around to see but there was none
visible. Then I wondered that by Allah, what glad tidings is this, for I
am proceeding to a combat with Imam Husayn (a.s.), and I had not yet
intended assist­ing you.” Imam replied,

*“But now you have (ultimately) reached goodness.”*

Then Umar bin Sa’ad called out, “O Durayd! Bring the standard closer.”
When he brought it closer, Umar fixed an arrow in his bow and shot it
saying, “Be a witness that I am the one to shoot the first arrow.” Then
others followed suit and challenged for combat.

Muhammad bin Abu Talib says that there was none among the companions of
Imam Husayn (a.s.), who was not wounded by it. It is said that after the
rain of arrows, only a few companions of Imam (a.s.) survived, while
fifty companions attained martyrdom.

(Tabari) Azdi says that Abu Janab, from the clan of Bani Kalb, related
to me that in our tribe there was a man named Abdullah bin Umayr, from
the clan of Bani Aleem. He had started living in Kufa and owned a house
on the head of the well of Bani Ja’ad, from the tribe of Hamadan. His
wife, who was from the clan of ‘Amr bin Qasit, was named Umm Wahab, the
daughter of Abd. He saw an army parading in Nukhaylah preparing for the
battle against Imam Husayn (a.s.), the grandson of the Prophet of Allah
(S). Abdullah says that, “By Allah! I had an intense desire to fight
against the polytheists. But now I desire fighting those who have
decided to fight the grandson of the Prophet. While my reward with Allah
would not be less than that for fighting against the polytheists.”

Then he went to his wife and related to her what he had heard and also
informed her his desire. She replied, “Verily whatever you have decided
is right. May your Allah guide you towards righteousness in all your
matters, go and take me too along with you.” He then withdrew and
reached Imam Husayn (a.s.) and remained with him until Umar bin Sa’ad
shot the arrows towards them and his army followed suit.

Then Yasar, the retainer of Ziyad, and Salim, the retainer of Ubaydullah
bin Ziyad, stepped into the battlefield and called out for combat.
Hearing this Habib bin Mazahir and Burayr (bin Khuzayr) stood up to
reply, but Imam Husayn (a.s.) signaled them to sit down. Then Abdullah
bin Umayr Kalbi stood up and asked permission to fight them. Imam saw
him to be a tawny man with a tall stature, sturdy arms and broad
shoulders, he said,

*“In my opinion he is a fatal match, then you may leave if you desire
meeting his challenge.”*

When Abdullah went towards them, they asked, “Who are you”? Abdullah
related to them his lineage and they said, “We do not recognize you.
Zuhayr bin Qayn, Habib bin Mazahir or Buzayr bin Khuzayr should have
come.” Yasar was standing with a naked sword near Salim. Abdullah said,
“O illegitimate son! Do you disdain fighting one man? Whoever shall come
to fight you shall surely be better than you”, saying this he attacked
Yasar instantly and striking him with his sword killed him.

When he was engaged in striking at him, Salim attacked him. Someone
called out to him saying, “This slave is lingering behind you.” Abdullah
was heedless until Salim galloped upon him and he struck at him with his
sword. Abdullah stretched his left hand forward, the fingers of which
got cut. Then Abdullah attacked him and killed him.

Then Abdullah recited the Rajaz, having killed both of them: “If you do
not know me, I am from the Bani Kalb, it is sufficient for me that my
family is from Bani Ulaym, I am a warrior and a man with a strong nerve,
and am not the one who shrieks at the time of anxiety, O Umm Wahab! I am
answerable to you in respect of the sword and spear of a man who
believes in Allah.”

His wife Umm Wahab picked up a peg of a tent in her hand and advanced
towards her husband calling out: “May my parents be your ransom! Fight
in the way of the pure progeny of Prophet Muhammad (S).” Abdullah
advanced towards her to send her back to the tents, but she caught hold
of his shirt and said, “I shall not leave you until I am killed along
with you.” Imam Husayn (a.s.) called out to her,

***“May you be rewarded fairly on account of the Household of the
Prophet, return back. May Allah’s mercy be upon you! Come to the ladies
for Jihad is not obligatory upon women.” Hearing this she returned
back.***

(Irshad, Tabari, Kamil) Then ‘Amr bin Hajjaj, with his army, attacked
the right wing of the companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.). When they came
near, Imam’s companions knelt down pointing their spears towards them.
Their horses were afraid to advance towards the spears and retreated
back. Then Imam’s companions shot arrows towards them killing some of
them while wounding others.

(Tabari, Kamil) A person from among the (clan of) Bani Tameem, named
Abdullah bin Hawzah, advanced further until he came face to face with
Imam Husayn (a.s.) and called out to him. Imam replied,

*“What do you desire”?*

The accursed replied, “May you get the good news of the (hell) fire.”
(Allah’s refuge) Imam replied,

*“No, it is not as you say. I am proceeding to the presence of the
Merciful Lord and the intercessor, who is obeyed.”*

Then he inquired as to who he was, and was told that he was the son of
Hawzah. Imam said,

*“O Allah! Send him to the fire (of hell).”*

Suddenly his horse was aroused and threw him down. (Irshad). But his
left foot got entangled in the stirrup while his right foot was raised
in the air. Then Muslim bin Awsaja attacked and cut his right foot. The
horse started run­ning with him with his head hitting against the stones
and trees of the desert until he died. Thus his spirit hastened towards
(the fire of) hell.

(Tabari) Azdi relates from Ata‘a bin Saeb, who relates from Abdul Jabbar
bin Wael, from his brother Masrooq bin Wael that I was along with the
army, who had advanced towards Imam Husayn (a.s.). I requested to be in
the forefront so as to get the head of Imam and thus earn honor in the
pres­ence of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad. When we reached him, a person from
amongst us named Ibn Hawzah advanced further and said, “Is Husayn
amongst you”? But Imam did not answer him.

When he repeated it thrice, Imam said,

*“Yes, here is Husayn, what do you desire”?*

He said, “O Husayn! Take glad tidings of (hell) fire” (Allah’s refuge).
Imam said,

*“Verily you speak a lie, I am proceeding towards the forgiving Lord and
an intercessor, who is obeyed. Who are you”?*

He replied that he was the son of Hawzah. The narrator says that then
Imam lifted his hands towards the heavens such high, that we could see
the whiteness of his underarms from below his clothes, and said,

*“O Lord! Hasten him towards the fire (of hell).”*

Hearing this Ibn Hawzah was enraged and desired to gallop his horse
towards Imam, but there was a moat in between them. Suddenly his foot
got entangled in the stirrup and the horse dragged him until he fell
off. Then his leg, peduncle and thigh separated, while the other half of
his body lay suspended on the stirrup. Seeing this Masrooq returned and
hid behind the horsemen. The narrator further says that I questioned him
(Masrooq) regarding his return and he replied that, “I have seen such
(wonders) from this family that I shall never ever fight them.”

Martyrdom of Burayr bin Khuzayr
-------------------------------

(Tabari) Thus the battle started. Azdi says that Yusuf bin Yazeed
related to me from Afeef bin Zuhayr bin Abi Akhnas, who was present at
Karbala. He says that Yazeed bin Ma’qal, who was from the tribe of Bani
Umayrah bin Rabi’ah, which is a branch of Bani Salimah of Abdal Qays,
came forward.

He told Burayr, “O Burayr bin Khuzayr! Do you see as to what Allah has
done to you.” Burayr replied, “By Allah! Allah has dealt fairly with me
and has brought forth evil for you.” Yazeed said, “You speak a lie, and
you never lied before. Do you remember once when I was walking along
with you in Bani Lawzan, you told me that Usman bin Affan had killed
himself, while Mu’awiyah bin Abu Sufyan was a misguided man and the one
who leads others astray, while the true and Righteous Imam and guide is
Ali bin Abi Talib”?

Burayr replied, “I bear witness that this is (still) my belief.” Yazeed
bin Ma’qal said, “I bear witness that you are among the astray.” Then
Burayr said, “Then do you desire that we imprecate one another, while
invoking the curse of Allah upon the one who lies. Then the one on the
right path should kill the one who is upon the wrong, then I shall come
out to fight with you.”

The narrator says that both of them came out into the battlefield and
lifting their hands invoked the curse of Allah upon the liar and that
the righteous one should kill the evil. Then they started fighting one
another. There were exchange of swords between them, when Yazeed bin
Ma’qal dealt a light and ineffective blow on Burayr. Then Burayr dealt a
blow upon his head, which cut his head and reached his brain. He rolled
down upon the ground like a ball, while the sword of Burayr was stuck in
his head, and he was lifting it up and down to pull it out.

Then Razee bin Manqaz Abadi attacked Burayr and grappled him. Both of
them struggled until Burayr threw him down and sat on his chest. Then
Razee called out, “Where are my defenders”? Hearing this Ka’ab bin Jabir
bin ‘Amr Azdi advanced to assist him, when I said, “This is Burayr bin
Khuzayr, the reciter of the Qur’an, who taught us the Qur’an in the
Mosque.”

He attacked Burayr with his spear. When Burayr felt the point of the
spear, he threw himself upon him and bit his nose. But Ka’ab sunk his
spear into him and drew it till his heart, while the entire point of the
spear entered his back. Then he hit him on the head and started
attacking him with his sword until he killed him (May Allah’s Mercy and
Blessings be upon him).

Afeef bin Zuhayr bin Abi Akhnas says, that it is as if I see Razee, who
was scattered on the ground, arising while brushing off the dust from
his cloak and telling Ka’ab that, “O brother (from the clan) of Azd! You
have favored me and I shall never forget it.”

Yusuf bin Yazeed says, that I asked Afeef whether he had really
witnessed it with his own eyes, to which he replied that, “I have seen
it with my own eyes and heard it with my own ears.”

When Ka’ab bin Jabir returned back, his wife, and his sister, Nawar bint
Jabir told him, “You have sided with the opponents of the son of Fatima
(a.s.), and have killed the chief of the Qur’an Reciters? By Allah! I
shall never ever speak to you from now on.” And Ka’ab bin Jabir recited
the following couplets: “You ask regarding me and shall be informed
regarding the morning of Imam Husayn (a.s.), when the spears were being
thrust, that did not I commit the act which you despise? When it could
not be imagined that day as to what I would do, I had with me my spear,
which did not falter and a white shining sword, which was sharp-edged
and fierce, then I unsheathed it and attacked a group, whose Religion
was not the same as mine, which was the obedience to the son of Harb,
when I had not witnessed anyone similar to them in their age before
them, who had fought fiercely in the battle, they are those who
safeguard their honor, then they bore pa­tiently against the spears and
swords and stepped into the battlefield, I wish this had profited them,
then when you meet Ubaydullah, give him this message that I am obedient
to the Caliph and compliant of his words, then it is I who killed Burayr
and favored the son of Manqaz, when he called for assistance.”

Martyrdom of ‘Amr bin Qartah Ansari
-----------------------------------

Then ‘Amr bin Qartah advanced and attacked, while defending Imam Husayn
(a.s.), and he was saying: “The battalion of Ansar knows that I am a
pro­tector of the territory of promise, I strike with a sharp-edged
sword similar to a youth, my self and household is lowly in front of
Husayn.”

Here Imam Husayn (a.s.) is considered more than one’s household, thus
vilifying Umar bin Sa’ad, who while talking to Imam had said that,

*“My house shall be destroyed ....... etc.” (as related in Section 15 of
this book).*

Sayyid ibn Tawoos relates, that after the martyrdom of Muslim bin
Awsaja, ‘Amr bin Qartah Ansari came forward and pleaded with Imam to
permit him to go to the battlefield. When Imam permitted him, he
attacked with such force, which was similar to that of the one who
yearns for Paradise. Thus he strived to serve the Master of Heavens,
until he killed a group of people from the army of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad.

There was no arrow, which would advance towards Imam, except that he
stopped it with his hands, and there was no sword which would come
towards Imam, except that he took it upon himself. Then Imam did not
receive any wounds until ‘Amr was alive. When he was totally wounded, he
turned towards Imam and said, “O son of the Prophet of Allah! Have I
fulfilled my (duty of) obedience”? Imam replied,

*“Verily yes, you shall be the one to go to Paradise before me. Then
offer my salu­tations to the Prophet of Allah (S) and tell him that I am
on my way following you.”*

Then ‘Amr fought bravely until he attained martyrdom (May Allah’s Mercy
and Blessings be upon him).

(Tabari, Kamil) It is related that ‘Amr’s brother, Ali bin Qartah, was
in the army of Umar bin Sa’ad. When he saw his brother fall, he called
out, “O Husayn! O liar and the son of a liar”! (Allah’s refuge) “You
have misguid­ed my brother and deceived him until you killed him.” Imam
replied,

*“Allah did not mislead your brother, in fact he was bestowed with
guidance, while it is you who are misguided.”*

The accursed said, “May Allah kill me if I do not kill you or die while
struggling against you.” Saying this he attacked Imam and Nafe’ bin
Hilal Muradi came and stood facing him. Then he at­tacked him with a
spear and threw him upon the ground, his companions came to his rescue
and took him away. Then he treated his wounds and was cured.

(Tabari) Azdi says that Nazr bin Saleh Abu Zuhayr Abasi says that when
Hurr bin Yazeed went and united with Imam Husayn (a.s.), a man from Bani
Tameem, named Yazeed bin Sufyan said, “By Allah! If my sight falls upon
Hurr, I shall kill him with my spear.” When the two armies were
attacking and killing one another, Hurr was attacking in the forefront,
while reciting the words of Antara: “With my charger’s neck and breast I
will launch myself at them again and again, until (the beast is )
clothed in blood.” And he was reciting the following Rajaz: “I am Hurr,
a host to the guest, I strike your necks with a swift sword, in defense
of the one, who has alighted at the ground of Kheef (in Mina), while I
do not regret over it.”

The narrator says that the tail and brows of his horse were wounded by
swords, and blood was flowing through it. Haseen bin Tameem, the head of
the police force of Ibn Ziyad, who had dispatched him to assist Umar bin
Sa’ad and made him the commander of the police under the command of
Yazeed bin Sufyan, told Yazeed bin Sufyan, “This is Hurr bin Yazeed,
whom you desire.” He then advanced towards Hurr and said, “O Hurr bin
Yazeed! Do you desire combat”? Hurr replied in the affirmative and he
came towards him. Haseen said that, “By Allah! It is as if his life was
in the hands of Hurr, who instantly killed him.”

Hisham bin Muhammad relates from Abu Makhnaf, who says that Yahya bin
Hani bin Urwah told me, that on the tenth (of Muharram), Hilal bin Nafe’
was attacking, while reciting the following couplets: “I am the son of
Hilal! My Religion is the Religion of Ali”! A man named Mazahim bin
Hurays came towards him and said, “I am upon the Creed of Usman.” Nafe’
replied, “However, you are upon the creed of the Shaitan”, saying this
he attacked him and ultimately killed him.

Then ‘Amr bin Hajjaj turned towards the army and called out, “O foolish
men! Do you know whom you have been fighting with? You are fighting the
valorous Kufans, who are ready to sacrifice their lives. Thus no one
should go to fight single-handedly with them, for they are only a few
left and a short time remains. By Allah! Even if you attack them with
mere stones, they shall perish.” Then Umar bin Sa’ad said, “Verily
whatever you have said is true and his opinion is accepted.” Then he
declared that no one should go for a single combat with them.

It is narrated that ‘Amr bin Hajjaj advanced towards the companions of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) and said, “O Kufans! Hold steadfastly to those who
listen to you and your community, and do not hesitate to kill the man
who has turned out of the Religion and has disobeyed the Imam.” Imam
Husayn (a.s.) said,

*“O ‘Amr bin Hajjaj! Do you incite people against me? Have we turned
away from the Religion, while you are steadfast upon it? By Allah! When
you die with these (evils) deeds of yours, you shall then know as to who
has turned away from the Religion, and who is worthy of (the fire of)
hell.”*

Martyrdom of Muslim bin Awsaja
------------------------------

Then ‘Amr bin Hajjaj attacked the right wing of the companions of Imam
Husayn (a.s.), along with the right wing of the army of Umar bin Sa’ad,
from the side of the Euphrates and they fought for sometime. Muslim bin
Awsaja Asadi was the first one among the companions of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) to attain martyrdom. Then ‘Amr bin Hajjaj and his companions
returned back.

(Manaqib) It should be noted that Muslim bin Awsaja was the agent of
Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.) in Kufa. He was given the charge to collect the
funds, buy ammunitions and accept allegiance (on behalf of Imam Husayn).

Muslim fought valiantly in the battle of Karbala, while reciting the
follow­ing Rajaz: “If you inquire about me, (know that) I am a male
Lion, (I am) from the chiefs and notables of the branch of Bani Asad,
thus the one who oppresses us has deviated from the Right Path and from
the Religion of the Self Sufficient, Omnipotent (Lord).”

He fought abundantly with the enemies and forbore upon the fight of the
army until he fell down.

The narrator says that when the clouds of sand sank, Muslim was seen
smeared in blood. Imam Husayn (a.s.) went to his head, when he was yet
alive. Imam said,

*“May your Lord have mercy upon you, O Muslim bin Awsaja! Of the
believers are the men who are true to what they covenanted with Allah,
of them is he who fulfilled his vow and of them is he who awaits (its
fulfillment), and they have changed not in the least” (Surah al-Ahzaab,
33:23).*

Then Habib bin Mazahir came to him and said, “It is very unpleasant for
me to see you smeared in mud and blood O Muslim! May you receive the
glad tid­ings of Paradise.” Then Muslim replied in a soft voice, “May
your Allah give you glad tidings of fairness too.” Habib said, “If I had
not known that I too would have to follow your path (of Martyrdom) and
reach you, it would have been my pleasure to ask you to will to me
regarding your heart’s desire, until I fulfill the rights of your
relatives and your co-religionists.”

Muslim replied, “I recommend this Master for you”, he said pointing
towards Imam Husayn (a.s.), “then you should ransom your life over him.”
Habib replied, “By the Lord of Ka’bah! I shall surely do that.” It was
not late when he died in their hands. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings
be upon him). And one of his slave girls was heard calling out, “O son
of Awsaja! O master!”

The companions of ‘Amr bin Hajjaj applauded, “We have killed Muslim bin
Awsaja.” Then Shabas turned towards his associates and said, “May your
mothers mourn over you! You kill yourselves with your own hands and are
separating from your own selves for the sake of others. Then you are
rejoic­ing because you have killed Muslim bin Awsaja? By Him in whom I
believe! I have seen him (Muslim) in the battlefield with honor for the
Muslims. I have seen him in the battle in the plain of Azarbayjan at the
time when no Muslim had moved from the places, he had already killed six
polytheists. And when such a man dies, you rejoice over it”? The
murderers of Muslim bin Awsaja were Muslim bin Abdullah Zababi and Abdul
Rahman bin Abi Khash­kar Bajali.

Then Shimr attacked the left wing of the Imam’s army. They stood in
front of him and his army and pushed them back with their lances. Then
Imam and his companions were attacked from all sides and Abdullah bin
Umayr Kalbi, who had previously killed two men, was martyred. Hani bin
Sabat Hazrami and Bukayr bin Hayy Tamimi killed him (May Allah’s Mercy
and Blessings be upon him) and he was the second Martyr among the
companions of Imam. Then the companions of Imam fought valiantly with
the Kufan army. Their horse­men, being thirty-two, attacked the Kufan
army from all sides and split all of them.

It is as if Abu Tufayl says regarding them: “What an army is this,
similar to the waves, similar to the powerful beasts like Leopards and
Lions, there are the old, the youth and the chiefs, who are mounted upon
the Horses, escaping from whose midst is very hard, when the rays of the
sun sets below their standard, it’s powers dims the eyes, their slogan
is similar to that of the Prophet, while their standards by which Allah,
the Beneficent avenges the schemers.”

It is as if it is said regarding them: “Astonishment that the clear-cut
swords and spears see months in the hands of this group, and they are
men, and astonishment that the fire burns upon their palms even though
their hands are oceans.”

(Tabari) When Urwa bin Qays, who was the commander of the horsemen, saw
this situation that his horses were split from all sides, he sent Abdul
Rahman bin Haseen to Umar bin Sa’ad with the message that, “Do you not
see that since today morning my horsemen have been dragging along with
these little group of men? Dispatch the foot-soldiers and the archers
towards them.” Then Umar bin Sa’ad turned towards Shabas bin Raba’ee and
said, “Will you attack Husayn”? Shabas replied, “Glory be to Allah! Do
you intend sending the chief of the towns and the master of the Kufans
with the archers? Do you not find anyone else who could do this job”?

Shabas disliked fighting Imam Husayn (a.s.). Abu Zuhayr Abasi says that
during the period of the caliphate of Mus’ab bin Zubayr, I heard him
(Shabas) say that, “Allah will never bestow goodness upon the people of
Kufa and will not reach them towards felicity. It is not surprising that
we fought in the ranks of Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and after him with
his son (Imam Hasan) against the children of Abu Sufyan for five years.
Then we pounced upon his son Husayn, who was the best from among the
dwellers of the earth, and we fought against him in the ranks of the
children of Mu’awiyah and the son of Sumayyah, the adulteress. Disgrace,
and what a disgrace”!

Then Umar bin Sa’ad called for Haseen bin Tameem and dispatched him with
the foot soldiers and five hundred archers. They proceeded further until
they reached Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his companions. Then they shot their
arrows towards them and impoverished their horses and all of them came
on foot.

Azdi says that Nameer bin Wahlah relates from Ayyub bin Mashrah
Haywanee, that he always said that, “By Allah! I was the one who
impoverished the horse of Hurr bin Yazid. I shot an arrow which pierced
it’s belly, it gave a cry and rolled up itself (on the ground). Suddenly
Hurr charged like a Lion and leapt upon them with his sword in hand
saying: “Even though you have cut off the legs of my horse, I am more
valorous than a male lion.” By Allah! I have not seen anyone like him,
who inflicted the ranks.”

The chiefs of his clan asked him, “Have you killed Hurr”? He replied,
“No, by Allah! I have not killed him. Rather another person had killed
him and I did not desire killing him.” Abu Wadak asked him the reason,
to which he replied, “For he was included among the devout men. By
Allah! If this deed of mine be a sin, then if I have to go to the
presence of Allah with the responsibility of injury and presence in the
army it is easy, than that I go to his presence with the sin of their
murder upon my neck.”

Abu Wadak said, “You too shall go to the presence of Allah with the sin
of their murder. Then tell me, that if you pursued one of their horses
and shot an arrow towards another, then you stood facing them and
repeated this act of yours numerous times, and you encouraged your
fellow army-men.

Then if you were attacked and you had to flee away while some of your
companions fol­lowed your example, resulting in the collaboration of you
all with them in their murder, then all of you are equal partners in
their blood.” Nameer said, “O Abu Wadak! You are disheartening us from
the mercy of Allah. Then on the day of Qiyamah if you had been in charge
of our accounts, may Allah not forgive you if you do not forgive us.”

It is better that we relate regarding them: “Does this nation desire the
intercession of the Grandfather (of Husayn) on the day of Qiyamah after
having murdered Husayn, no never, by Allah! They will find no
intercessor and they will be engulfed in the wrath in Qiyamah.”

(Tabari) They fought with them valiantly until the noon. The Kufan army
could not attack from any other side accept one, because their tents
were joint together. When Umar bin Sa’ad saw this, he ordered his men to
attack the tents from the left and right sides, to dig them up and to
surround them. Three four persons from among the companions of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) stood up to guard the tents.

Then they would attack the invaders from in between the tents and
whoever would come to dig the tent or plunder it, would be killed or
they would shoot an arrow and injure him. Then Umar bin Sa’ad ordered,
“Do not go near the tents, nor dig or plunder them, rather burn them.”
Then they burnt the tents and held back their hands from dig­ging or
plundering them.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

*“Let them burn the tents, for if they do so, the fire will act as a
prevention against them.”*

It happened as said, and a group of them fought with them from one side.

(Tabari) The wife of (Abdullah bin) Umayr Kalbi ran out into the
battle­field and sat at the head of her husband (who was already
martyred, as has been related earlier) cleaning the dust from him, and
said, “May Paradise be pleasant for you.” When Shimr saw her, he
commanded his retainer named Rustam, “Hit her upon the head.” He dealt a
blow upon her head which split open, and she attained martyrdom at that
very spot. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon her).

Then Shimr bin Ziljawshan attacked until he reached a particular tent of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) and striking it with his lance said, “Bring me fire,
so that I may burn it along with what it contains.” Hearing this the
womenfolk started shrieking and came out of the tents in panic.

Then Imam Husayn (a.s.) called out in a loud voice saying,

*“O son of Ziljawshan! Do you ask for fire to be brought so as to burn
the tent along with my family? May Allah burn you in the fire (of
hell).”*

Azdi says that Sulayman bin Abi Rashid relates from Hameed bin Muslim
that he said, that I told Shimr bin Ziljawshan, “Glory be to Allah! This
does not suit you. Do you desire tasting the wrath of Allah by killing
the children and ladies? By Allah! The commander will be pleased with
you only with the killing of the men.”

Then Shimr asked me as to who I was. And I said, “I shall not disclose
who I am.” I said this, for by Allah, I feared lest he would malign me
in the presence of the sovereign. Then a man came to him, whose orders
he obeyed more than of Shabas bin Rabee’, and said, “I have not heard a
more evil speech from you before, nor have I seen a more degraded
situation that you have placed yourself in. Then have you now started
frightening the women”?

I saw that hearing this Shimr was ashamed of himself and retreated back.
Then Zuhayr bin Qayn attacked him and his companions with a group of his
ten companions until they had pushed them away from the tents and they
went far away, and they killed Abu Uzrah Zababi, one of the companions
of Shimr, seeing this the entire army at­tacked them putting them to
loss. Many of the companions of Imam started falling down, and if one or
two of them fell it (their loss) would be easily visible, while those of
the enemies would not, because of their large numbers.

Reminding for Prayers by Abu Samamah Saedi and the Martyrdom of Habib bin Mazahir
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

(Tabari) When Abu Samamah ‘Amr bin Abdullah Saedi saw his companions
being killed one after the other, he turned towards Imam Husayn (a.s.)
and said, “O Aba Abdillah! May I be your ransom! I see that this army
has advanced closer to you. But Allah willing, they shall not be able to
kill you until they have killed us. And I desire that I go to the
presence of Almighty Allah having recited the Prayers (in your lead),
whose time has already approached.” Then Imam lifted up his head and
said,

*“You have reminded the (time of) Prayers, may Allah join you with the
worshippers and the reci­ters, and verily this is the prime time for
Prayers.”*

Then he said,

*“Tell them to lift their hands off us until we have finished reciting
the Prayers.”*

Hearing this Haseen bin Tameem said, “Your Prayers are not accepted.”
Habib bin Mazahir replied, “You think that the Prayers of the Progeny of
the Prophet of Allah is not accepted, while the Prayers of you, a
wine-bibber, is accepted”?

Then Haseen bin Tameem attacked him and Habib bin Mazahir came to meet
his challenge. Habib dealt a blow on the front of his head, which sank
in and Habib threw him down (from his horse). Then his companions came
to his rescue and took him away. Habib bin Mazahir then said, “I swear
that if we would have been similar to you in quantity or even half of
that, you would have turned your back from us, O men of ill origin and
impotents”!

That day Habib was saying: “I am Habib and my father is Mazahir, who is
a horseman of the battlefield when it is fierce, you are well-equipped
and large in quantity, but we are more obedient, forbearing (than you),
our proofs are exalted while truth apparent, and (we are) more pious and
peni­tent than you.”

Habib bin Mazahir attacked severely (Malhoof) until he had killed
sixty-two men. (Tabari) Then a man from the clan of Tameem attacked him
and dealt a blow with his sword on his head and killed him (May Allah’s
Mercy and Blessings be upon him). The name of his murderer was Budayl
bin Sareem, who was from Bani Aqafan. Then another man from the clan of
Tameem attacked him with a lance and threw him on the ground. When he
tried to stand up, Haseen bin Tameem struck him on the head with his
sword and he (again) fell down, then the person from Bani Tameem
alighted from his horse and cut off his head.

Seeing this Haseen said, “I too am a partner in his murder along with
you”, to which he said, “By Allah! No one except me has killed him.”
Haseen said, “Then give me his head so that I may hang it in the neck of
my horse so that people may see and understand that I too have
participated in his murder. Then you may take it back and carry it to
the presence of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad, for I am not desirous of the
reward (which he will offer you in lieu of the murder of Habib).”

The man refused to do so until his people made him agree. Then he gave
the head of Habib to Haseen, who hung it in the neck of his horse and
started taking the rounds in the ranks, and then returned it back.

The Tamimi man placed the head of Habib on his horse and carried it to
the palace of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad. The son of Habib named Qasim, who
was nearing adolescence, saw the head of his father and recognized it,
he followed him and went inside the palace and came out with him until
his sight fell on him. He said, “O dear son! Why are you following me”?
The child replied that there was nothing. The person told him, “What is
the matter, tell me”?

To which the child said, “This head which is with you is that of my
father. Give it to me so that I may bury it”. The man said, “O dear son!
The commander would not be pleased to it’s burial and I desire that the
commander reward me amply for this.” The child replied, “But Allah will
give you a bad punishment for what you did. For by Allah, you have
killed such a man who was better than you”, saying this the child
started weeping.

Days passed by and the boy grew up. He had no other grief except to
remain in pursuit of the murderer of his father so as to get him
un­aware and revenge the death of his father. At the time of Mus’ab bin
Zubayr, in the battle of Bajmira’, this boy entered his army. He saw his
father’s killer in a tent and followed him and waited in ambush for him.
He entered his tent, when he was taking a nap in the afternoon, and
striking him with his sword killed him.

Azdi says that when Habib bin Mazahir was killed, Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
bent. Then he said,

*“I surrender myself and my faithful companions to Allah’s
accountability.”*

It is stated in some books of Martyrdom (Maqatil) that the Imam said,

*“Your achievement is due to Allah O Habib! You were a man of
distinction, that you completed reciting the entire Qur’an in one
(single) night.”*

Martyrdom of Hurr bin Yazid
---------------------------

The narrator says that Hurr started reciting the following Rajaz: “I
have sworn not to be killed until I do not kill, and I shall not be
wounded except by advancing further, I will attack them with a
sharp-edged sword, I shall not retreat back nor will I flee (from the
battlefield).”

Furthermore he recited the following couplets: “I am Hurr, a host to the
guest, I strike your necks with a swift sword, in defense of the one who
has alighted at the ground of Kheef (in Mina), while I do not regret
over it.”

He held such a sword in his hand whose edge was raining death. It is as
if Ibn Mu’taz says about him, “I possess a sword which radiates death,
then it is not unsheathed, except that it starts spilling the blood.”

Hurr, along with his companion Zuhayr bin Qayn, attacked obviously. If
while fighting, one of them would get surrounded by the enemies, the
other would come to his defense and rescue him. They continued doing so
until the foot soldiers attacked Hurr from all sides and killed him.
(May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him)

Ubaydullah bin ‘Amr Badi, who was from the clan of Bani Kinda, says
that, “Do not forget Sa’eed bin Abdullah nor Hurr, who along with Zuhayr
aided at the need of the hour.”

Fattal Naishapuri, in his Rawzatul Wa’ezeen, while quoting the Martyrdom
of Hurr bin Yazeed says, that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) came to the head
of Hurr, blood was flowing from him. He said,

*“Well done O Hurr! You are at liberty in this world as well as the
hereafter, as your mother has named you.”*

Then he recited the following couplets: “What a best Hurr is the Hurr of
Bani Riyah, and the best Hurr during the exchange of spears, the best
Hurr who was generous with regard to his life when Husayn called out in
the morning.”

Shaikh Saduq too relates similarly from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.).

Shaikh Abu Ali in Muntahal Maqal says that Hurr bin Yazid bin Najiyah
bin Sa’eed is from (the clan of) Bani Yarboo’.

Sayyid Ne’matullah Jazaeri Tustari writes in his Anware No’maniyyah,
that a group of trustworthy men narrated to me that when Shah Isma’il
Safawi gained control over Baghdad, he came to visit the Shrine of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) in Karbala. He heard some people vilifying Hurr and hence
came to the head of his grave and ordered it to be exhumed. People
witnessed that Hurr was sleeping in his grave freshly drenched in his
blood, and a ker­chief was tied on his forehead.

Shah Isma’il tried to unfasten the kerchief from his forehead, which
according to the historical reports was tied by Imam Husayn (a.s.). When
the kerchief was untied, fresh blood started pouring out until the grave
was filled with it. Then when the kerchief was tied at it’s place, the
blood stopped. Then again they tried to untie that kerchief, but blood
started pouring out. They tried to stop the blood by other means, but
could not do so until they ultimately tied the same ker­chief. Thus the
fine status of Hurr was confirmed to them, and Shah ordered a mausoleum
to be erected on his grave and appointed a servant to look after it.

The Honorable Traditionist Shaikh Muhammad bin Hasan Hurr Ameli, the
author of Wasaelush Shi’ah, was from the progeny of Hurr bin Yazeed ar
Riyahi, as has been quoted by Shaikh Ahmad in his Durrul Mulook.

(Tabari) Abu Samamah Saedi killed his cousin, who bore enmity with him,
and then recited the Zuhr Prayers in the method of Salat al Khawf[^1] in
Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s lead.

(Malhoof) It is stated in another narration that Imam told Zuhayr bin
Qayn and Sa’eed bin Abdullah to stand in front of him so that he may
lead the Zuhr Prayers. They did so while Imam lead the Prayers with half
of his companions.

It is related that Sa’eed bin Abdullah Hanafi stood in front of the Imam
and thus became the target of their arrows. Wherever Imam would turn,
Sa’eed would stand in front of him until he was totally wounded and then
fell down. He said, “O Allah! Send your curse upon them similar to the
tribes of Ad and Thamood. O Allah! Deliver my greetings to Your Prophet,
and make him aware about the pain and wounds that I have borne, for I
crave Your reward while defending the progeny of Your Prophet.” Saying
this he breathed his last (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).
Thirteen wounds of arrows were upon his body, apart from the wounds of
lances and swords.

Ibn Nima says that some say that Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his companions
recited the Prayers individually with signs.

Tabari, Ibn Aseer and others state that after finishing the Zuhr
Prayers, they attacked fiercely and neared Imam Husayn (a.s.). Then
Sa’eed stood armoring the Imam and defended him from all sides thus
becoming a target of the enemies. Arrows started coming from all sides
until he fell down. It is written in the related salutations of the
Martyrs: Peace be upon Sa’eed bin Abdullah Hanafi, who, when Imam gave
them permission to leave him, said, “No, by Allah! We shall not leave
you alone.” Then you faced your death and defended your Imam, and you
witnessed the grace of Allah in the place of residence. May Allah gather
us along with you in the ranks of the martyrs. And may Allah provide us
your friendship in the exalted position of the magnificent ones.

We say: Reflect upon these words which prove the exalted status
possessed by this Felicitous Martyr, and other martyrs of Karbala, which
is beyond the imagination of the intelligent ones. While this is enough
(proof) of their grace.

Ibn Nima too has related the martyrdom of the above referred Sa’eed in
the words of Tabari and Ibn Aseer. Then he says that then Umar bin Sa’ad
sent ‘Amr bin Hajjaj with the archers. They shot arrows towards the
remaining companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and killed their horses. The
situation reached such that Imam had no horsemen left with him, and he
said,

*“Will the young horses be under the banner of others besides us, when
we are the chiefs of their masters? Then when a calamity desires
entering our town, we posses the power to turn it away, no one walks in
the width of the porch with a shining sword, and none from among our
group guards him.”*

(Tabari) Zuhayr bin Qayn fought valiantly and he was saying, “I am
Zuhayr and am the son of Qayn, I will bar you from Husayn with my sword,
for he is one of the two grandsons of the Prophet who is a virtuous and
chaste Proge­ny, there is no lie in that he is the Prophet, I shall kill
you and shall not regret over it, and I wish my self could be divided
into two (so that I may fight with you twofold).”

(Tabari) Then Zuhayr placed his hand upon the shoulder of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) and said, “Proceed further, for you are a guided one and are a
guide. Today you shall meet your grandfather the Prophet and (Imam)
Hasan and Murtaďa Ali (a.s.), and a well-equipped young man with two
wings, Ja’far your uncle, and Hamza the alive martyred Lion of Allah.”

(Maqtal of Muhammad bin Abi Talib) Then he attacked until he killed one
hundred and twenty men. (Tasleeyatul Majalis, Tabari, Kamil) Then Kaseer
bin Abdullah Sha’abi and Muhajir bin Aws Tamimi attacked him and threw
him upon the ground. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessing be upon him). When
Zuhayr fell from his horse, Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

*“O Zuhayr! May Allah not keep you away from Himself, and may Allah send
his wrath upon your killers as He did to those who were turned into
monkeys and pigs.”*

Martyrdom of Nafe’ bin Hilal
----------------------------

Naf’e bin Hilal Jamali (or Bajali) had engraved his name on his arrows
and dipped them in poison and shot them one after the other towards the
enemies saying, “I shoot these arrows whose teeth contains signs, while
it will not benefit those who fear, they are smeared in poison which
keeps the enemies in motion, and it’s striking fills the earth with
blood.”

He shot the arrows one after the other until they were exhausted and his
quiver became empty. Then he placed his hand upon his sword and said, “I
am a youth of the Yemeni tribe of Bajalah, I follow the Religion of
Husayn and Ali, I shall be martyred today and this being my heart’s
desire, and I shall meet my actions.”

Tabari says that he killed twelve men from the companions of Umar bin
Sa’ad, apart from those whom he wounded, until both his arms were
severed. Then he was arrested by Shimr, who called his companions to
drag him to Umar bin Sa’ad. Umar bin Sa’ad told him, “Woe be to you!
What have you done to yourself”? Nafe’ replied, “Verily my Allah knows
my intentions.” The narrator says that blood was flowing on his beard
while he was saying, “By Allah! I have slain twelve men among you,
excluding those whom I have wounded, while I do not reproach myself for
this. And if my hands would have been present, and my wrists would have
been there, you would not have arrested me.”

Shimr told Umar bin Sa’ad, “May Allah straighten your affair, kill him.”
Umar replied, “You have brought him, then kill him if you de­sire.”
Hearing this Shimr unsheathed his sword and Nafe’ said, “If you are a
Muslim, you would have despised meeting Allah with our blood upon your
neck. Praise be to Allah, who has destined our death at the hands of the
most accursed of the creation.” Then the accursed (Shimr) killed him.
(May Allah’s Mercy and Blessing be upon him).

Then Shimr attacked the army of Imam while saying, “Leave him, O Lion of
Allah, leave Shimr, so that he may strike at them with his sword and
will not flee, and he is a bitter tree and a fatal poison for you.”

Martyrdom of Abdullah and Abdul Rahman Ghifari
----------------------------------------------

When the companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.) perceived their loss and
realized that they themselves were incapable of defending the Imam and
his rela­tives, they hastened to lay their lives in the presence of Imam
Husayn (a.s.). Then Abdullah and Abdul Rahman, the sons of Urwa Ghifari,
came to the Imam and said, “Peace be upon you O Aba Abdillah! The enemy
has reached us and have hastened towards you from all sides, hence we
desire to be killed before you and sacrifice our lives for you.” Imam
replied,

*“Welcome! Come closer to me.”*

They came closer to the Imam and started fighting with the enemies in
his side. One of them said, “Verily the Bani Ghifar and Khandaf, as also
Bani Nizar knows, that I fight the adulterous group with my clear-cut
and swift sword, O nation! defend the sons of noble fathers against the
enemies with Eastern swords and sharp spears.”

(Tabari) The narrator says that two Jabirite men, named Sayf bin Haris
and Malik bin Abd, who were cousins and foster brothers, came closer to
Imam Husayn (a.s.) while they were weeping. Imam asked them,

*“O sons of my brother! Why do you weep? By Allah! I desire that your
eyes would be glowing.”*

They replied, “May Allah make us your ransom! We do not weep on account
of ourselves, rather we weep for you. We see that you have been
surrounded, while we are incapable of defending you.” Imam replied,

*“O sons of my brother! May Allah reward you fairly for this conscience
and sym­pathy.”*

(Manaqib) Then they advanced further saying, “Peace be upon you O son of
the Prophet of Allah”, and Imam too replied their salutations. Then they
attacked and were ultimately martyred. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings
be upon them).

Martyrdom of Hanzalah bin As’ad Shabami
---------------------------------------

(Tabari, Kamil) Then Hanzalah bin As’ad Shabami came and stood in front
of Imam Husayn (a.s.) (Malhoof) and started defending him with his face
and neck from arrows, lances and swords (Tabari, Kamil) while calling
out,

***“O my people! Verily I fear (that it may fall) on you the like of
that (what befell) the parties, the like of (what befell) the people of
Noah and Ad and Samood and those (who came) after them, and Allah
intends not injustice unto (His) servants. And O my people! I fear for
you the Day of Calling out (each other). The Day on which you shall be
turned back retreating, (when) for you there shall be no savior from
(the wrath of) Allah, and whomsoever Allah allows to stray, for him
shall not be any guide. (Surah al-Ghaafir 40:30-33)***

***O people! Do not kill Husayn, lest Allah may crush you with His
wrath. While the one who lies is indeed disappointed.”***

(Tabari, Kamil) Imam called out to him,

*“O son of As’ad! May your Allah have mercy upon you! They have become
worthy of the wrath from the time they have neglected your invitation
towards right before the battle, and from the time they stood up against
you, and considered lawful shedding the blood of your companions. Then
what escape do they have, after having killed your virtuous brothers”?*

Hanzalah said, “You have spoken the truth, may I be your ransom! It is
now time to go to the other home and unite with the brothers.” (Tabari,
Malhoof) Imam replied,

*“Yes, go towards that which is better for you than the world and
whatever it contains. Go towards the kingdom which will not wear out.”*

Hearing this Hanzalah replied, “Peace be upon you O Aba Abdillah! May
Allah’s blessings be upon you and your family. May Allah acquaint us
with you in Paradise.” Imam replied,

*“So be it.”*

Then Hanzalah proceeded further (Malhoof) and fought valiantly and
forbore the fear of battle, until he was martyred. (May Allah’s Mercy
and Blessings be upon him).

(Tabari) Then the two Jabirite brothers advanced further saying, “Peace
be upon you O son of the Prophet of Allah.” Imam replied,

*“And Peace be upon you.”*

They fought until they were martyred. (May Allah’s Mercy and Bless­ings
be upon them).

Martyrdom of Shawzib and Abis
-----------------------------

The narrator says that Abis bin Abi Shabib Shakiri came to Shawzib, who
was his relative, and said, “What is your heart’s desire”? He replied,
“What do I desire? I desire to fight alongside you, while defending the
grandson of the Prophet of Allah (S), until I am martyred.” Abis
replied, “I had desired the same regarding you. Then proceed further
to­wards the Imam so that he may include you among his companions as the
other proceeding you have done, so that I too may consider you. And at
this moment, if there would have been with me someone else nearer to me
than you, I would have sent him to the battlefield before me, so as to
mourn his death and earn abundant reward. This is the day of our last
actions, for after today there will be no actions but only accounting.”
Then Shawzib advanced further and saluted the Imam and fought, until he
was martyred. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Shakir is a clan of Yemen and a branch of the clan of Hamadan, which
reach­es Shakir bin Rabi’ah bin Malik. Abis himself was from the above
clan, while Shawzib was his retainer, meaning that Shawzib was staying
along with him or was his confederate and not his servant or a freed
retainer, as is assumed by some. On the contrary, our Shaikh, the
Traditionist (Husayn) Noori, the author of Mustadrakul Wasael, says that
perhaps the status of Shawzib might be higher than that of Abis, for it
is said regarding him, that he (Shawzib) was one of the foremost in
Shia’ism.

(Tabari) Then Abis bin Abi Shabeeb told Imam Husayn (a.s.) that, “O Aba
Abdillah! There in none upon the earth, among my relatives and others,
who is more dear and beloved in my eyes than you. If I had the power to
defend off oppression with anything more dear to me than my life, I
would surely have done so. Peace be upon you O Aba Abdillah! I call upon
Allah as my witness, that I am (steadfast) upon the path of your father
and yourself.” Saying this he unsheathed his sword with a wound which
was there on his forehead, and attacked the enemy.

Azdi says that Nameer bin Ramalah relates from Rabee’ bin Tameem
Hamadani, who was present in the battle, that I saw Abis proceeding
towards the battlefield and recognized him. I had seen him in numerous
battles. He was a valorous man, hence I said, “O people! Behold this is
a lion among the lions! He is the son of Abu Shabeeb! Thus no one should
confront him.”

Thus Abis started calling out, “Is there no man among you”? Hearing this
Umar bin Sa’ad said, “Pound him with stones.” Then people started
hurling stones at him, and when Abis saw this, he removed his armor and
helmet. Allah’s praise upon the one who said, “He fearlessly meets his
neck with the clear-cut spears, and he considers his head to be a
helmet, when the spears advance, he wears no other armor except that of
chastity.”

And a Persian Poet has said, “He removed his armor saying that I am a
moon and not a fish, and he removed his helmet saying that I am not a
rooster, and he came out without any armor or helmet, to embrace death
nakedly, similar to a bride.”

Then he attacked the enemies, (the narrator says that) it is as if I see
him pushing back a group of two hundred men. Then they advanced towards
him from all sides and killed him (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be
upon him). I saw his head in the hands of a group of people who were
quarreling among themselves that they had killed him. Then they came to
Umar bin Sa’ad, who said, “Do not quarrel, for he is not killed by any
one man”, and dispersed them back.

Martyrdom of Abul Sha’sa Kindi
------------------------------

Azdi says that Fuzayl bin Khadeej Kindi narrated to me, that Abul Sha’sa
Yazeed bin Ziyad (or Muhajir) Kindi, who was from the clan of Bani
Bahdula, knelt down in front of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and shot a hundred
arrows to­wards the enemies, out of which only five arrows missed the
target, while he was a master archer. Whenever he shot an arrow, he
exclaimed, “I am the son of Bahdula! A horseman of Arjalah”! Imam Husayn
(a.s.) said regarding him,

*“O Allah! Make firm his archery and offer Paradise to him as his
reward.”*

When he had exhausted all the arrows, he arose and said, “Only five of
my arrows have gone waste, while it is known to me that I have killed
five men.” Abul Sha’sa Kindi was among the group to be martyred
formerly. On that day he was reciting the following Rajaz: “I am Yazid
and my father is Muhajir, I am more valorous than a Lion of the thicket,
and I strike the rebels expertly with the spear, O Lord! I am a helper
of Husayn, and am the one to disassociate and separate from the son of
Sa’ad, and my right hand possesses a clear-cut and destructive sword.”

Yazid bin Muhajir was one of those who had come along with Umar bin
Sa’ad from Kufa to fight against Imam Husayn (a.s.), but when he saw
that they refused to accept Imam’s plea, he entered the fold of Imam and
fought for him and attained martyrdom (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings
be upon him).

Martyrdom of a collective number of companions of Imam Husayn (a.s)
-------------------------------------------------------------------

As regards Umar bin Khalid Saydawi, Jabir bin Haris Salmani, Sa’ad the
retainer of Umar bin Khalid, and Mujme’ bin Abdullah Aezi, they came out
with their swords in the beginning of the battle. They attacked the
Kufan army and entered their ranks. The enemies too responded to their
attack and surrounded them while separating them from their companions.
Seeing this Abbas bin Ali (a.s.) hastened towards them and rescued them
from their clutches. Then when again the enemies advanced further, they
attacked them and fought, until they all attained martyrdom at one
place. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon them).

Martyrdom of Suwayd bin ‘Amr bin Abi Muta’
------------------------------------------

Azdi says that Zuhayr bin Abdul Rahman Khas’ami narrated to me that the
last person (among the companions) to remain with Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
Suwayd bin ‘Amr bin Abi Muta’. He fought with the enemies, until he was
totally wounded and fell unconscious upon the ground among the martyrs.
When he regained consciousness, he heard that Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
mar­tyred and he arose in fright. They had taken away his sword, but he
had a dagger with him and he lifted it up. He fought with them for
sometime until he was martyred (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon
him). His murderers were Urwah bin Bata‘ Tughlabi and Zayd bin Raqqad,
while he was the last martyr (in the battle of Karbala).

Sayyid ibn Tawoos, while praising him says, that he was a nobleman and
recited Prayers abundantly. Then he fought like a ferocious lion and
re­mained firm until he fell down (unconscious) among the martyrs.

I, (the author) say that there is difference of opinion in the narration
of the Shi’ah and Sunni historians, traditionists and the authors of
Maqtal, regarding the sequence of the martyrdom of the companions of
Imam Husayn (a.s.), their total number, and their Rajaz. Some of them
have discussed the former ones in the end and the latter ones in the
beginning. Some have mentioned their names and Rajaz only, while still
others have mentioned regarding the martyrdom of some and left some.

Till here I have relied upon the reports of the ancient reliable
histor­ians, thus a group of the martyrs have been left out, whose
martyrdom have yet to be discussed. Henceforth I discuss their martyrdom
on the sequence given by Shaikh Muhammad bin Ali bin Shahr Ashob, as
quoted in his book Manaqib.

According to this sequence, first Hurr entered the battlefield followed
by Burayr bin Khuzayr, while their martyrdoms have already been
discussed. Then Wahab bin Abdullah bin Habbab Kalbi came out into the
battlefield. His mother too was accompanying him on that day, who told
him, “Arise O son! And defend the grandson of the Prophet of Allah (S).”
Wahab replied, “Verily I shall not act miserly.” Thus he came out into
the battlefield while saying: “If you do not know me, I am from Bani
Kalb, very soon you will see me and my sword, and will behold my attack
and influence in bat­tle, I will seek my revenge after the revenge of my
companions, and I will ward off grief and affliction before my grief, to
fight me in the battle­field is not a joke.”

He attacked the Kufan army and killed a group among them one after the
other. Then he returned back to his mother and wife and stood facing
them and said, “O mother! Are you pleased now”? She replied, “I shall
not be pleased until you attain martyrdom in the presence of Imam Husayn
(a.s).” Then his wife said, “I request you in the name of Allah not to
bereave me.” Hearing this his mother said, “O dear son! Do not accept
what she says, go and fight in the way of the grandson of the Prophet,
so that he may inter­cede for you on the day of Qiyamah.”

Wahab returned back saying: “I swear to you O Umm Wahab, to strike them
with spears and sword, similar to the swordsmanship of a youth who
believes in the Almighty, so as to give a taste of the bitter battle to
this nation, I am valorous and a youth possessing a clear-cut sword, I
am not fearful during battle, Allah, the Wise, is sufficient for me.”

Then he lay siege until he had killed nineteen horsemen and twelve
foot-soldiers. Both his hands were severed, seeing this his mother
lifted a peg of the tent and ran towards him saying, “May my parents be
your ransom! Strive in the way of the Household of the Prophet of
Allah.” Wahab proceed­ed further so as to return her back to the tents,
when she caught hold of his shirt and said, “I shall not return back
until I am killed along with you.” When Imam Husayn (a.s.) saw this he
said,

*“May Allah reward you favorably due to the right of my family! Return
back to the ladies, may Allah have mercy upon you.”*

Hearing this the woman returned back and Wahab fought until he was
martyred (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

The wife of Wahab came and sat at his head and started wiping the blood
from the face of her husband. When Shimr saw her, he commanded his
retainer to strike her with his club. He did so and she was the first
woman to attain martyrdom in the ranks of Imam Husayn (a.s.) (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon her).

It is stated in Rawzatul Wa’ezeen and Amali of Shakh Saduq, that
formerly Wahab bin Wahab and his mother were Christians, and they had
accepted Islam at the hands of Imam Husayn (a.s.). They accompanied the
Imam to Karbala, and on the day of Ashura’ Wahab mounted his horse,
while a peg of the tent was in his hands. He fought until he had killed
seven or eight men among the enemies. Then he was arrested and taken to
Umar bin Sa’ad, who ordered him to be beheaded.

Allamah Majlisi says, that he saw in a narration that Wahab was formerly
a Christian, then he along with his mother accepted Islam at the hands
of Imam Husayn (a.s.). When he entered the battlefield, he put to sword
twenty-four foot soldiers and twelve horsemen. Then he was arrested and
brought to Umar bin Sa’ad who told him, “What a marvelous valor you
possess.”

Then he ordered him to be beheaded. He was beheaded and his head was
thrown towards the tents of Imam Husayn (a.s.). His mother lifted his
head up and kissed it, then she threw it towards the army of Umar bin
Sa’ad, which hit a man and killed him. Then she lifted up a peg of the
tents and killed two others until Imam Husayn (a.s.) saw her and said,

*“O mother of Wahab! Return back. You and your son will be along with
the Prophet of Allah, while Jehad is lifted off from the women.”*

Hearing this she returned back saying, “O Lord! Do not disappoint me.”
Imam told her,

*“May your Lord not disappoint you, O mother of Wahab”!*

Then ‘Amr bin Khalid Azdi Saydawi came out into the battlefield and told
Imam Husayn (a.s.), “O Aba Abdillah! I desire to be united with your
companions, and I dislike to see you lonely and martyred.” Imam replied,

*“Go forth, and very soon we too shall join you.”*

He advanced further saying: “O self! Proceed towards the Beneficent
Lord, with glad tidings of spirit­uality and sweet basil, today you
shall receive favor for the virtues which you had performed, which is
written down upon the Tablet near the Re­warder Lord, do not fear nor be
frightful, for every living thing will face destruction, while patience
has a more part in your peace, O group of Azd from Bani Qahtan.” Then he
fought and was martyred (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

It is narrated in Manaqib that then his son Khalid followed him saying:
“Have patience upon the death of Bani Qahtan, so as to acquire pleasure
of the Beneficent Lord of Grandeur, Glory and Demonstration, and of
Eminence, Longevity and Benevolence, O dear father! You have reached
Paradise in the palace of the best of pearls.” He advanced further and
fought until he too was martyred (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be
upon him).

After him Sa’ad bin Hanzalah Tamimi, who was from the noblemen in the
army of Imam Husayn (a.s.), stepped into the battlefield saying: “Have
patience upon the swords and spears, have patience upon it to enter
Paradise, and reach the Hoor al Ein of delicacy, (like) the one who
wishes victory and success, and it is not only doubt or guess, O self!
Strive for tranquility and try to acquire righteousness.”

He lay siege and attacked severely and was ultimately martyred (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Then Umayr bin Abdullah Mazhaji came out reciting the following Rajaz:
“The Bani Sa’ad and Mazhaj know, that during battle I am a ferocious
Lion, I strike my sword upon the head of a well-equipped man, and throw
the warrior upon the ground, and make him a morsel for the Wolf and a
lame Hyena.” He continued fighting until Muslim Zababi and Abdullah
Bajali killed him. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Muslim bin Awsaja followed him, whose martyrdom has already been
discussed.

Then Abdul Rahman Yaznee stepped into the battlefield saying: “I am the
son of Abdullah from the progeny of Yazn, I am on the Religion of Husayn
and Hasan, I strike you with the sword of a Yemeni youth, through which
I desire the Audience of the Giver of Refuge.” And then attained
martyrdom (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

After him Yahya bin Saleem Mazani came out reciting the following Rajaz:
“I will strike the army with a decisive sword, a swift sword which
hastens towards the enemies, I am not inefficient nor frightful, and nor
do I fear the approaching death.” And he too met with the same fate (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Qurrah bin Abi Qurrah Ghifari followed him reciting the following Rajaz:
“The entire progeny of Ghifar rightly knows, as also the Bani Khandaf
after the progeny of Nizar, that undoubtedly I am a Lion in the heat of
the battle, and I pound and strike at the group of the adulterers with
the sword, in defense of the Progeny of the Righteous.” He put to sword
sixty-eight men, and was killed (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon
him).

Then Malik bin Anas Kahili stepped into the battlefield saying, “The
child­ren of Ali are adherents of Allah, while the children of Umayyah
are adher­ents of Shaitan.” Then he killed fourteen men, while some say
that he killed eighteen and was martyred (May Allah’s Mercy and
Blessings be upon him).

I (the author) strongly perceive, that Malik bin Anas Kahili, referred
to above, is none other than Anas bin Haris Kahili, the companion (of
Prophet Muhammad [s.a.w.s.]). Ibn Aseer Jazari in Asadul Ghabah says
that Anas bin Malik was one of the natives of Kufa. Ash’as bin Saleem
relates from his father, who says that the Holy Prophet (S) once said,

*“This son of mine (referring to Imam Husayn) would be killed at a place
in Iraq, then whoever remains at that moment should assist him.”*

Thus he was martyred along with Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Shaikh Ibn Nima in his Museerul Ehzan says that then Anas bin Haris
Kahili came into the battlefield saying: “Our clan of Kahil along with
Dawdan knows, as also Khandaf and Qays Aylan, that my nation is in
trouble, O nation! Turn into a ferocious Lion, and welcome the nation
with a swift sword, the Progeny of Ali are the followers of the
Beneficent (Lord), while the progeny of Harb, the followers of Shaitan.”

I (the author) say that he is referred to as Kahili because of his
ancestor Kahil. In the related Ziyarat-e-Nahiyah, it is stated thus:
“Peace be upon Anas bin al Kahili as Asadi.”

Then ‘Amr bin Muta’ Jo’fi stepped out saying: “Today the striking of the
sword is a pleasure for us, for the sake of Husayn the violent attack,
by this means we desire success and refuge against the fire of hell,
when there will be no expectation of refuge.” And he was killed (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

He was followed by Jaun bin Malik, the freed retainer of Abu Zarr
Ghifari. (Malhoof) He (Jaun) was a black retainer. Imam Husayn (a.s.)
told him,

*“I give you permission to leave, for you were in our midst in our times
of happiness, then do not imprison yourself in our way.”*

Jaun replied, “O son of the Prophet of Allah (S)! I have been feeding at
your place during the days of happiness (and security), then how can I
desert you in hardship? By Allah! The smell of my sweat is dirty, my
lineage low, while my color is dark. Then permit me Paradise, so that my
smell may turn into a pleasant fragrance, my lineage noble and my face
may be illuminated. By Allah! No, I shall not desert you until this
black blood of mine mixes with your pure blood.”

Then he came out into the battlefield saying: “How do the polytheists
find the striking of a black sword, in defense of the children of
Muhammad (S)? I will defend them with my words and my hands, while I
desire Paradise on the day of Qiyamah through this.” Then he was
martyred (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

(Malhoof) He (Jaun) killed twenty-five men and was martyred. Imam Husayn
(a.s.) came and stood near his head and said,

*“O Allah! Illuminate his face, fragrant his smell, include him among
the devout ones and make him known near Your Muhammad (s.a.w.s).”*

Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) relates that when people came to the plain
of Karbala to bury the martyrs, they found the corpse of Jaun after ten
days from which fragrance of Musk was emanating.

Then Anees bin Ma’qal Asbahi came out reciting: “I am Anees the son of
Ma’qal, and my right hand possesses a clear-cut sword, which I raise
upon the heads in the heat of the battle, in defense of Husayn the
honorable, endowed with distinction, the son of the Prophet of Allah,
who is the best of all Prophets.” He killed above twenty men and
attained martyrdom (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

He was followed by Yazeed bin Muhajir (Abul Sha’sa Kindi), whose
martyrdom we have already discussed.

Then Hajjaj bin Masrooq Jo’fi, the Muezzin (Prayer caller) of Imam
Husayn (a.s.), stepped into the battlefield saying: “Proceed forward O
Husayn, who are a guide and a guided one! Today you shall meet your
Grandfather the Prophet, and your Father Ali, the possessor of
munificence, whom we recognize through the Revelation.” He put to sword
twenty-five men and was killed (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon
him).

Then Sa’eed bin Abdullah Hanafi, Habib bin Mazahir Asadi, Zuhayr bin
Qayn Bajali and Nafe’ bin Hilal Jamali attained martyrdom (May Allah’s
Mercy and Blessings be upon them). (Their martyrdom have already been
discussed).

Janadah bin Haris Ansari followed them while reciting: “I am Janad and
am the son of Haris, I am neither fearful nor impotent, until my heirs
inherit from me, today my body will lay upon the earth.” And then he was
martyred (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Then his son ‘Amr bin Janadah came out saying: “Strangle the neck of the
son of Hind, and throw towards them this year the horsemen of Muhajereen
and Ansar, who had dyed their spears in the heat of the battle against
the polytheists during the days of Prophet Muhammad (S), and today they
will be dyed with the blood of the adulterers, today they will be dyed
with the blood of the base men, who have forsaken the Qur’an in defense
of evil, they have come to avenge the blood of (the battle of) Badr, for
which they have brought clear-cut swords and spears, I swear by my Lord,
I will keep striking the mischievous people with my swift and clear-cut
sword, it is rightly incumbent upon Azdi that daily he should meet the
enemy, and throw him down and attack while proceeding further.” Then he
fought and was killed (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Thereafter a youth, whose father had already been killed, came out into
the battlefield. His mother told him, “O dear son! Step out and fight in
the presence of the grandson of the Prophet of Allah (S).” When the
youth stepped out, Imam saw him and said,

*“The father of this youth has been killed, perhaps his mother would not
like him to come out into the battle.”*

The youth replied, “Rather my mother has ordered me to do so.” Then he
stepped into the battlefield reciting the following: “My Master is
Husayn and what a Best Master, who is the delight of the heart of the
conveyor of good deeds and a warner Prophet (S), Ali (a.s.) is his
father and Fatima (a.s.) his mother, do you know anyone who is his
co-equal? His countenance is like a shining star, and his forehead like
a full moon bright.”

When he was martyred (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him), his
head was thrown towards the tents of Imam Husayn (a.s.). His mother
lifted up his head and said, “Well done my dear son! O contentment of my
heart! O coolness of my eyes”! Saying this she threw away his head
towards a man who was killed by it. Then she lifted a peg of the tent
and attacked them while saying: “I am a feeble and old maid of my
master, whose (my) house is empty and who has turned frail and weak, but
I will strike at you vio­lently, in defense of the children of the Noble
Fatima (a.s.).” She killed two men by it, seeing this Imam called her
back and prayed for her.

I (the author) strongly perceive that the youth was none other than the
son of Muslim bin Awsaja Asadi. For the report as stated in Rawzatul
Ehbab and Rawzatush Shohada, in context of the martyrdom of the son of
Muslim bin Awsaja after the martyrdom of his father, is quite similar to
this. (Allah knows best).

Then a Turkish retainer of Imam Husayn (a.s.), who was a memorizer
(Hafiz) of the Qur’an, stepped out while reciting the following Rajaz:
“The ocean will set on fire due to my striking with the sword and spear,
and the atmosphere will become full of my shooting arrows, when the
sword comes into my right hand, the heart of the envious bursts.”

He killed numerous men, and some say that he killed seventy men and then
fell down from his horse. Imam Husayn (a.s.) came to him and wept and
placed his cheek upon that of his retainer. He opened his eyes and saw
the face of Imam (a.s.) and smiled and left for the heavenly abode (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

He was followed by Malik bin Dawdan, who came out saying: “This stroke
towards you is from Malik who is a ferocious Lion, the stroke of the one
who defends the liberal and honorable people, and who desires reward
from Allah, the Possessor of favor.” And then attained martyrdom (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Then Abu Samamah Saedi followed him while saying: “Condolence for the
Progeny of Mustafa (S) and his daughters, due to the siege by the
enemies of the son of Muhammad (S), the best of humans, condolence for
Zahra (a.s.), the daughter of the Prophet and for her husband, who is a
treasure of knowledge after the Prophet, condolence for the dwellers of
the East and the West, and wail for the army of Husayn, the good doer,
then who is there to reach my message to the Prophet and his daughter,
that your son is fallen in trouble.” Then he fell a martyr. (May Allah’s
Mercy and Bless­ings be upon him).

He was followed by Ibraheem bin Haseen Asadi, who was saying: “I will
strike at your joints and calves with the sword, so that this nation
spills my blood, and Abu Ishaq may attain martyrdom, by the nation I
mean the mischievous sons of adulteress women.” Then he was killed (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Then ‘Amr bin Qartah followed, whose martyrdom we have already
mentioned.

He was followed by Ahmad bin Muhammad Hashmi, who was reciting: “Today I
shall test my ancestry and my Religion, through my clear-cut sword which
is in my right hand, and I shall defend my Religion in battle with it.”
And was ultimately killed (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

It is quoted in Manaqib, that the group of companions of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) who fell martyr in the first raid were:

(1) Na’eem bin Ajalan, (2) Imran bin Ka’ab bin Haris Ashja’ee, (3)
Hanzalah bin ‘Amr Shaybani, (4) Qasit bin Zuhayr, (5) Kinanah bin Ateeq,
(6) ‘Amr bin Mashee’ah, (7) Zarghamah bin Malik, (8) Amir bin Muslim,
(9) Sayf bin Malik Namiri, (10) Abdul Rahman Arhabi, (11) Mujme’ A’ezi,
(12) Habbab bin Haris, (13) ‘Amr Janda’ee, (14) Jallas bin ‘Amr Rasebee,
(15) Sawar bin Abi Umayr Fahmi, (16) Ammar bin Abi Salamah Walani, (17)
Mas’ood bin Hajjaj, (18) Abdullah bin Urwa Ghifari, (19) Zuhayr bin
Basheer Khas’ami, (20) Ammar bin Hissan, (21) Abdullah bin Umayr, (22)
Muslim bin Kaseer, (23) Zuhayr bin Saleem, (24) & (25) Abdullah and
Ubaydullah sons of Zayd Basari, (26) Umroh, the retainer of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), (27) & (28) two freed retainers of Imam Ali (a.s.), (29) Zahir
‘Amr, the Retainer of Ibn Humaq. (May Allah’s Mercy and Bless­ings be
upon them).

In my (the author’s) opinion, the name of the (above referred) last
person is quoted wrongly, while the correct one is Zahir, the Retainer
of ‘Amr bin Humaq. Thus in the Ziyarat-e-Nahiyah, referring to the
martyrs, and the related Ziyarat-e-Rajabiyah (as quoted in Misbahuz
Zaer), it is quoted: “Peace be upon Zahir, the Retainer of ‘Amr bin
Humaq Khuza’i.” Thus it is correct that the one referred to is the same.

The proficient Erudite Qazi Mo’man Misri says that ‘Amr bin Humaq was
among the Emigrant companions (Muhajereen) of the Holy Prophet (S) and
the Tabe’een for whom Paradise was proclaimed by the Prophet, and who
remained (faithful) with Imam Ali (a.s.). ‘Amr remained alive after the
death of Imam Ali (a.s.). Once when Mu’awiyah pursued him, he fled away
to an island, along with him was another companion of Imam Ali (a.s.)
named Zahir. Both of them dismounted at a valley and a snake bit ‘Amr at
mid­night.

When it dawned, a tumor appeared and ‘Amr told Zahir, “Move away from
me, for I have heard my friend the Holy Prophet (S) saying that the
genies and men will be involved in my murder, and very soon I will be
killed.” They were talking when suddenly they saw the necks of horses,
who were in pursuit of ‘Amr. ‘Amr told Zahir, “O Zahir! Hide yourself,
and then when they have killed me and taken away my head and left my
body, you may bury me.”

Zahir said, “No I shall not do so, but I will fight them with my arrows
and when they are exhausted, I too will be killed along with you.” ‘Amr
replied, “Do what I tell you to do. Allah will give you success in
that.” Thus Zahir hid himself and the people came and killed him. Then
they beheaded ‘Amr and took his head along with them, this being the
first head in Islam, which was raised on a lance. When they returned
back, Zahir came out of his hiding and buried ‘Amr, after that he
remained alive until he was martyred along with Imam Husayn (a.s.) in
Karbala.[^2]

Thus it is proved through this narration that Zahir was from among the
distinguished companions of Imam Ali (a.s.). He was equal in rank to
‘Amr bin Humaq Khuza’i, the companion of the Prophet of Allah (S) and
the disciple of Imam Ali (a.s.). He was a virtuous slave (of Allah),
whom excessive worship had made old, body feeble and his color pale. He
had the good fortune of burying ‘Amr, his felicity was favored until he
made assisting Imam Husayn (a.s.) his sustenance, and attained
martyrdom.

And among the progeny of Zahir is Abu Ja’far Zahir bin Muhammad bin
Sinan, who was from among the companions of Imam Moosa al Kazim (a.s.),
Imam Ali ar Ridha’ (a.s.) and Imam Muhammad al Jawad (a.s.).

Furthermore it should be noted that the historians have quoted the names
of some persons, who were present on the tenth of Muharram to assist
Imam Husayn (a.s.), but they saved themselves and fled away.

(1) A retainer of Abdul Rahman bin Abd Rabbah Ansari. And as has been
stated earlier that he said that, “When I saw the companions of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) falling down I fled away (in fright) leaving them
behind.”[^3]

(3) Marqa’ bin Tamamah Asadi. Tabari and Ibn Aseer say that he had
spread his quiver of arrows upon the ground while kneeling down, and was
fighting until a group of people from his relatives came to him and
offered him protection and told him to return back to them. He returned
back with them, and Umar bin Sa’ad took him to the presence of
Ubaydullah bin Ziyad and related to him regarding him. Ubaydullah
banished him to Zarah. Firozabadi says that Zarah is a reed-bed and the
name of an area in Misr and Tarabuloos, and is also a (name of the)
mountain in Bahrayn, which has a water spring.

(5) Uqbah bin Sam’an. Tabari and Ibn Aseer say that Umar bin Sa’ad
arrest­ed him and he was a servant of Rabab (a.s.), the wife of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and daughter of Imru al Qays Kalbi and mother of Sakinah
(a.s.). When Umar inquired from him as to what position he held, he
replied that he was a retainer and did not have authority, thus Umar
released him.

(7) Zahhak bin Abdullah Mashriqi. We deem appropriate to relate about
him. Loot bin Yahya Azdi says, that Abdullah bin Asim Hamadani has
related to him that Zahhak bin Abdullah Mashriqi told him that: I along
with Malik bin Nazr Arhabi came to the presence of Imam Husayn (a.s.).
We saluted him and sat near him. Imam replied our salutations, then
after welcoming us in­quired as to why we came there. We replied, “We
have come here to offer salutations to you and pray regarding your
well-being, besides renewing our sight of you. Besides we have come to
inform you that the people of Kufa have united to fight you, thus you
may take your decision.” Imam replied, ***“Allah is sufficient and the
best Judge for me.”*** We related to him the vice of the people, then we
made a farewell salute and prayed for his well-being, while asking his
permission to leave. Imam said, ***“Why do you not assist me”**?* Malik
bin Nazr replied that, “I am under debt and have child­ren”, while I
said that, “I am indebted too even while having no children, then if you
promise to excuse me at the time when my defending you would not be
beneficial to you, I shall remain with you.” Imam replied that, ***“In
that case you are free to do so”.*** Thus I remained behind with him.

Thus Zahhak bin Abdullah remained along with Imam Husayn (a.s.) till the
day of Ashura’, and he has related reports from him regarding the day
and night of Ashura’. He further says that: When I saw that all the
compan­ions of the Imam have been martyred, while the enemies had laid
their hands upon him and his family, and no one, except Suwayd bin ‘Amr
Khas’ami and Basheer bin ‘Amr Hazramee was there. I came up to him and
said, “O son of the Prophet of Allah! Do you remember what pact was made
between us, and I had promised that until the fighters remain with you I
shall fight along with them, if not I shall be free. And you had agreed
to it.” Imam replied,

*“You have spoken the truth, but then how will you save yourself? Then
if you can do so, you are at liberty.”*

At the time when the horses of the companions were being wounded, while
arrows were being shot, I secretly hid my horse in one of the tents of
the companions, and I defended on foot. Then I killed two persons in
front of Imam and severed the hand of another. That day Imam told me
several times,

*“Do not severe the hands of anyone, may Allah not amputate your hands!
May Allah reward you due to the Proge­ny of your Prophet.”*

Then when he gave me the permission, I went and brought my horse from
the tent and sat on it. Then I spurned it until it stood on its feet and
I rushed from the midst of the army. They gave me the way until I
galloped away, while fifteen horsemen started pursuing me, until I
reached the village of Shafiyah near the bank of Euphrates.

They came near me and when I turned around, Kaseer bin Abdullah Sha’abi,
Ayyub bin Mushreh Haywani and Qays bin Abdullah Saedi recognized me.
They said, “This is Zahhak bin Abdullah Mashriqi, our cousin. We request
you in the name of Allah to lift your hands off him.” Hearing this three
men from among the Bani Tameem sided with them and others too followed
suit, thus Allah saved me.

Abdullah bin Abbas rightly said, while being reprimanded for not siding
with Imam Husayn (a.s.) (in Karbala), “Not a single person from among
the companions (to be martyred in Karbala) could be deleted nor added.
We knew them by their names even before meeting them.”

Muhammad bin Hanafiyah said, “Their [the companions of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) (in Karbala)] names along with the names of their fathers was
written with us. May my parents be their ransom, I wish I would have
been along with them, I too would have reached the great achievement.”

The noble and trustworthy Shaikh Muhammad bin Hasan Saffar Qummi, who
died in Qum in the year 290 A.H., relates in his book Basaerud Darajat
from Huzayfa Ghifari, that when Imam Hasan (a.s.) entered into a peace
treaty with Mu’awiyah and returned back to Madina, I was along with him.
A Camel laden with load was along with him every time and Imam never let
it go away from his sight. One day I inquired of him, “May I be your
ransom O Aba Muhammad! What is this load which is never separated from
you”? Imam replied,

*“O Huzayfa! Do you not know what it contains”?*

I replied in the negative. Imam Hasan (a.s.) replied,

*“This is a register.”*

I asked him as to what register was it. He replied,

*“It is a register containing the names of our Shi’ah.”*

I asked, “Please show me my name in it.” Imam told me to come the next
morning. I went in the morning accompanied by my nephew, who knew to
read, while I did not know to do so. Imam asked me as to why I had come
early in the morning? I replied that I had come to see that what he had
promised me. Imam Hasan (a.s.) asked,

*“Who is this youth along with you”?*

I said that he was my nephew and knew how to read, while I did not know.
He signaled us to sit down. Imam ordered that the centre register be
brought. The register was brought and when my nephew opened it to see,
the letters therein shone. Then while reading, he suddenly said, “O
uncle! Here is my name.” I said, “May your mother mourn you! Read my
name.” After scrutiny he showed me my name and we were overjoyed, and
this youth was martyred along with Imam Husayn (a.s.) in Karbala.

Receding to the account of the condition of the companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The books of martyrdom state, that the companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
started coming to him one after the other and saying, “Peace be upon you
O son of the Prophet of Allah”! Imam would reply to their salutations
and would say,

*“Very soon we too shall follow you.”*

Then he recited the follow­ing verse of the Qur’an;

***“Of the believers are the men who are true to what they covenanted
with Allah, of them is he who fulfilled his vow and of them is he who
awaits (its fulfillment), and they have changed not in the least.”
(Surah al-Ahzaab, 33:23.)***

“The cup of death rotates above them, and they have closed their eyes
against the world, similar to an inebriate, their bodies have reached
death upon the earth in his love, and they souls have ascended in the
curtains upon the high heavens, then they have not occupied a place
except near their friend, but they have not ascended due to anxiety.”

Sayyid ibn Tawoos says that the companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
competed with one another to sacrifice themselves for him. They were
such as has been said regarding them: “They are group who are called to
defend at times of anxiety, and some of the soldiers are occupied in
striking with the spears and some to gather the valorous, they have worn
their hearts upon their armors, as if they preceded one another in
sacrificing their lives.”

Shaikh Ibn Nima says regarding their valor, self-sacrifice and their
defense (of the son of the Prophet of Allah): “When they lift up their
wheatish colored lances and resolve firmly, then the Lions of the
thicket flee away in fright, to the name of the mill-stone of the
ferocious battle are warrior weapons, when they lay siege their
adversaries are in a loss, when they dig their legs in the battlefield,
then their promised place is the day of Qiyamah.”

Ibn Abil Hadeed in his Sharhe Nahjul Balagha says, that a person who was
among the army of Umar bin Sa’ad in Karbala was asked, “Woe be to you!
You have murdered the progeny of the Prophet of Allah”? To which he
replied, “Put stones in between your teeth (keep quite)! If you had seen
(that day) what we saw, you too would have done what we did. Valorous
persons equipped with swords, who were similar to the male Lions,
attacked us.

They would fling the valorous on the left and right and would fall upon
death. They would not accept protection, nor be allured by wealth. There
was nothing for them except acquiring dominion or death. If we had held
back our hands from them even for a short time, they would have
annihilated our entire army. What would we have done at that moment”?

Shaikh Abu ‘Amr Kashshi says that Habib was one of those seventy men,
who had assisted Imam Husayn (a.s.). They were forwarding their chests
in front of the lances and their faces (in front) of the edge of the
swords. They were offered protection and abundant wealth, but they
refused to accept the same saying, “We do not have any excuse to offer
the Holy Prophet (S) that we remained alive while Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
killed, until we all are killed.”

I (the Author) say that, “The companions of our Master Imam Husayn
(a.s.) hold a great right upon all the Muslims. It is appropriate that
here we quote a short couplet from their praises thus fulfilling an
insignificant part of their rights, for they were similar to what has
been said by their eulogizers. [Here the author quotes two couplets,
which I forego]

[^1]: Salat al Khawf - Daily Prayers of a person, which in war or
similar circumstances, is offered in a special and shortened way.

[^2]: The entire episode of the martyrdom of ‘Amr bin Humaq has been
discussed separately in Section 9 under Chapter 2 of this book.

[^3]: Refer to the entire episode in Section 18 of this book.


