Combat of the members of Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s Household (Ahlul Bayt) and their Martyrdom (May Allah be pleased with them)
=========================================================================================================================

Martyrdom of Abul Hasan Ali bin Husayn al Akbar (a.s.)
------------------------------------------------------

When the companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.) were martyred and none
remained with him except his family consisting of the children of Imam
Ali (a.s.), Ja’far bin Abi Talib (a.s.), Aqeel bin Abi Talib (a.s.), and
Imam Hasan (a.s.), they gathered and bade farewell to one another and
resolved to fight.

They were similar to what has been said regarding them, “They are a
group, who, when they step into the heat of the battle, you mistaken
them to be sun while their faces moon, they never refrain from being
compassionate at any cost whether the world deals fairly with them or
oppresses them, then when a pleader calls out for help at times of
trouble, they put forward themselves and are prepared to part with their
lives”.

Others say, “The ones with illuminated countenance whose lineage is
noble, (they are) dignified men belonging to the highest rank, when the
guest arrive suddenly upon them, their dogs do not bark at them, nor do
they question regarding the ensuing darkness”.

And Ka’ab bin Malik says, “They are a group from the Bani Hashim on
whose foundation stands a mighty wall, and it is such an authority that
cannot be transferred, they are a group due to whom Allah is merciful
towards His creation, and by means of whose grandfather (Imam Ali) the
Prophet (S) was rendered assistance, ones with illuminated countenance,
whom when one beholds, shall find generosity flowing from their hands
when the prevaricate world seeks excuses from it”.

The eminent Shaikh Ali bin Isa Irbili in Kashful Ghummah relates from
the book Itratut Taherah from Awam bin Hawshab, that he said, it is
related to me that the Prophet of Allah (S) once glanced at a group of
the Quraishite youth, whose faces were illuminated similar to the
swords, until grief became visible upon his face. It was told to him, “O
Prophet of Allah! What has happened to you?”

He replied,

***“We are a family for whom Allah has preferred the hereafter above
this world. I just recalled as to how my family will have to face
slaughter and expulsion at the hands of my nation”.***

Here the author quotes a sizeable eulogy of Sayyid Haydar Hilli, which
we omit.

(Irshad) Ali Akbar (a.s.), whose mother was Layla, the daughter of Abi
Murrah bin Urwah bin Mas’ood Saqafi, stepped into the battlefield.

Regarding Urwah bin Mas’ood, the maternal (great) grandfather of Ali Akbar (a.s.)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Urwah bin Mas’ood was one of the four noblemen of the Islamic world and
one of the two chiefs who has been quoted by the Qur’an, among the
infidels of Quraysh, as saying that,

***“Why was not this Qur’an sent down to a man in the two cities, (who
is) great?”***

***(Surah az-Zukhruf, 43:31.)***

He is the one who was sent by the Quraysh to enter into a peace treaty
at Hudaybiyah between them and the Prophet (S), when until that time he
was yet an infidel. In the ninth year of Migration (Hijrah), when the
Prophet returned from the battle of Taef, he accepted Islam and asked
permission to return to his hometown to invite the people towards Islam.
He returned back and invited them towards Islam, and when he was
reciting the Azan for the Prayers, one of his tribesmen shot an arrow at
him and he died. When the Prophet of Allah (S) received the news of his
martyrdom, he said,

***“The similitude of Urwah is that of the believer of Yasin,***[^1]
***who invited his tribe towards worship of Allah and they killed
him”.***

And it is quoted similarly in Sharhe Shamaele Muhammadiyah in
interpretation of the saying of the Prophet that,

***“If one beholds Isa bin Maryam (a.s.), he will find him to resemble
the most to Urwah bin Mas’ood”.***

Jazari relates from Ibn Abbas in Asadul Ghabah, that Prophet Muhammad
(S) said,

***“There are four Chiefs in Islam, Bushr bin Bilal Abadi, Adi bin
Hatim, Suraqah bin Malik Madalji, and Urwah bin Mas’ood Saqafi”.***

(Malhoof) Ali bin Husayn was the most handsome and elegant among all
men. He then asked permission from his father for battle. Imam (a.s.)
gave him permission and then looked at him with dejection, while tears
flowed from his eyes and he wept.

(Tasliyatul Majalis) It is related that he lifted his beard towards the
heavens and said,

***“O Allah! Be a witness upon these men, that the youth who resembles
your Prophet the most in character and speech is proceeding towards
them. Whenever we desired beholding the face of your Prophet, we would
look at him. O Allah! Withhold away the bounties of the earth from them
and cause dissention among them and scatter them. Disparage their policy
and do not make them earn the pleasure of their chiefs, for they invited
us so as to assist us, then they leapt upon us and fought us”.***

Then he called for Umar bin Sa’ad saying,

***“What has happened to you? May Allah terminate your progeny! And may
He turn your act inauspicious! And may He dominate someone upon you, who
would behead you in your bed as you have ripped our wombs and did not
consider the sanctity of the Prophet of Allah (S) with regard to me”.***

Then he raised a cry and recited the following verse of the Qur’an,

***“Verily Allah did choose Adam and Nooh and the descendants of
Ibraheem and the descendants of Imran above all the worlds” (Surah
aal-\`Imraan, 3:33).***

Ali bin Husayn laid siege upon the army while saying,

***“I am Ali bin Husayn bin Ali, by the House of Allah! We possess
superiority while bearing relation with the Prophet than Shabas (bin
Rab’ee) and Shimr, the base ones, I shall strike at you with the sword
until it bends, the sword of a Hashimite Alawite youth, I shall keep
defending my father, and by Allah! The son of the illegitimate one shall
not have command upon us”.***

He attacked the enemies repeatedly and put numerous among them to sword.

(Tasliyatul Majalis) He killed such a large number that the army started
bewailing. It is also related that although being thirsty, he killed one
hundred and twenty men. It is related in Manaqib, that he put to sword
seventy men and returned back to his father after receiving numerous
wounds.

(Tasliyatul Majalis, Malhoof) He said, “O father! Thirst is killing me
while the load of iron (ammunitions) has bereft me of my strength. Is
there water available so that I may regain strength and pounce upon the
enemies?”

(Malhoof) Hearing this Imam Husayn (a.s.) wept and said,

***“O Aide! O dear son!*** ***Fight for a while, and very soon you shall
behold your grandfather Muhammad (S). You shall drink from his flowing
cup and shall never ever be thirsty”.***

(Tasliyatul Majalis) Imam Husayn (a.s.) told him,

***“O my dear son! Remove your tongue out”,***

saying this, the Imam (a.s.) placed his tongue in his mouth and suckled
it. Then he placed his ring in Ali’s mouth and said,

***“Return back to the battlefield, and I hope that before the night
comes forth, your grandfather shall hand you a cup with overflowing
drink, consuming which you shall never ever feel thirsty”.***

Ali Akbar returned towards the battlefield and said, “The realities for
the battle have become apparent and after that it’s evidences too, by
the Lord of the heavens! We shall not part with your group until the
swords enter the sheaths”. Then he continued fighting until he killed
two hundred men.

(Irshad) The army of Kufa refrained themselves from killing him. The
sight of Murrah bin Munqiz Abadi Laysi fell upon him and he said, “The
sins of Arabs be upon my neck, if he passes by me doing what he does,
and I do not aggrieve his mother due to him”.[^2]

At the time when he was busy attacking the army, Murrah bin Munqiz faced
him and hurled a lance at him while throwing him upon the ground. Seeing
this, the army surrounded him from all sides and cut him to pieces with
their swords. “If the Indian swords have devoured their flesh, while the
flesh of the honorable men has always been its prey”.[^3]

It is stated in Manaqib that Murrah bin Munqiz Abadi suddenly pierced
his lance into Ali Akbar’s back and others attacked him with their
swords. Abul Faraj says that he attacked continuously until an arrow
pierced his throat and punctured it. He was drenched in blood and called
out, “O dear father! Peace be upon you! Here is my grandfather the
Prophet of Allah (S) calling me to hasten”. Then he raised a cry and
died. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Sayyid ibn Tawoos says that then Imam Husayn (a.s.) came besides Ali
Akbar and placed his cheek upon that of his. (Tabari, Tasliyatul
Majalis) Hamid bin Muslim relates, that on the tenth day (of Muharram) I
heard with my own ears

Imam Husayn (a.s.) saying,

***“O my dear son! May Allah kill the one who killed you. What measure
of audacity have they acquired against Allah, the Beneficent, and in
violating the sanctity of the Prophet?”***

(Irshad) Tears started flowing abundantly from Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s eyes
and he said,

***“Woe be upon this world after you”.***

It is stated in Rawzatus Safa that Imam Husayn (a.s.) wept profusely
besides him such that none had ever heard him doing so before.[^4]

Here the author quotes a lengthy elegy by Abi Tamam, which we forgo –
translator.

It is stated in the salutations of Ali Akbar (a.s.) related by Imam
Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) that,

***“May my parents be ransom upon the beheaded one, the one killed
guiltlessly! May my parents be ransom upon the blood that reached the
Friend of Allah in the heavens! May my parents be ransom upon you who
hastened towards the battlefield in the presence of his father, who
sacrificed you in the way of Allah! Then he wept upon you and his heart
scorched for you. He hurled your blood towards the heavens, not a drop
of which returned back, and his cry for you would not be diminished”.***

(Tabari, Maqatilat Talibiyyin, Malhoof) Shaikh Mufeed says that Sayyidah
Zainab (a.s.), the sister of Imam Husayn (a.s.) hastened, and cried out,
“Woe my brother! Woe my nephew!” She came and threw herself upon the
corpse of Ali Akbar (a.s.). Imam Husayn (a.s.) lifted her head and
brought her back to the tents. Then he called out to the youth saying,
“Take your brother”. (Tabari, Maqatilat Talibiyyin) They brought him
from the spot of his martyrdom and placed him in front of the tent
facing which he had fought.

There is difference of opinion in the statements of Scholars regarding
the first martyr among the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). Some opine that the first
martyr was Ali Akbar, while others say that it was Abdullah bin Muslim
bin Aqeel. And we, in concordance with the statements of Tabari, Jazari
(Ibn Aseer), Isfahani (Abul Faraj), Daynoori, Shaikh Mufeed, Sayyid ibn
Tawoos and others, consider Ali Akbar to be the first martyr (among the
Ahlul Bayt), while the salutations containing the names of the martyrs
bear testimony to this, whose wordings are: “Peace be upon you O the
first martyr from among the progeny of the best of Friends (of Allah)”.

And whatever Shaikh Najmuddin ibn Nima says that, “Quite a few persons
were alive among the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) when Ali Akbar went to the
battlefield”, is weak, and what he intended might be similar to the
above, but the trend of his speech does not confirm it.

There is also difference of opinion regarding the age of Ali Akbar
(a.s.). Muhammad Ibn Shahre Ashob and Muhammad bin Abi Talib opine that
he was eighteen years old, while Shaikh Mufeed says that he was nineteen
years old. Therefore according to this, he was younger than Imam Ali
Zainul Abedeen (a.s.). And some even say that he was twenty-five years
old or less, and was thus older than Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), while
this is accurate and more renowned.

The Eminent among Jurists, Muhammad bin Idris Hilli says at the
conclusion of the book Hajj in context of the Salutations of Abu
Abdullah Imam Husayn (a.s.) that, “Then salutations of his son Ali Akbar
(a.s.) should be pronounced, whose mother was Layla, the daughter of Abi
Murrah bin Urwah Saqafi. He was the first martyr on the day of the tenth
(of Muharram) from the family of Hazrat Abu Talib (a.s.). He was born
during the caliphate of Usman and has narrated traditions from his
Grandfather Imam Ali (a.s.), while poets, like Abi Ubaydah and Khalaf al
Ahmar, have composed couplets in his praise”.

Shaikh Mufeed in his Irshad, says that the one martyred in Karbala was
Ali Asghar (the younger), whose mother was from the clan of Bani Saqif,
while Ali Akbar (the elder) is Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), whose mother
was Shahzanan, the daughter of Khusro Parwiz or was a slave girl.[^5]

Abul Faraj relates from Mughirah, that once Mu’awiyah asked, “Who is
more worthy of the caliphate?” It was said unto him, “You”. He replied,
“No, the most worthy amongst men for this position is Ali bin Husayn bin
Ali who combines in himself the valor of Bani Hashim, the munificence of
Bani Umayyah[^6] and the honor of (Bani) Saqif”.

It should be borne in mind that according to some narratives and
Salutations he had a son and a family. The Trustworthy Authority of
Islam Shaikh Kulaini relates from Ali bin Ibraheem Qummi, from his
father, from Ahmad bin Muhammad bin Abi Nasr Bazanti, who says that I
inquired from Imam Ali ar Reza (a.s.) that, “If a man marries a woman
and also marries her father’s slave-girl?” Imam replied,

***“There is no harm in it”*****.**

I said, “It has reached me from your father that Imam Ali bin Husayn
(Zainul Abedeen) (a.s.) married the daughter of (Imam) Hasan bin Ali
(a.s.) and his slave-girl. And one of my friends have asked me to
inquire from you regarding it”.

Imam replied,

***“It is not so. Verily Imam Ali bin Husayn (Zainul Abedeen) (a.s.)
married the daughter of Imam Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) and the slave-girl of
Ali bin Husayn (al Akbar), who was martyred in Karbala”.***

Hamiri too quotes similarly with his reliable chain of narrators.

In the lengthy salutations quoted by (Abu Hamza) Sumali from Imam Ja’far
as Sadiq (a.s.) in context of the salutation of Ali bin Husayn, the
martyr of Karbala, it is stated: “Allah’s greetings upon you, and your
progeny, and your household, and your fore-fathers, and your sons”.

And regarding whether his mother was present is Karbala or no; we have
seen no reports confirming it. And Allah is the Best Knower.

Martyrdom of Abdullah bin Muslim bin Aqeel bin Abi Talib
--------------------------------------------------------

(Tasliyatul Majalis) The first one among the Ahlul Bayt to step into the
battlefield was Abdullah bin Muslim bin Aqeel. He was reciting the
following Rajaz: “Today I shall meet Muslim my father, and I shall meet
the youth who sacrificed their entirety for the Religion of the Prophet,
they are a group who do not know to lie, but they were fair and of noble
descent from Hashim, the masters of the noblemen”. He attacked thrice
and slew ninety-eight men, and in the end, ‘Amr bin Sabeeh Saydawi and
Asad bin Malik killed him. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon
him).

Abul Faraj says that his mother was Ruqayyah, the daughter of Imam Ali
bin Abi Talib (a.s.). Shaikh Mufeed and Tabari say, that a man from the
army of Umar, named ‘Amr bin Sabeeh, shot an arrow at Abdullah while he
placed his hand on the forehead to save himself. The arrow pierced his
hand and nailed it to his forehead and he could not separate it. Another
man pierced a lance into his chest and killed him. (May Allah sanctify
his spirit).

Ibn Aseer in his Kamil says that Mukhtar (bin Abu Ubaydah) called for
Zayd bin Riqqad Hababi. He came and said, “I nailed the hand of a youth
to his forehead from among them with an arrow, and the youth was
Abdullah bin Muslim bin Aqeel. When I shot an arrow at him, he said: O
Allah! These men deem us to be lowly and wretched. O Allah! Kill them,
as they have killed us. I shot another arrow at him and when I went to
his side, he had died. Then I pulled out the arrow from his heart, which
had killed him. I also started moving the arrow up and down from his
forehead, but its handle came out while its point remained therein”.
Hearing this, the men of Mukhtar hastened towards him, but he attacked
them with his sword. Ibn Kamil said, “Do not kill him with lances and
swords, rather kill him with your arrows and stones”. They shot arrows
at him and he fell upon the ground and was burnt alive. (May Allah’s
curse be upon him).

Martyrdom of Aun bin Abdullah bin Ja’far bin Abi Talib
------------------------------------------------------

Tabari says that the army surrounded them from all sides. Abdullah bin
Qatabah Ta’i Nab-hani attacked Aun bin Abdullah bin Ja’far bin Abi Talib
and killed him. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

It is stated in Manaqib that he was reciting the following Rajaz: “If
you do not know me I am the son of Ja’far, the truthful martyr who
abides in the illuminated Paradise, flying with green colored wings
therein, and this is enough (proof) for eminence on the day of Qiyamah”.
Then he killed three horsemen and eighteen foot-soldiers, and Abdullah
bin Qatabah Ta’i killed him.

Abul Faraj (Isfahani) says that his mother was Sayyidah Zainab Aqeelah
(a.s.), the daughter of Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and Sayyidah
Fatemah az Zahra (a.s.), the daughter of the Prophet of Allah (S).

Sulayman bin Qibbah, in elegy for Aun says, “Weep upon Aun if you desire
to weep, who was never prepared to forsake him (Imam) in distress, by my
life! ‘The Near Ones’ had to face great difficulties, then weep upon a
lengthy calamity”.

His mother Aqeelah (Zainab)[^7] is the one from whom Ibn Abbas relates
the narration of Fadak from her mother Fatemah (a.s.) and says: Our
prudent lady (Aqeelah) Zainab, the daughter of Imam Ali (a.s.), relates
to us....... (etc.).

It is better to be borne in mind that Abdullah bin Ja’far had two sons
named Aun, who were given the title of Akbar (the elder) and Asghar (the
younger). The mother of one of them was Zainab Aqeelah (a.s.), and of
the other Juma’ah, the daughter of Musayyab bin Najabah Fazari. There is
difference regarding which of them was martyred along with Imam Husayn
(a.s.) in Karbala. But it is evident that the one martyred (in Karbala)
was Aun al Akbar (the elder), the son of Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.), while
Aun al Asghar was killed in the incident of Hirrah by the men of Musrif
bin Aqabah, the accursed, as opined by Abul Faraj Isfahani.

Martyrdom of Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Ja’far bin Abi Talib
-----------------------------------------------------------

(Tabari) Amir bin Nah-shal Tamimi attacked Muhammad bin Abdullah bin
Ja’far bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and killed him. (May Allah’s Mercy and
Blessings be upon him.)

Abul Faraj (Isfahani) says that his mother was Khawsa,[^8] the daughter
of Hafsah from the clan of Bani Bakr bin Wael.

Sulayman bin Qibbah, in elegy for him says: “When the one whose name was
similar to that of the Prophet fell in their midst, they raised their
sharp-edged and clear-cut swords upon his head, then if you desire to
weep O my eyes, then weep generously with tears similar to a tempest”.

It is related in Manaqib, that he proceeded towards the battlefield
saying, “I complain to Allah regarding the enemies, a nation who are
blind and who spread devastation, who have changed the characteristics
of the Qur’an, the firm revelation, and its rationality, they have sided
in disbelief with the despots”. Then he put to sword ten men and Amir
bin Nah-shal Tamimi killed him.

Abul Faraj says that following him, his brother Ubaydullah bin Abdullah
bin Ja’far was martyred. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).
It is quoted in Manaqib, that Bashr bin Huwaytar Qanasi killed him.

Martyrdom of Abdul Rahman bin Aqeel bin Abi Talib
-------------------------------------------------

Usman bin Khalid bin Aseer Jahni and Bashr bin Sawt Hamadani Qanasi
attacked Abdul Rahman bin Aqeel and killed him.

It is quoted in Manaqib, that he was reciting the following Rajaz: “My
father was Aqeel thus know my position in the (Bani) Hashim, while the
(Bani Hashim) are brothers of one another, and are considerably honest,
masters of the Qur’an, this is Husayn whose base is eminent, and he is
the Master of the seniors as also the youth”.

He killed seventeen men. It is related from Madaeni, that Usman bin
Khalid bin Asheem and a Hamadanide man killed him. (May Allah’s Mercy
and Blessings be upon him). It is also said that the mother of Muhammad
bin Muslim bin Aqeel was a slave-girl and Usman bin Khalid Jahni killed
him.

It is related in Tarikh of Tabari, that Mukhtar seized two men in Kufa
who had participated in the murder of Abdul Rahman bin Aqeel bin Abi
Talib and looted his clothes. He severed their necks and burnt them,
Allah’s curse be upon them.

Martyrdom of Ja’far bin Aqeel bin Abi Talib
-------------------------------------------

His mother was Ummus Saghar, the daughter of Amir, from the clan of Bani
Kilab. While some say that his mother was Khawsa’, the daughter of ‘Amr
bin Amir Kilabi.

He stepped into the battlefield saying, “I am a youth of the valley, a
wanderer, I am from the family of Hashim, the predominant, and verily we
are the masters, this is Husayn the most sanctified among all sacred”.

Abdullah bin Urwah Khas’ami shot an arrow at him and killed him. (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

It is stated in Manaqib, that he put to sword two men, while others say
that he killed fifteen horsemen and Bashr bin Sawt Hamadani killed him.

Martyrdom of Abdullah al Akbar bin Aqeel bin Abi Talib
------------------------------------------------------

His mother was a slave-girl, while Abu Marham Azdi and Laqeet bin Ayas
Jahni killed him (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Abul Faraj Isfahani relates from Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) and
Muhammad bin Abu Sa’eed[^9] bin Aqeel bin Abi Talib al Ahwal (the
squint-eyed), that his mother was a slave-girl and Laqeet bin Yasir
Jahni seized him and killed him according to the narrative of Madaeni
who relates from Abu Makhnaf, from Sulayman bin Rashid, from Hameed bin
Muslim.

Muhammad bin Ali bin Hamza says that after him, Ja’far bin Muhammad bin
Aqeel was martyred. While it is also related from some that he was
killed in the incident of Hirrah. But Abul Faraj Isfahani says that I
have not found the name of the son of Muhammad bin Aqeel named Ja’far in
the genealogical books.

It is also related from Muhammad bin Ali bin Hamza, from Aqeel bin
Abdullah bin Aqeel bin Muhammad bin Abdullah bin Muhammad bin Aqeel bin
Abi Talib, that Ali bin Aqeel, whose mother was a slave-girl, was also
martyred on the tenth (of Muharram in Karbala). The persons among the
progeny of Abu Talib who were martyred on the tenth day (of Muharram)
were twenty two excluding those regarding whom there is difference of
opinion.

Ibn Qutaybah states in Ma’arif, that the children of Aqeel, who
accompanied Imam Husayn bin Ali (a.s.), were nine men, of whom Muslim
bin Aqeel was the most valorous.

Martyrdom of Qasim bin Hasan bin Ali bin Abi Talib
--------------------------------------------------

His mother was a slave girl. (Tasleeyatul Majalis) When Imam Husayn
(a.s.) saw that Qasim prepared to step into the battlefield, he embraced
him and they wept until both of them became unconscious. Then Qasim
asked permission to go, but Imam refused to grant him the same. He
continuously kissed the hands and feet of Imam Husayn (a.s.) until he
gave him the permission.

Qasim left for the battlefield while tears were flowing from his eyes
and he was saying, “If you do not know me I am the son of Hasan, the
grandson of the Prophet, the chosen one, the confidante, this is Husayn
similar to the one captivated by the mortgager, in the midst of the
people who may be deprived of rain water”. He fought fiercely and in
spite of being of tender age he put to sword thirty-five men.

It is quoted in Manaqib, that he was reciting the following Rajaz:
“Verily I am Qasim from the progeny of Ali, by the Lord of the House! We
possess superiority while being related to the Prophet than Shimr (bin)
Ziljawshan and the son of an illegitimate one”.

It is stated in the Amali of Shaikh Saduq that after him, referring to
Ali bin Husayn (al Akbar), Qasim bin Hasan stepped into the battlefield
saying, “Do not be uneasy O my self for everyone shall perish, for today
you shall meet the dwellers of Paradise”. He killed three men and they
threw him from his horse upon the ground. Fattal Naishapuri too quotes
similarly.

But Abul Faraj, Shaikh Mufeed and Tabari relate from Abu Makhnaf, who
relates from Sulayman bin Abi Rashid, from Hameed bin Muslim, who says
that a youth, similar to ‘the first Splinter of the New Moon’, stepped
into the battlefield.

He held a sword in his hand and wore a cloak and shirt. He wore shoes in
his feet, the strap of one of which was broken, and if I do not forget
it was the left one. Umar bin Sa’ad bin Nufayl Azdi said, “I desire to
attack him”. I said, “Glory be to Allah! Why so? This army which has
surrounded him from all sides will surely kill him”. He said, “By Allah!
I shall attack him”.He attacked him and before he could turn his face
towards him, he dealt a blow upon his head with his sword and slit it.
The child fell down on his face upon the ground and called out, “Alas! O
dear uncle! Come to my aid”.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) leapt into the battlefield like a wild falcon and
attacked like a furious Lion. He attacked Umar with his sword and he put
his hand against it, which got severed from the elbow and hung attached
to it. (Irshad) Then he yelled aloud, which was heard by the entire
army, and Imam Husayn (a.s.) lifted his hands off him. Then the Kufan
army laid siege to rescue Umar.

(Tasleeyatul Majalis) When the army attacked, the chest of their horses
hit him (Umar) and they started taking rounds until they trampled him
and he died.[^10] When the sand rested, I saw Husayn (a.s.) standing at
the head of Qasim, who was stretching his feet upon the ground. Imam
Husayn (a.s.) said,

***“Far be the nation who have killed you, while their enemy on the day
of Qiyamah shall be your grandfather (the Prophet)”.***

Then he said,

***“By Allah! It is hard upon your uncle that he could not come to your
aid when you called him, or he answered but it could not benefit you”.
(May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).***

(Malhoof) Imam said,

***“By Allah! Here he has numerous murderers while his aides are quite
less”.***

Then he pressed him to his chest and took him in a state that his legs
were drawing upon the ground. (Tabari) Imam Husayn (a.s.) pressed his
chest to that of Qasim. I said to myself, “What does he intend doing to
him?” Then he brought him and placed him near his son Ali bin Husayn (al
Akbar) and other martyrs of his family. I asked, “Who is this child?”
And I was told, “He is Qasim bin Hasan bin Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.)”.[^11]

It is related that Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

***“O Lord! Reduce their quantity, kill each one of them, abandon every
one of them, and never forgive them. Forbear O dear cousins! Forbear! O
my household! After today you shall never ever see humiliation”.***

Here the author quotes an elegy by Sayyid Haider in praise of Hazrat
Qasim, which we forgo.

In a lengthy salutation quoted by Sayyid Murtaďa Alamul Huda (the
Standard of Guidance) it is stated that: “Peace be upon Qasim, the son
of Hasan, the son of Ali, and Mercy of Allah and His Blessings! Peace be
upon you O the son of the beloved of Allah! Peace be you O son of the
sweet basil of the Prophet of Allah! Peace be upon you O whose desires
were left unfulfilled by the world! The one who could not cure his heart
through the enemies of Allah until death hastened towards him and his
desire died felicitations to you O beloved of the Prophet of Allah’s
beloved! How felicitous is your striving, and how eminent is your honor,
and how splendid is your place of return”.

Martyrdom of Abdullah bin Hasan bin Ali bin Abi Talib
-----------------------------------------------------

It is stated in Biharul Anwar, that before the martyrdom of Qasim,
Abdullah bin Hasan, regarding whom we have discussed earlier, entered
the battlefield. But the more accurate one is that he went to the
battlefield after Qasim, saying, “If you do not know me I am the son of
Haydar, I am a Male Lion of the thicket, and am a wild wind upon the
enemies”.

He put to sword twelve men and Hani bin Sabeet Hazrami killed him (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him), who’s face then turned black.

Abul Faraj relates from Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.), that Hurmalah bin
Kahil Asadi killed him, and his martyrdom shall be discussed later in
the context of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Martyrdom of Abu Bakr bin Hasan bin Ali bin Abi Talib
-----------------------------------------------------

His mother was a slave-girl, the mother of Qasim (a.s.). Abul Faraj
quotes from Madaeni, who, through his chain of transmitters, quotes from
Abu Makhnaf, from Sulayman bin Rashid that Abdullah bin Uqbah Ghanawi
killed him.

In the narration of Umayr and Ibn Shimr, it is related from Imam
Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) that Uqbah Ghanawi killed him.

Sulayman bin Qibbah in his elegies remembers him thus, “A drop of our
blood is upon the neck of the progeny of Ghani, while the
(responsibility of the) other blood is remembered upon (Bani) Asad which
cannot be computed”.

Abul Faraj considers his martyrdom to have occurred before that of
Qasim. But Tabari, Ibn Aseer, Shaikh Mufeed and others relate his
martyrdom after (that of Qasim). And Allah is the Best Knower.

Martyrdom of the sons of the Commander of the faithful Ali (a.s.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

(Irshad) When Hazrat Abbas witnessed the martyrdom of the better part of
his family, he summoned his real-brothers viz. Abdullah, Ja’far and
Usman. Then he said, “O sons of my mother! You do not have children, go
to the battlefield before me and sacrifice your lives, so that I may
witness your sincerity in relation to Allah and His Prophet (S).[^12]

Martyrdom of Abdullah bin Ali bin Abi Talib
-------------------------------------------

Abdullah entered the battlefield and fought fiercely and exchanged
swords with Hani bin Sabeet Hazrami and ultimately Hani killed him. (May
Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

The following Rajaz is quoted in Manaqib: “I am the son of an aide and
an excellent one, Ali the executor of excellent deeds, the sword of the
Prophet of Allah, the avenger, from which (sword) might would manifest
daily”.

Abul Faraj considers him to be twenty-five years of age.

Martyrdom of Ja’far bin Ali bin Abi Talib
-----------------------------------------

He fought bravely, and according to Manaqib was saying, “Verily I am
Ja’far the possessor of excellence, the son of Ali the bestower, the
successor to the Prophet a senior and master, I am in proportionate to
my (paternal) uncle Ja’far as also my maternal uncle, I defend Husayn
the possessor of generosity and grace”. Hani bin Sabeet attacked him and
killed him. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Abul Faraj quotes Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) saying,

***“Khawli Asbahi killed him”.***

Ibn Shahr Ashob says that Khawli Asbahi shot an arrow that pierced his
temple or his eye.

Martyrdom of Usman bin Ali bin Abi Talib
----------------------------------------

He entered the battlefield reciting the following Rajaz: “Verily I am
Usman the possessor of glory, my master is Ali the executor of virtuous
deeds, this is Husayn the master of fairness, the master of the young
and old”.

He was twenty-one years old; he went and stood at the place of his
brothers (who preceded him).

Abul Faraj and others say that Khawli bin Yazid shot an arrow at him
that threw him down.

It is related in Manaqib, that an arrow pierced his flank and he fell
off his horse. A man from (the clan of) Bani Aban bin Darim killed him
and took away his head. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).
It is related from Imam Ali (a.s.) that he said, “I have named him after
my (believer) brother Usman bin Maz’oon”.

Martyrdom of Muhammad al Asghar bin Ali bin Abi Talib
-----------------------------------------------------

His mother was a slave girl. (Tabari, Abul Faraj) A man from (the clan
of) Bani Aban bin Darim killed him and took away his head. (May Allah’s
Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Martyrdom of Abu Bakr bin Ali bin Abi Talib
-------------------------------------------

His name is not known (his Kuniyah is Abu Bakr) while his mother was
Layla, the daughter of Mas’ood bin Khalid.

(Tabari) A Hamadani man killed him. Madaeni relates that his corpse was
found near a stream while his murderer was not known.

It is stated in Manaqib, that Abu Bakr bin Ali stepped into the
battlefield reciting the following Rajaz: “My Master Ali is the
possessor of numerous excellences, from the progeny of Hashim the
gracious, the beneficent, the pre-eminent, this is Husayn the son of the
Messenger Prophet, we defend him with our sharpened swords, may my life
be your ransom O honorable brother”.

He fought until Zahr (or Zajr) bin Badar Jo’fi or Uqbah Ghanawi killed
him. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

It is stated in Manaqib, that then his brother Umar came into the
battlefield reciting the following Rajaz: “Leave O the enemies of Allah,
leave Umar, leave the Lion so that he may strike at you with his sword
and he shall not flee, O Zajr! O Zajr! And take your revenge from me”.
Then he killed Zajr, the murderer of his brother and entered the
battlefield.

We say, that it is known among the historians and biographers that Umar
was not present at Karbala along with his brother Imam Husayn (a.s.).
The author of Umdatut Talib, in conclusion of his speech, says that Umar
separated himself from his brother Imam Husayn (a.s.) and did not
accompany him to Kufa. While the narration stating that he was present
is Karbala is incorrect. Umar died at the age of 77 or 75 years in
Tas’a.

Abul Faraj says that Muhammad bin Ali bin Hamza says that on the day of
Ashura, Ibraheem bin Ali was also martyred in Karbala, and his mother
was a slave-girl. But others have not quoted him and I have not found
anyone by the name of Ibraheem bin Ali in the biographical books.

Sayyid ibn Tawoos says that the author of Masabeeh says that Hasan bin
Hasan al Musannah fought along with his uncle on the day of Ashura and
put to sword seventeen men. He was inflicted with eighteen wounds and
fell down from his Horse. His maternal uncle, Asma bin Kharejah, took
him to Kufa and treated him until he recovered, then he dispatched him
to Madinah.

It is quoted in Biharul Anwar from Maqtal of Khwarizmi, that on the day
of Ashura, a child came out of the tent of Imam Husayn (a.s.) wearing
earrings in both his ears. He was frightened and was looking towards the
left and right while his earrings were shaking. Hani bin Sabeet attacked
him and killed him. Shahrbanu[^13] looked at him dumbfounded and did not
utter a word.

Abu Ja’far Tabari relates from Hisham Kalbi that Abul Huzayl relates
from a man named Sakuni who says that during the days of Khalid bin
Ubaydullah, I saw Hani bin Sabeet Hazrami, who had turned old, saying in
the gathering of the people (of the tribe of) Hazram that, “I was there
in Karbala on the day of the martyrdom of Husayn and was riding a horse
along with other nine men. The horses were parading and galloping here
and there.

Suddenly a small child from among the family of Husayn, wearing a shirt
and trouser, came out of the tent. He held a peg of a tent in his hand;
he was frightful and was looking towards the left and right. It is as if
I see the two beads of earrings in his ears shaking, when he was turning
his head. And it is as if I see that a horseman galloped towards him and
on reaching him bent down and cut him into two pieces with his sword”.

Hisham says that Sakuni said, that the murderer of the child was Hani
bin Sabeet himself, and he concealed his name in fear of reproach. “My
eyes have not witnessed such children, whose grief would turn the hearts
of men to be roasted on fire”.

Relating to the Martyrdom of our Master Abbas bin Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Shaikh Mufeed in his Irshad and Shaikh Tabarsi in his A’alamul Wara say,
that the army attacked Imam Husayn (a.s.) and also scattered his troops
while their thirst intensified. Imam, accompanied with his brother
Abbas, galloped towards the Euphrates. The army of Umar bin Sa’ad
blocked their way, while a man from Bani Darim called out to them, “Woe
be to you! Block their way towards the Euphrates so that they may not
reach it”.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

***“O Allah! Let him be thirsty”*****.**

He was infuriated and shot an arrow towards Imam that pierced his chin.
Imam pulled out the arrow and placed his palm below it that became full
of blood. Then he said,

***“O Allah! I complain to You regarding how they treat the son of the
daughter of Your Prophet (S)”,***

Then they returned back thirsty. But the army surrounded Hazrat Abbas
(a.s.) and separated him from Imam Husayn (a.s.). Abbas fought lonely
until he was martyred. Zayd bin Warqa’ Hanafi and Hakeem bin Tufayl Ta’i
jointly killed him after inflicting several wounds upon him and he did
not have the strength to move. Sayyid ibn Tawoos too relates somewhat
similarly.

Hasan bin Ali Tabarsi relates, that the arrow of the accursed (from Bani
Darim) pierced the forehead of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and Abbas removed it.
But the previous narration is more renowned.

Tabari relates from Hisham, who relates from his father Muhammad bin
Saeb, from Qasim bin Asbagh bin Nabatah, who says that someone who was
present (in Karbala) during the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) told me
that, when the army of Husayn was routed, he mounted his horse and went
towards the Euphrates. A man from Bani Aban bin Darim said, “Woe be to
you! Station yourself between him and the Euphrates so that his Shi’ah
may not join him”. He galloped his horse and the army too followed him
and blocked his access to the Euphrates.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

***“O Allah! Make him thirsty”*****.**

The Abani shot an arrow that pierced the chin of Imam. Imam pulled out
the arrow and placed his palm below it, which became full of blood, and
he said,

***“O Allah! I complain to You regarding how they treat the son of the
daughter of Your Prophet (S)”.***

By Allah! Not much time passed, when I saw thirst overwhelming him while
he (the Abani man) was never satiated.

Qasim bin Asbagh further says that I was along with the one who was
fanning him (the Abani man) while a sweet drink, a jar of milk and jug
of water was kept. He was saying, “Woe be to you! Thirst is killing me”.
A jar of water or a cup, which was quenching the thirst of his family,
was handed over to him. He drank and vomited it, then slept for some
time. Then again he started saying, “Woe be to you! Give me water,
thirst is killing me”. By Allah! A sight similar to this was not seen
before, while his stomach cracked like that of a Camel.

We (the author) say that from the narration of Ibn Nima it proves that
the name of the person was Zar’ah bin Aban bin Darim.

It is related from Qasim bin Asbagh bin Nabatah, who relates from a
person who had seen Imam Husayn (a.s.) (in Karbala) who had positioned
himself upon a high moat close to the bank so as to reach the Euphrates,
while Abbas was along with him. Suddenly the letter of Ubaydullah
addressed to Umar bin Sa’ad arrived, which said that, “Block the water
supply to Husayn and his companions, and let them not taste a drop from
it”.

Umar bin Sa’ad dispatched ‘Amr bin Hajjaj along with five hundred men to
the waterfront. Abdullah bin Haseen Azdi called out, “O Husayn! Do you
see this water flowing similar to the heavens? By Allah! You shall not
get a drop from it until you, along with your companions, perish of
thirst”. Zar’ah bin Aban bin Darim said, “Position yourselves between
him and the Euphrates”. Then he shot an arrow towards Imam that pierced
his chin, and he said,

***“O Allah! Let him die of thirst and never forgive him”.***

A drink was brought for the Imam (a.s.), but he could not drink due to
the constant flow of blood. He threw the blood towards the heavens and
said,

***“Likewise towards the heavens”.***

And it is related from Shaikh Abdus Samad, from Abul Faraj, from Abdul
Rahman bin Jawzi, that after this the Abani man (Zar’ah) was inflicted
with the (disease of) scorching of the stomach and cold back, and was
yelling. Thereafter the above narration of Tabari is quoted until the
end.

The author of Umdatut Talib, in context of the children of Abbas (a.s.),
says that his Kuniyah (agnomen) was Abul Fazl and title Saqqa (the water
carrier). He was bestowed this title because he went to seek water for
his brother on the day of Ashura, but before he could reach it to him,
he was martyred. His grave is situated near the bank of the river
(Euphrates) on the spot of his martyrdom. He was the standard-bearer of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) on that day.

Abu Nasr Bukhari relates from Mufazzal bin Umar, that Imam Ja’far as
Sadiq (a.s.) said,

***“Our uncle Abbas was prudent and possessed a firm faith. He fought
along with Abu Abdullah (Imam Husayn) and underwent trials until he was
martyred. While (the responsibility of) his blood lies with the Bani
Hanifah, and he was thirty-four years when he was killed. His mother, as
also that of his brothers Usman, Ja’far and Abdullah, was Ummul Baneen,
the daughter of Hizam bin Khalid bin Rabi’ah.”***

Then he goes on to say, that it is related that the Commander of the
faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) inquired from his brother Aqeel, who was a
genealogist and knew the Arabian families well, to find a woman from a
valorous Arab family, so that he could marry her and she in turn would
bear him a valorous son.

Aqeel replied, “Then marry Ummul Baneen Kilabiyyah, for there is none
among the Arabs who is more valorous than her fathers”, thus he married
her. Then on the day of the tenth of Muharram (Ashura), Shimr bin
Ziljawshan Kilabi came and called for Abbas and his brothers saying,
“Where are my nephews?” They did not reply to him. Imam Husayn (a.s.)
told his brothers,

***“Answer him, although he is a lewd person, for he is from among your
uncles (of the same tribe)”.***

They asked him, “What do you desire?” Shimr replied, “Come to me, for
you all are under protection, do not kill yourselves along with your
brother”. Hearing this they denounced him in harsh words and said, “May
you be ugly and may that be ugly too what you have brought (the document
of security). Should we desert our Master and Chief and enter your
security?” He (Abbas) along with his three brothers was martyred on that
day.

Shaikh Saduq relates from Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) that:

***“May Allah’s Mercy be upon Abbas! He self-sacrificed fairly and
underwent trials. He offered his life for his brother until both his
arms were severed. And Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime, compensated him
with two wings and he flies in Paradise along with the Angels as He had
presented to Ja’far bin Abi Talib (a.s.). While Abbas (a.s.) possesses
such a position near Allah, may He be Hallowed and Exalted, that on the
day of Qiyamah all the martyrs will be envious of it”.***

Abul Faraj (Isfahani) says that Abbas bin Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.)’s
agnomen was Abul Fazl, while his mother was Ummul Baneen (a.s.), whose
eldest son he was. And he was the last among his real brothers to be
martyred, for he had sons, while his other brothers had none. He sent
them to the battlefield before himself until all of them were martyred
and their inheritance passed on to him.[^14]

Then he himself stepped into the battlefield and fell a martyr.
Ubaydullah (the son of Abbas) inherited from all of them and his uncle
Umar bin Ali disputed with him in this regard. Then he settled with him
by giving him the wealth that he agreed upon.

Jarmi bin Abul A’la relates from Zubayr, who relates from his uncle,
that the progeny of Abbas (a.s.) referred to him as Saqqa and bestowed
him with the agnomen of Abul Qirbah (Lit. father of the water-skin, for
he strived hard to get water for Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his family). But
I have never seen any of his sons nor have I heard anything like this
from them.

A eulogizer praises Abbas thus: “The youth is more worthy to be wept
upon whose death made Husayn weep in Karbala, he was his brother and the
son of his father Ali, Abul Fazl who was smeared in blood and assisted
his brother, he himself remained thirsty and strived to get water for
him”.

Kumayt (Asadi) says regarding him: “Abul Fazl whose remembrance is
pleasant and a cure for the illness of the soul, who fought against the
illegitimate men, while they fought against him who was the most
honorable among those who consumed the rain-water”.

Abbas (a.s.) possessed a pleasant countenance, he was handsome and of
immense height. When he would mount upon a sturdy horse, his feet would
touch the ground. He was called ‘Qamare Bani Hashim’ (the Moon of the
Bani Hashim). He was the standard-bearer of Imam Husayn (a.s.) on the
day of Ashura.

It is related from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) that he said that,

***“Imam Husayn (a.s.) arrayed his troops and handed over his standard
to Abbas (a.s.)”.***

Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) says that Zayd bin Waqad Jahmi (or bin
Warqa’ Hanafi) and Hakeem bin Tufayl Tai’ killed Abbas.

It is related from Mu’awiyah bin Ammar, who relates from Imam Ja’far as
Sadiq (a.s.), that he said that,

***“Ummul Baneen, the mother of the four martyred brothers would go to
(the cemetery of) Baqi’ and would lament with heart-rending and
grief-stricken words upon her sons. People would gather and listen to
her (sorrowful words). One day Marwan (bin Hakam) came and heard her
lamenting and started weeping (in spite of being ruthless himself).”***

Ibn Shahr Ashob in his Manaqib says that Abbas, the Saqqa’ (the water
Carrier), the Moon of the Hashimites, the Standard-Bearer of Husayn, and
the greatest of his real brothers went in pursuit of water. They
attacked him and he too lay siege and said, “I do not fear death even
when it calls out to me, or until I do not fight the tested fighters and
fall upon the ground, my life is ransom upon the one who is the life of
Mustafa, verily I am Abbas the one who fetches water, while I do not
fear on the day of battle”.

He scattered the forces, while Zayd bin Warqa’ Jahni, who was lying in
ambush for him behind a tree, severed his right hand along with the help
of Hakeem bin Tufayl Sumbosi. Then he took the sword in his left hand
while reciting the following Rajaz: “By Allah! Although you have severed
my right hand, I shall keep defending my Religion as also my positively
Truthful Imam, who is the son of the Chaste and Trustworthy Prophet”.

He fought until he was exhausted and Hakeem bin Tufayl Ta’i hid behind a
tree and dealt a blow upon his left hand and severed it. Abbas said, “O
self do not fear the infidels, may you receive the glad tidings of the
Mercy of the Omnipotent, along with the Prophet the Master of the
empowered, they have severed my left hand with injustice, O Lord burn
them with the fire (of hell)”.

The accursed killed him with his iron mace. When Imam Husayn (a.s.) saw
him upon the ground near the bank of Euphrates, he wept and said,

***“You have done injustice through your actions O accursed nation, and
have opposed the words of Prophet Muhammad (S), did not the Best Prophet
bequeath to you regarding us, are we not of the progeny of the Righteous
Prophet, is not Zahra (a.s.) from among you my mother, is not Ahmad (S)
the best among the creations, curse befell you and you were humiliated
on account of what you did, and very soon you will face the scorching
fire (of hell)”.***

We say that if one desires to realize the state of Imam Husayn (a.s.) on
the death of his brother, family members and other companions, should
ponder upon the words of Imam Ali (a.s.) and his condition upon the
death of his eminent companions and friends (in the battle of Siffīn)
like Ammar bin Yasir, Malik Ashtar, Muhammad bin Abu Bakr, Abul Haysam
bin Teehan, Khuzaymah bin Sabit and others. It is related that on a
Friday preceding his martyrdom, Imam Ali (a.s.) made a speech in which
he remembered them and said,

***“Where are my brothers who were upon the thoroughfare and where have
they passed who were truth loving men? Where is Ammar? Where is Ibnat
Teehan? Where is Zush Shahadatayn (Khuzaymah bin Sabit)? Where are
others similar to them who had pledged among themselves to die and their
heads were dispatched to the presence of wicked men?”***

Then he held his blessed beard in his hand and wept bitterly, then said,

***“Alas upon the brothers who recited the Qur’an and remained
steadfast. Those who recognized their obligation and fulfilled them,
they enlivened the customs and trampled the innovations. They were
invited to strive and they hastened towards it”.***

It is related, that when Ammar bin Yasir was martyred in Siffīn along
with a group of the companions of the Commander of the faithful Imam Ali
(a.s.), and when night came, Imam Ali (a.s.) wandered among the martyrs.
When he saw Ammar fallen upon the ground, he lifted his head and placed
it upon his thigh and wept, then said,

***“O death! Till when shall you be away from me, when you have not
spared for me any friend of (my) friend, I find you discerning towards
those whom I love, as if you proceed towards them with evidences”.***

In the complete poetical work (of Imam Ali), the first couplet is as
follows:

***“O death which shall not leave me, relieve me for you have taken away
all my friends”.***

It is related in Biharul Anwar, that when Hazrat Abbas (a.s.) found
himself alone, he came to Imam Husayn (a.s.) and said, “Do you permit
me?” Imam wept bitterly and said,

***“O dear brother! You are my standard-bearer, then if you go away my
army will get scattered”.***

Abbas replied, “My heart is getting narrow and I am satiated from life.
And I desire to avenge the blood of my brothers from these hypocrites”.
Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

***“Then bring water for these children”.***

Abbas proceeded and counseled the army and warned them, but it did not
prove fruitful. Then he returned back to the Imam and informed him. He
heard the children wailing “O thirst”, he took a water-skin and mounted
his horse and went towards the Euphrates. Four thousand men, who were
guarding the Euphrates, surrounded him from all sides and shot arrows at
him. He attacked them and killed eighty men until he had ripped them,
then he entered the river. He tried to drink water,[^15] when suddenly
he remembered the thirst of Imam and his Household. He then threw away
the water and filled the water-skin. He placed the water-skin upon his
right shoulder and turned towards the tents. They blocked his way and
surrounded him from all sides. He fought with them until Nawfal severed
his right hand with his sword.

Then he placed the water-skin upon his left shoulder. Nawful then
severed his left hand from the wrist and he held the water-skin by his
teeth. Then an arrow pierced the water skin and water flowed from it.
Another arrow pierced his heart and he fell off from the horse and
called out, “O Master! Find me”. When Imam came to his head, he saw him
smeared in sand and blood and wept.

Regarding his martyrdom, Turayhi says that a man attacked him and struck
at the crown of his head with an iron club that split up and he fell
down upon the ground and called out, “O Aba Abdillah! My salutations
upon you!”

Ibn Nima says regarding Hakeem bin Tufayl that he stole the dress of
Abbas off his body and shot an arrow at him.

It is stated in Biharul Anwar that it is said, that when Abbas (a.s.)
was martyred, Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

***“Now my back has bent, and my maneuver has lessened”.***

Here the author quotes two couplets in praise of Hazrat Abbas, one by
Abu Ja’far bin Ameer Alhaj Husaynee, and the other by Shaikh Ibn Nima,
which we forgo.

I (the author), say that while discussing the aid rendered by Hazrat
Abul Fazl (Abbas) to Imam Husayn (a.s.) reminds me of the aid rendered
by his (Abbas)’s father, the Commander of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.)
to his cousin, the Prophet of Allah (S). Therefore I shall quote it as
an embellishment for this book.

Jahiz in the book Usmaniyah quotes from Ibn Abil Hadeed that Abu Bakr
was in great severity in Makkah before migration, while Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.) was in safety. Neither was he sought after nor did he seek.
Abu Ja’far Iskafi, while refuting this, says that we have related a
reliable tradition with chain of authorities that when Imam Ali (a.s.)
accepted Islam, he was adolescent and sane. And he expelled the
Qurayshite polytheists with his tongue and heart and was a burden for
them. While he was the one who was confined in the valley (along with
the Prophet during boycott) and not Abu Bakr.

He was the one, who in the dark and straightened circumstances of the
boycott, was a confidante of the Prophet of Allah (S) and drank the
bitter cup of persecutions at the hands of Abu Lahab, Abu Jahl and
others, and burnt in the fire of confinement. He bore the difficulties
alongside his Prophet and carried the burden of great hardships upon his
shoulders while facing dangerous tasks. He was the one, who at night,
would steal out in fear[^16] from the valley and would go concealing to
the noblemen of Quraysh, like Mut’em bin Adi and others, in compliance
at the orders of Abu Talib (a.s.), and would also carry the load of
foodstuffs with a thousand fears and shivers upon his back for the Bani
Hashim. And if the enemies like Abu Jahl would see him, they would have
shed his blood. Verily Ali (a.s.) was the one who did thus during the
days of boycott, or was it Abu Bakr?

Imam Ali (a.s.), in his renowned sermon, explains his state at that time
and says,

***“They pledged together that they would not deal with us not enter
into a wedlock. They kindled the fire of battle upon us and they drew
us, the entire Bani Hashim, into a mountain of severity. Those who were
believers among us desired reward (in lieu of assisting us) and the
disbelievers were assisting their family. All the tribes of Quraysh
gathered together to oppose them and withheld their sustenance from
them. And they waited for them every morning and evening to succumb to
hunger while there was no way for any redress or improvement. Their
determination parted away and their desires died away”.***

Abu Ja’far Iskafi says, that there is no doubt that Abu Usman Jahiz has
succumbed under the influence of falsehood and has traversed the road of
error and treachery. Ultimately he became perplexed and understood
nothing until he said that what he said. And he assumed that Imam Ali
(a.s.) did not face miseries and hardships before Migration, and that
only after Migration, from the day of (the battle of) Badr, was he
engulfed in severity and trials. He has very well forgotten the days of
the boycott in the valley as to how Imam Ali (a.s.) faced severity while
Abu Bakr was in comfort and tranquility. And he (Abu Bakr) could sit
along with anyone whom he pleased and eat whatever he desired, while he
was independent and contented.

But Imam Ali (a.s.) was in the whirlpool of imprisonment and bore hunger
and thirst. Every morning and evening he faced the risk of being killed,
for it was he, who at the invitation of the noblemen and the wise men of
Quraysh, would go to acquire the food for them, until he would take care
of the Prophet of Allah (S) and the rest of Bani Hashim in the
straightened circumstances of the imprisonment in the mountain. And it
was very much possible that the enemies of the Prophet of Allah (S)
would unsparingly make him a prey of their swords. And he could become a
victim of Waleed bin Mugheerah, Utbah bin Rabi’ah and other Pharaohs and
tyrants of Quraysh.

He himself remained hungry and gave his own food to the Prophet of Allah
(S), while he himself remained thirsty and gave away his share of water
to the Prophet of Allah (S). It is he who nursed the Prophet during his
illness and was his aide during his loneliness. While Abu Bakr was
discharged from all these difficulties and he did not face their pain
and hardships, in fact he was unaware of their state, rather roughly.

Dealing with them or marriages among them was banned for three years.
They were imprisoned in the valley and could not step out and look after
their affairs. Then how could (Abu Usman) Jahiz overlook this merit and
neglect this privilege that was unparalleled. “This being one of his
numerous excellences, from which you can analyze other (excellences)”.
Here the author quotes some couplets of Shaikh Azari.

I (the author), say, that Abu Ja’far Iskafi has truly said that Imam Ali
(a.s.) nursed the Prophet (S) during his illness. As Ibn Abil Hadeed
relates from Salman Farsi (a.s.) that, I went to the presence of the
Prophet (S) on the morning preceding the day of his death. He said,

***“Do not ask me as to how I passed the last night in pain and
sleeplessness with Ali”.***

I asked, “O Prophet of Allah! Do permit that tonight I may bear the
sleeplessness with you in place of Ali”. The Prophet (S) replied,

***“No, rather he is more worthy than you for this task”.***

May my parents be your ransom O Ali!

Here the author quotes a couplet and another that of Safiyuddin Hilli.

Description of the valor of Hazrat Abbas (a.s.)
-----------------------------------------------

It should be noted that valor is a spiritual attribute and can be
perceived by the intelligence and not through observation. It cannot be
understood by itself but can be comprehended by beholding its
influences. If one desires to know whether Abbas is a valorous man, then
one should see him at the time when he is surrounded from all sides by
the valorous, while death has shortened his time and he has fallen in
the heat of the battle.

Then if he turns restless, is frightful and trembles, and he flees and
finds relief, and takes upon himself the disgrace of baseness and wears
the armor of disgrace of flight facing the tail of the sword, then know,
that he is far away from valor. But if he attacks forthwith and
considers the voice of the (striking of the) sword to be that of a
pleasant flute, and he hastens into the ranks of the combat as if he
proceeds amidst pleasures, and enters the waves of dread with a relaxed
heart and considers the embracing of the swords to be a felicity and
striking with the points of lances to be a profitable good-tidings.

“He acclaims the lances with his neck as if it is an aloes wood of a
sweet basil, while the sound of the (striking of the) sword near him is
similar to the singing voice of women who sing for him”. Then know that
it is he who holds the reins of valor in his hands, and he wears valor
that is the favorite of Allah.

Then know as to what we have said regarding the combat of the companions
of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and that of his family, as we have quoted, then
one would conclude that all of them possessed the highest status of
valor and the lofty position of vigor except that Abbas b. Ali (a.s.)
had the abundant share amongst them and a lofty and excessive position
while all of them were the pickers of his harvest. He possessed a
steadfast faith, profound foresight, and holds such a position near
Allah that all the martyrs will envy him on the day of Qiyamah. And why
would not this be, when his father was none other than the Commander of
the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.).

Mas’oodi relates in Murujuz Zahab regarding the battle of Jamal, that
the enemies attacked the right and left rank of Imam Ali (a.s.) and
pushed them back. One of the sons of Aqeel came to Imam Ali (a.s.) while
he had laid his head upon the cover of the saddle and was dozing off. He
said, “O dear uncle! Do you see where our right and left ranks are,
while you sleep?” Imam (a.s.) replied,

***“O nephew! Remain silent! Your uncle has a destined day (of death)
that cannot be avoided. By Allah! Your uncle does not fear whether he
hastens towards death or death hastens towards him”.***

Then he commanded his son Muhammad bin Hanafiyah, who was his
standard-bearer in the battle, to attack the Basran army. Muhammad
showed slackness for he was facing a group of archers, he waited for
them to exhaust their arrows. Imam Ali (a.s.) approached him and asked,

***“Why did you not attack?”***

He replied, “There was no other way except proceeding while facing the
arrows and lances, then I waited for them to exhaust their arrows so
that I may then attack them”. Imam replied,

***“Then proceed in the midst of the arrows, for death is your
armor”.***

Hearing this Muhammad attacked and was left in the midst of the points
of the lances and the shooting arrows. Imam Ali (a.s.) came to him, and
striking at him with the hilt of his sword, said,

***“The vein of your mother has desisted you”.***

Then he took away the standard from him and attacked, while others
attacked along with him, and the Basran army seemed similar to ashes
that were blown away by the wind.

The above-referred Muhammad bin Hanafiyah is the son of the Commander of
the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.). Thus Zuhri says that he was the most wise
and valorous among men. While Jahiz says regarding him, that all
unanimously agree that he was unparalleled and a true man in his age. He
excelled all in perfection and excellence, while his valor is proved
from that which the historians have quoted regarding the battle of
Siffīn.

And it is enough (proof) that he was the standard-bearer of Imam Ali
(a.s.). And in spite of this he showed slackness towards the archers (in
the above incident) so that they would exhaust their arrows, but may my
parents be ransom upon Abbas (a.s.), the standard-bearer of his brother
Imam Husayn (a.s.), the commander of his army, who advanced into the
ranks of four thousand men employed to watch upon the Euphrates. And he
stood firm like a mountain facing their archers he did not tremble nor
did he fear, rather he said, “I do not fear death even if it comes upon
me”.

As is related earlier that he (Hazrat Abbas) rescued some of the
companions of Imam Husayn (a.s.) when they were surrounded from all
sides by the enemies. Then know that he acted as a shield for his
brother Imam Husayn (a.s.). May my parents be your ransom O Abal Fazl!

Here the author quotes some couplets regarding the valor of Hazrat Abbas
(a.s.).[^17]

[^1]: When the people of the city disbelieved and rejected the message
from Hazrat Isa (a.s.), a man from the outskirts of the city, i.e.
Habib-an-Najjar (Habib, the carpenter), who is popularly known as
‘Mo’mine Ale Yasin’, came running and exhorted his people to believe in
the message of the ‘Selfless Ones’ (the Messengers). For his words refer
verses 20 to 32 of Surah-al-Yasin (36: 20-32). The Roman name of the man
is Theofelus i.e. Habibullah. There is another tradition that Prophet
Muhammad (S) said that, “There are three persons who responded to the
call of their Prophets without hesitation and they never bowed to any
one besides Allah even for the twinkling of an eye, viz.
Habib-an-Najjar, the believer of Ale Yasin; Izekiel, the believer from
the people of Fir’aun, and Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), who is superior
among all of them. Ref. Kifayat-ut-Talib by Muhammad b. Yusuf Ganji
Shafe’i, Sawaeqe Muhriqa by Ibn Hajar Makki, Tafsire Durre Mansur by
Jalaluddin Suyuti, Fath-ul-Qadeer by Shawkani, Tafsir Fath-ul-Bayan by
Siddiq Hasan Khan, etc.

[^2]: In Rawzatus Safa it is stated that he attacked the army twelve
times.

[^3]: In certain books of martyrdom it is stated that Murrah bin Munqiz
struck his sword upon the crown of his head and the army too struck at
him with their swords. Ali put his hands around the neck of his horse
who took him in the midst of the enemy. They cut him into pieces with
their swords. When his end drew near he called out, “O dear father! Here
is my grandfather the Prophet of Allah (S), who serves me an overflowing
cup. Then hasten! Hasten! For he holds a cup in his hand for you too,
then you too may partake of it.

[^4]: Allamah Turayhi relates, that when Ali bin Husayn (a.s.) fell a
martyr upon the desert of Karbala, Imam Husayn (a.s.) went besides him
wearing a shirt, cloak, and a turban whose two ends were on the either
side of his head (upon his shoulders). Imam said, “Now O my dear son!
You have found relief from imprisonment and the anxieties of this world,
and very soon I too shall join you”.

[^5]: Allamah Majlisi says that Muhammad bin Abi Talib and Abul Faraj
say, that his mother was Layla, the daughter of Abi Murrah bin Urwah bin
Mas’ood Saqafi and on the tenth (of Muharram) he was eighteen years of
age. Thus it seems that Abul Faraj also considers his age to be of
eighteen years, but Abul Faraj in his Maqatilat Talibiyyin does not
state so but says something contrary to it. For he considers Ali Akbar
to have been born during the caliphate of Usman bin Affan, and this is
more sane than his earlier quote.

[^6]: Ali Akbar was not directly related to the Bani Umayyah family;
rather his mother Layla was the daughter of Maymunah, the daughter of
Abu Sufyan (Ref. Al Husayn wa Batlat Karbala by Allamah Shaikh Muhammad
Jawad Mughni’ah). Here Mu’awiyah slyly tries to associate his lofty
character with that of his own family (Bani Umayyah), while in reality
Ali Akbar had inherited the outstanding merits and excellent character
of the Bani Hashim.

[^7]: Sayyidah Zainab al Kubra (a.s.) (the elder Zainab), the elder
daughter of Imam Ali (a.s.) and Sayyidah Fatemah az Zahra (a.s.) was
born in Madinah during the life-time of the Noble Messenger of Allah
(S). She was thus brought up in the sacred laps of her grandfather,
father and mother, along with her brothers and sister. Thus she was
surrounded from all sides by infallibility, then why would not one
expect such brilliance in her character? She combined in herself the
eminence of her grandfather, valour of her father, piety of her mother
and morals of her brothers. Soon after her birth, Jibra’eel descended
with greetings upon the Prophet of Allah (S) and presented the name
chosen by Allah for her, thus she was named Zainab, viz. embellishment
of (her) father, rather she proved to be an embellishment for Islam in
particular and the entire universe in general. Zainab al Kubra was
married to her cousin Abdullah, titled Bahrus Sakha (the Ocean of
Munificence), the son of Ja’far at Tayyar, and bore him four sons viz.
Aun, Muhammad, Ali and Abbas, and one daughter Umm Kulthum. She
sacrificed her sons Aun and Muhammad in the way of Allah at Karbala and
seldom wept upon them. After the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) she
assumed the role of preserving the name of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his
mission that was to secure the permanence of Islam and unveil the ugly
face of hypocrisy and despotism. She faced the worst ordeals of life
with unwavering forbearance and unparalleled prowess, which would even
falter the feet of the most valourous of men. While her eloquent sermons
at Kufa and Syria shook the very foundations of the throne of Bani
Umayyah, and people listened to her words dumbfounded and in awe. She
spoke such prudently that people presumed Imam Ali (a.s.) had risen, she
thus dealt a final blow to the wall of despotism. Apart from this, she
was the one who was responsible for preserving the continuity of the
Progeny of Prophet Muhammad (S), since it is narrated (at several places
in this book too) that at times she saved the life of Imam Ali Zainul
Abedeen (a.s.) and was prepared to sacrifice her own self in his stead.
Her sublime qualities can be established by numerous titles bestowed
upon her viz. Aqeelat Bani Hashim, the intellectual among the
Hashimites; Aqeelat Quraysh, the intellectual among the Quraysh;
Shareekatul Husayn, the associate of Husayn; Al Alematul Ghairul
Mu’allimah, an intellectual without having being trained; Al Faheematul
Ghairul Mufahhimah, a knowledgeable who needs none to make her
understand; Saniye Zahra, the second Zahra; Ummul Masaeb, the mother of
griefs; Sahibatul Musibatul Uzma, the bearer of the grand sorrow; etc.
There is difference of opinion regarding the place of her burial, some
opine that she died in Madinah and is buried there, while others say
that she lies buried in Cairo. But the most accurate, which is
unanimously accepted by the Shi’ah Scholars, is that she is buried in
Damascus, Syria at a place now known as ‘Zainabiyah’. The pilgrimage to
her blessed grave is highly recommended and visiting it is a desire of
every true believer and a seeker of truth. Numerous books have been
authored depicting her meritorious life, for further readings refer to:
Khasaise Zainabiyah by Sayyid Nuruddin Jazaeri, Zainab Ukhtal Husayn by
Muhammad Husayn al Adeeb, Zainab al Kubra by Shaikh Ja’far Naqdi,
Aqeelat Bani Hashim by Sayyid Ali Hashmi, Ma’a Batlat Karbala by Shaikh
Muhammad Jawad Mughniyyah, Ibnatuz Zahra Batlatul Fida by Ali Ahmad
Shalabi, Fi Rihabas Sayyidah Zainab by Sayyid Muhammad Bahrul Uloom,
Batlat Karbala by Dr. Ayesha Bintush Shati Misri etc. May Allah’s
Eternal Blessings be upon her and her Noble Household.

[^8]: In certain books it is stated that his (Muhammad’s) mother too was
Sayyidah Zainab al Kubra (a.s.), ref. Safinatul Bihar by Shaikh Abbas
Qummi, Khasaise Zainabiyah by Sayyid Nuruddin Jazaeri, Zainab: Ukhtal
Husayn by Muhammad Husayn al Adeeb, etc. And Allah is the Best Knower.

[^9]: Abu Sa’eed bin Aqeel is the same man who had humiliated Abdullah
bin Zubayr in the assembly of Mu’awiyah. Ibn Abil Hadeed relates from
Abu Usman that once Imam Hasan bin Ali (a.s.) went to meet Mu’awiyah,
when Abdullah bin Zubayr was seated there. Mu’awiyah desired to sow the
seeds of discord among the Quraysh, thus he asked the Imam, “Who was
elder, Zubayr or Ali”? Imam Hasan (a.s.) replied, “They were near (in
age) to one another while Ali (a.s.) was senior to Zubayr. And may Allah
have mercy upon Ali”. Abdullah bin Zubayr said, “May Allah have mercy
upon Zubayr”. Abu Sa’eed bin Aqeel, who was present there, said, “O
Abdullah! Why do you get excited when someone sends mercy upon his
father”? He replied, “I too send mercy upon my father”. Abu Sa’eed said,
“Your father was neither equal nor similar to him”. He said, “Why did he
not have a measure in it? Both of them were from the Quraysh and both of
them claimed caliphate, while neither of them succeeded”. Abu Sa’eed
replied, “Withdraw this from your mind. Ali (a.s.) occupied a place
among the Quraysh with relation to the Prophet (S) as you know, and when
he claimed caliphate they obeyed him, while he was a Chieftain. While
Zubayr aspired towards the cause whose commander was a woman, and when
the battle of Jamal intensified he retreated back. And before the right
would be distinguished from falsehood, he escaped. A crippled man
beheaded him and plundered his clothes. While Ali (a.s.), similar to the
time of his cousin (the Prophet), proceeded further. May Allah have
mercy upon Ali”. Ibn Zubayr said, “O Abu Sa’eed! If you had uttered
similar words to someone else, you would have known”. Abu Sa’eed
replied, “For whose sake (referring to Mu’awiyah) you defile him (Ali)
is himself reluctant with you”. Mu’awiyah interrupted their speech and
they became silent. Ayesha was informed about their speech, and one day
when Abu Sa’eed passed by her house, she called him in a loud voice
saying, “O Abu Sa’eed! You have uttered such and such words with my
brother”? Abu Sa’eed turned around but could not see anyone, and said,
“Shaitan looks at you while you do not see him”. Ayesha laughed and
said, “Bravo to your father! What a sharp tongue you possess”!

[^10]: In certain books it is stated that Qasim (a.s.) himself was
trampled upon by the horses’ hooves in his life-time, and Allah is the
Best Knower.

[^11]: It is related in Madinatul Ma’ajiz, that Qasim returned back from
the battlefield to his uncle Imam Husayn (a.s.) and said, “O dear uncle!
Thirst! Quench my thirst with water”. Imam enjoined him with forbearance
and then gave him his ring to place it in his mouth. Qasim says that
when I kept the ring into my mouth I found it similar to a spring of
water. My thirst was quenched and I returned back to the battlefield.

[^12]: Abu Hanifa Dinawari says that when Abbas bin Ali (a.s.) saw this,
he told his (real) brothers Abdullah, Ja’far and Usman bin Ali, whose
mother was Ummul Baneen Ameriyyah, from the progeny of Waheed, that,
“May my life be your ransom! Proceed further and lay down your lives for
your Master”. All of them went and started shielding Imam Husayn (a.s.)
with their faces and necks. Hani bin Sawb (or Sabeet) Hazrami attacked
Abdullah bin Ali and killed him, and then he attacked his brother Ja’far
and killed him too. Yazid bin Asbahi shot an arrow at Usman bin Ali and
killed him. Then he proceeded further and beheaded him. He brought the
head to Umar bin Sa’ad and asked for a gift. Umar replied, “Go and ask
for a gift from your commander Ubaydullah. The gift is with him”. Only
Abbas bin Ali remained, he fought alongside Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
defended him. He accompanied him everywhere until he too was martyred.

[^13]: This Shahrbanu is not the mother of Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen
(a.s.), who had died during child birth, as will be quoted in the end of
this book.

[^14]: From the above report of Abul Faraj it appears that Hazrat Abbas
sent his brothers before him so that he (or his son) might inherit from
them (Allah’s refuge). This seems quite fictitious, for if he had
desired the wealth of this world he would have accepted the invitation
of Shimr, who had offered him protection and Ubaydullah in turn would
have bestowed lavish gifts upon him. But his sincerity and devotion
towards serving his Imam is indisputable, while his faith and virtue
unparalleled. Thus this report of Abul Faraj is nothing but the outcome
of prejudice and his (Abul Faraj’s) pervert opinion.

[^15]: The above incident cannot be relied upon for the simple reason
being that such covetousness can never be expected from a person of
Hazrat Abbas (a.s.)’s caliber, who was far more exalted than can be
perceived by the ordinary intelligence. Thus to say that Abbas (a.s.)
intended drinking water, in reality tarnishes his eminent personality
and falsifies his devotion towards his Imam (a.s.), that it was only
after he remembered the thirst of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his household,
did he throw away the water. Probably, what Abbas (a.s.), the ‘Virtuous
Slave of Allah’, intended, while filling his palm with water, was to
announce to the enemies that the water, which they had held back from
them, was very easy for them to conquer, and he did this perhaps to
instill fear in their hearts. It was very easy for them to vanquish the
enemies and crush their suppression, but they had readily submitted to
the Will and Command of Allah, thus he threw away the water without
partaking a drop of it. Most significantly, it could also be described
as a declaration of Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s everlasting triumph against
evil and despotism at Karbala.

[^16]: Abu Ja’far Iskafi, in his above narration, has misinterpreted
that, “Ali (a.s.) would steal out in fear from the valley .........”.
These words do not confirm to the invincible character of Imam Ali
(a.s.), whose invincible prowess is evident in Islamic history, quoted
by both Shi’ah and Non-Shi’ah sources. In fact he often said, “By Allah!
I do not fear whether I hasten towards death or death hastens towards
me”, these being the words of a dauntless warrior, being ‘Approved’
(Murtaďa) by Allah. Verily the friends of Allah, no fear shall be upon
them, nor do they grieve. (Surah al Yunus, 10:62).

[^17]: Hazrat Abbas (a.s.), the son of Imam Ali (a.s.) through his
marriage with Ummul Baneen Fatemah al Kilabiyah was born on 4th Sha’ban
26 A.H. Since early childhood he was devoted to his respected father
Imam Ali (a.s.) and elder brothers Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husayn
(a.s.). He looked upon Imamayn Hasanayn (a.s.) as his masters rather
than his elder brothers and considered himself as their wretched slave,
as instructed by his mother, and was ever prepared to sacrifice his
entirety for them. He, as well as his real brothers, thus accompanied
Imam Husayn (a.s.) to Karbala and remained attached to him until their
martyrdom. Abbas could easily have accepted the proposal of security
brought to him by Shimr, the accursed, and could thus have saved himself
and lead a lavish life thereafter, but he refused to succumb to
treachery and hypocrisy, and rather preferred to be martyred while
striving in the path of Islam and the truth. He is often looked upon as
only a valourous and dauntless fighter, while the other prominent aspect
of his life is often neglected which demonstrates his excellent conduct,
unfaltering faith, absolute submission (to Allah and His Hujjat),
unwavering forbearance, abiding piety, intense virtue, unparalleled
wisdom, while in reality he combined in himself all the qualities of a
perfect ‘Slave of Allah’. His outstanding status can be validated from
the traditions of Aimmah (a.s.) in his praise. He has been bestowed with
numerous titles, which again portray his eminence, viz. Afzalush
Shuhada, the Most Excellent among the Martyrs; Bab-al-Hawaej, the Door
of (the fulfillment of) desires; Abdus Saleh, the Virtuous Slave (of
Allah); Qamare Bani Hashim, the Moon of the Hashimites; Abul Qirbah, the
father of the water skin; Al Saqqa, the water fetcher, Sahibe Liwa’il
Husayn, the Standard-bearer of Husayn (a.s.) etc., while his Kuniyah
(agnomen) is Abul Qasim and Abul Fazl. He married Lubabah, the daughter
of Ubaydullah bin Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib. The names of his children
are quoted as Ubaydullah, Fazl, Hasan, Qasim, and a daughter, while it
is related that two of his sons, viz. Fazl and Qasim were martyred in
Karbala. Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), in his salutations, remembers
Abbas (a.s.) in the following words: Peace be upon you O the Virtuous
Slave (of Allah), who served Allah and his Prophet (S), and the
Commander of the faithful (a.s.), and Hasan (a.s.) and Husayn (a.s.),
may Allah’s blessings be upon them all and His benedictions. Peace be
upon you and Allah’s Mercy and His blessings, and his forgiveness, and
His Paradise upon your (blessed) spirit and (sacred) body. I bear
witness, as also Allah, that you tread a path similar to the people of
Badr and those striving in the way of Allah, as also the devout ones who
struggle against His enemies, who strive to assist His friends, and
defend His beloved ones. Thus may Allah reward you, (with) an excellent
reward, abundant reward, prudent reward, a reward similar to (the one
bestowed by Him upon) those who fulfilled their allegiance to Him, and
accepted His call, and served those Authorised by Him”. Numerous books,
dealing with his life and merits, have been authored by the Shi’ah
scholars, for further study refer to: Al Abbas by Sayyid Abdul Razaq al
Muqarram, A’alamun Nas fi Fazaelil Abbas by Sayyid Sa’eed Behbahani, Al
Batalul Alqama by Shaikh Abdul Wahid al Muzaffar, Khasaesul Abbasiyah by
Shaikh Muhammad Ibraheem Karbasi, Maqtalul Abbas by Sayyid Mahdi
Tabatabai Yazdi, Tareekhe Zindaganiye Qamare Bani Hashim by Husayn
Imadzadeh etc. Thus he lived a fruitful life and died a felicitous
death. Hazrat Abbas (a.s.) lies buried in a Magnificent Mausoleum at
Karbala, Iraq, facing the Mausoleum of Imam Husayn (a.s.), perhaps yet
shielding his Master. His Mausoleum is an asylum for those seeking
fulfillment of their desires from Allah on his behalf, and a refuge for
every destitute, oppressed and downtrodden. May our lives be your ransom
O Abbas!


