Relating to the Martyrdom of Our Master Abu Abdullah Husayn (a.s.), and furthermore the Martyrdom of a suckling child and Abdullah bin Hasan (a.s.)
===================================================================================================================================================

This is the section that causes the tears to flow, grills the heart, and
scorches the liver of the believers! Complaint (against this tyranny) is
to Allah and aid is requested from Him (alone)!

In some books of Martyrdom it is related that when Imam Husayn (a.s.)
saw that seventy-two persons among his friends and relatives had fallen
down, he turned toward the tents of his family and called out,

***“O Sakinah! O Fatemah! O Umm Kulthum! My salutations be upon you
all!”***

Hearing this Sakinah said, “O dear father! Have you resolved to die?”
Imam replied,

***“How could the one, who is bereaved by his friends and helpers, not
resolve to die?”***

Sakinah said, “O dear father! Then return us back to the sanctuary of
our grandfather”. Imam replied,

***“Alas! If a sand-grouse (a type of a bird) is released at night, it
will sleep in peace”*****.**

Hearing this, the women of his family started lamenting and Imam Husayn
(a.s.) consoled them.

It is related in the same book that Imam Husayn (a.s.) then turned
towards Umm Kulthum (a.s.) and said,

***“I enjoin you towards goodness in matter of yourself. I am proceeding
towards the battlefield in the midst of these enemies”.***

Hearing this Sakinah started lamenting while Imam loved her extremely.
He pressed her to his chest and wiped her tears and said,

***“Know O my dear Sakinah! Very soon you will have to weep after me
when death will have surrounded me, then do not aggrieve me now with
your tears until the spirit remains in my body. Then when I am killed,
you are more worthy of weeping upon me, O the best of women!”***

It is related from Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.), that when Imam Husayn
(a.s.) resolved to be martyred, he called for his eldest daughter
Fatemah (a.s.). He then handed over to her a sealed envelope and an open
testament. Imam Ali bin Husayn (Zainul Abedeen) (a.s.) was ill at that
moment, Fatemah later handed over the letter to Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen
(a.s.) and from him it came down to us.

It is related in Isbatul Wasiyyah of Mas’oodi, that Imam Husayn (a.s.)
called for Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) in his state of illness, and
then handed over to him ‘the Exalted Name’ (of Allah) and the legacy of
the Prophets. He told him that he had handed over the (esoteric) wisdom,
texts, books and weapons to Umm Salama (a.s.) and had advised her to
hand over those things to him.

It is related in the same book that Khadijah, the daughter of Imam Jawad
(a.s.) and sister of Imam Hadi (a.s.) says that Imam Husayn (a.s.)
apparently bequeathed to his sister Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.), and during
the days of (the Imamate of) Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), the
Knowledge of Ale Muhammad (a.s.) spread through her medium so as to
conceal Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) (from the enemies) and to safeguard
his life.

Qutubuddin Rawandi in his Da’wat relates from Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen
(a.s.), that on the tenth of Muharram, my father pressed me to his heart
while blood was flowing through him, and he said,

***“O dear son! Memorize the supplication which Sayyidah Fatemah (a.s.)
received from the Prophet of Allah (S), who in turn received from
Jibra’eel and which was handed down to me, for it is beneficial for
fulfillment of all desires, in important matters, anxieties, harsh
circumstances and vital tasks.”***

The supplication is as follows:

بِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمٰنِ الرَّحِيْمِ

بِحَقِّ يٰس وَ الْقُرْآنِ الْحَكِيْمِ وَ بِحَقِّ طٰهٰ وَ الْقُرْآنِ
الْعَظِيْمِ يَا مَنْ يَقْدِرُ عَلَى حَوَائِجِ السَّائِلِيْنَ يَا مَنْ
يَعْلَمُ مَا فِيْ الضَّمِيْرِ يَا مُنَفِّسًا عَنِ الْمَكرُوْبِيْنَ يَا
مُفَرِّجًا عَنِ الْمَغْمُوْمِيْنَ يَا رَاحِمَ الشَّيْخِ الْكَبِيْرِ يَا
مَنْ لاَ يَحْتَاجُ اِلَي التَّفْسِيْرِ صَلِّ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَ آلِ
مُحَمَّدٍ.

BISMILLAHIR RAHMANIR RAHEEM

BEHAQQE YASEEN WAL QUR’ANIL HAKEEME, WA BEHAQQE TAHA WAL QUR’ANIL
‘AZEEME, YA MAN YAQDERO ‘ALA HAWA’EJIS SA’ELEENA, YA MAN YA’ALAMO MA FIZ
ZAMEERE, YA MUNAFFESAN ‘ANIL MAKRUBEENA, YA MUFARREJAN ‘ANIL MAGMUMEENA,
YA RAHEMASH SHAIKHIL KABEERE, YA RAZEQAT TIFLIS SAGEERE, YA MAN LA
YAHTAJO ILAT TAFSEERE, SALLE ‘ALA MUHAMMADIW WA ALE MUHAMMAD.

We (the Author) say, that another supplication of Imam Husayn (a.s.) is
quoted on the morning of the tenth, while a third one narrated from him
on the same day and which has been quoted by Shaikhut Taifa (Al-Tusi) in
the supplications of the third of Sha’ban wherein he says:

***“Then recite the supplication of Imam Husayn (a.s.) on the day of
Kauthar (referred to the tenth of Muharram).”***

It is related by Kaf’ami that the last supplication of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) on the day of Ashura is ....... (until the end).

It is related in Biharal Anwar, after quoting the martyrdom of an infant
child who had come out of the tent, that Imam Husayn (a.s.) turned
towards the right and did not find anyone. He then turned towards the
left and saw none, Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), who did not even have
the strength to lift up a sword (due to ailment), came out. Umm Kulthum
(a.s.) followed him calling out, “O dear son, return back”. He replied,

***“O dear Aunt! Leave me so that I may strive for the son of the
Prophet of Allah”*****.**

Imam Husayn (a.s.) saw him and said,

***“O Umm Kulthum! Stop him, lest the world may turn vacant of the
descendants of Muhammad (S)”.***

Martyrdom of the suckling child (Abdullah, Ali al Asghar)
---------------------------------------------------------

His mother was Rabab, the daughter of Imru al Qays bin Adi, and her
mother was Hind al Hanood. Sayyid Ibn Tawoos says that when Imam Husayn
(a.s.) saw the corpses of his youth and friends, he resolved to be
martyred, and called out,

***“Is there anyone who could defend the family of the Prophet of Allah?
Is there any monotheist who would fear Allah in respect of us? Is there
any aide who could come to assist us for the sake of Allah? Is there
anyone who could rush to our aid in lieu of reward from Allah?”***

The voice of lamenting of the ladies arose and Imam came to the door of
the tent and called for Zainab (a.s.) saying,

***“Give me my infant child so that I may bid him farewell”.***

Then he took him in his arms and bent to kiss his lips. Hurmala bin
Kahil Asadi shot at arrow at the child, which pierced his neck and
severed his head. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him and may
Allah’s curse be upon his murderer) A Poet says regarding this, “And the
one who bent to kiss his child, but the arrow preceded him in kissing
his neck”. Then he called out to Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) to take him
back. He filled his palm with the child’s blood and threw it towards the
heavens saying,

***“Every hardship is easy upon me when Allah is the Beholder”.***

Shaikh Mufeed says regarding the suckling child that Imam Husayn (a.s.)
sat in front of the tent while Abdullah, who was an infant, was brought
to him. A man from the Bani Asad killed him by shooting an arrow at him.

Azdi says that Aqabah bin Basheer Asadi relates from Imam Muhammad al
Baqir (a.s.) that he told me,

***“O Bani Asad! We hold a liability of blood among you”.***

I asked, “O Aba Ja’far! What sin do I share in it? And which is that
blood?” Imam replied,

***“A child was brought to Imam Husayn (a.s.), who held him in his lap,
one person from among you, the Bani Asad, shot an arrow at him and
severed his head. Imam gathered his blood and when both of his palms
became full of the blood, he sprinkled it upon the earth and said,
‘Almighty Allah! If You have withheld assistance from the heavens, then
bestow upon us that which is better, and take our revenge from these
evil-doers’.”***

Sibt Ibn Jawzee relates in his Tazkirah from Hisham bin Muhammad Kalbi,
that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) saw them persistent on killing him, he
brought the Qur’an and opening it placed it upon his head, and called
out,

 ***“The Qur’an and my grandfather, the Prophet of Allah (S), are the
judge between yourselves and me. O people! How do you consider the
shedding of my blood to be lawful? Am I not the grandson of your
Prophet? Has not the tradition of my grandfather reached you regarding
me and my brother that we are the Masters of the youth of Paradise? Then
ask Jabir (bin Abdullah Ansari), Zaid bin Arqam and Abu Sa’eed Khudri.
Is not Ja’far at Tayyar my uncle?”***

Shimr replied, “You shall shortly hasten towards ‘the raging fire’ (of
hell) (Allah’s refuge)”. Imam said,

 ***“Allah is great! My grandfather the Prophet of Allah informed me,
that he saw a dog filling his throat with the blood of his Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.), and I perceive that it is none other than you”.***

Shimr replied, “I shall worship Allah by the tongue only, if I
understand what you speak”. Imam Husayn (a.s.) turned his face and saw
his infant weeping due to thirst. He took him in his lap and said,

 ***“O people! If you do not pity me, at least pity this young
one”*****.**

A man shot an arrow at the child and severed his neck. Imam wept and
said,

***“O Allah! Be a judge between us and those who invited us, having
promised assistance, and in return killed us”*****.**

A voice came from the heavens calling out to him,

 ***“Leave him O Husayn! For he has a maid awaiting to nurse him in
Paradise”.***

Then Haseen bin Tameem shot an arrow at his lips and blood flowed from
it. Imam wept and then said,

***“O Allah! I complain to You regarding how they have faired with me,
my brothers, my sons and my family”*****.**

Ibn Nima says that then he lifted up the child and placed him among the
martyrs of his family.

Muhammad bin Talha quotes in his Matalibus Su’ool from the book Futooh,
that Imam Husayn (a.s.) had an infant child. An arrow was shot at him
that killed him, and then Imam dug a grave with his sword for him and
reciting Prayers upon him, buried him. Then he quotes an elegy.

It is stated in Ehtijaj, that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was left alone and
none remained with him except his son Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) and a
suckling child named Abdullah. He lifted up the child to bid farewell,
when an arrow came and pierced the neck killing him. Imam dismounted
from his horse and dug a grave with the sheath of his sword, then he
buried the child under the sand drenched in his blood, he then leapt
from his place, arose and recited elegies. The writers of Martyrdom, as
well as the author of Ehtijaj say, that then Imam mounted his horse and
went for the battle while saying:

 ***“The nation has disbelieved and have turned their face away from the
reward of the Lord of the worlds; the nation killed Ali and his son
Hasan, the excellent, the son of esteemed parents; they were filled with
hatred and rancor and called upon people and gathered to fight Husayn;
Woe be to the ignoble nation that assembled groups to fight the people
of the ‘Two Sacred Sanctuaries’; thus they left while inviting others
towards obedience of the apostates; opposing Allah to shed my blood, for
the sake of Ubaydullah from the progeny of the polytheists; and the son
of Sa’ad has killed me aggressively with the help of an army similar to
torrential rains; and all this was not in restitution of any crime
committed before me, except that my pride are the two stars, Ali who was
the best after the Prophet, and the Prophet who was the son of
Quraishite parents; my father is the best among men and I am the son of
the two best ones, the silver which has emerged from gold, I am the
silver the son of the two golden ones; then is the grandfather of anyone
among men similar to my grandfather, or their father similar to my
father; then I am the son of the two best ones, my mother is Fatemah az
Zahra and my father is the one who fractured the back of the polytheists
in (the battles of) Badr and Hunain, and who worshipped the Lord since
childhood when the Quraysh worshipped the two idols and worshipped the
Lat and Uzza together; and my father is the one who offered Prayers
while facing the two Qiblahs, then my father is the sun and my mother a
moon, while I am a star, the son of the two moons; and he (Ali)
displayed such wonders on the day of Uhad, that warded off envy, by
splitting the two armies, as also in the (battle of) Ahzab and Fathe
Makkah in which death was the word of the day for both the armies, and
all this was performed in the way of Allah; but how has the debased
nation dealt with the two children, the progeny of the righteous Prophet
Mustafa (S) and of Ali,*** ***similar to red roses, on the day of
striking of the two armies”.***

Then he stood facing the army with his sword unsheathed, renouncing life
and heart resolved to die. And he was saying,

***“I am the son of Ali the chaste from the progeny of Hashim, and this
grace is enough for me whenever I pride, my grandfather is the Prophet
of Allah the most eminent among all, we are the lanterns of Allah among
the creatures, and my mother is Fatemah Zahra (a.s.), the daughter of
Ahmad (S), and my uncle Ja’far is known as the possessor of two wings,
and among us is the Book of Allah and has been revealed in truth, and in
us lies lawfulness and the revelation proclaimed with goodness, and we
are the trusts of Allah among all men, while we declare this in secret
and in the open that we possess authority upon the spring (of Kauthar)
and we shall feed our followers with the cup of the Prophet, which
cannot be denied, and our followers are the eminent among followers,
while the one who bears animosity towards us shall be doomed on the day
of Qiyamah”.***

Muhammad bin Abu Talib says that Abu Ali Salami relates in his history,
that this elegy is composed by Imam Husayn (a.s.) himself and there is
no other elegy similar to it.

***“Although this world is considered to be pleasant, the reward of
Allah is magnificent and meritorious; and if the body is created for
death, then martyrdom in the way of Allah is the best for man; and if
sustenance is distributed and assured, then man should not strive hard
to seek it; and if the gathering of this wealth will result in leaving
behind, then why should man be avaricious”.***

Then he called the army for combat and whoever came close to him, he
would be killed instantly until he piled up the corpses. Then he
attacked the right wing of the army and said,

 ***“Death is better than perpetration for humiliation, while
humiliation is better than entering the fire of hell”.***

Then he attacked the left wing of the army and said,

 ***“I am Husayn the son of Ali, I have sworn not to run away from the
enemy, and defend the household of my father, until I die on the
Religion of the Prophet”.***

It has been related by some narrators that, “By Allah! I have not seen a
more valorous man similar to him, who is broken by the death of his son,
household and friends. The warriors initiated the attack upon him and he
responded to their attack similarly. And he scattered them, similar to a
wolf that enters the ranks of the sheep, and routed them and scattered
them. He attacked the well-equipped army of thirty thousand and they
scattered like locusts in front of him. Then he returned to his place
and said,

 ***“There is no Might and no Power except with Allah, the Most High,
the Most Great”.***

It is related in Isbatul Wasiyyah, that he killed one thousand and eight
hundred warriors with his own hands.

It is quoted in Biharul Anwar, that it is related by Ibn Shahr Ashob and
Muhammad bin Abi Talib that he attacked continuously until he had killed
one thousand nine hundred and fifty men, excluding the wounded ones.
Umar bin Sa’ad called out to his army, “Woe be to you! Do you know with
whom you fight? He is the son of a pot-bellied one. (Here he desires
ridiculing Imam Ali, Allah’s refuge). He is the son of the assassin of
the Arabs. Attack him from all sides”. Four thousand archers surrounded
him and blocked his way to the tents.

Muhammad bin Abi Talib, Ibn Shahr Ashob and Sayyid Ibn Tawoos say, that
Imam Husayn (a.s.) then said,

 ***“Woe be to you O followers of the family of Abu Sufyan! Then if you
are irreligious men and do not fear the day of Qiyamah, at least be
noblemen and come to your senses if you be from the progeny of
Arabs”.***

Shimr said, “O son of Fatemah! What do you mean?” Imam replied,

***“I say that we should fight with one another, while the ladies have
not erred. Lift your hands off plundering my household until I am
alive”.***

Shimr said, “Verily right is with you”. Then he called out, “Return from
the tents and make him your target while he is a merciful match”. Then
the entire army turned towards him and Imam Husayn (a.s.) asked for
water. And whenever he tried to go towards the Euphrates, the army would
attack him and turn him away from the river.

Ibn Shahr Ashob says that Abu Makhnaf relates from Jaludi, that Imam
Husayn (a.s.) attacked A’awar Salami and ‘Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaydi, who
were deputed with four thousand men to guard the bank of the Euphrates.
Then he entered his horse into the river and when the horse put his
mouth into the water to drink it, Imam said,

***“O my horse! You are thirsty as also myself, and until you do not
drink I shall not quench my thirst”.***

When the horse heard these words of the Imam, he lifted his head up and
did not partake of the water as if he understood what the Imam said.
Imam said,

***“I shall drink and you too drink”.***

He extended his hand and filled his palm with water, when a person from
the army called out, “O Aba Abdillah! You are pleasantly drinking water
while your tents are being plundered?” Hearing this, the Imam threw away
the water and lay siege while splitting the army and found his tents to
be safe”.

Allamah Majlisi in his Jilaul Uyoon says that then again he bade
farewell to his household and enjoined them with forbearance, and
promised them reward and recompense, then said,

 ***“Wear your veils and prepare to face trials, and know that Allah is
your protector and support and will deliver you from the evil of the
enemies and will make excellent your conclusion. His wrath will engulf
your enemies in different trials and He will bestow upon you distinct
blessings and wonders in lieu of these trials. Do not complain and do
not utter such things which would lessen your status”.***

It is stated in Biharul Anwar, that Abul Faraj says that Imam Husayn
(a.s.) went towards the river and Shimr said, “You shall not go towards
the river, rather you shall go towards the fire” (Allah’s refuge). A man
called out to him, “O Husayn! Do you not see the Euphrates waving
similar to the bellies of the fishes? By Allah! You shall not taste of
it until you perish due to thirst”. Imam said,

***“O Lord! Kill him due to thirst”*****.**

The narrator says that the (same) man would say, “Give me water to
drink”. Water would be handed over to him and he would partake of it and
vomit it. Then again he would say, “Give me water to drink, for thirst
kills me”. This went on and on until he died. (May Allah’s curse be upon
him)

A man named Abu Hatoof shot an arrow at Imam Husayn (a.s.) that pierced
his forehead. He pulled it out and blood flowed upon his face and beard.
Then he said,

 ***“O Lord! Do You see what I have to face at the hands of these evil
men? O Lord! Diminish their number and kill them until the last one. And
do not leave anyone among them upon the earth, nor forgive them”.***

Then he attacked them similar to a ferocious Lion, and there was none
who would reach him, except that he would split open his belly and kill
him. They shot arrows at him from all sides and he took them upon his
chest and neck and said,

 ***“How badly have you treated the Progeny of Muhammad (S) after him.
After killing me you shall not fear killing any of the servants of
Allah, and killing me would make their slaughter easy upon you. I desire
from Allah that in exchange of this humiliation of your’s he may bestow
martyrdom upon me, and then seek my revenge upon you through means that
you have never ever thought of”.***

Hearing this Haseen bin Malik Sakuni said, “O son of Fatemah! How shall
Allah take your revenge from us?” Imam replied,

***“He shall engulf you in wars and shed your blood, then a fierce
punishment shall befall you”*****.**

Then he fought until he was inflicted with enormous wounds. Ibn Shahr
Ashob and Sayyid ibn Tawoos numbers them to be seventy-two.

Ibn Shahr Ashob relates from Abu Makhnaf, who relates from Imam Ja’far
as Sadiq (a.s.) that,

 ***“The body of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was inflicted with thirty three
wounds of the lance and thirty four cuts of the sword”.***

Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) says that Imam Husayn (a.s.) was inflicted
with three hundred twenty plus wounds of lances, cuts of swords and
injuries by arrows.

In another narration it is stated that the number of wounds were three
hundred and sixty. While still in another three hundred and three
wounds, and it is also said that the wounds numbered one thousand three
hundred. The arrows were pierced in his armor similar to the thorns on
the body of a porcupine. And it is also related that all the wounds of
his body were upon his front side only.

It is related that (excessive) fighting had tired Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
he paused for sometime to rest. At that moment a stone was flung at his
forehead and he lifted the front part of his dress to clean it (the
blood), when a poisoned three-pronged arrow came towards him piercing
his chest. In some narratives it is stated that it pierced his heart and
he said,

 ***“In the name of Allah! And by Allah! And upon the custom of the
Prophet of Allah (S)”!***

Then he lifted his head towards the heavens and said,

***“O Lord! You know that they have resolved to kill the one besides
whom there is no other son of the Prophet upon this earth”.***

Then he pulled the arrow from his back (or chest) and blood started
flowing down similar to a groove. He filled his palms with it and threw
it towards the heaven, and not a single drop of it fell back. The
redness in the heavens was not seen before Imam Husayn (a.s.) did so.
Then he filled his other palm with it and wiped it on his head and beard
saying,

***“I desire to meet my grandfather, the Prophet of Allah (S), dyed with
this blood of mine. And I will say: O Prophet of Allah! Such and such
persons killed me”.***

Shaikh Mufeed, after quoting the mounting upon the horse of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) and going to the bank of the Euphrates and martyrdom of his
brother Abbas (a.s.) says, that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) returned from
the Euphrates towards his tents, Shimr bin Ziljawshan, accompanied with
a group of his accomplices, came to him and surrounded him from all
sides. A man named Malik bin Bashr Kindi stepped ahead and started
abusing Imam Husayn (a.s.) and struck at his head with his sword. It cut
the night-cap which he had worn and reached his head while blood started
pouring forth filling the night-cap.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

***“You shall never eat or drink again with this hand of yours’ and you
shall arise (on the day of Qiyamah) along with the oppressors”.***

He removed the cap from his head and asked for a kerchief and tied his
head with it. Then he wore another cap and fastened a turban upon it.

We (the Author) say, that Tabari too quotes similarly but says that he
wore a burnoose instead of a nightcap, and further says that Imam Husayn
(a.s.) was exhausted when a man from Kinda (Malik bin Bashr) stepped
forward and seized the burnoose from his head, which was made of fur. He
brought the burnoose to his wife Umm Abdullah, the daughter of Hurr and
sister of Husayn bin Hurr Badi. When he tried to wash the blood from it,
his wife perceived that it was of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and she said,

***“You have brought the stolen cloth of the grandson of the Prophet of
Allah (S) into my house? Get away with it from here”.***

His friends say that he remained indigent until he died.

Tabari says that Abu Makhnaf relates, that Shimr gathered ten Kufan foot
soldiers and proceeded towards the tents of the ladies of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) and stood between the Imam and his household. Imam Husayn (a.s.)
said,

***“Woe be to you! Then if you are irreligious men and do not fear the
day of returning*** ***(Qiyamah), at least be free-minded in the world
of yours and be noblemen. Keep your scoundrels and stupid men away from
my household”.***

Shimr said, “O son of Fatemah! Verily right is with you”. Then he
proceeded towards Imam Husayn (a.s.) with his group of lackeys which
included Abul Junub Abdul Rahman Ju’fi, Qash’am bin ‘Amr bin Yazid
Ju’fi, Saleh bin Wahab Yazbee, Sinan bin Anas Nakha’i and Khawli bin
Yazid Asbahi. Shimr incited them to kill Imam Husayn (a.s.).

He told Abul Junub, who was well equipped with arms, “Proceed further”,
and he said, “Why don’t you proceed further?” Shimr replied, “Do you
back-answer me?” And he said, “Then do you order me?” They started
abusing one another, and Abul Junub, who was a valorous man, said, “By
Allah! How I wish to thrust this spear into your eye”. Shimr lifted his
hands off him and said, “By Allah! I wish I could strike at you with the
sword”.

It is related that Shimr, accompanied by the foot soldiers, turned
towards Imam Husayn (a.s.) and he attacked them and scattered them. Then
they surrounded him with severity when a child ran towards Imam Husayn
(a.s.) from the tents of the household. Imam called out to his sister
Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) saying,

 ***“Take care of him”*****.**

The child did not pay heed and ran until he reached Imam and stood at
his side. Shaikh Mufeed identifies him as being Abdullah bin (Imam)
Hasan. The child said, “By Allah! I shall not part from my uncle”.

(Tabari) Bahr bin Ka’ab struck at Imam Husayn (a.s.) with his sword and
the child said, “Woe be to you O son of ill-natured man! Do you intend
killing my uncle?” The accursed struck at him with his sword, which the
child took upon his hands, and cut it till the flesh, while it hung. The
child cried, “O mother! Come to my aid”. Imam took him in his fold and
said,

***“O nephew! Forbear upon this trial and consider it to be blessing for
you. You shall unite with your virtuous fathers the Prophet of Allah
(S), (Imam) Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), Hamza (a.s.), Ja’far (at Tayyar)
(a.s.) and (Imam) Hasan bin Ali (a.s.)”.***

Then he lifted his hands for Prayers and said,

***“O Lord! Hold back the rains of the heavens and the abundance of the
earth from them. O Lord! Then if you give them some more life, then
dispel them, and take Thou among them, then make the rulers to be ever
displeased with them. For they invited us to render assistance and then
rebelled against us and killed us”.***

(Malhoof) Sayyid ibn Tawoos says that Hurmalah shot an arrow at him
(Abdullah bin Hasan) and killed him and he was in the arms of his uncle
Imam Husayn (a.s.). (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him)

Ibn Abd Rabbah in his Iqdul Fareed says that the sight of a Syrian man
fell upon Abdullah bin Hasan bin Ali (a.s.), who was handsome among men,
and he said, “I desire to kill this youth”. A man told him, “Woe be to
you! Lift your hands off him”. He did not pay any heed and struck at him
with his sword and killed him. When the sword reached him, he cried out,
“O uncle! Come to my aid”. Imam replied,

***“Here I am! This is a voice of the one who possesses less companions
and abundant murderers”.***

Imam attacked his murderer while severing his hand and with another
stroke killed him. I (the author) say, that Ibn Abd Rabbah has clearly
committed error and has identified Abdullah bin Hasan instead of Qasim
bin Hasan (whose martyrdom has already been discussed).

Tabari says that Imam Husayn (a.s.) then attacked the foot soldiers and
pushed them away from him.

Shaikh Mufeed says that the foot soldiers attacked the companions of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) from the left and right sides and killed them until
three to four men remained with him.

Tabari and (Ibn Aseer) Jazari quote similarly and say, that when Imam
Husayn (a.s.) was left with three or four men, he called for a long
fringed shirt that dazzled the eyes. It was of Yemeni origin and
minutely stitched. He tore it from some sides so that it could not be
removed off his body. One of his companions said, “I wish you wore
breeches underneath your clothes”. Imam replied,

***“It is a garment of disgrace, and wearing it is not befitting
me”*****.**

It is said that when he was killed, Bahr bin Ka’ab robbed the shirt away
from his body leaving it bare.

Azdi says that ‘Amr bin Shu’ayb relates from Muhammad bin Abdul Rahman,
that both the hands of Bahr bin Ka’ab would ooze out pus in the winters
and in the sUmmrs it would turn dry similar to wooden sticks.

Sayyid Ibn Tawoos says that Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

 ***“Bring me a garment which I may wear below my dress so that they may
not bare me”*****.**

Breeches were brought for him, and he said,

 ***“This is the dress of the disgraceful ones”*****.**

Then he called for a worn-out shirt, and tearing it, wore it below his
dress. When he was martyred, it was removed off his body.

Shaikh Mufeed says that when only three men remained with Imam Husayn
(a.s.), he turned towards the enemies while the three men defended him
and warded off the army away from him until they were martyred and Imam
was left alone. He was wounded upon the head and body, he then attacked
them from the left and right side and scattered them.

Hameed bin Muslim says that, “By Allah! I have not seen a shattered
person more valorous than him whose sons, family and friends have been
killed yet his heart being invincible. The foot-soldiers attacked him
and he faced them similar to a wolf who attacks the sheep and scatters
them to the right and left”.

When Shimr saw this, he called for the cavalry and stationed them behind
the frontline of the foot soldiers. Then he commanded the archers to
shoot their arrows at him. And such number of arrows pierced his body
that it looked similar to a porcupine, then he lifted his hands off them
and they came and stood facing him.

Zainab (a.s.) came to the door of the tents and called out to Umar bin
Sa’ad, *“Woe be to you O Umar (bin Sa’ad)! Abu Abdullah is being killed
why you behold?”* He did not reply and she said, *“Woe be to you! Is
there not a Muslim amongst you?”* But again none replied.

Tabari says that Umar bin Sa’ad neared Imam Husayn (a.s.), and Zainab
(a.s.) said, *“O Umar bin Sa’ad! Abu Abdullah is being killed while you
behold?”* The narrator says that it is as if I see tears flowing upon
his cheeks and beard while he turned his face away from Zainab (a.s.).

Sayyid Ibn Tawoos says that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was exhausted by
numerous wounds and he looked similar to a Porcupine, Saleh bin Wahab
Yaznee thrust a lance at his flank and he fell on his left cheek upon
the ground from the Horse’s back. Then he said,

***“In the name of Allah! And by Allah! And upon the Creed of the
Prophet of Allah”!***

Then he stood up.

The narrator says that Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) came out of the door of
the tent calling out, *“O my brother! O my Master! O my family! I wish
the heavens would fall upon the earth and I wish the mountains would
scatter upon the desert”.*

It is related that Shimr called out to his companions, “Why are you
waiting for this man?” Then they attacked him from all sides.

Hameed bin Muslim says that Imam Husayn (a.s.) had worn a fur cloak and
a turban upon his head, while his hair was dyed with Wasmah. I heard him
say, before he was martyred, when he was on foot but fought as if he was
mounted, and defended himself from the arrows, while the cavalry were
split from all sides and he attacked them with sword,

 ***“You conspire together against me? By Allah! After me you shall not
kill anyone else by whose murder Allah would have been more wrathful
towards you. By Allah! I desire that Allah cherish me in lieu of this
contempt of yours’. And He may take my revenge from you through means of
which you are unaware. Beware! By Allah! If you kill me, Allah too shall
kill you and shed your blood. Then He shall not lift His Hands off you
until He doubles the grievous punishment”.***

It is related that he remained alive for a lengthy period of time that
day, and if the army had desired they would have killed him. But they
considered one another for it, and each group desired that the other
would kill him. Shimr called out in their midst, “What do you have to
wait for? Kill this man, may your mothers mourn upon you”. Thus they
attacked him from all sides.

Shaikh Mufeed says that Zar’ah bin Shareek severed his left arm and
struck at his shoulder with his sword and he fell down upon his face.

Tabari says that then they retreated back and he was in a very bad state
and he would rise and fall. At this moment Sinan bin Anas bin ‘Amr
Nakha’i hit him with a lance and threw him upon the ground.

Shaikh Mufeed and Tabarsi say, that Khawli bin Asbahi came forward
hastily and alighted from his horse to severe his head, but he trembled.
Shimr said, “May Allah break your hands! Why do you tremble?” Then he
alighted from the horse and beheaded him.

Abul Abbas Ahmad bin Yusuf Damishqi Qirmani, who died in the year 1019
A.H., says in Akhbarul Dawl, that thirst became intense upon Imam Husayn
(a.s.) and they did not give him water to drink. A cup of water came to
his hand and when he bent to drink it, Haseen bin Nameer shot an arrow
at him, which pierced his chin, and the cup became full of blood. He
then lifted his hands towards the heavens and said,

 ***“O Allah! Lessen their quantity, kill each one of them, and do not
spare a single one from among them upon the earth”*****.**

Then they attacked him from all sides and he flaunted upon them from the
left and right side until Zar’ah bin Shareek struck at his left hand
with the sword and entered another into his shoulder. Then Sinan bin
Anas thrust a lance into his body throwing him down. Shimr then alighted
from his horse and beheaded him and handed it over to Khawli Asbahi.
Then they looted his clothes.[^1]

I (the author), say, that it is related in the narrative by Sayyid Ibn
Tawoos, Ibn Nima, Shaikh Saduq, Tabari, (Ibn Aseer) Jazari, Ibn Abdul
Birr, Mas’oodi and Abul Faraj, that Sinan (bin Anas), the accursed,
beheaded him.

Sayyid Ibn Tawoos says that Sinan came forward and said, “Although I
know that he is the grandson of the Prophet of Allah (S) and his parents
are the best among humans, I shall behead him”. Then he struck at his
blessed neck with his sword and severed his sacred and honorable head.

A poet says regarding it: “And what other disaster can be greater than
that of Husayn, when the hands of Sinan were killing him”.

Abu Tahir Muhammad bin Hasan (or Husayn) Barasi (or Narasi) says in
Ma’alimud Deen, that Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) said, that when Imam
Husayn (a.s.)’s matter reached this stage, the Angels started lamenting
in the Audience of Allah and said, *“O Lord! This Husayn is Your guest,
he is the grandson of Your Prophet”*. Then Allah created an image of
Imam al Qaem (a.t.f.s.) and said,

 ***“I shall seek revenge from them through his medium”.***

It is related, that Mukhtar arrested Sinan and severed each of his
fingers one after the other. Then he cut off his hands and feet and
flung him into a large vessel in which olive oil was boiling hot.

The narrator says that at the moment when they beheaded Imam Husayn
(a.s.), a violent and dark hurricane erupted engulfing the entire
horizon into darkness. Then a red storm blew and nothing could be seen,
while the army presumed that the curse of Allah had descended. This
continued for an hour and then ceased.

Hilal bin Nafe’ says that I was standing along with the companions of
Umar bin Sa’ad and someone called out, “O commander! Have glad tidings
that Shimr has killed Husayn”. I then went to the spot of his martyrdom
and stood at his side and he was dying. By Allah! I have never seen a
better corpse drenched in blood than his, and a face more illuminated
than his. While the light of his countenance and his formidable beauty
made me forget his death. In this state he asked for water, and a man
said to him, “By Allah! You shall not partake it until you enter ‘the
raging fire’ (of hell)” (Allah’s Refuge). I heard Imam say,

***“Woe be to you! I am not proceeding towards ‘the raging fire’, nor
shall I taste ‘the boiling water’ therein. Rather I am going to the
presence of my grandfather, the Prophet of Allah (S), and I shall be
residing in his place of the truthful residue in the shelter of Allah,
the Almighty. And I shall drink of the pure water, and then I shall
complain to him regarding what you did to me”.***

Hearing this all of them became enraged, as if they had no mercy in
their hearts, and in this very state, while he was speaking to them,
they beheaded him. I was astonished at their ruthlessness, and said, “I
shall never ever accompany you in any task from now on”.

Kamaluddin Muhammad bin Talha says in his Matalibus Su’ool, that the
head of the grandson and the beloved of the Prophet of Allah (S) was
severed with a sharp sword. Then they raised his head upon the lance as
is done with the apostates, and they paraded it in the midst of the
slaves of Allah in the cities. And they lead his family and children in
a state of disrespect, and mounted them upon the shaft of the Camel
without saddle or seat, in spite of knowing that they were the Progeny
of the Prophet, while their love was incumbent as specified by the
Qur’an and the true faith.

If the heavens and earth would have the power to speak, they would have
bemoaned and lamented upon them. And if the disbelievers had been aware
of it, they would have wept upon them and lamented. While if the
obstinate ones of the age of ignorance would have been present, they too
would have wept upon them and would have condoled one another upon their
martyrdom. And if the oppressive tyrants had been present at the episode
of his martyrdom, they would have assisted and aided him.

Woe be upon this catastrophe which has afflicted the hearts of the
God-fearing and remained as an inheritance for them! Woe be upon the
calamity which has grieved the hearts of the believers and pained those
who shall come in the future! Alas upon the Progeny of the Prophet,
whose blood was shed, and upon the family of Muhammad (S) whose swords
had decelerated, and Alas upon the Alawites who were left deprived of
aide and their masters being killed! Alas upon the Hashimites, whose
sanctity was violated, and shedding of whose blood was considered
lawful!

It is related in Nawadir from Ali bin Asbat, who relates from some of
his companions, that Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) said, that on the
tenth of Muharram, my father (Imam Zainul Abedeen) was very ill and was
inside the tent. I saw my friends walking to and fro along with Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and bringing water for him. Once he attacked the right
wing of the army and then the left wing, while once the central part.
They killed him in a manner that the Prophet had prohibited them to
slaughter an animal. They killed him with swords, lances, stones, sticks
and batons. Then they trampled his body by the horse’s hooves.

I (the author), say, that Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred on Friday, the
tenth of Muharram, sixty first year of the Migration (Hijrah) after the
Prayer of Zuhr. He was fifty-seven years of age. In another narration it
is related, that he was martyred on Saturday or Monday, but the more
accurate one seems to be Friday.

Abul Faraj (Isfahani) says that what has been related by the Ammah
(Non-Shi’ah) regarding the day of Monday is an error and is not
supported by any narration. This is so because the first day of
Muharram, the month in which the martyrdom occurred, according to the
conclusion from all astronomical deductions by the procedure of Indian
calculations, fell on Wednesday, hence the tenth cannot be on Monday
(but on Friday). And this itself is an evidence for truth that confirms
the narration.

Shaikh Mufeed, in context of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) on the
tenth of Muharram says that at the dawn of Friday, while some others say
Saturday, Umar bin Sa’ad (mobilized his forces), and according to the
previous report it is evident that it was Friday. And in context of his
entering Karbala, Shaikh Mufeed says that then he came forward, and that
was on Thursday, the second of the month of Muharram, sixty first year
of Migration (Hijrah).

It is narrated in the Tazkirah of Sibt Ibn Jawzee, that he (Imam Husayn)
was martyred on Friday, in between the Prayers of Zuhr and Asr, for he
had recited the Salatul Khawf along with his companions, while some say
that it was Saturday, which we have already discussed.

In the same book it is mentioned, that there are numerous reports
regarding his murderer. Hisham bin Muhammad (Kalbi) says that it was
Sinan bin Anas Nakha’i, the other one who is named is Haseen bin Nameer,
who shot an arrow at him and came forward and beheaded him. Then he hung
it in the neck of his horse so as to be endeared by (Ubaydullah) Ibn
Ziyad. The third name being that of Muhajir bin Aws Tamimi, the fourth
one Kaseer bin Abdullah Sha’abi, the fifth Shimr bin Ziljawshan. We say
that the sixth one who is named is Khawli bin Yazid Asbahi. (Allah’s
curse be upon all the murderers of Imam Husayn).

Muhammad bin Talha Shafe’i and Ali bin Isa Irbili Imami say, that Umar
bin Sa’ad ordered his companions saying, “Come forward and behead him”.
Nasr bin Harshah Zababi came forward and repeatedly struck at the neck
of Imam Husayn (a.s.). Umar bin Sa’ad was enraged and signaling to a man
standing on his right side, said, “Woe be to you! Go forward and relieve
Husayn”. Khawli bin Yazeed, May Allah enter him in the fire of hell
eternally, came forward and beheaded him.

Daynoori says that Sinan bin Aws Nakha’i thrust a lance at him and threw
him down, and then Khawli bin Yazeed Asbahi stepped forward to behead
him. His hands trembled and his brother, Shabal bin Yazid beheaded him
and gave it to his brother Khawli.

Ibn Abd Rabbah says that Sinan bin Anas killed him and Khawli bin Yazid
Asbahi, who was from the clan of Hameer, ended his life by beheading
him. He took his head to Ubaydullah and said, “Fill my stirrup with
abundant wealth ........” (as will be quoted later).

It is related from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), that when a stroke was
dealt upon Imam Husayn (a.s.), he fell off his horse and they ran to
behead him. A voice sounded from the heavens

 ***“O the nation which has become obstinate and turned astray after the
passing away of their Prophet! May Allah not bestow upon you the grace
of fasting and the (Eid of) Fitr”*****. Then he (a.s.) said,**
***“Therefore by Allah! They have not prospered nor shall they thrive
until the seeker of revenge (Imam Mahdi) for Imam Husayn rises”.***

Ibn Qawlawayh Qummi relates from Halabi, who in turn relates from Imam
Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred,
someone called out in the Kufan army. When he was reprimanded for it, he
said, “Why should I not cry when I see the Prophet of Allah (S)
standing, at one time he looks at the earth and another time at your
battle, and I fear lest he imprecate upon the dwellers of the earth and
you would be damned”.

The Kufan army said, “He is insane”, while the ‘repentants’ among them
said, “By Allah! What have we done to ourselves? We killed the Master of
the youth of Paradise for the sake of the son of Sumayyah”. Then they
revolted against Ubaydullah and their situation reached such as aught to
be. The narrator says that I asked them, “May I be your ransom! Who was
the caller?” They replied, “We presume it was Jibra’eel”.

In the narration of Mashhadi it is related that Salmah went to the
presence of Umm Salama (a.s.) while she was weeping. He asked, “What
makes you weep?” She replied, *“I saw the Prophet of Allah (S) in a
dream and his head and beard were smeared with dust. I asked: O Prophet
of Allah (S)! What has happened to you that you are smeared in dust? He
replied: Just now I have witnessed the murder of my Husayn”.*

It is related in Sawaeqe Muhriqa of Ibn Hajar, that one of the signs
that appeared on the day of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.), was
that the heaven turned dark so much so that the stars were visible
during the daytime. And whichever stone was lifted up, fresh blood was
found beneath it. And it is also said, that the heavens turned red due
to his martyrdom and the sun pitch-black. The stars became visible
during the daytime, while the men presumed that the (day of)
resurrection had arrived. And on that day whichever stone was lifted up
in Syria, fresh blood appeared beneath it.

[^1]: Daynoori says that Imam Husayn (a.s.) was thirsty and asked for a
cup of water, and when he lifted it up unto his lips, Haseen bin Nameer
shot an arrow at his mouth and he could not drink it. Then he kept the
cup upon the ground.


