Introduction: Birth of Our Master Imam Husayn (a.s.), the oppressed
===================================================================

There is a difference of opinion among the Shi’ah and Sunni Scholars,
traditionists and historians regarding the day, month and year of the
birth of Imam Husayn (a.s.). Some opine that he was born on the third of
the month of Sha’ban or fifth of the same month, or on the fifth of the
month of Jamadi’ ul Ula forth year after Migration (Hijrah), while some
say that it was in the end of the month of Rabi’ ul Ula third year after
Migration.

Thus, Shaikh Al-Tusi in his Tahzeeb, Shaikh Shaheed al Awwal in his
Duroos, and Shaikh Bahai in his Tawzeehal Maqasid unanimously agree and
accept the tradition of Siqatul Islam (the Trustworthy Authority of
Islam) Shaikh Kulaini (May Allah sanctify his grave), that Imam Ja’far
as Sadiq (a.s.) said that,

*“The distance between (the birth of) Imam Hasan (a.s.) and (the
conception of) Imam Husayn (a.s.) was a Tuhr (a period of cleanliness
between two consecutive menses), while between their birth six months
and ten days.”*

What is meant here is the minimum period of cleanliness, which is of ten
days. Imam Hasan (a.s.) was born on the fifteenth of the month of
Ramazan in the year of the battle of Badr i.e. second year of Migration
(Hijrah).

Besides, it is related that the distance between (the birth of) Imam
Hasan (a.s.) and (the conception of) Imam Husayn (a.s.) was not a period
of a Tuhr (cleanliness), and Imam Husayn (a.s.) remained in his mother’s
womb for six months.

It is written in the Manaqib of Ibn Shahr Ashob from Kitab al Anwar ,
that Allah, the Exalted, sent felicitations to His Prophet Muhammad (S)
regarding the conception and birth of Imam Husayn (a.s.) while condoling
him for his martyrdom. When Hazrat Fatima az Zahra (a.s.) was informed
about it, she was grieved, then the following verse was revealed,

***“With trouble did his mother bear him and with trouble did she bring
him forth, and the bearing and the weaning of him was thirty months”.
(Sura al Ahqaf, 46:15).***

Normally a woman’s period of pregnancy is of nine months, and no child
born in six months can survive, except Prophet Isa (a.s.) and Imam
Husayn (a.s.).[^1]

Shaikh Saduq, through his chain of transmitters, quotes from Safiyyah
bint Abdul Muttalib, that she said: When Imam Husayn (a.s.) was born, I
was attending to his mother. The Holy Prophet (S) came to me and said,

*“O Aunt! Bring my son to me.”*

I replied that I had not yet purified him. He replied,

*“Will you purify him? Rather Allah, the Exalted, has cleansed and
purified him.”*

In another tradition it is related that Safiyyah says that she then gave
the child to the Prophet who placed his tongue in his mouth, and Imam
Husayn (a.s.) started licking it. Safiyyah says that I strongly perceive
that the Prophet did not give him anything else except milk and honey.
She says that then the child urinated and the Prophet planted a kiss in
the centre of his eyes and wept, then handing him over to me said,

*“O my dear son! May Allah curse the people who will kill you”,*

and he repeated it thrice. I asked, *“May my parents be your ransom! Who
will kill him”?* and he replied,

**“The oppressive group to emerge from among the Bani Umayyah.”**

It is related that the Prophet recited the Azan in his right ear and
Iqamah in the left one. Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) relates that the
Holy Prophet himself recited the Azaan in the ears of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
the day he was born. Besides it is related that on the seventh day the
Aqiqa was performed and two white charming sheep were sacrificed, one
thigh of which along with a gold Ashrafi (a gold coin) was given to the
mid-wife. The hair of the child was shaven off and silver equal to it’s
weight was given as charity, then scent was applied on the child’s head.

The Trustworthy Authority of Islam Shaikh Kulaini relates that Imam
Husayn (a.s.) did not drink milk from his mother Hazrat Fatima (a.s.)
nor any other woman. He was always brought to the presence of the Holy
Prophet who gave him his thumb to suck. Imam Husayn (a.s.) sucked his
thumb and then would remain satiated for two or three days. Thus Imam
Husayn (a.s.)’s flesh and blood was formed from the flesh and blood of
the Holy Prophet (S).

Shaikh Saduq (May Allah sanctify his grave) quotes Imam Ja’far as Sadiq
(a.s.) as saying that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was born, Allah commanded
Jibra’eel to descend upon the earth with a thousand Angels and
congratulate the Prophet on His behalf and himself. Jibra’eel descended
and on the way he passed by an island where an Angel named Fitrus, who
was a bearer of the empyrean, lay there banished.

Allah had once assigned a job to Fitrus who delayed it due to laziness;
hence Allah took away his wings and expelled him to the island. Fitrus
worshipped Allah there for seven hundred years until the time Imam
Husayn (a.s.) was born. When Fitrus saw Jibra’eel he inquired of him as
to where was he going. Jibra’eel answered that, “Allah, the Exalted, has
bestowed His Blessings (Imam Husayn) upon Muhammad (S), thus Allah has
commanded me to go and congratulate him on His behalf and myself.”
Fitrus said,

***“Then O Jibra’eel! Take me too along with you to the presence of the
Prophet, perhaps he might pray for me.”***

Ji­bra’eel lifted him up and brought him to the Holy Prophet (S). When
he reached there he offered condolence to him on behalf of Allah and
him­self, then he presented the matter of Fitrus. The Prophet commanded
Fitrus to touch himself with the body of Imam Husayn (a.s) and arise.
Fitrus did so and ascended upwards saying,

***“O Prophet of Allah! This son of yours will be mercilessly killed by
your nation. Therefore it is incumbent upon me in exchange of this favor
that I recompense. Hence there is no person who visits his grave except
that I receive him, and there is no Muslim who offers salutations to him
or who prays for him except that I take it to his presence and carry his
message.”***

Saying this Fitrus flew away. In another narrative it is related that
Fitrus flew away saying,

***“Who is similar to me? For I am a freed one of Husayn (s.a.s), the
son of Ali (a.s.) and Fatima (a.s.), whose Grandfather is Ahmad (S).”***

Shaikh Al-Tusi relates in misbah that Qasim bin Abul Ala’a Hamadani (the
agent of Imam Ali an Naqi) received a written pronouncement from Imam al
Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) which read as follows: Our Master Imam Husayn bin Ali
(a.s.) was born on Thursday, the third of the month of Sha’ban,
therefore fast on that day and recite this supplication: “O Allah! I ask
you in the name of the one who is born this day…(till the end)”
Furthermore the following words are quoted: “Fitrus took shelter under
his cradle, and we seek shelter after him under his grave.”

Sayyid ibn Tawoos says in Malhoof that there was no Angel in the Heavens
who did not turn up to congratulate the Prophet (S) on the birth of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and condole him for his martyrdom, and revealed the reward
reserved for the Imam. They showed him the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.),
and the Prophet prayed,

*“O Allah! Forsake him who forsakes Husayn, and slay him who slays
Husayn, and do not bestow abundance to the one who wishes to derive
advantage from his death.”* [^2]

[^1]: The author says that we strongly perceive that in reality the
above verse refers to Imam Husayn (a.s.) and Prophet Yahya (a.s.) (and
not Prophet Isa) for their lives were quite identical to one another
while the period of their mother’s pregnancy was the same. It is related
that Prophet Yahya (a.s.) remained in his mother’s womb for six months
as Imam Husayn (a.s.), whereas in the case of Prophet Isa (a.s.), it is
found in numerous traditions that his mother bore him for a very short
period viz. nine hours, each hour equal to a month, and this seems quite
acceptable. It is related that Ummul Fazl, the wife of Abbas bin Abdul
Muttalib (the uncle of the Prophet) who nurtured Imam Husayn (a.s.),
recited some couplets eulo­gizing him.

[^2]: Ibn Shahr Ashob writes in Manaqib that one day Jibra’eel
descend­ed and saw Hazrat Fatima (a.s.) sleeping while Imam Husayn
(a.s.) was feeling restless and weeping. Jibra’eel sat down and consoled
and played with the child until Hazrat Fatima (a.s.) awoke, and the
Prophet apprised her of this. Sayyid Hashim Husayn Bahrani quotes in his
Madinatul Ma’ajiz from Sharhabeel bin Abi Awf, that when Imam Husayn
(a.s.) was born, an Angel from among the Angels of the High Paradise
descended and went to the Great Sea and called out between the Heavens
and the earth, “O servants of Allah! Wear the dress of grief and sorrow,
and mourn, for the son of Muhammad (S) lies beheaded, oppressed and
subdued.”


