Entry of the Household (Ahlul Bayt) of Imam Husayn (a.s.) into Kufa
===================================================================

(Umar) Ibn Sa’ad proceeded with the captives, and when they neared Kufa
the natives therein gathered for a spectacle. A narrator reports, that a
Kufan woman peeped down from her balcony and asked, “You are the
captives from which place?” They replied, “We are the captives from the
family of Muhammad (S)”.

Hearing this, the woman stepped down and started collecting the shawls,
skirts and veils and handed them over to them and they wore it. (Imam)
Ali bin Husayn (Zainul Abedeen) (a.s.) was along with the women, while
illness had bent him severely.

There was also Hasan al Musannah, who had accompanied his uncle and
Imam, and had endured the wounds of swords and lances and was severely
wounded, as also Zayd and ‘Amr, two other sons of Imam Hasan (a.s.) were
along with them. The people of Kufa started wailing and lamenting upon
their state, when Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.) said,

***“You weep and lament for us, then who killed us (except you)?”***

It is related from the ‘Intellectual among the Qurayshites’ Sayyidah
Zainab (a.s.), the daughter Imam Ali (a.s.), that when Ibn Muljim
wounded her father and she saw his last moments, she related the
tradition of Umm Ayman to her father and said, “Umm Ayman related to me
the following and I endear that I hear it from you”. Imam said,

***“O my dear daughter! The tradition is similar to the one related to
you by Umm Ayman. And it is as if I see you and the women of your family
captivated in this city in a wretched and dreadful state, and I fear
lest people might harm you. Forbear! Forbear! By Him, Who splits open
the seeds and creates human! On that day there shall not be another
friend of Allah upon this earth except you all, your friends and your
Shi’ah”.***

Sayyidah Zainab bint Ali (a.s)’s sermon in Kufa
-----------------------------------------------

Abu Mansoor Tabarsi in his Ehtijaj relates, that the sermon of Sayyidah
Zainab (a.s.), the daughter of Imam Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), in the
midst of Kufans on that day was a suppression and reproach of them.
Hizam bin Sateer Asadi relates, that when Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.) was
brought from Karbala to Kufa in an ailing state, the women of Kufa
started tearing off their collars and wailing aloud, while the men too
accompanied them in lamenting. Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), who was
ailing, called out to them in a feeble (yet stern) voice,

***“O these who weep! And who else except them have killed us?”***

Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.), the daughter of Ali (a.s.) signaled the men to
remain silent. Hizam Asadi continues that by Allah! I have never seen a
modest woman more eloquent than her and she spoke in the voice of the
Commander of the faithful Ali (a.s.). She signaled to the men to pay
heed, their breaths stopped in their breasts and their chimes faded. She
then glorified Allah and sent salutations upon the Prophet of Allah (S)
and said,

*“Now then! O Kufans! O men of vaunt! O treacherous men! O retreaters!
Beware! May your lament never cease and may your wailing never end.
Verily your similitude is that of a woman who untwirls the threads
spinned by herself. You have broken your pledges by deceit and there
remains nothing in you except pretense, self-conceit, exorbitance and
dishonesty. You have adopted the flatter of maids and coquettishness of
the enemies as your customs. Your similitude is of that of the expanse
vegetation or jewelry in the graveyard.*

*Beware! What an evil have you brought forth for yourselves that has
invited Allah’s wrath upon you and you have earned a place of fury in
the hereafter. You weep for my brother? Verily yes by Allah! You should
weep, for you deserve it. Weep abundantly and laugh less, thus you are
tainted with disgrace and trapped in contempt that you shall never be
able to wash off. How will you wash off the blood of the son of the
‘Seal of Prophethood (S)’ and the ‘Mine of Apostleship’ from yourselves,
who was the Master of the youth of Paradise, the General of the
battlefield, and an Asylum of your group. He was a residence of repose
for you and your well-being. He healed your wounds and safeguarded you
against whatever evil came towards you. You approached him when* *you
quarreled among yourselves. He was your best counsel and you relied upon
him, and he was a lantern of your path.*

*Beware! What evil have you brought forth for yourselves and what load
have you put upon your neck for the day of Qiyamah. Perdition!
Perdition! Destruction! May your search go vain and may your hands
paralyze that you have handed over the affairs of your provisions to the
wind. You have occupied a place in Allah’s wrath, while the stamp of
contempt and misfortune is sealed upon your forehead.*

*Woe be to you! Do you know that you have amputated the dear child of
Muhammad (S)? And what pledge have you broken off from him? And what
endeared family of his have you brought out onto the streets? And what
veil of sanctity have you snatched away from them? And what blood have
you shed from him? What an awry thing have you brought forth that it is
likely that the heavens would fall down and the earth would disperse,
while the mountains would crumble down as much as the fill of the earth
and the heavens.*

*The bride of your affairs is hairless, unfamiliar, indecent, blind,
ugly and sullen. You wonder why the heavens rain blood. The chastisement
of the hereafter is more disgraceful and there will be no helper. Let
not this respite make you frivolous, for none has the power to
anticipate upon Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime, and seeking vengeance
does not lapse from him. No, not at all, your Lord is in ambush for
you”.*

Then she recited the following elegies:

*“What will you reply when the Prophet shall ask you, how did you fair,
while you were the last nation, with my progeny and my children, the
noble ones, that some of them are captivated and some drenched in their
blood, this is not the recompense regarding which I advised you with
which you treated my ‘Near-ones’, I fear that a wrath similar to the
people of Iram*[^1] *might descend upon you”.*

Saying then she turned her face away from them.

Hizam says that I saw that all the men wandered away and were deeply
remorseful. An old man standing besides me wept bitterly until his beard
was soaked with his tears. He held up his hands towards the heavens and
said, “May my parents be ransom upon those whose elders, youth and women
are the chosen ones among all elders, youth and women. Their family is
respectful and their grace eminent”. Then he said, “Theirs are the best
of elders and the best progeny. And when tomorrow the progenies are
taken into account, theirs will not be from among the ruined and damned
ones”.

Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.) said,

***“O dear aunt! Please remain silent, that what has passed away should
serve as an example for the future. You, praise be to Allah, are an
intellectual without having being trained, and are knowledgeable who
needs none to make her understand. Verily, lamenting and wailing would
not return back those who have passed away”.***

Hearing this, Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) became silent and Imam (a.s.)
alighted and pitched a tent. Then he dismounted the women and brought
them into the tent.

Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.)’s remonstration amidst the people of Kufa and his reproach to them for their breach of trust and deception
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Then Hizam bin Sateer says that Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) came
forward facing the men and signaled them to remain silent. Then he sat
down and praised and glorified Allah and sent salutations upon His
Prophet, then said,

***“O people! Those of you, who know me, know me, while those who do not
know me I am Ali, the son of Husayn, who was beheaded without any fault
or error on the banks of the Euphrates. I am the son of the one whose
sanctity was violated and was robbed off the blessing of his life. His
wealth was plundered and his women were captivated. I am the son of the
one who was killed by a collective group, while this honor (Martyrdom)
is sufficient for us.***

***O people! I tell you in the name of Allah! Do you not know that you
had written a letter to my father inviting him? You deceived him while
pledging and promising to aid him and took the oath of allegiance to
him. And in return you fought against him and abandoned him? May you be
ruined by that what you have brought forth and may your ideologies be
ugly! How shall you face the Prophet of Allah (S) when he shall say to
you: You killed my progeny and violated my sanctity, you are not from
among my nation”.***

The voice of wailing of men arose and they started telling one another,
“You are ruined and you do not know”. Then Imam (a.s.) continued,

 ***“May Allah’s Mercy be upon him who accepts my counsel and safeguards
my recommendation in the way of Allah, the Prophet of Allah (S) and his
Progeny, that we possess better following while having relation with the
Prophet of Allah (S)”.***

They told him, “O son of the Prophet of Allah! All of us are heedful
ones, obedient and admirers of your sanctity. We shall not desert you
nor turn away from you. Then command us, may your Lord have mercy upon
you, we are along with you in times of conflict and peace. Then we shall
seek revenge from the one who oppressed you or ourselves”. Hearing this
Imam (a.s.) said,

 ***“Alas! Alas! O deceivers loaded with fraud! There is a large
obstacle between you and your futile caprice. You desire to fair with me
similarly as you have faired with my fathers? No, never. By the Lord of
the joyous Camels of the pilgrims! The deep wounds of the martyrdom of
my father and my family have not yet healed. The wounds inflicted upon
the breasts of the Prophet of Allah (S), my father and his sons have not
yet been forgotten. The bones of my neck are broken due to the sorrow
and its bitterness exists in between my throat and larynx. And the bones
of the heart are suffocating me. My desire is that you should not be of
those who benefit us nor of those who harm us”.***

Then he said,

 ***“No wonder that Husayn (a.s.) is killed, similar to his father, who
was better and greater than him. O Kufans! Do not rejoice upon this
affliction of ours which is a great affliction, who has been lying
martyred on the bank of the Euphrates, may my life be his ransom, while
the retribution for his murder shall be the fire of hell”.***

Besides, the remonstration of Fatemah Sughra (a.s.) with the Kufans is
also quoted. Zayd bin Moosa bin Ja’far relates from his father, who
relates from his fathers the sermon of Fatemah Sughra (a.s.), which she
delivered after returning from Karbala:

*“Praise be to Allah equivalent to the particles of sand and the weight
of the heavens until the earth. We praise Him and believe in Him and
rely upon Him alone, and we say that there is no other Deity except
Allah. He is Unique and has no associate, while Muhammad (S) is His
Slave and Messenger. And the heads of his sons have been severed
innocently on the banks of the Euphrates.*

*O Allah! I seek refuge in You if I attribute falsehood to You, or if I
misconstrue against what You ordered regarding the pledge of the
Vicegerency of (Imam) Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), whose right was usurped.
He was also innocently killed in one of the houses of Allah as they
killed his sons yesterday. There was present a group of men who claimed
to be Muslims, may their heads not remain upon their necks, he was
thirsty until his soul was taken up to You. He was of a praiseworthy
character, pious lineage, and renowned qualities and acclaimed Religion
and he did not fear rebuke and reproach in Your Path.*

*O Allah! You guided him towards Your Islam since his early childhood
and You praised his attributes in his adulthood. He constantly remained
sincere towards You and Your Prophet and Your salutations descended unto
him until You summoned him to Yourself. He was abstinent with regard to
this world and was not avaricious, while he was desirous with regard to
the hereafter. Then he strove in Your way, while You cherished and
preferred him and guided him to the Right Path.*

*Now then! O people of Kufa! O men of deceit, fraud and conceit! We are
a family tried on your account by Allah and He has tried you on our
account. He has made these trials as a felicity for us and has informed
us regarding it. We are the guardians of His Knowledge and the treasure
of His Intelligence. We recognize His Wisdom and are the Proof for His
slaves upon His earth. He cherishes us dearly through His Kindness and
has exalted us upon His creations through His Prophet.*

*You have belied us and committed infidelity through (oppressing) us.
You considered killing us to be lawful and have plundered our belongings
as though we are the infidels of Turkey or Kabul. It was yesterday that
you killed our grandfather and your swords spits the blood of us the
family (of Prophet). You have cooled your eyes due to an ancient enmity
(which you bear towards us) and rejoice upon the insolence towards Allah
and deceit that you bring forth. Do not rejoice upon shedding our blood
and plundering our belongings, for whatever has reached us through this
great affliction and the immense slaughter is in conformity to this
verse of the Qur’an:*

*Vie in hastening to forgiveness from your Lord and to a garden whose
extent is like the extent of the heaven and the earth, prepared for
those who believe in Allah and His Messengers; that is the Grace of
Allah, He bestows it upon whomsoever He wills; and Allah is the Lord of
Mighty Grace. Befalls not any disaster in the earth or in your own
selves save it is in a Book, ere We cause it to be verily that is easy
for Allah. (Surah al-Hadeed, 57: 21-22).*

*May you be expelled, look forward towards the wrath which will soon
descend upon you. The vengeance of the heavens will descend upon you
successively and erode, or He (Allah) should involve you in confusion
(in) party (dissentions) and make some of you taste the fighting of the
other. (Surah al-An\`aam, 6:65).*

*Then due to the oppression that you have committed upon us, you shall
remain everlasting in the fierce wrath in Qiyamah. Beware! Curse of
Allah upon the oppressors! Woe be to you! Do you know and do you
understand? With what hands did you aim the lances at us? With what
souls did you come to fight us? With what feet did you proceed for a
combat with us? Your hearts have* *hardened, your livers have turned
into iron, and your hearts have become blind, while your ears and eyes
have been sealed. Shaitan has enticed you and has enjoined you while he
has blinded your eyes and you shall never find guidance.*

*May you be ruined O Kufans! How much blood of the Prophet of Allah (S)
is upon you? And what measure (of vengeance) is upon your neck? Then you
committed treachery with his (the Prophet’s) brother Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.) as also his sons, the progeny of the Prophet, and who were among
the chaste and virtuous. And one of you said arrogantly: It is we who
killed Ali and his sons, with Indian swords and lances, and we
captivated their women-folk similar to the Turkish captives, and we
battled with him and what a battle. Mud in the mouth of the one who said
it! You pride upon the murder of the ones whom Allah has praised and
purified and has kept away all filth away from them? Hold your breadth!
Then sit down as a dog sits down upon the tip of its tail, as your
father sat. Every man shall reap what he sends forth. Woe be to you! You
envied us due to the grace that Allah bestowed upon us. What is our
fault in it if our river is full of abundant water, while the water of
your river has dried up, that cannot even hide a worm?*

*That is the grace of Allah, He bestows it upon whomsoever He wills, and
Allah is the Lord of Mighty Grace. (Surah al-Hadeed, 57:21).*

*Unto whomsoever Allah gives not light, there is not for him anything of
light”. (Surah an-Noor, 24:40).*

It is said that hearing this, the voices of wailing arose and people
said, “Enough O daughter of the Chaste Ones! You have blazed our hearts
and have flexed our necks and have inflamed our conscience”. Then she
became silent, salutations upon her and her father and grandfather.

Sayyidah Umm Kulthum bint Ali (a.s.)’s sermon in Kufa
-----------------------------------------------------

Sayyid Ibn Tawoos in his Malhoof quotes these sermons and then says
that, on that day Umm Kulthum (a.s.),[^2] the daughter of Imam Ali
(a.s.), bewailed from behind the curtain and said,

*“O Kufans! May you face evil! Why did you refrain yourselves from
rendering assistance to Husayn (a.s.), why did you kill him? Why did you
plunder his belongings and become its possessors? Why did you imprison
his women-folk and suppress him? May you be ruined and uprooted! Woe be
to you! Do you know what you have brought forth? And do you know what
load of sin have you taken upon your backs? And what blood have you
shed? And which women-folk have you taken as captives? And what children
have to loot? And what belongings have you plundered? You have killed
the best of men succeeding the Prophet (S), while mercy has departed
away from your hearts**.***

 *Beware, verily the Party of Allah alone shall be the successful ones
and verily the party of Shaitan are the losers (Surah al-Mujadilah,
58:22 and 19).*”

Then she retorted,

*“You killed my brother, woe be upon you, you will surely be rewarded by
the fire which burns eternally. You have shed the blood whose shedding
was proclaimed to be unlawful by Allah, by the Qur’an and Muhammad (S),
may you receive tidings of the fire where tomorrow you shall dwell
eternally. I shall weep upon my brother all through my life, who was
born as the best of creatures after the Prophet (S), the tears shall
flow upon my cheeks similar to the flood and rain waters and shall never
dry up. ”*

It is said that people started weeping and wailing aloud. The women tore
their hair and put sand upon their head. They scratched their faces and
started beating them and saying, “Alas! Alas!” The men started weeping
and pulled their beards. Never was such a wailing of men and women ever
been seen before.

Allamah Majlisi relates in Bihar al Anwar from the reliable books,
without quoting the chain of narrators, from Muslim, the plasterer, that
he said, that (Ubaydullah) Ibn Ziyad had summoned me to Kufa for the
repair of the Royal Palace. While I was plastering the doors, suddenly
voices of wailing arose from the surroundings of Kufa. A servant who was
supervising us came and I asked him, “What is the news that I hear hue
and cry in Kufa?”

He answered, “The severed head of a rebel has been brought in, who
revolted against Yazid”. I asked him as to who he was and he replied
that he was Husayn bin Ali (a.s.). I waited until the servant had left,
then I hit upon my face with my wrist (with such force) and feared lest
my eyes would have come out. I washed my hands and came out from the
back of the palace until I reached the open ground of Kufa. I stood
there while men were awaiting the arrival of the captives and the heads.
Suddenly nearly forty litters upon forty Camels drew near wherein were
women, family and children of Fatemah (a.s.), while Imam Ali (Zainul
Abedeen) was seated upon a Camel without a litter. Blood was dripping
from his legs and he was weeping in this state and said,

***“O evil nation! May you never be satiated! O the nation who did not
respect us in consideration of our grandfather! What will you answer on
the day of Qiyamah when we shall be joined along with our grandfather?
You made us sit upon bare litters as though it is not us who had
strengthened the foundations of Religion. O Bani Umayyah! Until when
shall you keep oppressing us or refuse to respond to the call of our
proclaimer? O those who clap your hands rejoicing upon our misfortunes
and slander us upon the earth, is not my grandfather the Prophet of
Allah, Woe be to you, who guides abundantly than the path of the
misguide? O event of Taff (Karbala)! You have made me the heir of grief
and sorrow. By Allah! The veils will be pulled off the faces of those
who have treated us badly. ”***

The people of Kufa started distributing dates, bread and walnuts to the
captivated children seated upon the litters. Seeing this Umm Kulthum
(a.s.) called out, *“O Kufans! Charity is unlawful for us”*. She took it
away from the hands and mouths of the children and threw it upon the
ground.

It is said that when she uttered these words, people wept on account of
this unpleasant event.

Umm Kulthum (a.s.) peeped out from the litter and said, *“Quite O
Kufans! Your men kill us while your women weep upon us? Allah is the
Judge on the day of Judgment between you and us”*. When she said this,
the voice of wailing increased and the heads were brought forth. The
head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was in the forefront, it seemed similar to
the Venus and moon and bore resemblance to the Prophet of Allah (S) more
than anyone else. His beard bore the mark of dye, while his face was
glowing like a disc of the moon, while the wind was whirling it (the
beard) to the left and right. Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) lifted her head and
saw the face of her brother and hit her head upon the wooden pillar of
the litter. We saw with our own eyes that blood started flowing from
under her veil and she started uttering with a broken heart,

*“O crescent who did not even rise when it was eclipsed and it set! O
piece of my heart! I had not presumed that the pen of destiny would have
written this. O brother! Speak to the young Fatemah so that her heart
may find solace. O brother! What has happened to the heart that was
merciful and kind towards us, that it has hardened? O brother! I wish
you would look at Ali (Zainul* *Abedeen) when he was being captivated
while he was also orphaned. He possessed no strength to retaliate; when
he was being flogged he was calling out to you helplessly, while his
tears were flowing. O brother! Take him into your fold and bring him
close to you and offer solace to his frightened heart, what a disgrace
for an orphan when he calls out to his father and receives no answer
from him”.*

[^1]: Iram - A city built by Shaddad, a claimant of Godhead, as a
challenge to Paradise, while exhausting all his resources. But he
himself could not have a glance at it and death overtook him at the
door. The people of that city were called the people of Ad, who were the
people of Arab antiquity; they were powerful and possessed a tall
stature. They became proud of their strength and power and thus rebelled
against Allah’s laws and were persistent in their arrogance and
disbelief, thus Allah’s wrath descended upon them and they were
destroyed. Numerous verses of the Qur’an refer to their state.

[^2]: Sayyidah Zainab as Sughra (the younger Zainab), better known by
her agnomen Umm Kulthum, was the younger daughter of the Commander of
the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) and Sayyidah Fatemah az Zahra (a.s.). She
was born during the days of her grandfather Prophet Muhammad (S), who
cherished her and nurtured her in his blessed lap. Her excellent
character, sublime morals, abundant virtue and unparalleled wisdom
earned her great fame and she was looked upon as the inheritor of her
mother’s chastity second only to her elder sister Sayyidah Zainab al
Kubra (a.s.). She was married to her cousin Muhammad bin Ja’far at
Tayyar, who died leaving her a widow. She remained attached and
dedicated to her brothers Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husayn (a.s.). Umm
Kulthum (a.s.) accompanied her brother Imam Husayn (a.s.) at Karbala and
witnessed the heart-rending episode of his martyrdom and those of the
other men-folk of her family. Her speeches and sermons at Kufa and
Damascus, reprimanding and condemning the oppressors for their misdeeds,
bear witness to her eloquence and valiant character, the legacy of her
father Imam Ali (a.s.). She remained steadfast and forbore patiently the
worst ordeals of life alongside her elder sister Sayyidah Zainab al
Kubra (the elder Zainab) thus entering the ranks of the most honorable
and pious women of the world. The Shi’ah Scholars unanimously agree to
her being free from error and fault (Mahfooz anil Khata). While the
episode quoted by Non-Shi’ah sources of her alleged marriage with Caliph
Umar bin Khattab is nothing but fictitious, and is fabricated with a
sole motive to demean the exalted status of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and
applause their enemies. Shi’ah Scholars have authored numerous books in
refutation of this alleged claim. For further study refer to: As Sirrul
Makhtoom fi Tahqeeq Aqd Umm Kulthum by Mawlawi Muhammad Inshallah
Muhammadi Siddiqi Hanafi Badayuni (a Sunni Author), Afhamul A’ada was
Khusoom fi nahi Tazweej Sayyidatena Umm Kulthum by Ayatullah Sayyid
Nasir Husayn, Kanze Maktoom fi hall Aqd Umm Kulthum by Fakhrul Hukama
Sayyid Ali Azhar, A Treatise by Ayatullah Shaikh Muhammad Jawad Balaghi,
etc. Also refer to the renowned Fatwa of Ayatullah al Uzma Sayyid
Shihabuddin Mar’ashi Najafi, refuting the claim. Sayyidah Umm Kulthum
(a.s.) died in Damascus and lies buried in the renowned graveyard of
Babe Sagheer, opposite her niece Sayyidah Sakinah (a.s.), the daughter
of Imam Husayn (a.s.). May Allah’s abundant Peace and Blessings be
showered upon her and her exalted family.


