On some of the virtues of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
============================================

The virtues of our Master Imam Husayn (a.s.) are quite apparent and the
tower of his honor and eminence is luminous and indisputable. In all
matters he holds an exalted status and honorable rank. There is none
among the Shia’h and others who have not praised his grace, excellence
and superiority.

The intelligent among them have recognized the truth, while the ignorant
are furbishing them. And why would not this be, for his es­teemed self
is surrounded from all sides by nobility, and the great ap­pearance has
taken hold of him all over, while beauty has sunk deep into him from all
directions and this cannot be denied by any Muslim.

His Grand­father is Muhammad al Mustafa (the chosen one) (S), his Father
Imam Ali al Murtaďa (the approved one) (a.s.), Grandmother Hazrat
Khadija (a.s.), Mother Hazrat Fatima az Zahra (the splendid one) (a.s.),
brother Imam Hasan (a.s.) the honorable, his uncle Ja’far at Tayyar, and
his Progeny pure Imams from the chosen ones among the family of Hashim.
It is said in one of the couplets: “Your splendor is evident for
everyone, except the blind who cannot see the moon.”

In Ziyarat-e-Nahiyah our Master Imam al Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) praises his
excel­lent personality in the following words:

*“And you fulfilled your duties and responsibilities with utmost
readiness.*

*Renowned for your charity, you performed the mid-night Prayer in
darkness.*

*Your path was firm, (you were) benevolent among the creatures, greatest
among the precedents, noble with regard to the lineage and eminent with
regard to ancestry, and you had an exalted position and several (other)
excellences.*

*You were of a commendable character, amply generous.*

*You were forbearing, sober, penitent, benevolent, knowledgeable,
rigorous.*

*A martyred Imam, penitent, beloved (by the believers), dreadful (for
the disbelievers).*

*You are the son of the Prophet of Allah (S) and the deliverer of the
Holy Qur’an.*

*And the arms of the nation (ummah).*

*And the one who endeavored in the way of (Allah’s) obedience.*

*Protector of the oath and covenant.*

*You hated the path of the transgressors.*

*A Bestower upon those in trouble.*

*One who prolonged the Bowing and Prostration.*

*(You remained) Abstinent from the world,*

*You always viewed it with the sight of the one who has to leave it
soon.”*

The he continues to say:

*“I wonder at myself that I am about to glorify the one whose praise has
exhausted the paper. The water of the seas is insufficient to fill the
book of your excellence, so that I may dip my finger in it to turn the
pages thereof (to read it).”*

His Valor
---------

The reporters and reliable authorities specify that when Imam Husayn
(a.s.) intended to go to Iraq, Ubaydullah bin Ziyad dispatched troops
one after the other towards him and also gathered the Police force to
kill him. He prepared an army of thirty thousand soldiers (foot and
horse-men) to follow him in groups one after the other and to surround
him fully equipped from all sides. They gave him the following notice:

*“Either submit to the orders of the son of Ziyad and swear the oath of
allegiance to Yazid, or be ready for combat, which would split open the
liver and cut the life vein, dispatch the souls above, and would throw
the bodies head-long unto the ground.”*

But the Imam, following the footsteps of his respected Grandfather and
Father, refused to surrender to indignity. He set an example of
self-respect and honor for the people, and accepted (noble) death below
the sword. Then he himself, along with his brother and family members
arose to defend (Islam) and accepted death instead of submitting to the
tyranny of Yazid.

The wicked and vile army desisted them and the immoral infidels started
shooting arrows at him. But Imam Husayn (a.s.) stood firm like a
mountain and nothing could weaken his determination. His feet were more
resolute upon the earth of Martyrdom than a mountain, while his heart
was not disturbed because of the fear of battle or death.

Similarly his supporters likewise faced the forces of Ubaydullah ibn
Ziyad and killed and wounded many of them. And they themselves did not
die until they had killed many of them, and made them taste death by the
ardor of the Hashimites. And none among the Hashimites fell a martyr
until they had thrown their opponents unto the ground and killed them
and sunk the hilts of their swords into their bod­ies. Imam Husayn
(a.s.) himself attacked the enemies like a ferocious lion and with his
mighty sword threw them upon the ground.

The narrator quotes a man as saying that,

*“By Allah! I have seen none like him, who having lost his sons,
relatives and dear friends, and in spite of this, his heart being
powerful and serene, and feet firm upon the ground. By Allah! I have
seen none like him before or after him”*

It has been related that there arose a dispute for a farm between Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and Waleed bin Uqba. And although Waleed was the governor
of Madina (but was on the wrong), Imam was infuriated and removed his
turban from his head and put it in his neck.

In the book Ehtijaj it is related from Muhammad bin Saeb, that one day
Marwan bin Hakam told Imam Husayn (a.s.) that, “If it were not for your
esteem and honor through Hazrat Fatima (a.s.), how could you have gained
excellence over us”? Imam Husayn (a.s.) was infuriated and caught hold
of his neck with an iron fist, then he removed the turban from his head
and tied it in Marwan’s neck, and he fell down unconscious, then he left
him.

The author says that Imam Husayn’s valor became a by-word while his
for­bearance in the battlefield had exhausted and frustrated others. His
combat is similar to that of the Holy Prophet (S) in the battle of Badr.
While his forbearance, even after facing numerous enemies and possessing
support­ers less in quantity, is similar to his Father Imam Ali (a.s.)
in the battle of Siffīn and Jamal.

Imam Mahdi (a.t.f.s.) in Ziyarat-e-Nahiyah says:

*“And (they) initiated the attack upon you.*

*So you too stood up (equipped with) spear and sword.*

*And you routed the army of transgressors.*

*And you were surrounded in the dust of the battle and (were) fighting
with Zulfiqar with such ferocity as if you were Ali, the empowered one.*

*So when the enemies saw you to be composed and calm without fear or
anxie­ty, they began to plot and lay traps for you, and began to fight
with you with cunningness and mischief.*

*And the accursed (Umar bin Sa’ad) ordered his army to cut off the water
supply (from you).*

*And all of them unleashed their atrocities to kill you and they
hastened to line up against you.*

*They struck at you with arrows and (they) extended their futile hands
to­wards you.*

*They did not consider your rights, nor did they deem their putting to
swords your friends as a sin, (and) they looted your belongings.*

*You bore the tribulations (of the battle) with firmness and forbore
their troubles, such that the Angels of the Heavens were astounded at
your pa­tience.*

*Then the enemies surrounded you from all sides and inflicted you with
wounds.*

*And they partitioned themselves between you and your family, there
remained no helper for you.*

*You deflected them with persistence and patience away from your women
and children.*

*Until they forced you down from your horseback, and you descended to
the earth, wounded.*

*The horses were trampling you with their hooves.*

*The atrocious army fell upon you with their swords.*

*The perspiration of death appeared on your forehead and your hands and
feet folded and unfolded to the right and the left (with uneasiness).*

*You were beholding with fear your belongings and your Household.*

*When in such a situation you might not have thought of your children
and family due to personal pain.”*

His Knowledge
-------------

It should be borne in the mind that the knowledge of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
was inspired by Allah and they were in no need to gain knowledge (from
others). And their present day knowledge was similar to that in the past
(without any change).

They were in no need of analogy, ponderence or con­jecture, while
apprehending their intellect is far beyond the capacity of human beings.
The one who tries to conceal their excellences is similar to the one
attempting to veil the face of the sun. It should be noted that they
examined the concealed in the present state. They grasped the verity of
intellect in the solitude of worship and they were far more better than
as perceived by their companions and friends. They would not pause (to
think) in front of the common profiteer and those trying to test them,
nor become upset or show slackness.

They were prudent in their conditions and discourses and were
unparalleled in their age. In distinction and honor, from the beginning
until the end, they were in conformity with one another. When they
opened their mouth to speak, others would remain silent. When they spoke
others would listen to them (with awe). Thus every strider could not
reach them (their lofty position) nor their aims were fulfilled (to
surpass them) and did not succeed in their policies.

They possessed such qualities, which had been bestowed upon them by the
Creator, and the Truth­ful (Lord) announced that He had removed doubts
regarding them. He explic­itly praised their grace and superiority until
He made them independent of evidences and analogy. Thus they said, “We
are the sons of Abdul Muttalib, the Master of men.”

His munificence and generosity
------------------------------

It is related that one day Hazrat Fatima az Zahra (a.s.) took her sons
Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husayn (a.s.) to the presence of the Holy
Proph­et (S) who was seriously ill (and he later died because of it).
She requested the Holy Prophet (S) to present to her sons something as
inheritance (from his attributes). To which the Prophet (S) replied,

*“As for Hasan, he shall inherit my awe and supremacy, and as for
Husayn, he will inherit my generosity and valor.”*

It is renowned that Imam Husayn (a.s.) liked to serve guests and fulfill
the desires of people and was friendly towards the relatives. He gifted
the indigent and poor, gave to the needy, clothed the naked ones, fed
the hun­gry, relieved the debts of the indebted, caressed fondly the
orphans, and aided the needy ones. Whenever he received any wealth, he
distributed it to others.

It is related that once when Mu’awiyah went to Makkah, he presented
nu­merous wealth and clothes to Imam (a.s.), but he refused to accept
them. This being the attribute of generous and liberal men, and
characteristic of the munificent. His personality bore witness to his
kindness, while his speech confirmed his excellent trait, and his
actions manifested his noble qualities.

It should be noted that generosity combined with munificence and mercy
is confined in (the personality of) Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) while in others it
is just superficial. Therefore stinginess was never attributed to anyone
among the Bani Hashim, while their generosity was compared to the clouds
(of rain) and their valor to the Lions.

Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), in one of his sermons in Syria said,

*“We are presented with wisdom, forbearance, generosity, eloquence,
valor, and love in the hearts of believers.”*

Verily they are inspiring oceans and clouds filled with rains.

The good deeds performed by them were inherited by them from their
forefa­thers. They had made good character as the Divine Law and a means
of perseverance and recognition of extreme honor, for they were the
noble sons of noble fathers.

They were the masters of the nation, chosen ones from among the people,
chiefs of the Arabs, the epitome of the children of Adam, the sovereigns
of this world, guides of the hereafter, Allah’s proof among His
servants, and His trustees in the towns. While all the eminence is
evident and visible in them.

Others have learnt (the lesson of) generosity from them and gained
guidance from their methods. How would he not part with his wealth, who
has set his foot (in the battlefield to sacrifice his life), and how
would he not deem the things of this world to be lowly who has collected
courage (provisions) for the Hereafter. There is no doubt regarding the
one who is ready to sacrifice his life in the battlefield, that he will
ever be prepared to part with his wealth. Then how will the one, who has
abandoned the pleas­ures of this world, have worth for the things of
this transient world?

The poet says:

*“He is generous with regard to his self, where even the munificent are
stingy, while the generosity of self (sacrifice) is the pinnacle of
generosity.”*

Hence it is said that generosity and valor have consumed milk from the
same breast (go hand in hand with one another) and are attached to one
another. Thus every generous person is brave and every brave generous,
and this being a common system.

Abu Tamam says regarding this: “When you see Abu Yazid in a gathering or
in a battlefield, or ransacking, then you shall agree that generosity is
nearing valor and munificence to valor.”

Abut Tayyib says: “They say that munificence is not enough, until he
built a house on the way fare, I say that the valor of a generous man
warns him against stinginess, O generosity, you may turn similar to a
whirlpool, his sword has rendered him protection from being drowned.”

Once Mu’awiyah praised the Bani Hashim for their munificence, the
children of Zubayr with valor, the Bani Makhzoom with arrogance, and the
Bani Umayyah with forbearance. When Imam Hasan (a.s.) heard his words,
he said,

*“May Allah kill him! He desires that the Bani Hashim (reacting to his
praise) may give away their wealth and thus become dependent on him, and
the children of Zubayr (being influenced by his praise) may get killed
while fighting, and the Bani Makhzoom would pride upon themselves so
that* *people may dislike them, and that the Bani Umayyah may
(cautiously) become lenient so that the people may start liking them.”*

Mu’awiyah said the truth, although truthfulness is far away from him,
but it so happens that quite often a liar (unwillingly) utters the
truth. In the case of Bani Hashim, where Mu’awiyah said that generosity
was present in them and valor and temperateness were particularly found
in them, while people just imitated them. The best qualities which were
distributed among all men were unified together in them. This being the
truth while everything else false.[^1]

His eloquence, abstinence, humility, and worship
------------------------------------------------

As regards his eloquence, virtue, humility and worship, if we go on to
relate about it, we will cross the limits of the capacity of this book.
Instead we quote the traditions about the love and affection of the Holy
Prophet (S) towards him.

Shaikh Muhammad ibn Shahr Ashob in his Manaqib quotes from Ibn Umar,
that one day the Prophet (S) was seated on the pulpit delivering a
sermon. Suddenly Imam Husayn (a.s.) came and his legs got entangled in
the end of his shirt and he fell down and started weeping. The Holy
Prophet (S) alighted from the pulpit and lifted him up and said,

*“May Allah kill the Shaitan! Verily he is a charming child. By Him in
whose hands is my life! I do not know as to how I alighted from the
pulpit.”*

In Manaqib, Abus Sa’adat, while praising the Prophet’s Household (Ahlul­
Bayt) relates from Yazid bin Ziyad, that one day the Holy Prophet (S)
came out of the house of Ayesha and passed from near the house of Hazrat
Fatima (a.s) when he heard Imam Husayn weeping. He said,

*“O Fatima! Do you not know that the weeping of Husayn causes me great
pain”?*

It is quoted in Manaqib from Sunan of Ibn Majah and Faeq of Zamakhshari,
that one day the Holy Prophet (S) passed through a lane and saw Imam
Husayn (a.s.) playing with some children. The Prophet stretched his
hands and tried to catch him, but Imam Husayn (s.a.s.) started running
from here to there so that he could escape. The Prophet was amused and
at last got hold of him. Then he placed one of his hand under the chin
and the other on his head, then he lifted him up and kissing him said,

*“Husayn is from me, and I am from Husayn. Allah befriends the one who
holds Husayn dear. Verily Husayn is one of the tribes (of the twelve
tribes of Bani Israel).”*[^2]

In the book Manaqib it is quoted through Abdul Rahman bin Abi Layla,
that he says, that one day we were sitting in the presence of the Holy
Prophet (S) when Imam Husayn (a.s.) came and started jumping and playing
on the back of the Prophet. The Prophet said, “Leave him alone.”

In the same book it is quoted from Lays bin Sa’ad, that one day the Holy
Prophet (S) was leading the congregational Prayers (*Namaz-e- Jama’ah*),
when Imam Husayn (a.s.), who was an infant, was sitting besides him.
When the Prophet went into prostration (*sajdah*), Husayn sat on his
back and striking his legs said, “Hil Hil” (a noise by which mounts are
galloped). The Prophet brought him down with his hands and made him sit
besides him and then stood up. Then again when the Prophet went for the
other prostra­tion this happened, until he ended his Prayers.

It is related from Amali of Hakim that Abu Rafe’ says, that one day I
was playing a game called “Midhah”[^3] with Imam Husayn (a.s.) who was a
small child at that time. When I won, I told him to let me mount upon
his back (as was the rule of the game), but he said that would I like to
mount upon the back of the one who had mounted the back of the Holy
Prophet (S)? Hence I yielded to it. Then when he won, I said that I too
would not allow him to sit on my back as he had done. But then he said
that would I not like to lift up the person who was lifted by the Holy
Prophet (S) himself? And here too I yielded.

In the same book it is related through Hafs bin Ghiyas from Imam Ja’far
as Sadiq (a.s.), that one day the Holy Prophet (S) prepared to recite
the Prayers and Imam Husayn (a.s.) was standing besides him. The Prophet
recited the Takbeer (Allaho Akbar) and Imam could not pronounce it. The
Prophet repeated it again but Imam could not do so. The Prophet repeated
his Takbeer seven times and on the seventh time Husayn recited it
correct­ly. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) says that thus reciting Takbeer seven
times before starting the Prayers (*Salat*) is recommended (*Sunnat*).

In the same book it is quoted from Tafseer of Naqqash from Ibn Abbas
that he said, one day I was sitting in the presence of the Holy Prophet
(S) when his son Ibrahim was sitting on his left thigh and Imam Husayn
(a.s.) on his right one. The Prophet kissed each of them subsequently.
Suddenly Jibra’eel descended with the Revelation (Wahy). When the
Revela­tion ended, the Holy Prophet (S) said,

*“Jibra’eel came to me from my Lord and informed me that the Almighty
Allah sent greetings to me and said that He would not let these two
children remain together, let one become a ransom over the other.”*

The Prophet looked at Ibrahim and started weeping and said,

*“His mother is a slave-girl, if he dies no one accept myself will feel
pain. But Husayn is Fatima’s and my cousin Ali’s son and my flesh and
blood, if he dies not only Ali and Fatima but myself too shall feel
immense pain. Hence I prefer my personal grief over the grief of Ali and
Fatima. Hence O Jibra’eel! Let Ibrahim die, for I ransom him over
Husayn.”*

Ibn Abbas says that after three days Ibrahim died. After this whenever
the Holy Prophet (S) saw Husayn, he would kiss him and pull him towards
himself and lick his lips. Then he would say,

*“May my life be sacrificed on him upon whom I ransomed my son Ibrahim.
May my parents be your ransom O Aba Abdillah”!*

[^1]: It is related that once a nomad came and saluted Imam Husayn
(a.s.) and asked from him saying, “I have heard from your Grandfather
that if you have a desire, ask from any one of these men: A noble Arab,
a generous master, one who understands the Qur’an, or the one gifted
with a beautiful face. The nobility of the Arabs is due to your
Grandfather (the Prophet), while generosity is your custom, the Qur’an
has descended in your own house, and particular beauty is apparent in
you, and I have heard your grandfather say: Whoever desires to see me,
should look at my Hasan and Husayn.” Imam said, “Tell me what do you
desire”? The nomad wrote down his desire onto the ground. Imam said, “I
have heard my father Imam Ali (a.s.) say, that the worth of every man is
through his good actions, and I have heard my grandfather the Prophet of
Allah say, that favor is measured through one’s wisdom. Thus I shall ask
you three questions, if you answer one of them, I shall fulfill one
third of your desire, while if you answer two of them, two thirds of
your desires shall be fulfilled, and if you answer all three of them,
your entire wish shall be fulfilled.” Then he brought a bag full of
coins and said, “If you answer, you shall get from this.” The nomad
said, “Do ask me, and there is no Might and no Power except with Allah,
the Most High, the most Great.” Imam said, “What deliv­ers a slave (of
Allah) from destruction”? He replied, “Reliance upon Allah.” He (a.s.)
then asked, “What is the adornment of man”? He replied, “Knowledge
accompanied by forbearance.” Imam asked, “But what if he does not
possess it”? He said, “Wealth with generosity and munificence.” Imam
again asked, “And what if he does not possess it”? He replied, “Poverty
accompanied by patience.” Imam said, “And if he does not possess it”? He
replied, “Thunderbolt (damnation) which would burn him.” The Imam smiled
and forwarded the bag (full of coins) towards him. In another tradition
it is related that the bag contained a thousand Ashrafis (a gold coin)
and two of his personal rings whose gems were worth two hundred Dirhams
each.

[^2]: Reg. the twelve tribes of Bani Israel, it is quoted in the Qur’an:
“And of Moosa’s people is a party, who guide (people) with truth and
there­by do justice. And We divided then into twelve tribes (or)
nations” (Sura al A’araf: 159-160).

[^3]: Midhah - This particular game is played with pebbles which have to
be aimed into a pit.


