Entry of the Household (Ahlul Bayt) into Syria and the blessed head in Damascus
===============================================================================

Shaikh Kaf’ami, Shaikh Bahai and Muhaddis Kashani narrate, that on the
first day of the month of Safar, the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
brought into Damascus. The day was considered a day of rejoicing for the
Bani Umayyah, and is a day for mourning (for the believers). “It was
considered a day of mourning by the Iraqis, while the Bani Umayyah in
Syria celebrated during it”.

It is related in Asarul Baqiyah of Abu Rayhan (al Biruni), that on the
first day of the month of Safar, the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
brought to Damascus. Yazid placed it in front of him and poked at his
teeth with the staff of his hand while saying, “I wish those of my clan
who were killed at Badr, and those who had seen the Khazraj clan wailing
(in the battle of Uhad) on account of lancet wounds, were here.

They would have hailed me with loud cries and said, ‘O Yazid! May your
hands never stupefy’, for we have killed the chiefs of his (the
Prophet’s) clan. I did so as revenge for Badr, that has now been
completed. The Bani Hashim only played a game with sovereignty. There
has come no Message (Risalah, from Allah), nor was anything revealed (as
Wahy). I would not belong to the Khandaq family, if I had not taken
vengeance upon the descendants of Ahmad for their deeds”.

It is related in Manaqib from Abi Makhnaf, that when the head of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) was brought to Yazid, a pleasant aroma emanated from it
that absorbed all other fragrances.

Sayyid Ibn Tawoos relates, that when the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) as
well as the captives neared Damascus, Sayyidah Umm Kulthum (a.s.) told
Shimr, *“I desire something from you”*. Shimr asked her as to what it
was, and she replied, *“Enter us into the town from a door which is less
crowded, while also command the bearers of the heads to move away from
amidst the Camels, so that a few men may have a glimpse of us in this
state”*.

The wicked man, in reply to her answer, commanded that the heads be kept
amidst the Camels, and then he took them from the midst the people who
had gathered for a spectacle. Then he took them in this state until they
reached a gate of the Grand Mosque of Damascus where the prisoners were
stationed.

It is related, that when one of the virtuous Tabe’een saw Imam Husayn
(a.s.)’s head upon the lance, he secretly disappeared from the midst his
companions for a month. When he was questioned regarding the reason for
it, he replied, “Do you not see what agony has befallen us?”

Then he recited the following elegy, “They have brought your head O
grandson of Muhammad (S), which is drenched in blood, it is as if they
have purposefully killed the Prophet in your stead during the light of
the day, they killed you thirsty and did not honor the interpretation
and revelation (of the Qur’an) regarding you, they pronounce the Takbeer
(Allaho Akbar) after having killed you, when in fact they have killed
the Takbeer and Tahleel (La Ilaha Illallah)”.

It is related in Bihar, as also Manaqib, through chain of transmitters
from Zayd, who relates from his fore-fathers, that Sahl bin Sa’ad said:
I intended going to my house, when I entered the central territory of
Syria, I reached a town in which streams were flowing and there were
green trees. I saw that the town had been decorated and there was merry
and rejoicing all around. While the women were beating the tambourine
and drum and were busy in amusement. I said to myself that I was well
aware of the celebrations of the Syrians, while that day was not a day
for celebration. I saw a group of people speaking to one another.

I went up to them and said, “You are celebrating in Syria of which I am
unaware”. They said, “As if you are from the desert?” I replied, “I am
Sahl bin Sa’ad, one of the companions of Muhammad (S)”. They replied, “O
Sahl! It is strange that the heavens do not rain blood nor does the
earth swallow its inhabitants”. I asked as to why they said this and
they replied, “How strange! The head of Husayn has been brought from
Iraq as a present, while these people rejoice”. I said, “How strange!
The head of Husayn is being brought in and they rejoice?” I asked, “From
which gate are they being entered in?” They pointed towards a door named
Baab as Sa’at.

Suddenly I saw standards one after the other, and one horseman held a
long pointless lance on which was mounted a head that resembled most to
the Prophet of Allah (S) with regards to his cheeks than anyone else.
Following the head were the women mounted upon saddle less camels. I
went towards them and asked one of them, “Whose daughter are you?” She
replied, *“I am Sakinah, the daughter of Husayn”*. I asked, “Do you have
any desire ? I am Sahl bin Sa’ad, one of the companions of your
Grandfather, the Prophet of Allah (S)”.

She replied, *“Tell the bearer of this head to take it further away from
our midst, so that the people may be busy in looking at it while the
family of the Prophet of Allah (S) may be relieved from their sight”*.

I went to the bearer of the head and said, “Do you desire obtaining four
hundred Ashrafi and in lieu of this fulfill my desire?” He asked as to
what was it, and I replied, “Take this head further away from the midst
of these women”. He agreed and took the Ashrafi. They then put the head
in a trunk and took it to the presence of Yazid while I too accompanied
them.

Yazid was seated upon a throne wearing a crown studded with pearls and
rubies, while a group of the Qurayshite notables were seated near him.
The bearer of the head entered therein and said, “Fill my stirrup with
gold and silver, for I have killed the Master of the guarded ones, I
have killed the best one with regards to father and mother, whose
ancestry is the best one when the ancestry is discussed”.

Hearing this Yazid said, “If you knew that he was the best among men,
why did you kill him?” He replied, “In greed for a gift from you”. Yazid
ordered him to be beheaded and it was complied. Then he placed the head
of Imam Husayn (a.s) in front of him and said, “How do you see this, O
Husayn?”

The author of Kamile Bahai relates the narration of Sahl bin Sa’ad
briefly and says that he said, that I saw the heads mounted upon the
lances while the head of Abbas bin Ali (a.s.) was in the forefront. The
head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) followed them while the women of the
Prophet’s family were behind the head.

The head displayed magnificent awe while light emanated from it. A round
beard, which had a few white hair in it and was dyed with Wasmah, seemed
very much attractive. His eyes were large and dark, and eyebrows were
joined together. His forehead was wide, nose long, while his lips were
smiling raised towards the heavens, and his eyes were gazed towards the
horizon. The wind was whirling his beard towards the right and left and
it was as if he was the Commander of the faithful (Ali).

It is stated in the same book, that the Prophet’s family was halted
behind the door of Syria for three days, while the town was being
decorated in a manner as was never seen before. Five hundred thousand
Syrian men and women, accompanied by tambourines, cymbals and drums wore
new dresses and prepared themselves and went towards them. It was
Thursday, the sixteenth day of Rabi’ul Ula, while inside the town (the
crowd of people) were similar to the day of resurrection and the people
therein were rejoicing. When the day advanced further, the heads were
entered into the city.

At the end of the day, with great difficulty, could they reach the gate
of the palace of Yazid bin Mu’awiyah due to the large crowd of men. A
throne, studded with jewels, was laid for Yazid and his house was
decorated, while golden and silver chairs were kept surrounding his
throne. The courtiers of Yazid ordered the bearers of the heads to enter
therein and they complied. They said, “By the honor of the commander! We
killed the Progeny of Abu Turab (Imam Ali) and severed their origins”.

Then they narrated the entire episode and laid the heads in front of
him. The Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) were imprisoned for a prolonged time, for
sixty-six days, and during this period, there was none who could salute
them. On that day an old Syrian man went to Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.)
and said, “Praise be to Allah that he has killed and destroyed you, and
put off the fire of revolt”.

Shaikh Mufeed says, that when they reached the gate of the palace of
Yazid, Makhfar bin Sa’labah called out, “I am Makhfar bin Sa’labah! I
have brought these vile profligates (Allah’s refuge) to Yazid”. Hearing
this Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.) said,

***“The son of Makhfar’s mother is the worst and the most degraded”.***

While some say that Yazid himself replied to him thus.

Shaikh Saduq in his Amali relates a report from a chamberlain of
(Ubaydullah) Ibn Ziyad, which we have already quoted in the section of
the episode in the palace of Ibn Ziyad. It is said, that then he
dispatched his messengers to all the districts with the news of the
death of Imam Husayn (a.s.). Then he ordered to dispatch the captives
and heads to Syria.

A group of men accompanying them told me, that we heard the sound of
lamenting and mourning of the Genies for Imam Husayn (a.s.) from the
night until the morning. When we reached Damascus, we entered the women
and the captives into the town during the light of the day. The
oppressive Syrians said, “We have never ever seen such beautiful
captives. Who are you?” Sayyidah Sakinah (a.s.), the daughter of Imam
Husayn (a.s.), replied, *“We are the captives of the family of Muhammad
(S)”***.**

They were detained at the stairway of the mosque along with Imam Ali bin
Husayn (Zainul Abedeen) (a.s.), who was in his youth. An old man from
among the Syrians approached them and said, “Praise be to Allah that He
has killed and destroyed you and put off the fire of revolt”. Then he
said whatever he desired, and when he became silent, Imam Zainul Abedeen
(a.s.) told him,

 ***“Have you read the Qur’an of Allah?”***

And he replied in the affirmative. He said,

*“Have you read this verse:* **‘*****Say (O Our Messenger): I demand not
of you any recompense for (the toils of the Prophethood) save the love
of (my) relatives.’?**” (Surah as-Shura, 42:23).*

He said, “Yes, I have”.

Imam (a.s.) said,

*“We are from that very family. Then have you not read this verse: ‘And
give to the near of kin his due.’?” (Surah al-Israa’, 17:26).*

He replied that he had read it, and Imam Sajjad (a.s.) said,

 *“We are one of those”***.**

Then he retorted,

***“Haven’t you read this verse: ‘Verily Allah intends but to keep off
from you (every kind of) uncleanliness O you the People of the House,
and purify you (with) a thorough purification’?” (Surah al-Ahzaab,
33:33)***

He said, “Why not”, and Imam said,

 *“We are the ones referred to herein”***.**

Hearing this, the Syrian man lifted up his hands towards the heavens and
said, “O Lord! I disassociate myself in Your presence from the enemies
and the murderers of the progeny of Muhammad (S). I frequently read the
Qur’an but never ever pondered upon this until today”.

Shaikh Al-Tusi relates from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), that when Imam
Ali bin Husayn Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) returned back after the martyrdom
of his father (a.s.), Ibraheem bin Talha bin Abdullah (or Ubaydullah)
came to receive him and said, “O Ali bin Husayn! Who was victorious?”
Imam, who was in the midst of the litters (of Camels), and had covered
his head, said,

***“O you who desires to know who was victorious, recite the Azaan and
Iqamah at the time of the Prayers”.***[^1]

It is related in Akhbarud Dawl of Daynoori, that (Ubaydullah) Ibn Ziyad
prepared Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) and the ladies and dispatched them
to Yazid along with Zahr bin Qays, Makhfar bin Sa’labah and Shimr bin
Ziljawshan. They proceeded until they reached Syria, and entered
Damascus along with the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and presented it to
Yazid.

Then Shimr started his speech and said, “O Commander of the faithful
(Allah’s refuge)! This man, along with eighteen men of his family and
sixty from among his adherents, revolted against us. Thus we faced them
and offered them to submit to the order of commander Ubaydullah bin
Ziyad, or else fight us, and they preferred battle upon submission. We
pounced upon them as soon as the sun arose…… (until the end)” But the
renowned historians relate, that these words were uttered by Zahr bin
Qays, while we have already quoted it in the Section 11 of this book
under the heading “Dispatching the blessed head from Kufa to Syria”.

Then the captives were brought to Yazid, and the women from his family,
his daughters and relatives lamented and wept. The head of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) was placed near Yazid, Sayyidah Sakinah (a.s.) said, *“I have not
seen a more harsh man than Yazid. Nor is any infidel and polytheist
worst and more tyrant than him”***.** He looked at the head and said, “I
wish those of my elders killed at Badr see, the bemoaning of the Khazraj
upon the deed of the sword”. Then he ordered that the head of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) be hung upon the gate of the Mosque of Damascus.

Sibt Ibn Jawzee in his Tazkirah says, that the reports are quite
renowned that when the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was brought to Yazid,
he called for all the inhabitants of Syria. He hit the head with his
bamboo stick and recited the above couplets of Ibn Zab’ari. He also
says, that Zuhri said, that when the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
brought, Yazid was standing at Jeeroon to have a glimpse of the
spectacle and was muttering the following couplets to himself: “When the
litters became apparent and the sun casts its shadow upon the mound of
Jeeroon, then the crow announced death, and I said whether you announce
or no, I have taken the due from my debtor”.

Ibn Abud Dunya relates, that when he (Yazid) dug his stick into the rear
teeth of Imam Husayn (a.s.), he recited the couplets of Haseen bin Hamam
Murri: “We forbore, while forbearance is our hobby, we split open the
heads of our friends with our swords, that severe the head and wrists,
for they were more disobedient and more oppressive”.

Mujahid says, that by Allah! There was none who did not abuse or rebuke
Yazid or distance them selves from him. Ibn Abud Dunya says, that Abu
Barzah Aslami was seated with Yazid, and he said, “O Yazid! Lift your
stick off this head. By Allah! In the days of the Prophet of Allah (S),
I saw him kissing his (Imam Husayn’s) rear teeth.”

(Sibt) Ibn Jawzee in his Radd bar Muta’assib Aneed says, that one is not
amazed by the deeds of Umar bin Sa’ad and Ubaydullah bin Ziyad, but one
wonders at the wretchedness of Yazid that he hit with his stick the lips
and teeth of Imam Husayn (a.s.), and also his pillage of Madinah, then
is it permissible to treat rebels in this manner? Is it not related in
the Islamic laws that the rebels in Islam should be buried?

Then his (Yazid’s) utterance that, “I have the right to imprison them”,
is not agreeable to the ones convinced of cursing him. I wish that when
the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was brought to him he had honored it and
recited the Prayers upon it. And he had not kept it in a tray nor had he
struck at it with his stick, when he had achieved what he had desired
through his death. But the rancor of the days of ignorance was ignited
within himself and the proof is the couplets (as stated above) that he
recited.[^2]

Ibn Abd Rabbah Andalusi in his Iqdul Fareed, relates from Rayashi who
relates through his chain of narrators from (Imam) Muhammad bin Ali bin
Husayn (al Baqir) (a.s.), that he said, that after the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (a.s.), we were total twelve children who were brought to Yazid,
while the eldest among us was (Imam) Ali bin Husayn (Zainul Abedeen)
(a.s.). All of us were bound in collars and chains from head to feet. He
(Yazid) told us, “The slaves of Iraq besieged you while I was unaware of
the revolt of Abu Abdullah (Imam Husayn) and his martyrdom”.

Shaikh Ibn Nima says, that (Imam) Ali bin Husayn (a.s.) said, that we
were twelve children who were taken to the presence of Yazid bound in
collars and chains. When we stood facing him, I said,

***“I say to you in the name of Allah, O Yazid! In your opinion if the
Prophet of Allah (S) would have seen us in this state, what would have
been the state of his mind?”***

Hearing this he turned towards the Syrians and said, “What do you opine
regarding them?” One of the accursed uttered such harsh words, that I do
not wish to repeat. Then Nu’man bin Basheer said, “Treat them as the
Prophet would have treated them if he saw them in this distressed
state”.

Fatemah bint Husayn (a.s.) said, *“O Yazid! These are the daughters of
the Prophet who have been captivated”***.** Hearing this, the men
started weeping, while the family of Yazid lamented. Imam Ali Zainul
Abedeen (a.s.) says, that I was bound in chains and said,

***“Do you permit me to say something?”***

Yazid replied, “You may do so, but do not speak rudely”. I said,

***“I am in a state in which I would not speak rudely, while the essence
of my speech is that in your opinion what would the Prophet of Allah (S)
feel and what would he do if he would see me bound in chains?”***

Hearing this he turned towards those close to him and said, “Release
him”.

It is quoted in Isbatul Wasiyyah of Mas’oodi, that when Imam Husayn
(a.s.) was martyred, Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) was brought to the
presence of Yazid along with the family, while his son Abu Ja’far (Imam
Muhammad Baqir), who was two years and some months old, was also along
with him. When Yazid looked at him, he said, “O Ali! What did you
behold?” Imam (a.s.) replied,

***“That what had been decreed by Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime, before
the creation of the heavens and the earth”.***

Then Yazid asked for the opinion of those who were present with him,
while all of them consented upon his murder and uttered such futile
words that I do not wish to quote. Then Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.)
started his speech. He praised and glorified Allah and said,

***“They have opined to you as opposed to the opinion of the courtiers
of Pharaoh. When he (Pharaoh) asked their opinions regarding Prophet
Moosa (a.s.) and Prophet Haroon (a.s.), they said:*** ***Give respite to
him and his brother. While these people opine that you should kill us,
whilst there is a reason for this”*****.**

Yazid asked, “What reason?”

Imam (a.s.) replied,

***“They were sons of sober women while these men are the sons of
unchaste women. For none other than the illegitimate sons would kill the
Prophets and their progeny”.***

Hearing this Yazid bowed down his head (in shame).

It is quoted in Tazkirah of Sibt Ibn Jawzee, that Imam Zainul Abedeen
(a.s.) and the women of the family were bound in ropes, while he was
calling out, *“O Yazid! In your opinion, if the Prophet would have seen
us in this captivated state and mounted upon the bare Camels without
litters, what would have been the state of his mind?”* There was none
who did not weep.

Shaikh Mufeed and Ibn Shahr Ashob say, that when the heads of the
Martyrs, along with that of Imam Husayn (a.s.), was placed before Yazid,
he hit the teeth with his stick and said, “This day is in lieu (revenge)
of the day of Badr. We split open the skulls of the honorable men, for
they had turned obstinate and oppressive”.

Yahya bin Hakam, the brother of Marwan, who was seated near Yazid said,
“The one killed at Taff (Karbala) is more near (in relation) than the
son of Ziyad, the debased, of unknown descent; the progeny of Umayyah is
scattered like the particles of sand, while the progeny of the daughter
of Prophet is scarce”. Yazid struck at the chest of Yahya bin Hakam and
said, “Keep quite! May your mother not remain”.

Abul Faraj Isfahani relates from Kalbi, that Abdul Rahman, the son of
Hakam bin Aas, was seated with Yazid, when Ubaydullah dispatched the
head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) to him. When the tray, containing the head of
Imam, was placed in front of Yazid, Abdul Rahman wept and said, “Send
message to the commander, that do not be of those who pull the (string
of the) bow without an arrow in it, the one killed at Karbala ...”
(until the end).

It is related, that when Hasan bin Hasan saw that Yazid was hitting at
the place where the Prophet had kissed (the lips of Imam Husayn), he
said, “O disgrace! The progeny of Umayyah is scattered like the
particles of sand, while the progeny of the daughter of Prophet is
scarce”.

Our Master Shaikh Saduq, relates from Fazl bin Shazan, who says, that I
heard Imam Ali ar Reza (a.s.) say that,

 ***“When the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was brought to Syria, Yazid
ordered it to be kept upon the ground and an eating carpet was spread in
front of it. He then ate facing it with his associates and drank wine.
When they had finished, he ordered the tray to be kept below his throne.
And he spread the sheet of backgammon upon the throne and started
playing. He started mocking, while uttering the names of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), his father (a.s.) and grandfather (S), and when he would win, he
would drink wine. Three times he drank wine and then threw some of it
near the tray (May Allah’s curse be upon him). Then whoever is one of
our Shi’ah, should refrain from drinking wine and playing backgammon.
Then whoever, when his sight falls upon wine and backgammon, remembers
Imam Husayn (a.s.) and curses Yazid and his progeny, Allah will forgive
their sins even if they be equal to the stars”.***

It is also related from Imam Ali ar Reza (a.s.), that the first one to
consume wine in Islam in Syria (openly) was Yazid, the accursed. When
the eating-carpet was spread facing the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.), it
was brought for him. He drank from it and gave some to his associates
and said, “Drink it, for it is an auspicious drink.

While one of its auspiciousness is that at the start of consuming it,
the head of our enemy Husayn is in front of us, while our eating-carpet
is spread facing his head. And we eat with a cheerful mind and heart at
peace”. Then whoever is amongst our Shi’ah should refrain from consuming
wine, for it is a drink of our enemies.

It is quoted in Kamile Bahai from Kitabe Hawiyah that Yazid drank wine
and sprinkled some of it upon the blessed head (Allah’s refuge). His
wife lifted it up and washed it with water, while perfuming it with
rose. Then at night she saw the ‘Mistress of the Women’ Sayyidah Fatemah
Zahra (a.s.) in a dream and apologized to her.

Shaikh Mufeed says, that Yazid then turned towards Imam Zainul Abedeen
(a.s.) and said, “Your father severed relations with me and did not
recognize my right, and he disputed with me regarding the kingdom. Then
you saw what Allah did to him”.

Imam replied,

 ***“Befalls not any disaster in the earth or in your own selves, save
it is in a Book, ere We cause to be, verily that is easy for Allah”***
***(Surah al-Hadeed, 57:22).***

Yazid turned towards his son Khalid and said, “Answer him”, but Khalid
did not know what to say. Yazid himself said, ***“Say: And whatever
befalls you of a misfortune, it is what your (own) hands have wrought.”
(Surah ash-Shura, 42:30).***

Then he called for the women and children, who were made to sit down
facing him. He looked at their miserable state and said, “May Allah
detest the son of Marjanah! If he held relations with you, or had pitied
you, he would not have dealt with you in this manner and would not have
dispatched you in this wretched state”.

Ali bin Ibraheem Qummi relates from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), that
when the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and the daughters of the Commander
of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) were brought to Yazid, Imam Zainul
Abedeen (a.s.) was bound in a collar. Yazid said, “O Ali bin Husayn!
Praise be to Allah that he has killed your father”.

Imam (a.s.) replied,

*“May Allah’s curse be upon them who killed my father”***.**

Yazid was infuriated and ordered him to be beheaded. Imam Sajjad (a.s.)
said,

*“If you kill me, then who is there to reach the daughters of the
Prophet of Allah (S) to their destination, and there exists no other
intimate man for them except myself***.***”*

Yazid said, “You may take them to their destination”, saying this he
immediately called for a file. He cut off the collar with the file with
his own hands and said, “Do you perceive what I intend?”

Imam (a.s.) replied,

***“You intend that none other than yourself would oblige me”*****.**

Yazid replied, “By Allah! I intended the same”. Then he said, “O Ali bin
Husayn! “***And whatever befalls you of a misfortune; it is what your
(own) hands have wrought.” (Surah ash-Shura, 42:30).***

Imam (a.s.) replied,

***“Nay! This verse was not revealed regarding us. Verily this verse was
revealed regarding us that,*** *‘**Befalls not any disaster in the earth
or in your own selves, save it is in a Book, ere We cause to be verily
that is easy for Allah. Lest distress you yourselves for what escapes
you, and be over joyous for what He has granted you and Allah loves not
an arrogant boaster.’ (Surah al-Hadeed, 57:22-23).*** ***We are of those
who do not regret upon that which has gone forth from our hands, nor are
we of those who rejoice upon that which comes to us”.***

It is stated in Iqdul Fareed, that Imam Husayn (a.s.) was enraged by the
sovereignty of Yazid bin Mu’awiyah and went towards Kufa. Yazid wrote to
Ubaydullah bin Ziyad, who was the governor of Iraq, “News has reached me
that Husayn is en route to Kufa, while your age and your city has been
entangled in him than any other age or city, and also among the
governors you have been entangled in him.

Therefore you may choose a life of liberty (by killing him) or turn a
slave due to him (by not killing him)”. Ubaydullah killed him and
dispatched his head, along with his family, to Yazid. When the head was
placed before Yazid, he cited a proverb by quoting a couplet of Haseen
bin Jamajim Maznee: We split open the skulls of honorable men, for they
had turned obstinate and oppressive”.

Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.), who was among the captives, told him,

***“The book of Allah, the Almighty, is more exalted than the couplet.
Allah says: ‘Befalls not any disaster in the earth or in your own
selves, save it is in a Book, ere We cause it to be verily that is***
***easy for Allah. Lest distress you yourselves for what escapes you,
and be over joyous for what He has granted you, and Allah loves not an
arrogant boaster.’”*** ***(Surah al-Hadeed, 57:22-23)***

Yazid was enraged and started playing with his beard, then said,
“Another verse of the Qur’an refers to you and your father: *“And
whatever befalls you of a misfortune, it is what your (own) hands have
wrought...” (Surah ash-Shura, 42:30).*

O Syrians! What do you opine regarding them?” One of the accursed men
uttered such words that we decline to quote. Nu’man bin Basheer Ansari
said, “If the Prophet of Allah (S) would have seen him in this state
what would he have done, then treat them similarly”.

Yazid replied, “You speak the truth, release them and bring veils for
them”. He then ordered food to be prepared for them and bestowed clothes
to them. He gave them abundant gifts and said, “If the son of Marjanah
shared any relation with them, he would not have killed them”. Then he
dispatched them to Madinah.

It is stated in Manaqib and other historical books, that then Yazid
turned towards Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.), so that she may speak, but she
signaled towards Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.), saying, *“He is our master
and the orator of our community”***.**

Imam Sajjad (a.s.) said,

***“Do not place avarice and greed in your heart for us, that you may
reward us and we may honor you, and that you may oppress us while we may
ward away oppression from you. Allah is witness that we do not like you,
nor do we despise that you do not like us”*****.**

Yazid said, “O son! You speak the truth. Rather your father, and
grandfather, had desired to acquire sovereignty. Praise be to Allah that
He killed them and shed their blood”.

Imam (a.s.) replied,

 ***“Prophethood and Imamate has always been decreed for my fathers and
ancestors long before you were even born”*****.**

With reference to this, Sayyidah Sakinah (a.s.) said, *“I have not seen
a more harsh man than Yazid. Nor have I seen an infidel and polytheist
worst and more tyrant than him”.*

It is related in Manaqib from Yahya bin Hasan, that Yazid told Imam
Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), “I wonder at your father who named all his sons
Ali”.

Imam (a.s.) replied,

***“My father loved his father very much and hence named his sons
Ali”.***

Sayyid Ibn Tawoos says, that the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was placed
facing Yazid, while the women were seated behind his throne, so that
they may not look at it. Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) looked at the head
and then never ever ate the flesh of the head after that. When the sight
of Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) fell upon it, she tore her collar and called
out in a grievous voice,

*“O Husayn! O beloved of the Prophet of Allah! O son of Makkah and Mina!
O son of Fatemah az Zahra, Mistress of the womenfolk! O son of the
daughter of Mustafa (S)”!*

The narrator says, that whoever was in the presence of Yazid started
weeping, while Yazid himself remained silent. One of the women of Bani
Hashim, who was in the house of Yazid, started lamenting for Imam Husayn
(a.s.), and called out, *“O beloved! O Master of the Prophet’s family! O
son of Muhammad (S)! O refuge of the widows and orphans! O the one
killed by the illegitimate ones”!* The narrator says that whoever heard
her started weeping.

“The act which makes the heart shift from it’s firm place, and burns the
heart with the fire of anger and rage, is the standing of the
\`Daughters of Revelation’ in front of their freed one, in a manner that
even their enemies weep for them”.

Then Yazid called for a bamboo stick and hit at the teeth of Imam Husayn
(a.s.). Seeing this, Abu Barzah Aslami said, “Woe be to you O Yazid! You
hit the teeth of Husayn (a.s.) with your stick? I bear witness that I
have seen the Prophet (S) kiss his teeth as well as that of his brother
Hasan (a.s.)”. Then he continued, “Both of you are the Masters of the
youth of Paradise. May Allah kill your murderers and descend His wrath
upon them. And may Allah prepare hell for them, and what an evil end
shall it be”. The narrator says, that hearing this Yazid was enraged,
and said, “Get him out of here”. He was dragged and thrown outside.

Then Yazid recited the couplets of Ibn Zab’ari: “I wish those of my
clan, who were killed at Badr, and those who had seen the Khazraj clan
wailing (in the battle of Uhad) on account of lancet wounds, were here.
They would have hailed me with loud cries and said, ‘O Yazid! May your
hands never stupefy’, for we have killed the chiefs of his (the
Prophet’s) clan. I did so as revenge for Badr, which has now been
completed. The Bani Hashim only played a game with sovereignty. There
has come no Message (Risalah, from Allah), nor was anything revealed (as
Wahy). I would not belong to the Khandaq family, if I had not taken
vengeance upon the descendants of Ahmad for their deeds”.

Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.)’s sermon in the presence of Yazid, the accursed, on the first of the month of Safar
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The narrator says that Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.), the daughter of Imam Ali
bin Abi Talib (a.s.), arose and said,

***“All praise be to the Lord of the worlds! And blessings of Allah upon
His Messenger and his entire progeny! How true has Allah, the Glorious,
said**: ‘**Then evil was the end of those who wrought evil, for they
belied the Signs of Allah, and at them they used to mock.’ (Surah
ar-Room, 30:10).***

***O Yazid! Now when you have locked the paths of the earth and the
horizon of the heavens upon us, and driven us similar to the captives,
do you presume that we are degraded in the eyes of Allah while you are
endeared? While you have acquired an eminent and lofty status near Allah
due to this? So you look down upon us and become arrogant, elated, and
you rejoice that the world has turned towards you? You assume that your
task is organized, while your sovereignty and kingdom pleases you?
Gradually you seem to have forgotten the words of Allah, the Mighty, the
Sublime,*** *‘**Let not those who disbelieve think that Our giving them
respite is good for their selves; We only give respite to them that they
may increase in sins, and for them is a disgraceful chastisement.’***
***(Surah aal-‘Imraan, 3:178).***

***Is this the custom of justice that you sit your women-folk and maids
behind the veils, while you captivate and parade the daughters of the
Prophet of Allah (S)? You snatch the veils off them*** ***and leave them
open, while their enemies parade them from one town to another, and the
inhabitants of every stream and town have a glimpse of them? And all
intimate and non-intimate look at them, as also the mean and noblemen,
when they do not have along with them their men or support? What
vigilance can one expect from them who have eaten the liver of the
virtuous ones, and whose flesh has emerged (by consuming) from the blood
of martyrs? How could he lessen his envy towards us, who looks at us,
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), with the sight of arrogance, enmity and resent?
And he boldly declares that ‘they would have hailed me with cries and
said: O Yazid may your hands never stupefy’!***

***Then you turn towards the teeth of Abu Abdullah (a.s.), the Master of
the youth of Paradise, and strike it with the stick of your hand? Then
why would you not say so? You have sent the wound to its bottom, and you
have uprooted the origins by shedding the blood of the Progeny of
Muhammad (S) and the stars of earth from the descendants of Abdul
Muttalib. Then you call out to your forefathers and in your assumption
you summon them? Very soon you too shall face their conclusion, and then
you will desire you were paralyzed and were dumb so as not to have
uttered these words, nor would you have possessed this character.***

***O Lord! Take away our rights from them and seek revenge from our
oppressors, and send forth Your wrath upon those who have shed our blood
and killed our aides. By Allah! You have torn your own skin and have
ripped your own flesh, and you shall go to His presence with the heavy
burden of having shed the blood of the progeny of the Prophet (S) and
violating the sanctity of his family and adherents, at a place where
Allah will have united their dispersed ones and increased the quantity
of their scattered ones, and present to them their rights. ‘And reckon
not those who are slain in the way of Allah, to be dead! Alive they are
with their Lord being sustained.’ (Surah aal-‘Imraan, 3:169).***

***Allah is sufficient as a judge upon you and the Prophet will be your
enemy supported by Jibra’eel. Very soon will your father, who set forth
the kingdom for you and sat you upon the neck of the Muslims, realize
what an evil place awaits the oppressors.***

***What an evil place you have acquired and what a feeble army you
possess. Nonetheless, the unpleasant circumstances have made me speak to
you; while I consider your status to be quite low and your reproach to
be large, as also I consider scoffing you abundantly. But the eyes are
manifest and hearts volley. Beware! It is astonishing that the army of
the noblemen of Allah be killed at the hands of the army of the
freed-ones, the Satans. These are the very hands that have clenched our
blood, and these are the very jaws that have devoured our flesh. While
these are the chaste and radiant corpses who are guarded, time and
again, by the wolves, and hyenas strew sand upon them. And now when you
consider us to be booty, ‘this is for what sent before your hands (what
you did in your life), and that (verily) Allah is not unjust to his
servants’ (Surah al-Hajj, 22:10).***

***I complain to Allah and rely on Him Alone. Then you may lay whatever
traps you have, and take thou whatever steps you desire, and endeavor as
much as you want. By Allah! You shall never be able to wipe out our
remembrance nor oust our inspiration from the midst, nor will you be
able to wipe off the disgrace of this episode. Your opinion is
erroneous, and your days less, while your group is scattered on the day
when the caller will announce: ‘Beware! (Now) Verily the curse of Allah
is on the unjust.’ (Surah Hud, 11:18).***

***Praise be to the Lord of the worlds, Who ended felicity upon our
beginning with forgiveness, and Who destined martyrdom for our
conclusion with blessings. I desire from Allah to complete His reward
upon them, and increase it further, and to turn with fairness their
succession upon us,*** ***for He is Merciful and a Friend. ‘Allah is
(quite) sufficient for us and the most Excellent Protector is (He)’
(Surah aal-‘Imraan, 3:173).”***

Yazid, in reply to this lengthy and significant speech of Sayyidah
Zainab (a.s.), said, *“*Lamentation of the aggrieved women is admirable,
but death is easy upon the lamenting women*”.*

In the letter of Ibn Abbas addressed to Yazid, it is written that the
worst reproach for him was that,

*“You captivated the women-folk and children of the Prophet of Allah (S)
from Iraq to Syria and plundered them and displayed your power upon us
for the people to behold? You subdued us and dominated the Progeny of
the Prophet of Allah (S). Then in your opinion you revenged the blood of
the infidels and wicked ones of Badr from your family. Then you revealed
your hidden revenge, and you manifested your envy similar to the fire
concealed in a flint-stone. You, as well as your father, took the excuse
of revenge for the blood of Usman.*

*Woe of the Judge of the day of retribution be upon you! By Allah! Even
if you remain safe from the stroke of my sword, you shall be grinded by
the sword of my tongue. Sand be in your mouth O evil-doer! O ill-omened
one! You are worthy of stones and reproach. If today you have gained
victory upon us, do not be deceived, for tomorrow we shall succeed in
the presence of the Just Ruler, Whose judgment is not contradictory (to
the truth). And very soon He shall engulf you in a grievous state, and
shall make you leave this world as an innate evil, deprived and guilty.
May your father never remain! Feast as much as you desire, for your sins
will multiply in the presence of Allah.*

*‘And peace will be unto him who follows the guidance’ (Surah
at-Taa-haa, 20:47).”*

Shaikh Mufeed relates from Sayyidah Fatemah bintul Husayn (a.s.), that
when we were seated in the presence of Yazid, he pitied our state. A
red-faced man from among the Syrians arose and said, “O Commander of the
faithful (Allah’s refuge)! Present this girl to me”, and by this he
meant me. I trembled and presumed that this was easy for them. I clung
to the lap of my aunt Zainab (a.s.) who knew that this could never
happen. My aunt told the Syrian,

*“By Allah! You lie! And you revealed your mean nature. You nor he has
any authority to do so”.*

Yazid was enraged and said, “It is you who lie! By Allah! I do have the
right to do so”. Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) replied,

*“No, by Allah! Allah has not given you the authority unless you leave
our nation and accept another religion”***.**

Hearing this Yazid’s anger increased two-fold and he shouted, “You speak
to me in this manner? Verily it was your father and your brother who
left the religion (Allah’s refuge)”. Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) replied,

*“If you are a Muslim, then you, as well as your grandfather and father,
reached the right path by the Religion of Allah and the Religion of my
father and my brother”.*

Hearing this Yazid said, “O enemy of Allah (Allah’s refuge)! You speak a
lie”. Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) said,

*“You have the sovereignty, and you abuse with oppression and you
reprimand anyone by the power of your rule”.*

Hearing this Yazid was abashed and remained silent.

Then the Syrian man repeated his request to present him the girl, and
Yazid shouted, “Get away! May Allah kill you”.[^3] Sibt Ibn Jawzee in
his Tazkiratul Khawas, relates from Hisham bin Muhammad (Kalbi), while
Shaikh Saduq in his Amali, and Ibn Aseer in his Kamil relate this
episode briefly, while both of them (Saduq & Ibn Aseer) attribute this
to Fatemah bint Ali instead of Fatemah bintul Husayn.

It is related in Malhoof, that a Syrian man looked at Fatemah bintul
Husayn (a.s.), and said, “O Commander of the faithful (Allah’s refuge)!
Present this girl to me”. Fatemah turned towards her aunt and said, *“O
aunt! Hasten to my aid! I have become an orphan, should I also become a
slave?”* She (a.s.) replied,

*“The immoral man has no authority”***.**

The Syrian asked, “Whose daughter is she?” and Yazid replied, “She is
Fatemah, the daughter of Husayn, while she is Zainab, the daughter of
Ali”. The Syrian asked, “Husayn, the son of Fatemah and Ali bin Abi
Talib?” and Yazid replied in the affirmative. Hearing this, the Syrian
said, “May Allah’s curse be upon you O Yazid! You kill the progeny of
the Prophet and arrest his family? I presumed them to be Roman
captives”. Yazid said, “I shall dispatch you to them”, saying this he
ordered him to beheaded.

It is quoted in the Amali of Shaikh Saduq, that Yazid ordered the
women-folk of Imam Husayn (a.s.) along with Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.)
to be imprisoned in a cell in which they would not be able to save
themselves from heat or cold. They remained there until the flesh of
their faces peeled and cracked.

It is related in Malhoof, that Yazid called for an orator and ordered
him to ascend the pulpit and abuse Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his father
(a.s.). He ascended the pulpit and started abusing the Commander of the
faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) and Imam Husayn (a.s.), and praised Mu’awiyah
and Yazid. (Imam) Ali bin Husayn (a.s.) called out to him,

*“O you who preach! You have bought the wrath of the Creator in lieu of
the pleasure of the creatures. While your place is the hell”.*

How appropriate has Ibn Sinan Khafaji praised the Commander of the
faithful (a.s.), “You abuse upon the pulpit the one, by means of whose
sword you have acquired the pulpit”.

We (the author), say, that Khafaji is Abu Muhammad Abdullah bin Muhammad
bin Sinan, a poet renowned as Ibn Sinan. He is connected to Khafajah
tribe of Bani Amir, while these couplets are recited by him too, “O the
nation that has turned infidel although they recite the Qur’an, that
contains reproach and guidance for them, you abuse upon the pulpit the
one, by whose sword you have acquired the pulpit, you have filled your
heart with envy from the days of (the battle of) Badr, while the
martyrdom of Husayn (a.s.) is the outcome of one of the numerous
concealed envies”.

Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.)’s sermon
-----------------------------------

It is quoted in Biharul Anwar, while the Author of Manaqib and others
relate, that Yazid ordered a pulpit to be prepared, and then he called
for an orator. He ordered him to rebuke Imam Husayn (a.s.) and Imam Ali
(a.s.) and report their tasks in front of the men. The orator ascended
the pulpit and praised Allah and eulogized Him, and abused Imam Ali
(a.s.) and Imam Husayn (a.s.) abundantly. Then he prolonged praising
Mu’awiyah and Yazid and attributed numerous good deeds to them until
Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.) called out to him, saying,

*“O you who preach! Woe be to you! You have bought the wrath of the
Creator in lieu of the pleasure of the creatures, while your place is
the hell”.*

Then he turned towards Yazid and said,

*“Do you permit me to speak that which would be agreeable to Allah and
would be a means of reward for those present?”*

Yazid refused to do so, while the people said, *“*Permit him to ascend
the pulpit, perhaps we may hear something (worthwhile) from him*”.*
Yazid replied, “If I permit him to mount the pulpit, he shall not
descend it until he humiliates me and the progeny of Abu Sufyan”.

They said, “How could this ailing youth do so?” Yazid replied, “He comes
from a family that has consumed wisdom along with the milk from their
infancy”. They compelled until he relented, and Imam (a.s.) ascended the
pulpit. He praised and eulogized Allah and delivered a sermon that made
the eyes weep and hearts shiver. Then he said,

*“O people! We have been bestowed six qualities and seven merits (by
Allah). Knowledge, forbearance, munificence, eloquence, valor and
friendship in the hearts of the believers are present in us. While our
merits are that the Prophet in Authority is from amongst us; the
Truthful (Imam Ali) is from amongst us; the Flyer (Ja’far at Tayyar) is
from amongst us; the Lion of Allah, and that of His Prophet, is from
amongst us; while also the two Sibtain*[^4] *of this nation are from
amongst us. Those who know me, know me, while those who do not know me,
I reveal my pedigree and ancestry for them until they recognize me. O
people! I am the son of Makkah and of Mina!*[^5] *I am the son of
Zamzam*[^6] *and Safa!*[^7] *I am the son of the one who lifted the
Black Stone (Hajar al Aswad) by the side of his quilt.*[^8] *I am the
son of the best one who adorned the trousers and cloak. I am the son of
the best ones who circumambulated (the Ka’bah) and performed the
Sa’ee.*[^9] *I am the son of the best ones who performed the Hajj and
pronounced the Talbiyah.*[^10] *I am the son of the one who was taken up
to the Masjid al Aqsa at night* **(during Ascension, Me’raj***). I am
the son of the one who was taken up to the Sidrat al Muntaha.*[^11] *I
am the son of the one ‘who drew nigh and became pending (in between the
creation and the Creator)’* **(referring to the Night of Ascension when
the Prophet (S) drew near to Allah***). I am the son of the one ‘who was
(nigh) the measure between the two bows (facing each other) or higher
still’* **(again referred to the Night of Me’raj)***. I am the son of
the one ‘who was bestowed revelation by the Almighty, what He did
reveal’* **(Again referring to the night of Me’raj. For all the above
verses refer Surah an-Najm, surah no. 53).** *I am the son of Husayn
(a.s.), the one killed at Karbala! I am the son of Ali, the Approved One
(a.s.)! I am the son of Muhammad, the Chosen One (S)! I am the son of
Fatemah az Zahra (a.s.)! I am the son of Sidrat al Muntaha! I am the son
of ‘the Blessed Tree’!*[^12] *I am the son of the one who was smeared in
blood and sand. I am the son of the one who was lamented upon by the
genie in the darkness of the night. I am the son of the one who was
mourned upon by the birds”.*

It is quoted in Kamile Bahai, that Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) had told
Yazid to let him deliver the sermon on Friday, and he yielded. On
Friday, Yazid ordered an accursed one to ascend the pulpit and abuse
Imam Ali (a.s.) and Imam Husayn (a.s.) as much he could, and also praise
and thank Caliph Umar and Caliph Abu Bakr. The accursed ascended the
pulpit and said whatever he desired. Then Imam (a.s.) said,

*“Permit me so that I may deliver a sermon”***.**

Yazid refused to fulfill his promise and did nor grant him permission.
People compelled him but he did not yield until his infant son Mu’awiyah
said, “O father! Where can his sermon lead? Permit him to deliver a
sermon”. Yazid replied, “You are not aware of their task, they have
received wisdom and eloquence as inheritance, and I fear lest his sermon
might give rise to mutiny and revolve upon our heads”. Then he permitted
him and Imam (a.s.) ascended the pulpit and said,

*“Praise be to Allah Who has no beginning, and the Everlasting Who has
no end. The foremost Whose beginning has no beginning, and the Last
Whose end has no end. All will perish, except His Own self. He measures
the days and nights and prepares the destinies, and blessed is Allah,
the King, and the All-Knowing”***.**

Then he continued his sermon saying,

*“Allah has bestowed us with Knowledge, forbearance, munificence,
eloquence, valor and friendship in the hearts of the believers. While
our merit is that the Prophet in Authority is from amongst us; and his
Vicegerent (Imam Ali) is from amongst us; as also the Master of Martyrs
(Hamza) and Ja’far, the one who flies in Paradise; while also the two
Sibtain of this nation are from amongst us. While also the Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.); who will kill the ‘Dajjal’. O people! Those who know me,
know me, while those who do not know me, I reveal my pedigree and
ancestry for them until they recognize me. O people! I am the son of
Makkah and of Mina! I am the son of Zamzam and Safa! I am the son of the
one who lifted the Black Stone (Hajar al Aswad) by the side of his
quilt. I am the son of the best one who adorned the trousers and cloak.
I am the son of the best ones who circumambulated (the Ka’bah) and
performed the Sa’ee. I am the son of the best ones who performed the
Hajj and pronounced the Talbiyah. I am the son of the one who was taken
up to the Masjid al Aqsa at night (during Ascension, Me’raj). I am the
son of the one who was taken up to the Sidrat al Muntaha. I am the son
of the one ‘who drew nigh and became pending (in between the creation
and the Creator)’* **(referring to the Night of Ascension when the
Prophet (S) drew near to Allah).** *I am the son of the one ‘who was
(nigh) the measure between the two bows (facing each other) or higher
still’* **(again referred to the Night of Me’raj).** *I am the son of
the one ‘who was bestowed revelation by the Almighty, what He did
reveal’. I am the son of Husayn (a.s.), the one killed at Karbala! I am
the son of Ali, the Approved One (a.s.)! I am the son of Muhammad, the
Chosen One (S)! I am the son of Fatemah az Zahra (a.s.)! I am the son of
Sidrat al Muntaha! I am the son of ‘the Blessed Tree’! I am the son of
the one who was smeared in blood and sand. I am the son of the one who
was lamented upon by the genie in the darkness of the night. I am the
son of the one who was mourned upon by the birds”.*

When his sermon reached at this stage, people started weeping and
lamenting, and Yazid feared lest it might result in a revolt. He called
out to the Mu’ezzin (Prayer caller) saying, “Give the call for the
Prayers”. The Mu’ezzin arose and said, “Allah is Great! Allah is Great”!
Imam said,

*“Verily Allah is Great, and the Most High, and the most Honorable and
the Most Kind than what I fear and of what I avoid”!*

Then he said, “I bear witness that there is no other Deity except
Allah”, Imam (a.s.) said,

*“Verily I too bear witness with others that there is no other Deity
except Allah, and no other Lord except Him, while I reject every
denier”.*

When he said, “I bear witness that Muhammad (S) is the Messenger of
Allah”, Imam removed his turban from his head and turned towards the
Mu’ezzin saying,

*“I request you in the name of this very Muhammad (S), remain silent for
a moment”.*

Then he turned towards Yazid, and said,

*“O Yazid! This Honorable and Noble Messenger is my Grandfather or
yours’? If you say that he is your grandfather, then the entire world
knows that you speak a lie. And if you say that he is my grandfather,
then why did you kill my father with tyranny, and plunder his belongings
and captivate his women-folk?”*

Saying this the Imam (a.s.) tore his collar and wept and said,

*“By Allah! There is none except myself upon this earth whose
grandfather is the Prophet of Allah (S). Why did these men kill my
father with tyranny and arrest us similar to the Romans?”*

Then he retorted,

*“O Yazid! You do this and then say that Muhammad (S) is the Messenger
of Allah (S) and turn your face towards the Qibla (in Prayers)? Woe be
to you on that day when my Grandfather and Father will be enraged with
you”.*

Hearing this, Yazid ordered the Mu’ezzin to give the Iqamah[^13] for
Prayers. People started murmuring and turmoil arose among them. Then a
group of people offered Prayers along with him, while some did not until
they had dispersed.

Then Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) sent a message to Yazid, saying that he
should permit them to mourn upon Imam Husayn (a.s.). He permitted them
and gave them residence at Daar al Hijarah. They held mourning gathering
at that place for seven days, and every day a large multitude of Syrian
women accompanied them in the mourning.

The men gathered and decided to storm the palace of Yazid and kill him.
Marwan (bin Hakam) became aware of this conspiracy and told Yazid, “It
is not in your interest to keep the family of Husayn in Syria. Dispatch
them back to Hijaz”. Yazid ordered the provisions for their journey to
be gathered and dispatched them to Madinah.

It is related in Manaqib from Madaeni, that when Imam Zainul Abedeen
(a.s.) revealed his identity to the people and they understood that they
were the Progeny of the Prophet, Yazid ordered one of his headsman to
take him to a small garden and kill him and then bury him there. The
headsman took Imam (a.s.) to the garden and started digging a grave.

Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) started reciting the Prayers, and when he
tried to kill him, a hand appeared and caught hold of him and flung him
face downwards upon the ground. He started yelling and became
unconscious. Khalid, the son of Yazid, heard his voice and went to his
rescue, but saw that he had died. He went and informed his father
(Yazid), who ordered the headsman to be buried in that grave and he
granted liberty to Imam (a.s.).

The prison in which Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) was kept in captivity has
been turned into a Mosque today. The author of Basaer says that Imam
Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) relates, that when Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) was
brought to the presence of Yazid along with the captives, he gave them
residence in a dilapidated house.

One of them said that, “We were kept in that house so that it would fall
upon our heads and kill us”. The guards said to one another in the Roman
language that, “Look at them, that they fear lest the house would fall
upon them, when tomorrow all of them shall be killed”. Imam Zainul
Abedeen (a.s.) says that,

*“None among them, except myself, could understand their Roman
language”.*

Our master Muhaddis Noori, as well as Allamah Majlisi, quotes from
Da’wat of Qutubuddin Rawandi, that he says, it is related, that when
Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) was brought to Yazid, he desired to kill
him too. He made him stand in front of him and inquired from him, so as
to get an answer for him which would act as a pretense to kill him. Imam
(a.s.) spoke to him cautiously and had held a rosary in his hand that he
would turn with his fingers while speaking to him. Yazid said, “I am
engrossed in speaking to you, while you recite the rosary? How is this
act permissible?” Imam (a.s.) replied :

*My father relates from my grandfather, the Prophet (S), that when he
would have ended his morning Prayers, he would not speak to anyone until
he held the rosary. Then he would say,* *“O Lord! I have made the
morning and am eulogizing You, praising You and reciting the
‘Tahleel’*[^14] *and ‘Takbeer’*[^15] *and extolling You equaling the
turning of the rosary”.*

***Then he would turn the rosary in his hands, and would speak to
whomsoever he desired while glorifying Allah. Then he would say, “The
reward of glorification is due for him, and acts as a protection for him
until he goes to bed”. And when he would go to bed, he would recite the
same and then keep the rosary under his head, and reward would be
accounted for him until the morning, while I am imitating the act of my
grandfather.***

Yazid repeatedly said, “Whatever I say to anyone from among you, you
emerge as victors in your answers”. Saying this he laid his hands off
him and bestowed gifts to him while releasing him. Regarding his
reference to his grandfather he meant the Commander of the faithful Imam
Ali (a.s.), and perhaps he meant the Prophet of Allah (S), particularly
since the one with whom he spoke was not inclined towards Imam Ali
(a.s.).

It is stated in Malhoof, that on that day, Yazid promised Imam Zainul
Abedeen (a.s.) that he would fulfill three of his desires. Then he
ordered them to be given residence in a house where they would not
remain safe from the cold or heat. They remained there until the skin of
their faces cracked, and until the time they remained in Syria, they
lamented upon Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Dream of Sayyidah Sakinah, daughter of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
---------------------------------------------------------

Sayyidah Sakinah (a.s.) relates, that on a Thursday I dreamt in Syria,
then she relates a lengthy dream and at it’s conclusion, she says, that
I saw a woman in my dream seated on a Camel-litter with her hand upon
her head. I inquired as to who she was and was answered that, “She is
Fatemah (a.s.), the daughter of Muhammad (S), the daughter of the
Messenger of Allah, your grand-mother”. I told myself,

*“By Allah! I should go to her and relate to her all that they have done
to us”*,

saying this I ran towards her. I sat in front of her and started
weeping, and then I said,

*“O dear Mother! They withheld our rights. O dear Mother! They scattered
our group. O dear* *Mother! They violated our sanctity. O dear Mother!
By Allah! They killed my father Husayn (a.s.)”***. She replied,** *“O
dear Sakinah! Remain silent, for it cuts my heart-vein. This is the
shirt of your father that I have preserved until I meet Allah along with
it”.*

Shaikh Ibn Nima relates, that Sayyidah Sakinah (a.s.) dreamt in Damascus
that five illuminated horses have come forth, and upon each one a
honorable personality is seated, while the Angels have surrounded them
from all around, a maid of paradise was also along with them. Those
mounted proceeded further while the maid came towards me and said,
*“*Verily your grandfather has sent salutations to you*”*. I replied,

*“Salutations upon the Prophet of Allah (S)! Who are you?”* She replied,
*“*One of the maids of Paradise”*.* I asked,

*“Who are these people who have arrived here mounted upon the noble
horses?”*

She replied, *“*They are Adam (a.s.), the One Chosen by Allah
(Sifwatullah); the second one is Ibraheem (a.s.), the friend of Allah
(Khaleelullah); the third one is Moosa (a.s.), the one who spoke to
Allah (Kalimullah); the fourth one is Isa (a.s.), the Spirit of
Allah*”.* I asked,

*“Who is he who has held his beard in his hand and is falling &
rising?”*

She replied, *“*He is your grandfather, the Prophet of Allah (S)”. I
said,

*“Where are they going?”*

and she replied, “They are going towards your father Husayn (a.s.)”*.* I
ran towards him to inform him as to how the oppressors have treated us
after his death. At that moment five illuminated camel-litters arrived,
and on each one a woman was seated. I asked,

*“Who are these women who have just arrived?”*

They said, *“*The first one is Hawwa, the mother of mankind; the second
one is Asiyah, the daughter of Mazahim (and wife of Fir’aun); the third
one is Mariyam, the daughter of Imran (and mother of Prophet Isa); the
fourth one is Khadijah (a.s.), the daughter of Khuwaylid; while the
fifth one, with her hand upon her head and is falling and rising, is
none other than your grandmother Fatemah (a.s.), the daughter of
Muhammad (S), your father’s mother”. I said,

*“By Allah! I should narrate to her as to how they treated us”*,

saying this I sat facing her and said,

*“O dear Mother! They withheld our rights. O dear Mother! They scattered
our group. O dear Mother! They violated our sanctity. O dear Mother! By
Allah! They killed my father Husayn (a.s.)”.* **She (a.s.) replied,**
*“O Sakinah! Remain silent. You have charred my liver and cut off the
joint of my heart. This is the shirt of your father Husayn (a.s.) that I
have preserved until I meet Allah along with it”***.**

Then I awoke from my sleep and wished to conceal it, but then I narrated
it to my intimate relatives and it became renowned among men”.

Dream of the wife of Yazid and her lamenting upon Imam Husayn (a.s)
-------------------------------------------------------------------

It is related in Biharul Anwar from Hind the wife of Yazid, that I laid
myself upon my bed. Suddenly I saw (in a dream) that the doors of the
heavens had opened ajar and the Angels descended one after the other
upon the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) while saluting him. At that moment a
cloud appeared, on which numerous men were seated, while one of them
possessed an illuminating countenance. He ran towards the head of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and kissing his teeth, said,

**“***O my son! They killed you, and then do you presume that they did
so without recognizing you? Then they blocked the access to water from
you. O dear son! I am your grandfather, the Prophet of Allah (S), this
is your father Ali al Murtaďa (a.s.), this is your brother Hasan (a.s.),
these are your uncles Ja’far (a.s.) and Aqeel (a.s.), while they are
Hamza and Abbas (the Prophet’s uncles)”,*

saying this he named each one of his family.

Hind says, that I awoke from my sleep with awe and fear and saw that
light had scattered around the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.). Then I arose
so as to find Yazid and I found him in a dark room facing the wall and
saying, “What did I have to do with Husayn?” And it seemed as if he was
surrounded by all the grief’s of the world. I related the dream to him
and he had bowed his head down (in shame). When it dawned, he called for
the family of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and said, “Do you desire to remain with
me or to back go to Madinah, as also to acquire numerous rewards?” They
replied,

*“Initially we desire to weep and mourn upon Imam Husayn (a.s.)”*.

He replied, “You may do as you desire”. Then some houses were vacated
for them and the women of Bani Hashim and Quraysh wore black clothes and
mourned upon Imam Husayn (a.s.) for seven days.

Shaikh Ibn Nima says, that till the time the women of the Prophet’s
household remained in Damascus, they wept and lamented upon Imam Husayn
(a.s.) with grief and wailing. The sorrow of the captives was abundant,
while their bereavement of the early death of their men was ample too.
They were given residence in a house where it was not possible to save
oneself from the heat and cold, until the skins of their delicate
bodies, which had grown behind the veils, cracked and blood started
oozing from it. Forbearance had departed from them while anguish had
taken hold, and sorrow had become their companion.

Dream of the infant daughter of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------

It is related in Kamile Bahai from Kitab al Hawiyah, that the family of
Prophethood had concealed from the children regarding the martyrdom of
their fathers. They told them that their fathers had been on a journey,
until Yazid called them to his house. A four-year-old daughter of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) one day awoke from her dream saying**,**

*“Where has my father been? Just now I saw him in a dream that he was
uneasy and distressed”.*

Hearing this, the women as well as the other children started weeping,
while the voices of their lamenting arose. Yazid arose from his sleep
and asked, “What has happened?” They found out the matter and informed
him and the accursed ordered that the head of her father (Imam Husayn)
be sent for her. The head was brought and kept in her lap. The girl
asked,

*“What is this?”*

and they answered, “It is the head of your father”. Hearing this, the
child was alarmed and started yelling, she took to ill and died in
Damascus.[^16]

While this incident is also quoted in some reports as follows: A
kerchief of fine silk was placed upon the head (of Imam Husayn) and the
tray containing it was placed in front of the child. The child lifted
off the veil and said,

*“Whose head is this?”*

They replied, “Your father’s head”. She lifted it up from the tray and
pressing it to her heart, said,

*“O dear father! Who had dyed you with your blood? Who has severed the
vein of your neck? Who has orphaned me in this infancy? O dear father!
Whom should I rely upon after your death? O dear father! Who shall take
care of the orphan until she grows up?”*

She spoke in similar words and then placed her lips upon that of his and
wept until she fell unconscious. When they shook her they realized that
her spirit had already departed. When the family (of the Prophet) saw
this, they started lamenting upon her state, while their mourning, along
with that of the people of Damascus, started anew, and on that day every
man and woman wept.

It is related in the same book, that Yazid commanded that the head of
Imam Husayn (a.s.), as also that of others among his family and
companions, be hanged upon the doors of the city.

And it is also related in the same book, that the head of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) lay hanging upon the Minaret of the Grand Mosque of Damascus for
forty days, while the other heads were hanged upon the doors of other
Mosques and cities and for a day upon the door of the house of Yazid.

Shaikh Rawandi relates from Minhal bin ‘Amr that, by Allah! When the
head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was brought to Damascus, I saw a man reciting
Surah al-Kahf facing it. When he reached the verse

*“Or do you think that the Fellows of the Cave and (of) the Inscription
(which) were of Our Signs (Miracles) (matters) wonderful?” (Surah
al-Kahf, 18:9)*

the head, in an eloquent voice, said,

*“My martyrdom and elevation is more astonishing that the Fellows of the
Cave”.*

Allamah Majlisi in his Biharul Anwar, after quoting the sermon of Imam
Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) from the pulpit of Syria says, that a Jewish
monk was seated in the presence of Yazid at that time. He said, “O
Yazid! Who is this youth?” Yazid replied, “He is Ali, the son of
Husayn”. “Husayn who?” asked the monk, and Yazid said, “The son of Ali
bin Abi Talib”. The monk asked, “Who is his mother?” And Yazid replied,
“She is Fatemah, the daughter of Muhammad (S)”.

Hearing this, the wise man said, “Glory be to Allah! He is the grandson
of your Prophet whom you killed so early? How badly have you faired with
his progeny after his death. By Allah! If there existed a grandson
amongst us from the loins of (Prophet) Moosa bin Imran, we believe that
we would have worshipped him equal to our Lord. Your Prophet departed
from your midst just yesterday, while today you pounced upon his son and
killed him. What an evil nation are you”.

Hearing this Yazid ordered his neck to be squeezed thrice. The monk
arose and said, “If you desire kill me, and if you desire release me,
and if you desire strike at me. I have read in the Tawrat that the one
who kills the progeny of his Prophet is an accursed one until he is
alive. And when he dies, Allah shall throw him into the fire of hell”.

Sayyid Ibn Tawoos says, that Ibn Lahee’ah relates from Abul Aswad
Muhammad bin Abdul Rahman that he said, that Ra’s al Jaloot came to meet
me and said, “There is a gap of seventy grandfathers between me and
(Prophet) Dawood (a.s.), and due to this the Jews respect me, while you
killed the son of your Prophet when there was only one father (or
mother) linking them?”

Incident pertaining to an envoy of the Roman king in the court of Yazid
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) relates, that when the head of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) was brought to Yazid, he ordered an assembly of wine. The
blessed head was brought and he kept it in front of him and started
drinking wine near it. One day an envoy of the Roman king, who was among
the noble and elite Romans, was present there. He asked, “O Arab king!
Whose head is this?” Yazid replied, “What is your business?”

He replied, “Whenever I return back to our King, he inquires from me all
that I have seen here, therefore it shall be my pleasure to narrate to
him regarding the incident pertaining to it, so that he too may
accompany you in your joy and merry”.

Yazid replied, “This head is of Husayn bin Ali bin Abi Talib”. The Roman
asked, “Who is his mother?” and Yazid replied, “She is Fatemah, the
daughter of the Prophet of Allah (S)”. The Christian said, “Woe be to
you and your devoutness! My religion is better than yours’. My father is
from among the progeny of (Prophet) Dawood (a.s.), while there exists
numerous forefathers between us. Yet the Christians honor me due to
this, and gather the dust of my feet as good omen saying that I am from
the Progeny of Dawood (a.s.). While you killed the grandson of your
Prophet, when there was not more gap between them accept of a mother?
Then what is this devoutness amongst you?”

Then he continued, “O Yazid! Have you heard the incident of ‘Kaneesae
Hafir’[^17]?” Yazid replied, “Tell me, so that I may hear it”. Then he
narrated the incident of the Christians who respected the hooves of the
ass, which the companions of Prophet Isa (a.s.) rode, while we forgo it
for the sake of brevity. Then he reprimanded Yazid and said, “This was
the opinion of the Christians regarding the hooves of the ass driven by
(the companions of) Isa (a.s.), while you killed the grandson of your
Prophet? May Allah, the Almighty, not grant affluence to you, and may He
not accept your devoutness”.

Hearing his Yazid said, “Kill this Christian, so that he may not defame
me in my own kingdom”. When the Christian heard this, he said, “Do you
desire killing me?” Yazid replied in the affirmative. The envoy said,
“Then know, that tonight I saw your Prophet in a dream, who told me: O
Christian! You are from among the inhabitants of Paradise. I was
astonished by his words, but now I say: I bear witness that there is no
other Deity accept Allah, and I bear witness that Muhammad (S) is the
Messenger of Allah”. Saying this he arose, and taking the head of Imam
Husayn (a.s.), pressed it to his chest and kissed it until he was
killed. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

One day Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) stepped out and started wandering in
the market of Damascus. Minhal bin ‘Amr approached him and asked, “How
did you spend your night, O son of the Prophet of Allah?” Imam (a.s.)
replied,

***“Our night was similar to the night of the Bani Isra’eel, from among
the people of Fir’aun, the heads of whose sons were severed and ladies
captivated. O Minhal! The glory of the Arabs upon others was due to the
fact that Muhammad (S) was an Arab. And we, the family of Muhammad (S)
have fallen, been routed this night, detested, killed and dispelled.
Thus verily we are Allah’s, and verily unto Him shall we return, upon
this night of ours O Minhal”.***

Allah’s blessings upon Mahyar who said, “They honor the base of your
pulpit, but they place your progeny under their feet, …….”.

It is related, that Yazid ordered the head (of Imam Husayn) to be hanged
upon the door of his house, and the women of his household be brought
in. When the women were entered into the house of Yazid, there was none
from among the family of Mu’awiyah and Abu Sufyan, who did not come to
them weeping, wailing and lamenting upon Imam Husayn (a.s.). All of them
abandoned their grand clothes and mourned for three days. And it is also
said that houses were emptied for the women in Damascus, while every
Hashimite and Qurayshite women mourned therein for seven days.

It is narrated in Irshad, that an order was issued that the women of the
Household, along with their brother Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), should
be kept in a house adjacent to the house of Yazid, where they resided
for some days.

It is related in Kamile Bahai, that when the women of the Household
entered therein, the women of the family of Abu Sufyan came to them and
kissed the hands and feet of the daughters of the Prophet of Allah (S)
and lamented and mourned for three days.

Hind, the wife of Yazid, ran into the court of Yazid bare head, tearing
her clothes and throwing her veil, and with bare feet while saying, “O
Yazid! Did you order that the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) be placed upon
the lance at the door of the house?” When Yazid, who had worn a crown
full of pearls, rubies and expensive jewels, saw his wife in this state,
he leapt from his place and veiled her saying, “O Hind! Forgive me, and
lament upon the grandson of the Prophet of Allah”.

It is also related that Hind, the daughter of Abdullah bin Amir bin
Kareez, was formerly married to Imam Husayn (a.s.). She ran to the
general assembly of Yazid saying, “O Yazid! The head of Husayn, the son
of Fatemah (a.s.), the daughter of the Prophet of Allah, is hung upon
door of my house?” Yazid arose and veiled her, saying, “Yes O Hind! Wail
upon him and lament upon the son of the daughter of the Prophet of
Allah, all the Quraysh weep for him. Ibn Ziyad hastened to kill him. May
Allah kill him”. After this Yazid gave them residence in his special
house and would not have breakfast and dinner until Imam Zainul Abedeen
(a.s.) would partake along with him.

It is quoted in Kamil of Ibn Aseer and Malhoof, that Yazid would not
have his breakfast or dinner until he had invited Imam Ali Zainul
Abedeen (a.s.) along with him. One day Yazid invited him along with ‘Amr
bin Hasan, who was a young lad of eleven years. Yazid said, “Will you
combat with Khalid, my son?” Umar replied, “Hand me a dagger and to him
too, so that I may fight him”. Yazid lifted him up in his lap and said,
“I recognize this demeanor for Akhzam, the infant of a serpent is none
other than a serpent”.[^18]

It is related in Kamil (of Ibn Aseer), that when the head of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) reached Yazid, he was pleased with Ibn Ziyad. His confidence in
him increased and he bestowed numerous gifts upon him and was pleased
with his work.

Within a short time, he was informed that people hated, cursed and
vilified him, thus he (falsely) regretted the murder of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), and said, “What would have mattered if I had taken his injury
upon myself and would have brought Husayn to my home, and could have
handed him over whatever he intended, although it would result in a
split in my kingship. I could have honored the sanctity of the Prophet
of Allah (S) and could have observed his right and considered his
family. May Allah curse the son of Marjanah! When Husayn had requested
him that he would place his hand in my hand and go away to another place
and live until Allah gives him death. But he did not yield to him and
killed him, and by doing so he made me detestable in the eyes of the
Muslims. And he ignited my enmity into their hearts, while now the
virtuous, as well as the evil ones, bear enmity towards me due to the
gruesome massacre of Husayn. What relation did I have with the son of
Marjanah! May Allah curse him and keep enmity with him”.

I (the Author) say, that if one reflects upon the character and
statements of Yazid one will understand, that when the head of Imam
Husayn (a.s.), along with that of his family, were brought for him, he
was very much delighted. Then he did that what we just saw earlier with
the sacred head and said such things regarding it. Then he captivated
Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) and the women-folk in a prison, devoid of
roof, until the skin of their faces scrapped. But when people recognized
them and discovered their honor, and they learnt that they were the
oppressed ones and the progeny of the Prophet, they vilified the status
of Yazid.

They cursed and abused Yazid and turned towards the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).
When Yazid saw this, he desired to free himself from the blood of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and shift the blame upon the neck of (Ubaydullah) Ibn
Ziyad. Then he cursed him due to this and regretted his murder and
changed his attitude towards Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) and his family.
Then he offered them shelter in his house in order to safeguard his
kingdom and dominion, as also to allure the hearts of people towards
himself, and not due to sincere remorse, and he expressed his anger at
the deeds of Ibn Ziyad (falsely). The evidence of this (his insincerity)
is the narration of Sibt Ibn Jawzee in his Tazkirah, that Yazid called
for Ibn Ziyad and bestowed him with numerous rewards and countless
gifts.

Then he made him sit close to himself and exalted his rank and made him
accompany his wives. He made him his boon companion, and one night he
became intoxicated and commanded the singer to sing a song and himself
extemporaneously said, “Give me a drink which would boost up my morale,
and hand over a similar one to the son of Ziyad, who is my confidante
and trustworthy, and is the one who fetches the spoils for me and fights
for me, the killer of the rebel, viz. Husayn (Allah’s refuge), as also
my enemies and the envious ones”.

Ibn Aseer in his Kamil relates from Ibn Ziyad, that in Syria he told
Musafir bin Shurayh Yashkaree that, “I killed Husayn for the simple
reason that Yazid had desired from me that either I kill him or kill
myself. And I chose to kill him”. (Allah’s eternal curse be upon them
both).

[^1]: Ibraheem was the son of Talha bin Ubaydullah, who was opposed to
Imam Ali (a.s.) and fought against him in the battle of Jamal, where he
was killed. Ibraheem himself was from among the adherents of Mu’awiyah
and in the above episode he precisely taunts Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen
(a.s.) and covertly rejoices that the vengeance of the blood of his
father had been secured from the progeny of Imam Ali (a.s.). What Imam
Sajjad (a.s.) meant here was that their motive, which was to preserve
the tenets of Islam and its’ permanence, establish Prayers and reinforce
the remembrance of Allah, for which they sacrificed their entirety, had
already been achieved. And the greatest evidence for it was the ‘Call
for Prayers’, thus victory was decisively with none other than Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and his family.

[^2]: Sibt Ibn Jawzee says, that my grandfather said, that it is not
surprising that Ubaydullah bin Ziyad fought against Imam Husayn (a.s.)
and appointed Umar bin Sa’ad and Shimr to kill him and they took his
head to him, but one is astonished at Yazid, who ascribed wretchedness
to himself while hitting his stick at his (Imam’s) teeth and captivating
the progeny of the Prophet (S). Then he made them mount the Camels
devoid of litters and desired to gift away Fatemah bint Husayn (a.s.) to
a man who had desired from him. And it is also astonishing that he
uttered the couplets of Ibn Zab’ari.

[^3]: It is narrated in the Maqtal of Ibn Nima, that the Syrians came to
congratulate Yazid for his victory. A red-faced and blue-eyed man from
among them looked at Fatemah bintul Husayn (a.s.), who possessed an
illuminating countenance, and then said, “O Commander of the faithful
(Allah’s refuge)! Present this girl to me”. Fatemah (a.s.) turned
towards her aunt and said, “I have become an orphan, now should I also
become a slave”? Sayyidah Zainab (a.s.) said, “No, by Allah, O Syrian!
This is not possible for you nor Yazid, unless you leave our Religion”.
The Syrian repeated his request, and Yazid replied, “May Allah kill
you”. Then he recited the couplets of Ibn Zab’ari. Thereafter the
daughter of Imam Ali (a.s.) arose and recited the sermon. Then Yazid
called for an orator and ordered him to ascend the pulpit. Here he
repeats the narration of Sayyid Ibn Tawoos, which we shall quote
hereafter.

[^4]: Referred to Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husayn (a.s.).

[^5]: A place 3 miles from Makkah where pilgrims halt on the 10th, 11th
and 12th of the month of Zilhaj, as part of the essentials of Haj.

[^6]: A sacred well in the Ka’bah which sprang forth to quench the
thirst of Prophet Isma’eel (a.s.) when he rubbed his feet on the ground,
rediscovered by Hazrat Abdul Muttalib (a.s.), the grandfather of Prophet
Muhammad (S) and Imam Ali (a.s.).

[^7]: A hillock in Makkah close to the Ka’bah.

[^8]: In the year when Prophet Muhammad (S) was about 35 years of age,
the structure of the Ka’bah was badly dilapidated either by floods, or
according to another version, by fire, and had to be rebuilt. The
Quraysh decided to put up a new construction and when the new walls were
raised high enough for the Hajar al Aswad (the black stone) to be set in
one of its corners, differences cropped up amongst the different tribes
as to who should have the distinction of fixing the Sacred Black Stone.
It was essentially decided to refer the matter to arbitration to
whosoever first enters the area from the door of the Bani Shaibah, while
the first to enter was Prophet Muhammad (S) himself. The matter was
accordingly referred to him for his final verdict, whereupon he
suggested that the Sacred Black Stone be kept in a big mantle and a
representative of each tribe should lift the cloak with the stone placed
in it. When that was done, Prophet (S) himself lifted up the stone from
the mantle and fixed it in its predetermined position. In this way, a
serious dispute was settled amicably to the entire satisfaction of all
the tribes, Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) points out this distinction of
his grandfather (S) in this sermon.

[^9]: Hastening between the two hillocks of Safa and Marwah by the
pilgrims, as an essential part of Haj, performed in remembrance of Hajra
(a.s.), the wife of Prophet Ibraheem (a.s.), who ran to and fro between
the 2 hillocks searching for water for her infant son Prophet Isma’eel
(a.s.).

[^10]: Special pronouncements to be recited while adorning the Ihram and
thereafter, one of the essentials of Haj.

[^11]: The Lote-tree at the ‘All Comprehensive Terminal’, the point
where ends and ceases all the knowledge of everyone and no one’s
knowledge crosses the limit. It is said that when Prophet Muhammad (S)
reached the point of ‘Sidrat al Muntaha’, Jibra’eel said, “I shall not
step an inch further from this”. The Prophet (S) passed that point too
and it is a symbol making the extreme bounds at last limit of the
heavenly knowledge beyond which neither an Angel nor any human being
could pass. (S.V.Mir Ahmad Ali in his interpretation of Verse 14 of
Surah an Najm (53:14).

[^12]: Refer to the Qur’anic Verse: Of a goodly word (being) like a
goodly tree, whose root is firmly fixed, and its branches (reach) in the
heavens. Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) relates that the Holy Prophet (S)
said, “I am the root of the goodly tree, Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) it’s
trunk, and the Divinely chosen ones of the issues of Ali (a.s.) are it’s
branches, while the faithful ones attached to the Holy Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
are it’s leaves.

[^13]: Call to stand up for Prayers, recited after the Azan.

[^14]: There is no other Deity accept Allah (La Ilaha Illallah).

[^15]: Allah is Great (Allaho Akbar).

[^16]: According to some of the historians and biographers, the daughter
of Imam Husayn (a.s.) referred to hereinabove is none other than his
beloved one Sayyidah Sakinah (a.s.). However some historians are of the
opinion (as will be quoted in this book too) that the child was not
Sakinah (but another daughter of Imam) while Sakinah (a.s.) remained
alive for a considerable period of time after her father. But we
strongly perceive the former report to be reliable, for her grave is
renowned in the prison in the Babe Sagheer Cemetery in Damascus, thus
verifying the above report, and believers throng for her pilgrimage from
far and near. And Allah is the Best Knower.

[^17]: The Synagogue of the (Ass’s) hoof.

[^18]: It is related in Tazkirah of Sibt that Zuhri says, that when the
women-folk from the family of Imam Husayn (a.s.) as well as his
daughters were entered into the house of Yazid, all of them arose and
lamented, wept and mourned Imam Husayn (a.s.). Yazid told Imam Ali
Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) that, “If you wish, remain with me, and we shall
treat you fairly, while if you wish, we shall despatch you back to
Madinah”. Imam (a.s.) replied, “I do not desire anything except (going
to) Madinah”. Sha’abi says, that when the women of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
met the women of Yazid, they cried, “O Husayn”! Yazid heard their
wailing and said, “Lamentation of the aggrieved women is admirable, but
death is easy upon the lamenting women”. Rabab, the daughter of Imru al
Qays, who was the wife of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and mother of Sakinah
(a.s.), was also present alongwith the women. While Imam Husayn (a.s.)
endeared both of them and said regarding them, “By my life, I cherish
the house in which there are Sakinah and Rabab, I endear them both and
spend most of my wealth upon them, and there is no reason for censure in
that, I shall not let them be neglected all throughout my life, until I
am buried beneath the earth”. Yazid, as well as other notables of
Quraysh proposed to her, but she replied, “I do not desire to have
anyone as my father in law after the Prophet of Allah (S)”. She remained
alive for a year after (the martyrdom of) Imam Husayn (a.s.) and died of
anger, while she never sat in the shade after (the martyrdom of) Imam
Husayn (a.s.).


