Mourning of the Heavens and Earth and its inhabitants upon Imam Husayn (a.s.)
=============================================================================

Shaikh Abu Ja’far Al-Tusi relates from Shaikh Mufeed, who relates from
Ahmad bin Waleed, from his father, from Saffar, from Ibn Isa, from Ibn
Abi Umayr, from Husayn bin Abi Fakhta, who says that I, along with Abu
Salamah Sarraj, Yunus bin Ya’qoob, and Fazl bin Yasar, was in the
presence of Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.). I asked, “May I be your ransom!
I have to go the presence of these men (perhaps referring to the Bani
Umayyah or Bani Abbas), we remember you there, and then what should we
say?” Imam (a.s.) replied,

*“Say thrice: May Allah’s blessings be upon you O Aba Abdillah”!*

Then he turned towards us and said,

*“Verily, when Abu Abdullah Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred, the seven
heavens and the seven earths, and it’s inhabitants, and what lies in
between them, and whatever whirls in paradise or hell, whether manifest
or concealed, wept upon him, except three”***.**

I asked, “May I be your ransom! What are those three that did not weep
upon him?” Imam Sadiq (a.s.) replied,

*There is no other Deity except Allah in all certainty, there is no
other Deity except Allah in devotion and humility, there is no other
Deity except Allah in faith and truth”.*

Shaikh Saduq relates from Jabalah Makkiyah who says that I heard Meytham
at Tammar saying that, “By Allah! After the passing of the ten days of
the month of Muharram, this nation will kill the son of their Prophet
(S), while the enemies of Allah will consider this day to be that of
affluence. While this shall certainly occur, and this has passed forth
in the knowledge of Almighty Allah. I inquired regarding it from my
master, the Commander of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.), and he told me
that everything, including the wild beasts of the forests, the fishes of
the oceans, and the birds, shall weep upon him. As also the sun, the
moon, the stars, the heavens and earth, and the believers from among the
men and genie, as also all the Angels of the heavens and earth, and
Rizwan (the gate-keeper) of paradise and Malik (the gate-keeper of
hell), and the bearers of the empyrean will lament upon him. The heavens
shall rain blood and sand”. Then he (Meytham) said, “O Jabalah! Then
when you see that the sun has turned red in color similar to fresh
blood, then know that the Master of Martyrs has been killed”. Jabalah
says, that one day I stepped out of my house, and I saw the shade of sun
upon the wall similar to a red linen. I started wailing and weeping and
said, “By Allah! Our Master Husayn bin Ali (a.s.) has been killed”.

Shaikh Abul Qasim Ja’far bin Qawlawayh relates through his chain of
transmitters from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), that (Caliph) Hisham bin
Abdul Malik dispatched a messenger and called for my father (Imam
Muhammad al Baqir). He reached Syria and when he entered therein, Hisham
asked, “O Aba Ja’far! We have called you so that we may question you
regarding an issue for which none is worthy of questioning except
myself. Nor have I found anyone else upon the earth knowing its answer
and being questioned, except one (i.e. you)”. My father (a.s.) asked,

*“The commander may question me whatever he desires, if I know the
answer I shall say so, and if I do not know it, I shall say so, while
honesty is the best”.*

Hisham said, “Tell me regarding the night on which Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.) was killed, how would the one who was not present at the town of
his martyrdom be aware of it, and what would be the sign for men
regarding it? Then if you know the answer tell me, while also tell me
whether this sign was apparent regarding Ali (a.s.) only or for anyone
else too?”

My father (a.s.) replied,

**“***O Commander! When the night, in which the Commander of the
faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) was martyred, came forth, no stone was lifted
up from the earth, except that fresh blood was seen underneath it, and
this prevailed until the dawn. And similar happened on the night of the
martyrdom of Prophet Haroon (a.s.), the brother of Prophet Moosa (a.s.).
And it was repeated on the night in which Yusha’ bin Noon* **(the
Vicegerent of Prophet Moosa)** *was martyred, as also the night on which
Prophet Isa (a.s.), the son of Mariam (a.s.) ascended up. This was
reiterated again on the night Sham’oon bin Jawn as Safa* **(the
vicegerent of Isa)** *was martyred, and similarly on the night in which
Husayn bin Ali (a.s.) was martyred”.*

Hearing this Hisham was enraged until the color of his face faded away
and he desired striking at my father. My father (a.s.) said,

**“***O commander! It is incumbent upon people to obey their leader and
guide him righteously. And my aim in answering the question of the
commander was that his obedience was incumbent upon me, then you should
be optimistic towards me”.*

Hisham said, “You may return to your family whenever you desire”. But
while he was just going, Hisham told him, “Then promise me and take an
oath upon Allah, that until I am alive you shall not relate this to
anyone”, and my father promised him.

We (the author) say, that what is said regarding the martyrdom of the
martyrdom of Prophet Haroon is contrary to the reports that prove that
Prophet Haroon (a.s.) died a natural death. Thus it is related from Imam
Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), that Prophet Moosa (a.s.) one day told Prophet
Haroon (a.s.) that,

*“Come with me to the Mount Sinai”***.**

They went there until they reached a house near the door of which was a
tree, while two sheets of clothes were hung upon it. Moosa (a.s.) told
Haroon (a.s.),

*“Go into the room and wear the two clothes and lie upon the platform
therein”***.**

Haroon (a.s.) did as told, and when he lay upon the platform, Allah took
away his soul. It is similarly quoted in the authentic reports, while
Imam Baqir (a.s.) had intended to speak in view of the belief of Hisham,
who believed that Prophet Haroon (a.s.) had been killed. Thus the Jews
told Moosa (a.s.), “Haroon did not die, but you killed him”.

An account of Zuhri on the Martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
----------------------------------------------------------

Ibn Abd Rabbah, while narrating regarding the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), quotes through his chain of authorities reaching Umar bin Qays
and Aqeel. While both of them narrate from Zuhri, who says that I, along
with Qutaybah, left for the city of Masseesah and went to visit Abdul
Malik bin Marwan. He was seated in his portico while people were
standing in two rows from the gate till near him. And whatever he
desired, he would convey it to him who was standing near him and he in
turn would pass on to the one near him until it reached the door. None
would be trespassing from in between the two rows, and then we came and
sat at the door.

Abdul Malik addressed one of them seated on his right side saying, “Are
you aware as to what occurred in Bait al Muqaddas on the night, the
morning of which Husayn (a.s.) was killed?” Each one started questioning
the other until it passed the door, while none could answer it. Then I
said, “I possess a report regarding this”.

This statement of mine passed through one another until it reached Abdul
Malik who summoned me. I went and stood in between the two rows near
Abdul Malik and saluted him. He asked, “Who are you?” and I replied, “I
am Muhammad bin Muslim bin Abdullah bin Shihab Zuhri, while I am
included among the genealogists”. Abdul Malik was very curious with
regards to the reports, and asked, “Tell me as to what occurred in Bait
al Muqaddas on the night, the morning of which Husayn (a.s.) was
killed?”

I replied, “Verily, such and such person (here I named the traditionist)
narrated to me, that on the night, the morning of which Ali bin Abi
Talib (a.s.) as also Husayn bin Ali (a.s.) were martyred, pure blood was
visible beneath every stone which was lifted from the ground in Bait al
Muqaddas”.

Abdul Malik replied, “You speak the truth. Whoever has narrated to you
has also narrated to me similarly, while you and me are the sole
recipients of this narration”. Then he retorted, “Why have you come
here?” I replied, “I have come here to guard the frontiers”. He said,
“You may remain at guard upon my door”. I remained with him and he
bestowed abundant wealth upon me. Then I took permission from him to go
to Madinah, and accompanied by my slave, I proceeded further with a bag
of wealth with me.

I lost the bag and my suspicion went upon the slave, I tried by bribing
and warning but he did not admit it. I threw him down and sat upon his
chest, and placed my elbow upon his chest while pressing it hard. I had
no intention of killing him, but he succumbed to the pressure of my
elbow while I regretted it. I returned to Madinah and inquired from
Sa’eed bin Musayyab, Abu Abdul Rahman, Urwah bin Zubayr, Qasim bin
Muhammad and Salim bin Abdullah. They replied, “We do not know the
repentance for it”.

This news reached Imam Ali bin Husayn (a.s.) and he called for me. I
went to his presence and narrated to him the entire episode. He said,

*“You can certainly repent. Then fast for two months consequently, and
free a believer from the bondage of slavery and feed sixty
destitutes”***.**

I performed these acts and then left to meet Abdul Malik bin Marwan.
News had reached him that I had lost the wealth, I remained at his door
for some days while he did not grant me permission to enter. I became
friendly with the teacher of his children who taught his son (the
etiquette as to) how to speak to his father. I told his tutor, “How much
wealth do you aspire to acquire from Abdul Malik, while I shall give you
the wealth equal to it. But you will have to teach his son that when he
goes to the presence of his father, he should plead on my behalf”.

The teacher asked, “What do you desire?” I replied, “He should say that
Zuhri pleads that the commander should be pleased with him”. He taught
him to do so, hearing which Abdul Malik laughed and said, “Where is
Zuhri?” He said that I was upon the door, and he permitted me to enter.
I went to his presence and said, “O ‘Commander of the faithful’! Sa’eed
bin Musayyab narrates from Abu Hurayrah, who narrates from the Prophet
of Allah (S) that he said: A believer does not fall in the same pit
twice (i.e. a believer does not commit the same mistake twice)”.

I (the author) say, that Masseesah is a city adjoining Jeehan, a
border-town of Syria. It is situated in between Antioch (an ancient city
of Syria, now in South Turkey) and Rome, and is an ancient place of
shelter for the Muslims. While Masseesah is also the name of another
village among the villages of Syria near ‘Bait Laheeya’ adjoining the
‘Door of Damascus’.

While Zuhri meant the former one for he introduced himself as related to
the border-town. And as regards Abdul Malik telling him that, “Both of
us are alien (ghareeb) with regards to this tradition”, he meant that
they were the sole recipients, while one of the meanings of ‘Ghareeb’ in
Hadees is that one man may narrate the text of the tradition.

Shaikh Abul Qasim Ja’far bin Qawlawayh Qummi relates from Zuhri, that
when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred, there was no pebble in Baitul
Muqaddas, except that pure blood was found beneath it.

It is also narrated by Haris A’awar, that Imam Ali (a.s.) said,

*“May my parents be ransom upon Husayn (a.s.), who shall be martyred
behind Kufa! By Allah! It is as if I see the species of beasts
stretching their necks upon his grave and weeping and lamenting upon him
from the night until the dawn. Then when this happens, one should remain
away from tyranny and ungratefulness”.*

Zurarah relates from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) that he said,

*“O Zurarah! Verily the heavens wept blood for forty mornings upon
Husayn (a.s.). The earth turned dark for forty mornings, and the sun was
eclipsed and turned red for forty mornings, while the mountains crumbled
and scattered and the seas exploded. The Angels wept for forty mornings
upon Husayn (a.s.), and until the head came to us, our women did not dye
or oil they hair nor did they apply colyrium or comb their hair. We
always remained grief-stricken after him, while my grandfather (Imam
Zainul Abdeen) wept whenever he remembered him until his beard was
soaked in his tears. And whoever would see him would become sorrowful
and weep. The Angels at the head of his grave weep too, and whoever is
there in the environment and heavens weep due to their weeping.*

*And it is said that: No tears or eyes are more cherished near Allah
than these eyes, which shed* *tears upon him. Then whoever weeps upon
him, Fatemah (a.s.) receives news regarding it, while this being the
cause for his felicity. And this news reaches the Prophet of Allah (S),
and it is as if he has fulfilled our rights. There is no man who shall
not arise weeping on the day of Qiyamah, except those who weep upon my
grandfather, while they shall arise with enlightened and illuminated
eyes and a cheerful countenance. The people will be in fright, while
they will be in peace. Others would be standing for accounting, but they
will remain along with Husayn (a.s.) among his associates under the
empyrean and it’s shade, while they shall not be fearful of the evils of
accounting.*

*It shall be said to them: Proceed towards paradise. They shall not pay
any heed and their hearts will not detach from the companionship of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and conversing with him. The houries will send invitation
to them that they, along with the ‘the youths of unchanging bloom’, are
anxious to have a view of them, but they shall not lift their heads and
shall remain engrossed in joy and mercy of the companionship of Imam
Husayn (a.s.).*

*While some of his enemies shall be seized by their disheveled hair and
thrown into hell, while some will call out that they do not have any
intercessor or a friend in need for them. Their (the mourners of Imam
Husayn) friends in Paradise will behold their (exalted) status, but will
not be able to near them or inquire from them. The Angels of paradise
will bring forth good-tidings for them from their mates (houries) and
the bearers of their wealth as to what pleasantries awaits them. They
shall reply that, Allah willing, we shall come to you. The Angels shall
convey their messages to the houries, whose eagerness will increase
after they hear regarding their excellence due to their proximity with
Imam Husayn (a.s.). Then they shall say: Praise be to Allah, that He has
delivered us from the great calamity and the frightful desert of Qiyamah
and saved us from what we feared. Then their mounts shall be brought
forth and they shall sit upon them, while eulogizing Allah, the
Praiseworthy, and greeting Muhammad (S) and his Progeny (a.s.) and shall
reach their destination”.*

It is related from the Commander of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.), that
he was in Rahbah and recited the following verse:

***“So wept not on them the heavens and the earth nor were they
respited” (Surah ad-Dukhan, 44:29).***

Instantaneously Imam Husayn (a.s.) came to his presence while entering
from one of the doors of the Mosque. Seeing him, Imam Ali (a.s.) said,

**“***It is he, who shall be killed, and the heavens and earth shall
weep upon him”.*

Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) says that,

*“The heavens and the earth wept upon Imam Husayn (a.s.) and turned red.
They did not weep upon anyone else except Prophet Yahya bin Zakariyya
(a.s.) and Husayn (a.s.)”.*

While at another place it is quoted from him that,

*“The murderer of Yahya bin Zakariyya (a.s.) was an illegitimate child,
as also the murderer of Imam Husayn (a.s.). The heavens and the earth
did not weep upon anyone else except these both”.*

The narrator asked, “What does the weeping of the heavens mean?” Imam
replied,

*“The sun arose with a red color and set similarly”.*

Dawood bin Firqad says, that I was seated in the house of Imam Ja’far as
Sadiq (a.s.), when we saw a pigeon named Ra’ebee (or Zaghabee) humming
excessively. Imam (a.s.) looked towards me for a lengthy time and said,

*“Do you know what this bird says?”*

to which I answered in the negative. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) said,

*“It curses the murderers of Imam Husayn (a.s.). Thus preserve these
birds in your houses”.*

Husayn bin Ali bin Sa’ed Barbari, the caretaker of the grave of Imam Ali
ar Reza (a.s.), relates from his father, that Imam Reza (a.s.) said,

*“Do you see this owl? In the days of my grandfather, the Prophet of
Allah (S), it took residence in buildings, mansions and houses. Then
when people would sit to eat, they would fly and sit close to them. The
people would throw food for them and they would also drink water and fly
away. But when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred, they went away from the
inhabited places to the deserted places, mountains and deserts. Then
they said : What an evil nation are you, that you killed the son of your
own Prophet! We do not find ourselves safe near you with regards to our
lives”.*

Shaikh Saduq relates from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), who relates from
his father (Imam Muhammad al Baqir), who narrates from his father (Imam
Ali Zainul Abedeen), that he said that one day Imam Husayn (a.s.) went
to his brother Imam Hasan (a.s.). When he looked at Imam Hasan (a.s.),
he started weeping. Imam Hasan (a.s.) asked, *“O Aba Abdillah! Why do
you weep?”* Imam Husayn replied that he wept on account of the
oppression that would befall him. Imam Hasan (a.s.) said,

*“The last oppression that shall befall me is the fatal poison that will
be poured in my mouth and I shall succumb to it. But my day would not be
similar to that of yours’ O Aba Abdillah! Thirty thousand people,
claiming to follow our Grandfather Muhammad (S) and follow Islam, will
unite to attack you and shed your blood, and violate the sanctity, while
captivating your women-folk and children, and plundering your tents. At
that moment the wrath (of Allah) will descend upon the Bani Umayyah, and
the heavens shall rain blood and sand, and all things will lament upon
you, to the extent that the wild-beasts of the forests and the fish of
the rivers will also weep upon your sufferings”.*

In the salutations recited by Sayyid Murtaďa, ‘The Standard of
Guidance’, it is said, “Islam smeared in dust along with you, and the
statutes and ordinances (of Islam) came to a standstill, the day turned
dark while the sun became eclipsed, the moon became dusky while the rain
and blessings of Allah halted, the heavens and the earth trembled as
also the earth of Batha, trials became universal and ideals became
diverse, the Prophet turned sorrowful as also Batool (Sayyidah Fatemah),
intelligence and talents were routed”.

Ibn Hajar in his Sawaeqe Muhriqa, and Abu Na’eem in his Dala’ilun
Nubuwwah, relate from Nusrah, a woman from the clan of Azd, that she
said, “When Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred, the heavens rained blood.
When it dawned, our buckets and jars were full of blood”.

It is quoted similarly in other traditions, and among the signs of
martyrdom are that the sky turned pitch black during day until stars
were visible. While no stone was lifted up, except that there was pure
blood underneath it.

Abush Shaikh says, that the seeds of green-weeds that were there in
their camps turned into ash. This caravan had come from Yemen towards
Iraq and reached them during the time of the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
(a.s.).

Ibn Uyaynah relates from his grandmother, who says that a Camel-rider,
whose seeds had turned into ash, narrated to me, that we slaughtered a
camel in our camp and rats entered into its flesh. We cooked the meat
but it tasted bitter similar to a colocynth. The heavens had turned red
due to his martyrdom and the sun was eclipsed until the stars were
visible during mid-day. People assumed that Qiyamah had arrived while no
stone was lifted up in Syria, except that there was pure blood visible
beneath it.

Usman bin Abi Shaybah relates, that after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) the sky became such, that for seven days the walls showed
red-like crimson linen, while the stars seemed as if colliding with one
another.

Ibn Jawzee relates from Ibn Sireen, that the universe became dark for
three days and then redness became visible in the heavens.

Abu Sa’eed says, that no stone was lifted up anywhere upon the world,
except that there was pure blood underneath it. The heavens rained
blood, stains of which remained for a long time upon the clothes.

Sa’labi and Abu Na’eem relate similarly, and then say, that it rained
blood. While Abu Na’eem states further, that when it dawned, their
buckets and jars were full of blood. It is also related, that it rained
blood upon the walls and houses of Khurasan, Syria and Kufa. And when
the head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was taken to the house of (Ubaydullah)
Ibn Ziyad, blood flowed upon his walls. Sa’labi says, that the heavens
wept, while their weeping was that it turned red. Some others say, that
the horizon of the sky became red for a period of six months after his
martyrdom. And thereafter the redness persisted (until today).

Ibn Sireen says, that report has reached us, that the redness of the
evening twilight was never visible before the martyrdom of Imam Husayn
(a.s.).

Ibn Sa’ad says, that this redness was not visible in the sky before the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Sibt Ibn Jawzee says, that when we are enraged our faces turn red, but
Allah Almighty is independent of possessing a face and thus His anger
upon the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was the effect of redness in
the skies so as to portray this great crime. Here ends the quotation
from Sawaeqe Muhriqa. While in the interpretation of the Qaseedah of
Hamziyah, it is quoted with similar contents.

It is related in Tazkirah of Sibt Ibn Jawzee from Hilal bin Zakwan, that
when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred, we saw the walls as if smeared
with blood for a period of two or three months from the time of the
morning Prayers until the sun-set. We went on a journey and suddenly it
rained, stains of which, similar to blood, remained upon our clothes.

Ibn Shahr Ashob relates in his Manaqib from Qarzah bin Ubaydullah, who
says that once during mid-day it rained upon the white blankets, and
when we saw it was blood. When the camels were taken to the waterfront
to partake of it, it (the river) had turned into blood. Then we received
news that Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred on that day.

It is related in the same book from Aswad bin Qays, who says that when
Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred, redness appeared (in the heavens) from
the east, and another from the west. It seemed that soon they would join
each other, and this continued for six months.

It is related in Uqud al Juman of Suyuti, that they (the astrologers)
say, that the sun eclipse does not appear, except on the twenty- eighth
or twenty-ninth of a month, this is nothing but conjunction, may Allah
kill them. According to what is related by the Saheehayn (Saheeh of both
Bukhari and Muslim) that the sun entered into eclipse on the day of the
death of the Ibrahim, the son of Prophet (S), which was on the tenth of
the month of Rabi’ul Awwal. This is related by Zubayr bin Bukar. It is
quite renowned in history that it entered eclipse again on the day of
the martyrdom of Imam Husayn, the day of the tenth (of Muharram).

Our Shaikh Shaheed (al Awwal) in his Zikra says, that it is quite
renowned that the sun entered eclipse on the day of Ashura due to the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) such that stars were visible during
mid-day.

Bayhaqi and others too relate similarly, and as we have quoted earlier,
that on the day of the death of Ibraheem, the son of the Holy Prophet
(S), the sun was eclipsed. And Zubayr bin Bukar, in the book Ansab says,
that he died on the tenth of the month of Rabi’ul Awwal.

Our Masters relate, that one of the signs of the (reappearance of) Mahdi
(a.t.f.s.) is that the sun would be eclipsed in the first-half of the
month of Ramazan.


