Complaining of the Angels regarding the Martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) in the Audience of Allah and their lamenting upon him
=============================================================================================================================

Shaikh Abu Ja’far Al-Tusi relates from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), that
when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred, the Angels bemoaned in the
Audience of Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime, and said, *“*O Allah! How
have they treated the chosen-one and the son of Your Prophet (S)?” Allah
showed them the image of the (Imam) Al Qa’em (a.t.f.s.), and said,

*“I shall seek his revenge from his oppressors through his medium”.*

Shaikh Saduq relates from Aban bin Taghlib, that Imam Ja’far as Sadiq
(a.s.) said,

*“Four thousand Angels descended from the heavens and joined Imam Husayn
(a.s.) so as to fight alongside him, but he did not permit them to
fight. They returned back and took permission (from Allah), but when
they returned back, Imam (a.s.) was already martyred. Now they remain at
the head of his grave with disheveled (hair) and smeared in dust. They
weep upon him until the Qiyamah, while the name of their leader is
Mansoor”.*

We (the author) say, that there are numerous traditions supporting the
view regarding four thousand Angels at the head of his grave. While in
the contents of some of them it is further related, that when the
pilgrims of Imam Husayn (a.s.) arrive, they come to receive them. And if
any of the pilgrims fall sick, they come to visit him; and if any of the
pilgrims dies, then they offer Prayers upon his dead body; and they pray
for his forgiveness after his death, while they ever await the rising of
(Imam) Al Qaem (a.t.f.s.).

Shaikh Ibn Qawlawayh relates from Abdul Malik bin Muqarran, that Imam
Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) said that,

***“When you go for the pilgrimage of Abu Abdullah (Imam Husayn), do not
utter anything except*** ***fair, for the Angels of the day and night,
along with you, meet those (the Angels) residing at the threshold of
Imam Husayn (a.s.). They shake hands with them but they do not answer
them due to excessive weeping. They wait until the sunrise or the
twilight so that they may speak to them. They then inquire from them
regarding the affairs of the heavens, but in between these two times
they neither speak to one another nor do they tire due to weeping and
supplicating”.***

Hurayz relates, that I inquired from Imam Abi Abdullah Ja’far as Sadiq
(a.s.) that, “May I be your ransom! What is the reason that the age of
you, the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) is less, and your deaths occur soon, when all
the creation is dependent upon you?” Imam Sadiq (a.s.) replied,

**“***Each one of us possess a register that contains our obligations.
And when we have performed that task, which is noted down in that
register, each one of us realizes that our end is near. Then the Prophet
(S) himself comes forth and informs us about our death, and whatever is
reserved for us near Allah is made apparent to us. And when Imam Husayn
(a.s.) read his register, and whatever had occurred and whatever still
remained was written therein. While the tasks that were suitable and yet
unperformed were therein, and he came out to fight the Kufans. And while
those obligations that were yet pending, the Angels sought permission
from Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime, to assist him. Allah granted
permission to them and they prepared themselves for battle, when Imam
Husayn (a.s.) was already martyred. The Angels called out in the
Audience of Allah saying : O Allah! You permitted us to descend as also
to defend him, and we came forth while You took away his soul?” Allah
revealed to them: ‘Remain under the shelter of his dome until he (Imam
Mahdi) rises, then you may assist him. Then now weep upon him, and that
you missed an opportunity to assist him. The distinction of his
assistance and lamentation is due to you.’ Therefore the Angels weep for
His (Allah’s) Proximity and the lapse of assisting the Imam (a.s.), and
when he (Imam Mahdi) shall arise, they shall assist him”.*

Safwan Jammal relates, that I accompanied Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.)
from Madinah en route to Makkah. On the way I inquired of him, “O son of
the Prophet of Allah! Why do I see you in a depressed, sorrowful and a
broken-down state?” Imam (a.s.) replied,

*“If you had heard what I hear, you would not have questioned me
further”.*

I asked, “What do you hear?” Imam Sadiq (a.s.) replied,

***“(I hear the) Complaining of the Angels in the Audience of Allah
regarding the murderers of the Commander of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.)
and that of Imam Husayn (a.s.). As also the elegies of the Genie and the
wailing of the Angels surrounding them, and their severe restlessness
due to it. Who is it that can suffice in eating, drinking and sleeping
(when he hears this)?”***

It is related in Bihar al Anwar from Hasan bin Sulayman, who relates
through his chain of authorities from Abi Mu’awiyah, from A’amash, who
relates from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), from his father (Imam Muhammad
Baqir), from his father (Imam Zainul Abedeen), that the Holy Prophet (S)
said: On the ‘night of Ascension’ (Me’raj), I reached the fifth heaven
and saw the image of Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.).

I asked, *“Dear Jibra’eel! What image is this?”* Jibra’eel replied, *“*O
Muhammad (S)! The Angels were desirous of beholding the face of Ali
(a.s.) and they said: O Allah! The progeny of Adam are fortunate to
behold the face of Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.), the beloved of Your beloved
Prophet Muhammad (S), and his Caliph, Vicegerent and Confidante, every
morning and evening. Then let us be fortunate too by beholding his face
similar to the dwellers of the earth.

Then Allah created for them his image from His Own, the Mighty, the
Sublime’s Sacred Light. Then Ali (a.s.) remains in their midst every
morning and night, they visit him and behold him every morning and
evening”. The narrator says, that A’amash related to me the tradition by
Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.), as related by him through his father (Imam
Baqir) that,

*“When the accursed Ibn Muljim dealt a blow with his sword upon the head
of Imam Ali (a.s.), the image, which was present in the heavens, became
wounded too. And whenever the Angels look at it every morning and
evening, they curse his murderer Ibn Muljim. And when Imam Husayn (a.s.)
was martyred, the Angels came forth and carried him and placed him
besides the image of Imam Ali (a.s.) on the fifth heaven. Then whenever
the Angels descend from the upper heavens upon the fifth one, and the
Angels of the lower heavens move upwards towards the fifth heaven to
visit the image of Imam Ali (a.s.), and they see him and Imam Husayn
(a.s.) smeared in their blood, they curse Yazid, Ibn Ziyad, and his
(Imam Ali’s) murderer until Qiyamah”.*

A’amash continues, that Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) told me that,
*“These are from among the concealed and mystic knowledge, then do not
reveal them to anyone, except those worthy of it”.*


