The children of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and some of his wives
========================================================

Shaikh Mufeed says, that Imam Husayn (a.s.) had six children:

• (Imam) Ali al Akbar (the elder Ali) (Zainul Abedeen), whose agnomen
was Abul Hasan and his mother was Shahezanan, the daughter of Khusroe
Yazdjurd.

• Ali al Asghar (the younger Ali) (popularly referred to as Ali al
Akbar), who was martyred at Karbala along with his father and regarding
whom we have discussed earlier. His mother was Layla, the daughter of
Abi Murrah bin Urwah bin Mas’ood Saqafi.

• Ja’far, he did not have any progeny and his mother was from the tribe
of Bani Quza’ah. He died during the lifetime of Imam Husayn (a.s.).

• Abdullah (popularly referred to as Ali al Asghar), who was martyred in
his infancy along with his father. He lay in his father’s lap when an
arrow came and pierced his neck and he was martyred, while we have
quoted regarding him earlier.

• Sakinah, whose mother was Rabab, the daughter of Imru’ al Qays bin Adi
Kalbi. She was also the mother of Abdullah bin Husayn.

• Fatemah, whose mother was Umm Ishaq, the daughter of Talha bin
Ubaydullah.

Ali bin Isa Irbili quotes in Kashful Ghummah, and it is quoted in
Kamaluddin also, that Imam Husayn (a.s.) had ten children, six sons and
four daughters. He mentions the names of his three sons to be Ali (as
narrated above), and Muhammad, Abdullah and Ja’far. Ali Akbar fought
alongside his father and was martyred, while Ali Asghar, the infant, was
martyred by the arrow, and Abdullah too was martyred along with his
father.

While the names of his daughters are Zainab, Sakinah and Fatemah (he
does not name the fourth one and probably she should be Ruqayyah, whose
grave is a renowned place of pilgrimage in Damascus – author). This is
quite renowned, and it is also said that he had four sons and two
daughters, while the former quote is quite renowned. But his eternal
remembrance and his lawful progeny is through Ali the median (al Awsat)
Zainul Abedeen (a.s.), and not through any other sons.

We say, that it is quoted regarding some of his children, while others
are not discussed.

Ibn Khashshab says, that he had six sons and three daughters, whose
names are similar to the ones quoted by Irbili above.

Hafiz bin Abdul Aziz bin Akhzar Janabazi relates, that Imam Husayn
(a.s.) had six children, four sons and two daughters. As regards the
names of his daughters he is in agreement with Shaikh Mufeed. But he
names the one martyred at Karbala to be Ali Akbar, and says that the
progeny of Husayn (a.s.) ensued from Ali Asghar, whose mother was a
slave-girl and he was the best in his age.

Zuhri says that I have not seen any Hashimite more excellent than him.

We (the author) say, that Hafiz has not quoted the name of Zainul
Abedeen, but he quotes the names of Ali Akbar and Ali Asghar. While the
correct one is that he had three sons by the name of Ali, as is narrated
in Kamaluddin that Zainul Abedeen (a.s.) was the median, while there is
difference of four between the narrations of Kamaluddin and Hafiz with
regards to the number of children.

We (the author) say, that there is difference of opinion among the
traditionists and historians regarding the name of the mother of Imam
Zainul Abedeen (a.s.).

Sibt Ibn Jawzee says that his mother was a slave-girl, while Ibn
Qutaybah is of the opinion that she was Salamah a native of Sindh, it is
also said that her name was Ghazalah. It is quoted in Kamil of Mubarrad,
that the name of the mother of Ali bin Husayn was Salamah and she was
from among the children of Yazdjurd and was from among the best women.

It is also stated that her name was Khawlah, or Salafah, or Barrah.

It is related in Irshad, that her name was Shahezanan, the daughter of
Yazdjurd bin Shahriyar bin Kisra. It is said, that her name was
Shaharbanu. The Commander of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) appointed
Hurays bin Jabir as the governor of the eastern provinces. He dispatched
the two daughters of Yazdjurd bin Shahriyar bin Kisra to the Imam
(a.s.)’s presence. He married Shahezanan to his son Imam Husayn (a.s.),
who bore him Zainul Abedeen (a.s.). He married the other one to Muhammad
bin Abu Bakr, who bore him Qasim bin Muhammad bin Abu Bakr, while both
of them were maternal cousins.

We (the author) say, that we strongly perceive that her real name was
Salafah, which was erroneously changed to Salamah or vice versa. Her
title was Shahezanan, while Imam Ali (a.s.) chose the name of
Shahrbanuwiyah for her. As has been narrated, that the Commander of the
faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) asked her,

**“***What is your name?”*

She replied, “Shahezanan, the daughter of Kisra”. Imam Ali (a.s.) said,

*“There should be no Shahezanan (Mistress of the women in Persian) upon
the nation of* *Muhammad (S) but should be Sayyidatun Nisa (Mistress of
the women in Arabic). You are Shahrbanuwiyah, while your sister is
Marwarid, the daughter of Kisra”*, and she agreed to it.

While Ghazalah or Barrah was the name of another maid of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), who reared him (Imam Zainul Abedeen). Imam addressed her as his
mother, and it is narrated that his mother (Shahrbanu) died during
childbirth, while another maid of his father brought him up. When he
grew up he knew no other mother except her, later he realized that she
was his maid, and people said that she was his mother thus he presumed
similarly.

As regards Sakinah, daughter of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------

Her name was Amenah, and it is said that her mother was Rabab, the
daughter of Imru al Qays bin Adi, who was the chief of (the clan of)
Bakr bin Wael.

On the day of the battle of Malh, in the days on the ignorance, he was a
Christian, he accepted Islam during the Caliphate of Umar bin Khattab.
He had not yet recited the Namaz, when Umar made him the governor of a
province, and he had not yet witnessed night when Imam Ali (a.s.) sent a
proposal for the marriage of his daughter Rabab to Imam Husayn (a.s.).
She was married to him and she bore him Abdullah (Ali Asghar) and
Sakinah. Regarding Sakinah and her mother, Imam Husayn (a.s.) had said,

*“By your life! I cherish the house in which there are Sakinah and
Rabab, I endear them both and spend most of my wealth upon them, and
there is no reason for censure in that, I shall not let them be
neglected all throughout my life, until I am buried beneath the earth”.*

It is related that the Commander of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) took
his sons Imam Hasan (a.s.) and Imam Husayn (a.s.) to Imru al Qays and
said,

*“O uncle! I am Ali bin Abi Talib, the cousin and son in law of the
Prophet of Allah (S), while these two are the sons of his daughter. And
we desire to enter into a relationship with you through wedlock”***.**

He answered, “O Ali! I wed my daughter Mahyah to you, and O Hasan! I wed
my other daughter Salama to you, while O Husayn! I wed my daughter Rabab
to you”.

Hisham (bin Muhammad Kalbi) says, that Rabab was from among the best and
most learned women, and after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) people
sent her proposals of marriage. She answered, *“I do not desire to have
anyone as my father in law after the Prophet of Allah (S)”*.

It is related that Rabab recited the following elegy for Imam Husayn
(a.s.): *“The illuminated one who was a source of light, lies unburied
martyred in Karbala, O son of the Prophet! May Allah reward you
favorably with regards to ourselves, and may Allah save you from the
deficiency in the scales (on the day of Qiyamah), you treated us with
mercy and (according to the) religion, now who remains for the orphans
and destitutes, who makes every deprived affluence and gives refuge to
them, by Allah! I shall not establish relation with anyone else other
than you, until I am hidden beneath the earth”.*

In the Section relating to the entry of the Household of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) into the presence of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad, we have related that
Rabab, the daughter of Imru al Qays and wife of Imam Husayn (a.s.),
lifted the blessed head, and placing it in her lap kissed it and said,
*“O Husayn! I shall never ever forget Husayn, those lances proceeded
towards him who had no lineage or father* *(present) at Karbala and
threw him upon the ground, may Allah never water both the directions of
Karbala”.*

Jazari relates, that Imam Husayn (a.s.) was accompanied by his wife
Rabab, the daughter of Imru al Qays and who was the mother of Sakinah.
They took her along with the other womenfolk to Syria and then returned
back to Madinah. The noblemen of Quraysh sent her proposals of marriage,
but she replied, *“I do not desire to have anyone as my father in law
after the Prophet of Allah (S)”.* She remained alive for one year after
Imam (a.s.) and never sat under (the shade of) the roof of the house
until she turned frail and died of anger.

It is also said, that she remained at the head of the grave of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) for one year and then returned back to Madinah where she
died of grief.

Abul Faraj Isfahani relates that Sakinah was along with the daughter of
Caliph Usman (bin Affan) in a mourning gathering. The daughter of Usman
said, “I am the daughter of the martyr”. Sakinah remained silent until
the Caller for the Prayers said, “I bear witness that verily Muhammad
(S) is the Apostle of Allah”. Sakinah then told her, *“*Is he my father
(referring to the Prophet) or yours?” The daughter of Usman replied, “I
shall never ever pride upon you”.

Damiri relates from Faeq, that Sakinah, the daughter of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), came weeping to her mother Rabab, while she was an infant. Her
mother asked her as to what happened, and she replied, *“*An infant
honey-bee pricked me with her tiny sting*”.*

Sibt Ibn Jawzee relates from Sufyan Sawree, that (Imam) Ali bin Husayn
(a.s.) resolved to go for the Hajj or Umrah. His sister Sakinah (a.s.)
arranged provisions for the journey for him worth one thousand Dirham
and dispatched it for him. When Imam reached Hirrah (near Madinah) he
distributed all the wealth among the destitutes.

Sakinah (a.s.) died on Thursday, the fifth day of Rabi’ ul Awwal, one
hundred and seventy Hijra,[^1] while her sister Fatemah (a.s.) died the
same year. Her (Fatemah’s) mother was Umm Ishaq, the daughter of Talhah
bin Ubaydullah. She was formerly married to Imam Hasan (a.s.) and bore
him a son named Talhah, who died in his infancy. After the martyrdom of
Imam Hasan (a.s.), Imam Husayn (a.s.) married her and she bore him
Fatemah.

Abul Faraj (Isfahani) says, that the mother of Umm Ishaq was Jarba’, the
daughter of Qusamah bin Tayy. She was given the title of Jarba’ due to
her immense beauty, for all the beautiful ladies seemed ugly as compared
to her beauty. Formerly Umm Ishaq was married to Imam Hasan (a.s.), and
when his end drew near, he told his brother Imam Husayn (a.s.) that,

*“I am pleased with this woman, when I am dead you may take her to your
house. Then you may marry her after the completion of her Iddah”*.[^2]

When Imam Hasan (a.s.) died, Imam Husayn (a.s.) married her (after the
completion of her Iddah). She bore Imam Hasan (a.s.) a son named Talhah,
who died issueless.

It is narrated in Taqreeb of Ibn Hajar, that Fatemah, the daughter of
Imam Husayn (a.s.), was a trustworthy women (with regard to narration of
traditions). She is included in the fourth category of traditionists,
and she died in her prime-age after one hundred Hijra.

Shaikh Mufeed says, that Hasan bin (Imam) Hasan requested his uncle Imam
Husayn (a.s.) to marry him to any one of his two daughters. Imam
replied,

*“I marry my daughter Fatemah, who resembles my mother Fatemah (a.s.),
the daughter of the Prophet of Allah (S), to you”.*

[^1]: Refer Note No.146 regarding Sayyidah Sakinah (a.s.)

[^2]: A period of abstinence from remarriage for women who have been
divorced or widowed.


