Merit of visiting the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
=================================================

Visiting the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) is recommended, while emphasis
upon visiting his grave is among the necessities of the Religion. It is
related that the visitation to his grave is essential upon every
believer and is obligatory upon every man and woman. While one who
abandons it, in fact has abandoned the rights of Allah and His Prophet,
while abandoning it is ungratefulness with the Prophet of Allah (S) and
is a result of a defect in his belief and Religion. And the one who
deliberately avoids it, he shall be among the dwellers of hell.

Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) told Muhammad bin Muslim that, *“Direct
our Shi’ah to visit the grave of Husayn bin Ali (a.s.), for it has been
made obligatory by Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime, upon every believer
who considers Husayn (a.s.) to be his Imam”.*

Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) says that,

*“Whenever anyone amongst you go for the Hajj and then do not go for the
pilgrimage of Imam Husayn (a.s.) has abandoned the right from among the
rights of the Prophet of Allah (S). For the right of Husayn (a.s.) is
made obligatory upon every Muslim by Allah”***.**

He says that, *“The one who dies without going to the head of the grave
of Husayn (a.s.), while he still considers himself to be our Shi’ah, is
in fact not our Shi’ah, and even if he goes to Paradise, he will remain
as a guest of the inhabitants of Paradise”.*

He (Imam Sadiq) asked Aban bin Taghlib,

*“O Aban! When did you go for the pilgrimage to the grave of Imam Husayn
(a.s.)?”*

Aban replied, “By Allah, O son of the Prophet of Allah! A lengthy time
has passed since I did not renew the pledge”. Imam (a.s.) replied,

*“Glory be to my Lord, the Sublime, and praise to Him! Inspite of being
a nobleman among the Shi’ah you have abandoned the visitation to the
grave of Husayn (a.s.)? The one who visits the grave of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), Allah writes down good deeds for him at every step, and forgives
his sins at each step. Then He forgives all of his past and future
sins”.*

It is related in numerous traditions that,

***“Do not avoid visiting the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) even during
the days of prohibition. And one who visits him (his grave) in fear (of
the enemies), Allah will give him refuge from the great fear of Qiyamah
and he will gain reward proportionate to the fear. And the one who fears
due to their fear, Allah will bestow him a refuge under the shade of His
empyrean while he shall remain along with Imam Husayn (a.s.) and shall
be protected from the fear of the day of Qiyamah”.***

It is related in traditions from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) that,

*“The wealthy should visit the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) twice every
year, while the indigent should visit once every year”***.**

He (a.s.) said,

*“Those who live near should visit at least once every month, while
those who live far away, once every three years”.*

It is also related from him that,

*“It is not fair to avoid it for more than four years”.*

It is related from Imam Abul Hasan (a.s.) that,

***“Whoever visits the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) thrice a year shall
remain safe from indigence. It is emphasized that one should visit his
grave with sincerity and eagerness. Then the one who goes to his grave
with eagerness, he is among the favored slaves (of Allah) and will
remain under the standard of Husayn bin Ali (a.s.). And the one who
visits him for the sake of Allah, Allah will forgive his sins similar to
a newly born, and the Angels will accompany him in his journey”.***

It is related in another tradition that,

*“Jibra’eel, Mika\`eel and Israfeel accompany him until he returns back
to his home”.*

It is related from Humran (bin A’ayan), that I went to visit the grave
of Imam Husayn (a.s.). When I returned back to my home, Imam Muhammad al
Baqir (a.s.), accompanied by Umar bin Ali bin Abdullah bin Ali, came to
visit me. Imam Baqir (a.s.) said,

**“***O Humran! Accept glad tidings that the one who visits the graves
of the martyrs of the Prophet’s family, intending Allah’s proximity and
solidarity to His Prophet, he shall be freed from sins similar to the
day his mother gave birth to him”.*

Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) said, that when the day of Qiyamah
approaches, an announcer will call out, *“*Where are the pilgrims of
Husayn (a.s.)?” A large multitude will arise, computing whose numbers
would not be possible by anyone except Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime.
Allah will ask them,

**“Why did you visit the grave of Husayn?”**

They will reply, “O Lord! We did that due to the friendship with the
Prophet of Allah (a.s.) and for the sake of Ali (a.s.) and Fatemah
(a.s.), and due to the sorrow that befell him”. It will be said to them,

**“Here are Muhammad (S), Ali (a.s.), Fatemah (a.s.), Hasan (a.s.) and
Husayn (a.s.). Go and unite with them, you shall remain along with them
in their status. Unite under the standard of the Prophet of Allah (S)
and remain under its shade, that is in the hands of Ali (a.s.) until all
of you enter Paradise”.**

Then they shall come to the standard from behind, the right and the
left.

It is related in numerous traditions, that the visitation of Imam Husayn
(a.s.)’s grave shall result in forgiveness of sins, be a means of
entering Paradise, and grant liberty from hell. It shall also result in
the negation of evils, elevation of rank and fulfillment of desires. The
one who goes to visit the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.), while being
cognizant of his right, Allah will forgive all of his past and future
sins.

In another tradition it is related that,

**“***His intercession will be accepted for seventy sinful people. And
there is no desire that is asked at the head of his grave, except that
Allah fulfils it”.*

Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) asked Abdullah bin Najjar that,

*“Do you go for the pilgrimage to the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) while
sailing in the boats?”*

He replied in the affirmative. Imam (a.s.) continued,

*“Do you not know that when your boat capsizes, it is said to you: O you
who have been cleansed, while Paradise is pleased with you?”*

Qa’ed Hannat told Imam (a.s.), “People come to the grave of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) with women who recite elegies and bring food along with them”.
Imam (a.s.) said,

*“Yes, I have heard it”.*

Then he (a.s.) continued,

**“***O Qa’ed! The one who comes to the head of the grave of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), being cognizant of his rights, all his past and future sins
shall be forgiven”.*

It is related that,

*“The pilgrims of the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) will enter Paradise
forty years before others, who will be engaged in accountability and
abeyance. While his pilgrim will turn his sins into a bridge upon the
door of his house, and will pass upon it as you pass upon the bridge
while leaving it behind”.*

It is related, that it will be said to the pilgrims of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) on the day of Qiyamah that, **“**Catch hold of the hands of
anyone whom you befriend and enter them into Paradise”. Then each man
will catch hold of the hand of another until a man will say to another,
“Do you not recognize me? I am the one who had risen for you on such and
such day?” He shall enter him into Paradise without any hindrance or
restrain.

Sulayman bin Khalid inquired from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) that, “I
have heard that you have said, that Allah beholds the earth every day
and night for a hundred thousand times. Then He forgives anyone whom He
pleases and He chastises anyone whom He pleases? And that He shall
forgive the pilgrim of the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his family
and anyone whom he intercedes for on the day of Qiyamah, whoever he be?
Then shall the one, who is worthy of hell-fire, also be forgiven?” Imam
(a.s.) replied,

**“***Yes, even the one worthy of hell-fire, provided that he is not an
enemy of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)”.*

It is related in numerous traditions, that visiting his grave is equal
to Hajj and Umrah, and striving in the way of Allah (Jihad), and
emancipation of slaves, rather it is equal to twenty Hajj, and better
than twenty Hajj, rather Allah will write down eighty Hajj in his
account.

While his pilgrimage is equal to the Hajj performed along with the
Prophet of Allah (S), rather the one who goes for his pilgrimage, being
cognizant of his rights, will be equal to the one who has performed Hajj
hundred times accompanying the Prophet of Allah (S). While the one who
goes for his pilgrimage barefoot, with each step that he takes forward
and backwards, he will get reward of emancipating slaves from among the
progeny of (Prophet) Isma’eel (a.s.).

Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) says that,

*“If I relate to you the merit of visiting his grave, you shall abandon
the Hajj, while a group from among you would not go for the Hajj. Woe be
to you! Do you not know that Allah preferred Karbala to be the Sanctuary
of His peace and affluence before He chose Makkah to be His Sanctuary?”*

Imam (a.s.) continued, *“*

*One day Imam Husayn (a.s.) was seated in the lap of his grandfather,
while he was caressing him and smiling.”*

Seeing this Ayesha said, “O Prophet of Allah! How much do you love this
child?” He (S) replied,

*“Woe be to you! How should I not cherish him and not be pleased with
him? He is the fruit of my heart and the light of my eyes. Beware!
Verily my nation will kill him, then whoever visits him (his grave)
after his death, Allah will write down one of my Hajj in his
account”***.**

Ayesha asked, “One of your Hajj?” He (S) replied, *“Yes, rather two of
my Hajj”.* Ayesha asked, “Two of your Hajj?” and he replied, *“Yes”*.
And as much as Ayesha started inquiring, he started increasing the
amount of reward (of Hajj) until he reached ninety Hajj along with his
Umrah.

Qaddah says, that I asked Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) that, “The one who
goes for the pilgrimage to the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.), while being
cognizant of his rights, and is neither an arrogant nor a denier, what
has he earned?” Imam (a.s.) replied, *“*

*One thousand accepted Hajj will be written down in his record, as also
one thousand pious Umrah. And if he is a damned one, he shall be noted
down as a felicitous one, and shall remain saturated eternally in the
blessings of Allah”.*

It is related in numerous traditions that going for his (Imam Husayn’s)
pilgrimage results in the increase of age, safeguard of self and wealth,
abundance of sustenance, relief from severity, and the fulfillment of
desires. While the least reward of his pilgrimage is that Allah Himself
guarantees the protection of his life and wealth until he returns back
to his family, while on the day of Qiyamah too Allah will safeguard him
fairly.

It is related, that when the news of Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s martyrdom
reached the cities, a hundred thousand infertile women came to the head
of his grave and later all of them conceived. While the Arabs would tell
their women, “If you do not go to the grave of this magnanimous
personality, you shall not conceive a son”.

Imam Muhammad al Baqir (a.s.) says that**,**

***“Imam Husayn (a.s.) of Karbala was killed as the one subjected to
oppression and severity, thirsty and devoid of any helpers, while Allah,
the Mighty, the Sublime, took an oath upon*** ***Himself that there is
none among the distressed, the ones subjected to severity, the sinful,
sorrowful, thirsty and ailing, who come to the head of his grave and ask
for desires, while intending proximity to Husayn (a.s.), except that
Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime, will relieve him of his severity,
fulfill his desires, forgive his sins, increase his age and multiply his
sustenance. ‘Therefore get warned O ye who have eyes.’ (Surah al-Hashr,
59:2)”***

Ibn Abi Ya’foor relates, that I asked Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) that,
“My eagerness to have a glimpse of you forced me to come to you and
relate to you what I face”. Imam Sadiq (a.s.) replied,

*“Do not complain to your Lord. It would have been fair if you would
have gone to the one who holds a greater right upon you than
myself”***.**

While his concluding sentence was more severe upon me than the former
one, thus I asked, “Whose right is more greater upon me than you?” Imam
(a.s.) replied,

*“Husayn (a.s.), it would have been better if you went to (the grave of)
Husayn (a.s.) and requested and asked your desires from Allah near
him”.*

It is related from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) that he said,

***“The one who does not go to visit the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.), he
shall remain very remote from numerous abundance, while one year from
his age will lessen”.***

It is related in numerous traditions that,

***“Visiting his grave is a meritorious deed and for every dirham spent
upon it is worth a thousand dirhams”.***

Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) told Ibn Sinan that,

*“For every dirham spent, ten lac dirhams shall be taken into account.
The Prophets, Messengers, Imams and Angels come to visit his grave.
While the inhabitants of the heavens pray abundantly for his pilgrims
and they give them glad tidings”.*

And there are numerous other traditions quoted regarding the merit of
visiting his grave, while we state some more traditions as a gift.

Shaikh Abul Qasim Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Qawlawayh Qummi relates
through his chain of authorities from Mu’awiyah bin Wahab that he says,
that I solicited permission from Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) to visit
him and he consented. I entered therein and saw him seated in his house
upon his Prayer mat. I sat down and he completed his Prayers, then I
heard him eulogizing the Almighty saying,

*“O Lord! You have preferred us for eminence and have bestowed
intercession through our medium us, and conferred Vicegerency as a
specialty for us, while You have bestowed us with the knowledge of the
past and future, and have entered our love into the hearts of people.
Thus forgive me and my brothers, as also the pilgrims of the grave of
Imam Husayn (a.s.), who have spent their* *wealth and presented their
bodies to severity, in their inclination to favor us, intending reward
near You due to bonding with us, and in order to appease the heart of
Your Prophet (S), and to fulfill our command, and to enter rage into the
hearts of our enemies. And by this act they desire Your pleasure due to
us. Thus reward them through Paradise and safeguard them every day and
night, then make their progeny as good successors. Then befriend them
and guard them from the mischief of every obstinate tyrant, as also that
of every able and disable among your creatures, and the mischief of the
Satans among the genie and men. Then fulfill their greatest desire that
they wish from You, remaining far away from their home-town, as also
those (of their desires) that they have desired for their children,
relatives and family. O Allah! Our enemies desisted their journey while
they did not stop so as to challenge our opponents. Have mercy upon the
faces whose colors have turned pale due to the sun, and have mercy upon
the heads that circumambulate the grave of Abu Abdullah Husayn (a.s.).
Have mercy upon the eyes that shed tears upon our sorrows, and upon the
hearts that are disturbed and pained for us, and also upon the wailing
for us. O Allah! I offer these souls and bodies to Your refuge until You
reach them to the head of the fountain of Kauthar on the day of thirst
(Qiyamah)”.*

He repeated this invocation in prostration several times, and then when
he completed it, I asked, “May I be your ransom! If this invocation
would have been for the one who had never recognized Allah, by Allah,
the fire (of hell) could never devour him. By Allah! I wish I had been
for the pilgrimage to his grave and would have not been for the Hajj”.
Imam Sadiq (a.s.) replied,

*“You are quite close to him (his grave), then what desisted you from
going for his pilgrimage?”*

Then he (a.s.) said,

*“O Mu’awiyah! The inhabitants of the heavens, who pray for his
pilgrims, are certainly more than those who pray for them upon the
earth”.*

It is quoted in Biharul Anwar from the author of Mazare Kabir, who
quotes with his chain of transmitters from A’amash, who says, that I
took residence in Kufa and had a neighbor with whom I often sat. It was
the night preceding Friday and I asked him, “What do you have to say
regarding the pilgrimage of Husayn (a.s.)?” He said, “It is an
innovation, while every innovation is misguidance, and every misguidance
is destined for hell”.

Hearing this I arose from near him filled with rage, and told myself
that, “In the morning I shall go to him and relate to him the traditions
proving the excellence of the Commander of the faithful Ali (a.s.),
perhaps Allah might enlighten his eyes”. I went to him in the morning
and knocked at his door. Someone answered from behind the door saying,
“He has left for the pilgrimage in the beginning of the night”.

Immediately I followed him until I reached the Shrine of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) and saw him prostrating, while he was not tiring due to excessive
prostrations and genuflections. I asked, “Yesterday you told me that his
pilgrimage is an innovation, and every innovation is misguidance, and
every misguidance is destined for hell, while today you come for his
pilgrimage?” He replied, “O Sulayman![^1] Do not reprimand me. I was not
a believer in the Imamate of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) until tonight when I saw
a dream which left me horrified”.

I asked, “O Shaikh! What did you dreamt?” He replied, “I saw a man in a
dream, who was neither too short nor too long, but was handsome while I
am unable to describe his features. He was accompanied by men who had
surrounded him and held him in their midst. While facing him was a man
mounted upon a horse with a bushy tail and he had worn a crown with four
pillars. All the four pillars were studded with gems that had
illuminated the distance of the road equal to three days. I inquired as
to who he was and was told that he was the Vicegerent of the Prophet
(S), Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.).

I lifted my eyes further and saw an illuminated Camel with a litter of
light, flying between the heavens and the earth. I asked as to whose
mount was that and was told that it was of Sayyidah Khadijah (a.s.), the
daughter of Khuwaylid, and Sayyidah Fatemah (a.s.), the daughter of
Muhammad (S).

Then I asked as to who was the youth and was told that he was Hasan bin
Ali (a.s.). I asked as to where were they going, and was told that all
of them were going for the pilgrimage of the oppressed martyr Husayn bin
Ali (a.s.), the martyr of Karbala. I went towards the litter, when I saw
some notes falling down from the heavens, on which was written: The
immunity of Allah, may His remembrance be sublime, is for the pilgrims
of the grave of Husayn (a.s.) on the night preceding Friday. Then a
caller announced to me saying: Beware! We as well as our Shi’ah are in
the exalted stations of Paradise. By Allah O Sulayman! I shall not leave
this place until my soul abandons my body.”

Shaikh Abul Qasim Ja’far bin Muhammad bin Qawlawyh relates from his
father, who relates from Ibn Mahboob, who relates from Husayn, the
grandson of Abu Hamza Sumali, that during the last days of the caliphate
of Bani Marwan, I left for the pilgrimage to the grave of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) hiding from the Syrians. I reached Karbala and took shelter in a
corner of the desert.

At midnight I went towards the grave, and when I reached further, a man
came and stood facing me saying, “Your reward is with Allah! Return
back, for you shall not reach the grave”. I returned back, and when it
was early morning, I went towards the grave. When I reached there, the
same man approached me and said, “O slave of Allah! You shall not reach
the grave”. I said, “May Allah pardon you! Why would I not reach it when
I have come from Kufa for the pilgrimage? Do not desist me, for I fear
lest it dawns and the Syrians find me here and kill me”.

He replied, “Wait for a moment, for (Prophet) Moosa bin Imran (a.s.) has
solicited permission from Allah to visit the grave of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), he has received permission and has descended from the heavens
accompanied by seventy thousand Angels. They are in his (Imam’s)
presence since the beginning of the night and are awaiting dawn so as to
return back to the heavens”. I asked him, “May Allah pardon you! Who are
you?” And he replied, “I am one of the Angels appointed to guard the
grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and invoke forgiveness for his pilgrims*”*.

I returned back and wondered whether my intellect would part away having
heard his words. I again went to the head of the grave after dawn, while
there was none to desist me now. I offered salutations and cursed his
murderers, and then I offered the morning Prayers and hastened back in
fear of the Syrians.

He (Ibn Qawlawayh) relates through his chain of authorities from Ishaq
bin Ammar, that I asked Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) that, “May I be your
ransom, O son of the Prophet of Allah! On the night of Arafah I was in
the Shrine of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and I witnessed three thousand men with
glowing countenance, emitting fragrance and adorning white clothes
praying there until the morning. And as much as I tried to reach near
the grave and recite invocations, I could not do so due to the immense
crowd of men. When it dawned, I fell into prostration, and when I lifted
my head, not a single one of them was visible”. Imam Sadiq (a.s.)
replied,

*“Do you know who they were?”*

and I replied in the negative. Imam (a.s.) continued,

*“My father has related to me from his father, that when Imam Husayn
(a.s.) was being martyred,* *four thousand angels passed by and flew
upon the heavens. Allah revealed to them:* **‘O group of Angels! You
passed by the son of my friend and beloved Muhammad (S) while they
killed him when he was in severity and you did not assist him?’** *Then
return back to the earth and reside at the head of his grave, and weep
with disheveled hair and smeared in sand until the day of Qiyamah. Thus
they remain at his grave until the arrival of the time”***.**

He (Ibn Qawlawayh) relates through his chain of authorities from
Mufazzal bin Umar, who says, that Imam Jafar as Sadiq (a.s.) told me,

*“By Allah! It is as if I see the Angels obstructing the believers near
the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.)”***.**

I asked, “Are they seen there?” He (a.s.) replied,

*“Far be it! Far be it! By Allah! They serve the believers, to the
extent that they rub their hands upon their faces. Allah sends down the
dishes of Paradise every morning and evening for the pilgrims of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) while the Angels serve them. And no man desires anything
from his desires of this world or the hereafter, except that it is
fulfilled”.*

I said, “By Allah! This is excellent”! Imam Sadiq (a.s.) asked,

*“O Mufazzal! Should I narrate to you something more?”*

I replied, “Verily yes, O my master”! And he (a.s.) continued,

*“It is as if I see an illuminated plank on which is kept a dome of red
rubies studded with gems. Imam Husayn (a.s.) is seated upon it, while
ninety thousand green domes are around him. It is as if the believers
visit him and offer salutations, while Allah, the Mighty, the Sublime,
tells them:* *‘O my friends! Ask of Me, for it is quite a long period
that you have borne severity and been humiliated and persecuted, while
this is the day that whatever of your desires, whether of this world or
the hereafter, that you wish from Me, shall be fulfilled.’* *And their
food and drink is from Paradise***.** *While by Allah, this is the
excellence which is unparalleled”.*

Allamah Majlisi says that the descending of food and drink upon them is
meant in Barzakh,[^2] while the erection of the domes will be during the
days of the Raj’at (of Aimmah), for it is said, “Desires of this world
as well as the hereafter”.

He (Ibn Qawlawayh) relates through his chain of authorities from
Abdullah bin Imad Basari, that Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) told me that,

*“There exists an excellence close to you, the similitude of which has
not been bestowed upon anyone else, and I presume that you are unaware
of it’s essence. You do not defend it genuinely nor do you arise for it,
and there are ones specialized for it who have been chosen for it, and
that has not been bestowed upon them due to their own might and power,
except whatever Allah had bestowed upon them. While this felicity has
been bestowed upon them by Allah through His Grace and Benevolence”.*

I asked, “May I be your ransom! What is that, the attributes of which
you have narrated? And why have you not named it?”

He (a.s.) replied, *“It is none other than the pilgrimage (to the grave)
of my grandfather Husayn* *(a.s.), who is far away from his home-town
and upon an alien land. Then the one who visits him and weeps upon him,
as also the one who does not visit him but remains grief-stricken for
him. And the one who was not available for him and his heart burns for
him, he sends blessings upon him. The one who beholds the grave of his
son (buried) at his feet upon the barren earth, where he had no
relatives and family and was deprived of his rights. The apostates
united until they killed him and wasted him and exposed him to the wild
beasts, and they blocked access to the water of Euphrates, which was
available for the dogs. They dishonored the right of the Prophet of
Allah (S) and did not consider his testimony regarding himself and his
Progeny (a.s.). Then he lay in his grave in a persecuted state and he
fell upon the earth along with his family and Shi’ah, and he entered the
earth of an alien and dreadful desert, upon the land where none goes to
him except those whose hearts have been tested with belief by Allah”*.

I said, “May I be your ransom! I would go for his pilgrimage until I got
involved in the matters of the sovereign and was handed over the charge
to safeguard their wealth. I have become quite renowned among them and
have therefore abandoned the pilgrimage due to dissimulation (Taqiyyah),
but am aware of the virtue involved”. Imam (a.s.) said,

*“Do you know what are the merits of those who visit his grave and what
abundant fairness do they possess near us?”*

I replied in the negative, and Imam (a.s.) continued,

*“Their merit is that the heavenly Angels glorify them, while the
goodness near us is that every morning and evening we pray for blessings
to be descended upon them. And my father has related to me, that from
the time he (Imam Husayn) was martyred, his grave has never been vacant
of those offering Prayers, be it from the Angels, genie or men and
beasts. There is none who does not envy his pilgrims or touches them,
and everything looks at him with hope of virtue, for he has beholded his
grave”***.**

Imam Sadiq (a.s.) then retorted,

*“I have been informed, that in the middle of the month of Sha’ban, a
group of one of the districts of Kufa and other men, accompanied by the
wailing women visit his grave.* *One of them recites the Qu’ran and the
other narrates the events, while still another weeps and the other
recites elegies”.*

I replied, “Verily yes, may I be your ransom! I have seen them as you
describe”. He replied,

*“Praise be to Allah, that He has placed among men those who come to us
and glorify us, recite elegies for us, and also placed among men our
enemies who reproach them (our friends) for it, be it from our own
relatives or others, so as to misguide them, and they consider this act
of their’s to be ugly”.*

It is related in Basharatul Mustafa from A’amash, who relates from
Atiyyah Kufi, that he says, that I accompanied Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari
for the pilgrimage to the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.). When we entered
Karbala, Jabir went towards the river Euphrates and performed bath. Then
he wore his pants and placed a robe upon his shoulders, and then he
opened a purse of Sa’ad (a perfume) and applied it upon his body.

He then started glorifying Allah at each step until he reached the
grave, then he told me, “Bond me to the grave”. I joined him to the
grave and he fell down unconscious upon it. I sprinkled water upon him
and he regained consciousness while repeating thrice “O Husayn”!

Then he said, “Why does the friend not reply to his friend? How could he
reply when the blood of his neck lies smeared upon his throat, while
there is separation between his head and body? I bear witness that you
are the son of the best of women. And why would it not be so, when you
have been fed by the hands of the Master of the Prophets, and brought up
in the laps of the pious, and have consumed milk from the breasts of
faith and you weaned along with Islam. You died in chastity as you lived
in chastity, while the hearts of the believers are aggrieved due to your
separation and there is no doubt in your fruitful end. Thus peace of
Allah and His Paradise upon you! I bear witness that you have treaded
the path similar to your brother (Prophet) Yahya bin Zakariyyah”.

Then he turned his eyes upon the grave and said, “Peace be upon the
souls that descended near the grave of Husayn (a.s.) and sat their
camels thereat! I bear witness that you established the Prayers and you
gave the Zakat, and you invited towards virtue and forbade against evil,
and you fought against the pagans and worshipped Allah until death
approached you. By Him Who sent Muhammad (S) rightly as a Prophet, we
are associated with you in the struggle of yours”.

Atiyyah says that hearing this I asked, “How are we associated with
them? When we did not alight at any valley or mountain, nor did we raise
the swords. While these martyrs gave away their heads and bodies and are
now separated from their children, while their women have been widowed?”

Jabir replied, “O Atiyyah! I have heard my friend, the Prophet of Allah
(S) say, that those who love some men, they shall arise along with them,
while those who are pleased at the task of the nation, remains
associated with them in their task. By Him Who sent Muhammad (S) rightly
as a Prophet! My intention and those of my companions are similar to
that of Husayn (a.s.). Now take me to the houses of Kufa”.

When we had paved a short distance, he said, “O Atiyyah! I recommend to
you, and I do not perceive that I shall meet you again after this
journey, befriend the friends of the Progeny of the Prophet (S), and how
I befriend them! And bear enmity with the enemies of the Progeny of the
Prophet who bear enmity with them, although they be one of those who
fast and remain awake at night (in worship). Then be merciful towards
the friends of the Progeny of Muhammad (S), for if one of their feet
slips due to access sins, the other one will remain steadfast due to
their affection. Their friends shall return back to Paradise and their
enemies to hell”.

[^1]: A’amash’s real name was Sulayman bin Mehran al Asadi and he was
popularly known as A’amash i.e. a dim sighted one.

[^2]: The intermediate period between death and Qiyamah, wherein a
person enjoys riches and happiness if he is a good-doer, or suffers
torment if he is an evil-doer. Ref. Qur’anic Verse: ‘And after them
shall be a barrier (barzakh) until the day they shall be raised again.’
(Surah al Mu’menoon, 23:100).


