Oppression of the Caliphs upon the blessed grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
======================================================================

Ibn Aseer in his Kamil, in context of the events of the year 236 A.H.
states, that in this year Mutawakkil ordered the grave of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) to be demolished, as also the houses and buildings surrounding
it. He ordered that seeds should be sown there and water to be run upon
it, and that the people should be refrained from visiting his grave. In
that district it was announced that, “If we find anyone around his grave
after three days, we shall throw him into an underground dungeon”.

People dispersed and avoided the pilgrimage, and then it was destroyed
and ploughed. Mutawakkil bore intense enmity with Imam Ali bin Abi Talib
(a.s.) and his family, then whoever reached him, who was from among the
friends of Ali (a.s.) and that of his family, he would confiscate his
wealth and kill him. One of his attendants named Ubadah, the eunuch (al
Mukhannas), would tie a pillow upon his stomach below his clothes and
bare his bald pate and come to Mutawakkil and dance, while the callers
would say “Here is the pot-bellied one, the caliph of the Muslims”.

(They meant imitating Imam Ali, Allah’s refuge) while Mutawakkil would
be consuming wine and laughing. One day this play was repeated in the
presence of Muntasir (the son of Mutawakkil), who reprimanded Ubadah who
then became silent fearing him. Mutawakkil asked him as to what
happened; Ubadah arose and informed him about the threat of Muntasir.

Hearing this Muntasir said, “O Commander! The one whom this dog imitates
and people laugh upon, is none other than your cousin and a nobleman of
your family, while your honor is due to him. If you wish you yourself
consume his flesh (malign him), but at least do not hand him over as
prey to this dog and the similitudes of him”.

Hearing this Mutawakkil turned towards his announcer and said, “All of
you say: The youth is aroused due to his cousin, when still the youth is
in his mother’s……” It was for this reason that Muntasir deemed lawful to
shed the blood of Mutawakkil.

Abul Faraj in his Maqatilat Talibeeyyeen says, that Mutawakkil was very
severe upon the family of Abi Talib (a.s.) and would spy upon their
tasks and would be infuriated and envious towards them, he would be
cynical towards them and malign them.

His vizier Ubaydullah bin Yahya imitated him in his hatred and would
vilify them near him. And he dealt (such severely) with them as none of
the caliphs of Bani Abbas had done before, one of them being plowing the
grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and destroying its mark. He appointed guards
upon all the roads so as to spy upon those who came to visit his grave.
Then they should be arrested and brought to him, and then he would kill
the pilgrims or persecute them severely.

Ahmad bin Ja’ad Washa’ related to me, while he himself was a witness to
it, that the reason for plowing the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was that
a female singer dispatched her maid to Mutawakkil, before he assumed the
seat of Caliphate, she would sing for him while he would drink wine. One
day he summoned her but was told that she was on a journey, while
actually she had been to visit the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.).

She received the message of Mutawakkil and hastened back and dispatched
one of her maids to him, whom he adored. Mutawakkil asked her, “Where
have you been?” She replied, “My mistress had been for the Hajj
Pilgrimage and she had taken us along with her”. It was the month of
Sha’ban and Mutawakkil asked, “Where had you been for Hajj pilgrimage in
the month of Sha’ban?” She replied, “To the grave of Husayn”. Hearing
this he was infuriated and ordered that her mistress should be brought
to him. She was imprisoned and all her wealth confiscated.

Then he called for one of his companions named Deezaj, who was a Jew,
and ordered him to go to the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and plough it
and efface it, as also to ruin it’s surroundings. He went and destroyed
all the structures surrounding it, as also the shrine. He ruined around
twenty acres adjoining it and when he reached the grave none would take
lead. Some Jews were then called who ploughed it and ran water around
it. He appointed guards surrounding it with a distance of one mile
between them, and then there was none who visited his grave, except that
he would be arrested and taken to him.

Muhammad bin Husayn Ashnani related to me (Abul Faraj), that a long time
passed since I did not go for the pilgrimage to the grave of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) due to fear. One day I made up my mind, that although I have to
risk my life, I would go for the pilgrimage. A man, who was a
perfume-seller, accompanied me and we entered therein. We hid during the
days and traveled at night until we reached the district of Ghaziriyyah.
We came out at night and passed by from in between the two guards who
were fast asleep until we reached his grave.

We could not trace it but we reached it by careful search and insight.
The case (of the grave) had been cracked and burnt; water had been run
around it, while the structure of bricks had fallen in similar to a
trench. We beholded it and fell upon it and such a pleasant fragrance
emanated from it, the similitude of which we had never ever smelt in our
lives. I asked the perfume-seller, who was along with me, that, “What is
this fragrance?” He replied, “By Allah! I have never ever smelt a
perfume similar to this”. Then we parted from there after placing a mark
around the grave. Then when Mutawakkil died, we, accompanied by a group
of the Shi’ah, went to the grave and searched the marks and found it
intact.

Mutawakkil appointed Umar bin Faraj Rajhee upon Makkah and Madinah, who
prevented the Progeny of Abi Talib (a.s.) from asking succor from others
and desisted people from being kind to them. And if news reached him
that anyone had favored them, even if it be less, he would be severely
chastised and penalized thoroughly.

Until a time came upon the Alawite women, that they did not have more
than one dress, which they would wear periodically to offer Prayers and
then remove it and sit bare-back upon the spinning-wheel until
Mutawakkil was killed. Then Muntasir turned towards them and favored
them while sending wealth for them that was distributed among them, and
he aspired by all means to oppose his father, and he did opposite of his
tasks while ridiculing him and expressing dislike for his ugly deeds.

Shaikh Al-Tusi in his Amali relates through his chain of authorities
from Muhammad bin Abdul Hameed, that I lived adjoining the house of
Ibraheem al Deezaj (the dumb ass) and went to meet him during his
illness to which he later succumbed. I found him in a wretched state, he
was unconscious and a doctor was at his bedside. I inquired of him due
to the relation and friendship that I had shared with him and I was his
confidante.

He concealed it and signaled towards the doctor’s presence. The doctor
perceived his gesture and did not know as to what medicine to prescribe,
therefore he arose and left. When we were alone, I again inquired
regarding his health. He said, “I shall relate to you and seek pardon
from Allah. Mutawakkil ordered me to go to Nainawah and remain guard
upon the head of the grave of Husayn. We had orders to plough upon it
and destroy the mark of the grave.

At night we went there accompanied by the workers and supervisors, who
carried shovels and pick-axes. I commanded my slaves and companions to
start the task of destroying the grave and plowing, while I lay down for
I was tired of the journey and sleep overtook me. Suddenly a hue and cry
arose and my slaves woke me up. I asked, “What has happened to you?”
They answered, “Something extraordinary has approached”. I asked as to
what it was, and they replied, “A group of men have obstructed us from
the grave and are shooting arrows at us”. I arose so as to investigate
the matter, and I saw similarly what they had described, while it was
the first night of the Layali al Beez.[^1] I said, “You too shoot arrows
at them”.

They shot arrows but they returned back towards the one who shot it and
killed him. Seeing this I was horrified and uneasy, while fever and
shivering gripped me. Then I hastened away from near the grave at that
very moment, while I was constantly thinking that if I did not perform
the orders regarding the grave, Mutawakkil would certainly kill me”.

Abu Burayrah (Muhammad bin Abdul Hameed) says, that I told him, “Do not
fear, for yesterday night Mutawakkil has been killed by the help of
Muntasir”. He replied, “I too have heard it, but am inflicted with a
disease in my body, regarding which I believe that I shall not survive
it”. Abu Burayrah says, that it was the first part of the day (when I
met him), while Deezaj did not see the night and died.

(Mu’allah) Ibn Khunays relates from Mufazzal, that Muntasir heard that
his father Mutawakkil abuses Sayyidah Fatemah (a.s.) (Allah’s refuge).
He inquired from someone who opined that, “His slaughter is incumbent,
but for every son who kills his father, his age is shortened”. Muntasir
replied, “I do not mind if my life is reduced after having killed him in
Allah’s obedience”. He remained alive for seven months after the death
of his father.

It is stated in the same book from Qasim bin Ahmad Asadi, that when news
reached Mutawakkil (Ja’far bin Mo’tasim) that people from the villages
gather at Naynawah for the pilgrimage to the grave of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), while a large multitude gathers at his grave, he dispatched one
of the commanders of his army with a huge cavalry to plough upon the
grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and desist people from gathering for the
pilgrimage.

The commander came to Karbala and executed his orders, while it was the
year 237 A.H. The wise men revolted and surrounded them and said, “If
until tomorrow you kill all of us, then too you shall not desist those
left from amongst us to perform the pilgrimage”. And they saw such
wonders that they wrote to Mutawakkil who answered back saying that they
should lift their hands off them and go to Kufa and pretend as if they
were reconciliating the task of people and return back to the kingdom.
This situation prevailed until the year 247 A.H. and again news reached
Mutawakkil that the wise men and the Kufans go to Karbala for the
pilgrimage to the grave of Husayn (a.s.). They gather in large numbers
and have prepared a huge market place.

Mutawakkil dispatched another commander with a huge contingent and
ordered them to announce that, “Any one who visits the grave of Husayn,
his blood and wealth is wasted”. He ordered the grave to be dug and the
earth to be ploughed. People refrained from going to the pilgrimage,
while the progeny of Abu Talib (a.s.) were pursued and killed, but
whatever he had desired, could not be fulfilled.

It is related in the same book from Ubaydullah bin Rabiyah, that in the
year 247 A.H. I went for the Hajj pilgrimage, and while returning back I
went to Iraq, while fearing the sovereign. I visited the grave of the
Commander of the faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) and then went to visit the
grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.). I saw that they had ploughed the earth (of
the grave) and ran water upon it while bulls were made to work there. I
saw with my own eyes that the bulls were driven until they reached the
structure of the grave, while they would turn towards the right and left
from there. They were being hit severely but it did not prove beneficial
and by no means were they placing their feet upon the grave.

Hence I could not visit his grave and returned back to Baghdad saying,
“By Allah! If the Bani Umayyah have killed the grandson of the Prophet
then his cousins (Bani Abbas) too have oppressed him, by your life, his
grave has been desecrated, while they regret for not having sided with
them in your murder, then when he died they pursued him”.

When I reached Baghdad I heard a hue and cry and inquired as to what was
the news. It was said to me, “The birds have come and have brought the
news of the murder of Ja’far Mutawakkil”. (May Allah’s eternal curse be
upon him). I was astonished and said, “O Lord! This night in lieu of
that night”.

In the same book it is narrated, that Yahya bin Mugheerah Razi says,
that I was with Jareer bin Abdul Hameed. An Iraqi man came to him and
Jareer inquired from him regarding the people of Iraq. He replied,
“Rasheed (Haroon) destroyed the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and ordered
the lote-tree (near it) to be cut down”. Jareer lifted up both of his
hands and said, “Allah is Great! A tradition has reached us from the
Prophet of Allah (S) regarding this, who said thrice:

*“May Allah’s curse be upon the one who fells the lote-tree.”*

Until now we were unaware of its interpretation, felling it would mean
ruining the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) so that people would loose its
track.

It is related in the same book from Umar bin Faraj Rajahee, that
Mutawakkil dispatched me to desecrate the grave of Husayn (a.s.). I
reached the area and commanded that the bulls be left to run upon the
grave. When they reached the grave, they would not run upon it, while I
beat them with my staff until it broke in my hands. By Allah! They would
not step upon the grave nor lay their feet upon it.

It is related in Manaqib, that Mustarshid looted the wealth of the
shrine and the city of Karbala, saying, “A Grave is in no need of
wealth”. He distributed it among his troops and when he left from there,
he was killed along with his son Rashid.[^2]

[^1]: Layali al Beez refers to the 13th, 14th and 15th of every lunar
month.

[^2]: Coincidentally, as I reach the (edition of the) translation of
this book until here, an important turn of events has taken place at
Iraq. The despotic Bathist regime (of my time), under the dictatorial
rule of Saddam Husayn al Tikriti, finally came to an end after many
years. Saddam ruled with an iron fist imitating the example of Yazid and
Mutawakkil, while none could oppose his barbaric acts. The worst
affected ones being the Shi’ah whom he persecuted in the worst possible
manner, which is difficult to be expressed in words. Hundreds of
Maraje’, Ulama and general public were put to death by his blood thirsty
family members and troops loyal to him. One cannot also forget the
brutal murder of Ayatullah al Uzma Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al Sadr and his
Erudite sister Sayyidah Bintul Huda, Ayatullah al Uzma Shaikh Murtaďa
Burujerdi, Ayatullah al Uzma Mirza Ali Gharawi, Ayatullah al Uzma Sayyid
Muhammad Sadr, Ayatullah al Uzma Sayyid Husayn Bahrul Uloom, Hujjatul
Islam Sayyid Muhammad Taqi al Khoei and scores of other Ulema. During
the uprising of 1991 when the Shi’ah of the twin Holy Cities of Najaf
and Karbala arose against his despotic regime, they were suppressed in
the most horrible manner, while even the Holy Mausoleums of Imam Ali
(a.s.), Imam Husayn (a.s.) and Hazrat Abbas (a.s.) had to face the brunt
of his aggression. The Shrines were desecrated and thousands of Shi’ah
and Ulema were killed inside the Courtyard while the great Marja’ of the
Shi’ah world Ayatullah al Uzma Sayyid Abul Qasim al Khoei was persecuted
and later died under suspicious circumstances. Then came the Moharram of
1424 Hijra (2003 A.D.) and Iraq was attacked by the US and her coalition
forces under the pretext of possessing weapons of mass destruction, thus
putting an end to Saddam’s barbaric regime. Finally after many years,
the Arba’een (fortieth day of the martyrdom) of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
observed with complete reverence with no prohibitions. Consequently this
Yazid and Mutawakkil of our age had to face the consequences similar to
his predecessors whose acts he shamelessly imitated, verifying the words
of Prophet Muhammad (S) who had said, “They shall bury them and shall
erect a symbol for the grave of the Master of Martyrs (Imam Husayn) in
that expanse desert, which will act as a guide for the righteous and a
means of affluence for the believers. And the followers of misguidance
and infidelity will try to erase it, but its mark would not but increase
evidently”.


