Conclusion: An account of the Tawwabeen (Penitents) and the rising of Mukhtar bin Abu Ubaydah Saqafi to avenge the blood of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
==============================================================================================================================================

Here we content ourselves to quote only that what has been narrated by
Ibn Aseer in his Kamil.

An account of the Tawwabeen (Penitents)
---------------------------------------

When Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred and (Ubaydullah) Ibn Ziyad returned
from Nukhaylah to Kufa, the Shi’ah disputed with one another in reproach
and repentance. They realized their great sin that they invited Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and later withdrew their hands from assisting and
complying him, while he was killed in their very neighborhood. They
realized that until and unless they either killed his murderers or were
themselves killed, the sin and disgrace could not be washed off.

They gathered around the five noblemen of Shi’ah in Kufa viz. Sulayman
bin Surad Khuza’ee, who was from among the companions of the Prophet
(S); Musayyab bin Najabah Fazari, from among the companions of Imam Ali
(a.s.); Abdullah bin Sa’ad bin Nufayl Azdi; Abdullah bin Waal Tamimi,
from the clan of Taym Bakr bin Wael; and Rufa’ah bin Shaddad Bajali, who
was from among the best companions of Imam Ali (a.s.).

They gathered at the house of Sulayman bin Surad Khuza’ee and Musayyab
bin Najabah started the speech. After praising Allah he said, “Now then!
Allah tried us by means of a lengthy age and delivered us from exposure
to various mischiefs. We wish from our Lord that tomorrow in Qiyamah we
might not fall prey to chastisement when it will said to us:

“*Did not We keep you alive long enough for him who reflected to reflect
therein? (Surah al-Fatir, 35:37).”*

The faithful Imam Ali (a.s.) has said:

**“***The age until which Allah accepts apologies from the children of
Adam (a.s.) is sixty years.*”

While all of us have reached the age of sixty years and are
self-praising and Allah found us to be treacherous with regards to the
circumstances relating to the grandson of the Prophet of Allah (S). His
letters and messengers reached us earlier and he ended his proof upon us
and requested us to assist him from the beginning until the end. We
remained away from self-sacrifice until he was martyred very close to
us.

Neither did we assist him through our hands nor did we side with him by
means of our tongues. Neither did we strengthen him with our wealth nor
did we solicit help from our families for him. What excuse do we have in
the presence of our Lord, and what explanation shall we offer to the
Prophet (S) that his beloved son and his progeny were killed. No, by
Allah! We have no excuse except that either we kill his murderers or we
die in his way. And we desire that Allah might be pleased with us due to
this self-sacrifice of ours’, and we should remain safe from His
chastisement. O people! One of you should take lead and it is necessary
that there should be a commander with whom you may take refuge, as also
a standard under which you may gather”.

Then Rufa’ah bin Shaddad Bajali arose and said, “Now then! Allah has
placed a best speech in your mouth, while you began your speech with a
sane task of fighting against the lewd men and in repentance of a great
sin. Your speech is justifiable and acceptable, while whatever you have
said regarding the requirement of a commander under whom one would take
refuge and a standard under which one would unite is true, and we all
too opine likewise.

Then if you accept this task you are likeable, a well-wisher and beloved
among the group. And if you opine, as also our group, we shall agree
that the noblemen among the Shi’ah and a companion of the Prophet of
Allah (S), a senior man like Sulayman bin Surad Khuza’ee should be
handed over the charge of this task, whose valor and religiosity is
commendable and whose foresight is reliable”.

Abdullah bin Sa’ad confirmed his speech, and Musayyab said, “You have
said the truth, appoint Sulayman bin Surad as your commander”. Then
Sulayman arose and after praising Allah, said, “Now then! I fear that we
shall not reach a better day than this age of short livelihood and the
great sin that has enveloped the distinguished chiefs of Shi’ah. All of
us desired that the Progeny of the Prophet (S) should come to us and we
promised to assist him. Then when they came to us, we displayed lethargy
and indigence and became negligent. We waited for one another until the
son of our Prophet (S), his progeny, his offspring and the pieces of his
body were martyred. He desired justice, but was denied, the lewd men
made him the target of arrows and focus of spears, and they galloped
towards him and put aside justice. Beware! Now arise, for your Lord is
furious with you and shut your eyes from your wives and children so that
Allah may be pleased with you. By Allah! I do not presume that He will
ever be pleased with you until you fight those who killed him. Do not
fear death, for everyone who fears death is humiliated. Then be like the
followers of Bani Israel when their Prophets told them: You oppressed
your own self when you worshipped the calf, then return back to your
Creator and kill your own ego. They refused and knelt down, then
rebelled. But then they realized that there was no other way for
deliverance from this great sin, except being killed. Then if you are
invited towards that which they were invited, then what shall you do?
Then sharpen your swords and fix points upon your spears

‘*And prepare ye against them whatever (force) you can, and steeds of
war at the garrison.’ (Surah al-Anfal, 8:60).*”

Khalid bin Nufayl said, “By Allah! If I know that my salvation from my
sin and the pleasure of my Lord lies in my being killed, I shall
certainly kill myself. All those present bear witness that whatever I
have with me, except my arms with which I fight my enemies, I sacrifice
it for the Muslims so that they may acquire power in fighting against
the lewd men”. Abu Ma’eemar bin Habas bin Rabi’ah Kinani supported his
view.

Then Sulayman said, “Enough of speech. Whoever desires donating anything
for this task should hand it over to Abdullah bin Waal Taymi. Then when
an adequate budget gathers with him, we shall mobilize the Shi’ah
destitutes with it”.

Sulayman bin Surad wrote a letter to Sa’ad bin Huzayfah (bin al Yaman)
and informed him of their decision and invited him for assistance. Sa’ad
read the letter for the Shi’ah of Madaen, who consented to it, and in
contents of a letter addressed to Sulayman bin Surad agreed to assist
him in this expedition. Sulayman wrote another letter with similar
contents to Musanna bin Makhrabah Abadi at Basra. Musanna replied back
saying, “We, the group of Shi’ah, praise Allah for this decision of
yours’. And we promise that we shall unite with you at the appointed
time”. And at the end of the letter he had written some couplets.

They started their activities in the year 61 A.H. after the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s.). They started gathering requirements for the battle
and invited people to seek revenge of Husayn (a.s.), one after the other
people started joining them and they continued their task until Yazid
died in 64 A.H. Hearing this the companions of Sulayman rallied around
him and informed him that, “Yazid has died and the state of the kingdom
had turned sluggish. Then if you permit, we should revolt against ‘Amr
bin Hurays, the assistant of Ibn Ziyad, and declare our intention of
revenging the blood of Husayn (a.s.) as also pursue his murderers while
inviting towards the sovereignty of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), who have been
denied their rights”.

Sulayman replied, “Do not make haste. I have pondered upon your proposal
and have concluded that all the murderers of Husayn (a.s.) are the
noblemen of Kufa and among the valorous Arabs. Then if you try to seek
revenge from them and they become aware of your intentions, all of them
shall pounce upon you with more severity than anyone else. Then I have
measured that if the group among your obedient ones revolt, you shall
not be able to seek your revenge, and you shall not heal your hearts but
shall fall prey to your enemies. Thus you may dispatch your missionaries
and invite people towards our assistance”.

They did as advised and a large number of men rallied around them after
the death of Yazid. The Kufans too expelled ‘Amr bin Hurays from Kufa
and pledged allegiance for Abdullah bin Zubayr, while Sulayman and his
companions remained busy in their missionary activities.

Mukhtar bin Abi Ubaydah entered Kufa in the middle of the month of
Ramazan, six months after the death of Yazid. Abdullah bin Yazid Ansari
was the governor of Kufa deputed by Ibn Zubayr, while Ibraheem bin
Muhammad bin Talha assisted him and was appointed to collect taxes.
Mukhtar arose to invite people towards seeking revenge for Husayn (a.s.)
and his slogan for this invitation was that, “I have been assigned as a
trustworthy deputy on behalf of the Mahdi Muhammad bin Hanafiyah”, while
a group of Shi’ah rallied around him. He (Mukhtar) said, “Sulayman
desires to revolt and lay his life, as well as those of his companions,
while he has no insight with regards to battle”.

Abdullah bin Yazid was informed that daily in Kufa people revolted
against him. It was said to him, “Imprison Mukhtar, and if you leave him
free, you shall not see fairness”. Abdullah replied, “If they fight us,
we too shall fight them, but if they do not disturb us, we do not have
anything against them. They seek revenge for the blood of Husayn (a.s.),
and may Allah’s mercy be upon them, they are in peace, they may revolt
in open against those who killed Husayn (a.s.), who is coming towards
them (he meant Ubaydullah bin Ziyad), while I too support them (against
him).

This Ibn Ziyad, who is the murderer of Husayn (a.s.) and that of the
virtuous and your colleagues, is coming towards you. The messengers from
the place of the Manbaj Bridge have brought this news, it is better that
you prepare unitedly for combat against him and not fight amongst
yourselves and kill one another, until you find your enemies to be
helpless and reach your goals.

This Ibn Ziyad is the worst among the creatures of Allah, he, as well as
his father, ruled upon you for seven years, and did not refrain their
hands from killing the virtuous and respectable people. He humiliated
you and is the one who kills anyone whom he desires.

He is now coming towards him; therefore face him with power, your arms
and your glory. Spend thoroughly against him and not upon your own
selves, while I desire your well-being. While Marwan had dispatched Ibn
Ziyad to (Northwest) Mesopotamia and ordered him that when he would free
himself from conquering it, he should attack Iraq.

When Abdullah bin Yazid concluded his speech, Ibraheem bin Muhammad bin
Talha said, “O people! Do not be tempted by the deceitful speech of this
charlatan. By Allah! Whoever revolts against us, we shall kill him. And
if we receive news that a group of men intends revolting against us, we
shall reprimand a father for his son, an infant for his father, relative
for a relative, a headman for his subservient, until they accept the
truth and submit to us”. Hearing this Musayyab bin Najabah sprang from
his place and cut short his speech saying, “O son of destitutes! You
terrify us by means of your sword and power? By Allah! You are more base
than him. We do not reprimand you for your enmity with us; we have
killed your father and grandfather. But O Commander! You have said
fairly”.

Ibraheem said, “By Allah! We shall slaughter, while this Abdullah bin
Yazid shows frailty”. Then Abdullah bin Waal said, “Why do you interfere
between us and our commander. You are not our commander, but are deputed
to look after the finances. Go and gather finances, but if you desire
spoiling the affair of this nation, (it is nothing new) for your father
and grandfather had done similarly and then they faced evil”. Ibraheem
and his accomplices started abusing them and they spoke badly with one
another. Then the commander (Abdullah bin Yazid) alighted from the
pulpit and Ibraheem threatened him that he would complain to Ibn Zubayr.
Abdullah went to his house and asked pardon and he yielded, while
Sulayman and his companions came out and started buying ammunitions and
prepared for a combat.

Entry of Mukhtar into Kufa
--------------------------

The Shi’ah had been abusing and vilifying Mukhtar regarding the episode
when Imam Hasan (a.s.) was wounded with a dagger in Sabat and was taken
to the white palace of Madaen.[^1] When the time of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
came and he dispatched Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s.) to Kufa, Mukhtar hosted
him and admitted him in his house, which is now that of Muslim bin
Musayyab (in the days of Hisham bin Muhammad Kalbi). He swore fealty at
his hands and invited people to obey him. When Muslim revolted, Mukhtar
had been to his village of Lafgha. He was informed regarding the
untimely uprising of Muslim at the time of Zuhr and he returned back to
Kufa along with his associates.

He reached Baab al Feel of the Mosque of Kufa after Maghrib, where
Ubaydullah (bin Ziyad) had appointed ‘Amr bin Hurays to pitch his
standard therein, while at that time people had already deserted Muslim.
Mukhtar wandered around and was in abeyance, and when ‘Amr was informed
of it, he invited him after offering shelter and he remained with him.
When it dawned, Ammarah, the son of Walid bin Utbah, informed Ubaydullah
regarding it. He summoned him (Mukhtar) with a group of other men and
said, “You have brought a group for assisting the son of Aqeel?” Mukhtar
replied, “Well, now I am under the protection of ‘Amr”, to which ‘Amr
bore witness. Ubaydullah struck at the face of Mukhtar with his staff
until his eyelid overturned, then he said, “If ‘Amr would not have borne
witness, I would have killed you”.

Then he sent him to the prison until Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred.
Mukhtar sent someone to Abdullah bin Umar, who was the husband of his
sister Safiyyah, who in turn wrote to Yazid and mediated for him. Yazid
ordered Ibn Ziyad to release him with a stipulation that he would not
remain in Kufa for more than three days.

Mukhtar went to Hijaz and when Ibnul Arq met him after the episode of
Waqisah, he saluted him and inquired about his eye. Mukhtar replied,
“The illegitimate one struck at it with his stick and that happened what
you now see”. Then he continued, “May Allah kill me if I do not shred
his fingers along with the other parts of his body”. Mukhtar then
inquired regarding Ibn Zubayr from him, and he replied, “He has taken
shelter under the Ka’bah and accepts allegiance in secret, and if he
gains power, he shall revolt”.

Mukhtar replied, “The sole man among Arabs today is he, and if he relies
upon my opinion, I would mend the people’s affairs for him. The tempest
of mischief is in the lightening and thunder and is revolving behind it.
Then until you hear that I have revolted at a place along with a group
of men and seek revenge for the blood of Husayn bin Ali (a.s.), the
oppressed Martyr, the Master of Muslims and the Grandson of the Master
of Prophets (S) killed at Karbala. By your Lord! I shall kill them equal
to the number of the murderers of (Prophet) Yahya bin Zakariyyah
(a.s.)”. Saying this Mukhtar left, while Ibnul Arq started wondering at
his words.

Ibnul Arq says, that by Allah, I saw with my own eyes whatever he had
said and I also related it to Hajjaj bin Yusuf, who laughed and said,
“Praise be to his Lord! What a virtuous man, combatant and crusher of
enemies was he”.

Mukhtar went to Ibn Zubayr but he did not confide in him and concealed
his secret from him, then Mukhtar parted away from him and did not meet
him for a year. Ibn Zubayr inquired regarding him and was informed that,
“He is in Taif and is convinced of the anger of Allah and the
elimination of the oppressors”. Ibn Zubayr replied, “May Allah kill him!
He has rallied behind the liars and the soothsayers. Then if Allah
desires eliminating the oppressors, Mukhtar himself is the first
oppressor”.

While they were speaking thus, Mukhtar entered the Mosque and started
circumambulating (the Ka’bah) and recited two units of Prayers. Then he
sat down while his associates sat around him and started speaking to
him.

Ibn Zubayr did not come to meet him and instead sent Abbas bin Sahl bin
Sa’ar to spy upon him. He went to Mukhtar and asked, “You remained away
from the group of the noblemen of Quraysh and the companions of the
Saqeef ? There is no tribe whose chiefs did not come to him and offer
allegiance at his hands”. Mukhtar replied, “I visited him last year but
he did not confide in me. Perhaps he is in no need of me while I too am
independent of him”. Abbas said, “Tonight come along with me to visit
him”. He agreed and after the Prayers of Isha came to the presence of
Ibn Zubayr and said, “I shall swear fealty at your hands upon three
conditions:

(1) You shall not do anything which is not in consent to me,

(2) You shall consider me as the leading one in your kingdom, and

(3) When you revolt, you shall present me with the best of your tasks”.

Ibn Zubayr said, “You shall have to pledge allegiance in matter of the
orders of Qur’an and Sunnah”. Mukhtar replied, “Then you may take pledge
from the most degraded of my slaves. By Allah! I shall not pledge
allegiance at your hands except upon these conditions”. Ibn Zubayr
yielded and Mukhtar pledged allegiance at his hands and remained with
him.

He fought along with Ibn Zubayr against Haseen bin Nameer and passed the
best test and fought manly and was most severe upon the Syrians than all
others. Then when Yazid died and the people of Iraq submitted to Ibn
Zubayr, Mukhtar remained with him for five months but Ibn Zubayr did not
present him any vital tasks. Then whenever any Kufan would come to
Makkah, Mukhtar would inquire from him about the Kufans.

Hani bin Habbuh Wada’ee told him that, “The Kufans have mutually
submitted to the command of Ibn Zubayr, but there exists a group of men
from among the Kufans, that if someone commands them and gathers them
upon their desires, he shall succeed to conquer Iraq for a considerable
time due to them”.

Mukhtar replied, “I am Abu Ishaq! I am the one who shall prepare them
upon the truth and shall throw the faulty upon the ground at their hands
and kill every oppressive mine”. Saying this he immediately mounted his
camel and reached Kufa. He entered the town of Heerah and on Friday
performed bath and wore a dress and passed by the Mosque of Sakoon and
the ground of Kindah. And from whichever group he passed by, he saluted
them and said, “Have glad-tidings of victory and success. The one whom
you desired has arrived”. Then he met Ubaydah bin ‘Amr Badee in Bani
Bada’, who was from the clan of Bani Kindah, and saluted him, and said,
“I give you glad-tidings of victory and salvation. You are Abu ‘Amr and
are of a best belief. May Allah forgive your sins due to this belief of
yours’ and conceal your evils”.

Ubaydah was more valorous and knowledgeable among men and (one of) the
most staunch adherents of Imam Ali (a.s.), but could not refrain himself
from consuming wine. He replied, “May Allah give you glad-tidings of
fairness! Then would you interpret regarding this glad tidings for me?”
Mukhtar replied, “Yes, meet me tonight”. Then Mukhtar proceeded further
and met Isma’eel bin Kaseer in Bani Hind and said, “Come to me tonight
along with your brother, I have good news for you”.

Then he went to the people of Bani Hamadan and said, “I have brought for
you that which would delight you”. Then he entered the mosque and people
became conscious of him. He sat down for Prayers under a pillar until
the Prayers started. He recited the Friday Prayers along with the men
and remained engrossed in Prayers until the Prayer of Asr. He returned
back to his house and the Shi’ah started visiting him, and Isma’eel bin
Kaseer, accompanied by his brother and Ubaydah bin ‘Amr visited him. He
inquired of them and they informed him about the movement of Sulayman
bin Surad and said, “He is one of the men of the pulpit”.

Mukhtar, after praising Allah, said, “Mahdi, the son of the Successor
(of Prophet) (referring to Muhammad bin Hanafiyah), has sent me to you
so as to be (his) trustworthy (authority), deputy, master and commander.
He has ordered me to kill the renegades and seek revenge for the blood
of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and aid the weak. You are the first ones among the
creatures of Allah to yield”.

They offered their hands to him and pledged allegiance. A similar
proposal was sent to the Shi’ah who were with Sulayman bin Surad and
informed them that, “Sulayman has no expertise with regards to battle
and is inexperienced. He desires to induce you to rebel and forwards you
towards death along with himself. While I shall undertake with schemes
and shall act according to the order of light (guidance) which has been
bestowed upon me. I shall help the friends and kill the enemies thereby
pleasing your hearts. Then listen to my words, take heed and scatter”.

He assembled a group of Shi’ah around him through such propaganda and
they started visiting him. They accepted him as a notable, while the
noblemen among the Shi’ah rallied around Sulayman and they would
consider none equal to him, while he was more of a burden for Mukhtar
than anyone else and he awaited the conclusion of Sulayman’s mission.

When Sulayman left for (northwest) Mesopotamia, Umar bin Sa’ad, Shabas
bin Rab’ee and Zaid bin Hars bin Ruwaym came to Abdullah bin Yazid
Hatami, the governor of Kufa, and his associate Ibraheem bin Muhammad
bin Talha, and said, “Mukhtar is more dangerous for you than Sulayman,
he (Sulayman) has left to fight your enemies but Mukhtar desires to
fight you in this very town. You may therefore arrest him and imprison
him until the affairs of men are set right”. They came to him unawares
and surrounded him. When Mukhtar saw them, he asked, “What do you
desire? By Allah! You shall never face victory”.

Ibraheem bin Talha bin Ubaydullah told Abdullah (bin Yazid), “Bound his
shoulders tightly and arrest him bare feet”. Abdullah replied, “I shall
not do so to a person who has not yet disclosed his animosity towards
us. While we have arrested him due to suspicion only”. Then Ibraheem
turned towards Mukhtar and said, “There is no nest for you here so that
you may spread your wings and feathers. O son of Abu Ubayd! What news
has reached me regarding you?” Mukhtar replied, “You have been informed
falsely. I seek refuge from Allah from deceit similar to the deceit
committed by your father and grandfather”.

Then he was taken to the prison without chains, while some say that he
was bound in chains. Mukhtar said in the prison, “By the Lord of the
seas ! By the palm-trees, trees, deserts, wilderness, the virtuous
Angels, the righteous chosen ones! I shall kill every obstinate with my
sharp edged sword along with a group of friends that would not be
similar to the Razalan, the deceivers and ill natured, until I
strengthen the pillar of the Religion and end the differences of the
Muslims and please the hearts of the believers and seek revenge for the
blood of the Prophets. The decline of this world is not hard upon me nor
do I safeguard against death”.

It has also been related regarding the revolt of Mukhtar in Kufa and
it’s causes, apart from the one quoted above, that Mukhtar told Abdullah
bin Zubayr that, “I know a group of men, that if there exists a man who
is intelligent, prudent, experienced and shrewd, who would control them
suitably and gather an army from among them for you, so that you may
combat the Syrians along with them”.

Ibn Zubayr asked as to who they were and Mukhtar replied, “The Shi’ah of
Ali in Kufa”. Ibn Zubayr said, “Then the concerned person should be
yourself”. Saying this he dispatched him to Kufa and he took residence
in a street and wept upon Imam Husayn (a.s.) and remembered his sorrows
until people gradually started gathering around him. They took him to
their base in Kufa and a large group rallied around him and when he
gained momentum, he attacked Ibn Muti’.

The departure of the Tawwabeen and their Martyrdom
--------------------------------------------------

In the year 65 A.H. when Sulayman bin Surad Khuza’i intended revolting,
he called for the chiefs among his associates and they rallied around
him. When the moon of the month of Rabi’ul Ula was sighted, and as per
their promise to revolt, they gathered at Nukhaylah. Sulayman arrived
and when he paraded among them he found them to be quite less in
numbers. He dispatched Hakeem bin Munqiz Kindi and Waleed bin Usayr
Kinani to Kufa and they called out, “O seekers of revenge for the blood
of Husayn”, while he was the first one to have raised this slogan.

When it dawned, only those men remained with him, who were with him
since earlier, and when Sulayman saw the record, he found that sixteen
thousand men had pledged their allegiance to him. He said, “Glory be to
Allah! Out of sixteen thousand men only four thousand have remained
loyal to us”. Someone told him, “Mukhtar has hindered them in between,
while two thousand men have joined him”. Sulayman replied, “That leaves
another ten thousand, then do not they possess faith? Do not they
remember Allah? Nor do they consider the pledge and covenant?”

They halted at Nukhaylah for three days and then dispatched someone to
those who had disputed with them, and a thousand other men joined them.
Musayyab bin Najabah arose and said, “May Allah’s Mercy be upon you!
Lazy men are useless for you, and shall not fight alongside you, then we
should arise with those who possess faith. Then do not await anyone and
assume your task”. Sulayman replied, “Verily yes! You have advised
wisely”, saying this Sulayman stood amidst his men and said, “Those who
have come while their aim in (serving) Allah’s way and the hereafter, is
from us, and we too are from him.

And Allah’s mercy be upon him whether they be alive or dead. And those
who have come to us with the intention of this world should know, that
we shall not lay our hands upon the spoils nor shall we obtain taxes,
except the pleasure of Allah. We do not possess gold, silver or other
goods, except swords and ammunitions. Then those who desire this world
should not accompany us”.

His associates called out from all sides, “We are not of those who crave
for this world, nor have we come to you in it’s pursue. We have joined
you so as to repent and revenge the blood of the grandson of the Prophet
of Allah (S)”. When they resolved to arise, Abdullah bin Sa’ad bin
Nufayl arose and said, “I have a suggestion, if it is fair, consider it
as a grace from Allah, and if not, then deem it to be from me. We have
come here to avenge the blood of Imam Husayn (a.s.), while all of his
murderers viz. Umar bin Sa’ad and the chiefs of the four districts of
Kufa and of the tribes, are very much in Kufa. We are leaving their
blood unshed here and are heading where?”

Hearing this all his associates agreed to his view, but Sulayman said,
“I do not share this view. For the one who in fact killed him and
gathered an army for him while saying: I shall not give you refuge until
you submit to my command, the lewd and son of a lewd is none other than
Ubaydullah bin Ziyad. Then proceed towards him with Allah’s affluence,
then if Allah bestows victory upon us, we believe that defeating others
would be all the more easy. And we believe that all the Kufans will side
with us, and will put to sword all those who are included in the blood
of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and shall not commit deceit. And if you are
killed, you will have fought those men whose blood was considered lawful
for you to shed, while goodness is reserved for the virtuous near Allah.
And it will not please me that you strive except against those whose
blood is lawful for you to shed. Then if you fight against the men of
your own city, all of you shall be entangled in (shedding the blood of)
men among your brothers or fathers or relatives or desirous of killing
them. Then desire goodness from Allah and proceed further”.

News reached Abdullah bin Yazid and Ibraheem bin Muhammad bin Talha that
Ibn Surad has revolted, they came to him along with a group of the
notables of Kufa, while those who had accompanied in shedding the blood
of Imam Husayn (a.s.) did not join him, rather they hid themselves in
fear.

While during those days Umar bin Sa’ad had taken shelter in the Royal
Palace. Abdullah bin Yazid told him, “Muslims are brothers of one
another, and should not commit treason and deceit with each other. You
are our brothers and inhabitants of the same city, while you are more
endeared to us than all the other citizens. Then do not aggrieve us due
to you nor lessen our quantity. You may therefore pause until we too
prepare ourselves, and when our enemy comes to us, we should face him
hand in hand”. He also offered them the taxes of the village of Jawkhee
(a Village in Wasit). Ibraheem bin Muhammad too agreed to his proposal.
Sulayman replied, “You have fulfilled your right of counseling and have
opined best what you desired. But we have offered ourselves to Allah and
we desire from Allah that He should bring forth fairness for us. Now we
should proceed”.

Abdullah said, “Then wait until we gather a huge army for you and you
should face your enemy with an enormous contingent”. They had received
news that Ubaydullah was coming from Syria with a huge contingent of
army. But Sulayman refused to delay any further and arose on Friday, the
fifth of the month of Rabi’us Saani 65 A.H. They reached Deere A’awar
and a large group among his companions remained behind and he said, “I
do not befriend that they stayed behind, but if they had accompanied us,
they would have acted miserly. Allah despised their motives and kept
them away from assisting us. And Allah chose you for this merit”.

They proceeded until they reached the grave of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
all of them lamented in a loud voice and wept bitterly. They requested
Allah to bestow His blessings upon him and repented for remaining aloof
from assisting him and fighting alongside him. They remained there for
one night and day and mourned him, while sending Allah’s blessings upon
him and his companions.

While their words near his grave were: “O Lord! Bestow Your blessings
upon Husayn, the Martyr and son of the Martyr! The guided one and the
son of the guided one! The Truthful one and son of the Truthful one! O
Lord! Bear witness that we are steadfast upon their Religion and their
customs, and we bear enmity with their murderers and are friendly
towards their friends. O Lord! We abandoned the grandson of our Prophet,
thus forgive our past sins, and accept our repentance. And bestow Your
blessings upon Husayn (a.s.) and his companions, who are the Martyrs and
Truthful Ones. And we hold You as a witness that we are steadfast upon
their Religion and upon that belief for which they were martyred. And if
You do not overlook our sins and do not bestow your blessings upon us,
we shall be of those who are in loss”.

They looked at his grave and their rage increased. Then they bade
farewell to his grave and left and they (had) gathered around it (his
grave) similar to (the people that gather around) the Hajar al Aswad,
then they left until they reached Anbar.

When they reached Anbar, they received message from Abdullah bin Yazid,
the governor of Kufa, with the following contents: “O our people! Do not
renounce your friends and do not comply with the orders of your enemies.
You all are the virtuous ones among your city, and when the enemies lay
their hands upon you, remember that you are the notables of the city and
do not fall prey to greed. O our people! Then if they lay their hands
upon you, they shall either stone you to death or try to revert you back
to their faith, and you shall not find salvation (if you do so). O our
people! Your hands and our hands are one and the same, while also our
enemies. Then if we unite against our enemies, we shall face victory,
and if we are entangled in differences, our pride would be diminished. O
people! Do not consider my advice to be a result of covetousness and do
not go against my decision, then when my letter is read to you, return
back. And salutations”.

Then Sulayman and his companions said, “This was offered to us even when
we were in our own city, and now when we have dedicated our hearts
towards the struggle, and have neared the battlefield of the enemies,
this opinion is not dear to us”.

Then Sulayman wrote a reply to him, he thanked and praised him and
wrote, “These sagacious men have sold themselves to their Lord and have
repented upon their great sin. They have turned their face towards Allah
and rely upon Him alone, and they agree to what Allah has destined for
them”. When this answer reached Abdullah, he said, “This group has
dedicated itself to death. The first news that shall reach you will be
none other than the news of their death. By Allah! They shall offer
their lives with greatness and piety”.

Then they proceeded until they reached Qarqisiyah well prepared, while
Zafar bin Qays Kalabi had bolted the doors (of the city) and did not
come to meet them. Musayyab bin Najabah was sent to him to request him
that he should sell them foodstuffs and provisions. Musayyab reached the
doors of Qarqisiyah and revealed his identity and then desired
permission to meet Zafar. Hazeel, the son of Zafar, came to his father
and said, “A man possessing a pleasing countenance revealing his name to
be Musayyab bin Najabah seeks permission to meet you”. Zafar replied, “O
my son! Do you not know who this man is? He is the sole horseman of the
entire tribe of Muzar Hamra’.

And if ten notables among them are counted, then he is one of them. He
is virtuous, abstentious and a devout man”, then he gave him permission
to enter therein. When Musayyab came to him, he offered a seat near him
and inquired from him. Musayyab revealed to him the circumstances and
their intentions.

Zafar replied, “We closed the doors upon you for we did not know as to
why you came to us, whether for ourselves or something else. We are
neither helpless nor do we befriend fighting you. We have received news
that you are peace loving and well-behaved men”. Then he commanded his
son to organize a market for them in the city and gifted Musayyab with a
thousand Dirham and horses. Musayyab returned the amount but accepted
the horses saying, “I believe that my horse has turned feeble upon his
feet and therefore I am in need of another”.

Zafar sent large quantity of bread, fodder and flour for them, thus they
did not have the need to buy anything more. Only some of them bought
whips and clothes and then they received orders to proceed the next day.
Zafar himself came out to bid farewell to them and gave the news to
Sulayman that, “Five commanders viz. Haseen bin Nameer, Sharhabeel bin
Zil Kila’, Adham bin Muhriz, Jabalah bin Abdullah Khas’ami and
Ubaydullah bin Ziyad are entering Iraq from Riqqah. While they have a
large contingent of army similar to the thorns and trees of the desert.
Then if you desire, you may remain in our city and we shall side with
you, and when the enemy reaches us we shall face them together”.
Sulayman replied, “The people of our city too desired similarly but we
refused”.

Zafar said, “Then hasten towards Aynul Wardah before them, where there
is a stream. Then turn your back towards the city and spend from the
villages, water and foodstuffs and remain composed from our side. By
Allah! I have not seen a group more dearer than you and desire that you
may reach there before them. Then if you have to fight along with them,
do not fight them in an extensive place, for it will result that they
will shoot their arrows & lances at you and vise versa, for they are
more in numbers than you, and I fear lest their surround you. Do not
stand facing them, for they shall throw you upon the ground, nor form
ranks facing them, for you do not have foot soldiers, while they have
both foot-soldiers as well as cavalry who would assist one another. Then
you should divide yourselves into groups and sections, and then you
should together lay siege upon their right and left wings and one group
should have another group accompanying them. Then if one of the groups
gets surrounded, the other should assist them and grant relief. Then
both of these groups should help one another and go up and come down.
But if you face them standing in ranks, the foot-soldiers shall attack
you and when you try to help your ranks, it will break up and result in
your defeat”.

Then they bade farewell, prayed for one another and praised him and
proceeded further until they reached Aynul Wardah. They encamped at its
western side and rested there for five days. And when the Syrian army
reached just one station away from Aynul Warda, Sulayman arose and
enjoined his companions regarding the Hereafter and encouraged them in
similar words and said, “Now then! The enemy whom you pursued day and
night has ultimately reached you. You should fight them fairly when you
encounter them and remain steadfast, for Allah sides those who forbear.
None of you should flee from the battlefield except in conformity with
the schedules of the battle or to return to one’s headquarters. Do not
kill those who flee, nor behead the wounded ones, and do not put to
sword the captured Muslims except when they fight you even after
detention. The attitude of Imam Ali (a.s.) was similar to those who
revolted against Islam”.

Then he continued, “If I am killed, Musayyab bin Najabah shall be your
commander, and if he too is killed, Abdullah bin Sa’ad bin Nufayl shall
command you. He shall be succeeded by Abdullah bin Waal, and if he too
is killed, Rufa’ah bin Shaddad shall be your commander. May Allah bestow
His Mercy upon the one who remains steadfast upon his pledge with
Allah”.

Then he dispatched Musayyab with four hundred horsemen and commanded him
to instantaneously attack the forefront of the Syrian army, then if they
succeed in their intentions, he should repeat the attack, or else they
should return back. He said, “You should neither leave behind any of
your companions nor dispatch anyone forward, except when there is no
other way”.

Musayyab traveled one night and day until it dawned, thereafter he
dispatched a group of patrolmen around to bring someone to him. They
brought a nomad to him and he inquired from him regarding the near-most
group of the enemy’s army. He replied, “The nearest to you is the army
of Sharhabeel bin Zil Kila’, at a distance of one mile away from you.
But he differs with Haseen (bin Nameer), who considers himself to be the
commander while Sharhabeel does not accept him, and both of them await
the orders of Ibn Ziyad”.

Musayyab hastened with his companions until he caught the Syrian army
unawares and assaulted them. They scattered around while Musayyab and
his companions killed some and wounded numerous while seizing their
mounts. The Syrian army evacuated their camps and scattered around,
while the companions of Musayyab gathered whatever spoils they could lay
their hands upon and returned to Sulayman with a large booty.

When Ibn Ziyad was informed about this, he dispatched Haseen bin Nameer
with an army of twelve thousand men to face Sulayman. The companions of
Sulayman faced them, when four days of the month of Rabi’ ul Ula were
left. Abdullah bin Sa’ad commanded the right wing, Musayyab bin Najabah
the left wing, while Sulayman positioned himself in the center of the
army. Haseen deputed Jumalah bin Abdullah to command the right wing and
Rabi’ bin Makhariq Ghanawee upon the left wing.

Then when they neared one another, the Syrians invited them to submit to
Abdul Malik bin Marwan. The companions of Sulayman replied that they
should depose Abdul Malik and hand over Ubaydullah bin Ziyad to them,
and in exchange they would expel the companions of Ibn Zubayr from Iraq,
and also that they should hand over the Caliphate to the Progeny of
Prophet Muhammad (S).

They refused to concede to each other’s proposals while the right wing
of Sulayman’s army attacked the left wing of Haseen and their left wing
attacked the right wing of Haseen’s army. Sulayman himself started a
general attack from the center of the army, while the Syrians scattered
away from their camps until night, while victory was at the hands of the
companions of Sulayman.

Both the armies retired for the night and when it dawned, (Sharhabeel)
the son of Zil Kila’ was dispatched by Ibn Ziyad to assist the Syrians
with an army of eight thousand vigorous men. The companions of Sulayman
faced them valorously, the similitude of which was never seen before,
and when the night came they lifted their hands off each other.

The wounded ones were numerous in both camps, while Sulayman appointed
preachers to exhort his companions to repeat the attack (the next day).
When it dawned, Adham bin Mahraz Bahili was dispatched by Ibn Ziyad to
assist the Syrians with an army of ten thousand vigorous men. They
fought fiercely until Zuhr on Friday, while the Syrians exceeded them
and surrounded them from all sides.

When Sulayman perceived the plight of his companions, he prepared for
martyrdom. He dismounted from his horse and called out, “O slaves of
Allah! Whoever desires meeting his Lord shortly and desires that his
sins should be forgiven, should come to me”. He broke his sheath, while
his companions imitated him and broke their sheaths too and fought with
them on foot until they had killed and wounded numerous ones from among
them.

When Haseen observed their forbearance and valor, he commanded the foot
soldiers to advance towards them and shoot arrows at them. The cavalry,
along with the foot soldiers, surrounded them and Sulayman was martyred
(May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him). Yazid bin Haseen shot an
arrow at him and he fell down, then he leapt from his place and again
fell down.

Then when Sulayman was martyred, Musayyab bin Najabah lifted the
standard and sent blessings (of Allah) upon Sulayman. He proceeded
further and fought awhile then returned back. He repeated his attack
until he too was martyred, while having put to sword numerous others
(May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Thereafter, Abdullah bin Sa’ad bin Nufayl lifted the standard while
sending blessings upon them both and recited the following verse of the
Qur’an:

*“Of the believers are the men who are true to what they covenanted with
Allah, of them is he who fulfilled his vow and of them is he who awaits
(its fulfillment), and they have changed not in the least” (Surah al
Ahzab, 33:23).*

His friends from the clan of Azd surrounded him (to shield him) and in
the heat of the battle three riders arrived with glad-tidings that Sa’ad
bin Huzayfah was arriving to assist them with one hundred and seventy
men from Madaen, while Musanna bin Makhraba Abadi too was arriving with
three hundred men from Basra. Abdullah bin Sa’ad said, “I wish they
reach us until we are alive”. And when the sight of the messengers of
Madaen fell upon the corpses of their brothers, they were dejected and
then retrieved and fought alongside them until Abdullah bin Sa’ad bin
Nufayl fell a martyr (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

He was killed by the nephew of Rabi’ah bin Makhariq. His brother Khalid
bin Sa’ad attacked the killer of his brother and entered his sword into
him and he fell in embrace of Khalid. His companions rescued him while
attacking Khalid and killing him.

The standard now lay without any bearer, while people called for
Abdullah bin Waal, who was engrossed in fighting fiercely with a group
surrounded by the Syrians. Seeing this, Rufa’ah bin Shaddad lay siege
and scattered the Syrians and rescued him from their midst while handing
him the standard. Abdullah fought for a while and then told his
companions, “Whoever desires a life after which there is no death, and
whoever wishes for repose following which there is no grief, and desires
bliss succeeding which there is no sorrow, should strive for proximity
to Allah by fighting against them, who have made lawful the prohibitions
of Allah. At night you shall be in Paradise”.

It was the time of Asr when he was fighting fiercely with his companions
and he put to sword numerous Syrians and forced them back. Then the
Syrians came to them from all sides and pushed them back to their
barracks where they could not attack them except from one side. At night
Adham bin Mahraz Bahili was appointed to fight them, and he attacked
along with the cavalry and foot-soldiers until he reached Ibn Waal, who
was reciting the following verse,

*“Think not of those who were slain in the cause of Allah as dead. Nay,
they are alive, finding their sustenance with their Lord (Surah
ale-Imran, 3:169)”.*

Hearing this Adham was enraged and attacked him while severing his arm
from his body. Then he retreated back and said, “I presume you might
wish you had remained at home”. Ibn Waal replied, “You have given way to
suspicion in your heart. In fact I do not cherish that your hand should
have been severed instead of mine. Rather I befriend that the reward
would be given to me for the hand severed in the way of Allah, and that
your sin may multiply as also my reward”.

He was again enraged by this answer and attacked him and killed him with
his lance while he was facing the enemy and was not moving an inch
behind (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him). While Abdullah bin
Waal was a Virtuous Jurist (Faqih).

And when Abdullah was martyred, the standard was handed over to Rufa’ah
bin Shaddad, and he said, “We should retreat back, perhaps Allah may
gather us on a worst day for our enemies to be entangled into”.

Abdullah Ahmar said, “But if we return back we shall all be killed,
while the enemies will be upon our shoulders and we shall not reach a
distance of one Farsakh, except that each one of us shall be killed. And
even if anyone is saved, the nomads will get hold of him and will hand
him over to the enemy to again proximity, then we shall be killed with
bounded hands. The sun is just about to set, we shall resist them and in
the darkness of the night we shall gallop our horses and leave before
morning and obtain respite. Then each one should ride along with his
companion and the wounded ones and we should know where we are going”.

Rufa’ah replied, “You have advised fairly”, saying this he lifted up the
standard and fought fiercely. The Syrians had assumed that they would
get rid of them until the night, but could not do so for they fought
bravely and in a valorous manner.

Abdullah bin Aziz Kinani proceeded further and fought with the Syrians,
then he called for the (people of the) Syrian tribe of Bani Kinanah to
himself. He handed over his child Muhammad to them so that they could
reach him safely to Kufa. They offered him protection but he refused,
and returned back and fought until he fell a martyr. Thereafter Kurb bin
Yazid Humayri fought fiercely with the Syrians at evening along with a
hundred of his companions and Zil Kila Humayri took him and his
companions in his protection while offering them immunity.

He replied, “We were at peace in this world, rather we came out for
immunity of the hereafter”, saying this they fought with them until they
were martyred. Thereafter Sakhr bin Hilal Mazani, accompanied by thirty
men of the clan of Bani Mazinah, proceeded forward and fought until they
too were martyred. (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon all of
them). At night the Syrians returned back to their camps and Rufa’ah
assessed his companions that their horses had either been killed or were
wounded, he handed them over to their relatives and collected provisions
at night and fled away.

When it dawned Haseen followed them but found none nor did he dispatch
anyone in their pursuit. They proceeded until they reached Qarqisiyah
where Zafar (bin Qays) requested that they should halt there. He kept
them as his guests for three days and gave them provisions for the
journey and they left for Kufa.

Sa’ad bin Huzayfah reached Hayyat with a group of people of Madaen,
where he received the news and therefore returned back. He reached
Sandoodah where he met Musanna bin Makhrabah Abadi and informed him too,
they remained there until Rufa’ah reached them. They received him and
wept and halted there for a day and night, thereafter each group left
for their cities.

When Rufa’ah reached Kufa, Mukhtar was in the prison from where he sent
him a message saying, “Now then! Bravo to the returning men who have
been offered a great reward by Allah! And Allah cherished their tasks
that they were martyred. By the Lord of the Ka’bah! For every pace that
you have taken and every hillock that you have stepped upon, its reward
is greater than this world. Sulayman fulfilled his pledge and Allah
received his spirit and offered a status among the Spirits of the
Prophets, the Truthful Ones and the Martyrs, but he was not a leader in
your victory. Verily I am the appointed commander and the reliable
trustee, the killer of the tyrants, the one to seek vengeance from the
enemies of the Religion and the seeker of revenge of blood. Therefore
prepare yourselves and gather arms and ammunitions and receive glad
tidings upon the book of Allah and the Customs (Sunnah) of His Prophet
(S) and revenge for (the blood of) Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) to defend the
feeble and strive against the ones who have considered the prohibitions
of Allah to be lawful. And greetings”.

The martyrdom of Sulayman and his companions occurred in the month of
Rabi’ul Ula. When Abdul Malik bin Marwan received news of the martyrdom
of Sulayman and the plight of his companions, he ascended the pulpit and
praised and glorified Allah and said, “Sulayman bin Surad, one of the
chiefs of Iraq, the creator of revolt and the leader of misguidance has
been killed, and the swords rolled the head of Musayyab upon the ground
like a ball. While their two chiefs of astray and deception, Abdullah
bin Sa’ad Azdi and Abdullah bin Waal Bakari, too have been killed, and
after them none remains among the transgressors”. But the accuracy of
this narration is doubtful for during that period his father Marwan was
yet alive (therefore he could not have succeeded his father).

Movement of Mukhtar in Kufa
---------------------------

In this year, i.e. 66 A.H. 14th Rabi’ ul Ula, Mukhtar revolted in Kufa
and ousted Abdullah bin Muti’, the governor of Abdullah bin Zubayr from
there. It started when Sulayman bin Surad was martyred and his
companions returned back to Kufa, they saw that Mukhtar was imprisoned
by Abdullah bin Yazid Hatami and Ibraheem bin Muhammad bin Talha.
Mukhtar sent them a letter from the prison in which he praised them and
promised them success, and he announced to them that he was deputed by
Muhammad bin Ali, renowned as Ibn Hanafiyah, to seek vengeance (for the
blood of Imam Husayn). His letter was read by Rufa’ah bin Shaddad,
Musannah bin Makhrabah Abadi, Sa’ad bin Huzayfah bin Yaman, Yazid bin
Anas, Ahmad bin Shamit Ahmari, Abdullah bin Shaddad Bajali and Abdullah
bin Kamil.

After having read the letter they sent Ibn Kamil to Mukhtar with the
message that, “We are your well-wishers, and if you desire we shall lay
siege and rescue you from the prison”. When Mukhtar heard this he was
overjoyed and said, “I shall be released from the prison in a few days”.
Mukhtar had sent message to (Abdullah) Ibn Umar that, “I have been
imprisoned innocently”, and he had desired that Ibn Umar should plead on
his behalf to Abdullah bin Yazid and Ibraheem bin Muhammad bin Talha.

He in turn wrote a recommendation letter to them and they relented and
released him. But they took surety from him and an oath that until they
held the reins of the government of Kufa, he should not pave way for
their captivity or revolt against them. And that if he does so, he shall
be compelled to sacrifice a thousand Camels near the Kab’ah and that all
his slaves, males and females, shall be emancipated.

And when Mukhtar was released, he remained at his house and with
whomever he met, he said, “May Allah kill them! What foolish men they
are that they believe that I shall honor the promise that I have given
them. And as regards the promise, I always look at the task that is
better than it, and then give compensation for it and thus I become free
of the promise. While my stand against them is better than remaining
aloof from them. As regards the sacrifice of Camels and emancipation of
slaves, it is more easier for me than spitting, I befriend that if I
reach my goal, I shall have no desire for slaves”.

Thereafter the Shi’ah visited him often and started liking him in
conformity to one another, while his companions started increasing day
by day and gained strength until Ibn Zubayr suspended Abdullah bin Yazid
and Ibraheem bin Muhammad bin Talha and appointed Abdullah bin Muti’ as
the governor of Kufa. Then when Ibraheem decided to go to Kufa, Bahir
bin Rustam Humayri met him and said, “Do not leave tonight, for the moon
is in the Aries”.

He replied, “We too are proceeding”, while he would proceed towards any
danger that he desired (without fear). And it is as if his speech
enamored him, while he was a valorous man. Ibraheem returned to Madinah
while having a large amount of taxes with him, but he said that the
situation was very bad and no taxes could be collected, while Ibn Zubayr
did not press him further.

Ibn Muti’ entered Kufa, while five days of the month of Ramadhan were
left, and appointed Ayas bin Abi Mazarib Ajali as chief of the police
force and commanded him to treat the people pleasantly and arrest the
suspicious ones.

When he reached Kufa, he ascended the pulpit and recited a sermon
saying, “Now then! The Commander of the faithful (he meant Abdullah Ibn
Zubayr, Allah’s refuge) has deputed me upon your city and your
boundaries. And he has ordered me to collect the taxes from you and not
to take anything outside of the city from your taxes without your
permission. And to treat you in conformity to the last will of Umar, as
also the custom of Usman bin Affan. Therefore fear Allah, and remain
steadfast upon the right, do not cultivate disobedience, while slash the
hands of the foolish among you. And if you do not do so, then condemn
yourself for it. By Allah! I shall punish severely every evil-hearted
disobeyer and shall straighten the back of every perverse and ignoble
suspect”.

Hearing this Sa’eb bin Malik Ash’ari arose and said, “As regards the
booty, we declare that we disagree that a large part of it should be
taken out, rather it should be distributed amongst ourselves. And we do
not want you to treat us in conformity to the attitude of anyone else
except Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.) that still remains amongst us in our
city. While we do not have any need for the attitude of Usman, neither
in the matter of booty nor regarding our own selves, as also of Umar bin
Khattab, whereas his attitude was little soft as compared to that of
Usman for sometimes he treated people with virtue”. Yazid bin Anas
replied, “Sa’eb speaks the truth”.

Then Ibn Muti’ said, “I shall deal with you in conformity to the
attitude of whomsoever you desire”, saying this he alighted the pulpit.
Ayas came to him and said, “This Sa’eb bin Malik is from among the
commanders of Mukhtar, then dispatch him to fetch Mukhtar, and when he
comes, imprison him, until the people’s affairs get straightened. His
provisions have been gathered and as if he desires to revolt”. Ibn Muti’
dispatched Za’edah bin Qudamah and Haseen bin Abdullah Barsami to fetch
Mukhtar. They told him, “Hasten to the call of the commander”. Mukhtar
prepared to go, when Zaedah recited the verse of the Qur’an:

*“And when planned they against you, those who disbelieved, that they
might imprison you, or slay you or drive you away (Surah al-Anfal,
8:30).***”**

Hearing this, Mukhtar threw away his clothes and said, “Wrap me with a
gown for fever has taken hold of me and I sense severe trembling within
me”. They returned back and informed Ibn Muti’ who then lifted his hands
off him.

Thereafter Mukhtar sent someone to fetch his companions and made them
reside in the adjoining houses, while he intended rising up in the city
of Kufa in the month of Muharram. A man from the clan of Shibam, a
branch of (the clan of) Hamadan, named Abdul Rahman bin Shurayh, who was
modest, came and met Sa’eed bin Munqiz Sawri, Sa’ar bin Abi Sa’ar
Hanafi, Aswad bin Jarar Kindi and Qudamah bin Malik Jashmi, and said,
“Mukhtar intends to drag us to revolt while we are not sure whether
Muhammad bin Hanafiyah has sent him or no? Come, let us go to him and
apprise him regarding Mukhtar, then if he directs us, we shall obey him
and be his associates, and if he refuses, we shall get away from him. By
Allah! It should not be that we should let go our Religion for this
world”.

They agreed and went to Ibn Hanafiyah who inquired from them regarding
the affairs of men. They gave him the details and related to him their
stand as also that of Mukhtar, and asked his permission to obey him.
Then when they concluded their speech, Ibn Hanafiyah, while answering
them, after praising and glorifying Allah and relating the merit of
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and remembering the sufferings of the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s.), said, “Regarding whom you have inquired that he
invites you to avenge our blood, by Allah! I desire that Allah may take
revenge from your enemies at the hands of anyone”.

And if he had been displeased with Mukhtar he would have commanded them
not to obey him. They returned back, while a group of the Shi’ah were
awaiting them so as to know their intentions, while their recourse
towards Muhammad bin Hanafiyah was displeasing to Mukhtar, who feared
lest they would bring a message that would disperse the Shi’ah from him.
Therefore when they entered Kufa, before going to their houses, they
went to Mukhtar who asked them, “What happened that you fell in doubt
and sedition?”

They replied, “We have been ordered to assist you”, and Mukhtar said,
“Allah is Great! Then summon the Shi’ah to me”. They called for those
who were within their reach and Mukhtar said, “A group desired that they
should verify the validity of my claim and therefore went to Imam Mahdi
(Muhammad Hanafiyah) and asked him regarding me. He replied to them that
I am his vizier, assistant and envoy, and he has ordered you to obey and
assist me with regards to my invitation of revolting against the
enemies, and seek revenge for the blood of the Progeny (a.s.) of the
Chosen Prophet (S)”.

Abdul Rahman bin Shurayh arose and gave them details of his journey and
announced that Ibn Hanafiyah had ordered them to assist and support him.
Then he said, “Those who are present should inform those who are absent,
then prepare yourselves and beware”. Thereafter those who had
accompanied him also arose and confirmed his words. The Shi’ah rallied
around Mukhtar while along with them was Sha’bi and his father Sharahil.
Then when they resolved to arise, one of his companions informed him
that, “The chiefs of Kufa have united with Ibn Muti’ to fight with you,
then if Ibraheem bin Malik (bin Ashtar) sides with us, we shall gain
victory upon the enemies. For he is well versed in politics, while his
father was honorable and from a (great) tribe, while his tribe is
honorable and well equipped with men”.

Mukhtar replied, “Then visit him and invite him”. Therefore a group,
along with Sha’bi, went to meet Ibraheem, and they apprised him of their
affairs and invited his assistance. They reminded him that his father
was from among the friends of Imam Ali (a.s.) and his Progeny (a.s.).

He replied, “I shall assist you in revenging the blood of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) with a condition that you shall make me your commander”. They
replied, “You are worthy to command, but presently this is not possible,
for Mukhtar has been sent and deputed for this task by the Mahdi
(referring to Muhammad bin Hanafiyah) to fight with the enemies, while
we have been commanded to obey him”. Hearing this Ibraheem became silent
and did not answer them while they returned back to Mukhtar and informed
him.

Mukhtar waited for three days and went to Ibraheem, accompanied with
more than ten of his companions, and Sha’bi and his father. He received
them fairly and made Mukhtar sit besides him. Then Mukhtar told him,
“This letter is from the Mahdi, Muhammad bin Ali the Commander of the
faithful (a.s.), who is among the best of men today upon the earth, and
is also the son of the best of men who have departed until he reaches
the Prophets of Allah and His Messengers. And he desires that you should
assist and support me”. Sha’bi says, that the letter was in my hand.
When Mukhtar ended his words, he said, “Hand him over the letter”.
Sha’bi handed him over the letter and he read it, the contents of which
were as follows:

*“From Muhammad al Mahdi to Ibraheem bin Malik Ashtar. Peace be upon
you! I send praise of Allah, besides Whom there is no other Deity, to
you. And now then! I am dispatching to you my vizier, a trustworthy man
and the one whom I have chosen to fight against my enemies, and have
commanded him to seek revenge for the blood of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.).
Therefore you, along with your tribe and those under your obedience,
should fight alongside him. Then if you obey us and accept our
invitation, you shall certainly hold a position near us, then you shall
have control upon each horsemen, the battalion, every city, pulpit and
border, from Kufa till Aqsa, the town of Syria, on which you gain
victory”.*

When Ibraheem completed reading the letter, he said, “Ibn Hanafiyah has
written to me earlier and had only written his name along with that of
his father (and not addressed himself as the Mahdi)”. Mukhtar replied,
“That was another time, while this is another time”. Ibraheem said, “Who
knows this letter is from him or no”. A group of the companions of
Mukhtar, comprising of Zayd (or Yazid) bin Anas, Ahmar bin Shamit,
Abdullah bin Kamil and others, except Sha’bi, arose to bear witness that
the letter was from him.

When Ibraheem heard their witnesses, he arose from his elevated bed and
sat Mukhtar in his place and pledged allegiance to him and they left.
Ibraheem turned towards Sha’bi and said, “You, as also your father, did
not bear witness along with this group, then do you consider them to be
liars?” He replied, “Rather they are the Master Scholars, Reciters of
the Qur’an, Chieftains of the city and the valorous among Arabs, those
similar to them do not speak except the truth”.

Then Ibraheem noted down their names and preserved it with himself and
invited his tribesmen and elders. Ibraheem started visiting Mukhtar
every night and revising the fulfillment of their plans. They resolved
to arise on Thursday night, the fourteenth of the month of Rabi’ ul Ula
66 A.H.

That night Ibraheem recited the Maghrib Prayers with his companions and
thereafter went towards Mukhtar equipped with arms. Ayas bin Mazarib
came to Abdullah bin Muti’ and said, “Mukhtar plans to fight you tonight
until tomorrow night, while I have dispatched my son to the ground of
Kinasah. Then if you dispatch a man from among your companions’ along
with well-equipped men to every ground of Kufa, Mukhtar and his
companions would fear to revolt against you”.

Therefore Ibn Muti’ sent the following with command upon the ground. He
dispatched Abdul Rahman bin Qays Hamadani to the ground of Sabi’ and
told him to gain control of his own clan but not to bring about any
incident. He dispatched Ka’ab bin Abi Ka’ab Khas’ami to the ground of
Bashar, Zahr bin Qays Ju’fi to Kinda, Abdul Rahman bin Abi Makhnaf to
Sa’ediyyin, Shimr bin Ziljawshan to Salim, and Yazid bin Ruwaym to
Murad. He commanded each one of them that the rebels should not cross
them to enter the city.

He dispatched Shabas bin Rab’ee to Sabkhah and told him, “Whenever you
hear any of their voices, go towards them”. It was on Monday when the
(army of the) empire occupied the grounds and on the night of Tuesday
Ibraheem desired to join Mukhtar.

He was informed that the grounds were filled with the army, while Ayas
bin Mazarib, along with the guards, had taken the streets and the Royal
Palace under his protection. Ibraheem was accompanied by a hundred men
who had worn armors below their shirts. His companions told him to take
a by-way but he said, “No, by Allah! Rather I shall pass from the center
of the road and from near the Royal Palace to instill fear into the
hearts of the enemies and announce that they are degraded and less in
our eyes”.

Ibraheem passed by Baab al Feel and circled the house of ‘Amr bin
Hurays. Ayas bin Mazarib, along with an army well-equipped with arms,
faced him and asked, “Who are you?” Ibraheem replied, “I am Ibraheem bin
Ashtar”, to which Ayas asked, “What is this group that you have brought
along with you, and what do you intend? I shall not lift my hands off
you until I take you to my commander”.

Ibraheem replied, “Get away from my way”, to which he replied, “I shall
not do so”. Abu Qatan Hamadani, who was one of the friends of Ibraheem,
was along with Ayas. Ibraheem called out to him, and he, presuming that
Ibraheem would request him to mediate on his behalf, went towards him.
When he neared him, Ibraheem snatched off his spear and pierced into the
neck of Ayas and threw him down, and commanded one of his companions to
get hold of his head. While the army of Ayas scattered and reached Ibn
Muti’. He deputed Rashid bin Ayas as the head of police in place of his
father and dispatched Suwayd bin Abdul Rahman Manqari to Kinasah in his
stead.

Meanwhile Ibraheem bin Ashtar reached Mukhtar and said, “We had decided
to lay siege tomorrow night, but due to certain circumstances we should
do so tonight”, and he informed him about the killing of Ayas. Mukhtar
was pleased by this news and said, “This is the first victory, Allah
willing”.

Then he told Sa’eed bin Manqaz, “Arise and set on fire dry sticks and
reeds and give signal”, and he told Abdullah bin Shaddad, “Arise and
announce: O defenders of the Nation”! Then he told Sufyan bin Layla and
Qudamah bin Malik, “Both of you raise the slogan of: O revengers of the
blood of Husayn”. Then he himself wore the dress of battle, and Ibraheem
said, “This army, that has gained control upon the grounds, shall not
let our companions reach us. It is better that I go to my tribe along
with my companions, and prepare those who obey us, and along with them I
should surround the districts of Kufa and raise the slogan. Then those
who desire to revolt would join us, while those who come to you should
be taken care of. And if they attack you, there should remain with you
such number of men who would defend you until I join you”. Mukhtar
replied, “Go and hasten, but lest you attack the commander and fight
them, then do not fight anyone except those who fight you”.

Ibraheem and his companions left and reached their tribe, and those who
accepted their call accompanied them. He entered them on the streets of
Kufa that very night and passed by the ground where the chiefs of Ibn
Muti’ had been stationed. There they met a group of cavalry of Zahr bin
Qays Ju’fi who had no commander. Ibraheem attacked them and pushed them
back until the road of Kinda, then said, “O Lord! You know that we have
come to rage for the sake of the Progeny of Your Prophet (S) and seek
revenge for their blood. Bestow victory for us upon them”.

Then he came back after leaving those who had fled and reached the
ground of Aseer. A group of men raised slogans and Ibraheem halted
there. Suddenly Suwayd bin Abdul Rahman Manqari, with a greed to earn
proximity to Ibn Muti’, galloped towards them, and when Ibraheem
received news that he had come; he called out, “O army of Allah! Come
forth, for you are more worthy of victory than these lewd men who are
submerged in the blood of the Progeny (a.s.) of your Prophet (S)”.

They proceeded further and attacked them until they pushed them into the
desert. They started climbing upon each other’s shoulders vilifying one
another; they chased them and entered them into the ground. The
companions of Ibraheem told him, “Some of us should follow them and
should gain benefit from the fear that has been instilled in their
hearts”.

Ibraheem replied, “No, rather we should reach Mukhtar and relieve his
heart, he should know that we are along with him and he should be
brave-hearted along with his companions. And because it is possible that
he must have been attacked till now”. Ibraheem reached the door of the
house of Mukhtar when he heard voices and perceived that battle was on.
Shabas bin Rab’ee had attacked them from the side of Sabkhah, while
Mukhtar had dispatched Yazid bin Anas to face him. Hajjar bin Abjar
Ajali too had laid siege, while he (Mukhtar) had dispatched Ahmar bin
Shamit to face him.

At that moment while fighting, Ibraheem came from the side of the Royal
Palace and Hajjar and his companions realized that Ibraheem had reached
them from their backs, therefore they immediately scattered unto the
streets. While Qays bin Tahfah Nahdi, one of the companions of Mukhtar,
along with a hundred men attacked Shabas bin Rabi’ who was fighting with
(Yazid bin) Anas and opened the way and reached Anas bin Yazid (or Yazid
bin Anas).

When Shabas saw this, he returned back to Ibn Muti’ and said, “You
should gather all the chiefs whom you have stationed on the grounds and
collect the army at one place and attack them, for they have attained
victory. While Mukhtar has prepared his task and has revolted”.

When Mukhtar was apprised of this, he came out of his house, and along
with a group of his companions, positioned himself in Sabkhah behind
Deere Hind. Abu Usman Nahdi came out and proclaimed: “O seekers of
revenge for the blood of Husayn! O defenders of the nation”, to the
tribe of Shakir who had gathered in their houses but had concealed
themselves due to fear of Ka’ab Khas’ami who had positioned himself
close to them and had blocked their way.

He then said, “O the guided tribe! The trustworthy and vizier of the
Progeny (a.s.) of Muhammad (S) has arisen, and has positioned himself
near Deere Hind. He has sent me so that I may invite you and give you
glad tidings, then come out, may Allah have mercy upon you”! They all
scattered out calling, “O seeker of revenge for Husayn”, and fought with
Ka’ab until they opened their way and reached Mukhtar and stationed
themselves alongside him. Abdullah bin Qatadah joined Mukhtar along with
two hundred men, Ka’ab attacked them, but when he realized that they
were from his own tribe, he opened their way. Shibam, a branch of the
tribe of Hamadan, too came out in the last part of the night. When this
news reached Abdul Rahman bin Sa’eed Hamadani, who was one of the
chiefs, he sent them message saying that, “If you intend assisting
Mukhtar, do not pass by the cemetery of Sabi’”.

They too joined Mukhtar, while three thousand and eight hundred men from
among the twelve thousand, who had pledged allegiance at his hands,
gathered around him until the dawn. He completed arranging them until
dawn and recited the morning Prayers along with his companions in
darkness.

Ibn Muti’ summoned the chiefs of all the grounds to the Mosque and
commanded Rashid to announce that, “Any one who does not come tonight to
the Mosque, his blood and wealth is lawful upon us”. Every one of them
gathered and Ibn Muti’ dispatched Shabas bin Rab’ee with an army of
three thousand men against Mukhtar, as also Rashid bin Ayas with four
thousand guards. Shabas proceeded towards Mukhtar, while Mukhtar
received the news of his arrival after the Morning Prayers and sent
someone to investigate.

Sa’ar bin Abi Sa’ar, who was one of the companions of Mukhtar, and could
not reach him until then joined him. He informed him that Rashid bin
Ayas had collided with him on the way. Mukhtar dispatched Ibraheem bin
Ashtar with five hundred or six hundred horsemen and five hundred
foot-soldiers to face Rashid, and he also sent Na’eem bin Hubayrah, the
brother of Masqalah bin Hubayrah, with three hundred horsemen and six
hundred foot-soldiers to face Shabas bin Rab’ee. He ordered them to
fight at night and not to fall prey to the enemy for they were large in
number than them.

Ibraheem went towards Rashid, while Mukhtar sent Yazid bin Anas with
nine hundred men towards the site of the Mosque. Shabas lined up facing
him and Na’eem fought fiercely with Shabas. Na’eem deputed Sa’ar bin Abi
Sa’ar as commander upon the cavalry and himself proceeded further along
with the foot-soldiers and fought with them until the sun arose and the
sun-light spread wide. The companions of Shabas attacked those of Na’eem
who scattered, while Na’eem himself resisted strongly until he fell a
martyr (May Allah’s Mercy and Blessings be upon him).

Sa’ar bin Abi Sa’ar too was arrested along with a group of his
companions; they released the Arabs and killed the Non-Arabs. Shabas
proceeded and surrounded Mukhtar who had turned feeble due to the death
of Na’eem.

Ibn Muti’ dispatched Yazid bin Hars bin Ruwaym with two thousand men who
blocked the entrance of the streets. Mukhtar handed over the command of
the cavalry to Yazid bin Anas and himself proceeded onto the ground
along with the foot-soldiers, while the cavalry of Shabas attacked him
and the companions of Mukhtar resisted them.

Yazid bin Anas told them, “O group of Shi’ah! They kill you due to your
affection for the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) and severe your hands and legs and
blind your eyes and hang you upon the branches of the palm-tree even
while though you remain seated in your houses obeying the enemies. Then
what do you presume, if they gain victory upon you today, by Allah, in
the twinkling of an eye they shall kill you with hands bound together,
and shall treat your children, womenfolk and wealth in a manner that
death is better than beholding it. By Allah! You shall not pave the road
of salvation from their side except through insistence and forbearance
besides opportune lances and the impressive striking of the swords. Then
prepare for the attack”.

Hearing this they gained momentum, knelt down and yielded to his orders.
Ibraheem Ashtar reached Rashid who had four thousand men along with him,
he told his companions, “Do not fear their large numbers, by Allah, for
even one man can be better than ten. And Allah is along with those who
forbear”. Then Ibraheem turned towards his standard-bearer and said,
“Take the standard further and kill the army behind you”.

They fought fiercely while Khuzaymah bin Nasr Abasi reached Rashid and
killed him while calling out, “By the Lord of the Ka’bah! I have killed
Rashid”. Hearing this, his (Rashid’s) companions fled while Ibraheem,
Khuzaymah and their companions, after having killed Rashid, proceeded
towards Mukhtar. They sent him a message, and when they received the
glad-tidings, they pronounced the Takbeer and their hearts became
stronger.

Ibn Muti’ dispatched Hissan bin Qa’ed bin Bakr Abasi with two thousand
men towards Ibraheem bin Ashtar to prevent him from reaching his army
positioned at Sabkhah. Ibraheem attacked them and they fled without
fighting them while Hissan stayed behind and defended his companions.
Khuzaymah attacked him and recognizing him said, “O Hissan! If there
would not have been relation between us, I would have killed you. Then
save yourself”. Suddenly his horse stumbled and he fell down upon the
ground, while people surrounded him and he fought with them for awhile.

Then Khuzaymah told him, “You are in protection. Do not hand over
yourself to death”. All of them lifted their hands off him and he
(Khuzaymah) told Ibraheem, “He is my cousin while I have promised him
protection”. Ibraheem replied, “You have done fair”, saying this he
commanded that his horse be brought. He was seated upon his horse and
Ibraheem told him, “Go to your house”. Ibraheem then proceeded towards
Mukhtar, who was surrounded by Shabas bin Rab’ee. Yazid bin Hars, who
was positioned upon the entrance of the streets, faced him so as to
desist him from reaching Shabas. Ibraheem dispatched a group of his
companions with Khuzaymah bin Nasr to face him, and himself, along with
some others, went to Mukhtar’s aid.

Ibraheem attacked the army of Shabas from behind, while Yazid bin Anas
too called out for battle. Shabas and his army fled and entered the
houses of Kufa, while Khuzaymah bin Nasr too defeated Yazid bin Hars and
they too fled and gathered in the entrances of the streets and behind
the roofs. Mukhtar proceeded further and when he reached the entrance of
the street, they started shooting arrows at him and prevented him from
entering Kufa from there. The defeated army of Sabkhah came to Ibn Muti’
and he also received the news of the killing of Rashid and turned
restless.

‘Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaydi told him, “O man! Do not clasp your hands. Go
out to the men and invite them to face your enemy. There are numerous
who will side you except these rebels whom Allah shall ultimately
humiliate. I am the first one to accept it while a group of men are
along with me and another is with others”. Ibn Muti’ himself came out
and reprimanded people for their flight and commanded them to face
Mukhtar and his companions.

When Mukhtar saw that Yazid bin Hars would not let him enter Kufa, he
turned his way towards the houses of Mazinah, Ahmas and Bariq. They
owned houses separated from the city, they gave water to his companions
to drink while he (Mukhtar) himself did not partake, for he was in the
state of fasting.

Ahmar bin Shamit told Ibn Kamil, “Do you not know that he is fasting?”
he replied in the affirmative. He said, “I wish he would break his fast
then he would be more stronger”. Ibn Kamil said, “He is infallible and
is intelligent with regards to his responsibility”. Ahmar replied, “You
speak the truth. Allah’s pardon”. Then Mukhtar said, “This place is
better for battle”. Ibraheem replied, “Allah has entangled the opponent
enemy in flight and instilled fear into their hearts. Then take us to
Kufa, by Allah! There is none to block our way to the Royal Palace”.
Mukhtar then kept those among his companions, who were old and ailing,
as also his belongings there, and appointed Abu Usman Nahdi to take care
of them and dispatched Ibraheem before him. Ibn Muti’ dispatched ‘Amr
bin Hajjaj with two thousand men to face Mukhtar.

Mukhtar sent a message to Ibraheem saying that he should kneel down
facing them, they knelt down while Mukhtar dispatched Yazid bin Anas and
commanded him to stand facing ‘Amr bin Hajjaj. Then he himself proceeded
behind Ibraheem and halted at the ‘Musalla’ (the place of Prayer) of
Khalid bin Abdullah. When Ibraheem desired entering Kufa from the road
of Kinasah, Shimr bin Ziljawshan came out against him with a group of
two thousand men. Mukhtar dispatched Sa’eed bin Manqaz Hamadani to face
him and sent message to Ibraheem that he should continue moving.

Ibraheem proceeded further until he reached the street of Shabas, while
Nawfal bin Masahiq had positioned thereat with two thousand or five
thousand men, while the latter number is more reliable. Ibn Muti’
ordered that it should be announced that people should join Ibn Masahiq,
and he himself positioned at Kinasah while giving the charge of the
Royal Palace to Shabas bin Rab’ee.

Ibraheem reached Ibn Muti’ and ordered his companions to dismount and
said, “Do not fear when they say that Shabas has come, or the family of
Atbah bin Nahas has come, or the family of Ash’as or Yazid bin Hars or
the family of so and so has come”, naming all the families of Kufa. Then
he retorted, “If they taste the fire of the swords, they shall flee away
from Ibn Muti’ as a sheep flees away from the wolf”. All of them obeyed
his orders while Ibn Ashtar tied the end of his shirt upon his waist
while all of them scattered in one manly attack. They ran upon each
others shoulders and gathered at the entrance of the streets.

Ibn Ashtar reached Ibn Masahiq, and catching hold of his reins, lifted
his sword upon him. Ibn Masahiq said, “O son of Ashtar! I request you in
the name of Allah, does there exist envy or revenge of blood between
us?” Ibraheem spared him and said, “Then remember this (kindness)”,
while he always remembered this favor. Then they entered Kinasah, while
pursuing those who had fled, and took control of each market and mosque,
while Ibn Muti’ and those of the noblemen of Kufa, who were along with
him in the Palace, were surrounded, except ‘Amr bin Hurays, who had
remained in his house and had retired to the desert.

Mukhtar himself entered and positioned himself at the corner of the
market and deputed Ibraheem, Yazid bin Anas and Ahmar bin Shamit to
surround the palace. After three days of severe siege, Shabas told Ibn
Muti’, “Find a way out for yourself and your companions. By Allah! They
do not possess the power to save you or their own selves”. Ibn Muti’
replied, “Then give me your opinion”. Shabas replied, “There is one way,
and that is ask protection for yourself and us and submit to them and
come out along with your companions, and do not kill yourself and your
companions”.

Ibn Muti’ replied, “I consider it a shame to seek their protection when
the commander of the faithful (he meant Abdullah bin Zubayr) holds
control upon Hijaz and Basrah”. Shabas said, “Then you should come out
of the palace in secret and enter the house of the one on whom you rely
and remain there until you reach your master”. Abdul Rahman bin Sa’eed,
Asma bin Kharejah, Ibn Makhnaf and other noblemen too accepted his
proposal.

They remained there until night, then Ibn Muti’ told them, “I know what
the ignoble and lewd men did to you, while all the noblemen and
meritorious among you listened and obeyed. I shall inform my master
regarding this and shall relate to him your obedience and battle until
whatever Allah wills”. All praised him and he came out alone and took
refuge in the house of Abu Moosa. Ibn Ashtar reached the door of the
palace while the companions of Ibn Muti’ threw open the doors after he
had left and said, “O son of Ashtar! Are we in protection?”

He replied, “All of you are granted protection”, thus they came out. All
of them then swore allegiance to Mukhtar, who entered therein and spent
the night therein, while the noblemen saw the dawn in the mosque and at
the door of the palace.

At dawn, Mukhtar came out and ascended the pulpit, after praising and
glorifying Allah, he said,

“Praise be to the Lord, Who promised victory to His friend, and to His
enemy a share in losses, and has made these glad tidings a means of
performance until the end of the world, and has approved His command,
while the one who accuses will ultimately be dejected. O people! A
standard was erected for us and duration was fixed. It was said unto us:
Raise the standard and perform the task in the scheduled time and do not
violate it. We paid heed to the invitation of the caller and heard the
words of the announcer, and how many men and women are there who give
news of death of those killed in the battle. Far be away the rebels, the
treacherous, the disobedient ones, those who refute and flee away.
Beware O people! Enter, and pledge allegiance at the hands of guidance.
I swear by the One Who has made the sky a roof upon everyone, and has
furbished valleys and roads upon the earth, after the allegiance of Ali
bin Abi Talib (a.s.) and his Progeny (a.s.), you will not find any other
allegiance more economical than this”.

Then he alighted the pulpit and all the noblemen of Kufa came and swore
allegiance at his hands upon the book of Allah, the customs of the
Prophet (S), seeking avenge for the blood of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), and
struggle against the cunning, defense of the weak, battle against the
aggressors, and peace with the Muslims.

Manzar bin Hissan and his son Hissan too pledged their oath of
allegiance to Mukhtar and when they came outside after visiting him,
Sa’eed bin Manqaz Sawri met them and said, “By Allah! Both of them are
from among the leaders of tyrants”. Then he killed both of them and as
much as Manzar kept saying, “Lift your hands off us until we obtain
orders from Mukhtar”, he did not pay heed to him.

When Mukhtar was informed about this episode, he disliked their
attitude. While Mukhtar was giving fair promises to the people and was
attracting the views of the notables to himself and was treating them
with kindness. It was said to him, “Ibn Muti’ is present in the house of
Abu Moosa”, but he did not reply and sent a hundred thousand Dirhams at
night with a message that, “Keep this as expenses for your journey, and
I know as to where you are and that you intend going away, but you do
not have the money”, while there was friendship between them.

Mukhtar had a thousand Dirhams in his treasury from which he gave five
hundred Dirhams each to those who remained with him until the siege of
the palace, while they were three thousand men. And he gave twenty
Dirhams each to those who had joined him after the siege of the palace
while remaining for three days of siege along with him. He met people
courteously and made the notables sit with him. T

hen he appointed Abdullah bin Kamil Shakiri as the head of his police
and appointed Kaisan Abu Umrah as the chief of guards upon his the seat
of his capital. One day when Abu ‘Amr was standing at the head of
Mukhtar, while he was speaking with the notables and was paying heed to
their words, one of his Persian friends told him in the Persian
language, “Do you not see that Abu Ishaq has turned towards the Arabs
and does not look at us?” Mukhtar asked him, “What did he say?” Abu
Umrah repeated his words for him and Mukhtar said, “This should not be
objectionable for you, for you are from me and I from you”, saying this
he bowed his head for some time and remained silent, then he recited the
following verse

*“Verily We, from the guilty ones, shall exact (the due) retribution”
(Surah al-Sajdah, 32:22).*

When they heard his words, they said, “Have glad tidings, as if you are
the ones who will kill”, while he had meant (to kill) the notables.

The first standard which Mukhtar fastened was for Abdullah bin Hars (or
Haris), the brother of Malik Ashtar, and made him the governor of
Armenistan. Then he appointed Muhammad bin Umayr bin Atarud upon
Azarbayjan, Abdullah (or Abdul Rahman) bin Sa’eed bin Qays upon Mosul,
Ishaq bin Mas’ood upon Madaen and Jawkha. He also appointed Qudamah bin
Abu Isa bin Zam’ah Nasari, who was an ally of the Saqif (tribe), upon
the greater Bahqabaz, Muhammad bin Ka’ab bin Qarzah upon the Central
Bahqabaz, Sa’ad bin Huzayfah bin Yaman upon Halawan, and commanded him
to fight the Turks and make peace therein.

Ibn Zubayr had appointed Muhammad bin Ash’as bin Qays as the governor of
Mosul, and when Abdul Rahman bin Sa’eed reached Mosul from the side of
Mukhtar, Muhammad fled to Takrit and paused there to see as to view the
circumstances, then he came from there to Mukhtar and pledged allegiance
at his hands.

Then when Mukhtar became relieved of the rebels and other tasks, be
called for audience of people and sat to judge and said, “I have to
attend to a task due to which I will not be able to accomplish this task
of judging”, saying this he appointed Shurayh to judge among people.
Shurayh feared the people and therefore pretended to be ill. While
people would say, “He befriends Usman and gave witness against Hujr bin
Adi and did not even reach the message of Hani bin Urwah from the prison
to the men, while Imam Ali (a.s.) himself had deposed him from
judgment”, and when this criticism came to his ears, he pretended to be
ill and abdicated. Therefore Mukhtar appointed Abdullah bin Utbah bin
Mas’ood in his place but he too became ill, then he appointed Abdullah
bin Malik Tai.

The elimination of the murderers of Imam Husayn (a.s.) by Mukhtar
-----------------------------------------------------------------

In this year, i.e., sixty six hijrah, Mukhtar turned towards the
murderers of Imam Husayn (a.s.) to kill them. The reason was because
when the caliphate of Marwan bin Hakam was established in Syria, he
dispatched two armies, one to Hijaz under the command of Hubaysh bin
Daljah Qayni, and the second towards Iraq under the command of
Ubaydullah bin Ziyad, while we have discussed regarding him during the
course of our discussion of the Tawwabeen.

He had promised Ibn Ziyad that on whatever he would lay his hands upon,
would be his own, and he had permitted him to plunder Kufa for three
days. He blocked the island where Qays Aylan and Zafar bin Hars, the
partisans of Ibn Zubayr remained, and he remained busy in skirmish with
them for one year and remained unmindful of Iraq until Marwan died and
his son Abdul Malik succeeded him.

He too renewed the agreement entered with Ibn Ziyad by his father and
commanded him to struggle for the fulfillment of his task. Therefore
when he could not lay his hands upon Zafar and Qays, he turned around
towards Mosul. Abdul Rahman bin Sa’eed, who was appointed the governor
upon Mosul by Mukhtar, wrote to him that Ubaydullah had stepped upon the
soil of Mosul and that he had evacuated Mosul and had taken refuge in
Takrit.

Mukhtar called for Yazid bin Anas Asadi and commanded him to go to Mosul
and station himself at the nearest place therein until an army would be
dispatched to assist him. Yazid replied, “Then give me the authority to
select three thousand horsemen so as to take along with me, and that I
should be at liberty to take my own decisions, and if I am wanting of
manpower, I shall ask help from you”.

Mukhtar agreed to his view and he selected three thousand horsemen and
left. Mukhtar escorted him, and while parting with him, said, “Then when
you reach your enemy, do not give them respite, and do not postpone any
opportunity for tomorrow. Then inform daily regarding your reports, then
if you ever require help, write to me, I shall dispatch assistance to
you even if you do not need help, so that your arms may become more
stronger and your enemies fearful”. Then people prayed for their well
being and he too prayed for them and said, “Desire the felicity of
martyrdom for me from Allah. By Allah! If victory parts away from me, I
should not loose martyrdom”.

Then Mukhtar wrote to Abdul Rahman bin Sa’eed that, “Hand over the
cities of Mosul to Yazid”. Yazid went to Madaen and traversed through
the land of Jawkhi and passed by Razanat and reached Mosul. He
positioned himself at Baquli and the news reached Ibn Ziyad. He said, “I
shall dispatch two thousand men against each thousand”.

Then he dispatched Rabi’ah bin Makhariq Ghanawi with three thousand men
and Abdullah bin Jumlah Khas’ami with three thousand also. Rabi’ah
entered Baquli a day before Abdullah and stood facing Yazid. Yazid, who
was severely ill, mounted his ass, while some people looked after him
upon that, and arrayed his troops and incited them for combat and said,
“If I die, your commander shall be Warqa’ bin Azib Asadi, and after him
Abdullah bin Zamarah Azari, who shall be succeeded by Sa’ar bin Abi
Sa’ar Hanafi”.

Then he appointed Abdullah to lead the right wing and Sa’ar upon the
left wing and appointed Warqa’ upon the cavalry and himself was laid
upon a bed in the midst of the army while he was saying, “If you wish
defend your commander or else desert him and flee”. He was guiding the
army while sometimes he was falling unconscious and some time regaining
consciousness. The army started the battle at dawn on the day of Arafah
and fought fiercely until the evening, while the Syrians scattered and
their barracks came under the control of the companions of Yazid. They
reached Rabi’ah bin Makhariq, the commander of the Syrians, whose
companions had deserted him. He came down on foot and called out, “O
friends of the truth! I am the son of Makhariq! You are fighting against
the slaves who have fled away and those who have left Islam”.

Hearing this, a group gathered around him and again battle ensued, while
the Syrians scattered for another time and Rabi’ah bin Makhariq was
killed. Abdullah bin Warqa’ Asadi and Abdullah bin Zamarah Azari killed
him. The losers settled for a moment and Abdullah bin Jumlah reached
them along with three thousand men and gathered those who had scattered
and stationed himself at Baquli. They spent the night patrolling, and at
dawn, which was the day of I’d uz Zuha, they fought fiercely. Then they
halted at the time of the Prayers of Zuhr and thereafter resumed
fighting, while the Syrians fled and left Ibn Jumlah along with a group
of men.

They fought until Abdullah bin Qirad Khas’ami attacked him and killed
him while the Kufans gained control of their barracks. They uprooted
them while killing them and arrested three hundred men whom Yazid bin
Anas commanded to be put to death while he himself was on the verge of
death. They were killed and he himself died at the end of the day, his
companions buried him while they wandered.

Warqa’ bin Azib Asadi, who he (Yazid) had appointed to succeed him, lead
his funeral Prayers and then addressed his companions saying, “What is
your view? It has reached me that Ibn Ziyad himself is coming with an
army of eighty thousand men, while I am one of you, therefore give me
your opinions.

According to my view, in the circumstances that Yazid (bin Anas) has
died while some have scattered away, we do not have the power to
confront the Syrians. Then today if retreat on our own, they will say
that we have withdrawn due to the death of our commander in suspension,
while our fear will still remain in their hearts. Then if we face them,
we shall fall in danger. And today if they rout us, their defeat of
yesterday will not benefit us”.

They replied, “You have opined fairly”, saying this they dispersed.
Their news reached Mukhtar and the Kufans created commotion and said,
“Yazid has been killed and not died a natural death”. Then Mukhtar
called for Ibraheem and dispatched him with seven thousand men, saying,
“If you come across the army of Yazid bin Anas, you shall be their
commander, then take them back along with you until you reach Ibn Ziyad
and his battalion, and fight with them”.

Ibraheem made Hammamul A’ayun his headquarters and proceeded further.
When he had left, the chiefs of Kufa, in opposition to Mukhtar, gathered
at the house of Shabas bin Rab’ee and said, “By Allah! Mukhtar has
become our commander without our consent and has emboldened our slaves,
he has made them mount our horses and given a share of our wealth to
them”. Shabas, who was their chief from the days of ignorance until the
declaration of Islam, said, “Leave me, I will go and meet him”.

He came to Mukhtar and related to him all the complaints of the chiefs.
Mukhtar answered each of their objections saying, “I am here to comply
to their consent and do whatever their desire”. As regards the slaves
and their entitlement to wealth, he answered, “I shall lift my hands off
them and shall hand over all the wealth to you so that you may fight the
Bani Umayyah and Ibn Zubayr, but with a stipulation that you shall
pledge and promise with a proper assurance”. Shabas replied, “I shall
discuss your stated opinions with my companions”, saying this he went to
them but did not return back and all of them consented to fight him.
Thereafter Shabas bin Rab’ee, Muhammad bin Ash’as, Abdul Rahman bin
Sa’eed bin Qays and Shimr together came to Ka’ab bin Abi Ka’ab Khas’ami
and spoke to him regarding this and he too consented with them. Then
they, in conformity to one another, came to Abdul Rahman bin Makhnaf
Azdi and invited him too. He replied, “If you listen to my words, do not
fight them”.

They said, “And why not?” He replied, “I fear lest dispute might erupt
amongst yourselves, while the valorous and champions among you (he named
some of them) are along with him, as also your slaves and retainers, and
they have a single slogan. While the slaves detest you more than your
enemies of the Arabian race, then they shall fight you with the valor of
the Arabs and enmity of the non-Arabs. Then if you give him some
respite, others will suffice you. The Syrian and Basran army shall soon
arrive and they shall remove him from amongst your midst, while you do
not fight amongst your own selves”. They replied, “We request you by
Allah not to oppose us, and do not ruin our consented opinions”. He
said, “Indeed I am one of you, then whenever you may desire arising, do
so”.

As soon as Ibraheem left, they leapt upon Mukhtar and occupied the
grounds of Kufa and each chief took position in each lane. Then when the
news of their revolt reached Mukhtar, he dispatched a swift messenger to
Ibraheem, who reached him at Sabat, with orders to return back
immediately. Then he dispatched someone to the chiefs of the revolters
saying, “Tell me as to what you desire? Then I shall do whatever you
wish for”.

They replied, “We desire that you remain away from us, because as you
assert that you have been sent by Muhammad bin Hanafiyah, while it has
been known that he has not sent you”. Mukhtar replied, “Then you may
dispatch your messenger to him and I too shall send mine, then wait
until his message arrives”, while Mukhtar desired to engage them in
conversation until Ibraheem reached him. Then he commanded his
companions to lift their hands off them, while the Kufans had sealed the
entrances of the lanes upon the revolters and except some little
provisions, none could reach them.

Abdullah bin Sabi’ stationed himself upon the ground, while the (clan
of) Bani Shakir fought fiercely with him, then Aqbah bin Tariq Jashami
came and sided with him while defending him from them. Aqbah came and
positioned himself in Jabanah Salul along with Shimr and Qays Aylan,
while Abdullah bin Sabi’, accompanied by the Yemenites, positioned
himself upon the ground of Sabi’.

The messenger of Mukhtar reached Ibn Ashtar on the night of that day,
Ibraheem himself returned and descended the next day. Then he gave rest
to his horses and left at night until he reached Kufa the next day at
the time of Asr. Then he spent the night along with his companions in
the Mosque. When the Yemenites gathered at the field of Sabi’ and the
time of Prayers arrived, each chief among them disliked that anyone
among them should lead the Prayers. Seeing this Abdul Rahman bin Makhnaf
said, “This is the first discord, then you may make the praiseworthy
man, the master of the Recitors, Rufa’ah bin Shaddad as the leader of
Prayers”. He lead their Prayers until the battle started.

Mukhtar aligned his companions in the street that did not have
buildings. Then he commanded Ibn Ashtar to face the people of Bani
Muzar, whose commanders were Shabas bin Rab’ee and Muhammad bin Umayr
bin Atarud, and they had positioned themselves at Kinasah. He (Mukhtar)
feared to dispatch him (Ibraheem) towards the people of Yemen, who were
his tribesmen, lest he might falter to fight them. While Mukhtar himself
went to face the people of Yemen who had stationed themselves at the
road of Sabi’.

He stationed himself near the house of ‘Amr bin Sa’eed and dispatched
Ahmar bin Shamit Bajali and Abdullah bin Kamil Shakiri forward and
ordered each of them that they should proceed from a fixed route which
would reach the field of Sabi’. Then he told them in confidence that
(the tribe of) Shibam had informed him that they would attack them from
behind, and they proceeded further in accordance to the orders. When the
people of Yemen were informed about their arrival, they split into two
armies and faced them and they fought such fiercely that men had not
seen a more fierce battle than this.

The companions of Ahmar bin Shamit and Ibn Kamil retreated back and
joined Mukhtar. Mukhtar asked them as to what was the news, and they
replied, “We were routed, and Ahmar bin Shamit had come on foot along
with a group of his followers”. While the companions of Ibn Kamil said,
“We do not know as to what happened to him”. Mukhtar, accompanied by
them, turned towards the ground until he reached facing the house of Abu
Abdullah Jadali. He positioned himself there and dispatched Abdullah bin
Fu’ad Khas’ami with four hundred men to search for Ibn Kamil, and told
him, “If he (Ibn Kamil) has been killed, you shall take over the reins
of command in his stead and fight the enemies. And if he is alive, leave
three hundred men from this group with him and take the rest one hundred
along with you and go towards the road of Sabi’ and attack them from the
side of Hammamul Qatn”.

He went and saw that Ibn Kamil was in the heat of the battle along with
a group of his companions. He left three hundred men with him and took
one hundred along with himself to the Mosque of Abdul Qays and then told
his companions, “I befriend that Mukhtar should be victorious, but I
also detest that today the noblemen of my clan should be killed at our
hands. By Allah! I endear death rather than that they should be killed
at my hands. Then position yourselves here, for I have heard that the
tribe of Shibam shall attack them from behind. Perhaps they should do so
and we might be excused from it”.

They yielded to his words and spent the night near the Mosque of Abdul
Qays. Then Mukhtar dispatched Malik bin ‘Amr Nahdi, who was a valorous
man, along with Abdullah bin Sharik Nahdi and hour hundred men, to aid
Ahmar bin Shamit. They reached him when the enemies had reached upon his
head and had surrounded him, while when this group reached there, the
battle became more intense. Ibn Ashtar, along with his army, reached
facing the people of Muzar and met Shabas bin Rab’ee and his companions
and said, “Woe be to you! Refrain from battle and retreat back”.

They did not pay heed to his words and fought him until they had to
flee. Hissan bin Qa’ed Abasi was wounded and was taken to his home where
he died, while he was the associate of Shabas bin Rab’ee. News was sent
to Mukhtar that the Muzar had fled, while he sent this glad tidings to
Ahmar bin Shamit and Ibn Kamil and their frontline became stronger.

While the people of (the tribe of) Shibam gathered and appointed Abul
Qaloos as their commander so as to attack the people of Yemen from
behind. But they told one another, “We wish we could attack the (tribes
of) Muzar and Rabi’ah for it was more appropriate”. Abul Qaloos did not
reply, and they asked him, “What do you say?” He replied,

*“Allah, the Almighty, has said: Fight ye those of the infidels near
you”* *(Surah at-Tawbah, 9:123).*

They accompanied him towards the people of Yemen and when they reached
the entrance of the ground of Sabi’, A’asar Shakiri collided with them
and they killed him while calling out, “O seekers of revenge for
Husayn”! When Yazid bin Umayr bin Zi Maran Hamadani heard them, he
called out, “O seekers of revenge for Usman”. Hearing this Rufa’ah bin
Shaddad said, “What do we have to do with Usman? I shall not fight along
with those who seek revenge for the blood of Usman”. A group of his
tribesmen objected to him saying, “You have brought us to the
battlefield, and now when we see them entering the swords into them, you
tell us to retreat and abandon them?”

He turned towards them and recited the following couplet, “I am the son
of Shaddad and upon the religion of Ali, I do not befriend Usman or a
deceptor, today I shall enter into the heat of the battle, and shall
attack fiercely”. He fought until he was killed. Rufa’ah previously
sided with Mukhtar, but when he realized his (alleged) fraud, he desired
to kill him unawares. That day he sided with the Kufans and when Yazid
bin Umayr called out, “O seekers of revenge for the blood of Usman”, he
separated from them and fought siding with Mukhtar until he was killed.

Yazid bin Umayr bin Zi Maran, and Nu’man bin Sahban Jarmi, who was a
virtuous man, were also killed. Furat bin Zahr bin Qays too was killed
and Abu Zahr was wounded. Abdullah bin Sa’eed bin Qays, as also Umar bin
Makhnaf, were killed. Abdul Rahman bin Makhnaf fought until he was
wounded and was taken in the state of unconsciousness to his home, while
the people of Azd fought surrounding him, and the people of Yemen were
routed in the worst manner. They arrested five hundred men from the
houses of Wadi’ayn and were brought with hands bound together to
Mukhtar. Mukhtar said, “Investigate regarding them, then inform me as to
which of them were included in the murder of Husayn (a.s.)”.

Then he put to death two hundred and forty eight men from among them
(who were included in the murder of Imam Husayn). His companions started
putting to sword their enemies (among the captives), and when Mukhtar
saw this, he commanded that those of the captives who were left should
be released. Mukhtar took an oath from them that they should neither
side with his enemies nor should they revolt against him or his
companions or plot against them. The caller of Mukhtar announced, “The
one who remains locked in his house shall remain in peace, except those
who are included in the blood of the Progeny of Muhammad (S)”.

‘Amr bin Hajjaj Zubaydi, who had sided in the blood of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), mounted his Camel and fled from the road of Waqisah while none
had any news until now regarding him. It is said that the companions of
Mukhtar found him while he had fallen down due to thirst, and they
killed him (May Allah’s eternal curse be upon him) and brought his head
to Mukhtar.

When Furat bin Zahr bin Qays was killed, Ayesha, daughter of Khalifah
bin Abdullah, who was one of the wives of Imam Husayn (a.s.), sent a
message to Mukhtar requesting for his burial. He permitted her and he
was buried.

Mukhtar dispatched one of his retainers named Zarbi behind Shimr bin
Ziljawshan, who was along with his companions. When they neared him,
Shimr told his companions, “You draw back, and perhaps this slave bears
avarice with me”. They went away from him and Zarbi ran towards Shimr
who attacked him and killed him. Shimr, accompanied by his companions,
ran out of Kufa and reached Sadna until night and went towards a village
called Kaltaniyah, which was on the bank of a stream and at the foot of
a hillock. They caught hold of a non-Arab man from the village and
brought him to Shimr. He thrashed him up and said, “You should take my
letter to Mus’ab bin Zubayr”.

The man went to his village in which Abu Umroh, one of the companions of
Mukhtar, was positioned on guard there between Mukhtar and the Basrans.
The non-Arab man met another non-Arab man from his village and
complained to him regarding his state and how Shimr had treated, he also
told him regarding the responsibility assigned to him. At that moment,
one of the companions of Abu Umroh, called Abdul Rahman bin Abi Kanood,
met them and saw the letter of Shimr addressed to Mus’ab bin Zubayr in
their hands. He asked the man as to where was Shimr. He showed him the
way and there was a distance of less than three farsakh in between them.
The companions of Shimr had warned him that it was dangerous to remain
there and that they should leave from there. He replied, “You fear this
liar such? By Allah! I shall rest at this place for three days”. But
their hearts were full of fear, and when they slept they heard the sound
of the horses’ hooves.

They said, “This is the sound of the horses’ hooves”. They neared them,
and before his companions could arise, the cavalry came down from the
hill and called out the Takbeer and surrounded the tents. His companions
scattered in bewilderment and left their horses behind them. Shimr wound
a clock around himself while the marks of leprosy were visible from
beneath it. He took a lance in his hand and hit it towards them, they
had not even given him time to wear his clothes or ammunitions. His
companions, who had positioned themselves at the distance away from him,
heard the voice of Takbeer and someone calling out, “The vicious one has
been killed”. Ibn Abi Kanood, who had seen his letter in the hands of
the non-Arab man, killed him and scattered his remains in front of the
dogs. (May Allah’s eternal curse be upon him, and may he remain in the
deepest dent of hell).

Thereafter Mukhtar returned to the royal palace from the ground of Sabi’
and Suraqah bin Mirdas Baraqi was arrested and brought to him. Suraqah
called out, “Forgive me today O disposer of goodness! O best among every
master of diligence and eminence, in the pilgrimage, continuance of
mercy and effort in prostration”. Mukhtar sent him to a prison, and on
the preceding day summoned him. He faced Mukhtar and said, “May Allah
amend the tasks of the commander! I swear by Allah, besides Whom there
is no other Deity, I have seen the Angels, mounted upon pie-bald swift
horses between the heavens and the earth, assisting you”.

Mukhtar said, “Then mount the pulpit and announce to the men what you
saw”. Then he mounted the pulpit and reported and alighted. Mukhtar took
him in secret and said, “I know that you have not seen anything, and you
desired that I should save you from killing. Then go to any place that
you desire, then go, for you are at liberty, but then do not incite your
men against me”. He left Kufa and reached Basra. Then he joined Mus’ab.

On that day Abdul Rahman bin Sa’eed (bin) Qays Hamadani was killed,
while Sa’ar bin Abi Sa’ar, Abu Zubayr Shibami and another man claimed to
have killed him, while Shibam is a branch of the tribe of Hamadan. The
son of Abdul Rahman told Abu Zubayr Shibami, “Have you killed my father
Abdul Rahman, the chief of your own clan?” He replied, “The one who
believes in Allah and the day of Resurrection, does not befriend the
enemies of Allah even if they be his father or brother”. And in this
battle eight hundred and eighty men were killed, while mostly those
killed were from among the Yemenites. The date of this struggle was the
sixth of Zilhajj 66 A.H.

Thereafter the notables scattered away and reached Basra, while Mukhtar
then turned towards killing the murderers of Imam Husayn (a.s.). He
said,

“Our religion is not that we may live and leave the murderers of Imam
Husayn (a.s.) alive. In that case what bad companions should we be in
this world for the progeny of Muhammad (S). While I would become the
‘Liar’ as is attributed to me. I solicit Allah’s assistance upon them.
Then inform me regarding each of them, and pursue them until you kill
them. And eating and drinking is detestable for me until I do not purify
this earth of them”.

They informed him regarding Abdullah bin Usayd Jahni, Malik bin Bashir
Badi and Haml bin Malik Muharibi. Mukhtar dispatched someone and
summoned them from Qadisiyyah. When his sight fell upon them, he said,
“O enemies of Allah and the Prophet of Allah (S)! Where is Husayn bin
Ali? Settle the debt of Husayn, you have killed those on whom you were
ordered to send salutations?”

They replied, “May Allah’s mercy be upon you! We were compelled to go
there, therefore oblige us and leave us alive”. He replied, “Why did you
not oblige Husayn, the grandson of the Prophet, and leave him alive, nor
give him water to drink?” While Badi (Malik bin Bashir) had seized the
burnoose of Imam Husayn (a.s.), Mukhtar ordered that both his hands and
legs should be severed. He was laid down and he coiled until he died,
while the two others were killed similarly.

Then Mukhtar summoned Ziyad bin Malik Zaba’i, Imran bin Khalid Qushayri,
Abdul Rahman bin Abi Khashkar Bajali and Abdullah bin Qays Khawlani.
They were brought to him, and when his sight fell upon them, he said, “O
murderers of the virtuous ones! O murderers of the Master of the
dwellers of paradise! Today Allah seeks retribution from you. It was an
ill-omened day on which you raided the dye weeds”, while they had looted
the dye weeds of Imam Husayn (a.s.). Mukhtar ordered them to be killed.

Abdullah and Abdul Rahman, the sons of Salkhab were then brought to him
along with Abdullah bin Wahb bin ‘Amr Hamadani, the cousin of A’amash
Hamadani. Mukhtar ordered them to be killed too. Then they brought Usman
bin Khalid bin Usayd Dahmani Jahni and Abu Asma bin Bashr bin Shumayt
Qanesi, who had assisted one another in killing Abdul Rahman bin Aqeel
and stripping him. He ordered them to be beheaded and they were thrown
into the blazing fire.

Then he summoned Khawli bin Yazid Asbahi, who had brought the head of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) to Kufa. When they went in his pursuit, he hid
himself in the lavatory, while the companions of Mukhtar entered his
house to search him. His wife, Ayoof, the daughter of Malik, who had
become his enemy from the night he had brought the head of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), came outside and said, “What do you desire?” They asked, “Where
is your husband?” She replied, “I do not know”, saying this she pointed
towards the lavatory. They went there and caught him while he had worn a
leather upon his head. They brought him outside and killed him in front
of his family and burnt him. (May Allah’s eternal curse be upon all of
them).

Elimination of Umar bin Sa’ad and other murderers of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

One day Mukhtar told his associates, “Tomorrow I shall kill a man who is
big-footed, with sunken eyes and stout eyebrows, the murder of whom will
please the believers and the ‘Neared Angels’“.

Haysam bin Aswad Nakha’i, who was near him, understood that he meant
Umar bin Sa’ad. He returned home and sent his son Irban to Umar and
informed him. Umar replied, “May Allah reward your father fairly! How
can Mukhtar kill me after bestowing promises and oath to me”. Abdullah
bin Ja’daj bin Hubayrah, was a relative of Imam Ali (a.s.), and was more
endeared to Mukhtar than anyone else. Umar bin Sa’ad had asked his
intervention and had secured a letter of protection from him. In the
letter Mukhtar had (deliberately) stated that any incident (Hadas)
should not come forth from his side, while what he meant was to answer
the call of nature (for Hadas also means that).

When Irban returned back, Umar came out of his house and went to
Hammamah and asked for explanation of the deed of security from one of
his retainers. The person replied, “It has been related on oath that no
impurity (Hadas) should be done on your part, and what impurity (Hadas)
is bigger than that you have left your house and have come here? Thus
hasten to your house and do not create any excuse for you”. Hearing this
Umar hastened to his house, while it was informed to Mukhtar that Umar
bin Sa’ad had left his house. He replied, “No never, he has a chain
bound in his neck which will bring him back”.

On the preceding morning, Mukhtar dispatched Abu Umroh in his pursuit.
He came to Umar and said, “Answer the call of the commander”. Umar arose
while his legs got entangled in his shirt and he fell down upon the
floor. Abu ‘Amr dealt a blow at him with his sword and killed him (May
Allah’s eternal curse be upon him) and brought his head to Mukhtar.
Mukhtar told his son Hafas, who was seated near him, “Do you recognize
this head?” He answered, “Verily yes! While life after him does not seem
fair”. Mukhtar ordered him to be killed too and said, “That was in lieu
of Husayn (a.s.) and this is in lieu of Ali bin Husayn (a.s.). By Allah!
If I kill one third of a quarter of Quraysh, debt of even one of their
fingers will not have been given”.

The reason for his agitation in killing Umar was that Yazid bin Sharahil
Ansari went to the presence of Muhammad bin Hanafiyah. He saluted him
and when their conversation reached Mukhtar, Ibn Hanafiyah said, “He
perceives that he is our Shi’ah, when the murderers of Husayn (a.s.) are
seated on the chairs facing him and he speaks to them?” When Yazid
returned to Kufa, he informed Mukhtar regarding it. Thus he killed Umar
bin Sa’ad and sent his head to Muhammad bin Hanafiyah and wrote to him
that, “Wherever I will find them, I will kill them. While I am in
pursuit of the remaining ones who had participated in the murder of Imam
Husayn (a.s.)”.

Abdullah bin Sharik says, that I have seen men wearing fringed robes and
black caps and mounted, that when Umar passed by them, before he was
killed, they would say, “He is one of the murderers of Husayn”.

Ibn Sireen says, that Imam Ali (a.s.) had once told Umar bin Sa’ad,
**“***When you shall reach a place and shall have an option to choose
between paradise and hell, while you shall select hell”.*

Thereafter Mukhtar dispatched someone in pursuit of Hakim bin Tufayl
Ta’i, who had plundered the clothes of Abbas bin Ali (a.s.) and had shot
an arrow at Imam Husayn (a.s.), and would say, “My arrow pierced his
shirt but caused him no harm”. The companions of Mukhtar arrested him,
while he dispatched someone to Adi bin Hatim, so as to intervene on his
behalf. Adi spoke to those who had arrested him and they replied that,
“Option lies with Mukhtar”, thus he went to meet him. While Mukhtar had
accepted his intervention for some people of his tribe who were arrested
in the ground of Sabi’.

The Shi’ah said, “Perhaps he may accept intervention for him”, saying
this they shot arrows at him in penalty of the arrows that he had shot
at Imam Husayn (a.s.) and had made his body similar to the porcupine.
Adi went to Mukhtar, who made him sit with him, and he intervened on his
(Hakim’s) behalf. Mukhtar replied, “Is it that I should release the
murderers of Husayn (a.s.)?” Adi replied, “He has been falsely accused”.
Mukhtar said, “Then if it is true, we shall leave him to you”. Ibn Kamil
entered therein and informed Mukhtar of his murder.

Mukhtar said, “Why did you make haste in killing him and not bring him
to me?” while in his heart he was pleased by his murder. Ibn Kamil
replied, “The Shi’ah arrested him forcefully and killed him”. Adi told
Ibn Kamil, “Rather you speak a lie. You perceived lest the one who is
better than you might accept my intervention for him. Therefore you
killed him”. Ibn Kamil started abusing Adi, while Mukhtar restrained
him.

Thereafter Mukhtar dispatched someone in pursuit of the murderer of Ali
Akbar, Munqiz bin Murrah, from the clan of Abdul Qays, while he was a
valorous man. They surrounded his house, when he mounted his horse and
with a lance in his hand, attacked them. A sword was struck at his hand,
but he scattered from their midst and saved himself and reached Mus’ab
bin Zubayr. But his hand turned ill and worthless.

Then Mukhtar sent someone behind Zayd bin Riqqad Habbani, he would say:
I shot an arrow at one of the martyrs and fixed his hand upon his
forehead, while he was none other than Abdullah bin Muslim bin Aqeel. He
could not separate his hand and said, “O Lord! They consider our worth
to be less, and consider us to be wretched. Thus kill those who kill
us”. Then another arrow pierced his heart, and when I came to his head,
he had already died. Then I pulled out the arrow from his heart that had
killed him, I tried pulling out the arrow that had pierced his forehead
and shook it, and its handle came out but the point remained stuck. When
the companions of Mukhtar surrounded him, he attacked them sword in
hand. Ibn Kamil said, “Do not attack him with lances or swords, rather
shoot arrows and stones at him”. They brought him down to his feet by
shooting arrows and stones at him, and then burnt him alive (May Allah’s
curse be upon him).

Then Mukhtar dispatched someone to fetch Sinan bin Anas, who had claimed
to have killed Imam Husayn (a.s.). But he was informed that Sinan had
fled to Basra, therefore he ordered his house to be demolished.[^2]

Then he summoned Abdullah bin Uqbah Ghanawi, he too had fled to
(northwest) Mesopotamia, while his house too was destroyed. He had
killed a child at Karbala.

Thereafter a man from the clan of Bani Asad, viz. Hurmalah bin Kahil
Asadi was summoned, who had killed one of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) (Ali
Asghar), but he could not be caught.[^3]

Then he dispatched someone in pursuit of a man from Bani Khas’am named
Abdullah bin Urwah Khas’ami, who would say, “I shot twelve arrows at the
companions of Husayn”, but he too could not be arrested and had joined
Mus’ab bin Zubayr, while his house too was destroyed.

Then they chased ‘Amr bin Sabah Sada’i, who would say, “I wounded the
martyrs but killed none”. They arrested him and at night brought him to
Mukhtar, who ordered him to be killed with lances, until he died.

Muhammad bin Ash’as was pursued, who had taken refuge in his village in
the south of Qadisiyyah, but they could not lay their hands upon him,
for he had fled to Mus’ab. Mukhtar ruined his house, and with the clay
and bricks he repaired the house of Hujr bin Adi, which was destroyed by
Ziyad.

Ibraheem bin Malik Ashtar leaves for battle with Ubaydullah bin Ziyad
---------------------------------------------------------------------

In this way, eight days remained of the month of Zilhajj, when Ibraheem
bin Malik al Ashtar left for a combat with Ibn Ziyad. He left two days
after the incident of Sabi’. Mukhtar dispatched all the valorous,
handsome and wise, experienced, and trained men among his companions
along with him. He himself escorted him until the monastery of Abdul
Rahman bin Ummul Hakam. There they met the companions of Mukhtar, the
occupants of the ‘chair’, which they had established upon a red mule and
would pray for his victory. When Mukhtar’s sight fell upon them, he
said, “By the Lord Who sends forth with goodness one after the other!
They shall be killed horde after horde and the oppressors shall be
eliminated in thousands”.

Then he bade farewell to Ibraheem and said, “Remember these three things
from me: Fear Allah openly and in secret, hasten in proceeding further,
when you reach the enemy, do not give respite and leap upon them”.
Ibraheem left until he reached the occupants of the chair, who had
gathered around it and were praying with their hands raised towards the
heavens. Ibraheem said, “O Lord! Do not entangle us in the tasks of our
foolish men. By Him in Whose hands is my life! This is of the custom of
Bani Isra’eel, who had gathered around the calf”. The occupants of the
chair returned back while Ibraheem proceeded towards his goal.

Elimination of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad
-----------------------------------

Ibraheem bin Malik al Ashtar hastily left Kufa so as to reach Ibn Ziyad
before he entered the territory of Iraq. Ibn Ziyad, accompanied by a
huge army, had come from Syria and occupied Mosul. Ibraheem came and
passed by Iraq and entered Mosul. He appointed Tufayl bin Laqit Nakha’i,
who was a valorous man, to command the front line of his army.

Then when they neared Ibn Ziyad, he arrayed his army and arranged them
in ranks. He proceeded further, and for the sake of investigation he
dispatched Tufayl further and himself reached the river of Khazir of
Mosul. He positioned himself in a village therein named Barmisa. Ibn
Ziyad too came facing him and positioned himself near him on the banks
of the river Khazir.

Umayr bin Habbab Salami, one of the companions of Ibn Ziyad, secretly
sent a message to Ibn Ashtar that, “Meet me specially”. The entire tribe
of Qays had borne enmity with Abdul Malik ibn Marwan after the episode
of Marje Rahit, while the army of Abdul Malik was the same tribe of
Kalb. Umayr and Ibn Ashtar met one another, and Umayr said, “I am the
commander of the left wing of the army of Ibn Ziyad. And I promise to
abandon the left wing and flee away”.

Ibn Ashtar asked him, “What is your opinion? Should I dig trenches and
await for two three days?” Umayr replied, “Beware! The enemy does not
desire anything except this. Every delay will be a boon for them, who
are similar to you in numbers. The scant army in postponement does not
have power to ward off numerous enemies. Attack them without respite
while their hearts are still in awe. And if they blend with your army
and fight day by day and in turn become familiar with them, they will
turn audacious”.

Ibraheem replied, “Now I have realized that you are my well-wisher,
while Mukhtar too had advised me similarly”. Umayr replied, “Then obey
him, for he is an expert in warfare, while none is more experienced than
him in this, and fight them this very morning”.

Umayr returned to his army and Ibn Ashtar gnashed his teeth while sleep
did not enter his eyes. When it dawned, he prepared his army and arrayed
the groups while appointing commanders. He appointed Sulayman bin Yazid
Azdi upon the right wing of his army and Ali bin Malik Jashami upon the
left wing, while he was the brother of Ahwas. He gave the charge of the
cavalry to Abdul Rahman bin Abdullah, his foster brother, while his
cavalry were quite less in numbers. He appointed Tufayl bin Laqit to
command the foot soldiers and handed over his standard to Mazahim bin
Malik.

Nearing dawn, he recited the Prayers in darkness and arranged his
companions. He stationed the appointed ones in their place and himself
came on foot while encouraging his army. He gave them tidings of victory
and took them in joy upon the huge hillock that stooped down upon the
enemy. He was informed that none of them had moved from their place.

He dispatched Abdullah bin Zuhayr Salwani to investigate regarding it.
He returned back and said, “Everyone of them were in the state of fear
and indolence. One of them met me and they say: O Shi’ah of the Progeny
of Abu Turab! O Shi’ah of the liar Mukhtar! While I replied that what we
possess is far more important than abusing”. Thus Ibraheem mounted and
neared the standards, while he remembered that Ibn Ziyad had killed
Husayn and his companions and family and he also remembered the
captivity (of his women) and blockage of water, thus he incited them to
kill him.

The army of the enemy came face to face. Ibn Ziyad appointed Haseen bin
Nameer as the commander of the right wing of Syrians and Umayr bin
Habbab Salami upon the left wing. He gave the charge of the cavalry to
Sharhabeel bin Zil Kila’. Then when they neared, Haseen attacked the
left wing of Ibraheem with the right wing of the Syrians. Ali bin Malik
Jashami confronted him until he was killed.

Then Qurrah bin Ali lifted the standard and he too pressed in along with
a group of valorous men until he was killed, while the left wing started
to flee. Then Abdullah bin Warqa’ bin Janadah Saluli, the nephew of
Habashi bin Janadah, who was from one the companions of the Prophet of
Allah (S), lifted up the standard and took charge of the fleeing ones
and called out, “O Army of Allah! Rally around me”.

He then gathered most of them around him and said, “Your commander
himself is fighting Ibn Ziyad, come let us go to him”. They came back to
Ibraheem and saw that he had bared his head and was calling out, “O army
of Allah! Come to me. I am the son of Ashtar. The best fugitive is the
one who attacks once more, while the one who excuses from reattacking
has committed evil”. Thus his companions returned back to him.

The right wing of Ibraheem attacked Umayr bin Ziyad (or Habbab)
perceiving that Umayr would flee the battle as promised. But Umayr
confronted them severely and considered fleeing away to be a disgrace.
When Ibraheem saw this, he said, “We shall attack the vast central part
of their army with a group, and if we rout them from their place and
make them flee, those whom you see on our right and left, shall fly away
like frightened birds”. His army attacked one side together and fought
with one another with lances, swords and clubs and fought for some time.
The sound of iron sounded similar to the pounding of clothes by washer
men.

Ibraheem told his standard-bearer, “Take the standard into the ranks of
the enemy”. He said, “There is no way to proceed further”. Ibraheem
replied, “Yes, there is”, and when he took a step further, Ibraheem
attacked severely with his sword. And he threw anyone who came in his
way and crushed the foot soldiers as if they were a flock of cattle. His
companions too followed suit, while a fierce battle ensued. The army of
Ibn Ziyad started fleeing and numerous people from both the armies fell
upon the ground.

It is said that the first one to flee was Umayr bin Habbab, while his
earlier combat was just an excuse. When the enemy had fled, Ibraheem
said, “I have killed a man under the standard lonely upon the bank of
the Khazir river. Go and find him, for I smelt the fragrance of Musk
emanating from him. Both of his hands had fallen towards the east and
his legs towards the west”. They found him and he was none other than
(Ubaydullah) Ibn Ziyad, who had been divided into two by the sword of
Ibraheem, and as described by him. They took hold of his head and burnt
his body. (May Allah’s eternal curse be upon him and his associates, and
may he remain eternally in the lowest dent of hell).

Sharik bin Judayr Taghlubi attacked Haseen bin Nameer Sakuni and assumed
him to be Ibn Ziyad. They scuffled with one another and Taghlubi called
out, “Kill me along with this illegitimate one”, thus they killed
Haseen.

It is also said that Sharik killed Ibn Ziyad. Sharik had accompanied
Imam Ali (a.s.) in the battle of Siffīn and his eyes had become weak.
And when Imam Ali (a.s.) passed away, he went to Baitul Muqaddas and
settled there in seclusion. And when Imam Husayn (a.s.) was martyred, he
took an oath to Allah that if revenge for his blood would be sought, he
would kill Ibn Ziyad or himself be killed.

And when Mukhtar arose to revenge the blood of Imam Husayn (a.s.), he
turned towards him and accompanied Ibraheem to Jabhah. And when the
Syrian army was attacked, he split the ranks along with his companions,
who were from Rabi’ah, until he reached Ibn Ziyad.

Then dust arose, and none could see each other, and accept striking of
iron nothing could be heard. And when the dust settled, both, Sharik and
Ibn Ziyad had fallen down killed. But the first narrative is more
reliable (of Ibn Ziyad being killed at the hands of Ibraheem bin Malik
Ashtar). Sharik was the same one who had composed, “I consider every
life to be futile, accept the lances under the shadow of the horses”.

Sharhabeel bin Zil Kila’ Humayri too was killed, while Sufia bin Hasid
Azdi, Warqa’ bin Azib Asadi and Abdullah bin Zuhayr Salami each claimed
to have killed him.

Uyaynah bin Asma was along with Ibn Ziyad, and when the army of Ibn
Ziyad was routed and fled, he took along with him his sister Hind, the
daughter of Asma and wife of Ibn Ziyad, while reciting the following
Rajaz, “Then if you have severed our ropes, you have also flung valorous
upon the ground”.

When the army of Ibn Ziyad fled from the battle, the companions of
Ibraheem pursued them and threw them into the river, while those who
were drowned were mostly the murderers (of Imam Husayn). Then they took
hold of their barracks with all their provisions as booty.

Ibraheem sent the glad-tidings of victory to Mukhtar and he received it
in Madaen. Ibraheem dispatched his officials to the cities of Mosul that
were under their control. He appointed his (foster) brother Abdul Rahman
bin Abdullah upon Nasibayn and gave him dominance upon Sanjar and Darad
and its surroundings from the island of Arazi. He appointed Zafar bin
Haris as the governor of Qarqisiyah and Hatim bin Nu’man Bahili upon
Haran, Riha, Samisat and it’s districts. He also appointed Umayr bin
Habbab Salami the governor of Kafare Tawsa and Tawre Asabdayn, while
Ibraheem himself positioned at Mosul.

He then sent the head of Ubaydullah, along with that of his other
commanders, to Mukhtar and they were scattered in the palace. A small
snake was seen crawling among the heads and it entered the mouth of
Ubaydullah and came out of the opening of his nose. Then it entered
through the other opening of his nose and came out of his mouth, and
repeated this act several times. Tirmizi has quoted similarly in his
Jame’.

Mughirah says, that the first one in Islam to mint false coins was
Ubaydullah (bin Ziyad).One of the porters of Ubaydullah bin Ziyad
entered the royal palace along with him at the time of the martyrdom of
Imam Husayn (a.s.). Suddenly the face of Ibn Ziyad became ablaze, and he
wiped it by the sleeve of his shirt and told the porter, “Beware! Do not
relate this to anyone”.

Mughirah says, that after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.), Marjanah,
the mother of Ubaydullah, told him, “O unchaste! You killed the grandson
of the Prophet of Allah? You shall never see paradise”.

Here concludes that what is quoted from Kamil of Ibn Aseer.

It is quoted in Bihar al Anwar from Sawabul A’amal, through chain of
narrators from Ammar bin Umayr Tamimi, that when the head of Ubaydullah
bin Ziyad and his companions were brought, I went to them, and people
said, “It’s come, it’s come”. Suddenly a snake came and started crawling
in the midst of the heads. It entered the opening of the nose of
Ubaydullah and came out, and then entered through the other opening of
his nose.

It is related in Kamiluz Ziarat, through chain of transmitters from
Abdul Rahman Ghanawi in context of the narration, that soon Yazid was
inflicted, and after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) he did not
benefit, while he died suddenly. He slept at night in an inebriate state
and in the morning his corpse had turned black similar to tar and had
fallen prey to remorse. And there was none who had obeyed him in the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and fought with him, except that he had
turned insane or developed leprosy or paralysis, and this continued in
his progeny as inheritance.

It is related in Akbarud Dawl of Yusuf Qirmani, that Yazid was born in
the year 25 or 26 A.H. while he was stout, obese and with abundant hair.
His mother was Maysoon, the daughter of Bajdul Kalbi ... until he says
that, Nawfal bin Abil Furat says, that I was in the presence of Umar bin
Abdul Aziz when a man pronounced the name of Yazid along with the
epithet of ‘the Commander of the faithful’. Hearing this, Umar said,
“You address him as ‘the Commander of the faithful’?” saying this he
ordered him to be flogged twenty times.

Ru’yani in his Musnad relates from Abu Darda’, that I heard the Prophet
of Allah (S) as saying that, *“The first one to change my customs will
be from among the Bani Umayyah by the name of Yazid”.*

Yazid died in the month of Rabi’ul Ula 64 A.H. due to leprosy in Hawran.
His corpse was brought to Damascus where his brother Khalid, while some
say his son Mu’awiyah, recited Prayers upon his dead body. He was buried
in the graveyard of Baab al Sagheer, while his grave has now been turned
into a trashcan, while he lived for thirty-seven years and his caliphate
lasted for three years and nine months.

Thus ends the book ‘Nafasul Mahmoom fee Maqtal al Husayn al Mazloom’ on
the Asr of Friday, the twentieth of Jamadi’ul Akhar 1335 A.H.,
corresponding to the birthday of our Lady Sayyidah Fatemah Zahra (a.s.),
benedictions upon her, and upon her father (S), and upon her spouse
(a.s.), and her sons (a.s.), (composed) at the hands of the guilty
author, Abbas, the son of Muhammad Reza al Qummi, may Allah nullify his
faults, facing the dome (of the Mausoleum) of Imam Ali Reza (a.s.), a
thousand greetings and salutations upon His Eminence, and Praise be to
Allah at the beginning and the conclusion, and Allah’s benedictions upon
Muhammad (S) and his Chaste, Virtuous, and Infallible Progeny (a.s.).

The English translation of this felicitous book ends on Wednesday, 29
January 2003 A.D. i.e. 25 Zilqa’ad 1423 A.H., corresponding to the
blessed day of Dahw al Arz, at the hands of the humble-most adherer of
the threshold of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), Aejaz Ali al Husaynee.

[^1]: It has been narrated by Tabari in his Tareekh (Vol. 5) that when
Imam Hasan (a.s.) was taken to the white palace at Madaen, Sa’ad bin
Mas’ood, the uncle of Mukhtar, was alongwith him. Mukhtar went to his
uncle and said, “Do you not desire acquiring a higher position”? to
which Sa’ad asked, “And what is that”? Mukhtar replied, “Arrest Hasan
and hand him over to Mu’awiyah”. Sa’ad replied, “Woe be to you! Should I
arrest the son of the Prophet of Allah (S) and hand him over to his
enemy? What a degraded man are you”. This was the episode which provoked
resentment against Mukhtar. But the majority of Shi’ah historians refute
this and consider this episode to be a fabrication to malign the
devoutness of Mukhtar. While some are of the view that even if Mukhtar
did this, it was due to his dissimulation (Taqiyyah), for he was being
closely monitored by the spies of Mu’awiyah. He later sheltered Muslim
bin Aqeel and rendered assistance to him. As is related that when Muslim
bin Aqeel was arrested, Mukhtar had been to a village called Lafgha. He
was then arrested by Ubaydullah bin Ziyad and was imprisoned until Imam
Husayn (a.s.) was martyred. He was very much aggrieved and pledged to
avenge his death. Later he avenged the blood of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
put to sword numerous ones among his murderers, thus his pure and
genuine intentions can certainly be considered. And Allah is the ‘Best
Knower’.

[^2]: It is also related that Sinan bin Anas was arrested and brought to
Ibraheem bin Malik Ashtar, who told him, “Woe be to you! Are you capable
to speak the truth as to what you did on the day of Ashura in Karbala”?
Sinan replied, “I did not do anything else except looting some pieces of
Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s clothings”. Hearing this Ibraheem wept and ordered
the flesh of his thigh (or leg) to be cut to pieces, when he was on the
verge of death; Ibraheem beheaded him and burnt his evil corpse. May
Allah’s eternal curse be upon him.

[^3]: It is narrated from Minhal bin ‘Amr, that after returning from
Makkah, I went to Madinah to meet Imam Ali Zainul Abedeen (a.s.). I
saluted him and sat down. Imam asked me, “O Minhal! What news do you
have regarding Hurmalah bin Kahil Asadi”? I replied, “I found him alive
and safe while I left Kufa”. Hearing this Imam (a.s.) lifted his hands
towards the heavens and said, “O Lord! Let him taste the heat of iron. O
Lord! Let him taste the heat of the fire”. Thereafter I went to Kufa and
found out that Mukhtar had risen to seek vengeance from the murderers of
Imam Husayn (a.s.). I was friendly with Mukhtar and went to meet him and
he inquired regarding myself. Then we started walking until we reached
‘Kanaes’, where he halted, as if awaiting the arrival of someone.
Suddenly a group hastened towards him with the news that Hurmalah had
been arrested. When he was brought to Mukhtar, he said, “Praise be to
Allah Who has granted us power upon you, the enemy of Allah and His
Prophet (S)”. Then he called for the executioner and said, “Severe his
hands and feet”. They yielded, then he ordered fire to kindled and a
sword was placed in it until it turned red hot, then his neck was
severed with it. (May Allah’s eternal curse be upon him). Seeing this I
exclaimed, “Glory be to Allah”! Hearing this, Mukhtar asked me the
reason for glorifying Allah at that moment. I related to him the above
episode, hearing which he was overjoyed and dismounted from his mount.
Then he recited two units of Prayers and glorified Allah for a lengthy
period of time for offering him the grace of becoming a medium of
fulfillment of desires of Imam Zainul Abedeen (a.s.).


