The governor of Madina and Imam Husayn (a.s.)
=============================================

(Kamil) When Yazid had taken the oath of allegiance for the Caliphate
from the people, he wrote a letter to Waleed bin Utba informing him of
the death of Mu’awiyah. In a short letter he wrote, “Now then![^1] Ask
for the oath of allegiance from Husayn, Abdullah bin Umar and Abdullah
bin Zubayr, and do not give them respite until they do so.”

When Waleed read about the death of Mu’awiyah, he was alarmed and the
news disturbed him, thus reluctantly he summoned Marwan bin Hakam.
Marwan was the governor of Madina before Waleed, and hence when Waleed
became the governor, he hated and abused him while separating himself
from him for a long time until the news of the death of Mu’awiyah and
the demand of alle­giance from the people reached him. This being
difficult for him, he called for Marwan.

When Marwan came, Waleed read the contents of the letter to him. When
Marwan heard it he recited “Verily we are Allah’s and verily unto Him
shall we return”, and he prayed for blessings to be bestowed upon
Mu’awiyah. When Waleed asked his advice regarding the issue, Marwan
re­plied, “In my opinion, before announcing the death of Mu’awiyah,
summon these persons this very moment (and ask them to swear the oath of
alle­giance for Yazid). If they refuse, cut off their necks before they
learn about Mu’awiyah’s death. For if they become slightly aware of
this, each one of them will go away to different places and start
revolting, and shall claim themselves eligible for the Caliphate.”

Waleed called for Abdullah bin ‘Amr bin Usman, who was just a lad, to
summon Imam Husayn (a.s.) and Abdullah bin Zubayr to meet him. It was a
time when Waleed usually did not meet anyone. Abdullah bin ‘Amr saw them
seated in the Mosque and conveyed Waleed’s message to meet them. They
told him to go back and that they would soon follow him. Abdullah bin
Zubayr turned towards Imam Husayn (a.s.) and said, “In your opinion what
is the reason for Waleed to call us to meet him at this unusual hour”?
Imam re­plied, “I presume that their leader of rebels has died and he
has called us to swear the oath of allegiance to Yazid before the news
spreads among other people.” Abdullah too consented to it and asked as
to what he would do. Imam replied that he would go to meet Waleed
accompanied by some youths. (Irshad)

Then he called for a group from among his relatives and said,

*“Lift up your arms, for Waleed has called me at this hour and might
force me to do that which I detest. I do not trust him, thus remain with
me. When I go inside to meet him, you all sit at the door, and when you
hear my voice raised, barge inside to defend me.”*

When Imam came to Waleed, he saw Marwan sitting with him. Waleed gave
the news of the death of Mu’awiyah to Imam Husayn (a.s.), and he
recited: “Verily we are Allah’s and verily unto Him shall we return.”
Then Waleed read the letter of Yazid and his order to get the pledge of
allegiance for him. Imam replied,

*“I understand that you shall not agree if I swear the oath of
allegiance in secrecy and privately until and unless I do so pub­licly
so that people may be informed about it.”*

Waleed replied in the affirmative. Imam Husayn (a.s.) said,

*“In that case wait until dawn.”*

Waleed replied, “As you desire. You may go in Allah’s refuge, until you
come to me with the people.” Marwan said, “If Husayn goes away from your
midst without swearing the oath of allegiance, you will never have the
power to ask the allegiance again until much bloodshed between him and
you. Hence imprison him till he swears the oath of allegiance, or else
cut off his head.” Imam Husayn (a.s.) arose and said,

*“O son of Zarqa! Will you dare to kill me? Verily you have lied and
have sinned.”*

Saying this Imam Husayn (a.s.) came outside and returned back with his
men to his house. Then Marwan turned towards Waleed and said, “You
disobeyed me? By Allah! You will never be able to lay your hands upon
him.” Waleed replied, “Woe be to your soul which is your own enemy O
Marwan! You have advised me regarding that which would ruin my religion.
By Allah! I do not like to acquire the wealth and domin­ion over which
the sun rises and sets if it involved the killing of Husayn. Glory be to
Allah! I should kill Husayn simply because he refused to swear the oath
of allegiance? By Allah! I am convinced that whoever is asso­ciated with
the killing of Husayn, on the day of Qiyamah he (his deeds) will weigh
less in scales near Allah.” Marwan said, “If this is what you think,
then whatever you did is quite right.” Then he returned back dis­pleased
with him.

Ibn Shahr Aashob writes in Manaqib that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) went to
meet Waleed and read the contents of the letter, he said that he would
not swear the oath of allegiance (bay’ah). Marwan, who was present there
said, “Swear the oath of allegiance to the Commander of the faithful
(meaning Yazid).” Imam Husayn (a.s.) replied,

*“Woe to you! Verily you have attrib­uted falsehood to the believers.
Who has made him the Commander of the faithful”?*

Hearing this Marwan arose and unsheathed his sword and said, “Call the
executioner and tell to behead him before he leaves from here, and the
responsibility of his blood will be on my neck.” When voices were
raised, nineteen men from among the family of Imam barged in with
daggers and Imam Husayn (a.s.) went away with them.

When this news reached Yazid, he deposed Waleed and appointed Marwan as
the governor of Madina. After this Imam Husayn (a.s.) and Abdullah bin
Zubayr left for Makkah, and Abdul Rahman bin Abu Bakr and Abdullah bin
Umar were left untouched.[^2]

As regards Abdullah ibn Zubayr, when he received Waleed’s message he
replied that he would soon come, then he went to his house and hid
himself. Waleed followed him thereafter and saw that he had gathered his
friends and had segregated himself. Waleed pressed him but Abdullah said
that he wanted respite to think over. Then Waleed sent his slaves to
Abdullah who went and abused him saying, “You will have to come to us or
else he will slay you.” Abdullah said, “I am wary because of your
compulsion. Give me respite, so that I may dispatch one of my men to the
governor to ask what he wants from me.”

Then he sent his brother Ja’far bin Zubayr. Ja’far went to Waleed and
said, “May Allah’s mercy be upon you! Lift your hands off Abdullah for
you have frightened him. Tomorrow he will come to you Allah willing,
hence command your envoys to return back.” Waleed sent someone to call
back his messengers who returned back. On the same night Abdullah,
accompanied by his brother Ja’far, left for Makkah taking the road of
Fara’, and no one else accompanied them.

(Irshad) In the morning when Waleed was informed about his flight, he
sent a slave of Bani Umayyah with eighty horsemen, who galloped behind
him, but could not trace him hence returned back. And that day they
remained busy in the affair of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and dispensed with him
until the night approached.

In the morning Imam Husayn (a.s.) came out of his house to hear the
reports from the people, when he came across Marwan. Marwan said, “O Aba
Abdillah! I desire your goodwill, thus accept what I say until you reach
the road of righteousness.” Imam told him to say what he wanted to.
Marwan replied, “I say that you swear the oath of allegiance to Yazid,
for it will be better for your life of this world and the hereafter.”
Imam Husayn replied,

*“Verily we are Allah’s and verily unto Him shall we return. Peace upon
Islam if the nation gets trapped in the leadership of Yazid, for I have
heard my Grandfather say that Caliphate is forbidden upon the children
of Abu Sufyan.”*

Thus they started talking to each other and their correspon­dence
increased, in the end Marwan was offended and left.

On the same day Waleed sent some people to the presence of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) so that he may come to swear the oath of allegiance. Imam
replied,

*“Let morning dawn and we shall see and you too shall see.”*

When they heard this they did not force him and returned back. On the
same night he left from Madina, and it was the night of twenty-eighth of
the month of Rajab. He left accompanied by his sons, brothers, nephews
and his family members except Muhammad ibn Hanafiyah. Muhammad was not
aware as to where he would go and hence said,

*“O brother! You are most dear and beloved near me and hence you are
most worthy for the gift of advice. Keep away from Yazid bin Mu’awiyah
and from the renowned cities as far as you can. Scatter your messengers
around and invite people towards yourself. If people obey your command
and swear fealthy to you, offer Praise to the Almighty, and if they
leave you and gather around someone else, your intellect and religion
will not be lessened. And your valor and mercy will not diminish. I fear
lest you go to a renowned town wherein a group of people supports you
while the others may rebel and thus you may fall prey to their lances.
At that time, the one who is the best person among all the people with
regard to himself and his parents, his blood may spill and his family be
humiliated.”*

Imam Husayn (a.s.) replied,

*“O dear brother! Where should I go to”?*

Muhammad replied,

*“Go to Makkah, and halt there. If you find relief, settle there for
that is what you seek. And if the climate does not suit you, go towards
Yemen. If you find safety therein, stay or else take refuge in the
deserts and mountains. Then go from one place to another until you find
out the position of the affairs of the people. At that moment your
decision will be the best opinion.”*

Imam Husayn (a.s.) replied,

*“O brother! You have advised rightly and I wish that your advise may be
firm and trium­phant.”*

Then he went to the Mosque and recited the following couplets of Yazid
bin Mufarri’:

*“Neither will I offend the grazing cattle in the morn­ing, nor shall I
be called Yazid. There will never come the day when I will yield
submissively, and death watches me to back off.”*

[^1]: Amma Ba’ad: A formulary phrase linking introduction and actual
subject of a book, letter or speech

[^2]: As regards Marwan the son of Hakam bin As, his animosity towards
Prophet Muhammad (S) is quite renowned. The Holy Prophet (S) had
banished Hakam bin Aas from Madina due to his rancor against Islam along
with his son Marwan (Ref. Tareekh - Abul Fida, Milal wan Nihal -
Shahrestani, Ma’arif - Ibn Qutaybah Page 94, Isti’ab - Ibn Abdul Birr
Page 118-119, Isabah - Ibn Hajar Vol 1: Page 344, Riyazun Nazarah -
Muhibuddin Tabari Vol 2: Page 143). Thus Marwan was often addressed as
“Tareed ibn Tareed” (the exiled and son of the exiled). When Usman bin
Affan ascended the Caliphate, he called both of them back, being himself
from the Bani Umayyah, and presented them with lavish gifts and went to
the extent of marrying one of his daughters to Marwan. Marwan’s hatred
towards the Prophet’s Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) came to light when Imam Hasan
(a.s.) was martyred and his body was brought to the grave of the Holy
Prophet (S) to be buried along side him. It was Marwan, who along with
with the other Bani Umayyah objected strongly against doing so. He
started reciting: “O Lord! Battle is better than ease. Should Usman be
buried in the outskirts of Madina and Hasan be buried along side the
Prophet? That will never be while I carry a sword.” After which arrows
were shot at the body of Imam Hasan (a.s.) and he had to be buried, in
accordance to his will, at Jannatul Baqi’ (Ref. Rawzatus Safa - Muhammad
bin Khawind Shah Vol 3: Page 7, Tareekh - Abul Fida Vol 1: Page 183,
Rawzatul Manazir - Ibn Shahnah Vol 2: Page 133, Tareekhe Kamil - Ibn
Aseer Vol 3: Page 182). Marwan’s grandmother Zarqa, the daughter of
Wahab, was a renowned prosti­tute (Ref. Kitaban Niza wat Taqasum, Page
20 - Ahmad bin Ali Maqrizi) In the above episode Imam Husayn (a.s.)
refers to him saying “O son of Zarqa” thus announcing his ignoble
descent.


