Discourse of Allamah Majlisi in Biharul Anwar
=============================================

Allamah Majlisi relates in Bihar al Anwar that Muhammad bin Abu Talib
Musawi says, that when Waleed received the letter to slay Imam Husayn
(a.s.) it was very hard upon him and he said,

*“By Allah! May Allah not let me witness the murder of the son of His
Prophet, even if Yazid gives me the entire the world and whatever is
contained therein in lieu of it.”*

It is said that one night Imam Husayn (a.s.) stepped out of his house
and went to the head of the grave of his Grandfather and said,

*“Salutations be upon you O Prophet of Allah! I am Husayn the son of
Fatima (a.s.). I am your beloved and the child of your beloved. I am
your son whom you have left as your heir among your* *ummah. Thus O
Prophet of Allah! Be a witness that these people have deserted me and
neglected me while refusing to protect me. This is my complaint to you
until I come to your presence.”*

Then he arose and started reciting the Prayers, constantly bowing and
pros­trating. Waleed went to his house to inquire whether the Imam had
left Madina or no. When he saw that the Imam was not there he said,
“Thanks to Allah that he has left and I have been saved from being
indicted and in­volved in spilling his blood.” Then Imam returned back
to his home and on the second night he again went to the grave of the
Holy Prophet (S) and recited some units of Prayers. After finishing the
Prayers he said,

*“O Allah! This is the grave of Your Prophet, and I am the grandson of
Your Prophet. You are aware as to what has befallen me. Verily I cherish
virtue and righteousness and abhor evil. O Lord of Glory and Honor! I
adjure You by the right of this grave and the one who is buried therein,
to bring forth for me that which is approved by You and Your Prophet.”*

Imam con­tinued weeping until the morning, then he placed his head on
the grave and slept for a short time. He dreamt that the Prophet (S),
surrounded by the Angels from the left, right and front, coming towards
him. The Prophet came near and pressed Imam Husayn (a.s.)’s head to his
chest. Then he kissed him between his eyes and said,

***“O my beloved Husayn! It is as if I see you smeared in blood at the
place of grief and trials, and a group from among my people have
beheaded you, and you are thirsty while they do not quench your thirst.
In spite of this they desire my intercession (on the day of Qiyamah).
May Allah keep them away from my intercession. O my beloved Husayn! Your
Father, Mother and Brother have come to me and they are desirous of
meeting you. And you have acquired such a lofty position in Paradise,
that unless you attain Martyrdom you shall not get there.”***

Imam looked at his Grandfather and said,

*“O Grandfather! I do not desire to return back to this world. Please
take me along with you and enter me into your grave.”*

The Prophet replied,

*“You should return back (towards the world) and attain Martyrdom, and
thus gain whatever great rewards Allah has reserved for you. For on the
day of Qiyamah, you, your Father, your Uncle and Yours Father’s Uncle
shall arise as a distinguished group until you all enter Paradise.”*

Imam Husayn (a.s.) arose from his sleep alarmed and nar­rated his dream
to his family and the progeny of Abdul Muttalib. On that day no one in
the world was more grievous and sorrowful than the family of the Holy
Prophet (S).

Thus, Imam Husayn (a.s.) started making preparations for the journey.
During midnight he went to the graves of his Mother Hazrat Fatima (a.s.)
and his Brother Imam Hasan (a.s.) to bid them farewell.

In the morning when he returned back to his home, his brother Muhammad
ibn Hanafiyah came to him and said, “O dear brother! You are most dear
and beloved to me than anyone else. And I will not refuse to advise
anyone except you, being most worthy of it, for you are from me, and are
my life, my spirit and my eyes and the elder of my family. Your
obedience is obligatory upon me for Allah has exalted you over me and
has chosen you as the Master of the Youth of Paradise.” Then he recited
the entire Tradition narrated by the Prophet (S) viz.

*“Hasan and Husayn are the chiefs of the youth of Paradise.”*

Then he said, “I desire that you go to Makkah, if you find peace, stay
there, and if the matter turns out to be different, then go to Yemen,
for the people therein are among the helpers and followers of your
Grandfather and Father. And they are the most kind hearted and merciful
among men, while their towns and cities are vast. Then if you can halt
there, do so, if not, then seek shelter in the deserts and
mountain-caves and go from one town to the other until you witness the
state of affairs of people, and may Allah judge between us and the group
these of evil-doers.”

Imam Husayn (a.s.) replied,

*“O brother! Although there is no place left in this world for
sheltering me, I shall never ever swear the oath of alle­giance to
Yazid.”*

Hearing this Muhammad ibn Hanafiyah concluded his speech and started
weeping and the Imam too wept. Then he said,

*“O Brother! May Allah reward you favorably, for you have advised me and
have opined righteously. As regards yourself O dear brother! You may
stay behind in Madina and be alert and keep informing me about the
affairs of the enemies.”*

Then Imam Husayn (a.s.) asked for paper and pen and wrote the following
recommendation for his brother Muhammad bin Hanafiyah:

*“In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful. This contains that
which has been willed by Husayn bin Ali bin Abi Talib to his brother
Muhammad re­nowned as Ibn Hanafiyah. Verily Husayn bears witness that
there is no Lord except Allah Alone. And bears witness that Muhammad (S)
is the Slave and the Messenger of Allah, who has been righteously chosen
by Him. And that Paradise and hell are truth, and without doubt the day
of Qiyamah will come. And Allah will arise all those who are buried
inside their graves. I have not risen to spread evil or to show off, nor
for spreading immorality or oppression. But I have left for the
betterment of the ummah of my Grand­father and I desire to propagate the
Religion and forbid against evil, thus following the footsteps of my
Grandfather and Father Ali bin Abi Talib (a.s.). Thus the one who
accepts truth through me, will have received truth from Allah, while the
one who betrays me, I shall forebear until Allah judges between myself
and the oppressive creed and verily Allah is the Best Judge. This is the
testimony to you from me O brother. And my favors is with Allah Alone on
Whom alone I rely, and my return is towards Him.”*

Then he folded the letter and affixed his seal on it and gave it to his
brother Muhammad ibn Hanafiyah and bade him farewell and left in the
darkness of the night.

Muhammad bin Abu Talib says that Muhammad bin Ya’qoob has related in
Wasael from Muhammad bin Yahya, from Muhammad bin Husayn, from Ayyub bin
Nuh, from Safwaan, from Marwan bin Isma’il, from Hamza bin Humran who
says that we questioned Imam Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) regarding the
uprising of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and the lagging behind of Muhammad ibn
Hanafiyah in Madina. Imam replied,

*“O Hamza! I shall relate to you a report after which you will never put
forward such questions to me in any gathering. When Imam Husayn (a.s.)
intended to leave Madina, he called for the paper and wrote therein: In
the Name of Allah the Beneficent, the Merciful. This is from Husayn bin
Ali bin Abi Talib to the Bani Hashim. Now then! The one who accompanies
me shall be martyred, while the one who separates from me will not
attain success and peace. Salutations.”*

Conversation of Angels with Imam Husayn (a.s.)
----------------------------------------------

Shaikh Mufeed has narrated through his chain of transmitters, that Imam
Ja’far as Sadiq (a.s.) said, that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) left Madina, a
group of Angels, having distinct marks, met him on the way. They carried
swords in their hands and had mounted the horses of Paradise. They came
to Imam, saluted him and said, “O Allah’s Proof (Hujjah) upon the
creatures after your Grandfather, Father and Brother! Allah the Glorious
had rendered help to your Grandfather through our medium in many of his
battles, and has now sent us to assist you.” Imam replied,

*“The promised land is called Karbala, thus you may come to me there.”*

They said, “O Proof of Allah! You may command whatever you desire and we
will comply to it and obey you. If you fear the enemies we shall defend
you against them.” Imam replied,

*“They have no way upon me and they will not be able to hurt me until I
reach my (destined) mausoleum.”*

The army of genie in defense of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
--------------------------------------------------

Numerous groups of Muslim genie came to Imam Husayn (a.s.) and said, “O
our Master! We are your adherents and helpers thus we shall fulfill your
command, whatever it be. If you desire we will halt here and slay all
your enemies.” Imam replied,

*“May Allah reward you with goodness! Haven’t you read the Qur’an which
was revealed to my Grandfather, wherein is stated:*

***“Wherever you be, death will overtake you, even if you be in towers
(strong and) lofty.” (Surah an-Nisaa’, 4:78)***

*and it is stated,*

***“Those for whom slaugh­ter was ordained would certainly have gone
forth to the places where they (now) lie (slain).” (Surah aal-‘Imraan,
3:154)***

*Then if I remain in this place, how would this unfortunate nation be
tested and tried? And who will lay in my grave in Karbala. (On the day)
When Allah the Glorious spread the earth, He chose that land for me. And
has made it a place of refuge for my followers (Shi’ah) so that they
might find peace there under in this world as well as the hereafter.
Come to me on Saturday, for I shall be martyred in the end of the week
on the tenth. No one from among my family, friends, brothers and
relatives will remain alive after my death, my head will then be taken
to Yazid.”*

The genie said, “O friend of Allah! And O the son of the friend of
Allah! If the obedience of your orders would not have been obligatory on
us and killing would not have been unlawful, we would surely have killed
all your enemies before they reach you.” Imam replied,

*“By Allah! We are competent enough to kill them than you. But the
intention is that one should be killed with (presenting valid) proofs
and reasons, and should be guided with proofs and reasons.”*

In other words, the Imam did not wish that they be destroyed before
submitting his proofs unto them. (Here ends that which has been quoted
in the book of Muhammad bin Abi Talib)

Dialogue of Umm Salama (a.s.) with Imam Husayn (a.s.) during his journey
------------------------------------------------------------------------

Allamah Majlisi says that I have read in some books, that when Imam
Husayn (a.s.) decided to leave Madina, Umm Salama (a.s.) came to him and
said, “O my dear son! Do not aggrieve me by going towards Iraq. For I
have heard your Grandfather say that my son Husayn will be killed in
Iraq at a place called Karbala.” Imam replied,

*“O dear Grandmother! I too am aware of it and I shall be forcefully
killed while there is no escape from it. By Allah! I know the day when I
shall be killed and recognize my murderer besides being aware of the
Mausoleum where I shall be buried. And I know all those people among my
family, relatives and followers who shall die along with me. And I wish
to show you the place where I shall be buried.”*

Then he pointed towards Karbala and the land there at arose and he
showed her the places where he would be buried, where he would lay
martyred, the site of his encampment, and the place where he would halt.
When Umm Salama saw this she wept bitterly and offered all decree to the
Almighty. Then Imam said,

*“O Grandmother! Allah Almighty desires to see me killed and that my
head be severed with cruelty and injustice. Besides (Allah) desires that
my family and womenfolk be expelled, and my children oppressed, bare
headed, arrested and bound in chains. And they would plead and call out
for help, but none would come to their aid.”*

In another tradition it is stated that Umm Salama told Imam Husayn
(a.s.) that, “I have with me some sand which your Grandfather had given
and which lies in a bottle.” Imam replied,

*“By Allah! I shall be killed even if I do not go to Iraq.”*

Then he lifted a handful of earth (from the land of Karbala which had
risen) and giving it to Umm Salama said, “Mix this with the sand in the
bottle given to you by my Grandfather, when it turns into blood, know
that I have been martyred.” (Here ends the quotation of Biharul Anwar).

Conversation of Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari with Imam Husayn (a.s.)
-----------------------------------------------------------------

Sayyid Bahrani in Madinatul Ma’ajiz quotes from Saqibul Manaqib, and
others quote from Manaqibus Sua’da that Jabir bin Abdullah Ansari says,
that when Imam Husayn (a.s.) intended going towards Iraq, I came to his
presence and said, “You are the son of the Prophet of Allah (S) and one
of his two endeared grandchildren. I do not hold any other opinion
except that you too enter into a peace treaty (with Yazid) as your
brother had done with Mu’awiyah, and verily he was trustworthy and
rightly guided.” Imam Husayn replied,

*“O Jabir! Whatever my brother did was ordained by Allah and the
Prophet, and whatever I shall do too shall be according to the command
of Allah and His Prophet. Do you wish that at this very moment I invite
the Holy Prophet, Imam Ali, and my brother Hasan) to testify regarding
my action”?*

Then Imam looked towards the heavens, suddenly I saw that the doors of
heavens opened ajar and Prophet Muhammad (S), Imam Ali (a.s.), Imam
Hasan (a.s.), Hazrat Hamza (a.s.), Hazrat Ja’far at Tayyar (a.s.) and
(my uncle) Zaid descended from the heavens upon the earth. Seeing this I
became frightful, when the Prophet said,

*“O Jabir! Did not I inform you prior to Husayn during the time of
Hasan, that you would not become a believer unless you surrendered to
the Imams and not object to their actions? Do you desire to see the
place where Mu’awiyah will dwell and the place of my son Husayn and of
his murderer Yazid”?*

I replied in the affirmative. Then the Prophet (S) struck his foot onto
the ground and it tore apart and another ground ap­peared beneath. Then
I saw a river flowing, which also tore apart, under­neath which was
another ground. Thus seven layers of the ground and rivers ripped apart
(one below the other) until there appeared hell. I saw that Waleed bin
Mughirah, Abu Jahl, Mu’awiyah and Yazid were bound together in a chain
along with the other rebellious Satans. And their torment was more
severe than that of the other people of hell. Then the Holy Prophet (S)
com­manded me to lift my head. I saw that the heavens had opened their
doors and Paradise was apparent. Then all those blessed people who had
descended from there returned back. When they were in the air the
Prophet (S) called out to Imam Husayn (a.s.),

*“Come and mingle with me my dear Husayn.”*

I saw that Husayn (a.s.) ascended too and joined them onto the high
status in Paradise. The Holy Prophet (S) then caught hold of the hand of
Husayn (a.s.) and told me,

*“O Jabir! This son of mine is here along with me, submit to him and do
not fall in doubt so as to become a believer.”*

Jabir says that, “May both my eyes turn blind if whatever I have seen
and related from the Prophet is false.”


