Introduction
============

Pluralism is in vogue.  As the Bangladeshi newspaper*Dainik Janakantha*
editorialized in June 5th, 2001, “…it is the age of achieving freedom.
It is the age of singing songs of triumph of pluralism over
authoritarianism.  It is the age of exception, the age of difference,
and the age of proclaiming the victory of mankind and diversifying the
sources of creativity.”[^1]   Unfortunately, the current daunting
reality does not endorse such a positive outlook.   As I write, news has
just come in of another suicide bombing in Iraq that killed two hundred
people, leaving countless lives devastated, and further reducing any
remaining element of trust in the country.  How are Iraqis to reconcile
their own internal religious differences while dealing both with
military intervention by a foreign power and a civil conflict?  It seems
that hopes for a pluralistic religious society in Iraq are fading away.
Across the world, the paradigm of hope has been replaced by many
sentiments of pessimism.  With today’s challenges, is there a hope for
the survival of religious pluralism?

In*The* *Clash of Civilizations* , Samuel Huntington states that the
dominant characteristic of the post-Cold War global environment is
violence between different ethnic and religious groups.  In his thesis,
Huntington argues that the primary axis of conflict in the future would
be along cultural and religious lines.  Many disagree with Huntington’s
thesis that the world’s traditions are inherently and inevitably in
conflict with each other. However, the daily news headlines make it
clear that far too much violence in our world is related to religious
differences.  On September 11th, 2001, the world witnessed a vicious
attack on human civilization.  The attacks in New York and Washington,
D.C. struck at symbols of American prosperity and power.  In turn, many
people in America have identified the enemy as another symbol - a
monolithic Islam diametrically opposed to the democratic West.  As a
result, many people believe that Huntington’s thesis has become a true
prophecy manifested in the clash of religions between Christianity and
Islam.   In response to the September 11th terrorist attacks, Europe,
America and many other countries enacted anti-terror laws (i.e. the USA
PATRIOT Act) that have made many Muslim men and women in these countries
feel that they are viewed with apprehension and even serious suspicion.
These sad realities question the validity of the discourse of religious
pluralism and indicate that there are very real, serious dangers to the
development of religious pluralism.  In fact, the whole notion of
religious pluralism is in turmoil.

The political philosopher Michael Walzer wrote that the challenge of a
multicultural society is to embrace its diversity while maintaining a
common life.  This suggests the need for all communities within a
diverse society to take responsibility for embracing a shared life while
maintaining their uniqueness.[^2]   For Walzer, it is this dynamic that
leads to the ideal pluralist society as a “community of communities.”
Otherwise, a chasm of ignorance between different religious communities
can too easily be filled by bigotry, often turning into violence and
hatred.  However, the question remains: How can we have a common life
while maintaining our uniqueness in a changing world?  Once again, the
hopeful visions for the “ triumph of

pluralism” and the “common life” seem very utopian at a time of great
crisis in our world.  Today, the world faces the ‘War on Terror’ and
global militarization.  Sadly, waves of local as well as global violence
have overtaken the pillars of religious pluralism and threaten to
escalate beyond all control.  The tragic, unpredictable events in many
regions cast their shadows over collective efforts to live in a
pluralistic and peaceful world.

However, it is precisely during such times of adversity, ideological
fundamentalism and absolutist exclusivity, that the world is most in
need of voices and forces of sanity, reason, and moral responsibility -
the genuine building blocks of religious pluralism.  As we witness
attempts at imposing a simplistic view of a Manichean universe,
polarization, and reductively stereotyping good and evil, we are most in
need of those who will engage in a redemptive validation of pluralism,
tolerance, diversity, authenticity of identity, and a comprehensive
engagement in collective responsibility.  The increasing reality of
interaction between cultures and religious traditions makes religious
pluralism not only impossible to ignore, but an obligatory task for
human empowerment and change.  Religious pluralism seeks to give a voice
and an audience to the silenced as well as grant a sense of legitimacy
to the excluded.

Religious groups tend not to ask themselves why the “other” thinks of
them the way that they do.  At the 2003 American Academy of Religion
Annual Meeting in Atlanta, sociologist of religion Robert Wuthnow was
asked how he thought faith communities were adapting to religious
pluralism in close quarters.  He used the metaphor of an elevator: Jews,
Christians, Muslims, and the rest of world’s religions are all riding it
together.  They are increasingly aware of the other people around them,
but they are doing just about everything they can to avoid a real
interaction.  To deal with the reality inside this “world-elevator,”
Diana Eck founded the “Pluralism Project” at Harvard University in 1991
in order to study and document the growing religious diversity of the
United States, with a special view to its new immigrant religious
communities.  Eck suggests that religious pluralism is only achieved by
the intentional and positive engagement of differences.[^3]   Mere
diversity, Eck maintains, is simply the fact that people from different
backgrounds live in proximity to each other.  For Eck, pluralism, on the
other hand, is when people from different backgrounds seek mutual
understanding and positive cooperation with each other.

What can scholarship in religious studies offer to the realm of
religious pluralism?  Scholars of religious study attempt to gain as
comprehensive a view of human thought and action as possible.  These
scholars are not satisfied with examining only what the social sciences
defines as “religion.”  Instead, many scholars find religiousness and
spirituality expressed in almost all human endeavors.  They move behind,
before, beyond, as well as into areas called “religion” in order to
encounter those ideas, images, and actions that express the ultimate
meaning of existence for people in a certain time and place.  Religious
studies scholars are concerned with religious ideas, images, and actions
regardless of the context in which they may occur.  They examine
religious beliefs, commitments, and devotion as part

of the comprehensive enterprise of trying to understand how humans
express notions of ultimate order and meaning.  For them, the issues of
power, loyalty, and identity are religious because they pertain to
ultimate order and meaning.  These are the issues that begin to fashion
the religion of the pluralistic culture.  They create pluralism because
they affirm a set of values beyond traditional allegiances.  Diversity
becomes pluralism, creating symbols, ideas, rituals, and myths that
maintain the worth of plurality.  Pluralism becomes a religious
phenomenon, and a study of the culture of religious pluralism becomes
more than an enterprise in the social sciences.

The scope of this essay is twofold.  First, this essay is a study of
religious pluralism.  By pluralism, I refer not to the fact there is a
plurality of religions in the world, but to the intellectual responses
to this plurality in the field of religious studies.  For some scholars
it is a response asserting some measure of equal standing between the
major religious traditions.  They maintain that God or the Absolute is
speaking uniquely to each religious tradition, and it is through the
ecumenical efforts of each tradition that the others will come to hear
the unique word that God or the Absolute has spoken to it.[^4]     The
question of truth becomes a question of the reliability of our ideas and
assumptions.  Correspondingly, they deny types of uniqueness and
absoluteness claimed for one religion or another.  For others, religious
pluralism refers to an ideological or normative belief that there should
be mutual respect between different religious systems and freedom for
all.  They hold that peaceful coexistence between different religious
systems is preferable to enmity between them.  Second, this essay will
examine some of the factors evident in the current situation of
religious pluralism from the perspective of the scholarship of religious
studies.  That is at least the task I have set myself.


