An Overall View: the Meanings of Religious Pluralism
====================================================

Before beginning to discuss the intellectual responses to religious
pluralism, some definitions and common challenges in today’s world of
religious pluralism should be briefly identified.  Discussing pluralism
is a complex matter.  The term pluralism is used to cover many aspects
of the society in question - ethnicities, political ideologies, economic
theories, genders, religions, and even, as found in some religious
educational literature, a variety of methodological techniques,
teachers, students, and philosophies of education.  The term religious
pluralism, which is now in widespread use, reflects various realities
and has different meanings.  Classical approaches in religious and
sociological studies to understanding religious pluralism offer two
possible models: the assimilation model of a cultural melting pot and
the functionalist model of social disorder.  Neither appears adequate in
the task of understanding contemporary religious pluralism.  For
example, new religious immigrants are not steadily assimilating into the
Western way of life, but are actively engaged in a process of
transforming it.  Most importantly, most of us wish to avoid social
chaos as a result of religious pluralism. We would rather prefer the
emergence of society that celebrate religious pluralism and social and
religious systems that increasingly accommodate plurality.

For some scholars, pluralism points to a state of society in which
members of diverse ethnic, racial, religious or social groups maintain
an autonomous participation in the development of their groups within
the confines of a common civilization.  In certain contexts, religious
pluralism can also refer to the plurality and pluriformity of societies,
which have been a reality since long ago.  Historians point out that
pluralism as an ideology was stressed most vigorously in England during
the early 20th century by a group of writers, including Harold Laski and
R.H. Tawney, who were reacting against what they alleged to be the
alienation of individuals under conditions of unrestrained
capitalism.[^5] They argued it was necessary to integrate the
individuals in a social and religious context which could give them a
sense of community.  A historical example of such a society was the
medieval structure of guilds, chartered cities, villages, monasteries,
and universities in Europe of the 16th century.

For the British sociologist James Beckford, the religious pluralism
characteristic of “Western democratic” societies to date has been a
pluralism based on the right to religious freedom.[^6]   This right, at
the collective level, means that religious diversity is not simply de
facto but also*de jure* .  In this sense the various policies of
tolerance in Europe from the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries,
which to a varying extent enabled minority faiths not to disappear, were
not yet a product of religious pluralism, Beckford argues.  In other
words, religious pluralism is inseparable from the political modernity
which was established in Europe and the United States near the turn of
the eighteenth century.[^7]

For Beckford and other scholars, religious pluralism is understood as a
political principle.  Strong pluralism needs to be based on the right of
individuals to religious freedom.  Some scholars distinguished between

several forms of religious pluralism.  In the diachronic perspective, a
distinction is drawn between an emancipatory pluralism pertaining
strictly to the individual’s right to religious liberty (and entailing,
in particular, a de-ethnicization of religion), and a pluralism of
identities marked by the demand from different religions for full and
equal recognition of their individuality.  The real diversity of
national models of emancipatory pluralism is also explained by the
antithesis between individualistic pluralism and communitarian
pluralism. “Individualistic pluralism” is founded on the freedom
(independence) of individuals, whereas “communitarian pluralism” is a
reaction to the assertion of modernity (rise of secularization and
establishment of societies based on the individual).[^8]  Since this
reaction is forced to take cognizance of the new situation with regard
to religious pluralism, it (re)creates, within society as a whole, a
faith-based community that is closed and hostile to modernity.

Ole Riis, a Danish sociologist, has observed that the concept of
religious pluralism may be used “in a descriptive and evaluative
sense.”[^9]   But, for Beckford, religious pluralism signifies a social
and political system which grants every religion equal respect and
facilities for individuals to practice their own religions without
hindrance.  This involves allowing for the individuality of each
religion and not turning the specific features of the dominant religion
into the standard practice.  In fact, such pluralism would be “strong
pluralism,” according to Beckford’s term.  In Beckford’s opinion, fact
and value should be kept separate from each other for the sake of
clarity.  He therefore believes that the term “religious diversity”
should be used to describe empirical reality.  On the other hand,
religious pluralism is a very specific way of considering this
diversity, being “an ideological or evaluative response to empirical
diversity” based on mutual respect between different religious systems
with the aim of peaceful coexistence for the various religions.

Much of the philosophical discussion on religious pluralism continues
to center on the works of John Hick.  Hick has focused his attention on
the differences between the various world religions.  His basic
pluralistic contention is not that different religions make no
conflicting truth claims.[^10] In fact, he believes that the differences
of beliefs between (and within) the traditions are legions and has often
discussed these conflicts in great detail.  His basic pluralistic claim,
rather, is that such differences are best seen as, different ways of
conceiving and experiencing the one ultimate divine reality.” However,
if the various religions are really “responses to a single ultimate
transcendent reality,” how then does one account for the significant
differences among these basic theistic systems?  Hick’s explanation is
that this limitless divine reality has been thought and expressed by
different human mentalities forming and formed by different intellectual
frameworks and devotional techniques.[^11]

Some scholars note that religious pluralism is more likely to generate
conflict in societies where the dominant religion retains sovereignty as
the operative religion of the social system.  Religious pluralism is
less likely to generate conflict in societies in which the value of
religious freedom is upheld by the operative religion of the social
system, whether or not the

dominant religion retains sovereignty as the operative religion.[^12]
For years, sociologists of religion used to point out that pluralism
undermined participation in religion and agreed that the relationship
was negative.  The best-known version of this theory was advanced by
Peter Berger.[^13]   He argued that religious pluralism reduces
religious vitality through its effect on plausibility.[^14]  The more
worldviews there are, the less plausible each seems, and as a result,
the less religious belief and activity there will be.  Over the last
decade, this theory has been challenged by advocates of religious
economics or a “supply-side” model of religious activity.  Led by Roger
Finke and Rodney Stark, the challengers have argued that the traditional
view is backwards; religious pluralism can be positively associated with
religious participation.  For them, the key mechanism is not
plausibility, it is competition.  Starting from the assumption that
“religious economics are like commercial economies,” they argue that
competition among religious groups increases the quantity and quality of
religious products available to consumers and, consequently, the total
amount of religion that this consumed.[^15]

Religious pluralism can assume many different forms.  To be more
precise, pluralism can refer to an ideological or normative belief that
there should be mutual respect between different cultural systems and
freedom for them all.  It holds that peaceful coexistence between
different cultural systems is preferable to enmity between them.  It
sometimes suggests that a state of balance in the importance attached to
different religious systems is better than an ideological monopoly or a
very one-sided relationship between a dominant system and subordinate
systems. Pluralism is not diversity alone, but an energetic engagement
with diversity.  Pluralism is not just tolerance*,* but the active
seeking of understanding across lines of difference.  It means holding
those deepest differences, even our religious ones, not in isolation,
but in dialogue and a relationship with one another.


