Religious Pluralism: Common Challenges
======================================

At this time it is appropriate to briefly highlight some common
challenges and difficulties in present-day worlds of religious
pluralism.

Secularization
--------------

Secularization has diverse meanings.  Secularization theory offers an
easy answer to the problem of pluralism: religious pluralism does not
matter because in a secularized social system, religion does not
matter.  One of the secularization theory’s ironies is that it does not
necessarily mean that religion becomes unproblematic.  On the contrary,
religious pluralism becomes more controversial and challenging precisely
at the time when secularization is in the process of losing some of its
significance as a force shaping social and cultural life.

Religion and State

In England today, it seems that the practical problems raised by
religious pluralism all call into question the status, the nature, and
the significance of the Church of England.[^16]   Some scholars outline
the current debate on possible solutions for reforming religious
representation in the House of Lords in order to take into account the
increasing religious diversity in England.  They explain the various
options, together with the underlying issues, advantages, and drawbacks
of each.  Some scholars propose solutions that have long characterized
this type of debate in England: disestablishment, political
institutionalization of religious plurality, or the legal status quo
with a rewriting of the role played by the Church of England.

Forced Conversion
-----------------

An obvious issue of difficulty is the missionary activity of some
religions which occurs when the superimposition of one’s own criterion
upon the other is followed by efforts to convert the other.  Difficulty
ensues when this desire and direction to carry one’s preaching and
teaching to others is made in a militant or exclusive manner.  Religious
pluralism seeks to promote the freedom of religion and conscience as a
fundamental human right.  In this situation, religious pluralism, which
is based on the right to religious freedom can be in turmoil.

Exclusive Claims
----------------

The phrase “religious exclusivist” is sometimes used by philosophers
such as Peter van Inwagen as a label for anyone who claims that his or
her perspective on a religious issue is true and that any incompatible
perspective is false.  Exclusivists say that their religion is the only
true religion and that those who adhere to it are saved.  A dangerous
threat to the creative contribution of pluralism is that at times, some
members of religions with exclusive claims react to the challenge of
pluralism with militant exclusivism.  This may generate a violent
ideological fundamentalism.  The fallacy of fundamentalism, or even
divine intervention and dispensation, can be exploited to justify
absolutism and exclusivity, thereby ending all hope of a solution based
on dialogue, while claiming unrestricted license to kill and destroy.


