Scholarly Perspectives on Religious Pluralism
=============================================

Wilfred Cantwell Smith[^17]
---------------------------

Wilfred Cantwell Smith says that theology needs to be true to a modern
perception of the world.  His rejection of supernaturalism can also be
discerned in the writings of some contemporary religious pluralists.
Smith rejects the idea that God has constructed Christianity in favor of
the idea that God has inspired us to construct it, as He/She/It has
inspired Muslims to construct what the world knows as Islam, or…Ramanuja
to write his theological commentaries.  He also rejects the idea that,
“God has given Christianity privileged statutes,” and he adds that the
assumption by Christians that they have been accorded quite special
treatment by God, available to no one else in like measure is
“theologically wary.”[^18]  He instead affirms “pluralism,” according to
which the figure of Christ is only one from among others (through) which
God has entered history, so that we can hold that God has played in
human history a role in and through the Qur’an, in the Muslim case,
comparable to the role in the Christian case in and through Christ.
Smith’s rejection of the idea of God as an omnipotent being who, whether
always or only sometimes, simply determines the events of our world, is
suggested by his statement that part of the truth about God is that “God
is confronted with recalcitrance…of us human beings.”[^19]

Smith strongly urges the necessity of learning each other’s religious
language and thought forms.  Only then will the vocabulary problem be
solvable.  As a contribution to the process that one must go on while
learning their language, Smith offers the following suggestion as a
possible basis for discussion between theists and non-theists: “by the
term God one means a truth-reality that explicitly transcends
conception, but in so far as conceivable is that to which man’s
religious history has at its best been a response, human and in some
sense inadequate.”[^20]   Smith strongly urges that our understanding of
each other’s concepts be anchored in history, even for
history-transcending and self-transcending concepts such as God.  The
problem is that some religions claim that truth is not anchored or
revealed in that historical process, but in the reality that is behind
or beyond it.

In his book,*Toward a World Theology* , Smith gives careful attention to
the importance of language in religious dialogue.  Although he agrees
that knowledge of each other’s language is essential, he takes a further
step in suggesting the need for some common operational or generic terms
in which communication across religions can take place. He proposes the
construction of conceptual categories to facilitate dialogue and
attempts to begin this by redefining the terms faith, salvation,
theology, and God.  Some scholars see a very real danger in this
approach as the construction of such categories will lead to the
formation of a meta-language, which would be yet one more thought form
to add to those already existing.  The best safeguard against such a
danger, they claim, would be to let the various religions speak as much
as possible in their own language and thought forms.

Mircea Eliade[^21]
------------------

Mircea Eliade’s great works*The History of Religious Ideas* and*Patterns
in Comparative Religion* show he dared to interpret all phenomena (i.e.
ideas, rituals, myths, symbols, and sacred texts) and illuminate the
meaning of each by its relationships and interconnections to each
other.  Above all, as in the interpretation of art, Eliade insisted that
the interpreter of religion needs to locate and interpret not the
period-pieces of religion but the classics; those original religious
expressions of the sacred which remain highly particular in both origin
and expression.  These classics, for Eliade, also disclose the universal
reality of the religious as the manifestation of the cosmos and,
ultimately, of Being itself.[^22]   By focusing major attention on the
interpretation of all religious classics in all religions, moreover,
Eliade’s interpretation theory may hold a singular clue to understanding
the elusive phenomenon of religion.[^23]   By taking this approach,
Eliade welcomed the other, the different, and the many as equal
participants in the religion of the cosmos that unites all humanity and
as equal participants who could teach modern mankind the fuller meaning
of a new humanism that would finally take seriously the whole of
humanity.[^24]   Eliade’s approach teaches us that the interpreter of
religion must be willing to interpret the claim to the attention of the
other in order to understand even the self.  In seeking dialogue with
the archaic other, one needs to pay attention to the archaic traditions
alive in the world as well as to remember one’s own repressed archaic
heritage.  The archaic is as the “Other,” but must not be allowed to be
merely a projected Other.  Its memory lives even now: memory heals,
memory liberates, and memory manifests the power and rhythms of the
sacred cosmos itself.[^25]   That cosmos the archaic traditions can
teach us to see anew with the always youthful eyes of their healing
memory.

Ninian Smart[^26]
-----------------

Ninian Smart argues that the philosophy of religions should be extended
to the philosophy of worldviews in order to develop a new understanding
of religious pluralism.  For Smart, the Western philosopher of religious
studies deals at the intellectual level with a relatively simplified
system of ideas in comparison with the complexities of the modern
systematic interpretation of Christianity and Judaism.   He argues that
the philosophy of religions should be broader.[^27]   Thus, the new term
“the philosophy of worldviews” seems more appropriate.   The philosophy
of worldviews is tied to worldviews as they actually exist in the world
as well as their developmental historical contexts.  Such a philosophy,
Smart claims, is closer to the analysis of reality which is absent in
the modern philosophy of religions.  The task, then, is to clarify the
criteria for determining the truth between the different worldviews and
outline an inventory of considerations relative to the truth of
worldviews.  These considerations are related to consistency, tension,
epistemological tension, rivalry, ethical insights, and psychology.
This makes systematic theology more difficult, but richer.  For Smart,
the major consequence of applying this philosophy is the sense of
inclusiveness that becomes requisite for reflections on the nature and
the destiny of human beings.  Smart argues that a major consequence of
his intellectual enterprise is that, “the philosophy of worldviews
reminds one how much the practical and the theoretical are interwoven in
humankind’s system of belief in a way

which leads to a gap between epistemology and commitment, that is,
between the softness of evidence and the deep meaning of a movement or
tradition.”[^28]    A serious challenge to Smart’s views is how to
define the term “worldview” and “religion.”  These terms remain so very
ambiguous and possibly could have so many conflicting interpretations.

Stephen Kaplan[^29]
-------------------

Stephen Kaplan argues that religious pluralism is a modern position born
not out of openness of one religious tradition to another, but rather
out of a philosophical attempt to confront the confluence of cultural
boundaries and the growth of relativism.  For Kaplan, the major world
religions are not traditionally pluralistic; they are either
exclusivistic or inclusivistic.  For Kaplan, exclusivism tells us that
there is no salvation outside of one particular religious tradition,
whereas inclusivism extends the possibility of salvation to those
outside its fold.  However, the means of salvation and the form of
salvation are restricted to that which is found within the inclusivist’s
tradition.[^30]   Kaplan proposes in*Different Paths, Different Summits:
A Model for Religious Pluralism* a new form of religious pluralism,
namely an ontological and stereological pluralism.

In Kaplan’s book, the aim is to, “attempt to envision how more than one
religious tradition can be ultimately true, not penultimately true; ….to
conceptualize the logical framework in which ultimate reality may be
conceived as plural, not singular.”[^31]   Moreover, Kaplan provides a
metaphysical system whereby people may view religion as simultaneously
existing, equally valid, and (perhaps) mutually exclusive, yet not
contradictory.  In this metaphysic, there may exist multiple
ontologies.  Each is to be viewed on its own terms and judged within its
own stereological providence.  Kaplan constitutes a valid religion by
the efficacy of its stereological solution to the human condition.  To
this end, he utilizes the model, provided initially by David Bohm, of
holography.[^32]   Bohm’s goal is to use the holographic model to
explain the possibility of viewing both quantum mechanics and relativity
theory as simultaneously existing and mutually exclusive, but not
contradictory.  Using this holographic model as a guide, Kaplan
indicates that 1) both domains logically demand the other; 2) both are
simultaneously existing and neither is logically prior; and 3) both are
interpenetrating.[^33]

Kaplan chooses to use Bohm’s holographic model in order to understand
particular stereological solutions as professed by three specific
religious traditions.  The stereological solutions with their
representative religions are: theistic salvation according to Richard of
St. Victor, monistic non-dualistic liberation as represented by the
Advaita Vedantin, and the process non-dualistic liberation of the
Yogacara Buddha. With these traditions, Kaplan achieves a variety of
religious perspectives and places them, complete with their ontological
perspectives, within his metaphysical system.  In this form of religious
pluralism, different individuals with different beliefs and religious
practices reach different conclusions to the human existence - or
different stereological conclusions.  This model proposes that within
one, and only one, metaphysical universe can there be different
ontological natures.  Each of these equal and simultaneous

ontological natures provides different individuals with the opportunity
to achieve different stereological ends; different forms of liberation
or salvation.  In this form of religious pluralism there are many
different paths as well as many different summits.  With regard to the
issue of ultimate truth, Kaplan argues that being right does not
necessitate that someone else is wrong.  On this basis, one does not
demand that the other abandon or denigrate their claims to truth in
order to ensure one’s own claims to truth.

Harold Coward[^34]
------------------

Harold Coward argues that the history of religions shows that each
religion rose in a religiously plural environment and shaped itself in
reaction to that pluralism.  For Coward, religions and philosophies
responded to pluralism in different ways.  Some religious philosophies
attempted to reduce all religions to one universal faith implying that
all religions are really the same.  This view has been considered
unacceptable by many major religions like Christianity and Islam.  For
Coward, this view leads to a violation of the principles of religious
freedom.  Some philosophies suggested that the various religions have
never been distinct entities.  Coward responds that in their
instrumental forms, religions have constantly borrowed from and
interacted with each other.[^35]   Another common feature that Coward
observes in the history of religions is that the superimposition of
one’s own criteria of validity upon another religion can lead to tension
and isolation.

Coward attempts to indicate six presuppositions upon which the religious
dialogue of the future should be grounded.[^36]    These presuppositions
are: (1) that in all religions there is experience of a reality that
transcends human conception; (2) that reality is conceived in a
plurality of ways both within each religion and among all religions, and
that the recognition of plurality is necessary both to safeguard
religious freedom as well as to respect human limitations; (3) that the
pluralistic forms of religion are instrumental in function; (4) that due
to our finite limitations and our simultaneous need for commitment to a
particular experience of transcendent reality, our particular
experience, though limited, will function in an absolute sense as the
validating criterion for our own personal religious experience; (5) that
the Buddha’s teaching of critical tolerance and moral compassion always
must be observed; and (6) that through self-critical dialogue we must
penetrate even further into our own particular experience of
transcendent reality (and possibly into the transcendental reality of
others).

For Coward, a basic prerequisite for future dialogue is that all
participants have accurate information about each other’s religions.
Fulfilling this prerequisite is probably the single largest obstacle to
the success of religious dialogue.  Coward notes that the majority of
people today are illiterate of their own religion as well as the
religion of others.  Therefore, the academic discipline of religious
studies has a major role to play in overcoming this problem.[^37]
Intellectual knowledge of the belief systems of all religions is needed,
but will not be sufficient by itself.  For Coward, one will not be able
to emphasize the sense of transcendent reality that the forms of each
religion seek to convey if only surface or basic intellectual knowledge
is achieved.  Thus, true empathy and understanding

require that we learn each other’s language, for therein are the
important nuances of transcendent experience that are often lost in
translation.  Coward points out that the educational prerequisite for
future dialogue is a stiff and a serious one, requiring dedication and
effort from all who would partake of this dialogue.  Pluralism should be
based on dialogue*.*   In this conext, he proposes that the language of
pluralism is that of dialogue and encounter, give and take, and
criticism and self-reflection.  Dialogue means both speaking and
listening, and that process reveals both common understandings and real
differences.

John Rawls[^38]
---------------

“The Fact of Pluralism”, as John Rawls calls it, has not merely
developed by means of migration, but rather through communication and
the global disintegration of communication barriers.[^39]   For Rawls,
pluralism has led to a differentiation of social positions, which have
created incommensurable philosophical, religious, and moral positions
through the process of modernization.  These can no longer be reduced to
former value system, due to the democratic structure of the occidental
world.   Rawls’ idea is to prove that the “Fact of Pluralism” does not
create indifference or even skepticism, but rather the opposite in the
search of modern societies for (even if only minimal) forms of consensus
building, which enables the survival of plurality according to Rawls.
He adds his central question, which at the same time is a central
question for religions, inter-cultural education: “How is it possible,
that there may exist over time a stable and just society of free and
equal citizens profoundly divided by reasonable religions,
philosophical, and moral doctrines?”  For Rawls, if one acknowledges
that there is always certain coherence between the “other” and
“oneself,” one also has to acknowledge that the “other” remains
constantly different.  There is no way to homogeneity by trying to make
the different alike.   For Rawls, the recognition of a pluralist society
underwent several stages:

The first stage is the confessional pluralism dating back to the
medieval days.  These developments are most visible in the effects of
the Reformation through its social and religious impacts with the
falling apart of a unifying religious concept.

A second stage is the social phenomenon of “class pluralism” dating back
to the early days of industrialization in Europe.

A third stage is the appearance of secularization and accompanying
ideologies leading to socio-religious as well as political plurality.

A next stage seems to be the cultural pluralism dating back to migration
movements (labor and political conflicts) since the middle of the 20th
century.  This process has gained momentum in recent years due to
increased political upheavals and ecological devastation as well as
related natural catastrophes.  This development includes the growth of
religious pluralism in many Western communities.

The present economic situation (globalization) supports development,
which can be termed ethnic and religious plurality.  The function and
role of the nation-state is of lesser and lesser importance and a new
momentum stems from the struggle of minorities for traditional
religious-cultural, including territorial settings. Thus, within a
culturally unifying attempt of

economic globalization, the plurality of the local gains a new momentum
in what is often termed the “village world.”

Economic globalization is an abstraction that is often discussed in
exclusively economic terms.  It is progress measured according to
improvements in the infrastructure, in industrialization, and in a
nation’s GNP –all in the belief that growth in these fields will
ultimately raise the quality of people’s lives.  And it will, but
quality of life depends also on other factors that are frequently left
out of the equation.  One such consideration is humanitarianism, and
human rights, which recognizes the common humanity shared by each and
every individual.  Another related concern that places the individual
squarely in the context of his or her community is culture and religion.
Closely related to both is the question of identity.  Sociologists tell
us that every individual plays a multiplicity of roles related to the
family, the workplace, and a host of communities ranging from the
religious to the political.  In other words, we all possess diverse and
divergent identities that make each of us unique.

Sayyed Hossein Nasr[^40]
------------------------

In his article “To Live in a World with No Center - and Many,” Sayyed
Hossein Nasr gives several of his reasons for a pluralistic
worldview.[^41]   According to Nasr, the very existence of human life
requires living with a meaning-giving center to which all aspects of
human life are related.  For Nasr, the existence of such a center is
necessary for avoiding a life of chaos.  Only through orienting our
lives towards a meaning-giving center can we eliminate the dangers of
nihilism, atheism, and other ideologies that threaten the sacred aspect
of human life.

Nasr argues that Western civilization created a center that underlied
all aspects of human life during medieval times.  Although this center,
or homogenous worldview, has been challenged in many aspects since
medieval times, Nasr argues that ethical life survived until recent
decades without being challenged seriously.  However, during the past
few decades, even the, “very foundations of the ethical norms” have been
challenged.  Other developments, such as new nihilistic philosophies,
various attempts at the revision of history, and the deconstruction of
sacred scripture and well-known works of literature, have helped create
a chaotic and centerless world where our absolute values have lost their
ultimate point of reference, Nasr argues.

Nasr explains that pluralism has been widely considered the only
alternative to this centerless worldview.  According to Nasr, one of the
most important reasons why pluralism has been so important, especially
during recent times, is that given the present world situation, we can
no longer isolate ourselves from exposure to other religious, cultural,
and ethnic diversities.  This exposure helps us understand and
appreciate the true nature and value of the other.  For Nasr, several
developments, especially in the United States, have prepared the ground
for a more pluralistic appreciation of the other.  In today’s United
States, one can easily see that there are multiple religions, along with
diverse cultural and ethnic identities.  Thanks both to migration and
conversion in the North American continent, there are numerous types of
religious people.  Accordingly, Nasr argues that the

diverse religious and philosophical currents and ethic groups have
helped strengthen a more pluralistic consciousness.  Given the
pluralistic context of the present world, he says that, “on the
religious level, it becomes even more difficult to assert the truth of
only our religion while denying any truth to the religions of
others.”[^42]

Although he affirms the value of pluralism, Nasr is very concerned about
the loss of the notions that give meaning and value to our lives.  He
writes:

“But what about the question of truth? And what about the principles of
human action, the ethical norms by which we must live as individuals and
also members of a human collectivity? Can we simply affirm pluralism
with total disregard for the truth and falsehood of things or have a
view of the world without a frame of reference?”[^43]

In Nasr’s view, any pluralistic position that will encourage the loss of
our values is deeply problematic.  Such loss would bring about
destructive consequences.  For Nasr, the reality of pluralism cannot be
ignored, so we can no longer live in a nostalgic world whether or not
there be only one center.  Considering the dangers of a centerless
world, relativism and nihilism are likewise not real options. But,
“there is also another possibility, which is to be able to live in a
world with many centers while confirming the reality of the center of
our own traditional universe.”[^44]  The real solution to the issue of
pluralism, Nasr further holds, lies in accepting, “the transcendental
unity of religions at the level of the Absolute,” endorsing the fact
that, “all paths lead to the same summit.”[^45]   He believes that his
version of pluralism, according to which there is only one Absolute and
all manifestations of the Absolute are relatively absolute,[^46] can do
justice to all the traditions.

For Nasr, every religion and culture is based on a center from which
moral, social, intellectual, and artistic values stem.  The real task
before us, therefore, is to live in a way that appreciates the value and
importance of these various religions and cultures without falling into
the dangers of sheer relativism and nihilism.  How is that possible?
What is the constructive part of Nasr’s argument that will make it
possible to live in the midst of such multiplicity and diversity without
falling into sheer relativism?  Contrary to those who see diversity as
an inevitable cause for “the clash of civilizations;” Nasr argues that
diversity does not necessarily imply such a clash.  The reason for this
argument lies in the considerable similarities among various
traditions.  In Nasr view, “there is a remarkable unanimity in the
various traditional religions and philosophies, which provide the
guiding principles concerning the meaning of human life, the
significance of the good as the principle of human actions, and the
presence of a transcendent dimension to human existence.”[^47]  Nasr
argues that although there are many theological differences among these
religious traditions, those differences are “overshadowed by the reality
and presence of the Ultimate.” Therefore, those differences possess a
secondary importance for Nasr.

Martin Marty[^48]
-----------------

Martin Marty argues that, “… it is impossible to make sense of the
Native-, African-, European-, Asian-, or Hispanic American peoples and
their traditions without engaging in profound exploration of their
religious

dimensions.”[^49] As a religious historian, he has confidence that free
societies are going to continue to possess religious pluralism as well
as agencies that care about the religious education of that society.
The challenge for Marty is how to learn to live creatively with them.
Marty also suggests that pluralism can mean three things:[^50] 1) “It
can grow simply out of the empirical reality, the given situation, the
morning news.” By this he means that when we look at the Western culture
there are many groups of various kinds, and he illustrates with
religious groups (at least 440) to which must be added the number of
sects, cults, causes, and cells; and that we look out on a nation in
which there are a great number of religious realities. 2) Pluralism can
mean “political resolution, the polity which allows a people to have a
civic peace.”  For example, in United States, “it is agreed that any and
all religious groups, as long as they keep certain general norms and
standards of the society - a society that has the broadest norms ever
known - are fully welcome.  Most importantly, there is not to be a
privileged group and there are not to be liabilities against those who
keep the civic peace.” 3) Pluralism can mean “philosophical pluralism.”
Here, Marty is taking about whether people view reality as cohesive with
a single center, or if it is in some way plural.  Marty says that as
long as pluralism exists, one can live creatively with it and therefore
make the best of it.


