Notes
=====

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1]*“Call to Resist Fundamentalism,”* *Dainik Janakantha* *, June 5,
200: [^16]: Cited in* *World News Connection: Near East and South Asia*
*, FBIS-NES-2001-0608, June 8, 2001.*

[^2] Miller, David and Michael Walzer. Pluralism, Justice, and Equality
( New York: Oxford University Press, 1995): 283-[^88]:

[^3] Eck, Diana. A New Religious American (San Francisco:
Harper-Collins, 2001): 14-[^18]:

[^4] Coward, Harold. Pluralism: Challenge to World Religions (Maryknoll:
Orbis Books, 1985): [^9]:

[^5] Champion, Francoise. “The Diversity of Religious Pluralism.”
International Journal on Multicultural Societies (IJMS), Vol. 1, No. 2,
1999: 40-[^44]:

[^6] Ibid., [^44]:

[^7] Ibid., [^50]:

[^8] Ibid., [^45]:

[^9] “Modes of Religious Pluralism under Conditions of Globalization.”
UNESCO MOST Journal on Cultural Pluralism, vol. 1, [^1999]: (Internet
access)

[^10] Hick, John. God Has Many Names (London: Macmillan, 1980): 2-[^10]:

[^11] Hick, John. “Whatever Path Men Choose is Mine,” in Christianity
and Other Religions (New York: Columbia University Press,
1963):180-[^183]:

[^12] Machacek, David. “The Problem of Pluralism.” Sociology of Religion
2003, 64:2: 145-[^61]:

[^13] Peter Berger is an American sociologist and theologian and well
known for his work “ The Social Construction of Reality : A Treatise in
the Sociology of Knowledge .”

[^14] Chaves, Mark and Philip Gorski. “Religious Pluralism and Religious
Participation.”  Annual Review of Sociology , 2001, Vol. 27 Issue 1:
261- [^79]:

[^15] Ibid., 261-[^263]:

[^16] Beckford, James. “Politics and Religion in England and Wales.”
Daedalus 120, 1991(3): 179-[^95]:

[^17] Wilfred Cantwell Smith (1916-2000) is widely known for his work on
Islam, especially his commitment to cross-cultural comparison.  Smith is
perhaps better known for his work on methodology (that is, his studies
on how one ought to go about studying religions), his interest in
developing a global theology of religious pluralism, as well as his
administrative work in helping to establish/revive centers for pursuing
the academic study of religion in general, or Islam in particular.
Major works: Toward a World Theology: Faith and the Comparative History
of Religion.

( Source: http://www.as.ua.edu/rel/aboutrelbiowcsmith.html )

[^18] Smith, Wilfred Cantwell. Towards a World Theology: Faith and the
Comparative History of Religion (Maryknowll: Orbis Press, 1981): [^61]:

[^19] Ibid., [^61]:

[^20] Ibid., [^66]:

[^21] Mircea Eliade ( 1907-1986 ) was a Romanian historian of religion,
fiction writer and philosopher.  He was a professor at the University of
Chicago .  As a scholar of religion, he traced the primordial myths and
symbols common to different cultures and pointed out the importance of
hierophanies (manifestations of the sacred in everyday life). (Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mircea\_Eliade )

[^22] Tracy, David. Dialogue with the Other: The Inter-religious
Dialogue. (Louvain: Peeters Press, 1990): 52-[^57]:

[^23] Ibid., [^53]:

[^24] Ibid., 52-[^57]:

[^25] Ibid., 56-[^58]:

[^26] Ninian Smart (1927-2001) was classically trained at Oxford
University in languages, history, and philosophy.  But as a scholar of
religion that he made his lasting international mark, notably at (among
the many other universities at which he taught) the University of
Lancaster, in the UK, and the University of California at Santa
Barbara.  He played a pivotal role in helping to establish thriving
programs in the academic study of religion--a role that had much to do
with his many writings on the proper method for conducting the

public study of religion, as well as his well-known cross-cultural
research on many of the world's religions.  Major works: Worldviews:
Cross-cultural Explorations of Human Beliefs (1982) and Dimensions of
the Sacred: An Anatomy of the World's Beliefs (1996).

(Source: http://www.as.ua.edu/rel/aboutrelbiosmart.html )

[^27] Smart, Ninian. “The Philosophy of Worldviews, or the Philosophy of
Religion Transferred,” in Religious Pluralism and Truth: Essays on
Cross-Cultural Philosophy of Religion. Thomas Dean, editor. (Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1995): 17-[^31]:

[^28] Ibid., [^30]:

[^29] Stephen Kaplan is a professor of Indian and Comparative Religions
at Manhattan College in Bronx.  Kaplan has published articles in a
number of edited volumes and journals such as Philosophy East and West,
Journal of Indian Philosophy, Journal of Asian Philosophy, Zygon,
Journal of Religious Pluralism, and Eastern Buddhist and another book on
Indian and comparative philosophy.

(Source:
http://www.manhattan.edu/academics/arts/rels/faculty/stephen.kaplan.shtml
)

[^30] Kaplan, Stephen. Different Paths, Different Summits: A Model for
Religious Pluralism (New York: Rowman and Littlefield, 2002): [^4]:

[^31] Ibid., 4-[^7]:

[^32] Holography (from the Greek , Όλος-holos whole + γραφή-graphe
writing) is the science of producing holograms; it is an advanced form
of photography that allows an image to be recorded in three dimensions
.  The technique of holography can also be used to optically store,
retrieve, and process information.

(Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holography )

[^33] Kaplan, Different Paths, 7-[^9]:

[^34] Harold Coward is a professor in the Department of History at the
University of Victoria, Canada, and the founding Director of the Centre
for Studies in Religion and Society.  His areas of concentration have
been Indian philosophy and religion, Hinduism, and Comparative
Religion.  Major works: Pluralism in the World Religions.  (Source:
http://www.mcmaster.ca/ua/alumni/gallery/coward.htm )

[^35] In this venomous age of Jewish-Arab conflict, it is easy to forget
that there once was another age in which Jews, Christians, and Muslims
lived shoulder to shoulder in cultural, political and social harmony.
During the Golden Age in medieval Spain, Jews, for example, played
prominent roles in politics, art, commerce and all major areas of social
discourse side by side with their Christian and Muslim brothers and
sisters.  They did not hate each other’s religion.  On the contrary,
their respective theologians learned from each other and used the wisdom
learned to enrich their own religion's discourse.

[^36] Coward, Harold. Pluralism: Challenge to World Religions.
(Maryknoll: Orbis Books, 1985): 105-[^106]:

[^37] Ibid., 107-[^110]:

[^38] John Rawls ( 1921- 2002 ) is an American philosopher .  He was a
professor of political philosophy at Harvard University and author of A
Theory of Justice (1971), Political Liberalism , Justice as Fairness: A
Restatement , and The Law of Peoples .  (Source:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John\_Rawls )

[^39] Rawls, John. The Law of Peoples: with the Idea of Public Reason
Revisited (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1999): 20-[^23]:

[^40] Seyyed Hossein Nasr is a professor of Islamic Studies at the
George Washington University, Washington D.C.  He is one of the most
important and foremost scholars of Islamic, Religious and Comparative
Studies in the world today. Nasr is the author of over fifty books and
five hundred articles which have been translated into several major
Islamic, European and Asian languages.  Major works: Religion and the
Order of Nature and The Heart of Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity.

(Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seyyed\_Hossein\_Nasr )

[^41] Nasr, Seyyed Hossein. “To Live in a World with No Center—and
Many.” Cross Currents 46/3 (Fall 1996): 318-[^25]:

[^42] Ibid., [^321]:

[^43] Ibid., [^321]:

[^44] Ibid., [^321]:

[^45] Ibid., [^117]:

[^46] Ibid., 117-[^18]:

[^47] Ibid., [^321]:

[^48] Martin Marty has taught in the Divinity School and the Department
of History of the University of Chicago since [^1963]:  He specializes
in late eighteenth and twentieth-century American religion.  Marty is
past president of the American Academy of Religion, the American Society
of Church History, and the American Catholic Historical Association.
The author of over fifty books, Marty has written the three-volume
Modern American Religion.

(Source: http://divinity.uchicago.edu/faculty/marty.shtml )

[^49] Marty, Martin. The One and the Many (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1998): [^196]:

[^50] Marty, Martin. “This We Can Believe: A Pluralistic Vision.”
Religious Education [^75]:01, Jan-Feb 1980: 1-7.

[^51]“*Mandela Urges Implementation of Gender Equality,” SAPA, March 25,
1998, cited in* *World News Connection: Sub-Saharan Africa* *,
FBIS-AFR-98-084, March 25, [^1998]:*
