Part 2 : What Is Society?
=========================

A society consists of groups of human beings who are linked together by
means of specific systems and customs, rites and laws, and have a
collective social existence. Collective life is that in which groups of
people live together in a particular region, and share the same climate
and similar foodstuffs. Trees of a garden also \`live' together and
share the same climate and the same kind of nourishment. In the same
manner, gazelles of a herd also graze together, and migrate toge­ther
from place to place. But neither trees nor gazelles can be said to have
a social life, as they do not form a society.

Human life is social in the sense that it is essentially gregarious. On
the one hand human needs, benefits, satisfactions, work, and acti­vity
are social in essence, and the social system cannot be maintained but
through division of labour, division of profits and a shared common
satisfaction of needs within a particular set of traditions and systems.
On the other hand, specific ideas and ideals, temperaments, and habits
govern human beings in general, giving them a sense of unity and
integ­ration. In other words, society represents a group of human
beings, who, under the compulsion of a series of requirements and under
the in­fluence of a set of beliefs, ideals and goals, are amalgamated
with one another and are immersed in a continuum of collective life.

The common social interests, and particular ties of human life unite
human beings together, giving to every individual a sense of unity
similar to that experienced by a group of people travelling together in
an automobile or an aeroplane or a boat, heading towards the same
destination, and sharing together the common hope of reaching the
destination safely, the dangers of the way, and a common fate.

How beautifully the Prophet of Islam (S) has described the philo­sophy
of \`enjoining right conduct and forbidding indecency' (al-'amr bil
ma'ruf wa nahy \`an al-munkar) by means of the following parable:

A group of people board a ship that sets sail on the sea tearing apart
the waves. Every one of them has a seat reserved for him. One of the
travellers claiming that the seat occupied by him belonged to none other
than him, starts making a hole under his seat with a sharp tool. Unless
all the travellers immediately hold his hand and make him desist from
doing so, they would risk drowning not only themselves but would also
fail to save the poor wretch from being drowned.

