Part 3 : Is Man Social By Nature?
=================================

The problem regarding the factors responsible for the emergence of
social life in human beings, has-been raised from the ancient times. Is
man born with the instinct of gregariousness, i.e. whether he was
naturally created as a part of a whole, with an urge in his nature to be
united with the whole; or if he was not created as a gregarious being,
but external compulsions and determinism imposed upon him a collective
life? In other words, is he by nature inclined to live freely, and is
disposed not to accept any kind of obligations and restrictions which
have been imposed upon him, although they may be essential for social
life? Has he in fact learnt from experience that no one is able to
continue one's life in isolation, and so he has been forced to surrender
to limitations imposed by social life? Or, although he is not gregarious
by nature, the factor that persuaded him to accept social existence was
not compulsion, or at least compulsion had not been the sole factor? Or,
was it by the ruling of his reason and through his faculty of
calculation that he arrived at the conclusion that only through
co­operation and social life could he better enjoy the gifts of nature,
and, therefore, he chose to live in company with other human beings?
Accordingly, the problem can be posed in three ways:

(i) Man is social by nature;

(ii) he is social by compulsion;

(iii) he is social by his own choice.

According to the first theory, man's social life is similar to the
partnership of a man and a woman in married life; each of the partners
was created as a part of a whole, and, by nature, yearns to be united
with the whole. According to the second theory, social life is like
co­operation, such as a pact between two countries which are singly
unable to defend themselves against a common enemy, and are forced to
work out an agreement of co-operation and collaboration. According to
the third theory, social life is similar to the partnership of two
capitalists, which gives rise to a commercial, agricultural or
industrial company aiming at attainment of greater profits.

On the basis of the first theory, the main factor is inherent in man's
own nature itself. On the basis of the second theory, it is some­thing
external to man's essence and independent of it. And according to the
third theory, the main factor responsible for social life is man's
intellectual and calculating faculty.

According to the first view, sociability is a general and universal
goal which man naturally aspires to attain. According to the second
theory, sociability is a casual and accidental phenomenon, a secondary
and not a primary objective. According to the third theory, sociability
is the result of man's faculty of reasoning and calculation.

It may be said on the basis of the study of the Quranic verses that
sociability is inherent in the very nature and creation of man. In the
Surah al Hujurat the Quran says:

O mankind! We have created you male and female, and have made you
nations and tribes, that you may know one another [not that on account
of this you may boast of being superior to others]. Certainly, the
noblest of you, in the sight of Allah, is the most God-fearing among you
....(49:13)

In this verse, besides an ethical precept, there is an implication
which indicates the philosophy of social existence of man, according to
which mankind is so created that it always lives in the form of groups,
nations and tribes, and an individual is known through his relation to
his respective nation and tribe-an identity which is an integ­ral part
of social existence. If these relations-which, in one way, are the cause
of commonness and association between individual men, and, in the other
way, are the cause of their separation and dissociation-did not exist,
it would have been impossible to distinguish one man from another. As a
consequence, social life, which is the basis of relationships of human
beings with one another, would not have come into existence, These and
similar other factors in social life, such as differences in features,
colour, and physique, provide the ground for specific marks of
distinction of an individual and impart individuality to persons. Had
all the individuals been of the same colour, features, and physique, and
had they not been governed by different types of relationships and
associa­tions, they would have been like the standardized products of a
factory, identical to one another, and consequently could not be
distinguished from one another. It would have ultimately resulted in the
negation of social life, which is based upon relations and exchange of
ideas, labour,. and commodities. Hence, association of individuals with
tribes and groups has a natural purpose. The individual differences
among human beings serve as an essential condition of social life. It
must not, how­ever, be used as a pretext for prejudice and pride; for
superiority is supposed to lie in human nobility and an individual's
piety.

In verse 54 of Surah al-Furqan, the Quran states:

And He it is who hath created man from water, and hath appointed for
him kindred by blood [relationships by birth] and kindred by marriage
[ac­quired relationships]. (25:54)

This verse reveals the purpose of birth-relationship and marriage
­relationship, which together bind individuals with each other, as
under­lying the design of creation. It is through these relationships
that indivi­duals are distinguished from one another.

In Surat al-Zukhruf, verse 32, it is stated:

Is it they who apportion their Lord's mercy? We have appointed among
them their livelihood in the life of the world and raised some of them
above others in rank, that some of them may tape labour from others, and
the mercy of thy Lord is better than [the wealth] that they amass.
(43:32)

While discussing the conception of tawhid (Divine Unity), in the part
dealing with the world outlook of tawhid, I have dealt with the meaning
of this verse.' Here I will give just the substance of the verse. Human
beings have not been created alike in respect of their talents and
dispositions. Had they been created so, everyone would have possessed
the same qualities and all would have lacked diversity of talents.
Naturally, as a consequence, none would have required the services of
others, thus making mutual co-operation and mutual obligations
meaningless.

God has created man in diversity with different spiritual, physical,
and intellectual aptitudes, dispositions, and inclinations. He has given
some people special abilities, and has imparted superiority to some over
others in certain talents. By means of this, He has made all human
beings intrinsically needful of others and inclined to associate with
others. Thus He has laid down the foundation of collective and social
life. The above-mentioned verse also asserts that social existence is
not merely a conventional, or selective or a compulsive affair, but a
natural one.

