Part 4 : Does Society Have an Essential and Independent Existence?
==================================================================

Society is composed of individuals; without individuals a society does
not exist. What is the manner of this synthesis? How is an indivi­dual
related to society, and what kind of relationship is it? Let us take
into consideration the following views:

**First View**

Society is constituted of individuals. This is merely a hypostatized
synthesis; i.e. a synthesis does not exist in reality. An objective
synthe­sis takes place when a series of elements influence one another,
and when there is a reciprocal and mutual relation of action and
reaction between the elements. These actions and reactions prepare the
ground for the emergence of a new phenomenon with its own specific.
characteris­tics, as observed in the case of a chemical synthesis. For
example, due to the action and reaction of the two gases, oxygen and
hydrogen, for example, a new compound, namely, water, is produced with a
new form and a new set of properties. The essential condition for a real
synthesis is that the constituent elements are merged into one another
in the process of synthesis, giving up their individual nature and
pro­perties, to bring into existence a new substance: the compound.
In collective life, human beings never merge with one another in this
way, and a society does not represent anything like a \`unified man'.
Thus, society does not possess an essential and independent existence,
but a secondary and a hypostatized one. It is the individual alone who
has independent, real, and essential existence. So, although human life
in society does have a collective form and colour, but members of
society do not merge to form a real compound called \`society'.

**Second View**

In reality, society cannot be compared to the natural com­pounds; it is
an artificial compound. An artificial compound is a kind of compound
although it is not a natural one. An artificial compound, like a
machine, is a system of interrelated parts. In a chemical com­pound, the
constituent elements lose their identity, and dissolves in the \`whole'
and essentially lose their individuality. But in an artificial
com­pound, the components do not lose their identity; they just
surrender their independence. The components are interconnected and
related in such a way that the effect of the resultant product is quite
different from the sum total of the individual effects of its
ingredients. For example, an automobile carries persons or things with a
great speed from one place to another. Its mobility and speed cannot be
attributed to the sum of individual performance of its parts when
considered as in­dependent and disconnected from one another. There is a
sort of co­ordination and coherence between its parts, which is
artificial and im­posed from without. However, merger of identities of
the ingredients in the \`whole' does not take place. Yet, the whole does
not exist with­out its constituent parts. The whole is the sum total of
its parts in addition to the specific connections and relations among
them.

Society, in the same manner, is comprised of several primary and
secondary organizations and bodies. These organizations, and the
indivi­duals who are connected with them, all are inseparably related
with one another. Any changes in any one of these institutions-cultural,
religious, economic, legal or educational-bring about changes in other
institu­tions also. Thus, social life is a phenomenon dependent on the
social machinery. But in this process, neither the identity of
individuals nor that of institutions is dissolved completely in the
society as a whole.

**Third View**
Society is a real compound like the natural compounds. But the
synthesis here is of minds and thoughts and of wills and wishes; the
synthesis is cultural and not physical. Like the material elements,
which in the process of action and reaction, reduction and dissolution
in one another, prepare the ground for the emergence of a new substance,
and due to this re-organization a new compound comes into existence and
the elements continue their existence with a new identity, individuals
also, who enter into social life with their gifts acquired from nature
and their inborn abilities, spiritually merge into one another to attain
a new spiritual identity, which is termed the \`social spirit'. This
synthesis itself is unique and special, with no parallel in the
universe. Since the components do affect and influence one another and
are transformed by mutual effect to acquire a new personality, this
synthesis is a natural and real synthesis. However, in this case, the
\`whole' or the \`compound' does not exist as a single physical entity.
It is different from other com­pounds in the sense that in other natural
compounds the synthesis is physical and the components influence and
affect one another to the extent of acquiring a totally new identity,
and the compound becomes a single indivisible entity, a real unit. The
multiplicity of constituents is dissolved and transformed into the unity
of the compound.

But in the synthesis of society and individual, though an actual
synthesis takes place-because, the constituents, the individuals, as a
result of their interaction, attain a new form and identity-the
plurality of individuals is not converted into a unity. This synthesis
does not produce anything like a \`unified man', a physical entity in
which all individuals have physically merged. Society conceived as a
single physi­cal entity is only a hypostatized abstraction.

**Fourth View**

Society is a real compound of a higher order than a natural compound.
In the case of natural compounds, the constituents have their own
individuality and identity before the synthesis occurs. During the
process of their action and reaction, conditions for emergence of a new
substance are produced. However, the human individual did not possess
any kind of individuality at the stage of pre-social existence. At that
stage, he is like an empty container capable only of embracing the
social spirit. Without social existence, human beings are absolutely
like animals, with the only difference that they possess human
apti­tudes. The humanity of a human being-i.e. his feeling of being a
human being, his consciousness of his human \`egohood', thought, human
likes and dislikes, and other emotions and feelings associated with
man-originates under the influence of the social spirit. It is the
social spirit that fills this empty pot and confers personality upon a
person. The social spirit has always been co-existing with man and shall
co-exist with him forever through its manifestations such as morality,
religion, education, philosophy , and art. The cultural and spiritual
causes and effects, actions and reactions among the individuals take a
specific shape due to the influence of the social spirit. Hence, they
are not prior to it. In fact sociology is prior to human psychology.
This view is contrary to the former view, which accepts the possibility
of human psychology even before the stage of social existence, and
regards sociology as belonging to a later development. According to this
view, if man had not acquired social existence and sociology, he would
not have reached the stage of acquiring human psyche and human
psycho­logy.

The first theory is a theory maintaining the priority of individual;
because, according to it, neither society has a real existence, nor law,
custom nor social destiny have an independent reality. Only individuals
have an objective existence and are knowable objects in an
epistemolo­gical sense. The life and destiny of every individual is
independent of that of other individuals.

The second theory is also a theory of the priority of individual. It
does not recognize the society as an independent \`whole', and also
denies an objective synthesis of individuals as a necessary condition of
social existence. But it considers the relationship among individuals as
somewhat objective, although confined to physical association.
Accord­ing to this theory, whereas society does not have an existence
indepen­dent of individuals, the individual alone has a real and
objective exis­tence. But according to this view, individuals, being the
constituents of a society, share a common destiny just as the components
of a machine or an automobile are related and linked together in the
form of a mechanical association of cause and effect, their movements
being mechanically interlinked. Moreover, society-that is the group of
inter­ related and interconnected individuals-from the point of view of
its specific system of mechanical cause-and-effect relationships, has an
identity independent of its individual parts.

The third theory, however, emphasizes the reality of individual as well
as that of society. This theory recognizes the independent exis­tence of
individuals; because, according to it, the existence of com­ponents of
society (individuals) is not merged into the existence of society. It,
also, does not accept any unified existence for society like that of
chemical compounds. At the same time, it recognizes the objec­tive
reality of society, because it considers the synthesis of individuals
similar to a chemical synthesis with regard to their spiritual and
intel­lectual makeup. As a result of this synthesis, individuals acquire
a new identity, which is the dominant character of society-although
society is not a physically unified entity. On the basis of this theory,
due to the process of interaction between the parts, an entirely new
entity has emerged: a new spirit, a new consciousness, and a new will,
which is over and above the intelligence, consciousness and will of the
indivi­duals, and which dominates the intelligence and consciousness of
all its individual members.

The fourth theory believes in the essentiality and absoluteness of
social reality. According to this theory, whatever exists is the
collective spirit, the collective consciousness, the collective
sensibility, the collec­tive will, and the collective \`self'.
Individual consciousness is nothing but a manifestation of the
collective consciousness.

**The Quranic View**

The verses of the Holy Quran confirm the third view. As I have stated
earlier, the Quran does not discuss human problems in our philo­sophical
and scientific terminology. Its language and approach is dif­ferent.
Nevertheless, the Quran views the problems concerning society in such a
way that it supports the third view. The Quran puts forward the idea of
a common history, a common destiny, a common record of deeds, a common
consciousness, understanding, sensibility and a com­mon conduct for the
ummahs (societies) [^2]. It is obvious that if the entity referred to as
\`ummah' did not have an objective existence, it would be meaningless to
talk of fate, understanding, conscience, obedience, and disobedience
with reference to it. It may be inferred that the Quran believes in a
certain kind of life which is the collective and social existence.
Collective life is not just a metaphor or an alle­gory, it is a reality;
likewise collective death is also a reality.

In verse 34 of Surat al-'A\`raf, the Quran asserts:

And every ummah (society) hath its term, and when its term cometh, they
cannot put it off an hour nor yet advance (it). (7:34)

This verse refers to life and existence that is given a limited period
of time, the duration of which cannot be changed. The end can neither be
advanced nor delayed; and this life is associated with the nation
(ummah), not with the individuals; or else it is evident that
individuals of a nation are deprived of their existence individually and
separately and not collectively and simultaneously.

In Surat al-Jathiyah, the verse 28 states:

Every ummah (society) shall be summoned to its record. (45:28)

Thereupon we come to know that not only individuals have a particular
record of deeds of their own, but societies are also judged by their own
records of deeds, because they, too, are like living beings who are
conscious, responsible, and accountable for their acts, as they have
freedom of will and act accordingly.

In Surat al-'An\`am, verse 108 states:

....unto every nation have We made their deeds seem fair ....(6:108)

This verse affirms that every nation evolves its own particular
consciousness, its own particular standards and its own particular way
of thinking. The consciousness, understanding, and perception of every
nation has a specific and distinguishable character.

Every nation judges things according to its own standards (at least in
the matters involving practical values and notions Every nation has its
own special way of perception and comprehension. There are many acts
which are \`good' in the eyes of one nation and \`evil' in the eyes of
another. It is the social atmosphere that moulds the taste and
percep­tion of the individuals of a nation according to its
value-system.

In Surat al-Mu'min, verse 5 says:

....And every nation purposed to seize their messenger and argued
falsely, [thinking] thereby to refute the Truth. Then I seized, and how
[awful] was My punishment. (40:5)

This verse is about an unrighteous resolution and decision of a nation.
It refers to a collective decision of immoral opposition to truth, and
asserts that collective disobedience deserves collective retribution and
punishment.

In the Quran, there are frequent instances how the actions of an
individual are attributed to the whole group, or sins of a generation
are associated with later generations. [^3] In such cases, the people had
the same (collective) thinking and the same (collective) will, or, in
other words, they had the same social spirit. For example, in the story
of the Thamud, the act of hamstringing Salih's camel, which was the deed
of an individual alone, is attributed to the whole nation (they
ham­strung the she-camel). The whole nation was considered to be
respon­sible for the crime. Consequently all of them were considered to
deserve the punishment for committing that crime: (so Allah doomed them
for that sin).

'Ali (A), in one of the sermons of the Nahj al-balaghah, elucidates
this subject in the following manner:

O people, actually that which brings together a community [and imparts
unity and a common fate to it], is the common feeling of approval and
disapproval.

Whenever any proper or improper action having collective appro­val has
been performed, even though by a single individual, the whole society is
held responsible for it.

Indeed only one man had hamstrung the she-camel of Thamud, but God
included them all in His punishment, because they all condoned his act.
So, God has said (in the Quran): "They hamstrung her and woke up
repentant.”

God sent down His punishment collectively on the people of Thamud,
because the whole nation maintained the same position and approved the
act of one individual, and when his decision was enacted, it was
actually the decision of the whole nation. God, in His Book, has
attributed the act of hamstringing of the camel to the whole nation,
although the act was performed by one person. It says: "That nation
hamstrung the camel," and does not say that one person from among them
committed the sin.

It is essential to remind here that mere approval of a sin, as long as
it remains a verbal approval alone and practical involvement has not
occurred, is not to be considered as a sin. For example, a person
commits a sin and another comes to know about it before or after its
committal and approves it, even though the approval leads to the stage
of resolution but is not translated into action, it is not a sin; as the
resolution of an individual to commit a sin, which is not translated
into action may not be considered a sin.

An approval is considered as participation in sin when it plays an
active role in its planning and execution. The collective sins belong to
this category. The social atmosphere and the social spirit favour the
occurrence of the sin and support it. If one of the members of a society
whose approval is a part of the collective will and whose decision is a
part of the collective decision commits the sin, it is here that the sin
of an individual becomes the collective sin. The above quoted passage of
the Nahj al-balaghah which refers to the contents of the Quranic verse,
explains the same fact. It is not merely the approval or disapproval
which is regarded as participation in the intention or committal of a
sin.

The Quran occasionally associates the acts of an earlier generation
with the latter generations. For example, the action of an earlier
nation, namely the people of Israel, has been associated with the
Israelites of the Prophet's age, and the Quran says that these people
deserve igno­miny and wretchedness because they slew prophets unjustly.
It is not so because in the view of the Quran they were the offsprings
of the same race, but because they represented the same evil social
spirit. It has been said that "human society has more dead than living.
[^4] It means that those who are dead participate in the formation of
every age more than the living. Therefore, it is also said that "the
dead rule the living more than before." [^5]

In the Quranic exegesis, al-Mizan, it is argued that if a society has a
single soul and the same social thinking, it is as if a single
indivi­dual. In this case, members of society are like the bodily organs
and faculties of one organism, intrinsically and physically united, and
are amalgamated in the form of a single human personality in thought and
action. Their pleasures and pains are like the pleasures and pains of
one person and their bliss and adversities are like the bliss and
adversities of one person. This discussion is further continued on the
following lines:

In its judgement on nations and societies having religious or national
pre­judices or having a unique social thinking, the Quran regards the
latter genera­tions punishable for the actions of the earlier
generations. A present genera­tion is regarded accountable and
punishable for the actions of those who have passed away. In the cases
in which people had the same social thinking and the same social spirit,
the Divine Judgement could not be otherwise. [^6]

$$Section[Society and Tradition]

**Notes:**

[^2]. \`Allamah Tabataba'i, al-Mizan, vol. II, p. 102.

[^3]. Following Quranic verses are referred to:

Woe, then, to those who write the Book with their hands and then say:
This is from God, so that they may take for it a small price. Therefore,
woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what
they earn. (2: 79)

Abasement shall be pitched on them, wherever they are come upon, except
they be in a bond of God, and a bond of the people; they will be laden
with the burden of God's anger, and poverty shall be pitched on them;
that, because they disbelieved in God's signs and slew the Prophets
without right, that, for that they acted rebelliously and were
transgressors. (3:112)

[^4]. Auguste Comte, as quoted in Raymond Aron's Main Currents in
Sociologi­cal Thought, vol. I, p. 91.

[^5]. Ibid.

[^6]. Al-Mizan, vol. IV, 112.


