Part 5 : Society and Tradition
==============================

If society has real existence, it should naturally possess laws
peculiar to it. If we accept the first theory about the nature of
society (which we have already discussed) and reject the existence of
society as a real entity, naturally we have to admit that society lacks
laws which may govern it. And if we accept the second theory and believe
in artifi­cial and mechanical composition of society, then we would have
to admit that society is governed by laws but that its laws are confined
to a series of mechanical and causal relationships between its various
parts, without the distinguishing features and particular
characteristics of life and living organisms. And if we accept the third
point of view, we shall have to accept, firstly, that society itself has
a comparatively more permanent existence independent of the existence of
individuals­ although this collective life has no separate existence,
and is distributed and dispersed among its individual members, and
incarnates itself in their existence.

It has discoverable laws and traditions more permanent and stable than
those of the individuals, who are its components. Secondly, we shall
have to accept also that the components of society, which are human
individuals, contrary to the mechanistic point of view, lose their
independent identity-although in a relative fashion-to produce an
organically composite structure. But at the same time the relative
independence of the individual is preserved; because individual life,
individual nature, and individual achievements are not dissolved totally
in the collective existence. According to this point of view, man
actually lives with two separate existences, two souls, and two
"selves." On the one hand, there are the life, soul, and self of the
human being, which are the products of the processes of his essential
nature; on the other, there are the collective life, soul, and self
which are the products of social life, and pervade the individual self.
On this basis, biological laws, psychological laws, and sociological
laws, together, govern human beings. But according to the fourth theory,
only a single type of laws govern man, and these are the social laws
alone.
Among the Muslim scholars \`Abd al-Rahman ibn Khaldun of Tunisia was
the first and the foremost Islamic thinker to discuss clearly and
explicitly the laws governing the society in independence from the laws
governing the individual. Consequently he asserted that the society
itself had a special character, individuality, and reality. In his
famous introduction to history, he has discussed this theory in detail.
Among the modern scholars and thinkers Montesquieu (the French
philosopher of the eighteenth century A.D.) is the first to discuss the
laws which control and govern human groups and societies. Raymond Aron
says about Montesquieu:

His purpose was to make history intelligible. He sought to understand
histori­cal truth. But historical truth appeared to him in the form of
an almost limit­less diversity of morals, customs, ideas, laws, and
institutions. His inquiry's point of departure was precisely this
seemingly incoherent diversity. The goal of the inquiry should have been
the replacement of this incoherent diversity by a conceptual order. One
might say that Montesquieu, exactly like Max Weber, wanted to proceed
from the meaningless fact to an intelligible order. This attitude is
precisely the one peculiar to the sociologist. [^7]

It means that a sociologist has to reach beyond the apparently diverse
social forms and phenomena, which seem to be alien to one another, to
reveal the unity in diversity in order to prove that all the diverse
manifestations refer to the one and the same reality.

In the same way, all the similar social events and phenomena have their
origin in a similar sequence of analogous causes. Here is a passage from
the observations on the causes of the rise and fall of the Romans:

It is not fortune that rules the world. We can ask the Romans, who had
a constant series of success when they followed a certain plan, and an
uninter­rupted sequence of disasters when they followed another. There
are general causes, whether moral or physical ....which operate in every
monarchy, to bring about its rise, its duration and its fall. All
accidents are subject to these causes, and if the outcome of a single
battle, i.e. a particular cause, was the ruin of a state, there was a
general cause which decreed that that state was des­tined to perish
through a single battle. In short, the main impulse carries all the
particular accidents along with it. [^8]

The Holy Quran explains that nations and societies qua nations and
societies (not just individuals living in societies) have common laws
and principles that govern their rise and fall in accordance with
certain historical process. The concept of a common fate and collective
destiny implies the existence of certain definite laws governing the
society. About the tribe of Bani Israel, the Quran says:

And We decreed for the Children of Israel in the scriptures: You varily
will work corruption in the earth twice, and you will become great
tyrants. So when the time for the first of the two came We roused
against you slaves of Ours of great might who ravaged [your] country,
and it was a threat per­formed.' [After you had regretted your sins and
became pious again] Then we gave once again your turn against them, and
We aided you with wealth and children and mode you more in soldiery.
[saying] If ye do good, ye do good for your own souls, and if ye do
evil, it is for them. (i.e. Our laws and customs are fixed and constant,
it is by this covenant that people are bes­towed with power, might,
honour and constancy or subjected to humiliation and abjectness). So
when the time for the second [of the judgements] came, because of your
acts of tyranny and despotism, We aroused against you others [of Our
slaves] to ravage you, and to enter the temple even as they entered it
the first time, and to lay waste all that they conquered with an utter
wasting. It may be that your Lord will have mercy on you[if ye mend your
ways], but if you repeat [the crime] We shall repeat [the punishment],
and We have appointed hell a dungeon for the disbelievers. (17:4-8)

The last sentence, i.e. "But if you repeat [ the crime] We shall repeat
[the punishment]" shows that the Quran is addressing all the people of
the tribe and not an individual.

It also implies that all the societies are governed by a universal
law.

**Notes:**

[^7]. Raymond Aron, Main Currents in Sociological Thought, vol. I, p.
14.
[^8]. Ibid.

