Part 6 : Determinism Or Freedom
===============================

One of the fundamental problems discussed by philosophers, particularly
in the last century, is the problem of determinism and freedom of
individual as against society, or, in other words, deter­minism and
freedom of the individual spirit vis-a-vis the social spirit. If we
accept the first theory regarding the nature of society, and consider
social structure to be merely a hypostatized notion, and believe in the
absolute independence of the individual, then there will be no place for
the idea of social determinism. Because, there will be no power or force
except that of the individuals, and no social force that may rule over
the individual. Hence, in this theory, there is no room for the idea of
social determinism.

If there is any compulsion or determinism it is of the individual and
operates through the individuals. The society has no role in this
matter. Hence, there can be no social determinism as emphasized by the
advocates of social determinism. In the same way, if we accept the
fourth theory, and consider the individual and indivi­dual's personality
as a raw material or an empty pot, then the entire human personality of
the individual, his intellect, and his free will would be reduced to
nothing but an expression of the collective intelligence and the
collective will, which manifest themselves, as an illusion, in the form
of an individual to realize their own social ends. Accordingly, if we
accept the idea of the absolute essentiality and primariness of the
society, there will be no place left for the idea of the freedom and
choice of the individual.

Emile Durkheim, the famous French sociologist, emphasizes the
importance of society to the extent of saying that social matters (in
fact all the human matters, as against the biological and animal urges
and needs, like eating and sleeping) are the products of society, not
the products of individual thought and will, and have three
characteristics: they are external, compulsive, and general. They are
considered to be external, because they are alien to individual
existence and are imposed from without upon the individual by society.
They existed before the individual came into existence and the
individual accepted them under the-influence of society. Acceptance of
the moral, social, and religious traditions, customs, and values by the
individual comes under this category. They are compulsive, because they
impose themselves upon the individual and mould the individual's
conscience, feelings, thoughts, and preferences according to their own
standards.

Because of being compulsive, they are necessarily general and
universal. However, if we accept the third theory and consider both the
individual and the society as fundamental entities-although admitting
the power of the society as dominating that of the individual-it does
not necessi­tate any compulsion or determinism for the individual either
in human or social affairs. Durkheimian determinism arises due to the
failure to recognize the essential nature of the human being. Man's
nature gives him a kind of freedom and liberty that empower him to
revolt against social compulsions. On this basis, we may say that there
is an inter­mediary relationship between the individual and the society
that lies between the extremes of absolute freedom and absolute
compulsion (amr bayn al-'amrayn).

Although the Holy Quran attributes character, personality, reality,
power, life, death, consciousness, obedience, and disobedience to
society, it also explicitly recognizes the possibility of violation of
social law by an individual. The Quran in this matter relies on what is
termed as the (Fitrat Allah)‘Divine nature’. In Surat al Nisa ; the
verse 97 refers to a group of people who called themselves "mustad'afun"
(the oppressed and the weak) in the society of Mecca, and took shelter
in their \`weakness and being oppressed' as an excuse for shirking their
natural responsibilities. In fact, they considered themselves helpless
as against the social compulsion and pressures. The Quran says that
their excuse cannot be condoned on any ground, because at least they
were free to migrate from the Meccan society to another one better
suited for the fulfilment of their aspirations. Elsewhere it states:

O believers! You have- charge of your own souls. He who goes astray
cannot injure you if you are rightly guided.(5:105)

The famous verse (7:172) regarding human nature states that man is
bound by the Divine covenant to believe in monotheism (tawhid), and it
has been made inherent in human nature. The Quran says further that it
is ordained in this way so that people should not say on the Day of
Judgement that "our fathers were idolaters and we did not have any other
alternative except helplessly adhering to the faith of our
fore­fathers." (7:1709 With such a nature gifted to man by God, there is
no compulsion to accept any faith contrary to the Divine will and to
human nature itself.

The teachings of the Quran are entirely based upon the notion of human
responsibility-man is responsible for himself and for society. The
dictum: al-'amr bil ma\`ruf wa al-nahy \`an al-munkar (commanding others
to do what is commanded by God and forbidding them from that which is
prohibited by Him), is a command to the individual to revolt against
social corruption and destructiveness. This is the Quranic code of
conduct prescribed for the individual to save society from chaos,
disorder, and destruction. Tales and stories embodied in the text of the
Quran deal mostly with the theme of the individual's revolt against a
corrupt social order. The stories of Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus,
Prophet Muhammad, the Companions of the Cave (Ashab al­-Kahf), the
believer of the tribe of the Pharaoh, etc. deal with the same theme.

The notion of social determinism is rooted in the misconception that
society in its real composition needs complete merger of its constituent
parts into one another and dissolution of their plurality into the unity
of the \`whole'. This process is considered to be respon­sible for the
emergence of a new reality. Either one has to accept that the
personality, freedom, and independence of the individual are real, and
so negate the reality of society and social structure (as in the case of
the first and the second theories regarding the nature of society and
the individual), or the reality of society is to be affirmed at the cost
of the individual and his freedom and independence (as in the case of
Durkheim's theory). A reconciliation between these two opposite
view­points is impossible. As all the conjectures and arguments of
sociology support the supremacy of society, the opposite view is
necessarily rejected.

In fact, from a philosophical point of view, all forms of syntheses
cannot be regarded similar. On the lower levels of nature, i.e. minerals
and inorganic substances, which in philosophical terms are governed by a
\`simple force,' and as interpreted by the philosophers, act according
to one and the same law, are synthesized in a way that they completely
merge into one another and lose their individuality in the whole. For
example, in the composition of water, two atoms of Hydrogen and one atom
of Oxygen are merged together, and both lose their individual
properties. But at the higher level of synthesis, the parts usually
retain a relative independence with respect to the whole. A kind of
plurality in unity and unity in plurality manifests itself at higher
levels of existence. As we see in man, despite his unity, a unique
plurality is manifested. Not only his lower faculties and powers
preserve their plurality to some extent, but, at the same time, there is
also a kind of continuous inherent opposition and conflict between his
internal powers. Society is the strangest natural phenomenon in which
all its constituent parts retain their individual independence to a
maximum possible degree.

Hence, from this point of view, we have to accept that human beings,
who are the constituent parts of a society in intellectual and
volitional activity, retain their individual freedom, and, therefore,
their individual existence precedes their social existence. In addition
to this fact, in the synthesis at the higher levels of nature, the
generic character of the parts is preserved. The individual human being
or the individual spirit is not determined by the social spirit; it
rather preserves its right to think and act freely.

