Part 8 : Nature of Society: Homogeneity Or Heterogeneity?
=========================================================

An answer to this problem, too, as indicated earlier, is essential for
every school of thought; because only a discussion of this problem can
throw light on an important issue: whether all human societies can
follow one and the same ideology, or if there must be a multiplicity of
ideologies based upon various types of societies; i.e. should each
nation, community, civilization, and culture necessarily possess a
particular ideology? Ideology means the sum total of the general schemes
and means which can lead a society towards the attainment of perfection
and its summum bonum (the highest good). We also know that every species
calls for specific qualities, conditions, and capacities; that which
represents the \`highest good' in the case of a horse is not identical
with that of a sheep or a man.

Hence, if all societies-assuming their objective existence--should
share the same essence and nature, they could also, possibly, share a
single ideology. Their mutual differences being like those among members
of the same species, any living ideology can be applied to them,
allowing within its framework adjustments for individual diffe­rence
according to the varying aptitudes of its members. But if societies have
different natures and essences, they naturally call for different
programmes, plans, ideals, and varying summum bonums particular to each.
In this case, one single ideology cannot be applied to all of them.

A similar problem applies to the changes and mutations of societies
over long periods of time. Do societies change their nature and essence
in the course of changes and mutations, in the same way as species are
transformed in the process of evolution? Does such a process of
transformation occur on the level of societies? Or if the social changes
are like changes in the circumstance of an individual of a certain
species, whose nature and generic characteristics are preserved in the
midst of all changes and transitions?

The first issue is related to sociology, whereas the second one is
connected with history. We shall discuss the first problem at present
and postpone the discussion of the second until we take into account the
nature of history.

Can sociological studies reveal whether or not there are some common
characteristics among various societies? Are the differences among them
only secondary and superficial, resulting from factors extraneous to the
essence and nature of society, which itself remains unchanged? Or is it
true that human societies are basically different in essence and nature,
and even if supposedly similar from the point of view of external
conditions, they function in intrinsically different ways? These
alternative views are suggested by philosophy in its effort to
disentangle obscurities surrounding the formal unity or plurality of
things.

There is a shorter route also, and that is man himself. It is an
established fact about man that homo sapiens is the only species that
has not shown any biological mutation from the very beginning of its
emergence. Some thinkers say that as the process of evolution of living
organisms culminated in the emergence of human being, nature altered its
course and diverted the movement of evolution from the biological to the
social course, and from the process of physiological evolution to that
of spiritual and intellectual development.

In an earlier chapter, while discussing the question "Is man
gre­garious?" we came to the conclusion that man-who is a single
species­ is ordained by nature itself to be gregarious and sociable.
That is man's intrinsic and inherent gregariousness that manifests
itself in the form of society and the collective spirit, is derived from
the essential nature of the human species. Man has social inclinations
because through them he can attain the kind of perfection of which he is
capable. His gregarious propensity secures for him the ground for the
collective spirit, which is itself a means to attain the end:
self-perfection. Accordingly, it is human nature itself that determines
the course taken by the collective spirit. In other words, the
collective spirit serves human nature. As long as man exists, human
nature would carry on its activity, supporting and encouraging his
social spirit. The collective spirit is derived, there­fore, from the
individual spirit, which in turn is effused from human nature. Man is a
single species, so human societies, also, have the same nature,
substance, and essence.

However, as in case of individual, who can deviate from the course of
nature and is occasionally even dehumanized, a society may also be
diverted from its natural course and be dehumanized. The variety in
societies is quite similar to diversity in individual morals, which are,
in any case, not outside the sphere of human nature. Thus, societies,
civilizations, cultures, and, finally, social spirits that govern
societies, in spite of the differences in characters and forms, have
ultimately a human character and not a non-human nature.

If we agree ?with the fourth theory about the synthesis of society, and
consider individual as only passive, receptive matter, an empty
container without any content, it would be tantamount to a negation of
the human nature. We may propound a hypothesis concerning diver­sity of
nature and essence among societies, but this point of view in the form
of Durkheimian theory is not at all acceptable; because it leaves the
very fundamental question unanswered. If the origin of the collective or
social spirit does not lie inside individuals, and if it does not spring
from the natural and biological aspect of human beings, then where does
it come from? Does the social spirit come from absolute nothingness? Is
it sufficient for the explanation of the social spirit to say that
society has existed as long as man has existed? In addition to this,
Durkheim believes that social phenomena such as religion, mora­lity,
crafts, art etc. are the products of its social spirit, which have been,
are and would remain the expressions of the social spirit, and thus have
\`temporal durability' and \`spatial extensibility.' This itself is a
proof that Durkheim implicitly believes that all societies have a
singular essence and nature, which manifests itself in the social
spirit.

The teachings of Islam emphasize absolute unity of religion, and
consider difference in religious codes and traditions as secondary, and
not essential and primary. We also know that religion is nothing except
a programme for perfection of the individual and society. It also
reveals that foundation of these teachings have been laid upon an
assumption of the unity of societies. If there were various \`species'
of societies, then the ends of perfection and their respective means
would have been also diverse, necessitating a diversity and plurality of
religions.

The Quran repeatedly stresses that there is not more than one single
faith throughout the world. There has been one religion in all regions,
in all societies and at all times. According to the Quran, religions-in
the plural form-have had no existence; only "Religion" (in its singular
form) has existed. All prophets preached and taught the same faith, the
same path, and the same purpose:

He has ordained for you the religion that He charged Noah with, and
that We have revealed to thee, and that We charged Abraham with, Moses
and Jesus, (saying), Establish the religion and be not divided therein.
(42:13)

The verses of the Quran which prove that the faith remains the same at
all times, in all regions, and in the scriptures of all true prophets of
God, are numerous. The difference lies only in certain rules and
ordinances, according to the relative stages of development or
back­wardness of societies. The logic that there is essentially no more
than one religion, is based on the outlook about man and society that
mankind is one and a single species and that men are not different in
their human essence. In the same way, human society, as an objective
entity, represents a single species, not a plurality of kinds.

