Introduction
============

In many of the verses of the Qur\`an, the performance of Salat al-Layl
and staying awake a portion of the night - after midnight - in the
worship of Allah (Glory and Greatness be to Him) has been mentioned, of
which, we present some of these verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْمُسْتَغْفِرِينَ بِالأَسْحٌارِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and those who ask forgiveness in the morning times.”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نٌافِلَةً لَّكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say your special (tahajjud) prayer during some part of the
night…”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَبِيتُونَ لِرَبِّهِمْ سُجَّدًا وَقِيٌامًا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And they who pass the night prostrating themselves before their Lord
and standing.”***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَتَجٌافَى جُنُوبُهُمْ عَنِ الْمَضٌاجِعِ يَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُمْ خَوْفًا
وَطَمَعًا وَمِمٌّا رَزَقْنٌاهُمْ يُنفِقُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Their sides draw away from (their) beds, they call upon their Lord in
fear and in hope, and they spend (benevolently) out of what We have
given them.”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كٌانُوا قَلِيلاً مِّنَ اللَّيْلِ مٌا يَهْجَعُونَ. وَبِلأَسْحٌارِ هُمْ
يَسْتَغْفِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They used to sleep but little in the night. And in the morning they
asked forgiveness.”***

The Salat al-Layl was Wajib upon the Messenger of Allah[^1] and no
Prophet had been sent before him except that it was obligatory upon them
as well.[^2]

In the ahadith from the Ahlul Bayt (peace be upon all of them), it has
been emphatically mentioned that:

1. Salat al-Layl protects one during the daytime.[^3]

2. Salat al-Layl is a Kaffarah for the sins committed in the day.[^4]

3. That house in which Salat al-Layl is recited beams with light for
those who are in the heavens just as the stars beam with light for those
who are on earth.[^5]

4. The great and noble people of our nation are those who are protectors
of the Qur\`an and who stay awake the night in worship.[^6]

5. There are three things which raise a person’s rank and station:

(i) Initiating the greeting to a fellow Muslim,

(ii) feeding poor people,

(iii) Salat in the darkness of the night when all other people are busy
sleeping.[^7]

6. Salat al-Layl makes one’s face beautiful; beautifies one’s etiquette;
gives a pleasant smell to one’s body and increases one’s daily
sustenance. It also removes sorrow and grief and gives strength to the
eyes.[^8]

7. One who does not read the Salat al-Layl is not considered as a Shi\`a
of the Ahlul Bayt.[^9]

8. One who is not able to perform the Salat al-Layl is truly a very
unfortunate person.[^10]

9. Committing sins is one of the reasons for one to be unsuccessful in
the performance of Salat al-Layl.[^11]

10. The performance of Salat al-Layl leads to gaining the pleasure of
Allah (Glory and Greatness be to Him); love of the Angels; is the Sunnah
of the Prophets; leads to the light of true recognition of Allah (Glory
and Greatness be to Him); is the foundation of belief; tranquility of
the soul; destruction of Shaitan; a weapon against one’s enemies;
acceptance of one’s supplications; acceptance of one’s actions;
increases the blessings in one’s sustenance; intercession when the Angel
of Death comes; brightness in the grave; protects the person while in
the grave; ease in the answering of the angels Munkir and Nakir and is
the companion and friend in the grave.[^12]

[^1]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 122

[^2]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 136; Tafsir Al-Qummi, Pg. 701

[^3]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 154; Mahasin Barqi, Pg. 53

[^4]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 136

[^5]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 161; Rawdhatu \`l-Wai\`dhin, Pg. 320

[^6]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 138; Amali Shaikh aduq, Pg. 141

[^7]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 141; Khisal, Vol. 1, Pg. 42

[^8]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 86, Pg. 153, Thawab Al-A’mal, Pg. 38

[^9]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 162; Maqnah of Shaikh Mufid, Pg. 111

[^10]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 164; Ma\`ani Al-Akhbar, Pg. 342

[^11]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 152; Tawhid Shaikh aduq, Pg. 17

[^12]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 161; Irshad Al-Qulub, Pg. 316


