Qunut of Salat al-Witr
======================

The Salat al-Witr is one Rak\`at and is the Salat and whispered
supplication that completes the Salat al-Layl. As it has been mentioned
in the ahadith, the Salat is the Me\`raj of the believer, and the Salat
al-Witr is the wave that carries the believer to the higher realms. It
has been specifically mentioned in the ahadith that, “The more a person
stands while in the Salat al-Witr will have to stand less on the Day of
Judgement.” [^1]

The main item that carries one during this spiritual journey is the
Qunut of the Salat al-Witr in which those who are the true servants of
Allah, spend countless hours, engrossed in supplication and tears and
asking forgiveness for their sins.

The Prophet of Islam Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah (blessings of Allah be upon
him and his family) has said: “Whichever of you prolongs the Qunut in
his Salat al-Witr will have more ease on the Day of Judgement.”[^2]

In the Wajib Salat, the Qunut is in place for the servant to supplicate
to his Lord however in the Salat al-Witr, it is for asking forgiveness
to Allah.[^3]

The following verse of the Qur\`an has been constantly mentioned in the
ahadith in reference to asking forgiveness during the Salat and
especially during the Salat al-Witr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِالأسْحاَرِ هُمْ يَسْتَغْفِرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and in the morning time, they used to ask for forgiveness”*** [^4]

During the Qunut of the Salat al-Witr, there are many supplications,
which can be recited, and although it is not possible to list all of
them here, we will mention the most important forms of seeking
forgiveness.

At the time of asking forgiveness, one should lift his left hand for
asking forgiveness and use the right hand to count the number of
times[^5] and if one uses a tasbih made from the dirt of Kerbala, then
the reward of the forgiveness is increased.

It has been related that the Prophet of Islam Muhammad ibn Abdullah
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) would ask forgiveness 70
times during the Salat al-Witr.[^6]

Imam Ja*\`*far ibn Muhammad as- adiq (peace be upon him) has said:
“Whosoever recites the following in the Salat al-Witr 70 times and
continues to do so for one entire year will be counted by Allah as a
*Mustaghfirin bil ashar* or one who used to ask forgiveness during the
night time and will make *Jannah* Wajib upon that person.”[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْتَغْفِرُ اللٌّهَ وَ أَتُوبُ إِلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I seek repentance from Allah, my Lord and to Him I turn back.”*

In another hadith it has been mentioned that, “Whosoever says the
following 100 times at the end of his Qunut and continues to do so for
fourty nights will be counted as a *Mustaghfirin bil ashar* or one who
used to ask forgiveness during the night time. [^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْتَغْفِرُ اللٌّهَ وَ أَتُوبُ إِلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I seek repentance from Allah, my Lord and to Him I turn back.”*

The Prophet of Islam Muhammad ibn \`Abdullah (blessings of Allah be upon
him and his family) used to ask for forgiveness 70 times in the Qunut of
Salat al-Witr followed by reciting the below line seven times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هٌذَا مَقٌامُ الْعٌائِذِ بِكَ مِنَ النٌّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“This is the station of the person who seeks refuge with You from the
Hell Fire.”*[^9]

The method of asking forgiveness as taught to us by Amir al-Mo’minin
\`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) in the night as is follows:

1. Recite the following 70 times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْتَغْفِرُ اللٌّهَ رَبِّي وَأَتُوبُ إِلَيْهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I seek repentance from Allah, my Lord and to Him I turn back.”*

2. Followed by reciting the following seven times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَسْتَغْفِرُ اللٌّهَ الَّذِي لاٌ إِلٌهَ إِلاٌّ هُوَ الْحَيُّ
الْقَيُّومُ وَأَتُوبُ إِلَيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I seek repentance from Allah the One whom there is no god except Him,
the Living and Self-Subsisting and to Him I turn back.”*[^10]

One of the most important acts in the Qunut of the Salat al-Witr is
supplication for forty believers (men or women) amongst one’s family,
friends, those who have asked to be prayed for, the deceased and the
Shi\`a of Amir Al-Mo’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him).
Whosoever does this will be assured that his supplications are
answered.[^11]

One should then say the following three hundred times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْعَفْوُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I ask for forgiveness.”*

Following this, the following should be said once:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّ اغْفِرْلِي وَارْحَمْنِي وَتُبْ عَلَيِّ إِنَّكَ أَنْتَ التَّوٌابُ
الرَّحِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Lord, please forgive me and have mercy upon me and turn back towards
me. Verily You are the Oft-Turning back, Most Merciful”* [^12]

It has been mentioned that Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husain as-Sajjad (peace be
upon him) used to recite the following line three hundred times in his
Qunut during the Salat al-Witr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْعَفْوُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I ask for forgiveness.”* [^13]

Allamah Majlisi has mentioned that the word **(اَلْعَفْوُ)** can also be
recited as **(اَلْعَفْوَ)** (with a fathah instead of a dhammah) on the
last letter.

\* Please do not forget this humble servant of Allah (Glory and
Greatness be to Him) in your prayers and especially in the blessed Qunut
of the Salat Al-Layl.

[^1]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 154; Fiqh ar-Rida, Pg. 1

[^2]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 287; Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, Pg. 308

[^3]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 18, Pg. 261, Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, Pg. 311

[^4]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 207; \`Illul ash-Shara’i, Vol. 2, Pg.
53

[^5]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 208

[^6]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 121; Tahdhib, Vol. 1, Pg. 272

[^7]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 120; Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, Pg. 301

[^8]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 22ا; Misbah of Kaf\`ami, Pg. 53

[^9]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 287; Al-Faqih, Vol. 1, Pg. 301

[^10]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol. 87, Pg. 308; Misbah of Al-Kaf\`ami, Page 58

[^11]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol., 87, Pg., 284; Misbah Al-Muttahajjid, Pg.
101

[^12]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol., 87, Pg. 275; Misbah Al-Muttahajjid, Pg. 101

[^13]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Vol., 87, Pg., 275; Misbah Al-Muttahajjid, Pg.
101


