Introduction and Preliminary Notes
==================================

This essay presents a short overview of the Islamic philosophical
approach to nature, the Islamic perspective on modern science and the
relations between sacred tradition, nature, and science in light of the
ongoing environmental crisis. It also proposes a solution to the
environmental crisis, based on an integrated understanding of these
subject matters. This is conducted through a lens that is Islamic by
method but universal in principle and conclusion.1

The prime source of all Islamic thought and practice, from theological
doctrine to sacred law, is the Holy Qur’an. Similarly, in this essay,
the influence of Qur’anic teachings is much greater than what may just
appear in citations; their influence is central to this work. With that
said, if there is anything presented in this essay that is disharmonious
with the Qur’anic message, it is the fault of the essay’s author.

Another prime source used for the purpose of this essay is the work and
teaching of the Islamic philosopher Seyyed Hossein Nasr. An esteemed
author of over 50 books and 500 articles, Nasr has written extensively
on a wide array of subjects including Sufism, perennial philosophy,2
comparative religion, the sacred sciences and the natural environment.3
In fact, much of this essay can be regarded as a summary of his
integrated writings on modern humanity’s approach to science,
spirituality and nature. Nasr has spoken at many lecture-series and
seminars, and in 1980 he was the first Muslim to deliver the prestigious
Gifford Lectures- a renowned annual lecture series in Scotland that
features the most prominent thinkers in the integrated field of
religion, science and philosophy.

In 1966, Nasr delivered the Rockefeller Lectures at the University of
Chicago; there he traced the root issues of the environmental crisis to
the spiritual crisis of modern humanity. These lectures became the basis
of his book, Man and Nature: The Spiritual Crisis of Modern Man, which
was used as a prime text for direction and reference in this essay. The
writings of others affiliated with Nasr, namely his late teacher
Frithjof Schuon and his student William C. Chittick, have as well had
significant influence on this essay’s content and direction.


