An Islamic Perspective on the Trouble with Modern Science
=========================================================

Science is defined today as “the intellectual and practical activity
encompassing the systematic study of the structure and behavior of the
physical and natural world through observation and experiment.”34 This
definition provides a basis for great compatibility between modern
science and the Islamic pursuit of knowledge, but with a few caveats.
The physical and natural world to which this definition refers is
Islamically known to embody sacred meanings; their studies are therefore
welcomed in Islamic circles, but integral as well is the ability to
interpret them on higher ground.

Modern science’s denial of metaphysics serves as the basis for much
disparity between Islam and modern science. This disparity boils down to
the great difference between Islam’s recognition of a sacredness in
nature and modern science’s denial of it. The secular approach of modern
science to nature has removed virtually all understanding of the sacred
qualities behind it. Unlike modern scientists, the traditional
scientists of old integrated theological ontology into their holistic
approach to studying nature and thus regarded the study of such sacred
qualities as the backbone of their work. Before this desacralization of
nature, a “vision of God in nature” seemed the norm of viewing the
world.35 The grave ramifications of this change in approach are evident
in the world today, and especially so in the environmental crisis.

Since the divorce of science and sacred tradition, the need to know God
no longer served as the impetus behind scientific studies. Before this
divorce, the philosophy of science was that of oneness (tawḥīd).36 The
traditional sciences of all sacred traditions were unified on certain
fundamental principles, and one such principle was the recognition of a
hierarchy of reality.37 All such levels of hierarchy alluded to the
reality of God as the Real, as well as His supreme and ultimate oneness
as the One (*al-Wāḥid* ). In the separation of science and sacred
tradition, there was a transformation of ideology from the assertion of
oneness to the making of many (takthīr)-the very antithesis of tawḥīd.38
Everything that was seen for its reference to the supreme oneness of God
became a separate entity and a “god” of its own. Rather than journeying
towards the One God of mercy, justice and sustenance, these very
features of God became individualized and regarded as entities of their
own. No longer was there a single center, orientation, goal or purpose,
nor was there recognition of just a single “god”; people worshipped
whatever “gods” appealed to them.39

Worry has also been expressed regarding the “neutrality” of science.
Although modern science can be neutral in its study of facts, it
nonetheless sets the stage and plants the seeds for havoc when in the
hands of the ignorant. The issue today is that most people lack
sufficient knowledge of the underlying nature of existence to be able to
integrate the facts of science into a proper view of reality.40

Thus, through modern science, humans lavishly and greedily exploit the
world’s resources for materialistic purposes. Had there instead been an
appropriate understanding of the underlying reality within nature,
people

could have better used science for purposes more harmonious with their
environments and contributive to their relationship with God.

Moreover, it is not just modern science’s narrow view of the material
and physical world that Muslim philosophers have protested, but more so
its dominant claim for recognition as the only acceptable science of
nature.41 The enactment of such a bold statement has had radical and
grave results. It has reduced other sciences, primarily those dealing
with the studies of metaphysics and the sacred, to a seemingly
inadequate view of the world and something along the lines of
superstition-or at least in the eyes of the public and scientific world
at large.42

In effect, there has been a loss of sacred symbolism linked to natural
phenomena.

This worries Islamic scholars because they recognize that without
symbolic intelligibility science itself becomes vain and harmful.43 The
current environmental crisis bears enough evidence to justify such
concern. Muslim philosophers such as Seyyed Hossein Nasr and Titus
Burckhardt have expressed great unease with the movement from the
traditional sciences to modern science alone. Through this move, modern
science’s vulgarized presentation of nature-as an entity void of any
symbolic or spiritual meaning-has become the axiom through which the
public and scientific communities at large see nature.

Through the secularization of nature, symbols within it became mere
facts and were thus divorced from other orders of reality. The cosmos
remained interestingly mysterious, but was regarded spiritually
meaningless. A traditional science such as alchemy was “reduced to a
chemistry in which the substances had lost all their sacramental
character.”44 Hence, traditional science’s study of relatively high
orders of reality was exchanged for the mere study of the manipulation
of matter in its own plane.45 In other words, science regressed into a
strictly empirical and moral-free study of only the superficial aspects
of the physical. Thus, the symbolism used by Native-Americans in their
understanding of their natural environment, the symbolism used by
Babylonians in their studies of the cosmos, the symbolism used by
alchemists in their experiments of alchemical substance, were all
substituted for a shallow perception that now helps fuel the superficial
materialist mentality prevalent in the world today. The natural
environment lost its symbolic significance in the eyes of the prevailing
majority in science; it became simply regarded as physical property
available for exploitation and consumption.

Even though modern science has the ability to provide certain kinds of
information, it denies itself the interpretation of that information on
any level other than that of the physical.46 This strictly logical
positivist approach may not have been an issue had there not been
obstacles placed against the interpretations of others. In consequence
to such obstacles, the world is provided with superficial facts
regarding the many uses of the environment, but not the symbolic
significances of such facts. Such symbolism had multiple interpretations
from varied perspectives, but are now all forgone. Humanity therefore
loses a great esoteric cosmological understanding in substitute for a
virtually never-ending attempt to satiate

worldly desires. The practical significance of this is that a tree today
can be used for the production of paper, pancake syrup, and other
consumer goods, but it is generally no longer a studied entity of
harmonious purity-let alone an instrument of enlightenment and
transcendence.

Despite Islamic philosophy’s criticisms of modern science, Muslim
governments of the East have openly welcomed it into their countries
with great expectations. Given certain factors within this reception,
regardless of such high expectations, these countries can ultimately
only achieve bittersweet-and mostly bitter-results. This is so because
Eastern governments have accepted modern science with a mentality
dangerously shaped by neocolonialism.47 More specifically, due to the
technological advancements of the West, all that is produced from the
East is considered-by both those in East and West-as inferior to
anything Western. It is evident in the Western developer’s approach to
third-world countries.

Traditional or practical knowledge is substituted for technological
knowledge that is considered far superior, albeit results that say
differently.48 Thus, Western products, such as modern science, are
welcomed to the East without question, replacing whatever was there
previously.

The issue is not only in the loss of traditional knowledge, but also the
latent negative impact of such an implementation. Since the science
itself is implemented without question, its potential negative impact
also goes unquestioned. Thus, the East suffers from the negative aspects
of modern science without having taken the opportunity to learn from the
mistakes of the West and hence having acted accordingly. This is all
evident in the environmental problems of Muslim countries today. From
the air pollution in Cairo to the infrastructural over-development of
Dubai to the deforestation of many areas in Indonesia, the Muslim world
today seems far from reflecting the harmonious and peaceful spirit of
Islam that can be found in traditional Islamic gardens and architecture.
In fact, the Muslim world’s current approach to the environment seems
far from Islamic.

In summary, modern science’s empirical approach is compatible with
aspects of the Islamic approach to knowledge, since the study of the
physical world alone is a legitimate one. However, other orders of
reality are not ignored within Islamic circles. While modern science
views natural phenomena as facts alone, the traditional Islamic approach
is to understand them as alluding to greater orders of reality, and
ultimately to God. Per Islamic philosophy, every object and all
phenomena, the extraordinary and the mundane, encompass metaphysical
qualities and meanings, as well as sacred references. Hence, Islamic
philosophers take issue with modern science’s claim for recognition as
the only science of nature, for there is immensely more to study than
just the physical. This dominant claim by science has fueled today’s
environmental crisis by stripping away the spiritual aspect of nature.
When stripped of the metaphysical, all that is left is the physical, and
thus a tree is viewed as nothing more than a resource for physical use
and study alone; that is the issue with the environmental crisis today.

A Solution
==========

The solution to the environmental crisis does not lie in the use of
environmental engineering alone. Even if humanity successfully reduces
its carbon footprint through various kinds of eco-friendly technology,
such a crisis shall continue until the environment is given back its
sacredness in the eyes of its abusers.49 Such a feat is only possible
through humanity’s making of peace with its surroundings, inner being
and most importantly God.

Of great importance to note regarding this “making of peace with God” is
that He is the God of all sacred traditions, despite differences in
understanding the nature of divinity. Both the environmental crisis and
the spiritual crisis are issues that not only affect those of all sacred
traditions, but that can also be resolved with help from any of these
sacred traditions. Thus, establishment of the proper mindset and
performance of the proper practice are key steps to take regardless of
one’s religious affiliation. Such mindset and practice can be catered
and customized to the thought and observance of that specific religion,
since the principles behind them are universal.


