The Proper Mindset
==================

Regardless of the feats of modern science in “green” technologies and
developments of sustainable methods of living, humanity shall continue
to mistreat nature in one way or another until nature is properly seen
for its sacred qualities. This step is integral for any lasting solution
to the crisis. It, however, implies the need for other steps before it.
Before individuals adopt a lastingly peaceful approach to nature as a
sacred entity, they must first make their way to God.

In people’s realization of holiness, they realize the presence of the
Holy. Before one can attribute sacredness to creation, one must
recognize that all sacredness stems from the Creator. With this
realization, individuals may see that all holiness within nature is but
a mere reflection of God the Holy. Thus, in order to make a proper and
lasting peace with nature, one must first make peace with the Lord.

By doing this, individuals make peace with their selves as servants of
the Lord and with the rest of creation as servants of the Lord as well.

If the masses simply make peace with creation and not the Creator, they
embark on what would inevitably be a short-lived journey. The very act
of doing so is inherently oxymoronic. Through it, they would attribute
sacred qualities to nature, but not recognize a source of such
sacredness. Nonetheless, it has happened before and the journey was in
fact short-lived. Had the Hippie movement of the 1960’s based their
revolt on something more substantial than a love for trees, their
original purpose of rebelling against modern day greed might have lived
for more than just a decade or so. What is needed is the rooting of
one’s self in devotion to the Creator and not to creation. The fault of
the Hippie movement was that its enactors based it on “peace and
love,”50 but not God the Loving, Who may have directed them into taking
peace and love far past the short-term alone. Thus, the Hippie movement
proved nothing more than a phase. This is evident today; not just in the
ridicule of hippies in popular culture, but more so in the continued
destructive practices of the very corporate world that hippies protested
against. Therefore, a making of peace with God the Sustainer is needed
in order to achieve a sustaining peace with nature.


