The Proper Practice
===================

Taking into consideration that the proper mindset needed in effectively
solving the environmental crisis involves a turn to God, the religious
establishments of today must be at the forefront of the solution.
Followers of all sacred traditions must turn to their respective
religions to answer the call to environmental stewardship.

This call is a universal one and is embedded in the origins of all the
sacred traditions of today. In doing so, people of faith can address the
environmental crisis in manners catered by and customized towards their
own respective religions.

Doing so shall benefit not only the environmental cause, but the
followers of the religion itself as well. Through this they would
involve themselves in an important part of their faith that has probably
been overlooked or underrated in the public sphere for far too long.
This is especially so for the Abrahamic religions of today whose mention
in the public sphere lacks any substantial connotation to the natural
world or environmental stewardship, when in reality the essence of their
respective tenets involves much of it.

In the Muslim world, diverse groups are coming out and taking
initiative.

Examples, ranging from grassroots groups to private entrepreneurships to
Islamic schools, include the**DC Green Muslims of Washington** , DC, the
Islamic Foundation for Ecology and Environmental Sciences of the UK, the
Wisdom in Nature group also of the UK, the Naqa’a Environmental
Enterprise group of Saudi Arabia, the Ilmu Giri Pesantren Islamic
environmental boarding school of Indonesia, and more.

An example of a collective Muslim response to the environmental issues
of today is the Muslim Seven Year Action Plan on Climate Change; it is
endorsed by Muslim leaders, scholars and civil society members from
around the world, including prominent religious figures such as the
Grand Mufti of Egypt and the Mufti of Palestine.51 The plan encompasses
a number of goals intended to ameliorate Muslims’ impact on the
environment, including the development of a “green” Hajj, in which the
annual pilgrimage would be made an eco-friendly one. Moreover, different
Islamic projects around the world are adding environmental features to
their agendas. The planned**“Park51”** Islamic community center in
downtown Manhattan, New York, for example, is slated to meet**LEED**
green building standards.52

Also fundamental to an effective solution are responses from writers in
both academia and the general public. Religious thinkers can help
provide the impetus behind hands-on environmental stewardship by
informing and educating people on the environmental aspects of their
respective religions. In the Muslim world, writers such as Seyyed
Hossein Nasr, writing since the 1960’s, have set foundations for others
to explore and continuously develop a proper Muslim response to the
environmental crisis. Writers of the past decade such as Mawil Izzi Dien
and Ibrahim Abdul-Matin, author of Green Deen: What Islam Teaches About
Protecting the Planet,53 have come to the fore to shed further light on
the Islamic outlook and approach to nature.

Moreover, activists within the Muslim response to the environmental
crisis are voicing themselves in new and more accessible ways. Their
message is atavistic in meaning, yet innovative in delivery. The
Internet has served as a platform in which Muslims from around the world
have come to voice their opinions, especially within the blogosphere. A
prime example of this is “A World of Green Muslims,” a blog that posts
“Green Messages from across the Muslim blogosphere.”54

There are also blog-like news outlets such as the “Green Prophet,”
which, though focused on Middle-Eastern environmental issues and not on
the subject of Islam and the environment, reports on Muslim
environmental activities.55 The wave of online Muslim responses to the
environmental crisis is increasing, as apparent with the emergence of
new hands-on groups and online entities such as the “Minnesota
Ecological and Environmental Muslims (**MEEM** )” of Minneapolis,
Minnesota.56

Muslims are responding to the environmental crisis, but much more has to
be done, especially in addressing the paradoxes within this aspect of
the Muslim world. Muslim countries like Iran have great reverence for
Islamic gardens, but simultaneously exude critically high levels of air
pollution in their capital cities. This paradoxical sight represents
much of the Muslim world, and the only way to truly solve it is in a
return to the essence of Islam. The Muslim world must revise its
values-including its environmental values-and the consequences of its
actions in the light of Qur’anic and prophetic teachings. From such
sources, Muslims can derive that they must walk on the earth with
gentleness and compassion, avoid abundance and waste in resources,
affirm sacredness to nature, and work with people of all backgrounds in
addressing the environmental issues of today.

Past the work of hands-on groups and academic writers, there is the need
for a sacred science. The loss of the metaphysical sciences, and hence
the studies of higher meanings of natural phenomena as well, has
contributed greatly to the vulgarized view of nature today, which in
turn has contributed to its ill treatment.

Since modern science sees nothing more than the physical in nature, it
cannot but treat it as a physical resource alone. Thus, an affirmation
of the sacredness in nature from the scientific community is needed.
Given the current state of modern science, this goal might seem overly
ambitious; however, it remains the reality of the situation.

If modern science is unyielding in its determination to study and
collect information on only the physical, then it must at least let go
of its claim as the only science and allow others to interpret such
studies and information on a higher level. A revitalization of
traditional and sacred sciences such as metaphysical cosmology and
alchemy can help to give back nature its sacredness in the eyes of
humanity. It is up to those with an understanding of natural theology or
the sacred sciences to revitalize their fields in the public sphere.
This can help break the cycle of modern humanity’s continuous
mistreatment of the environment.

Even though modern science has inflicted much harm on nature, it has
recently developed ways of amelioration. This is especially found in
today’s conservational efforts and environmental engineering
initiatives. These

efforts should not be ignored, but rather supported. They represent
means to a potential peace and their development must be encouraged and
promoted. It is an integral part to reducing the human negative impact
on the environment.

With an understanding of the religious, activist, academic and
scientific approaches to the environmental crisis, it is important that
the methodologies associated with them are not undertaken in an
individualistic manner. Instead, they must be addressed holistically.
The only methodology sustainable for both short and long-term results in
addressing the environmental crisis is a holistic and interdisciplinary
one that integrates each of these approaches and whatever else that may
contribute.

In brief, in order to better understand the natural environment and know
it for more than just its physical properties, modern humanity must turn
to nature’s sacred qualities. However, before the environmental crisis
around us can be solved, we must solve the spiritual crisis inside
ourselves, and in order to do so we must search both outwardly and
inwardly for the Signs of God. In seeing the presence of God all around
us, we recognize the sacredness of our surroundings. Thus, for  ultimate
peace, we must reconcile with nature, our selves, all forms of phenomena
and most importantly God.


