Overview
========

With extinctions and endangerments within the animal kingdom still
common place and the year 2010 possibly one of the hottest on record,
the environmental crisis of today seems quite alive and far from
ending.4 Moreover, the massive loss of natural recreational areas for
people and the continuous repeats of “natural” disasters show that
humanity itself is in grave danger. With this overwhelming plethora of
catastrophes becoming more and more common in the modern world, humanity
must ask itself: How has such an abnormal pattern of calamity come to
be, and how can it be ameliorated or stopped?

Simply put, the environmental crisis is but an outward reflection of the
inward crisis of modern day humanity. It is not just the environment
that is in crisis, but humanity as well. In fact, humans’ own inward
disharmony serves as causation to the disharmony prevalent in their
surroundings. Humans’ lack of self-discipline and morals - such as
excessive consumption and a lack of compassion - has translated onto
their environment and into the crisis apparent today. The root of
humanity’s disharmony with nature is therefore humans’ disharmony within
their own selves.

More specifically, this inward crisis is a spiritual one. The lack of
spirituality, rooted in a general lack of adherence to sacred tradition,
has spurred the loss of merciful aspects such as benevolence, love and
compassion. Such a loss created a void in the soul of humans that was
instantly filled by the very antithesis of such spiritual
characteristics. Devilish characteristics such as greed, apathy and
cruelty filled this void that was previously occupied by the fruits of
sacred religiosity and spirituality. This marring of the human soul has
translated from humans’ inner nature onto the outward nature around
them. Thus, the only lasting method for the modern human to redeem
harmony in its environment is by restoring harmony within the human
soul. Only with a purification of the heart, and hence the replacement
of its diseases with primordially healthy attributes, can peace be
attained both inwardly and outwardly.

In turn, direction is needed. Generally, the human’s self is too prone
to lawlessness to direct itself to a selfless state of peace. In order
to understand how to best travel on the route of love, humanity must
turn to the Loving. A turn to God, regardless of the sacred tradition
taken by each individual, is needed for a lasting inner-peace.
Humanity’s resolving of the environmental crisis depends on the
resolving of its own spiritual crisis, which, for each individual,
depends on his or her reconciliation with God.

A study of this from an Islamic perspective may prove beneficial, given
not only the Islamic sciences of the soul and the Islamic reverence for
nature, but also what Islam shares with other religions. Given its
theological correspondences to Western religions and its esoteric
similarities to Eastern religions, Islam has the capacity to provide a
universal basis that can benefit other religions in their own approaches
to the environmental crisis. The religious approach to the environmental
crisis, though perhaps different in nuance, is similar across all
religions.

Ultimately, all sacred traditions affirm sacred qualities to nature and
all recognize humanity’s responsibility of stewardship to this part of
God’s

creation, the natural world. In this essay, Islamic philosophy serves as
the lens through which these sacred qualities of nature are observed.


