A Qur’anic Case for Environmental Stewardship
=============================================

“Till, when they came upon a valley of ants, an ant exclaimed: “O you
ants! Get into your dwellings, lest Solomon and his soldiers crush you
without being aware!” Thereupon (Solomon) smiled joyously at her words,
and said: “O my Sustainer! Inspire me so that I may be grateful for
those blessings of Thine with which Thou hast graced me and my parents,
and that I may do what is right that will please Thee; and include me,
by Thy mercy, among Thy righteous servants!”5

When the Prophet Solomon (upon whom be peace) happened upon an ant
colony and heard an ant communicate to others, he smiled and was
inspired to pray to God.6 What significance does such a scenario, as
portrayed in the Qur’an, hold for the daily life of a Muslim? How can
such a prophetic reaction to nature bear influence on the Muslim
response to the environmental crisis today? To what Islamic resources
can Muslims refer for knowledge, inspiration and guidance in the
development of their own approach to their natural surroundings?

The Qur’anic portrayal of nature is one of a companion in the
glorification of God, a gift of sustenance, a cosmic book to learn from
and more. In the Muslim world, the Qur’an is considered the sole
literary source of sacred knowledge available today with unquestionable
authenticity. Its legitimacy as the Word of God is considered sacrosanct
and undeniable within the religion.7 Thus, a case for Islamic
environmental stewardship might be best put forth through direct
Qur’anic reference.


