A Cosmic Book
=============

Embodied throughout the cosmos are messages concerning all orders of
reality. They have significance for all kinds of knowledge, from that
regarding the superficially physical to the metaphysically ontological.
All such messages allude to God, His qualities and His supreme oneness.
They are the Signs of God (*Ayātu Llah* ) -shown for people with
specific characteristics, such as those who contemplate and seek a
greater kind of knowledge.12

Within humanity’s surroundings: the Sun seemingly rises from East to
West; in the Northern Hemisphere, moss is typically more abundant on the
northern side of trees; night and day reiterate the juxtaposed locations
of Sun and Earth... With so many natural compasses in humanity’s
surroundings, guidance and direction seem abundantly available. Though,
perhaps if people saw with other than just two eyes, they would find
guidance towards more than just physiographic location. All such
embodiments of messages constitute Signs of God-available to people for
their pursuit of knowledge concerning reality of both physical and
metaphysical domains. Such domains of reality, throughout their
hierarchies, allude to God the Real (Allah al-Ḥaqq) and to the many
other characteristics of God.

Nature itself is permeated with the Signs of God. A single snowflake is
of no threat whatsoever to a human being, but in the unity of
snowflakes - a snowstorm - humans flee for shelter; in this is an
allusion to the power of unity. It is always darkest before dawn; in
this is an analogy to the law of ease following difficulty.

Cyclically, land dies and is revived by means of rain from the heavens,
and in time it dies again and is again revived; in this is an allusion
to resurrection and a portrayal of the power of God as the Giver of Life
and the Bestower of Death (*Allah al-Muḥyi al-Mumīt* ). All such natural
phenomena are regarded as Signs of God; however, such signs can be
understood in many deeper levels than that of the simple examples just
noted.

In what is understood as a reference to a cosmic holy book, such signs
within the cosmos share the same terminology as Qur’anic verses. More
specifically, the Arabic word used in reference to Qur’anic verses,
“Ayāt,” is the very same term used in reference to signs within the
cosmos and within people. Thus, the signs within nature are regarded as
verses of a cosmic or natural holy book, and thus nature itself a holy
book-or more specifically, the cosmic “Qur’an of creation” (*al-Qur’an
al-takwīnī* ).13 Hence, with the realization that holy verses are not
just available in scripture-but in nature, the cosmos and the soul as
well-it is humanity’s responsibility to generally approach nature with
the same reverence it would a holy book.

*Most surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day, and the ships that run in the sea
with that which profits men, and the water that God sends down from the
cloud, then gives life with it to the earth after its death and spreads
in it all animals, and the changing of the winds and the clouds made
subservient*

*between the heaven and the earth, there are signs for a people who
understand.* 14


