Islamic Philosophy and Science
==============================

Islam has long claimed a strong compatibility with science and an
openness to the pursuit of sacred knowledge through it. The rich history
of Muslim contributions to the world of science bears enough evidence to
support this claim.

Scientific and mathematical branches such as algebra, astronomy and
chemistry are, at least in part, made available today due to the Islamic
sciences of old. Works by Muslim scientists, popularly known till today,
such as Ibn Arabi, Avicenna, and Averroes, have had great influence on
the discoveries and progresses within science and shall probably
continue to have so for however long science itself carries on.

Moreover, a great phenomenon pertaining to an integration of natural
theology and modern science has spread across Muslim culture. More
specifically, in light of modern scientific discoveries, Muslims today
use science to study what they consider Qur’anic miracles. The intention
is to use empirical proof as a foundation for their belief in God. The
many books and online resources on this topic are a product of this
cultural phenomenon. They include references to mathematical phenomena
in the Qur’anic repetition of words presentation of topics in
embryology,18 oceanography,19 astrophysics20 and more. It is another
example of how science has proved compatible with Islamic belief and
culture. Notwithstanding such compatibility, there remains a great
difference between the approach of modern science and that of the
traditional Islamic sciences.

Unlike the usual modern scientist, a traditional Muslim scientist’s work
was never undergone for the sake of understanding the physical alone. It
is the traditional Muslim scientist’s belief that the true function of
science is to discover aspects of the real.21 The intention behind their
work was to understand the different and higher orders of reality-all in
order to gather a better understanding of God.

This reality permeates the inherent nature of all things. It encompasses
the sacred symbolism of all facts, the gnosis attainable through the
study of creation and the virtually infinite allusions to the supreme
oneness of God.

The search for sacred knowledge had been a prevalent aspect of science
in Muslim lands for centuries. With this aspiration to better know their
Lord, Muslim scientists ranging from Jabir bin Hayyan to Avicenna have
pioneered their respective fields with studies of both the physical and
metaphysical. Through their studies of creation they intended to better
understand the Creator, especially given His invitation to do so.22
Thus, the Islamic sciences not only gathered information of their
surroundings, from earthly minerals to cosmic patterns, but also
interpreted them through a sacred lens.

Following this Islamic outlook, one greatly valuable aspect of science
is its study of the Signs of God embodied in all phenomena. Such signs
are pervasively provided throughout each person’s self and surroundings
so that people may come to better know God. Thus, all phenomena of all
kinds hold lessons for those who seek them. This notion is reflected
within all aspects of the Islamic religion and is further alluded to in
the Arabic vocabulary; there is a shared linguistic consonantal root
between the Arabic words for

knowledge, science, and world: ‘*ilm, ‘ulūm* and*‘ālam* , respectively.
It can thus be concluded that a great aspect of science is its
development of people’s knowledge of the world around-and within-them so
that they may better know God. By studying the virtually infinite signs
that symbolize His attributes, humanity can see that He is Allah
al-Khāliq ar-Rahmān, God the Creator the Infinitely Merciful.

Furthermore, science is viewed as a process of innovatively developing
the appropriate means to a God-pleasing end. With such an understanding,
the use of creative and non-traditional methods to maintain harmony
between humanity and the God-given natural environment is not just
permissible but encouraged as well.

The same applies to all innovations made for any good purpose. This is
reflected in the historical contributions of Muslim scientists to the
realm of science, as well as in the innovative works of Muslims today.


