The Separation of Science and Sacred Tradition
==============================================

The divorce between science and sacred tradition is rooted in a number
of things. In regards to Islam, the decline of the Islamic sciences
seems tied to the decline of Islamic civilization, and there are reports
today on both correlation and causation between the two.23 Internal and
external factors in Islamic civilization, such as socio-political issues
in Muslim lands and the Mongol invasion of Baghdad in 1258, are held
somewhat responsible for the loss of the Islamic sciences. However, the
true instigating factors behind the decline of both the Islamic sciences
and Islamic civilization seem to be a topic of debate in Western
literature.24 Regardless of these causes, it remains today that the
“Golden Age” of Islamic civilization is far behind and the Islamic
sciences of today are in no way near the pinnacle they had reached then.

On a universal level, the loss of a public connection between science
and sacred tradition seems rooted in a number of inter-connected events.
In the spread of Christianity into the West, and in its dialogue with
Hellenist Greeks who seemingly had a metaphysical intelligibility of
nature but not of God, a Christian movement had come about in which
there was no transcendental approach to nature, but only a strictly
nominalist theological way of understanding and reaching God.25 As noted
by the philosopher, metaphysician and Perennialist thinker, Frithjof
Schuon:

If a simple and rather summary formulation be permissible, one could say
that for the Greeks truth is that which is in conformity with the nature
of things; for the Christians truth is that which leads to God.

*Thus Christian attitude, to the extent that it tended to be exclusive,
was bound to appear to the Greeks as “foolishness”; in the eyes of the
Christians the attitude of the Greeks consisted in taking thought for an
end in itself, outside of any personal relation to God; consequently it
was a “wisdom according to the flesh”… it was in some respects a dispute
between a love-song and a mathematical theorem. It could also be said
that the Hellenists were predominantly right in principle and the
Christians in fact, at least in a particular sense that can be discerned
without difficulty.* 26

The Hellenist approach to nature was one of intellectual thought and
understanding, but was restricted by the limitations of empiricism.
Western Christianity saw the Hellenists’ pagan-like understanding of the
world as an obstacle to their potential realization of God. Thus,
according to Schuon, in lieu of intellect of this world as a path to
God, Western Christianity emphasized love as the path to Him.27
Consequently, the distinction between the natural and the supernatural
became so strict that it deprived most people a proper understanding of
nature’s spiritual qualities.28 The focus on nominal theology, and
moreover the influence of doctrines like rationalism on this type of
theology, later contributed to a European revolt against Christianity.29
In turn, this aided to a mentality of secularization that permeated the
scientific arena and finalized the separation of science and sacred
tradition. With that said, there are peripheral exceptions to this, as
evidenced by annual speeches given at the Gifford Lectures since 1888,
the general field of natural theology and the beliefs of creationist
scientists.

In regards to this Western Christian movement, it is important to note
that it does not represent all of Christianity. The movement came about
as a Christian response to a world of empirical naturalism; however,
some of its principles seem at great odds with the actions and beliefs
of others within the religion. On one hand, with an array of examples
quite widely ranging from Saint Francis of Assisi to the contemporary
Evangelical Climate Initiative,30 it seems that there have always been
Christians who recognized the human role of stewardship towards nature.

On the other hand, studies of metaphysics can be found in the writings
of Western Christian figures throughout the ages, with thinkers such as
Origen, Erigena, Dante and Jacob Böhme providing prominent examples.

In his presentation at the Rockefeller Lectures and in his book, Man and
Nature: The Spiritual Crisis of Modern Man, Nasr emphasized the need for
Christians to return to a theology of nature as understood in the
“intellectual light of the early Church Fathers, the Christian
metaphysicians of the Middle Age, such as Erigena and Eckhardt, or in
the sense of the theosophy of Jacob Böhme.”31 He also stressed the need
to learn from Oriental traditions that still studied metaphysics.32 They
are steps needed so that Christians today may both regain the Christian
understanding of the metaphysical domain of reality, and reestablish
more of the early Christian recognition of the sacred connection between
humanity and the rest of God’s creation. Other thinkers, such as Mircea
Eliade, Dom A. Graham and G. D. Yarnold, have voiced the same or a
similar message.33


