Bibliography
============

Writings
--------

Al-Ash'ari, Abu al-Hasan 1980:*Maqalat al-islamiyyin wa ikhtilaf
al-musallin* [Sayings of Muslims and Differences of Those Who Pray] 3rd
edn (Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner, 1980).

Ibn 'Arabi 1859 and reprints:*Al-Futuhat al-Makkiya* [Revelations of
Mecca], 4 Vols (Cairo: Dar al-kutub al-'arabiyya al-kubra). -1980:*Fusus
al-hikam* [Gems of Wisdom] 2nd edn (Beirut: Dar al-kitab al-'arabiyy).

Ibn Sina. Abu 'Ali 1957-60:*Al-lsharat wa al-tanbihat, ma\`a sharh Nasir
al-Din al-Tusi* [Book of Remarks and Admonitions, with the Commentary of
Nasir al-Din al-Tusi] ed. Suleyman Dunya, 4 parts (Cairo: Dar
al-ma'arif).

AI-Kirmani, Hamid al-Din 1983:*Rahat al-\`aql* [Peace of Mind] 2nd edn
(Beirut: Dar al-andalus).

AI-Suhrawardi, Shihab al-Din Yahya 1952: "Hikmat al-ishraq," in*Oeuvres
philosophiques et mystiques de Shihabeddin Jahya Sohrawardi ( 1),* ed.
H. Corbin, Bibliotheque Iranienne, Vol. 2 (Teheran and Paris: Institut
Franco-Iranien - Librairie d'Amerique et d'Orient), pp. 2-260.

References and further reading
------------------------------

Badawi, A. 1972:*Histoire de la philosophie en Islam,* 2 Vols (Paris:
J*.* Vrin).

AI-Baghdadi, Abu Mansur 1981:*'Usul al-din,* 3rd edn (Beirut: Dar
al-kutub al-'ilmiyya).

Chittick, W.C. 1983:*The* *Sufi Path of Love: the Spiritual Teachings of
Rumi* (Albany: State University of New York Press).

Corbin, H. 1964:*Histoire de la philosophic islamique* (Paris:
Gallimard).

Fakhry, M. 1983*: A History of Islamic Philosophy,* 2nd edn (New York:
Columbia University Press).

AI-Farabi, Abu Nasr 1890: Fi-ma yasihh wa ma la yasihh min ahkam
al-nujum" [What is right and what is wrong in astrology], in*Al-thamra
al-mardiyya fi ba\`d al-risalat al-farabiyya* [Longed-for Fruit of Some
Treatises by al-Farabi] (Leiden: E. J. Brill), pp. 104-14.

-- 1928: "Kitab al-fusus" [Book of Gems] in*Risalat ithbat al-mufariqat
wa nusus ukhra* [Treatise Establishing the Existence of Non-material
Essences and Other Texts] (Hyderabad: Majlis dai'rat al-'ulum
at-'uthmaniyya), pp. 1-23.

Frank, R.M. 1966: The Metaphysics of Created Being According to
Abu-l-Hudhayl al-Allaf. A Philosophical Study of the Earliest Kalam
(Istanbul).

Goichon. A. M. 1938: Lexique de la langue philosophique d'Ibn Sina
(Avicenne) (Paris: Desclee do Brower).

Ibn 'Arabi 1859:*Al-Futuhat al-Makkiya* [Revelations of Mecca], 4 Vols
(Cairo: Dar al-kutub al-'arabiyya al-kubra).

Ibn Rushd (Averroes) 1992:*Kitab al-kawn wa al-fasad* [Book of
Generation and Corruption], ed.J*.* P. Montada (Madrid: Consejo Superior
de Investigationes Cientificas).

AI-Kindi 1948:*Kitab al-Kindi ila al-Mu'tasim bi-llah fi al-falsafa
al-'ula* [Epistle of al-Kindi to al-Mu'tasim bi-llah in First
Philosophy], ed. Ahmad al-Ahwani (Cairo).

Nasr, S. H. 1964:*Three Muslim Sages: Avicenna, Suhrawardi, Ibn 'Arabi*
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).

Pines, S. 1954: "La longue recension de la Theologie d'Aristote dans ses
rapports avec la doctrine Ismaelienne,"*Revue* *des Etudes lsiamiques,*
22. pp. 7-20.

Tamir. A. 1991:*Ta'rikh al-lsma'lliyya: al-da'wa wa al-'aqida* [History
of al-Isma\`iliyya: Appeal and Doctrine] (London. Cyprus: Riyad
al-Rayyis li al-kutub wa al-nashr).

Walzer. R. 1962: "The Arabic Translation of Aristotle," in*Greek into
Arabic* (Oxford), pp. 60-113.

Wolfson, H. A. 1965: "Mu'ammar's theory of ma'na," in*Arabic and Islamic
Studies in Honor of Hamilton A.R. Gibb* (Leiden: E. J. Brill), pp.
673-88.


