Chapter 6: Attributing fallibility to the Prophet
=================================================

Historical facts clearly show that there was a deep-rooted conspiracy,
the spark of which was lit by Abu Sufyan, Marwan, Amr bin al-Aas…etc.,
long before they became reluctant Muslims. The spark was fanned into a
fire when a written pledge was made by some persons comprised of *Banu
Umayya* along with some companions of the Prophet (S) at the Kaaba, to
hasten the early departure of the Prophet (S) by waylaying and killing
him during his return from the last *Hajj,* and thus usurp the
*Caliphate.*

The forging of an alliance between the *Banu Umayya* and some companions
who were their childhood friends was absolutely necessary as the Muslim
*Umma* would not have tolerated the *Banu Umayya*, one time enemies of
Islam, to rule over them. When they could not succeed in killing him,
they conspired to oppose every wish of the ailing Prophet (S). They
refused to assemble under the banner of Usama violating the Prophet’s
specific and repeated orders. Later, they frustrated the Prophet’s
desire to write down his last will and came out openly saying that the
Qur’an was sufficient and that there was no further need for guidance or
directions from a delirious and dying Prophet (S).

It is not as if they wanted to create a doubt about the wisdom or
infallibility of the Prophet (S). They held the view that the Prophet
(S) was as much an ordinary man as they were; subject to greed, avarice,
prejudice, and a desire to aggrandize the self and family. To their
credit, it must be said that they genuinely thought that the Prophet (S)
was an ordinary human being. Therefore, they spied in his every speech
and action a personal motive! At every stage, they asked, “*Is this from
you or from Allah?*” They could never ever properly understand the
Prophet (S).

Though every person who claimed to be a Muslim was commanded and obliged
to unquestioningly submit to the command of the Prophet (S), in letter
and in spirit, history is full of instances where the companions, who
later became *Caliphs*, stood up to question the Prophet’s wisdom of
word or deed.[^1] They often asked, “*Is this from you or from
Allah*?”[^2] And every time the Prophet (S) had to reassure them that,
as the Qur’an vouchsafes, he never did anything out of his own will,
personal whim, or for pleasure.[^3] Later, whenever a tradition that was
in favor of Ali (a.s.) or against their liking or interest was related,
these very companions conveniently branded the tradition as the personal
whim of Muhammad (S) the individual and not the act of Muhammad the
Prophet (S). History is replete with instances where, for instance, Umar
confessed about the peace treaty of *Hudaibiya* and said, “*It was a day
when I doubted the wisdom of Muhammad (S) as never before, and I was
nigh recanting from the faith*.”[^4]

A perpetual, persistent, and commonly shared doubt in the Prophethood of
Muhammad (S) and the anomaly of being counted upon as the companions of
the very object of their suspicion, created inroads for a close nexus
between the *Banu Umayya* and such of the tribe of *Quraysh* who held
similar views. The ‘doubt’ was well conviction and they could not dispel
it despite spending time in the company of the Prophet (S).

The history of the prophets is replete with instances where their flock
accused them of being ordinary men like themselves. This arose on
account of the fact that if the Prophet (S) claimed to be super human,
the flock will rightly claim that the commandments could be followed by
him–a super human- and not by ordinary mortals. Therefore, the Prophets
had to appear human, subject to thirst, hunger, pain, joy and to walk
about in the market place to buy and sell. At the same time, the
prophets also performed miracles which set them apart from ordinary
human beings. A right thinking man considered the prophets to be similar
but superior to himself, whereas ignorant and misguided men considered
the prophets (S) to be just like any ordinary man.[^5]

Ultimately, a solution to the contradiction that arose between a
perpetually lingering doubt while constantly being viewed as the
Prophet’s companions took the shape of the old proposition that was all
too convenient for their secret plans. Thus, even during the lifetime of
the Prophet (S) itself, they started a subtle but sustained campaign
that Muhammad (S) was, after all, as much an ordinary human being as any
other, subject to greed, lust and all other human frailties and
excesses; and that it was only on those occasions when he received
Divine Messages that he acted as the Messenger of God. Thus, a cleavage
was made in the personality of Prophet Muhammad (S) and a rift was
created between religious and temporal leadership, for the conspirators
were fully aware that while they could not go anywhere near religious
leadership [imamate], they, as expert politicians, could stake their
right to temporal leadership [caliphate]. They knew that if you held the
calf, the cow would follow.

We may note here that whenever Divine Messengership combined with
temporal authority as in the case of Adam, David, Solomon, and the
Prophet Muhammad (S), no injustice was caused to anyone under such
‘Just’ rulers. On the other hand, when temporal authority was separated
from Divine Messengership, people suffered under unjust and oppressive
rulers.

In order to prevent any dissension or doubt, the Prophet (S) called for
pen and parchment so that he might write down his will declaring his
successor. Umar refused and prevented others from procuring pen and
parchment, knowing that the Prophet (S) would make a will in favour of
Ali (a.s.). Umar then declared that the Prophet (S) was hallucinating in
a state of *delirium*, and was, therefore, incapable of understanding
his own words and deeds. Umar put the last nail in the proverbial
coffin. He proclaimed:“*We* *have the Qur’an amongst us, which is
sufficient to guide us*.”[^6] Thus, Umar dispensed with the necessity of
any guidance from the Prophet (S) ! Hearing this, the Prophet (S) became
angry and told Umar:‘get out of my presence’.[^7] This incident is
recorded by Al-Bukhari under the same heading, i.e. ‘*Qumu Anni; get
away from me*’. The incident reveals that right in the presence the
ailing Prophet (S) they dared to suggest that the Prophet (S) was only
an ordinary human being and that he suffered from infirmity of the mind.
Thus, it was insinuated, firstly that the Prophet’s words were of no
consequence since they were merely the blabbering of a weak and
wandering mind, and secondly, that no guidance from the Prophet (S) was
needed any longer since they already had the Qur’an with them.

Disobeying the Prophet
----------------------

The Prophet (S) sent several ambassadors and delegations to the
neighboring kingdoms. Al-Munthir accepted Islam. The Egyptians sent rich
presents while the Hercules and Negus replied in courteous manner.
Khosrow, the king of Persia, behaved arrogantly and swore that he would
punish the Prophet (S). But Khosrow was murdered by his own son. The
Roman king had insulted and killed Usama’s father Zaid, who was sent as
an ambassador by the Prophet (S). The Roman king failed to apologize and
he threatened to wipe out the Muslims. This gave cause for the Muslims
to send an army, demand an apology from the Roman king, and to wage war
if he would refuse to apologize.[^8]

The Prophet (S), therefore, directed Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Sa’d bin
Abi Waqqas, Abu Ubaida bin al-Jarrah and all the Muhajirin and the
Ansar, except Imam Ali (a.s.), to go to the place called Mu’ta on an
expedition under the command of Usama bin Zaid.[^9] Objections were
raised saying that the senior companions were opposed to being placed
under the command of Usama who was a young man. Many argued that on
earlier occasions, the Prophet (S) had placed the very same companions
under the charge of Ali (a.s.) who was the youngest among them. However,
a foundation was laid for a demur and claim that the leader should only
be an older member and not any youngster.

Unable to collect men around him, Usama twice met the Prophet (S) who
became angry at his orders being disobeyed and he insisted that Usama
should immediately collect all the men and proceed on the expedition
without further delay. Books of history are full of reports as to how
Usama tried to collect the men for the expedition and how they refused
to assemble under his leadership and how the companions of the Prophet
(S) disobeyed the ailing Prophet (S).

History also records the palace intrigues of Aa’isha and Hafsa, wives of
the Prophet (S) and daughters of Abu Bakr and Umar respectively. The
animosity of these two women towards Imam Ali (a.s.) is very well
recorded in history. Each of these two women insisted that her father
should not proceed on any expedition and should be present in Medina,
since the Prophet (S) was about to die. Therefore, instead of going to
Usama as directed by the Prophet (S), Abu Bakr went to Suq to his newly
wedded wife, and Umar shuttled between his friends among the *Banu
Umayya* and the *Muhajirin*. Whenever the Prophet (S) called for Ali
(a.s.), each of these two women would suggest that her father might be
called instead of Ali (a.s.), but the Prophet (S) insisted on Ali
(a.s.), with whom he conferred for a long time.[^10] The Prophet (S)
said, “*God’s curse upon those who demurred in joining the army of
Usama*”[^11]

The Myth of Leading the Prayers
-------------------------------

During his last days, the Prophet (S) was able to lead the prayers only
once a day. When his sickness became severe, he was unable to go out and
lead the prayers. During his sickness, he asked Imam Ali (a.s.) to lead
the prayers. But somehow, this fact had to be obliterated or at least
rendered dubious in historical records. Therefore, years later under the
two caliphs*,* gullible historians introduced Abu Bakr and Umar as
persons who led the prayer in the place of the Prophet (S) during his
illness. That history, which was manipulated, is obvious from the
following contradictory versions:

According to the earliest version of Muhammad ibn Isshaq, it is reported
by Abdullah ibn Zam ibn al-Aswad that he was present near the ailing
Prophet (S), when Bilal called out the *Azan* and inquired as to who
should lead the prayers. The Prophet (S) told ibn Zam to ask anyone he
may find at hand to lead the prayers. Ibn Zam said that on hearing this
he came out, found that Abu Bakr was not present but Umar was. Ibn Zam
asked Umar to lead the prayers. When Umar stood up and said the Takbir,
the Prophet (S) heard Umar’s booming voice, and said, “*Where is Abu
Bakr? God and the Muslims refuse that Umar should lead the prayers*.”
Abu Bakr was sent for, but before he came, Umar had completed the
Prayer. Feeling hurt at the incident, Umar asked ibn Zam, “*Why did you
do this to me? When I led the prayers, I thought that I was complying
with the Prophet’s wish*.” Ibn Zam replied, *“The order was not from the
Prophet. When I could not find Abu Bakr, I thought that you are the next
best person to lead the prayers and therefore it was I who had asked you
to lead the prayer.”*[^12]

The above version is improved and amended by Husayn Dayar Bakhti by
substituting the words that the Prophet (S) told ibn Zam that he might
ask anyone he would find to lead the prayers, and in its place
interpolating that the Prophet (S) asked Abdullah ibn Zam to ask Abu
Bakr to lead the prayers but not finding Abu Bakr, he asked Umar to lead
the prayers.[^13]

But the great Sunni traditionist Imam Ahmed ibn Hanbal gives a different
version and narrates from Abdullah ibn Abbas who said:“*During his
sickness, the Prophet (S) sent for Ali (a.s.) to be brought in
immediately. Hearing this, Aa’isha said, ‘Why not my father Abu Bakr?’
The Prophet (S) said, ‘Very well’. Then Hafsa challenged, ‘Why only Abu
Bakr, and not my father Umar?’ The Prophet (S) said, ‘Very Well’. Then,
Ummul Fadhl said, ‘Why not my husband Abbas?’ The Prophet (S) said,
‘Very Well’. When all the three, Abu Bakr, Umar, and Abbas arrived, the
Prophet (S) lifted his head and not finding Ali (a.s.) among them, kept
quiet. Umar understood that the Prophet (S) was not in favour of any of
them and he said, ‘Let us move out’. Then Bilal, who had called out for
prayer [called out the Azan] came in. Aa’isha said, ‘Abu Bakr is
emotional and mild natured. Let Umar* *lead the prayer’. However, Abu
Bakr went out to lead the prayer. Then the* *Prophet (S) finding himself
slightly better, had himself lifted, his feet dragging on the ground,
went into the mosque with the help of two persons…The Prophet (S) led
the prayer and Abu Bakr was following him.”*[^14] *Al-Bukhari and Muslim
also report on lines similar to Ahmed bin Hanbal, with the addition that
when Aa’isha and Hafsa were disputing as to whose father should lead the
prayers, the Prophet (S) said, “You are [deceitful and cunning] like the
women of Joseph*.”[^15]

At-Tabari has a different version according to which the Prophet (S)
asked Abu Bakr to lead the Prayer. Aa’isha said, “*Abu Bakr is a soft
man.” The Prophet (S) said, “Then ask Umar to lead the prayers.” Umar
replied, “I am not going to lead the prayer when Abu Bakr is present.”
Therefore, Abu Bakr led the prayers.*[^16]

The incident was later manipulated in such a way as to suggest that,
during the three days preceding the Prophet’s death, Abu Bakr led the
prayers according to an indication *(Ishara)* given by the Prophet (S).
This manipulation is later used to suggest that Abu Bakr was indicated
to be the successor of the Prophet (S).[^17]

Thus, historical facts were distorted and the precedence of Abu Bakr and
Umar was sought to be established during the last days of the Prophet
(S), as a prelude and a step in aide to challenge the wisdom of the
Prophet’s words and deeds.[^18]

After finishing the prayer, the Prophet (S) returned to his chamber and
demanded that pen and parchment to be procured to write down his will
and testament, so that the Muslim community might be rightly guided and
not to fall into gross eternal error.[^19] We have recounted this
incident in detail in the preceding pages.

Anguish of the Ansar before the Saqifa
--------------------------------------

Umar apprehended that if the news of the death of the Prophet (S)
reached the Ansar, they would rush and swear allegiance to Imam Ali (S)
where they knew well that he had been nominated by the Prophet (S). He
was also aware that the Ansar were in favour of Ali (a.s.) to succeed
the Prophet (S). He realized that once Ali (a.s.) completed the funeral
rites, the entire Muslim community would swear their allegiance and make
Ali (a.s.) the caliph as wanted by the Prophet (S). He had to somehow
gain time and defer the question of succession till he could present a
fait accompli. It is for this reason that we find Umar standing near the
Prophet’s body with his sword unsheathed, imputing a sort of immortality
to the Prophet (S), and threatening that anyone who said that the
Prophet (S) had died, would be immediately beheaded.[^20] Having created
the desired confusion, Umar left the dead body of the Prophet (S) to be
buried by Ali (a.s.) and he hastened to the Saqifa. Abu Bakr, who came
after some time on his return from Suk, joined Umar at Saqifa, where he
was immediately declared as the Caliph.[^21] On their return from
Saqifa, Abu Bakr recited verses from the Qur’an to show that after all
Umar was wrong and the Prophet (S), like any ordinary human being, had
died.[^22] The confusion created by Umar’s assertion gave enough
breathing time to put into effect their plan of usurping the Caliphate.

The initial assertion of immortality and later contradicting it by
Qur’anic verses was cleverly used to prove that the Prophet (S) was as
much a mortal as any other. The crux of the matter was to remove any
possible doubt as to the Prophet (S) to be anything other than a mere
mortal, and thus attempting to establish that, if on occasions, the
Prophet’s actions appeared to be favorable to Ali (a.s.), all such
actions should be discounted and dismissed as the fancies of the
wandering mind of an ordinary man, who was naturally interested in
seeing his son-in-law and cousin becoming the leader of the Muslims.

Thus, all those innumerable occasions when the Prophet (S) declared Imam
Ali (a.s.) as his successor, they argued, should be presumed to be the
impulsive acts of Muhammad (S), the mortal man, who was impelled by the
desire to perpetuate a family rule. All such sayings of the Prophet (S)
regarding Ali (a.s.), they argued, should therefore be discarded as the
whims and fancies of an ordinary human mind. What was so long whispered
as a theory was now to be put into practical use.

The Ansar were witnesses to the nomination of Imam Ali (a.s.) by the
Prophet (S) on several occasions. They acknowledged Ali’s superiority in
all respects over the entire Muslim community. They all knew that as a
matter of fact Ali (a.s.) would have to become the successor of the
Prophet (S) and hence they were eager and ready to accept him as the
*Caliph*.[^23] They had none among them who could even remotely compete
against Ali (a.s.).

But, the open opposition shown to the ailing Prophet (S), in his last
days, was noted by the Ansar. Now, the Ansar realized that already plans
were afoot to forestall Ali’s succession and that some other unknown
person was likely to pre-empt Ali (a.s.) as well as the Ansar in order
to usurp the *Caliphate*. The Ansar argued that if it was going to be
any person other than Ali (a.s.), they had an equal, if not a better
claim to the *Caliphate*, as the people who gave a place and protection
first to the Muslims and later to the Prophet (S) himself. They hurried
to the *Saqifa of the Bani Sa’ida* which was their old hideout where all
urgent and important matters were discussed and decided. Sa’d bin Ubada
was a well-known, powerful, and ambitious man among the Ansar. The Ansar
decided that if any person other than Ali (a.s.) attempted to become the
*Caliph,* Sa’d Bin Ibada should stake the claim for the
*Caliphate.*[^24]

The Ansar themselves were a divided lot on account of long-standing
enmity between the two major tribes of al-Aws and al-Khazraj.[^25] Both
of the tribes had traitors who passed on the information to the
*Muhajirin*. Umar had, as his close friends and informers, Uwaim, Mu’in
ibn Adiy, and his brother Aasim from among the Ansar. These men were
jealous of and opposed to Sa’d bin Ibada and his tribe. When they saw
that Sa’d bin Ibada was likely to be put up as a candidate of the Ansar
to the *Caliphate*, Aasim hurried in search of Umar. He found him at the
Prophet’s house and from behind a wall, called out to him. Aasim and
Mu’in bin Adiy informed Umar that the Ansar had gathered at *Saqifa* and
were about to choose Sa’d bin Ibada as the *Caliph*.[^26] Aasim urged
Umar to hurry to Saqifa. Umar could not locate Abu Bakr, who was then a
short distance away at *Suk* with his newly wedded wife. Instead, he
found Abu Ubaida ibn al-Jarrah and offered the caliphate to him. Abu
Ubaida refused, saying that he dared not do so as long as seniors like
Abu Bakr and Umar were present. On the way, Abu Bakr met them and all
three of them hurried towards *Saqifa*, leaving behind the body of the
Prophet (S) to be buried by his family members and close
companions.[^27]

Even during the lifetime of the Prophet (S), Abu Bakr and Umar kept
their link with Abu Sufyan, Marwan, Mu’awiya, and other Umayyads. In the
heat of the Battle of Uhud, assuming that the Prophet (S) was killed,
Umar, Talha, and a few Muhajirin and Ansar fled to the mountains.[^28]
When Anas ibn an-Nadhr, came upon them and inquired as to why they
deserted the Prophet (S) at such a crucial moment, Umar lamented that
since he was told that the Prophet (S) was killed, he wished that
someone could go to the hypocrite Abdullah ibn Ubay and request him to
intercede and get an amnesty from Abu Sufyan who was the commander of
the infidel army.[^29] Umar and Abu Bakr, when they assumed the
*Caliphate*, doubly renewed their friendship with the *Banu Umayya*, the
clan to which Uthman belonged.

At the *Saqifa*, after much disputation, initially a sort of compromise
formula was proposed that in recognition of the undeniable protection
and services rendered by the Ansar to Muslims, one man from the Ansar
and one man from the Muhajirin should become *Caliphs*. Umar vehemently
objected saying that two swords could not be sheathed in one scabbard.
It is to be noted that at the *Saqifa*, there were only three persons;
Abu Bakr, Umar, and Abu Ubaida and nobody else from the Muhajirin.[^30]
S.M. Suhufi gives a total number of fourteen persons who had gathered at
*Saqifa.*[^31]

At the Saqifa, there was no any discussion between the Muhajirin and the
Ansar regarding the merits of their respective candidates. The only
contention of Abu Bakr and Umar was that they belonged to the tribe of
Quraysh, who accepted Islam long before the Ansar and that they were
relatives of the Prophet (S). On this ground, the people of Quraysh
contended that they had a better and superior right over the Ansar. The
details of what transpired at the *Saqifa* does not concern us here. The
entire incident and the manner in which Abu Bakr became the first
Caliphate is recorded in detail by all the historians as well as
reporters of traditions. The arguments between the two contestants are
set out in detail supported by authoritative references by Agha M.S.
Mirza in his book ‘The *Caliphate*’.[^32] Suffice it to say that there
were wordy duels followed by exchange of blows and bloodshed. At-Tabari
records that it was “truly a scene from the period of *Jahiliya* (the
pre-Islamic era).[^33]

A vast number of the Hashemites, Muhajirin, such as Salman, al-Miqdad,
Ammar, Huthaifa, Abu Dharr, and the Ansar such as Abu Ayyub al Ansari,
Jabir ibn Abdullah…etc., refused to acknowledge Abu Bakr as their
*Caliph*. The *Banu Umayya* headed by Abu Sufyan also initially refused
to acknowledge Abu Bakr’s *Caliphate*.[^34]

As to how, by offering wealth, property, and lucrative posts, and where
these did not work, by threats of annihilation and actual use of force,
the dissidents, except the *Banu Hashim*, were subdued by the *Caliph*,
is recorded in detail by Ahmed ibn Hanbal in his *Musnad*, Ibn Sa’d in
his *Tabaqat*, Ibn Qutaiba in his *Kitabul Imamah wes-Siyasah*, al-Hakim
in his *Mustadrak*, Abu Dawud in his *Musnad*, Shah Abdul Haq in his
*al-Ashi’atul Lami’a*, al-Balatheri in his *Futuhul Buldan*, in addition
to the books of Abul Fida, at-Tabari, al-Mas’udi, ibn Abil Hadid
al-Mo’tazili…etc.[^35]

Abu Sufyan ostensibly became a Muslim, but remained a pagan at heart,
for he was highly pleased when Umar and other Muslims deserted the
Prophet (S) and ran away in the battle of Hunain.[^36] He gloated:“*This
day we have seen the last of the witchcraft of Muhammad. This headlong
flight of the* *Muslims will be stopped only by the sea.”*[^37]

Introduction of Fatalism
------------------------

The *Umma* was greatly agitated by the fact that Ali (a.s.) was
cunningly sidestepped. There were unending discussions about the acumen
of the first caliph*.* The conspirators were aware that if an element of
Divine will was introduced, it would silence the common man. For this*,*
the next step was to introduce a sense of fatalism of the maxim ‘Man
proposes, God disposes’. Thus, it is that Umar introduced ‘Divine
Providence’ when he told Abdullah ibn Abbas:“*It is true that the
Prophet (S) intended and wished that Ali should attain the Caliphate.
But the wish of the Prophet can carry no weight, as God did not will it
so. The Prophet wished that Ali should attain the Caliphate, but God
wished it otherwise. The will of God prevailed, thus the Prophet’s
desire could not be fulfilled. …The Prophet wished to write a will
giving the Caliphate to Ali, but I prevented him from doing so in the
interest of Islam. The Prophet also came to know what was in my heart,
and refrained from writing the will. The will of God prevailed*.”[^38]

The uncanny introduction of fatalism brought out a mix that was easily
consumable for the *Umma* that was ever ready to resign to its ‘fate’.
To this day, Muslims are under the impression that what had happened at
*Saqifa* in the matter of *Caliphate* might have been due to the Decree
of God and we the *Umma*, including the Prophet and his progeny are
powerless on-lookers. In this view, are concealed and condoned all the
contrivances employed by the *Banu Umayya* and some greedy men of
Quraysh, to usurp the *Caliphate* and keep it successfully beyond the
reach of the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.).

In one swipe all those traditions regarding Imam Ali’s nomination to the
*Caliphate*, were done away with. But there remained those traditions
that spoke of the excellence and supremacy of Imam Ali (a.s.) over all
other Muslims in matters of faith, and his indispensability to Islam.
However, not much could be done as long as the Prophet (S) lived, for he
would have reiterated whenever they made any attempt to falsify a
tradition, thereby enhancing the number of narrators of traditions. Yet,
during the Prophet’s lifetime itself false sayings were attributed to
him so much so the Prophet (S) said, “*Whoever attributes false
traditions in my name shall surely be cast into hell*.”[^39] The
appropriate time for action, therefore, was immediately after the death
of the Prophet (S). However, political expediency demanded that the
foundation be laid when the Prophet (S) was in the last moments of his
life. Consummate politician that he was, Umar superbly carried out this
part of the conspiracy.

[^1]: Al-Bukhari, Chapter on Jihad, vol.2, p.14, ibnul Athir’s Tarikh
al-Kamil, vol.2, p.84, Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2, p.22, 32, Madarijun
Nubuwwa, vol.2 p.286-287, al-Waqidi’s Kitabul Maghazi, vol. 2 p.607, Ali
Naqi’s History of Islam, Pp.357-362.

[^2]: As-Seera al-Halabiyya, vol. 3, p.308-309.

[^3]: Qur’an, 53:3-4.

[^4]: Ibnul Athir’s Tarikh al-Kamil, vol.2, p.84, Tarikh al-Khamis, vol.
2, p.22, 32, Madarijun Nubuwwa, vol.2, p.286-287, al-Waqidi’s Kitabul
Maghazi, vol. 2, p.607, Ali Naqi’s History of Islam, p.357-362.

[^5]: Qur’an, Hud 11:31, al-Mu’minoon 23:33 – 35, 123 – 126, ash-Shura
26:153 – 154, 176-191, Yasin 36:13 – 29, al-Baqara 2:246 – 251.

[^6]: Al-Bukhari, Kitabul Ilm, Kitabul Jihad, Kitabul Khums, Bab Maradh
an-Nabi, Qumu Anni, Bab Karahiyat…, Sahih of Muslim,vol.5, p.75-76,
Ahmed bin Hanbal’s Musnad,vol.1,p.355- 356, ash-Shahristani’s Kitab
al-Milal wen-Nihal, ibn Hazm’s Kitab al-Fasl, vol. 1 p.23, Kanzul Ummal,
vol. 3 p.138, vol. 4 p.23, The Caliphate, p. 208-209.

[^7]: Al-Bukhari, Bab ‘Qumu anni’.

[^8]: Abul Fida’s Qasasul Ambiya, p. 408 – 409.

[^9]: At-Tabari, vol.3, p.188-189, Habibus Sayyar, vol. 1, Part 3, p.77,
Madarijun Nubuwwa, vol. 2, p.530, Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2 p.171, Ibnul
Athir, vol. 2,p.120, ibn Abil Hadid, vol. 1 p.53, vol.2 p.20.

[^10]: At-Tabari, vol.3, p.188-189, Habibus Sayyar, vol. 1, Part 3,
p.77, Madarijun Nubuwwa, vol. 2, p.530, Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2, p.171,
Ibnul Athir, vol. 2 p.120, ibn Abil Hadid, vol.1, p.53, vol.2, p.20.

[^11]: Stories From the Qur’an by S.M. Suhufi, p. 316, Arabic Text No.
119 at p. 351. [La’ana Allahu man takhallafa an jaishi Usama].

[^12]: Seeratun Nabi, Vol. 4, p.330.

[^13]: Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2 p.181.

[^14]: Ahmed bin Hanbal's Musnad, vol. 1, p.356.

[^15]: Al-Bukhari, Kitabul Azan and Kitabul I’tisaam, Sahih of Muslim,
vol. 1, part 3, p.79.

[^16]: Tabari, vol. 3, p.195

[^17]: Habib al-Sayyar, vol. 4, p. 356. Khilafah in Theory & Practice,
p.48-49.

[^18]: The Caliphate, p. 196-207.

[^19]: The Caliphate, p. 212 and footnote 264.

[^20]: Ibn Khaldun, vol.2, p.63, Shibli’s al Faruq, Part 1, p.65, The
Caliphate, p.230, 232.

[^21]: Al-Bukhari, Bab Fada’il As~haab an-Nabi, vol.2, p.193, ibn
Khaldun, vol.2, Supp. P. 63, Tabaqat of ibn Sa’d, Vol. 2, Part 2, p. 55.

[^22]: The Caliphate by M.S. Mirza, p.220-221, ibn Hisham, vol. 4,
p.334-335, Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 1, p.334, Al-Bukhari, Bab
Fada’il As~haab an Nabi, vol.2, p.193, ibn Khaldun, vol.2, Supp. P. 63,
Tabaqat of ibn Sa’d, Vol. 2, Part 2, p. 55; ibn Hajar al-Makki’s
As-Sawa’iq, p.5.

[^23]: At-Tabari, vol.3, p.198, al-Kamil of ibnul Athir, vol. 2,p.124,
Ibn Abil Hadid al-Mo’tazili , vol. 2, p. 7-8, 411.

[^24]: Ibn Abil Hadid, Vol. 2, p. 10.

[^25]: Ibn Qutaiba, Kitabul Imamah, p.9; The Caliphate, p.227, Khilafa,
p.48.

[^26]: Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. 2,p. 3.

[^27]: Al-Bukhari, Bab Fada’il As~hab an-Nabi, vol.2, p.193, at-Tabari,
vol. 3, p.208, Muhibbuddin at-Tabari’s ar-Riydun Nadira, Part 1, Ch.2,
Section 13, p. 15, 165.

[^28]: As-Suyuti’s ad-Durrul Manthur, vol.2, supp. P. 88.

[^29]: At-Tabari’s Tarikh, vol.3, p.19-20; Kitabul Maghazi, vol. 3, p.
45.

[^30]: Al-Bukhari, Bab Fada’il As~hab an Nabi, vol. 2, p.193, at-Tabari,
Vol. 3, p.208.

[^31]: Stories From the Qur’an by Suhufi, Eng. Tr. By Muhammad Fazal
Haq, P. 312 Islamic Seminary Publications [2003].

[^32]: The Caliphate, Its Conception and Consequences, p. 222 – 242.

[^33]: At-Tabari, vol. 3, p. 208-210, ibn Khaldun, vol. 2,supp. P. 63.

[^34]: Habib al-Sayyar, vol. 1, Part 4, p. 2, Abul Fida, vol. 1,p. 156,
at-Tabari, vol. 3, p.202, al-Mas’udi, vol. 2,p.194, ibn Abil Hadid, vol.
1, p. 134.

[^35]: Ibn Sa’d’s at-Tabaqatul Kubra, Part 1, Vol. 3, p.129, ibn
Qutaiba’s Kitabul Imama wes-Siyasah, vol.1, p.15, ibn Abil Hadid, vol.
1, p.133, vol. 2, p.3.

[^36]: Al-Bukhari, Kitabul Maghazi, vol. 3, p.45.

[^37]: At-Tabari, vol. 3, p. 128, Ibnul Athir, vol. 2,p.100, Abul Fida,
vol. 1, 146, ibn Kathir’s Tarikh, vol. 4,p.327, Margoliouth’s
‘Muhammad’, p. 394-402.

[^38]: The Caliphate, p. 46-47, 329-330, quoting Ibn Abil Hadeed’s Sharh
Nahjul Balagha, vol.3, p.114.

[^39]: Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 209.


