Disobeying the Prophet
======================

The Prophet (s) sent several ambassadors and delegations to the
neighboring kingdoms. Al-Munthir accepted Islam. The Egyptians sent rich
presents while the Hercules and Negus replied in courteous manner.
Khosrow, the king of Persia, behaved arrogantly and swore that he would
punish the Prophet (s). But Khosrow was murdered by his own son. The
Roman king had insulted and killed Usama’s father Zaid, who was sent as
an ambassador by the Prophet (s). The Roman king failed to apologize and
he threatened to wipe out the Muslims. This gave cause for the Muslims
to send an army, demand an apology from the Roman king, and to wage war
if he would refuse to apologize.**[1]**

The Prophet (s), therefore, directed Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman, Sa’d bin
Abi Waqqas, Abu Ubaida bin al-Jarrah and all the Muhajirin and the
Ansar, except Imam Ali (a.s), to go to the place called Mu’ta on an
expedition under the command of Usama bin Zaid.**[2]** Objections were
raised saying that the senior companions were opposed to being placed
under the command of Usama who was a young man. Many argued that on
earlier occasions, the Prophet (s) had placed the very same companions
under the charge of Ali (a.s) who was the youngest among them. However,
a foundation was laid for a demur and claim that the leader should only
be an older member and not any youngster.

Unable to collect men around him, Usama twice met the Prophet (s)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abul Fida’s Qasasul Ambiya, p. 408 – 409.  
 **[2]** At-Tabari, vol.3, p.188-189, Habibus Sayyar, vol. 1, Part 3,
p.77, Madarijun Nubuwwa, vol. 2, p.530, Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2 p.171,
Ibnul Athir, vol. 2,p.120, ibn Abil Hadid, vol. 1 p.53, vol.2 p.20.

who became angry at his orders being disobeyed and he insisted that
Usama should immediately collect all the men and proceed on the
expedition without further delay. Books of history are full of reports
as to how Usama tried to collect the men for the expedition and how they
refused to assemble under his leadership and how the companions of the
Prophet (s) disobeyed the ailing Prophet (s).

History also records the palace intrigues of Aa’isha and Hafsa, wives of
the Prophet (s) and daughters of Abu Bakr and Umar respectively. The
animosity of these two women towards Imam Ali (a.s) is very well
recorded in history. Each of these two women insisted that her father
should not proceed on any expedition and should be present in Medina,
since the Prophet (s) was about to die. Therefore, instead of going to
Usama as directed by the Prophet (s), Abu Bakr went to Suq to his newly
wedded wife, and Umar shuttled between his friends among the *Banu
Umayya* and the *Muhajirin*. Whenever the Prophet (s) called for Ali
(a.s), each of these two women would suggest that her father might be
called instead of Ali (a.s), but the Prophet (s) insisted on Ali (a.s),
with whom he conferred for a long time.**[1]** The Prophet (s) said,
“*God’s curse upon those who demurred in joining the army of
Usama*”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tabari, vol.3, p.188-189, Habibus Sayyar, vol. 1, Part 3,
p.77, Madarijun Nubuwwa, vol. 2, p.530, Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2, p.171,
Ibnul Athir, vol. 2 p.120, ibn Abil Hadid, vol.1, p.53, vol.2, p.20.  
 **[2]** Stories From the Qur’an by S.M. Suhufi, p. 316, Arabic Text No.
119 at p. 351. [*La’ana Allahu man takhallafa an jaishi Usama*].
