Chapter 7: Hadith
=================

By hastening to *Saqifa* and leaving behind the body of the Prophet (S),
they succeeded in usurping the *Caliphate* from Imam Ali (a.s.). As the
very first act, the *Caliph* invited the *Banu Umayya*, the inveterate
enemies of Islam and more particularly of the *Banu Hashim*, to
participate in the administration. They recalled the exiled Marwan and
Amr bin al-‘Aas and entertained them as close confidants, secretly in
the beginning and openly during the period of the third *Caliph.* The
*Caliphs* also appointed Abu Sufyan’s sons as governors of Syria, Iraq,
and Egypt.

The conspiracy extended beyond these overt acts. The conspirators
resolved to follow a system by which:

[a] the traditions [sayings] and the Sunna [deeds] of the Prophet (S)
were prohibited from being cited, repeated, or recorded.

[b] Altogether new traditions were invented to justify the exclusion of
Ali (a.s.) from the first three stages of the *Caliphate.*

[c] Traditions were so interpreted as to justify the assumption of the
*Caliphate* by persons other than Ali (a.s.).

[d] Traditions were distorted in favour of the legitimacy of the first
three *Caliphs* and the ruling *Caliph.*

[e] New traditions were invented as parallels to those traditions which
were known to be in favour of Ali (a.s.).

[f] Traditions were coined *to* show that the Prophet (S) and his
progeny (a.s.) were not different from other people and therefore, they
were fallible.

[g] Just criticism was shut down by inventing the need for expeditions
and wars under the name of Jihad, and people were sent to foreign
countries, or at least their attention was diverted from local problems
by innovating *Tarawih* prayers..

[h] The meaning of Zakat and Khums was so misinterpreted that it
excluded the *Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)* from their rightful share.

A consummate politician that he was, Umar achieved his objectives, first
as an advisor to Abu Bakr and later himself as the second *Caliph.* The
appointment of the third *Caliph* was made contingent upon his agreeing
to follow the aforesaid precedents of the first two *Caliphs.* Imam Ali
(a.s.) rejected the condition and refused to follow the footsteps of the
first two *Caliphs*, saying that he would not be bound by anything
except the Qur’an and the *Sunna*. On the other hand, Uthman, who agreed
to abide by this stipulation, became the *Caliph* and followed the
footsteps of the first two *Caliphs.*

Prohibition of Narrating the Hadith
-----------------------------------

The Prophet (S) had laid the foundation of Islam. Polytheism was
abolished. Women, for the first time in the history of the world, were
given personal rights and inheritance. The Arabs were weaned away from
their pagan beliefs. The Qur’an became the constitution. The rules for a
peaceful and pious society were laid down and put into practice. All
that was required had been fully explained in the sayings and actions of
the Prophet (S) that are known as *Hadith*.

Agha S.N. Mirza writes:“*The sources of information on all questions in
Islam are three; the Qur’an, the Hadith or the Sunna, and History. There
is no dispute about the provisions of the Holy Qur’an; the dispute
arises only in respect of its interpretation, and it is the
interpretation of the Qur’an alone that all the numerous sects, said to
be seventy-three in number, appeal as the basis of their cult. All
traditions are, of course, traced to the Prophet (S), and the
interpretation put on the different verses of the Qur’an by the Prophet
(S) are known only through the Hadith. Thus, so far as disputed
questions in Islam are concerned, the source of their solution or*
*information are two; Hadith and History*.”[^1]

Having gained the throne, the second phase of the conspiracy was set in
motion. The first *Caliph*, instead of collecting, collating, and
propagating the *Hadith*, reiterated the words of Umar and declared that
the Qur’an alone was sufficient guidance for Muslims.

As the first measure, he strictly prohibited the narration, recording,
or relying upon the Prophet’s words and deeds- collectively called the
*Sunna* or *Hadith*. Ath-Thahabi records that Abu Bakr said, “*Do not
relate among yourselves the traditions of the Prophet (S). Traditions
are likely to cause differences of opinion. The differences will be more
serious after us. I warn you against narrating any sayings of the
Prophet (S). If anyone inquires about what the Prophet (S) said in
regard to any matter, tell him that the Book of God is sufficient for
all purposes*.”[^2] Abu Bakr is also reported to have burnt a book
containing a collection of the sayings of the Prophet (S) declaring that
the traditions are irrelevant, redundant, and unnecessary as Muslims had
the Qur’an for their guidance.[^3]

Umar, during his *Caliphate* stringently enforced the edict by adding
that if traditions were narrated, people would abandon the Qur’an.[^4]
So fierce was Umar in enforcing the prohibition that for narrating
Hadith, he sent to prison ibn Mas’ud, Abu ad-Darda, and Abu Mas’ud
al-Ansari who were all noted companions of the Prophet (S).[^5]

Umar proclaimed that anybody found narrating any tradition should be
beheaded forthwith. A shallow reason touted for the stringent
prohibition was that different people narrated different traditions
which was likely to cause confusion. However, no explanation is given as
to why the method followed by the three caliphs in collecting the Qur’an
was not adopted for collecting the Hadith.

Quraidha ibn Ka’b says that Umar accompanied the army proceeding towards
Iraq for some distance and said, “*The chief reason for my accompanying
you is that since you are going to foreign lands where they recite the
Qur’an in a buzzing voice like bees, I want to tell you not to* *mention
the Prophet’s Hadith to them, lest their recital of the Qur’an might be
interrupted. Stop at the Qur’an; abstain from relating the Hadith of the
Prophet (S). I am with you in this matter*.” Due to this injunction,
when people inquired about the sayings of the Prophet (S), Quraidha used
to say that Umar had prohibited everyone from relating any
tradition.[^6]

All the three caliphs, Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman prohibited the
narration, recording, and reference to any tradition*.* Anybody
contravening these orders was subjected to heavy penalties and severe
punishment such as whipping, imprisonment, and even banishment.

Thus, all the sayings of the Prophet (S) in any manner relating or
referring to Imam Ali (a.s.), were effectively stifled and consigned
only to the memory of a few close companions of the Prophet (S) or in
rare books secretly written and well hidden.

Despite this, Imam Ali’s exegesis, sermons, sayings, letters, and
directions issued to his governors, forming the back-bone of the
earliest Islamic literature, were zealously preserved by his Shia and
are available even today. No such literature can be traced to the first
three Caliphs or the Umayyad or Abbasid rulers.

Coining and Propagating False traditions
----------------------------------------

Immediately after the Prophet’s death, Abu Bakr, as the first *Caliph,*
appointed Abu Sufyan’s son Yazid as the Governor of Syria. On the death
of Yazid bin Abu Sufyan, his brother Mu’awiya was made the Governor of
Syria.

Marwan, who was banished by the Prophet (S) for sedition, was recalled
and retained as a special and trusted advisor to the *Caliph*. He was
later made the Governor of Egypt. Abu Sufyan, Marwan, and their
respective offspring were inveterate enemies of Imam Ali (a.s.). They
formed the seed of the *Umayyad* *Dynasty* that ruled over Muslims for
about a century. They indulged in spreading systematic calumny against
the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.) in general and Ali (a.s.) in particular.

The amount of success they achieved can be measured from the fact that
most people in Syria, Iraq, and Egypt did not know who Ali (a.s.) was.
Some claimed that he was a bandit who fought against Islam. How this was
achieved, constitutes an important and integral part of the conspiracy.
Again, this was done in two parts, firstly by degrading the *Ahlul Bayt*
(a.s.) from on the pulpits, and secondly by coining false traditions in
favour of the opponents of Ali (a.s.) and the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.).

As the first step, a false propaganda was launched that the Prophet (S)
did not nominate anyone as his successor. Secondly, a false story was
circulated that the Ansar had planned to usurp the *Caliphate*. The
fact, as we saw earlier, was that the Ansar assumed and were willing to
accept the *Caliphate* of Imam Ali (a.s.) since they had no candidate
equal to him among them. It was only when the Ansar witnessed the
rebellious attitude of Umar at the Prophet’s deathbed, that they
realized that Ali (a.s.) was being sidestepped and someone else was
going to usurp the *Caliphate.* Thirdly, another false story was
circulated that Abu Bakr was elected by the majority, whereas the fact
was that the Banu Hashim, Quraysh, and other Muhajirin, Ansar, and
companions of the Prophet (S) as well as the Muslim public were all
assembled, at that very moment, at the house of the dying Prophet (S).
Those who were present at *Saqifa* were [1] Abu Bakr [2] Umar [3] Abu
Ubaida ibn al-Jarrah [4] Sa’d bin Ubadah [5] Qays bin Sa’d [6] Khuzaymah
bin Thabit [7] Usayd bin Hudhair [8] Uthman bin Affan [9] Abu Haytham
bin at-Tayyihan [10] Hassaan bin Thabit [11] Abdurrahman bin Awf [12]
Thabit bin Qays bin Shammas [13] Hubab bin Munthir [14] Mu’ath bin Adiy
[15] Bashir bin Sa’d al-A’war and [16] Harith bin Hisham and a handful
of other Muslims.

The next step was [i] to twist and modify well-known traditions so as to
completely change their import and context or [ii] to fabricate,
introduce, and propagate altogether new traditions glorifying the *Banu
Umayya* and the first three *Caliphs* and [iii] for every existing
tradition in favour of Imam Ali (S) and the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.), invent
a corresponding new tradition in favour of their opponents. These steps
were zealously and fully executed.

The foundation was laid on the very first day of Abu Bakr’s *Caliphate*.
Imam Ali (S) recalled before the congregation all those occasions and
traditions wherein the Prophet (S) had nominated him (Ali) as his
successor. In one voice, the assembly vouched for the veracity of every
one of those occasions and traditions. Abu Bakr feared that the people
might rise in support of Ali (S). Therefore, Abu Bakr invented a false
tradition and said, “*All that you have recounted is absolutely true,
for I myself had seen and heard and I do still remember all those words
of the Prophet (S) as a* *witness to all those occasions. But, I have
also heard the Prophet (S) declaring:‘We the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) were
especially chosen by Allah not for leadership in this world but for the
leadership in the eternal life hereafter’* Abu Bakr then added:*‘Allah
has not decreed that the Prophethood and Caliphate should remain in one
house’*.”[^7]

In saying so, Abu Bakr bifurcated religious leadership from temporal
leadership. This is an invention that contradicts the Qur’an and History
which show that every Prophet (S) appointed his own brother, son, or
near relative as his *Caliph* or successor.[^8] Out of the large
congregation, only Umar, Abu Ubaida ibn al-Jarrah, Salim, and Mu’ath bin
Jabal supported Abu Bakr by saying that they were present on that
occasion.[^9]

Agha M.S. Mirza gives a list of over a dozen prophets who nominated
their children, brothers, or other close relatives as their
successors.[^10] In fact, every Prophet (S) had unfailingly described,
identified, or named his successor. The office of the successor to a
prophet, like the office of Prophethood itself, lay within the domain of
the Divine Choice and Will. Never was the choice of succession to
Prophethood left to men.[^11] That they were Divinely appointed is
proved when the prophets performed miracles as for instance when Jesus
(a.s.) spoke from the cradle. Where no successor is appointed, as in the
case of Jesus, the Prophet (S) is kept alive, even among the Shia where
nomination ended with the eleventh imam and the twelfth imam did not
nominate another as his successor imam, the twelfth imam is kept alive
but in occultation.

Abu Bakr’s claim is an obvious fabrication, for whenever the Prophet (S)
spoke about Ali (S), from the first day of Youm ad-Dar to the last day
of his life, he consistently referred to his relationship with Ali (S)
as a subsisting one ‘*in this world and the next*’. On numerous
occasions, the Prophet (S) said, “*O Ali, you are to me like Aaron was
to Moses. You are my brother in this world and the next*.”[^12] He said,
“*O Ali, you are my Vizier, Guardian,* *Caliph, Vicegerent, and Deputy
in this world and the next*.” This fact is uniformly recorded in the
books of the Shia and the Sunni alike.

As against the preponderance of such traditions, Abu Bakr set up a
single tradition without quoting its context, the reason, or occasion
for the Prophet (S), excluding the temporal leadership from the *Ahlul
Bayt* (a.s.). The tradition is also falsified by the fact that contrary
to his own words, the Prophet (S) himself acted as the temporal as well
as religious leader of the Muslims throughout his life. Abu Bakr was
aware of this glaring contradiction, and therefore he added that ‘*God
did not wish to keep the Prophethood and Caliphate in one house*’.[^13]

Yazid bin Abu Sufyan and later on his brother Mu’awiya, during their
tenure, lavishly distributed money and property to those leaders of
congregation who made false accusations, abused, and cursed Imam Ali
(a.s.) from on the pulpit after every prayer, till it became a routine
affair. Abu Huraira and Amr bin al-Aas gained notoriety for gaining
immense wealth by fabricating false traditions. The notoriety caused
great uproar among the public and compelled Umar to confiscate their
illegal wealth. History books are full of instances of *Banu Umayya’s*
persecution of those who refused to impute false allegation, abuse, and
curse Imam Ali (a.s.). They were treated as renegades and were
mercilessly penalized, punished, banished, or even killed.

For the first time, the Umayyad rulers employed their henchmen
ostensibly to collect and compile traditions*,* but in fact to invent
and popularize false traditions against the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.). The
compilers were persons obliged to the caliph for the material comforts
showered on them. They were aware about the direction in which they
could find their safety, welfare, progress, and material comforts. There
was yet another category of persons who hated Imam Ali (a.s.), simply
because at some battle or skirmish, their forefathers or other near
relatives had challenged the Prophet (S), and in defense of Islam, Imam
Ali (a.s.) had killed them. All these kind of people combined against
Imam Ali (a.s.) to invent false stories defaming him and glorifying his
enemies. Another class of narrators were those who bore an innate hatred
toward Imam Ali (a.s.).[^14] They compiled only those traditions that
did not conflict with the *Banu Umayya’s* position as *caliphs*. They
scrupulously avoided any tradition in favour of the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.),
particularly the traditions that spoke of the virtues, supremacy, or
nomination of Imam Ali (a.s.).

A well-known Sunni writer Shibli has devoted a chapter under the heading
‘*Collection and Compilation of learning Commenced at the Instance of
the Rulers*’.[^15] He writes, “*Though Hadith and Fiqh were promulgated
to a considerable extent during the period of the Caliphs and many
centers of learning had been established, yet all of it was by word of
mouth only. But, the Umayyad kings ordered the Ulema to reduce it to
writing… First of all, Mu’awiya sent for Ubaid ibn Sharriyya from Yemen
to prepare the history of the ancients. After him, Abdul Malik ibn
Marwan commanded Sa’d bin Jubair to write books on every art*.”

Regarding Imam az-Zuhri who was the role model and mentor for Imam
Al-Bukhari, Shibli writes, “*In collecting Hadith, he took great pains.
He would go to the* *house of every one of the Ansar* *and would
interrogate their young and old, men and women… He was attached to the
durbar of Abdul Malik son of Marwan, who honored him greatly. It must be
particularly said that the said Imam was connected with the durbar of
kings and was among their closest friends; the education of Marwan’s
children was specially entrusted to him*.”[^16]

In his biography of Abu Hanifa named ‘*Seeratun No’man*’, Shibli
wrote:“*First of all, Imam az-Zuhri prepared a collection of Hadith
under the orders of the Umayyad rulers of the time. Copies of this
collection were sent by the rulers to all the Islamic countries. From
that time on, this collection of Hadith became common*.”[^17]

Every Muslim knew the famous tradition of the Prophet (S) that ‘Hasan
and Husayn were the two masters of the youth in Paradise’. The Banu
Umayya fabricated a tradition that Abu Bakr and Umar are the masters of
the old men in Paradise.[^18] This is, *ex facie* an absurdity, for in
Paradise, there should then be a master of infants, a master of middle
aged persons, and a master for all other imaginable categories of
people…etc., *ad nauseam*.

Another instance is where they distorted the tradition of *al-Najm,*
wherein the Prophet (S) allegedly said that all his companions were like
the stars shedding the light of wisdom and that the *ummah* was at
liberty to follow any one of them as all the companions were of the same
status. The fact is that many of the companions were addicted to the
prohibited vices. At any rate, most of them, like Umar himself, were
ignorant of the true meaning of the Qur’anic verses. After a careful
analysis, many learned Sunni *Ulema* have held that the tradition of
*al-Najm* is a fabrication.[^19] The distortion was made by substituting
the names of the Imams (a.s.) with the words ‘companions’.

The original tradition of *al-Najm* is as follows:“*Allah chose twelve
successors from my progeny as the rightful guides for my Ummah. Among
them, one succeeding another, there are eleven Imams after my brother
Ali. When one of them passes away, the next one takes his place. Their
example is that of the stars in the sky; when one disappears, another
manifests itself, because they are themselves rightly guided and they
shall rightly guide the Muslim Ummah. All of them are Authorities
appointed by Allah on the earth. They are the Witnesses over His
Creation. Whoever obeys them, in fact, obeys Allah, and whoever disobeys
them disobeys Allah. They are all with the Qur’an and the Qur’an is with
them. They will not separate from the Qur’an and the Qur’an will not
separate from them till they meet me at the Fountain in Paradise*.”[^20]

Agha S.N. Mirza analyses the reasons for so much animosity against Imam
Ali (S), which made them go to the extent of fabricating false
*traditions*. He wrote, “*Their firm conviction that Imam Ali (a.s.) was
the rightful claimant to the Caliphate, which they had deprived him of
by intrigue and clever moves, naturally made them see in him a most
formidable rival who must be carefully watched and strictly kept down if
they were to breathe easily in their usurped power. The Caliphate owed
its life to the opposition to the Prophet’s scheme in which Ali (S) was
to be the first Caliph. The position which the Prophet (S) had created
for Imam Ali (a.s.), coupled with the* *deeds of heroism which Imam Ali
(a.s.) had performed to save Islam, and the sacrifices he had made at
the risk of his life to establish the Islamic state, made him a
formidable rival in the eyes of the rulers who never forgot that what
they had obtained by a coup d'état, was not theirs by right. They,*
*therefore, regarded Imam Ali (a.s.) with that dread mingled with hatred
and enmity which is generally the hallmark of a precarious position
obtained by fraud and held up by force, and they used those devices and
stratagems which are generally resorted to by persons similarly holding
office without legitimacy, employing all the available means in their
power… They tried to keep Imam Ali (a.s.) down and erected enormous
barriers between him and the Caliphate. One of these, which in the end
proved insurmountable, was the push to prominence given by the first two
Caliphs to the Banu Umayya, the hereditary rivals and inveterate foes of
the Banu Hashim, with the result that when Imam Ali’s precarious rule
began, he found himself surrounded by hostile elements with an
independent and antagonistic kingdom in Syria confronting him… The Banu
Umayya inherited the policy as well as the government of the first three
Caliphs and the circumstances under which they wrested power from the
Banu Hashim added even more venom to the already poisoned sting*.”[^21]

Abu Huraira, who spent hardly a few years with the Prophet (S), was
credit with the maximum narration of traditions and is considered a
reliable narrator by the Sunnis. He was generously rewarded by Mu’awiya,
the governor of Syria, for coining false traditions against Ali (a.s.)
and in favour of the *Banu Umayya* and the first three *Caliphs*. It is
said that by spinning out false traditions*,* Abu Huraira amassed so
much unaccounted wealth and became notorious that Umar, in a show of
propriety, had to confiscate his property along with that of Amr bin
al-Aas.[^22]

The Effect of Prohibiting the Narration of Hadith
-------------------------------------------------

Conjecture recognized as a means to interpret the Qur’an
--------------------------------------------------------

Several occasions arose when the three *Caliphs* found themselves at a
loss to solve many legal and social issues relating to *fiqh
(jurisprudence),* *fara’idh (obligations), jizya,*[^23] *kharaj,*[^24]
*dhimmis*,[^25] converts…etc., merely by relying on the Qur’an. In all
such matters, where the three *Caliphs* could not find a solution or
precedent in the Qur’an, they had no option but to convene an assembly
of the companions of the Prophet (S) to inquire and ascertain if any of
them knew any tradition applicable to the matter in question. In this
manner, Umar learnt many traditions relating to simple matters such as
‘*Takbir*’[^26] at funerals, ablutions after coitus, *jizya* to be
collected from the *Magi…* etc.[^27]

The fact that Umar learnt, only much later in his life, about simple and
fundamental, day to day, matters such as ‘*Takbir*’ at funerals,
ablutions after coitus…etc., shows that not everybody knew or remembered
what was taught by the Holy Prophet (S). If this was the state of
knowledge of the *Caliph*, we can well imagine the state of ordinary
Muslims living in remote places. To some of them, the Qur’an was
unintelligible; and when they attempted to interpret it with their
conjecture, the Qur’an appeared to be full of contradictions. Thus, the
three *Caliphs* found that an omnibus prohibition against narrating
traditions was impractical and that they had no other option but to
refer to traditions, in order to explain not only verses from the
Qur’an, but also matters relating to Islamic practices, whenever the
occasion arose.

Thus compelled to rely upon traditions, the *Caliphs* resorted to a
unique method of collecting them. Only those traditions narrated by the
*Banu Umayya* or the Ansar were taken into consideration. Specifically
ignored and excluded from the exercise of collecting traditions were the
*Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.) and the *Banu Abdul Mutallib*, who, being members of
the house, were the best source for narrating traditions*.* The *Caliph*
sought traditions for the particular occasion and matter on hand. No
attempt was made to collect, collate, or compile traditions. Meanwhile,
many of the companions who had memorized traditions or witnessed the
Prophet (S) speaking about the virtues and supremacy of Ali (a.s.) over
all Muslims, and his nomination as the successor, had either died or
were killed. The surviving sincere narrators of traditions such as
Salman, Ammar, Kumail, Hudhaifa, Miqdad, Harith…etc., were banished to
the desert by the *Caliphs* on flimsy trumped up charges.

Though the sole motive in prohibiting the narration of traditions was to
suppress the Prophet’s nomination of Imam Ali (a.s.) to the caliphate,
the move left a profound ill effect on Islam itself. As a direct
consequence, inept and ignorant persons took control of the nascent
Islamic State. About Abu Bakr, the Prophet (S) is reported to have said,
“*Heathenism is still imperceptibly working within you like the
underground movement of ants*.”[^28]

The matter became more confounded when newly initiated Muslim Bedouin
Arabs, who were yet to understand the depth of the Islamic philosophy
and thought, were ordered to march against ancient civilizations such as
Persia, Mesopotamia, Syria, Rome, Greece, India, and China. The three
caliphs by prohibiting the narration of traditions*,* had in effect,
prevented a proper understanding of the Qur’an and the philosophy of
Islam.

The prohibition against narrating traditions left a bankrupt legacy to
Islam bereft of any philosophy of thought or action. This bankruptcy of
thought was the undoing of the zealous young and old soldiers, who were
confronted by the wisdom and philosophies of the ancient civilization of
Assyria, Babylon, Greece, Persia, India, China…etc.

Agha M.S. Mirza wrote, “*The discomfiture on the part of the Muslims was
due to the fact that the early and premature conquests had brought them
to the world stage before they had thoroughly imbibed the principles of
Islam for it to be infused into their very existence. They had only
outwardly left paganism, and old habits of thought that had been
ingrained in their nature by centuries of continuous conduct and
practice were still lurking in their minds, and like old companions of
childhood, held more attraction to them than the new tenets of Islam
that were so different to what they had hitherto known and
experienced*.”[^29]

The poverty of Islamic thought was such that the Muslim conquerors were
not aware of any suitable arguments to debate with the ancient wisdom of
Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Greece and India. The conquerors became
dumfounded students absorbing the philosophies from their subjects.
Their ego did not allow them to abandon the banner of Islam under which
they had marched in conquest, but they remained Muslims only in name.
Faced with such inconvenient situations, the early three Caliphs issued
an edict saying that where no solution could be found readily in the
Qur’an, one should use his own conjecture to arrive at a conclusion and
deduce a plausible argument. This corrupted the real philosophy of
Islam, and instead of searching for a solution in the Qur’an and the
*Sunna*, each one who had any following, invented his own sect of Islam.

[^1]: The Caliphate, p. 75.

[^2]: Tathkiratul Huffadh, vol. 1 p. 3, The Caliphate, p. 58.

[^3]: Shibli’s Al-Faruq, Part 2, p. 225, ath-Thahabi’s Tathkiratul
Huffadh, vol. 1, p. 5.

[^4]: Tathkiratul Huffadh, vol. 1, p. 7, Shibli’s Al-Faruq, Part 2, p.
223.

[^5]: Tathkira of ath-Thahabi, vol. 1, p. 7, Abdul Salam an-Nadawi’s
Tarikh al-Fiqh al-Islami, p.161-162, The Caliphate, p. 58-64.

[^6]: Shibli’s Al-Faruq, Part 2, p.223, The Caliphate, p. 59.

[^7]: Kitab Sulaym bin Qais, tradition No.5, p.57, 61, 91, 108 [Eng.Tr.
by Sayyid Ali Abid Rizvi & Nilam Rizvi, Pub. by S & N Rizvi, 2001,
Honslow, England.

[^8]: The Bible, Genesis, V, at-Tabari, vol. 1, p.76-87, Tarikh al-Kamil
of ibnul Athir, vol.1, p 20-26.

[^9]: Kitab Sulaym bin Qais, p. 108.

[^10]: The Caliphate, p. 120.

[^11]: Qur’an, Al Baqara 2 :246 – 251.

[^12]: Muhibbuddin at-Tabari’s Ar-Riyadun Nadira, Part 2, Ch.4, Sec. 6,
p.163, Mawaddatul Qurba, Mawaddat 6.

[^13]: Kitab Sulaym bin Qais, p. 57, 61.

[^14]: Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. 1, p. 370.

[^15]: Shibli’s Seeratun Nabi, p. 39-49.

[^16]: Shibli’s Seeratun Nabi, p. 15-17.

[^17]: The Caliphate, p.78.

[^18]: Kitab Sulaym bin Qais, tradition No.10, p.93.

[^19]: Agha S.N. Mirza’s al-Balaghul Mubin, Part 2, p.1326-1361 quoting
ibn Taymiyya’s Minhajus Sunna, ibn Hajar al-Asqalani’s Takhrijul
Ahadith, al Kashshaf.

[^20]: Kitab Sulaym bin Qais, tradition No.10, p.140.

[^21]: The Caliphate, p.56-57.

[^22]: A study of Islamic History, p.144.

[^23]: A tax levied on non-Muslims living in Muslim countries.

[^24]: Land taxation.

[^25]: Non-Muslims of other Divine religions who live under the Muslim
rule.

[^26]: The reciting of ‘Allahu Akbar’.

[^27]: Al Fru, Part 2, p.217, the Caliphate, p.60-64, ibn Sa’d’s
Tabaqat, vol. 2, Part 2, p.109, Abdul Salam an-Nadwi’s Tarikh al Fiqh
al-Islami, p.161-162 .

[^28]: As-Suyuti’s ad-Durrul Manthur, vol.4, p.54.

[^29]: The Caliphate, p. 338.


