The Myth of Leading the Prayers
===============================

During his last days, the Prophet (s) was able to lead the prayers only
once a day. When his sickness became severe, he was unable to go out and
lead the prayers. During his sickness, he asked Imam Ali (a.s) to lead
the prayers. But somehow, this fact had to be obliterated or at least
rendered dubious in historical records. Therefore, years later under the
two caliphs*,* gullible historians introduced Abu Bakr and Umar as
persons who led the prayer in the place of the Prophet (s) during his
illness. That history, which was manipulated, is obvious from the
following contradictory versions:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tabari, vol.3, p.188-189, Habibus Sayyar, vol. 1, Part 3,
p.77, Madarijun Nubuwwa, vol. 2, p.530, Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2, p.171,
Ibnul Athir, vol. 2 p.120, ibn Abil Hadid, vol.1, p.53, vol.2, p.20.  
 **[2]** Stories From the Qur’an by S.M. Suhufi, p. 316, Arabic Text No.
119 at p. 351. [*La’ana Allahu man takhallafa an jaishi Usama*].

According to the earliest version of Muhammad ibn Isshaq, it is reported
by Abdullah ibn Zam ibn al-Aswad that he was present near the ailing
Prophet (s), when Bilal called out the *Azan* and inquired as to who
should lead the prayers. The Prophet (s) told ibn Zam to ask anyone he
may find at hand to lead the prayers. Ibn Zam said that on hearing this
he came out, found that Abu Bakr was not present but Umar was. Ibn Zam
asked Umar to lead the prayers. When Umar stood up and said the Takbir,
the Prophet (s) heard Umar’s booming voice, and said, “*Where is Abu
Bakr? God and the Muslims refuse that Umar should lead the prayers*.”
Abu Bakr was sent for, but before he came, Umar had completed the
Prayer. Feeling hurt at the incident, Umar asked ibn Zam, “*Why did you
do this to me? When I led the prayers, I thought that I was complying
with the Prophet’s wish*.” Ibn Zam replied, *“The order was not from the
Prophet. When I could not find Abu Bakr, I thought that you are the next
best person to lead the prayers and therefore it was I who had asked you
to lead the prayer.”***<sup><sup>[1]</sup></sup>**

The above version is improved and amended by Husain Dayar Bakhti by
substituting the words that the Prophet (s) told ibn Zam that he might
ask anyone he would find to lead the prayers, and in its place
interpolating that the Prophet (s) asked Abdullah ibn Zam to ask Abu
Bakr to lead the prayers but not finding Abu Bakr, he asked Umar to lead
the prayers.**[2]**

But the great Sunni traditionist Imam Ahmed ibn Hanbal gives a different
version and narrates from Abdullah ibn Abbas who said:“*During his
sickness, the Prophet (s) sent for Ali (a.s) to be brought in
immediately. Hearing this, Aa’isha said, ‘Why not my father Abu Bakr?’
The Prophet (s) said, ‘Very well’. Then Hafsa challenged, ‘Why only Abu
Bakr, and not my father Umar?’ The Prophet (s) said, ‘Very Well’. Then,
Ummul Fadhl said, ‘Why not my husband Abbas?’ The Prophet (s) said,
‘Very Well’. When all the three, Abu Bakr, Umar, and Abbas arrived, the
Prophet (s) lifted his head and not finding Ali (a.s) among them, kept
quiet. Umar understood that the Prophet (s) was not in favour of any of
them and he said, ‘Let us move out’. Then Bilal, who had called out for
prayer [called out the Azan] came in. Aa’isha said, ‘Abu Bakr is
emotional and mild natured. Let Umar lead the prayer’. However, Abu Bakr
went out to lead the prayer. Then the Prophet (s) finding himself
slightly better, had himself lifted, his feet*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Seeratun Nabi, Vol. 4, p.330.  
 **[2]** Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2 p.181.

*dragging on the ground, went into the mosque with the help of two
persons…The Prophet (s) led the prayer and Abu Bakr was following
him.”**[1]** Al-Bukhari and Muslim also report on lines similar to Ahmed
bin Hanbal, with the addition that when Aa’isha and Hafsa were disputing
as to whose father should lead the prayers, the Prophet (s) said, “You
are [deceitful and cunning] like the women of Joseph*.”**[2]**

At-Tabari has a different version according to which the Prophet (s)
asked Abu Bakr to lead the Prayer. Aa’isha said, “*Abu Bakr is a soft
man.” The Prophet (s) said, “Then ask Umar to lead the prayers.” Umar
replied, “I am not going to lead the prayer when Abu Bakr is present.”
Therefore, Abu Bakr led the prayers.***[3]**

The incident was later manipulated in such a way as to suggest that,
during the three days preceding the Prophet’s death, Abu Bakr led the
prayers according to an indication *(Ishara)* given by the Prophet (s).
This manipulation is later used to suggest that Abu Bakr was indicated
to be the successor of the Prophet (s).**[4]**

Thus, historical facts were distorted and the precedence of Abu Bakr and
Umar was sought to be established during the last days of the Prophet
(s), as a prelude and a step in aide to challenge the wisdom of the
Prophet’s words and deeds.**[5]**

After finishing the prayer, the Prophet (s) returned to his chamber and
demanded that pen and parchment to be procured to write down his will
and testament, so that the Muslim community might be rightly guided and
not to fall into gross eternal error.**[6]** We have recounted this
incident in detail in the preceding pages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahmed bin Hanbal's Musnad, vol. 1, p.356.  
 **[2]** Al-Bukhari, Kitabul *Azan* and Kitabul *I’tisaam,* Sahih of
Muslim, vol. 1, part 3, p.79.  
 **[3]** Tabari, vol. 3, p.195  
 **[4]** Habib al-Sayyar, vol. 4, p. 356. Khilafah in Theory & Practice,
p.48-49.  
 **[5]** The *Caliphate*, p. 196-207.  
 **[6]** The *Caliphate*, p. 212 and footnote 264.
