Anguish of the Ansar Before the Saqifa
======================================

Umar apprehended that if the news of the death of the Prophet (s)
reached the Ansar, they would rush and swear allegiance to Imam Ali (s)
where they knew well that he had been nominated by the Prophet  

(s). He was also aware that the Ansar were in favour of Ali (a.s) to
succeed the Prophet (s). He realized that once Ali (a.s) completed the
funeral rites, the entire Muslim community would swear their allegiance
and make Ali (a.s) the caliph as wanted by the Prophet (s). He had to
somehow gain time and defer the question of succession till he could
present a fait accompli. It is for this reason that we find Umar
standing near the Prophet’s body with his sword unsheathed, imputing a
sort of immortality to the Prophet (s), and threatening that anyone who
said that the Prophet (s) had died, would be immediately
beheaded.**[1]** Having created the desired confusion, Umar left the
dead body of the Prophet (s) to be buried by Ali (a.s) and he hastened
to the Saqifa. Abu Bakr, who came after some time on his return from
Suk, joined Umar at Saqifa, where he was immediately declared as the
Caliph.**[2]** On their return from Saqifa, Abu Bakr recited verses from
the Qur’an to show that after all Umar was wrong and the Prophet (s),
like any ordinary human being, had died.**[3]** The confusion created by
Umar’s assertion gave enough breathing time to put into effect their
plan of usurping the Caliphate.

The initial assertion of immortality and later contradicting it by
Qur’anic verses was cleverly used to prove that the Prophet (s) was as
much a mortal as any other. The crux of the matter was to remove any
possible doubt as to the Prophet (s) to be anything other than a mere
mortal, and thus attempting to establish that, if on occasions, the
Prophet’s actions appeared to be favorable to Ali (a.s), all such
actions should be discounted and dismissed as the fancies of the
wandering mind of an ordinary man, who was naturally interested in
seeing his son-in-law and cousin becoming the leader of the Muslims.

Thus, all those innumerable occasions when the Prophet (s) declared Imam
Ali (a.s) as his successor, they argued, should be presumed to be the
impulsive acts of Muhammad (s), the mortal man, who was impelled by the
desire to perpetuate a family rule. All such sayings of the Prophet (s)
regarding Ali (a.s), they argued, should therefore be discarded as the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibn Khaldun, vol.2, p.63, Shibli’s al Faruq, Part 1, p.65, The
*Caliphate*, p.230, 232.  
 **[2]** Al-Bukhari, Bab Fada’il As~haab an-Nabi, vol.2, p.193, ibn
Khaldun, vol.2, Supp. P. 63, Tabaqat of ibn Sa’d, Vol. 2, Part 2, p.
55.  
 **[3]** The *Caliphate* by M.S. Mirza, p.220-221, ibn Hisham, vol. 4,
p.334-335, Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 1, p.334, Al-Bukhari, Bab
Fada’il As~haab an Nabi, vol.2, p.193, ibn Khaldun, vol.2, Supp. P. 63,
Tabaqat of ibn Sa’d, Vol. 2, Part 2, p. 55; ibn Hajar al-Makki’s
As-Sawa’iq, p.5.

whims and fancies of an ordinary human mind. What was so long whispered
as a theory was now to be put into practical use.

The Ansar were witnesses to the nomination of Imam Ali (a.s) by the
Prophet (s) on several occasions. They acknowledged Ali’s superiority in
all respects over the entire Muslim community. They all knew that as a
matter of fact Ali (a.s) would have to become the successor of the
Prophet (s) and hence they were eager and ready to accept him as the
*Caliph*.**[1]** They had none among them who could even remotely
compete against Ali (a.s).

But, the open opposition shown to the ailing Prophet (s), in his last
days, was noted by the Ansar. Now, the Ansar realized that already plans
were afoot to forestall Ali’s succession and that some other unknown
person was likely to pre-empt Ali (a.s) as well as the Ansar in order to
usurp the *Caliphate*. The Ansar argued that if it was going to be any
person other than Ali (a.s), they had an equal, if not a better claim to
the *Caliphate*, as the people who gave a place and protection first to
the Muslims and later to the Prophet (s) himself. They hurried to the
*Saqifa of the Bani Sa’ida* which was their old hideout where all urgent
and important matters were discussed and decided. Sa’d bin Ubada was a
well-known, powerful, and ambitious man among the Ansar. The Ansar
decided that if any person other than Ali (a.s) attempted to become the
*Caliph,* Sa’d Bin Ibada should stake the claim for the
*Caliphate.***[2]**

The Ansar themselves were a divided lot on account of long-standing
enmity between the two major tribes of al-Aws and al-Khazraj.**[3]**
Both of the tribes had traitors who passed on the information to the
*Muhajirin*. Umar had, as his close friends and informers, Uwaim, Mu’in
ibn Adiy, and his brother Aasim from among the Ansar. These men were
jealous of and opposed to Sa’d bin Ibada and his tribe. When they saw
that Sa’d bin Ibada was likely to be put up as a candidate of the Ansar
to the *Caliphate*, Aasim hurried in search of Umar. He found him at the
Prophet’s house and from behind a wall, called out to him. Aasim and
Mu’in bin Adiy informed Umar that the Ansar had gathered at *Saqifa* and
were about to choose Sa’d bin Ibada as the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tabari, vol.3, p.198, al-Kamil of ibnul Athir, vol. 2,p.124,
Ibn Abil Hadid al-Mo’tazili , vol. 2, p. 7-8, 411.  
 **[2]** Ibn Abil Hadid, Vol. 2, p. 10.  
 **[3]** Ibn Qutaiba, Kitabul Imamah, p.9; The *Caliphate*, p.227,
Khilafa, p.48.

*Caliph*.**[1]** Aasim urged Umar to hurry to Saqifa. Umar could not
locate Abu Bakr, who was then a short distance away at *Suk* with his
newly wedded wife. Instead, he found Abu Ubaida ibn al-Jarrah and
offered the caliphate to him. Abu Ubaida refused, saying that he dared
not do so as long as seniors like Abu Bakr and Umar were present. On the
way, Abu Bakr met them and all three of them hurried towards *Saqifa*,
leaving behind the body of the Prophet (s) to be buried by his family
members and close companions.**[2]**

Even during the lifetime of the Prophet (s), Abu Bakr and Umar kept
their link with Abu Sufyan, Marwan, Mu’awiya, and other Umayyads. In the
heat of the Battle of Uhud, assuming that the Prophet (s) was killed,
Umar, Talha, and a few Muhajirin and Ansar fled to the mountains.**[3]**
When Anas ibn an-Nadhr, came upon them and inquired as to why they
deserted the Prophet (s) at such a crucial moment, Umar lamented that
since he was told that the Prophet (s) was killed, he wished that
someone could go to the hypocrite Abdullah ibn Ubay and request him to
intercede and get an amnesty from Abu Sufyan who was the commander of
the infidel army.**[4]** Umar and Abu Bakr, when they assumed the
*Caliphate*, doubly renewed their friendship with the *Banu Umayya*, the
clan to which Uthman belonged.

At the *Saqifa*, after much disputation, initially a sort of compromise
formula was proposed that in recognition of the undeniable protection
and services rendered by the Ansar to Muslims, one man from the Ansar
and one man from the Muhajirin should become *Caliphs*. Umar vehemently
objected saying that two swords could not be sheathed in one scabbard.
It is to be noted that at the *Saqifa*, there were only three persons;
Abu Bakr, Umar, and Abu Ubaida and nobody else from the
Muhajirin.**[5]** S.M. Suhufi gives a total number of fourteen persons
who had gathered at *Saqifa.***[6]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. 2,p. 3.  
 **[2]** Al-Bukhari, Bab Fada’il As~hab an-Nabi, vol.2, p.193,
at-Tabari, vol. 3, p.208, Muhibbuddin at-Tabari’s ar-Riydun Nadira, Part
1, Ch.2, Section 13, p. 15, 165.  
 **[3]** As-Suyuti’s ad-Durrul Manthur, vol.2, supp. P. 88.  
 **[4]** At-Tabari’s Tarikh, vol.3, p.19-20; Kitabul Maghazi, vol. 3, p.
45.  
 **[5]** Al-Bukhari, Bab Fada’il As~hab an Nabi, vol. 2, p.193,
at-Tabari, Vol. 3, p.208.  
 **[6]** Stories From the Qur’an by Suhufi, Eng. Tr. By Mohammad Fazal
Haq, P. 312 Islamic Seminary Publications [2003].

At the Saqifa, there was no any discussion between the Muhajirin and the
Ansar regarding the merits of their respective candidates. The only
contention of Abu Bakr and Umar was that they belonged to the tribe of
Quraysh, who accepted Islam long before the Ansar and that they were
relatives of the Prophet (s). On this ground, the people of Quraysh
contended that they had a better and superior right over the Ansar. The
details of what transpired at the *Saqifa* does not concern us here. The
entire incident and the manner in which Abu Bakr became the first
Caliphate is recorded in detail by all the historians as well as
reporters of traditions. The arguments between the two contestants are
set out in detail supported by authoritative references by Agha M.S.
Mirza in his book ‘The *Caliphate*’.**[1]** Suffice it to say that there
were wordy duels followed by exchange of blows and bloodshed. At-Tabari
records that it was “truly a scene from the period of *Jahiliya* (the
pre-Islamic era).**[2]**

A vast number of the Hashemites, Muhajirin, such as Salman, al-Miqdad,
Ammar, Huthaifa, Abu Tharr, and the Ansar such as Abu Ayyub al Ansari,
Jabir ibn Abdullah…etc., refused to acknowledge Abu Bakr as their
*Caliph*. The *Banu Umayya* headed by Abu Sufyan also initially refused
to acknowledge Abu Bakr’s *Caliphate*.**[3]**

As to how, by offering wealth, property, and lucrative posts, and where
these did not work, by threats of annihilation and actual use of force,
the dissidents, except the *Banu Hashim*, were subdued by the *Caliph*,
is recorded in detail by Ahmed ibn Hanbal in his *Musnad*, Ibn Sa’d in
his *Tabaqat*, Ibn Qutaiba in his *Kitabul Imamah wes-Siyasah*, al-Hakim
in his *Mustadrak*, Abu Dawud in his *Musnad*, Shah Abdul Haq in his
*al-Ashi’atul Lami’a*, al-Balatheri in his *Futuhul Buldan*, in addition
to the books of Abul Fida, at-Tabari, al-Mas’udi, ibn Abil Hadid
al-Mo’tazili…etc.**[4]**

Abu Sufyan ostensibly became a Muslim, but remained a pagan at heart,
for he was highly pleased when Umar and other Muslims  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The *Caliphate*, Its Conception and Consequences, p. 222 –
242.  
 **[2]** At-Tabari, vol. 3, p. 208-210, ibn Khaldun, vol. 2,supp. P.
63.  
 **[3]** Habib al-Sayyar, vol. 1, Part 4, p. 2, Abul Fida, vol. 1,p.
156, at-Tabari, vol. 3, p.202, al-Mas’udi, vol. 2,p.194, ibn Abil Hadid,
vol. 1, p. 134.  
 **[4]** Ibn Sa’d’s at-Tabaqatul Kubra, Part 1, Vol. 3, p.129, ibn
Qutaiba’s Kitabul Imama wes-Siyasah, vol.1, p.15, ibn Abil Hadid, vol.
1, p.133, vol. 2, p.3.

deserted the Prophet (s) and ran away in the battle of Hunain.**[1]** He
gloated:“*This day we have seen the last of the witchcraft of Muhammad.
This headlong flight of the Muslims will be stopped only by the
sea.”***[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Bukhari, Kitabul Maghazi, vol. 3, p.45.  
 **[2]** At-Tabari, vol. 3, p. 128, Ibnul Athir, vol. 2,p.100, Abul
Fida, vol. 1, 146, ibn Kathir’s Tarikh, vol. 4,p.327, Margoliouth’s
‘Muhammad’, p. 394-402.
