Chapter 9: Mutilation of the Concept of Zakat and Khums
=======================================================

Having deprived the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.) of their rightful position, it
was essential that they should be subjected to poverty and want. The
next step of the conspiracy was to deprive them of the very source of
their sustenance. At the same time, funds were needed to enrich the
opponents of the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.). Under the Divine Law, provision
was made to the poor in the form of a Poor Tax [*Zakat*] of 2.5 percent
on some products (if they reach a certain specified amount) of every
Muslim. The *Sayyids* {progeny of the Prophet(S) } were specifically
prohibited from receiving Zakat from non *Sayyids.* Islam highly
recommended alms giving [*Sadaqa or* *Khairat*] every day. No limit was
prescribed for *Sadaqa or Khairat.* The *Sayyids* were specifically
prohibited from receiving *Sadeqa.*

Thus, *Sayyids* were left with *Khums,* which is one fifth of the total
accumulated profit in the form of cash or goods that remains as balance
in the account of a Muslim at the end of the financial year. Both
*Zakat* and *Khums* are in accordance with Qur’anic Injunctions.[^1]

In Islam, there was no need to create a treasury or a central fund, for
whatever was recovered as *ghanimah* [spoils of war] was immediately
distributed. K. Ali writes, “*So no regular system for the collecting of
revenue grew up. The small sources of revenue that would come to the
State treasury were distributed among the people then and there*.”[^2]
When there was no treasury, there was no question of collection of funds
nor was there any organization to collect such funds. Hence, there was
no possibility of misappropriation by those in possession of such funds.

The responsibility of payment of *Khums* and *Zakat* rested solely on
the individual.[^3] Such of the Muslims who could afford, were commanded
to **voluntarily** set apart *Zakat* and *Khums* from their income and
property at the end of every financial year and pay the same to those
indicated in the Qur’an. It was made obligatory that every person should
**himself distribute** *Zakat* and *Khums* to the deserving and the
needy; firstly among the relatives within the family, and then to the
orphans, the wayfarer, and lastly to deserving others. Muslims were also
commanded to give generously in charity to the poor, whether Muslims or
non-Muslims. The burden was laid on the individual because people should
be made aware of their obligations to and the rights of others over
them. The act of complying with injunctions relating to economy had to
be performed by the Muslims voluntarily and conscientiously with the
fear of Punishment for breach or a hope for reward for adherence to the
Divine Law, in the afterlife. In this structure of economy, there is no
provision for an agency for enforcement of collection of funds or a
treasury for its safekeeping or distribution. Until today, the command
regarding *Zakat*[^4] and *Khums*[^5] remains unaltered. Contrarily,
Khums and Zakat were made state revenue. The Government was never aware
of the plight of the poor in distant territories. Khums and Zakat was
doled out to the cronies who hovered around the persons in power.
Instead of the self-conscious duty of a Muslim, Khums and Zakat became
cumbersome levies payment of which every Muslim avoids!

K. Ali writes, “*In the Holy Qur’an, Zakat has been mentioned just
after* *prayer. It is said, ‘Perform the prayers and pay the*
***tax***[^6]*’ [Sura 2:80]. Zakat indeed is the tax for the poor. It
was imposed on the men of means, and all the money realized as Zakat was
distributed among the poor and needy. Through this system of Zakat, the
social consciousness has been reflected. There was an idea behind this
consciousness*.” [^7] Earlier on the same page, he writes:“*With the
expansion of the Islamic empire under Umar, the amount of regular
collection of revenue increased and it necessitated a well regulated
revenue system*.” Umar also innovated and imposed a new type of *Zakat*
unheard of during the times of the Prophet (S) and even during the
period of Abu Bakr. Umar imposed *Zakat* on foreign non-Muslim merchants
and horses.”[^8]

Regarding Khums, the fifth-share reserved in the Qur’an as the amount
payable by every Muslim to the progeny of the Prophet (S) (the
*Sayyids),* K. Ali writes:“*This [Khums] was an important source of
income of the state* ***under the first two caliphs**. It was divided
into three portions according to the Holy Qur’an.* ***But the share of
the Prophet (S) and that of his relatives were spent on the weapons and
equipments of the army***.”[^9] This statement brings out two
things:firstly, that only during the period of the first two *Caliphs,*
Khums was made an important source of income for the state. Secondly,
the amount meant to be paid to the Prophet’s relatives was stopped and
diverted for purchase of arms, contrary to the Qur’anic injunctions.
However, Umar increased the share of Aa’isha several fold, for which
bounty she ever remained thankful to Umar.

Islam had prescribed an astute life bereft of pomp and revelry. What the
Prophet (S) taught was a simple way of life and a simple belief in an
Unseen, Omnipotent God. It prohibited wine and a pompous way of life.
The Umayyads, who by nature were boisterous revelers, could not suffer
the prohibitions, as much as they could not comprehend an Unseen God.
Nicholson wrote that the Umayyads who had come to power as ‘kings by
right, *Caliphs* by courtesy’, adds, “*As descendants and
representatives of pagan aristocracy, which strove with all its might to
defeat Muhammad, they were usurpers in the eyes of the Moslem community
which they claimed* *to lead as his successors.”* [^10]

In the pre-Islamic times, the Arabs never believed in a life after
death, nor did they believe in resurrection, the Day of Judgement, or
the Final Reckoning. They had no concept of accountability, reward, or
punishment for their deeds. They lived their life to enjoy it
uninhibited to the full, for the moment. They suddenly realized that
Islam sought to put strange shackles, which they were only too eager to
remove and abandon on the slightest pretext. The death of the Prophet
(S) provided the opportunity. In a show of asserting their independence
they theorized that no Divine sanction is necessary in the matter of the
Prophet’s successor to govern the temporal affairs of the Islamic State.
Thus assuming power, the *Caliph* demanded that *Zakat* and *Khums*
should be directly paid to the agents of the *Caliph* instead of paying
it to the deserving, as the Qur’an directed*.*

Dispute about the Caliph’s Authority to Collect Zakat
-----------------------------------------------------

At the days of the Prophet (S), *Zakat* was never collected by any
authority. Payment of Zakat was an individual’s responsibility under
Qur’anic injunctions. For the first time, Abu Bakr ordered that Zakat to
be paid to tax collectors appointed by the government. This innovation
was strongly resented by several Muslims, who rightly believed that
*Zakat* was not a part of the state fund or treasury.[^11] It,
therefore, became necessary for the first two *Caliphs* to change the
very meaning and interpretation of the word ‘*Zakat*’ treating it not as
an individual’s obligation but as the right of the state. In this view
of the matter, the *Caliph,* for the first time in Islam, created a
standing force to extract *Zakat* from all Muslims and remit it to the
treasury. Later, the very same force was converted into an army for
invasion against foreign countries.

The first *Caliph* ordered the formation of an army to subjugate the
Muslims who refused to pay *Zakat* and *Khums*. The expedition brought
great disrepute as its leader Khalid bin al-Walid not only killed Malik
bin Nuwaira (the Prophet’s companion) unjustly, but also he got married
(by force) to the beautiful wife of Malik immediately after killing him,
without waiting for the mandatory period of *Iddah*[^12] to elapse. This
caused great resentment among Muslims. However, the *Caliph* refused to
take any action against Khalid, the transgressor. On the other hand,
Khalid’s action was sought to be justified under a concocted tradition
that if a scholar does the correct thing he will be rewarded for it, but
if the scholar commits a mistake and then regrets, he will be doubly
rewarded, once for repentance and the second for future abstinence!

The manner in which Imam Ali (a.s.) administered the institution of
Zakat and Khums stands out in stark contrast to the coercive methods
adopted by the earlier three *Caliphs.* He gave standing instructions as
Model Code of Conduct[^13] to the Tax Collectors. He directed them to be
gentle and considerate towards the subjects and to accept what they
voluntarily disclose as their tax liability. Where tax was paid in kind,
Imam Ali (a.s.) directed that the owner would have the first choice of
retaining what he wished. He reminded the tax collectors that *Zakat*
was in fact a person's due to Allah and should be distributed among the
poor and the destitute with equanimity. He made it clear that the
greatest crime is the crime against the community, that is the
usurpation of public funds.

The difference between the administration of the State by Imam Ali
(a.s.) and the other three *Caliphs* is the difference between a just
government and a corrupt government. In the matter of appointments to
government posts, Imam Ali (a.s.) was never influenced by relationship.
The only criteria for him was honesty and adherence to the Islamic
principles.

Under the first three *Caliphs,* Marwan, Amr bin al-Aas, Abu Huraira and
Abu Sufyan’s sons Yazid and Mu’awiya were patronized and they amassed
unlawful wealth. Persons banished by the Prophet (S) for sedition and
creating wars and conflicts were reintroduced as high profile officers
in the administration of the Muslim nation. People were asked to use
their own surmise and conjectures in the matter of interpreting Islam.

Imam Ali (a.s.) on the other hand, never played politics and was
therefore intolerant of any sort of corruption. He did not entertain
anyone on the basis of kinship or any clannish considerations. He
followed the Islamic tenets strictly and interpreted the Qur’an on the
basis of what the Prophet (S) had taught him. He abhorred
interpolations, innovations and other human interference in religious
matters.

[^1]: Zakat - Qur’an, 2:3, 43, 80, 83, 177, 277; 4:77; 162; 5:12, 55;
7:156; 9:5, 11, 18, 71; 18:81; 19:13, 31, 55; 21:73; 22:41; 78; 23:4;
24:37, 56; 27:3, 30, 39; 31:4; 41:7; 58:13; 73:20; 98:5. Khums - Qur’an,
8:1, 41; 17:26; 30:28; 33:27; 59:6-9.

[^2]: A Study of Islamic History by K. Ali, p. 140-141.

[^3]: Qur’an, 2:2-4.

[^4]: Qur’an, 2:3, 43, 80, 83, 177, 277; 4:77,162; 5:12, 55; 7:156; 9:5,
11, 18, 71; 18:81; 19:13, 31, 55; 21:73; 22:41, 78; 23:4; 24:37, 56;
27:3, 30, 39; 31:4; 41:7; 58:13; 73:20; 98:5.

[^5]: Qur’an, 8:1, 41; 17:26; 30:28; 33:27; 59:6-9.

[^6]: It is curious that Mr. K. Ali translates the verse in this manner
as to justify the collection of tax by the Caliph. The Verse is
translated to read :“ Perform the prayer and pay the poor tax”.

[^7]: Qur’an, 8:41, A Study of Islamic History by K. Ali, p. 141.

[^8]: K. Ali’s ‘A study of Islamic History’, p. 106.

[^9]: Ibid., p. 142.

[^10]: A Literary History of the Arabs, p. 193.

[^11]: K. Ali’s ‘A Study of Islamic History’, p.870.

[^12]: A specified period of time that must elapse before a Muslim widow
or divorcee may legitimately remarry.

[^13]: Nahjul Balagha, Instructions 25 and 26.


