Introduction of Fatalism
========================

The *Umma* was greatly agitated by the fact that Ali (a.s) was cunningly
sidestepped. There were unending discussions about the acumen of the
first caliph*.* The conspirators were aware that if an element of Divine
will was introduced, it would silence the common man. For this*,* the
next step was to introduce a sense of fatalism of the maxim ‘Man
proposes, God disposes’. Thus, it is that Umar introduced ‘Divine
Providence’ when he told Abdullah ibn Abbas:“*It is true that the
Prophet (s) intended and wished that Ali should attain the Caliphate.
But the wish of the Prophet can carry no weight, as God did not will it
so. The Prophet wished that Ali should attain the Caliphate, but God
wished it otherwise. The will of God prevailed, thus the Prophet’s
desire could not be fulfilled. …The Prophet wished to write a will
giving the Caliphate to Ali, but I prevented him from doing so in the
interest of Islam. The Prophet also came to know what was in my heart,
and refrained from writing the will. The will of God prevailed*.”**[1]**

The uncanny introduction of fatalism brought out a mix that was easily
consumable for the *Umma* that was ever ready to resign to its ‘fate’.
To this day, Muslims are under the impression that what had happened at
*Saqifa* in the matter of *Caliphate* might have been due to the Decree
of God and we the *Umma*, including the Prophet and his progeny are
powerless on-lookers. In this view, are concealed and condoned all the
contrivances employed by the *Banu Umayya* and some greedy men of
Quraysh, to usurp the *Caliphate* and keep it successfully beyond the
reach of the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s).

In one swipe all those traditions regarding Imam Ali’s nomination to the
*Caliphate*, were done away with. But there remained those traditions
that spoke of the excellence and supremacy of Imam Ali (a.s)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The *Caliphate*, p. 46-47, 329-330, quoting Ibn Abil Hadeed’s
Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.3, p.114.

over all other Muslims in matters of faith, and his indispensability to
Islam. However, not much could be done as long as the Prophet (s) lived,
for he would have reiterated whenever they made any attempt to falsify a
tradition, thereby enhancing the number of narrators of traditions. Yet,
during the Prophet’s lifetime itself false sayings were attributed to
him so much so the Prophet (s) said, “*Whoever attributes false
traditions in my name shall surely be cast into hell*.”**[1]** The
appropriate time for action, therefore, was immediately after the death
of the Prophet (s). However, political expediency demanded that the
foundation be laid when the Prophet (s) was in the last moments of his
life. Consummate politician that he was, Umar superbly carried out this
part of the conspiracy.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahjul Balagha, Sermon 209.
