Chapter 8 Mutilation of the Concept of Jihad
============================================

In Islam, there is no concept of aggressive or preemptive war. This was
amply demonstrated by the Prophet (s) throughout his life.**[1]**
Whenever possible, the Prophet (s) negotiated for and entered into peace
treatise with those who declared war against him. He sent delegations to
neighboring countries inviting them to Islam; a religion and life of
peace here and hereafter. The first Caliph, and more particularly Umar
who acted as the chief advisor to the first caliph and later he himself
as the second caliph, were fully aware of this concept of Jihad in
Islam.

For the Prophet (s), there was never any need for a standing army. He
was preaching the concept of One Unique God deserving worship, a
harmonious coexistence and peaceful way of life full of piety and above
all self-restraint and love for others. The code of conduct prescribed
for the Muslims was intended to create a peaceful model society. Muslims
were taught that there should be no compulsion in religion.**[2]**

Whenever individual Muslims were threatened by any aggression, they were
first advised to endure it in patience and supplication. There was no
scope for aggressive propagation of Islam. It was the conduct and astute
way of a Muslim’s life that was to provide the incentive for non-Muslims
to be attracted towards Islam. This was amply proved during the first
emigration of Muslims to Abyssinia where their conduct won several
converts to Islam. Any difference in ideology was to be sorted out
through wise and convincing exhortation and dialogue.**[3]**

All missionary zeal had to be confined to inviting men towards good,
enjoin what is right and forbid what is evil.**[4]** If, in spite of
exhortations and dialogue, someone could not be convinced about Islam,
the Holy  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Abu Dawud, vol. 1, p.348, the *Caliphate*, p. 323.  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 2:256.  
 **[3]** Qur’an, 16:125.  
 **[4]** Qur’an, 3:104.

Qur’an enjoins that he should be left alone, saying “You to your ways;
and I to mine.”**[1]**

Islam was a religion that meant to rule the heart of men and not their
person, purse or territory. The method adopted by the Prophet (s) was to
send delegations and letters to neighboring kingdoms explaining Islamic
tenets and not to send armies or arsenals. In Islam, there was never any
scope to maintain a standing army, nor did the Prophet (s), throughout
his life, ever raise a standing army. Whenever an occasion demanded the
defense of Muslims or the enforcement of a mutually agreed covenant,
volunteers were called for. There was never any compulsion that all
Muslims should join the army. At any rate, there was not a semblance of
an army during the Prophet’s time.

The propensity of an Arab’s mind, in those days, to readily incline
towards all sorts of expeditions and warfare for the sake of *Ghanima*
(spoils of war in the form of slave boys and girls in addition to the
usual booty) was only too well-known to the *Caliphs*.**[2]** The
*Caliphs* cleverly gave a religious colour to the adventure for the sake
of infusing in their soldiers that zeal and disregard for life which is
so essential for winning a war.

When Abu Bakr became the first *Caliph*, he was confronted with
complicated issues of religion as well as governance. In all such cases,
he referred people to Umar for finding a solution. So frequent was this
done that people started asking Abu Bakr:“*Are you the Caliph or Umar is
the Caliph?”* Umar was also seen to reverse several decisions made by
Abu Bakr. However, invariably both Abu Bakr and Umar considered Ali
(a.s) as the final authority. They repeated the tradition in which the
Prophet (s) had declared:“*Among you the best Judge is Ali*.” Umar often
confessed:“*But for Ali, Umar would have perished.”* Many such instances
are compiled in a book under the title “*Qadhaya (judgments of) Ameerul
Mo’minin*.”

Whenever Muslims met privately or in congregation after prayers, there
was open and fierce discussions about the ignorance so often exhibited
publicly by the *Caliph* and his inability to find solutions to even the
simplest questions that arose. They compared the *Caliph*’s incompetence
to the ease with which Imam Ali (a.s) solved the most difficult issues.
People in every congregation, recounted the various  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur’an, 109:6.  
 **[2]** Shibli’s Seeratun Nabi, vol. 1,part 1, p.444-447.

traditions of the Prophet (s) extolling Imam Ali’s supremacy over all
the other Muslims in knowledge, virtue, valor and nobility. They also
recounted the various occasions when the Prophet (s) nominated Imam Ali
(a.s) as his successor, and how, unfortunately, inept and ignorant
persons deprived him of his rightful and deserving place. The
discussions became more serious in the month of *Ramadan* when large
gatherings assembled in mosques after breaking the mandatory fast. Umar
found large groups openly expressing their dissatisfaction with the
capabilities of the *Caliph.* In order to prevent such critical
discussions, Umar ordered that instead of indulging in discussions,
people should spend their time in prayers. People asked him as to what
prayers and how much prayers are to be performed, as they did not
practice any such prayers during the Prophet’s time. Thus, arose the
practice of *Tarawih* prayers during the month of Ramadan. The lofty
matter of prayers was utilized to conceal the real intent of putting
down any discussion about the *Caliph.* Till this day, there is raging
controversy among the *Sunnis* as to the number of *Raka’s* to be
recited in *Tarawih* and whether the *Tarawih* is not in fact the
*Tahajjud* (Midnight) Prayers.

The *Caliph* was fully aware of the fact that the foundation of his
*Caliphate* was raised on wobbly and suspect grounds and that a popular
revolt was likely to erupt any moment, seeking to restore the
*Caliphate* to Imam Ali (a.s). Therefore, the need for wars and
expeditions had, perforce, to be invented and declared, so that men
might be sent away to far-off places on expeditions and wars. Thus,
public criticism about the competency and legitimacy of the person
occupying the seat of the *Caliph* was avoided and the possibility of
immediate revolt averted. Gilman wrote:“*Despots have always found it
necessary to employ their subjects in foreign wars from time to time, in
order to keep them away from feeling the galling chains by which they
are bound, or to hear their clanking; and it came to pass that when the
Caliph had all the tribes of Arabia under control, he saw no better way
to retrain them from new revolts than by tempting them to make inroads
upon their neighbors. Nothing could have been better planned by a ruler
acquainted with the volatile nature of his subjects*.”**[1]** On similar
lines is the opinion of the great scientist, philosopher Aristotle, whom
the Prophet (s) identified as one among the Apostles of God.**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Saracens, Ch.25, p.226.  
 **[2]** Shirazi’s Asaar-e-Tarikh Ajam, p 37.

The sending of foreign expeditions by the first two *Caliphs* was never
a religious movement, but the political expediency that the situation
demanded to safeguard their precarious perch on the *Caliphate*. What
was then sought to be disseminated by the sword was the political
sovereignty of the Arabs and not Islam the religion. Coupled with this,
was the greed to subjugate the rich resources of opulent neighboring
countries.

The principal reason for the wars was to divert the attention of Muslims
from the inefficiency of the persons heading the State, by taking
advantage of the Arab’s greed for loot. The historian K. Ali observes
that the *Caliphs* realized that the opulent lands of Persia, Egypt,
Rome and Syria had to be conquered to free the Arabs from their
dependence on the mercy of others and to relieve them from perennial
financial embarrassment.**[1]** The expeditions brought immense wealth.
But along with opulence, came several evils.

Nicholson observes about the ills brought by financial affluence:“*The
conquests made by the successors of the Prophet (s) brought enormous
wealth into Mecca and Medina, and when the Umayyad aristocracy gained
the upper hand in Uthman’s Caliphate, these towns developed a voluptuous
and dissolute life which broke through every restriction that Islam had
imposed.”***[2]** Many people joined the army in anticipation of getting
large booty, others out of misguided religious fervor. In one stroke,
the narration of Hadith was prevented, while simultaneously those who
were criticizing the mode in which the *Caliph* came to power, were
dispatched to far-off lands, either to lavish in their ill-gotten loot
or to be branded a martyr and buried in alien lands. At any rate, the
result was that potential opposition was effectively and ingeniously
removed.

The cause for the war with Syria is said to be the *Caliph’s* desire to
carry out the last wish of the Prophet (s) who had ordered Usama to
proceed towards Syria.**[3]** The reason given is misleading. The
Prophet (s) had ordered Usama bin Zaid to proceed immediately to Mu’ta
to avenge the disrespect and murder of his father Zaid who was sent as
the Prophet’s envoy. The Prophet (s) had ordered all the Ansar and the
Muhajirin, except Ali (a.s), to assemble under the command of Usama.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A study of Islamic History, p.101.  
 **[2]** Literary History of the Arabs, p.241.  
 **[3]** K. Ali’s ‘A Study of Islamic History’, p.82-83.

Abu Bakr, Umar, Uthman and, of course, even during the Prophet’s life,
the Banu Umayya disobeyed his order and remained in Medina. Later, after
the Prophet’s death, the *Caliph* now pretended to fulfill the last wish
of the Prophet. We have seen earlier how the last wish of the Prophet
(s) to leave a written Will was defeated by this same group of people.
In fact, the incident at *Mu’ta*, during the lifetime of the Prophet (s)
did not involve the Syrians at all but involved the Romans whose
chieftain Shurahbil of the Banu Ghassaan murdered the Prophet’s
envoy.**[1]** Instead of Rome, Abu Bakr declared war against Syria. The
War against the Romans was declared only in 634 A.D, two years after the
death of the Prophet (s).

Greed and Territorial Expansion: Motive for the Early Wars
----------------------------------------------------------

Though the wars were given a religious colour by misinterpreting the
word ‘*Jihad*’, the real reason was purely mercenary, coupled with the
desire to annex neighboring countries.

About the war with Syria, K. Ali writes, “*There* *were other causes
that widened the gulf of relationship. Arabia is a land of desert and
hence its inhabitants had to seek their fortunes outside Arabia. On the
other hand, the Byzantine Empire was famous for its richness and better
living and so the Muslims, in order to solve their economic problems,
turned their eyes towards the Byzantine Empire. Besides, the strategic
position of the Byzantine Empire was such that it was necessary for the
safety and defense of Islam.*”**[2]** Abu Bakr made Yazid ibn Abu
Sufyan, the Governor of Syria. On Yazid’s death, his brother Mu’awiya
succeeded as Governor, perpetuating a family rule that lasted for almost
a century.

About the war with Persia, K. Ali writes, “*From the geographical point
of view, Iraq, a province of the then Persian Empire, formed the natural
part of Arabia. Hence, it was essential to the Arabs…The economic factor
was not less important in deciding the fate of Persia. Iraq is a land of
immense wealth due to the flow of the Euphrates and the Tigris over the
surface of the province. Being a barren land, Arabia depended on the
province of Iraq for trade. But, the Persians did not allow the
Islamized Arabia to carry on the trade with them. So, the economic
necessity drove the Muslims to come into conflict with the
Persians*.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** K. Ali’s ‘A Study of Islamic History, p.89, 97.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p.97-98.  
 **[3]** Ibid., p.94.

That the wars were nothing but empire building and moneymaking is
admitted by the Sunni Historians K. Ali:“*When Abu Bakr was on his
deathbed, Muslims had defeated the Roman and Syrian frontiers. After
that, Khalid bin al-Waleed annexed Damascus, Ardan, and Hims one after
another to the empire of Islam*.”**[1]**

That empire building and economic considerations were the sole motive
for the wars against Palestine and Egypt is admitted by K. Ali in these
words:“*The causes for the conquest of Egypt are not far to seek. The
strategic position of Egypt, the richness of its grain producing soil
and the enmity of the Roman Emperor led the caliph to turn his attention
to the conquest of Egypt. The Byzantines had been living in Egypt since
their expulsion from Syria and Palestine. It was not safe for the
Muslims to allow them to live so near to Syria and Palestine. Besides
that Egypt was lying so dangerously near to Hijaz that it might be great
danger to the Muslims… The Arabs were not free from financial
embarrassment. They had to depend on the mercy of others for the
solution of their economic problem. Egypt was a rich country due to the
flow of the Nile on its surface… So, the Muslims, in order to improve
their lot and weaken the economic position of the Byzantines, felt it
necessary to conquer it*.”**[2]** Amr bin al-Aas was made the Governor
of Egypt. Later Marwan and Khalid bin al-Walid became governors under
the rule of the Banu Umayya.

Thus, the wars waged during the period of the first two Caliphs were
based on political and economic expediency. There is absolutely no
element of religion or holiness in the wars, except that the successful
warmongers went by the name of ‘Muslims’. To call these ‘wars’ as ‘Holy
Wars’ or ‘Islamic Wars’ will be the greatest abuse and injustice to the
noble word ‘*Jihad*’ the greatest of which is the *Jihad an-Nafs;* the
strife against the carnal desires of the self. All the wars were either
imperialistic preemptive aggression or for aggrandizement. Such wars
satiated the corporeal desires, in the process building an Empire in the
name of Islam. Such wars had absolutely nothing to do with Islam the
religion of Peace and Brotherhood, so strenuously propagated by the
Prophet (s). Nicholson observes:“*The Empire founded by the Caliph Umar
and administered by the Umayyads was essentially, as the reader will
have gathered, a military organisation for the benefit of the paramount
race*.”**[3]** The  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** K. Ali’s ‘A Study of Islamic History’, p.98.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p.101  
 **[3]** A Literary History of the Arabs, p. 254.

well-known Sunni writer Shibli reports from Abu Dawud that the Arabs
repeatedly asked the Prophet (s) whether a man would get any reward for
Jihad if he also had any worldly gain in view, and every time the
Prophet (s) replied that persons who had worldly gain in view, would not
get any reward in the next world for his Jihad.**[1]**

The institutions of the army and the treasury were created for the first
time in Islam by Abu Bakr who molded them on the Roman Model. These two
institutions, as we have seen above, had no place in Islam nor did they
have the sanction of the Prophet (s). They were innovations introduced
into Islam that were catastrophic, changing Islam the religion of peace
into a band of sword wielding, unlettered and uncivilized men who called
themselves Muslims.

The Muslims in the army, young and old, coming from far and near, towns
and desert, had no opportunity to understand anything about Islam. They
were forbidden to hear traditions that were the only other source, apart
from the Qur’an, to impart knowledge of Islam. The Qur’an itself
required knowledge of its special literary quality, the idioms,
parables, history, science, fables, the esoteric meaning, exegeses,
annotations with reference to the cause and circumstances of revelations
in order to understand the meaning of its verses. Most of the Muslims
remained ignorant of the real Islam, but externally appearing to be
Muslims.

The army, for its commanders, had such inveterate enemies to the Prophet
(s) and his Message, as Mu’awiya bin Abu Sufyan, Khalid bin al-Walid,
and Amr bin al-Aas. They had the least knowledge of or care for Islam.
For them, Islam was an empire and all that was involved was politics and
economics. They flouted all the laws of Islam. Drinking was the most
common habit for them. Mu’awiya used to recite a couplet saying, “*The
Banu Hashim has played with the rule; no archangel ever descended nor
was anything revealed (to Muhammad).*” Amr bin al-Aas fixed the Qur’an
on the door and pierced it with arrows. Khalid bin al-Walid was an
incorrigible debauch. One can imagine the faith of the ordinary soldier
under such commanders. The pity of the matter is that the commanders
went unpunished though the *Caliph* fully knew their crimes. Later
historians glorified them as ‘able’ commanders, concealing the
atrocities they committed.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Seeratun Nabi, quoting Abu Dawud, Vol.1, p.348.

About the Muslims assembled by the Caliphs into an army to invade the
advanced civilizations of Syria, Mesopotamia, Egypt and Rome, the best
description is given by Nicholson:“*Against such (Islamic) doctrines,
the conservative and materialistic instincts of the desert people rose
in revolt; and although they became Muslims en masse, the majority of
them neither believed in Islam nor knew what it meant*.”**[1]**

These half-baked Muslims were dumbstruck when they came face to face
with the material pomp and glory and a great wealth of philosophy of the
civilizations they conquered. They had no answer to the philosophies and
debates prevalent among those whom they conquered. The only answer they
could find was to consider themselves mere pawns in the hands of an
unseen ‘destiny’. They became numb fatalists, resigned to their fate.
The reason is analyzed ably by Osborne who observed, “*Fatalism is thus
the central theme of Islam… The great bulk of the people are passive;
wars and revolutions rage around them; they accept them as the decrees
of a fate which it is useless to strive against*.”**[2]** But in fact,
such fatalism is completely alien to Islam.

As we noted above that the very object of the wars was to gain economic
advantage and acquire territory, there was much pillage and looting. The
rulers led a grandiose and pompous life indulging in the very luxuries
that Islam had prohibited.

The expeditions brought, in addition to immense wealth, a plethora of
cultures, alien to Islam and unknown to the Arabs. While wealth brought
back the pagan spirit of unrestrained, indulgent life, the cultures
brought in philosophies which puzzled the conquering Arabs. The ancient
civilizations of Rome, Babylon and the Indus valley had their own
philosophies. The Arabs, intoxicated with wine and wealth, could hardly
care to understand the alien philosophies or to distinguish Islam from
such philosophies.

Those Muslims, who had no any interest in the preservation of Islamic
philosophy, found that they, personally, were not aware of any answer to
such philosophies as reincarnation, transmigration, karma, nirvana…etc.
They could never know the Islamic philosophy regarding Divine Decrees
and Human Volition. They simply resigned themselves to fate, which they
assumed had made them rulers of a vast empire out  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** R.A. Nicholson’s ‘Literary History of the Arabs’, p.178.  
 **[2]** Islam under the Arabs, p.26.

of the nomads of the Arabian Desert. All this was on account of their
abandoning Ali (a.s) and the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) who were the fountainhead
of the Islamic jurisprudence and philosophy.

S.M. Mirza wrote, “*It can well be imagined in what shape Islam emerged
from the medley of ideas, in which the doctrines of genuine Islam had
the weakest position. It was itself an immature, imperfect and defective
Islam, which the armies carried to foreign lands and gave to the
converts, who in turn, mixed it with their old ideas and habits of
thought. It was almost inevitable that their Islam should have more of a
paganistic than an Islamic tincture.***[1]**

In such a situation, the *Caliph,* as much puzzled as the common soldier
in an alien land, passed an edict that if one did not find a ready
answer in the Qur’an or the Sunna, he should use his conjecture to
arrive at a solution. This played havoc with Islam which became
distorted, assuming any shape that a man could imagine, completely
distorting the basic and most vital Islamic concept about God. Thus,
they assumed God to have a human-like body that would become visible on
the Doomsday. The license to find your own solution gave rise to any
number of cults, quite foreign and opposed to Islam. Thus, people
imagined that they could realise God within themselves, with the help of
wine and opiates.

Agha S.M. Mirza wrote:“*The state of things, coupled with the fact that
the Muslims, during the early Caliphate, had been given the sanction to
use their own judgement in religious matters if they thought there was
nothing in the Qur’an or Hadith applicable to the case under
consideration,**[2]** led to Islam being rent asunder into different
sects, most of them taking their inspiration not from the Qur’an but
from the atheistic philosophies of Greece and India*.”**[3]** That was
because the conquering young Muslims, uninitiated in the Philosophy or
study of Islam, thought that they had nothing suitable to give in return
for the Greek philosophy or the Hindu Vedanta.

The sects they invented were a curious mix of paganism, pantheism,
Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Christianity, Greek philosophy and Vedanta.
They had nothing to do with the simple philosophy of Islam taught by the
Prophet (s). Thus, the Sufis emerged, absorbing into Islam such  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The *Caliphate*, 340.  
 **[2]** Shibli’s Al-Faruq, Part 2, p.64, 240.  
 **[3]** The *Caliphate*, p. 335-336.

paganistic beliefs as Incarnation, Nirvana, Karma…etc., by giving them
Arabic terminology of *Hulul, Haqiqah, Fana*’…etc. The effect was that
Muslims became either fatalists or persons like Junayd and Mansur
al-Hallaj, who claimed that they were personifications of God [Haq].
Their search for God invariably started in the hallucinations created by
opiates or a drug of Hashish.

The proponent of each sect took care to meet the political exigencies
which required that Islam be so molded, the Qur’an so interpreted and
explained, as to support the usurpers of power on the death of the Holy
Prophet (s), for they were required to justify and explain to the public
that all that was done, indeed had Divine sanction. Agha M.S. Mirza has
written a detailed book in Urdu setting out all the amendments,
modifications, abrogations and distortions made in the Islamic Theology,
by the first three Caliphs, the Umayyad and Abbasid rulers.**[1]**

It is Abu Bakr and Umar who had gifted Syria to the notorious sons of
Abu Sufyan and gifted Egypt to the equally notorious Marwan. It is their
offspring, the Umayyads, steeped in paganism who, submerged in lust and
wine, came to rule the Islamic State for over a century. Muslim
historians note that the greatest possible harm was done to Islam under
the Umayyads in the first instance and later on by the Abbasids, and
that in the midst of worldly grandeur and power, Islam stood deserted
and forlorn.**[2]**

The first Caliph came to power through an election of sorts by a handful
of persons at Saqifa at a time when the Prophet’s body lay unburied. At
the time of his death, the first Caliph, instead of letting Muslims
elect their leader, left a will nominating the second Caliph as his
successor. It is curious that when questioned whether the Prophet (s)
did not nominate any one to succeed him, the first Caliph had quoted the
tradition that ‘prophets do not leave behind any inheritance’. But when
his turn came, the first Caliph made a will of the Caliphate as if it
were a heritable property belonging to him.

It is thus that the mode in which the second Caliph came to power was
not through any election of sorts or through election by a committee but
by nomination by the first Caliph. The third Caliph, on the other  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kitabul Tafriq Wal Tahrif Fil Islam.  
 **[2]** Abul Hasan an-Nadawi’s Seerat Ahmed Shahid, p.21.

hand, was chosen by a select committee nominated by the second Caliph,
with one member of the committee having the casting vote. Thus, the
ascension of the first three Caliphs to power was retrograde, going from
democratic process of sorts to autocratic nominations by individuals or
by a one-sided committee selected by an individual.

During the period of the first *Caliph* as well as during his own
tenure, the second Caliph is credited with planning and executing the
territorial expansion of the Muslim Empire. He is also reported to have
burnt or destroyed libraries and works of arts and sciences, which he
considered not in consonance with his understanding of the Qur’an. If
the books were in agreement with the Qur’an, he still decreed that they
should be destroyed as being redundant. It is due to this that it became
notorious that Muslims propagated Islam with sword in one hand and the
Qur’an in the other. He also entertained Abu Sufiyan, Marwan, and
Mu’awiya into his close, but private circle of influential political
advisors.
