Chapter 12: Imamate
===================

Imam Hasan (a.s.) followed the footsteps of his grandfather, the Prophet
(S). Like the Prophet (S), who had entered into Peace treaties including
the one with the infidels of Mecca, Imam Hasan (a.s.) preferred to enter
into a peace treaty with Mu’awiya in order to avoid unnecessary
bloodshed. The main terms stipulated in the treaty were [i] that
Mu’awiya should not nominate his successor; [ii] he should not interfere
in religious matters; [iii] he would stop forthwith the calumny and
falsehood propagated against Imam Ali (a.s.) and the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
from on the pulpits. Mu’awiya, the hypocrite that he was, signed the
treaty to gain instant reprieve, but he flouted every word of the treaty
even before the ink on his signature could dry.

Thus, for a second and last time, the ostensible temporal leadership was
separated from the religious leadership, not to be united again in one
person, until the reappearance of the Awaited Twelfth Imam (S). Before
we proceed to discuss Imamate, it will be proper to know the connotation
of the word ‘*Imam*’. In every language, words have different meanings
with reference to different contexts. Every language also attributes a
special meaning to a word. Though in Arabic the term ‘*Imam*’ means
‘leader’, in the Islamic sense and perspective, the term has acquired a
special and significant connotation exclusively referable only to the
religious head. For instance, the word ‘Messenger’ may apply to anyone,
but when a Muslim uses the word, it refers only to the Prophet (S) and
none else.

Even in this perspective, there has arisen a marked difference between
the Shiite and the Sunni interpretation. In the early centuries, both
the Shia and the Sunni, universally, acknowledged that the term ‘Imam’
refers exclusively to the twelve Imams designated by the Prophet (S).
The *six Sihah*[^1] which are the authentic books of traditions relied
on by the Sunnis, as also all other books of traditions, whether Shia or
Sunni, contain numerous references to the Prophet (S) designating and
identifying by name the twelve Imams (a.s.). Other offices of the state
were designated separately; for instance an ambassador was called a
‘Safeer’; the Governor was called the ‘Wali’.

However, centuries later, Abu Hanifa, ash-Shafi’iy, Malik, and Ahmed ibn
Hanbal were given the prefix of ‘*Imam*’ by their followers as a tribute
to their knowledge and work. Of these four, Abu Hanifa was exclusively
given the special title of ‘*al-Imam al-A’dham*[^2]’ since his treatise
and interpretation of Islamic tenets came to be followed by the largest
majority of Muslims, known as the Hanafites. It should be noted here
that these four (Abu Hanifa [b. 80- d.150 AH.], Malik [b. 95– d. 169
AH], ash-Shafi’iy [b.150– d. 204 AH] and ibn Hanbal [b.164– d. 241 AH] )
were all born several decades after the time of the Prophet (S) and they
were not designated or named as Imams by the Prophet (S), nor did they
themselves ever claim to be Imams. It was only a popular prefix added to
their names as a tribute, by their followers after their death out of
love, affection, and regard.

In much later times, the Sunni sect further diluted the significance of
the word ‘*Imam*’, and when any person possessing some knowledge of
Islamic jurisprudence, he was referred to as an *Imam*. The Twelver
Shia, on the other hand, consider only the twelve *Imams* (a.s.)
designated and named by the Prophet (S), as their temporal and spiritual
leaders, and Divine Guides. For the Shia, *Imamate* is as much a Divine
conferment as Prophethood. The verses of the Qur’an reveal that God
conferred *Imamate* on Abraham. Therefore, an Imam cannot be chosen or
elected by men.

There are several basic differences between the Twelver Shia and the
Sunnis as to who is an Imam. The Twelver Shia consider that the Imams
are chosen and designated by God. The Sunnis believe that it is
sufficient if the majority of Muslims designate a person as the Imam.
Among the Sunnis, the reputed knowledge of Islamic Jurisprudence is the
only criteria for such designation. The Twelver Shia, on the other hand,
hold that the Imams are chosen and designated by God; that the Imams are
endowed with knowledge of the past, present and the future; of the known
and unknown and all the scriptures revealed to the various Prophets,
since the Imams are the very embodiment of the Divine Wisdom.

For the Twelver Shia, the supreme commander [*Ulil Amr*], in temporal as
well as religious matters, is the *Imam* of the time. The Sunnis
interpret ‘*Ulil Amr’* as the head of the state, separating religion
from worldly affairs. Though, for the Twelver Shia, the terms *Imam* and
*Ulil Amr* refer only to the twelve designated *Imams* (a.s.), recently
the term was also being erroneously and unfortunately used, in its Sunni
sense of the word, by a small section of the Twelver Shia to denote the
head of a state. Similarly, the term ‘*ahlul thikr*’ exclusively denotes
the immaculate and infallible Ones (a.s.). However, in recent times, the
term *‘ahlul thikr’* is also being misused by some Twelver Shia to
denote a pious and learned person.

Another term that is grossly maligned, misinterpreted and misunderstood
is ‘*Jihad*’. There is a sharp difference in the Shiite and Sunni
interpretation. Basically, the term is used to denote struggle or
effort. Thus, the first requirement of a Muslim is *Jihad an-Nafs* (the
strife against one’s base desires or excesses). On a larger perspective,
it is a struggle, fight and strife against oppression and tyranny. In
the later sense, it means war. For the Twelver Shia, no person or body
of persons has the right to declare or commence a war. The Divinely
designated and Divinely inspired *Imam* (a.s.) of the time alone has the
authority to order or commence *Jihad*. Even in such cases, the *Imam*
(a.s.) never declares a war of aggression, or in modern terms, ‘war of
preemption’, but to act only in defense against oppression and tyranny
by standing up to the tyrant, after all the avenues of avoiding the
conflict have failed. This is exactly what Imam Husayn (a.s.) did in
Karbala, as the *Imam* of the time, to protect the faith and to expose
the injustice and oppression of Yazid, the tyrant ruler.

*Imamate*, the real and ostensible religious authority, always remained
with Ali (a.s.) and his eleven designated progeny who were then were, as
even today are, called *Imams* of the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.), while the
*Caliphate* came to represent temporal authority. The three *Caliphs*
never ever, at any time, claimed *Imamate* or called themselves or were
ever known as ‘*Imams*’. They always remained merely the *Caliphs*. The
real temporal as well as religious authority (*Caliphate* and *Imamate)*
always remained vested in the Imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.). The
importance of the difference between *Imamate* and *Caliphate* has to be
understood in the light of the Qur’an and the Sunna. The Qur’an reveals
that after Abraham’s sacrifice had been accepted, God declared that
Abraham, already a Prophet (S) and Khaleel, was made the ‘Imam’. When
Abraham wanted to know if his progeny also would be designated as Imams,
the reply was ‘not those who are transgressors and oppressors’.[^3]

Authentic traditions abound, in both Sunni and Shia books, about the
Prophet’s designating, by name, of the twelve *Imams* of the *Ahlul
Bayt* (a.s.). Thus, *Imamate* and therefore leadership, both religious
and temporal, always remained, in reality, with Imam Ali (a.s.) and his
eleven designated progeny called the *Imams of the Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.).
The choice of ostensible temporal heads, in all sorts of manners, never
made any difference to the Divinely appointed *Imam* (a.s.).

The various dictates and judgements rendered by the *Imams* (a.s.) in
temporal matters, which the rulers of the time found incapable of
solution, is an ample proof that the *Caliphate* (the temporal
authority) also remained, in reality, with the Imams (a.s.). What the
ruler of the time took away from the Imam (a.s.) was the treasury and
the hordes of hypocrites and timeservers. The Imams (a.s.) detested
glamorous ostentation and had no use for riches or sycophants. They
relished frugal and simple food, even as they gave generously to the
poor, orphans and the disabled. They preferred coarse clothes for
themselves but distributed good clothes to the poor. None of the *Imams*
(a.s.) hoarded wealth nor did they leave behind any property or money.
They always worked and earned their living and, therefore, had no need
to depend upon the ruler or to please him. They also detested hypocrites
and timeservers. Therefore, the loss of the treasury and the loss of
hypocritical supporters were of no importance to them. It is for this
reason that the *Imams* (a.s.) never made any attempt to fight and gain
the seat or the vain gloss of worldly power. It is, therefore, trite to
say that Imam Husayn’s dispute with Yazid was a struggle for power.

Some people argue that, after the Prophet (S), both temporal and
religious leadership passed on to the *Caliphs*. It is further argued
that the *Caliphs*, particularly the second *Caliph,* brought in several
innovations in religious matters such as adding to the morning call for
prayer [*Azan*], the words ‘*the prayer is better than sleep*’
[*as-salatu khayrum minan nawm]* ; appropriated *Khums* and used it for
military exploits instead of paying it to the progeny of the Holy
Prophet (S) ; banned the practice of *Mut’a* (temporary marriage) …etc.
These acts are touted as proof of the *Caliph’s* control and authority
over religious matters. The Prophet (S) himself was made to say that he
could not, in any manner, alter, amend, or introduce changes in the
Divinely revealed Laws.[^4] Therefore, the *Caliph* had no power to
bring in any amendment, alteration, or innovation in the Divine Laws. It
is common knowledge that transgression of any law does not amount to its
amendment by the individual. The Qur’an declared that Islam was revealed
to the Prophet (S) as a complete and immutable code of conduct governing
the Muslims in all walks of their life, whether temporal or religious.
The *Caliph’s* innovative actions cannot be termed to be in exercise of
the religious power assumed by or conferred upon him, but should be
treated only as unauthorized and illegitimate interference. No power can
be assumed to vest in anyone that would subvert the very principles for
the preservation of which the C*aliph* takes the office.

Further, if it was true that the three *Caliphs* exercised religious
authority as well as administration of temporal affairs, there would be
no need for the numerous occasions when the three preceding *Caliphs*
had to seek Imam Ali’s dicta whenever complicated matters of Islamic
jurisprudence had to be solved, and for the second Caliph to declare,
ever so frequently, that had Imam Ali (a.s.) not been there, Umar would
certainly have perished.

If really Yazid had both the temporal and religious authority, there was
no need for him to seek a Fatwa to legitimize his assault on Imam Husayn
(a.s.). Even today, where the so-called Islamic countries are faced with
a hypothetical or real religious issue, their governments seek the Fatwa
of the Mufti to legitimize their stand. If the government had the
temporal as well as religious authority, why should the ruler of an
Islamic country seek a Fatwa from any person other than the temporal
head of the state?

Both the Twelver Shia and the Sunni believe that while the government
has the power to regulate or carry on administration, religious issues
lie within the compass and exclusive jurisdiction of the religious head.
For the Twelver Shia, the matter is taken one-step further- while
temporal administration of a state may lie in the hands of those in
power, religious matters are always in the hands of the *Imam* (a.s.) of
the time. The *Imams* (a.s.) might not have pressed for temporal
authority in the interest of the survival of Islam, but neither did the
*Imams* (a.s.) surrender nor did the rulers claim to take away the
*Imam*’s religious authority at any time. Those who sought to ascend the
seat of power considered themselves only as administrators of temporal
matters, even as they were keenly aware that in religious matters they
were not competent to assume authority. It is thus that the *Caliphs*,
when confronted with matters of faith or jurisprudence, have readily
admitted their ignorance while asserting that Imam Ali (a.s.) had
superior knowledge and authority, in all matters, as the Holy Prophet
(a.s.) declared repository of wisdom.

The Ulema as Jurists have the obligation to search for and find a
solution from precedents by virtue of their learning and knowledge of
the Qur’an and the Sunna. They have no authority or power to innovate or
do the guessing game and come out with a probable solution according to
their personal view of the problem. On several occasions, the sixth Imam
(a.s.) has demonstrably deprecated the use of conjecture in matters of
religion. In this regard, it is worthwhile to translate the writing of
the late Allama Sayyid Zeeshan Haider Jawadi from his book ‘*Nuqooshe
Ismat*’:

“In the fundamental principles of Islam, every Imam is the guardian and
protector of the Shariah [religion]. The need for Imamate alongside the
Risalah [prophethood] is due to the fact that Divine Revelations cease
the moment the prophetic mission is completed, and it then becomes
necessary that there should be some *one who protects and preserves the
religion revealed through the prophet, so that the Divine Laws are
retained in their original form and applied in their original substance.
For all outward appearance, it seems possible that the Shariah may be
preserved even by the scholars of the Muslim community. But, Imamate is
indispensable for the preservation of the Divine Commandments, because
scholars are* *ignorant of the Divine Laws as they have no access to the
al-Louh al-Mahfoodh [the Preserved Sacred Tablet] and they acquire
knowledge by studying the Holy Book [Qur’an] and Traditions [Sunna] and
they interpret the Divine Laws, according to their individual human
capabilities. This is the reason why there is a conflict between the
Fatwa [Edict] of one scholar and another, and their method of reasoning
are conflicting, different and not uniform. On the other hand, the Imam
is endowed with complete knowledge of the Divine Commandments through
his access to the al-Louh al-Mahfoodh, even from the time of his birth.
Therefore, there is absolutely no question of contradiction or conflict
in the interpretation and implementation of the Divine Laws by one Imam
in different situations or between one Imam and another at different
times. All the Imams were the guardians and protectors of the Divine
Commandments and they performed their obligations. Preservation and
interpretation of the Divine Commandments, is of two kinds; one where
the Imam interprets a commandment whenever the occasion arose and there
was a likelihood or threat of the Commandment being misinterpreted or
put to abuse, and the second kind is where the validity of a Commandment
is challenged, or the Commandment is sought to be derogated, altered, or
abolished. In the later event, it becomes obligatory on the Imam, even
at the cost of his life, to stand up to such attempts to abrogate,
alter, abolish, or challenge the validity of the Divine
Commandments.*”[^5]

It is appropriate to mention here that most of the writings on *Imamate*
relate to the apparently human qualities of the fourteen Infallible ones
(a.s.). In fact, they are perfect in everything and represent the unique
model of morals and manners. The Prophets and the Imams form the link
between God and man, and therefore, necessarily, one facet of their
personality reflects Divinity while the other reflects human quality.

The concept of the Ideal or Perfect Man *(Insan Kamil)* among the Sufis
and some sects of Muslims, and the concept of Avatara Purusha among the
Hindus, are the nearest but not the perfect examples for the Shiite
concept.

In Shiite Islam, people have no right to choose the successor of the
Holy Prophet (S) as it is the prerogative reserved to God by Himself.
The simple reason is that man's knowledge is limited to availability,
approach, and reach. Due to the innate human tendency to err, man’s
knowledge is subject to frequent revision. Human knowledge is constantly
evolving, aided by observations and assisted by the implements
progressively invented by man.

Shiite tenets contradict the assumption raised by the other Islamic
sects that the Prophet (S) was, after all, an ordinary human being just
like any of us, and that he had two sides to his personality; occasions
when he acted as the Messenger of God and received Qur’anic Revelations
from God, and at all other times, when he was just a man, susceptible to
commit mistakes or be affected by natural human frailties. Refuting this
concept, the Shia hold that Prophets are invested with the office of
Prophethood from their inception in the Spiritual sphere. In that
sphere, God made covenants with them.[^6] They continue to be Prophets
from the moment of their birth in this world and remain so throughout
every moment of their life. The example of Jesus speaking from the
cradle[^7] is a case in this point. Therefore, there is no possibility
of the Prophet’s committing any error at any time. Nor can any successor
of the Prophet (S) be fallible.

The Sunni sects, on the other hand, hold that after the Prophet (S), any
person can become his successor by election, nomination, or appointment
by a select committee. The Shia argue that assuming that all the
buffalos of the world joined together and selected or elected the one
who had the longest horns among them and declared him to be a ‘man’, he
would nonetheless not cease to be a buffalo, nor will he become a ‘man’.
It is God Who created him a buffalo and he will remain so. No progress,
no evolution, no experience will elevate him to the position of man. So
also only, those that are Divinely appointed shall be the Prophets or
the Successors. Man has no say in the matter.

The Shia consider the Holy Prophet (S), as the Perfect Man, and being
God's chosen representative, as the Perfect Mirror that reflects the
summation and totality of the Being of God, without the need for
integration, incarnation or transmigration. For, it is impossible to
speak of integration, incarnation or transmigration without presupposing
two existents, whereas here there is only One Existence [without a
second] ; all things being extant within that One Being, but not
existent by themselves. The Existence that is One without a second
manifests Himself through His Creation and conceals Himself in His
Names. Between the states of manifestation and concealment there is an
intermediary stage (Barzakh) that distinguishes the manifest from the
hidden. This Barzakh is the Perfect Man who is the Mirror that reflects
summarily or in detail, the Manifest and the Hidden or an intermingling
of both.[^8] The Imams (a.s.) being the inheritors of the Prophet (S)
are the successors to the Perfect Man.

The Perfect Man is God's representative on the earth at all times. All
Apostles, Messengers, Prophets, and Vicegerents are Perfect Men of their
times. The earth cannot be without the Perfect Man to guide humankind
from the first to the last day.

In short, the mirror (more aptly a photograph) shows the image, but by
itself, it is something other than what it reflects. Yet, we identify
the person it reflects. The concept of Immaculacy and Infallibility of
the Imams (a.s.) is based on the fact that despite being the Mirror that
reflects Divine qualities, which often led men to assume and erroneously
declare that the Perfect Man *(Ma’soom*:infallible) is ‘God’, the
infallible ones (a.s.) themselves always rejected such false attributes
and elevation to godhead and declared that they posses human qualities
since they were once born (and therefore had a beginning) and one day
they would be destined to leave this world,[^9] whereas the Almighty
Creator alone is Beginningless and Eternal.

The Shia assert that both the spiritual and temporal leadership was with
the Prophet (S). After him, it was vested upon the designated
successors; the *Imams* of the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.). On the other hand,
other sects of Muslims consider the caliph, not necessarily appointed by
God, as the Temporal Authority, distinct from the Spiritual Authority
(the Imam). Therefore, according to the Sunnis, the successors of the
Prophets can be chosen by men, from among men. The Shias consider that
the Successor of a Prophet should be beyond human frailties so that
there is not the slightest possibility of his committing any error or be
influenced by worldly considerations while transmitting the Word of God
and the Divine mission. This is the basic Shiite tenet of the
Infallibility of the Imams (a.s.), the successors of the Holy Prophet
(S).

The Shias and a vast majority of Sunnis hold that the Holy Prophet (S),
his daughter the Immaculate Fatima (a.s.), Imam Ali (a.s.) and eleven
Imams (a.s.) from their progeny, designated by God, are the Immaculate
and Infallible persons (a.s.).[^10] God declared them chaste and He
protected them from even the slightest shadow of error.[^11] Hence, the
traditions related from the Infallible ones (a.s.) alone are considered
authentic by the Shias.

Thus, in Shiite thought, like the Prophet (S), the Imams (a.s.) hold a
unique position as the Intermediary between God and Man. It is therefore
that Imam Ali (a.s.) proclaimed, “*I am the Dawn of the First day of
Creation*.”[^12] The symbolism here is very eloquent. The dawn is the
intervening period that separates the night from the day, but by itself
it is neither ‘day’ nor ‘night’. One end is merged with the night and
the other end is merged in the day. So is the position of the Imam
(a.s.), who, being the intermediary between God and Man, is the
reflection of both, while by himself he is different from both. On the
one hand, in the capacity of the servant, the Imam (a.s.) is subservient
to the Omniscient and Omnipotent God, and on the other hand, the Imam
(a.s.), as the all-knowing Guide to humankind, is far superior to and
different from man.

[^1]: ‘Sihah’ is the plural for of ‘Sahih’ that is a book of Hadith.

[^2]: The greatest imam.

[^3]: Qur’an, 10:15, 33:62, 35:43.

[^4]: Qur’an, 10:15, 33:62, 35:43.

[^5]: Nuqoosh-e-Ismat, by Allama Zeeshan Haider Jawadi.

[^6]: Qur’an, 3:81.

[^7]: Qur’an, 17:30.

[^8]: Mir’aatul Aarifeen fee Multamise Zainul Aabideen, p. 24 and 25,
English Translation of Text, Translation, Introduction and Notes by
Sayyid Hasan Askari, Publishers:Zahra Trust U.K [1983], Burlington Press
[Cambridge] Ltd., Foxton, Cambridge CB 2 6SW.

[^9]: Qur’an, 3:185, 21:35.

[^10]: A Shiite Creed, Publisher WOFIS, P. 83, Waheed Akhtar, Early
Imamiyya Shiite Thinkers, P xxxii.

[^11]: Qur’an, 33:33.

[^12]: Nahjul Asrar.


