Chapter 9 Mutilation of the Concept of Zakat and Khums
======================================================

Having deprived the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s) of their rightful position, it
was essential that they should be subjected to poverty and want. The
next step of the conspiracy was to deprive them of the very source of
their sustenance. At the same time, funds were needed to enrich the
opponents of the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s). Under the Divine Law, provision was
made to the poor in the form of a Poor Tax [*Zakat*] of 2.5 percent on
some products (if they reach a certain specified amount) of every
Muslim. The *Sayyids* {progeny of the Prophet(s) } were specifically
prohibited from receiving Zakat from non *Sayyids.* Islam highly
recommended alms giving [*Sadaqa or* *Khairat*] every day. No limit was
prescribed for *Sadaqa or Khairat.* The *Sayyids* were specifically
prohibited from receiving *Sadeqa.*

Thus, *Sayyids* were left with *Khums,* which is one fifth of the total
accumulated profit in the form of cash or goods that remains as balance
in the account of a Muslim at the end of the financial year. Both
*Zakat* and *Khums* are in accordance with Qur’anic Injunctions.**[1]**

In Islam, there was no need to create a treasury or a central fund, for
whatever was recovered as *ghanimah* [spoils of war] was immediately
distributed. K. Ali writes, “*So no regular system for the collecting of
revenue grew up. The small sources of revenue that would come to the
State treasury were distributed among the people then and
there*.”**[2]** When there was no treasury, there was no question of
collection of funds nor was there any organization to collect such
funds. Hence, there was no possibility of misappropriation by those in
possession of such funds.

The responsibility of payment of *Khums* and *Zakat* rested solely on
the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** ***Zakat*** *-* Qur’an, 2:3, 43, 80, 83, 177, 277**;** 4:77**;**
162**;** 5:12, 55**;** 7:156**;** 9:5, 11, 18, 71**;** 18:81**;** 19:13,
31, 55**;** 21:73**;** 22:41**;** 78; 23:4**;** 24:37, 56**;** 27:3,
30**,** 39**;** 31:4**;** 41:7**;** 58:13**;** 73:20**;** 98:5**.**
***Khums*** - Qur’an, 8:1, 41; 17:26; 30:28; 33:27; 59:6-9.  
 **[2]** A Study of Islamic History by K. Ali, p. 140-141.

individual.**[1]** Such of the Muslims who could afford, were commanded
to **voluntarily** set apart *Zakat* and *Khums* from their income and
property at the end of every financial year and pay the same to those
indicated in the Qur’an. It was made obligatory that every person should
**himself distribute** *Zakat* and *Khums* to the deserving and the
needy; firstly among the relatives within the family, and then to the
orphans, the wayfarer, and lastly to deserving others. Muslims were also
commanded to give generously in charity to the poor, whether Muslims or
non-Muslims. The burden was laid on the individual because people should
be made aware of their obligations to and the rights of others over
them. The act of complying with injunctions relating to economy had to
be performed by the Muslims voluntarily and conscientiously with the
fear of Punishment for breach or a hope for reward for adherence to the
Divine Law, in the afterlife. In this structure of economy, there is no
provision for an agency for enforcement of collection of funds or a
treasury for its safekeeping or distribution. Until today, the command
regarding *Zakat***[2]** and *Khums***[3]** remains unaltered.
Contrarily, Khums and Zakat were made state revenue. The Government was
never aware of the plight of the poor in distant territories. Khums and
Zakat was doled out to the cronies who hovered around the persons in
power. Instead of the self-conscious duty of a Muslim, Khums and Zakat
became cumbersome levies payment of which every Muslim avoids!

K. Ali writes, “*In the Holy Qur’an, Zakat has been mentioned just after
prayer. It is said, ‘Perform the prayers and pay the **tax[4]**’ [Sura
2:80]. Zakat indeed is the tax for the poor. It was imposed on the men
of means, and all the money realized as Zakat was distributed among the
poor and needy. Through this system of Zakat, the social consciousness
has been reflected. There was an idea behind this consciousness*.”
**[5]** Earlier on the same page, he writes:“*With the expansion of the
Islamic empire under Umar, the amount of*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur’an, 2:2-4.  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 2:3, 43, 80, 83, 177, 277**;** 4:77,162**;** 5:12,
55**;** 7:156**;** 9:5, 11, 18, 71**;** 18:81**;** 19:13, 31, 55**;**
21:73**;** 22:41, 78**;** 23:4**;** 24:37, 56**;** 27:3, 30**,** 39;
31:4**;** 41:7**;** 58:13**;** 73:20**;** 98:5**.**  
 **[3]** Qur’an, 8:1, 41; 17:26; 30:28; 33:27; 59:6-9.  
 **[4]** It is curious that Mr. K. Ali translates the verse in this
manner as to justify the collection of tax by the Caliph. The Verse is
translated to read :“ *Perform the prayer and **pay** the poor tax*”.  
 **[5]** Qur’an, 8:41, A Study of Islamic History by K. Ali, p. 141.

*regular collection of revenue increased and it necessitated a well
regulated revenue system*.” Umar also innovated and imposed a new type
of *Zakat* unheard of during the times of the Prophet (s) and even
during the period of Abu Bakr. Umar imposed *Zakat* on foreign
non-Muslim merchants and horses.”**[1]**

Regarding Khums, the fifth-share reserved in the Qur’an as the amount
payable by every Muslim to the progeny of the Prophet (s) (the
*Sayyids),* K. Ali writes:“*This [Khums] was an important source of
income of the state **under the first two caliphs**. It was divided into
three portions according to the Holy Qur’an. **But the share of the
Prophet (s) and that of his relatives were spent on the weapons and
equipments of the army***.”**[2]** This statement brings out two
things:firstly, that only during the period of the first two *Caliphs,*
Khums was made an important source of income for the state. Secondly,
the amount meant to be paid to the Prophet’s relatives was stopped and
diverted for purchase of arms, contrary to the Qur’anic injunctions.
However, Umar increased the share of Aa’isha several fold, for which
bounty she ever remained thankful to Umar.

Islam had prescribed an astute life bereft of pomp and revelry. What the
Prophet (s) taught was a simple way of life and a simple belief in an
Unseen, Omnipotent God. It prohibited wine and a pompous way of life.
The Umayyads, who by nature were boisterous revelers, could not suffer
the prohibitions, as much as they could not comprehend an Unseen God.
Nicholson wrote that the Umayyads who had come to power as ‘kings by
right, *Caliphs* by courtesy’, adds, “*As descendants and
representatives of pagan aristocracy, which strove with all its might to
defeat Muhammad, they were usurpers in the eyes of the Moslem community
which they claimed to lead as his successors.”* **[3]**

In the pre-Islamic times, the Arabs never believed in a life after
death, nor did they believe in resurrection, the Day of Judgement, or
the Final Reckoning. They had no concept of accountability, reward, or
punishment for their deeds. They lived their life to enjoy it
uninhibited to the full, for the moment. They suddenly realized that
Islam sought to put strange shackles, which they were only too eager to
remove and abandon on the slightest pretext. The death of the Prophet
(s) provided  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** K. Ali’s ‘A study of Islamic History’, p. 106.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 142.  
 **[3]** A Literary History of the Arabs, p. 193.

the opportunity. In a show of asserting their independence they
theorized that no Divine sanction is necessary in the matter of the
Prophet’s successor to govern the temporal affairs of the Islamic State.
Thus assuming power, the *Caliph* demanded that *Zakat* and *Khums*
should be directly paid to the agents of the *Caliph* instead of paying
it to the deserving, as the Qur’an directed*.*
