Dispute About the Caliph’s Authority To Collect Zakat
=====================================================

At the days of the Prophet (s), *Zakat* was never collected by any
authority. Payment of Zakat was an individual’s responsibility under
Qur’anic injunctions. For the first time, Abu Bakr ordered that Zakat to
be paid to tax collectors appointed by the government. This innovation
was strongly resented by several Muslims, who rightly believed that
*Zakat* was not a part of the state fund or treasury.**[1]** It,
therefore, became necessary for the first two *Caliphs* to change the
very meaning and interpretation of the word ‘*Zakat*’ treating it not as
an individual’s obligation but as the right of the state. In this view
of the matter, the *Caliph,* for the first time in Islam, created a
standing force to extract *Zakat* from all Muslims and remit it to the
treasury. Later, the very same force was converted into an army for
invasion against foreign countries.

The first *Caliph* ordered the formation of an army to subjugate the
Muslims who refused to pay *Zakat* and *Khums*. The expedition brought
great disrepute as its leader Khalid bin al-Walid not only killed Malik
bin Nuwaira (the Prophet’s companion) unjustly, but also he got married
(by force) to the beautiful wife of Malik immediately after killing him,
without waiting for the mandatory period of *Iddah***[2]** to elapse.
This caused great resentment among Muslims. However, the *Caliph*
refused to take any action against Khalid, the transgressor. On the
other hand, Khalid’s action was sought to be justified under a concocted
tradition that if a scholar does the correct thing he will be rewarded
for it, but if the scholar commits a mistake and then regrets, he will
be doubly rewarded, once for repentance and the second for future
abstinence!  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** K. Ali’s ‘A Study of Islamic History’, p.870.  
 **[2]** A specified period of time that must elapse before a Muslim
widow or divorcee may legitimately remarry.

The manner in which Imam Ali (a.s) administered the institution of Zakat
and Khums stands out in stark contrast to the coercive methods adopted
by the earlier three *Caliphs.* He gave standing instructions as Model
Code of Conduct**[1]** to the Tax Collectors. He directed them to be
gentle and considerate towards the subjects and to accept what they
voluntarily disclose as their tax liability. Where tax was paid in kind,
Imam Ali (a.s) directed that the owner would have the first choice of
retaining what he wished. He reminded the tax collectors that *Zakat*
was in fact a person's due to Allah and should be distributed among the
poor and the destitute with equanimity. He made it clear that the
greatest crime is the crime against the community, that is the
usurpation of public funds.

The difference between the administration of the State by Imam Ali (a.s)
and the other three *Caliphs* is the difference between a just
government and a corrupt government. In the matter of appointments to
government posts, Imam Ali (a.s) was never influenced by relationship.
The only criteria for him was honesty and adherence to the Islamic
principles.

Under the first three *Caliphs,* Marwan, Amr bin al-Aas, Abu Huraira and
Abu Sufyan’s sons Yazid and Mu’awiya were patronized and they amassed
unlawful wealth. Persons banished by the Prophet (s) for sedition and
creating wars and conflicts were reintroduced as high profile officers
in the administration of the Muslim nation. People were asked to use
their own surmise and conjectures in the matter of interpreting Islam.

Imam Ali (a.s) on the other hand, never played politics and was
therefore intolerant of any sort of corruption. He did not entertain
anyone on the basis of kinship or any clannish considerations. He
followed the Islamic tenets strictly and interpreted the Qur’an on the
basis of what the Prophet (s) had taught him. He abhorred
interpolations, innovations and other human interference in religious
matters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahjul Balagha, Instructions 25 and 26.
