Chapter 14: Yazid bin Mu’awiya bin Abu Sufyan
=============================================

In his last days, Mu’awiya warned Yazid that he should be careful about
how he would handle four persons; Imam Husayn (a.s.), Abdullah bin Umar,
Abdullah ibn az-Zubair and Muhammad ibn Abu Bakr, who opposed his
succession. When Mu’awiya died in Syria, his son Yazid usurped the
governorship of Syria and staked his claim as successor of the head of
the Islamic State. Yazid appointed his kin and his henchmen as Governors
of various provinces. He appointed his cousin al-Waleed bin Utbah bin
Abu Sufyan as the Governor of Medina. Al-Waleed’s predecessor Marwan,
who was banished by the Holy Prophet (S) and the first and the second
*Caliphs*, was recalled to act as al-Waleed’s advisor.

Yazid’s fear of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was so great that he sent a special
emissary with a letter to al-Waleed commanding him to get the oath of
allegiance from Imam Husayn (a.s.), Abdullah Bin Umar, Abdullah bin
Az-Zubair, with a special stress on Imam Husayn (a.s.), and to kill them
if they refused.

Al-Waleed sent for the persons named in the letter. His messengers found
Imam Husayn (a.s.) and Abdullah Ibn az-Zubair in the mosque. They both
replied that they would meet al-Waleed later. Abdullah ibn az-Zubair
realized that for al-Waleed to send for them at that hour of night, the
reason might be that Mu’awiya who was known to be seriously sick, must
have died and that Yazid would have called for their allegiance. Ibn
az-Zubair also realized that the occasion provided the chance for him to
grab power that he so long cherished.

Instead of going to al-Waleed, ibn az-Zubair collected the members of
his clan and his followers and sat with them in the safety of his house.
When al-Waleed sent his henchmen who abused ibn az-Zubair and demanded
that he should come out and meet al-Waleed immediately or else be
killed. The terrified ibn az-Zubair sent his brother Ja’far to plead
with al-Waleed to withdraw his men, with a promise that ibn az-Zubair
would meet al-Waleed in the morning. Al-Waleed recalled his men
believing that ibn az-Zubair would keep his promise. Immediately after
al-Waleed’s men had left, ibn az-Zubair and his brother Ja’far rushed to
Mecca through secret routes under the cover of the night. Next morning,
al-Waleed sent for ibn az-Zubair only to find that he had already left
Medina under the cover of the night. Al-Waleed sent eighty horsemen to
trace az-Zubair and his brother. They searched all the known routes to
Mecca but could not find the desert route followed by ibn az-Zubair.[^1]
Ibn az-Zubair reached Mecca and sought asylum in the sanctuary of the
Kaaba, where he sought to win over followers by pretensions to piety.

From the four persons summoned by al-Waleed, only Imam Husayn (a.s.) met
him. Al-Waleed himself showed respect to Imam Husayn (S) and shirked the
thought of causing any harm to the Prophet’s grandson. At the meeting,
al-Waleed read out the first part of the letter demanding Imam Husayn’s
allegiance, and then he gave the letter to Imam Husayn (a.s.) to read
the later part. On seeing that the letter contained the command to kill
him, Imam Husayn suggested that al-Waleed should gather the people of
Medina in a public meeting and ascertain their opinion whether Imam
Husayn (a.s.) should take the oath of allegiance acknowledging Yazid’s
sovereignty. Al-Waleed agreed to do so, but the cunning Marwan
intervened and told al-Waleed either to obtain the oath of allegiance
there and then, or to kill Imam Husayn (a.s.) immediately. Imam Husayn
(a.s.) became angry at the audacity of Marwan and raised his voice in
protest, and the Hashimites, who were waiting outside, immediately
rushed in.[^2] On realizing that the situation has become volatile,
Marwan slunk away through a back door and al-Waleed pacified Imam Husayn
(a.s.). Later, Marwan told al-Waleed, “*You missed the best opportunity
to kill Husayn and protect Yazid’s Caliphate*.” The next day, there was
a chance encounter between Marwan and Imam Husayn (a.s.). Marwan
accosted the Imam and said, “*I advice you to swear allegiance to Yazid
and reap the benefits*.” The Imam (a.s.) replied, “*It is because of us
[the infallible pones] God opened up creation. It is due to us that
creatures get their sustenance, and it is due to us that life continues.
The likes of me do not pay allegiance to the likes of him (Yazid).*[^3]
*You want me to swear allegiance to Yazid who is an infidel and immoral
person. No wonder it is you who is supporting Yazid, for it is you,
Marwan, whom the Prophet (S) had banished for sedition and mischief*.”
Like his noble father Ali (a.s.), Imam Husayn neither surrendered to the
threats nor was he trapped by flattery.

From the beginning until his end, Imam Husayn (a.s.) staunchly opposed
the debauch and tyrant Yazid. He preferred to sacrifice himself and his
near and dear fellows rather than to surrender before Yazid.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) was informed that under Amr ibn Sa’d ibn al-Aas,
Yazid had dispatched a division of mercenaries with specific
instructions to kill him wherever he might be found.[^4] Under pressure
from Yazid, his governor al-Waleed sent his men to Imam Husayn’s house
in the night when the Imam had gone to visit the Prophet’s tomb. On the
following night also, al-Waleed’s men could not find Imam Husayn (a.s.)
in his house, as the Imam (a.s.) had gone to visit the tombs of his
mother and brother. Al-Waleed expressed his glee that he was spared the
blood of Imam Husayn (a.s.) whom he presumed had already left Medina.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) was faced with two options; he had either to
capitulate to the demands of Yazid or to leave Medina to prevent
bloodshed. He left Medina in the morning, two days before the new moon
of the month of *Sha’ban* in the year sixty of Hijra. Imam Husayn (a.s.)
followed the highway from Medina to Mecca, unlike ibn az-Zubair who took
flight in the night and reached Mecca through desert routes. The
contrast brings out the fact that ibn az-Zubair ran for fear of life,
whereas Imam Husayn (S) had no such fear. Secondly, the clandestine
departure through secret routes shows that ibn az-Zubair had political
aspirations, whereas Imam Husayn (a.s.) had no such intention. When
Yazid learnt that al-Waleed did not carry out his orders and let Imam
Husayn (a.s.) leave Medina, he replaced him with the notorious Marwan as
the Governor of Medina and Mecca.

On the way to Mecca, Imam Husayn met Abdullah ibn Mutee’ who inquired as
to where the Imam (a.s.) was going. The Imam (a.s.) replied that for the
present he was heading to Mecca. On hearing this, ibn Mutee’ said, “*I
was afraid that you may be heading towards Kufa [on account of the
thousands of letters addressed by the Kufians]. Kufa is the place where
your father Imam Ali (a.s.) was martyred. The Kufians are the most
treacherous and untrustworthy. They deserted your brother Imam Hasan (S)
when he was attacked by Mu’awiya’s men. Do not go to Kufa but stay in
Mecca, for once you are killed we will be annihilated*.”[^5]

The animosity of Yazid towards Imam Husayn was because of his inherent
character and his denial of Islam, a religion ostensibly professed for
political gain and just to stay in power. Yazid openly derided the Holy
Prophet (S) and Islam. He was a debauch and a drunkard of vile nature.
Yazid, by descent or by himself, never possessed any noble qualities.
His grandfather was Abu Sufyan who plotted and carried out several plots
to kill the Prophet (S). His grandmother was Hind who chewed the martyr
Hamza’s liver. His mother was Maysoon, a Christian planted by the
Christians to avenge the defeat conceded by them when they were
confronted by the Prophet (S) at the event of Mubahala. He had no pity
or mercy for anyone. He killed people in thousands even before the
battle of Karbala. Like his grandfather Abu Sufyan, Yazid also believed
that there would be no life other than this and that there would be no
heaven or hell and no accountability for one’s evil and sinful acts.
Nicholson wrote, “*The slaughter of Husayn does not complete the tale of
Yazid’s enormities. Medina, the Prophet’s city, having expelled its
Umayyad governor, was sacked by the Syrian army, while Mecca itself,
where Abdullah bin az-Zubayr had set up as rival Caliph was besieged,
and the Kaaba laid in ruins’.*[^6]

Allama Sayyid Zeeshan Haider Jawadi writes, “The evil personality and
character of Yazid was never in dispute among Muslims, but his faith and
the nature of Islam was always in dispute. Above all is the dispute
whether Yazid deserves to be cursed or not. However, it is well
established and acknowledged by every unprejudiced scholar that Yazid’s
Islam was never the real Islam and that his character was such that he
deserved to be cursed.” [^7]

The following renowned Sunni scholars of merit approve of cursing
Yazid:[^8]

**[a]** Allama al-Barazanji in his book ‘*Al-Isha’ah*’ and Ibn Hajar in
as-Sawa’iq record that when Ahmed ibn Hanbal’s[^9] son asked his father
about cursing Yazid, he replied, “*How can Yazid not be cursed when God
himself has cursed him.*” He then quoted the Qur’anic verse in which
those who create chaos and bloodshed are cursed.

**[b]** Ibn Khaldun says that Judge Abu Bakr bin al-Arabi al-Maliki
wrote in his book ‘Al-Awasim wel Qawasim’ that it would be absolutely
wrong to say that Imam Husayn (a.s.) was slain by the sword of his
grandfather. Yazid was never an Islamic ruler. The fundamental requisite
of Islamic rule is justice and equity and there was never a person more
just than Imam Husayn (a.s.).

***[c]*** *At page 254 of Preface to History* (Muqaddimat at-Taree*kh)
is mentioned, ‘the fact that the Islamic scholars are united in*
admitting the irreligiousness of Yazid and they hold that such a person
can not be an Islamic ruler and that any action taken against him can
not be construed as impermissible.

**[d]** The silent endurance by the companions of the Prophet (S) and
the next generation (Tabi’een),[^10] was not on account of their
approval of Yazid’s evil character, but because they did not like
bloodshed and therefore they did not consider it proper to assist him.

**[e]** Ibn Muflih al-Hanbali says that in the eyes of ibn Aqeel and
ibnul Jowzi, it is permissible to oppose an unjust ruler, just as Imam
Husayn (a.s.) stood up to oppose Yazid’s tyranny. Assuming for a moment,
if Yazid’s rule in its initial stage, is considered as that of a lawful
ruler, his rule automatically forfeits its legality and validity after
he had killed Imam Husayn (a.s.), desecrated the Kaaba, and disgraced
Medina.

**[f]** Allama at-Taftazani, the author of ‘Sharh al-Aqaiid
an-Nasafiyya’ writes that Yazid’s willingness before and his joyous
celebrations after the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.) are established
beyond doubt. Such a person cannot be attributed to have any faith. On
the other hand, he deserves to be cursed and God’s curse is upon his
accomplices and assistants.

**[g]** Ibn Hazm wrote in his book ‘Al-Muhalla’ that Yazid believed only
in a worldly, materialistic life. There is no justification for his
deeds. He was an absolute despot and tyrant. The attempts of some
scholars to justify his deeds are nothing but unjust excesses.

**[h]** Hafiz writes at page 298 of his book ‘Rasayil’ that the worst
and inhuman crime of slaying Imam Husayn (a.s.), capturing his
womenfolk, desecrating of Imam Husayn’s severed head, looting Medina,
and desecrating the Kaaba are sufficient proof of Yazid’s stone
heartedness, enmity towards the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), hatred, cunningness,
hypocrisy, and lack of faith. Every degenerate tyrant is a cursed one.
In fact, those who do not curse the accursed ones deserve, in turn, to
be cursed.

**[i]** Burhan al-Halabi writes that both Sheikh Muhammad Bakri and his
father used to curse Yazid and prayed, “*May God throw Yazid in the
deepest part of Hell*.”

**[j]** Ath-Thahabi writes in ‘*Siyer A’laamun Nubala’*’ that Yazid bin
Mu’awiya was an inveterate enemy of Imam Ali and the *Ahlul Bayt,*
self-conceited, ill mannered, characterless, drunkard, and debauch. He
started his rule with the murder of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his
household, and completed it with the incident of al-Harrah in the year
63 AH.

**[k]** Ath-Thahabi writes in page 496 of the 8th volume of the book
‘Mir’atuz Zamaan’ that when asked about cursing Yazid, Sibt bin al-Jowzi
replied that Imam Ahmed (bin Hanbal) considered it appropriate to curse
Yazid and we [his followers] also do not approve of him because his
deeds were most despicable. If people are content to stop with their
dislike, it is all right, but we too would have cursed him.

The above reference establish that scholars and historians of all times,
who were just and did not carry any prejudice, declared Yazid to be an
unjust ruler, infidel and hypocrite who deserved to be cursed. None of
them approved of Yazid’s character.

In recent times, some writers attempt to support Yazid on the ground
that Yazid was not personally involved in the slaying of Imam Husayn
(a.s.) or responsible for the subsequent events that took place. They
hold that Ibn Ziyad and Ibn Sa’d were solely responsible for the
horrible deeds… he certainly deserves to be cursed.”[^11]

It is only a few ignorant and irreligious writers who seek to justify
the legitimacy of Yazid’s rule and consider that his fight against Imam
Husayn (a.s.) in the battle of Karbala was nothing but a struggle for
power. Such writers are, in reality, the progeny of Yazid, and
therefore, until recently, used to consider Yazid as the Commander of
the Faithful [*Ameerul Mo’minin*]. They have conspired to legitimize
Yazid’s oppressive and tyrannous rule to downplay Imam Husayn’s
sacrifice and martyrdom by declaring Imam Husayn (a.s.) to be a militant
against the established rule.[^12]

Imam Husayn (a.s.), as his father Imam Ali (a.s.), never aspired for
political leadership, but he expressed his reservations against the
sinful and debauch Yazid’s taking control of the affairs of the Islamic
world. Imam Husayn (a.s.) continued to propagate Islamic sciences as the
acknowledged *Imam*. He never collected any army nor did he plan to
overthrow Yazid. Yet Yazid was mortally afraid that a day would come
when people would be attracted to the Islamic teachings of Imam Husayn
(a.s.), and Yazid’s own misdeeds would lead to a revolt. He sought Imam
Husayn’s seal of approval and he demanded that Imam Husayn (a.s.) should
openly acknowledge Yazid as the legitimate ruler of the Islamic world.
Like his father Imam Ali (a.s.), Imam Husayn (a.s.) refused to do so and
he preferred to remain in Medina discharging his duties as the
acknowledged *Imam* of the time.

[^1]: Nafasul Mahmoom, Urdu Translation by Allama Sayyid Safdar Husayn
Najafi, Abbas Book Agency Lucknow, p 95.

[^2]: Nafasul Mahmoom, p 94, Life of Imam Husayn [s] [The Saviour] p.
100.

[^3]: Nuzhatul Masa’ib, vol. I p.195 quoting ibn Nama.

[^4]: Maqtal al-Husayn by al-Muqarram, 165, quoted in Imam Husayn (a.s.)
& Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 51.

[^5]: Nafasil Mahmoom, p 109, al-Kamil of Ibnul Athir, 19-4 quoted in
Imam Husayn (a.s.) & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p 53.

[^6]: A Literary History of Arabs, Adam Publishers [2003] p. 198.

[^7]: Nuqooshe Ismat, p. 279.

[^8]: Ibid., p. 279 – 281.

[^9]: Note:Ahmed bin Hanbal is the founder of the Hanbalite sect of
Sunni Muslims.

[^10]: Tabi’een:the next generation, which did not personally meet or
hear the Prophet [s] but narrated traditions they heard from the
companions of the Prophet (S).

[^11]: Nuqooshe Ismat, p. 280–281.

[^12]: Note:Those who defend Yazid conveniently forget and forsake the
well-known doctrines of conspiracy, accountability and vicarious
liability. When the commander of an army entitled to take credit for
victory gained through his men, he is also responsible for the
atrocities committed by his deputies.


