Chapter 10 the Caliphate
========================

The Prophet (s) was the religious as well as the temporal leader of the
*Ummah.* The Qur’an quotes with approval instances of such combination
of religious and temporal authority in a single individual, namely the
Divinely appointed Prophets.**[1]** Since the office of Prophethood
ended with Muhammad (s), both the temporal as well as religious
authority ought to have remained with his successor, because the
administration of the affairs of the *Ummah* depended upon the
interpretation of the Qur’anic Injunctions in the light of the Prophet’s
traditions*.* The Prophet’s successor should have to be, per force, a
person who not only is an able administrator but also a person well
versed in the interpretation of the Qur’an in order to administer the
Divine Laws as interpreted by the Prophet (s). In the Qur’an, such
persons are called the ‘*Imams*’.

The Qur’an reveals that the ‘*Imams*’ are the sole authority under whom,
on the Day of Resurrection, each group will be collected and called
forth.**[2]** Guidance of humankind in accordance with the Divine
Commands is the responsibility of the infallible Imam (a.s). The Qur’an
reveals, “*We have appointed them Imams in order that they might guide
in accordance with Our Commands*.”**[3]** At another place, the Qur’an
reveals that the reason why they were chosen as *Imams* is their
unshakable faith and Divinely endowed Wisdom to enable them to guide
mankind:“*We have chosen from among them Imams who at Our Command shall
guide men to the right path, for they are patient and steadfast and have
certain [definite] knowledge of Our signs*.”**[4]** Since the Imams are
successors to the Prophets, their station is achieved only after the
individual has already attained all the high ranks. Thus, Abraham,
already a Prophet holding the special status of a ‘friend’ [*Khaleel*]
was conferred the ultimate honorific title of ‘*Imam*’*.* The sixth Imam
al-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur’an, 2:247, 4:52, 5:48, 12:22, 38:25, 62:2.  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 17:71.  
 **[3]** Qur’an, 2:123.  
 **[4]** Qur’an, 32:24.

Sadiq (a.s) said, “*Before appointing Ibrahim as the Prophet, God the
Almighty appointed him as his devout servant. Before ennobling him with
His friendship, He bestowed on him the rank of Messengerhood. Before
granting him the rank of Imamate, He made him His sincere and devoted
friend [Khaleel]. It was, therefore, after Ibrahim had attained a whole
series of high ranks that he was bestowed the honor of
‘Imamate’.*”***[1]***

Abraham was so pleased with the honor, which he held high in his esteem,
that he wanted the blessing to be continued and the *Imamate* continued
among his offspring. The answer Abraham got was that *Imamate* would
never be granted to a wrongdoer.**[2]** In other words, the *Imamate*
would be conferred only upon an Infallible and Immaculate person and
that no tyrant can ever be an *Imam.*

Infallibility and Immaculacy is an inseparable ingredient of Prophethood
and *Imamate* because in the matter of interpreting and implementing
Divine Commands and Ordinances, the *Imam* should not be swayed or
influenced by his personal desire, wish, fancy or fear. Imam al-Sadiq
(a.s) said, “*The Imam is designated by God and the Messenger to be
God’s proof before people. Through the blessed existence of the Imam
(a.s), a link is established between God’s servants and the
supra-sensible realm, and God’s Grace flows down upon them. God will not
accept the deeds of his servants unless they are loyal to the Imam. God
does not abandon His servants to their own devices after creating them;
instead, by means of the Imam, He lays out a path of piety before them
and thus establishes His proof*.”**[3]**

The special favors granted to the Prophets and the Imams brought with
them an element of jealousy among people. The Qur’an reveals:“*Are they
envious of what We in our generosity bestowed on the progeny of Ibrahim?
We gave the Book and Wisdom to the family of Ibrahim, and also gave them
kingship and rule*.”**[4]** People were ready to concede that the
prophets were given Books and Wisdom, but they became jealous and
inimical when the kingdom remained with the prophets.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kaafi, vol. 1, p. 180.  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 2; 123.  
 **[3]** Al-Hurr al-Aamili’s Ithbathul Hudat, vol. 1, p. 247, quoted in
Imamate and Leadership by Mujtaba Musavi Lari, p. 161.  
 **[4]** Qur’an, 4:52.

The word *Caliph* literally means ‘deputy’ and it was understood, in
Islamic connotations, to be synonymous with the word *Imam,* in the
matter of succession to the Prophet (s). However, the word *Caliph* was
later segregated to denote political rule by ordinary men instead of
guidance in all matters pertaining to Muslims by the Divinely appointed
*Imam.* The *Caliph* was no longer required to be Infallible and
Immaculate. Any person who claimed he had the majority and could hold
out threats to his detractors, was considered a fit person to be the
*Caliph* to rule the Muslim *Ummah.*

This extraordinary feat of fallacious reasoning was achieved by a simple
distortion of another Qur’anic phrase ‘*Ulil A*mr’**[1]** so that it
came to denote any person in authority. In doing so, it was purposefully
overlooked that the word ‘*ulil Amr*’ is conjointly used while speaking
about obedience to the Authority of God and His Prophet (s) both in
religious and temporal matters. The Qur’an reveals:“*O Ye believers,
obey the commands of God, the Messenger and the Holders of Authority
[Ulil Amr]. When you fall into disagreement concerning your affairs,
refer to the commands of the Lord and his Messenger, if you believe in
God and the Day of Judgement. This will be better for you than anything
else you might imagine, and conducive to a far better outcome*.”**[2]**
Thus, the Qur’an makes implicit obedience to the Divinely appointed
Holders of Authority [*ulil amr*] to be far superior and beneficial than
any contrivance adopted by man, to govern every aspect of an
individual’s life, both in this world and in the hereafter.

This is explained by Imam Ali (a.s) as, “*The only obedience incumbent
upon people is to the laws of God and the commandments of the Prophet of
God. As for obedience to the Holders of Authority, this has been made
incumbent because they are immune from sin, and in the very nature of
things they can not issue any order that violates or runs counter to
God’s Commands*.”**[3]**

The Qur’an brings out the other side of the coin. It reveals:“*Do not
follow those who have abandoned Me and pursue their own
fancies*.”**[4]** Thus, the use of any conjecture in matters pertaining
to Islam is strictly ruled out.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Men of authority.  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 4:58.  
 **[3]** Biharul Anwar, Vol. 25, p. 200.  
 **[4]** Qur’an, 18:27.

Who the Holders of Authority are, is talked about by Imam al-Baqir
(a.s.) :“*The Holders of Authority [Ulil Amr] are the leaders of the
Ummah, from the progeny of Ali (a.s) and Fatima (a.s) who shall remain
in existence till the Day of Resurrection*.”**[1]**

Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari asked the Prophet (s) about the Holders of
Authority whose obedience was made obligatory on the *Ummah*, and the
Prophet (s) replied, “*O Jabir, the first of them is Ali ibn Abi Talib,
followed by his two sons Hasan and Husain, and then by Ali ibnul Husain,
followed by Muhammad al-Baqir whom you, O Jabir, will live to see. When
you meet him, convey my salutations to him. He will be followed by
Ja’far as-Sadiq, Musa al-Kadhim, Ali ar-Ridha, Muhammad al-Jawad, Ali
al-Hadi, al-Hasan al-Askari, and finally the Hidden One; the Promised
Mehdi. These will be the leaders after me*.”**[2]**

To the above effect, there are numerous traditions recorded by both the
Sunnis and the Shias with reference to the twelve *Imams* (a.s)
mentioned in *Traditions* and exegesis as successors to the Prophet (s),
which are collected in Gulpaigani’s voluminous book ‘The Hidden Imam’.
**[3]**

Az-Zuhri relates that the Prophet (s) went to the tribe of Bani Aamir to
invite them to accept Islam. A man from the tribe, Bayhara by name,
asked, “*If we accept all your commands and you conquer your enemies
with our help, do you promise that after your death the leadership will
pass on to us?*” *The Prophet (s) replied,* “*The matter of governance
belongs to God; He will appoint whomsoever He wills*.” *The man
replied,* “*Are we to endanger ourselves in helping you against your
enemies, only to see the rulership pass on to some one other than
us?*”**[4]** This incident shows what exactly was in the minds as the
ultimate aim of a few, if not some well-known companions of the Prophet
(s), when they came forward to accept Islam.

At any rate, the question of rulership came to the fore immediately on
the death of the Prophet (s). The matter was considered so urgent and
important that Abu Bakr, Umar, and ibn al-Jarrah considered it proper to
leave the uninterred body of the Prophet (s) and go to *Saqifa.***[5]**
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Hur al-Aamuli’s Ithbatul Hudat, vol. 3, p. 131.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 123.  
 **[3]** Translated by Dr. Shabeeb Rizvi, Abaqat Publications, 2003.  
 **[4]** At-Tabari’s *Tarikh,* vol. 2, p. 84.  
 **[5]** *Musnad* of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol.4, p.104, *Tarikh* of
at-Tabari, vol. 2, p. 451, *Al-Iqd al-Farid* of ibn Abd Rabbih, vol. 3,
p.61, al-*Bidaya* of ibn Kathir, vol. 5, p. 260,

At *Saqifa,* it was the tribal spirit of the period of *Jahiliyya* that
asserted itself in the tribe *Quraysh* seeking to monopolize power in
their clan by condemning the *Ansar,* their opponents, as less
deserving.**[1]**

At *Saqifa,* neither Divine Wisdom nor Divine appointment was under
consideration. The only compelling factor was to wrest power and present
a *fait accompli* before the Muslim *Umma*, which could realize that Ali
(a.s) was being deprived of the *Caliphate*. This could be achieved only
after severe wrangling which lasted till the second day after the
Prophet’s death. Thereafter, the gathering from *Saqifa* headed by Abu
Bakr and Umar went to the Prophet’s house. According to the author of
Kanzul ummal, neither Abu Bakr nor Umar participated in the burial of
the Prophet (s). **[2]**

Umar himself later regretted the haste in which the affair was conducted
and *the Caliph* chosen at *Saqifa.* He warned:“*It was a hasty accident
that Abu Bakr became the leader. No consultation or exchanges of views
took place. If anyone in future invites you to do the same again,
instantly kill him*.”**[3]**

According to some *Sunni* thinkers, all that is required of a *Caliph*
is his capacity to govern by implementing the penalties prescribed in
Islam and guarding the *Ummah* against foreign intrusion. This means
that the *Caliph* has to provide the necessary police and military
protection to the *Ummah.* In this view of the matter, they argue that
the *Caliph* **needs not be** an infallible or immaculate person. It
will make little difference if the *Caliph* had a long history of
opposition to Islam because of its prohibiting idol worship. It also did
not matter if the *Caliph,* after having professed Islam, had frequently
strayed into the sinful alleys prohibited in Islam. All that was
required was his capacity to establish and enforce his dominance over
Muslims, although it might be through oppression and tyranny by
trampling upon the rights of Muslims and shedding their blood in the
process. The *Caliph,* according to this view, may flout all norms of
Justice and Equity, but he will be considered the leader of the Muslims
so long as he is able to hold control over the *Ummah.*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tarikh* of al-Ya’qubi, vol. 2, p.94. **  
 [1]** *Tarikh* of at-Tabari, vol. 5, p.31, al-*Kamil* of ibn al-Athir,
vol. 3, p.3.  
 **[2]** *Kanzul Ummal, vol. 3, p. 140.*  
 **[3]** *Seera* of ibn Hisham, vol. 4, p.308.

The natural corollary of such a hypothesis leads a well-known Sunni
scholar to write, “The Caliph can not be removed from office on account
of contravening God’s laws and commands, transgressing against the
property of individuals or killing them, or suspending the laws God has
decreed. In such a case, it is the duty of the Islamic community to set
his *misdeeds and to draw him on to the path of true guidance*.”**[1]**
This theory is against the Qur’anic injunction that lays down:“*None has
the freedom in the matter of the commands of God and His Messenger.
Whoever disobeys the commands of God and His Messenger falls a prey to
obvious error*.”**[2]**

The hypothesis is invented only to justify the conduct of the *Caliphs*
with the exception of Imam Ali (a.s), as we shall presently see. Before
that, we may note the observations of another Sunni Scholar Dr. Abdul
Aziz ad-Durri who wrote, “*At the time the sovereignty of the Caliphate
was being established, the political theory of the Sunnis with respect
to this institution was not based simply on the Qur’an and Hadith.
Rather, it rested on the principle that the Qur’an and Hadith must be
understood and explicated in accordance with whatever events
subsequently occurred*.” Ad-Durri then proceeds to quote and edict from
Judge Abul Hasan al-Mawardi’s book *al-Ahkam al-Sultaniyya* the
following passage:“*It is permissible for an unfit individual to be the
leader even if a fit individual can also be found. Once, someone has
been chosen; he can not be removed simply because there is some one
better and more fitted available*.” Ad-Durri concludes:“*He [the Judge]
admits and vindicates his principle in order to justify the rule by
numerous unfit Caliphs. It is possible, too, that he wished to refute
the Shia’s views on the subject. The theological and credal view he puts
forth serves no other purpose for the Sunnis, but to justify the
political development of the day. The only aim was to justify whatever
might be grouped under the heading of Ijma’ [consensus].*” **[3]**

Mujtaba Musavi Lari writes, “*Imamate and Caliphate are inseparable in
just the same way that the governmental functions of the Messenger of
God (s) can not be separated from his prophetic office. Spiritual Islam
and Political Islam are two parts of a single whole. However, in the
course of Islamic*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *At-Tamhid* of al-Baqillani, p. 186, quoted in Mujtaba Musavi
Lari’s *Imamate and Leadership, p. 13.*  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 33:36.  
 **[3]** Ad-Duri’s *al-Nudhum al-Islamiyya,* vol. 1, p.72-84, quoted in
Mujtaba Musavi Lari’s *Imamate and Leadership, p. 14.*

*history, political power did become separate from the spiritual Imamate
and the political dimension of religion was separated from its religious
dimension*.”**[1]**

*Imamate,* which is the succession to the Prophet (s), was always
considered by the Shias to be within the exclusive domain of the Divine
Will, as much as prophethood was. Man therefore had no choice in the
matter of succession to the Prophet (s). According to the Shias, the
Prophet (s) followed the same pattern of succession observed by the
earlier Prophets who appointed their successors only according to the
Divine Will. The Prophet (s) had also declared, nominated and
identified, by every means and on every occasion, his succeeding *Imams*
to come, until Doomsday. As we have seen earlier, by whatever name he is
called; *Imam, Ulil Amr, Khalifa, Ahlul Thiikr, Rasikhoon fil ‘Ilm,* the
successor to the Prophet (s) is to possess Divine Wisdom, Infallibility
and Immaculacy. Such persons will neither err nor transgress the divine
ordinances. Such persons will be most suited to establish a just Divine
rule over their subjects. All others will be prone to err, do injustice
and to contravene the Divine commandments, thus disqualifying themselves
from the right to enforce the very commandment that they themselves
flout.

Sheik Sulayman Khanduzi an Indian Sunni scholar of great repute
eliminates the possibility of the *Caliphs,* with the exception of Imam
Ali (a.s), from being counted among the *Imams* mentioned by the Prophet
(s) as being his successors. He wrote, “*According to scholars, the
traditions that specify the successors to the Prophet (s) to be twelve
in number are well-known and they have been narrated by different chains
of transmission. It became clear with the passage of time that what the
Messenger of God was referring to in this tradition were the twelve
Imams from his progeny. It is impossible to refer it to the first
Caliphs, for, they were four in number; nor could it be applied to the
Umayyads who were more than twelve in number; apart from which with the
exception of Umar ibn Abdul Aziz, they were all tyrants and oppressors
and they did not belong to the Bani Hashim, whereas the Holy Prophet (s)
had specified that his twelve successors would be from the Bani Hashim.
Jabir bin Samrah mentions that the Prophet (s) spoke this last part of
the tradition softly, because not everyone was happy that the Caliphate
should go the Bani Hashim. Similarly, the tradition could not have
referred to the Abbasids, because their number too is more than*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mujtaba Musavi Lari’s *Imamate and Leadership, p. 16*

*twelve; they did not act in accordance with the verse enjoining love
for the Ahlul Bayt [Qur’an 42:23] and they ignored the tradition of the
Cloak [Kisa]. The tradition must then refer exclusively to the Twelve
Imams from the progeny of the Prophet (s), for they were superior to all
others with respect to knowledge, moral virtues, piety and lineage. They
were a line who inherited their knowledge from the Messenger of God (s),
their great ancestor. This is confirmed by the tradition concerning the
two weighty trusts and numerous other traditions that have reached us
from the Prophet (s).***[1]**

About the wisdom and knowledge of the *Imams,* the sixth Imam Ja’far
as-Sadiq (a.s) said, “*The one who has the knowledge of the Book is Imam
Ali (a.s), for he himself said, ‘Be aware that the knowledge that came
to the earth with Adam (a.s) and all the knowledge with which the
prophets were ennobled down to the last Prophet (s), exists in his
progeny’*.”**[2]**

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) also said, “*The sacred Divine Essence has two forms
of knowledge:one peculiar to God Himself, inaccessible to his creatures,
and the other knowledge which is bestowed on angels and prophets. This
second category of knowledge is accessible to us, the Imams,
too*.”**[3]**

The fifth Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (a.s) said, “*The knowledge that came
down with Adam (a.s), the father of mankind, did not vanish, for it was
handed down from one generation to the next. Ali (a.s) had complete
knowledge of religion and shariah, and none of us, the Imams, dies
without designating our successor who will inherit his knowledge and
what God pleases to impart to him*.”**[4]**

The knowledge of the *Imams* encompasses the corporeal and incorporeal,
the spiritual and material, the seen and the unseen, the past, present
and future, the lives and philosophies of prophets and guides of bygone
times and those who were to come; in fact all that should be known to
man. It is thus, the seventh Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s), who was yet a
child, debated with Burayd, a Christian scholar, basing his arguments on
the Torah and the Gospels. Regarding this knowledge when Burayd asked,
the Imam (a.s) replied, “*This is our inherited knowledge. We recite and
pronounce each of those scriptures just as their followers and believers
do. God would not place on the earth His proof*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sheik Sulayman Al-Qanduzi’s *Yanabi’ul Mawaddah,* p. 446.  
 **[2]** Al-Majlisi’s *Biharul Anwar*, vol. 26, p. 160.  
 **[3]** Al-Kulayni’s *al-Kafi,* vol. 1, p. 255.  
 **[4]** Ibid., p. 222.

*(authority) who would have to say ‘I do not know’, in answer to any
question*.”**[1]**

The eighth *Imam* Ali bin Musa ar-Ridha (a.s) told his disciple
an-Nawfali, “*Al-Ma’mun will regret convening this meeting in which I
shall argue with the followers of the Torah by citing the Torah, against
the followers of the Gospel by citing the Gospels, against the followers
of the Psalms by citing the Psalms, against the Sabians in their own
Hebraic language, against the Zoroastrians priests in Persian language,
against the Greeks in the Greek language, and against the Arabs in
Arabic language. Al-Ma’mun will then realize that the seat, which he
occupies, and the authority, on which he rests, are not rightfully
his*.**[2]**

Imam Ali (a.s) said, “*Ask me (whatever you want) before you miss me,
for I know about the ways of the empyrean more than I know about the
ways of the earth*.”

Umar told ibn Abbas:“*I swear by Allah that if your friend (Ali) assumes
the Caliphate, he will cause the people to act in accordance with the
Book of God and the Sunna of the Messenger of God and will lead them to
the straight and clear path of Islam, the religion*.”**[3]**

As against this background of the Imam’s knowledge, let us see how the
*Caliphs* fare, in their own estimate as well as in the eyes of others.
Abu Bakr, on becoming the *Caliph*, made his opening speech from on the
pulpit, *“O People, I may fall into grievous error or I may not make any
mistake. If you see me deviating from the right path, prevail upon me to
return to it. The Prophet was infallible, but I am not. I have a Satan
ever drawing me towards error*.”**[4]** Abu Bakr declared that he was
not the Divinely appointed *Caliph*. Instead, he claimed to be the
*Caliph* of the Prophet (s).**[5]** On the same analogy, Umar was the
*Caliph* of Abu Bakr, Uthman was the *Caliph* of Umar, and so on and so
forth *ad nauseam*. However, the institution of the *Caliphate* itself
was abolished in 1924 by Mustafa Kamal Pasha of Turkey. It is therefore
clear that Abu Bakr was not the successor of Adam the first Divinely
appointed *Caliph.*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Kulaini’s *al Kaafi,* vol. 1, p. 225.  
 **[2]** Al-Hurr al-Aamili’s *Ithbatul Hudat,* vol. 6, p. 45, Sheikh
as-Saduq’s *Kitabut Tawhid* p. 427.  
 **[3]** Ibn Abil Hadid’s *Sharh* *Nahjol Balagha* vol. 3, p. 107.  
 **[4]** At-Tabaris’s *Tarikh* vol*.2, p.460,*Ibn Hisham’s *al-Seera,*
vol*. 4 P. 34, ibn Kathir’s al-Bidaya.* vol. 6 p. 303, ibnul Athir’s
*al-Kamil*, *vol. 2, p. 129.*  
 **[5]** Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol. 1, p.10, Muqaddima of ibn
Khaldun, Tr. Rosenthal, Vol. 1, p.388-89.

On several occasions when Umar was rescued by Imam Ali (a.s) from
committing gross error, he declared that ‘but for Ali, Umar would have
been doomed’.**[1]** Umar, the second *Caliph,* said, “*There were three
things that were permissible in the time of the Prophet which I have
forbidden on threat of severe punishment. The three things are Mut’ah
(temporary) marriage, the Mut’ah during the hajj, and reciting in the
Azan ‘hasten to the best of all deeds’ [Hayya \`ala Khairil
\`amal].**[2]*** He substituted these words with *‘Prayer is better than
sleep’ [as-slaatu khairum minan-naum]* in the dawn prayers.**[3]**

Umar’s son Abdullah was told about the prohibition imposed by his father
on the *Mut’ah* of the hajj and the *Mut’ah* marriage. He replied, “*I
am afraid you will incur the wrath of God and a stone will fall on you.
Are we to follow the Sunna of the Prophet or the sunna of Umar bin
al-Khattab*?”**[4]**

During the time of the Prophet (s) and during the time of Abu Bakr’s
*Caliphate* and the first three years of Umar’s *Caliphate,* a triple
pronouncement of *Talaq* (divorce) on a single occasion was considered a
single repudiation and not as final repudiation. Umar changed and
declared, “*I will count a triple pronunciation of Talaq on a single
occasion as final repudiation of marriage*.”**[5]** Thus, Umar altered
the Divine commandments and the Prophet’s *Sunna.*

Mu’awiya did the ultimate when he declared, “*Everything on the earth
belongs to God and I am God’s deputy (Khalifa). I will deal as I
please*.” Nobody had the courage to challenge Mu’awiya’s temerity except
Sa’sa’ah bin Sowhan.**[6]**

Regarding persons like Mu’awiya, the Prophet (s) said, “*When some of my
companions are brought before me at the Pond, they will feel ashamed. I
will then say, ‘Oh God, they are my companions?’ I will be told:‘You do
not know what they did after your death’*.”**[7]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibn Sa’d’s *Tabaqat,* vol. 2, p…  
 **[2]** *Al-Ghadir* vol. 6, p. 23.  
 **[3]** *Sahih of Muslim* vol. 3, p. 183, *Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal*,
vol. 3, p. 408, al-Halabi’s *Seera* vol. 4, p.37; ibn Katjhir’s *Tarikh,
vol. 3, p. 23.*  
 **[4]** At-Tirmithi’s *al-Jami’ul Sahih,* vol. 4, p. 38, al-*Bidaya* of
ibn Kathir, vol. 5, p. 141.  
 **[5]** *Sihih of Muslim,* vol. 4, p. 183.   
 **[6]** Al-Mas’udi’s *Muruj ath-Thahab.*  
 **[7]** *Sahih of Al-Bukhari,* Kitabul Fitan, *Sahih of Muslim,* vol.
5, p. 64.

The Qur’an poses this question:“*Is the one who guides to God more
fitting to be followed or the one who himself needs guidance? How would
you judge this matter*?”**[1]**

On this note, we will leave the question of *Caliphate* for our readers
to decide. However, we will have to revert to the historical incident of
*Saqifa, which* laid the foundation for the substitution of the
Infallible ones by ordinary erring mortals.

The Saqifa
----------

Some companions realized that the place shortly to be left by the
Prophet (s), for succession, had to be grabbed at all cost. They were
aware that all earlier Prophets like Abraham, Joseph, Moses…etc., had
appointed their kith and kin under Divine Commands. Muslims had
witnessed the Prophet (s), on numerous occasions, nominating Imam Ali
(a.s) as his successor. The last pilgrimage of the Prophet (s), his
sermons and advices, particularly his last sermon, addressed to over a
million Muslims and several foreign dignitaries assembled at Ghadir Khum
nominating Imam Ali (s) as his immediate successor, were fresh in
everyone’s mind.

A few persons, from the Muhajirin and the Ansar, abandoned the dying
Prophet (s) and assembled at a place called Saqifa of Bani Sa’idah,
which was some distance from Medina, and was used by the Ansar as a
place for holding secret discussion.

A violent dispute arose between the two groups, the Muhajirin**[2]** and
the Ansar,**[3]** each side claiming supremacy over the other. At that
time, Umar shouted asking Abu Bakr to extend his hand. Umar struck the
extended palm of Abu Bakr and immediately swore his allegiance to him
and shouted in his famous loud voice that Abu Bakr, being the eldest
among those present, has been chosen as the Caliph. This sudden move
surprised the squabblers. Their own internal dissension contributed to
their failure to take up the challenge in an orderly manner.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur’an, 10:35.  
 **[2]** ***Muhajirin*** were the first Muslims who migrated from
*Mecca* to *Medina.* The literal meaning is ‘emigrants’.  
 **[3]** ***Ansars*** were the residents of *Medina* who helped and
assisted the Prophet [s] and his companions, the *Muhajirin,* in
defending them against their enemies. The literal meaning of the word is
‘helpers or assistants’.

Even as the squabbles at Saqifa were in full swing, Imam Ali (s) was
busy with the burial of the Prophet (s). When he was informed of the
activities at Saqifa, he did not deem it proper, like others, to leave
the body of the Prophet (s) without performing the burial rites and to
rush to stake his claim.

For the whole day, the people from Saqifa went around Medina announcing
that Abu Bakr had been chosen as the *Caliph.* When they reached the
Prophet’s house, they found that Imam Ali (a.s) had performed the rites
and buried the Prophet (s). One of the people returning from *Saqifa*
wanted that the Prophet’s body should be immediately exhumed. Hearing
this, Imam Ali (a.s) said, “*Are you not ashamed that you deserted the
Prophet in several battles and now you abandoned his body to grab the
Caliphate? When he is buried, you want to commit the sacrilegious act of
exhuming him! Not even Jews and Christians will think of such a
horrendous deed. Shamelessly you call yourself Muslims*!” Imam Ali (a.s)
drew his sword and stood greatly enraged. Never had they seen Imam Ali
(a.s) in such temper and they were mortally afraid of his physical
prowess. They recollected the saying of the Prophet (s) to beware the
day when after the Prophet’s death Imam Ali (a.s) would unsheathe his
sword. Thus was prevented the sacrilegious act of exhuming the Prophet’s
body. But for Imam Ali’s intervention, the so called companions of the
Prophet (s) would have gladly carried out their ignoble deed of exhuming
the Prophet’s sacred body.

Observing these incidents, the opportunist Abu Sufyan approached Abbas,
the holy Prophet’s uncle, and said, “*These people have snatched away
the Caliphate from the Banu Hashim. You are the uncle of the Prophet (s)
and the eldest among Quraish. The people of Quraish will listen to you
and accede to your proposal. Let us swear allegiance to Ali (a.s). If
anybody opposes us, we shall kill him.*” Abu Sufyan and Abbas then
approached Ali (a.s). Abu Sufyan said, “*O Ali, if you agree, I will
fill Medina with large contingents of infantry and cavalry. Do accept
our proposal and put out your hand so that we may swear our oath of
allegiance of Caliphate to you*.” To this, Ali (a.s) replied, “*O Abu
Sufyan, I swear by the Almighty Allah that you, through this proposal,
want to create serious dissension and discord among Muslims. You have
always tried to harm the Prophet (s), and now you plan to harm Islam. I
do not need your sympathy or help*.”**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tarikh al-Khulafa, Vol. 3, p. 202-203, Quoting Kanzul Ummal Vol.
3, p. 140. Nahjul Balagha:Sermon No. 9.

If really Imam Ali (a.s) and the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) had any desire for
power, this certainly was the best opportunity, and Medina was the right
place since that its inhabitants were witnesses to the Prophet’s
declaring, on innumerable occasions, the supremacy of knowledge and the
moral and ethical character of the Ahlul Bayt (s) and the nomination of
Imam Ali (a.s) as his vicegerent, deputy, and successor.

The fact that the Ahlul Bayt (s) spurned pomp and glory of wealth and
power is recorded throughout the history of Islam and in the sermons,
sayings and writings of Imam Ali (a.s) and other members of the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s).

When the first Caliph’s father came to know that his son, Abu Bakr was
chosen as the Caliph in preference to Imam Ali (a.s), he inquired from
his grandson Mohammed Bin Abu Bakr as to how Abu Bakr could claim
preference over Imam Ali (a.s) and why Imam Ali (a.s) was not chosen as
the Caliph. He was informed that the choice fell on Abu Bakr because he
was the eldest among the contenders to the *Caliphate* while Imam Ali
(a.s) was still a young man. To this, he promptly replied, “*If age is
the criteria, then, as Abu Bakr’s father, I would better claim to be the
Caliph!”* He thus demonstrated the hollowness of the claim that age was
the decisive factor in the matter of the *Caliphate*.

Abul Fida Isma’il ibn Kathir writes regarding the Verses 41-48 of the
Chapter ‘Mary’:“*Allah the Almighty mentioned what happened between
Abraham (a.s) and his father Azar, and how Abraham (a.s) explained to
his father the falsehood of idolatry because Allah gave Abraham (a.s)
useful knowledge although he (a.s) was younger than his father;
therefore it was his duty and privilege to guide and point to the right
way.”**[1]*** Then, Ibn Kathir quotes the verse 114 of the Chapter
“*Tawba*”:“*And Abraham prayed for his father’s forgiveness only because
of a promise he had made to him. But, when it became clear to him that
he was an enemy of Allah, he dissociated himself from him, for Abraham
was most tender hearted and forbearing*.”

Though Azar was the father**[2]** of Abraham, in matters of faith
neither relationship nor age would confer superiority or status on a
person. An elderly and experienced person is also required to obey a
younger person who is invested with authority by Divine Pleasure. This
is  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qasasul Anbiya, Rightway Publication – [2005] – p. 89.  
 **[2]** In fact, he was his uncle, but because he regarded him too much
that he brought him up, he called him as ‘father’.

evident from the following tradition narrated through Abu Huraira by
Al-Bukhari in his *Kitab at- Tafsir*:“*On the Day of Resurrection
Ibrahim (a.s) will meet his father Azar whose face will be dark and
covered with dust. Ibrahim (a.s) will say to him, ‘Did I not tell you to
obey me?’ His father will reply, ‘Today I will not disobey you’. Ibrahim
will say, ‘O my Lord! You promised me not to disgrace me on the Day of
Resurrection; and what will be more disgraceful to me than cursing and
dishonoring my father?’ Then, Allah the Almighty will say to him:‘I have
forbidden the Paradise for the disbelievers’. Then, he will be
addressed, ‘O Ibrahim! See what is underneath your feet.’ He will look
and there he will see a blood-stained animal, which will be caught by
its legs and thrown in the Hell-Fire*.”**[1]**

Imam Ali (a.s) questioned the election/selection of Abu Bakr as the
*Caliph*, but restrained his followers and companions from revolting
against the regime for the reason that the Islamic State was yet in its
nascent stage and any dispute would have rendered it vulnerable to
attacks, both from its internal and external enemies. Therefore, Imam
Ali (a.s) frequently repeated the reply of Aaron (a.s) when Moses (a.s.)
asked, “*What kept you back from following me, when you saw them taking
the wrong steps? Did you disobey my instructions?” Aaron replied, “O son
of my mother! Seize me not by my beard or the hair of my head. I was
afraid that you may say that I caused a division among the children of
Israel*.”**[2]**

The earliest recorded version of the incidents found in the Book of
Sulaym ibn Qais al-Hilali**[3]** and the recorded sermons of Imam Ali
(a.s) in Nahujul Balagha**[4]** and Nahujul Asrar clearly show Imam
Ali’s predicament and disapproval of the events that took place at
*Saqifa* in the matter of succession after the death of the Prophet (s).

History is full of instances where Imam Ali (a.s) was sought,
unsuccessfully, to be compelled to give his allegiance to the *Caliph*.
Imam Ali (a.s) chose to remain aloof, saying that he was busy annotating
the Qur’an, which he had already compiled in book form on the personal
dictates of the Prophet (s). However, history also records that quite
often, Imam Ali (a.s) could not be ignored and the *Caliphs*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qasasul Anbiya, Rightway Publication – [2005] – p. 90.  
 **[2]** Ibn Kathir’s Qasasul Ambiya, p. 247  
 **[3]** Kitab Sulaym Ibn Qays al-Hilli, English Translation by Maulana
Sayyid Ali Abid Rizvi & Fazela Nilam Rizvi, published by S & N Rizvi,
Heston, Hounslow, England [ 2001].  
 **[4]** Nahjul Balagha – Sermon No. 7; ash-Shaqshaqiyya, Nahjul Asrar,
p. 262.

were obliged to seek his advice, guidance and judicial acumen, to
resolve difficult situations that appeared to shake the very
fundamentals and foundation of Islam. His cooperation in this regard,
with the sole object of protecting Islam in times of its need as the
Imam, would be often mistakenly touted as his approval of the validity
of the regime. However, the fact remains that Imam Ali (a.s) never
participated in the political affairs or the military expeditions of the
state but he confined himself to advice purely on religious matters or
to religious legitimacy of any issue faced by the *Caliphs*.

There was open criticism about the competence of the Caliph in deciding
important matters. Often the Caliph had to resort to Imam Ali’s help in
solving complicated issues. This reminded the Umma of the various
traditions extolling the supremacy and the virtue of Imam Ali (a.s) over
all others. People also recollected the various occasions when the
Prophet (s) nominated Imam Ali (a.s) as his successor. This discussion,
initially in whispers became an ominous rumble that could no longer be
ignored if the Caliph were to hold on to his seat.

As noted earlier, to avert the consequences of dissent, two measures
were adopted. Firstly, the *Caliph* banned the narration of traditions
on the grounds that they might create confusion and even make people
neglect the Qur’an in favour of traditions. Secondly, wars were declared
on neighboring countries.

Having failed to incite Imam Ali (a.s) to take military action against
the first *Caliph*, Abu Sufyan managed and successfully persuaded the
first three Caliphs to appoint his son Yazid as the Governor of Syria.
On the death of Yazid bin Abu Sufyan, his brother Mu’awiya bin Abu
Sufyan was appointed by the *Caliph* as Governor of Syria. Mu’awiya
persuaded the third *Caliph* to re-induct the infamous Marwan who in
turn removed just and honest officers and brought in avaricious and
corrupt Umayyads in all key posts.

During the reign of the first three Caliphs, more particularly the third
Caliph, Mu’awiya and his ilk gained free access to the corridors of
power and they extracted monetary favors and positions of considerable
power and influence. Soon, all the governors appointed by the first two
Caliphs were recalled and in their place, Umayyads or their henchmen
were appointed as governors by the third Caliph. Marwan was recalled
from the exile and he gained a very special status of a trusted advisor
of the third Caliph. They systematically harassed,

tortured and even banished several noble and trusted companions of the
Prophet (s).

Any person who was even suspected to be a friend, well-wisher or even a
mere sympathizer of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s), was secretly annihilated in
order to eliminate dissension and simultaneously consolidate the
Umayyads’ hold on power. Having gained access to power, they started a
lavish and sinful way of life at the cost of the public treasury.

The dreams of Abu Sufyan were realized and the Islamic State was
converted into a military empire of pomp and pretensions. The sons of
Abu Sofia, Yazid and his brother Mu’awiya, who became successive
governors of Syria, misused their position of power to accumulate great
wealth for themselves and they built huge palaces full of pompous
adornments at the cost of the public money.

The governors were inaccessible to anyone but their own henchmen. This
greatly enraged the Muslims who were taught to lead a simple life of
austerity. The mounting sufferings and cries of the public against
injustice and starvation went unheeded.

Regarding the situation, Justice Sayyid Ameer Ali wrote, “*The choice of
electorate fell upon Uthman, a member of the Umayyad family. His
election proved, in the end, the ruin of Islam. He fell at once under
the influence of his clan. He was guided entirely by his secretary and
son-in-law Marwan, who had once been expelled by the Holy Prophet (s)
for breach of trust. Uthman displaced most of the lieutenants employed
by Umar and in their place, he appointed incompetent and worthless
members of his own family. The weakness of the center and the wickedness
of the favorites were creating a great ferment among the people. Loud
complaints of extraction and oppression by the Governors began pouring
into the capital. Ali (a.s) pleaded and expostulated several times with
the Caliph about the manner in which he allowed the government to fall
into the hands of the unworthy favorites, but Uthman, under the
influence of his evil genius Marwan, paid no heed to these counsels*.”
**[1]**

The discontent became so rampant that delegations from Syria, Iraq and
Egypt arrived to complain to the Caliph about the anarchy and despotism
of the governors appointed by him. They held the third Caliph personally
responsible for the induction of persons, who were  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A short History of the Saracens, p. 47.

known criminals and open enemies of Islam, into position of power with
full access to the public treasury. Historians record that the
delegations met the third Caliph and pleaded with him to remove the
tyrannical governors of Syria and Egypt. *Caliph* Uthman refused to
remove Mu’awiya from the governorship of Syria. After great persuasion,
he agreed to appoint Mohammed Bin Abu Bakr [the first Caliph’s son] as
the Governor of Egypt in place of Abdullah Bin Sa’d. A letter was issued
to Abdullah Bin Sa’d, the governor of Egypt, asking him to hand over the
charge of the Egyptian government to Mohammed Bin Abu Bakr.

When the Egyptian delegation carrying the letter, was returning home,
they found a man overtaking them on a fast camel. They interrupted him
and upon search, they found another letter addressed to Abdullah Bin
Sa’d, the Governor of Egypt, directing him to behead Mohammed Bin Abu
Bakr and the delegation accompanying him. The second letter was also
written by the same scribe [Marwan] who wrote the order appointing
Mohammed Bin Abu Bakr as the Governor of Egypt. Both the letters
contained the seal of the Caliph. The scribe of both the letters had
taken advantage of the dots that are affixed either above or blow an
Arabic letter. Thus, In the first letter it was written ‘*Iqbal*’ which
means ‘accept’, by putting a dot under the third alphabet to read it as
‘*b*’; whereas in the second letter two dots were put over the third
alphabet which then became ‘*t*’ instead of ‘*b*’, to be read as
‘*Uqtul*’ meaning ‘behead’. The cunningness and duplicity enraged the
members of the delegations who immediately returned to Medina to
question the Caliph. It was found on inquiry that Marwan had scribed
both the letters and affixed the seal of the Caliphate. The Caliph
admitted the seal to be his and the writing in both the letters to be
that of Marwan. However, he pleaded ignorance in the matter. The
delegation demanded that Marwan should be handed over to them or,
alternatively, the Caliph himself should resign. The Caliph rejected
both the alternatives, whereupon the excited mob surrounded and attacked
his house. The third Caliph was confined within his house for three
days. He sent for assistance from Mu’awiya, who cunningly kept himself
away, deserting his benefactor and relative. Despite knowing that the
delegation was bent on causing harm to the third Caliph. Mu’awiya
purposefully did not come to his rescue, for he realized that if
anything happened to the Caliph, it would only furnish rich material to
foment dissension on clannish lines, which could be used to advantage
against any contender to the *Caliphate*, particularly Imam

Ali (a.s). Umar himself, when deliberating about his successor, said
this about Uthman:“*If he becomes the Caliph, he will impose Bani Abi
Ma’it over the people and then the Arabs will rise against and kill
him*.”**[1]**

The third Caliph, then, sought Imam Ali’s help, but by the time help
could reach, the enraged mutineers had slain the third Caliph. The
cunning Marwan took the bloodstained clothes of the Caliph and on it, he
sewed the severed fingers of the Caliph’s wife Na’ila. He, cunningly,
propagated false rumors shifting the blame of the murder of the third
Caliph to Imam Ali (a.s). The body of the Caliph was left on the public
square and was grossly dishonored and insulted by his enemies. His body
was then buried in a Jewish cemetery by the enraged public who prevented
his burial in *al-Baqee’,* the Muslim graveyard. However, in later times
*al-Baqee’* was expanded several times and Jewish and Christian
cemeteries came to be included in the present day within its
boundaries*.* Yet the whereabouts of the third *Caliph’s* grave remains
a mystery, just as the grave of Aa’isha remains a mystery.

The net result of the administration of the three *Caliphs* was that
Islam lost its religious identity and was converted into a worldly
power. The result is aptly summarized by a scholar in the literature and
history of Muslims, Akhilesh Mitthal who wrote:“*Their [Muslims]
history, also written by bards and sycophants, makes out that the
religion, Islam, forged the hereto warring tribes into a monolithic
corunna* *or column which shattered and overcame all those who came in
its path. In the year 681 AD, an Arab general Uqba bin Nafi’ plunged his
horse into the waves of the Atlantic until the steed was shouldered deep
in the waters. Uqba then unsheathed his sword and announced, ‘Allaho
Akbar. If the ocean had not intervened my victorious westward march, my
sword would have killed all who refused to accept Him’* ” **[2]**

Conclusion
----------

Islam is the last link in the chain of Divine religions. Similarly, the
Qur’an is the last of the Revealed Scriptures. By the time Islam and the
Prophet (s) appeared, humanity was ripe and ready to exercise its
cognitive powers to seek answers to the unknown and unseen, particularly
in the field of religion. Civilizations had developed largely  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Shibli’s al-Faruq, p. 123-124 quoted in MAA Sattar’s Caliph’s
Caliphate.  
 **[2]** The Deccan Chronicle published from Hyderabad, India, dated 20
February 2005.

and scientific inquiry replaced blind dogma. The sciences of logical
deduction, philosophy and probes into the hitherto unknown fields became
almost a passion and a pastime in everyday life.

Islam came to provide answers to unanswered question and to convince
that for his actions in this life, man was accountable to his Creator,
in an eternal life to come. The Qur’an provided a constitution for a
peaceful and harmonious life in this world and the means by which one
could hope to achieve salvation and eternal bliss in the life to come.

The Qur’an provided the basic constitution for Muslims. Like all
constitutions, the Qur’an also requires expositions and explanations,
which could be provided only by the Prophet (s) himself or by his
Divinely appointed deputies and successors. That is why the Prophet (s)
exhorted men to firmly hold on to the Qur’an and the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s)
so that men may not go astray and fall into gross error.

Yet, in a systematically planned move, Imam Ali (a.s) who was nominated
by the Prophet (s) was sidestepped and Abu Bakr was made the first
*Caliph*.

It is unfortunate that Muslims were ruled for almost half a century,
from 632 to 680 A.D, particularly in Syria and Iraq by Mu’awiya, the son
of Abu Sufyan the inveterate enemy who forever plotted to kill the
Prophet (s) and destroy his Mission. Abu Bakr ruled for about three
years from 632 to 634 A.D, Umar ruled for about ten years from 634 - 644
A.D, Uthman for about twelve years from 644 to 656 A.D, and the last of
*Caliphs,* Imam Ali (a.s.) was harassed by Mu’awiya and made to engage
in wars and skirmishes throughout the period of about five years from
656-661. The total period of governance under the *Rashidun Caliphs* was
only 30 years; whereas, Mu’awiya’s rule over Syria and Iraq extended to
another 18 years after the *four caliphs.* Thus, in a part of the
Islamic world from the very early days, what was taught for about half a
century was Mu’awiya’s brand of Islam.

That Mu’awiya did not create any confusion during the rule of the first
three *Caliphs* shows how the threat perception was viewed by both
sides, and how mutual concession were given and taken by both sides in
order to retain the seat that both sides knew it was not theirs by right
but only by mutual courtesy. Both sides also realised that any dispute
between them at that stage would have only strengthened Ali’s position,
since the companions, who had witnessed the Prophet (s)

speaking in favour of Ali, were alive and in a good number.

The fact that Imam Ali (a.s.) could re-establish true Islamic norms
within a short span of about five years, that too while he was engaged
by Mu’awiya in constant wars, shows that the righteous always win,
though their victory may come much later. It is this rule of Imam Ali
(a.s.) that we shall examine in the next chapter.
