Chapter 11 Imam Ali the Only Caliph By Public Choice
====================================================

If, at all, any real democratic choice of its ruler is to be found in
the entire history of Islam, it is to be found only in the case of Imam
Ali (a.s), when the entire population of Muslims, after the murder of
Uthman, unitedly and repeatedly requested Imam Ali (a.s) to assume the
religio-political governance of the Islamic world. Though he refused in
the beginning, he yielded when he was told that his refusal would be
tantamount to abdication of his duties as the *Imam.* Imam Ali (a.s)
accepted the political leadership of the *Ummah* in addition to the
religious leadership that always remained with him. Imam Ali (a.s) in
his famous sermon called ‘*Shaqshaqiyah’* elaborates the dilemma facing
him:“*At that time nothing surprised me more than the vast crowd of
people rushing to me* [demanding that I accept the *Caliphate*]. *It*
[the crowd] *advanced towards me from every side like the mane of the
hyena so much so that Hasan and Husain were neigh being trampled and
crushed and both ends of my garment [tunic] were torn* [due to being
pulled by the crowd to draw my attention] … *Behold, by Him Who splits
the seed and creates life, had there not gathered such multitude of
supporters, and had they not exhausted all the arguments, and had there
not been a covenant between God and the learned scholars* [Imams] *that*
[the Imams] *shall not sit quietly watching the gluttony of the
oppressor and the burning hunger of the oppressed poor, I would have
cast the rope of Caliphate on its own shoulders* [declined to accept the
Caliphate] *and I would have continued to give the last of them the same
treatment as the first one. You would then have realized that in my
view* [for me] *worldly life is not better than the sneeze of a
goat.”***[1]**

Thus, when by popular demand, Imam Ali (a.s) accepted the *Caliphate*,
after a lapse of over thirty years after the Prophet (s), for the first
time once again, the temporal authority [*Caliphate*] and the religious
authority [*Imamate*] came to be vested in one person (Imam Ali (a.s) ).
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahjul Balagha, Sermon No.3. The authenticity of this sermon is
testified by twenty-seven learned scholars mentioned in the note
appended to this sermon...

His leadership stands in stark contrast to the period of the three
earlier *Caliphs*.

Firstly, Imam Ali (a.s) never planned territorial expansion. Secondly,
he subdued the internal threat from the hypocrites [*Munafiqin*] like
Mu’awiya and those who were solely interested in acquiring power or
expanding territory like Talha and az-Zubair. Thirdly, he removed
corrupt officers, eliminated all lavish state expenditure, and directed
that the state funds should be utilized only for public welfare and to
help the needy and downtrodden. He directed that every person,
irrespective of his religion or belief, should be dealt justly and
equitably without fear or favour. His written instructions to his
Governors, Judges and Commanders of the army are eloquent testimony to
his Just Governance.

In the early days of Islam, Abu Sufyan incited people and waged war
against the Prophet (s). After he died, his son Mu’awiya continued the
family tradition and waged war against the Prophet’s beloved cousin and
successor Imam Ali (a.s). In addition to physical warfare, Mu’awiya made
false propaganda that Imam Ali (a.s) was instrumental in the murder of
Uthman.

During one of the savage battles against the enemies of Islam, Malik
al-Ashtar a great warrior was surprised to see that Imam Ali (a.s) was
nowhere to be seen fighting. He found Imam Ali (a.s) conversing with
some one. He asked Imam Ali (a.s) what he was doing at that crucial
stage of the battle, and he said, “*What are we fighting for, Malik*?”
Malik replied, “*We are fighting for God*.” Imam Ali (a.s) replied,
“*This man has just asked me to explain the concept of God in Islam. If
I am able to convince him through dialogue, there is absolutely no need
for any war or blood-shed*.”**[1]** This clearly shows that Imam Ali
(a.s) was more interested in propagating Islam through discussion and
dialogue rather than for its territorial expansion through war.

Every battle that Imam Ali (a.s) fought during his *Caliphate* was
against those who were enemies in the garb of Muslims. Imam Ali (a.s)
treated the Jews and the Christians in a just manner, permitting them to
practice their faith openly and fearlessly. For his personal needs, Imam
Ali (a.s) worked in his spare time. He never used the state funds for
himself or his family. Though Imam Ali (a.s) was the religious and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahjul Asrar, p. 262.

temporal head of the Islamic State, his simple house in Kufa is a
witness of his simple way of life. During that time, Mu’awiya had
occupied his grand Syrian palace, well-known for its revelry, pomp and
Grandeur. History records the fact that Imam Ali (a.s) ate simple food,
wore ordinary clothes that often contained patches sewn together.
History also records that Imam Ali (a.s) chose to mend his own shoes.

In the battlefield, if the opponent lost his sword or was disarmed, Imam
Ali (a.s) let him go. Imam Ali (a.s) never chased an enemy who lost his
steed or weapon and was unable to defend himself. Talha son of Abi Talha
was the bitterest enemy of the Prophet (s) and Imam Ali (a.s). In the
battle of Uhud, he challenged Imam Ali (a.s) to face him in single
combat. Imam Ali (a.s) invited him to strike first and warded off
Talha’s blow. In return, Imam Ali (a.s) gave such a blow that Talha fell
down and found it difficult to get up. When, instead of killing the
fallen Talha, Imam Ali (a.s) left him and walked away, the warriors
shouted that it was the best opportunity to finish off the bitter enemy.
Imam Ali (a.s) replied that he would not kill even an enemy, if such
enemy was not in a position to defend himself.

In the battle of *an*-*Nahrawan,* an enemy soldier lost his sword in the
combat with Imam Ali (a.s), and was trembling with mortal fear. Imam Ali
(a.s) raised his sword to strike him but stopped when he saw that the
enemy had lost his sword. Imam Ali (a.s) said, “*Run away my friend, for
you are now unable to defend yourself*.” The soldier said, “*Why don’t
you kill me and thus get rid of one more enemy*?” Imam Ali (a.s)
replied, “*We the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) do not kill any person who is unable
to defend himself*.” The soldier said, “*If what I hear about your
generosity is true, let me see if you would give me your sword*.” Imam
Ali (a.s) immediately gave his sword. The enemy soldier now said, “*Who
will defend you now against my attack?*” Imam Ali (a.s) calmly replied,
“*O ignorant man! If He so Wills, He will defend me. Neither you nor any
one else can cause even the slightest harm to me. If death, which is
sure to come, is destined for me now, by God, none can save me*.” This
reply impressed the soldier so much that he threw the sword, glorified
God and accepted Islam at the hands of Imam Ali (a.s). There are
numerous such incidents where Imam Ali (a.s) won converts to Islam
without waging war, merely on the strength of his character.

Mu’awiya, during 39-40 AH, organized the systematic looting, plunder,
arson, rape and other harassment of the villages bordering

Syria where mostly Jews and Christians lived. Kumail, who was appointed
as governor, wrote asking for permission to carry out similar attacks on
other villages in retaliation. Imam Ali (a.s) condemned the proposal and
wrote, “*It is your duty to protect your subjects from the enemy’s
attack more diligently and vigorously, instead of imitating his mean and
vile acts. Though they live under the control of your enemy, they are
civilians and human beings like us, though they may follow other
beliefs. Beware of following the deeds of the evil doers*.”

When his brother Aqeel fell in dire need, he approached Imam Ali (a.s)
and requested that his share might be paid before its due date with
something more than what he actually deserved from the state treasury.
Imam Ali (a.s), who was then the *caliph,* refused to give anything in
excess of Aqeel’s share or before the due date from the state treasury.
Instead, Imam Ali (a.s.) helped Aqeel from his personal funds. A similar
incident is also recorded about Abdullah ibn Jafar the son-in-law of
Imam Ali (a.s).

Imam Ali (a.s) never tolerated corruption in high office. He removed all
the corrupt governors who were misusing public funds. When one of the
governors appointed by him attended a sumptuous dinner hosted by some
rich people, Imam Ali (a.s) scolded him by writing, “*It is unfortunate
that you attended a dinner where only rich people were invited and poor
people were scornfully excluded*.”

Osborne wrote, “*Ali (a.s) had been advised by several of his counselors
to defer dismissal of corrupt governors previously appointed until he
himself was secure against all enemies... the hero without fear and
without reproach refused to be guilty of any duplicity or compromise
with injustice. This uncompromisingly noble attitude cost him his state
and his life; but such was Ali (a.s) who never valued anything above
justice and truth*.”**[1]**

Imam Ali’s strict control of state funds and his exhortations to lead an
astute and simple life in the way of God, enraged persons like Mu’awiya,
who were enamoured of worldly wealth and a pompous and sinful life. In
one of the battles, Mu’awiya’s army had gained control of the only water
source available and they deprived Imam Ali’s troops of water for three
days. On the fourth day Imam Ali’s troops gained control of the water
source. Mu’awiya was afraid that Imam Ali (a.s) would take revenge by
denying access to water.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Osborne, Islam Under the Arabs.

Mu’awiya consulted Amr bin al-Aas who said that it was not the cunning
Mu’awiya but the noble Ali (a.s) who controls the river. Imam Ali (a.s)
allowed access to the river saying that water was a basic necessity
provided by God to all living things and therefore should not be denied
to anyone, even if he was your bitter enemy.

Imam Ali (a.s) is the most read about and researched personality in the
history of Islam. Nahjul Balagha, a book having collections of Imam
Ali’s sermons, letters and sayings is well-known in the East and the
West. Many books have been written and several writers in the East and
the West have expressed their opinion praising Imam Ali (a.s). Another
popular book is Nahjul Asrar, published from Hyderabad, India. In
addition to this, there are several books of Imam Ali’s traditions,
sermons, sayings, supplications and writings, such as *as-Sahifa
al-Alawiyya.*

It may be recalled here that Imam Ali (s) presented the complete bound
volume of the Qur’an written down by him to the dictates of the Prophet
(s), to the first *Caliph*. When it was refused to be accepted, Imam Ali
(a.s) took it back saying that it could be again seen only in the hands
of the twelfth Imam (a.s) at the time of his reappearance.

Imam Ali (a.s) told Talha, “*The Prophet (s) made me write each verse of
the Qur’an as and when it was revealed. I have the entire Qur’an here in
this book, written down in my own handwriting together with its meaning,
every prohibition [haram] and permission [halal], every limit and every
command, the details of the amount of compensation [diya] payable for
the tiniest scratch and all that the Ummah will need, right from the
first day until the Doomsday*.”

Imam Ali’s character is unique in that he possessed a rare combination
of opposite qualities. He was an undefeated warrior yet very kind,
sympathetic and most gentle towards the poor and downtrodden people and
those enemies whom he subdued. He was a great orator, moralist and
philosopher. He was God-fearing, and an erudite teacher of religious
tenets. He was a just and noble ruler, who led a simple life, bereft of
all ostentation and grandeur that goes with the crown. He bore a noble
countenance, wore simple clothes, and ate the most common food that was
the staple food of the poor people of his time. He was always available
to his subjects and he moved among them freely. He was bereft of all
pomp and pretensions, so much so that when he moved about in the street,
he was identified as one among the

citizens. He neither feared any harm from his subjects, nor did the
citizens have any fear or hesitation in meeting and conversing with him
so easily.

Gibbon wrote,**[1]** “*He [Imam Ali (a.s) ] united the qualifications of
a poet, a soldier, and a saint. His wisdom still breathes in a
collection of moral and religious sayings; and every antagonist in the
combat of tongue or of sword was subdued by his eloquence and valor.
From the first hour of the mission to the last rites of his funeral, the
apostle was never forsaken by this generous friend, whom he delighted to
name as his brother, his vicegerent and the faithful Aaron of second
Moses*.”

Abdullah ibn Abbas, the governor, used to treat his non-Muslim subjects
with contempt. When they complained, Imam Ali (a.s) wrote, “*They may be
heathens and polytheists; nonetheless, they are our subjects and human
beings like us. They deserve better treatment than what you appear to
have shown them. Make yourself available to them, hear their complaints
and give proper consideration, and justly redress their grievances*.”
The directions**[2]** given by Imam Ali (s) in his letter to Malik
al-Ashtar form a self-contained code of conduct for Governance.

George Jordaq, an Egyptian Christian scholar in Arabic, Persian,
English, German and French languages, has compiled a book of the
excellent judgments rendered by Imam Ali (a.s). The book has been
translated into Urdu.

Apart from being the *Caliph*, Imam Ali (a.s) was and is always known as
the *Imam* and *Ameerul Mo’minin* [Commander of the Faithful]. After his
martyrdom, the title of *Caliph* was lost in history and the title
‘*Ameerul Mo’minin*’ was usurped by Mu’awiya and later rulers for some
time to denote the temporal authority- the person who was at the helm of
the affairs of Muslims. Now, even the word *Ameerul Mo’minin* is not
used by rulers of any Islamic state. However, it is noteworthy that
neither Mu’awiya nor the subsequent rulers of the Islamic world ever
claimed that they were *Imams*. Until today, the number of the
infallible *Imams* remains restricted to the twelve *Imams* named by the
Prophet (s) in numerous traditions.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The History of the Decline and the Fall of the Roman Empire,
Vol. 5.  
 **[2]** *Nahjul Balagha,* translated by Sayyid Ali Reza, published by
Abbas Book Agency, Lucknow, U.P.

Ibn Muljim and a few other *Kharijites* supported by Mu’awiya conspired
to eliminate Imam Ali (a.s). They chose a day in the month of *Ramadan*
and they planned to assassinate Imam Ali (a.s) at Kufa early during the
Morning Prayer. Mu’awiya created a legend that the conspirators had also
planned to eliminate Mu’awiya but that on the appointed day, he fell ill
and could not go to the mosque to lead the prayers. A story was thus
spun and popularized that Mu’awiya escaped assassination and, instead,
the person, who was deputed by Mu’awiya to lead the prayers, was injured
by the conspirator. However, when Imam Ali (a.s) was leading the Morning
Prayer in the great mosque of Kufa, the wicked Ibn Muljim struck him on
the head with his poisoned sword and seriously wounded him. The
gathering of worshippers chased ibn Muljim, and Huthaifa al-Yamani
caught him and tied his hands and feet. The crowd attempted to assault
the accursed Ibn Muljim. Imam Ali (a.s) saw this and noticed that the
ropes tying ibn Muljim were so tight that they were cutting into his
flesh. Imam Ali (a.s) abjured the gathering saying, “*He has not yet
been tried according our Shariah. Until he is tried and found guilty,
you have no right to hurt any under trial prisoner in any manner,
whatever be his crime*.”

What we have discussed above is with reference to the human side of Imam
Ali’s personality. There is also the spiritual aspect of the Fourteen
Immaculate and infallible persons, which elevates them above man but
below God. This aspect is discussed separately.

Abu Sufyan sowed the seed of hatred, Mu’awiya nurtured the tree and
Yazid reaped the harvest by slaying the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) openly and
defiantly in the Battle of Karbala. Abu Sufyan and his progeny invented
absolute falsehood, and they propagated and popularized such falsehood,
through their gullible henchmen. The coffers of the public treasuries
flowed in the hands of the corrupt Umayyads to propagate that Imam Ali
(a.s) never offered prayers. The result was that when news of Imam Ali’s
martyrdom reached Syria, people exclaimed:‘Ali in the mosque!?’ By the
time Yazid assumed power, people only remembered the grandeur of the
Umayyad rulers, and forgot the simple Islamic way of life, and they knew
little about Imam Husain (a.s) the pious and noble grandson of the
Prophet (s).
