Chapter 13the Muslim Empire
===========================

Mu’awiya’s extremely cunning nature was augmented by the advice and
support of Marwan and Amr bin al-Aas. Besides his cruel nature, Mu’awiya
was extremely cunning. When his attempts to search for defects in Imam
Ali (a.s) failed, he commenced the practice of praising the Banu Umayya
the inveterate enemies of Imam Ali (a.s), by inventing and propagating
false traditions attributed to the Prophet (s). Mu’awiya bribed his
henchmen and arranged for the propagation of daily calumnies and
falsehoods against Imam Ali (a.s) from on the pulpits after every prayer
in every mosque of Syria, Egypt, and Iraq. Any leader of the
congregational prayers, who was not amenable to his bribes or threats,
was ruthlessly removed or killed, and in the vacancy, Mu’awiya’s cronies
were appointed. The propaganda was so fierce and systematic that soon
people started comparing Mu’awiya with Imam Ali (a.s).**[1]** The
propaganda was so vicious that when the news of Imam Ali’s martyrdom
during offering the prayer in the mosque of Kufa reached the people of
Syria, they wondered how Ali could have been killed in the mosque when
he never attended any prayer.

Mu’awiya retained the control of Syria, Egypt, and Iraq, which he got in
the early days of the Caliphate and appointed his kin and sycophants as
his trusted advisors and representatives in various provinces. Except
for an opportunistic and hypocritical conversion, neither Mu’awiya nor
his father Abu Sufyan or his son Yazid had any regard or affinity for
Islam. Abu Sufyan was from the Kuffar (disbelievers) of Mecca and he
remained so. The Qur’an reveals that the Kuffar of Mecca asserted that
there would be no other life than the one in this world; that there
would be no life hereafter, and none would be resurrected or held
accountable for his deeds.**[2]** This philosophy was imbibed in the
Banu Umayya in general and Abu Sufyan, Mu’awiya, and Yazid in
particular, and was the cause of their cruel nature. They always held
the view that there would be no life

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahjul Balagha.  
**[2]** Qur’an, 6:29, 11:7, 16:38, 17:49, 17:98, 19:66, 27:67, 32:10,
44:34, 45:24.

hereafter and no accounting for one’s deeds. They proclaimed that the
Prophet (s) had invented these as myths in order to gain worldly power.
It is their greed that converted Islam into a Muslim Empire by expanding
territories and accumulating huge amount of illicit wealth, and in the
process abandoning the spirit of Islam. Islam that emerged, during their
rule, bore only a miniscule outward resemblance to the Islam propagated
by the Prophet (s). In the hands of the Banu Umayya, Islam was devoid of
its true spirit, philosophy, and the concept of God and the moral and
ethical life and standards taught by the Prophet (s). Abu Sufyan, his
son Mu’awiya and grandson Yazid abhorred the Divine commandments that
demanded Muslims to lead a virtuous, pious, and peaceful life of
coexistence with people holding different beliefs.

Mu’awiya’s denial of the afterlife and accountability naturally led him
to addiction to all sorts of vices and the temerity to commit great
atrocities against the poor. He harassed, persecuted, tortured or killed
the companions of the Prophet (s) who resented his way of interpreting
the way of life prescribed under Islam. He annihilated those who were
even suspected to be sympathetic to Imam Ali (a.s) or the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s). Cunning as he was, Mu’awiya carried out in public, the pretension
of being a Muslim, lest the power he gained as the head of the Islamic
state be wrenched away by the public. Slowly, but systematically, he
eroded minor injunctions of Islam, by letting go the transgressors and
later rewarding those who could fallaciously justify their irreligious
acts. He used the public funds not only to aggrandize himself but also
to eliminate or silence any opposition and to purchase support.

His appointees to higher posts had no knowledge of Islam or any other
sciences, but were well-versed in every evil trade and act. One of the
governors, while drunken, offered four rak’as in the Morning Prayer
instead of the obligatory two, and mockingly he told the congregation
that, if they were not tired, he could perform several more. His son,
Yazid used to make fun of Islam in the open court. Yazid’s conduct
eroded the credibility and quality of Islam, causing great anxiety to
the Imams (s) as well as the surviving companions of the Prophet (s) who
were the true Muslims of the time. Simon Oakley wrote:“Among my
authorities, I find one who, when treating of Hasan’s death, asserted
that, in the treaties between him and Mu’awiya, it has been stipulated
that Mu’awiya should never appoint a successor so long as Hasan

lived, but should leave, as Umar had before, the election in the hands
of a certain number of persons to be nominated by Hasan. Mu’awiya,
therefore, being desirous of leaving the Caliphate to his son Yazid and
thinking that he could not bring about his design so long as Hasan was
alive, determined to get rid of him.”**[1]**

Mu’awiya hatched a plan to eliminate Imam Hasan (a.s). Imam Hasan (a.s)
was poisoned by one of his wives at the instance of Mu’awiya who
promised that he would get her married to his son Yazid. In his last
moments, Imam Hasan (a.s) expressed his wish to be buried beside his
grandfather the Holy Prophet (s) and in the event of any opposition, to
bury him at the common burial ground of al-Baqee’, so that any conflict
and consequent division among Muslims might be averted. When Imam Husain
(a.s) took the bier in order to bury Imam Hasan (a.s) beside the
Prophet’s tomb, Mu’awiya incited Aa’isha to have arrows showered on the
coffin of Imam Hasan (a.s). Thus, Imam Husain (a.s) was prevented from
fulfilling the last wish of his brother. Imam Hasan (a.s) was then
buried in the graveyard of al-Baqee’ in Medina.

The martyrdom of Imam Hasan (a.s), further emboldened Mu’awiya in his
evil designs. He issued orders that any one praising Imam Ali (s) or
found relating traditions in praise of him or the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s)
should at once be beheaded, hanged, and cut into pieces. He also
instructed the leaders of congregations in every mosque to curse,
blaspheme, and spread falsehood about Imam Ali (a.s) and the *Ahlul
Bayt* (a.s) and amply rewarded those who complied with this order. The
greed of people encouraged them to invent ever-new traditions falsely
attributed to the Prophet (s), praising the open enemies of Islam such
as Marwan, Abu Sufyan, Mu’awiya… etc.

On the other hand, those, who refused to praise the Banu Umayya and
other enemies of Islam, were punished severely. Maytham at-Tammar, who
refused to curse Imam Ali (a.s), was tortured, his limbs were torn
apart, and his tongue was pulled out. His body was hung at the city
center as a warning to those who did not obey Mu’awiya’s orders. Hijr
bin Adiy al-Kindi (the great companion) was slaughtered for the same
reason. Muhammad, son of the first *Caliph* Abu Bakr, who had special
love and regard for Imam Ali (a.s), was killed and his body was stuffed
in the skin of a donkey and was burnt. In the city of Basra alone, eight
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Husain The Saviour, p. 71 – 72.

thousand persons, who declared their love and obedience for Imam Ali
(a.s) as a part of their faith, were meticulously traced and brutally
killed. The pensions of those, who were weak, disabled, old or orphans,
was stopped if they were even suspected of entertaining any affection
towards the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s).**[1]**

After Imam Hasan (a.s) had been poisoned, Imam Husain (a.s) lived
peacefully in Medina, imparting religious teachings and had a great
number of companions and followers. Mu’awiya, who had expanded his
control over various provinces, started to disclose his desire to
appoint his son Yazid as his successor. He was able to secure the assent
of the Syrians and some people in Iraq and Egypt. Mu’awiya’s
representative in Medina wrote to him stating that the people of Medina
were not in favour of Yazid to succeed Mu’awiya. Aa’isha, Imam Husain
(a.s), Abdullah Bin Umar, Abdurrahman bin Abu Bakr, Abdullah bin
az-Zubair and others were mentioned as the opponents. Mu’awiya came to
Medina and from on the pulpit of the Holy Prophet (s) he started to
praise Yazid and suggested his name as the successor after him. Aa’isha
interrupted him, shouted from her room, and asked which precedent
Mu’awiya was following in nominating his son, when the earlier Caliphs
did not appoint their sons.

Imam Husain (a.s) then got up and said that Yazid, being a flouter of
basic Islamic principles, a known debauch, gambler and drunkard was not
fit to be the ruler of the Islamic world. Imam Husain (a.s) suggested
that it was essential to discuss the character of Yazid in a public
meeting and discussion.**[2]**

Mu’awiya instructed Yazid to proceed to Medina via Mecca on the pretext
of performing the Hajj and to give lavish gifts to the people of Medina
and Mecca, in order to create an impression of his piety and generosity.
To some extent, the ruse worked and people were deceived by the
ostentatious gifts from Yazid.

Mu’awiya, under the advice of Marwan and Amr bin al-Aas then, proposed
that he would later call a public meeting to know people’s preference
regarding the matter of his succession. He assured Imam Husain (a.s),
Abdullah bin Abbas, Abdullah Bin Umar, Abdullah Bin  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kitabul Imamah wes-Siyasah & Kitabul Ahdath, quoted in Life of
Husain The Saviour 73.  
 **[2]** Balaghatul Husain, P. 35, Sermons, Sayings & letters of Imam
Husain [s] Compiled by Mustafa Mohsin Musavi, Urdu Translation by Moulvi
Sayyid Mohammed Baqir.

az-Zubair and all others who opposed Yazid that they would have their
say in the public meeting. Cunning that he was, he dispatched his
cronies to spread the false rumor that Imam Husain (a.s), Abdullah bin
Abbas, Abdullah Bin Umar, Abdullah Bin az-Zubair and all others who had
once opposed, had consented to Yazid being nominated as the successor of
Mu’awiya.

Mu’awiya made elaborate arrangement for the public gathering. He
instructed his cronies to disperse to strategic points in the crowd so
that they might carry out his directions at a given signal. When the
meeting commenced, Mu’awiya started praising Yazid as a pious and
generous person. He told the people of Medina that they had themselves
witnessed Yazid’s piety and generosity. When Imam Husain (a.s) tried to
protest, Mu’awiya politely asked him to be patient and hear him fully.
Mu’awiya assured, after he had finished his speech, Imam Husain (a.s)
that he would have opportunity when his turn came to say whatever he
pleased. Then, Mu’awiya proclaimed that all the nobles of Medina,
including those present on the rostrum, have agreed to his nominating of
Yazid as his successor. He then gave the signal to his cronies mingled
in the crowd, who created a huge commotion by shouting slogans in favour
of Yazid. In the confusion, nothing could be heard and a stampede was
created and the gathering was forced to disperse. Imam Husain (a.s) and
others opposed to Yazid were, thus, effectively prevented from voicing
their objections, while the gathering noted their presence alongside
Mu’awiya to be the sign of their approval of Yazid’s succession.**[1]**

Ronald P. Sokol wrote with reference to present-day world
leaders,**[2]** “*A leader not subject to law may indulge in the
propensity to assign a name, be it Jew, gypsy, terrorist, enemy
combatant, or insurgent, and then to demonize that name until sight is
lost of the other person’s humanity. When that point is reached,
humiliation, torture, and death are inflicted without compunction. That
propensity lies deeply embedded in the psyche. It stains democracies as
well as dictatorships, presidents as well as tyrants… Law is our only
tool for tempering that dark propensity*.”

This analysis applies, very aptly, to Mu’awiya and his son Yazid who
resorted to inventing falsehood, who threatened, bribed and set up  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Husain, p. 95-96.  
**[2]** Ronald P. Sokol, the International Herald Tribune, the Deccan
Chronicle, Hyderabad, 20 February 2005.

thousands of persons to curse, defame and disparage Imam Ali (a.s) and
the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s) from on the pulpits five times daily after every
prayer. Mu’awiya humiliated, tortured and even killed several of the
companions whom the Prophet (s) had highly praised for their integrity,
sincerity, religious acumen and fearlessness in the face of adversity.

Imam Ali (a.s) was targeted to be unjustly abused, because he
represented the pure, simple and unaltered Islam, as propagated by the
Prophet (s). There was no room in Imam Ali’s Islam for any materialist
way of life or a gilded monarchy of pomp and power that was the
cherished desire and practice of Mu’awiya, his ancestors and progeny.
The result of Mu’awiya’s action was that, except for a few right
thinking persons, Imam Ali (a.s) and all the good that he stood for,
came to be clouded and the real Islam propagated by the Prophet (s) was
mutilated by misinterpretations, conjectures, heresy and innovations.

Yazid followed his father Mu’awiya’s footsteps with added arrogance and
viciousness. He subverted the spirit of peaceful coexistence and
brotherhood that Islam taught. Yazid substituted it with a constant
strife for acquisition of power and territory, thereby creating chaos
and mutilating beyond recognition the very sense of the word ‘Islam’
which means peace.

About Mu’awiya, Justice Amir Ali quotes Osborne,**[1]** “*The astute,
unscrupulous and pitiless first Caliph of the Umayyads shrank from no
crime necessary to secure his position. Murder was his accustomed mode
of removing a formidable opponent. The grandson of the Holy Prophet (s)
was poisoned. Malik al-Ashtar, the heroic lieutenant of Imam Ali (a.s),
was destroyed in a like way. To secure the succession of Yazid, Mu’awiya
hesitated not to break the word he pledged to Imam Hasan (s), the
surviving son of Ali (a.s) …The explanation for this anomaly is to be
found in two circumstances, which I have more than once adverted. The
first one is that truly devout and earnest Muslims conceived that he
manifested his religion most effectively by withdrawing himself from the
affairs of the world. The other is the tribal spirit of the Arabs, the
conquerors of Asia, of North Africa, and of Spain. The Arabs never rose
to the level of their position. Greatness had been thrust upon them.
However, in the midst of their grandeur, they retained in all their
previous force of intensity, the passions, the rivalries, the*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Spirit of Islam, by Amir Ali.

*petty jealousies of the desert. They merely fought again on a wider
field, the battles of the Arabs before Islam*.”

The result of Mu’awiya’s usurpation of the leadership of the Islamic
world, led to terrorist methods for acquiring territory and silencing
the opposition. Unfortunately, to Mu’awiya goes the credit of being the
first terrorist clothed in Islamic garb as also the credit for stamping
that sobriquet ‘Islamic Terrorists’ which is now sought to be attached
to any and every Muslim.
