Chapter 16muslim Bin Aqeel: Imam Husain’s Ambassador To Kufa
============================================================

Imam Husain (a.s) called his cousin Muslim bin Aqeel and asked him to
proceed to Kufa to ascertain the veracity of the thousands of letters
written by the people of Kufa. Muslim took with him two guides for the
journey. The guides lost the way in the desert. They died of severe
thirst. Muslim was fortunate to find a well. He reached Kufa with some
difficulty. He stayed in the house of the great warrior al-Mukhtar, son
of Abu Ubayda ath-Thaqafi. Muslim was warmly welcomed by the people of
Kufa who gathered in great numbers. Within a few days, over eighty
thousand of them took the oath of allegiance. By taking the hand of
Muslim in paying allegiance, they accepted Imam Husain (a.s) as their
*Imam*. Muslim presided over the daily five-time prayers at the huge
mosque of Kufa which was filled to capacity.

Muslim wrote to Imam Husain (a.s) about the warm welcome and the oaths
of allegiance he received from most of the residents of Kufa. Muslim
wrote confirming the need for Imam Husain (a.s) to come to Kufa, for
religious guidance of the Ummah. He sent the letters through Aabis bin
Shabeeb ash-Shakiri, Qais bin Mushir as-Saidawi, and others.

At this point of time, if Muslim had any political inclination, he could
have easily overthrown the governor of Kufa with the help of his host,
the great warrior al-Mukhtar, son of Abu Ubayda ath-Thaqafi and the
public support he enjoyed. However, he neither wished nor was he
authorized by Imam Husain (a.s) to do anything that would amount to
interference in the affairs of the government.

The governor of Kufa, an-No’man bin Basheer, was informed about the
growing popularity of Muslim (may Allah have mercy on him) and the
perceived threat of a possible interference with the government.
However, the governor found that Muslim’s mission was purely religious
and it did not constitute a threat to the government. From on the
pulpit, an-No’man proclaimed that he would neither harm anyone who did
not interfere with the government, nor would he let anyone

go unpunished if he found any such interference. The failure on the
Governor’s part to take any action against Muslim created panic among
the Umayyads of Kufa. Imarah Bin Uqbah, Umar bin Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas and
Abdullah bin Muslim wrote separate letters to Yazid detailing Muslim’s
popularity in Kufa, and the consequent exposure of the ruler’s
atrocities and the probable unification of the pious and the poor
against the tyranny of the state. They complained that the governor was
inept in handling the situation and was guilty of inaction, and
therefore he should be forthwith replaced by a more stringent ruler.

Yazid was always apprehensive of a possible public revolt by his
harassed subjects and of loosing the throne that he knew was illegally
usurped by him. On receipt of the complaints from the Umayyads, Yazid
immediately issued orders dismissing an-No’man Bin Basheer. Ubaidullah
ibn Ziyad, who was then Governor of Basra, was given the additional
charge as the Governor of Kufa with specific instructions to kill Muslim
and any one who gave shelter to him or sympathized with Imam Ali (a.s).
Ibn Ziyad had already earned notoriety as the vile, cunning and cruel
governor of Basra.

Ibn Ziyad dressed himself in the manner of Imam Husain (a.s), and he,
throwing a veil over his face to conceal the impersonation, entered Kufa
with his soldiers. People, in thousands, had already gathered and
performed their prayers behind Muslim in the great mosque of Kufa.
Muslim told them that he had already written asking Imam Husain (a.s) to
come to Kufa. At that time when Ibn Ziyad, dressed like Imam Husain (s),
entered the mosque, people thought that Imam Husain (a.s) himself had
actually arrived with his followers. They rushed to meet him, kiss his
hands and swear fealty to him. When Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad removed the
veil, people were aghast to see that instead of Imam Husain (a.s), it
was the cruel Governor of Basra, Ibn Ziyad, who had impersonated and
deceived them. Immediately, Ibn Ziyad issued an order proclaiming that
anyone assisting or even found associating or speaking to Muslim would
be beheaded forthwith. This created a great scare in the minds of the
people.

When Ibn Ziyad knocked on the palace gate, an-No’man bin Basheer, the
Governor, also thought that Imam Husain (a.s) had come. He peered from
the balcony of his palace and said, “*Go away! I do not wish to have
anything with you*.” Ibn Ziyad’s men shouted that it was not Imam Husain
(a.s) but Ibn Ziyad who had come to relieve him from

the post of Governor on orders from Yazid. Hearing this, an-No’man
opened the palace gates.

In the night, Ibn Ziyad proclaimed that everyone should attend the
Morning Prayer and none should stay at home. In the Morning Prayer, Ibn
Ziyad proclaimed rewards to those who would bring Muslim bin Aqeel dead
or alive and threatened with confiscation of property and death for
anyone who sheltered Muslim.

Shareek bin al-A’war was a sincere follower of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s). He
lived in Basra. He was aware that Imam Husain (a.s) had sent Muslim ibn
Aqeel to Kufa and that the Imam (a.s) himself was expected to reach Kufa
shortly. On hearing that, Yazid had appointed Ibn Ziyad as the Governor
of Kufa. Shareek unsuccessfully tried to delay the reaching of Ibn Ziyad
to Kufa before Imam Husain (a.s). Soon, Shareek also reached Kufa and
stayed with his friend Hani Ibn Urwa. When Muslim learnt of the arrival
of Ibn Ziyad and the strict orders issued by him, he left al-Mukhtar’s
house and took shelter with Hani Ibn Urwa.

Ibn Ziyad had great respect for Shareek. When ibn Ziyad learnt that
Shareek was ill, he sent word that he would visit Shareek in Hani’s
house in the night. Ibn Ziyad was also a friend of Hani. Shareek
detested Ibn Ziyad for his cruelty and hatred to the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s).
Shareek told Muslim ibn Aqeel that since ibn Ziyad was a cruel
hypocrite, he deserved to be killed. This proposed visit was the best
opportunity to get rid of this wretch. Shareek gave a sword to Muslim
and suggested that he (Muslim) should hide himself behind the curtains
and at a given signal attack and kill Ibn Ziyad while he was engaged in
conversation. Hani was reluctant to have ibn Ziyad killed in his house
where he would be his guest. Shareek, however, gave the prearranged
signal, but Muslim remained in his room. Shareek started asking for
water and recited a couplet. As Muslim ibn Aqeel failed to carry out the
plan, Shareek repeated the couplet thrice. Hani pacified ibn Ziyad
saying that due to his illness Shareek was hallucinating since morning.
Ibn Ziyad’s servant Mehran realized that there might be a conspiracy to
kill ibn Ziyad. Therefore, Mehran pulled ibn Ziyad and took him away.
However, some narrators record that it was not Shareek but Hani ibn Urwa
himself who pretended illness and planned to kill ibn Ziyad.**[1]**
However, the reports about Shareek are more authentic.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 172.

Later Shareek questioned Muslim as to why he lost an opportunity to
eliminate an inveterate enemy of the *Ahlul Bayt* *(a.s).* Muslim ibn
Aqeel replied that the Prophet (s) and his progeny had never been
aggressors. They never took anyone by surprise or stabbed him from the
back. They never would kill a Muslim, even if he were only in name,
except in retaliation of his attacking first. Lastly, Muslim said that
he did not want to kill ibn Ziyad in the house of his host, Hani ibn
Urwa.**[1]** These words uttered by Muslim are eloquent testimony to the
fact that Imam Husain (a.s), Muslim, or anyone of the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s)
never ever made any attempt to gain power by slyly eliminating the enemy
through underhand methods. Shareek was so much grieved by the loss of an
opportunity to eliminate ibn Ziyad that he died three days after the
incident.

Ibn Ziyad was clueless about the whereabouts of Muslim. He consulted his
slave Mekhal who was very cunning and adept at mean tricks. Mekhal asked
Ibn Ziyad to give him three thousand silver coins. With this, he went
about pretending to be a friend of Imam Husain (s) who was seeking to
hand over the bag of money to Muslim. In the Mosque, Mekhal met Muslim
ibn Awsaja al-Asadi who was a sincere friend and follower of the *Ahlul
Bayt* (a.s). Mekhal told Muslim ibn Awsaja that he was a friend and
follower of the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s) and that having heard that Muslim ibn
Aqeel was in Kufa as the Ambassador of Imam Husain (a.s), he was
desirous of meeting and paying his allegiance to Imam Husain (a.s) at
the hands of Muslim ibn Aqeel. Mekhal told Muslim ibn Awsaja that he was
carrying three thousand Dirhams to be given to Imam Husain (a.s) through
Muslim ibn Aqeel. The ruse worked and Muslim Ibn Awsaja, after
extracting promises of secrecy, took Mekhal to Hani’s house. Mekhal met
Muslim ibn Aqeel and handed over the bag of coins to his (Muslim)
treasurer Abu Thumama. Mekhal then returned to the palace to inform Ibn
Ziyad that Muslim was staying with Hani.

When Ibn Ziyad knew this, he sent for Usama ibn Khadija and Amr bin
al-Hajjaj az-Zubaidi to inquire about Hani. They replied that Hani was
ill and bedridden. Ibn Ziyad said that he had information that Hani was
only pretending to be sick. Ibn Ziyad asked Usama and Amr to fetch Hani.
When Hani was brought, Ibn Ziyad asked whether he was sheltering Muslim
ibn Aqeel. When Hani evaded giving a direct reply,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid., p. 138, Life of Imam Husain the Saviour, P. 115.

Ibn Ziyad called for Mekhal, the spy, and asked Hani if he knew Mekhal.
Hani realized that he was trapped. Ibn Ziyad asked Hani to deliver
Muslim ibn Aqeel, and when Hani refused to hand over Muslim, Ibn Ziyad
hit Hani on the face with his stick and broke hiss nose. Hani was then
locked up in a room.

When Hani’s tribesmen found that Hani had not returned from ibn Ziyad,
they surrounded the palace and threatened to assault ibn Ziyad. Hani’s
tribesmen were valiant warriors. Fearing an uprising, Ibn Ziyad called
for Shuraih (the judge) and asked him to see for himself that Hani was
very much alive, and to report the matter to Hani’s tribesmen and to ask
them to go home. Shuraih found that Hani, though alive, was severely
beaten and he was bleeding. Hani asked Shuraih to inform his condition
to his tribesmen. Shuraih wanted to report what he found, but ibn Ziyad
threatened to kill him if he reported anything except that Hani was
alive. On being assured by Shuraih that Hani was alive, his tribesmen
left the palace. Immediately, Ibn Ziyad asked his men to kill Hani,
sever his head, and throw his body in a well.

The public support, which Muslim had, was genuine. But, as always, the
poor carry the memories and scars of oppression and are easily scared
and subdued by guile and by threats. Over twenty thousand people
surrounded Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad who took refuge behind the closed door
of the palace along with twenty of his elite. Cunning and cruel that he
was, Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad sent, as spies into the crowd through a back
door, his cronies Kathir ibn Shihab al-Harithi, al-Qa’qa’ ibn Shour
ath-Thuhali, Shabath ibn Rib’iy at-Tamimi, Hajjar ibn Abjar, Shimr ibn
thil-Jowshan al-Aamiri. They mingled with the crowd and pretended to
sympathize with the public. They first looked for, targeted their
relatives and friends, and told them that though their cause was just,
it was futile to confront a cruel despot like ibn Ziyad. They also
spread rumors that at Ubaidillah’s request, Yazid had dispatched a large
army to quell the rebellion. They spread the rumor that when the army
would arrive, even the innocent bystanders would not be spared the
severest punishment, and whatever they possessed would surely be
confiscated, leaving them to become beggars. Simultaneously, Ubaidullah
ibn Ziyad sent Muhammad ibn al-Ash’ath, al-Qa’qa’ ath-Thuhali and a few
others with white flags in gesture of truce to proclaim that whoever
came over to them and stood under the white flag would be spared
punishment and whoever failed to do so

would be severely punished by Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad and the approaching
army of Yazid. Those, who came under the flag, were quickly whisked away
to their homes. The rumors and the trick had an electrifying effect and
soon the mob disappeared. The bewildered Muslim ibn Aqeel was left
watching the sudden turn of events.**[1]**

Kathir ibn Shihab al-Harithi was entrusted with the task of finding out
all those who were companions of Imam Ali (a.s) and those who
sympathized with or supported the cause of Imam Husain (a.s). Soon,
Shihab arrested and imprisoned Sulayman ibn Surad al-Khuza’iy, Ibrahim
bin Malik al-Ashtar, Ibn Safwan, Yahaya ibn Ouf, Sa’sa’a bin Souhan
al-Abdi and other pious and learned men of Kufa. Later Hussein bin
Numayr arrested and imprisoned al-Muktar ath-Thaqafi who was living in a
village called Qatawan. He also arrested Abdullah bin Nufeil at the
Mosque of Kufa. In fact, the last mentioned two nobles were kept in
confinement until after the death of Yazid bin Mu’awiya and were
released by the public in a subsequent uprising.

Muslim realized the seriousness of the situation when Hani was summoned
and arrested by Ibn Ziyad. He was very much worried at the sudden and
adverse turn of events. He was apprehensive that in response to his
letter, Imam Husain (s) might soon reach Kufa and thus would walk into
the trap that was being laid for him. Even at that time, the mosque in
Kufa was full with devotees who offered prayers behind Muslim Ibn Aqeel.
As the news spread that Yazid’s army was fast approaching, the
congregation melted. Muslim left the mosque accompanied by only about
thirty people. Further down the streets only ten people remained. At the
end of the street Muslim found himself alone. He lamented at the sudden
desertion by the people of Kufa. He met Sa’eed ibn al-Ahnaf who told him
that the doors of Kufa had been closed and spies sent all over the place
to trace him. Sa’eed then took Muslim to the house of Mohammed ibn
Kathir who welcomed him heartily. Soon, news about Muslim reached ibn
Ziyad who sent a contingent to search Ibn Kathir’s house. Ibn Kathir had
so cleverly hidden Muslim that ibn Ziyad’s soldier could not find him.
Ibn Ziyad ordered ibn Kathir and his son to be arrested. When they were
brought before him, ibn Ziyad questioned them as to where they had
secreted Muslim. The valiant ibn Kathir and his son refused to betray
Muslim bin Aqeel. They tried to put up a fight, but they were  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, 85.

martyred. When Muslim learnt of the murder of ibn Kathir and his son, he
mourned for them and left ibn Kathir’s house.**[1]**

Thirsty and worried, Muslim aimlessly wandered the streets of Kufa.
Muslim saw an old woman named Tou’ah. He asked her for water, as he was
extremely thirsty. The old woman questioned Muslim, found who he was,
and gave him asylum as she loved and venerated Imam Ali (s) and his
family. Unfortunately, the old woman’s wretched son, Bilal bin
al-Hadhrami was a soldier in Ibn Ziyad’s army. He was a greedy man and
he betrayed Muslim for monetary gain.

Ibn Ziyad’s contingent of three hundred men surrounded the house of
Tou’ah that was in a narrow lane. Muslim came out of the house and faced
the soldiers who were forced to come two at a time because of the
narrowness of the lane. Muslim killed a major portion of the contingent.
The commandant, Mohammed ibn al-Ash’ath, had to send for reinforcement
several times. At this, Ibn Ziyad became angry and asked the commandant
if he would need the entire army to catch a single person. The
commandant, Mohammed bin al-Ash’ath, silenced ibn Ziyad with this
reply:“*We are not after a petty shop keeper. We are encountering a lion
of the family of Hashim. If you are so brave, you may yourself come and
conduct the operation*.”**[2]** Ibn Ziyad then ordered that either by
offering safety or by any sly means Muslim should be captured.

Finding it impossible to pry out Muslim from his advantageous position,
Mohammed ibn al-Ash’ath employed an old Umayyad trick. He sent his
soldiers to the rooftops of adjoining houses and asked them to throw
burning torches soaked in oil. The entire lane was filled with choking
smoke and burning torches. The commandant asked his soldiers to dig a
trench at the entrance of the street and cover it up with sticks and
grass. Unable to bear the heat and smoke, Muslim came out fighting. He
fell into the covered and concealed trench and was captured.**[3]**
According to al-Mas’udi, Mohammed ibn al-Ash’ath offered a truce of
safety without any duplicity. Muslim agreed to this and surrendered
himself.**[4]** However, the earlier version reported in al-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p.87.  
 **[2]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p 155.  
**[3]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p 156.  
**[4]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 153.

Malhoof and Manaqib of Shahr Ashoob**[1]** that Muslim was trapped in a
ditch and captured, and the later version of al-Mas’udi that ibn
al-Ash’ath promised asylum are incidents that followed one another and
therefore both versions are reliable.

Muslim told al-Ash’ath, “*I am afraid you will not be able to keep up
your promise or provide me any safety. Therefore, as a last wish, I ask
you to convey the message to Imam al-Husain that the people of Kufa have
betrayed us and that al-Husain should avoid Kufa and go to some other
place*.” Mohammed ibn al-Ash’ath took Muslim to Ubaidullah Ibn Ziyad’s
palace and said that he had promised protection to him. Ibn Ziyad became
angry and asked, “*Who has authorized you to give any guarantee of
protection? Your duty was to bring Muslim here and you have nothing else
to do now*.”

Muslim bin Amr al-Bahli took charge of Muslim bin Aqeel. Muslim asked
for water to quench his burning thirst, but the request was refused.
Then, Imara bin Uqba according to some historians and according to some
others Amr bin Hureith sent his servant to bring a mug of water. When
Muslim tried to drink the water, blood fell from his mouth filling the
cup. Muslim attempted thrice, but on all three attempts, his blood
filled the cup. On the last attempt, his teeth fell in the cup due to a
serious injury in his mouth, inflicted by Bukeir bin Hamran
al-Ahmeri.**[2]** Muslim threw the cup saying that it appeared that he
would be killed while being thirsty.

Muslim told Umar Bin Sa’d who was sitting with ibn Ziyad:“*You are
related to me, though distantly. I would like to make a last will to you
personally before I am killed*.” When Umar bin Sa’d declined, Ubeidullah
ibn Ziyad said, “*Go aside and listen to his last will. After all, he is
your relative.*” Muslim and Umar bin Sa’d went to a corner on the
terrace. Muslim said, “*I owe seven hundred dirhams, which I used for my
food… etc. I want that you may take the responsibility of discharging it
from my own funds lying in Medina. Secondly, my dead body should be
given a decent burial according to Islamic rites. Lastly, but the most
important is that you should arrange to send a message to Imam Husain
asking him not to come to Kufa at any cost*.” Amr ibn al-Aas informed
ibn Ziyad about the last wishes of Muslim. Ibn Ziyad said, “*A trustee
never betrays his trust. But sometimes mistakenly thieves are made
trustees*.” Then Ibn Ziyad said to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid., p. 157.  
**[2]** Ibid., p. 162, 157.

Muslim, “*You may deal with your money as you please. As for Husain, we
will do what we intend to do. And as for your dead body, why you bother
about what is done to it*.”**[1]**

Ibn Ziyad then started blaspheming and cursing Muslim bin Aqeel and Imam
Husain (s) with false allegations. Muslim refuted the false allegations
and reiterated that neither he nor Imam Husain (s) had ever intended to
divide the Ummah. Muslim said that ibn Ziyad and his master Yazid bin
Mu’awiya were the ones who were breaking the Islamic tenets and were
making un-Islamic innovations. Ibn Ziyad became angry and said, “*I see
that you shall be killed in a manner in which none was ever killed
before in the history of Islam*.” To this, Muslim replied, “*You are a
hard hearted tyrant and a heathen capable of all such innovations*.” Ibn
Ziyad then ordered, and Bukeir bin Hamran beheaded Muslim ibn Aqeel and
threw down the headless body from the turret into the cobblers’ market.
Hani was beheaded by Rashid (a Turkish slave of Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad) in
the market of meat vendors.**[2]** The headless bodies of Muslim ibn
Aqeel and Hani ibn Urwa were dragged through the markets. When the clan
of Bani Muthhaj, to which Hani belonged, learnt about this, the entire
clan rose up in revolt, rescued the headless bodies and buried them
according to the Islamic rites.

Later Muslim’s severed head was mounted on a lance and taken along with
the severed head of Hani ibn Urwa to Damascus. On seeing the heads,
Yazid gloated over them and directed that the heads should be hung in
the arch of the main entrance of Damascus. Yazid issued orders that
people should be imprisoned on the slightest suspicion or even false
allegation to be punished severely.**[3]**

Hani was a companion of Imam Ali (s) and he fought with him in the
Battle of the Camel (al-Jamal) during his Caliphate. Hani commanded
great respect among people and was a known supporter of the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.). The killing of Muslim ibn Aqeel and Hani Ibn Urwa took place on
the day of Arafa, Tuesday the ninth of Thul Hijjah, in the year 60 AH.
Some writers claim that it was Wednesday, the 10<sup>th</sup> of Thul
Hijjah. The earlier account of al-Mas’udi in Murooj ath-Thahab and of
other writers is considered more authentic. On the very day when  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 162 quoting al-Kamil of ibnul Atheer.  
**[2]** Ibid., p. 163-166.  
**[3]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 166.

Muslim ibn Aqeel was martyred in Kufa, Imam Husain (a.s) left Mecca
towards Kufa.

While accompanying Imam Husain (a.s), Muslim had left his wife and four
sons and a daughter in Medina. When Imam Husain (a.s) asked him to
proceed to Kufa, he took permission to go to Medina and bring his wife
and children. He left his wife, two sons Muhammad and Qasim and a
daughter Ruqayyah with Imam Husain (s) and took with him his two younger
sons to Kufa.**[1]** Ali Nazari Munfared wrote, “... *The number of
Moslem’s children is five, of whom two – Abdullah and Muhammad - were
martyred in the Karabala event and two other sons were martyred in
Kufa.”**[2]** However, the manner of attaining martyrdom of all the four
children is almost identical. Sheikh Abbas al-Qummi relates that the two
sons of Muslim left with Imam Husain (a.s) were captured and imprisoned
after the event of Ashura. However, an old guard, who sympathized with
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), let them out of prison. The two children wandered
and found shelter with an old woman who, from the fragrance of their
body, recognized them to belong to the Prophet’s family. She had a
son-in-law who was employed in Yazid’s army. He came into the house. In
the night he heard the snoring of the children, apprehended them, and
despite the pleas of the old woman, the man asked his slave named Faleeh
to behead them on the banks of the Euphrates. When the slave learnt
about the identity of the two sons of Muslim, he threw away the sword,
plunged into the river and crossed to the opposite shore, to the
surprise of his master. The man then asked his son to behead the
children. As they were proceeding along the bank of the Euphrates, the
young man came to know that the children were the grandchildren of the
Prophet (s). Like the slave, he also threw the sword, plunged into the
river and crossed over to the opposite shore. The enraged man then
declared that he himself beheaded the children, threw their bodies in
the river and took the severed heads to ibn Ziyad with the hope of
getting the promised reward. Ibn Ziyad after enquiring in detail as to
what transpired between him and the children, asked a Syrian slave to
behead the man for his cruelty as his reward*.**[3]**

An almost similar, if not identical, account has been given about the
two sons whom Muslim took with him to Kufa. S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali writes,
“*At last, somehow Muslim managed to send his two young children*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Husain the Saviour, by Mirza Ghulam Abbas Ali, Ch. 9, p.
95.  
**[2]** Imam Husayn (A) and the Saga of Karabal, Eng. Tr. Ali Ebrahimi,
p. 104.  
**[3]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 201-207.

*out of Kufa with his message to the Holy Imam, a counter to his
previous communication to him, requesting Imam Husain never to think of
Kufa any more*.”**[1]** Ahmed Ali continues, “*The two young souls in
their concealed march from Kufa, traveling during nights, lost their way
in the desert. They were once arrested and imprisoned but the pitiful
guard of the prison allowed them to escape, and at last they were found
by the good-hearted lady, the wife of Haris, who was already in search
of the innocents to win the rich reward.”* S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali then
narrates that in the middle of the night the children saw their father
in their dream and started lamenting. The noise betrayed their presence
and Haris took them out to the banks of the Euphrates. When he attempted
to behead them, his wife intervened and lost her hands. Haris severed
the heads of the children and threw their bodies in the river.**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Husain the Saviour of Islam, by S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali, Ansariyan
Publications, [2005], p. 155.  
**[2]** Ibid., p. 158-159.
