Chapter 17imam Husain’s Migration From Mecca
============================================

The History of Islam is replete with instances where, in a man-to-man
combat, Imam Ali (a.s) always gave the right of the ‘first strike’ to
his opponent and he attacked only in retaliation. There is no concept of
a ‘preemptive strike’ in Islam. The concept of ‘preemptive strike’ was
nurtured by the heathens who always struck from behind or without
provocation. We saw in the earlier chapter that Muslim ibn Aqeel
refrained from killing ibn Ziyad in Hani ibn Urwa’s house, though he
could have done so very easily. There is no instance in the entire
history of Islam where Imam Ali (a.s) or anyone of the Ahlul Bayt
attacked first or attacked an unsuspecting person from a hiding place.
Imam Ali (s) never attacked an enemy who was disarmed or was unable to
defend himself. He gave strict instructions to his men to follow the
Qur’anic injunctions, never to attack women, children, the disabled, the
sick or one who run away from the battlefield. It is this principle that
saved the lives of Abu Sufyan and Mu’awiya when they only turned their
backs and run away from the battlefield during their fighting against
the Prophet (a.s.).

Imam Husain (a.s) was steeped in the moral, ethical and spiritual
standards set up by his grandfather the Prophet (s) and his father Imam
Ali (a.s). The entire course of events that led to the battle of Karbala
shows that at each and every step Imam Husain (a.s) tried his best to
avoid direct conflict and consequent bloodshed. All his actions were
open and transparent. He never resorted to deceit or secret plans.

At the time of Imam Husain’s departure from Medina to Mecca, several of
his friends offered to accompany and support him. Instead of increasing
his armed forces by encouraging more people to join him, Imam Husain
(a.s) dissuaded them saying that Yazid was only after his (Imam Husain)
blood, and that knowing the cruel nature of Yazid he did not wish to
expose them to any harm and that it was not obligatory for them to join
him.

The Meccans received Imam Husain (a.s) with great love and reverence as
they had seen the Prophet (s) openly showing his love and care for him
before. They also remembered the Holy Prophet’s oft-repeated words that
Hasan and Husain are the two masters of the youth in the

Paradise. They gathered around him in great numbers, seeking guidance in
Islamic philosophy and other religious matters. They were enamored of
Imam Husain’s way of discourse, ethics and manners. Every day the
gathering swelled to greater proportions.

The fast approaching *Hajj* brought more and more people from far-off
places and countries. When the pilgrims learnt that the Holy Prophet’s
grandson was in Mecca, they swarmed around him to have a look at him and
to clarify their doubts in matters of religion, science, commerce,
rights, obligations, morals, ethics…etc. This irked ibn az-Zubair who
was planning to enlarge his own following. He therefore used to meet
Imam Husain (a.s) more out of curiosity to know what was happening in
Imam Husain’s camp, than out of real respect.

Al-Haj Moulvi Ghulam Abbas Ali Sahib wrote, “*Husain never attempted to
gain any land or disturb the government by any rebellious movement, in
spite of the love and power he was commanding at Mecca. He only lectured
to his disciples on various rites and ceremonies of Islam inculcated by
the Qur’an and the Prophet, on allowable and objectionable articles of
food, and on ethical principles. His chief aim was to train people to be
godly and pious and strict observers of the Islamic Principles. The more
he heard of the irreligion of Yazid, the greater was his zeal in
ordering his disciples to follow the Qur’anic injunctions. He feared
that the Arabs, who had long been accustomed to idolatry and irreligion
headed by atheistic monarch, would easily be misled and thus the success
achieved by his grandfather in training them to be pious servants of God
would be lost forever*.”**[1]**

In Medina, Imam Husain (a.s) had received hundreds of letters and
personal representations complaining against the tyranny and un-Islamic
character and conduct of Mu’awiya and his men. After Mu’awiya’s death,
Imam Husain (a.s) received at Mecca over twelve thousand letters from
the people of Kufa, complaining against the oppressive, vicious and
merciless killing of innocent persons by Ibn Ziyad, Yazid’s governor of
Basra, for criticizing his irreligious ways of life and distortion of
the Qur’an and the Sunna.**[2]** They pleaded with Imam Husain (a.s) to
save Islam from being distorted and misinterpreted by the unethical
usurpers of power.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Imam Husain the Saviour, p. 108.  
**[2]** Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, 61.

The people of Kufa were disgusted with the oppressive nature of the
Umayyad rule and the ignorance of the governors in religious matters.
The complaints to Mu’awiya and later to Yazid about the incompetence in
administration, the excessive partiality, the discrimination and the
incompetence of his governors even to perform the daily prayers properly
fell on deaf ears.

The dissatisfied people of Kufa assembled at the house of Sulayman ibn
Surad al-Khuza’iy, a companion of the Prophet (s), and resolved to
petition Imam Husain (a.s) to come to their rescue. Leading
personalities like Sulayman, al-Musayyab, Rifa’ah, and Habib ibn
Mudhahir signed a letter requesting Imam Husain (a.s) to relieve them
from the anarchy and oppression of the governor of Kufa. The letter was
delivered to Imam Husain (a.s) on the tenth of Ramadan, the year 60 A.H.
Thereafter, as many as 12000 such letters written by individuals as well
as collectively by groups of persons were received by Imam Husain (a.s)
within two months.**[1]** Letters signed by Shibath bin Rib’iy, Hajjar
bin Abjur, Yazid bin al-Harith, Urwa bin Qeis, Umar bin Hajjaj, Mohammed
bin Amr, and several others laid particular stress on the fact that as
the Imam of the time, it was incumbent upon Imam Husain (a.s) to come to
the rescue of the oppressed and to render justice, and if he failed to
do so, he would be responsible before God. All the letters emphasized
that the people of Kufa were left without an Imam to guide them in
matters of religion.

Though several letters had promised military assistance to remove the
governor of Kufa, Imam Husain (a.s) was not impressed by the prospect of
his taking up such venture as it was against his principles. Therefore,
Imam Husain (a.s) totally ignored such letters. It is the special aspect
of the last mentioned letter written by the people of Kufa calling upon
Imam Husain (a.s), as the Imam of the time, to come to the aid of Islam
that led him to make up his mind and abandon the safety of the Kaaba and
to proceed to Iraq, despite knowing the dangers involved.

One of the obligations cast on the Imam (a.s) was to stand up against
corruption in faith when the oppression, tyranny, and aggression of the
rulers became excessive and when collectively people called upon the
Imam to rise in defense of the faith. It is this part of Imamate that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p 61, Life of Imam
Husain the Saviour, p. 110.

the people of Kufa stressed upon in their letters which made it
obligatory on Imam Husain (a.s) to leave the safety of Kaaba and proceed
towards Iraq. Therefore, it is not that Imam Husain (a.s) wanted to
achieve power, but his departure to Iraq was in response to the call of
the people to redeem the faith from being corrupted and to protect the
common man from oppression, tyranny and cruelty of the state perpetrated
on the poor and the innocent. The importance of this aspect of the
Imam’s obligation stressed in the letters written by the people of Kufa
and Imam Husain’s response to the demand can be appreciated only with a
proper understanding of Imamate, which we have dealt with in an earlier
chapter.

Imam Husain (s) replied to the last letter that is extracted by al-Haj
Moulvi Ghulam Abbas Ali, *“In the name of Allah, the Most Merciful and
Compassionate. This letter is written by Husain son of Ali to the
believers and Moslems of Kufa. Hani and Sa’eed brought to me your last
letter. From this and your previous letters, I understood your unanimous
declaration that you have no Imam for your guidance. I considered all my
relatives and friends, but found none more learned and pious than my
cousin Muslim son of Aqeel. I am sending him to you and have commanded
him to intimate your real affairs. If he writes to me that most of you
are desirous of following the right path and supporting the truth, and
if the wise and virtuous among you unanimously agree with you as you
have represented in your letter, I shall be soon among you, God willing.
I should enlighten your minds with the fact that an Imam or true guide
is one who acts according to the Divine percepts, keeps himself steady
on the path of justice and righteousness, and who binds himself with the
laws laid down by God and His Prophet.*”**[1]**

Imam Husain’s reply brings out three salient points; **firstly**, that
the people of Kufa had unanimously declared that they had no Imam to
guide them, in which event it became obligatory for the Imam to fill the
void, **secondly** that Imam Husain (s) did not plan to go to Kufa as a
conquering *Caliph*, but as an Imam not exercising unbridled power but
as one who fetters his powers with the chains of Divine Laws to act
justly and righteously. In such case, all his actions would necessarily
be within the framework of the Divine Laws and there would be no
possibility of any injustice being meted out to friend or foe, and
**thirdly**, he was not an opportunist to empower himself with the
support of the disgruntled and impatient masses. Therefore, Imam  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Husain the Saviour, p. 111.

Husain (s) proposed to send a worthy representative to act as his
ambassador. This shows that there was neither caprice nor haste in the
Imam’s action, but a desire to act justly on the basis of the true state
of affairs.

At *Mina,* Imam Husain (a.s) gave a sermon to the huge congregation of
Hajjis who had assembled around him. Then the Imam (a.s) said,

*“You are fully aware of the tyranny and oppression of Mu’awiya and his
son Yazid. I wish to tell you something and request you* *to* *affirm if
what I say is right and to correct me if I am wrong. By God and by the
close relationship between me and the messenger of Allah, I ask you to
bear witness about what I shall say, standing here before you, and to
write it down, remember and propagate this my speech and message to
everyone in every tribe, village, town and city. I am doing this because
I apprehend that the truth will be buried and falsehood will be made to
prevail over the truth. But, God has promised to protect His light,
though the infidels may dislike it*.”

After glorifying Allah and reciting the numerous Qur’anic verses, which
were revealed about the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s), Imam Husain (a.s) narrated
the various traditions of the Holy Prophet (s) eulogizing Imam Ali (s)
and his progeny. We give below a part of the lengthy sermon:

*“Listen to me carefully and confirm if what I say is true. If you do
not know then ask those companions of the messenger of Allah who are
aware of what I am about to say, for they will confirm the veracity of
my statements. Is not Muhammad the messenger of Allah?”*

In one voice, the congregation replied, “Certainly.”

The Imam (a.s) said, “*Is not Fatima the only child of the Prophet and
that she is the Chief of the women in Paradise*?” They replied, “Indeed
it is as you say.”

The Imam (a.s) said, “*Is not Ali the cousin and deputy of the Prophet?
Have you not heard the Prophet (s) say, when he created a bond of
brotherhood between his followers that Ali was a brother to him, like
Aaron was to Moses?*

People replied, “We bear witness that what you say is true.”

The Imam (a.s) asked, “*Am I not the son of Ali and Fatima?*” They
replied, “Indeed you are so.”

The Imam (a.s) asked, “*Have you not heard the Prophet (s) say that I
and my brother Hasan are the masters of the youth in Paradise*?”

People replied, “We are witnesses to what you have said.”

The Imam (a.s) said, “*Is it not true that when the Prophet (s)
constructed the mosque, he had all the doors closed except the one
leading to the house of Ali and Fatima, and when Umar wanted to open a
chink in the wall of his house so that he could peep into the mosque,
the Prophet (s) sternly forbid it*?” They replied, “It was so.”

The Imam (a.s) asked, “*Is it not true that on the day of Mubahaila with
the Christians, the Prophet (s) took my mother Fatima to represent
women, my father Ali to represent men and I and my brother Hasan to
represent children of the Prophet? This the Prophet (s) did in
accordance with what was revealed to him by God*.”

They said, “Indeed, it is true.”

The Imam (a.s) said, “*Have you not heard the Prophet (s) say that
‘Fatima, Ali, Hasan, and Husain are from me and I am from them’ and that
‘they are my Ahlul Bayt’? Have you not heard the Prophet (s) say that
‘one who loves my Ahlul Bayt loves me and one who loves me loves Allah,
and he who opposes my Ahlul Bayt opposes me and he who opposes me
opposes Allah’?*”

The people said, “We affirm the truthfulness of what you said.”

The Imam (a.s) said, “*I make it obligatory on all of you gathered here
to repeat what all you heard from me now, to your kith and kin, friends
and acquaintances, in villages, towns and cities and wherever you find
two believers gathered in one place*.”

The Imam (a.s) has set out the reason why he took so much pain to repeat
what was already common knowledge, by saying, “*I apprehend that the
truth shall be buried and falsehood shall be made to prevail over the
truth. But, God has promised to protect His light, though the infidels
may dislike it*.”

This foresight of the Imam (a.s) is what has perpetuated his remembrance
and erased Mu’awiya and Yazid from the good books of history.

On the 20<sup>th</sup> of Thul Qa’dah, the year 59 AH, Imam Husain (a.s)
received a letter from Muslim ibn Aqeel, stating that over a lakh of the
people of Kufa had sworn fealty to him, accepting Imam Husain (a.s) as
their guide and Imam and seeking his presence in Kufa. Muslim urged Imam
Husain (a.s) to proceed to Kufa at the earliest. The entire course of
Imam Husain’s actions is strictly within the parameters set

out in his reply. His sermons to the people of Kufa and Syria and his
dialogues with Yazid’s army assembled in the battlefield at Karbala
bring out succinctly the principles on which Imam Husain (a.s)
maintained his actions.

Meanwhile, Yazid learnt of the popularity and public support Muslim
received from the people of Kufa. Yazid assumed that Imam Husain (a.s)
was planning to undermine his political grip and power. He ordered that
in addition to Muslim Ibn Aqeel, Hani ibn Urwa, and Shareek, all
supporters of the Ahlul Bayt should be either eliminated or at least
imprisoned. Thus, Maytham bin Yahya at-Tammar, Rashid al-Hijri, Hujr bin
Adiy, Amr bin al-Hamq, Kumail bin Ziyad ath-Thaqafi, Sulaym bin Qays and
several others who were known as supporters of the Ahlul Bayt were first
confined to prison and later tortured and killed.

Yazid had sent a contingent headed by Amr bin Sa’eed bin al-Aas, with
strict instruction to kill Imam Husain (a.s) in the very precincts of
the Holy Kaaba. When Imam Husain (a.s) learnt of this, he decided to
leave Mecca by performing the Umra (minor hajj) instead of the Hajj.

Umm Salama (the Prophet’s wife), Abdullah ibn Abbas, Abdullah ibn Ja’far
with two of his sons and Mohammad bin al-Hanafiyya the cousins of Imam
Husain (a.s) had also come to Mecca to perform the Hajj. Imam Husain
(a.s) met Umm Salama and handed over his books and other belongings for
safe custody to be given to his successor.

When Mohammed bin al-Hanafiyya learnt that the Imam planned to leave
Mecca, he met and dissuaded the Imam from proceeding towards Kufa. He
suggested that the Imam (a.s) should either go to Yemen or keep to the
desert until the disgruntled people of Kufa would get rid of their cruel
governor. To similar effect, Abdullah Ibn Abbas also suggested. To both
of them, Imam Husain (a.s) replied that as the Imam he was obliged to
respond to the call of people made through thousands of letters, to lead
and guide them in religious matters. He had also received Muslim bin
Aqeel’s letter to come to Kufa. Lastly, the Imam (a.s) said that he was
aware that Yazid had already dispatched a contingent with strict
instructions to kill him in the precinct of the Holy Kaaba. The Imam
(a.s) made it clear that he would not be instrumental in defiling the
sanctity of the Kaaba.**[1]** The Imam (a.s) also  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasil Mahmoom, p. 229-242.

told them that he dreamt of the Prophet (s) urging him to proceed
towards Iraq.

On his return when Abdullah Ibn Abbas saw Abdullah ibn az-Zubair, he
sarcastically recited an ode, the meaning of which was that then that
Imam Husain (a.s) was leaving Mecca, the field was clear for ibn
az-Zubair to achieve his dream of grabbing the leadership of Muslims.
This came true as Abdullah Ibn az-Zubair cherished a secret desire for
the Caliphate and strenuously put forth his claim later.

On the eve of his departure from Mecca, Imam Husain (a.s.) gave the
following sermon after praising Allah and seeking His blessings on the
Prophet (s), “*I long to join my forefathers just like Jacob longed to
join his son Joseph. The place to bury my body has already been fixed
and it is imperative that I reach there as soon as possible. I visualize
the Banu Umayya, like wolves tearing my body into pieces. We the Ahlul
Bayt choose only that which Allah has chosen for us. To be patient in
adversity is incumbent upon us, for God rewards those who are patient.
Whoever is desirous of joining me in my journey should be ready to
sacrifice his life for the cause, for tomorrow, God willing, I shall
leave Mecca*.”**[1]**

Imam Husain (a.s) left Mecca for Kufa on the eighth of Thul Hijjja, the
year 60 AH, the day on which Muslim ibn Aqeel and Hani ibn Urwa were
martyred in Kufa. According to some authors,**[2]** Imam Husain’s
caravan consisted of eighty-two males, including his family members and
relatives.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 230.  
**[2]** Matalibul Sa’oo, al-Mahzoon, al-Malhoof quoted in Imam Husayn
[A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p.105-106.
