Chapter 18imam Husain’s Journey To Karbala
==========================================

Those, who strive for a cause, do not care for the odds or the
consequences. Imam Husain (a.s) left Medina for the cause of Islam; to
save Islam from the corruption, innovation and distortions introduced by
the Banu Umayya. Islam was no longer the simple way of life, in which
bereft of pomp and pretensions, the ruler was hardly distinguishable
from the ruled. When Imam Ali (a.s) went into the bazaar of Kufa, he
could not be differentiated from the ordinary citizens. As the *Caliph*,
Imam Ali (a.s) made it clear that he was not to be feared and shunned.
He was one among them, though he held the ultimate authority. Even
people, who did not profess Islam, felt safe under his rule.

The Banu Umayya always considered Islam the religion to be an empire and
nothing more. They could hardly understand, nor did they care to
understand the philosophy of Islam. For them, Islam was a monarchy
heritable by those who had the money, means and power to suppress the
masses. Instead of being the creed providing to the poor, help in this
world and hope of salvation in the life to come, Islam was made into the
creed of the oppressive ruler wielding his sword in the name of Islam
while they were, in fact, cutting the faith into shreds. This terrifying
image of the Banu Umayya is now being imposed upon Muslims allover the
world by the opportunistic detractors of Islam. This terrorist image is
the only everlasting contribution of the Banu Umayya to Islam.

It was then high time for someone to take up the cause of the real
Islam, to bring out and expose the corruption, innovation and
distortions introduced by the Banu Umayya in Islam. It was time for
somebody to take up the cause of the poor and the oppressed, and to
retrieve for them the Islam that had changed their very way of life and
made them intellectuals instead of the robbers, dacoits and murderers
that they were before the advent of Islam. When Imam Husain (a.s) took
up this cause, he had no fear of numbers or the immediate result. He
knew that he was grossly outnumbered. He knew that he and his

followers would certainly loose their lives in the strife. He also knew
that ultimately posterity would realise that the truth would prevail
over falsehood. He established that even in the face of huge numbers and
heavy odds, the truth never bows down to falsehood. It is for these
reasons that we find Imam Husain (a.s) ignoring what appears, at first
look, to be sound advice from Abdullah Ibn Abbas, Mohammad ibn
al-Hanafyyia, Abdullah ibn Ja’far, Jabir ibn Abdullah al-Ansari, Ibn
az-Zubair, Umar ibn Abdurrahman, Musawwar ibn Makhramah, Abdullah ibn
Umar and a great number of relatives and friends.**[1]**

His relatives and friends were more concerned with the worldly outlook
of extreme odds and immediate fatal result. Therefore, they tried to
persuade him from going to Kufa, for they were fully aware from the days
of Imam Ali’s *Caliphate* that the people of Kufa were weak-hearted,
irresolute and most untrustworthy. They were also aware that Yazid and
his men were capable of terrorizing and committing the greatest
atrocities, even on women and children, in order to retain their power.
However, Imam Husain (a.s) himself gave his reason for not listening to
their apparently advice, “*I shall not be blamed by Allah for shrinking
from the religious duty of training and guiding people to be pious and
simple. If the people of Kufa prove disloyal and if I am killed in the
discharge of my duty, my position will be much nearer to God and they
will be responsible for their disloyalty and evil deeds.*”**[2]**

According to the historian ibnul Atheer,**[3]** Abdullah ibn Ja’far
himself, and according to other historians,**[4]** the Governor of Mecca
Amr bin Sa’eed either by himself or at the instance of Abdullah ibn
Ja’far, wrote a letter to Imam Husain (a.s). The letter was taken by
Abdullah ibn Ja’far and Yahya bin Sa’eed, the brother of the Governor of
Mecca. At-Tabari**[5]** sets out the contents of the letter as
follows:“*I am told that you are proceeding towards Iraq. May God
protect you from any evil that may befall you. I am afraid you may be
killed. I am sending this letter through Abdullah bin Ja’far and my
brother Yahya bin Sa’eed so that you may come back with them to me. I
assure you that in me you will find asylum, protection, kindness and
good company, and for what I have written I hold*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 108-115.  
**[2]** Life of Husain the Saviour, P. 124.  
**[3]** Al-Kamil of ibnul Atheer.  
**[4]** Al-Iqd al-Fareed.  
**[5]** Tarikh at-Tabari.

*God as my witness*.” Imam Husain (a.s) wrote back, “*You have offered
me asylum and protection. In Allah is the best asylum and refuge. He
does not give refuge in the hereafter to those who do not fear Him in
this world. We pray that we may fear and abide by Him in this world so
that we may hope for and find His refuge on the Doomsday. May Allah
reward you for your offer to be kind and good to me*.”**[1]**

Realizing that Imam Husain (a.s) was ready to sacrifice himself for his
cause, Abdullah ibn Ja’far left his two teenaged sons Oun and Muhammad
as his representatives to fight against evil.**[2]** Then, Abdullah ibn
Ja’far and Yahya bin Sa’eed returned to Medina.

Mohammed bin Abu Talib Musavi writes that when al-Waleed bin Utba, the
governor of Medina learnt that Imam Husain (s) was proceeding towards
Iraq, he (al-Waleed) who knew the cruel nature of Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad,
the recently appointed Governor of Basra and Kufa, wrote to ibn Ziyad as
follows:“*Al-Husain is coming towards Iraq. He is the son of Fatima who
is the only child of the messenger of Allah. See that no harm comes to
him nor should his family members be harassed in any manner. If any
irreversible damage is caused by you, the world will never forgive or
forget you*.” Ibn Ziyad read the letter but he did not heed the
advice.**[3]**

Imam Husain’s caravan stopped at a place called al-Abtah where Yazid ibn
Thabit al-Basri met Imam Husain (a.s) and learnt about the reasons of
the Imam’s migration.**[4]** The caravan halted for a short while at
some place where Imam Husain (a.s) purchased food and other stock from a
caravan that brought goods from Yemen.

At a junction of roads called Thatul Araq, Imam Husain (a.s) met Bishr
bin Ghalib who was coming from Iraq. When Imam Husain (a.s) enquired,
Bishr said, “*Their (the people of Kufa) hearts are with you, but their
swords are against you*.”**[5]** According to ath-Thahabi, at Thatul
Araq, Imam Husain (a.s) met the famous poet al-Farazdaq who was going
with his mother to Mecca to perform the Hajj. According to some  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 245-248.  
**[2]** Ibid., p. 247 quoting Tarikh at-Tabari.  
**[3]** Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 44 p. 368, Nafasil Mahmoom, p. 249, Imam
Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p.116.  
**[4]** Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 118.  
 **[5]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 249.

authors, their meeting took place at Mecca near the Kaaba. Yet, others
report that their meeting took place at a place called al-Sifah.**[1]**
Al-Farazdaq tried unsuccessfully to dissuade Imam Husain (a.s) from
going to Kufa. When Imam Husain (a.s) resumed the journey towards Kufa,
he found that all crossroads were manned by ibn Ziyad’s military and
check-posts were set up barring all roads except the one leading to
Kufa. Hussayn bin Numeir was in charge of these operations. By doing so,
ibn Ziyad ensured that Imam Husain (a.s) had no other option but to take
only the road to Kufa. Imam Husain (a.s) and his caravan reached a place
called Tha’labiyyah where he met Abu Hurrah to whom Imam Husain (a.s)
explained why he had to leave Mecca.

As there was no fresh news from Muslim, Imam Husain (a.s) sent,
according to some historians, Qais bin Musahhir as-Saidawi, and
according to some others, Abdullah bin Yaqtur, to go speedily in advance
and get news about Muslim ibn Aqeel. It is quite probable that Imam
Husain (a.s) sent both Qais bin Musahhir and Abdullah bin Yaqtur, one
after another within a short span of time.

At a place known as Qadisiyya, Qais bin Mushir was intercepted by
Hussayn bin Numeir. Before he could be searched, Qais destroyed the
letter written by Imam Husain (a.s) to the people of Kufa. Hussayn bin
Numeir arrested and sent Qais bin Musahhir to Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad in
Kufa. Ubaidullah asked Qais to curse Imam Husain (a.s) from the on
pulpit. Qais ascended the pulpit and praised the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and
cursed Mu’awiya, Yazid and Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad, who ordered Qais to be
thrown from above the roof of the palace and later beheaded.

At a place called Wadi al-Aqiq, Abdullah ibn Ja’far’s two sons Oun and
Muhammad brought and delivered a letter from their father addressed to
Imam Husain (a.s). They told the Imam that Abdullah himself had gone to
meet Amr bin Sa’eed, the Governor of Mecca, to persuade him to provide
all comforts to Imam Husain (a.s) when he would arrive in Mecca. Later,
Abdullah ibn Ja’far himself met Imam Husain (a.s) and left his two sons
to serve him as his representatives.

The next day, Imam Husain’s caravan reached Waqisa, which was turned
into a garrison of Yazid’s Syrian soldiers. A short distance from Imam
Husain’s caravan, another caravan was following and pitching  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 119, Footnote 3.

its tents. Imam Husain (a.s) sent his men to inquire who the members of
the other caravan were and what there intention in following his caravan
was. They found that the caravan belonged to Zohair bin al-Qain
al-Bajali**[1]** of the Nukheilah tribe and that they were following
Imam Husain’s caravan from Mecca, and out of the fear of the Umayyad
soldiers, they were pitching their tents at a distance. When they heard
the invitation of Imam Husain (a.s), they hung their heads and dared not
visit him for fear of persecution by the Umayyad army that was posted
all along the route taken by the caravans. When their women folk saw
this, they blamed them for their meekness. Zohair ibn al-Qain then went
to Imam Husain (a.s) and after a short conversation, he returned and
asked his men to pitch their tents near Imam Husain’s caravan. Thus,
Zohair’s men joined the small band of Imam Husain’s followers and their
women joined the company of Lady Zainab (a.s).**[2]**

On the next day, Imam Husain (a.s) halted at a place called
al-Khuzaimiah.**[3]** He found a man hurrying past his tents. He sent
Abdullah bin Sulaiman and Munthir bin Isma’il to find out who the rider
was. The rider informed Sulaiman and Munthir that he was Bakr from the
Bani Asad tribe and that he was coming from Kufa where he had witnessed
the torture and beheading of Hani ibn Urwa and Muslim bin Aqeel. They
narrated the details of the incidents leading to the martyrdom of Muslim
ibn Aqeel and Hani ibn Urwa. When questioned about Abdullah bin Yaqtur,
he said, “Abdullah was captured by Hussayn bin Numair who searched his
bags and found letters addressed by Imam Husain (a.s) to some nobles of
Kufa. Abdullah bin Yaqtur snatched and tore the letters into small bits
and scattered them into the wind. Being Enraged, Hussayn sent bin Yaqtur
to Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad, who in turn, tortured and threatened to kill
him if he failed to either disclose the names of persons to whom Imam
Husain (s) had addressed letters or alternatively to curse Imam Husain
(a.s) from on the pulpit of the mosque of Kufa. Bin Yaqtur chose the
second alternative. When being brought before the congregation in the
mosque, bin Yaqtur ascended the pulpit and instead of cursing Imam
Husain (a.s), he praised his noble qualities and he cursed Mu’awiya,  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Some authors say that the name is Zohair ibn **Qais** instead of
Zohair ibn al-**Qain**.  
**[2]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 254-256, Life of Husain, p. 127, Imam Husayn
[A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 127.  
 **[3]** A’tham al-Kufi says that the poet al-Farazdaq met Imam Husain
[s] at al-Khuzaimiah.

Yazid, Ibn Ziyad and the Banu Umayya, and exposed their cunning,
lawlessness, cruelty and evil intentions to retain the power illegally
grabbed by them. The enraged ibn Ziyad killed bin Yaqtur by throwing him
down from the highest building.”**[1]**

On hearing this, both Abdullah bin Sulaiman and Munthir bin Isma’il were
so much grieved that they did not disclose the sorrowful incidents to
Imam Husain (a.s) except after two days. When the caravan halted at
Zobala, they narrated the incidents related to them by Bakr at
al-Khuzaimiah. Meanwhile, Hilal bin Nafi’ and Uthman bin Khalid brought
the news confirming Bakr’s narration gathered through others.

When being told about Muslim’s martyrdom, Imam Husain (s) called
Muslim’s teenaged daughter Ruqayyah and placed his hand on her head. The
young girl realized that her uncle was treating her as if she was an
orphan. Imam Husain (a.s) said, “*My daughter, from today I am your
guardian in place of your father*.”

The next morning, a resident of Kufa called Abu Harrah came to Imam
Husain (a.s) and said, “*In these awful times, what made you leave the
safe precincts of your grandfather and the Holy Kaaba?*” The Imam (a.s)
replied, “*O Abu Harrah, I showed restraint when the Banu Umayya usurped
my properties. I showed restraint when they spread falsehood and they
cursed me and the Ahlul Bayt openly. Now they have sworn to kill me. I
have no other option but to migrate since it is obligatory on me to
avoid bloodshed as far as possible*.”**[2]**

Wherever Imam Husain (a.s) made a halt, people joined his caravan,
hoping that he was going to Kufa to remove the tyrant governor and that
there would be a war resulting in acquiring territory and treasury. They
had no other desire but to take a share in the spoils of a possible war.
By the time, Imam Husain’s caravan reached a place called Zobala, the
number of persons accompanying had swelled into several thousands.

According to some historians, it was at Zobala that the Imam (a.s)
received the details of the martyrdom of Muslim ibn Aqeel, Hani Ibn Urwa
and Abdullah ibn Yaqtur, through the messengers sent by  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Husain the Saviour, p. 128, Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 258-260
quoting al-Malhuf.  
**[2]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 260.

Mohammed bin al-Ash’ath and Umar ibn Sa’d, as the last wish of Muslim
ibn Aqeel.**[1]** Some other historians say that this happened at
Tha’labiyya.**[2]** Some historians record that it was at Tha’labiyya
that a Christian man met Imam Husain (a.s), became a Muslim and joined
the caravan and was martyred at Karbala.**[3]**

Realizing the materialistic objective of several persons who joined his
company, Imam Husain (a.s) called together all of them and said,

“*You are aware of the grievous murder of Hani, Muslim, bin Yaqtur and
other supporters of the Ahlul Bayt. We are betrayed by the very people
who wrote letters welcoming us to Kufa. Yazid is only demanding me to
give my allegiance to him and recognize him as the leader of all
Muslims. He seeks only to punish me if I did not comply. If you choose
to continue to follow me, you will be exposed to severe torture before
losing your life. Whoever wants to leave may do so now. It will not be a
sin to leave me now nor shall I have any complaint against those who
wish to leave now*.”**[4]**

A majority of the people who accompanied Imam Husain (a.s.) in the hope
of acquiring the spoils of war, departed, leaving only a small
contingent of a few hundred people.

Throughout his journey, Imam Husain (a.s) frequently gave such sermons
and advised the people to leave him. As a result, at every stage the
number of followers dwindled, so much so that only those accompanying
him from Medina or a few more of persons who joined him remained with
him, in the ranks of those who were later martyred at Karbala.

Imam Husain (a.s) left Zobala after a few days. When the caravan passed
a place called Batnul Aqabah, an old man called Amr bin Louthan from the
tribe of Bani Ikrima told Imam Husain (a.s), “I see nothing but the tips
of lances and the glint of swords as far as the eye could see in Kufa.
The very people, who had written letters requesting you to come, have
now turned against you. They will not stop short in killing you. Please
turn back and to any place except Kufa.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Malhuf, al-Saduq’s al-Irshad, Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 262.  
**[2]** Imam Husayn & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 128, Imam al-Husain wa
Asshabuh, p. 166.  
**[3]** Ibid., p. 132, Ibid., p. 172.  
**[4]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 261.

Imam Husain (a.s) replied, “I am aware of the situation, but I can not
act against the Will of God. By God, these people will surely slay
me.”**[1]**

A short distance from Batnul Aqabah, the caravan came across an oasis in
a place called Shiraf with many wells and ponds. Here, Imam Husain (a.s)
halted the caravan and asked his men to fill all leather bags and every
utensil they had with water. This move perplexed his companions as so
much water added to the weight and slowed down the journey.

Hussayn bin Numair (whose father’s name is mentioned as Tameem instead
of Numair by a few authors) was given charge of sealing all the roads
except the one leading to Kufa. Al-Hurr ibn Yazid ar-Riyahi was sent by
Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad with a thousand horsemen as an advance force to
intercept, surround and prevent Imam Husain (a.s) from going anywhere
else except Kufa, where Yazid’s forces had already assembled in great
numbers and strength.

After a short journey in the midst of barren and arid desert, a cavalry
of al-Hurr’s one thousand tired and thirsty horsemen approached Imam
Husain’s caravan. Several of them fainted due to dehydration and their
horses were stumbling due to the severe thirst under the scorching sun
of the desert. The contingent was headed by al-Hurr bin Yazid ar-Riyahi,
who said that before he could utter anything he and his men and horses
needed water to quench the thirst that was nigh killing them. Imam
Husain (a.s) ordered his men to supply water to all of them including
their horses.

Ali Bin at-Ta’’aan al-Muharibi says, “On that day, I was present as one
of the soldiers in al-Hurr’s cavalry. I was so thirsty and weak that I
could hardly drink the water offered by al-Husain’s men. Al-Husain
helped me in drinking the water. When all the men and horses of al-Hurr
were satiated and it was time for the noon prayer, al-Husain asked
al-Hajjaj bin Masruq to call out the Azan for prayers. When men from
al-Husain’s camp and the cavalry of al-Hurr had assembled for prayers,
al-Husain addressed them as follows:‘I have not come to you of my own
accord, but only in response to your written requests and personal
pleadings in which you stated that you are without an Imam [guide in
religious matters]. You expressed the desire that I should guide you in
religious matters and you had covenanted and bound  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p.263.

yourself to abide by my religious guidance. Tell me clearly if you are
firm, even now, in your covenant to take and abide by my guidance in
religion, so that I may be assured once again about the genuineness of
your need and your promise. On the other hand, if you do not intend to
keep your covenant made to me or if you do not want my presence, I shall
return to where I have come from’.

*When nobody gave any reply, al-Husain asked al-Hajjaj Bin Masruq to
call out the Eqamah. Then al-Husain asked al-Hurr if he wished to
separately offer the prayer along with his men or wished to pray under
al-Husain’s Imamate. Al-Hurr replied that he and his men would offer the
prayer under the leadership (imamate) of al-Husain, and then we rested
until evening*.”**[1]**

Ali Bin at-Ta’’aan al-Muharibi continues, “When the time for the Evening
Prayer came, al-Husain asked the Azan be called out. Once again, when
all the men from both camps assembled, they requested al-Husain to lead
the prayers… After offering the prayer, al-Husain addressed the men as
follows:“*Fear God and do justice by giving the rightful person his due.
We the Ahlul Bayt have the rightful and superior claim, and we deserve
to be the successors of the messenger of Allah instead of those who have
now usurped the seat of Caliphate. The usurpers are oppressing you and
are indulging in excesses. But in spite of your numerous letters and
representations, if you now choose to deny my rights and if you do not
wish to welcome me amidst you, I will return back to whence I have
come*’.

Al-Hurr replied, ‘*I know nothing about the letters of which you
speak*’.

Thereupon, Imam Husain (a.s) called Uqba bin Sam’an who brought the bag
containing the letters. On seeing thousands of letters written by the
people of Kufa, al-Hurr said, ‘*We did not write these letters. We are
bound by the orders to surround and bring you to Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad in
Kufa’*. Then al-Hurr read out a letter sent by Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad
under orders of Yazid, with specific instructions directing the cavalry
headed by al-Hurr to surround Imam Husain’s caravan and lead it straight
to Kufa. Imam Husain (a.s) said, ‘*Your death will overtake you before
you could accomplish that task*’. Imam Husain (a.s) asked his men to
prepare for the journey back to Medina. When they were about to proceed,
al-Hurr’s forces obstructed the way. Imam Husain (a.s)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p.266, Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of
Karbala, p. 132 quoting Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 5 p. 403.

rebuked al-Hurr for obstructing the passage. Al-Hurr told Imam Husain
(a.s) that he had no personal ill will against Imam Husain (a.s) and
that he was constrained to obey Ibn Ziyad’s order; otherwise, Ibn Ziyad
would carry out the threat to confiscate all his properties and kill him
and all his children and family members for disobedience. Al-Hurr said
that since Imam Husain (a.s) did intend to go to Kufa, he would also not
be allowed to go to Medina. Al-Hurr suggested that Imam Husain (a.s.)
might take any road except the road to Medina or Kufa. On hearing this,
Imam Husain’s caravan turned right and proceeded towards al-Uthayb and
al-Qadisiyya.**[1]**

On the way, the caravan halted at al-Badiyah. Al-Hurr and his
one-thousand-man army were closely following Imam Husain (a.s), and were
praying behind him. At-Tabari reports from Abu Makhnaf that Uqba bin
Abul Khirad has narrated a lengthy sermon of Imam Husain (a.s) addressed
to his followers and to al-Hurr and his men at al-Badiyah. The sermon is
as follows:

“God will punish those who do not oppose, by word and deed, a tyrant who
legitimizes what is forbidden, transgresses the limits prescribed by
God, breaks his covenant and flouts the traditions of the messenger of
Allah (s) and terrorizes and tyrannizes his subjects and leads a sinful
life. The Banu Umayya have become the disciples of Satan and forsaken
God. They have forbidden what is lawful and made lawful what is
forbidden by God. They have appropriated the public treasuries as if
they are their personal properties. I am the first one to oppose and
protest against their evil deeds. You wrote letters to me and your
representatives came to me. I am told that you have made a covenant that
you will not betray me to my enemies nor will you desert me in times of
need. It is but just that you should abide by your covenant. I am Husain
son of Ali and Fatima the only child and daughter of the Messenger of
God (s). I am with you and my family is with your family. We are not
those who misappropriate public funds. We are those who do not touch or
use public funds. We lead our lives as any common man, so that you may
emulate us by leading a simple life bereft of wasteful pomp. On the
contrary, if you choose to ignore and break your pledge and wish to
absolve yourself from the promised obligations, it will not surprise me,
for you have broken your covenants made with my father Ali, my brother
Hasan and my cousin  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 267.

Muslim ibn Aqeel. Only a conceited and inexperienced person will be
misled by your vain promises. Whoever makes a pledge and then breaks it
is in deed at a great loss.”**[1]**

Imam Husain’s caravan halted at a place that was the pasture of
an-No’man bin al-Munthir’s horses. It was near the border between the
Arabia, Iraq and Persia. Here, Thur-Rimma bin Adi, Nafi’ bin Hilal,
Majm’a bin Abdullah and Umar bin Khalid met Imam Husain (a.s).
Thur-Rimma was an expert guide of the desert roads. Thur-Rimma recited a
poem eulogizing Imam Husain (s) and his noble cause and cursing the Banu
Umayya and their evil deeds.**[2]** All the four men pledged their
support to Imam Husain (a.s). Al-Hurr said that since they were from
Kufa, they should be sent back to Kufa or in the alternative, they
should remain in al-Hurr’s army. Imam Husain (a.s) told al-Hurr that
they were his sincere followers and they should remain with him and be
considered among those who had accompanied him from Medina.**[3]**

Thur-Rimma informed Imam Husain (a.s) that many of the people of Kufa,
under mortal fear of being killed by ibn Ziyad, and several others
having succumbed to his bribery were ready to take up arms against Imam
Husain (a.s). When asked about Qais bin Mussahir, the messenger sent by
Imam Husain (a.s) to Kufa, they replied that he too, like Abdullah Bin
Yaqtur, was killed when he refused to curse the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) and to
praise Yazid from on the pulpit in the mosque of Kufa. Thur-Rimma told
Imam Husain (a.s) that ibn Ziyad has filled up the open lands of Kufa
with a great number of soldiers from Syria and other places, with orders
to intercept and immediately kill Imam Husain (a.s).

Thur-Rimma then came near Imam Husain (a.s) and whispered, “I have seen
a great army in Kufa gathered by Yazid and Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad in order
to surround and kill you. I like that you avoid Kufa at all cost. You
have such a small group of men that even al-Hurr’s thousand horsemen can
overpower and kill you all. If you want, I can show a safe place in the
mountains of Aja’. It is a safe valley surrounded by mountains where my
tribe lives in a fortification that is  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p.269, Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of
Karbala, p. 142, Maqtal al-Husayn of al-Muqarram, p. 184.  
**[2]** Tarikh at-Tabari, ibnul Athir’s al-Kamil.  
**[3]** Tarikh at-Tabari, ibnul Athir’s Kamil. quoted in Nafasul
Mahmoom, p. 274.

safe from marauders and neighboring kings. From there, you can write to
the tribe of Tay who inhabit the mountains and within ten days, their
warriors will come to guard you. I promise you that as long as we, the
tribe of Tay, live no harm will come to you.”

Imam Husain (a.s) thanked and blessed Thur-Rimma for his offer and said
that he was under a binding promise that he would not betray al-Hurr by
leaving with Thur-Rimma.

Thur-Rimma said that though he wished to join Imam Husain’s caravan and
sacrifice his life along with him, he had to bring essential goods to
his people on whose behalf he was acting as a trustee and also that the
yearly sustenance of his large family was with him to be delivered to
them. Thur-Rimma promised that as soon as he had discharged his trust,
he intended to rush back to Imam Husain (a.s) to sacrifice his life for
him. Imam Husain (a.s) bade farewell to Thur-Rimma.

According to Jamil bin Marsad, Thur-Rimma narrated that after
discharging his trust, he (Thur-Rimma) made his last will and bade
farewell to his family, saying that Imam Husain (a.s) was in need of
assistance and that he had to hurry to sacrifice his life for the Imam
(a.s). When Thur-Rimma was on his way, he met Samat bin Badr near the
place called Uthayb al-Hijanat. Samat bin Badr informed Thur-Rimma that
Imam Husain (a.s) was already martyred. Thur-Rimma returned to his
people to narrate the above incidents.**[1]** Another weak report
relates that Thur-Rimma was present with Imam Husain (a.s) in the battle
of Karbala and suffered several wounds due to which he fainted and was
later rescued by some people.**[2]**

When the caravan pitched the tents at some place on its way, Imam Husain
(a.s) gathered his small group of companions and spoke to them saying,

“You see what matter has happened. The world has changed its colours;
virtue has almost vanished. This is the age of Wrong and the followers
of Right have passed away. A time has come when a true believer has to
separate himself from the mischievous mutineers and turn towards his
Creator. Do you not see that the Divine Commands are neglected and what
is forbidden is practiced with relish? Life under tyrants is hard to
live and I consider death a great honor.”**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p.277 quoting Tarikh at-Tabari.  
 **[2]** Maqtal of Abu Makhnaf.  
**[3]** Life of Imam Husain the Saviour, p. 136, Nafasul Mahmoom, p.
270.

Imam Husain (a.s) then tried to dissuade his companions from
accompanying him, as he wanted to face the situation alone. He did not
want to expose his companions to any harm. Hearing this, Bilal bin
Nafi’, Burair bin Khudhair and other companions of Imam Husain (a.s)
protested saying that if they would be slain, then revived to be slain
again a hundred times, they would not leave him, for he was fighting
against an evil tyrant, and therefore would attain martyrdom and they
too have chosen to fight against evil and attain martyrdom. Thus, the
companions, despite Imam Husain’s entreaties, refused to leave him.
Zuhair ibnul Qayn got up and said, “*Even if life in this world becomes
everlasting, we would prefer to leave [give up our lives] this world
behind to follow and serve you*.”**[1]**

This situation is unique and exceptional in the history of humankind. It
is natural for anybody facing imminent threat to his life to assemble as
many of his supporters as possible to defend himself. Here, we find Imam
Husain (a.s) dissuading his companions from accompanying him. This is
not the conduct of one who desires to wage war. Imam Husain’s companions
were also unique in that they knew that they were few in number and
would be annihilated by the huge army that had gathered, and yet they
willingly chose to stand against tyranny along with Imam Husain (a.s).

In stark contrast is the case of Ubaidullah ibn al-Hurr al-Ju’fi who was
a sympathizer of the third *Caliph* Uthman. He had fought in the war of
*Siffin* as a supporter of Mu’awiya against Imam Ali (a.s). When Imam
Husain’s caravan made a short halt at Qasr Bani Muqatil, they found
Ubaidullah ibn al-Hurr Ju’fi in a tent. When Imam Husain (a.s) met him,
he said that he had left Kufa as it was filled and fortified with the
military of Yazid with instructions to kill Imam Husain (a.s) and his
family members even if it were to be in the premises of the *Kaaba.*
Imam Husain (a.s) said, “All of you have led a sinful life. Here is an
opportunity to be absolved of your sins. If you support me, my
grandfather the messenger of Allah (s) will intercede for you.”

Ubaidullah replied, “*I know that what you say is true, but I have seen
Yazid’s forces in such great numbers that it is impossible for me to
fight them, and I do not want to lose my life. Anyway, I offer you my
horse. He is a fast steed and he has always brought me safe from my
pursuing enemy*.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Malhuf.

Imam Husain (a.s) replied, “*I am in no need of your horse. I advice you
to go so far away that when I call out, my voice would not reach you,
for then if you hear me and do not come to my aid, you will be a
transgressor who will surely be thrown into hell*.”**[1]**

Al-Hurr and his cavalry was following Imam Husain’s caravan at some
distance and some times, he purposefully halted for long time so that
there was great distance between the two caravans. When Imam Husain
(a.s) and his small caravan reached a placed called Nineveh, a rider
came from Kufa and gave a letter in which Ibn Ziyad directed al-Hurr to
surround Imam Husain’s caravan and take it to a parched, arid open land
away from any source of water. On hearing this, a follower of Imam
Husain (a.s) called Yazid bin Ziyad bin Muhajir Abu Sha’tha al-Kindi and
an-Nahdi asked the messenger:“*Are you not Malik bin Nusair al-Beddi*?”
The man replied affirmatively. Then, Yazid bin Ziyad bin Muhajir said,
“*You are indeed an evil messenger*.” Malik said, “*I have been sincere
to my leader and I did what he bade me*.”

Yazid said, “*Indeed, you have chosen an evil leader; for the Qur’an
reveals that such leaders will be deemed to be the ones who invite
people to the fire of Hell and they shall not receive any help [on the
Day of Judgement].*”**[2]**

It has been the shameful conduct of the infidels and the hypocrites to
deny water. In the same way, Mu’awiya had denied water to Imam Ali (a.s)
and his men before. Ibn Ziyad denied water to be given to Muslim ibn
Aqeel too.

Thus surrounded, Imam Husain’s caravan reached a place that was about
forty miles from Kufa and three miles from the bank of the Euphrates.
Here, Imam Husain’s horse stopped and all efforts to goad him to go
forward having failed. Imam Husain (a.s) took the unprecedented step of
using his whip, which the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) never did as they loved their
animals and always treated them kindly. Imam Husain (a.s) then changed
several horses but to no avail. Then, camels were brought in and they
too did not move from their place. At last, Imam Husain (a.s) asked some
villagers about the name of the place, and some said it was al-Jazeerah,
some others said Nineveh, and others said the Land of Taff. Yet, another
said it was known as as-Saqiya, but  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 148, Maqtal
al-Husayn, p. 189, Nafasul Mahmoom, p 278-289.  
**[2]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 291.

Imam Husain (a.s) kept on inquiring. An old man, who had seen over a
hundred summers said, “This place, I heard from my elders, was called
Karbala in ancient times and that every Prophet (s) who passed by this
place was afflicted with severe grief.” Imam Husain (a.s) said, “Verily,
Karbala is composed of two words Karb (sorrow) and Bala (affliction).”

In the Old Testament, Deuteronomy 1:19 says that the Prophet Moses
(a.s.) lost his way and wandered for forty years around a place called
‘the Terrible Wilderness’ near Kadesh Barnea which later came to be
known as Qadisiya. It was also the place foretold for sacrifice near the
river Euphrates [Jeremiah 46, 9]. According to the Prophetic traditions,
Noah’s ark was caught in a whirlpool and Jesus Christ suffered and cried
at Karbala. Imam Husain (a.s) then ordered the tents to be pitched. It
is unanimously agreed by all historians that it was Thursday, the second
day of Muharram of the year 61 A.H. Imam Husain (a.s) sent his men to
call the residents of the village inhabited by the Banu Asad, who owned
the lands where he had pitched his tents. He offered to pay 60,000
dirhams and purchase the land. The tribesmen remonstrated saying that
the accursed land was fallow and never did anything grow in it, and
therefore no useful purpose would be served in buying it. Imam Husain
(a.s) replied, “This *land will become fertile with my blood and the
blood of my kin and companions, and people will soon inhabit it and my
Shia (followers) will visit it as a place of pilgrimage*.”

Imam Husain (a.s) purchased the land for 60,000 dirhams and a purchase
was made in the name of Ali al-Akbar bin al-Husain ibn Ali ibn Abi Talib
(a.s). Imam Husain (a.s) asked Ali al-Akbar to immediately entrust the
land back to the owners by declaring, “*I donate this land back to you
and make you its custodians so that you may keep the visitors of our
graves as guests for three days*.”

Then, Imam Husain (a.s) called all the men, women and children of the
tribe of Banu Asad. He addressed their men saying, “*My grandfather the
messenger of Allah (s) has told me that after my martyrdom, Yazid’s army
would severe the heads of the martyrs and leave the bodies on the open
plains of Karbala. It is my desire that you should arrange to bury our
bodies.*” Imam Husain (a.s) turned to the women and told them, “*If, out
of fear of reprisal by Yazid’s men, your men fail to bury our bodies,
please try to do so*

*under the cover of night.*” Imam Husain (a.s) then addressed the
children of Banu Asad, “*Oh children, if your men and women fail to bury
our bodies, I entrust the responsibility to you to playfully come and
throw a little soil to cover our headless bodies*.”

The entire night of the second day of Muharram was spent by Imam Husain
(a.s), his family and companions in offering prayers and glorifying God.
