Chapter 20seventh and Eighth of Muharram
========================================

The water stored in Imam Husain’s camp was exhausted by the night of the
sixth of Muharram and in the extreme heat of the desert; the whole
seventh day and the following night were spent by the children in crying
for water. On the eighth day of Muharram, Imam Husain’s brother and
trusted friend Abbas (s) tried to dig a well in several places, one
after another. Unfortunately, they faced a sheet of solid rock at every
place, shattering the hope of providing water to the thirsty children in
Imam Husain’s camp.**[1]**

Ali Nazari Munfared and some others write, “Nineteen steps away from the
tents facing the Qibla, Imam Husain (a.s) dug in the ground and a gush
of water erupted from which everybody drank and water bags were filled.
After this, the water disappeared without leaving any sign.”**[2]**

This is quite contrary to the reports received from the infallible Imams
(a.s). Even non-Shia sources do not record any such incident, except
perhaps in much later interpolations during the long rule of the
Umayyads and the Abbasids. From the Shia traditions, it is established
beyond doubt that no water was available in Imam Husain’s camp from the
seventh until the night of the tenth of Muharram, 61 AH.

Unable to see small children crying for water, Imam Husain’s companion
Yazid bin Hussayn al-Hamadani took the Imam’s permission to talk to and
persuade Umar ibn Sa’d to allow them to bring water from the river. When
he met ibn Sa’d, he did not greet him with the customary salutation. Ibn
Sa’d asked, “*Why did you not greet me? Am I not a Moslem*?” Al-Hamadani
replied, “*You have assembled to kill the Prophet’s grandson. With what
excuse will you plead before the Prophet (s) for whose intercession you
hope on the Day of Judgement? You have denied water to children that
even an infidel will not do. How do you*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Imam Husain [s] [The Saviour ], p. 148.  
 **[2]** Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 168, Nafasul
Mahmoom, p. 310 quoting Madinatul Ma’ajiz.

*then call yourself a Muslim*?” Umar ibn Sa’d said, “*For the present, I
am not worried about the Day of Judgment. What concerns me is the
Governorship of Ray which is waiting for me after I am finished with
Husain*.”**[1]**

Then, Imam Husain (a.s) called Abbas (a.s) and asked him to take some
companions and try to fetch water from the Euphrates. Abbas (a.s) took
twenty horsemen, and when they reached the riverbank, they were
challenged by al-Hajjaj who was guarding the river with his platoon. On
hearing the voice of Hilal bin Nafi’, who was his cousin, al-Hajjaj
permitted him to go to the river to drink. Hilal said, “*When the Holy
Prophet’s grandson and small children and ladies in his camp are not
allowed to drink water, it is a shame that you allow me to drink it*.”
He then asked his companions to charge forward and collect as much water
as possible in the leather bags. However, al-Hajjaj and his soldiers
unsuccessfully fought with Abbas (a.s) and his companions who succeeded
in bringing a few leather bags of water, which was not sufficient even
to quench the thirst of the children.**[2]** The thirsty children rushed
to take water, and in the melee, the vessel was upturned and water
flowed out on the ground. The elder members of Imam Husain’s entourage
did not get any water to drink since the seventh of Muharram.

Ibnul Atheer, a well-known Sunni historian, writes in al-Kamil, “*A vile
soldier, called Abdullah bin Hussayn al-Azdi standing at the banks of
the Euphrates, taunted al-Husain by saying:‘Don’t you see the crystal
water, as pure and transparent as the sky above? By God, you will not be
allowed to taste a drop until your death.’ On hearing this, al-Husain
lifted his hands toward the sky and prayed that the wretch might taste
the severity of thirst before his death. Thereupon, the said Abdullah
was seized by a burning thirst that to quench it he went on gulping
water from the river, vomiting it and gulping again and again, until at
last his stomach became bloated and he fell and died in the river within
a short time*.”**[3]** Though several such incidents should have been
seen as a warning, the wicked forces of Yazid remained unmoved.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 310-311, Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of
Karbala, p. 169.  
**[2]** Life of Imam Husain [s] [The Saviour ], p. 149, Imam Husayn [A]
& Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 169-170  
 **[3]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 307, Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of
Karbala, p. 168, Life of Husain the Saviour, p. 148.

Umar bin Sa’d was greatly enraged to learn that the brave companions of
Imam Husain (a.s) could face such a large platoon and succeed in getting
water, however meager, to Imam Husain’s camp. He ordered that the
riverbank should be barricaded more vigilantly and not a drop should
reach Imam Husain’s camp. Umar also tightened the circle around Imam
Husain’s tents and planned to attack them with his enormous army.

On knowing this, Imam Husain (a.s) came out of his tent accompanied by
twenty of his companions and asked Umar ibn Sa’d to come out for a
discussion. Umar came with twenty of his companions. The Imam (a.s)
asked his companions to stay back. Umar also left his companions and met
the Imam (a.s) alone. According to some historians, Imam Husain’s son
Ali al-Akbar (a.s) and brother Abbas (a.s) accompanied him when the
others went and stood at a distance. Umar ibn Sa’d was accompanied by
his son and one servant. Imam Husain (a.s) told ibn Sa’d, “*Do you not
fear God who will call you to account for my blood? You are aware that I
am the grandson of the Prophet (s). Leave the Banu Umayya and keep away
from harming me, for that will be more pleasing to God*.” Umar replied,
“*I am afraid that all my properties will be confiscated*.” The Imam
(a.s) said, “*I will compensate you with my properties*.”

According to some narrators, Umar untenably excused himself saying, “*I
am afraid they will annihilate my kith and kin*.” Imam Husain (a.s)
replied, “*Soon you will be killed in your bed and you shall have no
intercession or clemency. I hope that you shall not eat from the wheat
of Iraq except a little after me.*” Umar sarcastically replied, “*Barley
shall be enough*!”**[1]**

After this, ibn Sa’d ordered his army to surround the camp of Imam
Husain (a.s) from all sides. This incident took place on the night of
eighth of Muharram.

Between the fourth and the eighth of Muharram, ibn Ziyad continued to
send additional soldiers as reinforcement. By the morning of the eighth
of Muharram, over a lakh and forty thousand armed men were assembled
against Imam Husain (a.s) at Karbala. Whenever ibn Ziyad’s forces
arrived in Karbala, there was jubilation and beating drums and blowing
of trumpets. Every time this happened, Imam Husain’s sister  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 315, Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of
Karbala, p. 170-171, Life of Husain the Saviour p. 151-152.

Zainab (a.s) inquired if any body had come in response to Imam Husain’s
letter. On hearing a negative reply, she used to feel dejected. At last,
she remembered Habib ibn Mudhahir who was a childhood friend of Imam
Husain (a.s.). She asked Imam Husain (a.s.) to write to him. Finding
over a lakh of soldiers gathered by the satanic forces of Yazid and his
commanders, Imam Husain’s sister Zainab (a.s) insisted that he should
also write to some of his friends. Imam Husain (a.s) wrote a letter to
his childhood friend, Habib bin Mudhahir in the following words,

“*From Husain bin Ali to the great Jurist Habib. I am now surrounded by
Yazid’s forces at Karbala.*”

When Imam Husain’s messenger brought the letter, according to one group
of historians, Habib was buying henna in the market place. According to
other historians, when Imam Husain’s messenger brought the letter, Habib
was having food with his wife. Yet, others contend that the incident of
buying henna was on an earlier and entirely different occasion and the
conversation was between Habib, Maytham and Kumail.

According to the first version, on seeing the letter, Habib returned the
henna to the shopkeeper saying, “*Henna is of no use to me now. My white
beard will become red with my own blood*.” According to the second
version, on reading the letter, Habib got up from the dinner and told
his wife, “*I bequeath you all that I posses and I hereby divorce you*.”
His wife sorrowfully asked about the cause for this. Habib informed her
that he was leaving in response to Imam Husain’s call to join him as he
was surrounded by Yazid’s forces. He was sure that he would be martyred
and so he bequeathed all that he possessed to his wife and divorced her
so that she might, if she chose, go to her mother’s house and live
there. Habib told her that the wicked and satanic forces of Yazid would
not spare even women and children from insults and abuse. The noble wife
expressed her determination to serve Imam Husain’s sister Zainab (a.s)
and other ladies of his house during their travails. Habib reached Imam
Husain’s camp along with his wife to discharge the obligation to the
Imam.

When Habib reached Imam Husain’s camp, he found only a few hundred
persons. He asked permission to go to the nearby residents, the Bani
Asad tribe, and seek their help, since they were known to be brave and
honest people. He went under the cover of night and met

the tribe of Bani Asad, who were glad to learn that Habib also belonged
to their tribe. Habib said, “*I have brought you the best of all
presents. I bring good news for you, both in this world and in the
hereafter. The Grandson of the Prophet (s) has been surrounded by a vile
and cruel army. If you choose to help the Prophet’s grandson, you will
earn their blessings*.” Abdullah bin Basheer spoke for the Bani Asad
tribe and said, “*We will be only too glad to help the Prophet’s
grandson*.” On hearing this, ninety warriors from the Bani Asad tribe
accompanied Habib ibn Mudhahir and proceeded towards Imam Husain’s camp.
Meanwhile, Umar bin Sa’d learnt about this and sent four hundred men
under the command of al-Azraq. A severe skirmish ensued and many people
were killed on both sides. Fearing hard reprisal by ibn Sa’d, the
remaining persons of the Bani Asad returned back and vacated their
village.

Shimr along with his relative Abdullah bin Mahl requested ibn Ziyad to
issue a letter of guaranteeing asylum and safe passage saying, “*Our
four cousins Abbas, Ja’far, Abdullah and Uthman, who are sons of our
aunt Ummul Banin (and Imam Ali) are with al-Husain. We do not want that
any harm may come to them as they are related to us*.” Ubaidullah ibn
Ziyad agreed and gave the letter guaranteeing safe passage and asylum to
Abbas, Ja’far, Abdullah and Uthman, the four sons of Imam Ali
(a.s).**[1]** On the night of Ashura, Shimr showed this letter to Abbas
(a.s) and his brothers and asked them to desert Imam Husain (a.s) and
save themselves. Abbas (a.s) replied, “*How strange! You bring us
clemency while the Prophet’s grandson is sought to be killed. Damn your
asylum and protection! God is our protector and we are safe under the
banner of the Imam*.”\>**[2]**

Imam Husain (a.s.) came out and addressed the army of Yazid that
surrounded him,

“*Do you not know that I am the grandson of the messenger of Allah? Do
you not know that I am the son of only child of the messenger of Allah
Fatima? The martyr Hamza was my father’s uncle. The martyr Ja’far was my
father’s brother. Have not you heard the messenger of Allah declare and
stress his love for the Ahlul Bayt, and that the Qur’an and the Ahlul
Bayt are the*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 174, Nafasul
Mahmoom, p. 317-318.  
**[2]** Ansab al-Ashraf, vol. 3 p. 184 quoted in Imam Husayn [A] &
Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 174-175, Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 318.

*inseparable legacies that the messenger of Allah was leaving behind;
and that I and my brother Hasan are the masters of the youths of
Paradise? If you do not know all these things, then ask and verify, if
you so desire, the truth of what I have said from the surviving
companions of the messenger of Allah, such as Jabir bin Abdullah
al-Ansari, Abu Sa’eed al-Khudri, Sahl bin Sa’d as-Saa’idi, Zayd bin
Arqam, Anas bin Malik…etc*..”**[1]**

Imam Husain (a.s) then addressed those who belonged to Kufa and were now
in Umar bin Sa’d’s army,

“*Have you not written to me complaining that you had no Imam and
therefore invited me to come to Kufa and guide you in religious
matters?”*

When they pretended ignorance of such letters, Imam Husain (a.s) had the
letters brought from his tent and started reading out their contents
along with the names of writers. When there was no answer to this, Imam
Husain (a.s) said,

“*Even if you deny writing these letters and assume that the letters are
forged, tell me why you have surrounded us and do not allow us to go
away.”*

To this, Qeis ibn Ziyad replied, “*First, you acknowledge Yazid as the
caliph and sovereign, and then we shall listen to you*.”

Imam Husain (a.s) replied, “*I would rather sacrifice my life than to
declare allegiance to Yazid who is a tyrant and oppressor; ho is steeped
in worldly, carnal pleasures; brazenly disobeys the Divine Commandments
and in the open court makes fun of the Prophet (s). I would prefer to go
away from here, but if I am constrained, I will not submit to the
threats of a hypocrite and a despot. ”*

In reply, one from the enemy said, “*We will not let you go, nor will we
allow you to have even a drop of water until you are slain and your head
is presented to Yazid*.”**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p 313, Haeiri’s Balaghatul Husain, p.
156-157.  
**[2]** Life of Imam Husain [s] [The Saviour], p. 150-151.
