Introduction To the First Edition
=================================

Imam Husain ibn Ali (a.s) had to quit Medina because the Yazidite army
wanted to kill him. Yazid demanded a complete submission to his
tyrannical regime. The Imam (a.s), as the personification of *Haq*
(Righteousness), the lofty similitude of the Almighty – the *Noor*
(Light), refused to accept the supremacy of the Apolyon. According to
the Qur’an,***[1]*** if *Haq* bows down to earthly demands, there will
be utter corruption and chaos in heaven and earth and their inhabitants.
Therefore, God’s ambassador, the personification of *Haq*, the very
essence and symbol of Truth, never submit to the evil powers. Thus it is
that Imam Husain (a.s), like his father Imam Ali (a.s) and other
prophets of yore and the Imams who succeeded him, never submitted to the
tyrannical regimes of their times. Noah, Abraham, Moses, Zechariah and
Jesus all suffered at the hands of the tyrants, but never submitted to
their demand to abandon their mission of propagating the faith in One
Unique God who will raise the dead and hold everyone to account.

While leaving Medina, Imam Husain (a.s) explained:“I leave Medina to bid
the good and to forbid the wrong *[al-Amr bil Ma’roof, wen-Nahi anil
Munkar].**[2]*** This in fact is the entire corpus of religion and the
quintessence of Truth and the fundamental philosophy of faith. Imam Ali
(a.s) said that every worship is like a droplet in the abysmal ocean
when compared to al-Amr bil Ma’roof and an-Nahi anil Munkar.

Karbala is an eternal Truth where *Haq* could not be coerced into
submission, even at the cost of sacrificing lives. When shown a preview
of the events that were to take place at Karbala, from Adam (a.s) down
to every succeeding Prophet (s), it was to admit the greatness of
Husain’s sacrifice.***[3]***

The afflictions that Imam Husain (a.s) had to face and which were echoed
in the voice of Lady Zainab in her mission [as attempted to be portrayed
by Mr. A.K. Ahmed] were, in fact already prophesied.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur’an, 23:17.  
 **[2]** Haeri’s Balaghatul Husain, Tr. In Urdu by Baquer Naqvi,
P.108-118, Lucknow, 1.  
 **[3]** Qur’an, 57:22, Bihar, vol. 2 p. 34- 35, Nawasikhut Tawarikh,
vol. 6, p.470-471.

Karbala is an ocean. No single book or in fact any number of books can
fully do justice to the subject. Mr. A.K. Ahmed deserves to be
complimented for his effort. He has been working on the subject for over
three years. As a friend, he has an interesting personality. Being a
close relative of my brother Mr. Asghar Sa’eed, I have had great moments
when I could bridge up the aesthetic distance’.

**25th Rajab, 1427 AH**

**Sayyid Mohammad Ali Musavi**
