Preface to the First Edition
============================

All praise belongs to Allah, the Sublime, the Merciful, Who provides
guidance through His Chosen Ones (a.s.), who are Immaculate[^1] and
therefore Infallible. As the Vicegerents of Allah on earth, they wished,
said or did only that which Allah pleased,[^2] and in turn in His
Majesty, Allah declared their words, deeds and wishes to be His Will.

When the question of succession to the Holy Prophet (S) arose, the
Divine Will was forsaken, as if Allah and His Prophet (S) had left the
matter of guidance in the hands of those who were themselves in need of
guidance.

The word *Khalifa* (caliph) was sought to be interpreted in several ways
only to accommodate those who occupied that seat. At-Tabari, ibn Khaldun
and a majority of the *Sunni Ulema* interpreted the word ‘*Khalifa*’ as
‘one who came after’ or ‘those who succeeded one another after the
predecessor’s death’. In this sense, the Qur’anic verse[^3] was sought
to be explained by saying that Adam was the *Khalifa* [successor] of his
predecessors, the Jinn or the Angels.[^4] The implication of such an
interpretation is that, to be the immediate successor, the *Khalifa*
need not be of the same kind or class as his predecessor, the Holy
Prophet (S). In other words, the *Khalifa* need not be Immaculate and
Infallible and can *be* anyone from the *Umma* (nation). To bolster this
argument, the famous *Hadith* that states: “There shall be no prophet
after me”, is pressed into service.

The above line of thought led Abu Bakr to declare, immediately on his
ascension to the *Caliphate,* in his opening speech from on the pulpit,
“*O People, I may fall into grievous error or I may not make any
mistake. If you see me deviating from the right path, prevail upon me to
return to it. The Holy Prophet (S) was infallible, but I am not. There
is a Satan riding over me, ever drawing me towards error*.”[^5]

One of the earliest arguments put forth was that one could only be a
vicegerent of an absentee and not of one who is present. The question of
vicegerancy or succession, it was said, arises only after the demise of
the predecessor. In this sense of the matter, it is argued, there can be
no Vicegerancy of God who is Omnipresent. Subscribing to the above view,
Abu Bakr declared that he was not the divinely appointed *Khalifa*.
Instead, he claimed to be the Khalifa of the Prophet (S).[^6] But, the
absurdity of the matter becomes evident when we consider on the same
analogy Umar to be the *Caliph* of Abu Bakr, Uthman the *Caliph* of Umar
and so on and so forth. The absurdity becomes patent when we notice that
the institution of *Khilafah* ordained by God in the Empyrean was
abolished by Mustafa Kamal Pasha of Turkey, in the year 1924!

A distinction is made between spiritual leadership *(Imamate)* and
temporal leadership *(Khilafah).* The qualifications required to be an
*Imam* are exempted for the *Caliph.* Thus, we find that the History of
Islam is full of *Caliphs* who practiced what was prohibited and they
prohibited what was permitted, for they considered themselves lawmakers.
It is a common premise between the Shia and the Sunni that even the
Prophet (S) himself did not have the power to legislate or amend the
*Sharia*h.[^7]

After the Prophet (S), from Abu Bakr, the first *caliph,* to the last
one - Mustafa Kamal Pasha, none, barring the single instance of Imam Ali
(a.s.), claimed both Spiritual and temporal leadership together in one
person. All the Sunni and Shia Ulema are in perfect agreement that Imam
Ali (a.s.) was one among the five people declared Immaculate in the
Qur’an.[^8]

The dispute was and is always between the Divinely appointed Vicegerents
such as Abraham, Moses…etc*.*, and the self-proclaimed despots like
Nimrod, Pharaoh…etc. There abound in the Qur’an efforts of the Prophets,
Apostles and Saints to invite men to worship only One Unique God. In the
Qur’an abound also the persecution of the Divinely appointed ones by
tyrannical despots. These are not fables but part of history. The Holy
Prophet (S) had forewarned his *Umma* that, on account of their faith
and adherence to Islam, Muslims will be persecuted and slain. To such of
those who are slain in the cause of Allah, the special title of *Shahid*
[martyr] is given and they are promised everlasting life and abundant
rewards. The tyrant is assured the maximum eternal chastisement.

Of late, a queer tendency has developed among Muslims, to forsake
history altogether and invent justification for the tyrannical rule of a
majority of the *Caliphs,* particularly the *Umayyads*, by saying that
the atrocities they committed were invented by later historians under
the rule of the Abbasid *Caliphs*.

A modern day writer Dr. Ghulam Nabi, at page 59 of his book “Khilafah in
theory and Practice”[^9] writes:“Historical reports are generally
anti-*Umayyad* because they were narrated, collected, and preserved
during the Abbasid Khilafah by prejudiced reporters. Naturally, there
are so many charges against them. Some prominent (charges) are that they
made the Khilafah hereditary within the *Umayyad* family; that they were
oppressors; that they attacked the holy cities of Mecca and Medina; that
they prevented non-Muslims to accept Islam by charging the *Jizya*
[Taxes] to them; that they ruled by force and tyranny and that they
usurped public treasury converting it into a private property.”[^10] He
continues, “On the basis of these charges leveled against the
*Umayyads*, a distinction between *al-Khilafah ar-Rashida* (the
rightly-guided caliphate) [^11] and *al-Khilafah al-Umawiyyah* (the
Umayyad caliphate), is vehemently made so much so that many scholars are
not ready to call the *Umayyad* rulers as *Khulafa* (caliphs) and their
rule as the *Khilafah*. They call them rulers [*Muluk*; kings] and their
system of governance as the monarchy [*Mulukiyah*].[^12] A pertinent
question arises here whether the charges of these scholars or the
populist theories about the *Umayyad* rule are correct leading to the
main question with regard to the Islamic *Khilafah.*[^13]

If Mr. Ghulam Nabi is to be taken to be correct in his elucidation, then
most of the *Sunni* Islamic literature will become suspect and
unreliable. This raises another pertinent question as to why it should
not similarly be assumed that the historical reports were indeed
narrated, collected, and preserved by prejudiced reporters during the
*Umayyad khilafah*. In effect, these assumptions will discredit all the
reports collected during the *Umayyad* as well as the *Abbasid* periods.
Once this happens, no record of the Prophet’s time, the *Sunna* would be
available to the *Sunnis*, while the only Islamic literature to survive
would be *Shiite* literature which traces its authority from the
Immaculate and Infallible Masumin (a.s.), to the Prophet (S).

The present day tendency of people like Mr. Ghulam Nabi is probably due
to the fact that, from times past, the *Shias* often relied on *Sunni*
Islamic literature to support the *Shiite Creed*. Now these *Sunni*
sources are sought to be wiped out by editing or at least rendering
their suspect, only to withdraw the support they brazenly provided to
*Shiite* theology. In this process, they attempt to conceal the
atrocities committed by Yazid and accuse Imam Husayn (a.s.) of brewing a
revolt.

Mr. Ghulam Nabi writes, “*Changes and charges apart, basic objective of
the Umayyads was to maintain the unity of the Islamic Ummah and Muslim
State. They were living in a time when uprising and insurrection started
to shake off the unity of the Muslim world to eradicate or to expunge
the civil wars the Umayyads maintained their rule within their own
family by making their sons and brothers as their heir apparent*.”[^14]

By saying this, Mr. Ghulam Nabi attempts to maintain the proposition
that the *Caliph,* be he virtuous or vicious, once seated in power by
whatever means, should be obeyed implicitly.[^15] Anyone opposing such a
*Caliph* should be considered to have bred discord in Islam and
therefore liable to be eliminated for the sake and unity of Islam. If
this position is correct, then in the entire history of Islam Mu’awiya
was the first person to take up arms against a rightly guided and duly
elected *Caliph.* Instead of condemning, Mr. Ghulam Nabi, justifies
family rule and atrocities initiated by Mu’awiya and perpetuated by his
*Umayyad* successor. Mu’awiya was the first to divide Islam in the first
instance to grab power, by opposing the person in authority. Yet, Mr.
Ghulam Nabi attributes an honest intention to the *Umayyads* of trying
to maintain unity in Islam.

The writer appears to be willfully ignorant of historical occasions when
objections were taken by such highly respected person of the day, such
as Aa’isha, Abdullah ibn Umar, Abdullah ibn Abbas, Abdullah ibn
az-Zubair and a host of others when Mu’awiya sought to nominate his son
Yazid, sowing the seed for family rule over Muslims.

For the *Shias* their faith is simple. They rely only on the designated
twelve *Khulafa* who are attested by the Qur’an as being Immaculate.
Imam Husayn (a.s.) is the third of the twelve Immaculate and infallible
Imams. His martyrdom was not a secret affair. It was witnessed by
thousands of people of all faiths. Once again, the *Umayyads* are
spreading their net. The result is that Muslims are sought to be lured
into the Satanic trap of accusing Imam Husayn (a.s.) of attempting to
revolt and justifying his massacre as a necessity to protect Islam.

Much is sought to be made out of the silence of the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.)
and other nobles of *Mecca* and *Medina* during the black days of the
*Harra* incident. The insinuation is that the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.)
acquiesced in or at least did not object either the *Harra* incident or
the perpetrator of the incident.[^16]

The argument is silly because in the present day context, future
historians would be justified in writing that all the Muslim countries
approved the activities of Israel against its Muslim neighbors. In a
fallacious conclusion, such thinking would lend credence to assume that
God, by his silence, approves the acts of every tyrant and therefore the
tyrant would not be punished. The oppressed were advised to bear the
atrocities with patience. Such fatalism was imbibed into the Muslim mind
only to absolve the rulers of the time from the atrocities they
perpetrated. This again undermines the very concept of Divine Justice
and the reward or punishment so repeatedly promised in the Qur’an.

We should understand, in the correct perspective, without prejudice and
with reliance upon historical facts, the circumstances in and the cause
for which Imam Husayn (a.s.) sacrificed his life along with his infant
son and other martyrs. There can be no justification to kill the infant
with arrows. There cannot be argument as to why the infant’s body was
exhumed, its head severed and mounted on a lance to be paraded from
Karbala to Damascus. We should also realize that the cruelty with which
the noble ladies and children from the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.) were treated
after *Ashura,* had great silencing effect on the Muslims. Every despot
rules by the extent of the cruelty he and his cronies practice and the
terror they generate. Yazid heads the list of all tyrants and despots.
To justify him is to abet him.

It is high time that we refresh our memories with the Facts and
Philosophy behind the battle at Karbala, in which Imam Husayn (a.s.) was
forced to fight against a huge army with the support of only a handful
of his relatives and followers. The infant *Ali al-Asghar’s* martyrdom
is an eloquent proof of the barbarity and injustice of the enemy, which
people are now trying to render suspect as a prelude to obliterating
history.

My ancestors bore the brunt of Aurangzeb’s tyranny at Bijapur, when they
were impaled in walls merely because they adored the Masumin (a.s.).
They had to resort to dissimulation [*Taqia*]. Only since 1958, my
family declared its *Shiite* origin and practice. Even in these
enlightened times in several countries like Iraq, the murder of *Shias*
is considered a religious duty. The *Shias* do not seek retribution.
They only protest against the mutilation or suppression of truth.

I was fortunate to have the guidance of my brother Sayyid Muhammad
Musavi, retired Professor of English. Any amount of thanks will not
relieve me of my obligation to him. I am obliged and thankful to Sayyid
Zameer Ahmed Abedi alias Husayn, Editor / Proprietor of *Alawiyat*, [an
excellent monthly magazine] for his assistance in taking out references
and for his valuable suggestions in improving the form and substance of
this humble effort.

**A.K. Ahmed**
**August 2006**
**1st** **Sha’ban, 1427 AH**

[^1]: Qur’an, 33:33.

[^2]: Qur’an, 76:30, 81:29.

[^3]: Qur’an, 2:30.

[^4]: Dr. Ghulam Nabi, ‘Khilafah – In Theory and Practice’, p.21 quoting
at-Tabari’s Jami’ul Bayan, vol. 1 p. 449-451.

[^5]: At-Tabaris’ Tarikh, vol. 2 p .460, Ibn Hisham’s Seerah, vol. 4 P.
34, ibn Kathir’s al- Bidaya, vol. 6 p. 303, ibn al-Athir’s al Kamil, vol
2, page 129.

[^6]: Musnad of Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol 1 p.10, Muqaddimah of ibn Khaldun,
Tr. Rosenthal, vol. 1 p.388-89.

[^7]: Qur’an, 10:15.

[^8]: See commentaries of the Shia as well as the Sunni on the verse 33
of Sura 33 al-Ahzaab.

[^9]: Adam Publishers & Distributors, New Delhi. [2005].

[^10]: Mawdudi, Khilafato Mulukiat, Delhi, 1974, pp. 145-175.

[^11]: The first four caliphs after the Prophet (S).

[^12]: Mawdudi, Khilafato Mulukiat, Delhi, 1974.

[^13]: ‘Khilafa in theory and Practice’ by Ghulam Nabi, page 59, Adam
Publishers & Distributors, New Delhi [2005].

[^14]: Ibid., p.65-6.

[^15]: Ibid., p.112, quoting Muhammad Fu’ad Abdul Baqi, p.79.

[^16]: Dr. Ghulam Nabi’s Khilafa in Theory & Practice, p.69, quoting Ibn
Kathir, vol. 8, p.232-233.


