Chapter 21the Ninth of Muharram
===============================

The ninth day of Muharram was the successive third day without water in
Imam Husain’s camp. The children, particularly, suffered greatly from
the agony of thirst. Sukaynah (a.s) the daughter of Imam Husain (a.s),
who was a child then, later narrated, “*By the nightfall of the ninth
day, I and the other children in the camp were almost dying due to
thirst. There was not a drop of water available. We went around to find
out if any water is available. I found that my brother Ali al-Asghar,
who was six months old, had turned pale and was crying incessantly due
to lack of water and milk, as my mother’s breasts had dried up due to
her not getting any food or water for the last three days. My aunt
Zainab was unsuccessfully trying to console the infant. We were crying
out aloud. My father’s companion Burair al-Hamadani, who happened to
pass by our tents and see our plight, was greatly distressed*.”

Burair called some of his friends and insisted that each one of them
should hold a child by the hand and approach the enemy guarding the
banks of the Euphrates. Burair hoped that on seeing small children
crying for water the guards might allow them to drink water. One of
Burair’s friends, Yahya al-Muzani said that if the stonehearted enemy
refused and a skirmish ensued, the children would be exposed to mortal
danger. He therefore thought it unwise to take the children with them.
It was then decided that only Burair and his friends would approach the
riverbank from the road leading to Ghazaria. Once, Ishaq, a relative of
Burair, was in charge of that part of the riverbank. He allowed Burair
and his companions to go forward and drink as much water as they liked.
When they reached the river, Burair’s friends were overjoyed at their
good fortune and without even sipping a drop of water, collected it in
the leather bag brought by Burair. When the enemy soldiers found that
instead of drinking water, for which they had permission, Burair and his
men were trying to take water to Imam Husain’s camp, which was strictly
prohibited by their commander. An altercation ensued in which Burair
shouted that it was shameful that he and his friends should be allowed
to drink water but the grandson of the Prophet (s) and his small
children were forbidden.

An arrow pierced the leather bag and pinned it to Burair’s neck.

The intense arguments were heard in the camp and immediately Imam Husain
(a.s.) asked some of his friends to rescue Burair. On seeing several
persons approaching them, Ishaq’s men were subdued lest there should be
bloodshed. Bleeding profusely, Burair proudly set down the leather bag
and asked the children in the camp to drink. The anxious crowd of
jostling children upset the vessel and in no time, the water flowed out
and was absorbed by the parched earth. Burair was grieved that the water
brought at the risk of life could not pass the thirsty throats of the
children in Imam Husain’s camp.**[1]**

Imam Husain (a.s) came to know that the vile Umar bin Sa’d was planning
a sneak attack by his entire force from behind to kill everyone
including women and children and destroy Imam Husain’s camp. To
safeguard against such an event, a trench was dug all around the camp,
leaving a small passage in the front. Firewood and other available fuel
was lit and thrown into the trench. The heat of the burning trench was
added to the agony of the three-day’s thirst.

One of Umar’s soldiers called Jawairia, mocked saying, “*O associates of
Husain, this fire should remind you of the fire of Hell that is waiting
for you.*” Imam Husain (a.s) replied, “*You mention my connection with
fire, while I am expecting eagerly to meet my Creator*.” Thereafter,
Imam Husain (a.s) raised up his arms and prayed, “*O Lord, make this man
taste the fire in this world before the one that awaits him in the
next.*” Jawairia’s horse suddenly shied and threw him straight into the
burning trench, reducing him to ash.**[2]**

Imam Husain (a.s) deputed his brother Abbas (a.s) to go and speak to
Umar bin Sa’d. Abbas (a.s) went with about twenty companions. He asked
Umar bin Sa’d, “*Why have you surrounded us? What crime has Husain
committed ?*.”

Umar replied, “*Our chief [ibn Ziyad] has ordered that we should either
make Husain accept Yazid as the leader of Muslims and pay allegiance to
him, or kill him along with all those who support him*.”

Abbas (a.s) asked his companions to stay back and he said to ibn Sa’d,
“*Do not take any hasty step till I give your message and get the reply
from al-*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Imam Husain [s] [The Saviour], p. 153-158.  
**[2]** Life of Imam Husain [s] [The Saviour], p. 158 – 159.

*Husain*.” When Abbas (a.s) left, Habib ibn Mudhahir addressed the
surrounding army, *“You are a wretched gathering who have assembled here
to kill the only surviving son of Fatima and the grandson of the
messenger of Allah. You should know that the Prophet not only loved
Husain, but also commanded you to love and respect him. You have
gathered at the instance of Yazid who is a hypocrite and a sinner. His
father Mu’awiya, grandfather Abu Sufyan and grandmother Hind hated the
Prophet (s) and openly fought against him till they were overpowered and
pretended to become Muslims. Have you forgotten that Husain is the last
of the five persons about whom Allah has revealed the verse of
purification?*”

Zohair ibn Al-Qain said, “*You are a cruel and heartless assembly of
people who deny water to infants, children and the old and ailing. Do
you not hear the voices of the children crying for water? What sin have
the children committed that you deny them water for the last three days?
God will surly punish you for what you are planning to do. It is not too
late even now. Go away and do not harm Husain or his people, for indeed
Husain is innocent*.”

Some in the crowd kept quiet for fear of reprisal, other in anticipation
of reward and yet other merely out of their inherent cruel nature. Yet
others said, “*You are very few and sure to be killed. Leave Husain and
join us for your safety and prosperity*.” Habib and Zohair replied,
“*Life amidst sinners and tyrants like you is a curse. Death with Husain
is the ultimate triumph here and in the hereafter*.”

Abbas (a.s) came back after talking with Imam Husain (a.s). He addressed
the commanders and the surrounding army:

“I once again remind you that you have gathered to kill the Prophet’s
grandson al-Husain. With him is the progeny of Fatima and Ali and a few
friends. You have prevented water from reaching Husain’s camp so much so
several infants are near death. What crime have they committed to be so
tortured by your inhuman act? What crime has al-Husain done by which you
could absolve yourself from his murder? In the past, people have killed
prophets and pious people and deserved God’s wrath. You are also doing
the same now. Do not blame us that you were not warned sufficiently or
that you did not know with whom you are bent on fighting and killing. In
fact, you all know who Husain is, for it is you people who wrote and
invited him to guide you as your Imam. Now, al-Husain has asked me to
give you respite till tomorrow morning so that you may contemplate
during the night and comprehend the result before you take any action.
After that, you will

be solely responsible for your deeds and there will be no scope to plead
ignorance or find escape from the consequences of your action.”

In fact, by this action, Imam Husain (a.s) gave a night’s reprieve to
provide an opportunity to revive the oppressors’ dead conscience and to
enable them to realize and correct their mistake. It had a big effect on
the enemy, for, from their ranks several persons switched over to Imam
Husain’s camp. On the other hand, none from Imam Husain’s camp wished to
leave despite being offered asylum and safe passage or being aware of
imminent death.

Qurra bin Qeis al-Handhali, Habib ibn Mudhahir’s nephew, who had earlier
acted as ibn Sa’d’s messenger, was enraged at the injustice and cruelty
of ibn Ziyad in shutting down all accesses to water. He cursed ibn Sa’d
and joined Imam Husain’s camp saying, “*I have left behind Hell which
surely was my destination if I had stayed with and fought for ibn Sa’d.
I do not wish to go back to it. Husain’s camp is heaven and no wise man
would prefer hell to Heaven*.”**[1]** The disgusting conduct of Yazid’s
army in sealing the banks of the river and preventing water from
reaching the children and women in Imam Husain’s camp, prompted some
thirty soldiers to leave Yazid’s army and cross over to Imam Husain’s
camp.**[2]** This incident occurred late within the last night before
the battle. Al-Hurr himself crossed over to Imam Husain’s camp along
with his brother, son, and servant in the morning of the tenth of
Muharram.

The fact that some persons, contrary to all odds and human nature, left
a huge army when definite success and prosperity was within their reach,
and crossed over to support a small band of men facing certain death, is
another unique aspect of the battle of Karbala. Yet, inexplicably, most
authors narrate that it was Imam Husain (a.s) who sought a night’s
respite from the attack by ibn Sa’d and for prayers too.**[3]**

Here, we should remember that for centuries, most of the historians were
under the control of the Umayyads and the Abbasids who were inimical
towards the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s). They sought to remove anything that
glorified the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s) and supplement it with dubious, if  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Imam Husain [s] [The Saviour ], p. 145.  
 **[2]** Al-Iqd al-Fareed, vol. 4 p.168, Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga
of Karbala, p 184.  
**[3]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p 322, Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of
Karbala, p. 177, Life of Imam Husain (a.s) [The Saviour ], p. 152 – 153.

not derogatory and unconfirmed reports. M.S. Mirza quotes the learned
historian J.A. Conde, “*A sort of fatality attaching itself to human
affairs would seem to command that in the relating of historical events,
those of the highest importance should descend to posterity only through
the justly suspect channels of narration written by the conquering
parties. The mutation of empires, the most momentous revolutions, and
the overthrow of the most renowned dynasties seem all to be liable to
this advantage; it is from the Romans themselves that the history of
their rivalry with the Carthaginians has come down to us, and even if
Greek writers have similarly treated the subject, these men were
tributaries and dependants of Rome, who did not spare the flatteries
best calculated to conciliate its* *favour.”***[1]**

It is therefore not surprising that most historians report contrary to
the above version and mistakenly report that it was Imam Husain (s) who
sought time from the enemy. The popular version was created by simply
attributing the last part of al-Abbas’ speech to an unnamed soldier from
ibn Sa’d’s army who was supposed to have said, “*We give you time till
morning to ponder over the matter of accepting Yazid as your leader. If
you do not accept Yazid as your leader, we shall kill you in
combat*.”**[2]** The mutilation is cleverly carried out by attaching a
religious sanctity of ‘request for time for penitent prayers’. However,
a factual and sincere analysis brings out the lie.

It was an inviolable custom in those days that during battles, all
fighting ended with the sunset to be resumed after the dawn on the next
day. Only dacoits and plunderers violated this code, but never a
fighting army or a person of noble descent. At Karbala, on one side was
the huge army of Yazid and on the other side was the noble person of
Imam Husain (a.s), his family and a few companions. With such
overwhelming numbers, a sly nocturnal attack never even would have been
contemplated. Hence, there was never any threat of a nocturnal attack.
It will be trite to suggest that Imam Husain (a.s) perceived a nocturnal
attack and wanted to forestall it by seeking a night’s respite.

The Ahlul Bayt (a.s) never neglected prayers. Imam Ali (a.s) was
martyred while prostrating in the Morning Prayer. The Ahlul Bayt (a.s)
supplicated to God during long hours in the nights. For Imam Husain  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The *Caliphate* by Agha Muhammad Sultan Mirza, p. 24 quoting
“History of the Dominion of the Arabs in Spain.”  
**[2]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p 322, Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of
Karbala, p. 177, Life of Imam Husain the Saviour, p. 152 – 153.

(a.s), prayers were an integral part of his self. It is unimaginable
that Imam Husain (a.s) asked for a night’s respite to perform his
prayers and supplications in penitence.

Lastly, the effect of a night’s respite appears to have worked only in
favour of Imam Husain (a.s) to kindle the conscience of a few enemy
soldiers who left ibn Sa’d and joined Imam Husain (a.s). On the other
hand, no amount of advice or persuasion could dislodge even a single
member from Imam Husain’s camp. The Twelver Shia believe that the
Prophet (s) as well as Imam Ali (a.s) had given Imam Husain (a.s) the
names of those who would be martyred along with him in Karbala. The Imam
also knew that, in the initial stages, some of them would be with the
enemy and that they would ultimately join him. It is therefore
considered that Imam Husain (a.s) gave the respite to enable such people
to come over to him from the enemy’s camp.

After the sunset, in the night between the ninth and the tenth days of
Muharram, Imam Husain (a.s) led the obligatory prayers with his
companions. As soon as the prayers were finished, Imam Husain (a.s) made
a speech before his companions. First, he praised the Lord for giving so
many sincere companions and friends. He then said,

“I am thankful to you all for your affection and your willingness to
help me at this hour. But, I assure you that Yazid is only thirsting for
my blood. I hereby discharge you from the obligation under your pledge
of allegiance to me and I release you from all bonds you pledged to
assist me. I like that you leave me now and go back to your homes. I
shall not hold you responsible if you go away now, as it is now not
obligatory for you to remain with me. If you feel shy to leave before my
eyes, I will make it easy for you by putting out the lights so that, in
the darkness, nobody can see who has left the camp.”**[1]**

So saying, Imam Husain (a.s) snuffed out all the lights and darkness
enveloped for a long time. At that time, there were few hundred persons
besides Imam Husain (a.s), but, when the lamps were lit, only fifty-four
companions remained, in addition to Imam Husain’s kith and kin.

Those who remained with Husain (a.s) were resolute about sacrificing
their lives for the cause of the Imam of the day. Imam Husain’s  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p 323, Imam Husayn [A] & Tragic Saga of
Karbala, p. 178, Life of Imam Husain the Saviour, p. 160 – 153.

brother, Abbas (a.s) said, “*Woe to the life without you*!” **[1]**

Muslim bin Awsaja, an octogenarian and a companion of the Prophet (s)
got up and said, “*I have heard the messenger of Allah declaring that
‘Hasan and Husain are from my flesh and blood, and it is obligatory on
everyone to obey and love them as much as I myself love them.’ So, if I
desert you now, am I not responsible before the messenger of Allah? I
will not tolerate a tyrant and infidel to harm you. We shall make
ourselves a shield to defend and protect al-Husain, the example of
virtue and righteousness*.”

Zuhair ibn Al-Qain said, “*If we were to be killed a thousand times and
our bodies revived, we would fight against the oppressor to protect our
Imam and his just cause*.”

Seeing the love and devotion of his companions, Imam Husain (a.s.) said,
“*I am indeed proud to have such companions. Neither the prophets of
yore, nor my grandfather, nor my father had as many devout companions as
I now have at this time of adversity.”*

Another unique feature of the battle of Karbala is that impending
calamity and certain death should have, normally, brought a gloom over
Imam Husain’s camp. Quite contrary to this natural response, the entire
camp was jubilant. Some prided that they were fulfilling their covenant
by offering their lives for Imam Husain (a.s). Some others were anxious
to meet the Prophet (s) and Imam Ali (a.s) and receive the rewards that
awaited them. Each one was advising the other to be steadfast and to
sacrifice his life for the cause of the Imam (a.s). Muslim and the
octogenarian Habib, who always presented a sober countenance, gleefully
laughed as if they were small children, awaiting and about to receive
the object which they fondly desired. Even the women rose to the
occasion. Recounting stories of valour of the martyrs Hamza (a.s),
Ja’far (a.s) and Imam Ali (a.s) and several others, they encouraged
their children to face the enemy valiantly and discharge their
obligation to the Imam of the time. The teens were enthusiastic and
joyful in anticipation of tasting the elixir of death in martyrdom,
which they considered sweeter than honey, while defending the Imam
(a.s). Historians like Abu Makhnaf, at-Tabari and Abu Ishaq
al-Esfarayini record that throughout the night, supplications and
prayers and frequent cries of ‘Allaho Akbar’ were reverberating along
with the wailing of the thirsty children demanding water with  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Irshad of Sheikh al-Mufid, Tr. IKA Howard, p. 347.

their mothers trying to console them, that Imam Husain’s camp sounded
like a busy bee hive.

In the enemy’s camp, al-Hurr commanded a thousand men against Imam
Husain (a.s). He was restless, for he realized that it was he, with his
thousand men, who had surrounded Imam Husain (a.s) and prevented him
from going back to Mecca, Medina or any other place. He felt guilty when
he heard the cries of thirsty and hungry children in Imam Husain’s camp.
The blocking of the riverbank to prevent water, the sharpening of swords
and the elaborate plans of Umar bin Sa’d to eliminate a handful of
persons, pricked al-Hurr’s conscience. The innately cruel and vile
nature of Yazid, Umar bin Sa’d and ibn Ziyad further tormented his
conscience and soul. He paced his tent throughout the night. His son
asked him the reason for his anguish. Al-Hurr replied, “*I am at the
crossroads between Heaven and Hell. I have decided to leave Hell and go
to Heaven*.” So saying, at the first ray of dawn, al-Hurr jumped on to
his horse followed by his noble brother, son and faithful slave. They
galloped towards Imam Husain’s camp. Al-Hurr stopped a short distance
from Imam Husain’s tent, asked his son to tie his hands behind his back,
in the manner of tying an apprehended criminal. Seeing al-Hurr, his
brother, son and slave, Imam Husain’s companions advanced, thinking from
the past experience that al-Hurr was coming to cause mischief. Al-Hurr
asked his son to lay down all arms. All of them surrendered with bowed
heads. Al-Hurr begged to be pardoned and Imam Husain (a.s) readily
pardoned him saying, “*I am pleased with you, and your Lord the Creator
is also pleased with you*.”

The above facts bring out another unique aspect of the battle of
Karbala. In battles, people desert from a weaker side, be it weak in
arms or numbers, to the opponent who has superior strength or numbers.
In the battle of Karbala, none from Imam Husain’s camp left him though
apparently Imam Husain (a.s) had no superiority in numbers or arms. On
the other hand, from Yazid’s army of over a lakh of soldiers, at least
forty persons came over to fight for Imam Husain’s cause. There was no
incentive for them other than the independence of their spirit to uphold
justice and oppose repression. They did not choose to strike any deal in
the darkness of night. The switching over was not a clandestine affair,
but an open and defiant protest by right thinking persons against the
oppression and injustice of Yazid and his hordes.
