Chapter 22ashura; the Tenth of Muharram
=======================================

The battle of Karbala was foretold in almost all religions. The *Bhaunik
Puran* of the Hindus was translated into Urdu by Maulvi Abdurrahman
Chishgti, a prominent Sunni scholar under the title ‘Mir’atul
Makhlooqat’. In that book, Mahadev relates to his wife Parbati all the
future things that were to happen, including the birth of Prophet
Mahamat (Muhammad) who will preach a great religion and that a few years
after his death some evil men would unjustly murder his grandson.**[1]**

Among the Zoroastrians *Jamasp Nama* is a famous book of predictions. It
was translated into Urdu by Mulla Wahidi, editor of *Nizamul Mashayakh*,
Delhi. Jamasp predicts the birth of the Prophet (a.s.), the spread of
Islam and the chaos after the Prophet’s death. He writes, “Religion
shall become a stepping stone to rulership. People will wage war against
his son-in-law. The son-in-law will have two sons. One will be poisoned
and the other will be martyred along with his friends in the desert. The
leaders opponent to the Prophet’s progeny will be men of low
morals.**[2]**

The battle between Imam Husain (a.s) and the forces of Yazid took place
on the tenth of Muharram, the year 61 A.H corresponding to October 9,
680 A.D.

Mirza Ghulam Abbas Ali writes, “*Adib, the first month of the Jews,
corresponds to Rajab of Moslems; and Nisan, the seventh month of the
former, to Muharram of the later. But, during the time of Moses [Exodus
Ch.12 V. 2], the seventh month of the civil year was changed into the
first month of the sacred year, and hence Muharram that was originally
the seventh month is now considered the first month of the year by
Muslims.*” **[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Understanding Kerbala by Sayyid Sa’eed Akhtar Rizvi, Eng. Tr. By
Sayyid Ather Husain S.H Rizvi, Ansariyan Publication [2006], p. 70-73.  
**[2]** Understanding Kerbala, p. 74.  
**[3]** Life of Imam Husain [The Saviour], p. 170.

He writes further, “*The Jewish months as well as those of Hindus and
Moslems have always been Lunar. The difference in the dates calculated
by the Jews and the Hindus from those of Moslems is due to the fact that
the Jews give the month of Nisan 40 days and the Hindus give every third
year an additional month, so as to make their years keep pace with solar
years; otherwise, the Day of Atonement, Dasara and Muharram, all being
the tenth day of the seventh month, would fall on the same day.*”
**[1]**

The tenth day of the seventh month has great importance in every true
religion. The Christian and the Jews consider it as the Day of Atonement
or the Day of Sacrifice. They are directed to observe Sabbath and rest,
and a day of convocation in which they should afflict their souls and
give offerings of fire to the Lord on that day.**[2]** There is no
explanation with Christian and Jewish theologists as to why they are
commanded to afflict their souls on the tenth day of the seventh month.

In the Hindu mythology, Pandavas got the permission to untie their
weapons from the Jimmi plants in preparation of regaining their lost
empire from the Kauravas. Until date, the Hindus celebrate it as Dasara,
the tenth day of their seventh month. On this day, Hanuman found out the
place where Ravana had hidden Sita, and informed it to Rama.

According to Muslim traditions, it was on the tenth day of the seventh
month, at the place now called Karbala, Noah’s Ark was caught in a
whirlpool and barely escaped drowning. On that day while passing the
plains of Karbala during their times, the Prophets Abraham, Moses and
Jesus stumbled, suffered bleeding injuries and cried when their hearts
suddenly became heavy with inexplicable deep sorrow. Suffice it to say
that the Tenth day of the Seventh month is of great importance in every
religion, signifying war or sorrow.

It was the invariable custom among the Arabs in their wars to challenge
the opponent into a single combat. Those who were at the bottom of the
hierarchy came out first to throw or face the challenge, followed
progressively by the best, bravest, and renowned warriors, sparing the
commander until the last. If the single combat was indecisive, in rare
cases, recourse was to be a general onslaught by the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid., p. 170-171.  
**[2]** Leviticus, Ch.16 vol. 29, Ch.23 vol. 23 to 32, Revelations
12:1-11.

entire army, but, ordering a general onslaught was looked down upon by
valiant and noble soldiers as a mean and cowardly act of a vile and weak
commander.

In the battle of Karbala, the tradition of single combat was adopted in
the initial stages. The hostilities were invariably commenced by Yazid’s
forces, who, finding confidence in their numbers, challenged Imam
Husain’s small number of companions and family members in single combat.
Imam Husain (a.s) being steeped in his father Imam Ali’s tradition,
advised his small group of companions to refrain from commencing any
hostility, and only to defend themselves whenever the enemy threw a
challenge.

The scribes present in the battlefield were not in agreement as
regarding who was the first martyr or the sequence in which Imam
Husain’s companions went forth to meet the enemy’s challenge. The
differences in their reports may be due to their situation, exact spot
and time of their observation.

There also appears to be some difference, among various narrators,
regarding the number of martyrs from Imam Husain’s camp. It is commonly
asserted by the Shia sources that the total number of martyrs is
seventy-two, comprised of fifty-four companions of Imam Husain (a.s) and
eighteen members from his family including Ali al-Asghar, the
six-month-old son of Imam Husain (a.s).

Moulvi Mirza Ghulam Abbas Ali Sahib writes, “… *Thus, the whole number
of Imam Husain’s companions ranges between seventy-two and one hundred
and twenty according to different authors*.” **[1]** According to him,
the total number of companions, identified by name, is ninety-five and
the number of Imam Husain’s family members is twenty-seven, thus making
a total of one hundred and twenty-two martyrs. This figure takes into
account twenty-eight companions of Imam Husain (a.s) who were martyred
during the frequent shower of the enemy’s arrows,**[2]** shot blindly
towards Imam Husain’s camp. Sheikh Abbas al-Qummi gives a list of
twenty-nine companions of Imam Husain (a.s.) who were martyred in the
first raid.**[3]** S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali has appended a brief  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Imam Husain, p. 203.  
**[2]** Life of Imam Husain, p. 194, quoting at-Tabari who gives the
names of 28 martyrs, killed by the shower of arrows at Karbala.  
**[3]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 353.

note on 105 martyrs of Karbala in his book ‘Husain, the Saviour of
Islam’.**[1]**

All narrators, however, unanimously record that it was Umar ibn Sa’d who
emerged from his tent, called his slave Duraid to whom he handed over
the standard and stood under the shade of the banner with bow and arrow
in his hand and shouted “*My warriors! Bear witness before God and
people that it is me, Umar son of Sa’d, who is the first to attack
al-Husain*.” Umar, then, shot the first arrow towards Imam Husain’s
camp, signifying the commencement of war.

According to some narrators, al-Hurr, who crossed over to Imam Husain’s
camp early that morning, was the first person to seek permission to face
the challenger. Having got the permission from Imam Husain (a.s),
al-Hurr was preparing to go into the battlefield, when his servant Urwa
approached him saying that the slave cannot live to see his master
facing the enemy. He begged to be allowed to go first. He first
dispatched triumphed over several warriors in single combats and then
killed many of the enemy who surrounded him before falling down a
martyr. Thus, Urwa, Al-Hurr’s slave, according to some historians. was
the first to face the enemy and to attain martyrdom, followed by
al-Hurr’s son, brother Mus’ab and al-Hurr himself in that order.

According to Moulvi Mirza Ghulam Abbas Sahib, the first to face the
enemy was Abdullah son of al-Hurr who attained martyrdom after slaying a
good number from the enemy. He was followed by al-Hurr’s slave, son,
brother and al-Hurr himself. **[2]**

However, there is unanimity among all the writers that the last person
to face the enemy was Imam Husain (a.s). They also agree that just
before his martyrdom, Imam Husain’s six-month-old infant son Ali
al-Asghar (a.s) was brought into the battlefield to get for him some
water, but Harmalah martyred him by slitting his parched throat with his
powerful arrow.

Umar ibn Sa’d gave his army’s standard to his slave Duraid, the command
of the left flank to Umar bin al-Hajjaj and the right flank to Urwa bin
Qeis. He gave the command of the cavalry to Khouli and the infantry to
Shabath bin Rib’iy.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Husain the Saviour of Islam, Ansariyan Publications, [2005], p.
198 to 213.  
**[2]** Life of Imam Husain [A.S], p. 182.

Imam Husain (a.s) gave the standard to his brother Abul Fadhl al-Abbas
(a.s), who in turn appointed Zohair ibn al-Qain to command the right
flank and Habib ibn Mudhahir to command the left flank.

A detailed account of the battle itself is found in the various
‘*Maqatil*’.**[1]** Mirza Ghulam Abbas Ali’s book “Life of Husain” and
the English translation of Nafasul Mahmoom provide the details for those
who read English. Late S.V Mir Ahmed Ali, the well-known translator of
the Qur’an into English, has also written a book under the title of
“Husain; the Saviour of Islam” in 1964. Curiously, Ghulam Abbas Ali,
S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali as well as this humble servant all belong to Madras.
Another excellent book is Yasin T. al-Jubouri’s “Kerbala and Beyond.”
Our object is not to go into lengthy details of the battle but to bring
out the words uttered by Imam Husain (a.s) and his companions, so that
we may understand the object and motive that propelled them to fight
Yazid’s forces and attain martyrdom. Detailed accounts of the battle can
be found in several books, which establish the ferocity and inhuman
nature of the vile Yazid and his forces, and in contrast, the just cause
and the spirit of independence from tyranny in which Imam Husain (a.s)
and his noble companions defended themselves. Historians are also
unanimous in recording that it was Yazid’s forces that always initiated
the attack and that Imam Husain’s companions went forth, as a last
resort, in response to the enemy’s challenge.

In the following pages we give a general account of the battle with some
details about Imam Husain’s brother Abbas (a.s), his sons Ali al-Akbar
(a.s) and Ali al-Asghar (a.s). Whenever anyone from Imam Husain’s camp
emerged to meet the challenging enemy, they reminded their opponent
about the Qur’anic verses and sayings of the Prophet (s) which praised
and demanded adherence and obedience to the Ahlul Bayt (a.s). They
emphasised that Imam Husain (a.s) was the last of those Ahlul Bayt
(a.s). They also demanded to know what crime Imam Husain (a.s) had
committed and the reason why they were after his blood.

Moulvi Mirza Ghulam Abbas Ali Sahib recounts the various sermons
addressed by Imam Husain (a.s) and his companions Brurair, Muslim,
Zohair, Habib and several others before the enemy commenced the war.

According to some other authors, al-Hurr was the first to address the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The plural form of Maqtal that means the record of the murder of
so-and-so, but somehow particularly the martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.)
and his family and companions.

enemy, perhaps hoping that he would be able to persuade the thousand
horsemen he commanded to see reason and leave their services under the
aggressor and to shift their support to the righteous cause. Al-Hurr
along with his son, brother, and servant were some among those who had
crossed over from Yazid’s army. Therefore, his address to the forces
that he commanded until recently was very significant.

In his speech, al-Hurr praised the Lord and the Prophet (s) and he
recited verses from the Qur’an glorifying the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) one of
whom Imam Husain (s) was. Al-Hurr recited the verses relating to the
Prophet Salih (a.s.), the killing of whose camel had brought down the
wrath of God. He reminded them that the killing of Imam Husain (a.s) who
was from the very the flesh and blood of the Prophet (s), for no fault,
would be a major sin inviting greater wrath of God both in this world
and the hereafter. He reminded them that the pleasures and promises of
this world were merely a transitory mirage and that the life to come
would be the everlasting one. He then recounted his own experience
saying that until the last night he commanded Yazid’s cavalry and that
he realized that never had Imam Husain (a.s) done anything unjust,
illegal or contrary to Islam, while Yazid was an imposter, debauch and
hypocrite undermining Islam from within. It was this reason why he left
the command of Yazid’s cavalry though knowing that he would be martyred.

The enemy had no answer to al-Hurr’s arguments. Realising that al-Hurr’s
speech had caused a stir in the rank and file of the enemy, Shimr, the
most cruel and stonehearted of all, advised Umar bin Sa’d that they
should immediately attack and kill al-Hurr before he could utter another
word. Al-Hurr went back to seek Imam Husain’s permission to fight the
enemy.

Burair took permission to address the enemy. In his address, Burair told
the enemy, “*Would you deny and refuse to recollect the tradition in
which the messenger of Allah had said that he was leaving, among the
people, two inseparable and essential things, namely the Qur’an and the
Ahlul Bayt and that following both is obligatory and that if they
forsake anyone of the two, Muslims will be confounded and led astray.*”
In unison, the enemy forces replied, “*We admit that the messenger of
Allah had done so.”*

Burair said, “Would *you deny that in the Qur’an God declares that the
Ahlul Bayt are Immaculate, free from the possibility of committing
error*?”

The enemy soldiers replied, “*We can not deny what you say as it is the
truth.*” Burair said, “*Do you admit that al-Husain is one of the Ahlul
Bayt and the Imam of the time and that he is pious and righteous*?” The
soldiers replied, “We *do admit*.”

Burair said, “*Has al-Husain committed any transgression of divine laws,
killed anyone, deprived anyone of his property or has he committed any
act that demands his execution?*” The enemy forces admitted that Imam
Husain (a.s) had not committed any such act. Burair continued, “*Do you
not remember that Yazid’s father Mu’awiya prevented water in (the battle
of) Siffin and that when Ali gained possession of the river, he acted
magnanimously in giving water and he refused to act like Mu’awiya or to
prevent water to be given to the thirsty enemy*.” The enemy concurred.

Burair then said, “*You know that there are women, children and infants
in al-Husain’s camp who are being denied even a drop of water since the
past three days. You allow heathens, atheists, Christians and Jews and
even animals to drink water from the river, but you refuse to allow even
a drop of it, to your Prophet’s grandson and his children*.” The enemy
replied, “*We are soldiers employed by Yazid to wage war. We obey his
orders and there is no room for sympathy in a war*.”

Burair cursed their blind following and lack of humanitarian
considerations, and came back to Imam Husain’s camp.

Then, Zohair ibn al-Qain took permission to address the enemy ranks.
Zohair said, “*O you people who have gathered here, have you forgotten
that the messenger of Allah had advised you to adore and follow the
Ahlul Bayt of whom al-Husain is the most prominent of those present
here? This is the time of your test regarding that advice. You claim to
be Muslims. Your action will show how you treat al-Husain now in the
context of the Prophet’s advice*.”

Shimr shot an arrow towards Zohair saying, “*O old Man, will you face us
in combat or you will waste the breath of your old lungs with
unnecessary talk? I am anxious to kill all of you.*” Zohair replied,
“*Life among people like you is a disgrace and a burden. Death for
al-Husain’s cause is indeed a grace, blessing and everlasting
pleasure*.”

Muslim ibn Awsaja and Habib ibn Mudhahir went and addressed the enemy
similarly, but Shimr, Ibn Sa’d, Harmala and Khouli interfered and
disturbed their speech to prevent the soldiers from being impressed with
the unassailable arguments put forth before them.

Imam Husain (a.s) then addressed the soldiers of Kufa saying, “*Have you
not written to me and requested me to come to you for providing
religious guidance? Did you not assert that you are left without an
Imam? Have I not written in reply promising to be among you to provide
religious guidance? Have we done anything wrong? Have we committed any
crime? Did you ever find me negligent in my religious obligations or in
the adherence to the Islamic tenets?”*

The soldiers replied, “*You are not guilty of any of these*.”

Then, Imam Husain (a.s) said, “On the other hand, Yazid himself and his
men who have gathered here are guilty *of making innovations, discarding
religious injunctions, indulging in worldly carnal pleasures, and
mocking the messenger of Allah by saying that there is nothing but this
life in this world, and that there is no accountability or reward or
punishment and no life hereafter. Has not Yazid persecuted and killed
several noble scholars who were pious Muslims? Do you then take sides
with such men against me? Have you lost your sense of justice? Have you
forgotten that Islam teaches austerity and piety? Is not this worldly
life transitory and the gain you hope to get is not going to provide
eternal comfort to you? Do you not realize the consequences of the
evilness of your act in seeking to slay me?* ”

The enemy soldiers were spell bound. Imam Husain (a.s) continued, “*You
have fallen in serious error. You are misled and baffled by your own
ignorance and the incitement of Yazid and his men. You have lost your
sense of Judgement and the desire to distinguish and accept good instead
of evil. You are tempted by vain promises of worldly wealth and comfort.
I assure you that you shall not have it. In fact, your guilt will
torment you in this world and you will suffer punishment in the next.
Take heed and listen. I have not done anything wrong nor harmed any of
you, as you never met me before. There is no cause for enmity between
you and me. You know that God will punish those who kill an innocent
person. Desist from your evil plan, and even this moment let us part
ways and avoid bloodshed*.”

Umar bin Sa’d at the head of the enemy soldiers shouted, “*We will not
let you go. We have gathered here to fight and kill you and your
companions*.”

Imam Husain (a.s) replied, “*Disgrace be upon you! You have forsaken
your religion and become Satan’s disciples. The ill-gotten and
prohibited food that* *you consume has imbibed disloyalty, uttering
falsehood, injustice, oppression and shamelessness into your very blood
and nature. Yet, you seek my allegiance so that you may later claim that
I had assented to your evil deeds? I would rather sacrifice my life than
to succumb to the threats of a tyrant. I*

*have placed all facts before you to show who I am, and that we have not
done anything wrong to warrant your wrath. I have also warned you
sufficiently and if you do not heed my words, you shall be eternally
held responsible in this life and in the hereafter.*”

On hearing this, Umar bin Sa’d shot the first arrow towards Imam Husain
(a.s) saying, “*Bear witness O you God and men, that I am the first to
shoot this arrow in token of initiating this war against al-Husain and
his companions.*”

Thereafter, one after another, Imam Husain’s companions went, as per the
custom of the Arabs, to meet the challenge in a single combat. They told
the enemy about their noble ancestry and depending on their age, their
achievements in various wars fought alongside the Prophet, Imam Ali, or
Imam Hasan (a.s) and explained the relationship of Imam Husain with the
Prophet, his daughter Fatima, and Imam Ali (peace be on them). They
explained the justness of Imam Husain’s cause for which they were ready
to sacrifice their lives in accordance with the Qur’an and the Holy
Prophet’s traditions. Each of them prevailed over several opponents in
single combats and were martyred when they were slyly attacked from
behind or when Yazid’s soldiers made a concerted onslaught.

The Martyrdom of al-Qasim ibn al-Hasan
--------------------------------------

After the companions of Imam Husain (a.s) were all martyred, it was the
turn of his relatives; the remoter relatives facing the enemy before the
nearer ones. Thus, the first to go, one by one, were the six brothers,
three nephews and two sons of Muslim bin Aqeel (a.s), cousin and deputy
of Imam Husain (a.s) who was martyred in Kufa. Then, followed Own and
Muhammad the two sons of Abdullah bin Ja’far and Imam Husain’s sister
Zainab (a.s). Next, came the turn of the sons of Imam Hasan (a.s).
Al-Qasim was in his teens. In the single combat, he prevailed over
several renowned warriors including the renowned Syrian, al-Arzaq and
his brothers. When the enemy made a general attack with all his might,
Qasim fought with great valour and the ferocity of his attack scattered
the enemy whom he pursued right into the midst of Yazid’s army. Sa’d bin
Urwa bin Nufeil, a vile soldier of Yazid, hid himself and when Qasim
passed in pursuit of the fleeing soldiers, attacked from behind so
ferociously that Qasim fell from his horse. The enemy, seeing Qasim
lying on the ground, regrouped and attacked him. Hearing Qasim’s cries,
Abbas, Ali al-Akbar and Imam

Husain (a.s) rushed to rescue him, but in the melee, the hoofs of horses
of the retreating forces of Yazid trampled him (Qasim) badly.

The Martyrdom of Abbas and other sons of Imam Ali
-------------------------------------------------

According to Hafiz Jalaluddin**[1]**, Own son of Imam Ali (a.s) and
Asma’ bint Umais, a stepbrother of Imam Husain (s), was present and
fought valiantly for Imam Husain (a.s). He prevailed over Salih bin
Sayyar and his brother Badr bin Sayyar in a single combat, but while he
was thus engaged, Khalid bin Talha came from behind and dealt a mortal
blow and Own was martyred.

Abbas (a.s), one of the four stepbrothers of Imam Husain (a.s), was born
to Imam Ali (a.s) and Ummul Banin bint Hizam bin Khalid bin Rabi’a.
Three of them, Uthman, Ja’far and Abdullah had earlier in the day fought
the enemy and attained martyrdom. Abbas (a.s) was now very anxious to
face the enemy. He was a renowned warrior and had fought alongside Imam
Ali (a.s) even when he was only twelve years old. The enemy ranks were
terrified of facing him. Earlier in the preceding night Shimr, who
claimed that Ibn Ziyad, the governor of Kufa, was distant relative of
Ummul Banin, produced ibn Ziyad’s letter, offering enormous wealth and
property to Abbas in addition to a high post in Yazid’s army. Abbas tore
and scattered the letter of guarantee and refused to be enticed saying
that he was least interested in worldly wealth or power and that he was
fighting for the just and noble cause of Imam Husain (a.s) against the
tyrants and hypocrites.

When Abbas approached, Imam Husain (a.s) did not permit to fight against
the enemy. Instead, he permitted him only to fetch water from the river
Euphrates to quench the thirst of the children in the camp.

Abbas came out of the camp and addressed the enemy soldiers saying:

“*O you vile and base men of ignoble birth, would you deny the basic
need of water to the children of the Holy Prophet’s grandson al-Husain,
while you claim to be Muslims and hope for the Holy Prophet’s
intercession before God? What sin have these children committed that you
seek to kill them? How do you justify denying water to children and
women? Your conscience is dulled by the lure of wealth and you have
forsaken the Islamic tenets. The curse of God is forever upon you for
your evil nature*.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Roudhatul Ahbab.

Hearing these words, the enemy attacked Abbas (a.s) from all sides.
Abbas repelled the onslaught and the enemy soldiers took to their heels.
Murad, a veteran soldier from Yazid’s army, became infuriated and called
upon his men to stop running, as he, an accomplished soldier, would
singly face Abbas (a.s). When Murad attacked with his lance, Abbas
(a.s.) dexterously evaded it at the very last moment, wrenched it from
Murad’s hands and struck his horse with such force that Murad was thrown
down and his horse was disabled. Shimr shouted at Suraqa to take and
give Murad another horse called Tawia. Abbas (a.s) frustrated this plan
by killing Suraqa and taking the horse Tawia. Abbas (a.s) left his own
horse at Imam Husain’s camp and riding Tawia, went back to the fight.
Murad, in mortal danger, shouted at his men to come to his rescue
saying, “*Abbas, riding my horse Tawia, will kill me with my own
lance*.” Hearing the pitiful cries of the wretch, Shimr accompanied by
Sinan bin Anas, Khouli bin Yazid al-Asbahi, Jameel bin Malik and several
horsemen went forth to rescue Murad. But, before the rescue party could
reach Murad, Abbas (a.s) overtook them and killed Murad with Murad’s own
lance.

Scattering the enemy contingent, Abbas (a.s) reached the banks of the
Euphrates and asked the horse to drink water. The faithful animal turned
away its head as if refusing to taste water. Abbas (a.s) then raised a
handful of water up to his mouth to show to the world that he had
command over the river then. Abbas (a.s) filled the leather bag with
water and started towards Imam Husain (a.s) camp, anxious to deliver
water to the thirsty children. Fearing that water might, after all,
reach Imam Husain’s camp, the enemy soldiers rallied. Unable to face him
with sword or lance, the archers were pressed into service. While Abbas
(a.s) was busy avoiding the arrows, one of the soldiers came from behind
and severed his right arm. Abbas (a.s) caught the leather bag by his
left hand. Another vile soldier of Yazid slunk behind and cut his left
hand. Abbas (a.s) caught the leather bag by teeth, intent on saving the
bag of water. An arrow then pierced the leather bag and water flowed out
of it. At that moment, an arrow struck Abbas (a.s) in the eye, blinding
him completely, while simultaneously he was clubbed from behind with
brute force. Finding that his object of procuring water to Imam Husain’s
children failed, frustrated Abbas (a.s) had no desire to live, and he
fell down from his horse.

Imam Husain (a.s) fought and scattered the enemy and reached Abbas
(a.s), whose face and eyes were completely covered with blood. As a

last wish, Abbas (a.s) wanted his healthy eye to be cleaned of the blood
so that he might see his master in his last moments, even as he had
opened his eyes at his birth to see Imam Husain (a.s) before he saw
anyone else. Abbas (a.s) heaved a deep sigh and expressed his desire
that Imam Husain (a.s) should not take his body to the camp, as he was,
even at death, ashamed to face the children for whom he could not
procure water. Abbas (a.s) breathed his last in Imam Husain’s lap. His
wish was fulfilled and he was buried where he breathed his last. His
mausoleum is far away from that of Imam Husain’s camp.

Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s), the eldest son and next Imam to his father
Imam Husain (a.s.), was laid up with such high fever that he became
completely unconscious. Muslims believe that by making him sick, God
paved the way for the succession of the Imamate to continue by devolving
upon him.

The Martyrdom of Ali al-Akbar
-----------------------------

The last person to fight in the cause of Imam Husain (a.s) was his
second son Ali al-Akbar (a.s) who was then eighteen years old. He was
the darling of the family. He very much resembled the Prophet (s), not
only in appearance and bearing but also in the manner of speech. His
aunt Zainab (a.s) and his mother Layla were severely grief stricken on
his departure for battle. Imam Husain (a.s) asked them to pray for his
safe return. When Ali al-Akbar (a.s) went to fight the challenging
enemy, he overcame every mighty opponent who came for single combat.

The efforts in the battle coupled with the lack of water over the past
three days brought with it excruciating thirst. Ali al-Akbar returned to
the camp and said, “If only I could get a gulp of water, I would show
the enemy the mettle of a Hashemite warrior.” Hearing this, Imam Husain
(a.s) called and asked him to suckle his tongue, as there was not even a
drop of water available. When he took his father’s tongue in his mouth,
he immediately withdrew it saying, “Father, your thirst is more severe
than mine, for your tongue is parched and hard.”

Ali al-Akbar (a.s) went back to the battlefield. This time, Imam Husain
(a.s) forbade Zainab and Layla from praying for the safe return of Ali
al-Akbar (a.s). With renewed vigor, Ali al-Akbar (a.s) fought the enemy,
who instead of coming for single combat, now attacked him in a concerted
effort of the cavalry, archers, lancers and infantrymen. The lance of
the wretch Sinan ibn Anas pierced Ali al-Akbar’s chest and passed
through his liver.

All the day, Imam Husain (a.s.) used to call Abbas (a.s) and Ali
al-Akbar (a.s) to help him bring the bodies of every martyr. Now, when
he heard the cry of Ali al-Akbar (a.s), there was no one remaining to
assist him. Hameed ibn Muslim records, “*In the morning of Ashura when I
saw him, al-Husain appeared much younger than his sixty three years. By
the time al-Abbas was martyred, he was stooping from the waist. The
colour of his beard had turned salt-and-pepper. When I saw him hurrying
to the side of his martyred son Ali al-Akbar, he was stumbling and his
vision appeared to have dimmed. His hair had turned completely grey and
he appeared to have suddenly aged into a very old man. He was calling
out:‘Where are you Ali? Where is my Ali? Oh Lord, help me to find my
son!’ At that moment, Ali al-Akbar’s horse appeared, smeared with blood,
and it pulled al-Husain to where its master was rolling in
blood*.”**[1]**

When Imam Husain (a.s) attempted to lift his son’s full-fledged body, he
found that all his strength had suddenly drained. He prayed God to give
him the strength to lift the body. With great difficulty, he lifted and
put his son’s body on the back of the horse and took him to his camp. He
called out the children to help him in bringing down the body of Ali
al-Akbar from the back of the horse. Some years later in a congregation,
a person asked Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s), “*I was present at Karbala on
the day of Ashura. Though it was a very solemn occasion for the Ahlul
Bayt (a.s), towards the end of the day, I saw a woman of noble stature
clad in red clothes. I wonder what the happy occasion was which
warranted the wearing of a red colored dress.*” On hearing this, Imam
Zainul Aabidin (a.s.) wept and said, “*The woman was my aunt Zainab. She
had assisted my father in getting down my brother Ali al-Akbar’s body
from on the back of the horse and her clothes were smeared with his
blood and appeared red.”*

The enemy, finding that there none was left in Imam Husain’s camp except
women, children and the ailing and unconscious Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s)
and Imam Husain (a.s) himself, started shouting and clamoring for Imam
Husain (a.s) to come out and fight them.

Imam Husain (a.s) bade farewell to his family members and came out to
face the challenge. He asked Umar bin Sa’d to order his men to be quite
so that they might hear his words. Umar replied, “*I will order my men,
but can I prevent the neighing of horses and the clanging of armors*?”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Imam Husain the Saviour, p. 220.

Imam Husain (a.s) said, “*If you are not capable of it, I shall do it*.”
Then, Imam Husain (a.s) cast a glance all around. The men became quite,
the neighing of horses and the clanging of armors stopped. A miraculous
and absolute silence prevailed over the entire battlefield.

Imam Husain (a.s) first glorified God while addressing the enemy:

“God has created this world as a temporary and ever changing abode for
his creatures. Its pleasures entrap men and those who run after such
pleasures are, in reality, the losers. Let not the pleasures of this
world deceive you, for it denies you that which you seek and deprives
you of that which you aspire. I find that you have united in that which
God deplores and have thus incurred God’s wrath. You had apparently
accepted God’s sovereignty and Muhammad’s prophethood. Yet strangely,
you have joined hands against the very progeny of the Holy Prophet’s and
intend to kill them. Satan has prevailed over you and you have forsaken
God. You and your evil plans are going to be destroyed very soon. We are
from God and to Him is our return. You people have rescinded and lost
your faith and have become infidels. Tyrants will be soon
destroyed.”**[1]**

On hearing this, the vile Shimr said, “What you say is not
comprehensible to us, nor do we care for what you say.” Imam Husain
(a.s) replied,

“*I say:fear the True God,**[2]*** *and do not slay me, for in any
sense, it is neither legal nor proper for you to murder me. Nor have you
any right to disgrace me,**[3]** for I am the son of the daughter of the
messenger of Allah and my grandmother is Khadija. You know that the
messenger of Allah had declared that Hasan and Husain are the masters of
the youth of Paradise*.”

So saying, Imam Husain (a.s) raised his voice so that everyone there
might hear him. He said,

“O people of Iraq and all those who have gathered here, pay attention
and listen carefully. Do not be hasty until you hear me fully, for you
have the right to hear my objections and arguments before you, so that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Balaghatul Hussain, p. 105 – 107.  
**[2]** The words ‘True God’ is used here to distinguish between the
Creator on the one hand and the worldly wealth, power and pleasure which
Yazid and his men worshiped as their god.  
**[3]** To demand fealty for Yazid and to compel Imam Husain [s] to
swear allegiance to him is itself an act of insult and disgrace to Imam
Husain [s].

if you decide justly, it will stand to gain. If, perchance, you are
unable to decide justly*,**[1]*** I advise you first to, at least,
consult and discuss among yourselves so that you may resolve any
confusion, differences, difficulty or complication in the process of
arriving at a just conclusion. After this, inform me of your final
decision, but remember that God, Who had revealed the Book and *protects
the virtuous, is also my Protector*.”

Imam Husain (a.s) then returned to his camp, so that the enemy might
have the opportunity to discuss among themselves and arrive at their own
conclusion.

After some time, Imam Husain (a.s) once again returned to advise the
enemy forces. He said,

“You, people, are intent on being doomed. Is it not a fact that you
yourselves wrote to me complaining of your bewilderment at the
oppression and called me to your assistance? Have we not, at your
behest, rushed to redeem you? Until yesterday, you had drawn your swords
in our support and against oppression. Today, you have turned against
us. You fanned the smoldering fire of freedom against the common bigots
and oppressors, and today you are fanning the fire of hatred against us.
You have now joined hands with the enemy and are now opposing your
well-wishers, though your enemy has dealt injustice to you. You can not
repose any hope for just reward from the enemy except for the
possibility of getting impure and prohibited things of transitory carnal
pleasure. Nothing has transpired to shake your faith and confidence in
us. Then, what is the cause for deserting us and preparing to wage war
against us, even when our swords were in their sheaths and we continued
to repose confidence in you. Like swarms of locusts, you have gathered
in great numbers and surrounded us. You are doomed because you have
become oppressors, transgressors under Satan’s influence and you have
forsaken the Divine Commandments. You have joined the group of infidels
who introduced innovations in Islam, alterations in the Book and
Traditions, killed prophets and the progeny of their vicegerents. You
have now joined hands with those who adopted illegitimate children,
persecuted true believers, reviled the signs of God and tore the Holy
Qur’an into pieces. Your souls have accepted the most evil matter, which
have drawn you, in its vortex towards eternal doom. You are  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Injustice done out of fear or due to undue influence or avarice

supporting the offspring and associates of Harb (the Umayyads), and have
betrayed us. Your betrayal is well-known. Your roots are founded in
betrayal and your hearts are steeped in and content with betrayal. Your
character is abhorred by the pious and you are the most desired fruit of
usurpers. The curse of God is upon those who make solemn covenants only
to break them. You are, verily, those who broke their solemn covenants.
The illegitimate son of an illegitimate father (ibn Ziyad) is intent
upon two things; to either slay me or put me to the disgrace of meek
submission. It is impossible that I suffer the disgrace of submission.
My upbringing by the messenger of Allah in immaculate laps, noble
descent and independent mind does not brook even the very thought
abandoning sacrifice in preference to meek submission to the power of
the wretched tyrant. Look, I have discharged my duty of presenting my
objections and arguments and I have sufficiently warned you against
incurring God’s wrath for your evil intentions. You hold great numbers
of soldiers in your army against me while the numbers of my own
companions is very small. Friends have turned away from me and there is
none to help me. Despite all this, I have decided to stand up to your
evil forces.” **[1]**

According to Farwa, Imam Husain (a.s) then recited a few verses and
continued:

“It is only for as short time as it takes to mount a horse that you will
rejoice. Thereafter, you will be drawn and spun in the vortex of the
wheel of Time. My father has related this to me from my grandfather.”

Imam Husain (a.s) continued:

“*It is better that all of you and your associates sort out the affair
(to its proper and lawful conclusion) and do not hide your intent, but
make it known to each and everyone of you. After this, you are free to
deal with me forthwith, according to your choice. I only rely on God,
Who is also your Lord, for He controls everything, big and small, and
His Justice is sublime.”* **[2]**

Hearing this, Umar ibn Sa’d was enraged, and he asked his men to attack
Imam Husain (a.s) immediately. In his defense, Imam Husain (a.s) fought
and prevailed over whoever challenged him for a single combat. The evil
Shimr, as always, advised Umar ibn Sa’d to stop sending individuals, and
to launch concerted attacks. Imam Husain  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Balaghatul Hussain, p. 121–125.  
**[2]** Ibid., p. 127-129.

(a.s) repelled the attacks with such ferocity that the enemy soldiers
scattered for fear of their lives. Imam Husain (a.s) himself was
wounded. He then raised his voice and called out, “*Is there any one to
defend us? Is there anyone to help us*?”**[1]**

The Martyrdom of Ali al-Asghar
------------------------------

Imam Husain’s call had its effect on his son Ali al-Asghar (a.s), who
was six months old. The child fell out of his cradle in response to Imam
Husain’s call for help. This caused a great commotion among the women,
who feared that the infant was about to die out of the three day’s
thirst. The commotion and wailing attracted Imam Husain (a.s) who
returned to the camp. He took the child and covered him with a cloth to
protect him from the scorching sun. He brought the child into the
battlefield. The enemy soldiers assumed that Imam Husain (a.s) was
holding the Qur’an in his hand as a prelude to surrender. When Imam
Husain (a.s) lifted the cloth, the soldiers gasped with surprise to see
an infant. The infant smiled as if taunting the enemy in the face of
adversity.

Imam Husain (a.s) told the surrounding army:

“On account of you, this child has gone without water for the past three
days and you can see that the extreme thirst will kill him shortly. Is
there anyone who would provide water to this child?”

Several enemy soldiers were moved by the sight and a murmur of sympathy
was heard. Umar ibn Sa’d realized the seriousness of the situation and
said, *“Beware my soldiers! Do not be beguiled by al-Husain’s word. He
is only tricking you into getting some water for himself. Even if
al-Husain gets only a sip, it will reinvigorate him and several of us
will lose lives.*”

Imam Husain (a.s) replied,

“I only seek water for the infant, whose condition and agony is before
you. Since you fear that I may myself drink the water, I am placing this
infant on the ground so that you may yourselves take the child and
quench his thirst.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Note:Imam Husain’s request of help was not because he expected
to survive, but because he wanted to show that those surrounding him
were stonehearted and cruel and that there was none, at that time, who
was ready to help the lone, innocent person against the hordes who had
gathered in support of oppression and tyranny.

The child, placed on the burning sand of Karbala, protruded its tongue
as if to show the severity of the thirst. This act of the infant was so
eloquent that it created great pathos and several of the enemy soldiers
cried in grief. The eloquent gesture did not go unnoticed by Umar bin
Sa’d who considered it to be much more powerful than all the eloquent
sermons of Imam Husain (a.s) and all the martyrs. He therefore ordered
Harmala to interrupt Imam Husain’s words.

The cruel Shimr said, “*Beware soldiers! Al-Husain is only playing on
your sentiments. Do not forget that the emir ibn Ziyad’s order is that
not a drop of water should reach al-Husain or his family. Any
disobedience of his order will invite immediate punishment.*”

The wretched Umar ibn Sa’d called his archer, Harmala, who was renowned
for the velocity and strength of his arrows. He commanded Harmala to
kill the child with his arrow and thus to terminate the pathos created
by Imam Husain’s infant. Harmala’s arrow whizzed towards the child whom
Imam Husain (a.s) held close to his chest. The arrow slit the throat of
the six-month child and pinned him to Imam Husain’s ribs and arms. Imam
Husain (a.s) collected in his palm the dripping blood from the child’s
throat, looked towards the sky and then downwards towards the earth, and
finally applied it to his own face. He was seen muttering something.

Several years later in a gathering, Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s) was asked
why Imam Husain (a.s) had applied the infant’s blood to his face and
what was he muttering then. He replied, “*My father was saying*:‘*Before
God, I swear that these wretched people are cruel even to an infant. If
I throw the blood of this innocent martyr toward the sky, no rain will
ever fall anywhere on the earth, and if I throw it on the earth, it will
become parched and unproductive forever. Therefore, I am applying it to
my face so that I may complain to my Creator about the cruelty of these
people*.’

Imam Husain (a.s) was perplexed whether he should take the dead child
back to the camp or to bury him there. The cruel nature of Yazid’s army
was brought into full focus when, after the battle, the heads of martyrs
were counted, and not finding the infant’s head, soldiers were ordered
to find it. The wretched Harmala, Shimr and Khouli went about striking
their spears to find the soft earth where the child was buried and
ultimately unearthed the infant’s body, severed his tiny head and
carried it on a lance along with the heads of the other martyrs.

The Martyrdom of Imam Husain (a.s)
----------------------------------

Imam Husain (a.s) went back to his camp and bade farewell to his family
members who gathered around him in a circle. He advised them to bear the
calamity patiently. He then went to his ailing son and heir Zainul
Aabidin (a.s.) who was lying unconscious. The sweat from Imam Husain’s
brow fell upon Imam Zainul Aabidin who opened his eyes then. Seeing his
heavily injured father, Zainul Aabidin (a.s.) asked as to what happened
to all the relatives and companions, particularly Abbas and Ali
al-Akbar. Imam Husain (a.s.) told him that they were all martyred and
that he alone remained alive. He told Zainul Aabidin (a.s.) that then he
would not return from the battlefield. Imam Husain (a.s.) advised Zainul
Aabidin (a.s.) to bear the calamity with patience. He then said, “*My
son, when you go back to Medina, convey my greetings to our Shias
(followers) and tell them that I remembered them very much when I was
carrying the dead body of Ali al-Asghar. Ask my Shias to remember me
whenever they drink water and whenever they see any person suffering
away from his home.”*

Imam Husain then bade farewell to all members of his family and those
who were present in his camp. He bid adieu to each of the women and to
Fidhdha, his mother’s retainer.

As Imam Husain (a.s.) came out of his tent, his daughter Sukayna (a.s)
caught hold of him and on being told that he was going to the
battlefield, she cried out, “*My uncle Abbas went promising to bring
water, but he never returned. My brother Ali al-Akbar went, but he did
not come back. My cousins went but they too did not return. If you also
do not return, what will happen to me*?” To satisfy the child, he lay
down on the ground and Sukayna (a.s) clambered on and lay on his chest,
as she did everyday before going to sleep. She dozed off for a while,
but suddenly got up startled and said, “I *will not detain you because I
saw that your mother, father, and grandfather were all waiting for you
and asked me not to detain you any longer*.”

Imam Husain (a.s) who appeared old and feeble after the martyrdom of his
son Ali al-Akbar (a.s), now appeared to be invigorated with the desire
to meet his Creator. Abdullah ibn Imad, who was present in the
battlefield, narrates, “*I have not seen anyone whose companions, kith
and kin were slain before his eye, fighting the enemy with so much zeal,
vigour and determination*.”**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Imam Husain, p. 229.

Imam Husain (a.s) fought valiantly, scattered the soldiers and went to
the Euphrates. He spoke to his horse asking him to drink water, but the
faithful steed turned his head and refused to even lower his head. Imam
Husain (a.s) took the water in his hands to show that the river was now
in his control. He said, “*When my brother Abbas, my son Ali al-Akbar
and the infant Ali al-Asghar and my companions have all died thirsty, of
what use is this water to me?”* So saying, Imam Husain (a.s.) threw down
the water back into the river.

Meanwhile, the enemy had reassembled their ranks. Umar ibn Sa’d ordered
a general assault. Imam Husain (a.s) met the onslaught, defeated, and
scattered his opponents. He called out the names of Abbas (s), Ali
al-Akbar, Habib ibn Mudhahir, Muslim ibn Owsaja, Zohair, Habib, Sa’eed
and other companions, and asked them to witness his valour.

He then stood leaning on his sword and in a final attempt to bring the
enemy to reason, and eliminate the possibility of any claim as to a
mistake arising out of ignorance, regarding identity, he addressed the
enemy saying, “Tell me, by God, Do you not know who I am?” The soldiers
replied, “We know that you are the progeny and grandson of the messenger
of Allah.”

Imam Husain (s) said, “*Do you know that I am the son of Fatima,
daughter of the messenger of Allah*?” They replied, “*Yes, it is true*.”

Imam Husain (s) said, “By *God, you also know that Ali ibn Abu Talib is
my father*.” They replied, “*Yes, we know.*”

Imam Husain (s) said, “*Do you know that my grandmother Khadija was the
first to embrace Islam*?” They replied, “*Yes, it is so*.”

He then reminded them that it was his own uncle Ja’far and his father’s
uncle Hamza, who was killed and his raw liver was eaten by Hind mother
of Mu’awiya, were among the first martyrs who gave their lives for the
cause of Islam. He showed them the turban he was wearing and the sword
he held and asked, “*Do you know to whom these belonged*?” The enemy
replied, “*These are inherited by you from your grandfather, the
messenger of Allah*.”

Imam Husain (a.s) then reminded the enemy saying,

“Was not my father the first to accept Islam, entrusted as the Holy
Prophet’s trustee, given the standard by the Prophet (s) who declared
him as his vicegerent, successor and deputy? Did not the Prophet (s)

inform you that at the Pond of al-Kawthar in the Paradise, Ali will
quench the thirst of the faithful?”

The enemy admitted the truth of every word uttered by Imam Husain (s).
Umar ibn Sa’d replied, “*All this is nothing new. Everybody knows these
facts. We are professional soldiers and have come to fight you and not
to listen to your rhetoric. We will not rest until we slit your parched
throat.*” **[1]**

Imam Husain (s) then said,

“*Tell me if I have made innovations in Islam. Have I altered the Book?
Have I transgressed any tenet of Islam? Have I failed to observe my
religious obligations even once in my life? Have I killed anyone? Have I
deprived anyone of his property? Have you found anything I ever said to
be false? Did I ever hurt you? Did I ever aspire for any wealth or
power?”*

In one voice, the enemy soldiers declared that Imam Husain (s) had never
done any such thing.

Imam Husain (a.s) then asked, “*If you know all this, then tell me why
you want to slay me*?” Some of the soldiers shouted out, “*It is in
revenge for your father Ali. Our only desire is to slay you and avenge
our ancestors who were killed by your father Ali in the battles of Badr,
Uhud, Hunain and al-Khandaq*.”**[2]**

Umar ibn Sa’d realized that the real truth behind waging war had been
inadvertently revealed. Before Imam Husain (a.s) could say anything, the
cunning Umar ibn Sa’d ordered his soldiers to attack the women and
children in Imam Husain’s camp. This sudden turn of events greatly
pained Imam Husain (a.s).

He said, “O supporters of the Umayyads, how mean it is on your part to
think of attacking defenseless women. Even an atheist will not think of
doing it, if only out of his civic sense. You are worse than heathens
and atheists. I am still alive. Engage in combat with me and leave the
women and children alone.”

Imam Husain (a.s) quickly intercepted and killed the soldiers marching
towards his camp. He fell upon the enemy with renewed vigour and he
dispersed them far and wide.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Balaghatul Husain, P. 113-115.  
**[2]** Note, all these battles were fought by Imam Ali [s] to defend
and preserve Islam, under the Prophet [s].Though Yazid’s forces, in
seeking to kill Imam Husain [s], claimed that they were taking vengeance
against Imam Ali [s], it was in fact vengeance against the Prophet [s]
and Islam.

Imam Husain (a.s) called out at Umar ibn Sa’d to come before him. The
wretch came out and stood under the shade of the umbrella held by his
servant. At that time, there was much commotion and a lot of noise. Imam
Husain (a.s) said, “*I like to have a last word with you and your
army*.” Hardly could his words be heard above the din and noise. Imam
Husain (a.s) asked Umar ibn Sa’d to order silence so that all the
attendants might listen carefully. Umar ibn Sa’d replied, “*It is
impossible. I may ask my men to keep quite, but how can I prevent the
neighing of horses or the clanging of weapons*.” Imam Husain (s) said,
“*You have expressed your inability. Now, I will do it myself to see
that silence reigns so that every one present here may clearly hear
every word I utter*.”

Imam Husain (s) cast an intense glance all around him. The whole
atmosphere became quiet, neighing of horses and clanging of armor
stopped. Even the very wind became still and silence prevailed over the
entire battlefield. Thus, when Imam Husain (a.s), by his spiritual
power, commanded complete silence and got the attention of everyone, he
said in a loud and clear voice:

“O son of Sa’d, listen carefully and pay heed to my words so that you
may even now redeem yourself. I have been saying this from the first
day, and today I repeat it so that none may complain that he does not
know. I once again repeat that even now I give you the same three
options. I say, the first option is for you to remove the blockade
around me and let me go from here and return to Mecca or Medina.” Umar
ibn Sa’d replied, “Do you think that we have surrounded and dragged you
here to let you go? We are not such fools. Our leader Yazid has ordered
your death and has not permitted us to let you go from here.”

Imam Husain (a.s) then said, “Your second option is that since you
intend to confine me here and *to fight, let me have some water to
quench my thirst before fighting. Under your orders, I was deprived of
water for the past three days and this desert sun is scorching. ”*

Umar ibn Sa’d replied, “*We have strict orders from our emir Ibn Ziyad
not to allow even a drop of water to pass through your parched throat
until we slit it open*.” This reply of ibn Sa’d created a stir in his
army.

Imam Husain (a.s) said,

“O son of Sa’d, since you are neither willing to let me go nor to give
me even a drop of water, your third option is that, like true warriors,
come and face me one after another and fight me in single combat, for I
am alone and you are in thousands. ”

Umar ibn Sa’d realized that the refusal of all three options, which were
just and reasonable, might brook discontent and even lead to mutiny in
his own army. Grudgingly and outwardly, as hypocrite that he was, Umar
ibn Sa’d conceded the last demand and agreed that his soldiers would
challenge Imam Husain (a.s) only in a single combat.

Hardly had a few soldiers challenged and were vanquished by Imam Husain
(a.s), when Shimr bin Thul Joushan, Harmala, and Sinan bin Anas advised
Umar ibn Sa’d saying, “*This is the valiant son of the undefeated
warrior Ali. He is the best of the Hashimites, and like his father, he
can never be overcome in single combat, even if you keep on sending
warriors until eternity. The only way to defeat him is to order a
general attack, preferably by archers and lancers who can pick al-Husain
from a distance, without risking their own lives.*” Umar bin Sa’d
replied, “*You are only reflecting what is in my own mind*.” Umar
ordered a general attack by his archers and lancers. Arrows and lances
rained on Imam Husain (a.s) injuring him from all sides.

Imam Husain (a.s) suffered many serious injuries and was bleeding
profusely. He was swaying on his steed. Yet, none of the cowards dared
to go near him. An arrow struck his forehead with such force that it
stuck there. Imam Husain (a.s) pulled it out and fresh blood started
flowing on his face. He murmured, “*O God, be my witness as to how these
people treat your humble servant*.”

At that moment, another dart pierced his chest with such force that Imam
Husain (s) trembled on the saddle. He recited:

“In the name of Allah, for the sake of Allah, with His help and in
following the tenets of the messenger of Allah. My Lord, you are a
witness that these people has killed me and killed the progeny of Your
Prophet.”

An evil man, Salih bin Wahab al-Muzany, was waiting for an opportunity
and he struck the fainting Imam Husain (s) on the head with a heavy
club, bringing him down from his horse. Seeing this, Abdullah son of
Imam Hasan (a.s) who was about ten years old, rushed out, caught hold of
Salih, and said, “*How dare you assault my uncle?*” The notoriously
wretched Harmala struck Abdullah with his poisoned arrow. Imam Husain
(a.s) caught hold of the falling lad who died in his arms.

Imam Husain (a.s) looked up at the sky. It was time for evening prayers.
Imam Husain (a.s) put his sword in the scabbard and performed his
prayers while sitting. He was unable to lift his head. He collected a
little heap of sand, and placing his right cheek, facing the camp, and
watching if any assault is being made on his camp, Imam Husain (a.s)
recited, “*O Allah, my Preserver, my Master*.” He repeated this with his
left cheek placed on the small heap of sand and lastly with his forehead
placed on the small heap of sand. This *Sunnah* is practiced by the Shia
when they end their prayers, whether obligatory or recommended prayers,
by keeping, instead of a mound of soil, a small pellet made from the
soil of Karbala.

Seeing Imam Husain (a.s) motionless, ibn Sa’d ordered an assault on the
women in Imam Husain’s camp, just to find out if Imam Husain (a.s) was
still alive. On hearing the mean trick, Imam Husain (a.s) pulled himself
up and said,

“How cowardly and shameless you are! You order women and children, who
cannot defend themselves, to be assaulted. Come one by one if you are
men and fight with me, for I am still alive.”

The coward Shimr ordered his soldiers to surround Imam Husain (a.s) and
bring him down on the ground. The cowards surrounded Imam Husain (a.s)
in a great number and each one gave a blow with whatever weapon he
carried. Imam Husain (a.s) fell down and lay prostrate on the ground.
Malik bin Bishr gave a severe blow with his sword followed by Zar’ah bin
Shareek. Moving on his knees, Imam Husain (a.s) killed Zar’ah with a
single blow of his sword.

Imam Husain (a.s) said,

“O my Lord, give me patience so that I may bear this cruelty. I declare
that there is no God but You...”

Finding that Imam Husain (a.s), even in this plight continued to
glorify, pray and seek strength from God, the infidel hypocrite Hussayn
bin Numair struck an arrow which transfixed Imam Husain’s mouth.

Another wretch, Abu Ayyoob al-Ghanawi pierced Imam Husain’s throat with
an arrow. Nasr bin Kharasha dealt a heavy blow with his sword. Salih bin
Wahab al-Muzany struck Imam Husain (a.s) with his lance. Imam Husain
(a.s) continued moving about on his knees and praying. Sinan ibn Anas
dealt two blows, one with his lance and another with his arrow which
paralyzed Imam Husain (a.s).

All these names and factual details are recorded by historians who were
present in the battlefield at Karbala. The historian Abu Makhnaf,
recorded his detailed eye-witness account about the beheading of Imam
Husain (a.s).

First, Shabath bin Rib’iy attempted to behead Imam Husain (a.s), but
when Imam Husain (a.s) faced him, he ran back shivering. Sinan ibn Anas
asked the reason for his sudden retreat and Shabath replied, “*When I
saw al-Husain’s eyes, I found that they resembled the eyes of the
Prophet. The sight so frightened me that I had no courage to touch
al-Husain*.” Sinan mocked at Shabath and proceeded towards Imam Husain
(a.s). When Imam Husain (a.s) looked at him, Sinan trembled and ran away
and his sword slipped and fell from his hand.

When Shimr questioned him, Sinan replied, “*Al-Husain so much resembled
Ali that I was unnerved and I lost my courage.*” Shimr said, “*You are
all boneless cowards. It is I and I alone who will behead al-Husain.*”

The accursed Shimr sat on the chest of the prostrate Imam Husain (a.s).
Imam Husain (a.s) opened his eyes and asked the name of the one who was
so harsh to him. Shimr mentioned his name, and then Imam Husain (a.s)
asked, “*Do you know who I am*?” Shimr replied, “*Yes, I know that you
are Husain son of Ali and Fatima the daughter of the Prophet. Hasan is
your brother.*”

Imam Husain (a.s) said, “*When you know this, then why do you want to
kill me*?” The shameless brute replied, “*For the reward promised by
Yazid to anyone who brings your head.*” Imam Husain (a.s) asked, “*Is
salvation and a place in the Paradise dearer to you, or the reward
promised by Yazid*?” Shimr replied, “*Salvation and Paradise are vain
promises without proof and I am not sure about them, but I am sure of
the reward promised by Yazid.*”

On hearing this, Imam Husain (a.s) asked Shimr to remove the cloth
covering his chest. On seeing Shimr’s chest, Imam Husain (a.s)
exclaimed, “*How true my father is and how true my grandfather the
messenger of Allah is*!” Shimr asked Imam Husain (a.s) what was that,
and Imam Husain (a.s) replied, “*My grandfather, the messenger of Allah,
told my father Ali who related to me that my assassin’s chest would bear
the marks of leprosy and it would be full of coarse and long hair like
those of a wild boar.*”

Hearing this, Shimr became angry. He turned Imam Husain (a.s.) over and
beheaded him from behind. When asked later why he did so,

Shimr replied that he dared not look into the eyes nor hear the words of
Imam Husain (a.s) and therefore he turned him upside down. The severed
head mounted on a lance was handed over to Khouli ibn Yazid al-Asbahi
and Hamid ibn Muslim. The heads of the other martyrs including the
infant Ali al-Asghar were severed from their bodies, mounted on lances,
and carried by the tribes of Kindah, Hawazinn, Tameem, and Muthhij under
the command of the accursed Shimr bin Thil Joushan, Qais ibn al-Ash’ath,
and Amr ibn al-Hajjaj. The tribe of al-Hurr refused to severe his head
or permit trampling his body. They took his body and buried it in their
village about seven kilometers away from Karbala where his mausoleum is
found today.

Abu Makhnaf writes, “Having committed the nefarious and sacrilegious
act, Shimr cried out ‘Allaho Akbar’ while beheading al-Husain (a.s). At
that moment, darkness enveloped and a violent earthquake shook the
earth. Raw blood rained from the sky and a loud voice proclaimed, “By
God, an Imam, son of an Imam is unjustly slain. The one who cared for
the poor, the sick, the disabled, the widows and children is butchered
without cause.” This occurred on Friday the tenth of Muharram, in the
year 61 A.H.” Abu Ishaq al-Esfarayini narrates similar facts with some
additions.**[1]**

Among the Twelver Shia, the tragedy of Karbala is recited in the form of
Elegies called ‘Marthiyya’ and have been passed on from a generation to
another and regularly recited and detailed by their orators in prose in
their congregations known as ‘Majlis’, throughout the year on different
important occasions.

It will be incorrect to assume that the details of the martyrdom of Imam
Husain (a.s), his companions and family members are exaggerated. These
are facts recorded by impartial historians like Abu Makhnaf and Hameed
ibn Muslim, a reporter imbedded with Yazid’s army. None of their
accounts have ever been challenged or disproved or even shown to be
incorrect or exaggerated. Major Price, Simon Oakley**[2]** and several
western writers have relied on the narration of Hameed and Abu Makhnaf.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Life of Imam Husain, p. 239-240.  
**[2]** History of the Saracens.
