Chapter 24the Burial of the Martyrs
===================================

The night after the battle was the most painful one for the remaining
members of Imam Husain’s family. Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s.) was lying
unconscious with high fever. On the martyrdom of his father, he had
succeeded as the fourth Imam. There was no male member to guide the
women. Tents were burnt and the women and children were forced to go out
into the open. Lady Zainab (a.s), in keeping with the family tradition,
approached Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s.), the Imam of the time, and asked,
“*O son, all our men have been killed, our tents have been set on fire,
and our head-scarves have been snatched. We have no option but to remain
in the tents and be burnt to ashes or to go out into the open. You are
the Imam succeeding our martyred lord Husain. What do you order us to do
in the present state of affairs?*”

By her conduct, Lady Zainab (a.s) established that Zainul Aabidin Ali
ibn al-Husain (a.s) was the *Imam* succeeding his father that even at
the peril of one’s life, one has to strictly abide by the order,
direction, and wish of the *Imam* of the time.

Imam Zainul Aabidin replied that death would be preferable to life after
the loss of Imam Husain, yet since it would amount to suicide if they
remained to be burnt in the tents, they should go out into the open. The
Imam further said that if all were burnt to death, there would be no
anyone to tell the truth about what happened in Karbala and the tyrants
would spread all sorts of false rumors. It was therefore necessary to
live, though as captives, in order to propagate the message of Imam
Husain (a.s) and explain in detail the atrocities and injustice meted
out to him and his companions. From that moment, Lady Zainab (a.s)
became Husain’s ambassador, espousing Husain’s cause at every
opportunity, even at the most adverse situation.

Lady Zainab gathered all the women and children around the unconscious
Imam Zainul Aabidin in a secluded open spot. She took a pole from a
burning tent to ward off any mischief monger. In the middle of the
night, she found that two children were missing. She left in search of
the missing children, telling her sister Umm Kulthoom to take care of
others in her absence.

When Lady Zainab (a.s) entered the battlefield in search for the missing
children, she found them lying, clasped to each other. Out of sheer
fright and the terrific stress, the children had died. When she
returned, she found that Sukaina, the teenaged daughter of Imam Husain
(a.s), was missing too. Once again, Lady Zainab (a.s) went into the
battlefield. She found that, clasped to a headless body, Sukaina
appeared to be asleep. She heard a voice asking her not to disturb the
child. Lady Zainab (a.s) then asked, “*Are you my brother Husain*?” She
received the reply, “*Yes*.”

The battlefield was strewn with the bodies of the martyrs. The men of
Umar bin Sa’d removed the bodies of their killed soldiers, leaving
behind the bodies of Imam Husain (a.s), his relatives and
companions.**[1]** Some persons related to some of Imam Husain’s
companions removed the bodies of their relatives. Al-Hurr’s tribesmen
took away the bodies of al-Hurr, his son, and brother and buried them at
their village that is about seven kilometers from Karbala. Some other
persons took the bodies of their relatives. Only the bodies of the
offspring of Abdul Muttallib were left in the battlefield.

It was an unholy custom among the Arabs in the pre-Islamic times that
the body of the vanquished was trampled under the hoofs of horses in a
show of barbaric power. The custom was prohibited and discontinued after
the Prophet (s) had proclaimed Islam. Thus in none of the several
battles and skirmishes, nowhere do we find such incidents of trampling
of dead bodies.

As a mark of their return to barbarism, Umar bin Sa’d ordered horses to
be freshly shod in order to trample the headless body of Imam Husain
(a.s). Umar bin Sa’d called for volunteers to trample Imam Husain’s body
(a.s) under the hoofs of their horses. The ten accursed men, who
volunteered to do that, were [1] Ishaq ibn Hawiyyah [2] al-Akhnas ibn
Marsad ibn Alqama ibn Salamah al-Hadhrami [3] Hakeem ibn Tufayl
al-Sinbisi [4] Amr ibn Sabih al-Saidawi [5] Raja’ ibn Munqith al-Abdi
[6] Salim ibn Khaythama al-Ju’fi [7] Wahidh ibn Ghanim **[8]** Hani ibn
Thubeit al-Hadhrami [9] Salih ibn Wahab al-Ju’fi and [10] Useid ibn
Malik.**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Imam Husain and the Tragic Saga of Karbala, p.304.  
**[2]** At-Tabari’s Tarikh, vol. 6, P.161, Ibnul Athir’s Tarikh, vol. 4,
P.33, al-Mas’udi’s Muruj ath-Thahab, vol. 2, p.91, al-Bidaya of Ibn
Kathir, vol. 8, p.189, Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 3, p. 333, Manaqib of
Shahr Ashub, vol. 2 p.224, at-Tabrasi’s A’lamul

Before trampling the body, the accursed Ishaq ibn Hawiyyah pillaged the
shirt from Imam Husain’s headless body; al-Akhnas ibn Marthad ibn Alqama
al-Hadhrami took his turban; al-Aswad ibn Khalid took his sandals;
Jamee’ ibn al-Khalq al-Awdi or according to some others, Aswad ibn
Handhala took his sword; Badjal took Imam Husain’s ring by cutting his
finger.

When the severed heads of the Hashimites were counted, Umar bin Sa’d
noticed that the head of the infant Ali al-Asghar (a.s) was missing. He
ordered his men to find it soon. They started poking the ground with
lances to find the sift soil where Ali al-Asghar (a.s) was buried by
Imam Husain (a.s). Soon, a lance struck a soft spot and when probed
deeper out, came the body of the infant transfixed on the lance. The
infant’s head was severed and mounted on a lance with the other heads of
the seventeen Hashimites.**[1]**

We have dealt with some detail in order to show that the headless bodies
trampled and left in the battlefield were practically unrecognizable.
Though there are several reports that men from the tribe of Banu Asad
buried the bodies on the night of the eleventh of Muharram,**[2]**
Shiite sources discount such accounts, firstly on the ground that Banu
Asad could not have identified the bodies, and secondly, on account of a
fundamental belief that the *Imam* being Immaculate could only be buried
by another *Imam*.

The Waqifites believed that Imamate ended with the seventh Imam Musa
al-Kadhim (a.s). Ali bin Hamza, a *Waqifite* man*,* argued that since
Ali bin Musa ar-Redha (a.s) was in Medina when his father Imam Musa
al-Kadhim (a.s) died in Baghdad, he (ar-Redha) could not have buried his
father, being in Medina away from Baghdad, and so ar-Redha (a.s) could
not be the Imam.

Imam ar-Redha (a.s) asked, “*Tell me, who buried Imam Husain at
Karbala?*” The *Waqifite man* answered, “*Of course, it was Imam Ali
ibnul Husain Zainul Aabidin (a.s) who buried Imam Husain (a.s).”* Imam
Reza (a.s) said, “*But Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s) was unconscious with
fever and was taken to Kufa as a captive. How could he have buried Imam
Husain?*”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Wara, p.662, Imam Husayn & the Tragic Saga of Karbala, p. 314-316,
al-Jibouri’s Kerbala & Beyond, p.65.**  
 [1]** Life of Imam Husain the Saviour, p. 242.  
**[2]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 120 quoting Shahr Ashub and al-Mas’udi.

The *Waqifite* replied, “*Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s) by his miraculous
powers came from Kufa to Karbala in the night after Ashura, buried his
father and other relatives and he returned to Kufa before Umar bin Sa’d
or ibn Ziyad could notice his absence.”*

Imam ar-Redha (a.s.) replied, “*The same powers that enabled Imam Zainul
Aabidin to come from Kufa to Karbala in order to bury Imam Husain
enabled me as the Imam to come from Medina to Baghdad to bury my
father*.” The incident is reported in detail by Sheikh Abbas
al-Qummi.**[1]**

There are no detailed reports available about the burial, probably
because the historians recording the incidents moved to Kufa along with
the caravan on the eleventh of Muharram. According to Shiite tenets,
Imam Ali Ibnul Husain Zainul Aabidin (a.s) with the assistance of the
tribesmen of Banu Asad, Angels and the believers from the Jinn
identified the bodies and buried Imam Husain’s headless body along with
that of the infant Ali al-Asghar (a.s). At the foot of Imam Husain’s
tomb, he buried Ali al-Akbar (a.s). The body of Habib ibn Mudhahir was
buried near the tomb of Imam Husain (a.s). The bodies of the other
Hashimites along with other companions of Imam Husain (a.s) were buried
in a common graveyard at the foot to one side of Imam Husain’s tomb as
we find them today in the miraculous shrine in Karabala. After some
weeks, the captives were released and the heads of the martyrs given
back to them. Lady Zainab insisted that the martyrs’ families be allowed
to mourn their deads. The caravan reached Karbala. They found that a
companion of the Prophet (s) Jabir bin Abdullah al-Ansari had already
reached the tombs and was offering his supplications. Imam Zainul
Aabidin (a.s.) Joined the heads to the bodies of the martyrs with the
help of the men from the tribe of Banu Asad.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nafasul Mahmoom, p. 122-123.
