Part a Demolition of the Shrines
================================

The Bani Asad had helped Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s.) in burying the
martyrs. Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s.) foretold, “In this land of Karbala,
the shrine of Imam Husain (a.s) will become a beacon of perpetual
guidance. Centuries will pass but the grace flowing from Husain’s shrine
will continue unabated. The misguided leaders of recanting disbelievers
will spare no effort to destroy and obliterate every sign and memory of
the shrine, but every one of their malicious attempt will only augment
the glory of the shrine.”

History is witness to the fact that no less than eight times, if not
seventeen times, the shrine of Imam Husain (a.s.) was completely
destroyed only to come up in a larger and more glorious structure. The
Umayyads and the Abbasids spared no effort to prevent people from
visiting the shrine. Every such restriction only brought more and more
determined pilgrims. We give below a short account of these incidents.

Now, within a few years after Ashura, for the first time the Banu Asad
constructed a small structure over the graves and a mosque nearby. The
Umayyads however established police chowkidars to prevent people from
visiting the tombs. However, the structure remained until the end of the
reign of the Umayyads, who were more interested in identifying and
annihilating the Shia. The structure drew the Shia like a magnet and
thus helped the Umayyads in easily apprehending them (the Shia). Perhaps
this was the reason why the structure remained intact, even as the
Umayyads desecrated Medina and Mecca and the shrines in those cities.

According to the authors of *Nuzhat Ahlil Haramain* and *A’yaanush
Shia*, the first structure remained until the year 193 AH.**[1]** The
Abbasids, who succeeded the Umayyads in the rule, were initially engaged
in establishing their control over the newly acquired government. At
first, the jealousy and enmity to Imam Ali and his progeny was only
secretly nurtured. It was in the period of the Abbasid Caliph al-Mansur
ad-  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Tarikh Karbala-e-Mu\`alla Published by Islah*,* Khajwa, Bihar,
p.109.

Dawaniqi that the first demolition of the shrine took place. So cruel
was al-Mansur that he not only killed the Umayyads but also massacred
thousands from the progeny of Ali and Fatima and their followers. No
sooner than the shrine was demolished, a new and better structure was
put up by the public at great peril.

For the second time, Harun ar-Rashid demolished the structure out of his
intense enmity towards Imam Husain (a.s.). He even ordered the tree that
stood as a marker near the tomb to be cut. Harun ar-Rashid died shortly
thereafter and immediately another structure was constructed in the year
193 AH. Some authors are of the opinion that al-Ma’mun got the second
structure constructed in 193 AH only to pacify the enraged public by
pretending to be a well-wisher of the *Ahlul Bayt.*

Sheik at-Toosi also narrates that when Yahya bin al-Mughira was with
Jareer bin Abdul Hamid, an Iraqi came and on being questioned he said,
“*Harun ar-Rashid destroyed the tomb of al-Husain and cut the lote-tree
which was near the tomb and that was used as a mark leading to the tomb.
I have heard a tradition of the Prophet (s) who repeated thrice:‘May
Allah’s curse be upon the one who cuts the lote-tree.’ It is only now
that I can understand the significance of the Prophet’s saying.*”**[1]**

Sheikh at-Toosi in his *Amali* writes that in the year 247 AH,
Ubaidullah bin Rabee’ah went to perform the Hajj and on his return, he
went to visit the tombs of the martyrs of Karbala. He found that on the
orders of the caliph, the graves were demolished and when the earth was
sought to be ploughed, the bulls refused to tread the tomb (of Imam
Husain) and veered off to the right or the left of the tomb in spite of
being beaten severely. Ubaidullah saying, “*By Allah, if the Umayyads
have killed the grandson of the messenger of Allah, then their cousins
the Abbasids too have oppressed him. By your life, his tomb has been
desecrated even as they (the Abbasids) regret for not having supported
in killing al-Husain, they persecuted him after he was
martyred*.”**[2]** A similar report is narrated through Umar ibn Faraj
ar-Rakhji.**[3]**

The third construction, which was a huge structure, remained for about
forty years until al-Mutawakkil ascended the throne in 232 AH.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Nafasul Mahmoom,* p. 286.  
 **[2]** Ibid*.,* p. 285-286.  
 **[3]** Ibid*.,* p. 286.

Al-Mutawakkil not only demolished the structure but he also confiscated
all the properties dedicated to the shrine saying that the graves of the
dead did not need anything.**[1]** Soon after the demolition, every time
a new and larger structure was constructed by the public. In his tenure
of fifteen years, al-Mutawakkil demolished the shrine not less than four
times; in the years 233, 236, 237, and 247 AH.**[2]**

Al-Muntasir killed his father al-Mutawakkil and reconstructed the
shrine. In 247 AH, the shrine was once again constructed. Al-Muntasir
not only got the shrine reconstructed on a larger scale, but also he
encouraged people to visit it.**[3]**

In the year 263 AH due to a conspiracy of the government, the roof of
the shrine caved in and hundreds of visitors were crushed to death.

For ten years, the shrine remained without a roof. In 273 AH, Mohammad
bin Zaid bin al-Hasan bin Mohammad bin Ismael, who was known as *Da’iy
as-Saghir,* reconstructed the shrines at Karbala and Najaf once
again.**[4]**

The shrine in Karbala was provided a dome and the shrine in Najaf was
renovated and expanded. The shrines at Mecca and Medina were expanded
and fresh constructions were added by Adhdud Dowla Khosrow bin Buwayh
Dailamy. Ibnul Athir in his *at-Tarikh al-Kamil* praises the work done
by Adhdud Dowla. Ibnul Athir also records that a dacoit called Zaba bin
al-Asadi looted the shrine several times. Adhdud Dowla sent a large
contingent to apprehend the dacoits, but they escaped arrest.**[5]**
During this period, Imran bin Shahin constructed a mosque and walls
surrounding a huge courtyard at Karbala that were known as the
*Courtyard of Imran*. It is also said that under a vow taken by him, he
also constructed a mosque at Kazimain. In the month of Rabi’ul Awwal in
407 AH, there was an accidental fire that destroyed the entire
structure.**[6]** Some say that the fire was accidental but a majority
is of the opinion that it was started on the secret orders  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tarikh Karbala-e-Mu’alla*, p.111quoting *Nasikhut Tawareekh,*
vol. 2 p. 37.  
 **[2]** Ibid*.,* p.152-153.  
 **[3]** Ibid*.,* p.115 quoting *Nuzhat al-Haramain,* vol. 2 p. 17 and
*A’yan ash-Shia,* vol. 4 p. 53.  
 **[4]** *Tarikh Karbala-e-Mu’all,a,* p.117-118 quoting *Nuzhat
al-Haramain,* p. 20 and *A’yan ash-Shia,* vol. 4 p. 306.  
 **[5]** *Tarikh Karbala-e-Mu’alla,* vol. 2, p. 173 quoting *at-Tarikh
al-Kamil,* vol. 8 p.226,.  
 **[6]** At-*Tarikh al-Kamil* of ibnul Athir, vol. 9 p. 102.

of the caliph al-Qadir Billah who was responsible for several cases of
arson and looting.

After the fire, Ibn Sahlan Ramhurmuzi, who was appointed the prime
minister, constructed a stone wall all around the shrines in Karbala and
Najaf. These walls remained intact for about a century from 424 to 562
AH. Ibnul Athir was contemporary and has reported the incident in detail
in his book about the reconstruction of the shrine by Abu Mohammad bin
Sahlan.

In 526 AH, al-Mustarshid Billah merely appropriated all the moveable and
immovable properties dedicated to the shrines, but he did not meddle
with their structures.

In 620 AH, the caliph Nasiruddin’s minister Mo’ayyiduddin Mohammad
al-Alqami made many beautiful additions to the structure that remained
intact for about 360 years.

An Arab, Mohammad bin Falah came to power in 754 AH. He was a student of
Mohammad Sheikh Ahmed bin Fahad al-Hilli. He believed that Imam Ali
(a.s.) was alive and that his soul has had transmigrated into him. He
destroyed the dome of the shrine at Najaf saying that Imam Ali was God
and that God would never die. He converted the shrine into the royal
kitchen.**[1]**

Mohammad bin Falah’s son Ali went one step ahead of his father and
claimed to be God incarnate. In 858 AH, he looted the pilgrims to Najaf
and Karbala and destroyed the shrines and the houses surrounding them.

The foundations for the present structure of the shrine at Karbala were
laid and a beautiful building was raised in 767 AH by Sultan Owais bin
Sheikh Hasan al-Jalairi. His children Sultan Husain and Sultan Ahmed
continued the work of expansion and beautification. The Sultan’s
Bondsman Marjan was appointed governor of Baghdad. He revolted against
the caliph, but when the caliph brought a huge army, Marjan’s supporters
deserted him. Marjan sought asylum in the shrine of Imam Husain,
dedicated all his wealth to the shrine, and vowed that if he was spared
by the caliph, he would beautify the shrine. On receiving the Sultan’s
pardon, Marjan renovated the shrine and constructed a beautiful minaret.
Ibn Kathir, the author of *al-Bidaya wan-Nihaya* who  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Tarikh Karbala-e-Mu’alla,* vol. 2, p. 182-183 quoting
*Aatharush Shia*, p. 58-59.

was a contemporary and eye witness, has reported the incident in detail
at page 913 of vol. 14 of his book about the reconstruction of the
shrine by Abu Mohammad bin Sahlan and the beautiful minaret raised by
Marjan.**[1]**

On the tenth of Thul Hijjah, 1216 AH, corresponding to the year 1948 AD,
the Wahabite army of Arabs entered Karbala and demolished, razed the
shrine to the ground, and looted all decorations including the gold
inlays and precious stones. This incident is reported in detail in
Stephen Hamly’s book ‘Four Centuries of Iraq’s History’.

The minaret constructed by Marjan in 767 AH was demolished in the year
1354 AH. The excuse made was that the minaret was tilting towards one
side and that it might, in its fall, damage the main shrine. It is
commonly believed that the minaret was demolished only to misappropriate
the huge endowments that were made by the Safawid kings.

Shah Abbas Safawi in 914 AH, Sultan Sulaiman Qanuni in 941 AH, Shah
Tahmasb in 950 AH, the Qachar kings Sultan Agha Mohammad Khan, Fateh-Ali
Shah, and Nasiruddin Shah and finally Mulla Tahir Saifuddin, towards the
end of the 1300 AH, made several renovations and additions to the shrine
that we see today.

The latest incident of demolition of the shrine of Imam Ali an-Naqi
(al-Hadi) and Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (a.s) took place at Samara in
Northern Iraq by bomb blast on February 2, 2006. It bears testimony to
the fact that even in these enlightened and civilized times, people get
a sadistic pleasure in bombing and destroying the tombs. We can very
well imagine the atrocities that would have been committed in the days
when men were known to be more barbaric, illiterate and uncivilized.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid*.,* p.139.
