Part E: Persecution under the Mongols and Recent Times
======================================================

Persecution by the Mongols
--------------------------

During Akbar’s rule, Judge Noorullah ash-Shushtari, known as (the Third
Martyr) and popularly called ‘Qadhi (judge) Sahib’, migrated from Iran
to India. He was a great scholar in all the five schools of
Jurisprudence *(fiqh)* ; the Hanafite, Shafiite, Malikite, Hanblite, and
Shiism. His knowledge was appreciated by Akbar who appointed him as the
chief judge of Lahore. Ash-Shushtari accepted the appointment with a
precondition that he would administer justice according to any of the
five schools of Jurisprudence. His knowledge of the Islamic sects had
convinced him that there was always a parallel in one of the four Sunni
schools of Jurisprudence. Accordingly, he gave judgment according to
that school of Sunni Jurisprudence that was in agreement with the Shiite
thought. Complaints started pouring that ash-Shushtari was administering
judgment according to the Shiite Jurisprudence. Ash-Shushtari showed
that in fact he gave Judgment according to one of the four Sunni
schools, which incidentally was in agreement with the Shia Law. Akbar
realized the wisdom of ash-Shushtari and refused to entertain any
complaint against him.[^1]

When Akbar died, his son Jahangir killed Ali Quli Khan and took his
widow, famous Noor Jehan as his wife. We may recall the incident of
Khalid bin al-Waleed with Malik bin Nuwayra where Khalid killed Malik
and committed adultery with his wife. By his nature, like Khalid bin
al-Waleed, Jahangir was also a tyrant.

One of the Sunni scholars Makhdumul Mulk Abdullah al-Ansari became
all-powerful in Jahangir’s court. He was an extremist. He issued a
*Fatwa* that it was not only impermissible but had become sin to perform
the *Hajj* in the circumstances then prevailing. When asked to explain
he said, “*In these days, if pilgrims travel by land, they will have to
pass through the land of the Rafidhite (Twelver Shia) ] which is sin. On
the other hand, if the pilgrim takes a ship, all ships belong to the
Europeans where they will find the portraits of Jesus and Mary which
amounts to idolatry that is sin.”*[^2] Makhdumul Mulk equated the Shia
to idolaters and thereby indirectly declared them as disbelievers*.*

Makhdumul Mulk could not find fault with the judgments rendered by
Noorullah ash-Shushtari. He therefore planted a spy who pretended to be
a Shia. He gained the confidence of ash-Shushtari and got access to two
books on Shiism, namely, ‘*Ihqaqul Haq*’ and ‘*Majalisul Mo’minin*’. The
spy pretended to be deeply interested in the books and, after taking
ash-Shushtari’s permission to read them, he took them to his house. He
passed on copies of the books which became powerful weapons in the hands
of those who were inimical to ash-Shushtari. They took the books to
Jahangir as a proof that ash-Shushtari was Shia who deserved to be
executed. Jahangir agreed to their demand and ash-Shushtari was flogged
with barbed whips that virtually stripped his skin. This was in the year
1019 AH. Ash-Shushtari’s dead body was left lying on the open ground for
several days.[^3]

An Iranian nobleman, who was holding a high post in Gwalior, dreamt that
Lady Fatima (a.s.) was asking him to bury the body of the martyr
ash-Shushtari. The Iranian took permission from Jahangir and buried the
body near the Civil Court, a few yards away from *Changi Chowki.* In the
year 1188, Muhammad Mansur Musavi Nishapuri constructed a shrine over
the tomb. In the year 1290, a compound wall was constructed enclosing
the huge area of endowed land by Sayyid Ali Naqi, Deputy Collector. In
the year 1309, Tahsildars Kifayat Husayn and Khan Bahadur Sayyid Abul
Hasan and Sayyid Nazim, an advocate, fixed iron doors, and with
donations collected by the public. Nazim Husayn also started the
*Majlis* which has continued until now. In 1332 AH, a committee was
formed that supervised the construction of four buildings to accommodate
men and one building to accommodate women. They were constructed under
the direction of the Secretary Nawab Muhammad Sajjad Ali of *Sheesjh
Mahal.* [^4]

Adil Shahi and Qutub Shahi the kings of Deccan were Shia. Aurangzeb
persecuted and killed several of them. My father told me that my
ancestors, who were Shia living in Bijapore, were hunted down and
killed. The younger members of the family were made to stand and walls
raised around them, that if old structures were to be pulled down now,
skeletons would be found in the walls. Because of the persecution, my
grandparents left Bijapore and settled in Vellore of North Arcot
District of the erstwhile Madras State. They were pious people and until
now, their graves in Qasba near the Fort at Vellore are revered both by
Hindus and Muslims alike. However, in the process, they were forced to
conceal their faith, offer prayers only privately in closed rooms, and
shut themselves up during the first ten days of Muharram. In course of
time, Vellore and some surrounding villages acquired their own Shia
population. Madras being a cosmopolitan city, soon attracted the Shia
who settled in pockets in areas such as Thousand Lights on Mount Road,
Triplicane, Royapettah, Perambur, Pudupet…etc., and spread to several
outskirts of Chennai. Madras gave birth to several Shia scholars such as
Moulvi Hasan Raza from Pudupet, Moulvi Nabiul Ahmed Khan, Moulvi Ghulam
Muhammad Mehdi Khan, his son Ghulam Muhammad Taqi Khan, and S.V. Mir
Ahmed Ali from Thousand Lights; and lastly, my mentor and teacher Mirza
Ghulam Abbas Ali Sahib from Royapettah. There were such great
businessmen like the Khaleelis. It is said that the Khaleelis acquired
so many properties on Mount Road that the British Government issued a
notification, prohibiting sale of any property to the Khaleelis.

Bangalore, Mysore and its suburbs also have a sizeable population of
Shia. Andhra Pradesh Hyderabad has the largest Shia population. Vizag,
Masuliptam, Nagaram and Nellore also have sizeable Shia populations.

Hyderabad has its own legends. The Nizam was prevailed upon to issue an
order prohibiting breast-beating and to the Chant of ‘Husayn’, ‘Husayn’
in the famous Ashura procession of Bi Bi ka Alam. The Sunnis had argued
that breast-beating is barbaric and should be banned in these
enlightened days. When the Shia came to know about the ordinance, they
approached the Nizam who had a soft corner for the Shia. He gave them
counsel and said, ‘you go ahead with the procession on the lines I have
given you.’ When the procession started, the Shia started chanting ‘Ibne
Zehra wa wayla’ while striking their heads. The Sunnis rushed to
complain to the Nizam. The Nizam replied, “*At your instance, I have
banned breast beating. What can I do if they strike their head? I have
also banned the use of the words “*Husayn” *as desired by you. It will
not be an offence if the Shia use the word “Ibne Zehra” though that word
also refers to Husayn. They have not violated my order.* ”

In the late seventies through the eighties, there was a rash of
politically manipulated communal violence in the city of Hyderabad which
was frequently subjected to imposition of curfew. Once, the curfew fell
on the day of Ashura. Prominent Shia met and decided that, come what
may, they would take out, as usual, the procession of Bi Bi ka Alam and
perform all the usual rituals of *Matam*. They went to speak to the
Police Commissioner Mr. Pavithran and to convey the resolution of the
Shia to hold the procession as usual despite the curfew. Mr. Pavithran
was a very sensible person and he had observed that the Shia localities
had the lowest crime rate and that never did any untoward incident occur
during the Ashura procession. He therefore allowed the Ashura procession
of the Bi Bi ka Alam to be taken out as usual. The Sunnis and some
extremist Hindus objected saying that in the procession, Shia youth
would come out openly with their swords and knives and would likely use
the occasion to use the weapons against their opponents. They asked,
‘Would Mr. Pavithran permit them to come out openly with their swords
and knives?’ They argued that the Shia should at least be banned from
doing ‘*Matam*’ with swords and knives. Mr. Pavithran replied, “*If you
want to put your swords and knives to the same purpose of beating
yourselves, as the Shia do, then, to that extent I have no objection if
you too carry weapons to beat yoursel*ves.”

One of the great miracles of Imam Husayn (a.s.) to the present day is
that the wounds of those who beat themselves with chains, knives, and
swords never become septic and none is known to have died in the long
history of the Ashura processions anywhere in the world. I had
personally witnessed a team of Germans taking video of the Shia, young
and old, beating themselves with chains, Knives, and swords in the
Ashura procession at Diwan Devdi, Hyderabad. One of the team members
told me that they were puzzled by the fact that the chain, knife, or
sword used by one individual was used by another without cleaning it.
Looked at scientifically, this should lead to gangrene because the blood
group of one individual using the knife or sword may be ‘A’ and the next
person using the same sword may belong to a different blood group. The
gentleman told me that when they collected samples of blood from various
individuals and found that all the blood samples had turned to ‘O’
group, and later when the blood of the same individuals was tested
later, they belonged to various blood groups. None of the participants
ever needed or took ATS injection.

In order to obliterate this living miracle, a very attractive proposal
was mooted that instead of letting the blood flow on the roads on the
Day of Ashura, the Shia should donate their blood that could be used to
save lives. Many Shia were impressed by the novelty and apparent
nobility of the cause. Soon, it was realized that the motive behind the
suggestion was to dilute the effect that the procession made on the
onlookers and to erase the miraculous nature of Matam during Ashura. Our
ancestors sacrificed their properties and lives to keep the memory of
Karbala fresh in the minds of generations to come. Unfortunately, even
among the Shia, there has arisen a minority that holds prayer to be
superior to Majlis. There is no comparison between the two; if prayer is
like the Book of God, Majlis is the remembrance of the Prophet’s progeny
(a.s.).

Remember that the Prophet (S) had said, “I am leaving among you two
precious things entwined and knit together like a strong rope; the Book
of God and my Progeny. They will never separate from each other until
they will come to me at the Pond in the Paradise. If you cling fast to
them, you will never go astray at all.” An unnecessary controversy is
raised to separate the Book of God from the Progeny of the Prophet (S)
in an attempt to glorify one over the other. Glorifying one means
demeaning the other and that could only be the work of Satan. The
atrocities against the Shia were so severe that they preferred to remain
in anonymity. It is only recently that the world has started to take
notice of the Shia. It is for the Shia to put forth their religious
beliefs through their writings and to establish their exclusiveness
through their conduct. We should try to weed out some undesirable
elements that are a blot on the name and character of the Shia, by
educating our masses.

[^1]: Ibid., p. 23-24

[^2]: Shahide Salis, P. 22.

[^3]: Ibid., P. 24.

[^4]: Shahide Salis, P. 25-26.


