Part B Persecution of the Shia By the Umayyads
==============================================

The fact that the details about the persecution against the Shia was
compiled in seven volumes each of over 200 pages, under the title
‘*Masa’ibush Shia*’**[1]** goes to show the enormity of the matter. The
writer/compiler was Moulana Sadat Husain Khan Sahib. The book was
published by Sarfaraz Press, Luknow in 1347 AH. The book was reprinted
in three volumes in May 2001. I have mostly followed the contents of the
earlier edition of ‘*Masa’ibush Shia*’. Instead of detailing each
individual persecution that would only add to the volume of this book,
for brevity’s sake I have given short sketches of the persecution
against the Shia during various regimes.

Be it the Umayyads or the Abbasids or any other regime for that matter,
it is a historical fact that the Shia of the *Ahlul Bayt* alone were
persecuted, tortured, banished, and killed, beginning from the moment of
the Prophet’s death to the present day. In this enlightened twenty-first
century, in Iraq and elsewhere, misguided persons kill hundreds of Shia
with remote controlled bombs. The scenes of youngsters slitting the
throats or beheading those, whom they consider as their opponents, are a
slur on the religion whose founder is known as ‘Universal Mercy’. The
book ‘*Masa’ibush Shia*’ tells the story of the persecution against the
Shia throughout centuries.

The period of persecution of the Shia can conveniently be divided into
the following periods

[a] Immediately after the demise of the Prophet (s) between 11 and 30 AH

[b] The period after the martyrdom of Imam Ali in the year 35 until 60
AH when Mu’awiya died

[c] The period between 61 to 132 AH when Abdullah ibn az-Zubair and the
Umayyads ruled as the caliphs  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Calamities of the Shia.

[d] The period between 133 to 334 AH when the Abbasids ruled as the
caliphs

[e] The period when a multitude of caliphs came to rule the Muslim world

[f] During the Mongolian period and the recent times
