Persecution of the Shia By Mu’awiya From 11 To 30 Ah
====================================================

(i) Sa’d bin Ubadah
-------------------

Sa’d bin Ubadah was a close companion of Imam Ali (a.s). When the
Prophet (a.s.) settled the marriage of his daughter Fatima (s), Sa’d was
in charge of arranging the event and he did his job excellently.
According to ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, Sa’d was an erudite scholar, an
excellent swimmer, and noted archer of his time. Sa’d had inherited a
few forts which were well-known for generosity and hospitality.

In the Prophet’s army, there used to be two standards; Sa’d was the
bearer of the Ansar’s standard, while Imam Ali (a.s) was the bearer of
the Muhajirin’s standard.

Sa’d was a loyal companion of the Prophet (s). He was a well-educated
person and often officiated as the Prophet’s scribe in writing down the
Qur’anic revelations, writing letters, drafting deeds…etc. His tribe was
well known for its generosity and hospitality. Sa’d was among the people
of Medina who were, by reason of their learning of ancient scriptures,
aware that a Prophet would soon appear in the Arabia. When they heard
about the Prophet (a.s.) and the religion he preached and the torture
which he and his followers were subjected to, Sa’d along with some other
learned persons from Medina came to the Prophet (s) and invited him to
migrate to Medina. In every skirmish, battle, or other confrontation
with the opponents of Islam, Sa’d participated and fought valiantly.

When Umar, Abu Bakr, and Abu Ubaidah ibn al-Jarrah went to the *Saqifa*
to stake the claim for the *Caliphate,* Sa’d bin Ubadah challenged them
saying that among the tribe of Quraish, if the people of Quraish

were to have precedence, Imam Ali (a.s) was the nominated by the Prophet
(s) as his successor and that he was the most fit person to the post. On
hearing this, Umar was so infuriated that he shouted, “Kill Sa’d.”
However, Sa’d’s tribesmen rescued him. Sa’d never recognized Abu Bakr or
Umar as the *Caliphs.* He never mingled with them nor did he offer
prayers behind them at any time. He was steadfast in his refusal to
acknowledge Abu Bakr and later Umar as the *Caliph.* Umar asked Khalid
bin al-Walid who secretly killed Sa’d bin Ubadah. Though Sa’d was not
the first in point of time to be martyred because of his love for Imam
Ali (a.s), he was the first one to openly oppose at the *Saqifa* the men
who claimed the *Caliphate.*

Immediately after the death of the Prophet (s), the affair at the
*Saqifa* created a rift among Muslims. The Ansar had heard the Prophet
(s) nominating Imam Ali (a.s) as his successor. They were aware of the
virtue, caliber, and wisdom of Imam Ali (a.s) and hence were ready to
accept him as the successor to the Prophet (s). However, during the last
days of the Prophet (s), the Ansar found that every order of the Prophet
(s) was disobeyed and the parchment and pen he requested to write down
his will was denied. Umar was at the head of this group (who opposed and
disobeyed the Prophet). The Ansar realized that there was a concerted
effort to prevent Imam Ali (a.s) from succeeding the Prophet (s). They
determined that if anyone other than Imam Ali (a.s) was to become the
*Caliph,* the Ansar had in Sa’d bin Ubadah a better claim than the
stranger incumbent to the post.

When Umar wanted Khalid bin al-Walid to be penalized for having killed
Malik bin Nuwayra, a pious Muslim, and on the same night committing
adultery with his widow, for the sake of pleasing the *Caliph* Abu
Bakr*,* Khalid replied, “*I killed Malik bin Nuwayra to please Abu Bakr
just as I had killed Sa’d bin Ubadah to please you*.” After this retort,
Umar stopped accusing Khalid of murdering Malik bin Nuwayra.**[1]**

(ii) Malik bin Nuwayra
----------------------

Umar, who was well known for his booming voice and ill temper, went
around Medina brandishing his unsheathed sword and threatening dire
consequences if the caliphate of Abu Bakr was not accepted. In Medina,
many companions and learned Muslims preferred to express  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 80.

their disagreement by staying away from open acceptance of Abu Bakr as
the *Caliph*. They were immediately branded as friends of Ali and
therefore, by implication, enemies of the caliph. Ali himself was made a
target, dragged from his house and the house itself was threatened to be
set on fire for refusing to acknowledge Abu Bakr as the caliph.

The well known and true companions of the Prophet (s) such as Salman,
Abu Tharr al-Ghifari, Huthaifa bin al-Yeman, Malik al-Ashtar, al-Miqdad,
Maytham at-Tammar, Muhammad bin Abu Bakr (the son of the caliph), Malik
bin Nuwayra, Mohammad bin Abi Huthaifa, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, Sa’sa’a bin
Souhan, Qambar, Kumail ibn Ziyad, Sulaym bin Qays, and an endless list
of the Prophet’s companions and Imam Ali’s companions were not only
deprived of their pensions but also banished from Medina to flimsy
lands.

In remoter parts of the Islamic state, people were only aware that
during his last pilgrimage, the Prophet (s) had nominated Imam Ali (a.s)
as his successor and demanded that the Muslim Umma should obey him
alone. At any rate, they were not aware of any parallel nomination of
anyone else by the Prophet (s). This was all the more evident from the
fact that Abu Bakr, Umar, and their group claimed that the Prophet (s)
had not nominated any successor and that Abu Bakr was unanimously
elected at the Saqifa. This was contrary to what the Muslims had
witnessed during the lifetime of the Prophet (s) who had repeatedly,
from the first day of Youm ad-Dar till the incident of his demanding
‘ink and parchment’ to write down his will, nominated Imam Ali (a.s) as
his successor. Malik bin Nuwayra, a respected companion of the Prophet
(s), went to Medina and found Abu Bakr sitting on the Prophet’s pulpit.
Malik asked Abu Bakr who made him sit there when Imam Ali (a.s) who was
nominated by the Prophet (s) was the rightful person to occupy the seat.
Abu Bakr replied that he was elected at the Saqifa. Malik returned back
refusing to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr. Therefore, when Muslims found
that instead of Imam Ali (a.s) Abu Bakr had become the Caliph, they
refused to acknowledge the new incumbent or to submit to his authority.
Above all, Malik bin Nuwayra told his tribesmen to keep the Zakat and
Khums and to refuse paying them to the agents of Abu Bakr.

Abu Bakr became angry and ordered Khalid bin al-Walid to kill Malik bin
Nuwayra for disobeying the *Caliph’s* authority. When Malik heard this,
he said, “*I do not dare disobey the Caliph, but I will not bow down to
Abu Bakr who is a usurper of the Caliphate. The rightful Caliph is Ali
who*

*was nominated by the Prophet (s).”* After a short fight, Khalid bin
al-Walid killed Malik bin Nuwayra and his three hundred men. He
confiscated all their properties and arrested their women. On the same
night, he committed adultery with Malik’s widow who was renowned for her
beauty. These illegal acts created a stir among several persons, like
Abu Qattara, in Khalid’s army. They complained to Abu Bakr. The women
prisoners complained that they were unjustly imprisoned to which Abu
Bakr replied, “*Your men refused to pay the tax to me*.” The women
replied, “*If our men refused to pay the tax, you have slain them. Why
do you hold us prisoners, where we have not committed any crime?*”
Hearing this, Abu Bakr ordered them to be released. When Umar heard
about the murder of Malik bin Nuwayra and his companions and the
committing of adultery by Khalid, he suggested that Khalid should be
executed for killing a pious Muslim, and that Khalid should also be
stoned for committing adultery with Malik’s widow. Abu Bakr refused
saying that he pardoned Khalid for his misinterpretation and that he
would pay blood money to Malik’s heirs and ask Khalid to forthwith
divorce Malik’s widow. This decision speaks volumes about the *Caliph’s*
acumen. Firstly, the *Caliph* is not the authority to pardon sins.
Secondly, blood money could be paid only when heirs of the killed person
agree to receive it, but if they demand *Qisas* (retaliation), Khalid
had to be executed. Thirdly, since Khalid had committed adultery and no
marriage was possible between him and Malik’s widow, the question of
Khalid to divorce her does not arise at all. At any rate, what all
transpired was only because of the love that Malik bin Nuwayra had
toward Imam Ali (a.s).**[1]**

(iii) The Tribes of Kinda and Hadhramaut
----------------------------------------

Immediately after his ascension to the *Caliphate,* Abu Bakr was faced
with opposition from the tribes in the surrounding districts. The Kinda
and Hadhramaut tribes asserted, “*As long as the messenger of Allah was
alive, we were obliged to him. After the Prophet’s demise, we would have
obeyed if someone from his progeny [Ahlul Bayt] had ascended the
Caliphate. What right has the son of Abu Quhafa (Abu Bakr) over us or
over the Caliphate?”*

The *Caliph’s* agent Ziyad bin Labid was afraid that soon the entire
Arab society would rise against the *Caliph.* He approached the Bani
Zohd, a  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For a detailed study see *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 54 – 82
[2001 Edition] quoting several sources.

sub tribe of Kinda, and complained about the attitude of the Kinda
Tribe. Bani Zohd replied, “*Why do you insist upon demanding obedience
to one whom the Prophet (s) has never appointed as his successor?*”
Ziyad replied, “*It is true that the Prophet (s) did not command anyone
to obey Abu Bakr, but Muslims have appointed him by mutual consent.*”
The Bani Zohd replied, “*Since, as you claim, they exercised their
option, then why did they [the Muslims] not exercise their option in
favour of the Ahlul Bayt? We know that the Prophet (s) did not die
before nominating his successor. Therefore, keep away from us and do not
indulge in creating mischief. We are not obliged to your Caliph nor
would we abide by his orders.*”

On seeing the belligerent mood of the tribesmen, Ziyad took to his
heels. He returned with reinforcement and in the fight that took place
in the town of Bureim, 209 Shia under al-Ash’ath bin Qais were martyred.
Ziyad lost the fight and once again sought the safety of the Fort in
Bureim. Ziyad sought the help of Muhajir ibn Abi Umayya who collected a
large army and went to the aid of Ziyad. Al-Ash’ath also collected a
huge army. Ziyad was afraid of the army of al-Ash’ath and he wrote to
Abu Bakr. Abu Bakr in turn wrote to al-Ash’ath advising him to
surrender. The letter enraged al-Ash’ath and one of his companions
struck the hand of the courier. Al-Ash’ath was left with only two
thousand men. Hundreds of deserted him and joined Ziyad’s army.

However, al-Ash’ath defeated Ziyad’s men. Those, who escaped, sought
shelter in the Fort at Bureim. Once again, Ziyad wrote to Abu Bakr who
called a meeting in which Abu Ayyub al-Ansari said, “*The people of
Kinda are valiant warriors. Once all of them join hands, it will be
impossible to defeat them. The best course now is to forget collecting
taxes. Later, they may themselves regret and submit to you.*” To this,
Abu Bakr replied, “*O Abu Ayyub, I have sworn not to let go even a
six-month-old lamb and I will fight until the end in the matter of
collecting taxes*.”**[1]**

Abu Bakr sent a contingent under Akrima to assist Ziyad. The combined
forces of Akrima and Ziyad ibn Labeed surrounded the army of al-Ash’ath
and prevented food and water to reach them. Deprived of any strength to
fight, al-Ash’ath sought an amnesty from Ziyad. Ziyad imprisoned all the
men of al-Ash’ath and one after another, he beheaded them. He sent
al-Ash’ath to Abu Bakr.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 92 [2001 Edition].

Al-Ash’ath surrendered before the *Caliph* who immediately bestowed
costly gifts upon him (al-Ash’ath) and got him married to his sister Umm
Farwa through whom al-Ash’ath got three sons Mohammad, Ismael, and Ishaq
and a daughter called Ja’dah.

The treason of al-Ash’ath passed on to his children. His son Mohammad
was a soldier of Umar ibn Sa’d and fought against Imam Husain (a.s) at
Karbala. His two brothers Ismael and Ishaq joined the army of Abdul
Melik ibn Marwan. Ja’dah poisoned Imam Hasan (a.s).

Due to the betrayal by al-Ash’ath, noble men of the tribes of Kinda and
Hadhramaut, such as Suraqa bin al-Harith, Abdullah bin Arfajah, Adiy bin
Owf, and the tribes of Bani Hajjar, Bani Himyar, Banu Kinda, numbering
to about eight thousand were slaughtered merely because they wanted
anyone from the Prophet’s progeny to be the *Caliph* instead of Abu Bakr
whom they considered an incompetent usurper of the *Caliphate*.

Al-Ash’ath and his ilk were similar to Talha and az-Zobair who recanted
from the faith and were expelled as *Kharjites.* Thousands of learned
scholars and companions of the Prophet (s) and of Imam Ali (a.s) were
killed in the battles of al-Jamal, Siffin, and an-Nahrawan.

(1v) Abu Sa’eed Khalid bin Sa’eed bin al-Aas bin Umayya
-------------------------------------------------------

When Abu Bakr claimed to have been elected as the *Caliph,* a group of
twelve well-known companions of the Prophet (s) ; six from the Muhajirin
and six from the Ansar, decided to confront Abu Bakr. The six Muhajirin
were Khalid bin Sa’eed, Salman al-Farisi (the Persian), Abu Tharr
al-Ghifari, al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad, Ammar ibn Yasir, and Buraidah
al-Aslami. The six men of the Ansar were Abul Hasim ibn Yethan, Sahl and
Uthman bin Huneif, Ubay bin Ka’b, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, and Khuzaima bin
Thabith. They decided to sit near the pulpit on a Friday when Abu Bakr
would ascend the pulpit to deliver his sermon as the *Caliph.*

When confronted as to how he could become the Caliph when the Prophet
(a.s.) did not nominate him and when Imam Ali (a.s), whom the Prophet
(s) had nominated, was present, Abu Bakr was unable to give any reply.
He merely said, “*Leave me alone. I have somehow become the Caliph but I
am not the best among you*.” After this for three days, Abu Bakr locked
himself in his house. On the fourth day led by Umar, Khalid bin al-Walid
with one thousand men, Salim, a slave of Huthaifa

with one thousand men, Ma’ath bin Jabal with one thousand men went
around the streets of Medina with drawn swords.

Heading the contingent, Umar proclaimed, “O companions of Ali, I dare
you to repeat what you told the caliph a few days ago and I will have
each one of you beheaded.” To this, Sa’eed replied, “O son of
ad-Dhahhak…, do you mean to threaten me with the power of the sword?
Though we are few in number, we are not afraid of your threats. Were we
not bound by the orders of the Imam, this very moment we would have put
you and your cronies to our swords.”

Salman al-Farisi then got up and addressed Umar saying, “I have heard
the messenger of Allah saying that one day when my brother (Imam Ali)
would be sitting in the mosque along with his companions, he will be
harassed by a group of persons who are destined to be the dogs of Hell.
They would wish to kill him and his companions. Surely you are the Dogs
of Hell.” Khalid bin Sa’eed was killed in the year 13 or 14 AH.**[1]**

(v) Ubay bin Ka’b bin Qais al-Khazraji al-Ansari
------------------------------------------------

Ubay was one of the best reciters of the Qur’an. The Prophet (s) used to
say that it was a pleasure to hear Ubay reciting the Qur’an. Abul Fida
Ismael bin Ali in his book**[2]** gives the names of persons, apart from
the Banu Hashim, who refused to pay allegiance to Abu Bakr; az-Zobair
bin al-Awwam, Utbah bin Abi Lahab, Khalid bin Sa’eed bin al-Aas,
al-Miqdad bin Amr, Salman al-Farisi, Abu Tharr, Ammar bin Yasir,
al-Bara’ bin Aazib, and Ubay bin Ka’b bin Qais.

Similarly, in the initial stages, Abu Sufyan and the Umayyads refused to
acknowledge Abu Bakr as the Caliph. Ubay was one among the twelve
persons who surrounded Abu Bakr on a Friday and questioned him about his
eligibility to occupy the seat of Caliphate when Imam Ali (a.s), the one
nominated by the Prophet (s) was present.

During the reign of Umar, there was a great influx of people into Islam,
mostly due to the conquests of foreign territories. Umar wanted to
expand the Prophet’s mosque and he offered to acquire the houses of the
Prophet’s wives and other relatives.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p.109- 115 [2001 Edition].  
 **[2]** *Ibid.,* p.127- 128 [2001 Edition], quoting al-*Mukhtasar fi
Akhbaril Bashar.*

Umar came to al-Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib, the paternal uncle of the
Prophet (s) and said, “Abbas, it has become necessary to expand the
Prophet’s mosque in order to accommodate the large population of Muslims
in Medina. I have already acquired all the houses except yours,
surrounding the Mosque. You may ask for whatever price you want. I will
pay the same from the public treasury.”

Al-Abbas refused the offer. Umar said, “I give you three options to
chose anyone of them that you like; either you take whatever price you
want from the public treasury, or you choose any alternative place in
and around Medina so that I may get a house constructed for you, or you
give your house as donation for the use of Muslims so that your house
may be demolished and a larger mosque to be built.”

Al-Abbas refused to accept any of the three options. Then Umar suggested
that the matter might be settled by arbitration, and he asked al-Abbas
to name anyone as the arbitrator. Al-Abbas nominated Ubay bin Ka’b as
the arbitrator.

Al-Abbas and Umar came to Ubay to arbitrate on the dispute. After
hearing both sides, Ubay said, “I have heard the Prophet (s) saying that
when God asked (Prophet) David to build the ‘House of God’, David
prepared a plan for the construction of Baitul Maqdis (Jerusalem). The
square shape of the plan was marred by the house of a person from the
Israelites. David offered to buy the house but its owner refused to sell
it. David thought that if somehow he could acquire the house, he could
make a perfect square shape for the planned building. Then, God revealed
to David:‘I only want a house to be constructed so that people may enter
it and glorify me. I never like people to glorify me in a place usurped
by force. Therefore, you shall not have the honour of building a house
for me.’ On hearing this, David asked, ‘O Lord, will anyone from my
progeny build a house for You?’ God replied, ‘Yes, your progeny will
build a house for me’.”

Umar was enraged to hear this. He dragged Ubay by the collar into the
Prophet’s mosque and asked those assembled there whether anyone had
heard from the Prophet (s) what Ubay had related. Abu Tharr, who was
there, stated on oath that he had heard a tradition similar to the one
narrated by Ubay. Hearing this, Umar let Ubay go with great
consternation.**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p.129- 132 [2001 Edition].

Umar bore grudge against Ubay. One day, Ubay was passing through the
market followed by his disciples. Umar took the opportunity to whip Ubay
saying that to be surrounded by followers was an act of pomp and
pride.**[1]** Ubay was tortured on one pretext or the other, often on
the ground of ‘narrating traditions’ that was strictly prohibited by the
Caliphs. The real reason for the torture was that Ubay was a devout
follower of Imam Ali (a.s).

(vi) Bilal bin Rabah al-Habashi
-------------------------------

Bilal was the famous Caller of Azan and a great favorite of the Prophet
(s). Bilal was an Abyssinian slave who was purchased and set at liberty
by the Prophet’s uncle al-Abbas.**[2]** He had a slight lisp of the
tongue and could not pronounce ‘sh’ which he pronounced as ‘s’. Because
of this lisp, once Umar stopped Bilal from calling out the Azan. Umar
himself called out the Azan. The Prophet (s) came out and asked, “Why is
not the Azan called out today?” Umar said, “I had just called out the
Azan.” The Prophet (s) asked why Umar called the Azan instead of Bilal,
and Umar said that Bilal did not have the correct diction. The Prophet
(s) said that it was Bilal’s heart that was to be seen and not his
diction. He called Bilal and asked him to call the public for prayers
through the Azan.

Bilal was one of the very first converts to Islam. Being a poor slave,
he was subjected to severe torture by the infidels of Mecca. Bilal was
one among those who refused to acknowledge Abu Bakr as the Caliph. Umar,
referring to a mistaken belief that Bilal was purchased and emancipated
by Abu Bakr, told him (Bilal), “Is this how you repay your emancipator?”
Bilal replied, “If Abu Bakr had released me from slavery for the love of
God then let me be myself, for Abu Bakr has no right over me. If Abu
Bakr had retained his lordship over me, then, as a slave, I am prepared
to render personal service. But at no cost will I pay allegiance to one
whom the messenger of Allah did not nominate as the Caliph.”**[3]**

After the Prophet’s demise, Bilal faced hardships in Medina and he
wanted to migrate to Syria. Abu Bakr insisted that he should stay in
Medina but he said, “If I was made a free man for the love of God, then
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid*.,* p. 133.  
 **[2]** Ibid*.,* p. 136.  
 **[3]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 138 [2001 Edition].

none has the right to force me against my wish. But, if I am still your
bondsman, then imprison me for disobedience.” Abu Bakr relented and
Bilal went to Damascus where he died in the year 20 AH.**[1]**

(vii) Al-Hurmuzan
-----------------

Al-Hurmuzan was a prince of Ahwaz. He was an early convert to Islam and
had settled down in Medina. He was a pious Muslim and had participated
valiantly in several wars with the Prophet (s). He was a noted companion
of the Prophet (s) and of Imam Ali (a.s). He was a great scholar in the
Qur’an and Hadith. He was respected by the Muslims for his knowledge,
honesty, and piety.

Ubeidullah ibn Umar ibn al-Khattab had once seen Feiroz Abu Lu’lu’, a
Persian slave, carrying a double-edged knife that was commonly used in
Persia. When Feiroz stabbed and killed Umar with such a weapon,
Ubeidullah killed him immediately. Suspecting a Persian conspiracy,
Ubeidullah also killed al-Hurmuzan and Jufaynah. When protests were
raised that Ubeidullah had killed two innocent Muslims, merely on
suspicion, without any cause and without any inquiry, Uthman admitted
that the offense had been committed by Ubeidullah, but offered to pay
the blood money for al-Hurmuzan from the public treasury. Al-Hurmuzan
had no relatives living and so the blood money remained in the public
treasury. In this incident, Uthman had no right to accept blood money
for murder. It was the exclusive right of the heirs of al-Hurmuzan.
Since there were no heirs to accept the blood money, Ubeidullah ibn Umar
ought to have been subjected to the normal penal laws, instead of being
favoured because that he was the son of the preceding Caliph. The matter
of blood money was only a show put up before the public view, since no
money was paid to anyone. Al-Hurmuzan was killed only because he was a
supporter of the *Ahlul Bayt.*

(viii) Abu Tharr Jundab bin Junadah al-Ghifari
----------------------------------------------

He was the fourth or fifth person to embrace Islam. After conversion, he
went back to his tribe and preached Islam. He returned to Medina after
the Battle of al-Khandaq. He was a constant companion of the Prophet
(s), participating in all the battles and skirmishes. The Prophet (s)
said that there was none more truthful than Abu Tharr was.**[2]** He was
a great admirer of Imam Ali (a.s).  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid*.,* p. 139.  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 145 [2001 Edition], quoting
al-Isabah, vol. 4 p. 94.

After the Prophet’s death when many people deserted Imam Ali, Abu Tharr
was among the constant companions and supporters of Imam Ali (a.s) and
was among the twelve people who surrounded and questioned Abu Bakr about
his competence to become the Caliph. Abu Tharr was very outspoken and
often openly questioned the authority of Abu Bakr while arguing that the
Prophet (a.s.) had nominated Imam Ali (a.s) as his successor. For his
opposition, Abu Tharr was harassed. Umar had forbidden Abu Tharr and
some others from going beyond the city of Medina, for fear of his
relating traditions of the Prophet (s). Uthman banished Abu Tharr to
Syria. There, he found the extravagance and un-Islamic conducts of
Mu’awiya irritating him. He openly criticized Mu’awiya. Mu’awiya wrote
to Uthman complaining about the open criticism of Abu Tharr. Abu Tharr
criticized Uthman for showing favouritism to the Umayyads and filling up
all the government jobs with men from the Umayyads. Uthman banished Abu
Tharr to ar-Rabathah a forsaken place in the desert. Imam Ali, his sons
Hasan, and Husain defied the ban imposed by the Caliph and with other
friends, they went along with Abu Tharr until the border of Medina and
bade him good-bye. There, alone and without any help, Abu Tharr and his
wife lived for some time. When Abu Tharr died in the year 32 AH, his
widow was worried how he could be buried. At last, a cravan suddenly
appeared headed by Abdullah ibn Mas’ud and several compnions of the
Prophet (s) who performed the last rites and buried Abu Tharr in
ar-Rabathah. According to other traditions, Imam Ali (a.s.) with his two
sons was also present and he led the prayers and performed the last
rites for Abu Tharr. Throughout his life, Abu Tharr was tortured,
mentally and physically, for his affection for the Ahlul Bayt and for
narrating traditions openly and boldly despite the prohibition of the
Caliphs.

(ix) Al-Miqdad bin Amr
----------------------

In a quarrel with Shimr bin Hajjar al-Kindi, al-Miqdad struck him on the
leg with his sword, and he sought asylum with al-Aswad bin Yaghooth
az-Zohri in Mecca. Therefore, he came to be known as al-Miqdad bin
al-Aswad. Al-Miqdad was one of the earliest converts to Islam. He
migrated twice; one to Abyssinia in the early days of Islam, and the
second when the Prophet (s) ordered Muslims to migrate to Medina. He
participated in all the battles and skirmishes with the Prophet (s).
After the demise of the Prophet (s), al-Miqdad was one of the twelve
persons who surrounded Abu Bakr and questioned him

about his competency to become the Caliph. He was deprived of the state
pension and was subjected to financial difficulties. He was subjected to
immense mental torture for his love of the Ahlul Bayt. He died in the
year 33 AH.

(x) Salman al-Farisi
--------------------

Nobody knew the exact age of Salman. Some said that he was over a
century and a half of old. He had been a disciple under several
Christian saints, who told him about the awaited Paraclete. When the
Prophet (s) proclaimed Islam, Salman was one of the first to become
Muslim. The Prophet (a.s.) treated him as a member of his family (Ahlul
Bayt). Ibnul Arabi has discussed this tradition in detail in his book
‘al-Futuhat’ and established that Salman was also immaculate and
therefore was counted among the Ahlul Bayt.**[1]** According to Allama
Noori, Salman was in fact the last of the vicegerents of Jesus
(a.s.).**[2]** Salman was one of those persons who openly opposed Abu
Bakr as the Caliph. The others who joined Salman were Miqdad, Abu Tharr,
Buraida al-Aslami, Khalid bin Sa’eed, Ammar bin Yasir from the
Muhajirin, and al-Haitham, Uthman bin Hunaif, Sahl bin Hunaif, Khuzaima
bin Thabit, Ubay bin Ka’b and Abu Ayyub al-Ansari from the Ansar. For
not paying allegiance to Abu Bakr, Salman was so much beaten that his
neck became crooked. Salman died in the year 36 AH.

(xi) The Martyrs in the Battle of al-Jamal

The cunning Mu’awiya made use of the murder of Uthman into a political
weapon to oppose Imam Ali (a.s). He enlisted the help of Talha and
az-Zobair and convinced Aa’isha to join him in the battle of al-Jamal
against Imam Ali (a.s). The circumstances that led to Uthman’s murder
were as the following:Muslims, particularly of Syria, Egypt, and Iraq
were vexed with the tyranny and misrule of Mu’awiya. In Medina, Muslims
found that Uthman had filled the entire government with his kin and
clansmen who were inefficient, impious, and avaricious. The well known
case of al-Walid bin Uqba, who fully drunk led the Morning Prayer and
instead of the mandatory two rak’as, he performed four rak’as, and
turning to the congregation, he said, “If you like, I would add more.”
Muslims gave a memorandum to Uthman complaining that he had deviated
from the Prophet’s Sunna  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 180 [2001 Edition].  
 **[2]** Ibid*.,* p. 142.

and the precedents set up by his predecessor Caliphs, listing out the
following complaints:

**[i]** Uthman had gifted the Khums of Africa to his uncle Marwan. Khums
was the exclusive right of the Ahlul Bayt and could not be gifted to
anyone else.

**[ii]** From the Khums gifted by Uthman, Marwan illegally purchased
prime properties and constructed several mansions in Thee Khashab.

[iii] Uthman himself constructed seven huge mansions in Medina, out of
which one was given to his wife Na’ila and another to Aa’isha bint Abu
Bakr and the rest were given to his daughters.

**[iii]** He appointed inefficient and impious men from his kin and
clansmen in important government posts.

**[iv]** When al-Walid bin Uqba led the prayers while he was drunken,
and the matter was brought to his notice, Uthman refused to take action
against him.

**[v]** He neither appointed nor consulted many prominent companions of
the Prophet (s).

**[vi]** He had forcibly acquired several prime properties in and around
Medina.

**[vii]** He issued grants of cash and property to persons who had not
even seen the Prophet (s) nor had they possesses any special
qualification to deserve the grants.

**[viii]** He introduced whipping instead of expelling.

**[ix]** Ammar, who presented the memorandum, was severely beaten by
Uthman, Marwan, and their men that he was about to die. The rest of the
incidents leading to Uthman’s murder have already been set out in an
earlier chapter.

**[x]** At-Tabari reports that around Aa’isha’s camel, ten thousand men
were killed, a half of the number were companions of Imam Ali (a.s) and
the other half were partisans of Aa’isha.**[1]**

**[xi]**According to Shahr Ashub, there were twenty thousand men in Imam
Ali’s army, out of whom eighty were companions who had  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 202-203 [2001 Edition] quoting
*Tarikh* of at-Tabari, vol. 5 p. 222.

fought in the battle of Badr, fifteen hundred companions of the Prophet
(s), and two hundred and fifty were participants in the Homage of the
Tree (Bay’at ash-Shajara) **[1]**.**[2]** The total number of martyrs on
Imam Ali’s side was one thousand and seventy. Notable martyrs among the
companions of Imam Ali (a.s) were Zaid bin Souhan, Hind al-Jamali, Abu
Abdullah al-Abdi, Abdullah bin Ruqayya, Thumama, Hind ibn Amr, Ghaniyya
bin Haytham, and Makhdooj.**[3]**

It is related through al-Hasan al-Basri that Aa’isha wrote to Zaid bin
Souhan asking him to stay at home and not to join Imam Ali’s army. Zaid
replied, “You are doing what is forbidden for you by leaving your home
and entering the battlefield. Curiously, you are forbidding me to do
what my religion commands me to do, that is to take arms against
traitors.”**[4]**

(xii) Uthman bin Hunaif al-Ansari
---------------------------------

He was a companion of the Prophet (s). He was one among those who had at
first accepted Abu Bakr as the Caliph, but later he was convinced that
Imam Ali (a.s) was the designated successor of the Prophet (s). He
fought in the battle of al-Jamal as Imam Ali’s agent. When he was able
to subdue the enemy, compromise was suggested by Aa’isha. Uthman bin
Hunaif said that there could be no compromise as long as Aa’isha
associated herself with Talha and az-Zobair. The talks were inconclusive
and the parties retired for the night. During the night, Talha and
az-Zobair killed the guard of the mosque and several companions of
Uthman bin Hunaif who was captured and brought before Aa’isha by Labban.
She ordered the man to kill Uthman, but an old woman said that it was
unjust to kill Uthman bin Hunaif as he was a companion of the Prophet
(s). On hearing this, Aa’isha sent for the man and told him that Uthman
should be imprisoned instead of being killed. Labban was anxious to kill
Uthman bin Hunaif. He said that had he known the purpose of his being
recalled, he would not have returned. Mujashe’ bin Mas’ud suggested that
Uthman bin Hunaif should be severely beaten and his beard, mustache, and
eyebrows be plucked. The suggestion was carried out. Seventy of Uthman
bin Hunaif’s kin fought and were martyred in the battle of al-Jamal.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The homage that had taken place under the tree.  
 **[2]** Ibid*.,* p. 203 quoting *Manqib* of Shahr Ashub.  
 **[3]** Ibid*.,* p. 204 quoting *at-Tabari,* vol. 5 p. 224.  
 **[4]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 205-206 [2001 Edition] quoting
*Sharh Nahjol Balaghah* of Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. 2, p.81.

(xiii) The Martyrs in the Battle of an-Nahrawan
-----------------------------------------------

In the battle of an-Nahrawani, Imam Ali (a.s.) fought against the
Kharijites. Only nine men from the Kharijites remained alive and from
Imam Ali’s army only nine were killed, among whom were Ru’bah al-Bajali,
Rifa’a ibn Wa’il, al-Fayyadh ibn Khaleeli al-Azdi, Kaysum ibn Salama,
Habib ibn Aasim al-Azdi.

(xiv) The Martyrs in the Battle of Siffin
-----------------------------------------

Among the notable companions martyred at the battle of Siffin, which was
between the army of Mo’awiyai and the army of Imam Ali (a.s.), were
Owais al-Qarani, Huthaifa ibn al-Yaman al-Ansari, Abul Haytham, Malik
ibn at-Tayyihan al-Ansari, Khuzaima ibn Thabit Thush Shahdatain,
Abdullah bin Badeel al-Khuza’iy, Aqeel bin Malik, Abdullah bin Khabbab
bin al-Aratt, al-Harith bin Murra, Buraid al-Aslami and his two sons.

(xv) Ammar bin Yasir
--------------------

Ammar was from the first Muslims and was a very close companion to the
Prophet (s). The Prophet (s) foretold that Ammar would be killed by the
Aggressive Party. This tradition was widely known throughout the Muslim
world. After the Prophet (s), Ammar never acknowledged Abu Bakr, Umar or
Uthman as Caliphs. Ammar was one among the twelve persons who protested
against Abu Bakr on his becoming the Caliph. In fact, he presented the
memorandum complaining against the bad rule of Mu’awiya, Marwan, and
Uthman himself. Uthman not only whipped Ammar but also wanted to banish
him out of Median. When the clan of the Bani Makhzoom collectively
opposed the proposal to banish Ammar out of Medina, Uthman relented and
withdrew his order.

When Imam Ali (a.s) was elected as the Caliph by public demand, Ammar
joined Imam Ali’s army. He fought valiantly in the Battle of al-Jamal.

In the battle of Siffin when Amr bin al-Aas learnt that Ammar was in
Imam Ali’s army, he remembered the tradition that the Aggressive Party
would kill Ammar. Amr bin al-Aas started having doubts about the
righteousness of his cause. He sent Thul Kila’ al-Himyari to find out if
Ammar was among Imam Ali’s warriors. Thul Kila’ sent for Abu Noah
al-Himyari and enquired whether Ammar was on Imam Ali’s side. Abu Noah
confirmed the fact and asked why the inquiry was being made. Thul Kila’
replied that Amr bin al-Aas recollected the

tradition that the killers of Ammar would be aggressors and that Ammar
would always be with the truth and that Ammar would have a special place
in the Paradise and his killers would be in the Hell.

When Ammar was killed by Mu’awiya’s men, there was a commotion that
great injustice was done in killing Ammar. Mu’awiya, who was famous for
his cunning, said, “We did not kill Ammar. Those, who brought Ammar into
the battlefield exposing him to the dangers of the battle, are the real
killers of Ammar.” Hearing this, Imam Ali (a.s) said, “Does Mu’awiya
suggest that the messenger of Allah was the killer of Hamza?”**[1]**

(xvi) Hashim bin Utba bin Abi Waqqas az-Zohri
---------------------------------------------

Hashim was the nephew of the famous companion Sa’d bin Abi Waqqas.
Hashim embraced Islam on the day of conquest of Mecca. He was a devout
follower of Imam Ali (a.s). Hashim fought valiantly in the Battle of
Siffin. During the battle, a Syrian young man started abusing Imam Ali
(a.s). Hashim asked him why he was doing so. The young man replied, “I
have been told that the people of Iraq and their leader never perform
prayers and that they have killed the Caliph (Uthman).” Hashim said,
“Uthman was killed by the companions of the Prophet (s) and our leader
Ali had nothing to do with the murder of Uthman. Our leader is the first
to accept Islam, the first to pray behind the messenger of Allah. He
recites the Qur’an and spends the night in prayer. O Syrian, do not be
carried away by the false propaganda of the hypocrites. Save yourself
even now.” The Syrian young man was impressed by the speech of Hasim and
he left the battlefield. When Hashim was martyred, his son Utba took up
his standard and was martyred after a valiant fight. **[2]**

(xvii) Owais al-Qurani
----------------------

The Prophet (s) had foretold, “Though Owais may not meet me, he will
become a Muslim and will fight with my guardian Ali and will be martyred
in (the battle of) Siffin. Anyone who meets Owais is to convey my
salutations to him.” When Umar met Owais during the Hajj, he requested
him to pray for him. Owais replied, “Everyday I pray for every believer.
If you are a true believer you will be benefited by my prayers.”**[3]**
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 222 [2001 Edition].  
 **[2]** Ibid*.,* p. 225-226.  
 **[3]** Ibid*.,* p. 235.

Owais joined Imam Ali’s army, fought in the battle of Siffin, and was
martyred.

(xviii) Huthaifa bin al-Yaman’s sons Sagwan and Sa’eed
------------------------------------------------------

Huthaifa was a well-known companion. The Prophet (a.s.) had informed him
of the names of the hypocrites who had plotted to kill him (the Prophet)
on his return from the skirmish of Tabuk. Due to the desire of Huthaifa,
his two sons fought for Imam Ali (a.s) and were martyred in Siffin.

(xix) Malik bin al-Harith al-Ashtari
------------------------------------

Malik was a close companion of Imam Ali (a.s). He fought in many battles
alongside Imam Ali (a.s). When Mu’awiya started harassing Mohammed bin
Abu Bakr who was the governor of Egypt, Imam Ali (a.s) recalled Malik
from Azerbaijan. Mu’awiya learnt about this move and was scared of
Malik. He employed a man at a place called al-Qalzam to insert poison to
Malik, mixed with honey. On hearing this, Imam Ali (a.s) said, “Malik
was to me as I was to the Prophet (s).”

(xx) Kinana bin Bishr
---------------------

He was a devout follower of Imam Ali (a.s). When Mu’awiya made a revolt
in Egypt, Imam Ali (a.s) advised Mohammad bin Abu Bakr to seek the
assistance of Kinana. When Kinana was martyred in the battle, many
people deserted Mohammad bin Abu Bakr.

(xxi) Mohammad bin Abu Bakr
---------------------------

He was the son of the first Caliph Abu Bakr and the real brother of
Aa’isha. He was opposed to the Caliphate of his father. He was a devout
follower of Imam Ali (a.s). In the year 38 AH, Mu’awiya surrounded and
killed him while thirsty and his body was burnt.

(xxii) A’yan bin Dhubay’ah
--------------------------

Imam Ali (a.s) sent him to help Mohammed bin Abu Bakr in Egypt. However,
before he could reach Egypt, he was assassinated on the way by
Mu’awiya’s men.

(xxiii) Mohammad bin Abi Huthaifa
---------------------------------

He was an uncle of Mu’awiya, but he was a devout follower of Imam Ali
(a.s). When Umar bin al-Aas conquered Egypt, he arrested Mohammad and
sent him to Mu’awiya. Mohammad was jailed, but soon escaped. He hid
himself in a cave in Hawareen, but was soon discovered and slain by
Mu’awiya’s man Ubeidullah bin Umar bin Dhallam.

(xxiv) Maytham at-Tammar
------------------------

Maytham was a companion whose martyrdom was foretold by Imam Ali (a.s).
Maytham was shown the tree where his corpse would be hung. He used to
water that tree every day. Imam Ali had said that Maytham would be asked
to abuse Imam Ali (a.s) and on his refusal, his tongue would be pulled
out and cut by Mu’awiya. When Ubeidullah was appointed as the governor
of Kufa, he chased the companions and partisans of Imam Ali (a.s). He
asked each one of them to abuse Imam Ali (a.s) publicly from on the
pulpit. People like Hujr bin Adiy and several others refused to comply
and were thrown down from the parapet of the palace and their bodies
were dragged in the streets of Kufa. Maytham also refused to comply with
Ubeidullah’s order saying that his Imam, Ali (a.s) had already informed
him that Ubeidullah would pull out his tongue before crucifying.
Ubeidullah said he would disprove Imam Ali’s words. He ordered that one
hand and one leg of Maytham to be cut and he be thrown in the street.
When this was done, Maytham started praising Imam Ali (a.s) and cursing
Mu’awiya, Yazid, and Ubeidullah ibn Ziyad. Unable to stop Maytham,
Ubeidullah ordered Maytham’s tongue to be pulled out and his body hung
in the tree.
