Preface To the Second Edition
=============================

All praise belongs to Allah, the Sublime, the Merciful, Who provides
guidance through His Chosen Ones (s), who are Immaculate and therefore
Infallible. As the Vicegerents of Allah on the earth, they wished, said,
or did only that which Allah pleased, and in turn in His Majesty, Allah
declared their words, deeds and wishes to be His Will.

I did not expect the first edition to go out of stock so soon. We are
thankful to the Masumin (a.s) for their blessings.

Fallible as I am, there were several mistakes, though not in content,
that needed to be rectified. I have carried out the correction to the
extent of my limitations. I have added two important Chapters in this
edition. Chapter 25 deals with the incidents relating to the burial
after Ashura, 61 AH. Chapter 27 deals with the Persecution of the Shia
through the centuries. The last mentioned chapter is relevant in the
context of the present liberal atmosphere in several countries, which
tend to obliterate the torture and suffering the Shia were put to,
throughout history, even as lately as the last decade when Saddam
carried out wholesale annihilation of thousands of Shias. Through the
ages, our ancestors had preserved and passed on the Shiite traditions at
the risk of their lives, by word of mouth, from one generation to
another, fearing at every step, as to which relative, which friend would
betray them to the government of the time. I have heard the Moulvis at
Madras, at the end of the day of the procession on the seventh of
Muharram, thanking the Government for allowing us to openly mourn Imam
Husain (a.s). We tend to forget that during our ancestor’s times it was
a crime to mourn for Imam Husain (a.s) and people were executed for it.
The sacrifices made by our ancestors should not be forgotten, for they
are the very foundation on which our faith has been preserved.

I heartily welcome any suggestions, corrections etc. that will be
certainly incorporated to bring out a more comprehensive edition.

I thank the Almighty and the Masumin (a.s) and pray that in their
Benevolence and Grace, they may forgive my lapses and accept this humble
effort.

**A.K. Ahmed  
 20<sup>th</sup> March 2007  
 9<sup>th</sup> Rabee’ul Awwal, 1428 AH**
