Persecution By Mu’awiya Between 30-60 Ah
========================================

Mu’awiya appointed Bisr bin Artat to seek out and kill Imam Ali’s
partisans. Bisr played havoc in Mecca, Medina, Yemen, and other towns.
It is reported that he had killed more than 30,000 Shia.**[1]** When he
could not locate Ubeidullah ibn Abbas, he killed his little children in
front of their mother.**[2]**

When Abu Sufyan saw that Abu Bakr had been installed as the Caliph, he
went to Imam Ali (a.s) and said, “You have been deprived of your right
by those who do not deserve the post of caliph. If only you assent, I
will fill Medina with cavalry and soldiers to unseat the usurpers of the
seat of caliphate.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 247 [2001 Edition] quoting *Sharh
Nahjol Balagha* of Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. 1 p. 121.  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 1 p. 245 [2001 Edition] quoting
al-*Isti’ab and al-Isaba.*

Imam Ali (a.s] was fully aware that Abu Sufyan, who fought the Prophet
(s) all his life, was a hypocrite and that all he wanted was dissension
and discord in Islam. Imam Ali (a.s) refused to be dragged into the
trap. Rebuked and rebutted by Imam Ali (a.s), Abu Sufyan planned to join
the opponents of Ali.

Umar, who received the news of what transpired between Abu Sufyan and
Ali, realized that if left to himself, Abu Sufyan would cause great
mischief. Umar thought it best to purchase Abu Sufyan’s loyalty rather
than to face his mischief. Umar sent for Abu Sufyan and told him that he
and Abu Bakr had decided to appoint his (Abu Sufyan) son Yazid as the
governor of Syria. Abu Sufyan was immensely pleased. In the year 11 AH,
Yazid bin Abu Sufyan became the governor of Syria. Very soon, he died
and in his place, the caliph appointed Mu’awiya as the governor of Syria
and Iraq. Though, on becoming the second caliph, Umar removed several
governors on various charges, Mu’awiya was not disturbed from his post
in spite that his misrule was the cause of the uprising and the ultimate
assassination of Uthman.**[1]**

In his letter to Mohammad bin Abu Bakr, Mu’awiya wrote, “Even during the
lifetime of the messenger of Allah, we (the Umayyads) were together with
your father in contesting against Ali’s right (of leadership). We were
certainly aware of his superiority and supremacy over all others. But,
when God chose to take away the messenger of Allah from this world, it
was your father and his friend Umar who were the foremost in snatching
the caliphate from Ali by opposing him at all costs. In this, both of
them (Abu Bakr and Umar) were in perfect consonance with each
other.”**[2]**

Mu’awiya’s rule of Syria, Egypt, and Palestine actually commenced from
the year 11 AH, and lasted for fifty years, when he died in 60 AH. Thus,
the areas under his domain were far away from Mecca and Medina, the
centers of Islam, and the population there believed only what was taught
to them by Mu’awiya’s henchmen. The public had no idea who were the
relatives of the Prophet (s) or who were his companions. Mu’awiya made
the people there believe that he alone was the heir of the Prophet (s),
that Ali was a dacoit, and Husain a reactionary opposed to Islam. People
were made to believe that  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 2 p. 13, First Edition, Publisher
Idara-e-Nasirul Uloom, Luknow, UP.   
 **[2]** Ibid*.,* p. 3-4 quoting Ibn Abil Hadid’s Sharh Nahjul Balagha,
vol. 1 p. 284.

anybody who praised Ali must himself be a dacoit or at least of low
morality, and that anybody who praised Husain in fact sowed the seeds of
sedition. Fifty years were more than enough to achieve this goal.

From the year 11 to 35 AH, Mu’awiya apprehended no danger from the
ruling caliph. He had Syria, Iraq, and Egypt under his control. These
areas were far away from Medina, the then capital of Islam. Except for
the essentials, the public had no idea about the thought and philosophy
of Islam. In fact, Mu’awiya wanted the people to be ignorant of Islam so
that nobody might point out that Mu’awiya himself was acting against
Islam in his daily life. In order to win over the public, he allowed
them to lead a life without any reference to the prohibitions and
recommendations made in Islam.

The public found that their rulers provided them jobs and food. Beyond
that, they had no need or desire to consider any aspect of Islam or its
true proponents. As a result, al-Hajjaj bin Yousuf asked people from on
the pulpit, “*Who provides you food and jobs?*” People replied, “*The
Caliph.*” He then asked, “*Who is better, the Prophet or the
Caliph?*”**[1]**

The foundation for the thought that the *Caliph*, in the least, was next
only to God was strongly and truly laid by Mu’awiya. Because of this, in
the year 96 AH When al-Waleed bin Abdul Melik bin Marwan became the
king, he contended that the caliph was superior to past Prophets.

Ibnul Athir records that in 98 AH, al-Waleed bin Abdul Malik asked while
giving a sermon in Mecca, “Who is more important for you; the Caliph or
Abraham the Prophet? How I wish you realized the superiority of your
caliph who provided sweet drinking water for you whereas Abraham the
Prophet only provided brackish water (Zamzam). By God, al-Waleed is
dearer in the eyes of God than any Prophet.”**[2]** Al-Waleed was
referring to the well he had dug up in Mecca, which provided sweet water
for some time, but later it dried up.

Initially, Mu’awiya was engaged in consolidating his own position by
lavishly bribing amenable persons and killing or at least confiscating
the properties of those who were even suspected to sympathise with  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 4 p. 54 quoting al-Mas’udi’s *Murooj
ath-thahab,* vol. 2, p. 164.  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 4 p. 174-175.

Ali. But, from 11 to 30 AH, we do not find any interference by Mu’awiya
with the Caliph. When Uthman was killed, Mu’awiya apprehended a
contender and feared that he might lose power, and therefore, he took
these steps:**[1]**

[i] He sent his army commander Bisr bin Artat who killed 30,000 Shia and
slaughtered two young sons of Abdullah Ibn Abbas in their mother’s lap.

[ii] He sent Sufyan bin Ouf whose contingent of six thousand strong men
created terror by looting and destructing the houses of the Shia in
al-Mada’in.

[iii] He sent Abdullah bin Sa’dah al-Fazari with a contingent to loot
and harass the people who sympathized with Imam Ali (a.s.).

[iv] He sent ad-Dhahhak bin Qais with 30000 men to loot, terrorize, and
kill Ali’s adherents in Waqisa, Thalabiya, and Qatqat.

[v] He sent an-No’man bin Basheer to eliminate Ali’s adherents in Ayn
at-Tamr.

[vi] He removed the names of the Shia from the citizenship
registers.**[2]**

[vi] He stopped the state pensions to any one suspected to be a Shia.

[vii] He ordered that the testimony of anyone suspected to be a Shia
should not be admitted in evidence.

In his rule of about half a century, Mu’awiya laid a solid foundation
for the extreme hatred toward Imam Ali (a.s) and anybody even remotely
linked or sympathetic to him. In the course of time, the Shia along with
their Imams inherited the legacy of blind persecution by their
opponents. The Abbasids gained power on the basis of a popular and
widespread perception that the Umayyads were usurpers of Power and that
the Caliphate rightly belonged to Ali and his offspring. After gaining
power, the Abbasids became much crueler out of the unfounded fear that
if not persecuted, the Imams would wrest the power from them.

Sa’eed Akbarabadi, a Sunni historian, writes, “Every act forbidden and
disapproved by Islam was done to build up and stabilise the government.
There is an Arabic proverb that the Umayyads were ‘the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid*.,* vol. 2 p. 14.  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 2 p. 120.

First Diggers of buried bodies’ and the Abbasids were ‘the Second
Diggers of buried bodies’.” Then, the writer’s personal preference comes
to the fore and he makes his choice by adding, “Perhaps the first group
of gravediggers were less cursed.”

The writer gives the reason for the downfall of the Umayyads as follows,
“The fall of the Umayyads was largely due to their excessiveness,
repression, and tyranny and also due to their nomination of successors
within the life period of the working caliph. The Abbasids also
committed the same blunders and they never cared to change their
attitude and conduct.”**[1]** The writer forgets that the precedent of
nominating the successor was set by Abu Bakr when he nominated Umar as
his successor, and the example was scrupulously followed by Mu’awiya and
his successors. Elsewhere Sa’eed Akbarabadi gives the following reasons
for the development of apostatic trends in Islam:“The apostatic trends
that developed among Muslims were largely due to the following two
factors; the false and morbid system of government founded by the
Umayyads, and the patronage and propagation of rational branches of
knowledge and dogmatic theology by the Abbasids **[2]**”

We may recall here what we noted in earlier pages that firstly, the
Umayyads were invested with the governorship of Syria and Iraq by the
first two caliphs, and that the third caliph only expanded the hold of
the Umayyads by filling up every position of power with his relatives or
tribesman; secondly, when the first three caliphs prohibited the
narration of *Hadith,* they had to perforce open the doors for
*Ijtihad*.**[3]** When the unwanted effects of *Ijtihad* were noticed,
the doors of *Ijtihad* were suddenly and unceremoniously closed down,
but only after when Islam came to be divided into four sects. The
‘unwanted effects’ that the writer bemoans are but the fruits of the
seeds sown immediately after the death of the Prophet (s).

To be fair to the writer, who describes in detail the atrocities
committed by the Abbasids, we quote this passage:“*Besides the Umayyads,
people who were suspected of supporting the progeny of Ali were also
similarly maltreated*.”**[4]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The Rise and Fall of Muslims, p. 82, Adam Publishers [2005].  
 **[2]** Ibid, p. 94.  
 **[3]** To form one’s own judgment on questions concerning the
Sharia.  
 **[4]** The Rise and Fall of Muslims, p. 80.

As non-Muslim governments came to power, there was a slackening in the
torture and the killing of the Shia. Among the Indian Rulers, except the
two kingdoms of Bijapur and Golconda, all were *Sunnis.* Where the Shia
ruled, there was communal harmony, but in places like Luknow,
Benaras…etc., with the connivance of the rulers, the Shia were singled
out for persecution. With the passage of time, the Shia have slowly
forgiven and forgotten the persecution and torture they suffered for
centuries.

I remember as a youth that during the 60’s in Madras, we dreaded to wear
our ‘*Alfi*’ (a black scarf traditionally worn by the Shia during the
first ten days of Muharram) while passing a road called the *Jane Jehan
Khan Road.* If anyone was found wearing the *Alfi,* he was derided, spat
upon, and abused by the inhabitants of that road who were staunch
*Sunnis.* We had to perform our Majlises (ritual meetings) quietly
within specific localities thickly populated by Shia.

During the procession on the seventh of Muharram, on Triplicane High
Road, disturbance was sought to be created by throwing silver and gold
coins on the breast-beating processionists. Fortunately, advance
information was passed on by some well-wisher and the elders of the
community decided that from the junction at Pyecrofts Road and
Triplicane High Road, to the junction at Chowk (a square Bazaar) and
Triplicane High Road, there would not be any breast-beating and that the
processionists would only recite “*Nadi Aliyyan Aliyyan Ya Ali*” and
that nobody would stoop to pick up anything, even if it be silver or
gold coin which might be thrown on the processionists from the
surrounding buildings. People who planned the conspiracy are dead, the
throwing of the coins has stopped, but processions commemorating Imam
Husain’s martyrdom continue until now.

To perpetuate the memories of the great sacrifice at Karbala, the Shia
contributed their own blood. Be it Umayyad, Abbasid, or any other, the
successive regimes spared no effort to erase the graves and memories of
the sacrifice made by Imam Husain (a.s) and his companions. The rulers
imposed severe penalties by way of taxes for visiting the tombs of the
martyrs at Karbala. The Shia never hesitated to pay the huge levies to
visit Imam Husain’s shrine at Karbala. Leaving the old and the sick, the
Abbasids killed the young Shia, so that the Shia population might
dwindle.

Quite often, they ordered the tombs of the martyrs at Karbala to be
destroyed and erased completely. Ibnul Athir, in his al-Kamil, relates
that in the year 236 AH, the Abbasid caliph *al-Mutawakkil* ordered the
tomb of Imam Husain (a.s) and the surrounding houses to be demolished
without leaving any trace.**[1]**

Allama al-Majlisi quotes that Ibn Babwayh narrates through reliable
authorities from Abdullah Neishapuri that he had some dealing with
Hameed bin Atiyya at-Toosi, and he went to meet him in his house. It was
the month of Ramadan, but Atiyya had his food. When questioned why he
did not observe the fasting, Atiyya said, “I beheaded sixty young men
from the progeny of Ali and Fatima. The last of them was an old man. He
cursed me for killing the innocent progeny of Ali and Fatima and that I
would certainly be punished in the Hell. What use would prayer and
fasting make to me with the murderer of the innocent progeny of Ali and
Fatima? It is because of that that I neither pray nor fast.”

Mu’awiya appointed the following governors who were notorious for
committing cruelty and torture:

**[1]** al-Mugheera bin Shu’ba **[2]** Ziyad bin Sumayya (bin Abeeh)
**[3]** Samura bin Jundab **[4]** Amr bin al-Aas **[5]** Muslim bin Uqba
**[6]** Ubaidullah bin Ziyad who was the commander in chief of the army
that fought against Imam Husain and **[7]** Hussayn bin Numair who
guarded the banks of the Euphrates and prevented Imam Husain (a.s.) from
getting any water...etc.***[2]***

The following persons were friends of Imam Ali. They were killed when
they refused to curse the Imam in Mu’awiya’s presence:

**[1]** Hujr bin Adiy **[2]** Mohammad bin abi Huthaifa **[3]** Shaddad
bin Aws **[4]** Sa’sa’a bin Souhan al-Abdi **[5]** Abdullah bin Hashim
bin Utba bin Abi Waqqas **[6]** Jameel bin Ka’b ath-Tha’labi **[7]**
Jariya bin Qudama at-Tamimi **[8]** Shareek bin Shaddad al-Hadhrami
**[9]** Saifi bin Faseel ash-Shaibani **[10]** Qabeesa bin Dhubay’ah
al-Absi **[11]** Kiram bin Habban al-Anzi **[12]** Muhriz bin Shihab
at-Tamimi **[13]** Abdurrahman bin Hassan al-Anzi **[14]** Amr bin
al-Humq al-Khuza’iy **[15]** Juwairiya ibn Musshir al-Abdi**…**
etc.**[3]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Nafasul Mahmoom,*] p. 280, Pub Ja’fari Propagation Center,
Mumbai [2006.  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 2 p. 144 quoting an-*Nasa’ihul Kafia,
p.64.*  
 **[3]** Ibid*.,* p. 155-161.

Sumara bin Jundab killed eight thousand innocent persons.**[1]**

Ziyad bin Sumayya (bin Abeeh) was a bastard appointed by Mu’awiya as
governor of Basra. Ziyad knew every Shia and every one from Imam Ali’s
progeny in Basra. He killed over a hundred thousand of them.**[2]**

Al-Mughira bin Shu’ba cunningly told Shareek bin al-A’war al-Harithi to
collect people in order to fight against the Kharijites. Shareek
collected about three thousand Shia from the tribe of Rabi’a. When they
gathered outside Basra, al-Mughira surrounded and killed them all.

Ibn Ziyad, as the governor of Basra first and later as the governor of
Basra and Kufa, killed hundreds of thousands of Shia from the two cities

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 2 p. 166 quoting an-*Nasa’ihul Kafia, p.
52.*  
 **[2]** Ibid*.,* p. 169 quoting Sharh Nahjul Balagha.
