the Shia Martyred Between 64 & 73 Ah Under Abdullah Ibn Az-zubair’s Rule
========================================================================

We had noticed earlier that when he saw Abdullah ibn az-Zubair in Mecca,
Abdullah ibn Abbas said that he (ibn az-Zubair) was only waiting for his
opportunity to become the Caliph. This proved correct. The holy cities
of Mecca and Medina, Iraq, Persia, and the rest of the Muslim world,
[except Syria, Palestine, and Egypt] were under Ibn az-Zubair until 73
AH when was killed. Abdullah ibn az-Zubair was a mean-minded who felt
pleasure in creating chaos. He hated Imam Ali (a.s.) and his progeny.
When Yazid demanded his allegiance, ibn az-Zubair took asylum in the
Kaaba. He pretended to be pious while always coveting worldly gain. On
the death of Yazid and in the prevailing confusion, Abdullah ibn
az-Zubair declared his caliphate and occupied the Arabia and a part of
Iraq and Iran. He could not wrest Syria, Palestine, and Egypt where
Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad set up Abdul Melik bin Marwan as the caliph.

Ibn az-Zubair subjected the Shia living in Mecca and Medina to immense
torture and he exiled them out of the two holy cities. Abul Qasim
Mohammad ibn al-Hanafiyya was the third son of Imam Ali and step-
brother of Imam Husain. Ibn az-Zubair arrested and kept him in a dark
dungeon for a long time. Mohammad bin al-Hanafiyya had a son called
Hasan. Hasan was also subjected to torture in prison only because he was
the grandson of Imam Ali.

Abu Ishaq al-Mukhtar bin Abu Ubaida ath-Thaqafi was born in the year of
the Prophet’s migration to Medina. He was two years senior to Imam
Husain, but he considered Imam Husain to be his master. He openly
proclaimed his love for the progeny of Imam Ali. Mu’awiya had imprisoned
him in Kufa long before the battle of Karabala. It was

only after the martyrdom of Imam Husain (a.s.) when the general public
broke into to open the locks of the dungeon that al-Mukhtar could come
out. Learning about the cruel manner of the martyrdom which Imam Husain
was subjected to, al-Mukhtar swore that he would catch everyone of the
stone-hearted miscreants and kill them. Initially, he joined the forces
of Ibn az-Zubair and fought against Hussayn bin Numair. When he learnt
that the people of Kufa were like a herd of sheep that had lost their
shepherd, he went to Kufa and collected people who wished to seek
revenge for Imam Husain’s blood. Among them was Ibrahim bin Malik
al-Ashthar. Ultimately, both al-Mukhtar and Ibrahim were killed.**[1]**

It is reported by al-Khawarezmi that the day after al-Mukhtar was
killed, seven thousand Shia were surrounded and mercilessly killed by
Mus’ab bin Abdullah ibn az-Zubair. This incident so much influenced
Abdullah ibn Umar, the son of the second caliph, that once when Mus’ab
met him and introduced himself, Abdullah ibn Umar said, “*Yes, I know
that you are Mus’ab who had killed seven thousand Muslims without any
guilt. You may live as long as you wish*.”**[2]**

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For a detailed account, see *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 3 p. 215-227
[1966].  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 3 p. 226, quoting at-Tabari’s *Tarikh,*
vol. 8 p. 159.
