Persecution Between 64 To 85 Ah, By Marwan and His Son Abdul Melik
==================================================================

After the death of Yazid, there was much confusion. Marwan, who was
banished by the Prophet (s) and then allowed to come back by the first
caliph, now assumed power. His reign was in dispute and even the Sunnis
do not recognise him as a caliph. Within a year, he passed away. He had
nominated his son Abdul Melik as his successor in the rule. Thus, the
long cherished dream of Abu Sufyan was reralised and for nearly a
century, the Umayyads tossed around the ball of caliphate among
themselves.

Marwan could control only Syria and Palestine at first. After the
martyrdom of Mohammad bin Abu Bakr, Egypt also came under his rule. The
notorious Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad was his commander in chief, and persons
like Umar bin Sa’d, Hussayn bin Numair, Shimr bin Thil Joushan, and
other such cruel and tyrannous persons were heading the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** For a detailed account, see *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 3 p. 215-227
[1966].  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 3 p. 226, quoting at-Tabari’s *Tarikh,*
vol. 8 p. 159.

divisions of the army and cavalry. However, Marwan lived hardly for a
year after coming into power.

The rule of Abdul Melik bin Marwan lasted for twenty-one years that were
full of oppression and persecution. Any person, who was even suspected
to be a sympathiser with the *Ahlul Bayt,* was imprisoned, banished, or
killed for no other fault.

Mu’awiya, in his time, imprisoned several noble and innocent men.
Sulayman bin Surad al-Khuza’iy, al-Musayyab bin Naqaba al-Fazari,
Abdullah bin Sa’d bin Nafi’ al-Azdi, Abdullah bin Wal at-Taimi, Rifa’ah
bin Shaddad al-Bajali, Abdullah bin Sa’d bin Nufeil, Muttaqi bin
Muhrisa, Sa’eed bin Huthaifa, Katheer bin Amr al-Muzani, Sa’eed bin
Sa’eed al-Hanafi, Abdullah bin Handhala at-Ta’iy, Abul Huwayrith
al-Abdi, and their group of 4500 men known as the Tawwabin (repentants),
several of whom were companions of the Prophet (s) and of Imam Ali
(a.s.) and were noble men in their tribes, were imprisoned by Mu’awiya
on account of their love to Imam Ali.

Therefore, they could not participate in the battle of Karabala. When
Yazid died, pandemonium broke out and the public looted the treasury,
broke open the lock of the prisons and released all prisoners. Under
Sulayman bin Surd al-Khuza’iy, the Tawwabin wanted to seek revenge for
Imam Husain’s blood. Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad sent an army of twelve
thousand men under the command of Hussayn bin Numair. Ubaidullah himself
headed and army of thirty thousand men.

Most of the Tawwabin, numbering over five thousand, were killed by Ibn
Ziyad and Hussayn bin Numair’s men. A few Tawwabin escaped and went back
to their native places.

Ubaidullah ibn Ziyad and Hussayn bin Numair were killed near Mosul by
the men of Ibrahim bin Malik al-Ashtar and al-Mukhtar. Abdul Melik bin
Marwan appointed al-Hajjaj ibn Yousuf ath-Thaqafi as the governor of
Iraq, al-Muhallab bin Abi Sufrah as the governor of Persia, Hisham bin
Isma’eel and his son over Egypt, Musa bin Nuseir as the governor of
Yemen, al-Hajjaj’s brother Mohammad bin Yousuf as the governor of
Algeria. All these persons were vicious, cruel, and barbaric
murderers.**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 4 p.50 quoting Allama Kamaluddin
ad-Dimyari’s *Hayatul Haiwan,* vol. 1p. 55.

We may gauge the character of al-Hajjaj bin Yousuf from the incident
when he climbed the pulpit and asked the congregation, “Who gives you
the daily bread; the Caliph or the messenger of Allah?”**[1]**

Al-Hajjaj had the greatest contempt towards the Prophet (s) as well as
towards the people of Medina and Mecca in general. He used to boast,
“*Had I not been restrained, due to political necessity, by the caliph
Abdul Melik bin Marwan, I would have killed the people of Mecca and
Medina and put their corpses in sacs of donkey skin, for these people
bear a grudge against the caliph and are jealous of his affluence*.”

In the year 72 AH, Abdul Melik sent al-Hajjaj bin Yousuf with an army of
two thousand Syrians to subdue Abdullah bin az-Zubair whose son Mus’ab
had been already killed. Instead of Medina, al-Hajjaj went to Iraq and
sent men from there to Arafa in the Arabia. Abdullah ibn az-Zubair also
was collecting and sending men who fought and were defeated by the army
of al-Hajjaj. Since Abdullah ibn az-Zubair had established himself in
the Kaaba, al-Hajjaj wrote to Abdul Melik seeking permission to enter
the Kaaba. Abdul Malik gave permission and sent a contingent of five
thousand soldiers headed by Tariq bin Amr to assist al-Hajjaj.**[2]**
Abdullah ibn az-Zubair was killed in Mecca in the last days of the year
71 AH.

Al-Hajjaj killed Hamadan a bondsman and caller of Azan of Imam
Ali.**[3]** He also slaughtered Qambar another bondsman of Imam
Ali,**[4]** and beheaded Kumail ibn Ziyad, Imam Ali’s close
companion.**[5]** He also killed Umair [or Umar] bin ad-Dhabbi an old
man of 90 years.**[6]**

Al-Hajjaj inflicted four hundred whiplashes on Utba bin Sa’d for
refusing to curse Imam Ali (a.s).**[7]**

During his governorship of eleven years under the rule of Abdul Melik
bin Marwan and nine years under the rule of al-Waleed bin Abdul Melik,
al-Hajjaj killed 1,20,000 Shia in Kufa and Basra for the only  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid*.,* p.54.  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 4 p.59 quoting at-Tabari’s *Tarikhul
Umam wal Muluk,* vol. 1 p. 175, 360 *Al-Bidaya,* and al-Balathuri’s
*Ansabul Ashraf.*  
 **[3]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 4 p.150 quoting *Manaqib* of ibn Shahr
Ashub, vol. 3 p. 162.  
 **[4]** Ibid*.*, p.157, quoting Biharul Anwar, vol. 9 p. 714.   
 **[5]** Ibid*.,* p.161 quoting al-Bidaya wal Nihaya, vol. 9 p. 47.  
 **[6]** Ibid*.,* p.164.  
 **[7]** Ibid*.*, p.186.

reason that they were sympathisers with Imam Ali.**[1]** When al-Hajjaj
died thirty thousand men and twenty thousand women, who had been
imprisoned by him, were released

Abu Sadiq Sulaym bin Qais al-Hilali was a companion of the Prophet (s),
and of five Imams; namely, Imam Ali, Imam Hasan, Imam Husain, Imam
Zainul Aabidin, and Imam Mohammad al-Baqir (peace be on them). When
al-Hajjaj became the governor of Iraq, he ordered Sulaym to be arrested.
Sulaym hid himself in various countries, and he suffered immensely and
died in exile. His book under the title ‘Kitab Sulaym Bin Qays’ is
translated into English. It throws new light on the incidents that
occurred in the year 11 AH, and thereafter.

Sa’eed bin al-Musayyab was a well-known successor of the Prophet’s
companion (Tabi’een) and a companion of Imam Ali. Abdul Melik bin Marwan
wanted to get married to Sa’eed’s beautiful daughter, but Sa’eed married
her to a poor young man. In his anger, Abdul Melik ordered Sa’eed to be
whipped thirty times for refusing to accept him as the caliph. The old
man died in the year 94 AH.**[2]**

Sa’eed ibn Jubeir was a companion of Imam Ali (a.s). He was caught by
al-Hajjaj and slaughtered in the year 94 AH. Sa’eed cursed al-Hajjaj,
and within a few months, al-Hajjaj died.

Al-Waleed bin Abdul Melik poisoned Imam Zainul Aabidin (a.s.) on 25th
Muharram, 95 AH.

Sulayman bin Abdul Melik succeeded al-Waleed in the rule. He released
three hundred thousand prisoners (men and women) who had been jailed by
al-Hajjaj.**[3]** The release was not due to any mercy or pity, but
because it cost the exchequer too much. Sulayman poisoned Abdullah bin
Mohammed bin Ali bin Abi Talib.

Hisham bin Abdul Melik succeeded his brother Sulayman in the rule and
died in 125 AH. He poisoned Imam Mohammad al-Baqir (a.s.) and Abul Hasan
Zaid bin Ali. He demolished the house and cut off the tongue of
al-Kumait al-Asadi, a poet who wrote in favour of the *Ahlul Bayt.*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid*.*, p.93 quoting *Muruj ath-Thahab* of al-Mas’udi, vol. 3
p.175 and *Mukhtasar Tarikh* of Ibn Asakir, vol. 4 p.70.  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 4 p.181.  
 **[3]** Ibid., p.190 quoting *Manaqib* of ibn Shahr Ashub, vol. 2 p.
107, Hayatul Haiwan vol. 1 p. 55.

Haleef al-Qur’an Abul Husain Zaid bin Ali Bin al-Husain bin Ali bin Abi
Talib was killed along with his three hundred and thirteen followers by
an army of Yousuf bin Umar by the orders of Hisham bin Abdul Melik. He
then hung the corpse of Zaid on the main entrance to Kufa. The corpse
remained hung for five years. A pleasant smell emanated from the corpse.
This happened in the year 121 AH. In the same way, Mohammad bin Ali
al-Kufi was slaughtered the next year.

When al-Waleed bin Yazid bin Abdul Melik became the king, he sought to
arrest Yahya bin Zaid, who resisted against ten thousand warriors just
with the help of seventy followers. Zaid and his followers were
martyred. Zaid’s head was severed and sent to al-Waleed bin Yazid, and
his body was hung on the gateway of Jurjan for one year. Khushkhash
al-Azdi, who escaped death in the battle, was taken to Nasiruddin
Sayyar. Al-Azdi’s hands and feet were first severed, and then he was
martyred.
