Part C Persecution of the Shia By the Abbasid Kings
===================================================

The Abbasids did not fall in the category of the progeny of the Prophet
(s), the Ahlul Bayt. Al-Abbas was a paternal uncle of the Prophet (s).
The children of Ali and Fatima alone were called Shareef or Sayyid, a
term which came to be used more commonly later to denote the progeny of
the Prophet (s). A Sunni writer of repute states, “The offspring of Ali
are known as the ‘Ahlul Bayt’, ‘Aal Mohammad’, ‘the Progeny of the
Prophet’, ‘the Children of the Messenger’, ‘Aal Taha’ and ‘Aal Yasin’.
They are also known by the title of ‘Sayyid’ or ‘Shareef’. ”**[1]**

Moulana Ali Naqi Naqvi draws a fallacious assumption that since Abdul
Muttalib was the leader (Sayyid) of the Arabs, his children also came to
be called ‘Sayyids’. It is a historical fact that none from the
offspring of Abdul Muttalib’s other children, except those born to Ali,
ever were called Sayyid.

Yet, the Abbasids assumed a garb of the Khilafah indirectly from Abu
Hashim bin Mohammad bin al-Hanafiyya, the grand son of Imam Ali (a.s).
In order to pretend a proximity to Imam Ali (a.s), the Abbasids created
a legend saying that Abu Hashim al-Alawi appointed Mohammad bin Ali bin
Abdullah bin Abbas as his successor (Khalifa) at the place called
Hamiya. The Abbasids claimed that Abu Hashim was the Khalifa of Mohammad
bin al-Hanafiyya, who in turn got to the Khilafah from Imam Ali (a.s).
The Abbasids also claimed that Abu Hashim had a great following of the
Shia of Khurasan. Based on the above assumption, Ibn Khaldun, Ibnul
Athir, Abul Faraj al-Isfahani, and some other writers state that the
Abbasids invited people towards the ‘contentment of Aal Mohammad’. The
Abbasids claimed that before he died, Mohammad bin Ali bin Abdullah bin
Abbas appointed his son Ibrahim, and when Ibrahim was arrested by Marwan
al-Himar, he appointed his younger brother Abul Abbas Abdullah as-Saffah
as his successor.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Manaqib* of ibn Shahr Ashub, vol. 2 p. 134 quoted in Masa’ibush
Shia, vol. 5 p. 29.

The Abbasids also contended that Abu Hashim sent twelve persons as his
deputies to espouse his cause into the various districts of Iran. This
contention is not supported by any historical record that would show
that Abu Hashim bin Mohammad bin al-Hanafiyya went anywhere near
Khurasan or that he sent his emissaries. His father Mohammad bin
al-Hanafiyya himself was under the Imamate of the Fourth Imam Ali Ibn
Husain Zainul Aabidin (a.s.). Muhammad bin al-Hanafiyya predeceased Imam
Zainul Aabidin (a.s). Abu Muslim, who was a native of Khurasan, was
appointed as one of the emissaries by Ibrahim. Abu Muslim succeeded in
gathering huge support for the cause of ‘the contentment of Aal
Mohammad’ since the people of Khurasan loved the Ahlul Bayt. The cruelty
and oppression of the Umayyads had vexed the public and a revolt was
already brewing. The cause of ‘the contentment of Aal Mohammad’ was
heartily welcomed.

Though the Abbasids touted the cause of this conception, they cleverly
did not disclose the name of the person, who was supposed to represent
the Aal Mohammad, for the simple reason that if they had named
themselves, it would have been contested since, as detailed above, the
Abbasids did not fall in the category of Aal Mohammad. Therefore, they
claimed that they represented the children of Imam Ali (a.s).

[i] Abul Abbas as-Saffah (133–137 AH)
-------------------------------------

Abul Abbas as-Saffah became the first Abbasid Caliph in 133 AH, who
controlled Asia, Egypt and West Africa. The truth is that having gained
power in the name of *Aal Mohammad,* the Abbasids turned to be their
tormentors.

In order to establish his reign, Abul Abbas indiscriminately killed the
Shia and the Sunni. His brother Yahya, who was sent to quell the
rebellion in Mosul, earned the title of ‘Shedder of Blood’. The Caliph’s
title ‘as-Saffaah’ in itself means ‘butcher’. K. Ali writes, “The name
as-Saffah (butcher), by which the caliph was known, is well chosen, for
as such he is distinguished beyond all others in a dynasty that had
small respect for human life. He intensified his cruelty and guilt by
treachery in the face of solemn oaths and also by ingratitude, for
amongst his victims there were not a few who had spent their lives in
helping him to the throne.”**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A Study of Islamic History by K. Ali. P. 229.

The Abbasids were always suspicious that they might be dethroned,
particularly by the Imams of the Shia. They also realized that unless
held on a tight leash the public might see through their game and demand
that an Alawid be invested with the Caliphate. For these reasons, they
perpetrated untold hardships against anyone suspected to be a
sympathiser with the Ahlul Bayt (a.s). K. Ali, a Sunni present-day
historian, wrote, “The murder of Abu Muslim and Abdullah who helped him
greatly to raise the Abbasids to power and prestige, and his treatment
toward the descendants of Ali, the fourth Caliph, are the darkest
records in the Abbasid history.”**[1]** It was actually as-Saffah’s
younger brother, al-Mansur who was responsible for the murder of Abu
Salama and Abu Muslim. The only reason behind the murder was that people
such as Abu Salama Hafs bin Sulaiman in Kufa and Abu Muslim in Khurasan,
were supporters of the Ahlul Bayt. Most of them were also greatly
disappointed by the character of as-Saffah.

[ii] Abu Ja’far al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi (137–159 A H)
---------------------------------------------------

As-Saffah, at his dying moments, nominated his younger brother Abu
Ja’far Abdullah, who on becoming the caliph in 137 AH, assumed the title
‘al-Mansur’. Among all the Muslim monarchs, al-Mansur was the first to
keep near him an executioner holding an unsheathed sword, ever ready to
behead anyone instantly.

About al-Mansur’s cruel nature, Allama Abdur Rabbah reports, “When
al-Mansur sat in his court, the executioners will bring row upon row of
people and behead them so mush so that the blood used to flow in the
court and splatter on to al-Mansur’s cloak. Al-Mansur then ordered his
chaplain to preach to him. When the chaplain preached, al-Mansur used to
sit with his head bowed down as if he were ashamed, but in no time
another group of persons would be brought and beheaded as
before.”***[2]*** People were brought on the ground that they were
Alawid or on a mere suspicion that they sympathised with the Ahlul Bayt.

Al-Mansur ordered that the progeny of Imam Hasan (a.s) should be
gathered in one place. He got them chained and threw them into a dark
cell. As they could not make out day from night, and the times for
prayers, the prisoners divided the Qur’an into five parts in order to
approximate the time of prayer and after finishing each part they  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid., P. 234.  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 5 p. 93 quoting al-*Iqd al-Farid*, vol.
1 p. 41.

offered prayers. There was no sanitation due to which they fell sick.
When one died, the corpse was left to rot. Soon all of them died.**[1]**

Frequently, the progeny of Ali and Fatima and their sympathisers were
gathered and al-Mansur ordered to be flogged so severely that the
victims soon died.

Al-Mansur was the first person to make the victim stand and a masonry
pillar raised all around him. Thus when the pillar was raised around
him, Mohammad bin Ibrahim bin al-Hasan, was alive.**[2]**

One day, al-Mansur said, “By God, I do not find anyone as obedient as
al-Hajjaj was to the progeny of Marwan.” Once, al-Musayyab got up and
said, “My master, al-Hajjaj is nothing compared to us, for God has
elevated our Prophet (s) to the highest position among His creation, and
yet when you order us, we unhesitatingly carry out your orders to kill
the Prophet’s progeny. Tell us; are we not more obedient to you than
al-Hajjaj was to the progeny of Marwan?”***[3]***

Al-Mansur arrested Ibrahim bin al-Hasan bin al-Hasan bin Ali ibn Abi
Talib along with Abdullah bin al-Hasan, Abu Bakr bin al-Hasan, and his
brothers Abbas, Abdullah, Hasan, and Ja’far, and Hamza bin Ishaq bin Ali
bin Abdullah bin Ja’far. They were kept in confinement in Medina for
three years. Thereafter, they were shifted to a dark dungeon in
az-Zabadah where they all died one after another.***[4]***

Allama Mohammad Jawad wrote, “According to al-Mansur’s own admission, he
had killed more than a thousand persons who were from the progeny of Ali
and Fatima (a.s.). He killed innumerable Shia and invented new and
outrageous methods of torture and ultimate death.”**[5]**

Though several persons wrote to Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq (a.s) asking him to
accept the leadership of the Muslims, he refused. He was content to
preach Islam at Medina. It is said that he had as many as six thousand
students studying various sciences at his hand. Despite his
noninterference with politics, Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) was always looked
upon with suspicion by al-Mansur.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ibid*.*, p.101-102 quoting *Muruj ath-Thahab.*  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 5 p. 103, quoting at-Tabari’s
*Tarikh.*  
 **[3]** Ibid*.*, p. 104 quoting al-Mas’udi’s *Muruj ath-Thahab.* vol. 2
p. 171.  
 **[4]** Ibid*.*, p. 114-115 *& 119* quoting Maqatil at-Talibiyin.  
 **[5]** Ibid*.*, p. 146 quoting *ash-Shia wal Hakimun.*

Al-Mansur often used to send for the Imam with the intention of killing
him, but he always lost his nerve at the last moment. At-Tabari records
in his *Tarikhul Umam wal Muluk* that the Imam demanded that al-Mansur
should return the properties confiscated from him (the Imam).

Al-Mansur ordered the Imam to be poisoned. The order was carried out.
There was a cenotaph on the Imam’s tomb but that was demolished in 1344
AH, by Abdul Aziz bin Sa’ud of Saudi Arabia.

In his last moments, al-Mansur called his wife and son al-Mahdi and
entrusted a key saying that it was for the house that holds the most
precious of all his possessions. He instructed that the house should be
opened only after his death and that none except his wife and son
al-Mahdi should enter inside. When al-Mansur died, his wife and son
opened the house and were shocked to see rows upon rows of bodies of
young, old people, and children with tags in their ears showing the
branch of the Family of Fatima and Ali (a.s) to which they
belonged.**[1]** Such was the cruelty of al-Mansur.

[iii] Mohammad al-Mahdi (157-169 A H)

Al-Mahdi was as cruel as his father al-Mansur. He bore an unabated
hatred toward the Shia and Sayyids. When he found that his father had
hundreds of tagged bodies of the progeny of Ali and Fatima (a.s) stored
in a house, as we saw above, he ordered all the bodies to be buried in a
common ditch and a shop to be erected upon the ditch. He spared no
effort to trace Ali and Fatima’s progeny and to incarcerate them until
their death or to have them beheaded. Any person least suspected of
harbouring good will towards the Ahlul Bayt was unceremoniously killed
without trial. So ferocious was al-Mahdi that people concealed their
identity for fear of being persecuted for being the progeny of Ali and
Fatima (a.s). The Shia concealed their faith and preferred to be branded
as zindiq (atheists) rather than to be known as Shia.

[iv] Abu Mohammad Musa al-Hadi (169-170 A H)
--------------------------------------------

Though he ruled for a short period of one year, he became as notorious
as his father was for his cruelty and persecution toward the *Sayyids*
and the Shia. He imposed restrictions on the progeny of Ali and Fatima
(a.s) who lived in Medina, and made them stand surety for each other.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 5 p. 125-127 quoting at-Tabari’s
*Tarikhul Umam wal Muluk.*

He made it obligatory on them to report every morning to the local
authority. Often, they were made to wait for long hours just to insult
them. The insults led to altercations. Being unable to bear the insults
and harassment, al-Husain bin Ali bin al-Hasan bin al-Hasan bin al-Hasan
bin Ali ibn Abi Talib called for the progeny of Imam Ali (a.s) and the
following persons gathered around him; Yahya, Sulaiman, and Idris the
sons of Abdullah bin al-Hasan, Abdullah bin al-Hasan al-Aftas, Ibrahim
bin Isma’eel, Umar bin al-Hasan, Abdullah bin Isma’eel, and Abdullah bin
Ja’far. These ten persons were proceeding on their pilgrimage. They were
joined by thirty-six persons who were the progeny of Ali (a.s) and a few
bondsmen. They went to the governor’s house early in the morning. On
seeing them, the governor ran away. However, they were soon surrounded
by the army of al-Hadi the Abbasid king and were massacred. The bodies
remained lying on the ground for three days.**[1]** Six persons were
taken prisoners and were brought before al-Hadi who beheaded them.

[v] Haroon ar-Rashid (170-193 A H)
----------------------------------

Haroon ar-Rashid was the son of al-Mahdi and the brother of al-Hadi. In
his long reign of 23 years, he perpetrated great crimes of murdering the
progeny of Ali and Fatima and their supporters. He either killed or
imprisoned them to death. The following are a few names of those who
were killed or jailed to death by Haroon ar-Rashid, in addition to the
unnamed sixty ones from the Progeny of Ali and Fatima (a.s) in Toos.
Here are the names:

Ibrahim bin Isma’eel, Ali bin al-Hasan bin Ibrahim, Ali bin Hashim bin
Buraid, Ma’qil bin Ibrahim, Abdu Rabbih ibn Alqama, Idris bin Abdullah,
Hasanain bin Abdullah bin Isma’eel, Abbas bin Mohammad bin Abdullah, Abu
Mohammad Hisham bin al-Hakam, Ali ibn Salih at-Taliqani, Ishaq bin
al-Hasan bin Zaid…etc.

Haroon ar-Rashid was the first to order to demolish and remove Imam
Husain’s tomb. Before him, neither the Umayyads nor the Abbasids, though
desired, dared to destroy the tomb of Imam Husain (a.s). However, they
imposed severe restrictions on visiting the tomb.**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 5 p. 187-199 quoting al-Mas’udi’s Muruj
ath-Thahab, vol. 3, p. 336.  
 **[2]** Ibid., vol. 6 p. 46 quoting from ‘*History & Geography of
Karbala.*

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s) was living in Medina. When Haroon visited the
holy city, he went to the Prophet’s tomb and in order to show his
proximity to the Prophet (s), he saluted the tomb saying ‘*Peace be upon
my cousin’*. Imam al-Kadhim (a.s), who was present at that time, put
down Haroon ar-Rashid by saluting the Prophet’s tomb saying:‘*Peace be
upon my (grand) father.*’ Thus, the Imam proved that if proximity in
relationship was what would count, Imam al-Kadhim (a.s) was closer to
the Prophet (s) than Haroon was.

Due to the above incident, Haroon felt so insecure that on several
occasions, he made Imam al-Kadhim (a.s) travel from Medina to Baghdad to
kill him, but, whenever he met the Imam, he was scared to take any
precipitate action. Instead, on several occasions, Haroon imprisoned
Imam al-Kadhim (a.s) for long periods. Seeing the piety of Imam
al-Kadhim (a.s.), who was in prison for over a year, the jailor, at
Basra, Eesa bin Ja’far bin Mansur wrote to Haroon ar-Rashid asking him
to transfer the Imam to some other jail; otherwise he would himself
release.

Haroon sent Imam al-Kadhim (a.s) from Basra to Baghdad and kept him
imprisoned under al-Fadhl bin ar-Rabee’. Soon, al-Fadhl found that Imam
al-Kadhim (a.s) was innocent and that he was being unjustly persecuted.
Haroon learnt that Imam al-Kadhim (a.s) was living a relatively
comfortable life. He sent his confident Masrur to spy upon al-Fadhl.
Haroon gave two letters, one addressed to Abbas bin Mohammad and another
one addressed to Sindi bin Hashak asking him to follow the instruction
of Abbas bin Mohammad. Accordingly, Abbas inflicted one hundred whips on
al-Fadhl bin ar-Rabee’ and handed over Imam al-Kadhim to the custody of
Sindi bin Hashak. Sindi bin Hashak asked Imam al-Kadhim (a.s) to lie on
the floor and he made some Christian wrestlers to sit on, due to which
the Imam died. According to Ardabili, Sindi bin Hashak inserted poison
and martyred Imam al-Kadhim (a.s) **[1]**

Haroon’s jealousy of the infallible Imams of the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) was so
intense that he closed down the university run by Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) at
Medina. He frequently ordered Imam as-Sadiq to leave Medina and travel
to Baghdad just to disturb the Imam’s teaching of his students who were
said to be more than four thousand ones. Very cleverly, Haroon ar-Rashid
used the pretext of encouraging sciences and he  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 6 p. 69-71.

invited different persons for debates. His son al-Ma’mun followed the
same policy of diverting people from seeking knowledge from the Imams of
the Ahlul Bayt (a.s).

[vi]  Abdullah al-Ma’mun (198- 218 AH)
--------------------------------------

Al-Ma’mun was the son of Haroon Rashid. He was highly educated and was
cunning. He was an expert politician. He killed his brother al-Amin, who
was the caliph, after a prolonged battle of four years. Al-Ma’mun was a
son of a bondwoman whereas al-Amin was of pure Abbasid descent. This
created a rift between the Abbasids who were about eighty thousand
people, and this constituted the biggest threat to al-Ma’mun. Like his
predecessors, al-Ma’mun was also scared of the Alawids. Being a clever
politician, he first forced Imam Ali ibn Musa ar-Ridha (a.s) to marry
his daughter and offered to nominate as his heir apparent. By this
stratagem, al-Ma’mun had planned to subdue the Abbasids with the threat
that if they rose in revolt against him, he would hand over the
caliphate to the Alawids. For this purpose, he gave the title of
‘ar-Ridha’ based on the original Abbasid slogan of ‘ar-ridha min Aal
Mohammad; (seeking) the contentment of the progeny of Muhammad’.

Such a prospect was horrifying to the Abbasids. Al-Ma’mun was also
confident that once the pomp and glory of the earthly kingdom surrounded
him, Imam ar-Ridha (a.s.) also would fall into the trap of all the
attendant vices, just like the judge of judges Yahya bin Aktham had
fallen. It is said that al-Ma’mun was initially not given to any vices,
but when he got rid of his brother al-Amin, he felt safer and in course
of time fell into all sorts of vices that he indulged in that along with
his ministers, counselors, and religious heads.**[1]**

However, Imam ar-Ridha (a.s.) saw through the game of al-Ma’mun and
consistently he refused to have anything to do with rulership. Under
threat, Imam ar-Ridha was forced to accompany al-Ma’mun and sit next to
him. Imam ar-Ridha explained that his position was similar to his
grandfather Imam Ali’s when he was nominated and forced to participate
in the Shura**[2]** or to the Prophet Yousuf (a.s.) who became the
minister of the king of Egypt.**[3]** However, the Imam refused and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 6 p. 79 quoting Shibli Nomani’s
‘*Al-Ma’mun*’.  
 **[2]** Ibid., p. 127.  
 **[3]** Ibid*.*, p. 128.

never participated in the state affairs. Al-Ma’mun asked Abdullah bin
Basheer to grow his fingernails. When they had grown to a considerable
extend, he gave something that appeared to be tamarind, and asked
Abdullah to squeeze it. According to a popular tradition, it was through
grapes filled with poison that the Imam was made to consume and die.

There is an unending list of people who were martyred under al-Ma’mun’s
orders. The well-known among them are:

Al-Hasan al-Harsh, al-Hasan bin Zaid, al-Hasan bin al-Husain bin Zaid,
al-Hasan bin Ishaq, Ali bin Abdullah, Abu Sara bin Mansur, Mohammad bin
al-Husain bin al-Hasan, Mohammad bin Zaid bin Ali, Mohammad bin Ja’far,
Abdullah bin Ja’far, Mohammad bin Abdullah bin al-Hasan,… etc., in
addition to thousands of their supporters.

[vii] Al-Mu’tasim Billah (218-227 A H)
--------------------------------------

He was the son of al-Ma’mun and was nominated to the caliphate by his
father. He inherited from his ancestors the hatred for the Prophet’s
progeny. He imprisoned thousands of Shia and of the Prophet’s progeny
who died in prison or were killed on the orders of him.

Al-Mu’tasim married his daughter Ummul Fadhl, apparently out of respect
and love, to Imam Mohammad al-Jawad (a.s), but in fact to keep a close
watch on the activities of the Imam and to have an executioner ready to
eliminate the Imam by poison. Thus, Imam al-Jawad (a.s.) was martyred by
poison inserted to him by Ummul Fadhl at the behest of al-Mu’tasim

[viii] Al-Mutawakkil \`Alallah (232-247AH)
------------------------------------------

Al-Mutawakkil was the cruelest of all the Abbasid kings. He bore great
ill will towards the progeny of Imam Ali and Fatima (a.s) and their
Shia. He used to abuse and tell lies against Imam Ali (a.s) in the open
court. His clown Ibadah, who was a eunuch, pretended to imitate Imam Ali
(a.s). When al-Mutawakkil’s son al-Muntasir Billah saw this, he chided
his father saying that Imam Ali (a.s) was the nephew of their
grandfather Abbas bin Abdul Muttalib and allowing a clown to imitate him
was the worst thing. Al-Mutawakkil was given to heavy drinking and was
always surrounded by female dancers.

Al-Mutawakkil had abdicated his authority to the Turkish slaves who were
whimsically running the administration of the state. Al-Mantasir Billah,
with some disgruntled persons, killed his father al-Mutawakkil

in 247 AH, when he heard him abusing Imam Ali and Fatima az-Zahra’
(a.s.).**[1]**

Al-Mutawakkil not only bore ill will, but he also hated the popularity
of Imam Husain’s tomb at Karbala to which millions flocked as pilgrims.
Al-Mutawakkil wanted to erase the tomb completely. He destroyed the tomb
seventeen times during his rule of fifteen years, but there is a record
of four times; in the years 233, 236, 237 and 247 AH.**[2]** Every time
the tomb was erased a new and more magnificent structure was put up by
the Shia.**[3]** By al-Mutawakkil’s orders, anyone attempting to visit
the tomb of Imam Husain (a.s) was arrested and sent to the governor of
Kufa who either killed or punished him severely. Every time the tomb of
Imam Husain (a.s) was demolished, the surrounding houses and shops of
the Shia were demolished too. On four occasions, the entire town of
Karbala was demolished.

Umar bin Faraj, the governor of Medina and Mecca, looted the properties
of the progeny of Ali and Fatima (a.s) and harassed the Shia in all
possible manners. Similarly, the governors of Egypt and Kufa used to
arrest the Shia on false allegations and they punished them unjustly.

The names of the despotic governors are as follows:**[1]** Ibrahim
ad-Daizaj who demolished Imam Husain’s tomb in 233 and 236AH, **[2]**
Umar bin Faraj who demolished the tomb in 237 AH, **[3]** Harun
al-Mu’ammari who demolished the tomb in 437 AH, **[4]** Ja’far bin
Mohammad bin Ammar.

From the progeny of Imam Ali and Fatima (a.s) al-Mutawakkil killed the
following well-known and learned persons:*al-Qasim bin Abdullah, Ya’qub
bin Ishaq, Ahmed bin Isa, and Abdullah bin Musa.*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 6 p. 164-171 quoting at-Tarikh al-Kamil,
vol. 7 p. 20, Muruju ath-Thahab, vol. 2, ash-Shia wal Hakimun, p.
169…etc.  
 **[2]** *Masa’ibush Shia,* vol. 6 p. 186-199.  
 **[3]** Ibid*.*, p. 186.
