Chapter 1: Preamble
===================

The battle at Karbala is a well-known tragedy in the human history. It
is not fiction or legend, but a historical fact, chronicled by several
historians who were present in the battlefield, of whom Abu Makhnaf an
independent reporter and Hamid ibn Muslim, the imbedded reporter of
Yazid’s army, are the best known.

The battle at Karbala is unique in several respects. At Karbala, Imam
Husayn (a.s.) changed the very meaning and connotation of the terms
‘victory’ and ‘defeat’, ‘life’ and ‘death’. He and his small group of
his companions redefined human nature itself. They redefined the limits
of human endurance of sufferings for a noble cause. In sacrificing their
lives, they set an example to those who fight against anarchy and
materialism to protect the freedom and independence of mankind. At
Karbala, the conqueror became the loser and the vanquished became the
victor. By sacrificing their lives, the martyrs of Karbala became
immortal, while Yazid by killing them was erased out of the good books
of history.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) showed that numbers and odds do not matter. What
really matters, is the propriety, nobility and nature of the cause
itself. Imam Husayn (a.s.) showed that truth and righteousness are
ineffaceable and that the killing of a few persons, does not and cannot
obliterate the truthfulness and nobility of their cause.

Before Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his companions sacrificed their lives in
the battle at Karbala, a victorious person was the one who stood with a
fluttering banner in his hand, while the vanquished lay slain on the
ground, his flag lying limp beside him. The victor assumed the mantle of
a successful mission, while the loser was clothed with the infamy of
defeat and his unjust cause. Success in the battle was proof of victory
of justice over anarchy and oppression. Victory was synonymous with a
just and popular cause and the victor commanded the love, adoration and
respect of the public. The victorious and their cause became immortal.
The vanquished was buried in history, only to be remembered as a lesson
to posterity, his defeat considered the defeat of his unjust cause.

Mothers loved to name their children after the victor and shunned the
name of the vanquished. The victorious became heroes and the vanquished
were treated as villains in the everlasting memory of a nation, country,
tribe or culture. The epics, Iliad, Maha Bharatha, and Ramayana are some
examples, depicting truth and justice as personified in the triumphant
hero.

All these concepts were changed by Imam Husayn (a.s.). For the first and
perhaps the last time in history, the battle of Karbala established that
the vanquished might also be the victorious in his cause. The triumphant
were the ones who lay beheaded in the battlefield, their lifeless
bodies, proclaiming the victory of a living cause of immortal truth.

Imam Husayn (a.s.) and his small group of companions redefined human
nature itself. Generally, power and wealth attract people anxious to
pick up the crumbs. Those who lose power or wealth, find only deserters.
Karbala reversed this notion. None from the small group of Imam Husayn’s
companions deserted him, though they knew that at the end of the day
only death and no worldly gain awaited them. On the other hand, even at
the last moment before the battle commenced, several warriors from
Yazid’s huge army, crossed over to Imam Husayn’s camp, despite knowing
fully well that only death awaited them though worldly gain in the form
of the spoils of war would have been within their easy reach, at the end
of the day.

It is natural for every person facing immediate and imminent threat to
his life, to seek and gather people for his support and assistance. It
is more so where a war is planned and the leader gathers as many men as
he could find to form an army capable of facing the threat.

Quite contrary to this human nature, Imam Husayn (a.s.) at every stage
of his journey from *Medina* to *Karbala*, dissuaded people from joining
him, saying that what Yazid sought was only his blood.

It is obvious that, firstly, Imam Husayn (a.s.) was convinced of the
threat to his life and yet dissuaded people from joining him to form an
army; secondly, he had no intention of waging a war; thirdly, he wanted
to avoid bloodshed or at least to mitigate the loss of life; lastly, by
taking ladies, children, his close relatives, a few aged companions, and
the least number of able bodied youth, Imam Husayn (a.s.) wanted to show
that though the small band of people held no threat to his empire, the
cruel, atrocious, unjust and evil nature of Yazid and his huge army
would certainly commit the most horrendous murder and atrocities without
any excuse..

Imam Husayn (a.s.) showed that truth and justice do not always lie on
the side of the victorious majority. He showed that numbers do not count
and a handful of persons, standing up to oppression at the cost of their
lives, do in fact represent truth, justice, independence, and freedom.
He showed that truth is irrepressible, eternal, and would manifest
itself even from the trampled and lifeless bodies of the martyr. Their
death is not defeat but is in fact the victory of truth, righteousness,
justice, and the very spirit of freedom of mankind.

In as much as its other aspects, the uniqueness of Karbala extends even
to its pathos. There is not a single human relationship that was left
out from the list of martyrs. The relationship of the patriarch and his
family, between the leader and his followers, parent and child, newly
wedded husband and wife, between siblings, between cousins and children
of cousins, bond between friends, master and servant, rider and steed
etc., were all successfully put to test.

Historians, normally, are patronized by the winning party that assumes
power and write the chronicles of the victorious. History may also
record a few instances of individual valor of some opponent, but popular
Historians never espouse the cause of the vanquished. Karbala is unique
in this respect also. Without exception, every chronicler records the
justness of Imam Husayn’s cause, the cruel and unjust abuse of his dead
body and the torment that the remaining members of his family and
friends, particularly the widows and orphans suffered after the tragedy.

Any historian attempting to eulogize the cause of the defeated forces
would be branded a traitor. Such historians and their records would be,
mercilessly burnt and put out of circulation. However, at and after
Karbala, the atrocities were so open and rampant that Yazid and his evil
advisors, despite their tyrannical suppression and torture had no means
or courage to prevent the tragedy of Karbala being related, recorded,
repeated, and passed on to posterity.

In his speeches, letters, and discussions Imam Husayn (a.s.) made it
clear that he was leaving Medina only in response to the call of the
*Kufians* who had written thousands of letters and sent hundreds of
emissaries complaining that they had no *Imam* to guide them in matters
of faith and that, as the *Imam*, it was incumbent upon Husayn (a.s.) to
hurry to their guidance. Their complaint against Mu’awiya first, and
later against Yazid, was not so much regarding the physical or monetary
suffering but against the willful distortion of the principles of Islam.
Therefore, it became obligatory for Imam Husayn (a.s.) to leave Medina
and go to rescue the faith from being mutilated and corrupted by
Mu’awiya and his son Yazid. There was absolutely no political motive in
this.

Later, when al-Hurr’s cavalry surrounded Imam Husayn’s caravan, sealing
off all roads except the one leading to *Kufa*, a false propaganda was
made by Yazid that Imam Husayn’s journey was an affront to the political
power of Yazid. Imam Husayn (a.s.) made it clear that he was invited by
the people of *Kufa* for religious guidance and that he had no political
aspirations, and said that he would move out to any far-off land beyond
the domain of Yazid’s rule. This demand to be permitted to go out of
Yazid’s dominion was repeatedly made by Imam Husayn (a.s.) till his last
moments, signifying that he had no political aspirations and that his
only intent was to preserve and propagate the faith in its true form, as
revealed by his grandfather the Prophet (S).[^1]

For those who believe in miracles, numerous instances of the Divinely
inspired foresight of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and several miracles performed
by him are found in Karbala. Collecting water, in advance for al-Hurr
and his army, long before they arrived thirsty; the sudden shying of the
horse and throwing the taunting enemy soldier into the burning ditch;
the fountain of water which gushed when Imam Husayn (a.s.) struck his
toe on the ground to show his daughter Sakina (a.s.) that he had the
supernatural power to procure water; the intense and valiant fight by
Imam Husayn (a.s.), a man fifty-eight years old, before whose eyes his
friends and children were slain; the reciting of Qur’an by the severed
head of Imam Husayn (a.s.) throughout its long journey from *Karbala* to
*Kufa* to Damascus and back; the radiant light that was witnessed by
hundreds, which emanated from the niche wherever the severed head of
Imam Husayn (a.s.) was kept during night and many more such instances of
supernatural events are recorded in history. The recitation of the
Qur’an by the severed heads carried on lances or slung in the necks of
horses and camels provide the only proof of the Qur’anic verse that
declares that those who are martyred in the way of God, are not to be
counted among the dead, but that they are very much alive and are
sustained by God.[^2]

Even today, one can witness Husayn’s miracle, when mourners inflict
themselves with blades, pieces of broken glass bottles picked up from
the ground, chains and swords, and exchange those articles without even
cleaning before using them in the *Muharram* processions. Their wounds
are cured without recourse to medicine. Another unique and miraculous
feature is that, even to this day, the processions consist of heart
patients, diabetic patients, and those who suffer from severe
hypertension. None of them is known to have died from the self-inflicted
injuries or breast beating in the religious processions during the
commemoration of Imam Husayn’s martyrdom, anywhere in the world. All
these are signs of Imam Husayn’s continuing miracles. While
self-flagellation is considered in Christianity as a means of expiating
for sins, it is practiced only by highly revered priests. Among the
*Shias*, it is a common practice during *Muharram*.

Curiously, it is called a ‘battle’, but there were no two armies waging
war at *Karbala*. On one side was Imam Husayn (a.s.) with a few tens of
persons, including an infant six months old and several teenagers.
Opposing this small group was a huge army of infantry, cavalry, and
other regiments. The nobility and intensity of purpose and the vigour
and valour with which the small band of people fought a huge army, gave
it the shape of an unforgettable epic battle. Today, Imam Husayn (a.s.)
and his small band of supporters are universally acknowledged as
innocent martyrs, while Yazid and his huge army are disgraced for their
abominable acts of large-scale massacre and torture of men, women and
children.

Yet, Imam Husayn’s battle at *Karbala* is often distorted by prejudices
created over centuries of adverse propaganda carried on by suppressive
regimes. The consequent mutilation of real facts led to the dilution of
knowledge of the historic events, resulting in an unfounded belief that
it was a battle between two powers for succession fought between the
Umayyads represented by Yazid son of Mu’awiya, and the Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)
represented by Imam Husayn (a.s.).

The Shrine of Imam Husayn (a.s.) was razed to the ground at least on
eight occasions. Even the lote tree that marked the grave was cut down
and the soil tilled, so the people may not be able to identify the spot.
Yet after every demolition, a new and more elaborate structure came up.
How did people identify the spot in the absence of any trace? It is
reported that the aroma and fragrance emanating from the spot lert
people identify the spot. In the famous *Hadith* of *al-Kisa*, Imam Ali,
Imam Hasan, and Imam Husayn (a.s.) detected the presence of the Prophet
(S) from the aroma and fragrance that emanated from the body of the
Prophet (S). On another occasion, the Noble Lady Fatima (a.s.) wanted to
give a present to one of her friends who was getting married. The
Prophet (S) took out a few drops of his sweat that was applied to the
bride. Not only the bride but also seven generations among her children
carried the incense of the Prophet’s sweat. Jabir ibn Abdullh al-Ansari
was blind when he visited the shrine at Karbala soon after *Ashura*. He
identified the grave by the aroma and fragrance that emanated from it.

Among the Twelver Shia, their *Majlises* [meetings], are veritable
universities of their theology, where the basic Shiite tenets,
conceptual and philosophical teachings of the twelve Imams (a.s.) in
addition to scientific and historical facts revealed by the Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) are taught and orally transmitted. An early effort in English, in
the detailed study of the life of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and the battle of
Karbala, available perhaps only in some libraries, was the pioneering
work of my mentor, master and guide, the late Al-haj Moulvi Mirza Ghulam
Abbas Ali Sahib of Madras. He was a lecturer of the then Government
Muhammadan College [Govt. Arts College], Madras. He was well versed in
Arabic, Persian, and English. He was also a great orator among the
*Twelver Shia* of South India.

In the preface to his book ‘*Life of Husayn the Saviour*’ Alhaj Moulvi
Mirza Ghulam Abbas Ali wrote: “*Several authors have attempted to give
vivid pictures of stories, whose chronology is not yet traceable and
whose antiquity has led many to doubt the reality and genuineness of the
stories themselves and to suspect them as of the production of
intelligent heads for the inculcation of high moral and ethical
principles to the common folk in the most appealing and dramatic
fashion. But eye witness facts, as true as the day, occurred a thousand
years ago among the so called ‘most intelligent people of the middle
ages’, recorded in history by authors of the age, are relegated to
darkness and are not compiled to form a readable volume in English
literature*.”

S. V. Mir Ahmed Ali Sahib Vafakhani is another great luminary from
Madras, which fortunately is also my place of birth. S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali
Sahib joined clerical service in the Government Muhammadan College
Madras and later obtained his Bachelor’s Degree in Oriental languages
and also his M.Ed in Psychology. Mir Ahmed Ali Sahib’s English
translation with commentary of the Holy Qur’an printed by *Tahrike
Tarsile Qur’an* from New York in 2002, is quite popular, especially with
reference to the Holy Bible. He was a contemporary of Mirza Ghulam Abbas
Ali Sahib. At page 11[a] of his Introduction to the Translation of the
Holy Qur’an, S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali Sahib mentions several contemporary
leading Shia scholars of Madras and refers to Alhaj Mirza Ghulam Abbas
Ali Sahib and his book ‘Life of Husayn’, which was first printed in
1931.

It appears that S.V. Mir Ahmed Ali Sahib Vafakhani had first published
in the year 1925, a booklet of 25 pages under the title ‘*The King of
Martyrs*’ which was reprinted four times by the year 1964. Its
popularity prompted him to write a second book ‘*Husayn - the Savior of
Islam*’ which was first printed in 1964. Its second edition is printed
by Ansariyan Publications, Qum, Iran in the year 2005. This book makes
many references to the Bible and Christian dogma in regard to the
martyrdom of Imam Husayn (a.s.).

Another book on the subject is the excellent work of Sheikh Abbas al
Qummi, under the title ‘*Nafasul Mahmoom*’. It has been translated into
Urdu. Aejaz Ali T. Bhujwala translated it into English. The best book in
Urdu on the subject is ‘Akhbar*-e-Matam*’ published in Ramadan, 1947
A.D. It is available in the Salar Jung Library, Hyderabad. A very
enlightening, popular and well-researched book on the subject in Urdu is
Bilgirami’s ‘*Zibhe Azeem*’.

Ansariyan Publication, Qum, Iran has published in 2002 a very well
documented and well-written book of Yasin T. al Jibouri. The book in
English bears the title ‘*Karbala and Beyond*’ is very useful,
particularly with reference to the incidents that took place after
*Ashura*. Other books published by Ansariyan Publications are, the
English translation of Ali Nazari Munfared’s book under the title ‘*Imam
Husayn (a.s.) and the Saga of Karbala’* and Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi’s
book, translated into English by Sayyid Ather Husayn S.H. Rizvi under
the title ‘*Understanding Kerbala*’.

The popular source for eyewitness accounts of the battle at Karbala are
the ‘Maqaatil’[^3] of Abu Makhnaf, and Hamid ibn Muslim, the latter
being a scribe embedded with the army of Yazid. They meticulously
recorded not only the events but also the conversation, sermons and
challenges in the battlefield called ‘Rajaz’.[^4] If anyone of these two
chronicles omitted a particular event or a dialogue or sermon, found
elsewhere, it may be due to the scribe’s absence from that place and
time. But, over all, their records are authentic and have never been
disputed as the coinage of a fertile imagination.

The chief source for the Twelver Shia are the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.) -
members of the Prophet’s family - who were present at Karbala in Imam
Husayn’s camp and related the correct versions which was then passed on
to successive generations by the Infallible and Immaculate Imams (a.s.).
The present book is an attempt to understand the correct facts and
philosophy behind the Battle of Karbala, in the *Shiite* perspective.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 44 p. 329.

[^2]: Qur’an, 2:154, 3:169, 3:195.

[^3]: Maqtal literally means the ‘Manner (or\\and Place) of Massacre’.

[^4]: Rajaz is the customary manner in which an Arab warrior addresses
his opponent, in single combat, introducing himself, his lineage, his
military exploits, combat acumen and success in earlier wars.


