Chapter 2: Historical Background
================================

One has to look beyond the canvas of the battlefield itself, into the
early days of Islam, in order to understand the cause and the facts and
circumstances, which led Imam Husayn (a.s.) to face an enormous army at
Karbala and the reason and philosophy behind his refusal to submit to an
apparently simple demand for allegiance to Yazid. From a reading of the
following pages, the reader will understand that the seed for the battle
of Karbala was sown long prior to the birth of Imam Husayn (a.s.) and
later the battle was ultimately forced upon him. This is brought out by
the repeated assertions of Yazid’s army that though Imam Husayn (a.s.)
himself had done nothing against them or against Islam, they had
gathered to seek revenge for their ancestors who were killed by his
father Imam Ali (a.s.) in the battles of *Badr*, *Uhud, al-Khandaq* and
*Honain*.

During the life of the Prophet (S) all disputes, whether they led to a
fight or not, were between believers and non-believers or the opponents
of Islam. Chief among the opponents of Muhammad (S) and the religion he
preached, were the *Banu Umayya* (the Umayyads) headed by Abu Sufyan the
father of Mu’awiya and grandfather of Yazid. Abu Sufyan’s wife Hind is
the most infamous woman in the history of Islam, who plucked out and
chewed the raw liver of the martyr Hamza in the battle of ‘Uhud’.[^1]

History does not record any serious conflict, except petty jealousies,
between the *Banu Umayya* and the *Banu Hashim* (the Hashemites), prior
to the proclamation of Islam. The *Banu Umayya* never believed the
Prophet (S) to be the Messenger of God. They suspected that under the
cloak of religion, a mighty empire was in the making under their cousin
Muhammad (S). The *Banu Umayya* only desired and planned to appropriate
the leadership of the empire from Prophet Muhammad (S). They had nothing
to do with Muhammad’s Message. Before ostensibly accepting Islam, when
Abu Sufyan saw the zealous followers of the Prophet (S), he exclaimed,
“*Indeed our cousin has built a powerful army*.”

The Prophet’s uncle Abbas rebuked Abu Sufyan saying that it was not an
army but a small group of devout followers of the Message of Muhammad,
the Prophet (S). Abu Sufyan replied, “*Call it by whatever name you
will, for me it is a mighty army with immense potential to create an
empire*.” Abu Sufyan’s attitude never changed throughout his life,
though he claimed to have professed Islam and ingratiated himself among
the companions of the Prophet (S). Years later, when Uthman became the
third *Caliph*, Abu Sufyan jumped with joy seeing his dream come true in
the shape of the leadership of Islam falling in the hands of his kin,
Abu Sufyan gleefully advised Uthman:“*Now that the Caliphate has fallen
into your hands, toss it around like a ball and fearlessly perpetuate it
among your own kin, the Banu Umayya, for there is neither paradise nor
hell*.”[^2]

The real cause for the jealousy and blood feud between Banu Umayya and
Banu Hashim is best set out in the words of Abu Sufyan’s son Mu’awiya.
It is reported that *Mutawwaf* and his father *al-Mughira* visited
Mu’awiya who was reclining on his couch, and advised him to be
considerate and less harsh towards the *Ahlul Bayt*, now that he was in
power. At that very moment, the *mu’azzin* (the caller who calls out the
azan) shouted the call for prayers. Mu’awiya abruptly sat up and
declared: “*It is impossible that I take kindly to the Ahlul Bayt. What
memory do I leave behind when I die? Abu Bakr, Umar, and Uthman ruled
for long periods during their caliphates. After their death, does
anybody remember them, except occasionally to say that they were the
caliphs? Many people benefited from Uthman but they have forgotten his
bounties and even what had happened to him. When I die, the same thing
will happen and I will be completely forsaken. But, look what Hashim’s
offspring has done - five times every day, till Doomsday the minarets of
every mosque around the world will echo, twenty four hours every day,
the proclamation ‘I bear witness that Muhammad is the prophet of God’.
What difference does it make if I lead a pious or vicious life?*.”[^3]

A similar incident is reported with reference to Mu’awiya’s father Abu
Sufyan. It is related that Abu Sufyan had grown old and blind. He was
sitting in the mosque along with Abdullah ibn Abbas and several others.
The *Mu’azzin* started calling for the prayers. When the *Mu’azzin*
reached that part of the call testifying the Prophethood of Muhammad
(S), Abu Sufyan said, “*Look where my cousin Muhammad has placed his
name*.” Imam Ali (a.s.) who heard this retorted, “*Muhammad placed his
name not out of his own fancy but as commanded by God*.”[^4] This rancor
in the hearts of the *Banu Umayya* that Prophethood is only a pretense
to worldly power persisted through out centuries and continues to do so
till date.

Though Abu Sufyan, Mu’awiya, Yazid and their ilk spared no effort, they
could not prevent the proclamation of the Prophet’s name and Mission,
five times every day, all over the world in the *Azan*. Regarding this,
the Qur’an reveals, “*They desire to blow out [extinguish] the light of
Allah, but Allah seeks to perfect His light, though the infidels abhor
it*.”[^5] Long after the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.) had returned to Medina
after the tragedy of Karbala, Ibrahim bin Talha bin Obeidillah asked the
fourth Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.): “*Who won the battle at Karbala?*.” Imam
*al-Sajjad* (a.s.) replied, “*When the time for prayers comes and when
the Azan and Eqama* [the two calls before every prayer] *are called out,
you will know who the winner is*.”[^6]

Having failed to remove the Prophet’s name or substitute some other name
in its place in the *Azan*, Mu’awiya invented a novel way of taking
revenge against the *Ahlul Bayt* (a.s.), particularly Imam Ali (a.s.).
Mu’awiya made it obligatory, in all the provinces under his control,
that five times every day, after prayers Ali (a.s.) should be abused and
cursed from the pulpits [over seventy thousand pulpits according to some
reckoning] by the leaders of the congregations. Inventors of stories
demeaning Ali (a.s.) or coining false traditions in favour of the *Banu
Umayya* were lavishly rewarded. Abu Huraira and Amr ibn al-Aass earned
so much wealth by this process that Umar had to confiscate their huge
unaccounted wealth.[^7]

Some of the close companions doubted the wisdom and infallibility of the
Prophet (S), for they considered him to be an ordinary mortal like
themselves.[^8] Historians record the fact that in his last moments when
the Prophet (S) demanded a pen and parchment to write down his last will
and testament, Umar, one of the companions, not only refused to oblige
but also even prevented others under threat from complying, stating that
the Prophet (S) had become delirious in his death throes and that the
Qur’an is sufficient for guidance of Muslims.

After the Prophet (S), serious dissensions were created as to
succession. One party asserted that the Prophet (S) had clearly
nominated his successor while the opposite party contended that the
Prophet (S) did not nominate anyone and had left the matter of
succession in the hands of the Muslims. The nomination of Imam Ali
(a.s.) by the Prophet (S), which they had personally witnessed on
numerous occasions, was very fresh in the minds of Muslims. They saw the
Prophet (S) nominate Imam Ali (a.s.) from the very first day when he
invited the tribe of Quraish to the ‘Feast of Youm ad-Dar (day of
warning) ’.[^9] Again, for reciting before the non-Muslims of Mecca the
Chapter ‘Bara'a’ which in effect sets out the policy in Islam, Ali
(a.s.) was entrusted with the task while the Prophet (S) declared that
God had ordained that such an important task could be carried out either
by the Prophet (S) himself or by Ali (a.s.) ;[^10] during the
confrontation with the Christians of Najran in what is called
‘Mubahala’; and on the occasion of his last pilgrimage at a place called
Khum the Prophet (S) nominated Imam Ali (a.s.) as his successor and made
obedience and love of Imam Ali (a.s.) obligatory on the entire Muslim
Ummah.[^11]

As the very first step towards nullifying the Prophet’s nomination of
Ali (a.s.) as his successor, over the dead body of the Prophet (S), Umar
unsheathed his sword and brandishing it, shouted that he would behead
anyone who said that the Prophet (S) was dead. Umar declared that
Muhammad could not die and that he had simply gone, like Moses before,
to meet his Lord.[^12] Thus, very cleverly an impression was created
that the question of succession to the Prophet (S) had not yet opened,
since the Prophet (S) was not dead!

Shortly after the receipt of the news of the Prophet’s passing away, Abu
Bakr returned to Medina, from Suk where he was living with his newly
wedded wife. He proclaimed that Umar’s contention that the Prophet (S)
could not die and that like Moses, he had simply gone to meet the Lord,
is quite contrary to the Qur’anic verses which declare that one day,
like any other person, Muhammad (S) was also destined to die.[^13]

Even as the body of the Prophet (S) was being prepared by his family
members for burial, Umar and Abu Bakr left for the place called ‘*the
Saqifa*[^14] *of Bani Sa’ida*’ as they considered the matter of
succession far pressing and urgent than the burial of the Prophet
(S).[^15] At the Saqifa, Abu Bakr was declared by Umar as the leader
[*Caliph*] of the Muslims.[^16] Later on when the group returned to the
Prophet’s house, they found that he was already buried by Imam Ali
(a.s.), his children, relatives, and close companions of the Prophet
(S), who performed the funeral rites. The ever-scheming Abu Sufyan
unsuccessfully tried to incite Imam Ali (a.s.) by saying that he would
support Imam Ali (a.s.) and provide sufficient men and weapons so that
Imam Ali (a.s.) might, with Abu Sufyan’s support, challenge Abu Bakr.
Imam Ali (a.s.) asked Abu Sufyan to desist from his favorite and evil
games of sowing sedition and discord among Muslims. Imam Ali (a.s.) said
that Islam was still in its infant state and any precipitate action at
that stage, even though justified, would still be harmful to Islam.

For those who aspired to succeed to the Prophet (S), it became necessary
to stop repeating, if not completely obliterating from the memory of the
public, the numerous occasions when the Prophet (S) nominated Imam Ali
(a.s.), openly and publicly as his successor. One of the first orders
issued by Abu Bakr on becoming the *Caliph* was that traditions should
neither be related, recorded, nor propagated, on the ground that the
*Hadiths*, if related, were likely to confuse and disillusion the
public. Umar continued this edict and went to the extent of threatening
to behead not only those who tried to relate traditions, but also those
who listened to them. In fact, Umar imprisoned ibn Mas’ud, Abud Darda,
and Abu Mas’ud for relating *Hadith* in defiance of his orders.[^17]
When Uthman succeeded Umar, he followed the earlier caliphs and
continued the embargo on relating, collecting, or publishing
*Hadith*.[^18]

Mu’awiya, during his tyrannical tenure, went one-step further. He not
only prohibited relating of any *hadith* extolling the virtues of the
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.), but also encouraged invention and propagation false
and fictitious tales about the Prophet (S) and his progeny (a.s.). Imam
Ali (a.s.) was made a special target by bribing people to openly defame
and abuse him five times a day from every pulpit. The *Ahlul Bayt*
(a.s.) were portrayed as anti-Islamic mutineers *(baghi*). In addition
to this, absurd traditions were invented, intending to extol the virtues
of the three caliphs, which in fact were derogatory of the Prophet (S).
For example, it was said that Umar asked the Prophet (S) to see that his
wives were veiled but the Prophet (S) did not listen to him until the
commandment for *hijab* was revealed, in support of Umar.[^19] Another
tradition related that Satan was not afraid of the Prophet (S), but was
mortally scared of Umar.[^20] Some of the invented traditions were
outright slanderous and brought down the honor and dignity of the
Prophet (S), so much so that the Prophet (S) came to be portrayed as a
sexual pervert.[^21]

Mu’awiya, during his long regime, pretended that he was the only
surviving relative of the Prophet (S). To some extent, he succeeded in
obliterating from the public mind, the existence of the *Ahlul Bayt*
(a.s.) in Syria, Iraq, and the newly conquered Spain and Rome. The
malicious and false propaganda by Mu’awiya was so intense that when the
people of Syria learnt that Imam Ali (a.s.) was martyred while leading
the Morning Prayer in the Mosque in Kufa, they exclaimed ‘*What was Ali,
who never prayed, doing in the Mosque*!’ As a result of the calumny, in
a short span of time people failed to recognize Imam Husayn (a.s.) the
beloved grandson of the Prophet (S). Therefore, in every sermon or
discussion Imam Husayn (a.s.) made it a point to introduce himself as
the Prophet’s grandson and the surviving heir of the Prophet (S).

Abu Sufyan, Mu’awiya, and Yazid changed the philosophy and teachings of
Islam. They openly permitted what was prohibited and neglected what was
enjoined. Corruption and debauchery in high offices and oppression of
the pious and the poor became the order of the day. It is in this
context and situation where the hypocrites and opponents of Islam sowed
and nurtured the seeds of distortion of Islam, that the Battle of
Karbala becomes a milestone in the history of Islam. It is another story
that Abu Sufyan, Mu’awiya, and Yazid could not succeed in removing the
name of Husayn’s grandfather, the Prophet (S), from being proclaimed
five times every day. Just as anticipated by Mu’awiya himself, today he
is forgotten and if at all remembered, his name is linked only to
hypocrisy, cunning, evil, and irreligion. Today, mothers shun naming
their children after Mu’awiya or Yazid. It is interesting to note that
the word ‘*Mu’awiya*’ though used for a male - the son of Abu Sufyan,
literally means ‘a bitch’[^22].

[^1]: Tareekh at-Tabari, vol. 3, p. 22 &23 [s] Egypt, Seeratun Nabi,
vol. 1 p. 273, al-Istee’ab, vol. 2 p. 286, al-Majlisi’s Hayatul Quloob,
253.

[^2]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 11, p. 357, al-Mas’udi’s Muruj ath-Thahab
vol. 1 p. 440, Tarikh al-Khamees, Vol. 2 p. 97, Ask Those who Know, p.
42.

[^3]: Al-Muwafaqiyyat, p. 576, al-Mas’udi’s Muruj ath-Thahab vol. 2, p.
341, Ibn Abil Hadid, vol. 5, p 130, al-Ghadir, vol. 10, p. 283, Ask
Those Who Know, p.43-44.

[^4]: Al-Mas’udi’s Muruj ath-Thahab, vol. 6, quoted in Mufti Jafer
Husayn’s preface to the English translation of Nahjul Balagha, p67.

[^5]: Qur’an, 9:32.

[^6]: Al-Amali of Sheikh at-Tusi, p.66, al-Jibouri’s Kerbala & Beyond,
p.131.

[^7]: K. Ali, A Study of Islamic History, page 144.

[^8]: Al-Bukhari, vol. 2 p.14, Tareekh al-Khamis by Dayar Bakhti – vol 2
p. 32, Madarijun Nubuwwa, vol. 2 p. 286-287, History of Islam p.357,
358.

[^9]: Musnad of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal vol. 1 p.331, Abul Fida, Part 1,
p.116, at-Tabari, vol. 2 p. 217, ibn al-Athir, vol. 2, p.22, Mustadrak
of al-Hakim, vol. 2 p. 133, Habib Al-Sayyar, vol. 2, Part 3, p.160, ibn
Kathir’s Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 40, Kanzul Ummal, vol. 6 p. 392, 397, 401
and 408, Rawdatus Safa, vol. 2 p. 278 and 279, Ibn Taimiya’s Minhajus
Sunna vol. 4, p. 80, al-Mohibbuddin at-Tabari’s ar-Riyadul Nadira, Part
2 chap. 4 Section 6 p. 168, 202, 203.

[^10]: Al-Bukhari, Kitab as-Salaat, p. 238, at-Tabari, vol. 3 p. 154,
ibn Sa’d’s Tabaqat, vol. 2, Part 1 p. 121, Abul Fida, vol. 1 p.150,
Habibus Sayyar, vol. 1, part 3 p. 72, Tarikh al-Khamis, vol. 2, p.156,
Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani’s Fat~h al- Bari, vol. 8, p.241, Madarijun
Nubuwwa, vol. 2, p.492, ibn Khaldun, vol. 3, p. 222-225, Tarikh of ibn
Kathir, vol. 7, p. 337, 357, ibn al-Athir, vol. 2 p.111, The Caliphate,
p. 58.

[^11]: Sahih of Muslim, vol. 7, p. 122-123, Musnad of Imam Ahmad bin
Hanbal vol. 3, p. 14,17, 26, and vol. 4, p. 367, 371, vol. 5 p.182, 189,
Jalaluddin al-Suyuti’s al-Jami’ul Kabir, Kanzul Ummal vol. 6, p.390 and
vol. 3 p. 61, Musnad of Abu Dawud p.23 tradition No.154, Amir Ali’s
Spirit of Islam, Part 2, Ch 8, p. 292-293, The Caliphate, p 178-185.

[^12]: Al-Bukhari, chap., Ashabun Nabi, vol. 2, p. 193, Musnad of Ahmad
bin Hanbal vol. 1, p. 334, Tabaqat of ibn Sa’d, vol. 2 Part 2, p.55,
Shibli’s Al-Faruq, vol. 1, p.65, Ibn Khaldun vol. 2, Supp. P.63, ibn
Hisham, vol. 4, p.334, Abul Fida’s Qasasul Ambiya, p. 418.

[^13]: Ibn Hajar al-Makki’s as-Sawa’iq, p.5, ibn Hisham, vol. 6, p.5.

[^14]: A shed; a covered communal place appropriate for conversation and
discussion.

[^15]: Shibli’s al-Faruq, vol. 1, p.66 quoting at-Tabari, vol. 3, p.208;
Abul Fida’s Qasas, p. 417.

[^16]: At-Tabari, Vol. 3, p.200-210, al-Bukhari, Bab Rajm al Hubla,
Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal vol. 1, p. 55, Ibn Hajar al-Makki’s as-Sawaiq
chap. 1 Section 1, p. 5, al-Kamil of ibn al-Athir, vol. 2 p. 124, Tarikh
ibn Kathir vol. 5, p.245, al-Mohib at-Tabari’s ar-Riyadun Nadira, Part
2, Section 3, p. 164. ibn Hisham, vol. 4, p. 338, Tadhkiratul Huffaz by
ath-Thahabi – vol. 1 p.2, 3, 5 and 7, Sunan of ibn Maja, vol. 1 p. 12,
Sunan of ad-Darimi, vol. 1 p. 85. Shibli’s al-Faruk, Part 2, p. 223,
225, Agha Muhammad Sultan Mirza’s The Caliphate p. 58.

[^17]: Abdul Salaam al-Nadwi’s Tarikh al-Fiqh al-Islami, p. 161-162,
ath-Thahabi’s Tathkirat al-Huffadh Vol. 1 p. 7.

[^18]: Musnad of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal vol. 4, p. 64.

[^19]: Al-Bukhari, vol. 1 p. 46.

[^20]: Al-Bukhari, vol. 4 p.96, vol. 8 p. 161.

[^21]: Sahih of Muslim, vol. 2, p.157, Sahih of al-Bukhari, vol. 1 44,
171, 123, vol. 2 p. 65, 71, 232 and 234, & vol. 4, p.68, vol. 7 p. 29,
quoted in Ask Those Who Know, p. 67-68.

[^22]: Cf. Al-Munjid, p. 694.


