Chapter 4 Nomination of Ali To the Caliphate By the Prophet (s)
===============================================================

The chief and only cause for division among Muslims is the question
whether or not the Prophet (s) has nominated anyone as his successor.
All sects of Muslims universally agree that, of the four caliphs and in
fact among all the companions of the Prophet (s), Ali (a.s) was the most
learned, just, valiant, noble and deserving. Yet, the majority sect, the
Sunnis prefer to resign themselves to the historical fact that Ali (a.s)
became the fourth caliph, though they readily admit that Imam Ali (a.s)
was, in fact, the most deserving to immediately succeed the Prophet (s),
as the first caliph.

The differences and debates begin the moment when the legitimacy of the
first three caliphs is put to test. The Sunni do not wish to discuss the
impropriety of Ali (a.s) being relegated to the fourth place. The Shia,
on the other hand, believe that the caliphate was usurped through a well
planned conspiracy in which, systematically, all the occasions and the
sayings [traditions] of the Prophet (s) nominating Ali (a.s) as his
successor, were either erased completely or at least distorted and
misinterpreted, in order to justify Ali’s (a.s) exclusion from immediate
succession to the caliphate. Let us now examine the rival contentions
based on books considered authentic by the various sects.

From the first day when he was commanded to proclaim Islam, to the last
day when he was called to return to his Lord, the Prophet (s) had, at
every opportunity, identified and nominated Imam Ali (a.s) as his
immediate successor. This was in keeping with Divine Tradition, where
every Apostle either appointed or at least indicated his successor
according to Divine commands. God chose and appointed His Apostles and
their successors. From Adam (a.s) to the Last Prophet (s), man had no
say in their appointment. Wise men like the Magi were given signs by
which they recognized and identified prophets and their
successors.**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *The Journey of The Magi,* by T.S. Eliot.

The prophets themselves sometimes expressly appointed and at other times
gave clear indications about their successors. The golden thread in all
religions is that a Comforter or Mehdi [as Muslims call him] or a Kalki
[as the Hindus call him] will come towards the end of the world to bring
Divine Justice and universal peace. This personality, it is unanimously
agreed, is one chosen by God. Prophets are endowed with Divine Wisdom.
Therefore, as a part of their mission, they prophesy everything
including identifying and nominating their successors as a part of their
obligation.

In accordance with the traditions of earlier Apostles, throughout his
life, on every important occasion, the Prophet (s) declared in
unambiguous terms, often by physically pointing out, that Imam Ali (a.s)
was his deputy [*wali*], successor [*wasi*] and Administrator in Chief
[*vizier*].

(i) The Feast of Youm ad-Dar
----------------------------

On the very first day when the Prophet (s) proclaimed Islam,**[1]** he
arranged for a feast and invited the members of his clan. About forty
members from the *Banu Abdul Muttalib* attended the feast. This event is
called the Feast of *Youm ad-Dar* (the day of warning). All historians
and the narrators of Hadith, both Sunnis and Shias as well as non-Muslim
historians record this historical and momentous event unanimously and
universally.**[2]**

The following is the gist of what transpired on that occasion:The
Prophet (s) asked Ali (a.s) to make bread from one measure of wheat,
cook a leg of mutton and provide one pitcher of milk to feed the
invitees. On seeing such meager food, the guests made fun of the Prophet
(s) saying that the food was not enough even for a young child. However,
after all, the guests had eaten to their satisfaction, like the miracle
performed by Jesus, the food remained the same quantity  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur’an, 26:214.  
 **[2]** Musnad of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol. 1, p.331, Abul Fida, Part
1, p.116, at-Tabari , vol. 2 p. 217, ibn al-Athir, vol. 2, p.22;
Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol. 2 p. 133, Habib Al-Sayar, vol. 2, Part 3,
p.160, ibn Kathir’s Tarikh, vol. 3, p. 40, Kanzul Ummal, vol. 6 p. 392,
397, 401 and 408, Rawdatus Safa, vol. 2 p. 278 and 279, Ibn Taymiya’s
Minhajus Sunna, vol. 4, p. 80, al-Mohib at-Tabari’s Ar-Riyadul Nadira,
Part 2 chap. 4 Section 6 p. 168, 202,203, Gibbon’s ‘Decline & Fall’,
vol.. 2, p. 422, Thomas Carlyle’s Heroes & Hero Worship’, Lecture 2, p.
78, M.S. Mirza’s ‘The Caliphate’121-132… etc.

as it was prepared.**[1]** This prompted Abu Lahab, the Prophet’s uncle,
to declare that the Prophet (s) was indeed a sorcerer and that they
should beware being bewitched by his magic. Abu Lahab’s allegation of
sorcery against the Prophet (s) is similar to the allegations of
Pharaoh, his vizier Haman, and Qarun against Moses.**[2]**

After the feast, the Prophet (s) conveyed the Divine Message and
concluded his speech saying:“*Verily God has commanded me to invite you
to Him. If you accept Him as the One Unique God, you will be benefited
in this life as well as in the life to come. God has appointed me His
Messenger. Acknowledge me as the Messenger of Allah and help me in my
Mission. Now that I have passed on the Divine Message, I need some one
to assist me in carrying forth the Divine Mission after me. Who among
you will assist, share, and endure the burden in this mission of mine,
for, he shall be my Deputy [Khalifa], my Trustee [Wasi], my Chief
Administrator [vizier] both in this world and the life to come*.”

The entire congregation kept quiet, except Ali (a.s), who rose and
said:“*Though I am still in my teens and not strong enough as yet, I
shall be your Deputy [Khalifa], Trustee [Wasi], and Chief Administrator
[vizier].*” The congregation responded by deriding the Prophet (s), some
claiming that he was bewitched while others preferred to ignore him.

The Prophet (s) invited the Banu Abdul Muttalib again the next day and
on the third consecutive day for the miraculous feast as well as for
repeating the Divine Message.

On all the three days, Imam Ali (a.s) stood up in response to the
Prophet’s call for a helper and said, “*I shall be your Deputy, Trustee,
and vizier*.” The Prophet (s) hugged and blessed Ali (a.s) and holding
up Ali’s hand declared:“*Oh people, this Ali (a.s) here is my successor,
[wasi], my caliph, and my vizier both in this world and the next*.” The
Prophet (s) then prayed:“*O Lord, love him who loves Ali, hold as your
enemy whosoever shows enmity towards Ali, help those who help Ali, and
abandon those who abandon Ali*.” On hearing this, people taunted Abu
Talib saying, “*O Abu Talib, Muhammad has appointed your son as the lord
over Muslims. From today, you have to obey your son*.” All historians
and the narrators of Hadith and history record this historical and
momentous event unanimously and universally.**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Majlisi’s Hayatul Quloob, p.185, The Caliphate, p. 131-134.  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 40:23-24, 42:29 – 51, ibn Kathir’s Qasasul Ambiya
219.  
 **[3]** Musnad of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol. 1, p.331, Abul Fida, Part
1, p.116; at-Tabari, vol. 2 p. 217, ibn al-Athir, vol. 2, p.22,
Mustadrak of al-Hakim vol. 2 p. 133,

Here it is very important to note that on the Day of Warning, the
Prophet (s) was alone, without any support of men, means, or material.
Therefore, Imam Ali’s offer to support the Prophet (s) could not have
been motivated by any materialistic desire. Similarly, the Prophet (s)
also could not be accused of trying to confer any benefit or perpetuate
family rule, for at that stage there was neither wealth nor estate.
Instead of benefits, what was certain was only persecution in the shape
of mental and physical harassment. It is a historical fact that as a
direct consequence of proclamation of Islam in the feast of *Youm
ad-Dar,* the Prophet (s) was banished for confinement in the *Shi’b
(defile) of Abu Talib*. A social boycott was enforced and anyone found
to sympathize with the Prophet (s) was subjected to mental and physical
torture. Historians record that it was only the support of Abu Talib
(a.s) which deterred the Meccans from carrying out their cherished
desire of killing the Prophet (s).

The seeking of a supporter and nomination of Imam Ali (a.s) by the
Prophet (s) in the feast of *Youm ad-Dar* is in accordance with
traditions of earlier Prophets. About the Prophet Thul Kifl (a.s.), ibn
Kathir writes,**[1]** “Ibn Jarir and Ibn Hatam narrated on the authority
of Dawud bin Abi Hind on the authority of Mujahid that he said, ‘When
Alyasa [Elisha] became an old man, he said:“*If I could find a man who
will succeed me in managing the people’s affairs while I am alive, so I
will be able to see how he is going to serve the people*.” Then Alyasa
called the people, gathered them, and said, “*Who will fast in the day
and pray in the night and will not be angry, he will be my successor*.”
Then, an ordinary man stood up and said, “*I can do that*.” Alyasa said,
“*Will you fast in the day and pray in the night and will not be
angry*?” The man said, “*Yes*”, but Alyasa did not say anything. Then,
on the second day happened the same thing, and the people did not
answer, but the same man said, “*I can*”, therefore, Alyasa made him his
successor, and this ordinary man was *Thul Kifl*. Regarding the question
whether Thul Kifl was merely a righteous person or a prophet, Ibn Kathir
states that Thul Kifl’s name  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Habib Al-Sayar, vol. 2, Part 3, p.160; ibn Kathir’s Tarikh vol. 3, p.
40, Kanzul Ummal, vol. 6 p. 392, 397, 401 and 408, Rawdatus Safa, vol. 2
p. 278 and 279, Ibn Taymiya’s Minhajus Sunna, vol. 4, p. 80, Mohib
at-Tabari’s ar-Riyadul Nadira, Part 2 chap. 4 Section 6 p. 168, 202,
203, Gibbon’s ‘Decline & Fall’ vol. 2, p. 422, Carlisle’s ‘Heroes & Hero
Worship’, Lecture 2, p. 78, M.S. Mirza’s ‘The Caliphate’131-134. **  
 [1]** Qasasul Ambiya, p. 182.

being mentioned along with the name of other prophets **[1]** is a proof
enough to show that *Thul Kifl* was in fact a prophet. Moses also sought
a helper in facing the Pharaoh and God granted his wish and appointed
Aaron as his helper and successor.**[2]**

(ii) The Night of Emigration
----------------------------

On the night of his emigration (hijra) from Mecca to Medina, the Prophet
(s) asked Imam Ali (a.s) to sleep in his bed to defeat the conspiracy of
the Meccans to kill him.**[3]** He entrusted and authorized Imam Ali
(a.s) to do all the things that were to be done by the Prophet (s)
himself, including bringing to Medina all the family members of the
Prophet’s household. Imam Ali (a.s) remained in Mecca for three days and
returned the deposits of money or goods entrusted to the Prophet (s) by
the people of Mecca.**[4]**

(iii) The Bond of Brotherhood
-----------------------------

First at Mecca and again at Medina, the Prophet (s) created the bond of
brotherhood and recited the declaration of fraternity among his
companions. He chose Imam Ali (a.s) and declared him to be his brother
in this world and the afterworld. He compared his relationship with Imam
Ali (a.s) with the relationship between Moses and Aaron.**[5]**

(iv) The Sura of at-Tawba
-------------------------

When the ninth Chapter of the Qur’an was revealed, the Prophet (s) asked
Imam Ali (a.s) to recite it to the Meccans, saying that God commanded
that either he (the Prophet) himself or a man from him and no one else
should carry out that task. The Prophet (s) added, “*Ali is from me and
I am from Ali; he is my brother, my guardian, my successor, and my
caliph over my Ummah after me. He will discharge my obligations*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur’an, 21:85-86, 38:45-48.  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 28:33-35.  
 **[3]** Ameer Ali’s the Spirit of Islam, p. 47.  
 **[4]** At-Tabari, vol. 2 p.244, ibn Khaldun, vol. 2 p.15, ibn Hisham,
vol. 2 p. 94, Abul Fida, vol. 1 p.126, ibn Kathir, vol. 7 p.338, al
Kamil of ibn al-Athir, vol. 2 p. 38, al-Mas’udi, vol. 2 p.174-175,
Dayarbakhti vol. 1 p.367.  
 **[5]** Sahih of Al-Bukhari, Bab Manaqib Ali, vol. 3, p.146, Sahih of
Muslim, Bab Fadha’il Ali [s], vol. 7 p.120, Sunan of ibn Maja, vol. 1 p.
55, at-Tabari vol. 3, 144, Musnad of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol. 1, p.
170, 173, 175, 177, 179, 182, 184 and 185, vol. 3 p.32, 338, vol. 6 p.
369, 438, Tabaqat of ibn Sa’d, vol. 3 Part 1, p.14, Tarikh of ibn
Kathir, vol. 7 p.224, 334, 338-341, The *Caliphate*, p. 168.

*and fulfill my promises and none other than Ali (a.s) can do
so*.”**[1]**

(v) Mubahala
------------

On the occasion of the dispute with the Christians of Najran, the verse
known as ‘*the Aya of Mubahala*’ was revealed commanding the Holy
Prophet (s) to take with him his men, women, and children.**[2]** The
Prophet (s) chose none except his daughter Fatima (a.s) to represent
women, Imam Ali (a.s) to represent men, and Imam Hasan and Imam Husain
(a.s) to represent his children.**[3]**

(vi) Madinatul Ilm (the city of knowledge)
------------------------------------------

The most important aspect of Prophethood, one that distinguishes a
prophet from ordinary human beings, is the Divine Wisdom bestowed upon
the prophet and revealed from time to time through *Wahi*
(revelation).**[4]** About the Divine Wisdom granted to the Prophet
Muhammad (s), he said, “*I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its gate;
those, who wish to enter the city of knowledge, should do so by passing
through the gate*.”**[5]**

(vii) Ghadir Khum
-----------------

The final proclamation of Imam Ali’s succession was made by the Prophet
(s) on his return from the last pilgrimage at Ghadir Khum. The fact that
the Prophet (s) had declared that it would be his last pilgrimage was
widely known and Muslims gathered in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Bukhari’s Kitabus Salaat, p.238, at-Tbari vol. 3, p.154, ibn
Khaldun, vol. 3 p.222-225, Habib al-Sayar, vol. 1 Part 3, p.72, Tabaqat
of ibn Sa’d, vol. 2 Pat 1, p.121, Abul Fida, vol. 1, p.150, Tarikh
al-Khamis, vol. 2, p.156, Fat~h al-Bari, vol. 8, p.241, ibn al-Athir,
vol. 2, p.111, Madarij an-Nubuwwa, vol. 2, p.492, ibn Kathir, vol. 7,
p.337, 357.  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 3:61.  
 **[3]** Madarij an-Nubuwwa, Part 2, p.498-500, Sahih of Muslim, vol. 7,
p.120-121, Habib as-Sayyar, vol. 1, Part 3, p.73-74, ibn Hajar
al-Makki’s as-Sawa’iq, Ch. 9, Section 1, p.93 and Section 2 p.72, Tarikh
of ibn Kathir, vol. 7, p.3, as-Sayuti’s ad-Durr al-Manthur vol. 2, p.39,
al-Riyad of Mohibat-Tabari, Part 2, CH 2, Section 6, p.188, Fakhruddin
ar-Razi’s Tafseer al-Kabeer, vol. 2, p.700, al-Kashshaf of
az-Zamakhshari, vol. 1 p.307.  
 **[4]** Qur’an, 2:31, 2:247, 5:113, 18:65, 19:12, 21:79.  
 **[5]** Ibn Hajar al-Makki’s as-Sawaiq, chap 9, Section 2, p. 73,
Mustadrak, vol. 3, p.126-127, Yanabee’ul Mawaddah, chap. 14, p. 65,
71-72, Mohib at-Tabari’s ar-Riyad an-Nadira, Part 2, Ch. 4, Section 6,
p.193 Kanzul Ummal, vol. 6, p. 152 and 401, ibn Kathir’s Tarikh, vol. 7,
p.358-359, ibn Abdul Barr’s al-Isti’ab, Part 2, p.474-475.

unprecedented numbers to participate in the Hajj along with the Prophet
(s) for one last time. The Prophet (s) himself had invited ambassadors
and delegates from various countries to witness the special occasion.
These foreign delegates recorded every word, every movement, and every
action of the Prophet (s).

The proclamation of the nomination of Imam Ali (a.s) was thus witnessed
by foreign ambassadors, recorded, and preserved by their chroniclers in
their own countries and languages. Though, after the Prophet (s), an
attempt was made to burn or dispose off as rubbish all books except the
Qur’an in an attempt to obliterate any record of this event, the
chronicles narrating the event, survived in foreign countries, such as
Spain, Holland, France…etc. Thus, this event came to be recorded alike
by historians and Sunni and Shia narrators of traditions and is
universally accepted as genuine.

We give below a gist of the event, for brevity’s sake, incorporating the
salient features of the event:When the Prophet (s) was informed that he
was to join the Lord soon, he wished to perform his last Hajj and left
Medina on the 23<sup>rd</sup> February, 632 A.D. On learning this, the
Muslims considering that it was probably their last opportunity to
perform the Hajj alongside the Prophet (s) especially gathered in great
numbers.

While returning from the Hajj at a place called ‘Khum’, the Prophet (s)
received the following verse:“*O Messenger, proclaim that which has been
made manifest to you by your Lord. If you fail to do so, the Mission
shall remain unfulfilled. Allah will protect you from [evil] men.
Surely, Allah does not guide the non believers*.”***[1]***

The message in the verse was imperative and it cast an immediate
obligation on the Prophet (s) to disclose it to the Muslims, despite his
fears and awareness of possible undermining opposition by the hypocrites
who had by then surrounded him in good numbers. The verse was the
penultimate verse revealed to the Prophet (s), for, after this verse,
the verse regarding the completion of the Prophetic Mission and Divine
Guidance, was revealed as the last verse of the Qur’an.**[2]**

The Prophet (s) immediately halted the caravan, had the area cleared of
shrubs so as to accommodate the large gathering. He then ordered that
those who had gone forward to retrace their steps and those who  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Qur’an, 5:67.  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 5:4, as-Suyuti’s ad-Durrul Manthur, vol.. 2, p. 259.

were lagging behind, to hurry up to join him. Wooden saddles of camels
were collected and heaped one upon another to form a high pulpit or
pedestal.**[1]**

The Prophet (s) ascended the pulpit along with Ali (a.s) and in full
view of the gathering he tied a turban on his head in a gesture widely
prevalent and understood in the East and by the Arabs to symbolize
confirmation of succession to estate and office.**[2]**

The Prophet (s) then asked the gathering, “*Do you bear witness that I
have discharged my Mission and guided you in the path of Allah?*” The
crowd replied, “*Indeed we bear witness to that*.” The Prophet (s) said,
“*Very shortly I will be recalled to my Creator. I am leaving behind me
two precious things amidst you. One is the Qur’an – the Word of God; and
the other is my progeny [Ahlul Bayt]. They are both intrinsically and
inseparably linked with each other and will remain so linked until they
reach me at the Hawdh [pond] on the Day of Resurrection. Firmly adhere
to both of them. You will, then, not go astray or be misled into
error*.”***[3]***

The Prophet (s) then said, “*God is my Moula (guardian). Am I not the
Moula of you all (the Muslim Ummah)* ?.” They replied, “*Certainly you
are our Moula and the Moula of all Muslims*.”

The Prophet (s) then held aloft Ali (a.s) in his arms so much so that
the Prophet (s) himself was hidden behind Ali (a.s). Holding Ali (a.s)
thus, the Prophet (s) declared, “*Whoever I am his guardian, this Ali is
to be his guardian*.”

The Prophet (s) repeated this thrice and then prayed, “*O God, Be a
friend to the friends of him; be an enemy to the enemies of him; help
those who help him; abandon those who abandon him*.”***[4]***  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ad-Durrul Manthur of as-Suyuti, vol. 2, p.298.  
 **[2]** Musnad of Taylasi, p. 23, Hadith No.154 Mohibuddin at-Tabari’s
ar-Riyad an-Nadira, Part 2, Ch. 4, Section 9, p. 217.  
 **[3]** Sahih of Muslim, vol. 7 p. 122-123, Mustadrak, vol. 3 p.109,
110, 148, Musnad of Imam Ahmed bin Hanbal, vol. 3 p. 14, 17, 26 – vol.
4, p. 367, 371 – vol. 5 182, 189, ibn Asakir’s Tarikh, vol. 5 p.436,
Shibli’s Siratun Nabi, vol. 1 Part 2, p.131-132. Kanzul Ummal, vol. 6
p.390, vol. 3, 61, The *Caliphate* p. 181  
 **[4]** Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol. 1, p.152, vol. 4, p. 282, 368
and 372, Mishkat, p.565, ibn Kathir’s Tarikh, vol. 5 p. 208-214,
Tathkiratul Huffadh by ath-Thahabi, vol. 3 p.231, ibn Hajar al-Makki’s
as-Sawa’iq, Ch. 9, Section 2, p. 7, Kanzul Ummal, vol. 6 p. 403, 407,
Mohibbuddin at-Tabari, Part 2, Ch 4, Section 6, p. 169,170, 204, Habib
al-Sayyar’s Tarikh, vol. 1 Part 3, p. 77, Madarijun Nubuwwah, Part 4, Ch
13, 

The Prophet (s) then commanded all those who were present to remember
and record this message and pass it on to everyone in their respective
cities, towns and villages and to propagate it to whoever was not
present at that time and to repeat it whenever any two Muslims met, so
as to preserve the message for posterity.

Then, the Prophet (s) got down from the pulpit along with Ali (a.s). He
set up a separate tent in which he seated Ali (a.s) and directed all
those present to congratulate and swear allegiance to him (Imam Ali).

For three days, the proceedings went on. People like Abu Bakr, Umar ibn
al-Khattab, and other companions were among the first to rush forth and
congratulate Imam Ali (a.s) on his appointment as the immediate
successor to the Prophet (s). They paid their fealty and swore their
allegiance to Imam Ali (a.s).**[1]**

(viii) Authenticity of the event of Ghadir Khum
-----------------------------------------------

The authenticity and genuineness of the above event of *Ghadir Khum* has
been researched extensively by later historians and accepted as an
undeniable historical fact. We extract below the opinion of a few such
scholars:

Justice Amir Ali wrote, “*It is generally supposed that the Prophet (s)
did not expressly designate anyone as his successor in the spiritual and
temporal government of Islam; but this notion is founded on a mistaken
apprehension of facts, for, there is abundant evidence that many a time
the Prophet (s) indicated Imam Ali (a.s) for the vicegerancy, notably on
the occasion of the return journey from the performance of the ‘Farewell
Pilgrimage’ during a halt at a place called ‘Khum’. He convoked an
assembly of the people accompanying him, and used words which could
leave little doubt as to his intention regarding a successor. “Ali”, he
said “is to me as Aaron was to Moses. O Almighty God, be a friend to his
friend and a foe to his foes; help those who help him, and frustrate the
hopes of those who betray him*.”**[2]**

The renowned Sunni writer Shah Abdul Haq of Delhi, wrote regarding the
tradition of Ghadir Khum:“*This tradition is undoubtedly correct and
genuine; no less than sixteen and according to Ahmed ibn Hanbal, thirty*
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

p. 220, Tathkira of Sibt ibnul Jawzi, Ch. 2, p.18, The *Caliphate*, p.
181-182.**  
 [1]** Musnad of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol. 4, p. 281, Kanzul Ummal,
vol. 8, p.60, Tarikh of Habibus Sayyar, vol. 1 Part 3, p.77, ar-Riyadun
Nadira, vol. 2, Ch.4, Section 13, p. 230, Madarijun Nubuwwa, Part 4,
Ch.13, p.217.  
 **[2]** The Spirit of Islam, Part 2, Ch. 8, p.292-293.

*companions of the Prophet (s) who had themselves heard it from the
Prophet (s) testified to its correctness and genuineness when called
upon by Ali (a.s) to mention it on oath. Many eminent traditionists, for
example, al Nassa’i, al Tirmithi, and Ahmed bin Hanbal have related it
and testified to its genuineness; it has been related through many
channels; most of its ‘Asaaneed’ [testimonials] are correct and
unimpeachable. No attention should be paid to those who criticize it,
nor to those who say that the sentence ‘O God !, be a friend to his
friend and a foe to his foes’ is an interpolation, as that sentence is
also reported through unimpeachable authorities, most of which have been
scrutinized by ath-Thahabi and ibn Hajar and found correct*.”**[1]**

Another Sunni historian, Mirza Mohammad ibn Mo’tamid Khan writes, “*The
tradition of Ghadir is genuine and very well known. No one doubts its
genuineness and authority except a begotten [bastard] and no reliance
can be placed on the word of a begotten person*.**[2]**

Yet, another reputed Sunni narrator of Hadith, Qazi Sanaullah of
Panipat, India, writes about the reports [*hadith*] of the events of
*Ghadir Khum*:“*This hadith is no doubt genuine. It has reached the
degree of Tawatur (i.e:continuos and uninterrupted chain of narrators of
unimpeachable authority). Thirty of the companions of the Prophet (s),
like Abu Ayyub, Zaid bin Arqam, al-Bara’ ibn Aazib, Ammar ibn Murra, Abu
Huraira, ibn Abbas, Imara ibn Buraid, Sa’d ibn Abi Waqqas, ibn Umar,
Anas, Jarir ibn Abdullah al-Bajali, Malik ibn Huwairith, Abu Sa’eed
al-Khudri, Abu Tufail, Huthaifa ibn* *Usayd, and others have mentioned
this hadith in their books, and have verified its genuineness*.”**[3]**

The well-known historian and narrator of *Hadith*, Ali Muttaqi, examines
the sources and narrators of the event and quotes Zaid bin Arqum as
saying, “*I asked Zaid bin Arqam whether he himself has heard this from
the Prophet (s). He replied that everyone who was there saw with his own
eyes and heard with his own ears. Muhammad bin Jarir at-Tabari has
related this very ‘Riwaya; tradition’ through Atiyya al-Awfi from Abu
Sa’eed al-Khudri*.”**[4]**

Agha Muhammad Sultan Mirza, an eminent legal luminary and retired Judge,
has written a very detailed book under the title ‘*The Caliphate;*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *‘Al-Ash’iatul Lami’a*, vol. 4 P.668 quoted in The *Caliphate*,
p. 182.  
 **[2]** *Nuzulul Abrar*, p.21.  
 **[3]** *As-Saif al-Maslul*, quoted in *The* *Caliphate*, p. 183.  
 **[4]** The *Caliphate*, p. 180 quoting Kanzul Ummal, vol. 6 p.390,
vol. 3 p. 61.

*its Conception and Consequences*’, solely devoted to the matter of Imam
Ali’s nomination to succeed the Prophet (s). Mirza was born in Delhi in
1885 and died on 17-12-1965 AD. The book runs into 362 pages of
excellent research and analysis and was ready by 27 February 1949, but
unfortunately, it could only be published posthumously, towards the end
of 1988. On the subject of *Caliphate,* the book is an unimpeachable
authority.**[1]**

(ix) The Last Will
------------------

Under Islam, it is incumbent, if not mandatory, upon every Muslim to
make a will in order to prevent future disputes among his children. It
is also incumbent on those who are present at the time of making a will,
to strictly enforce the wishes of the dying person.**[2]** For instance,
Abu Bakr, during his last moments, sent for Uthman and dictated his will
nominating Umar as his successor, saying that he could not leave such a
grave affair as the *Caliphate* to future dissension in the absence of
his will.

Jurists allocate a chapter exclusively on ‘Wills’ in every book on
Islamic Jurisprudence. The last important historical event in the
Prophet’s life is recorded universally by all historians and narrators
of traditions as the time when the Prophet (s) called for parchment and
pen so that he might write down his last will, and prevent all
dissension. Al-Bukhari reports the event under seven headings in his
Sahih. Muslim, like several others, reports the incident in several
places.**[3]**

This incident is popularly known as the ‘Event of the Parchment and Pen’
*(al-Qirtas wel-Qalam*).

Regarding this incident, learned scholar M.S. Mirza comments:“*This was
the final attempt by the Prophet (s) to prevent his flock from going
astray and having to wander in the wilderness in search of a true
leader. Both explicitly and implicitly, by word and by deed, by
proclamation, exhortation and announcements, in fact by every means
available to him, he had tried to make his Umma see which quarter they
should look to for true leadership. However, ambition and avarice
blinded them, and they failed to heed his advice*.**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The *Caliphate*, by Agha Muhammad Sultan Mirza.  
 **[2]** Qur’an, 2:180, 5:109.  
 **[3]** Sahih of Muslim, vol. 5 p.75, 76, Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal,
vol. 1 p.336, 355, al-Milal wen-Nihal by ash-Shahristani, vol. 1 p.
23.  
 **[4]** The *Caliphate*, p. 207.

Mirza then quotes from al-Bukhari and Muslim:“*Ibn Abbas mentioned
Thursday and wept profusely, and said that it was on a Thursday that the
Prophet (s) asked them to bring ink-pot and parchment, so that he might
write the will which would save them till eternity from going astray.
But, they said that the Prophet (s) was talking nonsense [yahjur]. Ibn
Abbas said that during his last illness near his death, when many
companions including Umar, were in the house around him, the Prophet (s)
said, ‘Come, I will write to you a document which will protect you until
eternity from going astray’. But Umar said:‘The Prophet is under the
influence of the disease and we have the Qur’an. The Book of God is
sufficient for us’. Those present became divided into two factions; one
party was for supplying the writing material to the Prophet (s), and the
other supported Umar. When the unseemly disorder and uproar increased,
the Prophet (s) told the squabblers, ‘**Begone hence, this very
moment**’*.**[1]**

According to Kanzul Ummal, Umar recounted, “*When the Holy Prophet fell
ill, he asked for parchment and ink so that he might make a testament
which would save us till eternity from going astray. His wives cried
from behind the veil, ‘Don’t you hear what the Prophet is saying?’ I
said, ‘You are like the deceitful women of Joseph. When the Prophet is
ill, you weep, and when he is healthy you sit upon his neck’. The
Prophet (s) said, ‘Go away. They are better than you’*.”**[2]**

Curiously, about such an important event, most of the narrators, for
whatever expediency, do not narrate anything about what the Prophet (s)
proposed to write in his will. Some narrators comment that the Prophet
(s) intended to name his successor so that there may not be any
dissension or dispute about it.**[3]**

(x) The Oral Will
-----------------

Having been frustrated in reducing his will into writing, the Prophet
(s) made an oral Will. Al-Bukhari narrates that just before his death,
the Prophet (s) made an oral Will about three matters, but the narrators
remembered only two of the matters namely, **[1]** to expel the Jews
from the Arabian Peninsula and **[2]** to accord the same treatment to
foreign dignitaries, as the Prophet (s) himself had accorded. They said
that they did not remember the third matter.**[4]** Of course, the third
matter  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The *Caliphate*, p.209.  
 **[2]** Kanzul Ummal, vol. 3 p.138, vol. 4 p.52.  
 **[3]** Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani’s Fat~hul Bari, vol. 1 p.186, vol. 8
p.101.  
 **[4]** Al-Bukhari’s Kitabul Jihad, Kkitabul Khums, Bab Marzun Nabi.

they forgot was obviously the express nomination of Imam Ali (a.s) as
the immediate successor of the Prophet (s).

Ibn Hajar al-Makki narrates explicitly, “On his deathbed, the Prophet
(s) said, ‘O my people, shortly I will accompany the angel of death to
heaven. I have already declared, and I declare again, that I am leaving
among you the Book of God and my progeny [Ahlul Bayt] ’. The Prophet (s)
then caught hold of Ali (a.s) by the arm and raised it up saying:‘This
Ali here is with the Qur’an and the Qur’an is with Ali. The two shall
never separate until they meet me at the Hawdh (pond). Therefore, hold
on to them both firmly so that you may never go astray’.”**[1]**

The political climate made it difficult for the narrators to relate the
truth. Therefore, they sought an easy way out from certain persecution,
by pleading that they did not remember the third aspect willed by the
Prophet (s). Regarding this forgetfulness, Mulla Mo’in comments that it
was a political expediency that made the narrator suffer amnesia in
order to suppress the truth.**[2]**

Abu Bakr acted upon the two matters spoken to by the narrators as a part
of the oral Will made by the Prophet (s). Obviously, there was no place
in the scheme of the Caliph for third aspect so conveniently forgotten
by the narrators regarding the appointment of Ali (a.s) by the Prophet
(s) as his immediate successor.

(xi) Miscellaneous Traditions
-----------------------------

The Prophet (s) declared on numerous occasions that the obligations and
duties of Prophethood could only be discharged either by himself as the
Prophet (s) or by Imam Ali (a.s) as the Divinely appointed successor and
none else.**[3]** The Prophet (s) proclaimed repeatedly that just as
obedience and love for him was made obligatory, obedience and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Sawaiq of ibn Hajar, ch. 9, Part 2, p. 75.  
 **[2]** Madarijun Nubuwwa, Part 4, Ch. 14, Section 3, p.229.  
 **[3]** Al-Bukhari, Ch. 2, Manaqib Ali, Ibn Maja’s Sunan, Part 1, p.56,
Mishkat, Bab Manaqib Ali, p.564, Sunan of At-Tirmithi, Bk. 46, Ch 19 and
20, Musnad of Ahmad bin Hanbal, vol. 3 p.483 vol. 4 p.164,165 - vol. 5
p. 204, ibn Hajar al-Makki’s as-Sawa’iq Ch9, p.73, 75, ibn Kathir’s
Tarikh vol. 7, p.224, 344, 356, Yanabi’ul Mawaddah ch.7, p 52, 56
al-Ashi’atul Lami’ah of Shah Abdul Haq, vol. 4 p 665, Muhibbuddin
at-Tabari’s ar-Riyadun Nadira, Part 2, Ch.4, Section 6, p. 172, 174,
Kanzul Ummal, vol.6, p.153.

love for Imam Ali (a.s) was also made obligatory on every Muslim.**[1]**

The Prophet (s) declared, “Whoever curses Ali (a.s) in fact curses
me.”**[2]** The Prophet (s) said that he who is inimical to Ali (a.s) is
in fact inimical to him [the Prophet] and he who is an enemy of him [the
Prophet] is an infidel [Kafir], and such persons offend God.**[3]**

Conclusion
----------

From the above, it is obvious that the Prophet (s), at every stage and
until the very last moment of his life, made every possible effort to
discharge his duty commanded by God to nominate Ali (a.s) as his
successor. When he tried to make a Will, he was prevented by some of the
people surrounding him. He then made an oral will, the crucial part of
which was conveniently claimed to have escaped the memory of those who
witnessed the oral will.

But, the best evidence of Ali’s nomination by the Prophet (s) from his
deathbed, is the statement Umar made during his conversation with
Abdullah ibn Abbas recounted by Ibn Abil Hadid the mo’tazilite who
records that Umar said:“*There is no doubt that the Prophet (s) said and
did many things in this connection which do not support our view that he
did not nominate Ali (a.s) as his successor. The fact is that on many
occasions the Prophet (s) did go to the extreme in favoring Ali (a.s).
It is a fact that during his last illness, the Prophet (s) wanted to
write a will designating Ali (a.s) expressly to the Caliphate, but I
prevented him from doing so. By Allah, the Quraysh will never
unanimously agree to Ali’s Caliphate, and if he is ever selected as
Caliph, the Arabs will attack him from every direction*.”**[4]**

Some Sunni historians claim that the ‘election’ of Abu Bakr at *Saqifa*
was an impulsive action taken on the spur of the moment to prevent the
*Ansar* from usurping the *Caliphate*. Such a claim inherently means two
things; firstly, that there was no sanction from the Prophet (s) to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Mohibuddin at-Tabari’s ar-Riyadun Nadira, Part 2, Ch. 4, Section
6, p.172, al-Qanduzi’s Yanabi’ul Mawaddah, vol. 1 Ch. 41, p.123, Arjah
al-Matalib of Ubaidillah al-Aamertasturi Ch.4, p..595.  
 **[2]** Mustadrak of al-Hakim, vol. 3 p. 121, Muhibbuddin at-Tabari’s
ar-Riyadun Nadira, Part 2, Ch.4, Section 6, p.116, Ibn Hajar al-Makki’s
as-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, Ch 9, Section 2, p.74, Ahmed bin Hanbal’s Musnad,
vol. 6, p.323, Al-Qanduzi’s Yanabi’ul Mawaddah, Ch.6, p.48, ibn Kathir’s
Tarikh, vol. 7 p. 354, Kanzul Ummal, vol. 6 p.152, 401.  
 **[3]** Kanzul Ummal, vol. 6 p., 156.  
 **[4]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol. 3 p. 97 quoted in The *Caliphate*,
p.46.

elect a leader for the Muslims, and secondly, that the hasty manner in
which the affair was conducted implies that except for the few who were
available on the spot at *Saqifa*, the general body of Muslims had no
knowledge or say in what took place at *Saqifa*. What is sought to be
implied is that there was no prior planning and therefore no malice can
be imputed or attached to the deed.

To the contrary is the view of the Shia, as could be seen from the *Book
of Sulaym bin Qais al-Hilali*, an early companion of the Prophet (s) and
of Imam Ali (a.s). Sulaym narrates that while answering Talha ibn
Ubaidillah, Ali (a.s) took out a parchment and said:“*This is a written
pledge taken by five people in the Ka’aba at the time of the Prophet’s
last Hajj. Those five people had sworn that they would wrest the
Caliphate from me and divide it [circulate it] among themselves, when
the Prophet (s) is killed or he dies*.”**[1]**

About Umar’s appointing of a committee that selected Uthman as the third
caliph, Imam Ali (a.s) asked the second caliph’s son Abdullah ibn
Umar:“*How come I was included by your father in the shura***[2]** *as
one of the prospective candidates for the post of caliph, when he
himself along with Abu Bakr had stated that the Prophet (s) had excluded
me and the Ahlul Bayt from the caliphate*?”

Imam Ali (a.s) then asked Abdullah ibn Umar to tell truthfully what his
father, Umar, had told him just before he died. Abdullah replied, “*My
father said that if these people [the ummah] paid allegiance to that man
from Banu Hashim who has no hair in the middle of his head, he will lead
them to the right and enlightened path and will make them act according
to the Book of Allah and the Traditions of the Holy Prophet*.”

Imam Ali (a.s) asked Abdullah as to what he then told his father Umar.
Abdullah replied that he asked his father what then was holding him back
from making Ali (a.s) as the Caliph. Then Imam Ali (a.s) questioned
Abdullah ibn Umar as to what his father said in reply. Abdullah did not
reply and preferred to keep silent.

Then, Imam Ali (a.s) said, “*Though you may prefer to conceal it, the
Holy Prophet (s) had told me the details of the conversation that took
place between you and your father on that occasion*.”  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kitab Sulaym bin Qais, Eng. Tr. Sayyid Ali Abid & Neelam Rizvi,
Pub:S & N Rizvi, Heston, Houslow, TWS OJE, England [2001] p.108  
 **[2]** The Islamic principle of (rule by) consultation; an Islamic
consultative council.

Abdullah ibn Umar asked, “*When did the Prophet tell you*?” Imam Ali
(a.s) replied, “*The Prophet (s) told me personally at that time [during
his last Hajj] and later in my dream when your father died*.”

Abdullah said, “*What did the Prophet tell you*?” Imam Ali (s) replied,
“*O Abdullah ibn Umar, for the sake of God, will you confirm if what I
say is true*?” Abdullah replied, “*I may not openly confirm it but would
prefer to remain silent if what you say is the truth*.”

Then, Imam Ali (a.s) said:“*Your father told you that what was holding
him back from making me the caliph was the written pledge [sahifa] that
was sworn to by five persons in the Kaaba at the time of the Prophet’s
last Hajj*.” Sulaym bin Qais reports that at that time he found tears
welling in the eyes of Abdullah ibn Umar and his throat was
choking.”**[1]**

Sulaym continues that Salman then said, “*The five persons who had taken
the pledge in the Ka’aba were the same persons who falsely attributed a
hadith to the Prophet (s) saying that the Ahlul Bayt (a.s) had chosen
the ‘aakhira’ [afterlife] in preference to the ‘duniya’ [worldly life],
and that the Prophet (s) did not wish to combine the Nubuwwa
[prophethood] and the caliphate to be in the same house. Those persons
are Abu Bakr, Umar, Abu Ubaida bin al-Jarrah, Salim [slave of Huthaifa]
and Mu’ath bin Jabal.***[2]**

The above report of a prior conspiracy is supported by the following
circumstances:

(1) During the Prophet’s return from the last pilgrimage, the Archangel
Gabriel informed him that in pursuance of a conspiracy some persons had
planned to assassinate him in a valley called al-Aqabah. The Prophet (s)
ordered that none should ascend the valley until he had passed through
it. However, Huthaifa who was holding the reins and leading the
Prophet’s camel, saw some persons with masked faces, standing ahead of
them in the valley. Immediately an alarm was raised and Ammar pursued
them, but the masked persons took to their heels. The Prophet (s) told
Ammar the names of all the masked hypocrites, but he asked him to keep
the secret because the hypocrites pretended to be close companions of
the Prophet (s).**[3]** From that day, Ammar came to be called ‘the
keeper of the Prophet’s secrets’, for he never  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Kitab Sulaym bin Qais, p.110-111.  
 **[2]** Kitab Sulaym bin Qais, Hadith No.19, p.171.  
 **[3]** Madarijun Nubuwwa, Ch.12, p.201, Tafsir al-Kabir, vol. 4 p.
488, Tarikh Rawdhathul Ahbab, Al-Karrar, p.121, Hayatul Qulub, vol.2
p.823.

divulged the names though several prominent companions would frequently
approach and inquire if they were the ones who were named as
‘hypocrites’.

(2) Despite repeated and strict orders of the Holy Prophet (s) asking
all the *Muhajirin* and the *Ansar* including Abu Bakr and Umar to
assemble under the command of Usama to proceed on an expedition, Abu
Bakr and Umar disobeyed and remained in Medina.

(3) Instead of participating in the solemn occasion of the burial
rituals of the Prophet (s), Umar and Abu Bakr hurried to and remained at
the *Saqifa*; Obviously, the only urgency in the matter of the caliphate
was that if any time is given, the ummah including the Ansar would
discuss the competence of each of the candidates in the light of the
facts known to them as well as the various traditions of the Prophet (s)
relating to the caliphate and would have certainly chosen Imam Ali (s)
as the caliph, in keeping with the desire and directions of the Prophet
(s), so often proclaimed in his life. The imagined urgency is belied by
the fact that after Umar’s death, for three days there was no *Caliph*,
for the committee appointed by him could not arrive at a conclusion till
three days later.

(4) Having met the Ansar at *Saqifa*, the three men of Quraysh could
have convinced them to postpone the matter of succession at least until
the completion of the burial rites of the Prophet (s).

(5) All the persons who had taken the pledge in the Ka’aba were the only
persons who presented and relied upon a fabricated tradition which
misled the Muslims into believing that the *Ahlul Bayt*, the chief of
whom was Ali (s), had renounced their share in worldly matters, more
particularly the claim to the *Caliphate*, in preference to the life of
the hereafter and that the Prophet (s) had declared that spiritual
leadership and temporal leadership should not remain in the same house.
