Chapter 3: The Antagonists
==========================

Before the advent of Islam, *Mecca* was an international trade center
populated by Jews, Christians, Idol worshippers, atheists, and a motley
crowd professing several other philosophies and religions. When the
Prophet (S) propagated the concept and ideology of Islam, the immediate
opposition was to the concept of One Unique God. Barring atheists, most
*Meccans* were willing to accept Muhammad (S) as the Messenger or
Representative of God or even as an incarnation of God, for they had
inherited such beliefs from their ancestors. What they were unable to
digest were the concepts of One Unique God, a life after death, and
accountability for one’s deeds in an eternal afterlife.[^1]

Until the advent of Islam, most of the Arabs were idolaters, having a
pantheon of three hundred and sixty deities. They could not comprehend
the Islamic philosophy of One Unique God. They assumed that by teaching
a new philosophy the Prophet (S) was obliquely hankering after worldly
power and glory. They offered to make him their leader with as much
wealth as he wished in addition to proposals of arranging his marriage
with the most beautiful girl of his choice, provided he gave up his
Mission. The Prophet (S) refused, saying, “*Even if you put the sun in
my right hand and the moon in my left hand, I will not give up the
Mission to which I am commanded*.”[^2] Then the *Meccans* enforced a
social boycott and later put him to mental and physical torture.

Justice Murtaza Hussain in the footnote to his English translation of
Ali Naqi’s book, ‘The History of Islam’ writes, “*The Prophet’s message
is Islam - submission to the Will of God. Its distinctive features are
two:[1] A harmonious equilibrium between the temporal and spiritual [the
body and soul], permitting a full enjoyment of all the good that God has
created [Qur’an 7:32], enjoining at the same time on everybody duties
towards God, such as worship, fasting, charity… etc. Islam was to be the
religion of the masses and not merely of the elite. [2] A universality
of the call - all the believers becoming brothers and equals without any
distinction of class or race or language. ‘The only superiority which
Islam recognizes is a personal one, based on greater fear of God and
greater piety*’ [Qur’an 49:13].” [^3]

Among the *Meccans*, it was the Banu[^4] Umayya (the Umayyads) who bore
utmost personal enmity against the Prophet (S), followed by the Banu
al-Mughira, and the Banu Makhzum.[^5] Maulana Shibli, a Sunni scholar
writes, “*The Prophethood of Muhammad (S) was considered by the family
of Bani Umayya as the victory of its opponents, Bani Hashim, and on that
account they opposed the Prophet (S) to the maximum*.” [^6]

Since the Prophet (S) first preached Islam to the Arabs, they were the
first to take a leading part in opposing him and his Message - Islam.
*Quraish,* the Prophet’s own tribesmen, took active part in his
persecution as they found that Islam was contrary not only to their
pagan beliefs but also that it put restrictions upon their vagrant ways
of life.

Migration
---------

The Prophet (S) had, during the course of about forty years of his life
in *Mecca*, earned the reputation, in the entire community of the
*Meccans* without exception, of being truthful *(Sadiq*), honest and
trustworthy *(Amin).* In spite of their opposition to his Message, the
Prophet (S) was considered the most trustworthy. As a result, they
entrusted not only their valuables but also their affairs to the Prophet
(S). The fact that the Meccans offered to give unlimited resources and
offered to get him married to the wealthiest and most beautiful girl of
his choice[^7] shows that, for the *Meccans,* the Prophet (S) was a
noble and venerable person. However, what the *Meccans* abhorred was not
the Messengership of Prophet Muhammad (S), but the Message he
propagated.

The Prophet (S) along with those who had accepted Islam endured severe
torture, for over ten years, at the hands of the infidels of *Mecca*.
During this period, the persecution and hardened attitude of the
*Meccans*, made it difficult to peacefully spread Islam. The Prophet (S)
then received the Divine Commandment directing that the oppressed
Muslims should migrate to safer places.[^8] Thereupon, some Muslims
migrated to Abyssinia. According to Baqir al Majlisi, the number of
those who migrated at that time, was either seventy-two or eighty-two
men besides women and children.[^9] The pious and peaceful way of
Islamic life practiced by the Migrants not only endeared them to the
Abyssinians but also brought quite a few converts. This was the first
migration in Islam. A group of infidels from *Mecca* met the Abyssinian
King and tried to persuade him to hand over the migrants. However,
Ja'far, the Prophet’s cousin, put forth a convincing argument against
deportation, which earned the appreciation of the King.[^10] Negus (the
king of Abyssinia) refused to hand over the Muslims to the *Meccans*.
The infidels returned disappointed. However, since Abyssinia was far
away, the migration did not cause much concern to the infidels of
*Mecca*.

When one is faced with oppression, the Qur’an makes migration obligatory
upon man. The Qur’an reveals, “*Unto those whom the angels cause to die,
having been unjust to themselves, the angels will ask:‘In what state
were you (on earth) ?’ They will reply, ‘We were oppressed in our land’.
The angels will say, ‘Was not the earth of Allah spacious enough for you
to find refuge [from oppression] ?’ Hell shall be their home; an evil
refuge. Excepted are those such as infirm men, helpless women, and
children who have neither the strength nor the means to escape. [Such
are] Those [whom] Allah may pardon; He is Ever Pardoning,
Forgiving*.”[^11]

Another verse assures, “*Those that have embraced the faith and migrated
from their homes and fought for the cause of Allah with their wealth and
their persons are held in high esteem by Allah. They are the triumphant
ones. Their Lord has promised them joy and mercy, and gardens of eternal
bliss where they shall dwell forever*.”[^12]

Regarding the *Muhajireen* (migrants) and the *Ansar* (helpers), the
Qur’an reveals, “*Those that have embraced the faith and migrated from
their homes and fought for the cause of Allah and those that have
sheltered them and helped them – they are the true believers. They shall
receive Mercy and a generous provision*.”[^13]

About those who die during migration the Qur’an reveals:“*He who
migrates from his homeland for the sake of Allah and His Prophet (S),
and then encounters death, has his assured reward with Allah. Allah is
most Forgiving and Merciful*.”[^14]

In yet another place the Qur’an reveals:“*To those who migrated after
they had been persecuted and were patient in their strife, your Lord is
surely Forgiving and Merciful*.”[^15]

Thus, as a first step to protect humankind against oppression, migration
is made obligatory, with a Divine promise of safety and abundance in
this life and an assured reward in the life to come.

The people of Medina were literate and had already heard from their
Jewish and Christian friends about the awaited Redeemer
/Savior/Comforter. When news about the Holy Prophet’s unique Message
reached them, they sought and met the Prophet (S) and were convinced
that he was the awaited Redeemer. Not only did they accept Islam, but
they also pledged their support to any Muslim who wished to migrate to
Medina. The Muslims from Mecca who migrated to Medina are called the
*Muhajireen* and the Muslims of Medina who pledged their support to the
migrants are called the *Ansar*. The Prophet (S) directed the suffering
Muslims to migrate to Medina. Soon, only a few Muslims were left in
Mecca.

The infidels of Mecca soon realized that, not yielding to their
pressures, the Prophet (S) was already in the process of establishing a
center away from Mecca, conducive to the successful propagation of his
Mission. They also noticed that several Muslims had already migrated to
Medina. Since the Holy Prophet’s Mission was anathema to them, the
infidels of Mecca collectively hatched a conspiracy to physically
eliminate him and thus bring an end to his Mission. They were further
emboldened by the sad demise of the Prophet’s guardian, guide, and
paternal uncle Abu Talib (a.s.), who was the only obstacle in their way
of harming the Prophet (S). Within three days of Abu Talib’s demise, the
Prophet (S) suffered another serious blow in the sad demise of his wife
Khadija (a.s.).[^16] The Prophet (S) declared the year as ‘The Year of
Mourning’. The Prophet (S) received the revelation about the plot
hatched by the infidels[^17] and the Divine Command to migrate. He
appointed Imam Ali (a.s.) as his vicegerent and deputy, handed over all
the articles entrusted to him by the *Meccans*, and instructed him to
sleep in his place and in the morning to discharge his trust. The
infidels surrounded the Prophet’s house during night and assumed that it
was the Prophet (S) who was sleeping. In the morning, they were
surprised to find Imam Ali (a.s.) in the bed instead of the Prophet
(S).[^18]

One of the bodily miracles of the Prophet (S) was that when he walked on
soft soil, no footprints were left, while on hard stones his footprints
appeared prominently. On his way, the Prophet (S) did not leave any
footprints. Thus, the infidels could not have traced the route taken by
the Prophet (S). However, Abu Bakr who accompanied the Prophet (S) left
his footprints. The Arabs, who were expert trackers, traced the single
track of Abu Bakr’s footprints to the mouth of a deserted cave. The
attempts of the infidels to apprehend the Prophet (S) would have
succeeded, but for Divine intervention in which, miraculously, the cave
came to be covered with thick cobwebs and a pair of doves sat hatching
their eggs in their nest.

There is a general misconception that the plot to kill Muhammad (S) was
the cause for his migration. This implies that the Prophet (S) was more
concerned with his personal safety than that of his congregation, which
is a slur on the Prophet (S). As a result of this misconception, western
writers term the Holy Prophet’s migration as ‘Muhammad’s **flight** to
Medina’. Some writers use the words ‘Muhammad’s ***escape*** to Medina’.

The term ‘*hijra*’, which is used in the Qur’an, is mistranslated as
‘flight’ or ‘escape’. The Arabic word for ‘flight’ or ‘escape’ is
‘*firar*’ and not ‘*hijra*’. The misinterpretation is wanton and
mischievous. The implication in the mistranslation is that, fearing for
his life the Prophet (S) fled to Medina. If the Prophet (S) were to
leave Mecca for his personal safety, he should have been the first to
migrate. On the other hand, the Prophet (S) was one of the last persons
to leave Mecca, leaving behind Imam Ali (a.s.) and the members of his
(the Prophet) family to follow him. By that time, on the instructions of
the Prophet (S), all Muslims had already migrated to Medina or at least
had left Mecca on their way to Medina.

Every prophet (S) faced with persecution migrated. In fact, the whole
community along with Moses (a.s.) migrated. The large-scale migration is
called exodus. Historical evidence regarding the Prophet’s *Hijra*
(migration), completely disproves the notion that it was an impulsive
act to save his life. The migration, as noted earlier, was planned long
before the Prophet (S) himself migrated to Medina. In fact, it was Imam
Ali (a.s.) and the family members of the Prophet (S) who were the last
to migrate. From this, it is obvious that the Prophet (S) did not
migrate for fear of his life, but it was a planned migration under
Divine Command that was carried out systematically over a long period of
time.[^19] Therefore, it is not an impulsive action on the part of the
Prophet (S), for the Prophet (S), of his own accord, does not even
speak, let alone act out of his personal desire [Qur’an 53:3 ].

Under the Divine Command, the Prophet (S) was among the last to migrate
to Medina. Therefore, it is evident that the plot of the infidels to
assassinate the Prophet (S) was the result of their realization that
most Muslims had already migrated and the Prophet (S) himself was about
to do so. To say that the Prophet (S) migrated because of the plot of
the infidels of Mecca to kill him, is absolutely fallacious and a
historical subversion of facts, introduced by later historians under the
rule of *Banu Umayya*, *Banu Abbas,* and *Banu Fatima*. The falsehood is
carried on till date, due to ignorance and slavish following of earlier
misguided historians.

During that time, the Jewish tribes of *Bani Quraydhah, Bani
an-Nadheer,* and *Bani Qaynuqa’* in addition to some smaller ones,
formed part of the population of Medina. They were aware that their
sacred scriptures foretold the coming of the Comforter-Prophet. However,
as they feared that their power would be lost or at least minimized,
they chose not to openly accept Muhammad (S) as the awaited Prophet.
Their skills at astrology warned them that the new religion would soon
reach great heights. Therefore, the Jewish tribes of Medina preferred to
enter into a peace treaty with the Prophet (S). The terms of the treaty
were reduced into writing and many copies of the document were
distributed between the parties.

According to the early Shia historian Ali bin Ibrahim bin Hashim, under
the treaty it was mutually agreed that firstly, in the event of an
attack by people from outside Medina, the Jews would not support the
outsiders and secondly within Medina the Jews and Muslim would not
interfere with the affairs of each other. Other historians state that
there were as many as thirty-five covenants in the treaty. The infidels
of Mecca learnt of the treaty and considered it a defeat for them and a
great victory for Muslims. At Medina, Islam spread quickly. The Prophet
(S) proclaimed a bond of brotherhood between Muslims, who formed a
well-knit fraternity, pursuing a peaceful and God-fearing life.

The peace-treaty between Muslims and the Jews of Medina created an
impotent rage among the infidels of Mecca. Historians unanimously record
that Yazid’s grandfather Abu Sufyan, who was the chief among *Banu
Umayya*, not being content with torturing Muslims at Mecca, consistently
incited the people of Mecca to wage war against the Prophet (S). He was
at the head of every skirmish and battle that the Prophet (S) had to
face repeatedly. As an antagonist of Islam, Abu Sufyan commanded the
infidels in the battle of Badr, Uhud, al-Khandaq, and other smaller
confrontations like the one at Hudaibiya…etc., at regular intervals.

Abu Sufyan incited the Jews of Medina into flouting the peace treaty. He
incited the Jews to attack Muslims from within Medina, while Abu Sufyan
himself with his army planned to attack the Muslims from outside Medina.
The Prophet (S) through Divine Revelations learnt about the conspiracy
and warned the Jews, a majority of whom voluntarily left Medina and went
to their ancestral forts cumulatively known as *Khaibar*. Those Jews who
chose to remain in Medina initially desisted from helping Abu Sufyan,
but later attacked the Muslims on the incitement of Abu Sufyan.

In subsequent wars, the womenfolk of the infidels of Mecca were barbaric
and equally inimical towards the Prophet (S) and the philosophy of
Islam. The animosity and barbarism of Abu Sufyan and his family is
recorded in History when Abu Sufiyan’s wife and Mu’awiya’s mother Hind,
plucked out and chewed the raw liver of the Prophet’s uncle, the martyr
Hamza in the battlefield of Uhud.[^20] Abu Sufyan’s incitement of the
Jews had its effect and led to the famous battle of *Khaibar*. In all
the battles, Imam Ali (a.s.) stood as the sole protector, shielding
against the onslaught of the enemy and defending Islam and on the person
of the Prophet (S).

Having tasted defeat and unable to stop the steady progress of Islam,
the infidels of Mecca tried to prevent the Muslims from performing their
annual pilgrimage at Mecca. Even from ancient times, bloodshed at the
precinct of Mecca was prohibited. The Muslims proceeded towards Mecca to
perform *the Haj*. They did not carry any weapons, but had about seven
hundred camels for sacrifice. The Muslims were purely motivated by
religious zeal and had no thought whatsoever of any war.

Seeing the Muslims coming from Medina in large numbers, Abu Sufyan
misled the infidels of Mecca to assume that war was imminent. They sent
Khalid bin al-Waleed with a huge army, to intercept the Muslims. When
al-Waleed’s army appeared, Muslims felt offended and being fresh from
various victories and impelled by religious fervor, they wanted to fight
al-Waleed’s army. The Prophet (S) restrained them and wanted a peaceful
settlement. Several people, like Umar, owing to their shortsightedness
and lack of wisdom, doubted the Prophet’s wisdom in agreeing to a
peaceful settlement in the *Treaty of Hudaibiya*.

Reaching *Hudaibiya,* the Prophet (S) sent his emissary to impress upon
the infidels that he and his companions only wished to perform the Hajj
and did not intend to fight. Thereupon, the Meccans sent Suhail bin Amr
as their representative. Though he could have easily captured Mecca at
that time, the Prophet (S) preferred a peaceful solution and gave
several concessions in the well-known terms of the treaty of
*Hudaibiya*, between the Muslims and the Meccans, which was written
down.

In the treaty, it was agreed that the Muslims should return back to
Medina without performing the *Hajj* that year, and that from the next
year onwards the infidels would vacate Mecca for three days and allow
Muslims to perform the *Ha*jj peacefully. Another term of the treaty was
that those Muslims, who wished, should be allowed to live peacefully in
Mecca, without any interference from the non-Muslims.

In Mecca, there were two tribes; the *Bani Khuza’ah* and the *Bani
Bakr*, who were always at loggerheads with each other. The tribe of
*Khuza’ah* chose to support the Prophet (S) and the tribe of *Bani Bakr*
supported the infidels of Mecca. The Prophet (S) arranged for a ‘no war’
pact between the *Bani Khuza’ah* and *Bani Bakr*. In view of this, the
*Bani Khuza’ah* disarmed themselves. On the other hand, Abu Sufyan
incited and provided arms and men to the tribe of *Bani Bakr* and
incited them to take advantage, attack, and kill the unarmed men of
*Bani Khuza’ah*. This was against the ancient pre-Islamic tradition that
there should be no bloodshed within the precinct of the Ka’aba.

Under Abu Sufyan’s evil advice and active support, *the Bani Bakr*
attacked and killed some unarmed men belonging to the tribe of the *Bani
Khuza’ah* when they were performing their religious act of
circumambulating, within the precincts of the sacred *Kaaba*. The
infidels of Mecca, in helping *Bani Bakr,* committed a flagrant
violation of an important covenant of the treaty of *Hudaibiya*.

Amr bin Salim of the *Bani Khuzza*, escaped the massacre and reported
the incident to the Prophet (S). The Prophet (S) did not rush to declare
war, though he had a large following of men anxious to avenge the
sacrilege. Instead, in order to find an amicable solution, he wrote to
the infidels of Mecca offering two alternatives, namely, [1] to pay
compensation for those who were killed by *Bani Bakr*, and stop helping
*Bani Bakr*, or [2] to proclaim that the Meccans themselves have chosen
to rescind and abandon the truce of *Hudaibiya* and thus declare a state
of war.

It is said that, later, Abu Sufyan and Khalid bin al-Waleed and some
others regretted their act of helping the *Bani Bakr* with arms and men.
Such regrets are akin to the regret expressed by the drowning Pharaoh
who said, “*Now I believe in the God of Aaron and Moses*.” He received
the reply:“What *now, at this hour?*”[^21] However, having committed the
act, the *Meccans* were loath to acknowledge their shameful deed. They
chose the second alternative and proclaimed that they had rescinded the
terms of the treaty of *Hudaibiya*.

However, Abu Sufyan secretly sought to get the treaty renewed by going
to Medina, where his daughter Umm Habiba, married to the Prophet (S) was
living. He went with the great expectation that his daughter, out of
love for her father, will not only accommodate him but also recommend
him favorably to the Prophet (S). Reaching the Prophet’s house, he was
about to sit on the rug of the Prophet (S), when Umm Habiba, quickly
snatched away the rug, telling her father, contemptuously, that being an
infidel, Abu Sufyan was unclean[^22] and therefore unfit to sit on the
Prophet’s rug. Disheartened, Abu Sufyan returned to Mecca and informed
its inhabitants that a military conflict with the Muslims was then
inevitable and that they should immediately prepare to wage war against
the Muslims.

Since the infidels of Mecca had rescinded the truce of Hudaybia and
committed acts of aggression in killing the innocent Bani Khuza’ah,
there was no option for the Muslims except to face the aggressors. Any
inaction on the part of the Prophet (S) would have been construed as an
infirmity.

When the Muslims reached and camped outside Mecca, Abu Sufyan with some
of his companions went to reconnoiter the Muslim army. It was at that
time, according to the Sunni source Sahih of al-Bukari, that Abu Sufyan
and his companions were arrested by the Muslim troops and produced
before the Prophet (S). Abu Sufyan, mortally scared for his life,
offered to accept Islam by testifying that there is no God but Allah. He
did not acknowledge Muhammad (S) as the Prophet (S) of God. Abbas, the
Prophet’s uncle, told Abu Sufyan that unless he also acknowledged the
Prophethood of Muhammad (S), the acceptance of the faith will be
incomplete and that the Muslims will surely kill Abu Sufyan.[^23] Very
reluctantly and only outwardly to save his skin, Abu Sufyan acknowledged
Muhammad (S) as the prophet of God.

Abu Sufyan requested Abbas to show him the strength of the Muslim army.
The words uttered by Abu Sufyan, on seeing the army, spoke eloquently
about the quality of his Islam. The sight of such a large and devoted
gathering, brought visions of presiding over a vast kingdom. Abu Sufyan
exclaimed, “Indeed, my cousin has built up enormous military power!” To
this, Abbas replied, “What you see is not a king’s army, for Muhammad
(S) is not a king but the Messenger of God. It is the Message and
Prophethood of Muhammad (S) which has attracted such huge numbers of
sincere followers.” Abu Sufyan murmured, “I do not care by what name you
call it -Kingship or Prophethood. The sight of such a grand army is
indeed very pleasing.”[^24] He was indeed impressed by the military
strength and craved for the chance of usurping power, if not by himself
immediately, at least later by his progeny.

However, his subsequent conduct, throughout his life, is proof that Abu
Sufyan continued to be the infidel and trouble-shooter that he really
was, and that he never cared for Islamic tenets of a peaceful and pious
life. Long after he ‘embraced Islam’, Abu Sufyan on seeing the Muslims
defeated and running helter skelter, gleefully cried, “*At last the
spell of magic cast by Muhammad has waned. The fleeing Muslims will not
stop till they reach the sea*.”

Much is said and written about Abu Sufyan and his ilk of accepting
Islam. The actual word used by the Prophet (S) while referring to them,
is recorded in history. The Prophet (S) used the Arabic word ‘*Tulaqa*’
which means ‘emancipated’ or ‘freed from bondage’ and is used
exclusively to refer to the enemy who has capitulated and begged to be
spared in life.

Imam Ali (a.s.), an eminent and truthful eyewitness to the character of
such people, said:“*They did not accept Islam. They had simply
capitulated [istaslama] before Islam, keeping their infidelity in their
hearts*.” [^25] ‘Islam’ is defined as surrender of one’s self before
God.[^26] ‘*Istislam*’ means capitulation in defeat, before men. The
Prophet (S), faced with the ostensible declaration of faith by Abu
Sufyan, did not immediately brand him a hypocrite, because the Prophet’s
companions were incapable of understanding the real but hidden intent of
Abu Sufyan.[^27] The Qur’an also commands that such people should be
left free to do their own deeds.[^28]

When his companions prevailed upon him to reveal the names of the
hypocrites, so that they may be killed, the Prophet (S) said:“*Don’t
they claim to have accepted Islam? How can you kill them as long as they
claim to be Muslims? Will not posterity blame us saying that they
invited people towards Islam and when they accepted Islam, he got them
killed!*” The Prophet (S) left Abu Sufyan to justify the truthfulness of
his declaration of faith by his deeds. Abu Sufyan himself, by his
conduct proved that though ostensibly a Muslim, he was indeed a
hypocrite.

Some people may argue that the use of the word ‘*Tulaqa*’ was used by
the Prophet (S) only after he entered Mecca and that Abu Sufyan had
become a Muslim shortly before that time and therefore the word does not
apply to him. This will be a fallacious argument because, firstly, all
Meccans who were inimical to the Prophet (S), including Abu Sofia, were
known as the *Tulaqa*; Secondly Imam Ali (S) wrote to Mu’awiya, who was
in fact a second generation Muslim, being the son of Abu Sufyan:“*How
can one who is a ‘Taleeq’ and the offspring of another ‘Taleeq’ claim
superiority over a Muhajir*?”

The Immaculate Fatima (a.s.) used the same epithet ‘*Taleeq’* in her
arguments with Abu Bakr over Fadak. The Immaculate Fatima’s daughter
Zainab (a.s.) addressed Yazid in the same words when Yazid was sitting
on his throne in his palace at Damascus.[^29] Neither Abu Sufyan and his
progeny nor anyone in the annals of history ever dared to challenge the
assertion that Abu Sufyan was a *Taleeq*, Mu’awiya was the son of a
*Taleeq*, and Yazid was the grandson of a *Taleeq*. Later historians
favorable to *the Banu Umayya* never made any effort to contest or
altogether remove the appendage ‘*Tulaqa*’ while referring to Abu Sufyan
and his progeny. That no such effort was ever made proves the meaning
and authenticity of Abu Sufyan and his children being the *Tulaqa*.
When, on the death of Uthman, Mu’awiya sent Abu Huraira and Abu ad-Darda
to convey the message that Imam Ali (a.s.) should withdraw from the
*Caliphate,* they met Abdurrahman bin Ghanam on the way. On hearing
about their mission, Abdurrahman bin Ghanam told Abu Huraira and Abu
ad-Darda:“*What does Mu’awiya have to do with giving advice in the
matter* [of *Caliphate*] ? *Mu’awiya is one among the Tulaqa who have no
right to become the caliph. Secondly, Mu’awiya and his father were the
chiefs of the infidels who fought in the battle of Ahzab against the
Prophet (S).*”

We shall see, later, that when Abu Bakr became caliph, Abu Sufyan
hypocritically suggested that Imam Ali (a.s.) should stake his claim to
the *Caliphate*. Abu Sufyan disclosed his hidden desire when he told the
third caliph:*“Now, that the Caliphate has fallen into our [the
Umayyads] hands, you should play around with it, toss it around like a
ball and perpetuate it in the hands of the Umayyads*.” [^30]

Regarding Mu’awiya, an authentic Sunni source, Musnad of Imam Ahmed bin
Hanbal records the following incident related by Obeidillah Bin
Buraida:“*My father and myself went to Mu’awiya. We sat on a carpet. The
table was laid. We shared a meal. Then intoxicants were brought in.
Mu’awiya quaffed a cup and presented another to my father who refused
saying, ‘Ever since the time the Prophet (S) prohibited the use of
liquor, I have never tasted it.’ Upon this, Mu’awiya replied, ‘Nothing
pleases me more than wine, milk and boisterous company of revelers*.”

Another reputed Sunni author, Jalaluddin as-Suyooti writes, “*It was
Mu’awiya who was the first to ride on his steed between Safa and Marwa
[which is prohibited in Islam] ; who drank Nabeez [liquor] ; ate soil
and made others eat it. When he sat on the Holy Prophet’s pulpit and
demanded fealty for his son Yazid, Aa’isha put out her head from her
room and cried, ‘Stop Mu’awiya! Stop. Did the first two Caliphs appoint
their sons as successors?’ ‘No’ replied Mu’awiya. Aa’isha asked, ‘Then
whom do you follow in this audacious step’*.”

Regarding Abu Sufyan, Mu’awiya, and his son Yazid, their oft-repeated
couplet, recorded by both Sunni and Shia authentic sources, declares,
“*No Archangel ever appeared before Muhammad (S) nor was anything
revealed. It is all a power-game played by the Banu Hashim*.”

Yazid used to play with and make fun of Qur’anic verses. Once he quoted
the first part of the verse beginning with ‘So, woe unto worshippers’,
without completing it by reciting the remaining part–‘who are heedless
of their prayer’. Then he added ‘Look! Allah curses the worshippers and
not the drunkards’. We have cited these examples to show the nature and
faith of Abu Sufyan and his progeny who grabbed the reins of power to
create a violently aggressive empire in place of Islam–the religion of
universal peace.

[^1]: Qur’an, 6:29, 8:31…

[^2]: Abul Fida’s Qasasul Ambiya, p. 391.

[^3]: History of Islam, by S. Ali Naqi Naqvi, Printed by Imamia Mission,
[Hind] Aligarh, Translator’s Footnote No. 5 at p. 79.

[^4]: Banu or Bani means ‘the family or the tribe of’.

[^5]: As-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, p. 144, quoted in History of Islam.

[^6]: Seeratun Nabi, Vol. I p. 158 quoted in History of Islam, p. 81.

[^7]: Al-Majlisi’s Hayatul Quloob, 186.

[^8]: Qur’an, 2:218, 3:195, 4:97-100, 8:74, 9:20-22.

[^9]: Hayatul Quloob, Eng. Tr. By Rev. James L. Merrick; Ch. 11 P. 208.

[^10]: Abul Fida’s Qasasul Ambiya, p. 393.

[^11]: Qur’an, 4:97-99.

[^12]: Qur’an, 4:100.

[^13]: Qur’an, 8:74.

[^14]: Qur’an, 9:20-22.

[^15]: Qur’an, 16:110.

[^16]: Tarikhul A’immah, P. 106.

[^17]: Qur’an, 8:30, Abdullah al-Khunayzi’s ‘Abu Talib, Mo’min Quraish’,
p. 170.

[^18]: Al-Majlisi’s Hayatul Quloob, 225-226.

[^19]: Qur’an, 2:218, 3:195, 4:97-100, 8:74, 9:20-22.

[^20]: Tarikh at-Tabari, vol. 3, p. 22-23, Seeratun Nabi, vol. 1 p. 273,
al-Istee’ab, vol. 2, p. 286.

[^21]: Qur’an, Yunus 10:90- 92.

[^22]: Qur’an, 9:95-96, Abul Fida’s Qasasul Ambiya, p. 410, Majlisi’s
Hayatul Quloob, 289.

[^23]: Al-Majlisi’s Hayatul Quloob, 290.

[^24]: Al-Majlisi’s Hayatul Quloob, 291.

[^25]: Nahjul Balagha

[^26]: Qur’an, 2:208, ‘Al Islam Huwa Taslim’ Imam Ali in Nahjul Balagha.

[^27]: Qur’an, 2:204.

[^28]: Qur’an, 9:95-96.

[^29]: Seerat Fatimat az-Zehra, by Justice Sultan Mirza, p. 281.

[^30]: Nuqooshe Ismat.


