A Synopsis of Surah Hujurat
===========================

*Note: Chapters of Qur’an are called ‘Surah’. Hujurat means ‘rooms’ or
‘cha mbers’*

1) Personality of the Last Prophet
----------------------------------

The axis of society, which is the center of gravity for its
preservation, must be respected more than anything because the
preservation of this personality will be the basis of the survival and
supremacy of that society. What personality can ever be higher and which
axis weightier than the last Prophet, Muhammad, and which society can
ever be more stable and higher than the Muslim society?

Besides, it is an essential condition of Faith in God and knowing of His
Messenger that due respect and honor should always be given to His
Messenger.

It is here that, in the first part of this holy Surah, Almighty God,
addressing the Faithful, commands that it is absolutely necessary for
Muslims to restrain themselves from going ahead of God and His
Messenger. He asks them to control themselves from raising their voice
above the voice of the Holy Prophet and from calling him as they call
one another. Rather, they must observe courtesy; that they should wait
till the Holy Prophet comes out of his house and that only thereafter,
should they submit their need to him. They should never call him as they
call others.

2) Regret in Believing in the Word of a Transgressor
----------------------------------------------------

The basis of many quarrels and vengeance is the acceptance of the false
talks of mischievous people who, because of their selfishness, make two
or more people one another’s deadly enemies and some also consider this
evil deed enjoyable. Simple-minded people too, without making inquiries,
following their sentiments possibly accept their word. This results in
disputes, quarrels and even massacres and the enmity lasts for a very
long time. Though, sometimes the flames come down but after some time
they again rise up as we can see in history on several occasions. What
should be done, however, is that we must follow the guidance of the Holy
Qur’an and must not accept the word of an impious person and should
prevent the said bloodshed and restlessness.

Some others either because of sentiments or personal interests try to
drag others also by instigating them for fanning the fire of differences
and disputes.

In the second part of this holy Surah, a guidance has been given that
your duty, O Muslims! Is obedience of orders, not issuing orders! In
brief, if you choose obedience to God and His Messenger it would be
better both for your worldly life and your eternal life in the
Hereafter.

3) Reconciliation between Muslims
---------------------------------

The law of Islam considers its followers brothers of one another and
says that all are like the leaves of a single tree and limbs of a single
body. If one person is in trouble, others cannot remain unconcerned.
Therefore, if there occurs any ill will or trouble between two or more
persons; the duty of all others is well wishing, admonition and good
advice; and finally, if because for any reason, it is not remedied,
then, as an inevitable measure, for preventing furtherance of final
trouble, force should be applied against one who is lying, and before
things get worsened, stamp out the mischief and end the trouble. Of
course justice, piety, divine aspect and spiritualism should be kept in
mind, both in war and peace. These are the itineraries contained in the
third part of this holy Surah.

4) Find and Remove the Roots of differences
-------------------------------------------

For preserving amity in Muslim society, it is necessary that, first, the
elements or factors of disintegration should be found and then they
should be removed. The main factors that tear the hearts apart are
having bad opinion or misunderstanding about one another and thereafter,
in following and spying one another and then making a mockery of one
another and calling by insulting titles to tease one another and even
back biting one another and showing oneself higher than the other by way
of ego and pride. If these evils are found out and eliminated there will
be no more quarrels between Muslims and the tree of Islam will bear
desired fruits, happiness for all.

In order to stop such things, the Holy Qur’an admonishes us all that one
must never make a mockery of others because; it is quite possible that
the one whom you are mocking may be better than you. So do not call one
another names. The Holy Qur’an regards spying on others and forming bad
opinion about others a sin. It equates backbiting with eating carrion.

From preventing one from pride and ego, the Holy Qur’an says that the
origin of creation of all is one and the same. They are all born of a
father and a mother, and there is no distinction for one over another
from this aspect. It says that all natural differences (like color,
languages etc) are for recognition, not for self-glorification.

Such noteworthy subjects form the fourth part of this holy Surah.

5) Apparent Islam and inward Faith
----------------------------------

The reality of Islam and Faith has become confusing for a number of
people. The fact is that there is a lot of difference between Islam and
Faith. The holy religion of Islam, due to expedience, has based its
itineraries and planning on cleanliness, matrimony, inheritance etc on
verbal utterance with regard to Oneness of God and the Prophethood of
the last Prophet, Muhammad. But what is Faith?

It is to cling to this belief and also to believe that one is bound to
obey the Commands of God and orders of the Holy Prophet. At several
places in the Holy Qur’an, love of God and His fear and hope from and
trust in Him has been considered the essentials of Faith. In this holy
Surah also, a clear distinction between Islam and Faith has been shown.
It says that Faithful are those who are fully devoted to God and His
Messenger, that is, they are solely connected with Allah and His Prophet
and who are not inclined towards this material world.

As a result, they have no kind of doubt or hesitation and so they offer
sacrifices with their lives and their wealth in the path of Allah and in
struggle in His cause. This is because they have found out the highest
of aims and the best of ideologies. They know that everything is
transient and perishable except Only One God. So they sacrifice the
transient for the eternal.

Admonition regarding these matters forms the subject matter of the fifth
part of this holy Surah.

6) Faith is God’s Bounty
------------------------

Some unwise people during the initial days of Islam and also in other
periods thought that they have earned some rights by adopting Islam.
They thought that they have accomplished something extraordinary. So
they used to show to the Holy Prophet that they had done a favor to him
by becoming Muslims. The Holy Qur’an wants to make them understand that
verbal Islam has no spiritual value; that the real value is for the
Faith in heart which becomes manifest through words and deeds. It keeps
one away from sin and spurs towards every good; that this also is a
grant from the Lord Who adds good to everyone who has inclined to it. In
fact, by this kindness, God has favored the faithful. God knows who is
worthy of such a bounty.

This matter also forms the subject of the sixth and the last part of
this holy Surah.  
 Thus, this chapter shows the path of the good in this world and in the
Hereafter to Muslim as well as the Muslim society. We explain here under
six titles.

Simple explanation for common understanding
-------------------------------------------

Among the great bounties granted by God to Ayatullah Dastghaib, is the
bounty of eloquence whereby he, in a greater part of his life, prepared
the commentary of Qur’an in a simple- to-understand style for common
people. He explained difficult matters with common parables and stories.

Commentary of the Surah Hujurat is an example of his attractive and
unparalleled style of explanation. Like his other books it has been and
is being published in various modes and in attractive forms again and
again. This book will also be welcomed by all, God willing.

This book is a collection of his sermons of the holy month of Ramadhan
1396 Hijri coinciding with 1355 (Solar era). Hasan Sadaqat had very
painstakingly reproduced it from audiotapes. This transcribed edition
was then revised and printed. Mr. Sadaqat’s efforts are indeed worth
appreciation and thanks.

Of course, care has been taken to ensure that the style of speaking and
addressing, which is most popular today remains as it was.

By the way, the sermon of the fourth day of Ramadhan could not be
obtained for which we are extremely sorry. It is our earnest request to
those brothers who had recorded it to hand it over in the library of the
Shiraz Jama Masjid so that it can be incorporated in the next edition.

Finally I feel it my duty to thank the manager and the workers of the
well-equipped and unparalleled Mustafavi Press who extended every
co-operation in this religious service and to seek the best of rewards
for them from God in both this world and the Hereafter.

**Shiraz,  
 04/04/1357 (HS)/15th** **Shaban1398 (HQ)  
 (Birth Date of Imam Mahdi a.t.f.s.)  
 Sayyid Muhammad Hashim Dastghaib**


