Part 2
======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ اللَّهِ
وَرَسُولِهِ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ. يَا
أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَرْفَعُوا أَصْوَاتَكُمْ فَوْقَ صَوْتِ
النَّبِيِّ وَلَا تَجْهَرُوا لَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ كَجَهْرِ بَعْضِكُمْ
لِبَعْضٍ أَنْ تَحْبَطَ أَعْمَالُكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ لَا تَشْعُرُونَ. إِنَّ
الَّذِينَ يَغُضُّونَ أَصْوَاتَهُمْ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ أُوْلَئِكَ
الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوَى لَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةٌ
وَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe! Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His
Apostle, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is
Hearing, Knowing. O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the
voice of the Prophet, and do not speak loud to him as you speak loud to
one another, lest your deeds became null while you do not perceive.
Surely those who lower their voices before Allah’s Apostle are they
whose hearts Allah has tested for guarding (against evil); they shall
have forgiveness and a great reward. (49:1-3)”***

Observance of fast and recitation of Qur’an
-------------------------------------------

Yesterday I told you that the Holy Prophet said: Pray with purity of
intention and sincerity of your hearts to God so that He may give you
wisdom to fast in this holy month of Ramadhan and to recite the Holy
Qur’an. This should not be only verbal; your heart should really wish
so. Truly, how greedy is your heart for wealth and passions. So you pray
for these things. What should be the right thing is that you should pray
with a pure heart: O Lord! Let me not be ill in the holy month so that I
may fast for all the days of this month. O God! Make me recite the Holy
Qur’an in this month. Some of our Imams used to recite Qur’an forty
times during this holy month. All of you cannot do likewise. Recite and
go on reciting Surah Tawheed and all those little Surahs, which you have
learnt by heart. But, in any case, do not give up the recitation of
Qur’an.

Three main subjects in Surah Hujurat
------------------------------------

Surah Hujurat has eighteen verses. The first five are related with
respect and discipline with regard to God and the Prophet. They mention
the duties of the Faithful to Allah and His Messenger. Thereafter, are
verses, which mention what people must do in their collective and social
affairs with one another.

The third part of this Chapter deals with personal grace. Let us hope,
by the Grace of God, during these few days, our talks will center around
these topics with the blessings of Qur’an. May Allah give us wisdom to
act accordingly? Now the first discussion is about manners of the
Faithful in towards Allah and His Messenger.

No one has a right to go ahead of the master
--------------------------------------------

God means the One Who is the Creator of you and of everything. He
created the entire universe. Messenger means God’s representative.
Undoubtedly all the dignity and rights of a representative or a delegate
are subject to the dignity and rights of the one whom he represents. If
one is an ambassador of an important government, all the dignity,
respect and honor deserved by that government becomes due to their
ambassador also. Messenger means the representative of God, Who is the
Creator of all. So you have no right to go ahead of God and His
Messenger. Just use your wisdom. Can a slave or servant ever have a
right to go ahead of the Lord and His ambassador? O faithful ones! Do
not push yourselves forward before God and His Messenger, Muhammad.
Sometimes it so happens that a man takes himself ahead of God when he
says (if he is told that this thing is prohibited): I know. I have the
right. When he is told that God has prohibited it, he replies: Stop such
talk. He tries to outpace God and imagines that he has a right to
obedience. He says: Others should follow me. I should not obey God and
His Messenger!

Expediency before God and Prophet
---------------------------------

God forbid, sometimes it also so happens that man tries to take himself
ahead, as was done by Umar. After the Holy Prophet, Umar said:
Expediency demands that Ali should step aside and Abu Bakr must come up.
Why? Because ‘Ali is young’. Many great people of Quraish have been
killed by Ali. So they are infuriated with Ali. They would not submit to
him. The Islamic government will not run properly. Abu Bakr is senior in
age. In the past he has not killed any polytheist. In battlefields also,
he did not perform any remarkable feat. As he did not kill the
unbelievers, there is no enmity against him. Hence he should be the
chief of this state. In other worlds: I know better than God and His
Prophet what is better. God and the Prophet appointed Ali as the master
(Maula) in Ghadeer-e-Khumm but I know better. No one should say: How
could Umar do such a thing? Read what Sunnis have written and then you
will not wonder.

Three commands which Umar altered
---------------------------------

Qaushchi, the great Mulla who is a defender of Umar, says in *Sharhe
Tajreed* that one day Umar went up the pulpit and said, “There were
three orders effective during the days of the Messenger of God. I have
withdrawn them and made them illegal. I think it is expedient not to
keep and continue with them. The first is Mutah of women, which was in
vogue in the Prophet’s time.” This temporary marriage was permitted and
was in practice in the Prophet’s time.

Now, I do not like that it should continue any more. It has come to my
mind that Mutah is illegal. The second is also a Mutah, the Mutah of
Hajj. The third thing is the pronouncement of ‘Hayya alaa khairil a’mal’
(rush to the best of deeds), which, with a unanimous agreement of all
Muslims, was being recited in the call for Prayer during the days of
Prophet. It continued for two years in the rule of Abu Bakr also. When
Umar became the caliph he said, “If you say, ‘Hayya alaa khairil a’mal’
(rush to the best of deeds; which is Prayer) people will not hasten
towards Jihad. Then what is the importance of Jihad? So, henceforth, do
not recite ‘Hayya alaa khairil a’mal’ otherwise, it is likely that
people will remain stuck to prayer and will not proceed for Jihad.”

Another innovation in the Morning Azan
--------------------------------------

More strange is that the Sunnis have written that once at the time of
the Morning call for Prayer (Azan), Umar was fast asleep. He was late in
coming to the congregation. So the Azan caller came to his bed and said,
“As Salat khairum minan naum” meaning: Prayer is better than sleep. When
he repeated these words once or twice, Umar got up. He became very
pleased by these words. Instead of being harsh to him, he said: From
this day onward, this must be recited in the Azan. (But they object to
the Shias saying: I witness that Ali is the Wali of Allah [Aliyyun
waliullaah]).

Therefore, till date the Sunni people recite: “As salaatu khairum minan
naum” in the morning Azan instead of “Haiyya alaa Khairil Amal.” What
has Umar done? This is going ahead of God and His Messenger. What right
have you, to go ahead of God and the Messenger like this? It is putting
oneself ahead of God and the Prophet. You say no to what they have
ordered. You say: What I say is right. Just realize your limit. You are
a slave. You must submit. To whom? To God and to His messenger, who is
His representative.

We can speak a lot about similar actions of this man in Islamic history;
and which are still being followed whereby their adverse effects are
even today visible as Muslims are blindly following such unlawful
orders. But the discussion is very lengthy. Therefore, this much
suffices. In brief, going ahead of God and His Messenger is unlawful.

Orders attached to Islam!
-------------------------

I am compelled to discuss this belief. Since the time of Ibn Taiymiyah
till today, these Wahabis who are now following him in Hijaz, have
brought several innovations in Islam. One of such innovations is their
saying that visiting and touching the grave is unlawful. Weeping over
the dead is unlawful and so on. From where did you bring in these
orders? Its precedent reaches Umar. What makes Umar entitled to put
himself forward against God and His Prophet? How is it that many obey
him too?

An unrecognized tradition of Prophet
------------------------------------

A tradition was also concocted that Ayesha also did not accept (Weeping
on him or her brings chastisement on the dead). They say: You Shias weep
over Imam Husain. You beat your chests. All this is unlawful because the
Prophet has said, “If someone weeps over a dead, the dead one is being
punished.” The answer to this is that the Holy Prophet did never say so.
According to the sources of the Sunnis, the man who was first to make
this thought effective was Umar.

*Al-Ghadeer,* in its third volume give references from Sunni sources
showing that one day, Ruqaiyaa, daughter of the Holy Prophet or
Khadijah, expired in Medina. The young girl had suffered a lot in the
house of Uthman, which culminated in her death. Finally they brought her
body to the graveyard of Baqi. Fatima and other Hashemite women were
weeping. Umar bin Khattab picked up a lash and began to whip the poor
aggrieved women, one by one saying: Do not cry. The Sunnis also say that
the Holy Prophet held the hand of Umar and said, “Leave them! Their
hearts are aching. Let them weep.”

In fact Umar daringly stood up before the Holy Prophet. How strange! In
the words of Amini (may God raise his status), “I do not know whether
Fatima too was hit that day by that lash whereby it became a precedent
for the latter hitting?” In brief, the trouble is not with only one or
two or ten. These people who are not prepared to hear, flatly say: No.
It is what you yourselves are saying. It is unlawful. Have you not seen
that when someone tries to kiss the shrine of the Prophet of God, he is
whipped? After all what is the source of such prohibition?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ اللَّهِ
وَرَسُولِهِ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ إِنَّ اللَّهَ سَمِيعٌ عَلِيمٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His
Apostle, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is
Hearing, Knowing. (49:1)***

That is: O Muslims! Do not push yourselves forward. Here there is much
to speak about. We are all affected by it. We say: Such pushing forward
pertains, sometimes, to one’s opinion. A man imagines that his view or
opinion is more sensible than what God and His messenger have said!

Gives preference to his own likes
---------------------------------

Sometimes the pushing forward is in the matter of one’s likes and
dislikes. Man makes his desire outpace the wish of God and His
Messenger. He gives more importance to his pleasure than to God’s
pleasure and the pleasure of the Messenger. One pushes back what God
likes. There are many examples. Everyone faces such situations. For
instance, suppose it is the holy month of Ramadhan.

The climate is hot. One’s heart is not at all prepared to remain without
food, cigarette and tea etc for sixteen hours. The heart says: Eat as a
number of people who are healthier than you are not fasting. You are a
weak fellow. There are other examples also. What is the God’s command?
God’s pleasure is that you should observe fast; that you should nourish
spiritualism; that you should adopt the road leading you to Him. A
number of Muslims are there in every city that, without any genuine
cause, put their desire forward and push back what God desires. They eat
in Ramadhan and they are not afraid also!

It is time for prayer. He says: I have other work. Is the prayer not
work? Put God’s work behind and the work of your desire and passion
ahead!

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ… ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His Apostle…***

If you make every desire of your heart outpace God’s wish, know for sure
that you put your own self to loss. Be attentive to this point. If your
desires conflict with what is desired by God, then it is indeed a very
serious and dangerous situation. Who is the one who gives preference to
God’s wish? For example, two persons are busy talking, in a dispute.
What is God’s pleasure? It is Forgiveness. What is the inclination of
the heart? If he has slapped you once, you slap him ten times. Now you
obey God’s wish or your heart’s desire? Who do you put forward, God or
your heart? It is of course difficult that man must be put to a test
while being under the influence of greed, passion and anger. Do you obey
God or do you obey your heart and the Satan? If you outpace God and His
Prophet you are destroying yourself. You are destroying your Faith and
Religion. You are removing them. After two or three verses, it is shown
that man’s heart is hurt. In the matter of talking, God and His Prophet
say: Do not speak. Your heart says: Do speak and insult him, as you know
what he said to you. Now you also tell him and give him hard replies.
You must give the first place to God and His Prophet and push the
desires of your heart back.

Secrecy even after separation
-----------------------------

One knows the secrets of another fellow. One preserves it. It must be
preserved. His heart says: Speak out, whatever you know. But what do God
and His Messenger say? They recommend patience, honesty and fulfillment
of the covenant. You two were friends for quite a long time. You knew
each other’s secrets also. The Holy Prophet says, “Assemblies are
trusts.”[^1] You have no right to expose the secrets of your friend
until you breathe your last; even if your friendships breaks down or
companionship ends. At last, God and His Prophet say: Do not speak. Your
heart says: Speak out! You hear a bad word. Your heart says: Why don’t
you reply? Give him ten bad words. But what does Qur’an say? The
righteous (Faithful) people keep away from nonsense. It is necessary
that your desires, your demands, your opinions must be controlled. They
should be pulled back. Muhammad should be on the lead. He should always
be ahead of you. You have to be his followers. The community is behind
their chief. Do not be the followers of the Satan. Do not be under the
control of your own desires and passions. Do not push back God and
Muhammad.

God is Hearing, Wise
--------------------

Fear God. Know that God is present, seeing everything. Beware in the
matter of following others. If you go against God, the loss of both this
world and the Hereafter is for you.  
 God is all hearing. You have ears. So you can hear. Then God Who
created these ears does not hear? How strange! You, who are a creation
made up of a little earth, can know. But the God Who created you and all
does not know? He knows all the elements, which made you up. He knows
what is in the depths of your heart. He is aware of what is going on in
your mind.

Do not raise your voice higher than the voice of Prophet
--------------------------------------------------------

Another law of discipline ordained for you:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا لَا تَرْفَعُوا أَصْوَاتَكُمْ فَوْقَ
صَوْتِ النَّبِيِّ… ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the voice of the
Prophet. (49:2)***

Some of the uncouth Arabs used to call out loudly in the presence of the
Holy Prophet. This action is against good manners. God teaches them
courtesy. Appreciate the Great ones. O man! Know Muhammad. O man! Know
that Muhammad is not a common man. His holy heart is the place where
Divine Revelation pours. He is the light (Noor) of God. He is the
Messenger of God. How great is God. Muhammad is His representative.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلا تَجْهَرُوا لَهُ بِالْقَوْلِ كَجَهْرِ بَعْضِكُمْ لِبَعْضٍ… ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And do not speak loud to him as you speak loud to one another…
(49:2)***

You are sitting near Muhammad. It is a spiritual gathering. Keep quiet.
Your voice should be low. Do not talk loudly with him, just as you talk
with one another.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿أَنْ تَحْبَطَ أَعْمَالُكُمْ وَأَنْتُمْ لَا تَشْعُرُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…lest your deeds became null while you do not perceive. (49:2)***

If you do so (speak loudly) your deeds will become void and you will not
understand that your deeds have gone in vain. One who insults Muhammad,
the one who harms Muhammad; all his deeds go fruitless while he does not
even realize.

Respect for Prophet in every aspect
-----------------------------------

Therefore great persons have said that though this verse refers to an
assembly wherein the Holy Prophet is present, it hints at every field
and every aspect pertaining to Muhammad. It also includes his holy
Shrine. Everyone who intends to approach the holy Shrine of the Holy
Prophet must not raise his voice. It is undesirable to speak in a loud
voice even in the mosque. It is the House of God. Does one who shouts in
his house, shout in the house of God also? Do you not differentiate
between your house and the House of God? You are allowing pollution in
your house. Will it be allowed in the House of God also? Will you even
spit therein?

Is there no difference? The one who shouts or speaks loudly in the House
of God has not recognized God properly. His understanding is imperfect
and faulty. It is very undesirable to raise one’s voice in a mosque.
What to talk of making claims and demands! In brief there must be
silence at the holy grave of the Prophet. There must not be any kind of
loud voice as is being heard in usual talks and while calling one
another.

Sometimes it distracts my attention and sometimes it even affects me. In
the Holy Shrine of Imam Reza, it is noticed, and also at other Holy
Shrines that discipline is not being maintained, as it should be. People
talk and call loudly. Such disrespect should not be shown. They do not
know that an all-encompassing spirit is at this Holy place. If one shows
discipline here, it is a sign of his piety.

Sign of Piety in heart is discipline
------------------------------------

Then He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَغُضُّونَ أَصْوَاتَهُمْ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ
أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوَى.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who lower their voices before Allah’s Apostle are they
whose hearts Allah has tested for guarding (against evil)… (49:3)***

If piety is comprehended here, it is manifested through tongue and eye.
It reaches the depths of the heart. One of the signs of this piety is
discipline, respect, humanity and humility. Most of this piety is over
flesh and skin. His tongue is pious and holy, and so also his eye, ear,
hand, foot. This is physical piety. However, the piety in heart is its
being empty of worldly love, passions, desires, lust and greed. If the
heart is attentive, if there is fear of God in the heart, it creates
respect and discipline.

Such a person humbles himself before the Imam, before God and His
Prophet, while facing religion, on hearing the Command of God, while
witnessing the Truth. One sits on the ground. Whenever he is told that
this is God’s command, he bows down. Whenever he is told that this is
what Qur’an orders or this is what the Holy Prophet has ordained, this
is recommended by the Progeny of Muhammad he at once realizes their
greatness and he bows down before such orders.

It is narrated that once Imam Reza said, “If one visits the Holy Shrine
of Imam Husain knowing his right (having faith in his Imamate), he or
she is like the one who visited God at His Throne (Arsh).”[^2] What is
meant by true knowledge and recognition? Who is such an aware person? He
says: He or she is one who knows that it is obligatory to obey the Imam
as he is the argument (Hujjat) of God and also His representative. God
Himself has ordained his obedience. How great is God? So His
representative is also very great. He is alive. He does not die. The
body of Imam Reza is beneath the ground but his spirit is all over the
world. His spirit is everywhere. His soul has Divine attributes.

Then why do you visit their Shrines?
------------------------------------

No one should say: If the spirit of Imam is everywhere then why go to
his Shrine for visitation (Ziyarat)? I give you a little example so that
doubt may be removed. The sun is shining. At some places on the earth
there are stones and at others there is water. Some places are sandy. On
the earth, tell me, where is it shining more brightly? Where there is
sand, there is dust, there is marsh, there is water and there is rocky
land. A part is white, another black.

The spirit of Imam is present everywhere. Even now it encompasses this
very meeting of ours. If we salute him he replies. But the place where
his Holy body is buried, is more bountiful. Imam Reza is everywhere. But
at his grave in Mashad it is different. There the Imam’s charities are
more. It is a place where God’s mercies continue to rain. It cannot be
compared with any other place. Briefly speaking, you must not forget
that respect must be kept in mind both at the Sanctuaries of the Holy
Prophet and Shrines of the holy Imams. Do not make any noise there. Do
not talk or call out loudly.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَهُمْ مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…they shall have forgiveness and a great reward. (49:3)***

Those who keep God and His Prophet above themselves and who do not raise
their voice there, with full respect, discipline and humility; their
hearts have fear of God. They are such that every business of theirs is
kept behind. They always keep God’s Prophet ahead of all other things.
Here I will mention an interesting story.

Fire does not burn him
----------------------

The following incident is mentioned in the *Tazkirah* of Ibn Jawzi and
also quoted in *Fazailus Sadat.*

I saw a blacksmith in the market, whose furnace was ablaze. He inserted
some iron in it and made it red-hot. Then for fetching that red-hot
thing out, instead of using any means, he inserted his bare hand in the
furnace and pulled out the iron. The narrator says: I stood there for a
while in wonder. What kind of man is this? Fire does not affect his
flesh and skin! Why does this man insert his bare hand in fire?

Finally, I asked him about it. He was rather reluctant to reply. But
when I insisted he explained: It is as a result of an Alid[^3] woman.
What happened was that there was a famine and people faced starvation. I
had wheat and provision. One day a poor Alid lady came to me and said: I
am an Alid and my child and I are hungry. Please lend me some food. I
was infatuated by her beauty and wanted to commit fornication with her.
She rejected my offer and went away. Thereafter she came again and I put
forth my illegal proposal once more.

She again refused saying: Till this time I have never indulged in
unlawful affair. On the third occasion she was very helpless due to
hunger and said, “I will submit, but on a condition that there should be
total privacy. I am a respectable lady and no once must know about this
shameful affair.” I agreed and provided privacy and took her there.
There the lady began to tremble severely. I asked, “What happened?” She
said, “The place must be extremely private. None should be there.” I
said, “It is so here. No one is there except you and me.” She replied,
“God is present everywhere. Even if no one sees, God does see
everything. My recording angels and yours too are also present.” Hearing
all this, I said, “O Alid lady. Dust on my head. It should have been I
to tremble, not you. I must be afraid. So I withdrew. I went back and
gave first place to the command of God.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ… ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…be not forward in the presence of Allah and His Apostle…***

Now see what God does to him. He says: I did not extend my hand towards
the respectable and honorable Alid lady. I also gave her wheat and rice.
She prayed in my favor to God: May God make fire unable to burn your
hand just as you did not extend that hand to me. Ever since that day,
fire has not burnt me.

Why? Because he placed God ahead and put his desires behind.

Doing good to Sayyids brings good of this world and Hereafter
-------------------------------------------------------------

It also is quoted in *Fazailus Sadat* that Malik Dinar or someone else
wanted to go for Hajj. He arrived in Kufa where he stayed for a day or
two to join a caravan and to make provision for the Hajj journey. One
day he passed by a slum. He saw a woman slowly and silently going
towards the garbage lot and looking on all sides (to ensure that no one
was seeing her). Then she picked up a dead hen, hid it under her arm and
came out. This man also followed her until she reached her house and
knocked at the door. Some children came out asking, “O mother! Have you
brought chicken for us (to eat)?” The poor woman said, “Yes, I have
brought chicken for you. I will cook it for you.”

This gentleman stands bewildered at the poor woman’s door. He wonders
how this lady can cook carrion. At last, as he could not help remaining
silent and he told the lady, “I have been following you for quite some
time. I saw that you picked a dead hen, which is unlawful to eat. Why
did you do this?” The lady replied, “The fact is that, for the last few
days, we had nothing to eat. Our neighbors cooked meat and its smell
reached us and made my children restless. So I thought that even if I
bring a dead hen it would satisfy and silence my starving children.”
When the gentleman learnt this, he brought the whole amount he had
gathered for Hajj pilgrimage, which was nearly ten thousand dirhams. It
was not a trivial thing. He must have toiled hard for the same.

Now he brought God and His Messenger forward and pushed back his
intention to go for Hajj. He gave all these dirhams to the poor lady so
as to make her and her children’s life somewhat comfortable. Now what
about his own wish? What is interesting is that not only his expenses
for Hajj were gone but also the money for his personal expenditure was
also over. So he decided to do watering job in Kufa. When Hajis returned
from Mecca and Medina, he went to greet them. The Hajis told him, “How
have you arrived here earlier than us? We had seen you in Mina! We also
had seen you in Arafat!” The gentleman replied, “No sir, I was here
only.”

Then another Haji came forward saying, “O gentleman! Take this money for
God’s sake only and go.” He said, “Which money, whose money?” That Haji
replied, “That day, we were in a tent in Mina when a man arrived and
asked, ‘Are you from Kufa?’ We replied, ‘Yes.’ He said, ‘When you go
back, kindly give this amount to Malik bin Dinar.’ He simply handed over
this amount to us and went away swiftly. So these ten thousand dinars
are your property. Take it.” The man said, “By God! It is not mine.”
That man said, “I have to give it you.” Finally he took them. That night
in his dream a voice from the unseen informed him that this was his
reward in this world and that the reward in the Hereafter was still
reserved for him.

The summary of my lecture is: O Muslims! As far as possible keep God and
His Messenger ahead and keep yourselves behind them. You will succeed
both this world and also after death eternally. Woe unto us if we do
contrary to it; if we push God and His apostle behind our desires and
personal interests in our deeds, our views, in our talks, in our
dealings. It is the respect and honor for God and His Prophet that raise
a man up from dust.

Discipline of Abul Fadhl, a perfect example
-------------------------------------------

You know Abul Fadhl was the brother of Husain. How much he respected
Husain? Allaho Akbar (God is Great). Though he is the brother of Husain,
after all, Husain is the Imam. There is a lot of difference between an
Imam and an ordinary person. It is written: When Abul Fadhl addressed
Husain, he never said, “O Brother!” He always used to say, “My master!
My master!” etc. For giving him due respect he never sat in the seat of
Husain. During the eve of Ashura (10th Mohurrum), he moved around the
tents of ladies in such a way that the honorable ladies would know that
Master Husain had a devotee (one who would sacrifice himself for the
master), so that the ladies might be at rest. All these ladies were
afraid that tomorrow Husain would remain alone. Abbas (Moon of Bani
Hashim) also wanted that the ladies should rest assured that Husain did
have a devotee like the moon of the Hashimites.

O Muslims! You also should never fail to be respectful in front of God,
His Prophet, Qur’an, Divine Commandments, the scholars and the Sayyids.
The companions of Husain, with all this respect, still doubted whether
Husain was pleased with them or not? So the Moon of Bani Hashim, Ali
Akbar and all other people of Bani Hashim never took any step without
the permission of Husain, the Imam. When they went to the field, they
would ask, “O Master! Do you allow us to go forward or not? They have
strength, they also have a sword in hand and yet they would not move
unless permitted.”

O Shia Muslims! You should never do anything without the permission of
your Imam. You must have certainty of the Imam’s pleasure and agreement.
When the Moon of Bani Hashim came to his brother, he said, “O Brother!
The clamor of the thirsty children has compelled me. Do you allow me to
go and get some water for them?” The master gave the permission. He took
up the water skin on his shoulders, went forward and stood before the
army of Yazid and cried, “O people! I inform you that now no one has
remained from the companions of Husain. In these tents are only women
and children. I tell you that these women are burning due to thirst.”  
 There is no power or might except by Allah.

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol.3

[^2]: Kamiluz Ziaraat Chapter 59

[^3]: A descendant of Ali Ibn Abi Talib


