Part 3
======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَغُضُّونَ أَصْوَاتَهُمْ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ
أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوَى لَهُمْ
مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who lower their voices before Allah’s Apostle are they
whose hearts Allah has tested for guarding (against evil); they shall
have forgiveness and a great reward. (49:3)***

God, for maintaining discipline and respect when facing the Prophet,
says:  
 When you talk to the Messenger, never raise your voice over his voice.

Normally, while talking, when one wants to show superiority, he raises
his voice. All of you, in front of the Prophet, are in a lower rank. All
of you are like slaves who must obey him. He is sent by the Lord of the
universe. Whenever you want to say something to him. Keep your voice
low, lower than his voice. Do not raise your voices, as you do while
talking with one another, when you are facing the Messenger of Allah.
Know his dignity. It is a sign of your own greatness. Just see who is
facing you? Whom you are addressing? Realize your limits. If you make
your voice louder than the Prophet’s, all your deeds will go in vain. It
means, We order you to maintain the respect of Muhammad. If you show
disrespect to him you spoil your own deeds.

Deprivation of bounties of the presence of the Prophet
------------------------------------------------------

They have described the meaning of ‘Spoiling of deeds’ in two ways: One
is what the author of *Tafsir Majmaul Bayan* has written. He says: What
is meant is the deed (or act) of talking with the Prophet and of sitting
in his company. If it becomes spoiled or destroyed it is not a trivial
matter. How many bounties and benefits are there for one who sits with
and speaks to the representative of God. How many benefits are there in
such a great meeting!

The Holy Prophet is the source of all knowledge. Sitting for an hour in
the meeting of a scholar is better than reciting Qur’an twelve thousand
times. Then what if this hour is in the company of the head of all the
scholars? All the scholars of the world have learnt everything only
through him, from Muhammad Mustafa. Summarily speaking, if one is in a
gathering of Muhammad and does not maintain respect and discipline, his
presence will not be regarded as worship. God forbid, if he makes the
Prophet unhappy through any kind of disrespect, he has committed a
Greater Sin. It is like blasphemy. God’s curse rains on him.

O Muslims! If you do not maintain respect and discipline in front of the
Prophet, your deeds become null and void. Here deed means your worship
through your presence before the Holy Prophet. If you have hurt him, it
is a great sin that equals disbelief or blasphemy. You have destroyed
your deed with your own hands.

Apostasy nullifies deeds
------------------------

Another probability, described by some of the commentators of Qur’an is
that it means total nullification. Nullifying of a deed by another deed
is something not easily understood. Whatever Qur’an says must be
accepted. The Holy book clearly states that there are some sins, which
if committed, nullify all previous good deeds. Foremost among them are
disbelief and apostasy. May God save the one who offers prayer till the
age of thirty, observes fasts and even performs Hajj.

Then if he gets a lot of money and travels to centers of sin and evil,
after being lured buy them and says, “We were mad that we observed fasts
in hot summers and deprived ourselves from drinking, enjoyment and
gambling. Why did we go for Hajj and spend a lot of money? The Arabs ate
our wealth.” If he utters such words then his previous good deeds go in
vain. If he dies in this condition, he will not have in his credit even
a two-unit prayer. It is as saying goes; the cow gave milk but also
kicked it and spilled it all. If one turns away from his religion
(apostatizes), definitely there is a permanent chastisement for him.
There is no way of salvation for him. All the deeds which he had done
have gone in vain.

He himself has nullified them. A man’s turning apostate! What it means?
He himself says: I did it unnecessarily; I prayed prayer uselessly. Is
there any more prayer for him? He himself says: I performed Hajj
needlessly. Is there any Hajj for him or at his credit any more? Woe
unto such a fellow who ruined his future. In short, if one reverts to
disbelief his good deeds are gone.

One who hurts the Prophet nullifies his good deeds
--------------------------------------------------

Among other sins, which nullify good deeds and amount to disbelief is
harming or hurting the feelings of the Prophet. Qur’an mentions it very
clearly that one who annoys the Prophet and hurts him, each and every
good deed of his would go in vain. This is very clear. If one hurts the
Prophet it is as if he denies his Prophethood and Messengership. So
every good deed performed by him earlier is now null and void. Except
this misdeed, there is no other sin, which washes out previous good
deeds completely.

It means, if one has done several good deeds and has also committed some
sins, both remain at their place. It is not that all sins wipe out good
deeds, but apostasy indeed does. Yes, it is possible that some of the
good goes in vain due to some sins. For example, if someone annoys his
mother, it results in the nullifying of his previous good deeds. But his
prayer and fast etc. do not go away.

Whoever does god sees his good and whoever does evil shall see his evil.
One does not remove another.

What happened when they obstructed the burial of Imam Hasan beside the
Prophet’s grave? Imam Husain complained from the depths of his heart
regarding oppression and injustice pertaining to the behavior of Ayesha.
He said, “Umar brought the body of Abu Bakr at the grave of my
grandfather and hit the holy ground with a pick-axe.” Thus they showed a
serious disrespect. God says in the Holy Qur’an: Do not raise your voice
over the voice of the Holy Prophet. You came and hit a pickaxe over his
grave. You dug a grave to bury Abu Bakr by the side of the Prophet.

Thereafter Umar also made a will that he also be buried there.[^1] He
too showed such disrespect. They are too small too hitting a pickaxe on
the grave of the Holy Prophet. Of course, I have said this in the face
of what the Sunnis say. They say that being buried by the side of the
Holy Prophet is enough to show their greatness. This is a disgrace, not
gracefulness. Disrespect has been shown to the holy grave. Their place
was certainly not here. The next verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَغُضُّونَ أَصْوَاتَهُمْ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ
أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوَى لَهُمْ
مَغْفِرَةٌ وَأَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely, those who lower their voices before Allah’s Apostle are they
whose hearts Allah has tested for guarding (against evil); they shall
have forgiveness and a great reward. (49:3)***

Piety of the heart and the body
-------------------------------

Piety sometimes belongs to the physical organs and sometimes it is in
the heart. Importance is for the piety of the heart. The piety of the
body and physical organs is temporary and always in danger. Its value is
less compared to the piety of heart. For instance, it is the outward
(physical) piety because of which most of the people observe Ramadhan
fasts under the influence of what their parents told them; that if you
do not fast purposely you will have to observe fasts for sixty
consecutive days.

If one eats openly during Ramadhan on the first instance, he should be
given 20 lashes. On the second occasion fifty lashes and for third or
fourth the sentence is killing or death. This punishment may be given in
this world or not his chastisement in the Hereafter is definite (in
hell). The parents told these things to the child and therefore one
observed fasts of Ramadhan. He also heard that the one who does not
perform prayer passes away from this world as a disbeliever. One who
does not pray does not get the intercession of the Holy Prophet and the
Ahle Bait. Whoever does not pray will burn in hellfire, as Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿…مَا سَلَكَكُمْ فِي سَقَرَ؟ قَالُوا لَمْ نَكُ مِنَ الْمُصَلِّينَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***How is that they brought you to hellfire? They reply: We did not
pray.***

In brief, what made them tremble is what they heard from the pulpit or
from their parents or what they read or heard from Qur’an. This is an
impossible piety. The inner or the piety of the heart is that a man
understands and is convinced of what God wants him to understand, as to
know God and to know the status of man. Some years pass by and, by the
Grace of God, a light is lit up in his heart and then he understands the
greatness of God. This is the piety of the heart. Such understanding
makes him shiver.

They tremble on hearing the Name of Allah.

If piety does not reach the heart, the Name of God is just like all
other names for him.

Remains careful like a cat but…
-------------------------------

In order to make you understand the meaning of the Piety of heart and
the compelled Piety, I give you an example, there are some who are much
forward in the matter of showing their saintliness like a cat. You have
seen that when it rains, a cat slips away from the side of a wall as a
precautionary measure, fearing to become wet. Woe unto the cat. A splash
of rain makes a cat unhappy. But where does this holiness of the cat go
away when it jumps into a pond to catch a fish? It drowns half of its
body in the water of the pound. When it is the turn of desire and
passion, it forgets al piousness.

In the book *Oddatutdai*, a narration is quoted from the Holy Prophet,
the last messenger of God: In the Hereafter, on the Day of Judgment, a
group from my Ummah (community) will have a lot of good deeds, like
pieces of Egyptian cloth in whiteness and brightness but “It will be
ordained: Throw all of them in hell.” It will be exclaimed: O Prophet of
God! All these people were performers of prayer. The reply will be: Yes,
they did not give up prayer. They will again say: They had observed
fasts too.

The reply: Yes, they did fast. They will ask: O Messenger of God! Then
what has made them to be thrown into hell? The reply will be: These
performers of prayer and observers of fasts were such that when they saw
unlawful wealth, they fell on it head on. (Here the Arabic word
‘Wathaba’ means jumping). Just as a cat jumps on a fish these ‘pious’
people also jump upon unlawful wealth. For example: His father died. His
wealth came in his hands. He is told: This is the portion of your
brother and this of your sister. Give it to them. Why do you not observe
your father’s will? He says: Leave aside such things. He does not
possess the Piety of the heart. Come; now let us find out the path
leading to the Piety of the heart.

Understanding the greatness of His creation results in the Piety of Heart
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

You look at the outer space and observe that there are stars and stars.
In these galaxies there are millions of suns and other globes or
spheres. They are like our galaxy. But they are not yet visible to us.
In the second galaxy they have found out a star or planet with a
diameter of one-milliard and six hundred thousand kilo meters. If this
star appears in our solar system, it will cover one-sixth of the entire
sky. If it comes up here, there would never be night due to its
brightness.

I mention this just by way of an example. How vast is the machinery of
this creation of God! All these huge spheres are revolving and moving by
the orders of Only One Might. Their Director is One. Their Manager is
One. Just think about the movement of this our earth. In spite of its
bulk it does not deviate from its fixed path even for an instant. Same
is the case of the movement of the sun with all its mammothness.

They are, by nature, made to follow the path fixed for them. There are
some among you who are sixty or more years old. Have you ever seen any
such deviation till today? This twelve Signs of Zodiac! God is the
Greatest! You see that it is at its original place. The length of days
and nights increase and decrease regularly every year. Throughout your
life span have you observed even the slightest waywardness? How
regularly the night continues to become shorter and shorter up to the
start of spring. Then days and nights become equal. Again days become
longer till the end of spring. Then it reverses. These changes take
place with extreme precision. This is not so for the last sixty years
but it might be for the last sixty thousand years and may continue for
thousands of years. So say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللهُ أكْبَرُ، تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ، ذَلِكَ
تَقْدِيرُ العَزِيزِ الحَكِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

**Allah is the greatest. Blessed be Allah the best of creators. This is
the will of the most powerful and the wise.**

Both an elephant and a mosquito are from one mechanism
------------------------------------------------------

A mosquito, which can be blown away easily is similar to an elephant in
the mode of creation. The God who gave a trunk to the elephant has given
it to a mosquito too. During some nights it sits on your body and awakes
you, so that you may understand. Yet why do you not exclaim God is Great
(Allaho Akbar)? O God! What is this sting, which made a hole in my body?
What a wonderful sense of hearing have You given to it.

As soon as you raise your hand it flies off. The hearing faculty of this
mosquito is so great that its hears a noise, which you cannot. (like a
radar). When you raise your hand, its noise is so faint that you cannot
hear it but that mosquito does. O God! How astonishing is Your creation!
You have given it ear, eye, hands and feet in addition to two wings. An
elephant does not have wings. If a faithful person thinks and meditates
he becomes enlightened under the influence of piety. God’s greatness
gets entrenched in his heart.

One of its signs is that he regards that thing great which makes him
think and realize God’s greatness. He realizes that the greatest of all
human beings is Muhammad, the last Messenger of God, ever since the Lord
of the Worlds created the universe. The more you realize God’s
greatness, the more you become aware of Muhammad who is God’s
representative. This universe is but an exudation from the exudations of
Muhammad.

Imam Sadiq at the time of uttering the name of his holy grandfather
‘Muhammad’ was becoming so much respectful that his cheek almost
touched, in humility, his knees on the ground. He never uttered the holy
name without making or maintaining ablution. It is prohibited for every
Muslim to touch this holy name without ablution. To do so is an insult
to the Prophet.

By the way, it must be known that, this applies, when by this name, is
meant the Holy Prophet, not anyone who has this name.

Signs of Muhammad are also honorable
------------------------------------

To the extent the Holy Prophet Muhammad is respectable in your eyes, the
signs of Muhammad are also similarly honorable. Anybody whom you see not
respecting a Sayyid, know for sure that the Sayyids’s grandfather is
also not honorable in that fellow’s eyes. He does not regard him great.
If one has realized the greatness of Muhammad, even if a Sayyid hits on
his head or gives him any hardship, that calamity should appear light to
him because he regards that Sayyid as the prince. He is Sayyid and
master. Shaykh Ja’far Kashiful Ghita has mentioned reasons for serving
the Shaykh. Some money had arrived for distribution among the madressah
students and it was distributed accordingly as he himself was busy in
prayers.

When he finished the first prayer, there came a needy person between the
two prayers. He (the needy person) was a self-respecting Sayyid. He
stood exactly in front of the prayer mat of the Shaykh and said, “Give
me my portion (Sahm).” He was told, “You have come late. Whatever we had
has been already distributed.”

The self-respecting Sayyid did not at all care for the Shaykh. He spat
upon the face of the Shaykh. Spitting on someone’s face is regarded
worse than killing among the Arabs. But what did the Shaykh do? (This
argument is for the piety of the heart).

He spread the saliva with his own hand on his own face and beard and
said, “I want that my face should appear bright in front of Sayyida
Fatima Zahra on the Day of Judgment.” Thus did he realize the greatness
of Fatima. He intends to swallow his anger in front of the offspring of
Sayyida Fatima so that he may find a way whereby he may reach the
Sayyida’s grandfather on the hardest Day of Resurrection. Unless one
realizes the greatness of God he cannot realize the greatness of
Muhammad and of Zahra.

How then can he understand the greatness of a Sayyid? The said Shaykh
did not suffice with this. He stood up and asked the audience, “Whoever
respects the beard of the Shaykh should drop some money his lap.” The
Shaykh spread his own skirt for begging. The faithful followers imagined
that the Shaykh was collecting contributions for his pupils.

So they filled up his skirt with coins. The Shaykh gathered the amount,
kissed the hand of the Sayyid and put the whole amount in his hand
saying most respectfully, “Kindly forgive me and excuse me.” This was
because he wanted to get near to God Almighty.[^2] So, this is true
piety. It means the heart should be aware of the Lord of the universe.
Man must realize God’s greatness. If a man’s heart realizes the
greatness of God, he becomes weak and low before Muhammad. He bows down
before the Holy Qur’an, as it is God’s Word. But, if, God forbid, there
is no piety in heart then he has no regard and respect for God and
everything related to God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَغُضُّونَ أَصْوَاتَهُمْ عِنْدَ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ
أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوَى﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely those who lower their voices before Allah’s Apostle are they
whose hearts Allah has tested for guarding (against evil)... (49:3)***

Those who lower their voice in the Mosque of the Messenger, due to fear,
shame and modesty, God tested their hearts. Noise, shouting and
complaints are signs of ignorance and unawareness because of the lack of
piety in hearts. This is very strange and astonishing. In the Prophet’s
mosque, there are guards who show their backs to the Holy Shrine of the
Holy Prophet. What disrespect! They have no piety in their hearts. They
do not realize who Muhammad is. Their Shaykh also does not know.

Do not say that I am making an allegation. Ibn Taiymiyah himself, who is
their foremost peer, also does not know all this. He clearly says that
the grave of Muhammad is no different from other places. Just think
about whom you are talking? When have you realized the greatness God, by
which you could realize the greatness of Muhammad? You turn your back to
the grave of the Holy one. You extend your legs towards it. You come to
the Prophet’s mosque for prayer but you have no respect for the Prophet!
You say visiting the Holy Prophet’s grave is not permitted! All this is
because of lack of piety in heart. God has given the piety of heart to
you Shias and may he multiply it manifold.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿…أُوْلَئِكَ الَّذِينَ امْتَحَنَ اللَّهُ قُلُوبَهُمْ لِلتَّقْوَى﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…are they whose hearts Allah has tested for guarding (against
evil)…***

Here the Arabic word ‘Imtahana’ means ‘He tested’. He has tested the
hearts regarding piety. In other words, it is that God expanded their
hearts so that they may know His greatness. Expansion is the opposite of
narrowness. Unless one recognizes the greatness of God and His Prophet,
he does not become great. How can a twelve years old child realize the
greatness of the King! How can he pay respect? Unless the feeling of
greatness enters his heart he cannot realize greatness. Unless he goes
to school and learns writing how can he realize the worth of a good
writer? How can an illiterate person appreciate the value of a scholar?
How can he pay respect to him! By God! I am telling you the truth. If
man wants to pay respect to God he must realize His greatness. He must
make himself small. You will certainly ask me what is highness and what
is lowness?

When you were four or five years old, you used to get a two rial or a
five qiran coins from your parents to buy a toy. Now you have become
owner of thousands and millions. Yet you are as little as when you were
four or five years old. The name makes no change. If you like, I may
make it more clearly for you. You have already heard the story of Mulla
Nasiruddin who said: Praise be to Allah! There has been no change in me
though I have become old. People asked, “How can it be? You have become
obviously old.” He replied, “No. My strength and capability has not
changed at all. There was a heavy thing in our house. I could not lift
it in my youth. Now, when I am old, I cannot yet lift it. Thus, I have
not been changed since my youth.” There are some who have not changed
ever since their childhood days.

One had a small house wherein he had opened a little shop. If any other
child tried to kick it, he would catch the child’s leg, saying do you
want to destroy my house? In childhood, his house was of a few bricks.
Now the number of the bricks is, say four thousand. Briefly, littleness
is in not thinking and understanding. May God make man understand here,
not in the grave! May God give us a house, which may not be destroyed, a
house wherefrom man may not be driven out, a house that is forever
strong. When man gives up his thinking about permanent matters he is
still a child even at the age of ninety.

[^1]: Usul al-Kafi, Tafsir Durre Manthur, vol. 5; pg. 80.

[^2]: Manazelul Aakherah


