Part 4
======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يُنَادُونَكَ مِنْ وَرَاءِ الْحُجُرَاتِ أَكْثَرُهُمْ
لا يَعْقِلُونَ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***(As for) those who call out to you from behind the private chambers,
surely most of them do not understand. (49:4)***

The Almighty God recalls their incapability and says: Most of them have
no sense. Sense means capability of understanding. They have no human
intelligence. They have not become higher than animals in the matter of
understanding whereby they could know things fully. So that they may
know the full meaning, may recognize God and His Messenger, may
appreciate the status of messengership and Prophethood. Of course, this
requires that man himself should be great enough to comprehend that
messengership has a very high status. It is the place where God’s
revelations arrive. Here there is a connection with the unseen world.
God selects the one who is superior to all others from the viewpoint of
chastity, morality, purity and piety, personal hygiene etc. God selects
only such person.

Be patient till the Prophet comes out
-------------------------------------

The next verse contains many important meanings. It should be remembered
what this verse says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ صَبَرُوا حَتَّى تَخْرُجَ إِلَيْهِمْ لَكَانَ خَيْرًا
لَهُمْ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ.﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if they wait patiently until you come out to them, it would
certainly be better for them, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
(49:5)***

These Bedouins are undisciplined and ignorant. Had they shown patience
and self-control, had they not made haste in calling you from out of the
room until you came out yourself, and then had they submitted their
needs it would have been better for themselves. Honor of the Holy
Prophet, maintaining the respect of the status of messengership, is for
the benefit of Muslims themselves. One of the benefits is that they
reach their goal in a better way. Also, as a result of the respect shown
by them to the Holy Prophet, God makes their faith stronger and firmer,
their hearty relation and their friendship closer and their reward
higher. How many rewards are there for showing patience just for a
little while! O ignorant people! There is much good, luck and reward for
you in this.

Here, I want to show you the full meaning of***…it would certainly be
better for them…***today, so that many misconceptions be removed.

Christian allegations against the Prophet
-----------------------------------------

One of the Christian writers has, with his sinister pen, made false
allegations against Qur’an and the Prophet of Islam, by misrepresenting
facts. Finally, a European also wrote a book titled *An Apology to
Muhammad and the Qur’an.* Another fellow wrote a book, *Muhammad, the
Prophet who should be recognized a new.*

These Christian clerics have hurled many false and baseless allegations
against the Holy Prophet. They have drawn a distorted picture of the
Prophet’s noble character. One of the mischievous allegations is that
Muhammad was very much fond of fame, power, honor and respect; that he
has extensively praised himself in Qur’an. What do these five verses of
Qur’an from Surah Hujurat show?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لا تُقَدِّمُوا بَيْنَ يَدَيْ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ… ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His Apostle…***

Here He, puts himself first and also says thereafter that do not bring
yourselves before Muhammad and do not raise your voice louder than the
voice of Muhammad; that is, keep quiet; do not call him without his
permission; maintain the greatness of Muhammad. This goes to show that
(God forbid) Muhammad wanted that people should honor him, or for
instance, he has commanded that whenever one takes or utters his name
one must send Salawat on him and similar other allegations.

The duties are only for the benefit of Muslims
----------------------------------------------

The reply to all these foolish words and idle talks, allegations and
indecent utterances is in the verse itself:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لَكَانَ خَيْرًا لَهُمْ…﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…it would certainly be better for them…***

That is: O Muslims! O believers in Qur’an! In all the commands of this
Qur’an your own outward and inward benefit has been aimed at. Every
address is in the interest of Muslims. Whatever brings good luck to them
has been ordained and there is nothing like personal interest in them.
Curse of God on the one who utters such blasphemic words and says that
Muhammad had his own personal interest.

Learn true abstinence from Muhammad
-----------------------------------

What is personal benefit? It is property and wealth, position and
grandeur, fame and kingdom. But from the worldly viewpoint Muhammad
never placed a brick over a clay brick, even though if he had wished he
could have placed one sliver brick over one golden brick to build his
palace. But when he left this world, what worldly wealth did this great
Prophet leave behind? What moveable or immovable property did he ever
have? It was these few rooms (Hujurat) made of clay bricks, mud and
wood. What was the floor of the house of Muhammad made of? It was sand.
Sometimes there was a piece of straw mat thereon. So this was his
carpet.

And what kind of bed had he? Full details of the household materials of
the Holy Prophet are written in books. The pillow of the Holy Prophet
too was of palm fibers filled in a goatskin, which he placed under his
holy head. The mattress and the quilt of the Holy Prophet was a combined
cloth measuring fourteen meters. He placed half of it under his body and
used the other half to cover himself from above.

There was nothing in between. In the last days of his holy life his
wives said to one another: Since the bones of his body have begun to
show up let us do one thing. Let us make his bed sheet four-fold so that
it may become somewhat soft. So once they did so. That night the Holy
Prophet rose from his bed a little later, that is, he took a more
restful sleep. When he woke up he asked? Who did this? One of the wives
replied, “O Messenger of Allah! We did it. Now your body has become very
weak. We thought your bed should be a little soft.” He said, “You have
done injustice to me. Tonight as my bed was softer, I woke later. It
should be as before.”

The Holy Prophet had nothing like luxury. Even in hot season though he
wore no shirt he used to sleep on the hard mat. Once one of his
companions arrived and saw that the mat had left marks on the Holy body.
He wept and asked, “O Messenger of God! You are the king of kings. What
kind of life are you living?”

What I mean to say is that Muhammad was not as the liars have alleged.
What is property and riches? What is rank or position? What is fame?
(May God forgive), curse of God on the false defamers. Why do you not
come and read the life history of Muhammad? When did Muhammad seek fame,
power and kingdom?

On the ground like slaves and servants
--------------------------------------

Once the rich women of Medina passed by Muhammad and saw that he was
sitting on the ground. He himself said, “I like to sit on the ground
till the last day of my life.” This is spiritualism, which only the wise
can understand.

At last it was seen that the Holy Prophet was about to have his meal.
Now it was either dates or a piece of bread. The lady said, “O Master!
You are sitting like a slave and you are also eating like a slave! If
someone passes by you one will not recognize who you are!” The Prophet
replied, “And who can be a better slave than me? I am the slave of the
Lord of the lords and the King of the kings.” The lady said, “Please do
me a favor.

Kindly give a little from this morsel that you eat.” The Prophet
extended his hand to give a little from his food to the lady. But she
said, “Please, for God’s sake, give me from your holy mouth.” The Holy
Prophet gave her a little from his mouth, which she ate. As testified by
Amirul Momineen that lady never fell ill since that day until she
breathed her last. It was the grace of the morsel from Prophet’s mouth.

Was the Messenger of God a seeker of fame and name? Whenever he came to
a gathering he never sat on a prominent place. In fact, the gatherings
of the Holy Prophet did not have any such thing as high or low. People
used to sit in a circle on the ground. Everyone sat where he was.
Whenever foreigners arrived or whenever representatives of alien
countries brought some communication or wanted to meet the Holy Prophet
they had to ask, “Where is Muhammad?” They were told, “He is in the
mosque.”

In the Mosque, they used to see that it was a round gathering. After
seeing this they were compelled to ask, “Who among you is Muhammad?”
They saw that there was no distinction at all; that here all were equal;
there was nothing like protocol. All were sitting in a circle. Then the
Holy Prophet used to say, “Yes, I am Muhammad, how may I help you?”[^1]

Always first in Saluting
------------------------

Was Muhammad a seeker of fame and position? Did he ever want worldly
greatness? Muhammad used to say, “I wish that I should not leave or give
up some things until I live: One, sitting on the ground, another to be
the first in saluting others.” He never sought the first Salam from
others. Muhammad was the first in saluting even youngsters. If he saw
someone from a distance, before that person said a word, Muhammad would
exclaim first: Peace be upon you (As-alamu Alaikum).[^2]

I have read in a narration that some Muslims who wanted to be the first
in greeting the Holy Prophet, hid themselves so that he would salute him
first. However, when the Holy Prophet reached that point, he used to
say, “Salamun Alaikum, O the one, who is behind the wall! I do not want
out be later in offering Salam until I breathe my last.”[^3]

Hastening in offering Salam to others drives away ego. O sirs! Be the
first in saying Salam to those who are younger than you. Whenever you
enter your own house, say Salam to your wife and children. Never say: I
am master and so they should salute me first. On entering your home, say
Salam to your wife. When your wife comes to you say Salam, to her. When
your child reaches you, say Salam to him or her also. The Holy Qur’an
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَإِذَا دَخَلْتُمْ بُيُوتًا فَسَلِّمُوا عَلَى أَنفُسِكُمْ تَحِيَّةً
مِنْ عِنْدِ اللَّهِ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***So when you enter houses, greet your people with a salutation from
Allah…***[^4]

Hastening in Salam is the remedy of human ailments. It is very effective
in gaining humility. They Holy Prophet followed this path as God
ordained him: O Muhammad! Whenever the believers come to you, salute
them.

After the virtue of sitting on the ground and being the first in
offering Salam, is the matter of seating others on animals while riding.

Never rode when companions walked
---------------------------------

The third thing which the Holy Prophet did not want to give until his
last was making others sit behind him while riding. It is bad that one
rides while others walk beside him. By God’s grace now there is no horse
or ass riding. In earlier days, the master used to ride and his servant
used to walk with him. Woe unto the one who rides while his companion
continues to walk with him. The Holy Prophet never did this during his
entire life. Firstly, there was no particular animal he rode. He rode
whatever was available, be it a donkey or a mule, a camel, be there a
saddle or not, be there stirrups or not, a bridle or not. He put a date
leaf rope around the donkey, held the same in hand and went on.

Whenever he saw anyone walking with him the Holy Prophet used to ask
him, “Come and sit behind me.” He used to make a child, a youth or an
elder ride with him. Names of such persons mentioned in *Hayatul
Haiwan,* who had this good fortune, numbers thirty-four, one of them
being Fazal bin Abbas the Prophet’s cousin. The Holy Prophet was
probably returning from Arafat and was proceeding to Mina riding on a
camel. This youth came walking in the sun. The Holy Prophet made him sit
behind him and also gave him admonitions during this ride.

By the way, it also is mentioned in a narration that at that time Fazal
looked at an alien woman. The Holy Prophet turned his face as he wished
that Fazal should not commit the sin of looking at an alien lady. Well,
let us proceed. The Holy Prophet never left anyone walking when he
himself was riding. He either made him ride with him or he used to say:
Either you go first or let me go, and you may come later. Was the
Prophet seeking glory and pomp? With such manners what more and how much
more should we mention? While dining, the Holy Prophet never took any
support for sitting.

The Prophet did not demand a particular food item
-------------------------------------------------

He never wanted any particular food. Anas had served the Holy Prophet
for nine years, that is, he used to prepare and serve food to him. He
says that one day the Prophet was late in arriving home. “I thought he
might have dined at someone’s house so I consumed a little milk which
was kept for him. When he arrived, he sat for a while and then went to
bed without telling anything to me. I went to the Mosque and asked one
of the companions as to where and in whose house had the Holy Prophet
been.

He replied: The Holy Prophet was in the mosque. I asked: Why so late? He
replied: People had asked about a problem, which took time. I said: By
God! Muhammad did not eat at all and went to bed without saying anything
to me; I am so ashamed. What should I do? I wished I should go down into
the earth. After the Holy Prophet went to sleep I told myself: What will
happen at dawn? There was nothing to eat. The Holy Prophet woke up for
the predawn prayer, kept quiet, said nothing and hearing the call for
prayer, proceeded to the mosque for Morning prayers. He fasted the next
day without having the dawn meal. Not only this, he never mentioned this
ever.”[^5]

Let those who malign the Holy Prophet by writing that Muhammad was fond
of fame, name, dignity and power, tell us if this is the path leading to
such worldly things? How was the life style of Muhammad? God’s cursed on
every liar and on all those who make false allegations. Is this a
luxurious life, which Muhammad led? His life was full of patience,
forbearance and hard labor. He was acting against the demands and
desires of the heart.

Need of Anas
------------

Anas had the honor of serving the Holy Prophet for nine years. The
reason for it also was that at the time of the Holy Prophet’s arrival in
Medina, every faithful believer had brought some gift for him. The
mother of Anas held her child, Anas’ hand and came to the Holy Prophet.
She said, “O Messenger of Allah! I am an old and weak poor woman. I have
nothing to bring to you as a gift. I have brought this son of mine.
Kindly accept him so that he may serve you.” The Prophet of God also
accepted this offer. This boy was in the house of the Holy Prophet for
nine years and, as I have said, he was so fortunate to have this honor.

As a result of his mother’s offer as well as his own wish, after nine
years he sought permission to leave so that he may work somewhere for
earning his own livelihood. The Prophet of God told him, “You have
labored for nine years in our house. Now, ask for whatever you want so
that I may give it to you. I will fulfill every need of yours.” By the
way, this was the time when Islam had spread wide and gained wealth. If
Anas wanted, the Holy Prophet might even have given him some land in the
Islamic state.

He said clearly: Ask whatever you want. During these nine years, Anas
also had become wise and clever under the training of the Messenger of
God. He replied, “O Messenger of God! Kindly give 24 hours’ time so that
I may think over it.” After all, it is not an ordinary thing to ask
anything from the Prophet of God, who is the owner of both this world
and the Hereafter. The Holy Prophet said, “Well, think for 24 hours as
desired by you.” Anas thought during the night: What should I ask?

Sometimes his thoughts went after worldly things, like a herd of a
hundred sheep or camels, or governorship. Such thoughts came to his mind
but he pushed them all behind and pondered what was the benefit of all
that? All were perishable. Even if I ask for a hundred sheep or camels,
or land he would give but what is the gain in this bargain? A wooden
chair or throne connected with the wooden plank, which makes a coffin is
not really beneficial. What is better is that, which will last forever.

Then he began to think deeply: What should I ask for my hereafter?
Salvation demands Paradise and companionship of Muhammad forever.
Nothing else is better and higher than this. The company of Muhammad is
the highest thing. This is what all of us seek through the supplication
while reciting the Ziyarat Ashura earnestly. So this indeed is the last
and the highest need of every faithful believer. The explanation of
spiritual company has been mentioned in the book *Qalbe Saleem*. In the
Ziarat’s conclusion is the phrase that mentions the wish for the Praised
Position (Maqam-e-Mahmood). O reciters of the Ziyarat Ashura! Ask for
every need, which must be for this aim and, Insha Allah (God willing)
you will attain it. However, the Ziyarat Ashura is higher than such
partial matters. Worldly needs have no value therein.

Seek the praised status (Maqam-e-Mahmood) from God
--------------------------------------------------

Is it perhaps impossible for me to speak about *Maqam-e-Mahmood* (the
praised place) in this sitting? Where is *Maqam-e-Mahmood*? In Mahshar
(The Grand gathering ground in the Hereafter) there is an area named
*Maqam-e-Mahmood*. There is a pulpit having a thousand steps of light
(Noor). At the top, above all others, is the station of the last Prophet
Muhammad, thereafter is the Victorious Lion of Allah (Asadullah al
Ghalib) Ali bin Abi Talib.

Other stairs belong to the Imams and Prophets in accordance with their
status in the sight of God. Then those who left this world with Faith in
and love for Allah in their hearts, those who made themselves reach and
gain this company which we call and seek, that is the spiritual company,
those who remained with the Progeny of Muhammad and so their holy souls
joined with the holy souls and the pious ones.

Then, there, in this *Maqam-e-Mahmood*, their orator is the Holy
Prophet, standing on the highest stair. He praises Allah and gives a
sermon, wherein, according to narrations, he praises God in a way no one
had ever praised earlier.[^6] What a pulpit on top of which is the Holy
Prophet and below it are also the prophets, legatees, Imams and the best
people. What other distinctions should I say? Just know that it is so
great that in Ziyarat Ashura you seek it. You say: O Lord! Let me reach
*Maqam-e-Mahmood* for the sake of the holy blood, which was spilled, the
blood of Husain who is a divine sign. It is the place praised much, from
where so much mercy and rewards rain. It is so high and glorious that
the audience gets full reward of spirit.

It is said that if, in that gathering at *Maqam-e-Mahmood*, even the
Houries of Paradise arrive and inform the Faithful: ‘We are your Lovers’
and ‘We are eagerly awaiting You’ the lucky audience will reply, ‘How
can we leave this pulpit of Muhammad?’ Imam Sadiq is reported to have
said that on the Day of Judgment, Husain will be under the shade of the
Throne of God and God will be gathering those who had visited Husain’s
grave and his Shias and they will get so much happiness, delight and
mercy that it cannot be described except by God. So much so that from
one side, fairies from Paradise will arrive with a message saying, “We
are your lovers and we are eagerly waiting for you.” The people at the
said Maqam-e-Mahmood will reply, “We will come to you afterwards, if
Allah wills.” In other words, “We cannot leave the company of Husain; we
prefer it over you.”[^7]

Briefly speaking, these are the matters to be perceived, not described.
Those who recite the Ziyarat Ashura hope to be with Husain, with
Muhammad, with Ali. Anas asked for exactly this from the Holy Prophet
after serving him for nine years. Next morning, he came to the assembly
of the Holy prophet in the Mosque. The Prophet asked, “Did you think
over it?” Anas replied, “O Messenger of Allah! My need and my desire is
that I should be with you in the Hereafter.” The same what you recite in
the Ziyarat Ashura. Anas told the truth. He earnestly desired and longed
for remaining with Muhammad. He said, “I want only this.” What was the
reply of the Prophet?

Attain nearness to Allah through prostration
--------------------------------------------

Is it an ordinary thing to be with Muhammad? It is not possible without
qualification and capability. One who has no qualification does not
benefit. If a donkey is dressed royally and its made to sit on the
throne. Then even if saffron is put before it, it is of no use. A change
is needed. Humanity and spiritualism must be created so as to be able to
sit on a throne. This man desires to sit with the king of the universe.
The Holy Prophet shows him the way, which if adopted, can enable him to
be with Muhammad. He said: Make more and more prostrations. Because
prostration is to push back everything except Only One God. It is to cut
off the heart from everything else. The longer the prostration, the
better it is. The servant is nearest to his Lord when he prostrates
before Him.[^8]

If one weeps in prostration it is still better. The nicest recitation
too is: **There is no god except You, the glorified. Indeed I was of the
wrong doers** (Laa Illaah illaa anta subhaanaka innee kuntu minaz
zaalimeen) for twenty times, a hundred times, a thousand times. Imam
Sajjad sometimes recited such utterances placing his head on stones in
the valley of Medina. The narrator says, “When he prostrated, he did not
lift his head until his entire body perspired.”[^9]

One hour, two hours, only God knows how long in the hot air of summer.
My aim is to show what a prostration is. If you want to attain
spiritualism it requires some effort. You should be prepared to do
deeds, which may disconnect you from the material world and take you
towards spiritualism. Otherwise, supposing even if they bring you near
the Prophet, you cannot benefit by his company, unless hard efforts are
made. Its example is found wherein the Holy Prophet asked Anas to do
thus.

It is narrated that Amirul Momineen said that once a man came to the
Holy Prophet and said, “O Messenger of God! Kindly show me the way
whereby God may love me and people also may love me and my possessions
also may increase and my body may remain healthy and my life may be long
and God may raise me up with you in the Hereafter.” The Holy Prophet
replied, “These are six desires which require six virtues.

If you want that God should love you then fear Him and refrain from
sinning and if you want that people may befriend you then do good to
them and do not envy for what is in their possession and do not vie for
it and if you wish that your property should increase then pay the poor
tax (*Zakat*) and if you want that your body should remain healthy then
give more charity and if you desire to live longer then take care of
relatives and be kind to them and if you intend and hope that God may
gather you with me on the Day of Judgment, then extend your prostrations
for God Almighty.”[^10]

Summarily, if one desires nearness to Muhammad while continuing to sin,
it is merely wishful thinking because sin leads to the neighborhood of
Satans and Pharaohs. So there is no alternative to walk on the path of
obedience and worship which leads to Paradise and the neighborhood of
the Holy Prophet and the more one worships and obeys, the nearer he gets
to Paradise and the beloved ones of God. Among the kinds of worship,
prostration is more effective in creating spiritual nearness. Qur’an and
a number of narrations have emphatically mentioned that there are some
specialties in the matter of prostration. What is shown by the Imams is
briefly listed below:

1. Prostration (*Sajdah*) is the way of those who repent and turn
towards God.

2. Prostration gives utmost trouble to Satan.

3. Prostration drops sins just as wind drops leaves of a tree.

4. Prostration is a position wherein the servant is nearest to God.

5. Prostration is a condition in which man is in utmost humility and
slavery in front of the Lord creator.

In addition to extreme self-restraint, there are other worship and
deeds, which strengthen the soul. Tonight, we shall explain this holy
verse to you.

Khums also is for the Muslims themselves
----------------------------------------

Each and every duty or responsibility, which Islam has established is
mainly for the benefit of Muslims themselves. Nothing is meant for its
founder or the Holy Prophet; so much so that even the Khums (one-fifth),
which is made obligatory too is such. Curse of God on those who have
thought that Muhammad has done so for the benefit of his progeny and has
sought only their profit.

Actually Khums is prescribed with the aim that the hearts and wealth of
Muslims should become pure and their connection or relation with
Muhammad be stronger and closer, not that, through this God has provided
sustenance for the progeny of Muhammad. O rich Muslims! What are you to
give anything to them?

A Bahraini man once brought the Khums of his jewels to Medina and he sat
in such a manner as if he had done something great by bringing something
more for the Imam. The Imam signaled his servant to bring a vessel lying
in a corner. When they brought the tray, Imam recited some prayer on it
(perhaps there was sand in it). The Imam turned that dish upside down
before the man from Bahrain. So many gold coins poured therefrom that it
formed a heap between the slave and the Bahraini. Then the Imam said,
“We are not in need of your Khums. You should not think in this way. You
have not done anything great. What need do we have? It is our favor to
you that we accept what you bring as Khums in order to make you clean
and pure.”[^11]

This is your Khums, O Man! Tomorrow on the Day of Judgment, a caller
will call out on behalf of the Prophet of God: Anyone who has to collect
from Muhammad anything may get up. On that Day, all will await such a
call.

The Day of Judgment is an extremely hard day. Everyone will be burning
and trembling hoping that an intercessor comes up to help him or her;
that someone should arise to save him or her. It is very terrible. How
nice when you will hear those words! The grand gathering will ask, “What
does this mean?” Muhammad has right on everyone! The caller will
explain, “Everyone who, during his worldly life, did good to the progeny
of Muhammad, repaid their loans, gave respect to them, fulfilled their
needs, helped them may arise to get his right from Muhammad.”[^12]

On that Day, O Zakat-payer! What a delight and benefit you will taste!
All these commands are for you, only for your own benefit. So much so
that even the recommended deeds, like Ziyarat of Imam Husain are for the
benefit of the Shias, both in the world and in the Hereafter. But, in
the worldly life, the Ziyarat of the Imam results in a long life and
expansion in sustenance and fulfillment of needs. It is mentioned in
narrations and also experienced by many, and, in the Hereafter, it will
result in the forgiveness of sins and getting intercession of the
messenger of God and nearness to his Holy being.

They have quoted a tradition in *Kamiluz Ziyarah* according to which the
Holy Prophet had foretold the martyrdom of all the Ahle Bait on several
occasions. Imam Husain asked, “Our graves will be at different places on
earth and also at a distance from one another. How one can make Ziyarat
of our graves?” The Prophet replied, “Groups from my followers will come
to your graves for my sake. Now, it is my responsibility that in
exchange, I may hold their hands on the day of the Judgment, help them
and protect them from the fears and fright of that Day so that God may
admit them to Paradise.”

Again, in the same book, in the chapter of the merits of Kerbala there
is a tradition through Umme Aiman from the Holy Prophet, that he said,
“And they build, on the grave of Husain, a sign and symbol, that is a
shrine, which will last and will not become old. In times leaders of
disbelief and followers of deviation will try to obliterate the signs of
Husain but they will not be able to do so. Rather its height and
manifestation will increase day by day.” This tradition is one of the
news from the unseen given by the Holy Prophet. Whatever efforts the
Bani Abbas, especially Mutawakkil the cursed made, he could not succeed
in demolishing the grave of Husain. The tomb of Husain ever since is a
venue for many visitors.

Shaykh Shustari says in Khasais, “The beauty of this high and lofty dome
will go on multiplying with the passage of time.” We see that the
construction of Ka’ba and all the Holy structures do end but the
construction and expansion of the shrine and courtyard of the mausoleum
of Husain, the chief of martyrs does not stop. Rather, ever since the
cursed Mutawakkil demolished it, every year the caliphs of Bani Abbas
and kings following them have given importance to its reconstruction.
Ever since I was five year old till today when I am above sixty, not a
day has passed when I did not see addition or renovation of its design
and beautification. It appears it will be so till the Judgment Day.

In the translation of Khasais, the late Shahristani says, “I have
observed the construction and renovation of the new dome and the
widening of the courtyard in the upward direction, the construction of
the Nasiri courtyard and its basement, its stone floor and engraving on
its walls. This work still continues.”

I had the honor to visit the Najaf-e-Ashraf in 1360 when I saw that they
were expanding the shrine of Imam Husain and fixing marbles on its
walls. Till last year (97) whenever I went there I did not see that such
construction or renovation had ever ended. It is also mentioned in the
same tradition of Umme Aiman that the Holy Prophet said, “Angels are
writing in ink of Noor (Radiance), on the foreheads of the visitors to
the tomb of Husain, ‘Haa Zaairal Husain’ (This person has visited
Husain) and, on the Day of Gathering this will dazzle the eyes of all
and they (the visitors of Husain) will be known to all by this
radiance.”

[^1]: Hulyatul Abrar, Bahraini, vol.1, pg. 117

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, Vol. 4

[^3]: Hulyatul Abrar, Bahraini, vol.1, pg. 131

[^4]: Surah Nur 24:61

[^5]: Safinatul Bihar, 1:415

[^6]: Tawheed of Saduq

[^7]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 11, pg. 263

[^8]: Wasaelush Shia, Book of Prayers

[^9]: Muntahiul A’maal, Qummi

[^10]: Safinatul Bihar vol. 1, pg. 599

[^11]: Madinatul Maajiz, Bahraini, pg.496

[^12]: Fazailus Sadat


