Part 5
======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَوْ أَنَّهُمْ صَبَرُوا حَتَّى تَخْرُجَ إِلَيْهِمْ لَكَانَ خَيْرًا
لَهُمْ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***And if they wait patiently until you come out to them, it would
certainly be better for them, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.
(49:5)***

In this Holy verse, it is necessary to remember two points. It was
mentioned yesterday also but since it is important, for emphasis, here
is another mention: Had these nomadic Arabs (not made such reckless
noise in haste without discipline and), showed respect (and) remained
silent and had they submitted their say when the Holy Prophet, of his
own, came out (of his room) such respect and patience, instead of the
said indiscipline would have been better for them. These orders are for
showing respect to the Holy Prophet.

The Muslims must consider Muhammad greater and higher than themselves.
Should give respect and honor to him so much so that they should never
raise their voice higher than his voice in his gatherings. They must
never take themselves ahead of him. These orders are only for their own
good.

He fetches people from love for world to love for God
-----------------------------------------------------

Is Muhammad a seeker of pomp, rank, fame and name etc.? Curse of God on
him who has such a bad opinion about the Holy Prophet. A Prophet and an
Imam has to have twenty virtues one of which is that he should have no
love for material things. If one has even an iota of worldly love he can
never attain messengership. Messenger means one who draws people towards
the Hereafter. One, who has worldly love, draws people towards
materialism.

In Dua Nudba you recite: “And after You took promise from them to
renounce all the stages of this despicable world, and its superficial
attractions and allurements. Then they accepted the promise.”

The very first condition for the Messengers and for their legatees is
piety in the world. If they give importance to the world, if they look
at the pleasures, position and status in the world and to kingdom and
rule, then their reach is low. It is possible that a doctor gives
medicine to others but he himself is sick. The Messenger and the Imams
are spiritual doctors (physician of soul). They want to relieve people
from the love for world and to draw them towards love of Allah. What I
mean to convey is that all these orders are for Muslims themselves.

If you cared for the respect of Muhammad it is only for your benefit.
Your reward increases thereby. Your knowledge of God and Truth
multiplies. Your Faith becomes stronger. When you utter the holy name of
Muhammad and send Salawat on him, never imagine that Muhammad has any
need of it. It is only for you. O believers! Come shoulder to shoulder
with angels. As the angels get closer to Allah through Salawat on
Muhammad, you too may obtain nearness to God. As many times you send
Salawat on Muhammad your sins drop down in that proportion. Your
distance from God decreases and you get closer to Him. For example, the
Prophet says that if you send Salawat once to me I send ten Salawats to
him. All the Commandments of Islam are like this.

The reward of Prophethood for the faithful themselves: Love for the near kindered
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لا أَسْأَلُكُمْ عَلَيْهِ أَجْرًا إِلاّ الْمَوَدَّةَ فِي
الْقُرْبَى﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives…”***[^1]

What is the reward or recompense of messengership? Friendship and
affection for the progeny of the Holy Prophet. This matter stands till
Resurrection. Is it for the benefit of the Sayyids? Is it for personal
benefit that it may be draw an allegation against the Holy Prophet? No,
it is never so. Rather it is for the benefit of only Muslims so that
through the bounty of the friendship with the Sayyids and the progeny of
the Holy Prophet they may attain nearness to the King of the world of
existence, Muhammad and the Progeny of Muhammad. Muhammad has control
over the entire world.

The cause of creation and the aim of its end is Muhammad. The
accountability on the Day of Judgment is with Muhammad. Paradise and
Hell are in the control of Muhammad. At that time we would want to have
the help and intercession of Muhammad but then we refrain from helping
his progeny! Affection for the relatives of Muhammad is for our own
good. (Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives).

What we are saying is that you must befriend the progeny of the Prophet
not just to maintain respect for him and honoring his children for any
personal desire. The recompense, which is asked from you, is affection
for the Prophet’s relatives and it is only for you. If you befriended a
Sayyid and gave him honor and respect for the sake of his grandfather
then, to that extent, you have got nearness to the king of the world of
existence. Otherwise you may respect him or you may not, as you like.
The Sayyid is a Sayyid and so also the master. It makes no difference
for his mastership. He is the prince. But you get nearness to him
through respect for him.

Fasting strengthens spirit
--------------------------

The ignorant says, “Why God should need our prayer and fast?” It is you
who needs it. You require it for yourself. The Prayer, which you offer
is service to your own self. You made yourself remember God. Thus you
rose high up from an animal- like state. You fetched yourself out of the
full time engagement of merely eating, drinking, passion, anger,
ignorance and darkness. An animal has no sign of humanity or civility.

You kept fasts for a month of Ramadhan and made yourself nearer to the
otherworldly angels. You came to the Mosque and lined up like angels
saying ‘God is the greatest’ (Allaho Akbar) collectively. Is this a
little progress? Fasting gave you upliftment, which is for your own
benefit. God says: It is good for you. This fasting strengthens spirit.
It makes the Faith perfect. It shows you the path of approaching God. It
is only due to it that you distanced yourselves from animality and took
yourself nearer to Allah. You prayed at dawns. How delicious is it to
approach God after midnight.

Those who are fast asleep after filling up their bellies to brim cannot
have any idea of this advancement. The real delight is the delight of
the one who fasts. When you remember God like this and at this time, its
sweetness can only be experienced – not described. Fasting makes you one
of the patient ones. You enter the group of God’s people. Otherwise you
would have remained a two-footed animal.

Those who do not fast without any valid reason are harming only
themselves. They have degraded their own selves spiritually by showing
and announcing that I am so weak that I cannot control my stomach. This
is the manifestation of meanness. I am unable to hold myself for a few
hours from desires and passions. Likewise, those who fast show that I
have strength and power to hold myself for sixteen hours.

This is spiritualism. This is gaining power. It is said that the Zakat
money, which you give to the poor, though apparently, your money reaches
a poor person, but in fact, you have given a very big gift to yourself.
Apparently the money goes away from you but what is the reality? There
comes a light (Noor). You give one coin and, as a reward, you receive a
thousand times Noor (Radiance) which brightens your heart. Your rank
rises up spiritually.

One who spends money in the path of God extinguishes a burning fire and
one who become a miser, fans the fire. It is recommended that the hand
of the needy (whom you donate something) should be kissed. When its
reason was asked Imam Sadiq said, “Have you not read in the Holy Qur’an:
God accepts the charities? It is as if the hand of God receives it. What
is higher than this? What God accepts is bountiful.[^2]

The hand of the one who asks is worth kissing. Your own hand is also
worth kissing. If you show miserliness and if you do not give anything
in the path of God then indeed that hand is worth amputing. When you
become a miser you fan fire for your own self. Whatever you give drives
away the fire from you; it is a barrier between him and hell-fire.

Charity cultivates generosity
-----------------------------

Moreover, it generates a perfect virtue. Until a man becomes kind he
cannot approach the real needless ones. Do you wish to face the source
of generosity, that is, Ali bin Abi Talib, taking with you your
miserliness? Strange! How can you get nearness to Ali when you are a
miser? These charities take you nearer to Ali and so their benefit
reaches only you. Whatever you gave, you gave for yourself. You have
uplifted your own existence. In this way you can be nearer to the Most
Generous One, the Lord of the worlds. Until you have not inculcated
generosity in yourself, how can you, tomorrow, benefit from Divine
Mercy? It is not possible for man to reach the source of virtues unless
and until he inculcates in him those high virtues. A miser is far away
from Paradise, away from God, and away from the Progeny of Muhammad.

O Muslims! Appreciate the Divine Commands and responsibilities. Whatever
is there in it, it is only for your benefit. Whatever is made unlawful
for you, it is banned so that you may not be harmed; that you may not be
at a loss. Otherwise, in the words of the poet:  
 Even if the whole world becomes denier, His greatness will not be
affected.

Patience brings growth and draws limitless reward
-------------------------------------------------

For example, the God Almighty says in the Holy Qur’an: Be patient, Allah
is with the patient ones. So it is for you that God has said: I will
give you the reward; I will recompense. He further says: And if you are
patient it is better for you. Firstly, it is good for your body. When
you resort to this patience you get tranquility. Impatience brings you
nervous and restlessness making you ill. From the otherworldly view also
you lose its benefit. But if you are patient you will get a healthy body
and heart with a good life and you are given the promise of Paradise in
the Hereafter. After death, Paradise is the property of the patient
ones. Every deed there has a measure and weight but, for patience, there
is no measure. Reward of patience is immeasurable, limitless. Patience
is the remedy for your illness. If you will show patience, you will get
limitless reward from God.

For making patience easy, look at those who are in a more difficult
situation than you are in. Everyone who is in a calamity will find
another one in a worse condition. Look at him and say: Thanks God. For
example, you are living in a rented house. Then look at the one who does
not have any money even for paying rent. Do not look at the one who has
both a bungalow and a garden. Never look at the richer in worldly
matters.

Always look at the one who is in a more difficult position than you so
that you can be patient. You will benefit. This was a marginal comment.
The first sentence has ended. The summary of its first meaning is that
all the difficulties are from the Lord of the worlds. It is His mercy
towards His servants, which results in a good end and keeps one from
greater harms. It is not to put one in trouble by caring for others –
God forbid. It can never be so that Muslims should be put to trouble for
the sake of Muhammad.

Observance of rights is bilateral
---------------------------------

Islamic laws concerning the rights of an individual towards the society
are bilateral, that is, one’s right over other and the other’s right
over one. No preference is given to a particular side. In the social
rights also there is bilateral consideration. This Holy verse, on one
hand, tells the Muslims: Be respectful, give honor to Muhammad.
Considering Muhammad great is obligatory for you. If you not do so your
deeds will go in vain.

So much so that even your voice must never be louder than his. On the
other hands, it says to Muhammad: Be humble to the faithful who follow
you. As We have told your followers to observe your respect and honor
you, you too must be modest to them. If a poor mans comes to you and
says, “O Muhammad! I want you to do this for me, then do it.” The Holy
Prophet went with the needy, attended funerals and visited the ill etc.

Salute the faithful
-------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَإِذَا جَاءَكَ الَّذِينَ يُؤْمِنُونَ بِآيَاتِنَا فَقُلْ سَلَامٌ
عَلَيْكُمْ كَتَبَ رَبُّكُمْ عَلَى نَفْسِهِ الرَّحْمَةَ أَنَّهُ مَنْ
عَمِلَ مِنْكُمْ سُوءًا بِجَهَالَةٍ ثُمَّ تَابَ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ
وَأَصْلَحَ فَأَنَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when those who believe in Our communications come to you, say:
Peace be on you, your Lord has ordained mercy on Himself, (so) that if
anyone of you does evil in ignorance, then turns after that and acts
aright, then He is Forgiving, Merciful.”***[^3]

When this verse was revealed to the Holy Prophet, he became very happy.
It says: When these Faithful come to you, hurry up and say Salamun
Alaikum to them before they salute you and give them good tiding of
God’s mercy.[^4] Say: O those who accepted and responded to the call of
Muhammad! Your God has made it a must for Him to be kind to the
followers of Muhammad. He has bound Himself to be merciful to the
followers of Muhammad and to pardon anyone of them who sins unwarily,
accepting his repentance.

It is mentioned in the commentary that once the Holy Prophet came to
Mosque. Some of his companions were so poor that they did not have cloth
enough to cover themselves properly. When they sat near him they joined
their thighs, putting a piece of cloth on their knees to cover their two
legs. The Holy Prophet arrived, sat in their midst touching his knees
with those of the poor men and said: Thanks to God who has recommended
me to salute my followers. I have been commanded by God to respect to
you.

Sayyids should also respect the Muslims
---------------------------------------

Let me make further clarification of the bilateral position of rights.
It is recommended that you should befriend the Sayyids, honor them, do
good to them and give gifts to them. You have heard this very often. But
it is not a one-sided affair because it is also recommended to the
Sayyids that they should, for the good of the people, show humility to
them like their ancestor (the Holy Prophet) and not to boast that I am a
Sayyid, I am the son of the master, I am the prince. Just as Muslims
have to give respect to the Holy Prophet it is also a must for him (the
Prophet) to show humility to people. The Sayyid should also realize that
as the community befriends you for the sake of Muhammad you too should
appreciate that they are the ones who follow the religion of your
ancestor.

How much do you love the religion of your grandfather? You must love and
befriend them so that they follow the religion of your grandfather more
sincerely. Keep aside personal benefits and interests just as they put
aside their personal interests regarding you. You also should
reciprocate and befriend all.

It is mentioned in the third volume of *Biharul Anwar* that the last
Prophet Muhammad, during his last fatal illness, said from the pulpit to
Bani Abdul Muttalib, “O family and tribesmen of Muhammad! As the lineage
of each and every Sayyid reaches Hashim, the grandfather of Muhammad you
must be aware. Let it not be so that tomorrow, on the Day of Judgment,
my nation may come with (good) deeds and you come without deeds. In that
case, you will not benefit from me at all.

Merely claiming that I am a son of Muhammad does not count. I am telling
you something higher. The Holy Prophet told his daughter Fatima to audit
her deeds, “O Fatima! Do good and do not be proud. Go on doing good and
prepare for the journey to the other world and do not say that I am a
daughter of Muhammad.”

Then he said from the pulpit, “After my passing away no one must
maintain false ambitions and wishful thinking. By God Who made me His
Messenger, none can ever get salvation except through good deeds and
mercy of Allah.” It means if you think that you will go to Paradise
without Prayer, Fast, Charity and all obligatory deeds, it is a mere
wishful thinking. He said, “Even though I am Muhammad, if I commit a sin
I will fall.” Do not think that as Muhammad is Muhammad; since he is a
chief of the religion, he is an exception and that it is not wrong if he
sins.

Now if a Sayyid says: Since I am a Sayyid I will not go to hell. Some
ignorant says that Sayyids do not go to hell; they go to Zamahreer. Now
where is Zamahreer? It, in your imagination, is a good place! It is
mentioned in a narration that in the Hereafter, there is a part, which
is contrary to hell from the viewpoint of coolness. It means that hell
is very hot and Zamahreer is extremely cool. The difference is that
whoever, God forbid, goes to Zamahreer wishes that he be taken to hell.
Is, in your opinion, Zamahreer a nice place? There is no distinction
between a Sayyid and a Shaykh, common man and noble man, scholar and
ignorant, student and teacher.

Sayyids should all the more refrain from sinning
------------------------------------------------

Sayyids should, more than others, be careful and they must always
refrain from every sin. If a Sayyid sins his punishment is twofold. It
is mentioned in Wafi that if the sons of the Prophet worship the reward
is double and if they commit a sin then also the punishment is double
for them, one for sinning and another for degrading the honor of his
holy lineage. O woman! If you move out without an Islamic dress you have
insulted your ancestor, and you say I am a Sayyid lady! Tomorrow, in the
Hereafter you will get two chastisements, one the punishment for this
offence and another for dishonoring Fatima.

Being a Sayyid lady, do you realize what have you done? You have
insulted your religion, as people will say: This is a Sayyid and an Alid
woman. Why the progeny of the Prophet should act like this? The internal
enemy is indeed very dangerous. Children become foes and hence get
double punishment. Rather, the Sayyids should be in the front line of
the righteous people so that others may follow them. The progeny of the
Prophet are entitled to be the first and foremost in doing good deeds.
Sayyid ladies should come forward and act according to the Shariah of
Muhammad and in the matter of modesty, chastity and honor follow their
grandmother, Zahra so that other women may get lessons from them. This
is enough for now, let us go ahead.

Rights of spouses are reciprocal
--------------------------------

We have said earlier that in the holy code of conduct or Shariah of
Islam, while making laws, attention has been paid towards bilateral
relations (rights and duties) even in the matter of husband and wife. It
is said: “Men are the maintainers of women.” It is obligatory for women
to obey their husbands in conjugal affairs so much so that if the wife
goes asleep while her husband is angry with her, angels continue to
curse her so long as the husband is angry. Her prayer is not acceptable
nor her other deeds. She cannot keep unobligatory fasts without the
husband’s permission. Recommended charities and similar other good deeds
must also be done with the permission of the husband, and after
ascertaining what he wants.

As against this, the Holy Qur’an and traditions have also fixed
responsibilities and duties upon men regarding their wives. Besides
food, clothing and shelter, other serious responsibilities too are on
the husbands.

Once people insisted upon a man to take a wife. He did not agree and
began to weep much. They said, “Why should you weep? If you do not want
a wife, just say so? He replied, “What made me weep is another thing. I
have not yet taken a wife. I must first carry my own load to destination
to make myself worthy of Paradise. If I take a wife then it will be upon
me to save that lady also from hell. I am myself yet not fortunate
enough to pass through the Sirat Bridge how shall I make my wife worthy
of Paradise!” Everyone who takes a wife takes upon himself a huge
responsibility as the Holy Qur’an says: ***O men! Save yourself and your
family from hellfire***.

You cannot talk only about yourself. If you have a wife, it is
obligatory for you to hold her hand to take her away from hell as you
are the head of the family. Another responsibility imposed by Qur’an is
to live nicely with her. Whatever excessive faultfinding, you are doing
with your wives is all against the Shariat of Islam. The load of
responsibilities on man is indeed heavy.

Woe unto those who resort to unfair fault finding with their wives, who
behave badly with their women and even, God forbid, beat them. Man has
no right to beat his wife. On the other side, it is said reciprocally
that O woman! You must obey your husband. Likewise man is also told: You
have no right to issue orders to her as you wish. You cannot ask her as
to why did you not sweep the room. Islam tells the woman: O women! Your
jihad in the path of God is to serve your husbands nicely. Your jihad is
your good housekeeping, husband caring. Make yourself pure, clean and
beautiful. As far as you can, adorn yourself for your husband, serve him
and nourish his children. Give your milk (breastfeeding) to your
children and know that with every drop of the milk sucked by your child
from your breast you earn the reward of freeing a slave.

Islam tells the men: You have no right to compel your wives to
breastfeed your child: Feeding and clothing of the child is a
responsibility of the father. You have no right to command her if she
demands compensation for breastfeeding your child. She has a right to
it. Nourishment of a child is a father’s duty. But Islam also tells
mothers: You also, for the sake of God, without having an eye on money,
lovingly and thanking God for granting you a baby, feed it, breastfeed
your own child.

It is also recommended to men: Caring for the women is among the
bequests of the holy Imams. It is also a part of the will made by Amirul
Momineen. A woman is weaker. Man must control himself. He should not
become angry towards her. He must be considerate and sympathetic towards
his wife and he should be tolerant. If the wife loses her temper and
begins to make an uproar, you must keep cool. Do not say what she says.
If you repeat what she says the matter will worsen. This is against your
responsibility. You have to forgive your wife as her might is less. Man
must be different from woman in their behavior.

I feel better among women
-------------------------

May God be pleased with this honorable man. There is a humorous story
about him. I relate this so that men must remember it and dispel the
restlessness of the women in a light way. Once, in the house of the said
gentleman, there was some dispute. It rose so much that the woman cursed
his husband saying, “O God! Make him missing among men.” When her
husband heard this he retorted, “I am happier among women.” What the
woman meant was: Be dead. The husband returned her word saying: I feel
better among women. This single word made all laugh and the quarrel came
to end.

The rights of parents and children too are reciprocal
-----------------------------------------------------

Among the rights of the father is that the child must honor and obey the
father. The father is also recommended to be kind towards the little
ones. They are told: Do not do anything that may put the child to
trouble. Parents have the responsibility to nourish them, train them and
fulfill their needs; and even to marry them off. The rights of parents
over their children are in no way lesser than the rights of children
over their parents. Just as a right of the wife over her husband is not
lighter than his right over her.

Both sides must fulfill their responsibilities and duties. If one does
not do so one will have to answer before God Almighty. Beware of the Day
of Judgment when those whose rights were trampled upon will gather
around the responsible persons. All will be told (by God): Get back your
rights and establish justice by removal of injustices. Imam Sajjad
yearns in Dua Abu Hamzah: On the Day of Judgment, who will release me
from the hands of the claimants of rights! The Holy Qur’an says: The Day
when man will flee from his brother and mother and father and wife and
sons.

On the Day of Judgment, a man will run away from his wife. O Muslims!
Judgment Day is such when father runs away from his child and child from
his parents. Why? For what are they fleeing? Because of the rights upon
them. On seeing his father, the child will run away fearing that he will
catch hold of him saying: Do you remember how many rights of mine you
trampled upon in the world. A wife will run away from her husband
fearing that he will claim his rights which she did not take care off.
But fleeing is impossible. This is the first stage. The second stage
will bring blowings of the bugle. This is the beginning of the Grand
Gathering (Mahshar) when people will run away from those whose rights
had been trampled upon. The next stage has been mentioned in other
verses of Qur’an

[^1]: Surah Shura 42:23

[^2]: Layaliyal Akhbar

[^3]: Surah Anam 6:54

[^4]: Tafsir Minhajus Sadiqeen


