Part 7
======

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمَا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***…make peace between them… (49:9)***

Friday is a holiday
-------------------

Today is Friday. Islam orders that Muslims must observe it as a holiday.
They should take their hands off routine jobs once in a week. Woe unto a
Muslim who even on Friday runs after his worldly affairs. One week is
sufficient. Reach your religion also on one day. Do universal service.
Follow the commands of your religion fully.

Listen to God’s commands about the lawful and unlawful and remember
them. It is said that on Friday, come to the Mosque, offer prayer, not
solitarily but in congregation. Before the said two units prayer, a
qualified and pious, God-fearing speaker should draw the Muslims’
attention towards God, towards the Oneness of God and guide them to
correct beliefs. Also he should pay attention to their weekly affairs
and political needs. Unfortunately, the Shias are deprived of this
benefit of Friday prayer and so also are the Sunnis. What they offer is
not the real Friday prayer. What is the most important in the Friday
prayer is that the spiritual orator, during his two sermons should
correct the belief of Muslims in Allah’s oneness, should awaken the
sleeping souls of the audience who were negligent for a week.

They must come to masjid on Friday collectively when the preacher must
teach them that this world is not everything, why so much worry and
anxiety for the material worldly needs? There are real and permanent
things after death. You should have provision for the life after death
also.

Ali’s words in the Basra Market
-------------------------------

Amirul Momineen once, saw in the market of Basra how much engrossed
people were in business and trade, and in swearing for the same. He wept
over this condition of Muslims and told them: During the day you remain
engaged in buying, selling and swearing for earning worldly benefits and
during nights you sleep (not sitting in front of the television but fast
asleep like a corpse). Then when do you work for your Hereafter? When do
you strive and busy yourselves to prepare yourselves for your eternal
life after death? This world is for not more than fifty or sixty years.
Be careful and concerned for the life in which a day equals fifty
thousand years.

A man heard Ali’s words and said, “O Ali! We are fully engrossed in our
lives. It is essential for us to earn our livelihood.” The gist of Ali’s
talk is that he said: There is no conflict between the earning of
provision in this world and in making a provision for the Hereafter and
if you say, ‘I am greedy’ then I say you are not helpless.[^1]

I do not say that you should not earn a livelihood, but do it within
limits. Do not be greedy. Think of the Hereafter also. Do not drown
yourself in worldly affairs to such an extent that your behavior with
God suffers. If you have a chance for doing a good deed, do it. Join
someone’s funeral, visit an ailing person, help a believer by fulfilling
his need, repay loan of an indebted person. Do all the good deeds. But
if you say that ‘I want to earn more and more greedily’ then I must say
you are not helpless.

Do not forget Allah; be thankful to Him
---------------------------------------

One picks up a piece of bread from his dining mat and before eating
says: Praise be to Allah (I am grateful to God). O Allah! What a bounty
You have granted me. You gave protection and safety to me. You saved me.
Woe unto the unfortunate fellow who puts wine bottles on his dining
table. It is unlawful to place wine on a dining table. Even if one does
not drink it, it is prohibited to sit over there. Eating from that table
is unlawful as it is like putting a bottle of dirty urine along with
nice food articles. You must thank God. Woe unto the ungrateful fellow!
Who has created this wheat bread? Who has made arrangements whereby it
reached you?

*The cloud, the wind, the sun, the moon and the sky are functioning
continuously so that you may get bread and may not eat it negligently.
Everything is obeying God’s commands for your sake. It is not justice on
your part to disobey Him.* (Persian couplets)

Not only you disobey; curse on you because you also indulged in sinning.
You are sinning on your dining table. Before putting any morsel in mouth
say: In the name of Allah. Then say: Praise be to Allah. What I mean is
to be thankful to God. Muslims must be advised to remain awake from one
Friday to another by remaining constantly grateful to God. It should not
be so that, seeing any difficulty or undesired thing, you may forget all
the bounties of the Lord. The Shariah has prohibited uttering a single
word when the Friday preacher is delivering the sermon. All must be in a
state of full attentiveness. The Imam says that prayers are answered in
this hour.[^2] The hour when the preacher calls the attention of people
towards God and the audience is listening attentively.

Enjoinment of Piety in the Friday sermon
----------------------------------------

All religious jurisprudents agree as regards Friday sermon and its
manner that one of its conditions is to recommend piety; that is
observance of God’s commands and the accountability of people on the Day
of Judgment. The speaker should explain to people that they never make
anyone an equal of God. You may say: Muslims are not polytheists, but
what about hidden polytheism? Every Muslim who obeys the orders and
inclinations of his selfish desires against divine rules is falling in
polytheism. It is not piety. Do not serve your own lust, desire and
passion. Observe God’s commands.

Piety both in friendship and enmity
-----------------------------------

One of the boundaries of piety, which most Muslims have disregarded and
due to which they go backward despite a forward march in every age, is
maintaining piety both while having affinity and while entertaining
dislike of each other. Our God, our Lord, our Master, our Sustainer, our
Nourisher has told us that the relation between you is your religion.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنَّمَا الْمُؤْمِنُونَ إِخْوَةٌ فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَ أَخَوَيْكُمْ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The believers are but brethren, therefore make peace between your
brethren… (49:10)”***

Everyone who says: “There is no god except Allah. Muhammad is the
messenger of Allah’, of course with confirmation of Guardianship of Ahle
Bait and Hereafter, be he in the east or west, both of you are brothers
of one another. Be sympathetic to one another. Be friendly and loving
for one another both in the affairs of this world and the Hereafter. A
believer with regard to a believer is like a building. Have you observed
a building? How every part of the mansion supports another whereby the
whole structure is protected soundly.

It is essential that Muslims must be united and their hearts harmonious
from religious aspect and angel of faith. As regards enmity or ill
feeling, do not consider anyone your enemy except the one who is an
enemy of God and His Prophet.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لا تَتَّخِذُوا عَدُوِّي وَعَدُوَّكُمْ أَوْلِيَاءَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Do not take My enemy and your enemy for friends.”***[^3]

Consider such fellow your enemy. This is the order of God, His Qur’an
and common sense, but Muslims today are behaving in total contradiction
to it. My friend is he who is liked by me, who acts, as I like. He is my
friend who deals with me, who gives me profit or benefit. Everyone is
acting according to his heart’s inclination even if the other person is
a transgressor or even a disbeliever. One has enmity towards one who
does not behave as per his inclination even if he is a perfectly
faithful person in his behavior.

That one did not accord respect, he did not make a deal with him, he did
not give a loan and he did not behave according to one’s liking so he
regards him as his enemy. This is totally against the religious
commands. Even if he behaved against your liking, but since he is a
believer, is a friend (Shia) of Ali, he offers prayers; you should
regard him as your friend even though he made you suffer such and such
loss or did not extend you such and such benefit. In short, do not make
personal interest your criterion. Make God’s pleasure your measure or
balance. Enmity with a Muslim is unlawful. You should not be displeased
with a Muslims who does not follow prevalent rites and rituals. You
should be displeased on seeing a sin.

You should feel bad if males and females mix freely in a marriage
ceremony. These decorated women along with these youths! What a great
sin!! If possible, weep over it instead of applauding such foolishness.
First, why did they not invite me? The animus must be against sins, not
due to your own personal inclination. In the chapter regarding hatred,
it is written in the book *Qalbe Saleem,* that it is a must for Muslims
to ascertain the difficulties of other Muslims and to do their duty.
Your hatred based on what is against your inclination, rites and rituals
etc is unlawful. It is against piety. Anyone who became angry in this
way has breached the Islamic law. It is unlawful and prohibited.

It is mentioned in *Usul al-Kafi* that if two Muslims become angry at
one another and if this anger extends for three days both go out of the
edifice of Islam. We see and hear that some do not talk with one another
for a week, a mouth, are angry at each other and do not visit one
another; even do not look at one another. This is against piety. It is
unlawful.

Reconciliation between parties is compulsory
--------------------------------------------

It is ordered in the beginning of Surah Anfal: Observe piety, make peace
among yourselves. How many times have you committed this sin of giving
up the reconciliation duty? Have you ever repented from this sin?
Firstly, to be angry for personal desire and inclination is unlawful and
thereafter it is also compulsory to bring about reconciliation between
others.

Have we given up reconciliation? Fire should not be inflamed between two
fellows who are angry at one another. One conveys the word of this to
that and the word of that to this. If a man and his wife have quarreled,
since you, who are the head of the family or anyone who is belonging to
this family, after knowing this, it is your or his duty to make
reconciliation between the couple. He should not say: I am not concerned
and also: What I have to do! The Holy Qur’an commands: Observe piety,
make peace among yourselves. This is a clear command. At another place
the Qur’an orders: Make peace between your brothers. The two persons who
quarreled have done wrong and committed a sin. You do not do another
sin. Bring reconciliation between the two.

In the night of 21st Ramadhan, your master Ali as a part of his will to
his sons, said: My will to you two of my sons (Hasan and Husain) and to
every Shia and every Faithful believer till the Day of Judgment is
piety. Do not follow your heart’s inclination beyond a limit. Do not
become angry to much extent on the basis of desire. Observe God’s
commands. Look at God. Let bygone be bygone for God’s sake. Then said,
“Make peace between people. I have myself heard my cousin, the last
Prophet Muhammad Mustafa say, ‘Reconciliation between people is more
virtuous than all prayers and fasts.’”

If you see that there is ill will between a woman and her husband or
between two friends you see that there is reconciliation between them.
It is higher than offering prayer. It is narrated that the Holy Prophet
said, “After obligatory deeds, no deed is higher than making peace
between people.” Any amount of money can be used to do this duty. If
necessary, even tell an untrue thing. Spend your money. Arrange feasts.
Invite guests. These are the best worship acts for you. A lie spoken for
the sake of removing enmity in such circumstances will be recorded as
truth in the sight of God. Give importance to mutual reconciliation,
especially between a man and his wife.

Reconciliation between a man and his wife brought about by Amirul Momineen
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is mentioned in *Biharul Anwar* that in a day of extremely hot summer
before noon our Sayyid and Chief, Ali bin Abi Talib came out of his
house. Shadows of walls were decreasing and the sun was burning hot. The
Imam was perspiring profusely. One of his companions who passed by him
asked, “O Amirul Momineen! This is time for rest. Please return home and
recline in shade. How is it that you have come out in such a hot sun and
are sitting on a street?” He replied to the effect, “I have come out
with a hope that perhaps I may help an oppressed person. If there is any
dispute, I may settle it.” At that time a woman came weeping and
complaining and said, “O Ali! Please provide justice to me.” Ali asked,
“What happened?”

The lady replied, “My husband has beaten me and has driven me out of the
house and he has also sworn not to readmit me. I have no place other
than my husband’s house.” Hearing this, Ali got up at once and asked,
“Where is your house.” As shown by her it was quite far away from town.
I do not recollect. It may be some miles away. The Imam went ahead and
the woman behind him in this hot air at noon. Amirul Momineen did not
stop until they reached that house. He called the man. It is a detailed
narration. Finally the Imam made the lady enter her house and ordered
the husband to behave with love, kindness and affection peacefully.  
 You too should, to the best of your ability, make such reconciliation.

Reconciliation between a man and his wife brought about by Amirul Momineen
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

The holy month of Ramadhan is full of so many bounties, especially
during the nights of Qadr (19th, 21st and 23rd). There are three kinds
of people who do not get benefit in it: First, a drunkard who does not
repent, secondly, one who has been disowned and cursed by his parents.
Let us hope no Muslim is among them. Who is the unfortunate one who is
disowned by his parents? Yes, it is narrated that there can be a man who
behaved nicely with his parents while they were alive and pleased with
him. But after their death, one can become disobedient. T

hey asked the Imam, “How can it be so?” The Imam replied, “Because,
after their death, he never remembers them. So they also weep on this
account.” So think of those unfortunate ones. The prayers, which were
due to them, perform those prayers. Fast for the fasts, which they
missed to observe, or employ someone to perform them. If they were
indebted, pay off their debts… Thereafter, do not forget them in the
matter of charity. At least, pray for them saying: O Allah! Forgive my
parents and me and be merciful on them. Qur’an commands so: O Allah!
Forgive my parents and me and be merciful on them. Just as they brought
me up when I was small.

The third group, which is deprived of the bounties of Ramadhan, is of
those who keep and maintain hatred in their hearts for Muslims. So
anyone who has any ill will for his relatives or non-relatives must
drive that hatred from his heart. Also give gifts to him and ask pardon
so that God may make good your losses.

He said, “From the two who quarreled the one who went ahead for making
reconciliation will enter Paradise first.” Moreover, if you come to know
about conflict between two persons, make peace between them even by
spending money generously.[^4]

Imam’s expenditure on reconciliation between Shias
--------------------------------------------------

Abu Hanifah Saiqul Hajj (not the well-known Abu Hanifah) says, “There
was enmity and ill will between me and my son-in-law. It came into
public in the market or Kufa.” It was on account of the inheritance of
his daughter. The information reached Imam Ja’far bin Muhammad as-Sadiq.
He said, “What is the matter? Please come to me.” He took us to his
(Imam’s) house. The Imam asked, “How much are your claims?” Finally, he
advised us to make peace, settling the matter on payment of four hundred
dirhams. Then Mufaddal himself went inside the house and brought four
hundred dirhams and handed the amount to me saying, “Please kiss one
another and make peace.” An agreement of reconciliation was then written
accordingly.

(If you want to make reconciliation, then if the trouble is due to
money, or material wealth, open your purse and spend your money for this
precious deed. This expense is in the path of and for the pleasure of
God.)

Then Mufaddal said, “This money which I gave to you for making peace
between you was not my own. It belonged to the Imam. The Imam had told
me that this money must be used for reconciliation between Shias.”[^5]

Advent of Imam Mahdi for reconciliation
---------------------------------------

O those who long for the advent of the Imam Mahdi know that his work is
improvement and reconciliation. If you are telling the truth that you
like reconciliation and improvement then why do you not work for it?
When Imam Mahdi arrives, he would arrive for world peace. Then all will
become pious.

Everyone who is for peace and piety waits for such time. If a man is not
for peace and piety, even if he recites Dua Nudba it is of no use. You
say: Where is that heavenly reformer who will remove these discord,
differences? But what about yourself? Why do you not drive away
disputes? Why do you not make peace with your own wife, brother and
friend? What is going on in courts? Somebody says that in courts many
cases belong to family disputes. Many wives have complaints against
their husbands and many husbands against their wives. Why a woman goes
to make complaint against her husband in public? Where are the people of
yesterday? We remember them saying that the woman arrives in a black
veil and goes out in a white shroud. Women of olden days used to protect
the honor of their husbands, they did not make public issue of their
private differences.

Someone said: It is written in a newspaper that in the said family court
a lady had written in her claim demanding divorce that, “My husband
bought a car for me. But the number on it was out of fashion. I ask for
a new automobile but he says he does not have it. I do not want such a
husband.”

It is must for one to move towards sound morals and then only say: O
Lord! Where is the Master who comes to enact peace for all everywhere so
that all may live like brothers, wherever one looks there be only love
and affinity. The time of the appearance of Hujjattibnul Hasan (Imam
Mahdi) makes minds flourish, increases faith and causes piety to spread,
that is, lust and greed will go away with the wind.

It is necessary to have the taste of life in the time of Imam of the
time. If you want a life worth living, it is life in his era. Otherwise,
this life is nothing but barbarity. What kind of a life is this that
people are ready to commit suicides as there is nothing like kindness
and faithfulness in life?

I saw in a newspaper sometime back that in some of the countries, those
who reach an advanced age, their condition becomes, be they males or
females, pitiable because, others including their children and relatives
have no sympathy for them. So they establish government homes, like poor
houses, called Homes for the Old. Whoever becomes old and is out of
work, he or she is transferred to such houses.

They do have children and wealth but no one cares for them. Yet, if
there is an iota of comfort, it is in Islamic countries due to the
blessings of Islamic teachings. But they (evil forces) want that this
should also be removed from the society and that the foul smell of
selfishness should spread among you also. But I hope that things will
improve so that there may be preparedness for the arrival of Master of
the Age and the world reformer may be aided.

How do you become an assistant of the Imam of the time? Should you take
up guns and grenades? No, it is not so. Helping Master of the Age is in
reform and wisdom, peace and improvement. Improvement of self and of
others, rising higher and higher if one has wife and children.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلَقَدْ كَتَبْنَا فِي الزَّبُورِ مِن بَعْدِ الذِّكْرِ أَنَّ الأَرْضَ
يَرِثُهَا عِبَادِيَ الصَّالِحُونَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And certainly We wrote in the Book after the reminder that (as for)
the land, My righteous servants shall inherit it.”***[^6]

Pious people are the helpers of the Master of the Age (Wali Asr). They
are the righteous servants (Ibaadiyas swaalihoon) of God, not of
passions and desires. They are not corrupt. Corruption means
selfishness, greed and lust. The coercion, which they inflict upon one
another, is corruption or mischief, which ends in bloodshed and
corruption in the land of God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَاذْكُرُوا إِذْ جَعَلَكُمْ خُلَفَاءَ مِنْ بَعْدِ عَادٍ وَبَوَّأَكُمْ
فِي الأَرْضِ تَتَّخِذُونَ مِنْ سُهُولِهَا قُصُورًا وَتَنْحِتُونَ
الْجِبَالَ بُيُوتًا فَاذْكُرُوا آلاءَ اللَّهِ وَلا تَعْثَوْا فِي
الأَرْضِ مُفْسِدِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And remember when He made you successors after Ad and settled you in
the land- you make mansions on its plains and hew out houses in the
mountains- remember therefore Allah’s benefits and do not act corruptly
in the land, making mischief.”***[^7]

So this peace making is in remembering God. Remember Him so that you may
become competent for it. Let it never be so that when you hear a word
from someone about someone else, you repeat and relate it and thus fan
the fire of enmity. The good of both this world and the Hereafter are in
peace and reconciliation. Likewise the destruction of the life and
Hereafter is in lust and greed.

It is mentioned in Surah Shams after the oath taking that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿قَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَنْ زَكَّاهَا. وَقَدْ خَابَ مَنْ دَسَّاهَا﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He will indeed be successful who purifies it. And he will indeed
fail who corrupts*** ***it.”***[^8]

Meaning: Succeeded the one who cleansed his heart and deprived oneself
who destroyed it. Let aside your heart. Just see how God deals with you.
If you know the tastefulness of leaving aside selfishness, you will not
say that selfishness has any good in it.

If you trample upon your desires your honor also increases. Do not say:
It is repulsive. It is not so. Satan puts doubts in your heart. He does
not spare you.  
 God is Mighty. So whoever works for God is also strong.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿وَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ وَلِرَسُولِهِ وَلِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…and to Allah belongs the might and to His Apostle and to the
believers…”***[^9]

Whenever one turns towards God, he approaches his honor, respect and
good luck. But when he is caught in the net of desires and passions he
is in meanness, adversity, downfall and misfortune. The meaning of this
will become clearer with a Qur’anic story.

Wild wolves or shining stars!
-----------------------------

There were two contradictory dreams. Think over the dream of Yusuf and
that of his aunt. Yusuf saw in his dream that eleven bright stars along
with the sun and the moon fell in prostration before him.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿إِنِّي رَأَيْتُ أَحَدَ عَشَرَ كَوْكَبًا وَالشَّمْسَ وَالْقَمَرَ
رَأَيْتُهُمْ لِي سَاجِدِينَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Surely, I saw eleven stars and the sun and the moon- I saw them
making obeisance to me.”***[^10]

At that very hour his aunt saw in her dream that eleven brutal wolves
attacked Yusuf and torn him into pieces. What is the meaning of these
two dreams or visions? Undoubtedly, the eleven fierce animals who tore
Yusuf into pieces were the eleven brothers of Yusuf who attacked him in
the forest with knives, and finally threw him in a well and went away.

Yusuf himself saw eleven shining stars bowing down before him. They were
the same eleven brothers of his, once in the form of wolves and once in
the form of radiant stars. That form of a wolf was their state of
sinning. Even if you are the son of a Prophet, if you commit a sin, you
are a filthy wolf. Your angel-like form has become ugly, dreadful and
dark. But if you repent and say: ‘O my God have mercy on me, I seek
forgiveness of Allah,’ and reform yourself, sought pardon of the one
whom you did injustice, you become a shining star. These eleven brothers
who sinned turned into wolves but after some years, when they repented
and felt ashamed and came to Yusuf in a state of embarrassment and asked
forgiveness from him, Yusuf also said to them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
﴿لا تَثْرِيبَ عَلَيْكُمْ الْيَوْمَ﴾
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(There shall be) no reproof against you this day…”***[^11]

Now the same eleven wolves fell down on earth all together, regained
their angel-like form and became eleven shining stars.

Take benefit of Repentance
--------------------------

Do take the benefit of repentance or seeking forgiveness. Do not let
yourselves go to the grave in your present sinful state. Repentance is
the door of mercy or turning towards the truth that changes you.
Darkness turn into light, black spots become bright. Fire turns to
flowers. If you go to the grave in a sinful state, there is a volcano
for you in your grave. If you go with repentance there is mercy and
kindness.

Yusuf is a prophet and a son of a prophet. Divine quality is in his
nature. One of the attributes of God is to accept apology. So he
accepted the apology of his brothers. God also accepts and forgives. You
also come. Seek pardon and be sure that He will forgive you. Say: O
Lord! I was unwise and negligent; I was accosted by passions and lusts.

You are absolute Merciful, O Lord! Those who love the Merciful Lord turn
to Him and those dislike Him turn away from Him

[^1]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 20

[^2]: Biharul Anwar, vol. 18

[^3]: Surah Mumtahena 60:1

[^4]: For further clarification refer to the discussion of hatred in the
book of Qalbe Saleem

[^5]: Safinatul Bihar, vol. 6, pg. 40

[^6]: Surah Anbiya 21:105

[^7]: Surah Araf 7:74

[^8]: Surah Shams 91:9-10

[^9]: Surah Munafiqeen 63:8

[^10]: Surah Yusuf 12:4

[^11]: Surah Yusuf 12:92


