Obligation To Perform Hajj
==========================

It is clear from the Holy Quran and the traditions that performance of
Hajj is obligatory on every person who has attained puberty and has the
requisite wealth stated below.

Hajj is one of the basic principles of the religion; its performance is
one of its essentials, and its non-performance, after recognition of it
being obligatory, is a grave sin. Denial of the obligatory nature of
Hajj, when there is no room for any doubt about it, is blasphemy (kufr).
Allah states in the Holy Quran, "Allah has made it obligatory on those
who can afford and are able to make the journey to perform the
pilgrimage; and if anybody denies it, then Allah is above all the
universes. "

Sheikh Kulayni has reported authentically that Imam Sadiq (a.s.) has
said, " Whoever dies without having performed the obligatory pilgrimage
when he was not prevented by lack of means or illness or a Sultan, dies
a Jew or a Christian." Indeed, there are many reports on the pilgrimage
being obligatory and its importance, but the brevity of this work does
not permit setting them all out so that we confine ourselves to the
verse and the report above cited.

In religion the performance of the pilgrimage is obligatory on a person
once only and is known as Hijjatul Islam.

Rule 1:

Performance of the pilgrimage becomes obligatory immediately in the
year in which the conditions for it are ascertained to have realised.If
one fails to perform it, deliberately or for an excuse, it must be
fulfilled in the ensuing year, and so on. Postponing it without valid
reason is a grave sin.

Rule 2:

When proceeding to pilgrimage becomes obligatory, one must make all the
preparations and arrangements for the journey to be able to perform the
ceremonies in time. If there are several groups one could join or
flights one can take and one has confidence to reach in time if one
joins any of them or takes any of the flights, it is permissible to join
or take any of them, although it is preferable to chose the one that
would definitely reach in time.

Rule 3:

If it was possible for a person to join the first group but did not do
so in the confidence that the later group would reach in time but then
was not able to join it or it would not have reached in time for the
pilgrimage because of the delay, the obligation to perform the
pilgrimage does not become fixed on him, even though his delay was
excusable.


CONDITIONS WHICH MAKE HIJJATUL ISLAM OBLIGATORY

**The First Condition: Puberty**

Pilgrimage is not obligatory on any person who has not attained
puberty, even if he was approaching it. A pilgrimage, performed by a
child will not be counted as Hijjatul Islam, even if it is performed
properly.

Rule 4:

If a boy of means leaves for pilgrimage and attains puberty before
wearing ihram at the meeqaat, his pilgrimage is valid as Hijjatul Islam.
However, if he attains puberty after wearing ihram and before the stay
at Muzdalifah, he should complete the pilgrimage and it would be valid
as Hijjatul Islam.

Rule 5:

If a person performs an optional pilgrimage believing himself not to
have attained puberty but discovers during the pilgrimage or after its
completion that he had already attained puberty, his pilgrimage will be
counted as performance of an obligatory pilgrimage.

Rule 6:

It is recommended for a mature child to perform a pilgrimage but
according to majority of the scholars it is conditional on the consent
of his guardian.

Rule 7:

The consent of parents is not necessary for the validity of a
pilgrimage of one who has attained puberty. However, if departure to
perform a recommended pilgrimage displeases either or both of them, for
the fear, for example, of the dangers in the journey, then it is not
permitted to depart on a pilgrimage.

Rule 8:

It is recommended that in respect of a child, male or female, who is
not intelligent, the guardian should make him or her muhrim, that is to
say, help him wear the ihram, instruct him to recite the talbiyya and
advise him to be reciting it if he is capable of understanding, or else
he should recite it for him. He must also restrain him from all matter's
which a muhrim must avoid. It is permissible to delay removing the
clothes of a child till reaching Fakh if that route is taken. The child
must then be instructed to perform all such acts in the pilgrimage that
he can and the guardian should perform on his behalf what he is unable
to do. The guardian should make the child perform tawaaf, saee between
Safaa and Marwah, stay in Arafat and Macer, throw the stones if he is
able to, else throw them on his behalf, recite prayers after the tawaaf,
get his head shaved and the remainder of the acts.

Rule 9:

There is no objection to a guardian assisting a child to wear ihram
although he is not in a state of ihram himself.

Rule 10:

It is apparent that it is recommended that the person who takes a child
who is not intelligent on a pilgrimage as his guardian must be the
person who has the right to custody of the child as set out in the law
of marriages.

Rule 11:

If the expenses of the pilgrimage of the child exceed the usual amount,
the excess is the responsibility of the guardian and not the child.
However, if the guardian proceeds on pilgrimage the child becomes
unprotected or if the journey is in the interest of the child, it is
permissible to meet the expenses of the child from his own money.

Rule 12:

The cost of the sacrifice for the child is on the guardian and so is
the penalty (kaffarah) for hunting. As for penalties which are attracted
as a result of deliberate acts, they naturally would not fall on the
child or the guardian nor would they be payable from the the child's
money.

**The Second Condition: Intelligence:**

There is no obligation on an insane person to perform a pilgrimage,
even if the insanity is periodic. However, if the insane recovers during
the pilgrimage period, is of means and is able to perform the ceremonies
of the pilgrimage, then it is obligatory on him to perform the
pilgrimage, even if he remains insane during the other periods.

The Third Condition: Freedom:
The Fourth Condition: The Means:

There are a few rules that need consideration under this head:

A: Time:

This means that there must be enough time for proceeding to Makkah and
staying throughout the obligatory periods. It is not obligatory to
perform the pilgrimage if there are the means but not the time
sufficient for the journey and stay for the obligatory ceremonies there
or if making the time necessitates undergoing great difficulties beyond
what is normal. In such circumstances, it is obligatory to set aside the
funds to make the journey in the ensuing year. If there are the means in
the following year, performance of the pilgrimage is obligatory,
otherwise it is not.

**B: Physical Health and Strength :**

If a person is unable to travel to the holy places by reason of disease
or age, or unable to stay there for the specified periods because of
extreme heat or is otherwise unbearable for him, it is not obligatory
for him to set out for the pilgrimage personally but it is obligatory on
him to send an agent to perform it on his behalf.

**C: No Obstruction :**

'This means that the route must be open and safe so that there is no
obstruction to reaching the meeqaat and no danger to the pilgrim, his
property or honour. Otherwise, the pilgrimage is not obligatory. That is
the rule for proceeding to the holy places. As for the return from those
places, the rule will be set out under Rule 22 below. However, if after
wearing ihram an obstruction arises from reaching the holy places, like
illness, enemy or the like, then there are special rules relating to
such circumstances which will be discussed below.

Rule 13:

If there are two routes available for the journey to the pilgrimage,
one which is safe and the other not, the obligation to perform the
pilgrimage remains and the safe course must be taken, even if it is the
longer route. However, if taking the longer route entails travelling to
many countries, then such a situation would constitute an obstruction
within the meaning of the preceding rule.

Rule 14:

If a person has property in his country which would perish or be lost
if he went on pilgrimage, it is not obligatory upon him to do so.
Similarly, it is not obligatory to proceed on pilgrimage if doing so is
prohibited in religion, for instance if it would mean abandoning to do
what is more important in religion than the pilgrimage, like rescuing a
person from drowning or fire or if the journey is dependant upon
commission of a sin, the avoidance of which is more important than the
performance of the pilgrimage.

Rule 15:

if the performance of the pilgrimage will result in a sin, either by an
comission to do what is obligatory in religion or the commission of a
forbidden act a sin will have been committed which will have to be
answered but it will remain unconnected with the pilgrimage which will
be valid as a Hijjatul Islam if all the other conditions for its
validity will have been observed. There is no difference in this regard
whether the pilgrim was already liable to perform the pilgrimage or it
became obligatory on him only in that year.

Rule 16:

If there is an enemy on the way to the pilgrimage and there is no
defence against him except losing to him so much of one's property as to
be onerous on the pilgrim, it is not necessary to lose the property and
the obligation for the pilgrimage ceases. Otherwise, the obligation
remains but it is not necessary to bribe so that the road is opened and
the obstruction removed.

Rule 17:

If proceeding to the pilgrimage depends upon a journey by sea, the
obligation does not cease except if there is also a real risk of
drowning or illness. If the pilgrimage is performed despite the risk, it
is valid.

D: Expenses for the Journey :

There must be sufficient funds to meet the expenses of the journey for
eating, drinking and other necessities. The provision must be adequate
for the return journey including the transport charges. The amount
necessary would depend upon the position of the pilgrim.

Rule 18 :

Provision of the expenses and transport is not merely to meet the
necessities. They are an unqualified condition for the pilgrimage even
if the provision is not required by the pilgrim who, for instance, is
capable of making the journey walking without any difficulty and to do
so would not be beneath his dignity.

Rule 19 :

The measure of the expenses for the journey is what the pilgrim
physically has with him. It is not obligatory for a person to raise
funds to meet the expenses though his business or other sources. There
is no difference in this regard between a close and distant journey.

Rule 20:

The condition as to the expenses for the journey relates to the
expenses from the residence of the pilgrim and not his country of
origin. For example, if the pilgrim had moved to Madina for business or
other purpose and when he is there, he has the means for the journey or
sufficient funds to meet its expenses, it is obligatory on him to
perform the pilgrimage, even if he would not have had the means for the
journey if he was to make it from his country.

Rule 21:

If a person has property for which he is unable to find a buyer at its
real value and has to postpone the pilgrimage to be able to sell at its
real price, he is not obliged to sell it immediately. However, if the
expenses of the pilgrimage have already risen, for example the cost of
transport in the year in which he has the means are higher than they
would be in the following year, it is not permissible to postpone the
pilgrimage.

Rule 22:

The provision of the expenses for the return journey is a condition for
the pilgrimage only if there is intention to return home. If a person
does not intend to return home and wishes to reside in another country,
it is enough to have provision to reach him there. However, if the
country to which he wishes to proceed is more distant than his home
country, it is not necessary to have enough provision to reach him
there, and to make the p ilgrimage obligatory he needs only to have
sufficient funds to enable him to return to his country unless the
pilgrim has no option but to proceed to the more distant country.

**E: Availability of Means on Return :**

It must be possible for the pilgrim on his return to maintain himself
and his family. It is clearly necessary that on his return the pilgrim
should not have to fear poverty or inadequacy of means for himself or
his family because of the expenditure out of his property during the
journey to the pilgrimage. It is not obligatory on a person to proceed
on a pilgrimage if by doing so he would need to expend for the journey a
proportion of his property which is the means of maintenance for himself
and his family. If he does not have alternative means of livelihood in
keeping with his social status, it is clearly not obligatory on him to
sell his property which he would need as a necessity of life, nor is it
obligatory to sell his home which is in keeping with his position,
clothes for decoration, the household furniture or tools of trade needed
for livelihood like books necessarily required by a scholar for study.
Generally, disposal of necessities is not necessary if to do so would
cause distress and hardship.

However, if he has excess of such items which he does not need to
provide livelihood, it is obligatory to sell the excess in order to
provide the expenditure for the pilgrimage. For example, if one owns a
house of the value of eighty thousand pounds and it is possible to sell
it and purchase another one for a lesser price without causing any
strain, it is obligatory to do so and spend the excess sum produced in
making the pilgrimage and returning and in the expenditure for the
family.

Rule 23:

If a person has property which he needs it is not obligatory for him to
sell in order to proceed on pilgrimage, but if he subsequently is able
to do without, it becomes obligatory upon him to sell it and perform the
pilgrimage. For example, a lady has a piece of jewellery which she needs
and cannot do without but she reaches a stage when she is able to do
without it, either because of old age or otherwise, it is obligatory on
her to sell it and perform the pilgrimage.

Rule 24:

If a person owns a house and there is another house in which it is
possible to reside without strain, like a waqf property conforming to
his needs, it is obligatory to sell the house of ownership and perform
the pilgrimage, even if the purchase price may need to be supplemented
from his other property. This rule also applies to books of learning and
other means of life.

Rule 25:

If a person has sufficient funds to embark upon the pilgrimage, but
needs to marry, purchase a residence or satisfy any other need, it is
not obligatory to perform the pilgrimage.

Rule 26 :

If a person is a creditor and he needs the money for the total or part
expenses of the pilgrimage and the debt is already due, it is obligatory
on him to demand it. If the debtor does not make payment, but the
creditor is in a position to force him to make the payment even if it is
by suing him in a court of law or if he raises a dispute but it is
possible to set-off the sum against other payments due to the debtor, it
is obligatory on the creditor to resort to such measures.

Similarly, even if the repayment is not due, a demand should be made if
the debtor would make payment upon the demand. However, if the debtor is
impoverished or delays payment and it is not possible to enforce the
payment or if doing so would cause distress, or if the debt is premature
and the debtor is unwilling to settle it before the due date, then in
these circumstances, if it is possible to assign the debt without
causing harm or distress, one should do so and from the proceeds meet
the expenses of the pilgrimage or supplement them, if necessary, from
other property.

Rule 27:

For those carrying on a profession or a vocation like blacksmiths,
builders, carpenters whose earnings are normally sufficient to meet the
maintenance of themselves and their families, it becomes obligatory upon
them to perform pilgrimage if they receive property from inheritance or
other source which would be sufficient to meet the expenses of the
pilgrimage and the maintenance of the family during his absence.

Rule 28:

If a person's livelihood is derived from religious dues like khums,
zakaat, etc, and his income is assured without difficulty, it is
obligatory on him to proceed to pilgrimage if he acquires sufficient
funds for the return journey and maintenance of his family. The same
rule applies if another person has undertaken to pay for his livelihood
or if not with standing the expenditure on the pilgrimage there would be
no difference in his lifestyle after the pilgrimage.

Rule 29:

If a person receives sufficient sum of money to cover the expenses of a
pilgrimage by obtaining conditional ownership of property, it is
apparent that the pilgrimage becomes obligatory on him if he can prevent
the withdrawal of the ownership from him, for example; by selling the
article subject of a revocable gift. Otherwise, whether the pilgrimage
becomes obligatory depends upon the decision of the donor or the person
vested with the right to exercise the condition which could result in
withdrawal of ownership. If such person effects the withdrawal before
the completion of the pilgrimage, then the pilgrimage will be deemed not
to have been obligatory upon him.

Rule 30:

It is not necessary that the means be acquired from his own property
but can be acquired by begging or be provided by another person.
However, if the cloths for ihram during tawaaf and the prayers after
tawaaf were acquired unlawfully, the pilgrimage is not valid. If the
money paid for the sacrifice was acquired by unlawful means, the
pilgrimage is not acceptable unless there was no special condition for
the payment, for example payment be by specific coins, in which case the
pilgrimage will be acceptable but the pilgrim will remain responsible
for the unlawful money.

Rule 31:

It is not obligatory that the means be acquired. If a gift is made to a
person which would provide him with the means for the pilgrimage, he is
not obliged to accept it. Similarly if a person is offered employment
which is compatible with his status and the remuneration from it would
provide him the means for the pilgrimage, he is not obliged to accept
it. However, if a person renders services during the journey to the
pilgrimage and thereby acquires the means, performance of pilgrimage
becomes obligatory.

Rule 32:

If a person undertakes to perform a pilgrimage for another person on
remuneration and from its dues acquires sufficient means for himself to
perform the pilgrimage, then if it was a condition of the performance of
the pilgrimage for the other in that year, he must fulfil the pilgrimage
for the other in that year. If at the time of the pilgrimage in the
following year, he still has sufficient means to undertake the
pilgrimage, it becomes obligatory on him to perform it in the ensuing
year. However, if it was not a condition for the performance of the
pilgrimage for the other that it be performed in the same year, then it
is obligatory on him to perform pilgrimage for himself in that year,
unless he is confident that he can perform it for himself in the ensuing
year.

Rule 33:

If a person borrows money sufficient to cover the expenses of a
pilgrimage, it does not become obligatory on him even though he would
have the means to repay it on return from the pilgrimage, except if the
loan is for a very long period for which debtors do not usually
provide.

Rule 34:

If a person has incurred debts to the value of his entire property, it
is apparent that it is not obligatory on him to perform a pilgrimage.
There is no difference in this respect between prompt and deferred debts
or whether it was incurred prior or subsequent to the acquisition of the
means except when the debt is not repayable for a very long period, for
example of fifty years, for which debtors do not usually provide.

Rule 35:

If there is khums or zakah due on a person and has funds which would
not be sufficient to meet the expenses of the pilgrimage if he settled
his khums or zakkat liability, it is obligatory on him to settle those
liabilities and the pilgrimage is not obligatory on him. It is
immaterial whether the liability is on the funds intended to be expended
on the pilgrimage or is of arrears.

Rule 36:

If the pilgrimage has become obligatory on a person and there is
liability on him of khums or zakah or other obligatory dues, he must
first settle those liabilities and it is not permissible to proceed on
pilgrimage without having settled them. If the cloths of ihram and what
is spent on the sacrifice are from money bearing such liability, the
ruling thereon have been explained in Rule 30.

Rule 37:

If he has some means but is uncertain whether they will be sufficient
for the pilgrimage, as a matter of precaution he must make inquiries as
to its sufficiency.

Rule 38 :

If a person has property sufficient to meet the expenses of the
pilgrimage but is not available in cash or would be sufficient if it
supplemented the available cash but there is no possibility of spending
from the property or to sell it through an agent, then it is not
obligatory to proceed on pilgrimage, or else the pilgrimage becomes
obligatory.

Rule 39:

If a person has property which is sufficient to meet the expenses of
the pilgrimage; it is obligatory to perform it if he is able to travel
for pilgrimage in time. If he deals with the property in a way that he
becomes without the adequate means and unable to accomplish the
pilgrimage, it remains an obligation on him if he was certain that he
could have proceeded on pilgrimage in time. In this case if disposes the
property for a low price or by way of gift without consideration, the
transaction itself is valid but he is in sin because he avoided the
means which would have enabled him to perform the pilgrimage.

Rule 40:

It is not necessary that the pilgrim should own the means of the
expenditure. He need only have available to him property from which he
can lawfully expend. If it is enough to meet all the expenses and the
other conditions for the pilgrimage are satisfied, it becomes obligatory
on him.

Rule 41:

Just as it is necessary that there should be sufficient means to make
the journey, so is it necessary that there should be funds available for
the completion of the pilgrimage, indeed until return to one's home. If
property of a person is destroyed in his country or during the journey,
the pilgrimage is not obligatory on him. It will be manifest that he was
not of means from the beginning. For example, if a debt becomes enforced
on him for deliberately destroying the property of another and it would
not be possible to compensate the victim if the available funds were to
be utilised for the pilgrimage. However, if a person deliberately
destroys the property of another, the obligation to perform the
pilgrimage is not annulled but remains on his shoulders to be
discharged. However,if he had property which was enough to make him of
means and it is destroyed in his country, it will not be manifest that
he was not of means from the beginning. it will be sufficient for him to
perform the pilgrimage which will not become obligatory on him again.

Rule 42:

If a person has enough means but was unaware of it or was unaware that
the pilgrimage had become obligatory on him, and remembers or become
aware after the means have been utilised and not longer able to perform
the pilgrimage, then he had a reasonable excuse for his ignorance or
unawareness, the pilgrimage is not fixed on him, otherwise it is the
apparent that the pilgrimage becomes fixed on him if the other
conditions for pilgrimage become applicable and the means were
available.

Rule 43:

Means sufficient for the pilgrimage is established not only by its
acquisition but also if a sufficient amount is gifted to a person and it
matters not in this regard whether the gift is from one person or a
number of them if it is adequate in totality to meet the expenses of the
pilgrimage and the maintenance of the family and there is no difference
in this respect between the donor making the property lawful for use or
settling it for the pilgrimage or between making an outright gift of
property or making provision to meet the expenses.

Rule 44:

If a person bequeaths property to be expended on the performance of an
obligatory pilgrimage by another, it is mandatory on the latter to do so
after the death of the testator provided the legacy is adequate for the
expenses of the pilgrimage and the family. Similarly, if a person
creates a waqf or makes a nadhar (vow) or a bequest of property for
performance of an obligatory pilgrimage and the trustee, the person
fulfilling the nadhar or the executor gives the property to another to
perform an obligatory pilgrimage, it is mandatory on the other to do
so.

Rule 45:

It is not obligatory, in respect of a person who acquires the means for
the pilgrimage through a gift, to be able to return from the pilgrimage
in a condition of means. However, if he works especially during the
pilgrimage time and the earnings made in that period provide for his
expenses for the full or part of the year and he would not be able to
meet the expenses for his livelihood if he accepts the gift and departs
for the pilgrimage, he is not obliged to accept the gift, unless the
gift covers his expenses.

Rule 46:

If a person makes a gift to another so that the latter proceeds to
obligatory pilgrimage, it is obligatory to accept the gift. However, if
the donor gives the donee the option of proceeding to an obligatory
pilgrimage or not or makes the gift without any mention of an obligatory
pilgrimage, expressly or impliedly, it is not obligatory on him to
accept the gift.

Rule 47:

The existence of a debt is not incompatible with having sufficient
means acquired by way of a gift. However, if the debt is due for payment
and the creditor makes demand for it and the debtor is content to make
the payment if he does not proceed on pilgrimage, it is not obligatory
to perform the pilgrimage.

Rule 48:

If a person donates property to a group of persons so that one of them
should perform an obligatory pilgrimage and one of them advances to
accept the property, the remaining ones are released from the
obligation. However, if all of them leave the property although each of
them could have taken possession of it, then the obligation to perform
the obligatory pilgrimage is fixed on all of them.

Rule 49:

It is not obligatory to accept a gift to make an obligatory pilgrimage
unless the payment for it is a proper estimation of the expenditure. If
the payment is for Hajj-e-Tamatoo but the gift is for Hajj-e-Qiraan or
Ifraad, it is not obligatory for him to accept it and vice versa.
Similar is the position if the gift is for an obligatory pilgrimage and
the donee has already performed his obligatory pilgrimage. However, if
he did not perform it when it was obligatory on him and his
circumstances then changed and was now offered a gift to perform an
obligatory pilgrimage, it is mandatory on him to accept the gift.
Likewise, if there is a liability on him to perform a pilgrimage to
fulfil a nadhr (vow) or otherwise but does not have the means to do so
and is offered the gift to perform an obligatory pilgrimage it is
mandatory on him to accept it.

Rule 50:

If a gift is made to a person to cover the expenditure of performing an
obligatory pilgrimage and the property gets destroyed on the way to the
pilgrimage, the obligation lapses. However, if it is possible to
continue with the journey with his other property, it is obligatory on
him to perform the pilgrimage and will be counted as part of the
Hijjatul Islam. He may do so only if on his return to his family there
will be means of livelihood for them, else he may not use his property
for the pilgrimage.

Rule 51:

If a person authorises another to obtain a loan and proceed on a
pilgrimage with the funds so obtained, it is not obligatory on him to
seek one. However, if he receives such a loan, it becomes obligatory on
him to depart for the pilgrimage.

Rule 52 :

The price of the sacrifice is included in the expenses and if the donor
does not pay for it but meets the remainder of the expenses, it is not
obligatory on the donee to perform the obligatory pilgrimage provided
the donee cannot afford to pay the price of the sacrifice himself.
However, if the purchase of the sacrificial animal by the donee would
cause embarrassment to him, it is not obligatory to accept the gift.
Obviously, if any penalty (kaffarah) is incurred in the course of the
pilgrimage, it is the exclusive obligation of the donee to discharge
it.

Rule 53:

An obligatory pilgrimage performed with property gifted to the pilgrim
is valid to constitute Hijjatul Islam and even if the pilgrim acquires
means thereafter, he is not obliged to perform the pilgrimage again.

Rule 54:

It is possible for a donor to withdraw his gift before or after the
donee wears ihram but if he withdraws after the donee wears the ihram,
it is obligatory on the donee to complete the pilgrimage if he actually
has the means to do so and the donor will become the guarantor to
reimburse him for all his expenses. If the donor withdraws the gift
while the donee is on the way, he is responsible to pay for the expenses
of the return journey.

Rule 55:

If Zakah money is given to a person in the way of Allah and in the
public interest with, as a matter of precaution, the permission of a
mujtahid, to perform an obligatory pilgrimage, it is mandatory on him to
do so but if he is given the money from the share of Sadaat or Zakah
money from the share of the poor on the condition that he should spend
it on an obligatory pilgrimage, the condition is invalid and the
pilgrimage is not obligatory on him.

Rule 56:

If a person is gifted property from which to perform an obligatory
pilgrimage and it later becomes known to him that it was unlawfully
obtained by the donor, the pilgrimage is not valid and the true owner is
entitled to reclaim it from the donor or donee. If he claims from the
donee and the donee is unaware of the true ownership he should revert to
the donor; if he was aware he would have no right to revert.

Rule 57:

If, without means, a person performs an obligatory pilgrimage for
himself or another, either gratuitously or for reward, it is not valid
as a Hijjatul Islam and it is obligatory on him to perform a pilgrimage
when he acquires the means.

Rule 58:

If a person believes that he does not leave the means for the
pilgrimage to be obligatory on him but performs it in obedience to the
command of Allah intending it to be accepted and later learns that he
was of means, his pilgrimage is valid and there is no need for a second
pilgrimage.

Rule 59:

If a wife has the means, consent of her husband is not a condition for
her performance of an obligatory pilgrimage, just as it is not
permissible for a husband to forbid his wife to perform an obligatory
pilgrimage. However; he can forbid her to leave sooner than necessary if
there is sufficient time for the pilgrimage. The same rule applies to a
lady who has been granted a revocable divorce if she is in iddah.

Rule 60:

It is not a condition for a lady performing an obligatory pilgrimage to
be accompanied by a male within the prohibited degree (who is her
mahram) provided her safety is secured. If not, she must be accompanied
by a male within the prohibited degree even on remuneration, if that is
possible. If not, the pilgrimage is not obligatory on her.

Rule 61:

If a person makes a nadhar (vow) to visit the shrine ] of Imam Hussain
(a.s) each year on the day of Arafaat and subsequently becomes of means,
the vow lapses and he must perform the obligatory pilgrimage. This rule
applies in respect of every vow which affects the performance of the
obligatory pilgrimage.

Rule 62:

A person of means must perform the obligatory pilgrimage personally if
it is possible for him to do so and it is not permissible for someone
else to perform it for him, gratuitously or for payment.

Rule 63:

If a person is liable to perform an obligatory pilgrimage but is unable
to do so by reason of illness, senility, infirmity or other restraint or
the performance of it would cause anguish and there is no hope that he
would be able to perform it himself without anguish, it is obligatory on
him to appoint someone to perform it on his behalf. Such is also the
rule if he is wealthy but is unable to undertake the performance of the
pilgrimage personally or that to do so would cause him great difficulty.
Once it becomes obligatory to appoint another person to perform the
pilgrimage for him, it must be done immediately just as the performance
of the pilgrimage itself must not be delayed.

Rule 64:

If a person proceeds on a pilgrimage as an agent of another who is
disabled from doing so himself and the principal dies while the agent is
in the performance of the pilgrimage, the pilgrimage of the agent will
be valid, although the pilgrimage had become obligatory on the
principal. If, per chance, the disability ceases before death, it is
preferable that the , pilgrimage be performed personally, if possible.
If the disability ceases after the agent has worn ihram, it is
obligatory on the principal to perform the pilgrimage himself even
though the agent must complete the ceremonies, as a matter of
precaution.

Rule 65:

If it is not possible for a disabled person to appoint an agent to
perform on his behalf, the obligation to perform the pilgrimage lapses.
However, if the pilgrimage had become obligatory on him, it is
obligatory to have it performed after his death. Moreover, if it was
possible to appoint an agent and he does not do so until his death, it
is obligatory to have the pilgrimage performed after his death.

Rule 66:

If it becomes obligatory to appoint an agent but one does not, the
performance by another person of a pilgrimage on his behalf gratuitously
does not discharge the obligation and it remains obligatory on him to
send an agent as a matter of precaution.

Rule 67:

It is sufficient to appoint an agent from the meeqaat' and it is not
necessary that he be sent from the home country.

Rule 68:

If the pilgrimage becomes obligatory on a person and he dies after
wearing ihram in the Haram, he will be deemed to have accomplished his
pilgrimage. If he dies in the course of the Umrat-ul-Tamatoo, he will
also be deemed to have performed the pilgrimage and there is no
obligation to have it performed after his death. However, If he dies
before entering the Haram, it is obligatory to have the pilgrimage
performed again (qadha) even if the death occurs after his having worn
ihram but before entry into the Haram or even after the entry into the
Haram if he did so without ihram. This rule is especial to the Hijjatul
Islam and does not apply to other pilgrimages which have become
obligatory, by, for example, a vow (nadhr) or by reason of deliberately
invalidating an obligatory pilgrimage (ifsad). Nor has it any
application to the Umrat-ul-Mufradah. Whoever dies after wearing ihram
in the Haram in the performance of the pilgrimage, there is no doubt
that he will be deemed to have performed the Hijjatul Islam but if he
dies before then, it is clear that the pilgrimage would have to be
performed again for him by way of qadha.

Rule 69:

It is obligatory on a non-believer of means to perform a pilgrimage
even though it is not acceptable so long as he remains a non-believer.
However, if he loses the means before being converted, the pilgrimage is
not obligatory on him.

Rule 70:

The pilgrimage is obligatory on a Muslim who becomes apostate but its
performance in apostasy is invalid. If he repents, it becomes valid even
if the apostasy is innate arising out of his clan.

Rule 71:

If a non-Shia performs an obligatory pilgrimage and then becomes a
Shia, it is not obligatory on him to perform the pilgrimage again
provided he had performed the pilgrimage in accordance with the rules of
the faith he then held or it was performed in accordance with our faith
and he had the intention of closeness to Allah in the performance of the
pilgrimage.

Rule 72:

If the pilgrimage becomes obligatory but is deliberately delayed and
one loses the means, it is obligatory to perform it by any means
possible, even begging but not to the stage of hardship and anguish. If
he dies, the pilgrimage has to be performed for him by way of qadha even
if someone performs it gratuitously for him instead of requiring
reward.


