Tawaf-ul-nisa
=============

Tenth and Eleventh Obligations:

This is the tenth obligation in Hajj and the eleventh is the prayers
(salaat) which follow it. Although they are obligatory, they do not
constitute the ceremonies of Hajj and the failure to perform them, even
if deliberate, does not invalidate the Hajj.

Rule 414:

Tawaaf ul-Nisa is obligatory on both males and females. If the male
fails to perform it, any woman becomes unlawful for him and if the woman
omits to perform it, any man becomes unlawful for her. An agent
performing a tawaaf ul-Nisa will do so on behalf of the principal and
not himself.

Rule 415:

The procedures and rules regarding the Tawaaf ul-Nisa and the prayers
following it are the same as those for the 'tawaaf for Hajj and the
prayers after it. The only difference is in the niyyah.

Rule 416:

If, by reason of illness or otherwise, a person is unable to perform
the Tawaaf ul-Nisa, he should do so with the help of another person or
even riding an animal or carried by another man as explained in rule 323
above.

Rule 417:

If a man fails to perform the Tawaaf ul-Nisa, whether knowingly and
deliberately or out of ignorance of the rule or through oversight, any
woman is forbidden to him until it is performed. If there is difficulty
about him performing it personally, it is permissible for him to appoint
an agent to do so on his behalf and when the agent has performed it on
his behalf, his lawful women become permissible to him. If he dies
before performing it, then, if his eldest person performs it on his
behalf, the obligation is satisfied, otherwise, as a matter of caution,
its qadha must be performed and paid for out of the shares of the adult
heirs with their approval.

Rule 418:

It is not permissible to perform Tawaaf ul-Nisa before saee. If one
does so knowingly and deliberately, it is obligatory to repeat it after
saee and if one does so out of ignorance of the rule or through
oversight, it is apparently sufficient, though, as a matter of caution,
one must repeat it.

Rule 419:

It is permissible to perform Tawaf ul-Nisa before the two stays at
Arafaat and Mina for people mentioned in rule 409 above but their wives
do not become lawful to them until after the performance of the
ceremonies at Mina, the throwing of pebbles, sacrifice and shaving of
head or taqseer.

Rule 420:

If menstruation of a lady commences and her companions will not await
her becoming clean, it is permissible for her to omit the performance of
the Tawaaf ul-Nisa and depart with her companions and in such a case, as
a matter of caution, she should appoint an agent to perform the tawaaf
and recite the prayers on her behalf. If the menstruation commences
after she had performed the fourth round, it is permissible for her to
omit the performance of the remainder of the tawaaf and depart with her
companions. As a matter of caution, she must appoint an agent to perform
the remainder of the tawaaf and recite the prayers on her behalf.

Rule 421:

The rules applicable to forgetting to recite the prayers (salaat) after
the Tawaaf ul-Nisa are the same as those for forgetting to say them
after the tawaaf for Umrah which is mentioned under 326 above.

Rule 422:

Man and woman become lawful to each other after both have performed
Tawaaf- ul-Nisa and recited the prayers. The prohibition on hunting
remains, as a matter of caution, till the noon of the thirteenth.
Cutting of trees and grass and hunting in the Haram is forbidden anyway
as already stated above.

STAY IN MINA

**Twelfth Obligation:**

The twelfth obligation in Hajj is to spend the nights of the eve of the
eleventh and twelfth in Mina. It is necessary to form the intention to
do so in order to attain the nearness of Allah. If, on the day of Idd,
the pilgrim departs to Makkah to perform the tawaaf and saee, it is
obligatory on him to return to Mina to spend the night there. He who has
not refrained from hunting in the state of ihram must also spend the
night of the eve of the thirteenth in Mina. As a matter of caution, so
must one who has not abstained from sexual intercourse in the state of
ihram. Apart from these two categories, the remaining pilgrims can
depart from Mina after Zuhr on the twelfth but if they delay their
departure till night falls, they must spend the night of the eve of the
thirteenth in Mina till dawn.

Rule 423:

If a pilgrim prepares himself to depart from Mina and leaves the
premises he occupied there but is unable to depart from Mina because of
the great rush of pilgrims or for other reason, then, if it is possible
for him to spend the night there, it is obligatory to do so but if there
is some difficulty about spending the night there, he is permitted to
leave Mina though, as a matter of caution, must sacrifice a sheep as a
penalty.

Rule 424:

If it becomes obligatory on a person to spend the night in Mina, it is
not necessary for him to spend the whole of the following day there
also; he need stay just long enough to throw the pebbles at the three
Jamaraat. Nor is it obligatory to spend the entire night there; it is
enough if he remains there from the beginning of the night to a little
after midnight or from a little before midnight till dawn. It is
preferable that he should spend the first half of the night there but
must not enter Makkah before sunrise.

Rule 425:

There are some exceptions to the rule requiring stay in Mina:

(1) A person who finds it difficult to stay or one who fears danger to
life or property by staying in Mina;
(2) those spending the whole night in worship in Makkah, except for the
time needed to meet necessities like food, drink, etc;
(3) those who, having performed the Tawaaf, remain in prayers and then
depart from Makkah crossing beyond the city, can remain on the route
without the need to have entered Mina and are permitted to delay their
return to Mina to throw the pebbles and
(4) people who bring water for the pilgrims.

Rule 426:

One who omits to spend the nights in Mina must sacrifice a sheep for
every night as a penalty except for groups (2), (3) and (4) above. As a
matter of caution, even those who omit to do so by oversight or out of
ignorance of the rule or are excused from spending the nights there must
sacrifice a sheep.

Rule 427:

A person who departs from Mina and then re-enters at night on the eve
of the thirteenth on some business does not need to spend the night
there.

THROWING PEBBLES AT JAMARAAT

**Thirteenth Obligation:**

The thirteenth obligation in Hajj is throwing pebbles at the three
jamaraat, the First (Oola), Middle (Wusta) and Last (Uqbah), on the
eleventh and twelfth and, as a matter of caution, also on the thirteenth
if its eve was spent in Mina. It must be done personally and appointment
of an agent is not permitted except for a good reason.

Rule 428:

It is obligatory to commence the throwing of pebbles at the First
Jamrah (Oola), then the Middle (Wusta) and finally the Last (Uqbah). If
the sequence is not followed, even if by oversight or ignorance of the
rule, the procedure must be repeated to achieve the proper sequence.
However, if one forgets or misses a Jamrah and throws four pebbles at
the subsequent one before realising, he may complete the seven and there
is no need to repeat there.

Rule 429:

The obligations already set out at page 69 above in respect of the
throwing of pebbles at the Uqbah (the last) apply to the throwing of the
pebbles at all the Jamarat.

Rule 430:

The pebbles must be thrown at the Jamaraat during the day. The
exceptions to the rule are shepherds, the indebted who are fearful of
being arrested and all those fearing danger to their life, honour and
property are permitted to throw the pebbles at night instead of doing so
during the day.

Rule 431:

If a person omits to throw pebbles on the eleventh by ignorance or
oversight, it is obligatory on him to make up for it on the twelfth by
way of qadha and if a person forgets to do so on the twelfth he must
make up on the thirteenth and, as a matter of caution, the one who omits
the throwing of pebbles deliberately is like the ignorant and, as a
matter of caution, must differentiate between his current and qadha
actions; the qadha must precede the current and the qadha at the
beginning of the day and the current at noon.

Rule 432:

If a person omits to throw pebbles by oversight or ignorance and
recalls after reaching Makkah, it is obligatory on him to return to Mina
to throw the pebbles. If he had forgotten to throw the pebbles on two or
three days, he must keep an interval of one hour between the throwing of
pebbles for the different days. If he recalls after departure from
Makkah, it is not obligatory to return to Mina but he must perform the
qadha in the following year personally or by appointing an agent.

Rule 433:

The pilgrim who, like the sick, cannot throw the pebbles personally
should appoint an agent to throw them on his behalf. It is preferable
that he should attend at the place of jamaraat and witness the actions
of his agent, if possible. If the agent throws the pebbles on his behalf
at a time when there was no expectation of recovery but the pilgrim
subsequently recovers, then, as a matter of caution, he must throw the
pebbles personally. However, if he is not able to appoint an agent
because of not being conscious, his guardian or any other person can
throw the pebbles on his behalf.

Rule 434:

The omission to throw the pebbles does not invalidate the Hajj, even if
deliberate. However, it is obligatory to perform its qadha personally or
through an agent, as a matter of caution, in the following year.

PERSONS PREVENTED FROM PERFORMING HAJJ

Rule 435:

If a pilgrim has been prevented from performing Umrah after wearing
ihram, he should make the sacrifice from wherever he is if he is
carrying the sacrifice with him. If not, he must obtain the animal and
sacrifice it and, as a matter of caution, he is not relieved without
doing so. As a matter of caution, he must also perform taqseer or shave
his head.

Rule 436:

A pilgrim who is prevented from performing Hajjul-Tamatoo, if he is
prevented from the two stays or, in particular, the stay at Muzdalifah,
as a matter of caution, he must perform tawaaf and saee, then shave his
head and sacrifice a sheep to be relieved from his ihram. If he is
prevented from tawaaf and saee after the two stays and the ceremonies at
Mina and is unable to appoint an agent, he must sacrifice an animal at
the place where he is prevented and if it is possible to appoint an
agent, he must, as a matter of caution, do both, sacrifice an animal and
also appoint an agent to complete the ceremonies on his behalf. If a
person is prevented specially from the ceremonies at Mina without
affecting his entry into Makkah, if possible to do so, he must appoint
an agent to throw the pebbles and make the sacrifice on his behalf and
then have his head shaven or perform taqseer and, if possible, sending
his hair to Mina and be relieved from ihram. He may then perform the
remaining ceremonies.

If it is not possible for him to appoint an agent, he is relieved from
making a sacrifice but must fast in lieu of it. Then he must have his
head shaven or perform taqseer and proceed to Makkah to complete the
ceremonies there and be relieved from all the prohibitions applicable in
the state of ihram including those regarding his wife. His Hajj will be
valid.

Rule 437:

By making the above said sacrifice, a person prevented from performing
Hajj is not relieved of his obligation to perform a Hajj and if he
remains of means to the following year it is obligatory on him to repeat
it or else the liability will continue to rest on him.

Rule 438:

If he is prevented from returning to Mina to spend the night there and
throw the pebbles, his Hajj is completed but he must appoint an agent to
throw the pebbles on his behalf in that year and if that is not
possible, as a matter of caution, in the following year.

Rule 439:

For the above said sacrifice there is no difference whether it is a
camel or a sheep and if he is unable to make the sacrifice, he must fast
for ten days instead.

Rule 440:

If a pilgrim in the state of ihram has intercourse with his wife before
the stay at Muzdalifah, he must complete the remaining ceremonies and
repeat the hajj as mentioned earlier. However, if he is prevented from
completing the ceremonies, the rules relating to the prevented pilgrim
would apply to him but he must pay a penalty for the intercourse in
addition to the animal for sacrifice.

PERSONS PREVENTED FROM COMPLETING HAJJ BY SICKNESS ETC.

Rule 441:

If a person becomes prevented from completing an Umrat-ul-Mufradah or
Umrat-ul-Tamatoo and wishes to be relieved from ihram, his obligation is
to send an animal or its price to Makkah and to seek a promise from his
companion to make the sacrifice there at an appointed time. On the
arrival of the time, he must shave or perform taqseer and becomes
relieved from the prohibitions of Ihram and the companion becomes
relieved upon making the sacrifice. If he becomes prevented during Hajj,
the rules stated above will apply. However, the place of sacrifice is
Mina and the time is Idd day. In all the above mentioned cases the
prevented pilgrim is relieved except from intimacy to a woman but in
both Hajj or Umrah, only after they have completed the Tawaaf and
saee.

Rule 442:

If the pilgrim during the Umrah becomes sick and sends his animal for
sacrifice but subsequently recovers from his illness and is able to
continue with his journey to Makkah and arrives there before the
sacrifice of the animal, he must sacrifice it himself. Then, if it was
Umrat-ul-Mufradah, his obligation is only to complete the Umrah.
However, if it was Umrat-ul-Tamatoo and was able to complete its
ceremonies before the midday of Arafaat or ninth Dhil Hijjah, then he
should do so, otherwise his Hajj automatically becomes Hajj-ul-Ifraad.
The same rule applies if he had not sent an animal for sacrifice and
waited till recovery and being able to continue the journey.

Rule 443:

If a pilgrim becomes ill and sends the sacrifice but then his sickness
is alleviated and feels he will be able to perform the pilgrimage, he is
obliged to undertake the ceremonies. If he fulfils the two stays or, in
particular, the stay at Muzdalifah, he will have performed the Hajj, as
stated above. He completes the ceremonies and makes the sacrifice.
However, if he does not sacrifice an animal, his Hajj will turn into
Umrat-ul-Mufradah but if he makes the sacrifice, he will be relieved
from the prohibitions in the state of ihram, except approaching his
wife. It is obligatory on him to perform the tawaaf, the prayers, saee
and the Tawaaf ul-Nisa and the prayers after it to make the wife lawful
to him.

Rule 444:

If a person becomes prevented from performing tawaaf and saee because
of illness or the like, he can appoint an agent to perform them on his
behalf but he must recite the prayers after the tawaaf when the agent
has completed the tawaaf. However, if he was prevented from proceeding
to Mina and performing its ceremonies, he must send somebody to throw
the pebbles and make the sacrifice. Then he must shave his head or make
taqseer and send his hair to Mina, if possible. He should then complete
the other ceremonies.

Rule 445:

If a person becomes prevented from performing pilgrimage and sends a
sacrifice but before it reaches the appointed place it is damaged in the
head, it is permissible for him to shave his head and if he does so he
must sacrifice a sheep at the place or keep fasts for three days or feed
six poor persons with one and a half kilos of food to each.

Rule 446:

By making the sacrifice, the prevented pilgrim only becomes relieved of
the prohibitions of ihram but not from his obligation of performing the
Hajj which he must repeat in the following year if he has the means, or
else it remains a liability on him.

Rule 447:

If the prevented pilgrim does not sacrifice an animal nor has he
available the cash to meet its price, he must observe fast for ten
days.

Rule 448:

If the pilgrim in the state of ihram is unable to continue his journey
to the holy places to perform the ceremonies of Umrah or Hajj because of
reasons other than those stated above, then if he is in
Umrat-ul-Mufradah, he should sacrifice an animal and shave his head or
make taqseer, as a matter of caution and be relieved at the place at
which he is. The same rule applies to Umrah-ul-Tamatoo if he is unable
to complete the Hajj. Otherwise, it is apparent that his obligation
changes to Hajj-ul-Ifraad. However, if he is in the course of the Hajj
and is unable to stay at Arafaat and Muzdalifah or to stay at Muzdalifah
in particular, then he is relieved from his ihram by the
Umrat-ul-Mufradah.

Rule 449:

A group of jurists state that if a pilgrim does not have the animal for
sacrifice accompanying him and makes a condition at the time of wearing
ihram that Almighty Allah relieve him whenever he is prevented or an
obstruction arose, like an enemy or illness, the advantage of such a
condition being that he can be relieved from all the prohibitions of
ihram so that there is then no need for sacrifice or shaving, not to
perform tawaaf or saee and be permitted to approach women. Though this
opinion could be justified, as a matter of caution, one must observe the
methods of being relieved at the time the obstruction arises as
mentioned above and ignore such a condition for being relieved.

Here we conclude the obligations in Hajj and turn to rules of conduct.
Scholars have mentioned of them and while they all cannot be set out
extensively in this work, a few of them will be stated briefly:

THE RECOMMENDED ACTS IN IHRAM

There are a few acts recommended in the state of ihram:

(1) Before wearing ihram one must clean the body, cut one's nails, trim
the mustache and remove the hair under the armpits and below the
navel.

(2) Those who intend to proceed to Hajj should keep the hair on the
head and beard loose from the first of Dhil Qa'dah and those intending
to perform an Umrat-ul-Mufradah for one month before the trip.

(3) One must perform ghusl at the meeqaat but if there is fear that
water will not be available there, it may be performed before leaving
for meeqaat. If water is found there, the ghusl be repeated. If after
the ghusl, one urinates, or eats or wears clothes forbidden in the state
of ihram, it is recommended that the ghusl be repeated. A ghusl
performed during the day will last to the end of the night which follows
and the ghusl made in the night will last to the end of the following
day.

(4) At the time of making ghusl, recite the following supplication as
stated by Sadooq:

<p dir="rtl">
بسم الله وبالله اللهم اجعله لي نورا وطهورا وحرزا وامنا من كل خوف و شقاء
من كل داء وسقم . اللهم طهرني وطهر قلبي واشرح لي صدري واجر على لساني
محبتك ومدحتك والثناء عليك فانه لاقوة لي الا بك وقد علمت ان قوام ديني
التسليم لك والاتباع لسنة نبيك صلواتك عليه واله,
</p>

Translation: I commence by the name of Allah and seek help from Him. O
Allah render this ghusl an illumination for me and that it may purify
me, protect me from all fears and be a cure for all ills. O Allah,
purify me and my heart, broaden my chest and that my tongue may utter
words of love, adoration and praise for You as there is no strength for
me but You and I know that my religion is submission to You and
following the practices of Your prophet, may Your peace be on him.)

(5) At the time of wearing the ihram, recite the following
supplication:

<p dir="rtl">
الحمد لله الذي رزقني ما اواري به عورتي واؤدي فيه فرضي واعبد فيه ربي
وانتهي فيه الى ما امرني الحمد لله الذي قصدته فبلغني واردته فاعانني
وقبلني ولم يقطع بي ووجهه اردت فسلمني فهو حصني وكهفي وحرزي و ظهري وملاذي
ورجائي زمنجاي وذخري وعدتي في شدتي ورخائي
</p>

(Translation: All praise to Allah who has granted me clothes to cover
my body, perform my duties and worship my Sustainer and reach where He
has commanded me. All praise to Allah who when I directed my course
towards Him, reached me; when I directed my intentions towards Him,
assisted me, drew me close and did not shatter me; when I sought His
pleasure, granted me peace. He is my fort, refuge, protector, support,
hope, salvation, saviour and my provider in times of hardship and
comfort.)

(6) The cloths for ihram be made of cotton.

(7) The ihram be worn after the noon prayers. If this is not possible,
it be worn after any daily prayer or after the recitation of two
rakaats. It is preferable that in the first rakaat, after the recitation
of the Chapter on Al-Hamd, the Chapter on Tawheed be recited and in the
second rakaat, after the Chapter on Al-Hamd, the Chapter on Kafiroon be
recited. After the prayers, Allah be praised and salawaat be sent on the
Holy Prophet and his progeny and then the following be recited:

<p dir="rtl">
اللهم اني أسالك ان تجعلني ممن استجاب لك وامن بوعدك واتبع امرك فاني عبدك
وفي قبضتك لا اوقي الا ما وقيت ولا اخذ الا ما اعطيت وقدذكرت الحج فاساْ لك
ان تعزم لي عليه على كتابك وسنة نبيك صلى الله عليه واله وتقويني على
ماضعفت عنه وتسلم مني مناسكي في يسر منك وعافية واجعلني من وفدك الذي رضيت
وارتضيت وسميت وكتبت. اللهم اني خرجت من شقة بعيدة وانفقت مالي ابتغاء
مرضاتك
</p>

<p dir="rtl">
اللهم فتمم لي حجتي وعمرتي . اللهم اني اريد التمتع بالعمرة الى الحج على
كتابك وسنة نبيك صلى الله عليه واله فان عرض لي عارض يحبسني فخلني حيث
حبستني لقدرك الذي قدرت علي . اللهم ان لم تكن حجة فعمرة . احرم لك شعري
وبشري ولحمي ودمي وعظامي ومخي وعصبي من النساء والثياب والطيب ابتغي بذالك
وجهك والدار الا خرة
</p>

(Translation: O Allah, include me among those who have responded to
Your call, have faith in Your promise and follow Your command for I am
Your slave in Your confinement. I cannot be saved except by You and
cannot take except what You grant. You have reminded us of Hajj. I
beseech You that You make me firm on Your book and the practices of Your
Prophet (s.a.a.w.). Grant me strength where I am weak and that I may
perform with ease and health. Include me among those whose arrival
pleases You, You are pleased with, You call by name and have recorded. O
Allah, I have travelled from far and have spent my property to attain
Your pleasure. O Allah, accomplish my Hajj and Umrah. O Allah, in
compliance with Your book and the practice of Your Prophet (s.a.a.w.), I
intend to perform the Umrat-ul-Tamatoo for Hajj. If any impediment comes
in my way, remove it by Your power. O Allah, if I do not achieve the
Hajj, I may at least the Umrah. I forbid myself, for your sake, my hair,
body, flesh, blood, bones, brain, my union with my wife, clothes and
perfume so that I may attain Your pleasure and the Hereafter.)

(8) Make the niyyah (intention) for ihram together with talbiyyah.

(9) It is recommended that men recite the talbiyyah aloud.

(10) Say during the talbiyyah:

<p dir="rtl">
لبيك اللهم لبيك لبيك لا شريك لك لبيك ان الحمد والنعمة لك والملك لاشريك
لك لبيك .لبيك ذا المعارج لبيك لبيك داعيا الى دار السلام لبيك لبيك غفار
الذنوب لبيك لبيك اهل التلبية لبيك لبيك ذاالجلال والاكرام لبيك لبيك تبدئ
والمعاداليك لبيك لبيك تستغني ويفتقر اليك لبيك لبيك مرهوبا ومرغوبا اليك
لبيك لبيك اله الحق لبيك لبيك ذا النعمان والفضل الحسن الجميل لبيك لبيك
كشاف الكرب العظام لبيك لبيك عبدك وابن عبدك لبيك لبيك يا كريم لبيك
</p>

(Translation: I am present, O High, I am present. I am present, O one
who calls towards Heaven. I am present, I am present O forgiver of sins.
I am present, I am present O one who owns my presence. I am present, I
am present O Mighty and Generous. I am present, I am present O You who
first created and to whom all will return. I am present, I am present O
one who is free from want and to whom all turn for their needs. I am
present, I am present O who is feared and to whom there is inclination.
I am present I am present, O true God. I am present O the one with
Grace, Excellence, Goodness and Beauty. I am present O one who averts
major calamities. I am present, I am present Your servant and the son of
Your servant. I am present, I am present O Generous, I am present.) Then
say:

<p dir="rtl">
لبيك اتقرب اليك بمحمد وال محمد صلوات الله عليه وعليهم لبيك لبيك بحجة
وعمرة معا لبيك لبيك هذه متعة عمرة الى الحج لبيك لبيك تمامها وبلا غها
عليك لبيك
</p>

(Translation: I am present seeking nearness to you through Muhammad and
his progeny. I am present, I am present for Hajj or Umrah, I am present,
I am present. And this is the Umrah connecting to the Hajj. I am
present, I am present, my presence is certain and so is my communication
to You.) (11) The talbiyyah constantly repeated in the state of ihram,
when waking from sleep, after every prayer (salaat), when embarking on a
vehicle or riding and disembarking or dismounting, while climbing or
descending, when meeting other riders or in the desert and even in the
condition of janabah or menstruation. It must not be stopped in the
Umrat-ul-Tamatoo until the houses of Makkah appear and in
Hajj-ul-Tamatoo till the noon of the day of Arafaat.

MATTERS DISCOURAGED IN IHRAM

(1) To wear ihram in black cloths; as a matter of caution, this colour
must be avoided and it is preferred that the ihram be of white cloths.

(2) To sleep on yellow bedding or pillow.

(3) To wear dirty cloths for ihram. If they become dirty in the state
of ihram, it is better not to wash them but there is no objection in
wearing another pair.

(4) To wear ihram of cloths with pictures.

(5) To apply henna before wearing ihram if its colour would remain at
the time of wearing ihram.

(6) To have a bath and it is preferred, as a matter of caution, that
one must not massage the body.

(7) To reply to a caller by saying, "Labbaik", that is I am present.


