Making a Will Regarding Pilgrimage
==================================

Rule 73:

If a person on a deathbed has an obligation to perform a pilgrimage and
has adequate means, he must make sure that it will be performed after
his death, even by directing in his will and in the presence of
witnesses. However, if he has no adequate means but thinks somebody will
donate for his pilgrimage he must direct that in his will. If he dies,
one must be performed from his gross estate as must also be done if he
has made a general direction about it without qualifying that its
expenses be defrayed from his bequeath able one-third. However, if he
directs that the pilgrimage be performed from his one-third and the
expenses can be met from the one-third of the estate, then the expenses
must be paid for from that portion and must take precedence over all
other directions in the will. If the bequeath able one-third of the
estate is insufficient to meet the expenses of the pilgrimage, the
balance must be defrayed from the entire estate.

Rule 74:

It has been said that if a person dies without having performed the
obligatory pilgrimage but leaves a deposit with a person who fears that
if he paid the deposit to the heirs, they will not have the obligatory
pilgrimage performed on behalf of the deceased, it is obligatory on that
person to perform the pilgrimage himself on behalf of the deceased and
pay the heirs only the balance, if any, left after meeting the expenses
of the pilgrimage. However, all this is arguable.

Rule 75:

If a deceased dies without having performed the obligatory pilgrimage
and leaves debts and liability of khums and zakaah and his estate is not
sufficient to discharge all these obligations, then if the property on
which the khums and zakaah became payable is available, the khums and
zakaah must first be paid from it. If there is khums and zakaah still
payable, then the pilgrimage will take precedence over their settlement
but the settlement of debts takes precedence over the pilgrimage.

Rule 76:

If a deceased dies without having performed the obligatory pilgrimage,
it is not permissible for the heirs to spend for the estate without
first meeting the expenses of the pilgrimage, whether the estate is
sufficient to meet the expenses or not. However, there is no objection
relating to transactions made after provision has been made for the
expenses of the pilgrimage.

Rule 77:

If a deceased dies without having performed the obligatory pilgrimage
and his estate is not sufficient to meet the expenses of having it
performed, the available assets must be applied towards the repayment of
debts, khums and zakaah and the balance be distributed among the heirs.
It is not obligatory on the heirs to supplement the expenses of the
pilgrimage from their personal property.

Rule 78:

If a deceased dies without having performed the obligatory pilgrimage,
it is not necessary to pay for the expenses of the pilgrimage from the
country of the deceased. It is sufficient to pay from the meeqaat.
Indeed, it is sufficient to appoint an agent from the meeqaat closet to
Makkah. As a matter of high precaution, if the estate is large, it is
better to pay for the expenses from the country of the deceased. If the
estate is very large and the heirs have decided definitely to have the
pilgrimage performed, then expenditure from the estate is permissible.
This is also the rule in respect of the debts of the deceased. However,
if the cost from the country of the deceased is higher than the cost
from the meeqaat, the share of the young heirs must not be utilised to
meet the cost.

Rule 79:

If a deceased dies without having performed the obligatory pilgrimage,
it is obligatory to have it performed in the year of the death. If it is
not possible to find an agent from the meeqaat in that year, it is
obligatory to send an agent from the country of the deceased and defray
his expenses from the gross estate. It is not permissible to delay it to
the succeeding year even if it is known that in the following year, it
will be possible to engage an agent from the meeqaat. However, if the
cost from the country of the deceased is higher than the cost from the
meeqaat, the share from the young heirs must not be utilised to meet the
cost.

Rule 80:

If a deceased dies without having performed the obligatory pilgrimage
and it is not possible to obtain an agent at the ordinary fee, it is
obligatory to engage one even at a higher than the usual remuneration
and defray the expenses from the gross estate. It is not permissible for
the heirs to postpone the pilgrimage to the following year even if some
of them are young. However, if the cost from the country of the deceased
is higher than the cost from the meeqaat, the share of the young heirs
must not be utilised to meet the cost.

Rule 81:

If some of the deceased persons heirs consider that there was the
obligation on the deceased to perform the pilgrimage and some do not, it
is not obligatory on those who consider so to have the pilgrimage
performed except to the extent of their shares of inheritance. If
necessary, in the ultimate, they must litigate those who did not
consider so in order that their shares in the estate are also utilised
to defray the expenses. The same rule applies if there is a disagreement
on a question of debt. However, if the shares of those who consider so
are not adequate to meet the expenses of the pilgrimage, it is not
obligatory on them to subsidise the deficit from their personal
properties.

Rule 82:

If a person dies without having performed the obligatory pilgrimage,
and a person performs one on his behalf gratuitously, it is not
obligatory on the heirs any longer to have one performed themselves and
the cost that would have been incurred on the pilgrimage will revert to
the heirs for distribution among them. However, if the deceased had
directed that the pilgrimage be performed from his bequeath able
one-third, the cost that would have been incurred on the pilgrimage will
not revert to the heirs but should be spent on some good cause or alms
in his name.

Rule 83:

If a person dies without having performed the obligatory pilgrimage but
directs in his will that an agent be appointed from his town to perform
one, then it is obligatory to do so. However, the excess of the
remuneration over what would have been paid if the agent was appointed
from the meeqaat will be met from the bequeath able one-third of the
estate. If, in the will, he directs that the pilgrimage be performed
without more, then it is sufficient to appoint an agent from the meeqaat
unless he expresses an intention that the agent be appointed from his
town, for example by fixing a sum for the pilgrimage which would equal
the remuneration for the agent from the town.

Rule 84:

If a deceased directs in his will that the agent be appointed from his
town but the executor or heir appoints one from the meeqaat, the
appointment is invalid, if the remuneration was being paid from the
estate of the deceased. However, the obligation of the deceased will be
discharged by the performance of the agent.

Rule 85:

If a deceased directs in his will that an agent be appointed to perform
a pilgrimage from another town or country, for example, from Najaf, it
is obligatory to act on it and the expenses in excess of what would have
been payable to an agent appointed from the meeqaat will be met from the
bequeath able one-third of the estate.

Rule 86:

If a deceased directs in his will that an agent be appointed to perform
an obligatory pilgrimage on his behalf and fixes the remuneration, it is
obligatory to act upon it. The remuneration should be paid from the
gross estate if it does not exceed the usual remuneration, but if it
does, then the excess must be borne by the one-third bequeathable
portion.

Rule 87:

If a deceased directs in his will that an obligatory pilgrimage be
performed on his behalf from an identified property and it is in the
knowledge of the executor that there is liability of khums or zakaah on
the property, these must first be settled from the property. The balance
should then be applied towards the expenses of the pilgrimage. If it is
not sufficient to meet the expenses, the deficit must be subsidised from
the gross estate if the obligation of the deceased was for Hijjatul
Islam, otherwise the balance must be spent in good cause of the kind in
which the deceased would have wished to donate.

Rule 88:

If it becomes obligatory to appoint an agent to perform an obligatory
pilgrimage on behalf of a deceased person and the one on whom it became
obligatory delays the appointment so much that the property from which
the appointment would have been made is lost, he is personally
responsible and it is obligatory on him to appoint an agent from his
personal property.

Rule 89:

If it is known that the pilgrimage had become obligatory on the
deceased but it is doubtful if he had performed it, then it is
obligatory to have it performed on his behalf and its expenses must be
met from the gross estate.

Rule 90:

The obligation of the deceased is not discharged by the mere
appointment of an agent to perform a pilgrimage on his behalf. If it
becomes known that the agent did not perform the pilgrimage for good
reason or not, it is obligatory to appoint another agent and meet the
expenses from the gross estate. If the original agent was paid from the
estate, it is obligatory, if possible, to recover the sum from him.

Rule 91:

If a person volunteers to become an agent and is prepared to charge a
lesser than usual remuneration, he must be appointed if the payment is
being made from the estate. Taking into account the size of the estate,
an agent must be appointed on the basis of his respectability and
nobility and for this purpose it is permissible to pay a higher
remuneration.

Rule 92:

Whether the appointment of the agent is obligatory from the country of
the deceased or meeqaat is determined by the mujtahid followed by the
heir or the heir's ijtihad' and not of the deceased. If the faith of the
deceased was that it was obligatory to appoint an agent from his country
but that of the heir is that it is permissible to appoint one from the
meeqaat, it is not obligatory on the heir to appoint one from the
country of the deceased.

Rule 93:

If the pilgrimage had become obligatory on a deceased who does not
leave any estate, it is not obligatory on the heir to appoint an agent;
however, it is recommended specially for his relatives that they do
so.

Rule 94:

If a deceased directs by his will that an obligatory pilgrimage be
performed on his behalf and it becomes known that it was Hijjatul Islam,
then the expenses must be paid from the gross estate unless he has
expressly directed that the expenses be borne from the bequeathable
one-third. If it becomes known to the one directed that the pilgrimage
was other than Hijjatul Islam or if there is doubt on the matter, then
the expenses must be paid from the one-third.

Rule 95:

If a deceased directs in his will that an obligatory pilgrimage be
performed on his behalf and names the person to be appointed as the
agent, then it is obligatory to comply with the direction. If the agent
does not accept the appointment except for a higher than the usual
remuneration, the excess must be borne by the one-third portion of the
estate if the pilgrimage was Hijjatul Islam.

Rule 96:

If a deceased directs in his will that an obligatory pilgrimage be
performed on his behalf and fixes the sum to be paid to the agent but
the sum is such that it is not accepted by anyone, then if the
obligation of the deceased was for Hijjatul Islam, it is obligatory to
make up the difference from the gross estate. If it was not for Hijjatul
Islam, the sum fixed for the remuneration must be used for a good cause
of a kind in which the deceased would have wished to donate.

Rule 97:

If a person sells his house for a sum and makes a condition with the
purchaser that he should spend the sum on the performance of an
obligatory pilgrimage after his death, then upon his death the sum will
form part of his estate. If the pilgrimage to be performed was Hijjatul
Islam, the condition becomes operative and it is obligatory to spend the
sum on the remuneration for the pilgrimage if it does not exceed the
usual remuneration. If it does, then the deficit will be met from the
one-third of the estate. If the pilgrimage was for other than Hijjatul
Islam, the condition is still valid and the whole remuneration will be
paid from the one-third. If the one-third is not sufficient to meet the
expenses, the condition is not operative in respect of the shortfall.

Rule 98:

If a person donates, for example, his house to another on the condition
that he should perform a pilgrimage on his behalf after his death, the
condition is valid and operative. It ceases to be the property of the
donor and will not form part of his estate after his death even if the
pilgrimage is optional and the testamentary rules will not apply. The
same rule applies to a transaction in which the owner of the house
passes ownership to another so that after his death the other should
sell the property and spend the proceeds to have a pilgrimage performed
for him. In such a case, the condition is valid and operative even if
the pilgrimage is optional and the heirs have no right in the property.
If the donee fails to fulfil the condition, the right in the property
does not shift to the heirs but to the executor or a mujtahid and if he
cancels the transaction, the property reverts to the estate of the
deceased.

Rule 99:

If an executor dies and it is not known whether he appointed an agent
before his death, it is obligatory to appoint an agent from the estate
if the pilgrimage is Hijjatul Islam and from the one-third if it is not.
If the executor had taken possession of property to expend on the
pilgrimage and it is available, it should be repossessed. If there is a
doubt that the executor paid the agent from his property and then
reimbursed himself from the property of the deceased and such property
is not available, the executor is not responsible as there would be
doubt that it may have been lost without being wasted.

Rule 100:

If the property is lost in the hands of the executor without waste on
his part, he is not responsible and an agent must be appointed from the
remainder of the estate if the pilgrimage is Hijjatul Islam and from the
one-third if not. If the remainder had already been distributed among
the heirs, a sum sufficient for the remuneration of the agent should be
recovered from them in the proportion of their shares. The same rule
applies if a person is appointed an agent and dies before the
performance of the pilgrimage without leaving any estate or if it is not
possible to recover from his estate.

Rule 101:

If the property is lost in the hands of the executor before the
appointment of an agent and it is not known if it was lost by reason of
the negligence of the executor, it is not permissible to exact
compensation from the executor.

Rule 102:

If a deceased directs in his will that a certain amount be spent on a
pilgrimage other than Hijjatul Islam and there is doubt that it is in
excess of the bequeath able one-third, it is not permissible to spend
the whole of the amount without the consent of the heirs.

THE RULES ON PILGRIMAGE BY AGENT (NIYABAH)

Rule 103: Qualifications of an agent:

First: Puberty: An obligatory pilgrimage performed by a minor as an
agent of another is not valid, whether it is Hijjatul Islam or any other
even if the minor is intelligent. However, it may be correct to say that
an optional pilgrimage performed by a minor as an agent of another with
the approval of his guardian is valid.

Second: Intelligence: - A pilgrimage performed as an agent by a person
of unsound mind is not valid, whether the disease is permanent or
intermittent if the pilgrimage is performed when affected. However,
there is no objection to him performing as an agent of a lunatic.

Third: Faith - As a matter of precaution, a person who is not a twelver
cannot become an agent even if he were to perform the pilgrimage in
accordance with the rules of our faith.

Fourth: There must be no obligation on the agent himself, which he
would be carrying out, to perform an obligatory pilgrimage in the year
in which he is appointed. If he is unaware or unmindful of his
obligation he can be appointed an agent. This condition affects the
validity of the appointment of the agent, not the validity of the
pilgrimage of the agent. Thus, even if there was an obligation on the
agent to perform a pilgrimage personally, the obligation of his
principal for the performance of the pilgrimage will be discharged.
However, the agent will not be entitled to the stipulated remuneration
but only the usual amount.

Rule 104:

It is not necessary that the agent should be righteous (Adil) but he
must be reliable in the performance of the pilgrimage on behalf of the
principal.

Rule 105:

The principal on whose behalf the pilgrimage is performed will become
discharged from his obligation only upon the valid completion of the
pilgrimage by the agent. It follows that the agent must be conversant
with the performance of the pilgrimage and its rules even if by
following the guidance of another in all the ceremonies. When a doubt
arises in his performance of the ceremonies during the pilgrimage, he
can ignore it.

Rule 106:

There is no objection to the appointment of an agent for an intelligent
minor or a person of unsound mind. Indeed, an agent must be appointed if
the pilgrimage became obligatory on a person of unsound mind during his
period of sanity but died insane.

Rule 107:

There is no requirement that the principal and agent should be
homogeneous. The appointment of a male agent for a female principal and
vice versa is valid.

Rule 108:

There is no objection in appointing as an agent a person who has not
been to a pilgrimage before, whether the principal had been on
pilgrimage before or not. The gender of the agent or the principal does
not matter. Some scholars say that it is discouraged to appoint as an
agent a person who has not been on a pilgrimage before, but this is not
proved. However, in the case of a principal who is is alive but has not
been able to perform the Hijjatul Islam or had a pilgrimage fixed on him
but died before performing it, it is preferable to appoint as an agent a
person who has not been on pilgrimage before.

Rule 109:

It is necessary that the principal must be following Islam and the
appointment as an agent for an infidel is invalid even if the infidel
has died with means. If his heir is a Muslim, it is not obligatory on
him to appoint an agent to perform an obligatory pilgrimage for the
deceased and an enemy of Ahlul Bait is also regarded as an infidel
except that it is permissible for a son of such a person himself to
perform an obligatory pilgrimage for his father if he is a twelver, but
not for the relatives. However, a twelver can perform a pilgrimage and
dedicate it to a relative who is an enemy of Ahlul Bait.

Rule I10:

There is no objection in appointing an agent to perform an optional
pilgrimage for a living person, whether gratuitously or for reward. The
same is the rule in respect of an obligatory pilgrimage for a person who
is disabled from performing it personally. Except for this reason it is
not permissible for a living person to appoint an agent to perform a
pilgrimage on his behalf. An appointment of an agent for a dead person
is always valid, whether gratuitous or for reward and whether for an
obligatory or an optional pilgrimage.

Rule 111:

It is necessary for the validity of the agency that the intent must be
to perform the pilgrimage on his behalf. A principal who should be a
definite and identified person. Although it is not necessary that his
name be uttered, it is recommended that the principal be remembered in
all the ceremonies.

Rule 112:

Just as the performance of an obligatory pilgrimage is valid whether it
is gratuitous or by permission, so is it valid if it is for reward or in
fulfilment of a condition of marriage.

Rule 113:

It is apparent that the agent must act as if the pilgrimage is for
himself with regard to the rules on disabilities and as they would have
applied to him in his pilgrimage and also the rules relating to the
order of the ceremonies.; In the result a pilgrimage can be valid in one
case but not in another. For example, if the disability occurs during
the stay at Arafaat, he can choose the emergency stay and the pilgrimage
is valid and the principal released from the responsibility. However, if
he was unable to remain in Arafaat for either the normal or the
emergency stay, his pilgrimage is invalid.

It is not permissible to engage a person who knows he will be unable to
perform some of the ceremonies, whether the pilgrimage is performed by
the agent gratuitously or not. However, there is no objection in
engaging a person who knows that he will move under a shade or will omit
ceremonies which would not invalidate the pilgrimage even though the
omission was deliberate, like tawafun Nisah or staying in Mina for the
evenings of 11th or l2th.

Rule I14:

If the agent dies before wearing ihram, the pilgrimage is not valid for
the principal and it is obligatory to appoint another agent to perform
the pilgrimage again. If the agent dies after wearing ihram, the
pilgrimage will be valid and it is clearly so if he dies after wearing
ihram in the precincts of the Holy Mosque. There is no difference in
this regard between Hijjatul Islam and other obligatory pilgrimages when
the agency is for reward.

Rule 115:

If the agent dies after wearing ihram and entering the Holy Mosque, he
is entitled to his full remuneration if his appointment was to have the
deceased discharged from his obligation. However, if his appointment was
to perform certain ceremonies, he will be entitled to so much of the
agreed remuneration as would be commensurate with the ceremonies
performed by him and if he died before wearing ihram, he would not be
entitled to anything. However, if the part relating to preliminaries is
included in the agreement of the agency, then he would be entitled to
the remuneration proportionate to the task undertaken by him.

Rule 116:

If the appointment was from the country of the principal but the route
to be taken by him to Makkah was not specified, the agent is free to
choose his route. However, if the route has been laid out in the
agreement, it is not permissible to disregard it. If the agent proceeds
by another route but completes the ceremonies, then if the provision of
the route in the agreement of agency was only as a condition, and not a
specific term of the agreement, the agent is entitled to his full
remuneration. However, the other side is entitled to repudiate the
agreement for the breach of the condition in which event the agent will
be able to recover only the usual remuneration paid for the pilgrimage
and not the agreed remuneration. If the specified route was a term of
the agreement, the other side can again repudiate it. If it is
repudiated, the agent is entitled to the usual remuneration for the
parts of the agreement he performed but not for the route he took and
the parts with which he did not comply will be ignored. However, if it
is not repudiated, the agent is entitled to the agreed remuneration.

Rule 117:

If a person agrees to become an agent for another to perform an
obligatory pilgrimage in a specified year and then agrees with another
person to perform an obligatory pilgrimage on his behalf in the same
year, the second agreement is invalid. The two remuneration would be
valid if they are charged in respect of different years or if one or
both of them were not to be performed immediately.

Rule I18:

If a person agrees to perform a pilgrimage as an agent in a specified
year, it is not permissible for him to do so in an earlier or subsequent
year than that specified without the consent of the person who appointed
him. However, the principal will be discharged from obligation by the
performance in the different year. But the agent will not be entitled to
claim his remuneration if he hastened or delayed the pilgrimage without
the consent of the person who appointed him.

Rule 119

If an agent is prevented or blocked from performing the ceremonies, the
same rules apply to him as would have applied to the principal if he had
been performing the pilgrimage personally. These rules will be set out
below. If the agency agreement was confined to that year, it becomes
annulled. If it is not so confined, the liability to perform it remains
on his shoulders but the person who had appointed the agent can
repudiate it if there was a condition that the pilgrimage be performed
in that year.

Rule 120:

If the agent commits an act which attracts a penalty (kafarah), he must
meet it from his personal property, regardless of whether the agency is
gratuitous or for reward.

Rule 121: If the remuneration for the pilgrimage is a fixed sum which
proved insufficient for the expenses of the pilgrimage, it is not
obligatory on the appointor to subsidise the deficit just as if the
remuneration proved in excess of the expenses, the agent would not be
obliged to refund the excess.

Rule 122:

If a person is appointed an agent to perform an obligatory or an
optional pilgrimage but vitiates it by having intercourse before
reaching Mash'ar, it is obligatory on him to complete the pilgrimage and
it will be valid for the principal. It is obligatory on the agent to
perform an obligatory pilgrimage in the ensuing year and pay a penalty
but it is obvious that he is entitled to his remuneration. If he does
not perform the pilgrimage in the ensuing year, far good reason or
without, the rule still applies requiring him to perform the pilgrimage
at his own expense.

Rule 123:

Although by the agreement of agency, the remuneration becomes the
property of the agent, it is not obligatory to make payment to him until
he has completed the pilgrimage unless there was express agreement for
earlier payment. It is clear that the agent can stipulate that the
remuneration be paid before the pilgrimage, for generally it is not
usual that an agent should proceed on the pilgrimage and undertake all
the ceremonies without having received the remuneration.

Rule 124:

If a person is appointed an agent, he cannot substitute another person
for himself without the consent of his appointor.

Rule 125:

If a person is appointed an agent to perform Hajj-ul-Tamatoo in good
time but per chance the time becomes short and the agent changes the
Umrat-ul-Tamatoo into Hajj-ul-Ifraad and after completing it performs
the Umrat-ul-Mufradah, the obligation of the principal will be
discharged. However, the agent will not be entitled to his remuneration
if his appointment was conditional on the performance of the ceremonies.
If, on the other hand, it was conditional on the obligation of the
deceased being discharged, he will be entitled to the remuneration.

Rule 126:

If the pilgrimage is optional, there is no objection to the agent
performing it on behalf of a number of persons. With regard to
obligatory pilgrimages, an agent can perform it on behalf of one person
only except if the pilgrimage has become obligatory on two or more
persons jointly. For example, if two persons make a vow that they will
together with a third jointly contribute towards the remuneration of an
agent to perform a pilgrimage, then in such a case it is permissible for
them to appoint one agent on their behalf.

Rule 127:

If the pilgrimage is optional, there is no objection to a number of
persons becoming agents in one year on behalf of one person, living or
dead, gratuitously or for reward. The same rule applies to obligatory
pilgrimages, if they are many. For example, there may be two pilgrimages
obligatory on a person, living or dead, in respect of two vows, or one
of them may be Hijjatul Islam and the other obligatory by reason of a
vow. In such circumstances, it is permissible to appoint two agents,
each to perform one of them. Similarly, it is permissible to appoint two
agents, one of them in respect of an obligatory and the other an
optional pilgrimage. It is not far from correct to say that two persons
can be appointed agents for the same obligatory pilgrimage like Hijjatul
Islam as a matter of precaution in the fear that the pilgrimage of one
of them may be spoiled.

Rule 128:

To make tawaaf for oneself has been recommended. It is permissible to
appoint an agent to do so on behalf of a deceased and also a living
person who is away from Makkah or although he is in the city is unable
to perform it himself immediately.

Rule 129:

There is no objection to an agent performing an Umrat-ul-Mufradah for
himself or another person on completion of the pilgrimage for which he
was appointed. Likewise, he can then make tawaaf for himself or another
person.

like Hijjatul Islam as a matter of precaution in the fear that the
pilgrimage of one of them may be spoiled.

Rule 128:

To make tawaaf for oneself has been recommended. It is permissible to
appoint an agent to do so on behalf of a deceased and also a living
person who is away from Makkah or although he is in the city is unable
to perform it himself immediately.

Rule 129:

There is no objection to an agent performing an Umrat-ul-Mufradah for
himself or another person on completion of the pilgrimage for which he
was appointed. Likewise, he can then make tawaaf for himself or another
person.

OPTIONAL PILGRIMAGE

Rule 130:

It is recommended to perform an obligatory pilgrimage, if it were
possible, even if one does not have the required means or has already
performed the Hijjatul Islam. It is recommended to do so each year for
those who can afford it.

Rule 131:

It is recommended that at the time of departure from Makkah, one makes
the intention to return there.

Rule 132:

It is recommended to send on obligatory pilgrimage someone who does not
have the means to perform it himself. It is also recommended to take a
loan to proceed to obligatory pilgrimage if one can make the repayment
later. It is recommended to make much expense during the pilgrimage.

Rule 133:

It is permissible for a person who receives zakaah from the share of
the poor to spend it on a recommended pilgrimage.

Rule 134:

It is a condition for the performance of an optional pilgrimage by a
married woman that she should obtain the consent of her husband. That is
also the rule for a woman in iddah arising on a revertible divorce but
not for a woman in iddah arising on a final divorce. A widow who is
still in iddah of her late husband can perform a pilgrimage without
anyone's consent.


