Hajj-ul-ifraad
==============

You have observed that Hajj-ul-Tamatoo consists of two parts:
Umrat-ul-Tamatoo and Hajj. The first part is connected to the second,
the Umrah preceding the Hajj.

Hajj-ul-Ifraad is a distinct kind of pilgrimage incumbent upon those
who live in or within 48 miles of Makkah and if it is possible for such
a person to perform an Umrat-ul-Mufradah, it is obligatory on him to do
so separately. If it is possible for him to perform only one of them,
his obligation will be to perform that only. If it is possible for him
to perform one of them at one time and the other at another time, he
must perform each of them at the time possible and if he can manage both
together, he must perform them at the same time. In this situation it is
the common view among the scholars that as a matter of caution, he must
give precedence to the Hajj over the Umrat-ul-Mufradah.

Rule 158:

All the ceremonies are common to Hajj-ul-Ifraad

and Hajj-ul-Tamatoo but there are certain differences:

First: For Hajj-ul-Tamatoo it is obligatory that Umrat-ul-Tamatoo must
precede it and both be performed in the same year (as already stated)
but that is not necessary for Hajj-ul-Ifraad.

Second: In Hajj-ul-Tamatoo, slaughtering of an animal is obligatory (as
already stated) but that is not necessary for Hajj-ul-Ifraad.

Third: In Hajj-ul-Tamatoo it is not permissible to give precedence by
choice to tawaaf or Saee over the two stops but it is permissible to do
so in Hajj-ul-Ifraad.

Fourth: In Hajj-ul-Tamatoo, the ihram for the Hajj is worn in Makkah.
For Hajj-ul-Ifraad, it depends upon whether the pilgrim lives in Makkah
or not and this will be set out below.

Fifth: Umrat-ul-Tamatoo must precede the Hajj but that is not necessary
for Hajj-ul-Ifraad.

Sixth: As a matter of obligatory caution, in Hajj-ul-Tamatoo, it is not
permmited to make an optional tawaaf after wearing the ihram for it but
that is permmitted in Hajj-ul-Ifraad.

Rule 159:

If a person wears ihram for an optional Hajj-ul-Ifraad, he is permitted
to change his intention to Umrat-ul-Tamatoo by removing some hair and
coming out of ihram unless he has recited Talbiyah after Saee in which
event the change is not permmitted.

Rule 160:

If a person wears the ihram for Hajj-ul-Ifraad and enters Makkah, he is
permitted to perform an optional tawaaf but, as a matter of caution, it
is obligatory on him to repeat the talbiyah after the prayers (salaat)
for the tawaaf if he did not change his intention to Hajjul Tamatoo
while it was permissible to do so. This caution applies to obligatory
tawaaf also.

HAJJ-UL-QIRAAN

Rule 161:

The ceremonies for this pilgrimage and Hajj-ul-Ifraad are the same,
except that in this form of pilgrimage the pilgrim will take the
sacrifice with him from the time he wears ihram till Mina. Just as ihram
is confirmed by talbiyah, so it is by piercing the animal or placing a
necklace round its neck. If a person wears the ihram for Hajj-ul-Qiraan
he is not permitted to change to Hajj-ul-Tamatoo.

MEEQAATS FOR WEARING IHRAM

There are special places designated by the sacred rules of Islam for
wearing ihram and it is obligatory to wear the ihram there. These places
are called Meeqaat and are nine of them :

(1) Dhul Hulaifah which is situated near Madinah and is the meeqaat for
the people of Madinah and all those who wish to perform the pilgrimage
travelling from Madinah. As a matter of caution, it is preferred that it
be worn, if possible, in the mosque which is there known as
Masjid-ul-Shajarah in which case it is insufficient to wear ihram
outside except for ladies in menstruation.

Rule 162:

It is not permissible to delay wearing ihram from Dhul Hulaifah and
wearing it at Johfa except if necessary to do so by reason of sickness
or weakness or other cause.

(2) Wadi-ul-Aqeeq which is the meeqaat for the people of Iraq and Najd
and those passing through there. It has three parts: Maslakh, Ghamrah
and Dhat Erq. According to the preferred view, a pilgrim should wear his
ihram before reaching Dhat Erq if there is no impediment by way of
dissimulation (taqiyyah) or illness.

Rule I63:

It has been said that in dissimulation, it is permitted to wear ihram
secretly before Dhat Erq without removing all clothes. On reaching there
the clothes may be removed and ihram worn without incurrig any penalty.
However, this opinion is arguable.

(3) Johfa which is the meeqaat for the people of Syria, Egypt and the
West and those who pass from there if they have not worn ihram earlier
at Dhul Hulaifa either with or without excuse.

(4) Yalamlam which is the meeqaat for the people of Yemen and those who
pass from there. It is the name of a mountain.

(5) Qarn-ul-Manaazil which is the meeqaat for the people of Taif and
all those who pass through that route. The last four meeqaats, i.e.
numbers (2) to (5), are not only the mosques there but the places
themselves so considered. If the pilgrim is unable to specify the exact
place, he can wear ihram by making a vow (nadhr) before reaching the
meeqaat.

(6) Any place parallel to one of the meeqaats above mentioned: If a
person takes a route which does not cross any of the meeqaats above
mentioned, then he must wear ihram from any place which is parallel to a
meeqaat, that is to say, a place at which, when he faces the Holy Kaaba,
one of the meeqaats would be to his right or left and when he proceeds
from that point to Makkah, the meeqaat would be behind him. It is
sufficient to use common sense to determine if he has reached such point
and it is not necessary to take exact measurements.

If a person takes a route on which he reaches a place at which becomes
parallel to two meeqaats, then, as a matter of precaution, it is
recommended that he should wear ihram on reaching the first of such two
places.

(7) Makkah which is the meeqaat for Hajj-ul-Tamatoo. It is also a
meeqaat for people resident in Makkah and its neighbourhood who perform
Qiraan or Ifraad. As a matter of precaution, one should wear ihram at a
place within the area considered as part of the ancient Makkah at the
time of the Holy Prophet (saaw), although it is permissible to wear it
at one of the new places recently built except those which would fall
outside the Haram.

(8) The pilgrim's home is the meeqaat for those who are nearer to
Makkah than the meeqaat as it is permissible for them to wear ihram from
their homes and are not obliged to return to a meeqaat.

(9) The nearest border of Hill like Hudaybiyyah or Jo'ranah or Taneem:
It is the meeqaat for Umrat-ul-Mufradah after the Hajj-ul-Qiraan or
Ifraad and all Umrat-ul-Mufradah by those in Makkah. There is only one
exception which was explained earlier under Rule 140.

THE RULES ON MEEQAAT

Rule 164:

It is not permissible to wear ihram before reaching meeqaat nor is it
enough just to pass from there in ihram. There is no alternative to
wearing the ihram at the meeqaat itself. However, there are two
exceptions to the rule:

(1) If a pilgrim has made a vow (nadhar) to wear ihram before the
meeqaat, then it is valid to do so nor is it necessary to renew it at
the meeqaat or pass through it. Indeed, it is permissible to proceed
straight to Makkah without passing through any meeqaat. In this regard
there is no difference between an obligatory and an optional pilgrimage
or Umrat-ul-Mufradah. However, if the ihram is for an obligatory
pilgrimage, then it is necessary that he should wear ihram in the season
of the pilgrimage, as already stated above.

(2) If a pilgrim wishes to perform an Umrat-ul-Mufradah in the month of
Rajab and he fears that the month will elapse if he proceeded to the
meeqaat to wear the ihram, then it is permissible to wear the ihram
before the meeqaat and it will be reckoned as the umrah of Rajab even if
the remaining ceremonies are performed by him in Sha'baan. In this
regard there is no difference whether the umrah is obligatory or
optional.

Rule 165:

It is obligatory on the pilgrim to be certain that he has reached the
meeqaat and wear ihram there. He must be satisfied or have proof that
the place is the meeqaat. It is not permissible to wear the ihram if
there is doubt whether the meeqaat has been reached.

Rule 166:

If a pilgrim had made a vow to wear ihram before meeqaat and contrary
to it wears ihram at the meeqaat, his ihram is not invalidated. However,
he must pay the penalty for infringing the vow, if he did so
deliberately.

Rule 167:

Just as it is not permissible to wear ihram before reaching meeqaat, so
is it not permissible to delay wearing it. It is not permissible for a
person who intends to perform a pilgrimage or umrah or to enter Makkah
to pass the meeqaat without wearing ihram there even if there is another
meeqaat ahead. If a pilgrim passes by a meeqaat, he must, if possible,
return to it to wear the ihram.

There is one exception for those who pass Dhul Hulaifah but without
wearing ihram proceed towards Johfa without excuse. In such a case,
wearing ihram from Johfa is sufficient, but it is sinful to do so. As a
matter of precaution, it is impermissible to pass any place which is
parallel to one of the meeqaats without wearing ihram even if one can
ignore this precaution because there is another meeqaat ahead. If a
passenger does not intend to perform a pilgrimage or enter Makkah
changes his mind after passing meeqaat, then he can wear ihram for
Umratul-Mufradah from the lowest of Hil (Adnal Hil).

Rule 168:

If a pilgrim passes by a meeqaat deliberately without wearing ihram,
then, without prejudice to the previous rule,

(i) if it is possible to return to the meeqaat, it is obligatory to do
so and wear ihram there; it makes no difference whether he returns after
having entered the Haram or from outside it and if he does so, his
pilgrimage is valid;

(ii) if the pilgrim is not able to return to the meeqaat, whether he is
inside or outside the Haram, his pilgrimage is invalidated and wearing
ihram from any place beyond the meeqaat is not sufficient. He must
perform the pilgrimage in the ensuing year if he has the means.

Rule 169:

If a pilgrim omits to wear ihram through oversight, unconsciousness or
such other cause or ignorance of the rule or meeqaat, four situations
would arise:

(i) if it is possible to return to the meeqaat, it is obligatory to do
so and wear ihram there;

(ii) if he is in the Haram and it is not possible to return to the
meeqaat but it is possible to come out of the Haram, he must get outside
the Haram and wear ihram there; it is preferable that having come
outside the Haram he must proceed as far away from the Haram as possible
to wear ihram;

(iii) if he is in the Haram and it is not possible to come out, he must
wear ihram wherever he is, even if he has entered Makkah;

(iv) if he is outside the Haram but it is not possible to return to the
meeqaat, as a matter of precaution, he must return as far as possible
towards the meeqaat and wear ihram.

In all these four situations, his pilgrimage is valid if he acts in
accordance with what is stated above. The same rule applies to a person
who wears ihram before reaching meeqaat or after leaving it out of
ignorance or by oversight of the rule.

Rule 170:

If a pilgrim omits to wear ihram at meeqaat out of ignorance of the
rule and enters the Haram, like the others, he must get out of the Haram
and wear ihram if it is not possible for him to return to meeqaat. In
such a situation, it is preferable that he should go as far away from
the Haram as possible and then wear ihram if by doing so there is no
risk of missing the pilgrimage. If there is no possibility of moving out
of the Haram, then, like the others, he should wear ihram in the
Haram.

Rule 171:

If the umrah becomes invalidated, including by reason of the invalidity
of the ihram, it is obligatory to repeat it, if possible and if, for
lack of time, it is not possible to repeat it, the obligatory pilgrimage
becomes invalid and it is necessary to perform it again in the
succeeding year.

Rule 172:

A group of scholars have stated that if a pilgrim performs an umrah
without ihram, it is valid if he did so out of ignorance or by oversight
but this proposition is arguable. In this situation, it is preferable
that, if possible, it be repeated, just as we have stated.

Rule 173:

If a person travels from far for a pilgrimage, it is obligatory on him
to wear ihram for umrah at one of the first five meeqaats. If his route
passes through one of them, no doubt arises. If not, as happens in the
current times when pilgrims first land in Jeddah, which is not one of
the meeqaats, it is not permissible to wear ihram there as it has not
been established that it is parallel to any meeqaat. In such a case he
has three options: (1) He can make a vow (nadhr) to wear ihram from his
town or on the way just before landing in Jeddah and wear the ihram at
the place stipulated in the vow, be it even on the plane. (2) If he
lands in Jeddah without ihram, he can proceed to Rabigh which is on the
way to Madinah and wear ihram there by making a vow (nadhr) there as it
is situated before Johfa which is one of the meeqaats. (3) He must make
a vow to wear ihram in Jeddah and do so and there is no need to renew
the ihram at the point midway between Jeddah and Haram which is parallel
to Johfa.

Rule 174:

It has already been stated that for Hajj-ul-Tamatoo it is obligatory to
wear ihram in Makkah. If a pilgrim deliberately wears the ihram
elsewhere, his ihram is invalid if he enters Makkah having worn it.
Indeed, it is obligatory on him, if possible, to wear it again in
Makkah, else his Hajj is invalid.

Rule 175:

If during Hajj-ul-Tamatoo a pilgrim forgets to wear ihram for Hajj in
Makkah, it is obligatory for him, if possible, to return to Makkah.
Otherwise, he must wear the ihram wherever he remembers to do so, even
if he has reached Arafaat and his Hajj is valid. The same is the rule
for one ignorant of the rule.

Rule 176:

If a pilgrim forgets to wear the ihram for Hajj and does not remember
to do so until the completion of all the ceremonies, his Hajj is valid.
The same rule applies to one who is ignorant of the rule.

THE PROCEDURE FOR IHRAM

Three Obligations for Ihram:

First: Niyyah, that is, the pilgrim forms the intention to perform what
is obligatory on him by way of Umrah and Hajj to attain nearness to
Allah. If he does not know all the ceremonies in detail, he must form
the intention generally. In such a case, it is obligatory that he should
know of what is obligatory on him item by item by checking from the
Rules or from the learned he trusts. In the niyyah, the following must
be included:

(1) that the intention must be to attain nearness to Allah, just as in
other forms of worship;
(2) that the intention must be formed at the definite places specified
before under the heading of meeqaats;
(3) that the ihram is worn for Umrah or Hajj, and whether for
Hajj-ul-Tamatoo, Qiraan or Ifraad, if it was on behalf of someone else,
such intention must be expressly formed. However, if it was for oneself,
not intending it to be for someone else is sufficient. It is apparent
that one who wishes to perform a pilgrimage to fulfil a vow must perform
the ceremonies to accomplish the vow without any need to state expressly
the intention of a pilgrimage upon a vow for oneself or on behalf of
another, for Hijjatul Islam, Hajj to fulfil a vow, obligatory as a
penalty or optional. If the intention is formed without determining the
pilgrimage, the ihram will be invalid.

Rule l77:

It is not necessary to utter the intention aloud or mentally. It is
enough that the intention is consciously formed as in other forms of
worship.

Rule 178:

There is no requirement for the validity of the ihram that there should
be a determination to refrain from all the prohibitions from the wearing
of it to its removal except for sexual intercourse and masturbation.
Thus if a pilgrim intends from the wearing of ihram for obligatory
pilgrimage to have sexual intercourse with his wife or masturbate before
the stay at Muzdalifah or wavers on this matter, his ihram is
invalidated. However, if he does not intend from the wearing of the
ihram not to refrain from them but after wearing ihram intends to commit
either of them, the ihram is not vitiated.

Second: Talbiyah, that is, to utter as follows: "Labbaik, Allahumma
labbaik, labbaik, la sharika laka labbaik". And it is highly preferable
to add the following: "Innal hamda wanni'amata laka wal mulk, la sharika
laka". It is permissible to add "labbaik" and say, "la sharika laka
labbaik".

Rule 179:

Every pilgrim must learn the proper pronunciation of the words of the
talbiyah and recite them correctly just as the recitation of the
Takbiratul Ehram in prayers, even if it is by following another person
reciting these words. If a person does not have the proper pronunciation
of the words nor is there a person whom he can follow, he is still
obliged to recite the words as best he can unless his recitation is such
that it is not considered to be talbiyah. In such a situation, it is
preferable that he should recite as much as he can, recite the
translation of the talbiyah and appoint an agent to recite it on his
behalf.

Rule 180:

A person who becomes dumb as a result of disease or injury should
recite talbiyah as much as he can and if he is unable to recite he must
move his tongue and lips while he is making intention and make gestures
by fingers which coordinate with the recitation. A person born dumb
should move his tongue and lips as if he is reciting and make gestures
by fingers as well.

Rule 181:

For the unconscious or the retarded, another person must recite for
him.

Rule 182:

The ihram for Hajj-ul-Tamatoo, Umrat-ul-Tamatoo, Hajj-ul-Ifraad or
Umrat-ul-Mufradah is not complete without talbiyah. As for
Hajj-ul-Qiraan, it can be completed with talbiyah or signs or by the
following ways: the first by the sacrifice of a camel, the pilgrim,
standing to the left of the camel, must tear off the right side of the
hump of the camel letting its blood ooze out and the second by
garlanding a camel or one of the other animals round its neck with worn
slippers used when going to pray. It is preferable that both the methods
be used. In Hajj-ul-Qiraan it is preferable that the talbiyah be recited
even if the ihram was worn by following either of the methods.

Rule 183:

Purity from urine or excrement is not a condition for the validity of
the ihram. Thus, a person can wear ihram even in condition of janabah,
haydh, nifaas or the like.

Rule 184:

The position of talbiyah in ihram is that of Takbirat-ul-Ihram in
prayers (salaat). Ihram is not complete without it or the other two
methods discussed in Rule 182 above, particularly in Qiraan. Therefore,
if a person wears the ihram and the two pieces of cloth but before
reciting the talbiyah performs one of the acts prohibited during ihram,
he has not done any wrong and there is no penalty on him.

Rule 185:

If a person proceeds on pilgrimage via Masjidul Haram, it is preferable
to delay the recitation of talbiyah till he reaches Bayda, which is the
end of Dhul Hulaifa and where the ground becomes flat but, as a matter
of caution, he must recite the talbiyah without delay and on reaching
there should recite loudly and openly.If he proceeds by any other route,
it is preferable to delay the recitation till he has walked a little. If
a person proceeds on the pilgrimage from the Holy Mosque, he can delay
it till he reaches Raqtaa which is a place near the Masjid-ul-Rayah, a
little before Masjid-ul-Jinn.

Rule 186:

As a matter of caution, a person performing Umrat-ul-Tamatoo must stop
the recitation of the talbiyah on sighting the houses of old Makkah and
those arriving from the route of Madinah at the rear of Madniyeen. Those
performing Umrat-ul-Mufradah must stop the recitation on entering the
Haram if they have arrived from outside Makkah and for those who have
gone outside Makkah only to wear ihram should cease the recitation on
sighting the Holy Kaaba. Those performing the Hajj must stop the
recitation at noon on the day of Arafaat.

Rule 187:

If after wearing the two pieces of cloth for ihram but before departing
from the meeqaat, a person entertains a doubt as to whether he had
recited the talbiyah or not, he should recite the talbiyah and if the
doubt arises after the recitation as to whether he had recited it
correctly, he should resolve that he had.

Third: Wearing the two pieces of cloth after abstaining from the
matters prohibited during ihram is obligatory; but children are an
exception in this rule as they can delay wearing ihram till Fakh if they
take that route. It is apparent that there is no certain way of wearing
them. So, one can wear one of the pieces of cloth round the waist
however he wishes and place the other piece over the shoulders or use it
as a robe but, as a matter of caution, the two pieces should be worn in
the ordinary way.

Rule 188:

Wearing of the two pieces of cloth is obligatory as a matter of
obedience in worship but is not a condition for the validity of the
ihram.

Rule I89:

As a matter of caution, it is necessary that the cloth worn round the
waist should cover the portion from the navel to the knee and the other
cloth should cover both the shoulders, arms and a considerable part of
the back. As a matter of caution, both the pieces must be worn before
the niyyah and talbiyah; if the niyyah and talbiyah precede the wearing
of the ihram, the pilgrim must make the niyyah and recite the talbiyah
again after wearing the ihram.

Rule 190:

If through ignorance or oversight the ihram is worn over a shirt, the
shirt must be removed immediately and the ihram is valid. It is clear
that the ihram is valid even if the shirt was worn deliberately.
However, if it is put on after wearing ihram there will be no doubt that
the ihram will be valid but the shirt must be removed from below.

Rule 191:

There is no objection in having more than the two pieces of cloth in
ihram at the time of wearing it or afterwards for protection against
heat or cold or for other reason.

Rule 192:

The conditions as to the cloth that may be worn in prayers (salaat)
also apply to the cloth used for ihram. It is necessary that they should
not be made of pure silk or any wild animal or from parts of the body of
an animal whose meat is forbidden or from gold and both the pieces must
be clean (not najis).

Rule 193:

It is necessary that the cloth worn round the waist be of the quality
that the body is concealed and is not exposed but the cloth round the
shoulders need not be of such quality.

Rule 194:

As a matter of great caution, both the pieces must be of textile, and
not of leather or hide.

Rule 195:

The obligation to wear the two pieces round the waist and the shoulders
is confined to males only and does not apply to females who may wear as
ihram their usual clothes which would comply with the conditions stated
above.

Rule 196:

It is forbidden to wear ihram made of silk and although generally the
rule is for males it also applies to females in respect of ihram and as
a matter of caution, females must not wear anything made of pure silk
throughout the period of ihram, except in the case of necessity as for
protection from cold or heat.

Rule 197:

If either or both of the pieces of cloth worn as ihram become unclean
(najis), as a matter of caution, it or they must be changed or cleaned
as soon as possible.

Rule 198:

It is not obligatory to have the cloths of ihram on all the time. There
is no objection to its removal, whether necessary to do so or not. Nor
is there any objection to changing them provided the other pair complies
with the conditions stated above.


