The Conditions For Tawaf (circumambulation)
===========================================

There are certain matters relating to tawaaf:

First: Niyyah: The tawaaf is invalid if there is no intention to
perform it for the purpose of attaining nearness and obedience to
Allah.

Second: Cleanliness from urine and excretion and if one performs the
tawaaf despite such uncleanliness, whether deliberately or out of
ignorance or by oversight, the tawaaf is invalid.


Rule 283:

If in the course of the tawaaf, the pilgrim in the state of ihram
passes wind, water or excretion,then:

(i) if he does so before completing the fourth round,the tawaaf is
invalid and he must repeat it after performing wudhu;

(ii) if it occurs involuntarily after completing the fourth round,he
must interrupt the tawaaf,perform wudhu and complete the tawaaf from
where he had interrupted it;

(iii) if it occurs after completing the fourth round, but occured
deliberately,then, as a matter of caution, he must complete the tawaaaf
after performing wudhu and repeat the tawaaf.

Rule 284:

If the pilgrim entertains a doubt about being in wudhu before
commencing the tawaaf, then if he remembers having performed wudhu and
the doubt relates to whether it was subsequently broken or not, he
should ignore the doubt,else it will be obligatory on him to perform
wudhu and the tawaaf. However if that doubt arises in the course of the
tawaaf, then if he remembers having performed wudhu before, the ruling
is as already stated; else, if the doubt arises before the completion of
the fourth round, he must perform wudhu and repeat the tawaaf, else he
must interrupt the tawaaf, perform wudhu and complete the remainder of
the tawaaf.

Rule 285:

If the doubt arises about the cleanliness after completing the tawaaf
it must be ignored, although as a matter of caution it may be repeated
but it is obligatory to clean oneself for the prayers (salaat) after the
tawaaf.

Rule 286:

If it is not possible to perform wudhoo for a reason not likely to
change, tayammum must be performed for the tawaaf and if even tayammum
is not possible the tawaaf itself cannot be performed. When all hope of
possibility fades, a deputy must be appointed to perform the. tawaaf on
his behalf and, as a matter of recommended caution, he must also perform
the tawaaf without wudhu or tayammum.

Rule 287:

When the periods of Haiz and Nifas are over and on Mujnib, ghusl is
obligatory for the performance of tawaaf and if it is not possible to do
so and there is no hope of any possibility of ghusl, then the tawaaf
must be performed with tayammum. In such a case, as a matter of
recommended caution, a deputy must also be appointed to perform the
tawaaf and if even tayammum is not possible, the appointment of the
deputy will be confirmed.

Rule 288:

If in the course of Umrat-ul-Tamatoo, a lady whether in the state of
ihram or not gets into menstruation, then, if there is sufficient time
for performance of the Umrah, she should wait for the period to be
completed, perform her ghusl and then perform the Ihram. If, however,
the time is short, two situations can arise:

Firstly, if the period commenced before getting into the state of
ihram, she should change to Hajj-ul-Ifrad and on completion of the
ceremonies for Hajj, if possible, it is obligatory on her to perform the
Umrat-ul-Mufradah.

Secondly, if the period commences after getting into the state of
ihram, then she has the choice of either performing the Hajj-ul-Ifraad
as stated in firstly above or to perform the ceremonies of
Umrat-ul-Tamatoo without performing the tawaaf and its prayers. After
saee she should perform taqseer and then wear the ihram for Hajj. On
returning to Makkah after completing the ceremonies of Mina she should
perform the tawaaf of the Umrah before performing the tawaaf for the
Hajj. If even then the bleeding should be continuing and she is
convinced that it will continue until after return from Mina, she should
appoint a deputy to perform the tawaaf for her. She should perform the
saee herself.

Rule 289:

If the bleeding commences when the lady in the state of ihram is in the
course of tawaaf, then if it occurs before the completion of the fourth
round, the tawaaf is invalid and the rule in her case is as stated above
but if it occurs after the completion of the fourth round, what was
performed is valid and it is obligatory to complete the remainder of the
tawaaf after ghusl. In both the situations, as a matter of caution, if
time permits, she should perform a complete tawaaf afterwards. Else, she
should perform saee and taqseer, wear the ihram for Hajj and on her
return to Makkah from Mina after completion of the ceremonies there she
should perform the tawaaf by way of qadha before performing the tawaaf
for the Hajj as stated above.

Rule 290:

If the bleeding commences after completion of the tawaaf but before
saying the prayers (salaat) for the tawaaf, it is valid and she should
say the prayers after performing her ghusl but if the time is short, she
should perform the saee and taqseer and say the prayers by way of qadha
before the tawaaf of Hajj.

Rule 291:

If a lady has completed her tawaaf and said her prayers (salaat) for
the tawaaf and then feels the bleeding but is uncertain as to whether it
commenced before the tawaaf or the prayers or during one of them or
after completion of the prayers, she should proceed on the basis that
the tawaaf and the prayers are valid. However, if she knows that it
commenced before or during the prayers, the preceding rule will apply.

Rule 292:

If, when a lady enters Makkah she is able to performs the
Umrat-ul-Tamatoo but deliberately postpones its completion until her
monthly period commences and the time becomes short, it is apparent that
her Umrah becomes invalid. As a matter of caution, she should change to
Hajj-ul-Ifraad and has no choice but to perform the pilgrimage again in
the following year.

Rule 293:

In an optional tawaaf, cleanliness is not a prerequisite and is valid
without it but it is essential for the prayers (salaat) which are not
valid without it.

Rule 294:

It is sufficient for a disabled person to clean himself according to
his condition. For example, he may be helpless or incontinent of urine
or afflicted with intestinal ailment and may not be able to control
himself. As a matter of caution, he must do both, if possible, perform
the tawaaf personally and appoint an attorney to perform it on his
behalf. In the case of abnormal menstruation, as a matter of caution, if
it is little, she should perform a separate wudhoo for both the tawaaf
and the prayers; if it is moderate, she should perform a ghusl but a
separate wudhoo for both of them and if it is intense then she should
perform a separate ghusl for the tawaaf and the prayers without the need
for wudhoo if there is no urination. If there is, then, as a matter of
caution, wudhoo would also have to be performed with the ghusl.

Thirdly, Conditions of tawaaf: Cleanliness of the body and clothes: a
tawaaf is not valid if the body or the clothes worn are unclean (najis).
The uncleanliness (najasah) which is excusable in prayers (salaat)-like
blood of the size of less than a dirham is not, as a matter of caution,
excusable in tawaaf. There is no objection in carrying anything which is
najis during tawaaf.

Rule 295:

There is no objection about blood from ulcers or wounds oozing in the
course of a tawaaf if it is difficult to restrain it. Nor is it
obligatory to remove the blood from the cloth or body in the course of
the tawaaf. For a pilgrim to have with him unclean things in the course
of a tawaaf does not invalidate the tawaaf nor items which would
invalidate the prayers (salaat) if worn in them.

Rule 296:

If the pilgrim is unaware of any uncleanliness (najasah) on his body or
clothes and becomes aware of it only after completion of the tawaaf, it
is valid and there is no need to repeat it. Similarly even the prayers
(salaat) after the tawaaf will be valid if he was unaware of the
uncleanliness until after completion of the prayers unless he was in
doubt about the uncleanliness before the prayers or made investigation
and did not become aware of it. However, the person who has a doubt but
does not make investigation and finds the uncleanliness after prayers
must, as a matter of caution, repeat the prayers.

Rule 297:

If the pilgrim forgets about the uncleanliness (najasah) on his body or
clothes and remembers of it after completion of the tawaaf it is
apparent that the tawaaf is valid but, as a matter of caution, it is
better to repeat it. However, if he remembers it after completion of the
prayers (salaat) he must repeat the prayers, as a matter of caution, if
he forgot as a result of negligence, otherwise there is no need to
repeat it.

Rule 298:

If the pilgrim was unaware of the uncleanliness (najasah) on his body
or clothes and became aware of it in the course of the tawaaf or he or
the clothes became unclean in the course and before the completion of
the tawaaf, then if he has clean (tahir) clothes on him, he should
change into clean ones and complete the tawaaf and if he does not have
them with him, then if this occurred after the completion of the fourth
round of the tawaaf, he should leave the tawaaf, clean the clothes or
himself and complete the tawaaf. If this occurs before the completion of
the fourth round, he should leave the tawaaf, clean the clothes or
himself and, as a matter of caution, perform another complete tawaaf,
even though it is apparent that it is not obligatory to repeat the
tawaaf.

Fourth: Circumcision of Males: It is apparent that as a matter of
caution, if an intelligent child wears the ihram himself, he must also
be circumcised. If he is not intelligent or his guardian helped him wear
the ihram then it is not clear that he is required to have been
circumcised for the purpose of tawaaf, although, as a matter of caution,
he should be.

Rule 299:

If an uncircumcised pilgrim in ihram, whether of puberty or an
intelligent child, performs a tawaaf, it is invalid and, unless he
repeats it after being circumcised, will be regarded as a person who has
abandoned the tawaaf and treated as will hereafter be discussed.

Rule 300:

If a person has the means to perform the obligatory pilgrimage but is
not circumcised, then if he can be circumcised and can perform the
pilgrimage in the same year, it is obligatory on him to do both in the
same year or else, he should postpone the pilgrimage till after
circumcision. If it is not possible for him to be circumcised at all,
whether because of some necessity or any other reason, then it is
obligatory on him to perform the pilgrimage but, as a matter of caution,
he should perform the tawaaf himself for both the Umrah and Hajj and
also appoint an agent to perform the tawaaf and say the prayers (salaat)
after the tawaaf on his behalf and he should recite the prayers (salaat)
after the tawaaf after the agent has recited them.

Fifth: As a matter of caution, it is necessary to cover the private
parts during tawaaf and the clothes have to be lawfully acquired. As a
matter of caution, all the rules applicable to the clothes worn during
prayers (salaat) must be observed during tawaaf as well.


