The Obligation in Tawaf
=======================

There are eight obligations to be fulfilled in tawaaf:

First: It must be commenced at Hajar-ul-Aswad (The Black Stone) and as
a matter of recommended caution the entire body of the pilgrim must pass
in front of the entire Stone. It is recommended to stop a little
distance from the Stone so that one is certain to be opposite to it 'and
the extra distance will provide assurance of a proper start.

Second: Each round is completed at the Hajar-ul-Aswad and in the last
round it is recommended to proceed a little further from the Stone so
that the extra distance covered may provide assurance of its proper
completion.

Third: At all times during the tawaaf, the Holy Kaaba must be to the
left of the pilgrim. If, in order to kiss a corner of the Holy Kaaba one
faces it or because of great rush of the pilgrims, one becomes facing it
or it is to one's back or right the distance covered in such pose will
not be counted as part of tawaaf. This rule is basic common sense as is
also evident from the tawaaf of the Holy Prophet (S.A.A.W.) when he did
so riding. So there is no need for special effort to be made at the Hijr
Ismail and at the corners.

Fourth: Hijr Ismail must be included in the tawaaf, that is to say, the
pilgrim must go round the Hijr without entering it or climbing its wall.
Fifth: One must circumambulate keeping clear of the Holy Kaaba and the
projection from it known as Shadharwaan. Sixth: One must circumambulate
seven times continuously. Less than seven rounds will invalidate the
tawaaf and if more than seven rounds are made deliberately, the tawaaf
will be invalid too as will be discussed below.

Seventh: The seven rounds must follow each other without considerable
interruption between them.

Eighth: The tawaaf must be performed by free movement of the pilgrim.
If he was made to move by being pushed by the crowd the tawaaf will not
be acceptable.

Rule 301:

It is generally well known about tawaaf that it be performed between
the Holy Kaaba and Maqame Ibrahim (a.s.) which is a distance of twenty
six and a half arm lengths (=about 12 meters) and as one has to go round
the wall of the Hijr Ismail, the distance there is reduced to six and a
half arm lengths (=4.42 meters) but it is clear that if one moves
outside this ambit it is acceptable particularly if one is unable to
remain within the limits or it would cause him harm to do so. However,
if possible, it is recommended to repeat the tawaaf if one has moved
outside the limits.

DEPARTING FROM BOUNDS OF TAWAF

Rule 302:

If a person departs from the limits of tawaaf and enters the Holy
Kaaba, the tawaaf is invalidated and it must be repeated. It is
preferable that the tawaaf be first completed and then performed again
if the departure took place after completion of half of the tawaaf.

Rule 303:

If a pilgrim departs from the tawaaf to the ' Shadharwaan', the tawaaf
becomes invalid to the extent of the departure. As a matter of caution,
after making good the distance, he should complete the tawaaf and then
repeat it. As a matter of caution, one should not, in the course of
tawaaf, extend one's arm towards the ' Shadharwaan' or the wall of the
Holy Kaaba to touch a corner or whatsoever.

Rule 304:

If a pilgrim enters Hijr Ismail in the course of a tawaaf, by oversight
or out of ignorance, the round in which this occurs is invalid and there
is no option but to repeat it and it is better to repeat after
completion of the entire tawaaf: The same rule applies, as a matter of
caution, to walking on the wall of the Hijr and a pilgrim in the course
of tawaaf must not touch the wall of the Hijr either.

Rule 305:

If, without good reason, a pilgrim in the course of a tawaaf departs
from it to the outside before completing the fourth round, the tawaaf is
invalid and has to be repeated. If it was after completing the fourth
round, as a matter of caution, the tawaaf must be completed and then
repeated. However, if the tawaaf was optional, he may complete the
remainder provided that he does not break the sequence.

Rule 306:

If menstruation of a lady commences in the course of a tawaaf, it is
obligatory on her to depart from it and the Masjid-ul-Haraam
immediately. The Rule that would then apply to her has already been
discussed in the Condition for tawaaf above.

Rule 307:

It is permissible for a pilgrim performing tawaaf to depart from it in
order to visit a sick person or to attend to his own matter or that of a
brother in faith, and if the tawaaf was obligatory and he had completed
the fourth round, his tawaaf is valid. However, if he leaves before
completing the fourth round, his tawaaf is invalidated. If the tawaaf
was a recommended one, he can continue from where he stopped, even
though he had not completed four rounds.

Rule 308:

It is permissible to sit down to rest in the course of a tawaaf but it
must not be prolonged so much that the sequence as generally accepted be
broken for in that event the tawaaf becomes invalid and has to be
performed again.

IRREGULARITIES IN TAWAAF

Rule 309:

If a pilgrim interrupts a tawaaf in order to obtain the benefit of
praying at the earliest time or join congregational prayers or perform
the recommended prayers, then he must complete the tawaaf from where he
interrupted it after completing his prayers. As a matter of caution, he
should repeat the tawaaf after completing it if the interruption was in
the course of an obligatory tawaaf and occurred before completing the
fourth round.

Rule 310:

If during a tawaaf an omission is made by inadvertence and the pilgrim
becomes conscious of the impropriety before the sequence of continuity
is broken and he has not left the area of tawaaf, he should complete it
and it will be valid.However, if he becomes conscious of it after the
sequence is broken, then if he had forgotten to perform one round or two
or three rounds, he should perform it or them, and the tawaaf will be
valid. If he cannot perform it personally even though he remembers after
returning to his home, he may appoint an agent to perform it on his
behalf. If he had forgotten more than three rounds, he should return and
perform the missed ones but it is better that having done so, he should
perform another full tawaaf.

ADDITIONS IN TAWAAF

There are five kinds to be considered:

1. If there is no intention to make any additions as part of the tawaaf
being performed or another tawaaf, for example that it was intended to
make one more round assuming that it was recommended to do so, any
addition made does not invalidate the tawaaf.

2. If at the commencement or in the course of a tawaaf an intention is
formed to make an addition as part of the tawaaf being performed, it is
undoubtedly invalid and has to be performed again.

3. If after completion of the tawaaf, any addition made is considered
part of the tawaaf performed, then it is clear that the tawaaf becomes
invalid.

4. If the addition is intended to be part of another tawaaf, the other
tawaaf will need to be completed but it will not be valid as two tawaafs
will have been joined except if both the tawaafs are not obligatory
ones, but it is discouraged to join two tawaafs.

5. If the addition is intended to be part of another tawaaf which per
chance was not completed, there is neither addition nor connection but
the tawaaf is none the less invalid as it lacks the intention of
attaining nearness to Allah. Similar will be the case if the pilgrim
intends at the commencement or in the course of the tawaaf to make an
addition knowing of the invalidity of the connection between the two
tawaafs as there would be no certainty of the intention to obtain
nearness, even if the connection does not materialise out of accident.

Rule 311:

If a pilgrim makes addition to his tawaaf by oversight, then if he
remembers after reaching the Iraqi corner he must complete that addition
as a complete tawaaf with the intention of attaining nearness to Allah,
without specifying it to be obligatory or recommended. Then he must
recite four rakaats, and preferably separate them by reciting two for
the obligatory tawaaf before saee and the other two for the recommended
tawaaf after saee. As a matter of caution, the same rule applies if he
remembers before reaching the Iraqi corner.

DOUBT AS TO THE NUMBER OF ROUNDS

Rule 312:

If after the completion of the tawaaf a doubt arises as to the number
of rounds performed or the propriety of the tawaaf, it may be ignored.
If it arises in the course of the prayers (salaat) recited after the
tawaaf, the doubt may also be ignored.

Rule 313:

If the pilgrim is sure of having performed seven rounds but entertains
a doubt as to whether there was any addition, for example doubting if
the last round is the eighth, the doubt should be ignored and the tawaaf
is valid. If the doubt, however, arises before the last round is
completed, it is clear that the tawaaf is invalid and, as a matter of
caution, the last round be completed and the tawaaf repeated.

Rule 314:

If a doubt arises as to the number of rounds performed, for example,
whether six or seven or whether five or six or lesser, the tawaaf is
invalidated and so is the case if the doubt is in respect of greater
number of rounds or lesser, like whether the last round is the sixth or
the eighth.

Rule 315:

If the doubt is whether it is the sixth or the seventh round and owing
to ignorance of the rule the pilgrim proceeds on the basis that it is
the sixth round and completes the tawaaf, he is obliged to perform the
entire tawaaf again but if he remains ignorant of the rule until the
period for correction passes, the tawaaf would be valid.

Rule 316:

It is permissible for a pilgrim to place reliance on the count of
rounds by his companion if the latter is certain of his count.

Rule 317:

If a doubt arises in an optional tawaaf, one can proceed on the basis
of the lower figure and the tawaaf is valid.

Rule 318:

If a pilgrim omits to perform the tawaaf in Umrat-ul-Tamatoo
deliberately and knowingly or out of ignorance and it is not possible to
perform it before the time of stay at Arafaat, the Umrah is invalid and
he is obliged to repeat the Hajj the following year and, as already been
discussed, it is clear that his ihram will also be invalidated but, as a
matter of caution, he should change to Hajj-ul-Ifraad and complete it
with the intention of performing Hajj and Umrat-ul-Mufradah. If a
pilgrim deliberately omits to perform the tawaaf of Hajj, and it is not
possible to rectify the omission, the Hajj is invalid and he is obliged
to repeat the pilgrimage in the following year. If he did so out of
ignorance, the penalty is the sacrifice of a camel.

Rule 319:

If a pilgrim forgets to perform a tawaaf it is obligatory on him to
perform it when he remembers and if by then the period for it has
passed, he should perform it by way of qadha and his Hajj will be valid.
As a matter of caution, after the qadha tawaaf, he should repeat the
saee. If he remembers at a time when it is no longer possible to perform
its qadha, for example if he has forgotten the tawaaf of
Umrah-ul-Tamatoo till his stay at Arafaat or forgot his tawaaf of Hajj
till the end of Dhil Hijjah he must perform the qadha and repeat the
saee as a matter of caution. If he has already reached his home country,
he is obliged to appoint an agent.

Rule 320:

If a pilgrim forgets to perform tawaaf, returns home and has sexual
intercourse with his wife and later remembers the omission, then if the
tawaaf was for Hajj, he is obliged to have a sheep sacrificed in Mina
and if it was for Umrah in Makkah.

Rule 321:

If a pilgrim forgets to perform a tawaaf and remembers it when there is
still opportunity to perform its qadha, he should undertake it in his
former ihram and there is no need to renew it. However, if he has
departed from Makkah, it is necessary to wear a new ihram in order to
enter Makkah except for the cases explained in Rule 141.

Rule 322:

All that becomes lawful for a pilgrim after tawaaf does not become
lawful for the one who forgets to perform it until after he has
performed its qadha or his agent has done so on his behalf.

Rule 323:

If by reason of illness, fracture of bones or old age, a pilgrim is
unable to perform tawaaf by himself, it is permissible for him to take
assistance from another person even by way of sitting on the shoulders
of the other or pushed on a wheelchair but, as a matter of caution,
should be carried in such a way that his feet touch the ground. If even
that is not possible, he is obliged to appoint an agent to perform the
tawaaf on his behalf. If even that is not possible, for example, because
he is unconscious, his guardian should appoint an agent. The same is the
rule in respect of the prayers (salaat) after the tawaaf. If he can
recite them himself, he should do so, else he should appoint an agent to
recite them on his behalf. (Rules regarding menstruation of women have
already been discussed under the conditions of tawaaf).

THE PRAYERS (SALAAT) AFTER TAWAAF

The third obligation in the Umrat-ul-Tamatoo consists of two rakaats to
be recited after the tawaaf. It is recited like the Fajr prayers except
that the reciter has the option to recite it aloud or silently. It is
obligatory to recite it close to Maqaame Ibrahim (a.s.) and, as a matter
of caution, it is clear that it must be recited at its rear. If it is
not possible to do so, one may recite them on one of its both sides in
addition to reciting them far from the Maqaam but at its rear. If this
is not possible, any of the two is sufficient. However, if this is not
possible either, then one may recite them anywhere in the Mosque, as a
mater of caution, as close to the Maqaam as possible.This is the rule
when the tawaaf is obligatory but when it is optional, one may pray
anywhere in the Mosque.

Rule 324:

If a person deliberately omits to say the prayers after tawaaf, his
Hajj is invalid.

Rule 325:

The prayers must be recited immediately after the tawaaf, that is to
say, there must not be a gap of time, generally speaking, between the
tawaaf and the prayers.

Rule 326:

If a pilgrim forgets to recite the prayers after tawaaf and remembers
them after saee, he should recite them immediately and there is no need
to repeat the saee, although one may do so as a matter of caution. If he
remembers them in the course of the saee, he should interrupt it and
recite the prayers at the Maqaam and then return to complete the saee
from where he had interrupted it. If he remembers them after departing
from Makkah, it is obligatory to return and recite them at the Maqaam,
if doing so will not cause inconvenience and if it is not possible to
return, he should say them wherever he remembers them. Even if it is
possible to return to the boundary of the Haram, it is not necessary to
do so. If one omits to recite the prayers out of ignorance, the same
rule applies to him as for the one who forgets.

Rule 327:

If a person dies but has an obligation to recite the prayers, it is
obligatory on his eldest son to have the qadha recited.

Rule 328:

If the recitation of the prayers by the pilgrim is not correct and he
is unable to correct it, it is sufficient for him to recite whatever he
knows. If it is possible to render the recitation correct, it is
obligatory to do so. If, despite such possibility, he does not correct
the prayers and the time becomes short, he should recite them as best he
can and also join congregational prayers and also appoint an agent to
recite them on his behalf.

Rule 329:

If a pilgrim is unaware that his recitation is incorrect and his
ignorance is excusable, his prayers are valid and there is no need to
recite them again, even if he comes to know after the prayers that there
was a defect in them. If his ignorance was not excusable, then after
correcting his error, he must recite the prayers after tawaaf again and
the rules relating to a person who had forgotten to recite the prayers
will apply to him.


