The Obligations of Safe
=======================

This is the fourth obligation in Umrat-ul-Tamatoo. In saee too,
intention to seek nearness of Allah is obligatory but there is no
obligation to cover the private parts or for cleanliness although it is
preferable to be clean during saee.

Rule 330:

Saee is to be performed after tawaaf and the prayers (salaat). If it
'is performed before the tawaaf or the prayers, it is obligatory to
repeat it after performing them. As for one who forgets to perform a
tawaaf and recalls after performing saee. the rule has already been set
out above.

Rule 331:

Niyyah is necessary in saee that it is performed for Umrah or Hajj,
whichever is applicable, to attain nearness to Allah.

Rude 332:

Saee consists of seven rounds. The starting point for saee is the first
part of Safaa and from there to proceed to Marwah. This is counted as
the first round. Then one must return to Safaa and reach there. This
would be counted as the second round. The process must be repeated until
seven rounds are completed at Marwah. One should cover the whole
distance between the two mountains each round and there is no need to
climb on any of the mountains even though it is preferable to do so. It
is obligatory, as a matter of caution, that there should be continuity
in its performance and there should not be a gap of time between the
rounds.

Rule 333:

1f a person starts from Marwah as the first round, the saee will be
invalid and he must restart from Safaa.

Rule 334:

Although it is better but it is not necessary in saee that the pilgrim
must walk; it is permissible to ride on an animal or be carried by
another person or pushed on a wheelchair.

Rule 335:

It is necessary in saee that the pilgrim must go and return between
Safaa and Marwah on the known track. It is not permissible to go or
return via the Mosque or along another route. However, there is also no
requirement that one must walk absolutely straight.

Rule 336:

When walking to Marwah, one must advance towards it and likewise when
proceeding towards Safaa; one must advance to it. It is not permissible
to turn one's back to Marwah if proceeding to it or turn one's back to
Safaa when returning from Marwah. However, there is no objection to
merely looking to the right, left or back in the course of the walk.

Rule 337:

It is permitted to sit at Safaa or Marwah or between them to rest but,
as a matter of caution, one must avoid sitting between Safaa and Marwah,
except for those who are tired, or to pray at the earliest time. In
these cases. one may complete the saee from where it had been
interrupted. As a matter of caution, if one interrupts a saee one should
complete it and then repeat it.

THE RULES OF SAEE

Saee is one of the fundamentals of Hajj and if one omits to perform it
deliberately, whether knowing the rule or ignorant of it or because the
time became so short that it could not be performed before the period
for stay at Arafaat, the Hajj is invalidated and he is subject to the
rules applicable to one who deliberately omitted the tawaaf already
mentioned above.

Rule 338:

If one forgets to perform saee, one must perform it when one remembers
but if one remembers after completion of the ceremonies of Hajj and is
unable to perform the saee personally because of some restraint or
difficulty, he is obliged to appoint an agent and in both such cases,
the pilgrimage will be valid.

Rule 339:

If a pilgrim is unable to perform the saee personally even by being
carried on the shoulders of another man or on a wheelchair, he may
appoint an agent to perform the saee on his behalf and his Hajj will be
valid.

Rule 340:

As a matter of caution, a pilgrim must not delay the performance of
saee after the tawaaf and prayers beyond the period necessary to avoid
heat and exhaustion although it is permissible to delay it till night.
In ordinary circumstances it is not permissible to delay it to the next
day.

Rule 341:

The rule on additions in saee is exactly the same as the rule in
tawaaf. It invalidates the saee if additions are made knowingly and
deliberately. However, if the addition is made out of ignorance of the
rule, it is clear that the saee will not be invalidated but, as a matter
of caution, must be repeated.

Rule 342:

If a pilgrim makes addition in saee by mistake, the saee is valid but
if the addition is a complete round or more, it is recommended that he
should complete seven rounds to make a full saee apart from the first
one. In this way he will complete at Safaa.

Rule 343:

If a pilgrim deliberately makes less than the required rounds in saee,
whether knowing the rule or not, and is unable to remedy it because of
the required period of stay in Arafaat, his Hajj is invalidated and he
is obliged to perform it again in the following year. It is obvious that
his ihram is invalidated also. If the omission is out of oversight, it
is obligatory on him to perform what was omitted when he remembers even
if it is after completion of Hajj. If he remembers the omission whilst
he is in Arafaat, or after the expiry of Dhil Hijjah, as a matter of
caution, he must repeat the saee after completing the forgotten rounds.
However. if this is difficult, he is obliged to appoint an agent to
perform on his behalf. As a matter of caution, the agent must perform a
full saee with the niyyath of fulfilling an obligation of his principal
in addition to completing the forgotten rounds.

Rule 344:

If in the course of Umrat-ul-Tamatoo, a pilgrim mistakenly omits a
portion of saee but in the belief that he had completed it, then, as a
matter of caution. he should sacrifice a cow in penalty and, as already
stated, it is obligatory to complete the saee.

DOUBTS IN SAEE

After taqseer, there is no room for doubt in the number of rounds made,
but if it arises before taqseer then, if the doubt is whether additions
were made, it should be ignored but if it is whether omissions were
made, the saee is invalidated.

Rule 345:

If having reached Marwah in the last round, a pilgrim entertains a
doubt as to whether it was his seventh or ninth round, the doubt should
be ignored and the saee is valid. However, if the same doubt arises in
the course of a round, the saee is invalidated and has to be performed
again.

Rule 346:

The rule on doubt concerning the number of rounds in saee is the same
as the rule for such doubts in tawaaf arising in the course of the
tawaaf itself. If there is doubt on the number of rounds, the saee is
invalidated.

TAQSEER

It is the fifth obligation in Umrat-ul-Tamatoo. Its meaning is to cut
some hair of the head or beard or mustache. It is necessary that this is
done with the intention of attaining nearness to Allah and it is not
enough for taqseer merely to pluck out hair. As a matter of caution, it
is preferable to cut hair rather than nail.

Rule 347:

Taqseer completes the Umrat-ul-Tamatoo. It is not permissible to shave
off the head as to do so is forbidden and attracts, as a matter of
caution, a penalty of a sheep if one does so knowingly and
deliberately.

Rule 348:

If a pilgrim has sexual intercourse after saee but before taqseer
knowingly and deliberately he is liable to a penalty of a camel.
However, if he did so in ignorance of the rule, he is relieved of the
penalty.

Rule 349:

Taqseer must follow saee and it is not permissible to perform it before
saee.

Rule 350: Taqseer is not obligatory immediately after saee and it is
permissible to do taqseer where one pleases, whether near Marwah or at
one's house or other place.

Rule 351:

If a pilgrim deliberately omits to perform taqseer and wears ihram for
Hajj, his Umrah is invalidated and obviously his Hajj changes to Ifraad.
He must perform the Umrat-ul-Mufradah later and, as a matter of caution,
repeat the Hajj in the following year.

Rule 352:

If a pilgrim omits taqseer by oversight and proceeds to wear ihram for
Hajj, his Umrah and ihram are valid but, as a matter of caution, he must
pay a penalty of a sheep.

Rule 353:

In Umrat-ul-Tamatoo when a pilgrim performs taqseer, all the
prohibitions in the state of ihram are lifted including shaving off the
head but as a matter of caution, it is lawful to shave the head within
thirty days from the day of Idd-ul-Fitr, but not after the period. If he
does shave after the period knowingly and deliberately, he must pay, as
a matter of caution, the penalty of a sheep.

Rule 354:

In Umrat-ul-Tamatoo, Tawaaf ul-Nisa is not obligatory but there is no
objection in performing it.

IHRAM FOR HAJJ

It has been stated above that there are thirteen obligations in Hajj
which will now be considered in detail:

FIRST OBLIGATION:

Ihram: The best time for wearing it for Hajj is the day of Tarwiyyah
which is the eighth of Dhul Hijjah at noon and it is permissible to wear
ihram from three days before then for old and sick people fearful of
overcrowding. They can wear ihram and depart from Makkah before the
other people. Indeed, if need be, immediately after completing
Umrat-ul-Tamatoo, it is permissible to wear the ihram for Hajj and
depart from Makkah.

Rule 355:

Just as it is not permissible to wear the ihram for Hajj before
taqseer, so it is not permissible in Hajj to wear the ihram for
Umrat-ul-Mufradah before the completion of the ceremonies of Hajj.
However, it can be worn after completion of all the ceremonies but
before Tawaaf ul-Nisa.

Rule 356:

The time for wearing ihram is very limited on the day of Arafaat when
there is fear of missing the time for the required stay in Arafaat.

Rule 357:

The rules concerning the procedure, obligations and prohibitions in the
state of ihram apply just the same to both the ihram for Umrah and Hajj,
and the only difference between them is in the niyyah.

Rule 358:

It is obligatory to wear ihram from Makkah as mentioned above. The best
place for it is the Holy Mosque and it is recommended to wear the ihram
after reciting two rakaats at Maqaam-e-Ibrahim or Hijr Ismail.

Rule 359:

If a pilgrim forgets to wear ihram or ignorant of the rules, departs
from Makkah without wearing it and then remembers or acquires the
knowledge, it is obligatory on him to return to Makkah, even if he is in
Arafaat, and wear ihram from there. If because of limited time or other
reason it is not possible to return to Makkah, he should wear the ihram
wherever he is. Similarly if he remembers or acquires the knowledge
after the stay at Arafaat, he should proceed to Makkah if that is
possible and wear ihram there but if he does not remember or acquire the
knowledge until after completion of Hajj, his Hajj is valid.

Rule 360:

If a pilgrim knowingly and deliberately omits to wear ihram, it is
obligatory on him to correct it and if it is not possible to do so
before the stay at Arafaat, his Hajj is invalidated and he is obliged to
repeat it in the following year.

Rule 361:

As a matter of caution, one must not make an optional tawaaf after
wearing the ihram for Hajj and before departing from Makkah and if one
does so, one must, as a matter of caution, renew the talbiyah after the
tawaaf.

THE STAY AT ARAFAAT

SECOND OBLIGATION;

The second obligation in Hajj-ul-Tamatoo is the stay at Arafaat to
attain nearness to Allah. The requirement is the presence in Arafaat,
regardless of whether the pilgrim is riding, walking, sitting or
moving.

Rule 362:

The boundaries of Arafaat are from Oranah. Thowayeh, Namerah to Dhil
Mijaz and Maazamein. Obviously these boundaries are outside the places
of stay for the pilgrims.

Rule 363:

Apparently, the mountain is within the part of the place for stay but
it is recommended to stay on the flat land to the left of the
mountain.

Rule 364:

One must stay in Arafaat consciously so that sleeping or being
unconscious throughout the period will not count as valid stay. However,
if the pilgrim commenced the stay consciously, then if he subsequently
slept or became unconscious, the stay will not be affected.

Rule 365:

As a matter of caution. the stay at Arafaat should be from the
beginning of noon on the ninth of Dhil Hijjah till sunset. It is
apparent that a delay caused by performance of ghusl or praying zohr and
asr jointly is permissible. The stay there for this period is obligatory
and whoever omits to do so commits a sin but it is not one of the
fundamentals of Hajj, meaning that if one omits to stay there for a
portion of the required time, one's Hajj is not invalidated. However, if
one deliberately omits to stay there altogether, the Hajj is
invalidated. Presence there is one of the fundamentals, not the stay
throughout the period.

Rule 366:

If a pilgrim forgets to stay at Arafaat or omits to do so out of
ignorance or other cause, it is obligatory on him to stay there for a
portion of the eve of Idd and his Hajj will be valid. If he fails to
stay there at all, his Hajj will be invalidated. This rule applies when
he can catch up with the stay at Muzdalifah before sunrise but if he was
unsure about reaching Muzdalifah before sunrise he must stay at Arafaat
only and his Hajj is valid.

Rule 367:

It is forbidden to depart from Arafaat knowingly and deliberately
before Maghrib, but doing so does not invalidate the Hajj. There is no
penalty on him if the pilgrim repents and returns to Arafaat, otherwise
he must sacrifice a camel in Mina and not Makkah as a matter of caution,
or, if this is not possible for him, he must observe fast for eighteen
days consecutively, in Makkah or on his way home. The same rule applies
to one who forgets or ignorant of the rule departs prematurely. It is
obligatory on him to return there on remembering or learning the rule,
otherwise, as a mater of caution. he must satisfy the stated penalty.

Rule 368:

Since some of the ceremonies of the pilgrimage are obligatory on
certain days it is the duty of the pilgrim to investigate the sighting
of the moon for the month of Dhul Hijjah so that he can perform the
ceremonies at the correct times.

If the Qadhi of the holy places proclaims the sighting of the moon but
it was not established according to the religious criteria, then it may
said to be acceptable for those convinced that the proclamation was
correct. They must abide by it and their pilgrimage is valid, otherwise
it will be invalidated. Furthermore, it may be said that to follow the
proclamation of such a Qadhi is sufficient even though the pilgrim is
not convinced about it, especially when taqiyyah requires such a
practice. But both the views are not approved, then if it was possible
for the pilgrim to perform all the ceremonies on the fixed times
according to the conviction of the pilgrim, his pilgrimage is valid.
Otherwise, if he ignores the opinion of the Qadhi regarding the two
stays his Pilgrimage is invalidated; however, if he follows the opinion
of the Qadhi without making investigations the validity of his
pilgrimage is arguable.

THE STAY AT MUZDALIFAH

THIRD OBLIGATION:

The third obligation in Hajj-ul-Tamatoo is the stay at Muzdalifah which
is also known as Macer-ul-Haraam. The limits within which the stay is
obligatory are from Ma'zmein to Hiyadh and Wadi Muhassar. If, because of
overcrowding and limited time, it is not possible to be within the
limits, one can climb to Ma'zmein. The intention for the stay must be to
attain nearness to Allah.

Rule 369:

When the pilgrim departs from Arafaat he must, as a matter of caution,
spend the night in Muzdalifah. As a matter of caution, he should stay
till sunrise even though it is apparent that he can depart from
Muzdalifah for Wadi Muhassar before sunrise but he is not permitted to
cross the Wadi and enter Mina before sunrise.

Rule 370:

It is obligatory to stay in Muzdalifah from dawn to sunrise on the day
of Idd but the stay throughout the period is not one of the fundamentals
of Hajj. Thus, if a pilgrim stopped there for a period of the eve of
Idd, then he departs before dawn, his Hajj is valid, but if he does so
deliberately, he incurs a penalty of a sheep. If he does so out of
ignorance, there is no penalty on him.

Rule 371:

If a person does not stay there at all between dawn and sunrise, his
Hajj is invalid. The exceptions are ladies, children, the fearful, the
weak, the aged and the sick. 1t is permissible for them to spend the
night (the eve of Idd) at Muzdalifah and proceed to Mina before dawn.

Rule 372:

The stay at Muzdalifah must be with the intention of attaining nearness
to Allah and consciously as stated for the stay at Arafaat.

Rule 373:

If a person forgets to stay at Muzdalifah or is, for other cause,
unable to remain there between dawn and sunrise, he must do so for a
period between sunrise and noon on the day of Idd. If he omits to do so
altogether, his Hajj is invalidated.

ACCOMPLISHING THE TWO OR ONE OF THE STAYS

It has been stated above that for the stay at both Arafaat and
Muzdalifah, there are appointed and alternative periods of stay. If the
pilgrim manages to stay during the definite periods in both the places,
there is no difficulty. If not, the following circumstances arise:
First: if the pilgrimage did not manage to stay at either of the places
at all, his pilgrimage is invalid. It is obligatory for the pilgrim to
change to Umrat-ul-Mufradah in the ihram of Hajj itself. It is then
obligatory on him to perform the Hajj in the following year if his
obligation was Hijjatul Islam and his means still exist or else the
obligation will remain on him.

Second: If he manages to stay in Arafaat during the appointed period
and the alternative period in Muzdalifah. Third: If he manages to stay
in Arafaat during the alternative period and in Muzdalifah during the
appointed period, then in these two circumstances his Hajj is valid but
with doubt.

Fourth: If he stays at both the places in the alternative period, then
it is clear that his Hajj is valid but, as a matter of caution, in the
following year he must repeat whatever, if any, of the other obligations
in Hajj which remained uncompleted or else the obligation to perform
pilgrimage will remain on him.

Fifth: If he manages only the stay at Muzdalifah during the appointed
period, his Hajj is still valid. Sixth: If he manages only the stay at
Muzdalifah during the alternative period, then it is apparent that his
Hajj is invalid and should be changed to Umrat-ulMufradah.

Seventh: If he manages only the stay at Arafaat during the appointed
period, then it is apparent that his Hajj is invalid and he must change
to Umrat-ul-Mufradah. The exception to the rule is if he passes through
Muzdalifah on the way to Mina during the appointed period but does not
stay there because of ignorance of the rule, then it is not far from
correct to say that the Hajj will be valid, particularly when passing
through Muzdalifah, the pilgrim was in the remembrance of Allah. Eighth:
If he manages only the stay at Arafaat in the alternative period, his
Hajj is invalid and he must change to Umrat-ul-Mufradah.


