Mina and the Obligations There
==============================

FOURTH OBLIGATION:

When the pilgrim departs from Muzdalifah, it is obligatory to proceed
to Mina to perform the obligations there which, as will be discussed in
detail, are three:

1. Throwing pebbles at the Jamrat-ul-Uqbah:

This is the fourth obligation in Hajj on the day of the sacrifice and
there are certain details:

1. The intention (niyyah) for the act must be to attain nearness to
Allah.
2. Seven pebbles must be thrown, not more or less, and it is not
permitted to throw anything other than pebbles.
3. The pebbles must be thrown one after the other and not two or more
of them at the same time.
4. It is necessary that the pebbles hit the Jamrah.
5. The pebbles must reach the Jamrah by being thrown at it and not
merely depositing them there.
6. The throwing of the pebbles and hitting the Jamrah both must be done
by the pilgrim himself. So, if the pebble was in his hand but he was
pushed resulting in the pebble reaching the Jamrah, the obligation is
not satisfied. The same rule applies if the Jamrah is obstructed by a
man or an animal whose movements result in the pebble hitting the
Jamrah. However, there is no objection if the pebble hits something and
then reaches the Jamrah.

7. The pebble must be thrown by hand. So if the pilgrim throws it by
his mouth or feet, it is not sufficient and, as a matter of caution, it
is not permissible to use a tool to fling a pebble onto the Jamrah.
8. The throwing of pebbles must be carried out between sunrise and
sunset. Ladies and the others who are permitted to leave Muzdalifah at
night may throw the pebbles at the Jamrah at night during the eve of
Idd.

Rule 374:

If during the throwing of the pebbles, the pilgrim entertains a doubt
as to whether the pebble struck the Jamrah or not, he must resolve that
it did not unless he had already engaged himself in another obligation
or it was already night when the doubt arose in which cases he must
ignore the doubt.

Rule 375:

Two matters are to be borne in mind regarding the pebbles:

(1) The pebbles must have been picked within the borders of the Haram
but not from the Holy Mosque or the Mosque of Khiif and better still
that they be picked in Mu-zdalifah.

(2) As a matter of caution, they must not have been used for this
purpose before and it is recommended that they be coloured, dotted and
soft and of thickness of a finger and at the time of throwing them, one
should be standing on one's feet.

Rule 376:

As a matter of caution, the pebbles must be hit upto the original
height of the Jamrah and it is not sufficient to hit the extension and
elevation recently made or the upper storey of the Jamrah recently
constructed. If it is not possible to hit the on the original area only,
then the pilgrim may personally hit the extended portion and appoint an
agent to hit the original portion on his behalf.

In this regard, it is immaterial whether the action is from awareness,
ignorance or by oversight.

Rule 377:

If a pilgrim forgets to hit the pebbles on the day of Idd or omits to
do so out of the ignorance of the rule, he must correct the' error by
the 13th of Dhi1 Hijjah whenever he remembers or learns of the rule. If
he recalls or learns the rule at night, he must throw the pebbles the
next day unless he qualifies in the category permitted to throw them at
night. If he recalls or learns after the 13th of Dhil Hijjah, as a
matter of caution, he should retum to Mina and throw the pebbles and
repeat the exercise in the following year personally or appoint an agent
to do so on his behalf. If he recalls or learns the rule after departure
from Makkah, there is no need to return to Mina but in the following
year he must either throw the pebbles personally or appoint an agent to
do so on his behalf.

Rule 378:

If a pilgrim forgets to hit the pebbles on the day of Idd or omits to
do so out of ignorance of the rule and recalls or learns the rule after
having performed the tawaaf, it is not obligatory to correct the
omission after the tawaaf, although, as a matter of caution, one should
do so. However, if he knowingly and deliberately omits to throw the
pebbles, then obviously his tawaaf is invalidated and it is obligatory
on him to repeat the tawaaf after throwing the pebbles.

FIFTH OBLIGATION:

2. Sacrifice of an animal at Mina:

This is the fifth obligation in Hajj-ul-Tamatoo and it is necessary to
form the intention of doing so to attain nearness to Allah. 'The
sacrifice must be made during the day, unless one is afraid to do so in
which case it may be made at night. It is obligatory, as a matter of
caution, that it be made after throwing the pebbles but if one does so
before the throwing of pebbles because he forgot or did not know the
rule, it is still valid and does not need to be repeated. It is
obligatory that the sacrifice be made at Mina and if it is not possible
because of the rush there and Mina is not able to accommodate all the
pilgrims the sacrifice may be made at Wadi Muhassar. If, by delaying the
sacrifice, it becomes possible for the pilgrim to make the sacrifice in
Mina he may delay it upto the thirteenth of Dhil Hijjah.

Rule 379:

As a matter of caution, the sacrifice must be made on the day of Idd
but if the pilgrim forgets or omits to do so for other cause or
ignorance of the rule, then it is obligatory to do so by the l3th of
Dhil Hijjah but if the cause continues to subsist, it may be delayed to
the end af Dhil Hijjah. As a matter of caution, the sacrifice must not
be made at night except by those who are fearful.

Rule 380:

Each pilgrim is obliged to make one sacrifice.

Rule 381:

It is obligatory that the animal of sacrifice be either a camel, a cow
or a goat. It is not permissible to sacrifice a camel unless it has
reached the age of five years and has entered the sixth. If it is a cow
or a goat it must have completed two years and, as a matter of caution,
entered the third and if it is a sheep unless it has completed the
seventh month and entered the eighth. As a matter of caution, it must
have completed one year and entered the second. If after the sacrifice,
the pilgrim learns that the age of the animal was less than the
required, the sacrifice is not proper and will have to be made again.

It is also necessary that all the parts of the animal be sound; it must
not be blind, lame, without ears or with damaged horns, etc. Indeed it
is apparent that it should not be castrated (unless another is not
found), weak, sick, very old or diseased in both testicles. There is no
objection if its ears are injured or perforated although, as a matter of
caution, they must be clear of such defects. As a matter of recommended
caution, it must not have been born without a tail or horns.

Rule 382:

If a pilgrim purchases for sacrifice a sound animal without any
deformity and pays its price and later discovers that it has a defect,
it will be sufficient as a sacrifice.

Rule 383:

If possible, the conditions for sacrifice discussed above should be
fulfilled but if a condition cannot be fulfilled, a pilgrim should
fulfil as many of them as possible.

Rule 384:

If an animal of sacrifice is slaughtered in the belief that it is fat
but it transpires that it is weak, it will still be sufiicient and
another need not be purchased and slaughtered.

Rule 385:

If there is a doubt that an animal is weak but is slaughtered in the
name of Allah and it transpires that it is fat and sound, it will be
sufficient for the sacrifice. The same rule applies if the pilgrim
entertains a doubt after the sacrifice as to whether it was carried out
in Mina or elsewhere. However, if the doubt that arises is whether he
sacrificed an animal at all, then if it arose after shaving the head or
taqseer, the doubt should be ignored. Otherwise, he needs to return to
Mina and effect a sacrifice there.

Rule 386:

If a sound animal is purchased for Hajj-ul-Tamatoo but after the
purchase it becomes sick or deformed or loses a limb or a defect
appears, it is not sufficient to slaughter it for sacrifice. As a matter
of caution, the pilgrim should sacrifice it as well and if he sold it he
should spend its price in charity.

Rule 387:

If after the purchase of an animal for sacrifice it gets lost and not
knowing that someone else had sacrificed it on his behalf another is
purchased but before the other is slaughtered, the first is found, it is
sufficient to slaughter the first and the second remains the property of
the pilgrim; he may slaughter it as well if he so wishes. As a matter of
recommended caution, he must slaughter the second one as well. If the
lost animal is found after the second was slaughtered, as a matter of
caution, the first must also be slaughtered.

Rule 388:

If a person finds a lost animal belonging to another person, he should
look for the owner till the I2th of Dhil Hijjah and if he fails to find
him by the afternoon (asr) of the day, he should slaughter the animal on
behalf of the owner.

Rule 389:

If an animal cannot be found for sacrifice in time and the pilgrim has
the cash ready, he should deposit it with a reliable person to purchase
and slaughter an animal on his behalf before the end of Dhil Hijjah and
at the same time he should keep fasting. If after the elapse of the
whole month of Dhil Hijjah, an animal is not found, then one must be
slaughtered in the following year.

Rule 390:

If an animal cannot be found and the cash is not available, then in
lieu of the sacrifice, the pilgrim must observe fast for ten days, on
the seventh, eighth and ninth of Dhil Hijah and the remaining seven at
his home after return. As a matter of caution, the seven fasts must be
observed consecutively. It is permissible to keep the first three fasts
from the first of Dhil Hijjah after the completion of the
Umrat-ul-Tamatoo but must be kept consecutively. If he does not retum
home but remains in Makkah, he must wait till his companions reach home
or for one month before keeping the seven fasts.

Rule 391:

If the person on whom there is the obligation to keep the three fasts
cannot observe a fast on the seventh of Dhil Hijjah, he should keep the
two on the eighth and ninth of the month and the third on his return to
Makkah after completing the ceremonies at Mina. If he is unable to fast
on the eighth either, he should wait to return from Mina when he should
keep the three fasts together. As a matter of caution, on return from
Mina, the fasts must be kept without undue delay. If he becomes unable
to keep the fasts on return from Mina, he should keep them on his way
home or on reaching home but he should not join them with the seven
fasts. If he becomes unable to keep the three by the time the moon for
the month of Muharram is sighted, he is relieved from the fasts and he
must make the sacrifice in the following year.

Rule 392:

If it is not possible for a pilgrim to find an animal and the cash for
it is not available to him and he observes the three fasts during Hajj
but then it becomes possible for him to make the sacrifice, it is
obligatory on him to do so as a matter of caution.

Rule 393:

If it is not possible for a pilgrim to make the sacrifice on his own
but is able to join others in partnership, as a matter of caution, he
should do so to make the sacrifice and also keep the fasts as stated
above.

Rule 394:

If a person hands to another an animal or its value for the other to
purchase an animal and sacrifice it on his behalf and subsequently
entertains a doubt as to whether the agent has sacrificed the animal or
not, he must resolve that the agent has not done so. However, if the
agent is a reliable person and informs him that he has sacrificed the
animal, then that would be suffcient.

Rule 395:

The conditions for the sacrifice of an animal do not apply if the
sacrifice is being made to satisfy a penalty (kaffarah) although, as a
matter of caution, they should also be fulfilled.

Rule 396:

It is not necessary that the animal, whether for sacrifice or penalty;
be slaughtered by the pilgrim personally. It is also permissible to
appoint an agent to do so in which case the agent must make the
intention on behalf of the owner of the sacrifice and not himself
although, as a matter of caution, he must make the intention also. The
agent must be a Muslim.

THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SACRIFICE

As a matter of caution, one-third of the sacrifice must be given in
charity to the needy faithful, one-third to the faithful as a gift and
one-third can be eaten by the owner. It is not obligatory to hand over
the one-third to the poor personally but it is permissible to hand it to
his agent (even if the agent is the owner of the sacrifice himself) who
would distribute according to the instructions of the principal, whether
gift to another or sell or abandon or otherwise. It is desirable to take
the meat of the sacrifice from Mina if people who are there do not need
it.

Rule 397:

It is not necessary that the sacrifice be physically divided in three
parts. It is enough if he gives one-third undivided share of it in
charity, one-third undivided share of it as a gift and eats a portion
from the remaining one-third himself.

Rule 398:

If a person receives a portion by way of charity or gift, he is free to
deal with it as he pleases and there is no objection in his passing
ownership in it to a non-faithful or a non-Muslim.

Rule 399:

If the animal is stolen after the slaughter as a sacrifice or forcibly
snatched before distribution of the meat by way of charity or gift,
there is no obligation on the owner of the sacrifice. However, if he
deliberately wastes it or gives it to persons not entitled to it, then,
as a matter of caution, he is liable for the portion of the poor, that
is one-third, as a matter of caution.

SIXTH OBLIGATION:

3. Shaving of Head and Taqseer:

It is the sixth obligation in the obligatory Hajj and it is necessary
that the intention (niyyah) in carrying it out should be to attain
nearness to Allah. It is not permissible to perform this obligation
before the Idd day or even on its eve except for those who are fearful.
As a matter of caution, it should be done during day time and after the
throwing of pebbles and the making of sacrifce but if it precedes them
or either of them by oversight or ignorance of the rule, then there is
need to repeat it.

Rule 400:

Shaving of the head is not permissible for ladies and taqseer is
specified for them.

Rule 401:

Men have the option between shaving of the head and taqseer but shaving
of the head is preferred. However, if one applies glue, honey or the
like in the hair of the head because of lice or gathers the hair to one
side of the head and ties them together, as a matter of caution, he must
prefer shaving the head. If it is the first Hajj of the pilgrim, as a
matter of caution, he too should prefer to shave the head.

Rule 402:

If a pilgrim opts for shaving his head but fears that the barber will
injure his head, it is not permissible for him to shave but he should
have a crop by a machine or he must perform the taqseer and then have
his head shaved.

Rule 403:

If it is doubtful whether a person is a male or a female or a
hermaphrodite is obliged to perform taqseer unless he has applied glue
or honey in the hair or has gathered and tied them, in which case, he
should perform both but, as a matter of caution, he should first perform
taqseer and then have the head shaven.

Rule 404:

After the shaving of head or taqseer, all the matters which had been
forbidden during ihram become permissible except intimacy to the wife,
perfume and hunting. It is apparent that intimacy to ladies is not
exclusively intercourse but applies to all types of enjoyments which are
forbidden during ihram. However, a pilgrim can attend the nikah and be a
witness at it after shaving his head.

Rule 405:

If a pilgrim forgets to perform taqseer or have the head shaven or
omits to do so out of ignorance of the rule and departs from Mina, he
should return and perform either of them but if it becomes difficult to
return, he should perform either of them from wherever he is and, if it
is possible, send the hair to Mina. However, if the pilgrim shaves his
head somewhere other than Mina, even though deliberately, it is
sufficient but, if possible, he must send the hair to Mina.

Rule 406:

If a person forgets to perform taqseer or have his head shaved or omits
to do so out of ignorance of the rule and recalls or learns the rule
after completion of all the ceremonies of Hajj and then performs either
of them, it is not necessary to repeat the tawaaf and saee, although, as
a matter of caution, one should repeat the tawaaf and saee if he recalls
or learns the rule while still in Makkah.

TAWAAF OF HAJJ AND THE PRAYERS (SALAAT) AND SAEE

Seventh, Eighth And Ninth Obligations:

The seventh, eighth and ninth obligations in the obligatory Hajj are
tawaaf, its prayers and saee.

Rule 407:

The rules, procedures and conditions in respect of them are similar to
those set out above for Umrah.

Rule 408:

It is recommended to return to Makkah on the Idd day to perform the
tawaaf and as a matter of caution not to postpone it beyond the eleventh
even though it is permissible to do so. It is permissible to postpone
the tawaaf till the end of Dhil Hijjah.

Rule 409:

As a matter of caution, it is not permissible in Hajj-ul-Tamatoo to
perform the tawaaf of Hajj and the prayers after it and the saee before
the two stays at Arafaat and Muzdalifah. The only people who are
permitted to perform tawaaf and the prayers before the two stays are

(i) women who fear the start of menstruation or nifaas, that is blood
after delivery;

(ii) old and ill people who find it difficult to retum to Makkah or to
perform tawaaf after returning from Mina because of the crowd or the
like reasons;

(iii) people who fear from any other cause preventing them from
returning to Makkah. It is permissible for these groups of people to
perform tawaaf and its prayers and saee before the two stays at Arafaat
and Muzdalifa. As a matter of caution, they should perform the saee also
before the two stays and repeat it at its proper time. It is preferable
that the tawaaf and prayers be repeated, if possible, by the end of Dhil
Hijjah.

Rule 410:

Those who perform the tawaaf of Hajj after the two stays at Arafah and
Muzdalifa must perform it after shaving or taqseer. However, if
deliberately and knowingly they perform it before the two stays, they
must repeat it afterwards and pay the penalty of a sheep.

Rule 411:

The rules applicable to a pilgrim who is unable to perform tawaaf, its
prayers and saee in Hajj-ul-Tamatoo are the same as those applicable in
Umratul-Tamatoo mentioned under Rules 329 and 339 above. A lady who
notices that mensturation has statted and is unable to stay in Makkah
till she becomes clean to perform the tawaaf, it is necessary for her to
appoint an agent to perfarm the tawaaf and its prayers on her behalf and
then after the performance of the tawaaf and its prayers by the agent,
perform the saee personally.

Rule 412:

On completion of the tawaaf, prayers and saee, use of perfume becomes
lawful but, as a matter of caution, intimacy with wife and hunting still
remain prohibited.

Rule 413:

For those permitted to perform tawaaf and saee before the two stays,
use of perfume will not become.

lawful until after the completion by them of the ceremonies of Mina,
the throwing of pebbles, sacrifice and shaving of head or taqseer.


