No. 79 (46 Verses)
==================

**Contents of the Sura:**

The theme in this Sura, like Sura Nabaa, is about Resurrection and, on
the whole, can be divided into six parts:

1. It emphasizes on the certainty of the Great Day and lays stress on
its occurrence by emphatic statements which relate to the
Resurrection.

2. It points to one part of the frightening and dreadful incidents of
that Day.

3. It precisely mentions the story of Moses and the end of the arrogant
Pharaoh as a consolation for both the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) and the
believers, as well as giving a warning to the disbelievers, and also
contains an indication to the fact that the denial of the Resurrection
is the source of many sins.

4. It mentions a few of the countless Powers of Allah which exist in
the heavens and on the Earth; themselves, being evidences of the
possibility of Resurrection and the new life after death.

5. It describes another part of the horrible events, on that Great Day,
and the painful end of the disbelievers in contrast to the rewards of
the righteous.

6. At the end of the Sura, it emphasizes on the fact that no one knows
the date of that Day, however, it is certain that it is near.

The name 'Naziat' is derived from the first verse of this Sura.

**The Virtue in studying this Sura:**

It is narrated that the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) said: "For he who studies
Sura Nazi'at the length of his stay and his reckoning on the Day of
Judgment will last as long as the saying of a daily prayer and,
thereafter, he will come into Paradise".(1)

A tradition from Imam Sadiq (p.b.u.h.) says: "He who studies it (Sura
Naziat) will not pass away but satisfied, will not be brought into the
Resurrection but satisfied, and will not come into Paradise but
satisfied", (with the infinite Grace of Allah) .

The shocking verses of this Sura awaken the sleeping souls and draw
their attention to their duties. Then, it is certain that only those who
spiritually put the contents of this Sura into practice will receive
these rewards; not those who content themselves with the mere reading of
its words.

(1) Majma'-al-Bayan, vol. 10, p. 428


