Sura Takwir (the Folding Up) No.81 (29 Verses)
==============================================

In The Name of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful

**Contents of the Sura:**

This Sura is among the Meccan Suras and there is a variety of evidence
to verify this fact. For instance, the Sura denotes that the enemies of
the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) called him mad and this treatment used to happen
in the early periods of his prophecy in Mecca, when his enemies did not
take his statements seriously and were quite careless about them.

**This Sura can be divided into mainly two themes:**

The first theme is pointed out in the beginning verses of the Sura;
those which contain the signs about the Hereafter and the occurrence of
some great changes regarding the end of this world and the beginning of
the Next World; the Resurrection.

The second theme is in a mystical passage showing how the Great
Qur'anic Revelation was true, and was revealed through the angel
Gabriel, and which has a remarkable effect on Man's soul for his
spiritual guidance. This part is accompanied by some enlightening oaths;
full of meaning.

**The Virtue in Studying Sura Takwir:**

There are many traditions narrated about the importance of this Sura
and studying it, such as a tradition from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) that
says:" He who studies Sura 'Takwir' (The Folding Up) will be saved by
Allah from being exposed to shame when the book of deeds will be laid
Open." (1)

Another tradition from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) says:

" He who wishes to look at me on the Day of Judgment, should study Sura
Takwir (The Folding Up) ".(2)

The tradition has also been narrated in another form, which says: " He
whose looking at the Hereafter makes him glad (as if he sees it) ,
studies Sura 'Takwir'(The Folding Up) , 'Infitar' (Cleaving Asunder) ,
and 'Inshiqaq' (The Rending Asunder) . (Since, in these Suras, the signs
of the Hereafter are illustrated so clearly that the reciter of them
feels that the scene of Hereafter is in front of him) . (3)

It is narrated that the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) was asked why he had grown
old so early and he answered : Hud, Waqi'ah, Mursalal and Naba' made me
old. (The reason is that the horrible events of the Hereafter are so
clearly illustrated in them that it makes every conscious person
prematurely old) .

(4) It is also narrated from Imam Sadiq who said: He who studies Sura
Abasa and Takwir will be with the Mercy and Grace of Allah in the
eternal Heaven and this is easy for Him when He wills. (5)

The items mentioned in this narration vividly show that the goal, by
recitation, is to produce knowledge, faith, and action in the reciter.

(1) Majma-al-Bayan, vol.10, p.441.

(2) Ibid.

(3) Qartatbi, The Commentary, vol. 10, p.7017.

(4) Nur-uth-Thdqalayn. vol.5, p.513.

(5) Thawab-ul-amal. according to what is cited in the quotation of
Nur-uth-Thaqalayn, vol.5, p.512.


