Commentary : Verse 10.11.12.13.14
=================================

(10) وَإِذَا الصُّحُفُ نُشِرَتْ

(11) وَإِذَا السَّمَاءُ كُشِطَتْ

(12) وَإِذَا الْجَحِيمُ سُعِّرَتْ

(13) وَإِذَا الْجَنَّةُ أُزْلِفَتْ

(14) عَلِمَتْ نَفْسٌ مَّا أَحْضَرَتْ

10. And when the scrolls (of the deeds of mankind) are spread,

11. And when the heaven shall be unveiled,

12. And when Hell is set ablaze,

13. And when the Garden is brought nigh for the righteous) ,

14.Every soul shall (then) know what it has produced (of its deeds)
".

**Commentary:**

The first stage; the events as a preliminary to the Resurrection, viz:
the destruction of the world, was described in the former verses. Now,
in the following verses, the second stage of the Resurrection is pointed
out, that is, the appearance of the Next World with its record and
reckoning.

,And when the scrolls (of the deeds of mankind) are spread.

The term /suhuf/ is the plural form of the term /sahifa/ meaning 'a
thing spread open like a face, or pages of a book; a book on which
something is written'.

In the Hereafter, the records are spread in front of their owners to
view, read and count the deeds themselves, Sura Isra', No. 17, verse 14
says: Read thin (own) record: sufficient is thy soul this day to make
out an account against thee.

It is also open before the eyes of others; that which is a praise for
the good-doers and a pain and punishment for the astray evildoers.

And when the heaven shall be unveiled.

The term /kushitat/ is based on /kasht/ which as Raqib cites in his
book Mufradat , originally means 'to remove, take off -- the covering or
skin of an animal', and as Ibn-Manthur cites in Lisan-ul-Arab it means
'to remove a curtain from something' , then the sense, from verse 11,
the 'cloud! separate and scatter' is derived from this word.

The term, in this verse, means that the curtains over the subjects
hidden; such as angels, Heaven and Hell, which do exist, but are secret
to people in this world, will be removed and Man can see the Reality of
the existing Universe, and as the next verses denote, the blazing Hell
and eternal Heaven are brought near.

Verily, the Day of Judgment is when the reality of everything will be
made manifest and the heavens will be unveiled.

According to the above commentary, this verse points to the incidents
of the second stage of the Resurrection in which the process of
Mankind's rebirth will come forth and their new life will begin. The
verses before and after it, also, confirm the same idea. Many
commentators have meant it with the sense of 'folding up the heavens'
which refers to the events of the first stage of the Resurrection, that
is, the destruction of this world. This idea seems improbable, though,
because it corresponds neither with the original meaning of the term
/kushitat/ nor with the arrangement of the verses before and after it.

For this reason, in the next verse, it says:

And when Hell is set ablaze.

As Sura Taubah, No. 9, verse 49 says: ...And indeed Hell Surround the
Unbelievers (on all sides) . Hell exits now, today, but, in this world,
the curtains cover it and do not let us see it, as well as Heaven which,
according to many verses of the Qur'an, is prepared for theRighteous, at
this very moment. (1)

Also, for the same reason, the next verse says:

And when the Garden is brought nigh (for the righteous) .

This very idea is mentioned in Sura Shuara, No. 26, verse 90 with a
difference that it contains the word 'Righteous' but, this verse does
not.

The term /uzlifat/ is based on /zalf/ and /zulfa/ which means
'nearness, proximity, a near approach'. This nearness may be from the
view point of 'place' or 'time' or from the view point of 'the means of
preparation', or all of them, viz: Heaven is near to the believers both
from the point of view of place and time of arrival and it is also easy
for them to reach it.

It is worthy to note that it does not say that the Righteous approach
Heaven, but it says 'Heaven is brought near for the Righteous' and this
is the most honorable situation possible in this case.

As was mentioned earlier Heaven and Hell are present just now, but, on
that Day, Heaven is brought nearer and Hell is set more ablaze.

Then, finally, in the last verse of the current section which is,
indeed, complementary to the previous verses and is a substantive clause
for the conditional clauses occurred in the former twelve verses, it
says:

Every soul shall (then) know what it has produced (of its deeds) ,

This statement clearly shows that all the deeds of Man are present
there, and Man's knowledge about them is a knowledge consisting of
observation and self conviction.

This fact is mentioned in some other verses of the Qur'an, too, such as
Sura Kahf, No. 18, verse 49: ...They will find all that they did',
placed before them...; and Sura Zilzal, No. 99, verses 7-8 that say: So
whoever has done an atom's weight of good shall behold it, And whoever
who has done an atom '5 weight of evil shall behold it.

(1) Sura Al-i-'Imran, verse 133, Sura Hadid, verse 21.

This verse also makes reference to the personification of deeds. Our
deeds apparently have an end and vanish in this world, but this will
never be so. They will be personified (incarnated) in appropriate forms,
in the next world, and present in the Hereafter.

**Explanation:**

The Order of the Verses.

In the current and prior verses twelve events, in relation to the
Resurrection, are mentioned. The first six events relate to the first
stage viz: the desolation of this world; and the second six events
relate to the second stage, that is, the rebirth and new life after
death.

In the first group of verses, the word is about the darkening of the
sun and the stars, the movement and agitation of the mountains, the
exploding of the seas, the negligence about wealth, and the fear in wild
animals.

In the second group of verses, the statement is about: the different
groups of Man coming into the Hereafter, the questioning of the
girl-child buried alive, the spreading of the scrolls containing the
deeds of Mankind, the removing of the curtains from the heavens, Hell
being ablaze, Heaven being brought near, and finally, Man's full
knowledge of his own deeds.

In spite of their brevity, these verses are so meaningful and awakening
that they shake everyone and bring them into a thoughtful state such
that they can visualize the end of this world and the circumstances of
the Resurrection, in their minds, as if they see them with their very
eyes. How nice and expressive the verses of the Qur'an are, and how
impressive and meaningful its refined subtleties and pertinent
details!

**Will the Solar System and the Stars Darken?**

First of all, we should know that the Sun is a star and a medium sized
one among all stars, hut by itself and in comparison with the Earth it
is extraordinarily large Its volume is more than 1,300,000 times that of
the Earth, but since its mean distance from the Earth is nearly
93,000,000 miles (about 150,000,000 kilometers) we see it as it is
now.

To understand the immenseness and greatness of the Sun it is enough to
imagine that if the Earth and its moon, with the same distance that they
have between them now, were transferred into the Sun; the moon could
easily rotate around the Earth, inside the Sun, without protruding out
from its inner surface.

The outside heat of the Sun is estimated to be about 6,000 C, and the
heat of the inside is estimated to be several million degrees. (For
additional data about the Sun, refer to page 87, Sura Nabba, No. 78,
verse 13) .

If we want to express the weight of the Sun in metric ton, we should
write the figure 2 with twenty seven zeros behind it.

The height of the flames from the Sun's surface shoot up to about
160,000 kilometers, so that our Earth can easily disappear in them
because, the Earth's diameter is not more than 12,000 kilometers.

The heat and the brightness of the Sun, in spite of George Gamof's
statement, do not originate from burning coal forming the Sun's body,
but are from the energy produced by atomic decomposition and we know
that this energy is extremely intense. Therefore, the atoms of the Sun
are always changing into energy through decomposition and reduction.
According to the calculations of scientists, every minute, the Sun loses
4,000,000 tons of weight, but its body is so huge that it does not show
an apparent change even after thousands of years.

It is worth mentioning, here, that the very loss of weight is effective
in the destruction of the Sun over a length of time, and by becoming
thinner and thinner at last, this great world-illuminating-lamp will
gradually darken. This fate is also true for the other stars.

Therefore, what is said in the aforementioned verses about the
darkening of the Sun and the destruction of the stars is a fact that is
in agreement with modern science. The Qur'an has stated these facts
when, not only in the Arabian Peninsula, but in all scientific meetings
held by scientists of the world, at that time, no one knew anything
about these statistics.


