The Character and Development of Divine Guidance in Bible History
=================================================================

1. The Patriarchal Period
-------------------------

Many people immediately think of such things as Shi'ite, fundamentalism,
fanaticism and even terrorism when they see the word Imamate. The Bible
brings to mind Christian or perhaps Jewish faith. Almost everyone might
wonder what connection there is between the Imamate and the Bible.

Once we understand what the Imamate and the Bible really are, the
connection between the two begins to appear. The Bible is not the
exclusive heritage of Christian and Jew. It is a collection of writings
from the Middle East produced over many centuries. It should not be
surprising that the Bible reflects traditions and practices found in any
number of religions native to the area. In fact, the books of Moses are
more central to Samaritanism than they are to Christianity, or even
Judaism.

This study will show how the Bible has molded the concept of Imamate as
later known in Islam. I shall not examine the historical development of
Shi'ism and try to prove that the Imamate developed directly on the
basis of the Bible. It is more realistic to think that the Bible
reflects concepts current for centuries in the Middle East. These ideas
have influenced both the Bible and the appearance of the Imamate. I want
to point out some of these ideas as they appear in the Bible.

The concept of Imamate among Muslims relies on Bible stories and
characters. There is, for example, a Muslim belief that God revealed the
names of the twelve holy Imams to Adam. This, of course, does not appear
directly in the story of Adam in the Bible. Nevertheless, the tree of
life, the rivers of Eden, and the naming of the animals in the Bible
story are all related to Muslim beliefs about the Imamate.

Before going further, we have to make clear what the Imamate is. The
twelve historical figures of authority among the Shi'ites represent the
Imamate. Muslims believe that the holy prophet Muhammad at the command
of God conferred the authority of leadership on his cousin and son
­in-law All-ibn-Abi-Taleb. Those who believe and accept this authority
are called Shiites, or partisans of All. Mus­lims, who do not believe in
this God-given government after the prophet, are called Sunnites,
because they prefer to restrict themselves to the example or sunna of
the prophet alone. The Imamate is God-given authority after the time of
the prophet. The word Imam basically means leader.

Ali's two sons in succession, Hasan and Husayn, became Imams after him.
After that, each Imam conferred the authority on one of his sons until
the full number of twelve Imams was completed with Muhammad Al-Mahdi,
who is believed to be still alive in occultation or hiding.

The concept of Imamate is based on the idea that there must be a *living
person* who is a divine proof or demonstra­tion of the existence of God
and a vehicle of *divine guidance* or practical means for carrying out
God's sovereign will. It fits into the Shiite configuration of basic
faith principles. First is the unity of God, followed by belief in
divine justice. Prophethood expresses the belief in verbal or written
revelation. The next logical step is practical dem­onstration of that
revelation, and this is the Imamate. Finally, the Day of judgement
expresses the principle of human responsibility before God.

By now it is clear what we shall look for in the Bible. We shall look
for evidence of God-given leadership authority. That authority will
focus on human figures whose lives are evidence of the existence of God
and who have the author­ity to interpret and apply the verbal
revelation. Factors associated with such leadership will be the symbolic
value of the number twelve and the strange experience of occul­tation or
hiding. In summary, our examination of the Bible focuses on the
following clues of the Imamate: 1. human witnesses to the unity of God;
2. figures making verdicts on legal application; 3. figures in series of
twelve; and 4. occultation.

Genesis 1:26 and one or two other verses in Genesis speak of a man as
the image of God. Genesis one gives dominion to the man in God's image.
This is just about as close to a definition of the Islamic Imamate as we
can find anywhere. This aspect of image and dominion comes clearly
through to the modern mind even in the West, even among Christians. It
is interesting to note that the only dominion actually defined in
Genesis one has to do with the sharing of food. One area is given to
humankind and one area to other creatures. Yet there is hardly a
commenta­tor in existence who recognizes the literal, textual limits of
dominion. Nearly everyone jumps to the conclusion of Imamate, that the
man has a true leadership role far beyond the boundaries of food.

The principle of God-given leadership is so logical to the human mind
that in such circumstances it is able to jump over so many steps of
logic to reach it. Nevertheless the reality of God-given leadership is
extremely repugnant in human experience. Of the five principles of
Islamic belief, the Imamate is the most difficult for people to grasp
and adhere to. That is because people like to eat from the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil. In Genesis two and three the very first
story about human beings is of their succumbing to the desire to decide
for themselves what is right and wrong, for that is literally what
eating from the tree signifies. People prefer to decide for themselves
what is right and wrong rather than relying on the whole chain of divine
revelation. The verbal revelation is subject to interpretation and
leaves loopholes for personal decisions about right and wrong. Verbal
revelation lets you talk yourself into almost anything. Confrontation
with a living authority does not.

The book of Genesis does not make an overt issue of such authority. It
presents the thing as a matter of course. Noah is one of the greatest
examples Muslims refer to in presenting the Imamate. Anyone who followed
the verbal revelation meticulously, yet failed to enter the ark, was
destroyed along with the sinners. This telling argument summarizes the
Bible teaching of the Imamate.

There is, however, in the story of Noah a detail much overlooked. How
did Noah determine which animals were clean and which were unclean? Up
to that point the dominion of food permitted only fruits, grains and
nuts for human consumption. Animals are mentioned only in terms of skins
and burnt offerings.

Most Christians are unwilling to postulate a verbal revelation of divine
legislation. Most people want to relegate the ten commandments to the
time of Moses. Yet even if we presuppose a detailed divine legislation
before the time of Noah, there are still always points of practice in
determining clean and unclean that require on the spot evaluation. That
on the spot evaluation is what most clearly shows Noah to be an Imam or
leader by divine authority.

There is an even clearer example in the case of Abraham. Some might
suggest that the distinction between clean and unclean we find with
Noah, goes back only to Moses. Hardly anyone will want to maintain that
lying was forbid­den only from the time of Moses. When to hide the truth
and when to tell all is precisely a question that verbal revelation can
never cover completely. On the spot evalua­tion is essential. Yet we
find both Abraham and Isaac telling their wives to lie about their
marriage under certain circumstances. This is called *taqiyyah* in Imami
practice.

The Imam may grant permission to hide the truth or even lie in order to
save life. In Genesis 12:11-13 and again in 20:11 Abraham is allowed to
make such a *fatwah* or verdict. He could only do this if he had
God-given authority to do so.

These two great examples from the book of Genesis are details often
missed by the Christian commentator and even the Jewish one. Judaism has
replaced the Biblical Imamate with rabbinical method, which is
epitomized in the Talmud. The question of the Imamate is precisely, as
we shall see, what separated early Christianity from Judaism. At the
time of Jesus, rabbinical method was taking over Judaism. Jesus
represented the earlier Imami thought.

He claimed to have God-given authority which could override verdicts
obtained through scholarly application of the law, and even in a sense
the law itself. Nearly every confrontation between Jesus and the people
of his day turned on the question of divine authority or rabbinical
method. First-century messianism continued better in medieval Islam than
in medieval Christianity. Still, the idea of divinely appointed
authority comes through in the concept of the bishop of Rome as vicar of
the \`Son of God'.

So far we have examined legal verdicts that presuppose divine authority.
Let us turn to the greater issue of bearing witness to the unity of God.
This was the central theme of the experience of Abraham. There are many
references in the latter part of the book of Genesis to the \`God of the
fathers'. This could be interpreted in terms of a totemistic ancestor
cult. There is one event in the life of Abraham that prevents such an
interpretation.

That is the meeting with Melchizedek in Genesis 14:18-24. Melchizedek
was not a part of Abraham's family cult. He was economically and
politically viable in himself. He worshipped God under a different name
than did Abraham. Up to this point the God of Abraham is called YHWH in
the book of Genesis. The God of Melchizedek is called *El-Elyon.* In
verse nineteen Melchizedek recognizes Abraham as a worshiper of the same
God, whom he defines as possessor of heaven and earth. Here is the idea
of a universal God.

Abraham in verse twenty-two refers to his own God by the name YHWH, to
which he adds significantly, the term of Melchizedek, *El­* *Elyon.* In
so doing Abraham establishes himself as divine proof. This is the best
example in the book of Genesis of witness to the one, universal God. The
whole book, as we shall see later, nevertheless focuses on the issue of
the unity of God.

Thus far we have looked at examples of two Imami criteria in the book of
Genesis. Two criteria remain, \`twelve' symbolism and occultation. It so
happens that the first example of Bible occultation occurs in the book
of Genesis. In Genesis 5:24 we read that 'Enoch walked with God: and he
was not; for God took him'. The two figures in the Hebrew Scriptures,
Enoch and Elijah, are known in Islamic tradition as Idris and Ilyas or
together under the epithet *Khidr,* the evergreen one. Occultation as an
alterna­tive to death is specifically related to Imami experience in the
Bible.

The final point is \`twelve' symbolism. This is obvious in the book of
Genesis for the sons of Jacob. Christians will perhaps remember that
Ishmael also had twelve sons. The twelve sons of Ishmael are the point
of departure for \`twelve' symbolism. All other series of twelve that
come after them are dependent on them. The long description of the
births of the sons of Jacob and the significance of their names are an
attempt at imitating the list of Ishmael's sons, whose names are also
significant. Strangely enough, the Bible does not carry through
consistently on giving the names of the twelve sons of Jacob wider
significance. The meanings of these names relate to the story of their
own lives and not to a greater, spiritual truth.

Liberal researchers will find another difficulty with the names of the
tribes. There are in fact thirteen tribes rather than twelve. The Bible
uses two means to resolve this. The first is by dropping a name, that is
Levi. The other is by relegating two names, Ephraim and Manasseh, back
to an original father, Joseph. Because Ishmael had twelve sons whose
names had spiritual significance, Jacob had to have twelve sons too.
Because the Ishmaelites were divided into twelve tribes, the Israelites
had to have twelve tribes too. They skewed reality to make it work, and
by so doing reaffirmed the significance of the number twelve in
connection with God-given authority.

Here are the Bible texts for each version of the twelve tribes of
Israel. One group contains the names Levi and Joseph: Genesis 35:23-26;
49:3-28; Deuteronomy 27:12­13; 1 Chronicles 2:1-2; Ezekiel 48:30-34;
Revelation 7:5-8. The other group contains instead the names Ephraim and
Manasseh: Numbers 1:5-16; 19-44; 2:1-34; 7; 10:14-28; 13:4-15; 34:17-29.
All thirteen tribes are mentioned in Numbers 26:5-62.

The Islamic Imams have reigns somewhat like a line of kings. That is,
the term of an Imamate runs from the death of the preceding Imam. The
book of Genesis runs through twenty-one generations of patriarchs from
Adam to the sons of Jacob. The fact that there were twenty-one
generations obscures the fact that there are precisely twelve periods of
the Imamate from Adam to Jacob. A table of birth and death dates for the
first twenty generations will show this.

I do not mean to imply anything about the historical accuracy of these
dates. I merely point out that, as they are presented in the book of
Genesis (chapter five and follow­ing), they express twelve succeeding
periods of Imamates running from expressed death date to expressed death
date. The symbolic number twelve is thus embedded in the Genesis story.

The list of names in the first column goes from father to son with the
exception of Ishmael and Isaac, who are both sons of Abraham. A number
of interesting issues appear from the death dates. The first six
generations are clear. These are Adam, Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel,
and Jared. Each succeeding generation outlives the earlier and there is
no break in the Imamate. The problem with the seventh generation is
interesting. It is interesting first of all because the number seven is
also a sacred number. This appears already in Genesis four which focuses
on Lamech, the seventh generation. It appears even earlier in the seven
days of the creation story. The seventh Shiite Imam is the one giving
most problems as well. The majority accept twelve Imams including Musa
al-Kadhim as the seventh. The Ismailis retain his elder brother, who
died before his father, as the seventh and final Imam. The problem with
Enoch in the seventh generation is that he was occulted during the
Imamate of Seth, nearly five hundred years before he might have been
eligible for the Imamate himself.

The Imamate passes on to Methuselah, the eighth generation and the
seventh Imam. Since he outlives his son, the Imamate passes to his
grandson Noah in 1656, the year of the Flood. So in the first ten
generations there are only eight Imami reigns. Another interesting fact
is that the lifetimes overlap to the extent that Adam, who died in 930,
could have been personally known to Lamech, who was born in 874. Noah is
the first generation not to have the possibility of having known Adam.
Noah was born in the second Imamate, that of Seth.

A new and interesting problem arises after Noah. Noah had an immense
choice in successors. According to the text, Noah in fact outlived
Peleg, his great-great-great-grandson, and even Nahor, the
great-grandson of Peleg and grandfa­ther of Abraham. When Noah died,
Abraham was 58 years old. The other aspect of the problem is that the
direct following of generations in the Imami reigns would pass over
Abraham.

In 2006 Shem would normally become Imam. Since Shem died in 2158, the
oldest living in line would be Eber, who died in 2187, after the death
of both Abraham and Ishmael. The Imamate should then have gone to
Ishmael's oldest son. The reason for the inclusion of such an extensive
story of Abraham in the book of Genesis must partially at least be in
explanation of why the Imamate went to Isaac instead of Nebajoth, the
eldest son of Ish­mael.

We are thus faced with alternate and perhaps rival lines of the Imamate
after Noah. In one we have Noah, Shem, Eber, and Nebajoth. In the other
line we postulate that Noah overrode the other generations and chose
Abraham as his successor. This would explain why Abraham acts as an
Imam. It would also explain the rivalry between Ishmael and Isaac, if
such in fact actually existed. In that case Isaac may have taken the
Imamate after the death of Ishmael. The line would thus be Noah,
Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, a total of twelve Imams in all. The
rivalry would thus be between the Shem-Eber line on one hand and the
Abraham-Ishmael on the other.

The call of Abraham could very well fit into a rivalry between Abraham
and Shem. The flight into Palestine made the dual reign possible. It in
turn provided a good reason for Abraham to leave his own country. The
dialogue between Abraham and God could very well fit into God's answer
to Abraham's prayer that Ishmael be considered in the Imamate after him.
God's emphasis of Isaac could very well be prophetic of the
reconciliation between the two lines if Eber chose the docile Isaac over
Ishmael's line. Isaac was after all married to a woman from a family
which would presumably have followed Shem and Eber. The whole problem
arose because of the many generations covered by the Imamate of Noah,
and the fact even that some generations died before Noah himself.

The rivalry between Jacob and Esau also has Imami ramifications. Of
course Esau as the elder had pretensions to the Imamate. Their
reconciliation took place before Jacob actually stepped into the
Imamate. In Genesis 28:9 we find that Esau married the sister of
Nebajoth, who also had pretensions to the Imamate. This was in the
backlash that took place when Esau noticed that Isaac intended to give
the Imamate to Jacob even though he had sought the blessing through
deceit. The connection of Esau with the Ishmaelite line might indicate
that Rebecca represented the earlier Mesopotamian claims. Rebecca would
thus be expected to prefer an Ishmaelite to Isaac as her husband. The
intricate marriage consultation in Genesis twenty-four may be in view of
convincing the family of Rebecca that Isaac was the valid Imam rather
than Nebajoth. So the claims of Ishmael and Abraham may have been the
root of the contention between Jacob and Esau. Esau would have fallen
back on the original loyalty of his mother's family in order to gain
status.

A final point remains unmentioned in Genesis. That is the matter of
Nebajoth and Kedar, the second son of Ishmael. There is little evidence
that Nebajoth or Kedar ever contended for the Imamate. Other portions of
the Hebrew Scriptures, however, suggest that the Ishmaelite line may
have continued through Kedar as well. Kedar and not Nebajoth is the
forebear of the prophet Muhammad.

Kedar especially appears again and again. They are both praised most
highly: Isaiah 42:11; 60:7. Kedar is faithful to God even when Israel
has completely forsaken the faith. Jeremiah 2:10. Finally, Kedar will be
a witness against Tyre in the Day of Judgement. Ezekiel 27:21.

The Imami concern clarifies the Genesis narratives. The marriage of
Isaac is a case in point. One of the longer chapters in the Bible,
Genesis 24, is reserved to describe the event. Why is the marriage of
Isaac so important? The reason is that it joins and reconciles the two
rival Imami lines. Every detail of Eliezer's journey confirms this.
Point after point is made to convince the family of Rebecca that the
marriage is the will of God. No other family in Genesis required such
proofs. There was something at stake far beyond a mere marriage. It was
the Imamate.

The lifetime disagreement between Rebecca and Isaac confirms this. But
the story of Jacob reveals a new aspect. The Imamate has already been
separated from an automatic descent through the eldest son. Now the
moral aspect of the Imamate appears in the history of the lives of
Jacob's sons. The elder sons fail to exhibit Imami character. Simeon and
Levi break a sworn agreement. Judah messes up his family life and has a
son with his son's wife. Reuben sleeps with his father's wife. Whether
or not we accept the historicity of these stories, their purpose is to
show that these men, although the elder brothers, were inferior to
Joseph. Joseph's morality is tested and shown to be perfect. The Imamate
is based not only on lineage, but on moral perfection.

The family of Jacob finally gives a reason why Noah might have
overlooked Shem and made Abraham his successor in the Imamate. The
family of Laban, which presumably represented the Imamates of Shem and
Eber, was polytheistic. Laban was the brother of Rebecca and the father
of Leah and Rachel, Jacob's wives. This polytheism is evident in
Rachel's stealing of the images (Genesis 31:32). The text shows clearly
that polytheism was kept secret from Jacob, which in turn shows that
Jacob was adamantly monotheistic.

The polytheism of Laban may well have begun very early on, even during
the time of Shem. Polytheism would have been a very good reason for Noah
choosing Abraham, the monotheist, as his Imami heir. The holy Qur'an in
fact gives this as the reason. Abraham's flight from Mesopota­mia was
the direct result of the conflict between faith in one God and
polytheism.

In summary, the twenty generations mentioned in Genesis represent twelve
Imami periods. The stories that follow seem to center on rival Imami
claims. These rival claims appear in the case of Abraham and Ishmael,
but seem to be reconciled in Isaac because of his position in the
lineage, his docility, and his marriage to Rebecca. Moral perfection
replaces the role of lineage in the Imami concern in the story of
Jacob's sons.

We have outlined the essentials of what can be gleaned from the book of
Genesis in reference to the Imamate using a scholarly methodology that
is acceptable in Western circles. This is not to say that the details of
possible rivalry are demonstrated with any certainty. At this point,
how­ever, I shall turn to a Hurufi methodology. I shall examine the
meaning of the names of Ishmael's sons. Then I shall step further into
the methodology and faith of the past by examining a text from a Hurufi
point of view.

In order, the names mean as follows: *Ishmael = God* hears,*Nebajoth*
brought forth, fruitfulness; *Kedar =* ash­ coloured, dark; *Adbeel* =
disciplined of God; *Mibsam =* fragrant;*Mishma* = hearing; *Dumah =
silence; Massa =* burden, tribute; *Hadar = majesty; Tema = sunburnt;
Jetur* = encircled, enclosed; *Naphish = breathed,* refreshed; *Kedema*
precedence, help. The faith of the patriarchs is defined in contrast to
the faith of Cain's civilization in Genesis 4:26 as calling on the name
of the Lord, or *dhikr* as it is known in Islamic practice. This most
primitive relig­ious practice gives rise to the name Ishmael, God hears
(our calling on his name). God's hearing our call results in a
twelve-step spiritual development.

The first step is fruitfulness, the immediate stimulation of the
spiritual practice. This soon subsides into the real work of *dhikr.*
The first symbol of this is darkness, then discipline. After this trial
the soul is rewarded with more substantial progress in fragrance.
Fragrance is followed by the experiences of hearing and silence, tribute
and majesty. The second cycle of discipline finds a symbol in the
sunburnt arid seclusion. This is followed by the second reward in
refreshment and help. These four alternating cycles of discipline and
reward correspond to the mystical four gates and the four elements,
earth, water, fire and air.

There is an Islamic story about Adam. When Adam ate of the fruit of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil, his skin became discolored. Then God
gave him the names of the twelve holy Imams. After reciting these for
some time, his skin regained its natural color. The Bible refers to this
discoloration as nakedness.

The tree of life and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil
represent two different ways of achieving a verdict. The tree of the
knowledge of good and evil represents the desire to be able to
distinguish right from wrong for oneself. Such independence is the root
of all false religions ancient and modern. The tree of life represents
reliance on divine authority and setting aside one's own ideas of right
and wrong. The tree of life represents the Imamate or divinely
established authority.

In Genesis 2:9 the tree of life is mentioned for the first time. It is
called *\`eets hakhayyim* in the original Hebrew. The phrase \`tree of
life' in Hebrew contains seven letters. These seven letters are
remarkable from a Hurufi point of view. They are in order: *\`ayin,
tsade, he, khet, yod,* and *mem.* The *yod* is repeated, so there are
seven letters in all, the number of perfection.

Although there are twelve Imams, there are only six names, three of
which are used more than once. Four of the Imams are named Ali, two are
named Hasan, and three are named Muhammad. The names Husayn, Ja’far and
Musa are each used once. The letter that begins the names Hasan and
Husayn does not occur in Hebrew. In Hebrew *he* and *khet* are used
instead. So the two letters *he* and *khet* can account for the initial
letters of Hasan and Husayn. The name All begins with *'ayan.* The names
Musa and Muham­mad begin with *mem.*

There is only one name left, Ja’far. The cognate letter in Hebrew for
the initial of this name is *gimel,* which does not occur in this
phrase. Ja’far, however, is commonly known by the epithet Sadiq. The
word Sadiq, truthful, begins with *tsade* in Hebrew. A Shiite will
immediately see the signifi­cance of this name being the hidden one,
since this particular Imam is of strategic importance in the historical
development of Imami practice. So the initials of the names of the
twelve holy Imams are hidden in the phrase \`tree of life'.

The initials of these six names spell out the words \`tree of life.' The
order is not chronological, however. The first word \`tree' is made up
of the initials of All and Sadiq. All is the first Imam and Sadiq the
central Imam in regard to practice. The second word, \`life', begins
with the letters of Hasan and Husayn, who represent the two sides of
right­eous life, reconciliation and revolt against oppression. The
seventh and final letter, *mem, is* the initial of both Muham­mad and
Musa. Musa is the seventh Imam. Muhammad is the name of the last Imam.
So the positions of the letters are logical. When the initials of the
names of the twelve holy Imams are set out in a sense logical rather
than chronological pattern, they spell the Hebrew words \`tree of life'.

Two letters remain unmentioned. These are the two *yod* in the middle of
the word \`life'. Two *yod* are used in Hebrew as the abbreviation for
the name of God.

The tree of life appears throughout the Bible as a symbol of the
Imamate. It is the introductory figure of the *Zabur* or Book of Psalms.
Psalm one describes the perfect man, the one who puts into practice the
verbal revelation. Verse three refers to him as the tree of life, the
tree whose leaves do not wither.

The Imamate appears in Jesus' sermon on the mount. Jesus refers to the
prophet to follow after him as the tree of life. Jesus offers the fruit
of this tree as evidence that he is a true prophet.

\`Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their fruits.
Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good
tree bringeth forth good fruit.' Matthew 7:15-17. Revelation 22:2 tells
us how many fruits there are on the tree of life. \`In the midst of the
street of it, and on either side of the river, was there the tree of
life, which bare twelve manner of fruits.' So we find that the prophet
to come after Jesus is known by the twelve fruits which he produced, the
twelve holy Imams.

The story of the Patriarchs in the Bible is largely the story of divine
proof and divine guidance. As we dig under the surface of these stories,
we find more and more details which suggest that a fundamental concern
of these people was the Imami progression. This concern translated
itself into the keeping of genealogies, the transmission of stories
about early divine guidance, and the gathering of evidence of authority
as conflicting claims arose. Without the concern for Imami authority,
the story of Abraham might not have been preserved.

2. The Judges
-------------

We have seen some aspects of the lives of the Patriarchs that do not
immediately meet the eye. An example of this is the fact that according
to the Bible, Noah's death is dated in the fifty-eighth year of Abraham.
Some readers of Genesis might be quite surprised by that fact. The
reason for this is that the book of Genesis has an entirely different
purpose as it now stands. It was not originally written to portray a
concern with the Imamate. Although that concern appears to be of prime
importance in the stories themselves and probably in their early
survival, the book of Genesis is put together in another way.

Perhaps the best way of illustrating this is with the way the symbolic
numbers are used in Genesis. The deepest level of Genesis focuses on the
number twelve. This is the number of sons of Jacob and Ishmael, and the
number of successive generations of the Patriarchs. The second level is
seven. Some liberal scholars suggest that the seven-day creation story
is a late addition. The number seven is important in the Flood story as
well. Jacob served seven years for his wives. Genesis four focuses on
the seventh generation in the line of Cain, and Genesis five on the
seventh generation in the line of Seth. The surface structure of the
book of Genesis superimposes a different symbolic number. That is the
number ten.

Since seven and twelve are numbers having to do with the Imamate, we can
conclude that the Imamate is a consideration embedded in the stories of
Genesis them­selves. The number ten does not relate to the Imamate. Its
most direct relationship is with the decalogue or ten commandments. The
ten commandments are the heart of the books of Moses. The book of
Genesis in its present form is arranged in the Mosaic tradition and not
the patriarchal tradition. It is edited as an introduction to the ten
commandments following along in the next book of Moses, the book of
Exodus.

The number ten is superimposed by the Mosaic tradi­tion upon the stories
of the book of Genesis. We find this especially in two areas. The first
and most obvious is the division of genealogies by tens. The first
genealogy of ten is in Genesis five.

The second one is in Genesis 11:10-26. The second area in which the
number ten is superimposed on the book of Genesis is structural. The
book is divided into ten very uneven sections with an introduction. Each
section begins with the words \`these are the generations of... or
*toldot*. The whole book is thus structured in ten separate narratives,
all but the first of which are named for the principal character. These
ten section divisions are found in Genesis 2:4, 5:2, 6:9, 10:1, 11:10,
11:27, 25:12, 25:19, 36:1, and 37:2.

The ten sections of Genesis are not chosen haphazardly. They are clearly
of two genres. There are five genealogies and five narratives. An
examination of these might give an idea of what the Mosaic tradition is
all about. The book of Genesis can then be set in the context of the
whole. Although it is fortuitous that the books of Moses are divided
into five books, the logical development of the message can still be
seen to advance roughly in terms of this division. There is a specific,
central message of each book.

The structure of the creation story in Genesis 1:1-2:3 is an obvious
attempt at giving the Sabbath a cosmic founda­tion. But even more
fundamental in the story is the message that all existing things are
created by one God. This one, universal God is the central theme of
Genesis. With awesome clarity, Genesis four shows the failure of
civilization to deal with so basic a problem as fratricide. Lamech's
despairing lament is followed by the austere comment: \`Then began men
to call upon the name of the Lord.' Genesis 4:26. The first verse of
Genesis five sets God above the passing generations of men. The central
theme of the Flood story is a God who can and will judge the whole
world.

We have already seen how Abraham rose above cultural and national
divisions to affirm the unity of God. The story of Abraham is reported
with such detail partly because it strikes so directly to the heart of
polytheism. The basis of polytheism is the functional division of gods.
Ancient man in the Middle East believed that every place was governed by
the god of that place. Piety was defined as recognizing whatever gods
reigned in the place you were.

When Abraham went from Mesopotamia to Palestine, piety required that he
leave the gods of his fathers and serve the gods of the land. This was
an unquestioned and unques­tionable mindset. The story of Abraham must
have seemed like the wildest science fiction even three thousand years
ago. The mind to invent it would have been admired for incredible
imagination. But more important was the unequalled daring, not to
mention impiety, of a man who travelled about and worshipped only one
God. This is far more startling than the modern rise of atheism. It is
the central issue of the book of Genesis that must have struck the
ancient audience more than anything else. The fact that we hardly notice
it today only shows how different we are from ancient peoples.

The unity of God in the book of Genesis is the central theme. This
central theme of Genesis becomes the axio­matic point of departure in
the book of Exodus. When God appears to Moses in the burning bush, the
fact of God's unity is already established. Another issue appears, the
issue of justice for the oppressed. Moses goes to Pharaoh with the
message of God, \`Let my people go'. The structure of the book of Exodus
is in two parts, divided at the giving of the ten commandments in
chapter twenty. The ten com­mandments are the heart of the book. The
Decalogue defines divine justice. The story of deliverance from
oppression is followed by the legislation of justice.

The second half of the book of Exodus looks back on the justice of God
in another way. It centers on the building of the sanctuary, \`that I
may dwell among them'. The last half of the book seems to be dealing
with the other side of the coin of divine justice. The other side of the
coin is not mercy, although this is an issue throughout the book. It is
divine consistency. It is the fact that God can be trusted to be
consistent. This is perhaps best brought out in the middle of the
sanctuary story when God told Moses He would destroy the people for the
sin of worshipping the golden calf. It is Moses who shows mercy. God
gives evidence of extraordinary consistency. The whole book of Exodus is
an amazing treatise on the justice of God.

The book of Leviticus is a book of ordinances and legis­lation. The
whole book is summed up in Leviticus 10:10, \`That ye may put difference
between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean.' The emphasis is
on verbal revelation of the will of God, the central role of a prophet.

The last book of Moses, called Deuteronomy, is made up almost entirely
of Moses' farewell speech. Time and again Moses sets forth obedience to
God and disobedience. He draws a contrast between success and failure,
punish­ment and reward. The focus is on blessings for obedience and
curses for disobedience. The book comes to a climax in the Song of Moses
in chapter thirty-two.

Much of the song is couched in the words of God, who finally says, \`See
now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I
make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver
out of my hand. For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live
forever. If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on
judgement; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and reward them that
hate me. I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall
devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the captives,
from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.' The central issue of the
book of Deu­teronomy is divine judgement.

The books of Moses, the Torah or Taurat, develop this grand theme. The
unity of God logically leads to the realization that God is just. God's
consistency logically leads to the verbal revelation of God's will. The
revelation of God's will logically comes to the Day of judgement, the
realization of human responsibility before God. But the fourth book
remains unmentioned. This is the book of Numbers, the book of the
Imamate. The central theme of the book of Numbers is the Imamate.

Almost every passage in the book of Numbers fits into one of two themes:
the first theme is the assignment of people to specific roles. The
second is the description of Moses' defense of the role of leadership.
Both of these themes are overtly Imami. The idea that God has assigned
certain human beings to a specific leadership role is not far from the
idea that God has assigned every human being, in fact, all created
things, to a specific place in creation. Of course Moses' defense of the
role of leadership is a defense and reaffirmation in every case of the
Imamate itself.

With the possible exception of Numbers five, nine and ten, the first
part of the book fits into the first theme, the assignment of people to
specific roles. The first defense of the Imamate in Numbers begins in
chapter eleven and culminates in chapter twelve. The rebellion comes
from Moses' own brother and sister. Miriam voices the revolt in the
following words, \`Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he
not spoken also by us?' Numbers 12:2. Miriam understood the role of the
prophet very well. The prophet is one through whom God speaks to the
people. She failed to grasp the importance of the Imamate. In this she
was like many people today, who recognize the prophet, but not the Imam.
She felt that she and Aaron should have equal leadership with Moses
because God also spoke through them. They recognized that Moses enjoyed
a position of leadership that they did not participate in, but they did
not understand that this leadership of Moses was God-given and sacred.
The punishment of Miriam was a clear affirmation of the Imami principle
and the specific role of Moses in filling it at that time.

Numbers thirteen tells the story of the twelve spies. Moses sent a
representative from each tribe to view the land of Canaan. All spies
brought back a good report of the land, but only Caleb and Joshua were
ready to enter it. The others were afraid of the inhabitants. They
instigated a rebellion against Moses. Again Moses had to come to the
defense of his divinely appointed leadership. This story also lays the
groundwork for Moses' successor in the Imamate, who turned out to be
Joshua.

Chapter fifteen is legislative, but leads into chapter six­teen. A new
attack on the Imamate comes in the rebellion of Korah. This was a
rebellion of princes in the congrega­tion. They set themselves not only
against the Mosaic Imamate but the Aaronic priesthood. Again God takes
the initiative and affirms the divine authority of Moses' leadership by
destroying the rebels.

Chapter eighteen returns to the first theme along with legislation.
Chapter twenty returns to the defense of the Imamate in the event of the
water from the rock in Meribah. This chapter draws a clear distinction
between the prerogatives of the Imam and the prerogatives reserved for
God Himself. As such it forms a logical sequence to the development of
the Imamate.

The confirmation of the Imamate continues in chapter twenty-one. The
episode of the fiery serpents inspires the people to recognize their sin
both against God on one hand, and against His appointed leader on the
other. \`We have spoken against the Lord, and against thee.'

The episode of Balaam is a sort of interlude in the Imami development of
the book of Numbers. It has its place, however, because the blessings
Balaam is forced to pronounce over Israel have Imami force. They
culminate in the great prophecy, \`Out of Jacob shall come he that shall
have dominion.' Numbers 24:19.

Numbers twenty-six returns to the first theme. But in chapter
twenty-seven the Imamate is affirmed in a surpris­ing and delightful
way. The daughters of Zelophehad sue for inheritance. This situation
illustrates most strikingly how verbal legislation cannot be enough.
There must be an on the spot evaluation in order for justice to come
about.

The women receive their inheritance because Imami intervention was able
to supersede the law.

Following this event, it seems that Moses himself realized more than
ever the necessity of the continuing Imamate. Numbers 27:16-17 contains
the great Imami prayer of Moses. \`Let the Lord, the God of the spirits
of all flesh, set a man over the congregation, Which may go out before
them, and which may go in before them, and which may lead them out, and
which may bring them in; that the congregation of the Lord be not as
sheep which have no shepherd.'

Numbers 27:18-23 describes Moses' appointing of Joshua as his successor
in the position of leadership. Joshua's leadership is described in the
Biblical book of Joshua. After that the leadership role passed down
through a series of people called judges. These are given along with
some of their exploits in the book of judges. The interest­ing thing
about the book of Judges is the fact that there are twelve of them.

The writer of the book seemed to think that a series of twelve such
functionaries was the only appropriate one. He could have construed the
judges to be fifteen, since Joshua preceded them and they were followed
apparently by Eli and Samuel. The twelve figures of the book of judges
are Othniel, Ehud, Shamgar, Deborah, Gideon, Tola, Jair, Jephthah,
Ibzan, Elon, Abdon, and Samson.

At this point we have seen how the books of Moses or Taurat include the
Imamate as the fourth in a series of five great themes. We have seen how
the fourth book of Moses, the book of Numbers, centers on the Imamate
throughout, defining it and defending it. Finally, we have seen how the
role of leadership was passed on from Moses to others, first Joshua and
then the twelve judges described in the book of judges.

We can now pass on to examine some Imami actions among these people.
These will be authoritative applica­tions of the law. In the patriarchal
series we found the witness of the one, universal God, the distinction
between clean and unclean, and the practice of *taqiyyah* or concealing
the truth to save life. These Imami actions are found among the Mosaic
figures to be sure. But with Moses there is a new kind of Imami action.

Already in the experience of Noah the need arose for a means of reducing
violence. There was no legal verdict, and the result was the Flood and
the introduction of the Imami role of deliverer in its most primitive
form. With Moses, the Imami role of deliver is fully developed. After
the Flood new legislation provided for the execution of murderers. The
purpose of this was to prevent murder. The legislation itself, however,
seems in conflict with the commandment of the decalogue 'Thou shalt not
kill'. In any particular case, only an Imami verdict can tell us when
the execution of a murderer can legally take place.

Probably one of the most often pondered questions of the Bible is the
problem of violent warfare. Many a man has spent his life looking for a
way of reconciling violent warfare with the commandment 'Thou shalt not
kill'. Many solutions have been offered, but few of them satisfy. Many
Jewish commentators suggest that the commandment means 'Thou shalt not
murder'.

Such readers mean that other killing does not break the commandment. Few
Christians are satisfied with that. Generally Christians see the
practice of the Hebrew Scriptures as primitive and an advance in the
grace and mercy of the Gospel. Besides being parochial, such an
explanation ignores the true depth of the Hebrew Scriptures on one hand,
and their real emphasis on grace and mercy on the other.

Perhaps the straightest way of coming to the answer is by understanding
that God is not bound by His own commandments. The commandment 'Thou
shalt not kill' is addressed not to God, but to people. At the command
of God, God's representative on earth, the Imam or divinely appointed
leader of any given time, may either kill or command to kill without
breaking the commandment. The absolute commandment is 'Thou shalt not
kill'. If, how­ever, circumstances warrant it, God Himself can override
the commandment.

When this type of Imami action began with Moses, almost every execution
or war was carried out directly through the intervention of God Himself.
Examples of this are the drowning of Pharaoh's army in the Red Sea, and
the deaths of Nadab and Abihu. Nevertheless, action by the congregation
or even individuals can be found. In Leviticus 24:14 the congregation
stones a blasphemer, and in Num­bers 25:8 Phinehas kills an Israelite
and the woman who had seduced him into idolatry.

Of course the principle is clear. All legislation is at the point in the
chain of revelation just preceding the Imamate. An ordinary individual
does not have the right to apply the legislation to practice. He must
approach it through the Imamate or divinely appointed leader. There is
not a conflict between law and Imamate. We do not have the right to
judge either of them, for there is no standard for such judgement.
Rather, revelation comes to us in a chain, first of all, the law, and
secondly, the Imamate, through which the law applies in our practice.

Here is an illustration. We read the commandment 'Thou shalt not kill'.
In a particular situation the reigning Imam tells certain people to kill
certain others. If we do not understand the Imami principle, we will
wonder why the divinely appointed leader is inconsistent with the
com­mandment.

If we understand the Imami principle, we understand that the commandment
'Thou shalt not kill' is part of the verbal revelation on which the Imam
makes his verdict. But there are many other verbal legislations which we
might overlook that also contribute. Finally, the Imam's direct
assessment of the particular situation is crucial as well. When the Imam
puts all of these together, his verdict is the consistent and relevant
sum of divine revelation.

The same principle holds true with all verbal com­mandments. The
commandment 'Thou shalt not kill' is the one that especially becomes
visible in the Mosaic series. Nothing is more typical of the period of
Joshua than warfare and violence. The name Joshua means \`God delivers'.
He is the prototype successor of Moses.

All twelve Imami figures in the book of judges are of the same type.
They are *deliverers.* Their main function is to kill as many enemies of
the worshipers of God as possible. This is not inconsistent with the
chain of Biblical revelation nor with the commandment 'Thou shalt not
kill'.

In the area of Imami verdicts, the Bible sets forth the ones most
central to practical needs. If we approach the verbal divine revelation
for ourselves, we can often draw valid conclusions on what behavior is
required. But sometimes in practice the matter of what is clean and
unclean, as with Noah, requires an on the spot evaluation.

The verbal legislation does not cover the details of every­thing that is
right or wrong. Without divine leadership, we would now and then run
into trouble knowing what to do. Next comes, with Abraham and Isaac, the
issue of *taqiyyah.* Without Imami guidance we would be forced to reveal
everything we know in every situation, or else take it upon ourselves to
make legislative application. These two doubtful areas are the basic
ones. Imami leadership makes verdicts on the details of legislation
(what is right and wrong) and on the application of legislation (what
principle is appropriate to a specific situation). The matter of violent
warfare falls into the latter class.

I fully realize that people unaccustomed to the concept of divine
leadership will have difficulty grasping these principles. They will
still have problems with Abraham and Isaac and struggle with the idea
that they told their wives to lie. They will still have problems with
violent warfare in the Bible.

I shall approach this difficulty in two steps. First, we must realize
that our verdicts on what is right and wrong are not the criteria. We
may think that violent warfare is always wrong, but we do not have the
right to that opinion unless we reject Biblical authority. The tragedy
of Saul reveals this clearly: 1 Samuel 15. The phrase \`to obey is
better than sacrifice' has become proverbial.

God took the kingdom away from Saul, because he had pity on the enemy
and did not kill them all as God commanded. God gave the kingdom to
someone who would obey and kill those whom God said to kill. This is the
Bible thought. Whether or not we like it, that fact is inescapable. In
order to understand divine leadership we have to get used to the idea
that a command of God is valid whether we like it or not.

The second step towards comprehension is to realize that our perception
of reality is limited. Conflict between the verbal revelation and the
practical application arises in our own minds through ignorance of both
which legislation is applicable and what the whole situation is. Seeing
a part of the whole, we draw conclusions different from those of the
divine leader.

Rather than accusing Abraham or Isaac of fostering falsehood, we should
understand that the fault is in our own ignorance. When we perceive the
divine guide as inconsistent, he is in fact carrying out the will of
God. To do as we think he should do would be disobedience. When Saul
saved the enemy king alive, he was disobeying the commandment 'Thou
shalt not kill'. He was taking the commandment out of its revelatory and
practical context. To misapply it is to disobey it.

The problem of violent warfare or even violent acts is perfectly
resolved in the Imamate. The pacific principle in practice, however,
prevails. Only warfare or violent acts commanded by the reigning divine
leader are valid. Since governments on earth today do not even make the
pretense of a claim to divine guidance, participation in their armies
and warfare is forbidden. One may fight only at the command of a Moses
or a David.

Seen from this point of view, the exploits of Samson can be enjoyed and
applauded for the mighty feats of honor which they are. This need not,
does not detract from our consistent application of the Imami principle,
which prevents us from participating in warfare or violence. On the
other hand, according to Biblical principles, if the true divine leader
of today mediated a command from God to kill, we would have the duty of
endeavoring to obey it.

3. The Kings
------------

We have seen how the concept of the Imamate has devel­oped in the Bible.
The basic ideas appear from the beginning. These are the witness of the
one, universal God; the practical, authoritative application of verbal
legislation; the experience in some cases of occultation; and the
tendency to find series of twelve.

The patriarchal period presents Noah as an Imam in the deliverer role.
The problem was violence and the solution was legislation to deter the
murderer by the death sentence. The Imami role in salvation came into
its own with Moses and the judges who followed. Violent warfare became
more and more a part of an Imam's task as a deliverer.

This extraordinary role continued with the kings. The kings, however,
introduced a different emphasis. Without neglect­ing deliverance through
warfare, they made verdicts on day-to-day issues. The continuing,
routine influence of the Imamate took its place alongside its
extraordinary role. The Imamate took on an ever-increasing content and
impor­tance.

As we move away from the patriarchal period, there are fewer and fewer
figures who combine the roles of prophet and Imam as did Abraham and
Moses. Nevertheless, the prophetic role of the first kingly Imam, David,
is important. The only king after David who was a prophet as well as an
Imam was his son Solomon. Jesus also combined the two roles. But most of
the kingly Imams found themselves working side by side with prophets.
This of course lent a unique character to the Imamate of this period.

Judaism and Christianity have done the world a disserv­ice in separating
the faith of Jesus from the history of the prophets and kings. The
Gospel presents Jesus as the son of David, thus tying this Imami line
into one. The message of Jesus differed from rabbinical Judaism
precisely on the question of the Imamate. The Imamate was conservative
and represented the older faith. Rabbinicism was something new, the
product of lost Jewish national independence. Jesus and John represented
the old faith of prophets and kings. To separate them from that history
is to concede the claims of rabbinicism.

The occultation events during this long period are our first concern.
There are two of them. The first is the occultation of Elijah, described
in 2 Kings 2. Elijah ap­peared in consultation with Jesus in the
transfiguration, described in Matthew 17:1-13; Mark 9:2-13; and Luke
9:28-36. Elijah, like Enoch before him, was a prophet rather than an
Imam. Occultation of an Imam had to wait for Jesus, who was the second
case of occultation in this period.

We have seen that the symbolic number twelve begins with the number of
the sons of Ishmael. The number of the tribes of Israel and the number
of judges are manipulated to follow the symbolic pattern. The number
twelve is embed­ded in the twenty-one generations listed in Genesis.

In the same way the sacred number twelve is embedded in the list of
kings of Judah, the line of David. If we take the whole list from the
books of Kings and Chronicles we find the following twenty-one kings.
The kings are each evaluated in the Scriptures as either good or wicked
kings. I have marked the good kings with a plus sign (+). David+,
Solomon+, Rehoboam+, Abijah+, Asa+, Jehoshaphat+, Jehoram, Ahaziah,
Jehoash+, Amaziah+, Uzziah+, Jotham+, Ahaz, Hezekiah+, Manasseh, Amon,
Josiah+, Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, Jehoiakhin, Zedekiah. There are twelve
good or Imami kings.

A host of prophets confront the twenty-one kings. Some of them left
writings which have not survived. More than twelve of them left writings
in the Hebrew Scriptures. Nevertheless, the books are arranged in the
Hebrew Scriptures in such a way that twelve short prophetic books are
grouped together. They are .called the twelve minor prophets. These are
Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah,
Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi. The other prophets such as Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Ezekiel and Daniel are gathered separately. So the compil­ers of the
Scriptures recognized a need for arranging in a series of twelve.

The book of Psalms or Zabur also shows a concern for the number twelve.
The Psalms are gathered from earlier collections. Each collection shows
a concern for number symbolism in the number of Psalms included. The
Psalms are divided into five books, like the books of Moses. The first
originally contained forty Psalms. The second origi­nally contained
thirty, the first two books totaling seventy. The whole collection
contains one hundred and fifty Psalms, one Psalm in the first book
divided into two (Psalms nine and ten) and one in the second book
(Psalms 42 and 43), thus bringing the total up to one hundred and fifty.

There are eleven Psalms with twelve verses each, al­though several
Psalms of thirteen verses might fit into the series. There are eleven
Psalms for the sons of Korah, although Psalm 43 seems to have been
detached from Psalm 42, thus making an undesignated twelfth. Finally
there are clearly twelve Psalms of Asaph.

The text of the Psalms is mostly written in the first per­son, I, and is
addressed to either God or people, sometimes the congregation and
sometimes wicked people. This is the speech of the Psalmist. There are
only a few places in the Psalms where God speaks directly. These are
Psalm 15:2-5; 46:10(11); 50:5-23; 75:2-8; 81:6-16; 82:2-7; 89:19-37 and
95:9-11. Only one of these eight passages is from the Psalms of David,
Psalm 15. Psalm 46 is a Psalm of Korah. Psalm 89 is of Ethan the
Ezrahite. All of the rest but the last are Psalms of Asaph. Most of the
speech of God is con­tained in the series of twelve, the Psalms of
Asaph.

The Psalms of Asaph are Psalms 50 and 73-83. Since at least Psalms 79
and 80 appear to be later than the others, these Psalms are not in
chronological order of composition. Their order relates to their
symbolic place in the series of twelve. We have already seen how the
names of the sons of Ishmael form a logical pattern of spiritual
development. The series of twelve at some point began to show specific
symbolic meanings for each numbered slot from one to twelve. This is
full-blown in the Psalms of Asaph.

Psalm 50 represents God in judgement, giving His words to the righteous
and to the wicked. It introduces God as high and mighty. Psalm 73
presents God as good. Psalm 74 presents the most difficult situation,
one in which it seems that God has forsaken and the righteous fall prey
to enemy attacks. Psalm 73 focuses on praise to God. Psalm 76 returns to
God's judgement with expressions such as breaking and cutting off. Psalm
77 focuses on the word \`remember', and emphasizes constancy in trusting
in God. Psalm 78 points to the law of God as finished and estab­lished.
It makes a parable of the experience of Israel in their forgetting God
and falling into disaster. God came to their aid when they repented.

Psalm 79 is a prayer when the temple of God was invaded by the heathen.
The petition is for revenge of the blood of martyrs and sighing of the
prisoner. Psalm 80 is in a similar situation, but focuses on restoration
of prosperity. It emphasizes trust in God. Psalm 81 deals with the issue
of idolatry. Psalm 82 touches on justice for the poor and oppressed. It
contains the mystical expressions of entrance into union with God.

Psalm 83 speaks of a time when the heathen have taken control and the
word of God is hidden in silence. Yet even this silence is a witness of
the one true God. The Psalm contains the prayer that God will rise up
and fill the earth with justice. Thus each slot in the series of twelve
has its particular symbolism, and some of them are clearly contrastive
and easy to identify.

The final series of twelve that we shall examine among the kings is the
series of twelve disciples of Jesus. Jesus himself combined the roles of
prophet and Imam. Still, his ministry focused heavily on the Imamate.
This was the issue he particularly had to face as Judaism apostatized
and left the earlier Biblical faith, substituting it with rabbinical
method.

He should have emphasized the Imamate in any case, since he was the
culmination of the Davidic line, to whom all of the messianic promises
of David pointed. His twelve disciples were a symbolic series
emphasizing his claims to be the divinely appointed leader and guide for
humankind, the savior to whom the savior judges pointed, and the messiah
king of whom the early kings were shadows, types and figures.

We have now seen how the experience of occultation ultimately joins the
Imamate in the ascension of Jesus. We have mentioned the extensive
blossoming of the symbolism of twelve during this period. It remains to
examine the Imami action as revealed in this period. We shall
investi­gate the characteristics that were added to the Imamate in the
experiences of the Imami kings.

The Imamate during the period of judges and even Moses was characterized
by low loyalty. The authority of Moses was constantly questioned. This
factor gave rise to the emphasis in the book of Numbers which affirms
the Imamate time and again. The twelve judges inspired loyalty mainly in
times of crisis. Otherwise, people tended to \`do what was right in
their own eyes'.

The kingly Imamate is different. David inspired a love and loyalty
completely unknown to Moses. The books of Samuel and Chronicles are
filled with stories of testimoni­als to David. His people loved him. His
soldiers adored him and risked their lives, even to get him a drink of
water from the well of Bethlehem. The concept of personal loyalty became
so important that Jesus finally makes it the central issue. The Greek
Scriptures seem even to set it above obedience. \`Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.'

Before examining Imami features among the kings, let us recapitulate
those features as they have arisen from the text. Among the patriarchs
the Imamate appears in a series of twelve. The witness to the existence
of the one true God is its outstanding feature. Authoritative
application of law to specific cases in evident. The authority to
distinguish between clean and unclean and to give a verdict on taqiyya
or concealment appears. The outstanding question resolved among the
patriarchs is the question of the transmission of the Imamate. The
factor of moral capacity takes precedence over mechanical genealogical
inheritance.

The aspect of the Imam as a deliverer, rudimentary in the story of Noah,
appears full-fledged with Moses and the judges. This period emphasizes
the factor of divine ap­pointment and neglects genealogical preference
completely. Rather than the mere unity of God, the Imamate witnesses to
the justice of God in a wide variety of ways.

With the kings, a new area of emphasis appears. Without neglecting the
sporadic aspect of deliverance, the kingly Imams take on a day-to-day
role in governing. Their application of the law is constant. With the
kings the series of twelves continues. With the kings the experience of
occultation is finally joined to the Imamate in the ascension of Jesus.
The kings establish an aspect of the Imamate which was weak and
difficult to maintain under Moses and the judges, the aspect of personal
loyalty. Personal loyalty is the unique feature to look for among the
kings.

The first model of Imami loyalty appears in the life of David, who
before receiving the Imamate himself, contin­ued to give his loyalty to
the preceding king. This king, Saul, was divinely appointed and
anointed, but lost his kingdom through disobedience to the command of
God to kill the enemies of truth. The kingdom and Imamate were taken
from him and given to David. What is fascinating is the degree of
loyalty David showed Saul during the interim period, during the period
between the time God told Saul he would lose the kingdom and the time he
actually did. David's loyalty to Saul is the greatest testimony for
Imami loyalty.

We have already noted how Imami loyalty characterizes the reign of
David. This is in contrast to the experience of Moses, who hardly ever
inspired true loyalty and had to resolve many a conflict arising because
of its lack. David's loyalty to the \`anointed of the Lord' is
especially in evidence in the following texts.

In 1 Samuel 15, Saul disobeys the command of God and Samuel the prophet
tells him that he will lose the kingdom. In 1 Samuel 16, Samuel anoints
David. In 1 Samuel 17, David begins the deliverer aspect of his Imamate,
which excites the jealousy of Saul. He tries to kill David several
times. David's loyalty to Saul and faithfulness in the initiation of his
Imami duties appear in 1 Samuel 18:14­16. \`David behaved himself wisely
in all his ways; and the Lord was with him. Wherefore when Saul saw that
he behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him. But all Israel and
Judah loved David, because he went out and came in before them.'

When the attempts on David's life failed, Saul tried to destroy him
through intrigue. He induced David to marry his daughter, although David
tried hard to avoid it. This became prophetic of later attempts by
usurper rulers to destroy Imams through such marriages. Finally the
daugh­ter of Saul helps David escape.

Time and time again David refuses to take Saul's life when the
opportunity arises. Every time he explains this by saying that he will
not touch the Lord's anointed. This attitude on the part of David is
neither patience nor temerity. He is consciously affirming personal
loyalty as a central issue of the Imamate. By so doing he in fact
estab­lishes his own position.

The lengths to which David went to establish the Imami loyalty, although
they seem extreme, were in fact insufficient as history shows. The fall
of the kingdom all but destroyed the Imamate. The Imamate as a part of
the chain of establishing the will of God was supplanted by rabbinicism.
Kingship at the time of Jesus was a purely political institution. That
is why Jesus' claims ran afoul of Roman politics. Both those who
accepted him and those who rejected him misunderstood the Imami
implications of his mission. He told his listeners to \`take up the
cross' and follow. They had no inkling of what \`following' meant. The
same is true today. Christianity places the emphasis on the cosmic
sacrifice on the cross and forgets what it means to follow.

Judaism erred in favor of the law, and thus drew the condemnation of
Paul. Christianity has erred in favor of sacrifice, and has thus drawn
the condemnation of Islam. Where is the Bible message of Noah, Moses,
David and Jesus, the call to follow the divine representative? We must
look for it outside the Jewish and Christian establishments. We must
find it outside established Islam. Establishment itself is its negation.

Our investigation of basics in the Biblical text has al­ready suggested
to us that by merely keeping the law we cannot please God. Knowledge of
the law and perfect adherence to it cannot preserve one from formality,
hypocrisy, pride and the egotistical attitude which attempts to buy God
off. Paul is the most eloquent writer in the Bible on this wretched
state of affairs. He says in Romans 7:18, \`I know that in me (that is,
in my flesh) dwelleth no good thing: for to will is present with me; but
how to perform that which is good I find not.' Paul's answer to the
dilemma is quite simply attachment to Christ. He contin­ues in Romans
8:1, \`There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus.' For Paul, loyalty to Jesus who appears as the Messiah and
divine guide in the flesh is the \`how to perform' which humanity
craves.

It is quite a different thing to perform the injunctions of the law out
of fear, pride or conformity to a group than to be so attached to the
divinely appointed guide that every thought and act is subjected to love
and loyalty to him. There is all the difference between day and night.
It is this difference that Paul so eloquently tries to get across. To
perform one's prayers because of the letter of the commandment is of no
avail. But to perform them out of love to the divine guide is entrance
into true life.

The strange thing is that the difference may not be ap­parent. The
outward actions may very well be the same. There is no way to judge
another, no way in fact to judge oneself. That is why the constant
return in love to the divine guide is essential. The confidence of Paul
in this salvation, however, is finally reflected in his words, \`I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creatures, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.' Romans 8:38-39.

Paul recognizes the basic practices of faith. Prayer: 1 Timothy 5:17;
Romans 12:12; 1 Corinthians 7:5; Ephesians 6:18. Fasting: 1 Corinthians
7:5; Acts 14:23. Alms: Acts 24:17. Pilgrimage: Acts 24:17-18.

Paul is clear on the basic principles of faith.

1) There is only one God. \`Is he the God of the Jews only? is he not
also of the Gentiles? Yes, of the Gentiles also: Seeing it is one God,
which shall justify the circumci­sion by faith, and the uncircumcision
through faith.' Romans 3:30.

2) That one true God is perfectly just. \`To declare, I say, at this
time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him
which believeth in Jesus.' Romans 3:26.

3) The knowledge of sin comes through the revealed
Scriptures**.**\`Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh
be justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowl­edge of sin.'
Romans 3:20.

4) Recognizing that the verbal revelation is not enough to bring
humankind in obedience to God, Paul preaches the message of a divine
guide through faith in whom his hearers may find true life. \`Therefore
being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ: By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we
stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.' Romans 5:1-2.

5) That one true God shall judge the world. \`In that day when God shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel.' Romans
2:16.

The main message of the New Testament is to establish Jesus Christ in
the role of Imami leadership in the face of and in contrast to the
growing and developing role of rabbinical method in Judaism in the first
century AD. That is the import of Paul's proclamation of faith in Christ
and his opposition to Jewish law or the rabbinical method of
establishing verdicts of right and wrong.

4. The Twelve Holy Imams
------------------------

There are in fact recent Imami phenomena in Christian Protestantism. Two
examples are found in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
and a Seventh-day Church of God group. The organization by a council of
twelve reveals an awareness, however dim, of Biblical Imami principles.
Sadly, the imposition of such an organization does not guarantee divine
authority. It merely imitates it. We must find the true continuity of
Biblical Imami authority within a few centuries after Jesus. A gap of
nearly two thousand years is not acceptable.

Muhammad appeared as a prophet of God at the right time. As did all
prophets, he condemned idolatry and polytheism. His mission in terms of
the Imamate was timely. First of all, he warned the Jews for their
rejection of the claims of Jesus. He condemned them for rejecting the
Imamate. Secondly, and this was the most timely of all, he attacked the
Christian corruption of the Imamate.

Although the Imamate was already misunderstood by many Christians in the
first century, the replacement of the Imamate by the doctrine of the
trinity and Episcopal authority did not become complete until shortly
before the coming of Muhammad. Muhammad condemned the Christians'
paradoxical rejection of Jesus' Imami role and their raising him to the
status of God.

When Muhammad appointed his cousin and son-in-law Ali ibn Abi Taleb as
his Imami successor, he inaugurated a line of twelve authoritative
figures. All of these claimed Imami authority. It is our purpose at this
point to summarize the Biblical aspects of the Imamate which are
reproduced among these twelve divine proofs.

The following characteristics arise from the Bible ac­count. The Imam is
first of all a witness to the unity of God and its clearest exponent. He
applies the law of God authoritatively to situations not clearly covered
by the verbal revelation. Such situations include the difficult areas of
purity but may extend to other applications of the law, even to the case
of verdicts on concealment or *taqiyya*.

The factor of diplomacy is balanced by the factor of deliverance. At
times the Imam is called upon to lead people out of oppression into
freedom. The Imamate is related to series of twelve. The experience of
occultation, at first only tenuously related to the Imamate, appears
full-fledged in the Imami experience of Jesus. With David the necessity
of continued and strong loyalty to the Imam appears. The Biblical
Imamate is summed up as living proof of divine guidance.

An examination of the lives and teachings of the twelve holy Imams from
Imam Ali to Muhammad al-Mahdi reveals a remarkable correspondence
between the Bible teaching and the Imami fulfillment. The Bible
carefully and consistently develops the theme which appears in the
twelve holy Imams. The Bible asserts itself not only as the foundation
for the Imamate, a grand source for the devel­opment of Imami
principles, but as a prophetic witness of the final flowering of the
institution in the descendants of Muhammad.

The prophetic character of the Bible Imamate appears vividly in the
symbolism of the series of twelve. Each slot or position in the series
has its own character. The first slot is obviously a commencement. The
second is conciliatory. The third is martyrdom. The fourth is praise.
The fifth is clarity of distinction. The sixth is codification. The
seventh is loyalty. The eighth is betrayal of promises from the world.
The ninth to the twelfth progress from imprison­ment and secrets to
occultation.

The most easily identifiable of these are the third and fourth slots,
martyrdom and praise. As we examine the Biblical series of twelve, we
note that very often these two aspects occur at the expected points. The
names of the sons of Ishmael are the normative point of departure. The
name of the third son is \`Adbeel', disciplined of God, and the name of
the fourth is \`Mibsam', fragrance.

These two names give a rough equivalent to the third and fourth slots we
have already seen. Levi and Judah are the third and fourth sons of
Jacob. Levi with his brother Simeon took part in the slaughter of the
Shechemites and was therefore scattered in Israel. His descendants
became the priests, those who engaged in sacrifice. The figure of Levi
emi­nently represents martyrdom in sacrifice. The name 'Judah' means
praise.

The names of the third and fourth judges are Shamgar and Deborah. The
only thing we know about Shamgar is that he slew six hundred Philistines
with an ox-goad (judges 3:31). His one act fits perfectly into the slot
of martyrdom and sacrifice. The story of Deborah in the book of judges
is the only one to contain a hymn of praise to God (judges 5).

The third and fourth good kings are Rehoboam and Abijah. Although these
two are not actually called good, since they permitted evil things in
the kingdom, still they opposed the idolatry of Jeroboam and remained
faithful to God. Rehoboam is the one who lost the kingdom of Israel,
thus representing martyrdom and sacrifice. His loss of the temple
treasure to Shishak the Pharaoh is also representa­tive. Abijah's war
experience with Israel contrasts with Rehoboam and represents the power
of praise. He was victorious over Israel without the use of arms. The
priests blew trumpets and the people shouted, and God worked for them
without their engaging in battle. (2 Chronicles 13:14­15).

The third and fourth in the series of minor prophets are Amos and
Obadiah. All of the prophets in this series are similar in predicting
woe and judgements and finally restoration. It is thus difficult to
place them in characteristic slots without doing violence to their true
character.

Psalms 74 and 75 are the third and fourth of the twelve Psalms of Asaph.
Psalm 74 begins with the words \`O God, why hast thou cast us off
forever?' It is like a study of the Karbala massacre itself and is one
of the most clearly prophetic passages of the Bible. Psalm 75 begins
with the words \`Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks'. A compari­son
with the supplications of Imam Zainul Abideen shows a remarkable
similarity between the themes of this Psalm and the Imam's work. As
such, this Psalm also forms a remarkable prophecy of the coming fourth
Imam.

The clearest prophetic expressions of the Imamate in the Bible are thus
truly the names of the sons of Ishmael and the twelve Psalms of Asaph,
which fit all twelve slots perfectly.

The twelve apostles of Jesus are slightly problematic. They are not a
series of twelve successive figures, and as such are more like the sons
of Ishmael and Jacob than like the judges or kings. Nor do they clearly
fit into the slots of twelve. The Gospel of John gives Peter and Philip
the third and fourth place chronologically.

The martyrdom of Peter is striking, but the martyrdom of James takes
precedence in being the first. Nor does the theme of praise necessarily
attach itself to Philip. The apostles of Jesus, like the minor prophets,
are relevant to the Imamate mainly because they appear as twelve. They
do not have an Imami role of their own, although they are among the
greatest witnesses to the Imamate. They are the ones who answer and
affirm Jesus' Imami call \`Follow me'.

The actual Imamate seems to have been conferred on James by Jesus, for
we find James taking a leadership role in the church at Jerusalem after
the occultation of Jesus. The successors of James fled from Jerusalem
into Arabia in AD 70 where they kept the faith in obscurity until the
coming of the prophet Muhammad. There may well have been twelve of them
in all over this period of a little over five hundred years. From the
Imamate of James beginning in AD 31 to the birth of Muhammad in AD 570
is 539 years. An average of about forty-four years is not at all
unrealistic for this quiet period. But we do not know their names. We
only have the prophecy that when faith is gone from Israel, a remnant
shall always exist in Kedar (Isaiah 21:16-17; 42:11-12).

In sum, the principle of the Imamate is a central issue of the Bible.
From beginning to end there have been authori­tative figures which the
text assumes to have been sent from God. Love, loyalty and obedience are
seen in the text to be their due. The second point of our list of
Islamic distinc­tions is amply illustrated from the Bible. Only the
Islamic doctrine of Imami infallibility is left somewhat undevel­oped
before the emergence of Jesus as a God-sent figure. As a whole, divinely
appointed leadership as it appears in the Bible corresponds amazingly
closely to the Islamic Imamate. No institution in established
Christianity so closely parallels it.


