Purity
======

Islamic purity practices are described in some detail in Tabataba'i
pages 228ff. Ali (1988:109a, 110a) defines the matter in precisely the
same way. The ablutions of Islam are of three basic types: dry ablutions
under special cir­cumstances, ablution of head, hands and feet, and
finally washing of the entire body.

States of purity and impurity are defined in terms of contact with
defiling substances, such as urine, faeces, unclean animals, menstrual
blood, semen, and dead bodies. Ablutions after defilement are required
before engaging in acts of worship.

The only remnant of purity regulations to be found in established
Christianity is baptism and in a very limited degree the washing of
feet. The distinction between pure and impure has disappeared. The acts
requiring a state of purity in Islam, such as prayer in prostration and
reading the sacred text as an act of worship, are also more or less
non-existent in Christianity.

The concept of purity in Islam is attached to three more features
besides ablutions. These are circumcision, avoid­ance of unclean meat in
the diet, and the giving of alms in charity, which is known as zakat or
purification.

The question now facing us is whether or not the Bible reflects the
distinction between pure and impure as found in Islam and in Judaism as
well for that matter. Further­more, does the Bible recognize ablutions
in principle before certain acts of worship? Finally, if so, are those
acts of worship and methods of ablution similar to those in Islam?

It follows also to note whether or not the practice of circumcision is
justifiable on the basis of the Bible, and whether avoidance of certain
meats is maintained, and if so, whether they are the same ones forbidden
in Islam. The giving of alms in charity might be mentioned also, but it
is a feature of Islamic purity which is found in some form in both
Judaism and Christianity as well. Since it is less distinctive, it will
not interest us greatly here, except to note that the Bible certainly
does enjoin charity.

There is a little note in John 2:6 which sheds light on purity. \`And
there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner of the
purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.' Now
Jesus quarreled with the people of his time about ablutions. He strictly
avoided ablution before eating and did not permit his disciples to
engage in it.

The quarrel is described in Mark 7:2-3. \`And when they saw some of his
disciples eat bread with defiled, that is to say, with unwashed, hands,
they found fault. For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash
their hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders.' (See
also Matthew 15:2 and Luke 11:38).

Having divine authority, Jesus did not follow the tradi­tion of the
elders. He had authority to render a verdict on the law himself. It is a
mere fact that the washing of hands with the invocations involved does
not appear in the law.

The quarrel was apparently so involved that some of the disciples of
Jesus in fact did not understand the principles of his interpretation.
Even at the end of his ministry the issue was unclear. Peter demands an
ablution before the meal in John 13:9. \`Lord, not my feet only, but
also my hands and my head.'

It is as though Peter had got the impression that the practice of Jesus
was stricter than that of the Pharisees, and in addition to hands, the
feet and head should also be purified before eating. The fact was that
Jesus opposed ablution of any kind before eating, because it was not
justifiable by the Torah.

The washing of feet was an exemplary act in hospitality (cf. Genesis
18:4; 19:2; 24:32; 43:24; Judges 19:21; 1 Samuel 25:41 and 1 Timothy
5:10), not an act of ablution. Peter did not apparently realize this.
His outburst, however, gives us the one clear reference in the New
Testament to ablution of head, hands and feet.

Jesus did not oppose ablution that was justifiable on the basis of the
Torah. Specifically the entire body ablution, called baptism in the New
Testament, is often mentioned. Other forms of ablution are ignored since
there was no argument about them. The text deals only with forms of
ablution that went beyond the injunctions of the law. Ablution before
the performing of acts of worship remains valid in the practice of
Jesus.

Since the practice of ablution is not described in the New Testament,
even in the case of full-body ablution or baptism, we are constrained to
rely on the text of the so­ called Old Testament for details of its
execution. Even there, the details are scarce. The description of ritual
acts is notoriously deficient in religious texts, in the Qur'an even
more than in the Bible, since they are practices that are transmitted
more by the example of the prophets than verbal precept.

Nevertheless a number of descriptions exist. The Torah describes
ablutions for the priests and for others on certain occasions of ritual
defilement, such as contact with the dead and sexual activity.

Exodus 29:4. \`And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water.' See
also Exodus 40:12, Leviticus 8:6.

Exodus 30:18-21. 'Thou shalt also make a laver of brass, and his foot
also of brass, to wash withal: and thou shalt put it between the
tabernacle of the congregation and the altar, and thou shalt put water
therein. For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet
thereat: When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they
shall wash with water, that they die not; or when they come near to the
altar to minister, to burn offering made by fire unto the Lord: So they
shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not: and it shall
be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to his seed throughout
their generations.' See also Exodus 30:30-32.

Leviticus 14:9. \`But it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall
shave all his hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all
his hair he shall shave off. and he shall wash his clothes, also he
shall wash his flesh in water, and he shall be clean.' See also
Leviticus 15:5-11,13,16,17,21, 22,27.

Numbers 19:7-8. \`Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall
bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp, and
the priest shall be unclean until the even. And he that burneth her
shall wash his clothes in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shall
be unclean until the even.' See also verses 18-19.

Deuteronomy 23:11. \`But it shall be, when evening cometh on, he shall
wash himself with water; and when the sun is down, he shall come into
the camp again.'

The prophets note some instances of ablution, in some cases showing
slight differences in the details from those depicted in the Torah.

2 Kings 5:10,14. \`And Elisha sent a messenger unto him, saying, Go and
wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and
thou shalt be clean... Then he went down, and dipped himself seven times
in Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God: and his flesh came
again like unto the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.'

2 Chronicles 4:6. \`He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right
hand, and five on the left, to wash in them: such things as they offered
for the burnt offering they washed in them; but the sea was for the
priests to wash in.'

The Psalms make some references to the ablutions that have preceded the
prayer occasion. These give innocence as the spiritual counterpart of
ablution.

Psalm 18:20,24,26. \`The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness;
according to the cleanness of my hands hath he recompensed me...
according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight... With the pure
thou wilt show thyself pure.'

Psalm 24:3-4. \`Who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean
hands, and a pure heart.'

Psalm 26:6. \`I will wash my hands in innocence: so will I compass thine
altar, O Lord.'

Psalm 73:13. \`Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my
hands in innocence.'

Isaiah and Jeremiah concentrate on the problem of hy­pocrisy, or the
attitude that as long as the formal aspect of ablution is maintained,
moral behavior can be discounted. These prophets show clearly that
formal ablution is of no value if it is not followed by the behavior it
implies.

Isaiah 1:16. \`Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your
doings from before mine eyes; cease to do evil.'

Jeremiah 2:22. \`For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee
much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, said the Lord God.'

The New Testament texts show that the practice of ablution was continued
by the followers of Jesus Christ.

Acts 9:37. \`And it came to pass in those days, that she was sick, and
died: whom when they had washed, they laid her in an upper chamber.'

Hebrews 10:22. \`Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our
bodies washed with pure water.' The author is not referring here to
hygienic practices, necessary though they may be. He is talking about
ritual purity through ablutions and its spiritual, moral and ethical
counterpart.

It can be concluded that the concept of ritually pure and impure is
found throughout the Bible. Although there may be some minor variation
in its details, ablution is main­tained throughout in the form of total
immersion or washing on one hand, and the washing of the extremities on
the other. Ablution is a formal sign of the inward decision to put away
evil actions.

The concept of purity and impurity in the Bible is not limited to
ablution alone. When there was a disagreement among the followers of
Jesus about the practice of the law, it was specifically the matter of
purity that was maintained and agreed upon for all people. Acts 15:20.
\`But that we write unto them, that they abstain from pollutions of
idols, and from fornication, and from things strangled, and from blood.'

This text clearly enjoins the purity code in diet that is found in
Leviticus eleven and Deuteronomy fourteen. This means that purity
requires that slaughtering take place in such a way that the name of God
alone and that of no idol is pronounced, that the blood is removed, and
that only specific animals are appropriate to be eaten. All three of
these factors are, according to Acts 15, essential.

In the clear light of this text it remains puzzling that Christianity
ignores the most basic injunctions regarding purity. To take texts
regarding the washing of hands (Matthew 15:10-20) or the association
with Gentiles (Acts 10:9-28) and apply them to the matter of dietary
purity is unjustifiable. To interpret the Pauline statements (for
example the discussion of vegetarianism in Romans 14:2-3) so as to grant
permission to eat ritual impurities is only to construe Paul at variance
with the rest of the Bible. The conclusion of such interpretation is the
discrediting of Paul, not the permission to eat impurities.

The Jewish practice of kosher, on the basis of Exodus 23:19, forbids the
mixing of milk and meat, taking the precaution of keeping separate
cooking and eating vessels. The Torah text forbids seething the meat of
a kid in its mother's milk. The Jewish practice in fact comes, according
to some scholars, from ancient Canaanite practice and not from the Torah
at all.

In Genesis 18:8 Abraham mixes milk and meat products. Jews might say
that the laws of purity were revealed only at the time of Moses, but
that is belied by the fact that they were already known at the time of
Noah (see Genesis 6-9). How could Noah take a different number of clean
and unclean animals into the ark unless it was already clear to him
which were clean and which unclean? The Bible thus describes a purity
code which in some aspects is closer to that of Islam than it is to that
of Judaism.

Ali does not give a specific and comprehensive list of forbidden meats.
Tabataba'i does so on page 249. Slaughter­ing must be done facing
towards Mecca, pronouncing the name of Allah, and letting out the blood.

A comparison with Acts 15:20, Deuteronomy fourteen and Leviticus eleven
shows that the Bible and Islamic practice are almost identical. The
slaughtering practice is described in the same terms. The list of
forbidden species is the same with the exception of the camel and zebra,
which are, according to Tabataba'i, permitted in Islam and forbidden in
the Bible.

The camel, but not the zebra, is actually specified in the Qur'an as
edible. There may be scholars who prohibit the zebra. A small difference
is in the categorization. The forbidden species in the Torah are called
*shekets,* abomination, which may correspond to the Islamic term
*makruh.* Some of the forbidden meats in Islam are called by the
stronger term, *haram*. The prohibition in Islam is thus couched in
stronger terms than in the Bible.

Two other practices of purity are described in the Bible. The practice
called \`circumcision' in English is called \`purification' in some
other languages. According to the Bible, this practice was either
instituted or reinstituted at the time of Abraham (Genesis seventeen).
It can hardly be overemphasized that the true faith of the Bible is
specifi­cally the faith of Abraham, since all of the Biblical prophets
are purported to be either forefathers or descendants of Abraham. The
practice of circumcision of male infants is not questioned at all in the
Bible in any text.

There was a disagreement among Jews concerning the circumcision of adult
converts to the faith, apparently between Hellenismg Jews mainly from
Alexandria and others during the decades immediately preceding and
following the time of Jesus Christ. Since circumcision, like ablution,
was an outward sign of an inward preparation, it was thought that the
inward preparation sufficed.

This argument carried over among the followers of Christ.

Paul took the position that adult converts to the faith need not be
circumcised, in fact, should not be circumcised merely to satisfy the
demands of the other party. The authoritative church in Jerusalem with
James at its head agreed with him, while certain Pharisees did not (Acts
15:5,19-20). The discussion does not apply to the matter of circumcising
infants. This was never questioned. It was only a matter of choosing to
be or not to be circumcised oneself, at an age when that choice was
possible. All of Paul's strong words against circumcision refer to this
situation alone.

Interestingly enough, however, Paul's argument that circumcision is
superfluous since Abraham was accepted before he was circumcised could
be turned around to support the other argument. After all, he was
circumcised even though he was accepted, and that even at the age of
ninety. Despite Paul's forbidding circumcision to the adult converts in
Galatia, he himself circumcised Timothy. Obviously Paul forbade the
Galatians from circumcision because they construed it in such a way as
to weaken their faith in Christ. There is not one word in the Bible to
suggest that male children of believers should not be circumcised.

Since the subject of circumcision is becoming an in­creasingly polemic
one, it appears necessary to examine the Biblical texts in more detail.
The basic legal texts will be observed first and then the New Testament
ones, especially as they relate to the Pauline situation, which is the
basis for most Christian practice.

The institution of circumcision is found throughout the seventeenth
chapter of Genesis. This happened when Abraham was ninety-nine years old
(Genesis 17:1). Cir­cumcision is dealt with in regard to the command to
obey God perfectly and enter into covenant with Him (17:1-2). It is not
set forth for the Jews alone, but for the many nations of which Abraham
is to become father (Genesis 17:4-6). It is a part of the promise that
Abraham's descen­dants will inherit the land of Palestine (17:7-8).

Circumcision is performed on males alone, not on females (17:10).
Circumcision consists of cutting off the foreskin (17:11). It should
normally take place on the eighth day after birth, that is, on the same
day of the following week (17:12). It should be performed on every male
one has access to (17:12-13). Failure to be circumcised constitutes a
breaking of covenant with God (17:14). The rest of the chapter describes
Abraham's performance of circumcision at the age of ninety-nine when his
son Ishmael was thir­teen.

Abraham circumcised Isaac as an infant in Genesis 21:4. \`And Abraham
circumcised his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded
him.'

Later legislation is limited to only a few Mosaic passages. Exodus
12:44,48. \`But every man's servant that is bought for money, when thou
hast circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof... And when a stranger
shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the Passover to the Lord, let all
his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; and he
shall be as one that is born in the land: for no uncir­cumcised person
shall eat thereof.' This text adds to the Abrahamic covenant only that
circumcision is an absolute prerequisite for participation in the
observance of Passover.

The general legislation is repeated in Leviticus 12:3. \`And in the
eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised.'

Circumcision is used metaphorically to indicate willing­ness to obey God
from the heart. Such symbolism begins already in the Mosaic text,
Deuteronomy 10:16. \`Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart,
and be no more stiff necked.' Deuteronomy 30:6 expands on the
metaphorical use. \`And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart,
and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, and with all thy soul, that thou mayest live.'

Genesis thirty-four reports the circumcision of the Shechemites by the
sons of Jacob. This story is interesting, since it appears to make
circumcision the only requirement of conversion. Exodus 4:26 mentions
the circumcision of Moses' son. Joshua five reports the circumcision
before entering the promised land.

The only other remarks of the prophets are those of Jeremiah. First is
Jeremiah 4:4 in which he echoes the metaphorical usage in Deuteronomy.
In Jeremiah 9:25 the valuelessness of circumcision without obedience is
maintained. \`Behold, the days come, said the Lord, that I will punish
all them which are circumcised with the uncircumcised.'

This is the whole legal and early Imami basis on which the later
discussion of circumcision rests.

Circumcision is also mentioned a few times in the gos­pels. Luke
mentions the circumcision of both John and Jesus in Luke 1:59 and 2:21.
The only report of Jesus speaking of circumcision is in John 7:22-23.
\`Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision; (not because it is of
Moses, but of the fathers;) and ye on the Sabbath day circumcise a man.
If a man on the Sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses
should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a man
every whit whole on the Sabbath day?'

This teaching does not directly relate to circumcision, but to the
justification of Jesus' act of healing on the Sabbath in the eyes of the
Pharisees. When Jesus was accused of breaking the Sabbath by healing, he
gave this argument. The verdict of the Pharisees was that a Sabbath born
child should be circumcised on the following Sabbath, and this did not
constitute Sabbath-breaking, since it was commanded in the law. Jesus
does not comment on the validity of the Pharisaical verdict.

Stephen, in his sermon in Acts 7:8, reports the covenant of circumcision
with Abraham in a positive sense. \`And he gave him the covenant of
circumcision: and so Abraham begat Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth
day; and Isaac begat Jacob; and Jacob begat the twelve patriarchs.'

The problem with circumcision arises for the first time in Acts
10:44-47. \`While Peter yet speak these words, the Holy Ghost fell on
all them which heard the word. And they of the circumcision which
believed were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because that on
the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost. For they
heard them speak with tongues, and magnify God. Then an­swered Peter,
Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we?'

This text is full of special concepts and assumptions. The first is the
use of the term \`the circumcision' for a certain group of people. The
larger set is the whole of those under the law of Moses. The subset
within the circumci­sion is those \`which believed' in Jesus Christ.
Through the preaching of Peter and a divine act, we are brought face to
face with a new group, those who believe in Jesus Christ, but are not
\`of the circumcision'. This new group is characterized by belief in
Christ, the gift of the Holy Ghost, and baptism by water. They are not
circumcised, and it remains somewhat unclear what their relationship to
the law of Moses is.

The question cannot be delayed beyond Acts 15:1. \`And certain men which
came down from Judea taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved.' Acts 15:5
\`But there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees which believed,
saying, That it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to
keep the law of Moses.'

The question is not resolved by appeal to rabbinical method, but by
appeal to Imami authority in the figure of James, who is either the Imam
in his own right succeeding Jesus, or his representative. Acts 15:13.
James begins his verdict by making prophetic reference to the Davidic
authority passed on through Jesus. Acts 15:16-17. At the same time he
extends this authority to the Gentiles. In verse 19 he turns to the
verdict at hand. \`Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them,
which from among the Gentiles are turned to God: But that we write unto
them, that they abstain from pollutions of idols, and from forni­cation,
and from things strangled, and from blood. For Moses of old time hath in
every city them that preach him, being read in the synagogues every
Sabbath day.' Acts 15:19-21.

Verse nineteen clearly implies that converts among the Gentiles should
not be constrained to be circumcised. But verse twenty adds details
which cloud a clear verdict. If the converts are not required to be
circumcised, they are still required to adhere to certain forms. It is
impossible that the practices mentioned are exhaustive, since
fornication is mentioned but not adultery, eating meat offered to idols
is forbidden, but not idol-worship itself.

Nor is it clear that James is referring to the covenant of Noah for the
Gentile converts, rather than the covenant through Abraham or Moses. If
James were implying the covenant of Noah to be valid, he should have
mentioned the practices specific to that covenant. In fact he does refer
to the specifics of that covenant in regard to diet, but he overlooks
blood revenge, and adds to it fornication. He is not therefore referring
to the covenant of Noah.

The problem is resolved when we remember the charac­ter of Imami
verdicts. James has no incentive to interpret the law in general. He is
dealing with a specific case. He is acting as Imam at a particular time
in regard to a particular problem. He therefore speaks to the practical
issues present. He knows what issues are specifically at stake with the
particular Gentile converts in question. They are liable to commit
fornication, but not adultery. They are liable to eat meat offered to
idols, but not worship idols. They are liable to eat things forbidden by
the law, and must be reminded specifically of those. These people are
liable to think that the Imami verdict allowing them as adult converts
to remain uncircumcised permits their ignoring the law on other points,
specifically in diet. James thus warns them of this danger. In so doing,
he limits the verdict to the matter of the releasing of the Gentile
converts in question from the obligation of circumcision.

Having established the Imami verdict and limited it to the matter of
releasing from the obligation of circumcision in a particular case,
James goes on to speak about the reading of the law in verse twenty-one.
The clear implica­tion is that James expects the uncircumcised Gentile
converts to listen to the reading of the law in the syna­gogues every
Sabbath. The Christian who appeals to the verdict of James for the
neglect of circumcision in later times must also follow the verdict of
James and attend the Sabbath reading of the law in the synagogue. One
cannot take the one without the other.

There are two points in regard to this situation that must be made. The
first is that the question of circumcising adult converts to the law of
Moses was one widely debated, especially among Hellenistic Jews. The
period was one of missionary endeavor, and there were many cases of
conversion to Judaism. The problem was very real and practical.

The second point is that Paul was present at the giving of James's
verdict and appears to support it, since he was part of the delegation
which took the verdict to the Gentiles in question, the Gentiles in
Antioch, Syria and Cilicia (Acts 15:23). If we must add attending the
Sabbath reading of the law in the synagogue to release from the
obligation of circumcision in James's verdict, we must also add the
avoidance of eating meat offered to idols. Paul does not appear to take
this verdict of James as of universal signifi­cance. He admits its
validity for the specific case at hand, but he does not admit its
general validity.

Paul in principle allows eating meat offered to idols in 1 Corinthians
8. His argument is of great interest. He bases it on the unity of God.
Since God is one and there are no other gods besides Him, idols are
empty, having power only in the mind of the ignorant. Therefore, it is
not significant whether meat has been offered to idols or not.

Sensitivity to meat offered to idols is the result of a weak conscience.
One should therefore avoid eating meat offered to idols simply out of
deference to those who have a weak conscience and might be emboldened to
sin against them­selves by our example. Paul thus rejects the universal
value of James's verdict, accepting it only in the specific conflict
among the Gentile converts in Syria, Antioch and Cilicia at that time.
Once the Imami verdict releasing the obligation of any legal practice
under specific circumstances is aban­doned, the general recourse must be
the written legislation. Paul therefore puts himself face to face with
the law.

Paul's discussion of circumcision is therefore outside the pale of
James's release of the obligation on Gentile converts at the time. His
discussion takes place strictly within the context of the law, and
possibly within the context of Imami verdicts of which we have no
record.

The first Pauline text is Romans 2:25-29. \`For circum­cision verily
profiteth, if thou keep the law: but if thou be a breaker of the law,
thy circumcision is made uncircumci­sion. Therefore if the
uncircumcision keeps the righteousness of the law, shall not his
uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? And shall not uncircumcision
which is by nature, if it fulfill the law, judge thee, who by the letter
and circumcision dost transgress the law? For he is not a Jew, which is
one outwardly; neither is that cir­cumcision, which is outward in the
flesh: But he is a Jew, which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that
of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not
of men, but of God.'

Here Paul notes three potential groups: those who are circumcised and
keep the law, those who are circumcised and who do not keep the law
otherwise, and those who are not circumcised and keep the law otherwise.
He condemns the second group and condones the third. His argument is
that circumcision is valid only when the law is otherwise observed, and
that observing the law otherwise places the individual in the same
situation as the circumcised law keeper.

This concept is a logical reversal of the text noted above in Jeremiah
9:25, where God's punishment falls equally on the circumcised and
uncircumcised. Such a reversal, however, that God's reward falls equally
on the circumcised and uncircumcised, conflicts with Genesis 17:14. Paul
is led into the argument by the very real and practical situation of
circumcision being a form imposed in infancy which does not necessarily
conform to later individual choices.

Paul continues the discussion in Romans 3:1-2. \`What advantage then
hath the Jew? or what profit is there of circumcision? Much every way:
chiefly, because that unto them were committed the oracles of God.' Paul
recognizes the value of circumcision as a part of the configuration
necessary for the guarding and transmitting of Scripture. He sees it to
be a historically and socially important factor rather than a personal
one. He thus interprets the legisla­tion as referring to the creation of
a people who would preserve revelation. He implies that to apply this to
the individual faith experience is to skew the meaning and role of
circumcision.

In Romans 4:9-12, Paul continues his thought. \`Cometh this blessedness
then upon the circumcision only, or upon the uncircumcision also? for we
say that faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness. How was it
then reckoned? when he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in
circumcision, but in uncircumcision.

And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of
the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he might be the
father of all them that believe, though they be not circumcised; that
righteousness might be imputed unto them also: And the father of
circumcision to them who are not of the circumcision only, but who walk
in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had being yet
uncircumcised.'

Here Paul points out that circumcision is not the condi­tion for
receiving pardon for sin (cf. Romans 4:7-8). The condition for receiving
pardon is faith in any case. Paul continues to maintain the non-salvific
role of circumcision as seen in chapter three, but he does place an
added burden on its meaning as a \`seal of the righteousness of the
faith which he had yet being uncircumcised'. By making cir­cumcision a
\`seal' of such righteousness, Paul apparently tries to use it
psychologically to avert the hypocrisy which he condemned in chapter
two. Although Paul thus rejects any salvific role of circumcision, he
gives it more than a symbolic role. It is part of the process of
preserving Scrip­tural revelation, and it is a physical badge which
should stimulate the individual to exercise the kind of faith Paul does
see as salvific.

In 1 Corinthians 7:18-19 Paul makes the same point more briefly. \`Is
any man called being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised. Is
any called in uncircumci­sion? let him not be circumcised. Circumcision
is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the
commandments of God.'

Here Paul succinctly notes several things. He places the discussion
clearly in the area of conversion of adult males to faith in Christ. He
notes that such a situation should not have any effect on circumcision.
He respects the same dichotomy that James had between circumcision and
keeping the law in other matters. For the convert, circum­cision is not
obligatory, but keeping the commandments otherwise is.

Paul engages in a polemic discussion of circumcision without adding
anything essential to his arguments in Galatians 2:3,7-9,12; 5:2-3,6,11;
6:12-13,15. Chapter two refers to the confrontations between Paul and
others and does not directly deal with the practice of circumcision
itself. Chapter five is even more polemic, using strong language against
the circumcised. \`Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify again to
every man that is circum­cised, that he is a debtor to do the whole
law... For in Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth anything, nor
uncir­cumcision; but faith which worketh by love.' The only thing Paul
adds to his thought here is heat.

Paul's heated conclusion in Galatians 6:12-13 is clearly in keeping with
his rational arguments in Romans. \`For neither they themselves who are
circumcised keep the law; but desire to have you circumcised, that they
may glory in your flesh.'

The words are used in Ephesians 2:11 and Philippians 3:3-5. It appears
that in the latter Paul more clearly takes a Deuteronomic position on
heart circumcision. \`For we are the circumcision, which worship God in
the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh.' It has become increasingly clear that the circumcision of adult
converts is associated with a rabbinical concept of legal interpretation
as a way of personal salvation. Paul is the champion of the Imami
alternative, that faith in Jesus Christ as the divinely appointed leader
is essential to personal salvation. Paul shows an awareness from the
beginning that the purpose of circumcision as originally legislated is
not a way of personal salvation, and to use it as such is to skew its
meaning.

These concepts of heart circumcision by faith in Christ come out
strongly in Colossians 2:11. \`In whom also ye are circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of
the flesh by the circum­cision of Christ.' Paul sees the Imami loyalty
to Christ as the means whereby God performs the Deuteronomic
circumcision of the heart (Deuteronomy 30:6). Unity of all in Christ is
brought out without regard to circumcision in Colossians 3:11. In
Colossians 4:11 and Titus 1:10 the word circumcision refers to the
Jewish believers without adding to the discussion.

In sum, it appears that circumcision was taken out of its context to be
a necessary act of adult converts in order to attain personal salvation.
As such, it was strenuously attacked by Paul, who saw it in its role as
a part of the process of preserving Scriptural revelation through a
particular people partly identified by circumcision. He did grant it
more than symbolic meaning in the personal experience, however, as long
as it did not threaten the Imami status of Jesus as opposed to
rabbinical method. For him, circumcision of adult converts began to take
on symbolic meaning as reliance on rabbinical interpretation in the
place of Christ's authority. In that context, he became bitterly opposed
to circumcision of adult converts.

Paul's discussion of circumcision strenuously affirms obedience to the
commandments among those who have accepted Christ as the divinely
appointed representative of God. He does not even mention the practice
of circumcis­ing infants. He only touches the problem of requiring adult
converts to be circumcised. His affirmation of obedience to the law
implies the continued practice of circumcising infants in conformity to
the example of Jesus.

The Christian aversion to keeping the law is largely a result of
misunderstanding Paul's concept of Christ. The Christian idea of
distinguishing between faith and acts of obedience to the law is a
result of Greek and Gnostic distinction between spirit and matter.
Paul's distinction is between keeping the law according to rabbinical
authority and interpretation, and between recognizing the claims of
Christ and obeying the law through love and loyalty to him. The conflict
is between loyalty to Jesus and loyalty to rabbinicism in the first
century AD.

It is conceivable that submission to rabbinical authority and submission
to the lordship of Christ could theoretically result in precisely the
same actions. The difference is not in conformity or nonconformity to
the law of Moses, but in the motivation. Paul does not have authority to
do away with the law of Moses. He can only point out who has God-given
authority to interpret and implement it.

Finally, the legislation of circumcision, as Jesus accord­ing to John
points out, is not based on Mosaic legislation but on the Abrahamic
covenant, a covenant made in view of all the families of the earth
(Genesis 12:1-3).

In sum, the four purity practices of Islam, circumcision, a ritually
pure diet, alms in charity, and ablution of the whole body or the
extremities, are all described in the Bible in ways almost identical to
Islamic expression and practice. The details of ablution show some
diversity even within the Biblical text itself, but do not conflict in
any way with Islamic practice. Despite the established Christian
interpre­tation of the Pauline texts to be against purity codes, it is
still possible to make a strong, Biblically comprehensive, and
consistent case in favor of the purity codes of circum­cision, diet, and
ablution. It will be a matter of opinion whether the case against purity
is strong and consistent. It is certainly not Biblically comprehensive,
since it depends almost entirely on Paul alone, a man who according to
the Christian Scriptures, never even met Jesus in person. On the other
hand, as we have shown, Paul can be understood consistently to favor
purity as well.


