Fasting
=======

Both Tabataba'i (243-245) and Ali (1988:117a-118a) describe Islamic
fasting in the same terms. It consists essentially of making the
intention to fast, abstaining from food, drink, sexual intercourse and
some other pleasures during the daylight hours of the month of Ramadhan,
that is the ninth lunar month.

Besides the obligatory month of fasting other fasts may be followed in
the same way. Fasting is made void also by quarrelling. Charity,
additional prayers, and acts of justice are especially maintained during
the month of fasting.

After discussing prayer in the sermon on the Mount (Matthew six), Jesus
approaches fasting. Again, he warns of hypocrisy rather than giving the
details of fasting. This is again because the details of fasting were
already known. If alms are discussed in preparation for prayer, as
representing purification, fasting is an appropriate subject to follow
the subject of prayer.

Fasting is almost always mentioned in the Bible along with special
prayers of petition. Examples of such fasting are in the time of Esther
(Esther 4:3 and 9:31), in the experience of Daniel (Daniel 6:18 and
9:3), and in the advice of Jesus (Matthew 17:21 and Mark 9:29). The
words of David especially connect fasting with prayer of petition: While
the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept: for I said, Who can tell
whether God will be gracious to me, that the child may live? But now he
is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him back again?' 2 Samuel
12:22Â­-23.

In this text we see that fasting appears in the Bible along with
weeping. Dressing in sackcloth, sitting in ashes, and not wearing
perfume are also mentioned (Nehemiah 9:1; 1 Kings 21:27). Proclaiming a
fast is often associated with a solemn assembly as well (Joel 1:14; 2:15
et al.). It appears that special months of fasting were instituted
during the Babylonian captivity of Judah, probably in view of the crisis
(Zechariah 8:19). \`Thus said the Lord of hosts; The fast of the fourth
month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the
fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah joy and gladness, and
cheerful feasts; therefore love the truth and peace.' This verse clearly
suggests that these months of fasting would no longer be observed when
the reason for their existence, the Babylonian captivity, disappeared.

But there is no specific legislation dealing with fasting. It is assumed
in the Bible text that everyone already knows that fasting is a valid
practice and how it should be done. This may indicate that some portions
of the Torah have been lost, since legislation is assumed.

In fact, the only fasting mentioned in the Torah or books of Moses is
the forty-day fast of Moses (Exodus 34:28). \`And he was there with the
Lord forty days and forty nights; he did neither eat bread, nor drink
water.' From this we can see that the fast of the Bible is not a partial
one as in Christianity, but complete: absolutely nothing can be eaten or
drunk.

From the fast of Moses, of Elijah (1 Kings 19:8), and of Jesus (Matthew
4:2), we can see that on certain occasions a fast of forty days was
required. The great length of this fast indicates that, since it is
stated to be complete, it must have permitted some eating and drinking
during the night.

Although many of the fasts mentioned in the Bible are certainly personal
vows and not general practice, some general fasting practices are found.
A specific fast day is mentioned in Jeremiah 36:6. \`Therefore go thou,
and read in the roll, which thou hast written from my mouth, the words
of the Lord in the ears of the people in the Lord's house upon the
fasting day: and also thou shalt read them in the ears of all Judah that
come out of their cities.'

Here we find a definite practice of fasting. The following verses will
show that this is not just a day of fasting, but precisely a month. More
detail on this day of fasting is given in verse nine: \`And it came to
pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, in
the ninth month, that they proclaimed a fast before the Lord to all the
people in Jerusalem, and to all the people that came from the cities of
Judah unto Jerusalem.'

This is not a special fast proclaimed by a religious ruler, because this
particular king was wicked. Nevertheless, he did follow the formality of
what was practiced: the month of fasting. The time given for this
fasting is stated to be the ninth month.

The season of the fast in this particular year, thought by many scholars
to be 604 BC, is stated to be in the winter. Jeremiah 36:22, \`Now the
king sat in the winter house in the ninth month: and there was a fire on
the hearth burning before him.' Now the present Jewish calendar adds a
thirteenth month from time to time to match the solar year, so that the
ninth month of the civil year (used in the dates of kings' reigns) falls
in May or June, summer in Palestine. If we project the lunar calendar
presently used in the Middle East back in history, we find that the
ninth month falls in November of the year 604 BC. It appears that during
Bible times a purely lunar calendar was used, and the ninth month was a
month of fasting.

Bible fasting includes more than just not eating and drinking, however.
Isaiah 58 is the great fasting chapter of the Bible. \`Behold, in the
day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labors. Behold, ye
fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: ye
shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice to be heard on
high. Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict
his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread
sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an
acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to
loosen the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let
the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal
thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out
to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that
thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?' Isaiah 58:3-7.

From this we see that fasting includes avoiding certain pleasures on one
hand, and doing acts of charity and justice on the other. That is, there
are some other pleasures besides food and drink that must be avoided.
Also, the central meaning of the fast has to do with feeling for the
hunger of the hungry and doing something to alleviate it. In addition,
especially the practice of using sackcloth and ashes seems to be
condemned. We find the same condemnation, because of its connection with
hypocrisy, mentioned by Jesus in Matthew six.

So we find fasting a basic, though unlegislated, practice throughout the
Bible, from Moses to Peter and Paul (Acts 10:30; 14:23; 27:33; and 1
Corinthians 7:5). In summary, we can say that Biblical fasting is the
complete abstention from eating and drinking and some other pleasures
during the daylight hours of the days of the ninth month of the lunar
calendar. It includes acts of charity, alms and justice, and the
especial avoidance of anger and quarrelling. As such it is identical
with Islamic practice.


