Pilgrimage
==========

Ali (1988:118a-121a) gives detailed descriptions of Islamic pilgrimage.
It takes place in the twelfth month of the lunar calendar and consists
of a journey to Mecca and rites there culminating in a rite of sacrifice
and shaving the head. It includes circumambulation of the *Kaaba* or
house of God and a prayer of two units at the beginning, middle and end
of the pilgrimage event.

The final subject of Jesus' address on the mount in Matthew six appears
to be pilgrimage. The place of pilgrim­age was a subject of controversy
in Jesus' time. The Jews claimed Jerusalem, the Samaritans the mount of
Jacob as the place of pilgrimage.

Jesus said to a Samaritan woman, \`Woman, believe me, the hour cometh,
when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship
the Father. Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for
salvation is of the Jews. But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true
worshipers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the
Father seeketh such to worship him.' John 4:21-23.

Besides pointing out that salvation, that is he himself, came from among
the Jews, Jesus notes something about the place of pilgrimage. Firstly,
he notes that there will be a time when it will be neither in Jerusalem
nor in the mountain of the Samaritans. Secondly, he points out that it
will be in a place where those who truly worship God will come.

The place of pilgrimage is mentioned in Deuteronomy twelve along with
some indications of what is included in its festival. The place is \`the
place which the Lord your God shall choose', (verses 5, 11, 14, 18, and
21). The pilgrimage event is largely a time of sacrifice. The Bible even
states, however, that if the place of pilgrimage is too far away, the
sacrifice may be performed at home (Deuteronomy 12:21).

The law, or books of Moses, does not state when the time of pilgrimage
is. In fact, the Bible as we have it does not give the specific date of
the pilgrimage. It seems to assume that people know it. There is a way
of finding the approximate date, however.

If we look at the order of the book of Psalms in the Bi­ble, we find
that the book is divided into five parts. The first four parts end with
a special formula, amen, so we know there is a break there. The fifth
part, Psalms 107-150, is really made up of a series of collections. The
first collec­tion is Psalms 107-118, and this is appropriate for use in
the first of the annual festivals mentioned in the Torah (Leviticus
23:5-14), Passover and Unleavened Bread, which comes in the seventh
month (or the first Torah month).

Psalm 119 is really a collection of Psalms in itself and is appropriate
for the second festival mentioned (Leviticus 23:15-22), Pentecost, which
comes in the ninth month and is a memorial of the giving of the Torah or
law to Moses. This festival has been retained as Ramadhan in Islamic
tradition. The third collection is .Psalms 120-134.

Each one of these Psalms bears the title in Hebrew, \`A Song of
Pilgrimage'. But if we look at the list in Leviticus, this festival is
missing. The next festival in the list is Trumpets and Atonement
(Leviticus 23:23-32), and this fits the next collection of Psalms, that
is, Psalms 135-145. This festival comes during the first ten days of the
first month (the seventh Torah month), and has been preserved as the
Ashura of Muharrem in Islamic tradition.

The final group of Psalms is Psalms 146-150. Each of these Psalms has
the title \`Hallelujah', and is appropriate to the last festival, the
feast of Tabernacles in Leviticus 23:33-37. This is a feast of
thanksgiving in the third quarter of the first month.

The structure of the book of Psalms thus reveals that there is a
festival of pilgrimage sometime after the ninth month and sometime
before the first month. A year-end pilgrimage and sacrifice at the house
of God is thus clearly a Bible practice from ancient times. This is
apparently the pilgrimage to which Jesus was referring in Matthew six.

Although not all of the many details of Islamic pilgrim­age appear in
the Bible, the primary features do occur. The timing of the pilgrimage
is the same for the Bible and in Islam. The features of sacrifice,
prayer and circumambula­tion are primary in both the Bible and Islam.
The only contrasting detail is the place of pilgrimage, which is Mecca
in Islam. But the place of pilgrimage in the Bible was moveable at an
early stage, and was prophesied by Jesus himself to be someday moved
from Jerusalem to another place. In sum, Islamic pilgrimage is basically
the same as that of the Bible.


