Sacrifice
=========

The paradigm of sacrifice in the Bible, and indeed in Islam, is the
sacrifice of Abraham. The faithfulness of Abraham in offering up his son
has caught the holy imagination of every faith. The Biblical account is
found in Genesis twenty-two. \`And it came to pass after these things,
that God did tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said,
Behold, here I am. And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac,
whom thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him
there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell
thee of.'

This text has precipitated one of the great battles be­tween the books,
with Jews and Christians on one side and Muslims on the other, for the
Qur'an reports a similar test for Ishmael rather than Isaac. The key to
understanding the text is in the phrase 'thine only son'. The fact is
that, even according to the Bible, Isaac was never Abraham's only son.
Either the Bible has made a terrible mistake here, or we are dealing
with something else.

There is a consistent and coherent explanation.

All over the world there are rites of passage as they are called for
young people about the time of puberty. Nearly all of them include some
kind of symbolic acts representing the death and rebirth of the
initiate. Very often they include a substitution sacrifice to represent
the death of the youth. The phrase 'thine only son' fits consistently
into a rite of this type, as does the rest of the conversation in the
chapter.

The phrase is obviously a part of the liturgical formula for the
sacrifice of the first­born. Normally the first-born is the only son
thus sacrificed, but in the case of polygamy, when the rite is repeated
for the first-born of each wife, it may not be literally true. In the
case of Isaac it was not, but since it was a part of the ritual formula,
the phrase was used in his case as it undoubtedly had been somewhat more
accurately used in the case of Ishmael earlier. Both the Qur'an and the
Bible report matters correctly.

This consistent understanding of the text not only rec­onciles the Bible
and the Qur'an, but deflates the belief in human sacrifice. To imagine
this to be a real test, in which Abraham actually agrees to offer his
son, and is stopped from killing him only at the last moment, is to lay
the foundation for accepting human sacrifice. The result in Christian
theology is to make a human sacrifice the core of belief.

The fact that Abraham lived in a society which according to
archaeologists actually committed human sacrifice sheds light on the
meaning of the text. Although such sacrifice was expected in the time
and place, still Abraham did not engage in it. He engaged in a
substitution ritual which in itself indicates more clearly than anything
could that the Bible tradition does not accept human sacrifice under any
condition.

Sacrifice in Islam occurs during the pilgrimage and at other important
occasions such as the birth of a child. The sacrificial animal must be
of a clean sort. It is placed facing Mecca, the name of God must be
pronounced, and it is cut so that the arteries of the throat and
windpipe are severed and the blood drained. Sacrifice in Islam can
generally be replaced with fasting. On sacrifice, note Ali (1988:120a).

The first examples of sacrifice in the Bible are narrated without a
command in Genesis 4:3-7 and 8:20-21. The first command to sacrifice in
the Bible was given to Abraham (Genesis 15:9). It is significant that
the faith which claims to represent the faith of Abraham, Islam, is the
one in which sacrifice is retained to this day.

The rather fluid system of family sacrifice of the patriar­chal period,
which is very much like that of Islam today, gave way to a complex
temple system of sacrifice as de­scribed in the Torah and the prophetic
writings. This sacrificial legislation appears to have had the function
of systematizing and limiting sacrifice among a people whose generosity
was likely to cause at times the problem of over­sacrifice, if the
sacrifices every six steps at the removal of the ark at the time of
David is any indication. The sacrificial legislation of some parts of
the Torah conflicts with the practice in others and with the sacrificial
system described in the final chapters of Ezekiel. This indicates the
possibil­ity of some variation.

There is apparently an early trend against blood sacrifice in the Bible
as well. We see this especially in the Psalms and the prophets. Psalm
51:16. \`For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou
delightest not in burnt offering. The sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.'
Isaiah 1:11 \`To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto
me? said the Lord: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat
of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of lambs,
or of he goats.'

Since the temple at Jerusalem was lost in the seventh decade of the
Christian era, there has been no sacrifice in rabbinical Judaism. In
Christianity, the sacrifices of the Hebrew Scriptures are considered as
types prophetic of the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross, after which no
sacrifice can take place. The sacrifice of Jesus is either re-enacted or
remembered in the Eucharist where the bread and wine are blessed and
thought to be, contain or represent the body and blood of the sacrificed
Jesus.

The vicarious sacrificial death of Jesus on the cross is thought to be
an essential requisite for the forgiveness of sin. Muslims have
generally, but not universally, denied the crucifixion altogether.
Obviously that is a stand the Bible does not share, since the
crucifixion is definitely maintained in the Gospels. The substitution
theory, known from the Gospel of Barnabas, does not seem reconcilable
with the canonical Gospels. The swoon theory, whereby Jesus was
crucified but did not die, is somewhat more tenable, but requires the
assumption that the disciples were ignorant of the true facts.

What is in conflict with Islam is not the death and resur­rection of
Jesus as such. It is the vicarious sacrifice for sin which is absolutely
and altogether unacceptable. The easiest and most direct path to that
goal is merely to deny the crucifixion altogether. But in so doing, the
Muslim must reject the Gospel narrative.

The Christian doctrine of the vicarious sacrifice of Jesus has only two
Biblical sources. The first is the allegorical interpretation of the
sacrificial system of the Hebrew Scriptures. The second is the
metaphorical application of the Paschal lamb to Jesus in the writings of
Paul and Peter. There is no Gospel justification at all.

The only condition for forgiveness in the Gospel is in Matthew 6:14-15.
We are forgiven as we forgive others. The Christian doctrine, despite
being so central to the faith, has only the most tenuous Scriptural
foundation. Although Muslims do not do so, they could find a far firmer
basis for their rejection of a vicarious sacrifice for sin in Scripture
than the Christians find in favor of their doctrine.

I shall not discuss further the historicity of the crucifix­ion and
resurrection of Jesus. Some of the non-canonical Gospels do not even
mention it. One, the Gospel of Barnabas, even denies it outright. It is
undeniable, however, that the New Testament teaches the historical
crucifixion and resurrection. But this does not imply that the New
Testament teaches that this was a sacrifice in atonement for sin which
God required in order to be able to forgive sins.

There are two facts that cannot be denied. First, the Christian
establishment maintains that Jesus gave himself as a sacrifice for sin
on the cross and without that sacrifice God could not forgive sin. The
second historical fact is that the followers of Jesus Christ went on
participating in the sacrificial system of the temple in Jerusalem until
its destruction in AD 70.

The amazing truth is that the apostolic church, for more than a
generation after the ascension of Jesus, still offered the Old Testament
sacrifices. Did they not know that Jesus had already paid the price for
sin? Or was that a belief that only arose later? The only consistent
answer is that it is a later belief, one completely unknown to Paul,
Jesus or any of the disciples of the first century.

The epistle to the Hebrews clearly teaches that Jesus replaces the
temple service, its sacrifices and its priests. But the historical fact
is that such belief came only in connection with the destruction of the
temple. What really happened is that the followers of Jesus continued
their Jewish worship of the one true God until that worship system was
destroyed.

After that, Jews had only the syna­gogues and Christians only their
primitive churches. The temple sacrificial system ended for both. But
while the Jews continued to bewail the temple for two thousand years,
the Christians were comforted in another way. The devastated Christians,
some of whom no doubt thought their sins could no longer be forgiven
with the temple destroyed, sought comfort in Jesus Christ. When they
needed him most, he came in to replace the temple, its services and its
priests.

But it is quite a different thing to maintain that God demands a blood
sacrifice in atonement for sin. Sacrifices were always a part of
worship. Cain and Abel wanted to bring a sacrifice to God. So did Noah
and Abraham. The first command to sacrifice was given to Abraham
(Genesis 15:9). The people in early times were more generous than people
today, so God had to limit sacrifice during the time of Moses (Exodus
36:6-7).

All of the regulations about sacrifices in the books of Moses tell how
little should be offered, not how much. But it was next to impossible to
get the people to see this. Later, in David's time, when the ark was
removed to Jerusalem, they stopped to offer sacrifices every six steps
(2 Samuel 6:13). Ancient people wanted to honor God and affirm their
sincerity in prayer by offering sacrifices. But God never required
anything but sincere repentance in order to forgive sins. \`Sacrifice
and offering thou didst not desire; mine ears hast thou opened: burnt
offering and sin offering hast thou not required.' Psalm 40:6.

The practice of blood drainage in slaughter as well as sacrifice is one
of the things the Jerusalem council main­tained for Gentile converts
(Acts 15:20,29). Despite the variation in practice, the maintaining of
purity code in the kind of sacrifice and the method of slaughter is a
constant from beginning to end.

The Christian belief that God requires the blood of an innocent human
being before He can forgive is somewhat disconcerting. It does not seem
that the Bible maintains the doctrine. The Bible does comfort those who
lost the temple with the fact that Jesus Christ remains and is far
better than any priest or sacrifice. It does legislate the limiting of
sacrifices at the time of Moses, so that there would be less
slaughtering of animals in every place.

In no place does Jesus declare that he was a sacrifice in atonement for
sin. The only condition he ever set for forgiveness of sin was that we
forgive one another (Matthew 6:14-15). The apostles later used language
that emphasized the necessity of believing in Christ for forgive­ness,
and in this they were consistent with the concept of divinely appointed
leadership.

This is not to deny that the innocent suffering and even death of a
sinless human being is redemptive. This belief goes far back into
Judaism long before the appearance of Jesus. It is very much in evidence
at the time of the Mac­cabees. It continues after Christianity and
appears in Islam with the tragic martyrdom of Husayn at Karbala.

But none of these deaths satisfy the demands of a stern God thirsting
for blood or exacting the necessary ransom or penalty as the Christian
doctrine would have it. All of the references to the blood of Christ and
his sacrifice on the cross can be understood either as redemptive in
this sense, or as meta­phorical of the Gospel experience. This is
supported by Jesus himself when he says, \`Greater love hath no man than
this, that he lay down his life for his friends.'

The idea that God is in the sin business, that He takes pay for sin, is
a strange one. It seems Biblical that there is no penalty to be paid to
him. \`The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life.'
Romans 6:23. It is strange that Christians claim that sin is forgiven by
grace alone, and then inconsistently go on to maintain that God requires
a blood sacrifice.

If God's grace is infinite and sufficient, no sacrifice can add to it.
If God's grace is not sufficient, then He is not God. This is the real
point. It is non-Biblical gods who require human sacrifices. When such
trinities of gods are superimposed in the place of the God of Biblical
revelation, then human sacrifice naturally follows along. This is the
origin of the Christian doctrine. Human sacrifice is not acceptable in
the Bible.

What is the Gospel experience of which the expressions of sacrifice in
the experience of Jesus are metaphors? According to Paul, the sacrifice
that God requires is the sacrifice of ourselves and of all we have in
His service. \`I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God,
that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, accept­able unto
God, which is your reasonable service. And be not conformed to this
world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God.'
Romans 12:1-2.

There are specifically two subjects in this passage. In verse one there
is a description of \`reasonable service'. The word \`service' refers
specifically to worship. For Paul, the core of liturgy is the sacrifice
of oneself as a living gift to God. Such sacrifice alone is holy and
acceptable to God. Animal sacrifices, the offering of formal prayer, the
recita­tion of Psalms and other inspired texts of praise and worship,
and calling on the name of God, all are vain and useless without the
desire to offer oneself as a living sacrifice to God.

In verse two there is reference to everything else, all that is not
liturgical. It entails \`proving' what is the will of God. Paul does not
refer to mechanical obedience on one hand, or even the obedience of love
and loyalty as such on the other. Rather, he gives a method of attaining
the good, acceptable and perfect will of God in everyday life.

Paul sees a two-step process. The first step is the mental preparation.
It is the willingness not to conform. There is probably nothing so
difficult to give up as conformity. But the doctrine of the unity of God
quite definitely and directly implies that conformity, that is,
obedience to the common opinions of the time and place, is idolatry. The
unity of God has not space to spare for public opinion and conformity to
it. It has only room for conformity to the will of God. Conformity to
anything else is unacceptable.

The second step is the mental transformation. Like the first step, this
is the reasonable effect of liturgical self-sacrifice. The act of giving
oneself as a living sacrifice in worship has definite repercussions on
the rest of life. It transforms the mind, bringing the soul into
conformity to the will of God. It is very likely that this Pauline
concept of personal liturgy and its spiritual ramifications differ
little from Islamic concepts of prayer in prostration.

It seems that Islam best represents the Biblical descrip­tion of
sacrifice. It includes the possibility on certain occasions to sacrifice
clean animals by draining the blood.

There is a healthy limitation of sacrifice, and recognition of the heart
condition of the worshiper as of primary impor­tance.


