Marriage
========

The subject of marriage as such, the practice of polygamy to the extent
of up to four wives, and the practice of timed or temporary marriage in
Islam have come under fire from outside observers. It is of utmost
interest to note the Biblical legislation on these issues. Ali
(1988:139a-140a) defends temporary marriage and polygamy.

In Islam marriage is a contractual agreement between two parties. A man
may contract up to four full, dowered, simultaneous marriages. Divorce
is also allowed. Concubinage or limited contracts are also permitted,
even with the limitation of time. Adultery is punishable according to
Islamic law by death. There is no ideal of celibacy in Islam, and
marriage and reproduction are a foremost duty.

From the very beginning the Bible seems to support Islamic values.
Genesis 1:28A is the first direct divine command to human beings in the
Bible. It is the command to reproduce. Reproduction is a divinely
appointed duty and not a matter of choice. To choose not to reproduce is
to disobey the divine command. Human reproduction is reaffirmed by
direct command in Genesis 8:17; 9:1,7; and 35:11.

Marriage is instituted by holy example with a ritual marriage formula
spoken by the man in Genesis 2:23-24. The text in Genesis 3:16 relates
specifically to the situation of Eve and cannot be generalized. Eve is
placed under the rule of her husband because of her role in mediating
the temptation to him. This is not evidence of the subordina­tion of the
wife in general.

On the contrary, the list of subordinates in Exodus 20:10 does not
mention the wife as a subordinate, which suggests that she is on an
equal status with her husband. The sorrow of conception is a prophecy of
the tragedy of Cain and Abel. The prophecy is given to prepare Eve for
what will be an insupportable horror, and as such is a grace. The text
does not imply that Eve is being punished with the pain of childbirth,
rather she is being warned that her child would later cause her sorrow.

Genesis 4:19 is the first example of polygamy in the Bible, and it is
the example of a wicked person. The list of generations in Genesis five
give holy examples of people

carrying out the command to reproduce. Genesis 16:2 is the first case of
multiple marriage by a righteous person. By holy example Abraham
institutes multiple marriages under the condition that it is agreeable
to the first wife and for the purpose of carrying out the command to
reproduce in the case of a barren wife. The example also provides the
possibility of marriage by purchase, since Hagar is said to be a
handmaid of Sarah. She was not provided with a dowry.

Although no new example is given in the Biblical story of Lot in Genesis
nineteen, there are passages which can be misunderstood. In verse eight,
Lot offers his daughters to the men of Sodom in lawful marriage in his
judgement against their attempted homosexual rape. In so doing he gives
a positive injunction for marriage, rather than deliver­ing his
daughters up to degradation.

In Genesis 19:31-38, the details show clearly that Lot did not accept
incest. The fact that the daughters in the story give Lot wine to hide
their plan indicates clearly that they knew their father would not agree
to the arrangement. In verses thirty-three and thirty-five the
expression \`he perceived not' shows that Lot is blameless. Thus the
story does not condone such behavior.

Nevertheless, assuming that legislation at the time of Lot was somewhat
less than what we now possess, the actions of the daughters of Lot
should not be judged on the basis of our greater knowledge. Their
motivation was not degraded. It was a misguided attempt at obeying the
basic command to reproduce. The lesson of the experience is to show us
to what lengths a human being can go when he depends on his own
judgement or the judgement of other human beings in determining what is
right and wrong. The story of the daughters of Lot confirms the need for
divine guidance.

Genesis 20:12 raises again the issue of incest, stating that Sarah and
Abraham were children of the same father. This does not necessarily mean
that they were from the same biological father. It could very well mean
that they were from the same ancestor on the father's side. In many
cultures there is no distinction in terms between siblings and parallel
cousins.

The use of the word father in Semitic languages is very broad indeed.
Two men are known to have been called the father of Abraham, and only
one of them can have been his biological father. Terah is known from
Genesis 11:27 et al., while Azar is known from the Qur'an 6:75 et al.
There is no reason to assume that Abraham and Sarah were biological
siblings, whereas there is every reason to assume they were not.

At this point we come to the issue of limited marriage or concubinage.
The texts of the Bible can be classified in three groups: those spoken
by God Himself and thus giving direct divine commands; those describing
the holy example of prophets and other human beings with God-given
authority to serve as such holy examples; and finally those texts
describing the behavior of ordinary people whose example we might not
follow. Obviously the first category is normative, whereas the last is
not. The second category also has a certain degree of normative value.

In principle we could be certain that concubinage is meant only for
those texts where the word *\`Pilegesh'* occurs. This word is of
uncertain origin. It is used once in the Bible in Ezekiel 23:20 to refer
to the male partner in such a relationship. The word is thus both
masculine and femi­nine without a change in form.

The first mention of concubinage in the Bible as that of Nahor in
Genesis 22:24. There is another concubine mentioned by name in Genesis
36:12, Timna who was the concubine of Eliphaz, son of Esau. Both of
these men were devout, although not holy examples.

But even the use of the word *\`Pilegesh'* does not guaran­tee that true
concubinage is meant. Genesis 25:6, from the example of Abraham, gives
us the only specific regulation characterizing concubinage, that is,
that the children of concubines do not inherit from the father.
Therefore the use of the word *\`Pilegesh'* in Genesis 35:22 is a loose
application of the word to a slave wife whose children did inherit and
who was taken as a wife specifically for the purpose of bearing
children. This text, however, is doubtful in any case, and should not be
used.

In 1 Chronicles 1:32, the word *\`Pilegesh'* refers to Keturah, the
third wife of Abraham. The Genesis text is ambiguous about this
marriage, and it is certain that the marriage was not specifi­cally
contracted for producing children. The Genesis text does not state
whether Keturah's children inherited with Ishmael or whether they were
given gifts with the children of Abraham's other concubines.

There are no texts of direct, God-given revelation that refer to
concubinage as such, although many texts of legislation must refer to
marriage of all types. We shall have to turn to the two lower categories
of texts to find an indication of the Bible attitudes towards marriage
of pleasure.

Abraham is the first holy example of concubinage in the Bible. By holy
example concubinage is stated for Abraham in Genesis 25:6. The word
appears here in the plural, indicating that Abraham had more than one
concubine. One difference between wife and concubine is stated: the
children of the wife inherit, while those of the concubine are given
gifts at the father's discretion. This is the one characteristic
limitation of concubinage which the Bible states. It otherwise seems to
assume that concubinage is well-known and needs no further description.

The extensive marriage description in Genesis twenty ­four adds little
legislation. Genesis 24:4 suggests by holy example that relatives are
preferable mates than non­relatives, but the real sense of the text may
be a distinction between worshipers of God and idolaters. Genesis 24:53
institutes the dowry by holy example.

Although it appears from verse fifty-eight that Rebecca consented
eagerly to the marriage, verse fifty-one goes so far as to suggest that
the decision for the marriage was made by the male guardians that is
father and brother. Genesis 24:65 indicates the wearing of a veil in the
presence of the bridegroom before marriage. The matters of male
guardians and the veil are not established by holy example, since the
personages referred to are not authoritative.

By holy example in Genesis 25:21, Isaac makes suppli­cation to God for
his wife's barrenness. Almost all preceding legislation is confirmed by
the holy example of Jacob's marriages in Genesis 29:15-30:24. Jacob had
two dowered wives and two slave wives. No concubines are mentioned.

The only new problem of legislation is the marrying of sisters. This
practice is contradicted by direct divine command in Leviticus 18:18. We
must therefore re­examine the text. Laban is the father of Leah and
Rachel, the two sisters who married Jacob. Our English usage of the word
father may be leading us astray, for the Semitic usage is much broader
and may well refer to a common male ancestor, the living leader of the
clan to which both women belong as sisters. Since this is precisely as
likely on the basis of the word usage as our first, normal assumption,
we must choose the meaning of living male ancestor instead of biological
father, because it permits reconciliation with law. The same phenomenon
explains the matter of Abra­ham and Sarah.

By holy example in Genesis 34:15 it is prohibited for a guardian to
consent to the marrying of a believer woman to an uncircumcised man.

The incestuous relation reported in Genesis 35:22, at least on the basis
of the Masoretic signs, seems to be a textual corruption. It may be a
gloss in explanation of Genesis 49:4. It is serious because of its
implication of one of the sons of the prophet, but is a text purporting
to be the words of a human rather than a quotation from God. If the text
is accepted, then Genesis 49:4 would clearly state the behavior to be
unacceptable.

The levirate, or responsibility of the next of kin for the widow, is
instituted by holy example in Genesis 38:8-11. The responsibility
includes producing children in the name of the deceased. The story of
Tamar in Genesis 38:13-26 is another example of a misguided attempt to
obey the command to reproduce. Just as in the story of the daughters of
Lot, subterfuge on the part of Tamar leaves Judah guiltless of incest.
The action of Tamar only serves again to emphasize how the attempt to
obey God without taking divine guidance into consideration will
eventually lead astray.

Judah's behavior in this story must be examined. In verse twenty-six,
Judah recognizes his fault in not giving his third son Shelah to Tamar
as the law of levirate demanded. When Judah learns that the unknown
woman with whom he has contracted a marriage is his daughter-in-law, he
has no more marital relations with her. It appears that Judah
consistently applies marriage legislation except in denying Tamar to
Shelah, for this is the only fault he acknowledges. We must therefore
look for the legal basis of Judah's relations with Tamar.

Verses 16-18 describe the negotia­tions between Judah and Tamar. These
are ordinarily understood as the negotiations between a man and a
prostitute. If Judah thought that Tamar was a prostitute, which is not
certain, it does not imply that he did not marry her. We have already
seen from verse twenty-six that Judah does not acknowledge having made a
negotiation of prostitution. He condemns prostitution in his judgement
of Tamar.

We know also that Judah, as one of the twelve sons of Jacob, is a holy
example. We must therefore conclude that Judah was contracting a
marriage dowry. The sons of Tamar are therefore not illegitimate,
despite the fact that the marriage was terminated when Judah learned who
his wife was. The termination of the marriage is not described in
detail. We do not know if it was terminated by divorce, by shortening a
contract of concubinage, or by the lapse of the time of contract. This
is possibly an example of concu­binage, as it is not certain what kind
of contract Judah made with Tamar.

Legislation on marriage continues in Exodus 20:14, which is a part of
the decalogue and thus has more validity than any other passage, since
it was spoken directly by God without the mediation of a prophet. Exodus
20:14, reiter­ated in Deuteronomy 5:18, prohibits sexual activity
outside contracted marriage for married people.

The foundation of this command seems to be a concern with the right of
children to know with certainty the identity of both biological mother
and father. It thus implies the prohibition of adoption which distorts
such identity through hiding or changing the name. It also implies the
prohibition of artificial insemination by secret or anonymous donors.
The command reveals nothing about the permanence of marriage or the
number of marriage partners. The com­mand is reconfirmed in Leviticus
18:20.

Exodus 21:7-11 adds detailed legislation in explanation of marriage by
purchase instead of marriage by dowry. Verse seven states that marriage
by purchase may be contracted only through the father of the bride. This
prevents slave trade. Verse seven prohibits temporary marriage through
purchase. This prevents prostitution of daughters by fathers. Verse
eight permits divorce by redemption.

Divorce by selling the wife to another partner or trader is forbidden.
Only the father may redeem. Verse nine permits purchase of a wife to the
son of the purchaser, in which case the wife has the rights of a
daughter. Verses ten and eleven relate to the taking of another wife.
Power to take another wife by either purchase or dowry is on three
conditions: the first wife must retain her original level of food,
clothing and marital rights. Diminution of any of these three gives her
the right of free divorce, without obligation to return the redemption
money to her husband.

Exodus 21:22-25 refers to accidental injury to a pregnant woman by an
outside party. Injury resulting in miscarriage must be compensated
according to the demands of the husband and judges. Injury to the woman
must be pun­ished by the infliction of the same injury on the
perpetrator. \`An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth' relates to the
case of injury to a pregnant woman.

Exodus 22:16-17 refers to fornication, that is sexual activity between a
man and unmarried woman. In such a case, the man is obliged to endow the
woman as wife. He is obliged to give the full dowry of virgins, even if
the father of the woman refuses to give her to him in marriage.
Leviticus 18:6-20 lists the degrees of relationship prohibited for
marriage: father, mother, father's wife, sister being either daughter of
mother or father, son's daughter or daughter's daughter, father's
sister, mother's sister, father's brother, father's brother's wife,
son's wife, brother's wife, wife's daughter, wife's son's daughter,
wife's daughter's daughter, wife's sister simultaneously.

Leviticus 19:20-22 relates to sexual relations between a man and another
man's purchased wife. There is no death penalty for either: the woman
must be scourged and the man to give a trespass offering consisting of a
ram. Leviticus 19:29 prohibits prostituting one's daughter. Leviticus
20:10-12,14,17 provides penalties for certain sexual acts. Adultery, or
sexual activity between a man and the wife of another, demands the death
penalty for both parties. Sexual activity with one's father's wife or
one's daughter-in-law demands death for both parties. Marriage to a
woman and her daughter demands death by burning for all three parties.

Ostracism is the penalty for marrying sister or half-sis­ter. Leviticus
20:19-21 provide childlessness as the penalty for marrying father's or
mother's sister, uncle's wife, or brother's wife.

Leviticus 21:7,9,13-14 relates to the reproduction of Israelite priests,
descendants of Aaron. Verses 7, 13-14 require that the priest marry only
a virgin. Verse nine provides the penalty of burning to death with fire
for the daughter of a priest who engages in illicit sexual activity.

Numbers 5:11-31 provides for the case of adultery in which there is no
witness. The ritual curse identifies and in itself punishes the woman
who has committed adultery without witnesses to the crime.

Numbers twelve raises another point of holy example on the part of
Moses. Moses took a second wife beside Zipporah, who was a Midianite, a
descendant of Abraham and Keturah. His second wife was an Ethiopian.
Aaron and Miriam opposed the marriage, either out of misguided jealousy
for Zipporah, racism, or opposition to polygamy.

Racism and opposition to polygamy are charges too serious to level at
Aaron and Miriam without very strong evidence. Although most modern
Western minds balk at polygamy, this is merely a cultural prejudice. The
Bible supports polygamy through both direct command and holy example. In
the case of the levirate it may even be a duty.

There is no support for polyandry, however, probably because of the
concern for the right of children to know the identity of both
biological father as well as mother. Moses apparently married the
Ethiopian woman while Israel was camping at Hazeroth (Numbers 11:35). It
is possible that this marriage was one of concubinage, although there is
no other evi­dence for this than the intimation that it may have been
motivated by the desire for temporary pleasure rather than bearing
children.

Deuteronomy 7:3-4 prohibits marriages between believ­ers and
unbelievers, whether male or female. Deuteronomy 17:4-7 regulates the
death penalty for sexual crimes. The penalty is death by stoning. Two
men or one man and two women are needed as witnesses to invoke the death
penalty. The witnesses must be first in carrying out the execution.

Deuteronomy 17:17 prohibits multiple marriage for the king. This should
not mean that the king may not have the same privileges in marriage as
the commoner. What may be forbidden is the making of treaties with
foreign powers sealed by marriage. The problem still remains, however,
since by holy example Solomon did this extensively.

Deuteronomy 20:7 prohibits participation in war to the betrothed whose
marriage is not yet consummated. Deu­teronomy 21:10-14 regulates
marriage to a captive of war. Verses twelve and thirteen determine one
month of mourning, with head shaved and nails pared, before the
consummation of marriage. Divorce of the captive demands that she be
given freedom. A divorced captive may not be sold.

Deuteronomy 22:13-21 refers to accusation of non-vir­ginity at marriage.
If one claiming to be a virgin marries and is found not to be a virgin,
she is to be stoned. If her husband makes a false claim against her and
she produces the proof of her virginity, the husband must pay a hundred
pieces of silver to the father and relinquish the right of divorce.

Deuteronomy 22:22-27 reaffirms the death penalty for adultery for both
parties. The woman is not punished, however, if the crime happened in
the countryside where her cries for help could not be heard. Deuteronomy
22:28­29 refers to the case of rape of an unmarried woman. The man must
give a dowry of fifty pieces of silver, the dowry for virgins, and
relinquish the right of divorce. Deu­teronomy 22:30 reaffirms the
prohibition of marrying one's father's wife. Deuteronomy 23:17 reaffirms
the prohibition of prostitution.

Deuteronomy 24:1-4 regulates divorce. A man may divorce the wife by
giving a bill of divorcement. She is then free to marry another. The
former husband may not remarry her if she has been married after his
divorcing her.

Deuteronomy 24:5 provides that a man may not go out to war or be charged
with any business for one year after the consummation of marriage.

Deuteronomy 25:5-10 regulates the details of the levi­rate. If a man
dies childless, his next of kin is responsible to marry his wife and the
first-born is named as the heir of the one who has died without
children. Escape from this responsibility requires legal intervention.
The wife must testify to the refusal of the man to marry her before
witnesses, and if he maintains refusal, she must take off his shoe and
spit in his face.

At this point all of the legislation has been presented. There are of
course many holy examples in support of it. In 1 Samuel 1:10-11 Hanna by
holy example reaffirms supplication in case of barrenness. She clarifies
the legisla­tion by the use of a vow of the Nazirite for the hoped for
child, by which the hair should not be shaved.

In 2 Samuel 6:20-23, by holy example David punishes his wife Michal by
permanently withdrawing conjugal rights from her without divorcing her,
in punishment for disrespect to her husband. In 2 Samuel 11 we have the
holy example of David and its abrogation by the prophet Nathan in 2
Samuel 12.

The betrothed wife of Uriah was divorced by Uriah so that he could
participate as a hero in the wars, on the basis of Deuteronomy 20:7, or
the consummated marriage of Uriah to Bathsheba was forfeited by divorce
for the same reason on the basis of Deuteronomy 24:5. David contracted a
marriage with Bathsheba in the meantime. Knowing of the intent of Uriah
to remarry her after the war, there was disagreement between David and
Bathsheba on which of them should inform Uriah of the marriage. Neither
was willing to do so, and the situation led to David's willingness to
concede to Uriah's desire to be placed in a position where he could
attain military glory, hoping that his death would relieve them of the
necessity of revealing the new marriage to him.

Because of the ques­tionable motivation involved, this behavior was
struck out of holy example by revelation through the prophet Nathan. The
general use of this text for facile forgiveness of adultery and murder
is not a valid interpretation. Such interpretation would invalidate the
law, which provides the death sen­tence for both murder and adultery.
Nathan's words in 2 Samuel 12:9 should be viewed as hyperbole in
presenting the case to the king.

2 Samuel 13:13 suggests the possibility of marriage be­tween brother and
half-sister, in conflict with Leviticus 18:11. This may represent
ignorance on the part of Tamar, or more likely, the vain attempt to talk
her assailant out of rape.

Although marriage and relations outside marriage are dealt with in the
other prophetic writings, even in the case of Hosea no new holy example
or direct divine revelation appeared. The rest of the examples of
concubinage can be briefly mentioned.

In judges 8:31, we find that Gideon had a concubine by holy example, who
bore a son, Abimelech, who was the first king in Israel.

In 2 Samuel 5:13, by holy example David contracted concubinage as well
as normal marriage with many women. 2 Samuel 15:16 refers to ten women
who were David's concubines. The same group of women is mentioned in 2
Samuel 16:21-22 and 20:3. Another group of David's concubines is
mentioned in 2 Samuel 20:3. David's concu­bines are mentioned again in 1
Chronicles 3:9.

In 1 Kings 11:3, by holy example Solomon contracted marriage with seven
hundred women and concubinage with three hundred. The surprising number
of wives here is of course not normative. The Bible places no
restriction on the number of wives. The limitation of four wives is one
of the few new legislations of the Qur'an.

Two concubines are named in 1 Chronicles 2:46,48 with whom Caleb
contracted. Caleb is not specifically a holy example, but there is no
mention of his ever committing an act which was condemnable. On the
contrary, he is often mentioned for his courageous conduct in connection
with the successor of Moses, Joshua.

1 Chronicles 7:14 mentions a concubine of Manasseh, son of Joseph. Since
Jacob incorporated both of Joseph's sons into the twelve, Manasseh is
also a holy example.

In 2 Chronicles 11:21 there is mention of concubines for Rehoboam, son
of Solomon. Rehoboam, despite his political errors, can be counted as
one of the twelve good kings of judah and thus a holy example.

Song of Solomon 6:8-9 bears reference again to the holy example of
Solomon in contracting concubinage.

There are thus five or six holy examples of concubinage specifically
mentioned in the Bible as such. We shall now examine texts referring to
concubinage that cannot be taken as holy example, and texts referring to
holy example of marriage which may or may not be concubinage.

There is a long and tragic story about the concubine of a Levite in
judges nineteen. There is every reason to believe that this Levite was
devout, although he was not a holy example.

The concubine of King Saul is mentioned by name in 2 Samuel 3:7 and
again in 2 Kings 21:11. King Saul is not a holy example, for the kingdom
was taken from him for disobedience. David himself, however, continued
to treat him as the anointed and gave fealty to him until his death. He
can be assumed to have been generally devout.

Esther 2:14 refers to the concubines of King Ahasuerus. This king is not
a holy example.

At this point it may be pertinent to examine the distri­bution of cases
of concubinage. More than half of the individuals contracting
concubinage are holy examples whose exemplary lives were authoritative,
God-given revelation which the people of their times were required to
imitate. The others, with the exception of Ahasuerus, were devout
people, some of whom have no spot on their record.

There is no specific record in the Bible of any wicked personage
contracting concubinage. We can assume that at least the wicked kings
had concubines, but it is nowhere specifically stated that this is so.
In the Bible concubinage is mentioned only in connection with devout
living. An explanation of this may be that wicked people generally
resorted to prostitution rather than taking on the respon­sibility of
concubinage.

The Scriptures do not deal with length of contract in marriage. Marriage
as generally described in the Bible shows evidence of being permanent,
although permanence of marriage is never legislated. Many of the cases
of concu­binage we do find appear to be of rather long term. Exodus 21:7
directly states that marriage by purchase must be permanent. This is an
obvious deterrent to prostitution. The inference is that other forms of
contract exist.

Concubinage and polygamy both fell out of use some­time after the return
from captivity and during the rise of rabbinicism. As concubinage fell
into disuse among the Jews, problems arose. Although there is evidence
of prostitution existing alongside marriage and concubinage, the
incidence of prostitution may have increased with the decrease in
polygamy and concubinage.

The parts of the Gospel relating to the period before Jesus' ministry
reaffirm the validity of the law on marriage. Joseph contemplates
divorcing Mary because of her pregnancy before the consummation of the
marriage (Matthew 1:19). This is in consistent harmony with the law.
John the Baptist suffered imprisonment and finally execution because he
was so severe in maintaining the law against marrying the brother's wife
(Mark 6:17).

There is no direct divine legislation in the Gospel. With only one or
two possible exceptions, the whole body of the text is clearly the
witness of others than God. It is also from the point of view of the
hierarchy of order subordinate to the Hebrew Scriptures. Since Jesus
combined the offices of prophet and divine guide, his words can be taken
with the force of holy example or prophetic authority. His acts can be
taken with the force of holy example. His words and acts may therefore
abrogate earlier holy example, but can only reaffirm, clarify, or apply
direct divine revelation.

The contextual concern of the primary commandment itself is no longer in
evidence at this point. There is no need to populate the earth, which
has already achieved an adequate population. The emphasis moves away
from reproduction to evangelism. Rather than giving birth to more
believers, the focus moves to the new birth. The primary command ought
then to be reinterpreted to include evangelization. The bridge to this
is already seen in the blessings on the seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
found in Genesis, by which all nations share in the faith of God. The
gospel commission of Matthew 28:18-20 should therefore be seen as the
culmination of the first command of the Bible, the command to reproduce.

Nevertheless, the Gospel sheds some light on marital relations and the
moral duties relating to them. Matthew 5:31-32 (Luke 16:18) quotes
Deuteronomy 24:1 in regard to the bill of divorce. This is expanded in
the discussion of Matthew 19:1-12; (Mark 10:1-12). The story in Matthew
22:23-33 (Mark 12:18-27; Luke 20:27-38) does not refer to marriage
directly, but to the resurrection.

This text is generally interpreted to mean that Jesus abrogated the law
of divorce for all cases except that of adultery, in which case divorce
is permitted. There are two serious problems with this interpretation.
The first problem is that Jesus does not have the authority to abrogate
the law. He only has author­ity to reaffirm, clarify and apply it to new
or specific situations. The law permits divorce, and even if divorce was
given because of the specific situation of the hardness of hearts, Jesus
could reapply it only in the specific situation that hardness of heart
no longer existed.

The second problem is that the penalty for adultery is death. There is
no use in providing for divorce in the case of adultery, because divorce
can only be applied to a living person. Only a living person can be a
recipient of the bill of divorce. But the direct result of adultery,
that is the death sentence, must take place before a new issue can be
raised. Even if the sentence could be postponed, what sense is there in
divorcing someone only to execute them?

This problem disappears when the term*\`porneia',* translated
fornication, is rather applied to the list of prohibited marriages in
Leviticus 18:6-20. Divorce would thus be considered appropriate only in
the rare case when the marriage at some point was found to be illegal
because of a degree of kinship that had gone unnoticed earlier.

If we take Luke 16:18 to be the pure legislation, and the exception in
Matthew to be the misguided clarification of a later hand, we are left
with an unconditional prohibition of divorce. This is easier to deal
with. Without abrogating the general law of divorce, Jesus could make
the application of divorce in a specific situation unlawful. The text
gives no indication of what that situation might be. We must either
assume that the application is specific and limited or, on the basis of
the ordered hierarchy of textual values, reject the text altogether.

If there is no indication in the text of what specific situation the
prohibition of divorce applies to, we must look for such a situation
first in the practice of the society of Jesus, if possible, and then in
later societies in the same area. We do not have information on the
practice of Jesus' time, but we do find examples in the area. The law of
divorce is used in the Middle East as an alternative to prostitution.
That is, marriages are contracted with the intention of divorce after
even so short a term as hours. We may safely assume that Jesus is
referring to this practice.

The legislation of Matthew 5:31-32 and Luke 16:18 is of the validity of
holy example, since it consists of the words of a prophet and divine
guide. It clarifies the valid applica­tion to cases in which the
hardness of the hearts of a married couple contribute to their inability
to live together. It clarifies that marriage with the intention of
immediate divorce as an alternative to prostitution results in adultery
and is therefore an invalid use of the law of divorce.

Besides the increase of prostitution as such, we are justi­fied in
assuming that the present-day practice of marriage with intent to
divorce began to appear in first century Judaism, the time and place to
which the Gospels refer. This alternative to prostitution is prevalent
today in the Middle East and must have been known at the time of Jesus.
It is in this context that we should read the Gospel injunctions against
divorce.

We can safely assume that Jesus' treatment of marriage with the intent
to divorce forms a part of Jesus' legal reform. Jesus rejects rabbinical
method as an application of the law. Marriage with intent to divorce is
precisely the kind of circumvention that rabbini­cal method allows.
Jesus, by contrast, relies on holy example in his application of the
law, and sets himself up as such an example.

We do not know the specific application of holy example that Jesus made
in regard to concubinage either in his own person or in regard to the
holy example of earlier Scripture. In the Gospels as preserved to us, he
never discusses the issue of the decrease in polygamy and concubinage.
He only condemns what came to replace them, that is, mar­riage with
intent to divorce. The general assumption that Jesus himself was
unmarried has only the textual founda­tion that no wife is specifically
mentioned. It is based on prejudices arising from later Christian ideals
of monasti­cism.

Considering Jesus' age and the mores of his time, we could more safely
assume that he had one wife. That would be a consistent, modern Jewish
assumption. Considering Jesus' authoritative application of the law in
contrast to rabbinical method, we could even more safely assume that he
could have had more than one wife and concubine. These wives and
concubines could be among those men­tioned in such texts as Luke 23:55:
\`And the women also, which came with him from Galilee, followed after,
and beheld the sepulchre, and how his body was laid.'

The collection of letters appearing after the Gospels, coming where they
do, have the least authority of all Scripture. They do not contain the
quoted words of God, but rather, human witnesses. At this point, there
is little that can be done but reaffirmation of what has gone on before
and limited application to some new situations. We do not have a right
to interpret the letters in conflict with the earlier Scripture. The
Pauline conflict with the \`law' should not be seen as a conflict with
Scripture, but with the configuration of rabbinical method for
interpreting and implementing it.

1 Corinthians 5:1 reaffirms the law against marrying one's father's wife
(Leviticus 18:8 and Deuteronomy 22:30). Verses 9-13 gives as punishment
that the believers should shun the offender altogether. This is in
reference to the fact that the believers are living under an ungodly
government and are therefore restrained from carrying out the penalties
of the law. Chapter six points out the fact that the congre­gation of
believers is lawfully responsible to govern by the law, but is prevented
from doing so by an ungodly govern­ment which must be taken into
practical consideration. Appeal to the authority of such government is
forbidden.

1 Corinthians 7 is a continuation of the Pauline applica­tion of the law
to the Corinthian church of his day. Verse one states what seems to be a
celibate ideal. This should be qualified by several factors. First, as
already mentioned, the necessity of replenishing the earth has become a
secondary concern, properly supplemented by evangelization. Second, the
unstable times were not conducive to family life (1 Corinthians
7:26,29). This factor appears in Jesus' warning in Matthew 24:19, \`woe
to them that give suck in those days'. The Pauline letters, inspired and
inspiring as they may be, are written under the prevailing conception of
the time. There was an immediate expectation of the second coming of
Christ, the tribulation and the end of the world.

Under these conditions, Paul's ideal of celibacy takes on another
flavour. He himself points out that this is a clerical verdict and not a
divine one in 1 Corinthians 7:6.

With these qualifications, Paul gives specific instruction on how to
maintain celibacy and still maintain the demands of the law on marriage
and chastity. Marriage overrides celibacy if it conflicts in practice
with the law, \`for it is better to marry than to burn (with passion)'.
1 Corinthians 7:9. Every effort to avoid divorce is to be made, but
divorce is not absolutely forbidden (1 Corinthians 7:15). There is
nothing in the text which seems to conflict with the law.

The following applications of the law are mentioned specifically in 1
Corinthians 7: mutual benevolence be­tween husband and wife, conjugal
relations are the duty of both husband and wife, mutual consent to
abstain from conjugal relations in order to fast and pray must be
tempo­rary, avoid divorce, permit divorce of an unbeliever from a
believer, permit remarriage of the widow.

2 Corinthians 2 may reflect the result of the rebuke of a man marrying
his father's wife. Paul's advice was to \`leave him to Satan' and to
shun him completely. Apparently the man repented and separated from the
illicit union. There was then argument in the congregation about how to
relate to the man. Paul clarifies a reinstatement and forgiveness as
being his position (2 Corinthians 2:6-11). Leviticus 20:11 provides the
death sentence for this case. Paul's verdict thus contradicts the law.
At this point in history there was a long tradition of Jewish courts.
The rabbinical method had already come into its own.

The death sentence in practice was not applied even in the Jewish
community. Paul's reversal of verdict from shunning to forgiveness is
not only in the context of the man's repentance. It is in the context of
the fact that the law does not provide shunning as a punishment for this
particular sin, but rather the death sentence. The law does not provide
for the substitution of one sentence for an­other. Therefore Paul's
changed verdict has as much validity as the first one.

In Galatians 5:19 there is a condemnation of adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, and lasciviousness.

Ephesians 5:22-33 gives some principles on relations between husbands
and wives. Paul appeals for the best of behavior between husband and
wife, but bases it on the wife's submission to the husband and the
husband's love for the wife. The social equality between husband and
dowered wife is unquestioned in the Hebrew Scriptures. The Pauline
attitude may show the influence of a chauvin­istic society or a cultural
drift toward the subordination of women, although his verdict is
unimpeachable. The same chauvinistic foundation appears in Colossians
3:18-19.

Adherence to the law regarding sexual behavior is emphasized in 1
Thessalonians 4:3,5,7. In 1 Timothy 3:2 Paul gives qualifications for an
overseer in the congregation, saying he should be the husband of one
wife. The same point is made for deacons in verse twelve. This is
some­times understood to imply that more than one wife in succession is
meant. If this were the case, however, not only divorce would be
prohibited, but also the remarriage of widowers. Although the Jewish
practice of monogamy was well established at the time, this was not true
for the Greek population. Paul here states that the overseer and deacon
must be monogamous. The other side of the coin is that monogamy for the
ordinary member of the congregation is not enjoined.

In 1 Timothy 4:3, Paul condemns those who forbid to marry. In 5:14 he
encourages younger women to marry and bear children. 1 Peter 3:1ff
agrees with the Pauline verdicts, even to the point of chauvinism,
enjoining the submission of wives and the love of husbands.

At this point it is possible to make a general evaluation of the
Biblical texts from the point of view of Islamic law. I shall make only
some brief remarks on salient features here, not least of all because
Islamic law appears in four Sunnite schools of jurisprudence and a
multitude of Shi'ite varia­tions. It can be noted first of all that the
general point of view of the Biblical legislation is much in the same
spirit as that of Islam. Since the Islamic legislation itself is not in
agreement on all details, one can hardly find complete consistency
between it and the Bible legislation.

All Islamic schools differ from the Bible in two points. They all limit
the number of wives to four, whereas the Bible places no limit on the
number of wives. 1 Timothy 3:2,12 cannot be construed as a general limit
for two reasons. It is in reference to a specific class of specialized
people, and it comes at such a low level of order and validity that it
cannot even be taken as legislation at all.

The other point of difference is a configuration of laws surrounding the
brother's wife. Islam permits marriage to the brother's wife (on the
death of the brother or in the event of divorce). The Bible does not
permit it in general, but in the case of a childless widow commands it.
The levirate is also probably associated to the law forbidding travel
for war or business during the first year of marriage and during the
engagement. This law probably stands in view of reducing the necessity
of implementing the levirate.

Although there is no direct legislation on the subject, concubinage is
attested by the holy example of Abraham, David and Solomon, among
others. Islam generally does not recognize concubinage after the time of
the Caliph Omar, although it is accepted by some jurisprudents. The
general Sunnite practice is to accept a marriage contract as valid even
when it is contracted with the intention of divorce. This alternative to
prostitution appears to have been severely condemned by Jesus. Jesus'
attitude may suggest acceptance of concubinage, however.

There are some slight differences in the Bible and Is­lamic legislations
on punishment for sexual crimes, but in the main they are similar.
Burning, for example, is un­known as a punishment in Islamic law, except
for the active partner in homosexual anal coitus. The same can be said
for the similarity between incest laws. The Bible and Islam agree on the
number of witnesses for a contract: two males or one male and two
females, that is, two or three. But Islam requires four witnesses for
adultery, and there is no provision in Islam, as there is in the Bible,
for unwitnessed adultery.

In summary, an examination of the whole Bible suggests the following.
Concubinage, or limited marriage for pleasure, is mentioned in the Bible
in regard to about ten men. It is mentioned, however, in such a way as
to indicate that it was a well-known and widespread practice. Its
characteristics are therefore not described in detail. There is
mentioned only the fact that children of concubinage do not inherit with
a man's other children. The Bible does not legislate anything about the
time period of marriage, except that marriage by purchase must be
permanent. Every example of concubinage in the Bible relates to a devout
personage, and more than half of them relate to men whose holy example
had to be followed by the people of their times.

The decrease of concubinage and polygamy among the Jews led to an
increase in prostitution, and its alternative, marriage with intent to
divorce. The most consistent interpretation of Jesus' opposition to
divorce points to this specific practice. The Gospel thus reverts back
to the holy example of the earlier Scriptures.

In sum, it appears that in general the Bible accepts po­lygamy while
maintaining monogamy as an ideal. It accepts divorce with reluctance. It
also accepts concubinage, or limited marriage. It punishes adultery,
prostitution and to some extent premarital relations. It differs from
Islam mainly in the practice of the levirate and in placing no
restriction on the number of wives.

There are some differences in penalties as well: for example burning in
the Bible is the penalty for contracting a marriage with a mother and
daughter, whereas in Islam the penalty of burning is reserved only for
the active partner in homosex­ual coitus. Unlike Christianity, both the
Bible and Islam, not to mention Judaism, conceive of marriage as a
contract between two persons, not as a sacrament.

In the end, we do well to remember Jesus' example of Scriptural
interpretation. He states that the beginning is the ideal: one wife, no
divorce. All of the legislation after that has taken the hardness of
human hearts into consideration. We should all strive for the ideal, and
that ideal is the same in all three faiths. Considering that divorce and
multiple marriage of some kind are practiced in Islam with less
frequency in general than in Western societies, we are justified in
believing that Muslims make a true effort to maintain both the
legislations of Islam and the ideal of monogamy without divorce.


