Negative Considerations
=======================

An examination of the Christian scriptures from an Islamic point of view
has, as a side issue, thrown grave doubts on the Biblical roots of such
Christian doctrines as the Trinity, the deity of Jesus, and his death on
the cross as an atoning, vicarious sacrifice for sin. At this point I
shall try to do the same for Islam.

Are there portions of the Bible which conflict with the teachings and
practices of Islam?

It is clear by now that the basic teachings of Islam can be justified on
the basis of the Bible as easily as the doctrines of Christian­ity,
perhaps more easily and convincingly. But there may be Biblical texts
which conflict with the texts we have exam­ined and thus with Islam as
well. Furthermore, there may be Biblical practices which are unknown to
Islam. Finally, there may be Islamic practices we have not mentioned
which conflict with the Bible. Let us take up these three subjects in
order.

The foremost body of texts causing problems for the Muslim reader are
those referring to the crucifixion of Jesus. Islam denies the death of
Jesus because it cannot accept any human sacrifice for sin. The Islamic
understand­ing of forgiveness is that it is made on the basis of divine
grace and repentance. No sacrifice can add to divine grace nor replace
the necessity of repentance. The Muslim sees the sacrifice of Jesus on
the cross to detract both from infinite divine grace and human
responsibility in repen­tance.

Rather than dealing with the issue directly, there has been a tendency
in Islam to deny the death of Jesus out­ right, and thus avoid the issue
altogether. There can hardly be a sacrifice on the cross if Jesus never
died. There are two explanations in Islam.

The majority explanation, taken from the Gospel of Barnabas, is that
there was a substitute on the cross, who miraculously seemed to take on
the appearance of Jesus. The minority explanation is the so-called swoon
theory, by which Jesus was on the cross, but did not die. He merely
swooned and revived in the tomb. In general Muslims do not deny the
ascension or the second coming of Jesus at the end of the world. They
differ from Chris­tians, however, in making his activities at that
future time somewhat subordinate to the awaited Islamic figure of the
Mahdi. Many Muslims believe that the main reason for Jesus' second
coming is so that he will have a chance to die as all men must.

It is almost undeniable that the New Testament teaches the death and
resurrection of Jesus. A case has been made for the swoon theory, but it
has to presume that the disciples and gospel writers were then ignorant
of the true facts.

There are several references to the death or removal of Jesus in the
Qur'an, but all are subject to various interpre­tations. Q3:54 \`Recall
when God said: O Jesus, I will take thee away and lift thee up unto
Me...' The margin reads \`complete thy term'. It is not at all clear
what the Qur'an means to have happened to Jesus at the end of his life
on earth and before his resurrection. Q4:157 \`And for their saying (in
boast) "Verily we have slain the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, the
Apostle of God;" But they slew him not, and they crucified him not, but
(it) became dubious unto them; and indeed those who differ therein are
only in doubt about it, they have no knowledge about the (real) matter,
pursuing (only) a conjecture; and certainly, they slew him not.' In
Q19:33 Jesus is said to have prophesied of himself miraculously in the
cradle, \`And peace be on me the day I was born, and the day I die, and
the day I am raised alive.'

The Christian will immediately see Jesus' words about his birth, death,
and ascension as completely in accordance with the Gospel birth,
crucifixion, resurrection and ascen­sion, and wonder why the Muslim
interprets them in terms of a disappearance without death and a return
to die some millennia later.

The text on the crucifixion is generally interpreted to deny the death
of Jesus, rather than to deny that it was the boasting Jews who killed
him. Either interpretation is possible, and both have problems. The
context of the verse is clearly within the discussion of Jewish ridicule
of Christians, not in context of whether or not Jesus died.

On the other hand, the expressions against the crucifixion are strong,
so that to interpret the meaning for Romans rather than Jews to have
committed the act is also suspect. If the latter meaning is correct, it
would have been more effective to state that the Romans killed Jesus,
rather than to emphasize that the Jews were not in possession of the
facts. If the interpreter desires to reconcile the Qur'an and the Gospel
narrative however, the only way of doing so is to under­stand that the
Qur'anic text refers to the Romans having killed Jesus instead of the
Jews.

Most Muslims will certainly prefer to keep their belief that Jesus was
not crucified, and consider the Bible cor­rupted on that point. For
those desiring to meet Christians on a more congenial footing, another
interpretation is possible.

A more difficult problem for Muslims is the Bible prac­tice of
describing God in anthropomorphic terms. The Hebrew Scriptures are
especially filled with such passages and the translations into Arabic do
nothing to mitigate the problem. Muslims reading the Arabic Bible thus
get a stronger impression of anthropomorphism than is found in the
Hebrew.

An example is Genesis 6:6. \`And it repented the Lord that he had made
man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart.' The Christian will
likely feel comforted by the idea of God grieving for humankind. The
Muslim will focus on the problem of God regretting having made man. The
Muslim will note that the text does not take divine foreknowledge into
consideration, nor God's unchange­ability. Some Muslims might also be
offended by attribution of grief to God.

Another example is Exodus 31:17. \`It is a sign between me and the
children of Israel for ever: for in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.' The
Qur'anic references to the same event speak not of resting on the
seventh day, but of ascending the throne. The Muslim finds the idea of
God needing rest in the first place offensive, and to add to this that
God was \`refreshed' is outright repulsive. The Chris­tian, on the other
hand, may find such expressions comforting in bringing God closer to
human experience.

It is likely that both Muslims and Christians do the text an injustice
by judging it from criteria foreign to it. The ancient Hebrew language
is extremely poor in expressions indicating the distinction between
concrete and abstract. Thus words are used in Hebrew with both an
abstract and concrete meaning.

By contrast, the Arabic language is very precise in making such
distinctions. It is easy to miscon­strue the Hebrew meaning of words by
giving them concrete connotations where such did not exist at the time
of writing. Thus both Muslims and Christians should adjust their
thinking. Christians should realize that the Hebrew text is more foreign
to their thinking than they presume in drawing anthropomorphic
conclusions.

Muslims should realize that the Hebrew does not have the precision of
the Arabic and expresses the same concepts of God as they are acquainted
with in language as appropriate to them as the ancient Hebrew allows. It
may be unfortu­nate that abstract thought was not so well expressed in
ancient Hebrew as it was in medieval Arabic, but that is a fact that has
to be accepted. Muslims have the advantage over Christians in that the
Qur'an can prevent errors of misunderstanding the Hebrew text.

Christians must face not only the linguistic and cultural differences of
the text, but overcome centuries of prejudice in favor of non­ Biblical
doctrines, such as the Trinity, the deity of Jesus, and the vicarious
sacrifice of Jesus in atonement for sin.

Besides what seems to be anthropomorphic descriptions of God in the
Bible, Muslims often face difficulty with narratives of the prophets.
Bible stories often tell events offensive to Muslims especially
regarding sin on the part of prophets. Although some of these can be
understood as translation problems, there remains a residue of truly
difficult passages.

In the chapter on marriage it was noted that the story of David and
Bathsheba can be interpreted more to David's favor by merely translating
the word \`wife' as \`betrothed wife'. With that, the accusations of
both murder and adultery fall, and David remains with a lesser fault. In
the same chapter Judah's behavior with Tamar was seen to relieve him of
charges of prostitution by the application of a marriage contract.

Among the residue of truly difficult passages there are the stories of
Noah and Lot. In Genesis 9:20-29, Noah runs into trouble for being
drunk. Even if we go so far as to say that the intoxication was
unintentional, the Muslim will always note that a prophet should be
protected from such involvements. The story of Lot and his two daughters
goes beyond mere drunkenness to incest. Although the text makes it clear
that Lot is not responsible, the story remains a sordid narrative from
the Islamic viewpoint.

Islamic explanations of these texts generally turn on the issue of Bible
corruption. The Muslim will see these texts as malicious additions to
the Bible. Many Christians have become accustomed to historical
criticism and do not find this a problem. Muslims may consider
corruption of one passage to defile the whole.

Such stories seem to have no other explanation but cor­ruption of the
text, a cultural source no longer understandable, or an allegorical
interpretation. None of these is very convincing. At this point it might
be useful for Muslims to learn a new attitude from Christians. It is
possible to relate to a mutilated text in terms of its useful­ness.

Muslims relate to the Qur'an in a way incomprehensible to Christians,
some of whom see the Bible as hardly more than a historical witness of
question­able reliability. It would be possible for Muslims to see the
Bible as an imperfect witness of truth that is perfectly expressed in
the Qur'an. Even if we possessed the earlier books in their original and
uncorrupted form, if they had been perfect, what need would there have
been for the Qur'an?

The story of Lot brings us to another problem with the Bible text, the
problem of pornographic description. Much of the problem here lies in
Muslim prudery which defines pornography in different terms than those
used when the Bible was written. Muslims are able to discuss legal
matters in detail. It is the matter of narrative which is offensive.

This problem could be largely offset in Muslim eyes if Muslims
understood that narrative has a different function in the Bible than it
does in the Qur'an. There is very little narrative in the Qur'an, while
much of the Bible is narra­tive in nature. Bible narrative is
legislatively purposeful even when it is not directly stated to be so.
What is considered by Muslims to be pornographic narrative can generally
be classed in one of two categories.

The first is legislative condemnation of such acts by implication. The
second type is prophetic denouncement using pornographic figures.
Prostitution is one of the most common Biblical figures for idolatry. It
is not a great leap for Muslim sensibilities to realize that sexual
unfaithfulness is an apt figure for the atrocious character of shirk,
that is, association of false gods with God.

The final textual problem of the Bible is that of alcohol. Muslims
generally believe that the prohibition of alcohol came only at the time
of the Qur'anic revelation. They do believe, however, that none of the
early prophets used alcohol. Most Muslims see the Qur'an as giving a
progres­sive and ever more strict prohibition of alcohol. Some even deny
that alcohol is actually prohibited in the Qur'an. The Bible is even
more ambiguous on this point.

There are Biblical texts condoning wine for medicinal purposes, most
notably 1 Timothy 5:23. \`Drink no longer water, but use a little wine
for thy stomach's sake and thine often infirmities.' But the Biblical
approach to alcohol does not end there. There are some Christians who
maintain that the Bible condemns the non-medicinal use of alcohol
completely, and it is certainly true that the Bible consis­tently
condemns drunkenness. From the historical critical point of view, one of
the earliest Biblical texts condemns drunkenness (1 Samuel 1:14). So
there is a clear limitation on alcohol from the earliest times.

One of the best-known of Biblical condemnations of drunkenness is
Proverbs 20:1. \`wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever
is deceived thereby is not wise.'

But it is one of the Torah texts that causes the most problems,
Deuteronomy 14:26. And thou shalt bestow that money for whatsoever thy
soul lusteth after, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for strong
drink, or for whatso­ever thy soul desireth: and thou shalt eat there
before the Lord thy God, and thou shalt rejoice, thou, and thine
household.' There is not a problem with the word wine, which does not
differentiate between fermented and unfermented.

Thus all of the texts speaking positively about wine in both the Hebrew
and Greek Scriptures may be interpreted as referring to unfermented
wine. The word *\`sheker'*or strong drink is another matter, and it is
easily recognized by the Muslim who knows the Qur'anic language as well.
It is inescapably alcoholic and intoxicating. The problem is magnified
by the fact that it is described here as appropriate to the worship
activities of the pilgrim­age itself.

Of the Biblical practices unknown to Islam, we have already mentioned
the levirate. Most Biblical practices seemingly unknown to Islam are
contained within the priestly ministrations of the ancient Hebrew temple
service. Besides those there are the annual festivals described in the
Torah, and the weekly Sabbath.

Of these practices, rabbinical Judaism follows in some sense all but the
priestly, temple services. The rationale for not following these is that
the temple was destroyed in the seventh decade of the first century AD,
so there are no longer the requisite facilities for doing so. Apparently
the only priestly function preserved in modem Judaism is the receipt of
the redemption money for the first-born.

Of these practices, Christianity in general follows almost none. There
are only quaint exceptions, such as the Lutheran requisite that a priest
in the church not be disabled according to the priestly descriptions in
the Torah. There are some exceptions as well on the peripheries of
Christianity, such as the animal sacrifices of the Armenian Christians,
and the Sabbath-observance of the Ethiopian Coptic Christians and some
others.

The Christian rationale for neglecting these is that the law came to an
end in the Messiah and is no longer valid. As I have pointed out, this
is an inconsistent rationale, since Christians apparently continued to
participate in the temple sacrifices for a generation after the death of
Jesus which was supposed to put them to an end. Christians generally
place all of these features, temple worship, annual festivals, and the
weekly Sabbath into the one category of ceremonial law which was a
shadow of things to come, that is, of Jesus the Messiah.

Temple practice seems to have contained the possibility for change.
There is certainly a striking difference between the temple service
described in Leviticus and that described in the last chapters of
Ezekiel. There are also essential differences between Leviticus and
Deuteronomy.

It is very likely that these differences reflect differences from one
time period to another, differences in practice from one place to
another at the same time, and differences based on the verdicts of
different divinely appointed representatives at different times. Thus
the Biblical revelation can be considered to represent a variety of
temple practices without necessarily being inconsistent.

Such variation in practice can be seen for the annual festivals as well.
The list in Numbers twenty-eight and twenty-nine does not mention the
specific pilgrimage festival at all, while Deuteronomy twelve seems to
focus entirely upon it. The structure of the Psalms includes all of
them. Christianity has rejected all of them on the basis of a symbolic
interpretation, and replaced them with extra­biblical festivals
originating in the local religions of Europe, North Africa and the
Middle East. Judaism follows the sequence in Numbers, neglects the
pilgrimage, and adds some festivals from a post-Biblical period.

Although Islam cannot be seen to follow temple proce­dures and annual
festivals exactly, it can be seen to be well within the same field of
variation and viewpoint. An emphasis of the Deuteronomic pilgrimage to
the detriment of some of the festivals of Numbers twenty-eight and
twenty-nine is certainly as justifiable as the Jewish practice, which
neglects the pilgrimage festival.

Among the Biblical festivals only one is not represented in some way in
Islamic practice, and that is the festival of Tabernacles or Succoth.
Otherwise, Ramadhan corresponds in time and spirit with Pentecost,
Muharrem with the feast of trumpets and the day of atonement, and the
widespread practice of fasting in the seventh month with Passover. The
differences in observance are largely within the variation already noted
for the Bible itself.

The Sabbath is another problem. Historically, the three great traditions
of Islam, Christianity and Judaism have had their representative days,
Jumu'a (Friday), Sabbath, and Sunday. A careful examination of the Bible
text reveals the most astounding fact. All three traditions depart from
the Bible and perhaps even the Qur'an in their practice. The Bible and
possibly the Qur'an supports the marking of two days of the week with
special regard, Friday and Sabbath or Saturday. There is little evidence
for any Sunday obser­vance in the Bible at all, and what there is
depends heavily on the weight of post-Biblical centuries of practice to
give it any force.

It might be best to look at some detail in this matter since both
Muslims and Christians will be justifiably skeptical of my conclusions.
The Bible begins with the creation story in Genesis 1:1-2:3. The
structure of the story suggests that one of its major functions is the
justification of the week. The seven days of creation are each given
their own character by the things purported to have been created on
them, but the sixth and seventh day are especially marked. The sixth day
is said to be the day on which human beings were created, blessed, given
the power to reproduce, given dominion, and the right to food. The
seventh day is also set apart from all others by the fact that it was
the only day that was blessed by God.

The same configuration of a special blessing on the Sab­bath day,
preceded by a special blessing on humankind on the preceding day
continues throughout the Bible. Note, for example, Exodus sixteen, in
which the days of the week are again divided into three groups. There
are the days on which manna comes in the morning, is sufficient for that
one day, and spoils if kept over. These are the first to fifth days of
the week, Sunday to Thursday. On Friday a double portion of manna comes,
and this manna can be kept over without spoiling. On Saturday or the
Sabbath no manna comes and the blessing of Friday feeds the population,
thus showing all to be dependent on God.

Most of the Sabbath regulations in the Torah reflect this concern of
providing a double portion of food on Friday, and avoiding food-getting
or preparing activities on the Sabbath. The other writings expand on
this to some extent, but add little of a new nature. Everything relates
to the Friday blessing of food and the Sabbath enjoyment of that double
portion and avoidance of food-getting on that day. The thrust of the
cycle thus focuses on human dependence on God for sustenance and
represents it literally and specifically in the Friday and Sabbath
experience.

The Sabbath is mentioned in the Qur'an several times. Q2:65,66 \`And
indeed ye know of those amongst you who transgressed on the Sabbath, so
We said unto them, "Be ye apes, despised and spurned!" So We made it a
lesson for (those of) their own times and for those (of their posterity)
who came after them and an exhortation unto those who guard (themselves)
against evil.' This text is said to be in reference to an event during
the time of David when people set traps for fish before the Sabbath and
came at the end of the Sabbath to gather the catch. They were punished
for this attempt at circumventing the Sabbath by being turned into apes.
See Q5:60.

The story is given more extensively in Q7:163 \`And ask them about the
town which was beside the sea; when they did exceed (the limits) in the
Sabbath when their fish did come unto them on the day of their Sabbath,
appearing on the surface of the water; and on the day they observed not
the Sabbath, they (the fish) did not come unto them; Thus did We try
them for they were transgressing.'

In Q4:47 \`O ye whom the Scripture hath been given! believe in what We
have sent down confirming what is (already) with you, ere We change
their faces (features) and turn them towards their backs, or as We
cursed the people of the Sabbath; (know ye, that) the Command of God is
ever executed.' Further, Q4:154 \`And we lifted up the Mountain over
them at their covenant and said We unto them "Enter the door
prostrating" and said We unto them "Exceed not (Our limits) in the
Sabbath (day)" and We took from them a firm Covenant.' Ali (1988:425)
gives the marginal note for this verse.

\`Some may argue about the importance of the "Sabbath" while days are
God's. The answer is the same as would be given about the importance
attached to the *"Qiblah"* while in all directions is God's - It is only
a Test.' In this Ali does not recognize the symbolic value of the
Friday-Sabbath configuration as representing the sustaining power of
God. He only sees it as a test, like the *Qiblah* or direction of
prayer. No doubt he is right in this, and for this he has the direct
witness of the Qur'an in 7:163. But the *Qiblah* has been changed from
time to time, whereas the Friday-Sabbath configuration has not. His
remark seems to indicate that some Muslims argue for the importance of
the Sabbath, whereas he disagrees with them.

In Q16:124 \`Verily the (punishment of) the Sabbath was ordained only
for those who differed about it; and verily thy Lord will judge between
them on the Day of Judgement in what they used to differ about.' This
text was probably addressed to the Jewish practice of Sabbath
observance. The Jews recognize the death sentence of the Bible on
Sabbath-breaking, and yet fail to carry it out. The Qur'an relegates the
punishment for Sabbath-breaking to the Day of judgement, and furthermore
only on those who differ about the Sabbath, or deny its validity. The
Qur'an thus draws together the loose ends of Bible legislation.

The Friday-Sabbath configuration is best described in the Qur'an in
Q62:9-11 \`O ye who believe! when the call is made for prayer on Friday,
then hasten ye (all) unto the remembrance of God and leave off (all)
trading, that is better for you, if ye do know! And when the Prayer is
ended then disperse ye in the earth and seek ye of the grace of God, and
remember ye God much, so that ye may be successful. And when see they
merchandise or sport, they break away unto it, and leave thee standing.
Say thou "What is with God is better than sport and (better) than
merchan­dise, and God is the Best of sustainers."'

The matter of Friday prayer is clear, as well as the fact that Friday
itself is not a sabbath or day of rest, since trading continues up to
the call for noon (*dhohr*) prayer. After the time of noon prayer, which
according to Ali (1988:105a) is \`from the time the sun passes the
meridian up till a little before the sunset', it is appropriate to seek
the grace of God, remember God much, and avoid merchandise and sport.
These four practices foster the realization that \`God is the Best of
sustainers.' The Qur'anic understanding of the Friday-Sabbath
configuration thus appears to be very much in accordance with the Bible
understanding before it.

Since the Qur'an relegates punishment for Sabbath­ breaking to the Day
of judgement, and since there is no provision for recuperating Sabbaths
missed, as with the Passover in the Bible or prayer and fasting in
Islam, it is only natural that the details of Sabbath-observance have no
place in Islamic *Fiqh* or jurisprudence. The lack of provision for
recuperating missed Sabbaths means not only that no recuperation is
possible, but only aspects of the Sabbath which cannot under any
circumstances be missed can be declared *wajib* or obligatory. Only the
*niyat* or intention itself could fall in that category, since
everything else could be legitimately overridden. It is thus *mustahab.*

Yet there is evidence of more extensive observance of the Sabbath in
Islam in earlier times than seems presently followed. According to
Islamic *hadith,* not only the prophet but all four rightly guided
caliphs followed the practice of two units *duha* prayer on Sabbath
mornings in the Quba mosque in Medina, and not on other mornings. An
examination of the extensive *hadith* literature would reveal a number
of other traits as well, such as Sabbath avoidance of marriage and
burial if possible, because of the belief that what one does on the
Sabbath will be repeated. If the Sabbath is unknown in Islam, it is
mainly for not knowing Islamic traditions themselves. As Ali notes,
there is some disagreement among Islamic scholars about how important
such injunctions are, but no one denies that they exist.

It is finally time to ask whether there are Islamic beliefs and
practices which conflict with the Bible. We have already noted that the
belief that Jesus did not die on the cross almost unavoidably conflicts
with the Gospel narra­tive. We have also mentioned the fact that the
Qur'an permits the camel as both sacrifice and meat to eat, which the
Bible does not permit. We have also noted that some Islamic scholars
also permit the zebra, and Sunni practice permits an even larger number
of both sea and land animals forbidden in the Torah.

There is but one final issue I should like to bring up. Is the Islamic
use of the strict lunar calendar an innovation or a restitution of
Biblical practice? The Jewish and Christian establishments will
uncritically condemn the Islamic calendar.

The Christian calendar has so far departed from the Bible that there is
no need to examine it. It is a solar calendar with artificial months
having more to do with the Roman emperors than with the phases of the
moon. The Jewish calendar is more problematical. Its generalized use
over many centuries gives it an aura of authority.

The recent conformity of Karaim Jews to the rabbinical calendar only
serves to strengthen this post-biblical tradition. That the rabbinical
calendar is post-biblical is clear even without a detailed examination
of its history, going back to Hillel II. The fact that two thousand
years ago there were several competing calendar systems within Judaism
speaks for itself. All of them claimed to be Biblical, and none of them
are precisely the same as the Jewish calendar presently in use.

What we need to demonstrate is not the details of post­biblical
calendars in use among Jews and Christians in different eras, but
whether or not the Islamic calendar can be defended on the basis of the
Bible, and whether it can be shown to have been in use in early times.
Surprisingly enough, both are easy to do.

The Islamic calendar consists of twelve lunar months in one year,
established by the sighting of the moon. The Jewish calendar adds a
thirteenth month on certain years and does not rely absolutely on the
sighting of the moon for the beginning of each month. What we need to
establish is that the Bible mentions only twelve months, and that the
months are established by the sighting of the moon.

The Islamic calendar can be defended on the basis of the fact that out
of the scores of dates mentioned in the Bible, including all twelve
months of the year, there is no date for any event during a thirteenth
month. The thirteenth month is completely unknown to the Biblical record
of dates. If the adjustment to the solar calendar by a thirteenth month
was accepted practice in Biblical times, there should be a mention in
justification of the practice or at least a date using it. There is
neither. There is no mention of a thir­teenth month, so we are justified
in assuming a year of twelve months for the Biblical year.

There are a few texts in the Bible mentioning the new moon, but Psalm
81:3 is most important for establishing the process of sighting and
broadcasting the arrival of the new moon. \`Blow up the trumpet in the
new moon, in the time appointed, on our solemn feast day.' The necessity
for giving the signal shows that the new moon was established not by any
calculation, but by sight.

Clearly, Islam has added a few features to the Biblical faith and we
have discussed these in more or less detail as they appeared. There seem
to be several important innova­tions. Among these are the strict lunar
calendar, fasting in Ramadhan, the *Qiblah* (direction of prayer) and
pilgrimage to Mecca, the pilgrimage and sacrifice in the twelfth month,
limitation of the number of wives to four, Friday congrega­tion, slight
differences in laws of marriage and inheritance, and permission to eat
camel. A closer examination shows that even some of these, regard for
Friday, the strictly lunar calendar, and pilgrimage in the twelfth
month, and fasting in the ninth, are merely reforms going back to the
Bible.


