About the Author
================

Thomas McElwain was born into a devout family in the United States in
1949. He was occupied by religious subjects from an early age and wanted
to become a pastor. He studied theology and history at the Seminaire du
Salève in France from 1968 to 1972, after which he continued studies in
religion at Andrews University in Michigan. Already in France he was
considered a rebel in terms of theology, but his expertise in languages
earned him respect.

In 1974 he entered the University of Uppsala to study Biblical Languages
and Ethnography. He completed a PhD degree in 1979 from the University
of Stockholm with a dissertation on American Indian religious
traditions, Mythological Tales and the Allegany Seneca. He has written
several books and many articles on Native Ameri­can religion,
Christianity, Judaism and Islam.

For many years he has lectured at various universities, especially the
University of Turku in Finland where he was active from 1979-1984. He
was editorial secretary for the Nordic journal of comparative religion,
*Temenos,* for five volumes. He has been on the faculty of the
department of Comparative Religion as *docent* at the University of
Stock­holm since 1982.

His active participation in church work led to his ordi­nation to the
ministry in 1988. He served a Baptist missionary society full time from
1986 to 1990. He was a voting delegate to the Baptist World Alliance at
its session in Zagreb in 1989, representing the Seventh Day Baptist
General Conference of USA and Canada.

Following the Baptist principles of Bible study, which encourage freedom
of thought and objective examination of the text, he has come to
conclusions which will surprise the reader no matter what his or her
religious background


