Conclusions
===========

We have looked at all of the basic teachings of Islam and many of the
basic practices. We find that all of them are clearly and abundantly
taught throughout the Bible. I daresay Christianity would be hard put to
find in the Bible as much justification for its teachings and practices.

The Trinity, the Atonement, the transubstantiation, ecclesiasti足cal
hierarchy, Church authority, the observance of Christmas, Easter and
other Christian festivals, all require amazing leaps of logic in
interpretation to gain any support from the Christian Scriptures. In
contrast, Islamic beliefs and practices naturally arise from the
expressions of the text.

We have examined the Bible from the point of view of all five pillars of
Islamic belief and practice as expressed in Sunni Islam. It is possible
to justify, sometimes in the smallest detail, these beliefs and
practices. The unity of God, the prophets including Muhammad, the sacred
Scriptures, angels and the resurrection for the Day of judgement are all
maintainable, sometimes with a very high rate of success. The practices
of prayer in prostration, alms, fasting, and pilgrimage are clearly
defensible from the Bible text.

The special doctrines of Shi'ism also hold true when examined from the
Bible. The justice of God, divine guidance, and the middle way between
determinism and free will can all be defended, although the latter has
had as varied a theological history in Christianity as it has had in
Islam, and many passages in both the Bible and the Qur'an could be
interpreted to defend either determinism or free will. Striking
parallels to the Shi'ite Imamate have been seen to exist in the Bible.

Aside from the Islamic basics, many details of faith and practice are
maintained by the Christian Scriptures. Among these are many details of
marriage, divorce, animal sacrifice, purity, diet laws, circumcision,
purity, and even prostration on earth substance. Such things as the
witness by two men or two women and one man appear. The Islamic
practices of raising the hands and saying *\`Allahu Akbar',* the
expres足sions *\`Assalaamu Alaykum'* or \`Peace to you', and \`*in* *sha
Allah',* \`if God wills', are all Biblical traditions.

The Bible not only supports Islamic beliefs and prac足tices, but does so
consistently. There is relatively little in the Bible that is offensive
to Muslim eyes, and most such things are offensive because they have
been given a Chris足tian interpretation, or because of linguistic and
cultural changes that make them less understandable than they originally
were.

Islam is based, not on the Bible, but on the Qur'an, Islamic tradition,
and the example of the Prophet and, in the case of Shi'ites, on the
example of the twelve holy Imams.

The similarities between the Bible and Islam are explained to believers
by the fact that the same God inspired both, and to researchers by the
fact that both Qur'an and the Bible are products of Middle Eastern
monotheism. All of the great principles of Islam are clearly evident in
the earlier Scriptures as they remain in our hands today, encumbered as
they may be with the ravages of time.


