Introduction
============

Not only Judaism in its several varieties, but hundreds of different
sects of Christianity all maintain that their beliefs and practices are
based on the Bible. If so many different religions can be justified by
the Bible, why not Islam?

Most of Christianity recognizes the authority of the Bible, containing
the Hebrew and Greek writings. There is some discussion of what writings
to include and to what degree they are authoritative, but in principle
Christians recognize the Bible. All forms of Judaism recognize the Torah
and the other writings of the Tanach, which makes up the Old Testament
of the Christian Bible. Islam appeals primarily to the Holy Qur'an, but
in principle accepts the Bible. In practice, Muslims reject the Bible on
the assump­tion that it is corrupted from the original in order to make
it accommodate to Christian teaching.

The problem arises when we compare the beliefs and practices of any
particular religious group with the book it appeals to. Inevitably there
is much selectivity and interpre­tation, but beyond this remains the
bare fact that the book is never the sole source of belief and practice.
Where would the Christian year of festivals, the liturgy and a multitude
of beliefs and practices be if all had to be founded on the Bible? Many
of them would sadly fall by the wayside.

The decoupling of books from actual belief and practice first struck me
a few years ago when I noticed how the books relate to the day of
worship. The Hebrew Scriptures obviously maintain the observance of the
Sabbath or seventh day of the week. Jewish tradition quite consistently
puts this in practice. The observance of Sunday is characteristic of
Christianity. But there is very little justification for this in the
Greek Scriptures, the so-called New Testament.

On the contrary, the Sabbath is men­tioned very often, sometimes quite
favorably. I looked in the Qur'an to see how it dealt with the issue,
and found that the Sabbath is maintained on a half-dozen occasions in
the Qur'an as well. Friday prayer is also well established in the
Qur'an, unlike Sunday in the New Testament, which can only be defended
by doing violence to the text. But there is no Qur'anic justification
for observing Friday as a special day from Thursday evening, as many
Muslims do. We thus find the Sabbath to be a feature common to all of
the sacred books. By contrast, the traditions vary on how they relate to
the Sabbath, Judaism observing Saturday, Christianity Sunday, and Islam
Friday.

By way of experiment I began to think how the Scrip­tures align
themselves with the beliefs and practices of the various traditions.
There might well be more features supporting Judaism in the Qur'an than
mere reference to Saturday observance, and on the other hand, more
features supporting Islam in the Bible than special recognition of
Friday. Since Muslims generally do not know the Bible well, there is
every reason to believe that they might be mistaken when they think the
Bible supports Christianity. In sum, one question seems never to have
been answered: how do Islamic belief and practice compare to the texts
of Judaism and Christianity, that is, to the Bible?

I first came to the conclusion that the Bible might reflect Islamic
features in unexpected ways through a reading of the Sermon on the Mount
in Matthew 5-7. A closer look at this text will reveal how the Bible can
express Islamic values even on a structural level. This passage contains
the texts which the greatest numbers of Christians know by heart.

Some Christian sects, notably those who have descended from the
Anabaptists, seem to base the core of their doctrine on this passage
alone. The Sermon on the Mount is beloved by Christian and non-Christian
alike. The non­religious person in Christian societies often appeals to
its words. It is said that Gandhi based his practice of non­violent
resistance on it.

Since this is indisputably one of the most important texts of
Christianity, we can only wonder how well it supports the basic beliefs
of Christianity. Some of the most important beliefs of Christianity are
these three: Christians believe that God is one God eternally existing
in three persons, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Spirit.
Christians believe that the man Jesus is also in one and the same person
at one and the same time completely and wholly God Almighty, one and
equal with the Father.

Finally, Christians believe that salvation and correspond­ingly
forgiveness of sins depend on the atoning sacrifice for sin made by
Jesus in his death on the cross. By comparison, the well-known five
pillars of Islamic practice are: testifying that there is no god but
God; prayer, alms, fasting, and Pilgrimage.

The whole Sermon on the Mount implies time and again that there is only
one being who is God, the one Jesus calls \`Our Father'. Because we live
in a world of permissive child-rearing, we fail to notice immediately
that the basic relationship referred to is the relationship of
submission and obedience. The God of the Sermon on the Mount is one to
whom people owe submission and obedience. No trinity is mentioned at
all. In no place in Matthew five to seven does Jesus even remotely
suggest that he himself is God Almighty.

From the Christian point of view the vicarious sacrifice of Jesus on the
cross for forgiveness of sin is the heart of the Gospel. Jesus does
suggest a condition for forgiveness of sin, but that condition is not
his vicarious death on the cross. He says that we shall be forgiven as
we forgive (Matthew 6:15), and judged as we judge others (Matthew 7:2).

Christians have rightly divided the Sermon on the Mount into three
chapters, for it does in fact present three subjects. Belief in the law
and the prophets is the subject of chapter five. Certainty of the Day of
judgement is the subject of chapter seven. Chapter six presents the
faith of Jesus in practice.

Let us first take a look at chapter five. The subject here is to
maintain the authority of the law and the prophets. When Jesus spoke to
the crowd, he was faced with people who were suspicious of one thing,
whether or not he upheld the law. The people had already seen miracles.
They were ready to believe in Jesus provided that he could produce
evidence that he was loyal to the lain, and that he upheld the Torah,
the books of Moses. This was crucial. Without it he would not be
accepted.

So Jesus set about the task. First of all he gained the people's
confidence by giving a series of blessings. Luke 6:24-26 adds curses to
these. The familiar covenant of blessings and curses, so well known from
the book of Deuteronomy, immediately flooded into his hearers' minds.
They were on familiar ground. They felt at ease.

Then Jesus came to the point. \`Think not that I am come to destroy the
law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For
verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever
therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach
men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.' Matthew 5:17-19. There it is: Jesus has had his say.
Stronger lan­guage could not have been invented. In the rest of the
chapter he gives illustrations, first from the Ten command­ments and
then from other parts of the books of Moses. He illustrates how he
supports the law.

Modern interpreters might maintain that Jesus gave a new law, because he
contrasted what he said with what was said earlier by saying, \`But I
say unto you...' But when Jesus says that anger is murder, surely no one
with good sense will say that he means you can kill people after all as
long as you are not angry with them. When he says to look in lust is the
same as adultery, only an insane person would say he means that it is
all right to go to bed with someone illicitly as long as you do not look
at them with lust first. Jesus does not abrogate the law when he points
out its spirituality. He does not give permission to disobey the law by
striking out against hypocrisy.

In the same way Jesus supports the law of divorce and oaths. Untold
misery has come from Christians who think Jesus abrogated the law of
divorce by saying, \`Whosoever shall put away his wife causeth her to
commit adultery.' In all of his commentaries Jesus is attacking
hypocrisy, which is keeping the law in letter, but having altogether
different intentions. In this case Jesus is attacking the hypocritical
practice in the Near East of marrying with the intention of immediate
divorce in order to give a legal face to prostitu­tion. In a society
where prostitution is not even given that legal basis, the true teaching
here is likely to escape notice. Jesus affirms the law of Moses. He can
do nothing else without discrediting himself. He accepts the legislation
on divorce when it is used as originally intended.

When it comes to oaths, Christian interpreters have done little better.
Jesus again attacks hypocrisy. In Matthew 23:16-23, Jesus tells
precisely what kind of oath he is talking about. He is attacking the
practice of clothing a lie with an oath that is formally defective. A
seller in the market-place might swear by the temple. When an irate
buyer returned with a complaint, he would then say, \`Oh, I swore by the
temple, so it is not binding. If I had sworn by the gold of the temple,
it would have been binding.' Jesus attacks this hypocrisy, and in so
doing upholds the law and acquires the confidence of his listeners.

Let us take a quick look at Matthew seven. The chapter shouts the
subject from the very beginning. \`Judge not, that ye be not judged. For
with what judgement ye judge, ye shall be judged.' Matthew 7:1-2. Jesus
gives many valuable hints on how to prepare for the judgement to come.
He says to concentrate on yourself rather than on others. Most of us go
through life spending a great deal of time talking and thinking about
other people's faults and very little time correcting our own.

Jesus is practical and knows what we are like. He says to ask God for
help. No one can stand in the judgement without the infinite grace of
God. He says that we will be judged according to the law and the
proph­ets and sums up the law and the prophets very neatly. \`Do as you
would be done by.' Matthew 7:12. He warns us not to follow the crowd.
Conformity will only take us to hell (verses 13-14). He warns us not to
be taken in by false prophets and gives a hint on how to know them. He
says that pretending to be religious will get you nowhere, but only
those who do God's will can be saved in the judge­ment (verses 21-23).
All in all, the chapter is about the Day of Judgement and how to prepare
for it.

After establishing his authority on the law and the prophets, and before
warning about the Day of Judgement, Jesus gives us a beautiful summary
of his own teaching. Matthew six is above all the very teaching of Jesus
Christ as presented in the Christian Scriptures. Anyone who truly
desires to follow the faith of Jesus Christ can find the pillars of
practical faith right here in this chapter. They are few and simple.

Most Christian creeds can be reduced to a few simple pillars, which are:
belief in the Trinity, faith in the atoning sacrifice of Christ for the
forgiveness of sin, the Church as the channel of grace, and the eternal
reward. Judaism can be summed up as belief in one God, the Torah, and
the covenant of God with the people of Israel. Islam is summed up as
confession of one God, daily prayer in prostration, alms in charity,
fasting, and pilgrimage. So how does Jesus sum up his faith according to
the Christian Scriptures?

When we turn to Matthew six, the first subject is cov­ered in verses one
to four. We may be surprised to find that the first pillar of practice
mentioned is giving alms in charity. Jesus warns us, aptly enough, to
avoid hypocrisy in the giving of alms.

When we read on, the next pillar of practice appears in verses 5-15.
That second pillar is prayer. Jesus does not tell us here how to pray.
All of his listeners already knew this. They knew it from the law and
the prophets. They knew that Daniel prostrated himself in prayer toward
the house of God morning, afternoon and evening (Daniel 6:10). They knew
from the Psalms of David, called *The Prayers* in Hebrew, that prayer
should be done at set times in the day and should be preceded by
ablutions. They knew from the same Psalms that prayer should be done
standing, bowing, and prostrating. They knew that prayer, according to
the Psalms, included raising the hands and crying time and again, Yigdal
Adonai' or in English \`The Lord be magni­fied' or in Arabic \`Allahu
akbar'.

What Jesus did tell the people was to avoid hypocrisy in prayer, to pray
briefly and simply, and then he gave them a list of appropriate subjects
for prayer. The so-called Lord's Prayer is that list. It is not a model
prayer to be repeated word for word, or the version of it given in Luke
would have been identical. So the second pillar of practice mentioned in
Matthew six is prayer in brevity, simplicity, and lack of hypocrisy.

The third pillar in the practice of the faith of Jesus is found in
Matthew 6:16-18. Here he mentions fasting, again with the warning that
we must avoid hypocrisy. He does not tell us how to fast. But we already
know how to fast, just as his listeners did. Is it the Christian fast of
avoiding certain foods? No. It is a fast of total abstention from food
and drink, just as Moses did on the mount (Exodus 34:28). That tradition
came unbroken all the way down to Jesus, who practiced it himself
according to Matthew 4:1-2.

So far Jesus has attacked hypocrisy in the practice of faith. Now he
comes to an entirely different problem. In Matthew 6:16-34 we are not
faced with hypocrisy, which is the plague of almsgiving in charity,
prayer, and fasting. We are faced with fear and excuses. Those are the
plagues of pilgrimage.

Jesus goes straight to the problem of how to convince people to go on
pilgrimage to the house of God as they should by the example of the
Christian Scriptures and as they were commanded to do in the law of
Moses. The first excuse he meets is, \`Somebody might break in our house
and steal our silver and gold while we are gone.' Matthew 6:19-21. The
next excuse he meets is, \`What are we going to eat and drink on the
way? And how am I going to make up the lost time from work? I have to
support my family. I have to buy new clothes for the children before
school starts and I don't see how we are going to make ends meet. We
can't go on pilgrimage this year.' Matthew 6:22-34.

In sum, Matthew six gives in order four of the tradi­tional Islamic
pillars of practice as the very core of Jesus' message. Embedded as they
are in the very structure of the passage, they suggest that other parts
of the Bible might well be hiding features that may become clear only as
we view them from an Islamic perspective.

Islamic belief and practice are not based on the Bible. They are based
on the Qur'an and on the Sunna or example of the Prophet. The
confrontation between Christian and Muslim is often largely a
confrontation between books. For that reason Muslims assume that the
Bible teaches what Christians believe and practice. They very often use
the Bible to show that it does not teach Islam and shows evidence of not
being valid.

Whether or not the Bible has been corrupted, as Muslim commentators and
Christian scholars maintain, is beside the point for the present study.
There is no reason why the Bible could not be approached from the
opposite angle. The conflict of books is generally a deadlock. A new
approach might raise fresh issues among the traditions, and help us to
see them in a new light. Does the Bible as we now have it, and as it has
been used through centuries of Christian tradition, support Islamic
beliefs and practices?

Some Muslims have appealed to the Christian Scriptures on behalf of
their faith to some extent. Most such appeals surround the figure of the
final prophet. Since much has been written about this, I have not given
it a special chapter here. I shall merely summarize some of the more
important arguments that Muslims have traditionally made.

The problem posed here is whether or not the Bible is complete and the
faith finished, or whether it leaves the door open for prophets to come.
The Bible on many occasions contends that people who rejected prophets
and divinely appointed leaders in their own times, pretending to rely on
earlier ones, no matter how valid these might have been, were lost.

Are there any Biblical reasons for rejecting the idea of additions to
the canon? Revelation 22:18 appears to be a serious obstacle to
addition. \`If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto
him the plagues that are written in this book.' The answer to this is
obvious. These words refer to the whole book that was written in the
scroll at hand, that is, the book of Revelation. They do not refer to
the addition of more books to the collection of the canon. The book of
Revelation itself was accepted in the canon only centuries after it was
written. No other Biblical evidence is to be found against more
prophets.

On the contrary much warning is given against false prophets and how to
recognize them. \`For there shall arise a false Christ, and false
prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders; insomuch that, if it
were possible, they shall deceive the very elect.' Matthew 24:24. If the
prophetic revelation were closed, it would only remain to say that
anyone claiming to be a prophet is false. The implication is that at
least one more prophet is forthcoming.

Those who came to question John the Baptist reveal that the people of
the time knew that another prophet was coming and were expecting him.
John 1:19-25. \`And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent
priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou? And he
con­fessed, and denied not; but confessed, I am not the Christ. And they
asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he said, I am not. Art thou
that prophet? And he answered, No. Then said they unto him, Who art
thou? that we may give an answer to them that sent us. What say thou of
thyself? He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make
straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Elias. And they which
were sent were of the Pharisees. And they asked him, and said unto him,
Why baptizes thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither
that prophet?'

From this it appears clearly that three figures were ex­pected: the
promised Messiah or Christ, Elias or Elijah, and \`that prophet'.
Although John in his modesty denied it, Jesus later stated that John was
the expected Elias (Matthew 11:14). Jesus himself was the expected
Messiah or Christ. Who then is the prophet to come? It is a fact that he
does not appear in the Bible. So we must look for him after the time of
Jesus.

We know that prophets according to the Bible, speak by the inspiration
of the Spirit of God. So we can expect to find information if there is
any in the promises relating to the future working of the Spirit of God.
The most compre­hensive of these are found in John 14-16. Looking
through these chapters the following verses stand out.

John 14:26. \`But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the
Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remem­brance, whatsoever I have said unto you.'

John 15:26. \`But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you
from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeded from the
Father, he shall testify of me.'

John 16:7-14. \`Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is expedient for
you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come
unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is
come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgement: Of sin, because they believe not on me; Of righteousness,
because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; Of judgement, because
the prince of this world is judged. I have yet many things to say unto
you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit when he, the Spirit of truth
is come, he will guide you into all truth: for he shall not speak of
himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak: and he will
show you things to come. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of
mine, and shall show it unto you.'

Now the Spirit of God in the Bible narratives works not in a void but
through human beings. This promise refers to a prophet who has ears and
a mouth (John 16:13). What do we learn from this prophecy of Jesus about
the prophet to follow him? Muslim scholars have pointed out that the
Greek word translated \`Comforter' is much like the Greek for \`Most
Praised' or Ahmed, which is a form of the name Muhammad. This
alternative is found in the Gospel of Barnabas and in some Syriac
sources.

First of all, there is a three-part message. He will reprove the world
of unbelief in Jesus Christ. He will bring a message of righteousness
that is a renewed regard for obedience to the commandments. He will
emphasize the importance of the Day of Judgement.

Secondly, Jesus remarks that there are many things to be said, but he
cannot teach his hearers all of these things because they are not yet
ready for them. The inference is that the prophet to come will teach
some new points of doctrine and practice that the people of Jesus' time
were not ready to receive. These things probably have to do with the
change of the direction of prayer and place of pilgrim­age from
Jerusalem to another place, and other details that could not be accepted
as long as the temple existed.

Thirdly, the coming prophet would guide into all truth. That is, when
his message is given, there will never be any need for another message,
since with his revelation all truth which God intended to reveal will
have been revealed.

Fourthly, he will not speak using his own words. He will be verbally
inspired. He will actually hear the message of God in spoken form from
the angel and will recite verbally what he hears. He will thus be
different from some prophets who received the inspired message and wrote
it in their own words.

Fifthly, he will reveal future events.

Sixthly, he will preach the things that Jesus himself taught.

It would appear that we have a good deal of information about the
prophet to follow Jesus, probably enough to identify him with certainty.
Nevertheless, on another occasion Jesus gave still more information. In
Matthew 7:15-20, Jesus points out that \`by their fruits ye shall know
them.' This is generally thought to refer to actions, bad fruits being
evil actions and good fruits good acts. Psalm 1:3 describes this prophet
\`who brings forth fruit in his season.' The book of Revelation suggests
that the tree has twelve different fruits (Revelation 22:2). It is very
possible that Jesus is referring to the fact that the prophet to come
should have twelve pure descendants or followers who would have
authority and act as the final divine guides in their age. We can be
sure of this only if we find a prominent contestant for the position of
Prophethood who actually had twelve such descendants or representatives.

Contemplation of the seven criteria shows immediately that most of them
are subject to interpretation. It would be easy, for example, to
construe the three-pronged message to fit almost any claimant to
prophethood. The one criterion which is hard and fast is the prophecy on
the means of revelation. We must look for a prophet who heard a voice
and dictated the message word for word.

Joseph Smith, for example, claimed to receive the mes­sage on golden
plates from which he translated in writing. Although he might fit all of
the other criteria, he misses on the most objective one.

Ellen White, to take another prominent example, claimed to hear the
voice, but she never claimed verbal inspiration, nor did she dictate the
message of the angel in a book She wrote her books in words of her own
choice. Besides, she, unlike Joseph Smith, was not followed by a
succession of twelve. Nor did she herself in fact claim to be the
promised prophet.

All of the criteria can be easily fitted to the case of Mu­hammad. But
the one objective criterion, the means of revelation, seems so
overwhelmingly appropriate that it is difficult to dismiss it. The story
is that Muhammad was praying and meditating in a cave when the angel
Gabriel suddenly appeared to him and he heard the words: \`In the name
of God the most gracious, ever merciful! Recite in the name of thy Lord
who creates perfectly. He creates man from a clot. Recite! And thy Lord
is the most honorable!' Qur'an 96:1-3.

The subject of Biblical prophecy as related to Muham­mad is widely dealt
with by Ahmed Deedat, Abdul-Ahad Dawud, and many others. I have said
little here in addition to such studies and left out much that has been
said. I would only add something to Ahmed Deedat's excellent handling of
Deuteronomy 18:18, \`I will raise up a prophet from among their
brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth; and he
shall speak unto them all that I shall command him.' Christians often
claim that this refers to Jesus. But the parallel between Moses and
Jesus seems inconsistent, since Christians claim Jesus to be God and
deny such status to Moses. If Jesus is God, he is definitely not like
Moses and the passage cannot apply to him. If he is not God, then the
Christian doctrine falls.

The history of Muhammad is tragic. After the death of Muhammad many
Muslims followed unjust and irreligious caliphs. The later caliphs
changed the religion to suit themselves. This is recognized by both
orientalists and Muslims alike. The family of the prophet's daughter was
hounded, persecuted, poisoned and murdered by the so called Muslim
State. It is only a miracle that some knowledge of the eleven
descendants of the daughter of Muhammad has come down to us. These pure,
humble, persecuted people might well be compared to the twelve fruits of
the good tree Jesus mentions in Matthew seven.

Since we are examining the Bible as the traditional, his­torical text of
Christianity I have chosen to use the King James Version in English and
the Hebrew Masoretic text and received text of the Greek New Testament
from which it was translated. The editions of the latter I have followed
are The New Testament, The Greek Text Underlying the English Authorized
Version of 1611, Trinitarian Bible Society, London, and *Biblia
Hebraica,*Johanne Leusden, Everardo Van Der Hooght, Judah D'Allemand,
London 1822. I have also referred to the Byzantine Greek text in the
edition of : “TA BIBΛIA, H ΘEIA ΓPAΦH THΣ ΠAΛAIAΣ TE KAI KAINHΣ
ΔΙΑΘΗΚΗΣ”, Moscow, 1841.

The method will be to examine the whole Bible in terms of the various
Islamic beliefs and practices. Critical method will be relevant to the
extent necessary to identify Biblical beliefs and practices in context
which show similarity or equivalence to Islamic ones. The method is
rigorous and scientific, but approaches problems vastly different from
those usually examined by scholars. It is not the goal to establish the
original or source text.

That would defeat the purpose. What is of interest is to what extent the
Bible as it has come down to us through Christian tradition reflects not
Christian but Islamic aspects. Such a study would be fortuitous except
for the fact that the texts of Christianity and Islam share a
geographical and to a great extent cultural heritage.

The examination of the Biblical text will entail first of all the
establishment of linguistic equivalents for Islamic features. The second
and supporting method will be to establish conceptual equivalents. The
second method obviously lacks the objectivity of the first, but will
certainly prove fruitful, as it allows us to bring to bear on each
subject texts which may be relevant, but which might be overlooked from
a mere linguistic approach. The linguistic approach is used first and
primarily in order to preserve objectivity.

Since Islamic approaches to written Scripture make a clear distinction
between writings purporting to quote God directly (the Qur'an), and
writings purporting to quote human beings *(hadith* or traditions), I
have indicated those distinctions in the use of Bible texts. Texts
purporting to be quotations of the very words of God are marked with a
star. Strangely that basic distinction is largely overlooked by Jewish
and Christian readers.

Judaism and Christianity share many beliefs and prac­tices, some of
which are considered fundamental to Islam. Among such fundamental
beliefs in common are the belief in Scripture-bearing prophets, angels,
and sacred Scriptures as such. The Day of judgement is a belief common
to all three traditions as well. These fundamentals are copiously
represented in the Bible, and they are the focus of a brief exposition
in chapter one. Other aspects are common to all three traditions, but
have features which distinguish them within the traditions. It will be
of interest to focus on such distinguishing features in order to
establish what precisely is described by the Biblical texts.

A study of this kind, because of its pioneering character as well as the
limits of time and space, can only be partial. I cannot examine all of
the texts bearing on a subject in detail, or even mention all of them
for most subjects. Many questions will remain for further research, but
I have tried to touch on the most important ones. I hope that the reader
will thoughtfully consider whether or not the Bible supports the basic
teachings of Islam.

The best way of establishing Islamic beliefs and practices is to refer
to authoritative Islamic texts. I have taken as basic sources *Islamic
Teachings in Brief* by Ayatullah Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i,
Ansariyan Publications, Qum, Islamic Republic of Iran, translated by
Muzhgan Jalali; and the introductory notes of *The Holy Qur'an,* S.V.
Mir Ahmed Ali, Tahrike Tarsile Qur'an, New York, 1988.

The specific issues I have identified as both representing Islam and
showing distinctively Islamic features in contrast to other traditions
are the following: the concepts of God and divine guidance, purity,
prayer, fasting, pilgrimage, sacrifice, polygamy and concubinage. All of
these are included in Ali's Introduction to *The Holy Qur'an* with the
exception of polygamy and concubinage (Ali 1988:69a, 104a). He deals
with polygamy and concubinage in brief notes on important topics (All
1988:139a, 140a). They are all dealt with in detail in Tabataba'i.


