Beliefs and Practices in Common
===============================

The pillars of Islam are well known: belief in God, angels, the
prophets, the books of revelation, and the Day of Judgement. These are
among the first criteria Muslim scholars use in evaluating the orthodoxy
of any movement. The concept of God is a complicated subject, and is
described in some detail in chapter two. There may be some differences
in both theological detail and lore relating to angels, but the basic
belief is common to Judaism, Christianity and Islam.

Although Muslims accept a number of prophets unknown to Christianity and
Judaism, as well as Muhammad, the basic belief in prophets as such is
common to all three faiths. Although there is some disa­greement about
which books are true revelation, not only is the basic belief in written
canons a common feature of all three faiths, but all three believe in at
least the Torah or Books of Moses.

There are also details of difference regarding the Day of judgement, but
it too is a feature of Judaism, Christianity and Islam. Therefore we
shall merely note briefly the four pillars of belief angels, prophets,
books and judgement. They are not only common to all of the faiths, but
they are considered fundamental in Islam. These are features of the
faiths which are not only a part of belief and practice, but which also
appear in the canons themselves. I shall examine a few representative
Biblical texts in order to establish the fact that these four beliefs
are expressed in the Bible.

Genesis 28:12. \`And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the
earth, and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God
ascending and descending on it.' The knowledge of the existence of
angels goes back to the very beginning. Angels are even mentioned in the
story of Adam and Eve (Genesis 3:24). This verse expresses the role of
angels in the communication between God and human­kind.

Psalm 68:17. \`The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands
of angels; the Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place.' The
role of angels as bearers of the universe is expressed in this Psalm.
This idea is found in the prophets as well, and has become a common
feature of Bible visionary experience.

Psalm 91:11. \`For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways.' The role of angels in relationship to people is
one of divine guardianship. The invisible presence of the angels has as
its role not so much the guardianship from danger (as the adversary
would have it in Matthew 4:6), but the guardianship from falling into
sin. The way in which we are kept is the straight and narrow way.

Psalm 103:20. \`Bless the Lord, ye his angels that excel in strength,
that do his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.' The
role of the angels is not only to carry out the commands of God, but
also to carry out His praise and worship. The continual prostration and
praise of some angels is described graphically in Revelation 5:11 et al.

Psalm 104:4. \`Who maketh his angels spirits; his minis­ters a flaming
fire.' Human curiosity as to the source of angels in creation is also
satisfied in the Bible. Just as humans have come from spirit and earth
(Genesis 2:7), so the angels have come from spirit and fire.

Matthew 13:49. \`So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels
shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just.' The role of
angels on the Day of judge­ment is an active one in dividing the just
from the unjust.

Matthew 18:10. \`Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones;
for I say unto you, That in heaven their angels do always behold the
face of my Father which is in heaven.' This warning refers to those who
oppress the weak, thinking that they are invulnerable since their
victims have no power. In fact, the cry of the oppressed is said to have
direct access to God by the angels. The Bible would have us take this
into account in our relations with others.

Matthew 26:53. \`Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and
he shall presently give me more than twelve legions of angels?' The
prophets have immediate access to more than twelve legions of angels. It
is only amazing that the prophets have shown so much forbearance in
dealing with those who not only reject their messages but even oppresses
them.

I Corinthians 11:10. \`For this cause ought the woman to have power on
her head because of the angels.' Human beings are shy in their behavior
before other human beings who are visible. The Bible suggests we should
be shyer in our behavior when we are alone, since at such times we are
still visible to the angels.

Hebrews 1:14. \`Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation?' Angels are spirits
sent out to do the will of God.

Revelation 1:1. \`The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto
him, to show unto his servants things which must shortly come to pass;
and he sent and signified it by his angel unto his servant John.'
Messages are brought to the prophets by the medium of the angels.

The central feature of Islamic belief in angels relates to their role in
revealing Scripture to the prophets. But the Bible also reflects Islamic
belief that the angels are essen­tially different from human beings as
separate creations.

The Islamic idea of being shy in the presence of angels and thus
avoiding bad behavior is also Biblical. The angels' action of
prostration is both Biblical and Islamic. The Biblical bearing up of the
chariot of God is much like the Islamic idea of angels bearing the
throne or Arsh of God. All in all, the Biblical passages referring to
angels are well within the Islamic configuration of belief.

Angels bring the divine revelation to certain people. Such people are
called prophets. The belief in prophecy is basic to Judaism,
Christianity and Islam. The principle of prophethood is mentioned in the
Bible many times.

\`The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things which
are revealed belong unto us and to our children forever, that we may do
all the words of this law.' Deuteronomy 29:29.

Whether we can do as God tells us to do is a false ques­tion.
Practically every story in the Bible is an illustration of the fact that
God tells people to do things and holds them responsible if they do not.
This is not to deny all of the ramifications of myth and history, symbol
and poetry of the Bible. But it is to state a simple fact. God held Adam
and Eve responsible for eating of the fruit of the tree of knowl­edge of
good and evil. Whatever depths of metaphorical or spiritual meaning
there may be in the story, it does strongly imply that they were
responsible for their actions.

Again, when God told Noah to build an ark, something far beyond the
possibilities of most of us, He expected Noah to build it and held him
responsible. When God told Abraham to go, He expected him to do it. This
is one of the obvious, incontrovertible facts of the Bible: God
com­mands. A human being either obeys or disobeys. The human being
either enjoys or suffers the consequences.

The true question is not whether we can fulfill the commandments of God,
but how we can fulfill them. This text in Deuteronomy gives us the first
step in how \`we may do all the words of this law'. With the single
possible exception of the ten commandments, all revelation has come
through a prophet. Everything that is revealed is there so that we can
know what to do. We cannot obey God unless we know what He is telling us
to do. That is what the revelation of the prophets is for.

There is a good deal of Bible evidence for this principle. The following
are some of the more important references in the Bible which show that
God uses prophets in order to send His verbal revelation to humankind.

2 Kings 17:13. \`Yet the Lord testified against Israel, and against
Judah, by all the prophets, and by all the seers, saying, Turn ye from
your evil ways, and keep my com­mandments and my statutes, according to
all the law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by
my servants the prophets.'

2 Chronicles 20:20. \`And they rose early in the morning, and went forth
into the wilderness of Tekoa: and as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood
and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem; Believe in
the Lord your God, so shall ye be established: believe his prophets, so
shall ye prosper.'

2 Chronicles 24:19. \`Yet he sent prophets to them, to bring them again
unto the Lord; and they testified against them: but they would not give
ear.'

Nehemiah 9:26. \`Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled
against thee, and cast thy law behind their backs, and slew thy prophets
who testified against them to turn them to thee, and they wrought great
provocations.'

Jeremiah 7:25, 1. \`Since the day that your fathers came forth out of
the land of Egypt unto this day I have even sent unto you all my
servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them.'

Jeremiah 29:19\*. \`Because they have not hearkened to my words, said
the Lord, which I sent unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up
early and sending them; but ye would not hear, said the Lord.'

Jeremiah 35:15\*. \`I have sent also unto you all my ser­vants the
prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, Return ye now every
man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other
gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to
you and to your fathers: but ye have not inclined your ear, nor
hearkened unto me.'

Daniel 9:10. \`Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to
walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants the prophets.'

Hosea 12:10\*. \`I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have
multiplied visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the
prophets.'

Amos 3:7. \`Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he re­vealeth his
secret unto his servants the prophets.'

Zechariah 1:4-5\*. \`Be ye not as your fathers, unto whom the former
prophets have cried, saying, Thus said the Lord of hosts: Turn ye now
from your evil ways, and from your evil doings: but they did not hear,
nor hearken unto me, said the Lord.'

Zechariah 7:12. \`Yea, they made their hearts as an ada­mant stone, lest
they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts hath
sent in his spirit by the former prophets: therefore came a great wrath
from the Lord of hosts.'

Matthew 5:17. \`Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the
prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.'

Acts 3:21-23. \`Whom the heaven must receive until the times of
restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his
holy prophets since the world began. For Moses truly said unto the
fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he
shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every soul, which
will not hear that prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people.'

James 5:10. \`Take, my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the
name of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction, and of
patience.' This text is extremely important, since it almost uniquely in
the Bible states clearly and overtly that the example of the prophets is
normative. Bible religion is one which applies the example of the
prophets to all the actions and institutions of life. It is the neglect
of this principle which has created an unjust and secular society.

1 Peter 1:10. \`Of which salvation the prophets have in­quired and
searched diligently, who prophesized of the grace that should come unto
you.'

The religion of the Bible is clearly a faith founded on the revelation
of the prophets. The Bible also clearly states which prophets were true
and which false. The message of the prophets is to focus attention on
the commandments of God. Their purpose is to show what we should do in
obedience to God. The prophet who 1) upholds the commandments of God and
2) is in agreement with the earlier prophets and 3) comes to call people
to a return to obedience to God, is a true prophet.

The example and messages of the prophets can only reach later
generations as they wrote or dictated the revelation in written form.
The belief in sacred books is a direct and logical extension of belief
in divine revelation through prophets.

In the chain of revelation from God to angels to proph­ets there is
continuity from prophets to the sacred Scriptures, the writings of the
prophets which contain the words of revelation given to them. Such
writings are referred to often in the Bible. Some representative
exam­ples follow.

Matthew 22:40. \`On these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets.' The two commandments referred to here are the proclamation of
the unity of God in Deuteronomy 6:4-5 and the command in Leviticus 19:18
to treat the rights of the other person with the same regard as one's
own. The revelation of God thus deals with human responsibility toward
God, toward others, and toward oneself. The law and the prophets in
their entirety deal with these three issues.

Luke 24:44. \`And he said unto them, These are the words which I speak
unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled,
which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the
psalms, concerning me.' At the time of Jesus three categories of sacred
prophetic writings were already known: these are the law of Moses or the
Torah, the writings of the other prophets, and the Psalms.

2 Timothy 3:16. \`All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correc­tion, for instruction
in righteousness.' The three categories of scripture mentioned in Luke
24 are described here in terms of how they should be used. They can be
used first of all to find out what they present as true teaching or
doc­trine.

This is basically the use that we have made of them here. We have tried
first to find out their teaching about God, for example. But the
writings can be used for reproof of wrong actions, for correction of our
views, and for instruction in righteousness that is, learning what we
should do and how to do it. An example of instruction in righteousness
would be in our examination of the Bible texts to find out how the Bible
says people should pray.

2 Peter 1:20-21. Knowing this first that no prophecy of the scripture is
of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by
the will of man: but holy men of God speak as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost.' Here the apostle notes that what is written in the writings
of the prophets is not merely their opinions. He says that what they
have written is a revelation from God, inspired by the Spirit of God.

Revelation 1:3. \`Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the
words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein:
for the time is at hand.' There is a threefold blessing on people's
relationships to the writings of the prophets. There is a blessing on
those who read or recite the words of their writings. There is a
blessing on listening to the recitation of the sacred books. Finally
there is a blessing on doing what the sacred books tell people to do.

Revelation of the will of God by the means of angels speaking to
prophets who write or dictate the message is of little use unless God
holds human beings responsible for how they relate to what He has
revealed. This is a final point of common ground between Judaism,
Christianity and Islam.

There is nothing more clear in the Bible than the fact that God brings
all creatures into account. He brought Adam and Eve into account. He
brought Cain into account for killing his brother. He brought the people
of Noah's day into account, and those of Sodom and Gomor­rah. He brought
the Israelites into account for worshipping other gods, for rejecting
the prophets, and for neglecting the example of those sent to guide
them. The unity of God, the prophets, and the divine guides are the
three great criteria of judgement.

The Bible abounds in overt references to the Day of Judgement. \`It is
appointed unto men once to die, but after this the judgement.' Hebrews
9:27.

Deuteronomy 32:41\*. \`If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hands
take hold on judgement; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and
will reward them that hate me.'

Psalm 9:7-8. \`But the Lord shall endure forever: he hath prepared his
throne for judgement. And he shall judge the world in righteousness; he
shall minister judgement to the people in uprightness.'

Ecclesiastes 11:9. \`Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth: and let thy
heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know thou that for all these
things God will bring thee into judgement.'

Ecclesiastes 12:13-14. \`Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter:
Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.
For God shall bring every work into judgement, with every secret thing,
whether it is good, or whether it is evil.' This text points out two
points in preparation for the Day of Judgement: 1) to acknowledge the
one true God; 2) and to keep His commandments.

Matthew 12:36. \`But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgement.' No
Bible prophet speaks so much of the Day of judgement as does Jesus
Christ. This text is only one example of many.

Hebrews 6:2. \`Of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands,
and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgement.' The author
of this epistle points out that the Day of judgement is preceded by
three points of readiness: 1) ablutions, or means of purifying; 2)
laying on of hands, or swearing allegiance to the divinely appointed;
and 3) the resurrection from the dead. All three of these are acts of
divine grace, the first through the prophets, the second through the
divine guides, and the third directly at the hand of the angels.

2 Peter 2:9. \`The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of
temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgement to be
punished.' Readiness for the Day of judgement depends on the grace of
God which delivers the godly out of temptations. This grace has already
been described in four points: the proclamation of the unity of God, the
justice of God, God's gracious revelation through the holy prophets by
the angels and preserved in the holy books, and the divine guides who
exemplify the will of God in flesh and blood, in active demonstration.

2 Peter 3:7. \`But the heavens and the earth, which are now, by the same
word, are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgement
and perdition of ungodly men.' This text suggests that the Day of
judgement is cataclysmic. It is not merely metaphorical of the condition
of human responsibility. It entails a real end of the world as we know
it and the beginning of another. It includes real fire.

Revelation 14:7. \`Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to
him, for the hour of his judgement is come: and worship him that made
heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters.'

With this verse we have a summary of what is called the everlasting
gospel in verse six. It tells in one sentence what we have been
discovering and uncovering up to this point. It includes first of all
the acknowledgement of the one true God who made all things and is thus
sovereign over all. It includes three things that we are to do in
relationship to this God: 1) we are to fear Him, that is, fear to act in
any way contrary to His commandments; 2) we are to give glory to Him,
that is we are to live in such a way that we as creatures glorify our
Creator; and 3) we are to worship Him precisely in the way that we are
commanded to do in the Bible. Finally, this text points to the final
aspect of the gospel that we are to live in view of the Day of judgement
which is imminently upon us.

Although this final text is from the New Testament and thus not a part
of the Jewish canon, the principles it expresses are common to all three
Scriptural faiths. Human responsibility is an inherent principle
throughout the Bible message, which comes to a pinnacle in the Day of
judge­ment when all are finally brought to account.

Belief in angels, prophets, sacred books and the Day of judgement are
fundamental to Islam. They are also beliefs which Muslims share in
principle, if not in detail, with Jews and Christians. More importantly,
from the point of view of this study, we have seen that all four beliefs
are amply described in the Bible from a point of view which is
remarkably consistent with Islamic belief.

We shall look at the first pillar of Islamic belief, the be­lief in God,
with a little more attention.


