A Just God
==========

Logically speaking, to say that God is one is to say that God is
impartial. That is, when we speak of God we must ignore parts. There are
no parts involved in the issue. There are not two sides of the story.
That is why all of the things the Bible has to say about God can be
deduced from the one Bible statement, a just God (Isaiah 45:21).

Nehemiah 9:33. 'Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us;
for thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly.' In this prayer
Nehemiah recognizes the justice of God even during difficult times.
There is a tendency among some to suggest that God is the source of evil
and good alike. The principle of justice denies that. Although it is
possible to illuminate this principle philo­sophically, to do so would
go beyond the Biblical text. The Bible answer to the question is that,
insofar as God is concerned, \`we cannot find him out'.

Job 37:23. \`Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out: he is
excellent in power, and in judgement, and in plenty of justice: he will
not afflict.' Here is perhaps the most complete expression of the
justice of God in the Bible. Justice is placed in the context of God's
power and judgement. These two working together may be perceived from a
human point of view as affliction. We are warned that this perception is
false, and we should beware of laying any particular thing to God's
account, lest we set ourselves up in judgement of God.

Psalm 89:14. \`Justice and judgement are the habitation of thy throne:
mercy and truth shall go before thy face.' Again judgement and
sovereignty are associated with justice. This verse indicates, however,
that mercy and truth are also essential to the configuration of justice
as applied to human affairs.

It has become apparent that some things can be said about God since they
are inherent to the logic of God's unity and justice. The attributes of
power, judgement, mercy and truth have already appeared. The Bible
refers to other things that can truthfully be said about God,
espe­cially from the human point of view.

Numbers 22:28. \`And the Lord opened the mouth of the ass, and she said
unto Balaam, What have I done unto thee, that thou hast smitten me these
three times?' It is peculiar that Christian interpreters ignore a
fundamental attribute of God, which is creation of speech.

Deuteronomy 32:4. \`He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his
ways are judgement: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right
is he.' \`Rock' is the concrete term referring to God as the perfect
refuge. This is based in this text on the fact that his work is perfect,
that is, complete in itself and not dependent on anything. This is
stated to be possible because all his ways are judgement, that is,
every­thing He does is based on His own judgement and is not contingent
on anything else. There is therefore nothing that can weaken His
capacity to be a refuge. The result of such independence is that God is
perfectly true, since there is neither need nor contingent that can
pressure Him to swerve from His perfect judgement.

Deuteronomy 33:27. \`The eternal God is thy refuge.' Eternity does not
refer to infinite time, but the fact that God is not bound by time and
space at all. According to the creation story in Genesis 1, God created
space and time. God's sovereignty over space and time permit Him to be
the perfect refuge from all dangers that exist in time and space. 1
Chronicles 29:11-12. 'Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power,
and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the
heaven and in the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou
art exalted as head above all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and
thou reignest over all; and in thine hand is power and might; and in
thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all.'

Job 36:26. \`Behold, God is great, and we know him not, neither can the
number of his years be searched out.'

Psalm 90:2. \`Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had
formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting,
thou art God.' Not only is God eternal, but He is uniquely eternal. He
is the only One who is not bound by time and space. Not only did He
create all things, but He is God independently of all things. He does
not need anything to establish His divinity by comparison. He is good
without the evil which defines good relatively, He is Creator even
without creation to prove His creatorship, He is without any \`is not'
to support His existence.

Psalm 93:2. 'Thy throne is established of old: thou art from
everlasting.' Eternity logically gives rise to sovereignty. Note
Deuteronomy 33:27.

Isaiah 40:28. \`Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the
everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth,
fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no searching of his
understanding.' The logical succession here is eternity, sovereignty,
creatorship, omnipotence, and omniscience. Eternity or being unbounded
by time and space suggests sovereignty. Sovereignty suggests the
capacity to create. Creating suggests complete power over what is
created and perfect knowledge of it.

Isaiah 57:15\*. \`Thus said the high and lofty one that inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy place, with
him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit
of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.' The
exaltedness of God is referred before eternity, thus showing that it is
not a relative but an absolute exaltedness. God is not to be compared to
another. On the other side of eternity comes the attribute of holiness.
Holiness, that is, separation or otherness, cannot be considered
relative either, since the absoluteness of God's attributes is already
established in the beginning of the verse. The last half of the verse
expresses the divine penetration into the human world. The complete
separateness of God might suggest that the human world can have no
contact with divinity. This logical conclusion must be denied, however,
since it would limit God. As exalted sovereign, eternal and holy or
separate, God can choose to deal with the human world. He is not limited
by it. God's penetration into the created world is always divine, that
is sovereign and independent. Therefore, such penetration does not imply
the possibility of incarnation, which by definition is subservient and
dependent, subject to the limitations of time and space.

Jeremiah 10:6. \`Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O Lord; thou
art great, and thy name is great in might.' The term \`great' is used
here in the absolute sense. The text states that there is none to be
compared with God. No standard of measurement can be applied to God.
There is therefore no associate or compound with God.

Jeremiah 10:10. \`But the Lord is the true God, he is the living God,
and an everlasting king.' To be truly God implies that such God is
living and always sovereign. As such, the idea that death can be
attached to God is inconsis­tent and therefore invalid.

Habakkuk 1:12. \`Art thou not from everlasting, O Lord my God, mine Holy
One?'

Luke 19:40. \`And he answered and said unto them, I tell you that, if
these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out.'
Here Jesus recognizes the attribute of God which is creation of speech.

Romans 16:26. \`The everlasting God.'

1 Timothy 1:17. \`Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the
only wise God, be honor and glory for ever and ever.' Within one
sentence Paul states the attributes of sovereignty, eternity,
immortality, invisibility, and omnis­cience.

James 1:17. \`Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and
cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness,
neither shadow of turning.' This text states that God is unchanging. It
implies at the same time that there is no compound or association with
God, nor any qualities additional.

These texts are only representative of hundreds more in the Bible
expressing the inherent divine attributes. We can affirm these
attributes without breaking the commandment 'Thou shalt not make unto
thee any graven image' because they are overtly expressed in the Bible
itself. On the basis of these texts we can say that God is eternal,
almighty, all-knowing, ever-perceiving, ever-living, all-independent in
will and action, creator of speech, and ever-truthful. We can affirm
that God is never a compound, accommodation, incarnation, association,
nor is He visible or changing, nor does He have need or qualities that
may be separated, added or subtracted. But all of these things are
logically deducible from His unity and justice. At this point I have
reached what is sufficient in expressing the Bible faith in regard to
what God is like. I conclude in brief, that a large segment of the Bible
is there to show that God is just.

We can summarize the everlasting Gospel to this point: 1) God is One and
there is no other God but He. 2) The one true God is inherently just,
and all of his actions and attributes are consistent with His perfect
justice.

We have noted that the Bible declares God to be just. The problem of
justice is more complex than that, how­ever. The metaphysical dilemma is
how to reconcile the absolute sovereignty of God with the clear fact
that the God of Scripture and revelation firmly calls human beings to
account for their behavior.

If God is truly sovereign, does that not mean that all things are
determined by His will? If all things are determined by God's will, how
then can God hold people accountable for what they do? There are texts
in both the Bible and Qur'an which seem to affirm either God's absolute
sovereignty or determinism on one hand, and human accountability and
free will on the other. If it has become apparent that a proof text
method is not sufficient for resolving the issue of God's unity or
trinity, it is even more apparent that a simple proof text method will
tell us even less about this knotty problem.

The debate between Pelagius and Augustine, and be­tween predestination
and Arminianism, in Christianity, seems to have parallels in Islamic
history as well. Sunni theology tends to opt for sovereignty. There is
an attitude of awe before the decree of God which seems, from the human
viewpoint, only to gain from its arbitrary character. By contrast,
Shiite theology tends to reconcile sovereignty and free will in a middle
ground. In brief, actual events are conceived to consist of various
aspects, all of which are created by a sovereign God. The whole
configuration is within the sovereignty of God, but one of the many
contributing factors in any event may be free will.

The middle way between determinism and free will is not merely a means
of reconciling texts which seem to conflict. It is a real attempt to
deal with the metaphysical issues involved in both human suffering and
human responsibility. Nevertheless, I have chosen one text to illustrate
the problem. In 2 Samuel 24:1 we have a text which has been used by
Ahmed Deedat to illustrate the corruption of the Bible, which is the
conclusion he draws from the conflict with 1 Chronicles 21:1.

\`And again the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he
moved David against them to say, Go, number Israel and Judah.'

1 Samuel 24:1. \`And Satan stood up against Israel and provoked David to
number Israel.' 1 Chronicles 21:1.

The conflict between the two texts is in the matter of who moved David
to number Israel, the Lord or Satan. The facile Christian solution
appears inadequate. It would have the \`he' of 1 Samuel 24:1 refer not
to the natural antecedent (the Lord), but an unmentioned antecedent
(Satan). The most natural solution is to accept that one text states the
Lord to have moved David and the other Satan.

An explanation following the midway between deter­minism and free will
would be as follows. This event includes many contributing aspects,
among which are divine sovereignty, the action of Satan, and the
exercise of will or choice on the part of David. It is the configuration
of these aspects, along with other contributing factors, which produced
the event. One aspect, divine sovereignty, is mentioned in 1 Samuel
24:1. Another aspect, Satanic temptation, is mentioned in 1 Chronicles
21:1. Both versions note the responsibility of David.

Since all three aspects are present in the text, the best interpretation
is one which includes all of them. Ahmed Deedat's suggestion that the
conflict between sovereignty and Satanic action in the Bible implies a
corrupt text is not only weak from a scholarly point of view, but could
be turned back against the Qur'an itself, God forbid.

In conclusion, we may say that the Bible definitely states that God is
just. How the Justice of God fits into the working of divine sovereignty
and human free will is a subject requiring metaphysical speculation. The
middle way, however, between determinism and free will provides a method
for reconciling the seeming conflicts in both the Bible and the holy
Qur'an.


