Divine Guidance
===============

The Islamic principle of divine guidance appears in detail in Tabataba'i
123ff. Ali (1988:84a) defines it briefly.

"The khilafat-e-Ilahia was the apostleship and after the conclusion of
the apostleship with the Holy Prophet Muhammad, it was conveyed to
Imamate, the divinely inspired heavenly guidance through the godly ones
purified by God Himself, who were born pure, who lived pure and who
surrendered them­selves in the way of the Lord in all purity, which
historic fact is unanimously acknowledged by the Muslim world as a
whole.

Islam demands faith in these Holy Imams as in the apostleship of God, as
the all-Truthful, holy and infallible guides divinely commissioned for
the preservation of verbal form and the true meanings, both external and
internal, of the Holy Qur'an, the final Word of God, as its authentic
custodians and the divinely inspired inter­preters and the correct
models of godly life on earth to be copied by their devotees. The series
of Imamate starts with All ibne Abi Taleb and ends with Mu­hammad ibnul
Hasan Al-Mahdi, the last and living Imam of the Age."

The salient features of the Imamate as conceived in Islam are therefore
that it is a necessary continuation of revelation implied in the
institution of prophets. Its representatives are divinely appointed
through revelation to their successors. The Imams are pure and
infallible. They are custodians and interpreters of the prophetic
revelation. They are models of godly life to be copied. They appear in a
series of twelve, and there is always a living one, even if he is in a
state of occultation.

Prophets can tell us what to do, but may not be able to make us
understand in practice how to do it. They can call us away from sin and
rebellion against God, but they cannot keep us from falling into
formalism and hypocrisy. Humanity needs something more than the
revelation brought to the prophets at the hand of angels and inscribed
in holy books. We need implementation. In order to do something
properly, you need first verbal instructions (the prophets) and then a
live demonstration (divine guidance). What God reveals in words by the
prophets He reveals in action, in flesh and blood, by the divine guides.

Without divine guidance we cannot apply the true im­port of the
prophetic revelation. \`Philip ran thither to him, and heard him read
the prophet Elias, and said, Under­standest thou what thou readest? And
he said, How can I, except some man should guide me?' Acts 8:30-31. This
statement by the Ethiopian shows clearly that the writings of the
prophets are not enough. There must also be a divine guide to implement
them in practice.

Throughout the Bible there are figures who are revela­tions of the will
of God in action. Some of these are also prophets, such as Abraham.
Abraham was a prophet (Genesis 20:7), but he was also a demonstration in
action, a divine guide. This is shown by his action in giving his son
over to be sacrificed.

A prophet brings the verbal principle, but a divine guide applies the
theory to practice. Divine guidance sometimes seems to be contrary to
the law, especially when the law is interpreted hypocritically or
legalistically. Christianity has generally made this mistake. For
example, because Jesus rejected the washing of hands before eating,
Christians have assumed that he rejected all ablution with the exception
of baptism. Mere scholarship and study cannot settle this issue. It
would have to be settled by an authoritative figure.

A good example of the principle of divine guidance is in Jesus'
judgement of the adulteress in John 8:1-11. Accord­ing to the literal
interpretation of the law, she should have been stoned to death. But the
divine guide knew the situation. He was able to apply the law both
justly and mercifully. He said, \`He that is without sin among you, let
him first cast a stone at her.' He neither abandoned the law, nor made
an unjust verdict.

The knowledge of the divine guide or divine proof comes directly from
God. Such a person is able to penetrate the heart of the circumstances
and make a just verdict without being taught or informed in human
institutions. Jesus is the supreme example of divine proof in the Bible.
\`But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men,
and needed not that any should testify of man: for he knew what was in
man.' John 2:24-25. His direct revelation was a source of marvel to the
rabbis, who depended on long years of study to acquire the ability to
make verdicts. John 7:15: \`And the Jews marveled, saying, How knoweth
this man letters, having never learned?'

According to Islam, God requires adherence to the living witness of his
will just as much as to the verbal witness of the prophets. It was not
enough for salvation to follow the faith of Adam and Seth: it was
essential to follow Noah into the ark. Those who performed their prayers
faithfully and claimed to be believers and followers of the one true
God, but who failed to enter the ark, drowned. It was not enough to keep
the ten commandments in Egypt: it was necessary to follow Moses through
the waters of the Red Sea. It was not enough to claim to be the children
of Abraham in the first century Ate. It was essential, according to
Christian Scripture, to accept and follow Jesus Christ.

There is a strange aspect of the experience of divine guides in the
Bible that sets them apart. That is the experi­ence of occultation, that
is, being secretly taken away from the visible world. There are three
examples of this in the Bible:

Genesis 5:24. \`And Enoch walked with God: and he was not; for God took
him.'

2 Kings 2:11. \`And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked,
that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and
parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into
heaven.'

Acts 1:9-11. \`And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld,
he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight. And while
they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men
stood by them in white apparel; which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why
stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus, who is taken up from
you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go
into heaven.'

Precisely the same kind of occultation is claimed in Is­lam for the Imam
of the Age. Tabataba'i on page 154 says, \`After the martyrdom of his
father, al-'Imam al Mahdi (AS) had *al-Ghaybat al-Sughra* (the Short
Occultation of al Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi [AS]) by the order of Allah and
answered the questions of the Shi’as and resolved their problems through
Al-Nuwwab al-Arba'ah (the Four Deputies of Imam al-'Asr (AS) who had
successively attained the eminent position of being the Imam's (AS)
Deputy. The Imam (AS) then had *al-Ghaybat al-Kubra* (the Great
Occultation of al-'Imam Muhammad al-Mahdi [AS]) until the time when he
will appear by the order of Allah to administer justice in the whole
world after it gets over­whelmed with injustice and oppression.'

What is above all most important about the divine proof is his
authority. Just as it is fatal to reject a true prophet, it is perhaps
doubly fatal to reject the divine guide. To reject the divine guide and
yet cling to the prophet is to fall into legalism, hypocrisy and
formalism.

Jesus said, \`All power (Greek: authority) is given unto me in heaven
and in earth.' Matthew 28:18. Some of the people in Jesus' time did not
understand the necessity of following the divinely appointed authority.
It was enough for them to have Abraham as their father.

In Matthew 19:16-23 there is the story of a young man who asked Jesus
what he should do to have eternal life. Jesus gave him the first step,
the answer of the prophets, to keep the commandments. The young man had
kept the commandments all his life, but still realized that he lacked
something. He asked Jesus what he lacked. Then Jesus revealed the
principle of divine guidance in its glorious clarity: Matthew 19:21.
\`If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the
poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me.'

The answer is full surrender to the one divinely ap­pointed and sent
from God. The criterion is not how well the commandments have been kept.
Perfect keeping of the commandments is perhaps worse than none at all,
when it allows the individual to think that he has bought God off by
well doing. The young man's keeping of the command­ments merely
contributed to his being lost. It is possible to keep the commandments
literally, but we must go beyond keeping the commandments to love God
with all the heart and soul and mind. We attain that necessary love in
surren­dering and submitting to the one sent from God.

As the Bible presents divine guidance, it is all a matter of
relationship. The legalist thinks that it is enough to do the right
thing. But if you do the right thing and at the same time ignore and
reject the one in flesh and blood who perfectly represents right, it
shows that there is no true love of right. Love of ideals and principles
is a hateful thing if it is combined with hatred of those people who
most per­fectly live by those ideals and principles. At the time of
Noah, all those who thought it was enough to keep the commandments
perfectly were lost. All those who attached themselves to Noah, no
matter how imperfectly they carried out the commandments, were saved
from the Flood. It is a matter of attachment.

According to the Bible, God has made it so that we are required to find
out who the living divine proof is, and to attach ourselves to him in
love, loyalty and obedience. This is why God speaks of those who \`love
me, and keep my commandments'. It is the attachment of love which comes
first and is decisive. The New Testament gives such a role to Jesus.
Such loving attachment naturally produces obedience. \`The love of
Christ constraineth us.' 2 Corinthians 5:14.

It is clear at this point that throughout the Bible there appear figures
who bring the revelation of God's will into action and practice. In
every time period, according to the Bible, those who accepted and
followed these divine proofs sent from God were successful in pleasing
God and obeying Him. The Bible comes to a climax in a great divine
guide, the promised Messiah, Jesus Christ. It is the principle of the
Imamate, or divine guidance, that makes the entire New Testament
relevant. Without such an authority figure, the Hebrew Scriptures,
coupled with Rabbinical method, clearly suffice.


