Solutions of the Problem of Evil
================================

As I noted before, we may distinguish between several versions of "the
problem of evil". In other words, we face a cluster of problems
collected under this title. So, it would be natural that these different
problems must be considered and solved separately. In Islamic
philosophy, we find a lot of theories and discussions which after all
can serve as philosophical materials for constructing solutions for
these problems. Nevertheless, we rarely find Islamic philosophers who
undertook some efforts to distinguish between different solutions.21
Thus, we have to link each of those theories to an appropriate solution
as far as possible.

The Negative Nature of Evils
----------------------------

As we saw before, almost all Muslim philosophers advocate**TNNE** . This
theory about the negative nature of evils, can help us to face one of
the versions of the problem of evil which I already called "the
creation-dualistic problem". The problem is that it is impossible that
God, as the absolute good and benevolent, brings about the evils in our
world. So, there must be another creator who creates the evil against
God's will. But, according to philosophical principles as well as
Islamic teachings about the monotheism, it is impossible for the
universe to have two first efficient causes or two ultimate creators.

According to**TNNE** , we can make a short and conclusive reply: Evil,
as something which is of non-existential entity, does not need to any
cause or creator at all. For Muslim philosophers, the cause and its
effect are two existents so that the latter is dependent on the former
in its existence.22 So, a nonexistent entity could neither be a cause
nor an effect. At most, we can say (almost in a metaphoric sense) that a
nonexistent entity is the effect of the nonexistence of its cause. In
short, a non-existential entity cannot have an existential cause.

Assuming the above view on causation, we can conclude that evil, given
its non-existential nature, does not really have any cause.

Consequently, evils are created neither by God nor by any other being;
in fact, they are not created at all. Sadra refers to this solution in a
short passage: "And you have known that evil is nonexistence or a
non-existential thing and nonexistence surely does not require any
cause…and so is the non-existential entity inasmuch as it is
non-existential." (Mulla Sadra, 1963, pp. 293-294)

The Minor Evil is Necessary for the Major
-----------------------------------------

Good Muslim Philosophers in their study of the problem of evil commonly
appeal to a classification which they historically traced to Aristotle.
According to this classification the situation of any given creature, in
virtue of being good or evil, could not exceed five possibilities: 1)
being totally good; 2) being good in the majority of cases and evil in
the minority of cases; 3) being equally good and evil; 4) being good in
the minority of cases and evil in the majority of cases; and 5) being
totally evil.

Avicenna explores these five possible situations as follows:

*Things in the [faculty of] estimation are either [(a)] things which, if
[reckond in the] estimation as exiting, cannot but be absolutely evil;
[(b)]*

*things whose existence [consist] in being good, it impossible for them
to be evil and deficient;[(c)] things in which goodness predominates if
their existence comes to be, anything but this being impossible for
their natures; [(d)] things in which evilness predominates; or [(e)]
things in which the two states are equal. (Avicenna, 2005, pp. 345-346)*

Considering each of these possibilities separately, Muslim philosophers
come to conclude that only the first and the second possibilities could
be actualized by God. This claim seems enough clear as to the first
kind. In their view, the incorporeal intellects (*al-oqul almujarradah*
) are instances of the first kind; they are pure good (*al-khayr
al-mahdh* ) without any evil aspects and God do create these intellects.

As to the second kind, it is argued that God, in spite of its minor
evilness, should create it.

The reason is that if God refrain from creating this kind of existents,
then the result is that a major good will be prevented just because of
its minor evil and this seems not to be a wise act.

Since God is absolutely wise, He should permit the realization of the
second kind too. The corporeal objects in the natural world are usually
classified within this kind of beings.

Fire is a very common example; in the most cases it has valuable
benefits for human beings and even for other beings, but it happens in a
few cases that leads to some privation and in effect, it becomes an
(accidental) evil.

But what should we say about the remainder possibilities? According to
Islamic philosophy, God is wholly good and absolutely wise and
benevolent and it sounds reasonable that such a God never creates a
totally or mostly evil thing.

God even does not permit the existence of a thing with equal good and
evil aspects, since this seems far from being a wise creation.

It seems that the most controversial part of the above theory is its
claim about the second kind. One crucial question may be that why God,
being omnipotent, cannot create such things like corporeal objects so
that they never (even not in the minor cases) result in evil.

In order to answer the above question, Muslim philosophers insist on the
necessary relation between major good and minor evil aspects in this
kind of beings. To clarify this claim they frequently call our attention
to the necessary characteristics of our material world.

First, in the whole hierarchical order of the universe, the material
sensory word lies in a lower level than that of the nonmaterial world
which is the world of the incorporeal intellects.

The latter, as I indicted before, is void of any kind of evil. But, if
the former is to be without evil, it cannot still remain as the material
world but will change into the higher world; i.e., the world of
intellects. In short, it is impossible for the material world to be
without evil since, in this given case, the material world comes to be
not the material world, which is absurd!

Avicenna puts the question and his proposed answer in this way:

*If [however] it is said, "Why is evilness not prevented from it to
begin with so that it would be entirely good?" one would then say:[If
evilness was prevented from it] then [these things] would not be what
they are, …*

*[[and]]* 23 *their existence would [no longer] be the existence which
is theirs, but the existence of other things that have come to be which
are other than they are and which have been realized. [By this] I mean
what is created in such a way that evil have not follow from it
primarily. (Avicenna, 2005, p. 346)*

Second, we consider that motion, change and other limitations, as the
essential aspects of the material world, necessarily lead, though in the
minor cases, to some clashes and contrasts among corporeal beings, which
in their turn bring about some minor evils.

Suhravardi claims:

*Adversity and evil only are the requirements [of things] in the world
of glooms [originating] from motions. (Suhrawardi, 1373, p. 235)*

Since the material world receives all these properties through its
matter and hyle, the hyle is originally responsible for evils. Matter
and hyle, however, are essential aspects of the material world:

*And such a corporeal being is not void of clash and contrast which
cause division and plurality and the source of plurality is matter…Thus,
hyle is the origin of evils and imperfections and, as you have not, it
must be realized. (Mulla Sadra, 1981 , p. 74)*

Another notable question concerning Muslim philosophers' claim about the
minor evil may be this: Is the so-called minor evil really minor and, to
put it in other words, are the evil aspects of material objects truly
less than their good aspects?

In order to answer this question, Muslim philosophers usually appeal to
a couple of considerations. First, they call our attention to recognize
the difference between "being great in number" and "being more and
numerically greater than" (It is obvious that the latter notion is, in
contrary to the former, a relative one).

Philosophers' claim is not that the number of evils in the material is
not great; instead that their quantity is not more than that of goods.

Avicenna makes this point in the following passage:

If someone said,*"Evil is not something rare or numerically the lesser
but numerically the greater,"* [we answer that] this is not the case.
Rather, evil is numerous but not the numerically greater; for there is a
difference between the numerous and the numerically greater - for
example, maladies. (Avicenna, 2005, p. 347)

Secondly, they explore several material things, like fire, water, air
and so on, to show that in these things the good aspects are much more
than the evil ones. Mulla Sadra writes:

…like fire whose perfection lies in the faculty of [producing] heat and
burning and by means of which great advantages and plentiful benefits
are obtained, but it happens sometimes for it to burn the house of a
holy man or the garment of a prophet.

*And like water whose perfection lies in [its] coldness and moisture,
but it happens for it sometimes to drown the [inhabitants of] towns and
to kill God's servants. And so is the earth, the air, the rain, the
cloud etc. (Mulla Sadra, 1981, p. 69)*

Thirdly, we may insist on the fact that, while comprising evils to
goods, we should employ the qualitative criteria too. The idea is that
at least in some cases, a particular good, though less great than a
certain evil in quantity, may be greater in quality. For example, a very
short pleasure might be so great that would be superior to a long pain
in a manner that one is ready to endure that pain in order to receive
the pleasure.

At any rate, if we accept the aforementioned points, we will be ready to
make a solution for what I earlier called "the problem of Divine
providence and evil". If the minor evil, in the material world, is a
necessary partner of the major good, then it will impossible for one of
them to be realized without the other.

Consequently, even God, though omnipotent and all-powerful, cannot (in a
particular sense) bring about the reality of the major good free of
evil. On the other hand, as we saw before, to refrain from creating the
major good in order to prevent the minor evil is reasonably not a wise
action. And since God is the absolute Wise, He should permit the major
good to be realized in the world of nature. Thus, God creates the major
good which inevitably implies the minor evil.

One may claim that the main question still remains without answer: How
does evil enter the realm of Divine decree and predetermination. In
order to make a direct answer, Muslim philosophers once again appeal to
the essential/accidental dichotomy. The minor evil inasmuch as it is a
necessary condition of the major good, enters into Divine decree
accidentally. God wills essentially just the realization of goods, but
the minor evil comes to be willed accidentally. Avicenna writes:

*God, exalted be He, wills [all] things, and evil was also willed in the
way of what is accidental.* 24 *Since He knew that it exists by
necessity, He paid it no heed. (Avicenna, 2005, p. 345)*

Another version of the problem of evil for Muslim philosophers which I
noted before originates from apparent inconsistency between Divine
wisdom and the realty of evils as far as they are signs of disorder and
futility.

Confronting this problem, Muslim philosophers commonly make two claims:
1) our actual world must be the best possible world which could be
created by God; it is on the best possible order (al-nizam al-ahsan) and
2) there is no evil in the world which lacks a wise and reasonable
objective. In the reminder of this article, I shall explain these two
claims briefly.

The best possible world
-----------------------

As we considered before, Divine providence, in the Islamic philosophical
thought, requires His knowledge of the best possible order of the world,
His being the cause of it and His being satisfied with its coming to
existence. Thus, our world can not be but the best possible world. In
order to support this claim, Muslim philosophers proceed in two main
ways; a priori and a posteriori. In the a priori approach it is argued
that, appealing to the statements about God's attributes (such as His
omnipotence, omniscience and so on) as premises, we can construct pure
rational proofs for the claim that our world is the best possible one.
In the a posteriori approach, they

explore several actual state of affairs in our world to show that all of
them are totally wise and in the best conceivable order.25

Evils and Reasonable Ends
-------------------------

Another attempt to solve the problem in question is to show that
so-called evils in the world have reasonable ends. Here the whole
procedure is once again inductive. We are invited to contemplate on
various kinds of evil in order to discover Divine purposes in them.

Of course, we should not forget our cognitive limitations and
shortcomings. Nevertheless, even our bounded knowledge would suffice to
disclose many of these reasonable purposes. It is helpful to note that
what is usually meant here is a kind of universal, and not particular,
purpose. A universal purpose or end of an evil is what belongs to the
whole order of the world while a particular one relates to the very
person who is harmed by that evil.26 To have an example we may consider
some natural evils:

The death by which the people are usually feared, if its real nature is
grasped, it will be known that its purpose is nothing but the
transmission of the soul from a lower world to an upper one and it
refers to one of the natural perfections… and in the same manner God
created the sun and the moon and the rains for the universal benefit and
interest, though sometimes they may harm some people and animals and
plants. (Mulla Sadra, 1981, p. 92 and 99) Sadra continues to disclose
Divine ends for the natural process of some animals' being eaten by
others.


