References:
===========

[1] Abedi Shahrudi, Ali (1373), "*A Critique of the Existential Theory
of Good and Evil* ", Kayhane Andishe, No. 48.

[2] Avicenna, (1404 A.H.)*Al-Isharat wa Al-Tanbihat* , accompanied with
Al-Tusi's commentary, Daftar Nashri al-kitab, vol.3

[3] Avicenna (2005),*The Metaphysics of The Healing* , translated,
introduced and annotated by Michael E. Marmura, Brigham Young University
Press: Provo, Utah.

[4] Al-Farabi (1408 A.H),*Al-Taaliqat* , Beyrut: Dar al-Manahil.

[5] Hospers, J. (1992),*An Introduction to Philosophical Analysis* , 3rd
ed. London: Routledge.

[6] Mirdamad,*Al-Qabasat* (1374 A.H), Mehdi Muhaqiq (ed.), Tehran
University Press: Tehran.

[7] Morewedge, Parviz, (1973),*The Metaphysica of Avicenna (ibn Sina)* ,
London, Routledge & Kegan Paul.

[8] Mulla Sadra,*Al-Hikmat Al-Mutealiyah fi Al-Asfar Al-Aqliyat
Al-Arbaah* ,*[Al-Asfar]* , (1990a), vol. 4, Beyrut, Dar Ihyaa al-Turath
alAarabiyah.

[9] Mulla Sadra,*Al-Hikmat Al-Mutealiyah fi Al-Asfar Al-Aqliyat
Al-Arbaah* ,*[Al-Asfar]* ,  (1990b), vol. 6, Beyrut, Dar Ihyaa al-Turath
alAarabiyah.

[10] Mulla Sadra,*Al-Hikmat Al-Mutealiyah fi Al-Asfar Al-Aqliyat
Al-Arbaah, [Al-Asfar]* , (1981c), vol.2, Beyrut, Dar Ihyaa al-Turath
alAarabiyah.

[11] Mulla Sadra,*Al-Hikmat Al-Mutealiyah fi Al-Asfar Al-Aqliyat
Al-Arbaah, [Al-Asfar]* , (1981), vol. 7, Beyrut, Dar Ihyaa al-Turath
alAarabiyah.

[12] Mulla Sadra, (1363),*Mafatih Al-Ghayb* , Mohammad Khajawii (ed.),
Tehran, Muassese Mutaleat wa Tahqiqat-e Farhangi,

[13] Al-Nuri Al-Zinuzi, Mulla Abdollah, (1974),*Al-Lamaat Al-Ilahiyyah*
,

[14] Al-Razi, Fakhr al-Din and Khwaje Nasir al-Din al-Tusi (1404
A.H),*Sharhay al-Isharat* , Qum, Maktabat al-Marashi,.

[15] Suhrawardi, (1373),*Hikmat al-Ishraq* , in Suhrawardi's Collected
Works, introduction and edition by Henry Corbin, Tehran, Institute of
Humanities and Cultural Studies, 1373 A. H., vol. 2.

[16] Al-Zinuzi, Agha Ali Modarres (1376), Badaye*Al-Hikam* , Ahmad Waezi
(ed.), Alzahra: Tehran.

[17] Peterson, Michael L. (ed.) (1992),*The Problem of Evil* ; Selected
Readings, Notre Dame, Indiana, University of Notre Dame Press.

[18] Al-Shirazi, Qutb al-Din,*Sharhu Hihmat al-Ishraq* , Qum.

[19] Suhrawardi (1373),*Hikmat al-Ishraq* , in Suhrawardi's Collected
Works, introduction and edition by Henry Corbin, Tehran, Institute of
Humanities and Cultural Studies, vol. 2.

[20] Taliferro, Charles (1998),*Contemporary Philosophy of Religion* ,
Oxford, Blackwell Publishers Ltd.

Notes
-----

[^1]: Associate Professor, Department of Philosophy, Tarbiat Modares
University

[^2]: See: (Peterson, 1992, p. 3)

[^3]: This article also does not deal with Muslim theologians' views,
since beside a few common aspects, the whole theological approach here
differs deeply from that of philosophers (both in the formulations of
the problem and in the proposed resolutions). Nevertheless, I shall
sometimes refer to the views of some thinkers (Like Fakhr al-Din al-Razi
and al-Tusi) who are commonly known as Muslim "theologian-philosopher".

[^4]: It is worth noting that in the current literature "theodicy" in
its narrow sense is used against the "defense".

[^5]: Roughly speaking, the logical problem claims a kind of
inconsistency between the belief in an omnipotent, omniscience and
wholly good God and the belief in the existence of evils. According to
the evidential problem, however, the existence of evils provides strong
evidence against the existence of God and thus, renders the theistic
beliefs unreasonable.

[^6]: To paraphrase this question in a more contemporary form, we may
simply ask: Why does God permit evils?

[^7]: For example, the title of the relevant chapter in Avicenna's The
Healing is: "On providence, showing the manner of the entry of evil in
divine predetermination". (Avicenna, 2005, p 339). Mulla Sadra adopted a
bit different and longer title: "On Divine providence and allembracing
mercy and the manner of the entry of evil and harm in the [realm of the]
predetermined beings in terms of divine decree and predetermination".
(Mulla Sadra, 1981, p. 55)

[^8]: For a detailed statement of this problem, see: (Mulla Sadra, 1363
, pp. 275-276)

[^9]: Muslim philosophers believe that, regarding the hierarchical order
of existence, it is impossible for a higher level (i. e. more perfect)
being to something in behalf of a lower (less perfect) one. According to
this principle, God's action, as a simple eternal reality, has no end
except the very Divine essence. However, this does not deny the fact
that the particular actions of God must have reasonable ends and
purposes.

[^10]: What is meant here by Sadra seems to be much similar to what
Leibniz called "metaphysical evil".

[^11]: As we shall see later, following Aristotle, Muslim philosophers
believe that some of God's creatures, such as pure nonmaterial
intellects (oqul) are totally free from any kind of evils. So, it would
be enough clear that in this context "evil" could not be used in the
first sense mentioned by Sadra.

[^12]: It is worth noting that some of Muslim philosophers trace this
theory to Plato. Mirdamad, for example, after mentioning TNNE writes: "
… and this is a principle by means of which Plato, the theosopher,
refuted the doubt instilled by the dualists in order to prove two
creators; the creator of goods and that of evils." Mirdamad, 1374,
p.434)

[^13]: I mean by "metaphor" here what we may call "philosophical
metaphor" in contrast to "linguistic metaphor". This idea is grounded in
the philosophical consideration that we sometimes attribute the property
of one thing to another because of the close connection between the two
things. To present a simple (and inaccurate) example, we may call a
certain syrup "sweet" while the thing which is really sweet is the sugar
dissolved in the liquid.

[^14]: In the contemporary philosophy of religion, evil is normally
divided into two main kinds: natural evil and moral evil. Moral evils
result directly or indirectly from immoral actions. War, murder, and
torture are examples of moral evil. On the contrary, natural evils, like
diseases, floods and volcanoes (or, more accurately, the sufferings
caused by natural phenomenon) do not follow immoral actions. Of course,
the contrast between these two kinds is not always clear. For more
discussion see: (Taliferro, 1998, p. 301). According to Leibniz, evil
emerges in three main forms: metaphysical, physical and natural.
Sometimes, a fourth kind is added i.e., the emotional evil, which is
thought of to be identical with suffering and pain.

[^15]: Sadra elsewhere cites this claim with some hesitations: It is
firmly possible to claim that this subject is selfevident and the
mentioned examples were just for admonition." See: (Mulla Sadra, 1981,
p. 62). There are other philosophers who believe that TNNE is self

evident (c.f. Mirdamad, 1374, p. 428 and Al-Nuri Al-Zinuzi, 1374, p. 410
and Al-Zinuzi, 1376, p. 478).

[^16]: For an example, see: (Al-Shirazi, p. 520)

[^17]: Sadra summarizes this argument and reveals its main logical form:
"And the form of this deductive argument in its natural order is this:
If the evil were an existential entity, then the evil would be not evil;
the consequent is false [because it is a contradiction], thus the
antecedent is false too." (Ibid. p. 59)

[^18]: By "apprehensional evil" I just mean any evil which consists in a
kind of apprehension. It is helpful to note that apprehensional evil, in
the above sense, should not be bounded to pain and suffering; there are
other types especially what is called "double ignorance" (jahl
almurakab). Pain and suffering, however, play the main role in the
challenge.

[^19]: For another expression of this response, see: (Mirdamad, 1374, p.
331)

[^20]: In the view of later Muslim philosophers, knowledge (in its broad
sense) has two main kinds: 1) "Knowledge by presence" in which the
subject knows the object directly and without the medium of
conceptualization since the object itself, and not its mental idea
(surah), is present for the subject. 2) "Acquired knowledge" in which
the subject knows its object indirectly and by means of its mental idea.

[^21]: Recently some authors distinguished between various proposed
solutions in different religious and philosophical traditions. To give
an example, John Hospers distinguishes between seven solutions. See:
(Hospers, 1992, pp. 310-319)

[^22]: Mulla Sadra mentions two definitions for the "cause":

"We say that "cause" has two meanings: First, it is the thing from its
existence the existence of another thing takes place [i.e., the effect]
and from its nonexistence the nonexistence of another thing takes place.
In the second meaning, it is the thing on which another thing is
dependent in its existence…" (Mulla Sadra, 1990c, p. 127)

[^23]: What is written between [[ ]] is my addition.

[^24]: Advocating this view, Mirdamad pointed out that the evils in
question should be considered as accidental from two different aspects:
first, they are accidental in that they are existents which cause some
privations. Second, they are also accidental in the sense that they are
willed by God accidentally. See: (Mirdamad, 1374, p. 435)

[^25]: For a detailed presentation of these two approaches see: (Mulla
Sadra, 1981, pp. 108-118).

[^26]: It seems that this universalist perspective, though successful in
answering the present challenge of inconsistency between Divine wisdom
and the apparent futility and vainness of evils, can not contribute in
solving the problem of Divine Justice. For a contemporary critique of
the universalist view, see: (Abedi Shahrudi, 1973)
