Introduction
============

The so-called "problem of evil", in its various forms and versions, has
a long and impressive history. During past centuries, all great
religious traditions â€“ including Abrahamic ones, i.e. Judaism,
Christianity and Islam - as well as Hinduism and Buddhism have more or
less addressed this problem and tried to propose solutions for it.
Moreover, philosophers belonging to different philosophical schools have
made valuable attempts to find theoretical solutions. It would be
helpful here to note that we can distinguish, from a very general
perspective, between three main kinds of what may be called "the problem
of evil":2

a) The Theoretical Problem
--------------------------

The theoretical problem of evil concerns the logical relations among
certain beliefs about God and His attributes, on the one hand, and the
reality of various on the other. One question here, for example, would
arise as how could the reality of some actual evils be consistent with
Divine justice or wisdom.

b) The Existential Problem
--------------------------

This problem, in contrast with the theoretical one, deals not merely
with internal logical relations among a collection of beliefs or
statements, but rather with one's personal experience of evils in the
actual life which may be highly effective on his/her approach to life
and its meaning. For instance, it is possible for someone who is unable
to solve the existential problem to loose his/her trust in God or
his/her belief in the meaningfulness of life.

c) The Practical Problem
------------------------

This kind of problem consists of finding a practical way to decrease the
amount of actual threatening evils around us and prevent their
consequent calamities and disasters as much as possible. We may say that
nowadays many charitable institutions are dealing with this practical
problem.

Undoubledly dealing with the existential and practical problems of evil
actually requires more or less some basic ideas and theories about God,
world and Human beings and their interrelations. But a part of these
ideas and theories could be presuppositions supported by authorities
such as religious scriptures or reliable human information sources.
Regarding the very complicated nature of theoretical problem of evil,
however, engaging with it requires much more! Thus, we find prominent
and well-known philosophers and theologians (among other thinkers) who
have undertaken to wrestle, theoretically, with this powerful and nimble
competitor!

In this paper, I shall explore briefly the main views of Muslim
philosophers on the theoretical problem of evil. Since, there are
naturally some disagreements among these philosophers, I, due to some
actual limits, should almost restrict myself to the more common views in
order to draw a whole and, as far as possible, clear and comprehensive
picture that could be, though approximately, attributed to what is
usually called "Islamic Philosophy". It is not necessary to mention here
that a comprehensive critical and detailed discussion of the issue goes
beyond the limits of an article like this.3

Broadly, we may call any approach to solve the theoretical theistic
problem of evil a "theodicy". Therefore, the present article seeks to
provide a brief exploration of Muslim philosophers' theodicy.4


