What is an Evil Like?
=====================

To present a more or less minute definition for "evil" is not as easy as
it may seem at the first glance. That is partly because the word "evil",
within an Aristotelian metaphysical framework, does not refer to a
certain kind of a particular metaphysical category, as "red" or "cat"
denotes a certain kind of color or animal respectively.

We may rightly regard things belonging to different categories as
"evil". Some of human acts are called "evil" as well as some natural
events such as earthquakes and floods.

Moreover, mental states like pain and suffering provide another sort of
evils. So, one may wonder whether there could be a single and general
concept of evilness applicable to these*heterogeneous* entities.

To engage in a fruitful philosophical discussion of the problem of evil,
however, it is necessary to have an almost clear conception of what evil
is like. Otherwise, it would be too optimistic to expect a satisfying
settlement for the problem.

Bearing these facts in mind, Muslim philosophers commonly try to
characterize "evil" especially in terms of the opposition between the
concepts of good and evil. A conspicuous view is that good consists in
(or stems from) existence (*wujud* ) and, therefore, evil consists in
(or stems from) nonexistence (*adam* ). The immediate result of this
view is that all of the various forms and kinds of evil could be reduced
to nonexistence and privation; evils, in their very essences, are of
negative and non-existential nature. As we shall see later, this type of
characterization mobilized Muslim philosophers with a theoretical
apparatus, which enabled them to provide a solution for some versions of
the problem of evil.


