Evil as Nonexistence and Privation
==================================

So far I claimed that in Islamic philosophy evils are seen as
non-existential entities. But do we in fact see any sort of nonexistence
as an evil?

Now that I am writing this paper, there is not a ball on my desk? Then
is the nonexistence of a ball on my desk an evil? It seems not. Thus, a
kind of modification is required. Some philosophers associate evil with
the nonexistence of a (deserved) perfection, which may be called
"privation". Al-Farabi, for example, holds:

Indeed, God is nothing but the perfection of existence and it is the
Necessary Being (wajib alwujud) and evil is the privation of existence
and the negation of perfection. (Al-Farabi, 1408, p. 49)

Avecinna is much more explicit in this respect.

After mentioning some kinds of evil, he says:

*Thus, evil in essence is privation, though not any [type] of privation
but only privation of that to which the nature of the thing necessarily
leads in terms of the perfections that belong permanently to its species
and nature. (Avicenna, 2205, p. 340)*

So, we do not count any item of nonexistence as an evil but only the
lack of such perfection that a thing normally should possess in terms of
its nature. Therefore, the lack of sight is an evil for a blind person
and not for a tree.

But an existent may be seen as an evil as far as it destroys or prevents
another existent's perfection. Avicenna continues to distinguish between
essential and accidental evils:

*Accidental evil [on the other hand] is the nonexistent, or that which
keeps perfection away from that which deserves it. (Ibid)*

Avicenna's example to elucidate this distinction is a case in which heat
brings about the lost connectedness of one's organ. In this case, in
Avicenna's opinion, the essential evil consists in the nonexistence of
the connectedness, while the heat itself is an accidental evil, since
though "…it becomes an evil relative to the sufferer from it, it has
another aspect in terms of which it is not an evil." (Ibid) I shall
return to this issue later.

According to Mulla Sadra, however, "evil"

can be used in two senses:

*1) In the first sense, all beings except God possess some evil aspects.
God, as the unique Necessary Being, is the absolute good and other
beings, since they are contingent, can be described as evils as far as
they lack the degree of absolute good. In other words, all God's
creatures are evils in the* *sense that they are more or less imperfect.
(Mulla Sadra, 1981, p.58)* 10

However, Mulla Sadra reminds us very soon that this is not the sense
which is usually meant in the philosophical discussions on evil.11

2) Evil, in the second sense, "… consists in the nonexistence of an
object or the nonexistence of one of its perfections which is peculiar
to it inasmuch as it is that certain object…. Therefore, philosophers
said that evil lacks any [existent] essence, it is instead a nonexistent
entity which consists in either the nonexistence of an object or of its
perfection." (Ibid)

This second sense is what Sadra's predecessors had in mind when they
talked about evils. We may call this view about the nature of evils "the

theory of the nonexistent nature of evil" (henceforth:**TNNE** )12 It is
fair to note here that**TNNE** should never considered as equal to the
aforementioned view which says that evils are nothing except dreams and
illusions. According to**TNNE** , evils are real as well as goods but
their very natures are nonexistential and negative. Thus, the blindness
and ignorance are realities and**TNNE** 's claim is just that
philosophical analysis shows that they are nonexistent realities.


