Several Applications of the Word "Evil"
=======================================

Beside the attempt to clarify the non-existential nature of evil, Muslim
philosophers commonly explore the different applications of the term
"evil". Taking these various uses into account helps us to have a better
understanding of what an evil is like and prepares the way for
distinguishing several aspects of the problem of evil in correspondence
to several types of evils.14

Avicenna distinguishes between four uses of "evil":

Evil is spoken of in [various] ways. Thus "evil" is said of the
blameworthy acts, and "evil"

is said of their principles in moral dispositions.

"Evil" is said of pains, distresses, and their like.

"Evil" is [also] said of the falling short by each thing of its
perfection and of its loss of that which would naturally belong to it.
(Avicenna, 2005, p 343)

According to the above passage, "evil" is applied to four categories:

1. the immoral actions and wrong doings.

2. the principles of these actions in the agent's dispositions.

3. the pains and distresses and like.

4. the lack of an expected perfection.

One may wonder whether the above classification is in accordance
to**TNNE** , since the first three categories in the list obviously are
of an existential nature. Facing this problem, Avicenna makes some more
analyses in order to disclose the hidden relation of those categories,
the nonexistence. He thus goes on to claim that the third class, i.e.,
the sufferings and pains, "even though their meanings are existential,
not privative, follow [from] to privation and deficiency." (Ibid)
Therefore, suffering and pains are called evil just as far as they are
the result of some privation. (I shall discuss this view later under the
title of "Apprehension Evil").

What about the first and second types? Their connection to nonexistence
is stated as follows:

*Evil in acts is also [evil] in relation to the one who loses his
perfection by its reaching him, as with injustice, or in relation to a
perfection necessary in the religious regime, as [when] adultery [takes
place]. Similarly, moral dispositions are only evil by virtue [of such
acts] proceeding from them. And they are connected with depriving the
soul of perfection that ought to belong to it. (Ibid)*

To sum up, we can say that several categories which normally are called
evil are either non-existence and privation (as the lack of the deserved
perfection) or originate somehow from nonexistence (like the pains) or
bring about some privation whether directly (like malefic actions) or
indirectly (like the vices and immoral dispositions). So, we find that
in all these various categories, what originally should be considered as
evil is nothing but nonexistence and privation.

The Grounds of**TNNE** How are the adherents of**TNNE** to justify their
belief? In the works of Muslim philosophers, we may distinguish three
different approaches:

I. To claim that TNNE is self-evident
-------------------------------------

Mulla Sadra expresses this claim in the following passage: "There is no
doubt that existence is, in itself, good and glory and nonexistence is,
in itself, evil. And this is the judgment of the primordial nature."
(Mulla Sadra, 1990a, p. 121)15

It is helpful to notice that if we accept this claim we should consider
philosophers' exploration and analysis of several types of evil to
disclose its non-existential nature as mere admonitions (tanbihat) and
reminders. This is because Muslim philosophers commonly maintain the
possibility of some evident proposition being obscure for some people
(due to certain reasons). In this case some reminders and admonitions
may be required in order to make the proposition acceptable.

However, it seems that most of Muslim philosophers were not ready to
confine themselves to this claim and thus tried to provide some further
grounds.

2. To explore several types of evil
-----------------------------------

The second way is to explore several types of evils in order to show
that in all cases the essential evil is a kind of privation (We
considered one example of this approach in Avicenna). This approach
sometimes has been considered as an attempt to present a kind of
inductive argument.

This interpretation, however, has raised an objection based on the weak
logical status of induction: inductive arguments are not logically valid
arguments and thus, can not result in certain conclusions. Therefore, no
inductive argument can conclusively provide adequate support for**TNNE**
.

Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, for example, puts his objection in this way:

*This [i.e., to justify**TNNE** on the basis of exploring several types
or instances of evils] is to rely on just a few examples and you have
known that this does not cause any certainty. (Al-Razi and al-Tusi,
1404, part 2, p. 80).*

It is clear that this objection is based on the aforementioned
interpretation. But we may interpret their project just as an attempt to
provide some evidences for**TNNE** and to answer some possible alleged
counterexamples.

Mulla Sadra, after examining the nature of several types of evil such as
immoral dispositions and actions as well as some physical evils such as
extreme heat and frigidity, puts his defense of this approach in a clear
way:

*The objective of mentioning these examples is not to argue for this
claim by means of induction or analogy, but to answer the
counterexamples and clarify the distinction between essential and
accidental evils and abolish the confusion between these two and reveal
that evilness in all things seen as evil refers to or originates from a
non-existential aspect. (Mulla sadra, 1981, p. 62)*

3. To present a deductive argument
----------------------------------

There is no doubt that the main ground for**TNNE** , if any at all,
could be a deductive argument. Philosophers who adopted this approach
proposed different formulations some of which are more complicated than
others.16

Mulla Sadra's argument, though long and almost complicated, deserves to
be cited in detail:

*And the argument is that if evil was an existential entity, it would be
evil either for itself or for another object. [But] it is impossible for
it to be evil for itself since otherwise it couldn't have existence at
all because the existence of an object cannot require its nonexistence
or privation of one of its perfections. And if an object requires the
privation of some of its perfections, the [real] evil will consist in
that privation and not that very objectâ€¦. And it is also impossible for
an evil, given that it is existent, to be evil for another being since
it would be evil either because it obliterates that object or
obliterates one of its perfections or does not obliterate anything. So,
if it is evil because it obliterates that object or one of its
perfections, then the evil is nothing but the nonexistence of that
object or the privation of its perfection and not that existential
entity itself. And if it does not obliterate anything, then it will not
be an evil for that object since we certainly know that whatever does
not cause the nonexistence of an object, nor the privation of its
perfection could not be regarded an evil for that object since that
object is not harmed or damaged by it. (Mulla Sadra, 1981, pp. 58-59)*
17

In order to criticize this argument I need a broad space. In short, one
may say that it commits the fallacy of begging the question for in some
stages Sadra proceeds in a manner as if he already has presupposed a
non-existential nature for evils. For example, he says that it is
impossible for an object to be evil for itself since "the existence of
an object cannot require its nonexistence or privation of one of its
perfections." It seems that this requirement itself is based on an
assumption about evil being necessarily linked to some kinds of
nonexistence, but this assumption is what the argument seeks to
establish. If this objection is applicable here, then we may conclude
that the argument is nothing but a detailed pseudoargument which reveals
one's intuition about the non-existential nature of evils.


