Introduction
============

In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

All praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds. May the peace and
blessings of Allah be upon Muhammad, his pure Household and the
righteous among his companions. Indeed people's enthusiasm towards Islam
and embracing it in overwhelming numbers is indisputable. This great
phenomenon is drawing the attention of observers everywhere, whether
they believe in Islam or not.

It is appropriate to ask: Is this the result of efforts exerted by
Muslim missionaries? Has the means of communication, at the disposal of
Islam, reached the level of those of its rivals? To say the least, the
answers are doubtful, particularly to the second question.

A great number of Muslims still do not see the necessary connection
between being a Muslim and a missionary, conveying the message of Islam;
unlike the first generation of Muslims who worked under the banner of
the Messenger (s.a.w.). In the same vein, a large number of Muslims do
not consider themselves responsible for exemplifying Islam and the
practicing of it in terms of personal behaviour, ethics and tens of
other aspects of good conduct. Consequently, some Muslims would do a
great damage to Islam or even distance many people from it by acting
contrary to their religion.

But, it is obvious that the means of communica-tion are at the disposal
of others, especially by the West, both in its religious and civil
sense, surpassed what is obtained in Islamic media, in the same way, the
West's industry and technology surpasses that of the East.

People' turning towards Islam, being in the West or in the East, and
from different classes of society, preceded by the educated people, is
due to the empti-ness of the ideologies of Western materialism, on the
one hand, and shows the richness of the Islam in its thought, belief and
tenets of behavior, on the other.

The Western man has no doubt attained all the means of material
comfort. What he lacks is a tranquil heart, a blissful mind, a noble
soul and an intellect that can relate with profound matters and lofty
objectivees. Thus, whenever the Muslims gain the opportunity to play the
role of the deliverers of the Message of Islam and become the
missionaries bearing its word to the world surrounding them, then the
Promised Day on which Islam shall overwhelm all religions and
ideolog-ies will definitely be near, Allah willing: And give glad news
to the faithful.

However, as Islam has its own principles, bases, concepts and rules,
therefore, the issue of propagation is also given special attention and
the verses of the Holy Qur'an and the noble texts have defined and
explained the features of propagation and cited its milestones. The
evolution of societies, coupled with the progress of knowledge and the
flourishing of the arts, all have a great influence on the methods of
Islamic propagation, and are closely interconnected with a number of
social sciences.

We are glad to present this study to our dear readers, beseeching
Allah, the Most High, to make our community the best of communities
selected for mankind commanding what is right and forbidding what is
wrong and believe in Allah. All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the
worlds.


Al-Balagh Foundation

**The Divine Message - A Transformation Movement**

"…verily Allah changes not the condition of a people until they change
what is in theirsel-ves;…" Holy Qur'an (Ra\`d 13 : 11)

"O my people! how is that I invite you unto salvation and you call me
unto fire? You call me that I should disbelieve in Allah and associate
with Him that I have no knowledge of, and I invite you unto the
Almmighty, and the Oft-Forgiving (Lord)". Holy Qur'an (Mu'min 40: 41-
42)

The study and analysis of the form of the divine call, its thought,
composition, constituents and objecti-ves make us conclude that it is a
movement for transformation, whose main objective is to change man's
social and intellectual conditions, and is not a syncretic call that
accepts compromises or corrupt situations contrary to its principles.
This call rests on the foundation of the belief in Allah, the One, the
Unique, calling people to Him so that His Divine unity will be confessed
to and worshipping Him be establish-ed on the earth.

This great foundation and broad mode of thought clearly espouses the
transformative nature of the Islamic message. It is really a call for
the transforma-tion of concepts and reforming what the pertain to, such
as feelings and sentiments, and for redirecting the mental powers and
faculties. This is regarded as the fundamental principle for bringing
about a comprehen-sive change in behaviour, relationships, coordination,
civilization and way of life. The Holy Qur'an makes it clear by
saying:

"…verily Allah changes not the condition of a people until they change
what is in theirselves;…" Holy Qur'an (Ra\`d 13 : 11)

A sound heart is the very foundation of a sound and healthy formation,
the uprightness of both individ-ual and society and the deserving of
divine recompense. "The Day when will avail not wealth or sons, save him
who comes unto Allah with a heart submissive." Holy Qur'an (Shu\`ara
88-89)

For this reason, the Qur'an builds the move-ment of social changes,
including politics, economy, and social behaviour, on the foundation of
changing the nature of the human self and its inner realm.

So, this change starts from the depths of the mind and the purification
of the self and sentiments, so as to attain the sound and healthy heart
which is free from evil tendencies and does not accede to straying,
corruption or the penetration of the perverted inner intellect. From
studying the verses of the Qur'an which talk about the form of the
Islamic message and its principles, one will understand that it is a
transformative message, whose aim is to eradicate the condition of
pre-Islamic period of ignorance and uproot all its dimentions.

In this sense, it is a call that demolishes, rebuilds and changes the
mode of thinking and the method of material thought, as well as, a way
of properly unders-tanding things.

It is a call for a change in belief and the foundation of thought in
life, and a transformation of feelings, sentiments and human emotions.
It is also a call for change in the human relation-ships and ties and an
exposition of the nature of human behaviour in addition to social and
historical changes. It is a call for change in organisation and laws;
for changing the course of life.

It is a movement which persists in building the individual, the society
and the state in a distinctive manner and a continuous change based on
the principl-es of demolition and reconstruction.

A perusal of the verses previously mentioned will reveal the method of
transformation carried by the Islamic Message and the fact that it
rejects the com-promising stand, vis-à-vis pre-Islamic period of
Jahiliyyah, with all its diverse denominations, schools of thought and
social behaviour. Nowadays, this Jahiliyyah has, no doubt, taken on new
theoretical forms and trends of philosophical,

political, economi-cal and mental schools aiming to explain the nature,
thought and behaviour of man and his social life, in a manner which
contradicts the Islamic approach. The latter starts with changing the
mode of thinking and belief and building a principle of thought based on
firm, rational and scientific foundations. The following verses of the
Holy Qur'an portray a clear picture of this by the transformation in
thought and belief. Allah, the Most High, says:

"You call me that I should disbelieve in Allah and associate with Him
that I have no knowledge of, and I invite you unto the Almighty, and the
Oft-Forgiving (Lord)". Holy Qur'an (Mu'min 40: 41- 42)

"I withdraw from you and what you call up-on other than Allah, and I
call upon (only) my Lord…" Holy Qur'an (Maryam 19: 48)

"…and whoever disbelieves the rebels (false deities) and believes in
Allah, has indeed laid hold on the strongest handle no break is for it…"
Holy Qur'an (Bqara 2:256)

Thus, the Divine Message of Islam starts with thought and belief to be
the base that carries the edifices and deliniates the course for life.
It is a call to the unity of Allah as the basis on which civilization is
built, and the social and psych-ological condition is established.

Then, it stats to purify the self and change the inner realm of man,
ranging from his feelings and his sentiments, like those of love, hate,
anger, pleasure, etc., and construct it on the basis of the belief in
Allah, the Glorious.

The Holy Qur'an establishes this fact:

"And the believes men and the believer women, they are guardians to one
another..." Holy Qur'an (Tawba 9: 71)

"Verily, your guardian is (none else but) Allah and His Apostle
(Muhammad) and those who believe,…" Holy Qur'an (Ma'ida 5: 55)

"…Muhammad is the Apostle of Allah, and those who are with him are
vehement against the infidels, compassionate among themselves…" H oly
Qur'an Fath 48:29)

"O you who believe! Take not the disbeliev-ers for friends rather than
the believers; …" Holy Qur'an (Nisa 4: 144)

"You shall find not a people who believe in Allah and the Hereafter
befriending, those who oppose Allah and His Apostle, …" Holy Qur'an
(Mujadala 58: 22)

The noble Messenger, Muhammad (s.a.w.), has firmly established the
nature of emotional and mental relationships between the believers,
says: "The strongest bond of belief is to love for the sake of Allah and
hate for the sake of Allah" "None of you will be a (true) believer until
he likes for his brother what he likes for himself."

"The most accomplished in belief from among the believers is the best
of them in morals." "The best of mankind is he who benefits others."

It is within these foundations and principles that Islam changed the
feelings, sentiments and drives, both mental and moral, and coordinated
and strengthened them on the basis of loyalty to the Almighty Allah, His
Messenger and the believers as well as, disassociation from the enemies
of Allah. In the following verses, the Holy Qur'an portrays the strong
emotions and the interplay of belief and sentiment, and the feelings
that bestow such mental urges and aroused emotions upon the one
contented in thought:

"And when they hear (the Holy Qur'an) what has been sent to (Our)
Apostle (Muham-mad) you will see their eyes overflowing with tears on
account of what they recognize of the truth; say they;: \`O Our Lord! We
believe, so write us down with the witness (of the truth).'"
Holy Qur'an (Ma'ida 5: 83)

"Allah has sent down the best recital, a Book consistent (in its parts)
with iteration, at which do shudder the skins of those who fear their
Lord, then get softened their skins and their hearts unto the
remembrance of Allah; This is Allah's guidance, guides He with it
whomseover He wills; and whomsoever allows Allah to stray, for him there
is no guide." Holy Qur'an (Zumur 39:23)


