Causes of Differences
=====================

A survey of Islamic thought and history and an exploration of the
causes of conflicts shows that they centered on the following points: 1-
Scientific differences and the multip-licity of the Methods of Ijtihad,
Comprehension and Istinbat:

It is a scientific conflict, like the differences of whether a given
tradition truly came from the Prophet (s.a.w.) or not, or the
differences on the meaning of a particular Qur'anic verse, or the rules
derived from it, or the abrogation of it by a another verse or not, or
accepting a particular historical event or rejecting it, or the
differences on whether to accept certain terminologies, such as,
\`Qiyas' (analogy) and \`Istihsan' (approval) or not, or to accept the
companions school of thought \`madhab al-Sahabi' as a compulsory verdict
or not, which continues even to the present day.

Just as these issues and realities have a direct bearing on one's
understanding of Islamic legislation and ideology, the level of
knowledge of the scholar practicing \`Istinbad', and his ability, also
affect the understanding.

Scientific conflicts take a great share in indoctrinating the academic
mentality and promoting the by and opinions through conducting
provocations, criticisms, dialogues and methodology in order to defend
the accepted theory.

2- Bigotry and Selfish Desire: This is where the greatest problem lies,
because bigotry, corrup-tion and selfish desire negate all objectivity,
scientific thinking and the methodology of dialogue. Instead it brings
about mental impedi-ments, deepens the conflicts, sows hatred and
vengence on the opposite view. In this case, the scientific dialogue
gives way to protecting selfish interests and personal accomplish-ments
rather than depending on the truth, principles and scientific reality.

3- Political and Worldly Interests: The beginning of the conflicts
which occured on the day of the Prophet's (s.a.w.) demise, was political
in nature, as there are differences on the understanding of the Qur'an
and the Sunna (the Prophet's Traditions) and their applications. These
facts became conspicuous during the time of the companions, especially
under the rule of Uthman bin Affan, the third caliph, when he mainly
depended on the Umayyads in his administration. The revolt against
Uthman and his assassination, the outbreak of armed conflicts between
the constituted authority of Imam Ali (a.s.) and the seccesionist
Mu'awiyya bin Abi Sufyan are all proofs of political differences.

As a result, two governments existed in the Islamic community, the
cause of which was political differences, as well as, the differences in
understanding and applying of the Book and the Sunna. One of these two
governments represented the Omayyads, which was considered, by the
companions, as having submitt-ed to Islam by force (after oppressing and
subsequently fighting it). The second government consisted of Imam Ali
(a.s.) and the Prophet's companions \`sahaba' both the immegrants
\`Muhajirin' and the helpers \`Ansar' who made up the vanguards for
building Islam under the leadership of Imam Ali (a.s.), and saw his
superiority in the field of leadership and legislation.

When the two governments became distinct from one another, the Omayyad
government consolidated its power by adopting the ideological conflicts
and tyrannizing the scholars and men of political and jurisprudential
thought who subscribed to the school of Ali and his household
\`Ahlul-Bait' . This action was meant to exclude them from the political
struggle thereby eliminating any political opposition. A war of
propaganda and slander was waged against the followers of Ah-lul-Bait
(a.s.) and their ideology.

Then came the Abbasids dynasty which proved more oppressive and
terroristic to the Ahl-ul-Bait (household) of the Holy Prophet (a.s.).
It is noteworthy that the tyranny of these dynasties did not stop at the
Imams of the Ahl-ul-Bait (a.s.), and the scholars of their school, but
affected the founders of other Islamic schools, as well.

Those people with political interests, the sycophants and beneficiaries
had their day, sowing those differences between the Muslims, applying it
in order to conselidate their power and posing as defenders of this
school or that, to gain followers and protectors. Islamic history is
replete with bloody wars between the rulers who exploited that
destructive weapon.

4- Historical Differences: History is nothing but a register of events
and occurances which took place in the past according to the social
laws. The Muslims paid great attention in writing the life history of
the Prophet (s.a.w.) and Islamic history throughout the ages.
Nevertheless, historical records are afflicted by a great problem which
shows itself as the absence of fairness and objectivity and the
existence of forgery, or skipping a good deal of facts in order to
please political figures, or because of enmity towards other ideological
or jurisprudential schools, or because of blind bigotry. These attitudes
had distorted the reality and other historical facts and records.

After the spreading of knowledge and aware-ness and the later
generations becoming enlighten-ed, the rise of Islamic reform movements,
the clamour for proximity of the Muslims, their consciousness of the
danger of contemporary \`Jahiliyya' and the political, ideological and
the civilizational challenges, caused the Muslims to turn to ideological
dialogue and scientific investi-gation. The first step they took was to
start from the postulates and facts accepted by all, so that these
axioms would be the foundation of understanding and dialogue in
establishing the truths.

It is pertinent, here, to mention the steps to be taken in the dialogue
between Muslims. Scientific experience has proved that these steps can
contribute immensely in bringing about the mutual understanding and
removal of the mental and ideological obstacles in the way of proximity.
We hope that these steps can make the foundation of ideological and
political unity among the Muslims.

Those concerned with this difficult task should also be able to
differentiate one sect from another and employ the appropriate methods
in discussing with each other. The Islamic postulates accepted by all
Muslims and on which any dialogue between members of different sects or
schools of thought should be based are centered on the following
points:

1- That every person who testifies to the two testimonies (that there
is no deity worthy of worship except Allah and Muhammad (s.a.w.) is His
Messeng-er) is a Muslim. He enjoys the rights other Muslims enjoy and is
charged with responsibilities similar to theirs.

2- That disunity, disputes and enmity between the Muslims are forbidden
in Islam. All the Muslims accept this fact and their duty is to act as
one community with the same objectives.

3- The Muslims share the view that to exercise Itihad is allowed and
that Islamic rules are of two categories; those that occur in clear
texts and those that are the result of \`Ijtihad'. That there shall be
no Ijtihad where a clear text exists. That the result of \`Ijtihad' is,
at most, speculative and therefore liable to criticism and abrogation
where the mistake of the scholar exercising Ijtihad is established. On
these bases, the scientific dialogue concerning the disputed issues
takes off.

4- The Book and the Sunna are the basic proofs accepted by all Muslims
and the yardstick for all other disputed proofs. The discussion must
start from this fact, then proofs are adduced for the soundness or
otherwise of other sources of Islamic jurisprudence, such as analogy
\`qiyas' and approval \`istihisan'. Similarly, the proofs for the
controversial secondary rules \`ahkam al-far\`iyya' are tested.

5-The experts on hadith and other great learned scholars from different
Islamic schools and sects have compiled the hadith from different chains
of narrators producing their compendiums of hadith. Each one of these
scholars had his narrators by whom he related the hadith and ascribed it
to the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.).

The books compiled by these scholars contain conflicting narrations
coming from those narrators and the scholars from different schools of
thought never approved the soundness of whatever is recorded in those
compendiums. Each scholar, therefore, holds his view and criticizes that
of others.

The method of scientific dialogue which is followed by the true
believers in establishing unity and mutual understanding between the
Islamic schools of thought, makes it incumbent on the Muslims to consent
to the facts accepted by the scholars. They should examine the chains of
narrators of controversial narrations to know the extent to which they
conform to the Book of Allah and the unanimously confirmed hadiths of
the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.). This will help them to know the sound
hadith and free them from ideological enmity which the enemies of Islam,
who reap benefits from our disunity, try to perpetuate.

It will also make them realize that the weak narrations found in the
hadith books, are regarded as a pretext for attacking one another, being
denounced as renegades or sinners or villifying others. Definitely,
scientific investigation, methoological intellect, sincere and true
approach in searching for facts, is the only healthy way for conducting
dialogue among Islamic schools. This same method must be employed when
studying books on history and biography in order to establish historical
facts, correcting historical distor-tions and cleansing it of falsehood
and interpolations.


**Procedures of Missionary Work**

The methods and means of delivering Islam to the audience and
missionary work in general, is among the critical issues which
contribute to either success of missionary activities or its failure.
This is so because the objectives which the Islamic message is trying to
achieve and contribute in bringing into existence are fundamental
issues. These are:

1- The Islamic principles, values and thoughts, themselves, in their
capacity of being suitable and in conformity with the intellect, science
and unimpaired human taste and their natural ability of solving the
problems of mankind and building a growing civiliza-tion.

2 - The level to which Islamic mujtahids \`jurist capable of exercising
\`Ijtihad', thinkers and theoretic-ians understand those Islamic
principles, thoughts and values which they address to others and their
power of theorizing and formulating their \`ijtihad'.

3- The means, procedures and institutions to be employed in delivering
the Islamic Message.

4- The level of personality and extent of commit-ment of the Islamic
missionary, his awareness, ability in social interaction, understanding
others and examp-lification of Islamic principles and values in his
behaviour and actions that can influence others.

5- The level of experience in applying the Islamic system, the adequacy
of machinery of the Islamic government representing the religion of
Islam and its capability of examplifying the Islamic principles in
forming the state and society and in individual behaviour.

All these fundamentals have a great impact in the success of missionary
work or its failure. Therefore, the Holy Qur'an has treated the issue of
means and procedures of propagation, imparted awareness and activism to
the propagators, stressed on the importance of presenting a living
example for practising Islam and proper unders-tanding and awareness and
the method of interact-ing with the audience in these words:

"And call you unto the way of your Lord with wisdom and kindly
exhortation and dispute with them in the manner which is the best;
verily you Lord knows better of him who has gone astray from His path;
and He knows best of those guided aright."
Holy Qur'an (Nahil 16: 125)

The importance the Qur'an attached to means and procedures of
propagation was as great as that which it attached to its aims,
objectives and the results towards which the whole effort is made.

Because of the importance of the procedures and the personality of the
propagators of the Islamic Message, the Qur'an commands that the mission
is to be prepared both ideologically and socially and be equipped with
means and procedures that will ensure their success. In a similar way it
stressed that this important task be assigned to a group and enjoined
their proper religious education:

"And that there should be among you a group who call (mankind) unto
virtue and enjoin what is good and forbid wrong; and these are they who
shall be successful." Holy Qur'an (Al-e-Imran 3: 103)

And He said:

"…; why should not then a company from every party of them go forth
that they may acquire (proper) unders-tanding in religion, and that they
may warn their people when they return unto them…" Holy Qur'an (Tawba 9:
122)

A wrong procedure will definitely damage the reputation of the Message
and those who convey it. Not only that, it will distort the pure and
crystal clear picture and the attractiveness of the Islamic principles,
values and goals. Thus, the procedures and means of conveying the
Islamic Message have a mental, ideological and practical influence in
the success and or failure of mission-ary work.

There is an important legislative issue here: The procedure and method
of propagation is one of man's actions, each of which is controlled by
one of the following rules: Obligation \`wujub', forbidden \`hurmah' or
allowed \`ibahah'. The laws of Islam do not disassociate the purity of
procedure and means from the ends and results at which it aims. The
great Prophet (s.a.w.) alludes to this fact:

"Obedience to Allah cannot be achieved through sinful ways".

This shows that Islamic principles do not approve the achievement of
aims by all means, because, contrary to Michiviellian politics, the ends
do not justify the means. It is, therefore, incumbent on those
undertaking missionary work to choose only legal means and methods that
conform to Islamic rules through which Islamic aims can be achieved.

The fundamental issues that must be considered here are:

1- The procedure and way of invitation to Islam and the level of
thought and social realities. "We, the company of Prophets, have been
ordered to address the people according to the level of their
intellect". What to note also is the particular situation of every
invitee so that we can address him based on Islamic concepts.

Every individual is at a particular level of thinking and mental
disposition, consequently, there are certain inlets through which his
intellect and heart can be reached so that the Islamic thoughts would
not face any internal resistance. This is why it is necessary to study
persons and groups and reach a scientific understanding of their natures
before addressing them. And objectives of Islam.

2- The real mental, economic, political, social, ideological, etc.,
needs of an individual or group must be considered. Contemporary man, is
indeed, suffering from anxiety and psychological alienation, economic
and political problems, social injustice and a host of other
encumbrances, just as the society is weighted down by these problems. It
is, therefore, foremost to address both the individual and the society
on how to solve their problems. This will definitely open up responses
from the depths of the heart and the Islamic message will readily be
accepted when it becomes clear that it is the only alternative that can
bring relief.

3- The invitation must be a gradual process and the Islamic concepts
presented in stages so that it will easily be recieved, comprehended and
practised.

4- It is worthwhile to arrange a programme which is cultural,
informative and practical in nature. This will make propagation a
clearly thoughtout affair and not an off handed one. The propagator
should start with the fundamentals and the first principles to end up
with the intended objectives and results.

5- The propagator should start by addressing his audience from the
postulates accepted by both parties; the believer and the audience so
that what is agreed on will form the foundation from which we work
towards wider horizons and firmer belief in the principles "Say; O
people of the Book, come you to a Word common between us and you,…" Holy
Qur'an (Al-e-Imran 3:64)

6- To respect the personality of the person and or the party addressed.
Let there, in his mind be a correct picture of human dignity and
responsibility and his ability to participate in reforming the way of
life and building the society.

7- Strengthening the relationship between the present world and the
next and making the invitee perceive it so that what motivates him in
taking action and undertaking reform will be his turning towards Allah,
the Almighty and developing the means of establishing a relationship
with Him. This is, indeed, a spiritual and ideological force that gives
man an endless stimulaation.

8- There must be a strong interaction of feelings between the caller
and those he is addressing, and whose conditions of thought, ethics and
worship he is struggling to change, so that they will have a real
perception of his concern for their guidance and for improving their
condition. This can be done by sharing their sorrows and joys, giving
his donation in meeting their needs and feelings on their personal and
social distress.

9- Removing the individual or group, which is under invitation, from a
corrupt environment that can influence their thoughts, spirits and
behaviours and procuring alternative ways of fulfilling their needs for
activities and relationship. Such alternatives may include the
libraries, a society, a social foundation and religious friends.

10- Mankind has been suffering from injustice and the tyranny of
oppressive rulers throughout history. It is, therefore, a fundamental
political issue to present Islam as an alternative system which
delivers, supports and leads man. This will no doubt wipe out all
non-Islamic theories, structures and thoughts and pave the way for man's
interaction with Islamic principles and values through active
conviction.

11- Sometimes Islamic thoughts and concepts are presented directly by
means of dialogue, or giving a presentation of the thought, stand and
view of Islam or a comparison between Islam and other systems.

This often has a defined impact. Some other times it proves difficult
to introduce Islamic thought directly. In this case, the believer who
undertakes missionary work, whether he is a writer or debater or artist,
should employ the recreational method that is symbolic and rather
unrelated to Islam. This method is usually employed in stories, novels,
the theatre, poetry, films, portraits, etc. and has the effect of
convincing the other party.

12- To start dialogue on a neutral and objective beginning. If a
dialogue starts by cornering the other party and defining the expected
result and tenaciously stressing one's view, it will make the other
party experience the urge to resist and express his bigotry. Therefore,
it is better to start from a position of neutrality and gradually search
for the truth, jointly. This will positively affect the codiscussant by
having a real feeling that both parties are meerly searching for facts
and exploring for the truth in their dialogue. They can, thus, conduct
their debate in a receptive and open minded atmosphere with defensive
measures and mental obstacles removed.

The Almighty, Allah directed the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) to take up this
method by saying:

"Say: \`Who provides you with sustenance from the heavens and the
earth?' Say: \`(It is) Allah, and verily (either) we or you are guided
aright, or in manifest error?'" Holy Qur'an (Saba' 34: 24)


