Foundations of Propagation
==========================

Information dissemination and publicity activities occupy a very
important and critical position in man's life now that the world is full
of inventions and industrialization, operating with scientific methods
and advance techniques. This makes information, publicity and
ideological and psychological warfare the single most important
instrument that serves any thought, ideology, facilitates the
propagation of the principles of a people and supports politics, the
economy and boosts the morale of troops in armed combat.

Information and publicity undertakes three important tasks: Ideological
and psychological attack aimed at shaking or even destroying the
foundations of a faith or idea, introducing, buttressing and depending
on the status quo and establishing social and civic changes; creating
contentment in the minds and creating public opinion.

The more capable the means of information is in terms of technical know
how and expertise and the ability in directing the message, the more
successful it will be in fulfilling the aims and objectives of
propagation. It is, therefore, imperative for those who undertake the
duty of Islamic \`da'wa' and propagation to avail themselves of all the
advancements attained in science and technology, such as the radio, the
television, the video and the press. Similarly, the discoveries in the
field of psychology, such as the scientific understanding of the nature
of the intellect and the mind, and how they are influenced, are
indispensable.

The work of propagation and information definitely needs special
foundations for propag-ation and information dissemination on a par with
the current civilization. These foundations must put in view the rivals
of Islamic thought and what they posseses in terms of technology,
organization, administration and programmes. They should be able to
employ the different sciences in the service of propagating and
forwarding the Islamic message.

When we study and analize the methods conveying thoughts and concepts
we will find that there are three ways. They are:

1- The word.
2- The picture.
3- Practical behaviour

**1- The word:**

Since the beginning, propaganda and the need to inform the fundamental
instrument for conveying any idea and having impact on the audience has
been the word. As human knowledge and science evolved, the art of
constructing the word and the method of passing it on to the intended
audience also developed by means of oration. The Holy Qur'an discusses a
lot about the art of oration and explains the importance of the word and
its impact on the listener; psychologically and ideologica-lly. The
Almighty, Allah, says:

"See you not how sets forth Allah a parable? Of a goodly word (being)
like a goodly tree, whose root is firmly fixed, and its branches (reach)
in the heaven, yielding its fruit on every moment…" Holy Qur'an (Ibrahim
14: 23-24)

And says:

"…and speak kindly unto all people…" Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2: 83)

The Almighty Allah even commanded Moses and Haron (Aaron) (a.s.) to
employ mild speech in order to have an impact on Pharoah, the peak of
human arrogance. Using mild speech as a way of addressing the audience
gave Moses (a.s.) the hope in guiding Pharoah as the following verse
enjoins:

"Go you both unto Pharaoh, verily he has trans-gressed (the bounds).
Then speak you both unto him a gentle word, happly he may get
admonish-ed or fear (Our punishement)." Holy Qur'an (Taha 20: 43-44)

Just as the good word has a constructive psych-ological impact and a
positive and fruitful role, the evil word has a destructive impact and
deceptive and misleading role in the life of mankind. Thus, the Glorious
Qur'an attached the evil word and likened it with the evil tree which
gives only harmful fruits. Allah, the Most High, says:

"And the parable of an evil word is that of an evil tree rooted upon
the surface of the earth, it has naught of stability." Holy Qur'an
(Ibrahim 14: 26)

And He warns us of the power of deception of the word and its
misleading ideological and psychological effects, thereby exposing the
hypocrites who take it as a cover. He says:

"When you see them, marvel you their bodies; and if they speak, you
listens unto their speech; (they are) as if they were blocks of wood
propped up in garments, deem they that every cry is against them, they
are the enemy (of yours), so beware you of them! May Allah annihilate
them, whence do they deviate!" Holy Qur'an (Munafiqun 63: 4)

And His saying:

"And call you unto the way of your Lord with wisdom and kindly
exhortation and dispute with them in the manner which is the best;..."
Holy Qur'an (Nahil 16: 125)

This verse makes incumbent that the wise missionary should employ a
good word in conveying Islamic thought and exhortation to the audience.
The Holy Qur'an brought a miraculous method and a literary presentation
that bewilders the intellect and overwhelms the minds. It is a wonderous
token of eloquence that achieved the aims and objectives of the
message.

The honourable Messenger (s.a.w.) described the importance of the word
and its power of impact, change and conveying what is intended in the
following words: "Verily there is a (form of) spell in eloquent speech."
The missionary, therefore, should have literary ability and a good
command of language in discussion, speech and writing. He must be able
to make appropriate use of his words.

From the foregoing, it is obvious that 'the word', as one of the
instruments for propagation, needs the services of special
organizations. These organs would bear the responsibility of ensuring
the appropriate-ness and versatility of the language of propagation and
the method of relaying information to the audience. Those in charge of
the above mentioned organs would need the necessary expertise and
artistic ability and advanced technological tools for the collection,
broadcasting and dissemination of the fruits of those organs. Such tools
include the radio, the instruments used in recording, writing, printing,
speech, dialogue, schools, libraries, lectures and parties.

Thus, it is incumbent on us to plan and work out programmes in order to
prepare our missionaries and give them the required education and
orientation on the art of propagation and its requisite know-how.

Indeed, the conditions we are in today, have made the programmes for
preparing the orator, writer, lectur-er, journalist or advertiser
indispensable. Where we are unable to establish preparatory
organizations and foundations we can only resort to conducting special
courses for grooming the Muslim missionaries, giving them drills on
their work and conveying the expertise, experiences and information from
experienced missionaries worthy of emulation. 2- The Picture:

Man, by nature, is very responsive to pictures, scenes and other
sensory situations as portrayed in paintings, and they often have an
impact on his thoughts and feelings. The more a picture portrays
movement and thoughts the greater the reaction it entails and it would
have a stronger power for changing the viewer and be more efficient in
accomplishing its aim.

With the development of informative technology, the use of pictures and
movies in propaganda and publicity has also advanced. The art of cinema,
television and video has become the most prominent means of propaganda
and publicity, introducing ideas and concepts, presenting human problems
and influencing the senses, intellect and feelings of the viewers.

Motion pictures are more efficient in information dissemination but
conventional pictures also retain their value. Lively pictures, such as
carricatures, are no doubt a means by which the problems of society are
presented, thoughts and concepts are conveyed and the general public is
educated and given awareness.

The Islamic call is comprehensive and covers all segments of human life
and its ills. As such, applying pictorial methods in spreading Islamic
thought, presenting its solution to the societal ills and its knowledge
and culture to the general public is indeed an efficient means. Those
responsible for propagative activities should, therefore, work towards
the establish-ment of organizations, companies and centres for film
production and procure professional artists who would train people in
this field and be able to employ the motion picture in propaganda and
publicity in a successful way.

The picture, especially when projected on screen, presents an
embodiment of a thought, gives it a perceptible dimension and brings its
meaning closer to the minds, whether the thought is political,
economical, ethical, or it pertains to worship like pilgrimage, prayer
or other bodily worship.

**3- Practical Behaviour:**

"And say you (unto them), act as you will, Allah beholds your deeds,
and His Apostle, and the believers;…" Holy Qur'an (Tawba 9:105)

"O you who believe! Why say you what you (yourselves) do (it) not? Most
hateful is it unto Allah that you say what you (yourselves) do (it)
not?" Holy Qur'an (Saf 61:2-3)

"By the Time! Verily man is in loss! Save those who believe, and do
good deeds, and exhort each other to truth and exhort each other to
endurance." Holy Qur'an (Asr 103: 1-3)

The distinguishing feature of the Islamic Message is that it is a life
building message, a message for knowledge and action. It is not a
collection of sheer ideas nor mere intellectual theories. For this
reason, the Qur'an invites to a belief based on a foundation of
knowledge associated with action, as confirmed by tens of verses. The
Qur'an makes this clear enough and supports its call by these
principles. Concerning these principles the following verses of the Holy
Qur'an are explicit: "And say you (unto them), act as you will" &
"Verily man is in loss! Save those who believe, and do good deed,"

As we read the temporal disapproval of the Qur'an on those who only
talk but do not act on their word, thereby turning the principles and
objectives of Islam into mere speeches, narrations, theological
dialectics and theories devoid of reality and action.

The Holy Qur'an condemns such a stand, saying:

"Why say you what you (yourselves) do (it) not? Most hateful is it unto
Allah that you say what you (yourselves) do (it) not?" Holy Qur'an (Saf
61:2-3)

Whenever man disregards action and becomes content with mere words and
misleads himself and others into behaving such that talking alone is
sufficient, he is definitely exposing himself to the wrath of Allah, the
Most High. This is so, because such a person is a liar who says what he
does not practice and he cannot change the reality in the way. A person
who enjoins others to practice truthfulness, piety, restraining the
oppressors, kindness, helping the needy and devotion to one's
principles, but he, himself, upholds nothing from these values or even
acts contrary to it before the public view, will never be accepted by
the people and not a word nor admonish-ment of his will be acted upon.

The best way to present Islam is to act according to it. This way is
examplified in the behaviour of the true believers and in its
enforcemnent by the nation founded on Islamic principles. Only then can
the word be a means of introducing Islam since it is applied both in
behaviour and actions pertaining to the way of life.

When the sceptic witnesses practical application of Islam in the
society, in the economy, ethics, com-mitment in political freedom and
execution of Islamic laws to solve man's problems, these will serve as
the best caller to Islamic principles and the most powerful means of
satisfying others. On the other hand, propaga-tion will have a negative
effect on the audience if the Muslim missionaries distort Islam by
misapplying it and allowing a discrepancy between their word and
action.

The verses of the Revelation and the Prophetic Guidance that invite
people to justice, knowledge, production, love and peace, for example,
would lose their value and impact in the minds of the nation and people
who do not believe in Islam if they see that the Islamic society does
not apply these principles, nor do they have any impact on it. It should
be noted that others are observing our social condition and individ-ual
behaviours before they study Qur'anic texts and our legislations,
despite the fact that it is the texts and laws that are suppose to be
regarded as a judging gauge on our situation and behaviour and not the
reverse.

Other agencies and organizations that are capable of conveying the
Islamic ideology and awareness in its capacity as a practical religion
and are able to convince those who are being invited, of Islam's concern
for their welfare, are the foundation for serving humanity, like
schools, hospitals, charity organisations and humanitarian agencies,
whose duty is to preserve human rights and honour and to reveal and
demonst-rate Islam's concern for man. As the social life of man evolved
political and ideological organizations, also, evolved and as a
consequence, the means of social work that can be employed in
propagation have become numerous.


**The Qualities of a Successful Missionary**

"And call you unto the way of your Lord with wisdom and kindly
exhortation and dispute with them in the manner which is the best;..."
Holy Qur'an (Nahil 16: 125)

The believer, who conveys the Divine Message to the people, is a worker
whose effort is to spread Islam and change the form of society through
ideological methods. For the success of his work, the missionary and
propagator should possess certain qualities and distinctions. These are
summarized in the following points: 1- Sincerity and Love of Allah, the
Glorious:

The most fundamental feature of a missionary is to be sincere to Allah
and love Him. The more a person loves Allah, the Almighty, the loftier
his soul will be. He will be endowed with a continuous power for action
which will not dwindle. He firmly believes that his work is worship and
that he is striving to attain Allah's pleasure, introduce the people to
Him, subject them to His service and bring them to His proximity. This
impetus form, the strongest mental spur, propels man to carry out his
work and really be attached to it.

If this reality does not exist in the mind of the missionary, his work
will turn into a form of social responsibility devoid of spirit, impact
and devotional value and the caller will lose perseverance and
absorption in his work.

We can see this fact in Allah's saying:

"…but Allah has endeared the faith unto you, and made it attractive in
your hearts and made abhorrent unto you disbelief and transgression;
they are they who are on the right guidance." Holy Qur'an (Hujurat 49:
7)

2- Love for Others and Zeal for Reforming : When the Islamic worker
acquires the feature of loving others and being benevolent to them, and
carries a humanitarian spirit that makes him conscious of the necessity
of salvaging man and reforming him, he will embark upon his work
forcefully and committedly. His concern will be sincere and unabating,
for he always possesses his thoughts and feelings.

In the following verses of the Qur'an we read about the love that the
Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), the deliverer of mankind, had for the
people, how bitter he was about their lack of response to the call of
truth and his zeal in guiding them. These verses reveal the feelings of
uneasiness he had because of their opposing stance vis-a vis the call of
Allah:

"So maybe that you will worry yourself with grief after them, if they
believe not in this revelation (the Qur'an)." Holy Qur'an (Kahf 18: 6)

And His saying:

"…so let not your self go (in vain) in grief for them…" Holy Qura'n
(Fatir 35: 8)

These two verses of the Holy Qur'an aim at lessening the psychological
pain experienced by the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.) as a result of his
people's disregard for his call and their opposition. These verses
reveal the extent of his sincerity to the people, concern for their
guidance and zeal for transforming the society and rebuilding it,
also.

This distress and sorrow in the pure soul of the Prophet (s.a.w.)
reaches this level because of his love for humanity, and his zeal for
its delivery which can be likened to that of a compassion-ate father for
saving his children and reforming their behaviour. This sincerity, love
and zeal to guide others, is depicted by the saying of the Almighty
Allah:

"Indeed has come unto you an Apostle from among your selves; grievous
to him is your fa-ling into distress, (he is) solicitous regarding your
welfare, towards the faithful (he is) compassionate, (and) merciful."
Holy Qur'an (Tawba 9:128)

Such is the nature of the sincere Muslim whose soul is zealous for
other's guidance, he bears the message of reform and transformation
which propels him to work deligently and assidously. This is so because
the internal and psychological feelings often nourish mental convictions
with impetus and the desire to practice theoretical ideas.

3- Social Nature: One of the characteristics of a missionary is to be a
social person capable of interacting with the people. He must be jovial
and charming and be able to mingle with others. He can influence others
with his feelings, thoughts and behaviour but would not be influenced by
the polluted milieu he is working to reform, and from which he is trying
to rescue others. He will be an active factor in changing and not a
liable to surrendering whenever he encounters polluted ideologies or
behaviours. Thus, an unsociable introvert cannot serve as a successful
missionary.

An introvert may succeed in writing and exch-anging with the society in
his publications but he would only address his audience from an ivory
tower, his thoughts could not have the real contact with societal
problems nor could they react to man's needs. The Islamic call can only
interact with man in his social activities, his daily life and his
professional roles in society by coming face to face with him at social,
cultural and humanitarian foundations and mass organizations. It must
also take it upon itself to share the sorrows and joys of those it
addresses, meet their needs, and take up the responsibility of solving
the social, economic and political problems of the people. This will
convey the deep concern that propagators have for the common good.

**4- Good Behaviours:**

"And most certainly you stands on sublime morality." Holy Qur'an (Qalam
68: 4)

"…had you been severe and hard-hearted, they would surely has dispersed
away from around you…" Holy Qur'an (AL-e-Imran 3: 159)

"…and speak kindly unto all people …" Holy Qur'an (Baqarah 2: 83)

"And be kind unto him who follows you, of the believers." Holy Qur'an
(Shu\`ara 26: 215)

"…Repel you (evil) with what is the best, when lo! He between whom and
you was enimty, shall be as though he were a warm friend." Holy Qur'an
(Fussilat 41: 34)

"…and who restrain (their) anger, and forgive (the faults of)
people..." Holy Qur'an (Al-e- Imran 3: 134)

"So turn you away from them and say: \`Peace (be unto you)'; for they
shall soon know (the result)." Holy Qur'an (Zukhruf 43: 89)

"And those who, from what is vain, keep (themselves) aloof." Holy
Qur'an (Mu'minun 23: 3)

"…and dispute with them in the manner which is the best…" Holy Qur'an
(Nahil 16: 125)

The Prophet (s.a.w.) is quoted to have said :

"You can not suffice the people with your wealth, therefore, suffice
them with your good ethics."

Surely, to interact with the people and make friends with them is, in
itself, an art and a form of knowledge and expertise. Good ethics and a
nice interaction with others is one of the most influential ways to
reach the souls. Where there is no response to an idea, the good manners
find their way. The good ethics of a caller are more effective than his
persuasive word, for they are the messengers to the souls whose movement
is not hindered by obstacles. A bright face, a nice and soft speech
which makes the distressed happy, cheers up the miserable and pleases
the dis-gruntled; forgiving the wrong-doers and overlooking their faults
and gentle behaviour in which importunity, anger and emotion are shunned
and the opinion of others is respected are all means of practicing lofty
morals, which, in turn, prepares the grounds for a favourable response
from one's audience.

The Qur'an summarizes the importance of good morals in the success of
missionary work in its extolment of Prophetic demeanor, and his fruitful
social intercourse in reconciling the hearts and uniting the people
around him. It says:

"…had you been severe and hard-hearted, they would surely has dispersed
away from around you…" Holy Qur'an (AL-e-Imran 3: 159)

This verse establishes an ethical and psycholog-ical method of
attracting the people towards the ranks of the believers and winning
their hearts. At the same time, it explains how unseemly interaction
with others and uncouth and harsh behaviour would distance and disperse
others from the believers. Thus, the believers would be left in
isolation and lose their supporting masses; a situation that will give
their enemies a free hand in cornering and destroying them since they
are already mentally besieged.

The Holy Qur'an attributes the unity of the people and their obedience
to the message, to the purity of the Prophet (s.a.w.) from all kinds of
harshness and unwholesome dealings and his mild and refined character.
"And most certainly you stands on sublime morality." Holy Qur'an (Qalam
68: 4)

**5- Wisdom and Foresight:**

"And call unto the way of you r Lord with wisdom and kindly exhortation
and dispute with them in the manner which is the best." Holy Qur'an
(Nahl 16: 125)

One of the fundamental characteristics of a successful missionary is to
have wisdom and foresight in his work and relationship with others. He
must be able to plan for the future, beyond the present stage and
condition; and be able to place them under his forecast of the future.
He works and plans for his future, the future of the coming generations
and the clashes with other civilizations.

He does not limit himself to chang-ing the present deviation only. The
sage is one who assigns to everything its rightful place. He is wise in
thought, dealings, speech and choosing the appropriate language and the
way he treats people. This is important because when a piece of work
lacks wisdom, it turns into a damage and hinders the Islamic course.

The evidence of wisdom in a missionary consist of the following:

He plans his work, thinking for the future as he thinks for the present
time.
He knows how to win friends.
He knows how to steer clear of enemies.
He knows how to win others who are unable to be rightly guided.
He knows how to employ the effort of opponents for the benefit of his
stance.
He makes use of the experiences of others.
He knows how to convince others of his thought and scheme.
He knows how to successfully deal with the society in which he lives.
He knows how to take precautions for contingenc-ies and
probabilities.
He knows how to select effective words.
He knows how to identify the correct stand and then selects it

6- Commitment to the Islamic Laws: It is imperative that the bearer of
an ideology who invites others to it possesses such a behaviour as would
make him the mirror of his thoughts and a practical model which others
can emulate.

In a case whereby there is discrepancy between words and deeds, the
trust of those invited to the cause who believe in it, act according to
it and await its success will surely be shaken and shattered. Surely,
accusation will replace their trust and despair their hope.

The Holy Qur'an has mentioned many a parable about the truthful
believers who follow up word with deed, working even before speaking.
Their way was work and commitment rather than exhortations given from
the pulpits, nor was it by way of writing books, after which they
withdraw it.

Based on the close relationship between word and deed, Islamic thought
distinguishes between Islam (submission) and Iman (belief). Islam is to
acknow-ledge the two testifications which will confirm his being a
Muslim, although he might be uncommitted to the rule of the Shari'a. He
who accepts Islam, but does not act according to it, remains a Muslim,
although being a deviated sinner. Iman, on the other hand, means
acknowledging the two testifications and acting in accordance with what
the message bears, be it a belief system, ideology, legislation or
values, in the fields of behaviour and overall way of life.

It is incumbent upon the person who calls people to sacrifice and
strive in the way of Allah with wealth and life, to help the needy, to
truth, faithfulness and trustworthiness, to stay clear of forbidden
desires, to disregard the vanities of the world and to long for Allah's
recompense to apply these principles in his behaviour and deeds, so that
he can be a real missionary in behaviour and action, not only in word
and exhortations.

A society that could not feel and witness sincerity in the work of a
missionary would not just accept empty words. The holy Qur'an has
forbidden the act of talking without backing one's speech with action,
and informs us that the wrath of Allah awaits such people.

Allah, the Exalted, says:

"O you who believe! Why say you what you (yourselves) do (it) not? Most
hateful is it unto Allah that you say what you (yourselves) do (it)
not." Holy Qur'an (Saff 61: 2-3)

Allah, the Most High, has sworn that man will be in vain unless he
backs his word with action. And He says: "By the Time! Verily man is in
loss! Save those who believe, and do good deeds, and exhort each other
to truth and exhort each other to endurance." Holy Qur'an (Asr 103:
1-3)

And He says:

"And say (unto them), act as you will, Allah beholds your deeds, and
His Apostle, and thee believers." Holy Qur'an (Tawba 9: 105)

Both the Qur'an and the history bear witness to the fact that the
highest example for mankind in the issue of conformity of action with
word is the Messenger of Allah, Muhammad (s.a.w.). This is why he was
the model for mankind by practicing the principles to which he called
the people. He was able to build the ideological edifice and construct
that great society and glorious, everlasting civilization on the
foundations of tawhid, unity of Allah, and ethical values.

**7- Ability to Handle Discussions:
**
"…and dispute with them in the manner which is the best." Holy Qur'an
(Nahl 16: 125)

The success of the issue by which he addressses people and public
opinion, depends on the value of its principles and on the people who
bear the message and defend it.

A right issue can be a lost one if its presentation and defence is
entrusted to someone who is not able to carry out the assignment. More
so, he might also do a lot of damage to the cause. Because of the
importance of the word he method of dialogue, the Holy Qur'an presented
various verses that discuss the method and procedures of handling it.
Discussion and holding dialogues with others, is indeed, an art in
itself.

It, is, therefore, incumbent upon the missionary to perfect this art by
rehearsal and practical drill. On the part of the foundation for
propagation, it is imperative to groom the propagators, and those
concerned with missionary work, by educating and training them on the
method of handling dialogues and symposiums. There should be rehearsals
in dialogue under the guidance and supervision of an experienced
specialist. Where their strong and weak points, in the way of conducting
the dialogue and debate, as well as, their method of presenting an idea
and defending it, should be pointed out.

Perhaps, one of the foundations of a successful dialogue is to engage
the opponent by starting from the postulates which were accepted by both
parties, so that a desired result can be reached. One must not seek
victory over his opponent just for victory's sake, irrespective of
whether he becomes convinced of an idea or rejects it. The objective of
a discussant is to convince the other party of his idea and not to be
victorious over him.

8- It is a well known fact that, conveying an idea or a word to its
recipient and gaining accep-tance, is one of the loftiest arts in a
human's rela-tionship. This art has its own instruments and techniques
for expression and has access to the mind of the audience.

It is imperative for the missionary to perfect the means of conveying
Islamic thoughts and deliver it to the people with what he possesses.
He, therefore, stands in need of the art of oration, discussion, writing
or lecturing. He must train himself, putting much effort in mastering
whatever he can of these arts, so as to enable himself to relay his
thoughts and convince others of the Islamic enterprise, or the issues
which he is working to change and reform. To procure enough speakers,
writers and other experts is one of those obligatory duties that is a
collective responsibility of the whole Muslim community (wajib
al-Kifa'I), since the Islamic message and principles are in need of
it.

**9- Ensuring Islamic Consciousness and Culture:**

"…; why should not then a company from every party of them go forth
that they may acquire (proper) unders-tanding in religion, and that they
may warn their people when they return unto them…" Holy Qur'an (Tawba 9:
122)

"Say (O Our Apostle Muhammad): \`This is my way, I invite (you all)
unto Allah; with clear sight, (which) I and he who follows me
(possess-es)…" Holy Qur'an (Yusuf 12: 108)

One of the essential elements and conditions thaat a person who intends
to work for the propagation of Islam must fulfil, is that he must have
social and political consciousness, the education the society needs and
the knowledge of religion, its fundamentals and methods. This does not
mean that Islam exempts those without much knowledge of the duty of
commanding good and forbidding evil and inviting others to Islam. Every
Muslim is duty bound to play his part in that field according to his
knowledge of the rules of Shari'a (Islamic Law).

In the above-mentioned verses, the Holy Qur'an stresses that having
religious knowledge and insight are among the fundamental pivots of
calling people to Allah. 10- Acquaintance with the composition of the
society, its situation, conditions and ideological, political, civil and
psychological problems.

The Muslim missionary encounters complex societal ideas, customs,
traditions and compositions. He relates with a society conditioned by
its problems, anxieties, aspirations and expectations. Islam, being a
civilizational scheme concerned with reforming the society, makes it
obligatory on the missionary to be conversant with the ideological and
psychological composition of his society and have full awareness of its
problems. The following verse summarizes this:

"Say (O Our Apostle Muhammad): \`This is my way, I invite (you all)
unto Allah; with clear sight, (which) I and he who follows me
(posses-ses)…" Holy Qur'an (Yusuf 12: 108)

Therefore, those undertaking the issue of propaga-tion have no recourse
but to conduct studies and analysis and increase their comprehension and
draw reform programmes.

11- Belief in the Fulfillment of the Aims of Propagation: One of the
most critical problems facing missionary work is to have despair and be
pessimistic in reforming the society and correcting corrupt practices,
and thinking that the Islamic programme is unable to take up the role of
a pioneering leadership. A Muslim imbued with the message starts his
work with the hope for changing the situation. He is propelled into
setting the divine commands into motion, those commands which call for
opposition to corruption and crushing the tyrants however powerful and
haughty they might be.

The Holy Qur'an has indeed roused the spirit of developing strong hope
in the souls of the believers and removing their despair. Many verses
try to curb this problem so that the dynamo of hope would move towards
the objectives. For example, His saying:

"And indeed We did write in the Psalms (Zubur) (given to David) after
the Reminder (Tawaith given to Moses), that the earth, shall inherit it
My servants righteous." Holy Qur'an (Anbiya 21: 105)

"And indeed We to bestow (Our) favour upon those who were considered
weak in the land, and to make them the Imams (guides in faith), and to
make them the heirs." Holy Qur'an (Qasas 23: 5)

"Allah has promised unto those of you who believe and do good deeds
that He will certainly appoint them successors in the earth as He
appointed successors those before them." Holy Qur'an (Nur 24: 55)

Indeed, the pioneering party of Islam, under the leadership of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.), set out to oppose the tyrants of the earth, in spite
of their few numbers and paucity of means. It created a miraclous feat
having been victorious and overpowering the seemingly invincible. Thus,
faith and the power of will, not the power of the sword and wealth, was
the victor, despite the role of material wherewithal in awarding
victory.

Indeed, the Holy Qur'an reminded the believers to this fact, and
presented a lively picture of practical experience before them:

"Indeed Allah has succoured you at \`Badr' when you were contemptibly
weak.." Holy Qur'an (Al-e-Imran 3:122)

12- Endurance of Difficulties and Tribula-tions: The bearer of the
message and the reformer who calls for establishing Islam, changing the
composition of society, changing the ideological and cultural content of
the society, the reform of which he is working for, will no doubt face
serious rejection and stiff resistance from the powers protecting the
ignorant \`ignorant' system and existing social composition. They will
do this, in order to protect their interests and selfish desires, which
they will loose whenever the tyrannic leadership reverts to Islam.

In view of this, the patrons of the system will hasten, with all the
means at their disposal, to destroy and eliminate those whose main aim
is changing the society and establishing the Islamic alternative. It is
necessary for those working for the sake of Islam to realize this fact
and be ready to endure all trials, tribulations and tyranny with
perseverance, steadfastness and unpliable resolution.

13- Considering the development of the human society and the complexity
of its problems, institutions and active forces, it will be naive to
regard impulsive, unprompted work as capable of executing any task and
achieving the aims. Therefore, it is necessary to conduct studies and
plan for the activities and sources that can carry Islamic thought,
principles and objectives.

The missionaries must be capable of planning on two levels; the
individual and institutional levels. Perhaps planning which is
indispensable in the success of Islamic objectives is also obligatory in
the Shari'a, and this is in accordance with a precept of the principles
of Islamic jurisprudence \`ilmul usul' which says:

"Anything (or act) without which an obligatory act cannot be fulfilled,
is itself an obligatory thing / act".


