The Missionary's Education
==========================

"…; why should not then a company from every party of them go forth
that they may acquire (proper) unders-tanding in religion, and that they
may warn their people when they return unto them…" Holy Qur'an (Tawba 9:
122)

This verse discusses about the obligation of acquiring religious
knowledge, as well as, spreading it to others. It establishes the
connection between the imperative nature of studying Islam, being aware
of its thoughts and concepts and assimilating its culture, on the one
hand, and inviting to it, propagating it and presenting it to others, on
the other hand. This is because acquiring knowledge \`tafaqquh', which
is mentioned in the verse, means understanding, ideological and
intellectual awareness, as well as, grasping the Islamic rules, aims and
objectives.

This is how this holy verse made it compulsory upon all Muslims to
acquire knowledge, as well as, calling people to Allah. Allah, the Most
High says:

"Say (O Our Apostle Muhammad): \`This is my way, I invite (you all)
unto Allah; with clear sight, (which) I and he who follows me
(possesses); anad glory be to Allah, and I am not of the polytheists."
Holy Qur'an (Yusuf 12: 108)

Indeed, if this Qur'anic exposition talks on acquiring religious
knowledge in its capacity as a collective responsibility which must be
discharged to the level of sufficiency, and that the propagator should
invite others with clear awareness, comprehension and insight, then,
other verses teach the missionaries and propagators the method to be
used in calling people to Islam. For instance, His saying:

"And call unto the way of you r Lord with wisdom and kindly exhortation
and dispute with them in the manner which is the best." Holy Qur'an
(Nahl 16: 125)

"…Repel you (evil) with what is the best, when lo! He between whom and
you was enimty, shall be as though he were a warm friend." Holy Qur'an
(Fussilat 41: 34)

We can see that learning the methods and knowing the means by which to
invite people to Islam is part of acquiring religious knowledge and
grasping its content and purposes.

If the Qur'an requires those propagating Allah's word to dispute with
their opponent scientifically and with the best and most effective
methods, then, it means that the Qur'an requires the callers to be more
acquainted with the thoughts, culture, beliefs and ideology of the
opponent. This will empower them to enter into disputation and dialogue
with the opponent with full power and strength.

Thus, it is imperative that a propagator should be acquainted with the
culture of his time and grasp the ideas, theories and concepts of the
civilization which prevails in the world, for the ideological battle is
similar, to a large extent to, the armed one. To explore the forces of
the enemy and his capabilities is surely a precondition for engaging him
in the battle. It makes no difference whether these forces and
capabilities are human, economic, information and publicity, arms,
technology, planning or other factors, such as, natural conditions and
political set up. Likewise, the Muslims cannot enter the battle field of
ideology without first ascertaining the nature of thought of the enemy
or opponent or the others' view, as a preparation for ideological
warfare.

From the Qur'anic exposition, investigation and practical experience of
the course of the missionaries and propagators over the ages, we can
highlight on the culture and education that is necessary for them to
acquire and the level of that education in terms of comprehension,
differentiation and constructing the ideal form of education.

A. Ideological Education: It is necessary for a Muslim missionary to
study a complete course on beliefs which covers the fundamentals of
Islamic belief and the important issues thereof. Such issues as
Monotheisim (the oneness of Allah), prophethood, the next world, fate
and destiny, determinism \`jabr' and the free choice \`ikhtiyar'...etc.
Along the way he must grasp the most prominent views of Islamic sects
and schools of thoughts, philosophers and the people of hadith to such a
level as to furnish him with a clear picture of the main areas of
ideological conflicts between the different Islamic approaches.

It is also required of the caller to distinguish himself by being
conscious and objective and accept the onerous responsibility of
inviting people to the right opinion and pure understanding. He must in
no way be a bigot nor surrender to wrong understanding, for he is
answerable to Allah, the Almighty, should he engage in calling people
towards the wrong way and distort Islam.

A successful propagator should be able to present the Islamic views in
a scientific and comparat-ive way without prejudice or bigotry. His duty
is to explore the way of uniting the Muslims, call for a scientific
investigation and refrain from denouncing his opponent as a renegade or
maltreating him or insulting his ideology and understanding, so long as
the other party believes in the fundamentals of faiths and testifies
with the two testifications. On the other hand, the missionary should
always expose perverted ideas and make the Muslims cognizant of them by
presenting facts, scientifically.

B. Jurisprudential Education: This is among the fundamental elements of
Islamic education. Knowing Islamic legislation, both the principles and
the details, open up the ideological horizons before the Muslim. It will
help him in propagating the Shari'a, teaching the society, comparing the
Islamic legislation with other forms of positive legislation and to
illustrate the greatness of the former and its ability to organize the
society and develop it. Because of all this, the missionary has to study
a course on jurisprudence \`fiqh' and the basics in principles of
jurisprudence \`usul al-Fiqh' so as to empower his ability of
undestanding.

C. Studying the Prophetic Biography: A full study of the Prophet's
(s.a.w.) biography, especially the section of his da'awa and jihad, and
a grasp of Islamic history, plays a great role in educating a Muslim,
developing his ability to carry the message and understanding its
methods and problems. Therefore, a missionary must read a complete
course on the prophetic biography and at least a summary of Islamic
history so that he can appreciate the historical experience and
comprehend the biography of the Messenger (s.a.w.).

D. Social and Political Education: To understand the society and have
enough awareness politically and socially, is a fundamental element in
educating a Muslim missionary. Studying the society through reading the
specialized social, political and psychologi-cal subjects will
definitely furnish him with the required knowledge. Cultural awareness
in the political and social fields can also be improved by following up
the news, political analyses and societal studies concerned with social
issues. This follow up will make the propagator be always in touch with
the events and happenings especially that which affects the Muslims and
the Islamic question world wide.

E. Methodological Education: The missionary needs the knowledge of
means, methods and ways of executing his work. He can find these in the
experiences of other Islamic workers and the experiences of a propagator
of other ideologies, also. Another source of this form of education is
psychological studies, writings about world famous figures, leadership
and administration. It must be mentioned that the caller must be heedful
and exercise caution concerning the experiences of non-Muslims, by
observing the values and yardstick of Islam. A noble hadith states: "It
is not possible to obey Allah by disobeying him."


**Problems and Obsticales**

**1- External Poblems and Obstacles:**

The course of the Divine Call, in all its dimen-sions and various
facets and scopes, be they ideologi-cal, psychological, political,
social, ethical or other-wise, is that of struggle, confrontation and
reform etc. This is why the Holy Qur'an calls this way "The Thorny One".
This name is more appropriate for it in that it is a way of difficulties
and obstacles. This is because the hostile forces, throughout the
confrontation stage, use whatever is at their disposal to destroy Islam
and its ideology.

And when the Qur'an discusses the difficulties and impediments faced by
the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and the first generation of Muslims, it is
really speak-ing about the most critical part of the history of the
tussle between the two opposite approaches. This picture wanted to
create a clear view, a complete awareness and a mental and practical
preparation for facing those difficulties and impediments. In that
period, the Islamic call faced all dimensions of the conflicts with the
pre-Islamic period of ignorance \`jahiliyya' while the latter employed
all what it had.

Studying this particular period will present us with a complete view of
the course taken by Islam over the ages. It will also reveal the norms
and laws governing the course of history and reform. By subjecting the
history of the divine call, and particularly that of the Muhammadan call
to studies and analysis, summoning witnesses as handed down to us by the
Qur'an or other means of confirmation, we can identify the methods of
war and opposition resorted to by the tyrants and the enemies of Allah
and humanity, throughout the history and stages of the tussle, past and
present.

We can identify the most dangerous areas of opposition and obstruction
imposed by the \`jahiliyya' movement on the message and its bearers.
They are:

A. Ideological Opposition: The pivotal element around which all tussels
and conflicts are centered is that of thought and belief, though the
level of though and belief of the former \`jahili' people was indeed
primitive. Despite their primitive nature, they were employed in
opposing the message that called mankind to the unity of Allah, belief
in Him, the revelation, prophethood, the hereafter, regards the
intellect as a means of cognition and faith and employed the purity of
human nature and mental reasoning in the material world in order to
reach that faith and belief.

The ideological tussels, through the efforts of the \`jahili'
intellect, was directed toward casting doubt on the call of the Prophets
(s.a.w.), the principles of faith in Allah, the Glorious, the methods
and organization of the divine thought and the ability of the Islamic
enterprise in uplifting and developing human life. That opposition has
indeed evolved from its primitive stage to the stage of theories with
scientific and philosophi-cal coloration. These includs the founding of
schools, theories, philosophies and methods of investigation and
thought, all for the purpose of continuing the fight against faith in
Allah and in the everlasting divine message, on a planned and organized
platform. There-fore, the two paths are:

The path of belief in Allah, the Glorious, and that of disbelief and
perversion.

Surely, to face the war of thought equipped with modern theories and
means is the responsibility of the Muslim scholars, intellectuals and
writers, missionaries and Islamic organizations such as the centres for
studies, libraries, schools, universities, publishing houses, mass
medias and the Islamic states. This war will entail establishing a
permanent presence in the ideological battle field that is launched by
organizations and mass mobilization agencies against Islamic thought. It
is also in need of an ideological work planned and theorized according
to well studied and practical foundations.

Perhaps, the most prominent foundations to consider before entering the
battle field at this level are:

1-The Muslims should be equipped with the original Islamic thought by
resorting to its first principles; the Qur'an, the \`sunna' and the
Prophetic biography. They must also study the secondary sources of the
Islamic knowledge namely; the ideological sources, jurisprudence and the
principles of jurisprud-ence and studies in the Islamic history,
sciences of the Qur'an and hadith and contemporary Islamic culture. In
order to achieve all this, it is necessary to establish institutes,
schools, study circles, research centres and special libraries where
missionaries can be specially trained on the issue of Islamic
propagation.

2- To provide the missionaries with the knowle-dge of modern culture
and methods such as psychol-ogy, publicity and studies on public
opinion, sociology, English and French languages, and the mastering of
the Arabic language for the non-Arab missionaries. Acq-uiring these
branches of knowledge will enable the propagator to understand man and
his society and the method of interacting with him. It is imperative to
train the missionary on the procedures of \`tabligh' and association
with others and how to enter into intellec-tual dialogue…etc.

In order for a propagator to acquire knowledge and information, it is
most desirable for us to prepare them so as to specialize on the issue
of \`tabligh' in a particular region of the world, so that all his
efforts will be concentrated in the region for which he is trained. It
is therefore, necessary for each missionary to study the situation,
condition and language of his appointed region. 3- To provide the
missionaries with scientific and practical means needed for their
task.


**Method of Ideological Confrontation:**

Throughout the duration of ideolgical confronta-tion between Islam and
its rival, the contest had its ups and downs; ultimately Islamic thought
had the upper hand. The vitality of Islam and the greatness of its
principles were the source of strength that brings about victory,
time-testedness and superiority. Unfortunately, the method of conveying
Islamic thought is often mis-applied or impaired and its thoughts,
concepts and rules meddled with or misunderstood or presented in a
primitive and unrefined way.

The method, programme and language of discourse inevitably has its
effect on the success of Islamic thought and its civilizational
enterprises in its role as leader of humanity.

Perhaps the most prominent methods through which authors, orators and
men of letters present the Islamic thought are three:

1- The method of defence and refuting arguments. This a method which
portrays the condition of psych-ological crises that the Islamic
condition suffers from. It can be justly said that the stage of
scientific and technological advancement of Europe, America and Japan
which started at the beginning of the twentieth century, was the factor
that instilled an inferiority complex into the minds of the Muslims of
that period. This generation of Muslims grew up in the guidance of
materialistic thought which fed the Islamic world via the universities,
perverted political parties and the intrusion of foreign cultures. This
phenomenon prompted the Islamic authors and thinkers to resort to the
method of defence and refuting arguments.

This method, no doubt, was fruitful. It enlightened the contemporary
generation, but all the same, it was not able to present Islamic
ideology, theories, values and principles in an encompassing manner.

2- The method of attacking and criticizing the perverted and deviated
ideologies. This method portrays self-confidence and a shift to
challenge, casting away foreign thoughts and revealing the defects and
scientific and methodological discrepancies found in them.

3- The third method which necessity dictates in expousing Islamic
knowledge is the level of propound-ing Islamic theories covering
numerous fields such as politics, social, economic, educational,
psychological, behavioural, historical and the methodology of science,
arts, literary, law…etc. The Islamic cultural and ideological project
must cover all the fields of culture, education and the need for
organizing the society and the state and play its role in leading the
life and civilization of mankind. It must, therefore, be a pioneering
thought and a complete scheme as expected.

B. Skepticism and Lying: Among the method of confronting the Prophets,
Messengers and callers to Allah and ruining their divine thought is
casting doubts on the truthfulness of their call, the soundness of their
principles, thinking and the chastity of their persons so as to shake
the trust the audience has in them and render, sceptical, those who have
already embraced the ideology. In this way, detractors expect to create
a sort of schizophrenia in the callers themselves and a gulf between the
callers and the society. The Holy Qur'an exposes this vicious method and
those disguising themselves in it, saying:

"…and whenever (thereafter) and apostle came unto you with that which
your selves desired not, swelled you with pride, some (of the apostle)
you belied (as imposters) and some you slew." Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2:
87)

In other places, their statements, which they made in order to inspire
scepticism concerning the truthful-ness of the message and the soundness
of its objectives, are reported:

"We heard not of this in the former creed. This is nothing but an
imposture. (What) has the reminder been sent down (only) unto him among
us? Nay! They are in doubt about My reminder, Nay! They have yet tasted
not My chastisement!" Holy Qur'an (Sad 38: 7-8)

Then it states:

"But said the chiefs of those who disbelieved, from among his people:
\`This is a man like unto yourselves who intends to exalt himself above
you; but had Allah will (to send any apostle) He would certainly have
sent angels. We have heard not of this among our fathers did. Verily his
is not but a man maniac so bear you with him for some time." Holy Qur'an
(Mu'minun 23: 24-25)

"Said the chiefs of the people of Pharaoh: \`Verily this indeed is an
enchanter (most) learn-ed'. He intends to turn your out of your land;
What is it then your counself?" Holy Qur'an (A'raf 7: 109-110)

In this way, the Prophets (s.a.w.) and reformers are accused of lying,
insanity, greed for power and name and for worldly gains so as to cast
doubts on their noble, human objectives and guiding, divine call.

C. Psychological Warfare: The psychological war is considered, one of
the most dangerous weapons used by the enemy against his opponent. The
\`Jahiliyya' often have taken recourse to psychological warfare, in its
different forms against the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), the message and its
bearers, throughout the ages, past and present. They spread rumours and
slanders against the personality of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), they mock
his companions, disparage them and belittle their social standing.

They spread fear and terror among the ranks of the Islamic group, the
callers to Allah, the Glorious, so as to weaken the morale and shake the
Islamic personality from within. Their aim is to create psych-ological
defeat which will strip the followers of the Divine Message of their
self-confidence and instill uneasiness and tension in their lives. As
the organization crumbles and fear and terror rules the individual and
the believing group, its struggle and resistance fizzles out.

The Qur'an speaks about the psychological war launched by the opponent
against the Messenger of Allah (s.a.w.), the Message and those who call
toward it, in order to place before them the reality of the war in all
its dimensions, thereby establishing its stand thereof and provide the
followers with psychological immun-ity. It says:

"And all that We relate unto you of the accounts of the apostles is to
confirm with it you heart…" Holy Qur'an (Hud 11: 120)

The Glorious Qur'an mentions the conditions of psychological warfare
employed by those hostile to the divine call throughout the ages: "And
certainly you shall hear from those who have been given the Book before
you and those who join other gods with Allah, much annoy-ance…" Holy
Qur'an (Al-e-Imran 3: 186)

"…Is this he whom Allah has raised to be an aposlte." Holy Qur'an
(Furqan 25: 41)

"…And we see not any have followed you but those who are the meanest of
us,…" Holy Qur'an (Hud 11: 27)

"…And said: \`(He is) tutored (by others), a mad man." Holy Qur'an
(Dukhan 44: 14)

"Verily he is not but a man maniac so bear with him for some time."
Holy Qur'an (Mu'minun 24: 25)

"…and said the disbelievers: \`This is a sorcerer, a great liar.'" Holy
Qur'an (Sad 38: 4)

"…\`Hearken you not unto this Qur'an, make noise in it,…" Holy Qur'an
(Fussilat 41: 26)

"And say they: \`Why was not this Qur'an sent down unto a man in the
two cities, (who is) great?'" Holy Qur'an (Zukhruf 43: 31)

"The life of this world has been made alluring to those who disbelieve
and tthey scoff at those who believe…" Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2: 212)

"And indeed were (also) ridiculed (some) of the apostle before you, but
surrounded those who ridiculed that (very torment) which they had been
ridiculing." Holy Qur'an (Anbiya' 21: 41)

"…and say I not about those whom your eyes hold in contempt (that)
Allah will never bestow on them (any) good…" Holy Qur'an (Hud 11: 31)

"If he hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the
agitators in the city desist not, We shall certainly rouse youup against
them, they shall not be allowed to be your neighbour in it, but a little
while." Holy Qur'an (Ahzab (33: 60)

Apart from revealing the methods employed in psychological warfare and
defining most of its issues, the Qur'an also enjoins the Messenger
(s.a.w.) and the believers to be steadfast and raise themselves high
above what their detractors try to instill in their minds of the
weakness of their camp, their social position and their inability to
empower the Jahiliyya movement and its fortress. The Qur'an addresses
the believers in a general way, stressing these commands: "And be
patient against whatever they say and avoid them with a decorous
avoidance."
Holy Qur'an (Muzammil 73: 10)

"And lose not heart and grieve not, for you shall gain the upper land,
if you (only) be (true) believers." Holy Qur'an (Al-e-Imran 3: 139)

"Indeed, successful are the believers. Those who in their prayers are
humble. And those who, from what is vain, keep (themselves) aloof." Holy
Qur'an (Mu'minun 23: 1-3)

The instrument of threat, spreading fear and terror in the midst of the
believer's ranks represents an important part of the activities of
arrogant \`Jahili' forces carried out to hem in the bright oasis of
Islam and prevent its light from spreading to the darkness of
unbelief.

The Holy Qur'an registers these hostile stands taken and the
psychological warfare launched by the haughty powers over the ages,
saying:

"And sit not in every path, threatening and hindering from the path of
Allah, him who believes in Him, and seeking to make it crooked…" Holy
Qur'an ((A\`raf 7: 86)

**D. Killings and Bodily Extermination:**

In order for the arrogant powers, the protectors of the \`jahili'
existence, to confront the Divine Call and that the psychological war
would succeed and no mental resistance is exhibited by the persevering
believers, these tyrants resort to imprisonment, torture and physical
and bodily extermination. They also launch bloody wars to wipe out the
bearers of the Divine Message, those who defend the values of truth and
faith. This is one of the natures of conflict and confrontation in its
worst and most violent forms. With this form of confrontation the
arrogant forces wish to extricate itself from and terminate the
activities and all traces of the existence of its opponent.

The Qur'an recorded this kind of resistance to the truth, by bringing
tens of verses discussing about torture and killing, fighting, jihad and
defending the truth. For example, His saying:

"How many a prophet has fought with whom were myriads of Godly men, and
they lost not heart at what befell them in the way of Allah nor did they
weaken, nor did they demean themselves (before their enemies); and Allah
loves the steadfast ones." Holy Qur'an (Al-e-Imran 3: 146)

And His saying:

"…and their slaying the Prophets unjust-ly…" Holy Qur'an (Al-e-Imran 3:
181)

And His saying:

"And when planned they against you, those who disbelieved, that they
might imprison you, or slay you or drive you away…" Holy Qur'aan (Anfal
8: 30)

And His saying:

"And Pharoah the owner of the stakes. Who (all) transgressed in the
cities. And multip-lied wickedness therein." Holy Qur'an (Fajr 89:
10-12)

In this way, the Qur'an records those scenes and pictures and presents
it to the first generation of the Qur'anic message to inspire them with
patience and perseverance for the obstacles on the way and the
sacrifices for it. The Qur'an mentions the story of the companions of
the trenches who were burnt alive in ditches full of fire.

It mentioned how Pharoah \`Fir'aun' killed the believers.

It referred to the greatest crime perpetrated in human history at the
hands of the Jews, condemning them to the wrath of Allah and ignominy,
in the following words: "…and humilation and wretchedness were stamped
upon them and they drew unto themselves the Wrath from Allah; This
because they used to reject the signs of Allah and slay his apostles
un-justly; this because they disobeyed and were wont to transgress."
Holy Qur'an (Baqara 2: 61)

In the same way, the Qur'an discusses about those terrible and bloody
scenes and encounters, history has handed down to us pictures portraying
struggle, fight-ing and bloody confrontations which caused the down-fall
of arrogant powers and the leaders of the \`jahili' camp who control the
fates and destinies of the people. It speaks about the wars of the Holy
Prophet (s.a.w.) and his battles, in Badr, Uhud, Khaibar, Khandaq,
Hunain and tens of other battles and confrontations. It also mentions
the forms of torture and fighting which his companions and the followers
of his message encountered.

E. Imprisonment and Torture: Among the methods adopted by the tyrants
and enemies of guidance is imprisonment and torture, in order to
obstruct the activities of the believers and stand in their way of
spreading the principles to which they call the people to. The callers
are imprisoned and various means of torture and terrorization are
applied to them so as to wipe their activities out.

The tyrants and oppressive forces hostile to Islam, have indeed
specialized in inventing different methods of mental and bodily torture.
If a researcher will take the opportunity to undertake an investigative
study on the believers suffering at the hands of the enemies of
guidance, the arrogant tyrants, he would have been able to produce
evidences of millions of them in prisons undergoing different methods of
torture. This kind of treatment was meted to them, not because of any
crime, but, as a result of an ideology they believe in, a true belief
they embraced and a call to goodness to which they invited people to.
How clearly the Holy Qur'an depicts this reality when it states that:

"They tormented (them) for naught but that they believe in Allah, the
Ever-Prevalent, the Most Praised." Holy Qur'aan (Buruj 85: 8)

"O my people! how is it that I invite you unto slavation and you call
me unto fire?" Holy Qur'an (Ghafir 40: 41)

The prison was one of the ways followed by the Quraish after the
Prophet's patience and steadfastness wore them out. They planned to
imprison or kill or exile him, so that they could isolate him from the
society and bar the people from his speech and invita-tion. The Holy
Qur'an, addressing the patient Prophet (s.a.w.), says:

"And when planned they against you, those who disbelieved, that they
might imprison you, or slay you or drive you away…" Holy Qur'an (Anfal
8: 30)

F. Sanctions and Economic Warfare: Among the hostile methods employed
by the \`jahiliyya' against the Noble Messenger, Muhammad (s.a.w.) and
his follow-ers, and up to this time the arrogant powers are using it so
as to weaken Islam and force the believers to accept and submit to the
devilish \`jahili' status quo, was economic and social sanctions. The
three years Quraish's boycott of the Prophet (s.a.w.) and his
comp-anions and uncles who accepted and supported his call, is the most
conspicuous evidence of this hostile method. That savage economic
confrontation exposed the inability of this method in shaking the
principled stand of the Holy Messenger (s.a.w.) and his disciples and
the failure of such malicious efforts.

The pagan Quraish employed this deterrent eco-nomic and social boycott
in Mecca while the hypcrites of Medina, at another time, resorted to the
same system of pressure against the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and his
disciples. Their aim was to subject his followers to hunger, thereby,
forcing them to disperse from around the Honourable Messenger
(s.a.w.).

The Holy Qur'an has recorded this base action so as to be a reminder
and a lesson to subsequent generations of believers. It is also an
everlasting deterrent for any person intending to follow this Islamic
way, for the arrogant powers are ever intent on employing this evil
means of pressure and economic sanctions. Allah, the Most High, says:

"They are the ones who say (unto those who help the believer-
refugees): \`Spend you not aught upon those who are with the Apostle of
Allah untill they break up; And Allah's are the treasures of the heavens
and the earth, but the hypocrites understand (it) not." Holy Qir'an
(Munafiqun 63: 7)

In another place, the Holy Qur'an exposes, to the Muslims, the failure
of economic war or its withdrawal in the face of the stand of true
faith, saying: "Verily those who disbelieve spend of their wealth to
obstruct (men)) from the way of Allah, so will they spend it, then (in
the end) it shall be against them (a matter of) regret…" Holy Qur'an
(Anfal 8: 36)

Allah, the Almighty, has indeed said the truth; surely the will of
truth has gained victory while the polytheists and the hypocrites lost
the battle. The treasures and resources of the earth have indeed flowed
for the Muslims. This was the result of economic sanctions impos-ed on
the Messenger (s.a.w.) and his call and, thus, was how the system of
economic blockade was vanquished in the face of resistance and
resolution of believing man.

G. Allurement with Wealth, Women and Position: The same way as the
arrogant powers and enemies of Allah and the humanity employed economic
boycotts, they also used and they are still using, the method of
alluring the callers with wealth, women and position in order to seduce
those whose spirits are weak and suffering from anxiety.

The Holy Qur'an has paid great attention to fortifying the Islamic
personality from falling prey to forbidden desires and pleasures so as
to create spiritual defence and the power to resist allurements.
\`Jahiliyya' had indeed clashed with the firmest will and power of
resolution any human ever carried; the will and resolution of the Guide
Prophet, Muhammad (s.a.w.). They foolishly tried to seduce the Noble
Prophet (s.a.w.) with wealth, women and investing him with authority,
but, he rose above those inconsequential proposals proclaiming his
eternal statements:

"Oh Uncle! I swear by Allah that if they place the sun in my right hand
and the moon in my left hand so as to abandon this affair, I would never
have abandoned it…" He said this firm statement after the Quraish sent
him his uncle with the proposals of the leaders of the Quraish. The
proposals were that they would amass such wealth for him till he became
the richest man among them, that they would give him, in marriage, the
most beautiful women he liked and that they would make him their king
with the condition that he abandon his principles and call. He rejected
and uttered his famous statement, which is still a guide to those who
take the prophetic path, the bearers of the banner of Islam.

H. Exile and Banishment: Exile and banishment was - and still is - one
of the means by which the tyrants confront the Prophets, Messengers and
the bearers of the Message to isolate them from the society and raise a
barrier between the divine call and the souls listening to it. Indeed,
the Noble Prophet (s.a.w.), and the believers, had taken recourse to
migration, leave behind their kinsmen, their wealth and houses, to save
their religion, continue along their course and spread the principles of
truth and goodness in other lands. They migrated from their birth places
because the chances for answering their call had been blocked and their
movements curtailed.

Prophets Abraham, Lot, Moses, Muhammad (s.a.w.) and other prophets had
taken recourse to migration. Abraham (a.s.) fled from the terror and
arrogance of Ninrod, Moses from that of Pharoah and Muhammad (s.a.w.)
from Quraish's terrorism and arrogance. Those migrations brought about
great ideological changes in human history, established great landmarks
on man's road to civilization and ushered in a mighty victory for the
principles of guidance and faith, contrary to the plans of the tyrants
and what they hoped to achieve by exiling these men of religion.

The Qur'an has narrated about the exiling and banishing of the Prophets
from their homes by the arrogant powers; it has also enjoined to
undertake migration and the search for a new land and a new society
ready to accept the divine thought and act its principles, where the way
is open for the Muslims to proclaim their faith and practice their
religion.

Let us ponder on some Qur'anic verses that discuss this phenomenon
which is very important in the course of the divine call, so as to gain
more understanding of the acts of migrations and banishment during the
various stages of conflict. Allah, the Most High says: "…Certainly we
will turn you out O Shu\`aib, and those who believe with you, from our
town…" Holy Qur'an (A\`raf 8: 88)

"And said those who disbelieved unto their apostles: \`Certainly will
we drive you out of our land…" Holy Qur'an (Ibrahim 14: 13)

"And how many a twon which was mighter in power than you town which has
driven you out; We destroyed them, and no helper was there for them."
Holy Qur'an Muhammad ( 47: 13)

"Those who have been expelled from their homes unjustly save that they
say: \`Our Lord is Allah.'" Holy Qur'an (Hajj 22:40)

In these verses, the Qur'an presents the acts of hostile banishment
meted out to the Prophets (s.a.w.) and their followers. In other places,
the Qur'an commands the believers to migrate and look for new lands and
societies to continue their work of propagating Islam and establishing
the society of Monotheism. Allah, the Most High says:

"…They, therefore, who did migrate and were turned out of their homes
and suffered in My way and who fought and were slain, I will morst
certainly blot out their sins from them,…" Holy Qur'an (Al-e-Imran 3:
195)

"Verily those whom the angels taake away (at death) while they are
unjust to their (own) selves (in sin), They (the angels) shall ask (the
sinner souls) \`In what state were you?' They shall reply \`Weakened
(and oppresed) were we in the land,;' They (angles) will say \`Was not
the land of Allah vast (enough) for you to migrate therein?' So these
(are those) whose refuge shall be Hell; and what a bad resort it is."
Holy Qur'an (Nisa' 4: 97)

"…therefore, take not friends from among them until they migrate in
Allah's way…" Holy Qur'ann (Nisa' 4: 89)

"And (as for) the foremost, the first of the (Meccan) immigrannts and
the (Madinites) supporters and those who followed them in goodness,
Allah is well-pleased with them…"
Holy Qur'an (Tawba 9: 100)

**2- Internal Problems and Obsticles:**

The external problems and impediments were not only obstacles faced by
the Divine Call and the Prophets and their disciples, and which had to
endure throughout the continuity of this noble course. The Divine cause,
especially during the time of Muhammad (s.a.w.), faced internal
problems, also. The Holy Prophet (s.a.w.) and a group of his faithful
companions, were able to overcome internal problems. The Islamic course
contained those obstacles and uprooting them thanks to the wisdom,
sagacity and loftiness of the personality of the leader, the holy
Prophet (s.a.w.).

The Qur'an has recorded for us the internal problems of the Islamic
group, pointing to its danger and guiding us as to the way of solving
them and uprooting the negative impact they would have on the Muslim
society, by way of wise methods. This concise study cannot treat this
wide topic by discussing those problems and analyzing them. We can only
present those which are most dangerous and most recurring in the domain
of collective or individual missionary work. Perhaps this can portray
the Qur'anic view to the missionaries and Islamic workers, who face
collective problems or are active in propgation Organizations.

The most important issues around which the Qur'an concentrates when
discussing problems and internal threats to the Islamic group during the
time of revelation and prophethood are the following:

A- Hypocrisy: The activities of hypocrites are carried out with
planning and intelligence and are aimed at destroying the Islamic
framework and spreading division, conflict and internal scepticism
within the ranks of the Islamic group and society.

The Qur'an made much mention of the hypocrites and seriously warned us
of them because of the danger of their activities and their far-reaching
influence. Similarly, the Qur'an directed its warning, admonition and
threat to them, saying:

"And when began to say the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was
disease that: \`Promised us not Allah and His Apostle but (it was only)
a deception.'" Holy Qur'an (Ahzab 33: 12)

"…They are the enemy (of yours), so beware you of them! May Allah
annihilate them, whence do they deviate." Holy Qur'an (Munaafiqun 63:
4)

"If the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease and the
agitators in the city desist not, We shall certainly rouse you up
against them, they shall not be allowed to be your neighbour in it, but
a little while." Holy Qur'an (Ahzab 33: 60)

It is very important that we should study the phrase "they are the
enemies" which occurred in the last verse. This is obviously an
identification and an emphasis for implementing danger, the source of
which is that this covert disgruntled element is trying to disguise
itself and infiltrate into the ranks of the Islamic group, spread its
poisonous utterances and set its snares.

**B- Differences and Conflicts:**

If the issue of hypocrisy is a case of an external body living within
the community of Muslims, then, the dissention and conflict from within
the Islamic community and or between individual members arises because
of different causes, which includes ignorance and misunderstand-ing,
difference of opinion and multiplicity of views and selfish interests
and love of the worldly vanities such as power, popularity, position,
material gains, tribal feelings and other causes of conflicts and
differences.

During the time of the Holy Prophet (s.a.w.), the Islamic society and
the Muslims had faced different problems and conflicts in various
situations. The most dangerous were what the Muslims encountered during
the battle of Uhud, the conflict between the (Meccan) Emigrants and the
(Madinites) Helpers, the efforts exterted by the hypocrites and the Jews
to incite ancient tribal feuds and other similar situations. The Holy
Qur'an made mention of these incidents and warned and enjoined the
Muslims to safeguard themselves gainst political, social and ideological
differences.

"…and quarrel you not, for then you will be weakened in heart, and will
depart your power". Holy Qur'an (anfal 8: 46)

"And in whatever thing you differ, its decision is unto Allah." Holy
Qur'an (Shura 42: 10)

The danger of conflicts becomes even more seri-ous when it arises from
personal aggrandizement, selfish desire, love of the world and bigotry,
which has been disapproved by Islam; and then disguised as a thought,
theorized about and presented as a matter of viewpoint and an issue of
academic or practical conviction. The Holy Qur'an not only disallowed
conflict and dissension, but, also enjoined unity, loyalty and hold-ing
fast to the rope of Allah, saying: "And hold you fast by the cord of
Allah alltoge-ther, and be not divided (among yourselves)." Holy Qur'an
(Al-e-Imran 3: 103)

"And the believer men and the believer women, they are guardians to one
another." Holy Qur'an (Tawba: 9: 71)

C- Failure to obey the Commands of the Leadership: Islam considers the
issue of leadership, also known as \`Imamah' (leadership) and \`Wilayah'
(guardianship), as one of the foundations in building the Islamic group,
society or state. It also fosters the relationship between the group and
its guardian or Imam based on mutual love and loyalty. It commands the
Muslims to obey the leader of the group, state or ummah with the
condition that he must be suitable and equal to the task, dedicated to
the rules and values of the Shari'a and worthy of emulation in the model
course of realizing the objectives and expectations of the Islamic
group.

Despite all the training and direction that Islam dedicated for
inculcating these concepts, the problem of disobeying the qualified
leadership and failing to abide by its directions is a palpable
phenomenon in the life of the Muslims. The existence of this problem in
the Islamic community has no doubt impeded the course, ushered in a
condition of fragmenting the fabric standing in the way of achieving its
goals.

D- The Problem of Weakness of Stance and Being Influenced by
Psychological Warfare and Opposing Publicity: After depending on the
Almighty Allah, the foremost pillar of building the community and its
strength, both individual and collectively, is self-confidence, having
high spirits and having the feeling of power and ability to overcome the
enemy, which equipped the Ummah with protection against psychological
warfare, thereby, qualifying it for carrying on with the arduous tasks
of reform and confronting the enemies.

By the time weakness penetrates the ranks of the community,
disenchantment and retraction ensues. This is why the Qur'an attacked
this phenomenon and enjoined it to be remedied and gotten rid of. The
Holy Qur'an commanded the Muslims in many places and directives to raise
their spirits and morale, foster self confidence and create a true
picture of the nature of internal forces in the field of struggle.

"And lose your not heart and grieve you not, for you shall gain the
upper hand, if you (only) be (ture) believer." Holy Qur'an (Al-e-Imran
3: 139)

"…If you suffer pain, assuredly they also sufer as you suffer; but you
hope from Allah what they hope not;..." Holy Qur'an (Nisa' 4: 104)


