Prologue
========

*The decision of the emperor of Rome for the wedding of his two
grandchildren is the beginning of this story; but the wedding did not
took place on that day! This is the beginning of the relationship of
Nargis with the holy family of Imamate.*

*The pain of Nargis for the absence of Imam Hasan \`Askari and her
request from the emperor of Rome is another point in this attractive
story. Then, we shall narrate the secret conversion of Nargis to Islam
that gave her an opportunity to see her future husband, who was none
other than Imam Hasan \`Askari. Then comes the Imam’s help and
assistance to the princess Nargis to travel to Iraq, and this is the
final section of this chapter.*

The Wedding Party
-----------------

Nargis was the daughter of Yeshoua the son of Caesar. Maternally, she
had a relationship with Simon the Zealot, one of the disciples of Jesus
the son of Mary.

When Nargis was thirteen years old, her grandfather, the Roman emperor,
decided to give her in marriage to one of his grandsons, who was
Nargis’s cousin.

So, the Roman emperor invited many personalities from his nation for the
wedding ceremony: more than three hundred priests and clergymen, some
illustrious men from the descendants of the twelve Apostles of Jesus the
son of Mary, nine hundred men and women from the aristocratic families,
and finally his military high ranking commanders.

The Strange Fall Of The Crosses
-------------------------------

The servants of the palace took a precious litter, which was adorned
with innumerable beautiful gems before the emperor of Rome. They
installed many crosses around the precious litter for the marriage
ceremony. Soon after the future groom came on and stood on the litter,
the archbishops and bishops stood up from their seats to show him
respect.

Everything was ready for the ceremony to get started according to the
court etiquette. By the emperor’s order, the archbishops opened their
Bibles to recite the wedding vows; but suddenly, the crosses around the
litter fell down unexpectedly on the ground…! The pedestals of the
litter began to tremble and moved from their places; so, the frightened
groom fell down on the ground in front of the astonished people…!

When the archbishops saw that strange incident, they got deeply
frightened and stunned, because of the fall of the crosses at the very
beginning of the wedding ceremony was a terrible, sinister event for all
Christians.

The archbishops came close to the Roman emperor and said respectfully:
“O great Emperor! We beseech you! Let us not perform this doomed
marriage ceremony! Maybe this unfortunate wedding would demolish the
Christian government, the church of Christ, and its submitted societies
in the near future…!”

Another Effort
--------------

The Roman emperor was astounded by that strange event, so he ordered to
his servants, saying, “Rise up the litter and place the crosses on their
places around it once again! Then, bring on the brother of this
unfortunate young man to become the new groom! Maybe this time, he would
be lucky unlike his ill-fated brother…!”

The servants and the courtiers did exactly what the emperor had ordered
them. After a while, the new groom came on with a stunned face and stood
obediently on the litter and got ready for the new ceremony, but when
the group of the archbishops came to their places to begin once again
the ceremony, the same incident was repeated just like before!

The emperor did not know what to do or think; at last he gave up his
will to marry his grandchildren and he cancelled the ceremony with
sadness and frustration… The guests went back homes silently, not
knowing what to think... At the end of that day, everyone was wondering
astonishingly about the strange events of that day. The young princess
Nargis was as astonished as the others …

The Holy Prophet of Islam in Rome
---------------------------------

At the very night of that strange day, princess Nargis, once more, saw
in dream Jesus the son of Mary accompanied by Simon. There stood also
some of the disciples of Jesus all of whom stood strangely at the same
place where the archbishops and the clergymen stood on that day…

Then, she saw the Holy Prophet of Islam in her dream accompanied by the
Commander of Believers \`Ali ibn Abi-Talib and a number of his
descendants. There was also a handsome young man … They came to the
palace where princess Nargis lived and Jesus the son of Mary stood
respectfully before the Prophet of Islam to say his greetings with
utmost respect.

The Marriage Proposal
---------------------

The Holy Prophet, referring to the young man beside him, said to Jesus
the son of Mary, “O Spirit of God, I came here to ask for the hand of
princess Nargis the descendant of your successor Simon for my beloved
son Abu-Muhammad…!”

When Jesus heard these words of the Holy Prophet, he turned to Simon
and, looking happily at him, said, “O Simon, dignity and honor have
indeed come to you! You have been honored to give your daughter in
marriage to the illustrious offspring of Imam Mahdi, Muhammad’s
descendant…!”

Simon nodded his head down in deference and replied delightedly, “Oh my
lord! What an honor! What a joy! I agree with gladness and happiness in
my heart!”

When Simon declared acceptance, the Holy Prophet descended from his
pulpit where he was seated and recited the wedding vows between his son
Imam Hasan \`Askari and princess Nargis while the holy Imams, Jesus, and
the Apostles witnessed joyously the ceremony of the marriage of that
beautiful bride and that handsome groom!

Illness Of Nargis
-----------------

The next morning, princess Nargis woke up with surprise and while she
was re-entering the real world around her, she remembered clearly her
vivid dream, which appeared to have been a vision…

When she understood the real reason for those unfortunate events, she
decided to keep her true vision for herself and hide it from everyone
including her dearest grandfather! Maybe they would kill her if they
came to know about her clandestine marriage with the descendant of the
Prophet of Islam in a vivid dream!

A few days later, Nargis could not help thinking incessantly about her
husband Imam Hasan… She had not said anything about her vision to
anybody! But she longed to meet her husband again… And her waiting made
her impatient and the longtime absence of Imam Hasan made her sad and
ill, because she didn’t eat or drink anything. The illness of Nargis
disturbed her family, especially her grandfather who loved her dearly.
The Emperor invited the best physicians of his country to the palace to
treat princess Nargis, but none of them could guess the real reason of
her illness. So, their medicine did nothing to help the young woman…

A Request From The Emperor
--------------------------

When all attempts to heal Nargis failed, the emperor thought that the
death of her granddaughter was imminent, so he went to see her. Sadly he
said to her, “My lovely daughter, is there anything that you wish for?
Anything I may do for you?”

Nargis waited for such a moment for long time; so, she said, “O
grandfather, it seems that the doors of tranquility and comfort are
closed in my face forever. I don’t like to be rude, but I believe that
if you stop torturing the Muslim prisoners in your dungeons, have pity
on them, and set them free to return to their homelands, I strongly hope
that Jesus and her Holy Mother will cure me, no doubt…”

The Roman emperor gratified quickly and without any hesitation the
request of Nargis and ordered his soldiers to behave kindly to Muslim
prisoners. When Nargis found out that her grandfather had complied
completely to her request, she then started to eat and drink in order to
make her grandfather happy. After a few days, she seemed better and when
the emperor came to visit her and saw her physical improvement, he
reinforced his command to his soldiers so that they would continue to
have a better behavior with Muslims more than ever.

Nargis in the Presence of the Sovereign Lady of all the Women of the World
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

After fourteen nights had passed from the request of princess Nargis
from her grandfather, Lady Fatimah Zahra', along with Virgin Mary and
thousands of Celestial Angels that accompanied them appeared in her
dream once again.

Holy Mary the mother of Jesus looked at Nargis and said fondly, “My
sweet daughter! This gracious lady is the Sovereign of all the women of
the whole world, and she is the holiest lady in the entire universe;
namely, Fatimah Zahra', your mother-in-law…”

After Nargis heard the sweet words of Virgin Mary, she started to cry
happily. She then placed her soft head on Lady Fatimah Zahra'’s lap and
asked her illustrious mother-in-law why her grandson Imam Hasan \`Askari
had not yet come to see her wife this time.

She then explained that she was deeply saddened by this fact and missed
the absence of her husband painfully… That was why she had been so
ill...

Lady Fatimah Zahra' smiled tenderly to Nargis, embraced her, and said,
“O my lovely daughter-in-law! My son could not come to see you when you
are still Christian… And because of the religion you follow, my holy
sister Mary is not satisfied either. If you want Jesus and his holy
mother Mary to be satisfied of you, and if you like my grandson to come
and see you, please do repeat slowly all the things that I will say
now...”

Then Lady Fatimah Zahra' uttered, “*ashhadu an la ilaha illa allahu wa
ashhadu anna muhammadan rasulu allahim* (I testify that there is no god
but Allah and Muhammad is the messenger of Allah.)”

So excited for this unforgettable meeting with these two holy ladies and
willing to satisfy both of them, Nargis unhesitatingly complied and
repeated delightfully, “*ashhadu an la ilaha illa allahu wa ashhadu anna
muhammadan rasulu allahim* (I testify that there is no god but Allah and
Muhammad is the messenger of Allah.)”

She wanted more than anything else to see once again her dearest
husband!

Lady Fatimah Zahra' embraced her happily and said, “From now on, wait
for my son Hasan! He will come and see you...”

Meeting With Her Husband
------------------------

Nargis woke up the next morning and remembered clearly her dream. She
was so sure that her husband Imam Hasan would come in her dream to see
her the next night that she joyfully repeated the creed of Islam once
more so as to make sure that everything was henceforth ready for her
real meeting with her husband…

Nargis was sure about her husband’s presence at the very night in her
dream. So she made herself ready to meet Imam Hasan and went quickly to
sleep. Upon entering the realm of dreams, she met her beloved husband
and after their greetings to each other she said to him, “My beloved
husband! Why did you not come earlier to see your wife…? Do you know how
much I love you and how much pain I suffered from your long absence…?”

Imam Hasan replied tenderly, “O my sweet wife! After your conversion to
Islam, I promise you that from now on I will never leave you! I also
promise you that I will come in your dream every night just to see you…”

Destination: Iraq
-----------------

One night, Imam Hasan informed Nargis in dream, “In the near future,
your grandfather will prepare a powerful army to fight against Muslims.
He himself will be the commander-in-chief. Listen carefully, Nargis: you
should change your clothes and put on the clothes of a simple slave and
incognito, go along with your grandfather’s army. In due time, I shall
inform you what to do after that. So, be aware and wait for my next
instructions!”

Nargis did exactly what her husband had ordered her and dressed like a
slave and went along with other slaves who had to accompany her
grandfather’s army. On their way to battlefield, some Roman sentinels
from her grandfather’s army poisoned some Muslim soldiers and Nargis got
very sad about the future of the unfortunate Muslims. From that special
night when Nargis had converted to Islam due to the kind assistance of
Lady Fatimah Zahra' and even on her way to Iraq, Imam Hasan appeared in
her dreams every night without exception and protected firmly his young
bride from every danger.


