On the Threshold of the birth
=============================

*In this chapter, Lady Hakimah, Imam Hadi’s illustrious sister, will be
invited at the night of the birth of the last Imam. We shall see the
very respectful, kind behavior of Lady Hakimah toward Nargis. In this
section too, the birth of the baby boy and the night prayers of Imam
Hasan, along with Lady Hakimah and Nargis herself, are narrated. The
last section of this chapter is about Imam Mahdi who shall begin to talk
with Lady Hakimah.*

On The Night Of 14th Sha’ban
----------------------------

Days and nights passed and Nargis was the center of attention in the
house of Imamate. No one was aware yet of the important role of Nargis
as the future mother of the Last Savior of the World. The only persons
who knew about this were Imam Hadi, Imam Hasan her husband and the
father of the future baby, and his aunt Lady Hakimah.

After the sad days of the martyrdom of the tenth Imam Hadi, Imam Hasan
received the important role of Imamate by the will of God Almighty while
he was only twenty-two years old. His wife Nargis was already pregnant.
By the will of God Almighty, all signs of her pregnancy were hidden from
everyone including Lady Hakimah. She did not know about that and after
nine months, there was still no sign of a baby in Nargis’s womb.
Finally, on Thursday, Sha\`ban 14th, 255 AH, Imam Hasan invited his aunt
to his house.

In a letter, the Imam wrote, “My beloved aunt! I would like to invite
you to come over here for breaking the fast with us. This very night
too, our God Almighty will finally grant us our wishes! At that special
night, the beloved baby that all of us have been waiting for his birth a
long time ago will come into this world! God Almighty will thus complete
His blessings to all human beings with the birth of my son. My aunt,
tonight the Patron of the Age will be born and one day he will offer
eternal life and perfect justice to the whole world after the death of
the earth.”

Lady Hakimah went quickly and happily to Imam Hasan’s house and asked
him excitedly, “My lord, are you sure that tonight is the special night
you were longing for its arrival?”

With smile, Imam answered, “Of course I am sure, my aunt!”

Lady Hakimah was aware of the details of the life of Nargis and of the
glad tidings of her life, but she asked Imam Hasan once more, “My lord,
may my life be offered as ransom for you! But… who is the mother of this
great child?”

Imam replied, “Of course! Nargis is the mother of my son!”

The Deep Affection of Lady Hakimah to Nargis
--------------------------------------------

Lady Hakimah loved Nargis very much and Nargis also showed a lot of
respect to her husband’s illustrious aunt; so, when lady Hakimah used to
come to their house, Nargis herself used to take off the shoes of lady
Hakimah and kiss her hands tenderly.

When Imam Hasan told his aunt about the night of the birth of the Savior
of the world, Lady Hakimah went quickly to Imam’s house and entered
Nargis’s room. The princess smiled sweetly upon seeing her and stood up
respectfully like always and asked her, “My life be offered to you, my
dear aunt! How are you?”

Lady Hakimah answered quickly, “Do not ever say that again, my sweet
child! It is my life and the entire world that should be offered to you!
I’m fine.”

Nargis said kindly, “Dear aunt, let me take off your shoes.” But Lady
Hakimah did not let her touch her shoes; rather, she herself bent down
and kissed Nargis’s feet and said, “My beloved child! You are my lady
from now on! I promise our God that I will not let you touch my shoes
ever again! I am at your disposal forever! Please, tell me what I should
do for you?”

Mahdi: The Savior of the World and the Son of Nargis
----------------------------------------------------

Nargis began to wonder about Lady Hakimah’s words and strange behavior,
because she had never let her do anything! And now, suddenly, Lady
Hakimah began to say the strangest thing ever: “My child! God Almighty
will grant you a son this very night! He shall be the lord and master of
all the people of the world! And one day, he will solve all the
hardships and problems of all of his believers, by God’s will!”

Nargis had not expected to hear such words from Lady Hakimah; so, she
became very embarrassed and said modestly, “My sweet lady! What are you
talking about?”

Lady Hakimah answered her without hesitation, “No, please do not call me
like that ever again! You are my lady and you are the greatest lady of
this era! Do not wonder nor doubt about your high rank and position, my
child!”

After this brief conversation, Lady Hakimah looked at the body of Nargis
but could not see any sign of pregnancy! She asked Nargis about her
general condition, and she answered that she was well; she felt neither
headache nor pains. Then both of them went to see Imam Hasan to whom
Lady Hakimah said, “My lord, I didn’t see any sign of pregnancy on
Nargis’s body!” Imam Hasan smiled kindly and replied, “Dear aunt! Be
assured that my son will be born tonight! The mother of my son is like
the mother of Prophet Moses; so, there shall not be any sign of
pregnancy on her until the time of birth. At that time, Pharaoh’s
soldiers by his direct order used to kill all pregnant women they would
see so as to find and kill Moses. My son is like Moses. My sweet wife,
know that your baby is a boy, his name is Muhammad, and he is the next
and last Imam after me.”

Serenity and tranquility appeared on Nargis’s pure and innocent face
after she had heard those words from her beloved husband.

Calmly, she asked him, “My lord, what is the right time for the birth of
my baby?” Imam responded, “Beloved wife! It will coincide with the rise
of dawn.”

A Prayer in the Night…
----------------------

At the sunset of the fourteenth day of Sha\`ban after the time of the
ritual sunset and evening prayers, Imam Hasan, Lady Hakimah, and Nargis
broke their fast and ate their dinner. After a while, Nargis went to her
room to rest a little and she slept peacefully. Lady Hakimah went inside
her room to be beside Nargis, perhaps she might need something; so, she
could help her quickly. Imam Hasan sat in one corner of the room to rest
for a moment.

After resting for an hour, Lady Hakimah woke up sooner than usual for
offering the Night Prayer. She went to the backyard to perform the
ritual ablution. When she returned inside the room, she was thinking
still about the birth of that illustrious baby; so she looked up at
Nargis but the young woman was deep asleep! She slept deeply and
serenely and did not move in her bed as pregnant women usually do.

After performing the rituals of the Night Prayer, Lady Hakimah sat in a
corner of the room to rest for some moments, but she slept once again.
After a while, she woke up suddenly and saw that Imam Hasan and Nargis
readying themselves for the Night Prayer. Each one of them headed for
the prayer-place to pray God.

After finishing her prayer, Nargis returned to her bed and slept, while
Imam Hasan and lady Hakimah remained in their places to pray and wait
for the beginning of that great event.

The Waiting
-----------

After an hour, Lady Hakimah went to the backyard and gazed at the
nightly sky… It seemed that the rising of the dawn was close. For a
moment, Lady Hakimah felt a kind of doubt about the time of the birth of
the baby in her heart and said to herself dubiously, “And now, dawn is
beginning to come… But still, there is no sign of the promise of my
Imam…”

Suddenly, Imam Hasan, from inside the house, said loudly, “My dear aunt!
Do not let your heart and mind have such thoughts! Do not doubt! We are
so close to the will of God Almighty!”

Lady Hakimah, most embarrassed from her thoughts and doubt, returned
quickly inside the house and read some Qur'anic verses from Surah
(Qur'anic Chapter) Sajdah and Surah Yasin.

The Words Of The Baby With Lady Hakimah
---------------------------------------

A few minutes later, Lady Hakimah went to Nargis’s room and saw her
trembling. She took her quickly in her arms and asked, “Why, my sweet
lady! Are you well? Do you think the time of your giving birth to your
son has finally come?”

Nargis answered, “Yes, I think the time has come!”

Then, Imam Hasan ordered from another room, “My aunt! Do please read
loudly the verses of Surah al-Qadr!”

While Lady Hakimah recited the verses of Surah al-Qadr, she heard
suddenly that the baby from inside Nargis’s womb began to recite the
same Surah along with Lady Hakimah! After having finished that, the baby
inside Nargis’s womb said his greetings to Lady Hakimah.

For a moment, Lady Hakimah got frightened and ran toward Imam Hasan who
said to her, “My aunt! Do not be afraid and do not wonder about the will
of God Almighty! Do you not know that God Almighty make us, the Imams,
skillful speakers from our infancy and in our adulthood and appoint us
as His living proofs on earth?”

The Final Moment
----------------

Lady Hakimah returned to Nargis’s room and with her soft hands, held
Lady Hakimah’s hands tightly and shut her eyes. Then she began to recite
verses of the Holy Qur'an.

At that moment, Nargis vanished in front of Lady Hakimah’s eyes! It
seemed that an invisible curtain had suddenly dropped down and separated
Lady Hakimah from Nargis! Once again, Lady Hakimah ran quickly toward
Imam’s room but Imam Hasan did not let her explain what she had just
witnessed; rather, he said to her, “Do not worry, my dear aunt! Go back
to the room and you will see her once again in her place.”


