Preface
=======

The sixth century of the Christian era was a period during which the
flood of atheism rose to its apex. Worldwide, all countries were
engulfed by the deluge of paganism surging in four directions. In china,
the teachings, of Confucius were forgotten; India became the cradle of
idolatry; Persia was exulted in fire-worship; Europe lay wrapped in the
black shroud of the Dark Ages. Arabia was, likewise, in the grip of a
number of idols which were worshipped by different tribes. All immoral
practices and shameful sins prevailed in that peninsula, destroying
social structures and wiping out moral values.

At long last, according to the laws of reaction, the darkness of
atheism was shattered by the light of divine guidance. The sun of
Monotheism shone again in all its brightness, discarding the clouds of
apostasy, star-worship and other pagan doctrines. In Mecca, savior of
humanity started a dramatic change in the history of man.

Endowed with his God-gifted power, he brought radical changes to the
decadent society. Through the medium of wise preaching, he succeeded in
convincing his people, and later the world at large, that image-worship
was a senseless practice, and that they ought to believe in One Supreme
Being Who is the Creator, Lord and Sustainer. Rising to the zenith of
political power and prowess, this reformer later commanded the ignorant
folks to abandon idolatry and gambling, give up usury, and abstain from
wine-drinking.

As the greatest law-giver of all times, he set for mankind an
everlasting code of ethics that ensured moral excellence. He released
the poor from the grip of capitalist exploitation, relieved the
oppressed from the clutches of the profiteers, and set such basic rules
as would ensure the emancipation of slaves through the employment of
terse and well calculated measures.

Muhammad was the name of this sage and reformer to whom all the
moralists of the East and the West ought to pay homage. With incessant
labor, and with the sacrifice of house and hearth, Muhammad
revolutionized the moral and mental attitude of his wild-tempered, rough
and unruly nation within the short span of twenty years. When he was
finally called to God's mercy, he left this world satisfied and
contented, having successfully and fruitfully fulfilled his mission.

He had also left behind him capable successors, from his own holy
Progeny, who never ceased conveying his sacred teachings in the light of
the holy QUR'AN and the exemplary SUNNAH. He had clearly and
unambiguously declared that both the holy QUR'AN and his revered Progeny
would survive in close connection with each other till the Day of
Judgment. Indeed all moralists, rationalists, and historians of the East
and the West ought to pay homage to that sublime reformer.

We feel it is our moral obligation to form an idea about the
biographies of the holy Prophet and his revered descendants. This book
is a humble effort to achieve this objective. We are morally bound to
know as much about these sacred sages as can be by reviewing authentic
and reliable sources. It is indeed a sad fact that the young generations
of schoolboys and schoolgirls, as well as college students, are by far
more familiar with other philosophers and reformers than with the holy
Prophet and his true followers. It is a great intellectual gap the
filling of which is badly needed now more than ever before.

The biographies of the Prophet and his sacred Progeny set a perfect
standard of moral excellence for all humanity. In our daily life, we are
doomed to encounter numerous odds. The theme of morality is to remember
our duty in all circumstances, pleasant and unpleasant, however
intolerable the latter may be. In order to attain this goal, it is
incumbent upon us to study the biographies of individuals who exercised
a complete control over their desires. These were especially blessed and
guided by the Almighty. They were not ruled by sentiment; rather, they
were always of their duties and moral obligations. They set the best
examples in piety, perseverance, fortitude and sacrifice.

The biography of Muhammad and his sacred Progeny is a comprehensive
book of morality each page of which narrates either feats of bravery and
courage, or deeds of generosity, sacrifice, and self-denial. If one
studies such biographies, he will come across some jewels of wisdom and
knowledge. He will find in them storehouses of knowledge and theology.
The pages of their biographies bring to his view sanguine scenes of
battles fought against tyranny and oppression.

Those noble sages did not live their lives under the same
circumstances. The bitter odds of life forced them to face various
situations and fortunes, and they had to cope through various means and
methods, each according to what best suited his own individual capacity
and caliber. In order to learn the best methods to apply in various
circumstances, we must read these biographies, one by one, so that we
may go through all events and come to know of the best possible way to
deal with them.

It is equally important to appreciate the lofty status they enjoy in
numerous verses of the holy QUR'AN which refer to their sublime ethics
and exemplary deeds. I would like here to quote only a few of them which
is but a drop in the ocean:

On p. 244 of GHAYAT AL-MARAM, 'ALLAMA AL-BAHRANI quotes the FAQIH ABU
AL-HASAN MUHAMMAD IBN ALI IBN SHADHAN as stated in AL-MANAQIB
AL-MA'AHMIN TARIQ AL-AMMAH, quoting IBN 'ABBAS saying that he heard the
Messenger of God (P.B.U.H.) say in a lengthy HADITH: "O people! Whoever
is pleased to emulate me, let him accept the WILAYAT of ALI IBN ABU
TALIB and the Imams from my offspring, for they are the storehouses of
my knowledge". JABIR IBN 'ABD ALLAH AL-ANSARI stood and asked: "O
Messenger of God! How many are these Imams?" He (P.B.U.H.) answered: "O
JABIR! You have asked me, God bless you,

about Islam in its entirety!" then he added: "Their number is similar
to the number of wells which gushed forth for MUSA IBN 'UMRAN when he
struck the stone and twelve wells gushed forth". On p. 406-407, Vol. 2,
of TAFSIR AL-BURHAN, 'ALLAMA AL-BAHRANI quotes IMAM ABU JA'GAR MUHAMMAD
IBN JARIR from SHADHAN from SALMAN saying: "The Messenger of God
(P.B.U.H.) said once to me: 'God the Almighty and Sublime never sent a
prophet or a messenger without assigning twelve NAQIBS (representatives
or deputies)'.

I said: 'O Messenger of God! I have come to know that from the People
of the two Books'. He said: 'O SALMAN! Did you come to know who are my
NAQIBS and who are the twelve men God selected for the nation after me?"
I said: 'God and His Messenger know best'. He (P.B.U.H.) said 'O SALMAN!
God created me of the choice of His light and called upon me and I
obeyed Him, and He created IMAM ALI out of my light and He called upon
him and Ali obeyed Him, and He created Fatima of both myself and Ali,
and He called her and she obeyed Him, and He created AL-HASAN of me, of
Ali and of Fatima, and He called upon him and he obeyed Him,

and He created AL-HUSAIN of me, of Ali, of Fatima, and of AL-HASAN, and
He called upon him and he obeyed him. Then He named us after five of His
own Names: God is the Praised One (MAHMUD), and I am Muhammad; and God
is the Sublime ('ALI), and this is 'Ali, and God is the Creator (FATIR;
see Chapter 35 of the holy QUR'AN), and this is Fatima; and for God are
all the attributes of bounty (IHSAN), and this is AL-HASAN; and God is
the One Who grants (MUHSIN), and this is AL-HUSAIN. Then He created out
of us and out of AL-HUSAIN nine Imams, and He called upon their souls,
and they obeyed Him even before He created the heavens or the earth or
the human species; for we have been but light raising God, listening
unto Him, obeying Him'". SALMAN continues to say that he asked the
Messenger of God (P.B.U.H.): "May both my parents be sacrificed for thy
sake, what shall be the reward of those who know these Imams?

" He (P.B.U.H.) answered: "O SALMAN! Whoever knows them as they ought
to be known and emulates them and befriends their friends and becomes
the enemy of their enemy shall, by God, go where we shall go, and shall
live where we live". SALMAN continued to ask the Messenger of God
(P.B.U.H.): "O Messenger of God! Can Imam be acquired without knowing
their names and lineage?" He (P.B.U.H.) answered: "No, SALMAN". Then
SALMAN asked: "O Messenger of God! I would like to be one of their men,
for I know them up to AL-HUSAIN", whereupon the Messenger of God
provided him with the names of the rest of AHL AL-BAYT, saying, "Then
the master of the worshippers ALI IBN AL-HUSAIN, then his son MUHAMMAD
IBN ALI splitter of the knowledge of the early ones and the latter of
the Prophets and Messengers,

then JA'FAR IBN MUHAMMAD, God's truthful tongue (AS-SADIQ), then MUSA
IBN JA'FAR who suppresses his anger perseveres for the sake of pleasing
God, the Almighty and Sublime, then 'ALI IBN MUSA who accepts God's
destiny (AR-RIDA), them MUHAMMAD IBN ALI who is chosen from the best of
God's creation, then 'ALI IBN Muhammad who guides people to God's way
(AL-HADI), then AL-HASAN IBN ALI who is the silent keeper of God's
secret, then Muhammad IBN AL-HASAN the guide and the truly guided one
who is the living articulator (AL-QAIM) of God's Rights". Then the
Prophet (P.B.U.H.) continued saying, "You shall come to see him
(AL-QA'IN, AL-MAHDI) upon his Return, and so shall everyone who is like
you, and whoever accepts his sovereignty out of knowledge". SALMAN
continues to describe is feeling of ecstasy at such glad tidings. This
proves that all those who possessed the spiritual caliber of SALMAN, who
believed in an emulated these saintly souls, will have the unique
distinction and honor of being risen from death to witness the return of
AL-HAHDI and enjoy the kingdom of God which he will INSHA-ALLAH
establish on earth.

The first in the series of biographies of these illustrious sages is
the biography of Prophet Muhammad, the Chosen One, the Seal of the
Prophets, peace be upon him and his Progeny. His noble conduct is an
ideal to be followed by every Muslim. Nay! Since the character of that
great teacher was the climax of moral excellence, all humanity ought to
proudly emulate him. Then we will narrate the biography of IMAM ALI IBN
ABU TALIB. It is so comprehensive that not one group of men, or
inhabitants of a particular region, but rather people of the whole world
can find in it their ideal model. His career was so multi-faceted that
we can see numerous models of cardinal virtues in that one individual.
If we analyze the biographies of great men, we will find that each
excelled in one virtue or two. Take, for example, Alexander the Great,
napoleon, or Cromwell.

They can be taken as models of martial talents, men who maneuvered
their armies skillfully in very precarious situations, winning
astounding victories. But you cannot learn a lesson in sacrifice,
humbleness or generosity from them. NAUSHERWON, Persian ruler, is
renowned for his unparalleled justice, but he is a model for kings only.
His life does not teach people how to live peacefully as good neighbors
maintaining a social order. HATIM AL-TA'I is distinguished for
generosity. But how to fight for the cause of righteousness and the
interest of the nation cannot be taught by that Bedouin chief.

Names of RUSTAM, RICHARD LION-HEART and KHALID IBN AL-WALID shine
brilliantly in the sky of bravery, but the will not demonstrate for us
as to how we should deal with oppressive rulers patiently for the sake
of the good-will of humanity, or how to relinquish our rights to avert
the calamities of a civil war. Even the combination of three or four, or
even five, of such "great" personalities will not form a model to guide
us in various walks of our lives.

History nevertheless brings before our view one sublime figure whose
character has acquired the combination of all virtues, one who has left
his footprints to guide us in all circumstances. He prompts us to fare
honorably in prosperity or adversity, in success and in failure, as a
king or as a laborer, as a commander or as a soldier, as an orator or as
a philosopher- in all phases of life. This is the personality of IMAM
ALI IBN ABU TALIB who was the true successor of the holy Prophet and the
living embodiment of his teachings. In the biography of IMAM ALI, one
finds all aspects of human conduct which teach him how to lead his life
in changing circumstances, and how to stand before the world as a model
of moral perfection. It was IMAM ALI from whom humanity can seek
guidance by scrutinizing the various facets of his life and career.
Another personality to be particularly cherished by half the human race,
I mean the fair sex, is that of FATIMA AZ-ZAHRA, the chaste daughter of
the holy Prophet.

Islamic teachings are not confined to men only; they include women,
too. The personality that can be a model exclusively for women is that
of Fatima, the sublime among the ladies of the world. She can singly
guide half the human race as successfully towards moral perfection as
the thirteen Infallible ones can guide men. Then comes the prince of
Peace, IMAM HASAN, who for the sake of the welfare of the Muslims, and
for the sake of saving them from bloodshed, relinquished his right as
Caliph of the Muslims and concluded a treaty with his opponent MU'AWIYA
on such equitable and wise terms as would ensure, if implemented, the
protection of the Divine Law,

which was the ultimate objective of his life. He also provided chances
to prepare the UMMA for JIHAD or for the great sacrifice which his
younger brother HUSAIN performed on the blooded field of KARBALA. In
order to attain moral excellences in a life full of hardships, a pious
person has first to subdue his own desires and animal instincts. He has
to tread upon and rise above his physical urges, and he has to struggle
for the achievements of his principles in the light of reason and
wisdom. He has also to fight external obstacles hindering his path
towards the truth.

Environment, atmosphere, the pace of time and the forces of oppression,
all unite to distract him from the path to righteousness. The floods of
injustice, the storms of tyranny and downpour of troubles make it
impossible for him to stand in their face. In such situations, it is not
possible for everyone to lay down his life for the cause of defending
the truth. Fortitude, forbearance, patience and courage are words
written in dictionaries and are narrated as tales or legends or recorded
in books of ethics.

But to demonstrate the actual meaning of these words during times of
hardship, or advance bravely towards the valley of death, or to quicken
the staggering legs towards a real challenge, we need a living guide who
serves as a model of such caliber. We desire the presence of a seasoned
and experienced hero who braves the storms of calamities, swims through
the ocean of blood and calls upon the whole world to: "Come up and
follow me to the zenith of truth, the apex of righteousness, and the
heights of fortitude…!" Such a personality can undoubtedly be none other
than HUSAIN IBN ALI.

Among the Fourteen Infallibles, tall stands IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN, IMAM
ALI son of HUSAIN, the embodiment of patience and devotion. He was
strong enough to undergo the hardships of fetters, shackles and
imprisonment in the way of God on one hand, while, on the other hand, we
find him given to worshipping his Lord in the loneliness of dark nights.
These days, the human race is stooping into materialism, forgetting the
Creator, living in a world where the mighty and powerful wish to trample
upon the weak and the meek, the majority desiring to crush the minority.
It was always needed, and it is now needed more than ever before, to
cultivate in our hearts a feeling for devotion and worship since a true
worshipper will never shrink from serving humanity.

A true devotee of God will always serve His fellow human beings. If he
is strong, he will not abuse his strength by oppressing the weak;
rather, he will protect them with his God-given strength. This feeling
will obligate the majority to defend the minority instead of crushing
it. in order to cultivate this feeling in our hearts, we ought to
narrate the biographies of those purified persons who, even during times
of extreme desperation and dismay, did not forget their Lord.

When composed and enjoying all conveniences, one can enjoy the freedom
of worship. But when the clouds of calamity and misery rest heavily on
the mind, and the heart-rending shocks of the massacre of a whole family
overwhelms the soul, worshipping the Lord so sincerely as to receive the
title "ZAIN AL-ABIDIN", that is "chief of the prostrates", is the task
of none but IMAM ALI son of HUSAIN.

IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR and IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ were scholars who
revived the passion for learning and the pursuit for knowledge. The
highway of the Divine Law, paved by Prophet Muhammad, the last Messenger
of God, was blocked by doubts, fallacies and superstitions. Yet every
individual among the Prophet's Descendants attempted to preserve the
message of God and offered while doing so precious sacrifices, but alas
the grip of political persecution always choked his voice and in the end
brought him to an untimely death. IMAM AL-BAQIR and IMAM AS-SADIQ,
however, had the chance to present to the world the sacred teachings of
the Prophet which can ensure the reform of ht sinful human race. IMAM
MUSA AL-KAZIM suffered the hardships of prison cells while upholding the
banner of truth. IMAM AR-RIDA was appointed as the heir-apparent to the
'ABBASIDE monarch during the hey-days of the dynasty. He was surrounded
by the elites, princes and ministers of the most significant and
powerful empire of its time.

But he always sought to please his Lord, ignoring the pomp and power
bestowed upon him even against his own will. He kept his escutcheon
stainless, spotless, and he demonstrated how to perform that noble duty
for which man was placed on earth. IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI lived the
shortest span of life among the Imams, yet he demonstrated that when a
person is resolved to be the model of moral perfection, he can leave an
immortal impression of his conduct on the human mind.

Such a life, in spite of its short span, can be as important in moral
history as any other of a longer duration. The biographies of IMAM ALI
AN-NAQI and IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI are characterized with the same
virtues which were the legacy of this household of Prophet-hood Although
both Imams lived in exile and imprisonment, they incessantly continued
to propagate the teachings of the Prophet, braving all odds.

It is a fact that the religion of Islam is not merely a collection of
doctrines. Islam came to bear the torch and shed the light on the zigzag
of the human life. This is the way which may be described as 'thinner
that hair and sharper than the sword'. One method, considered right at
one time, may become wrong at another. It was, therefore, necessary to
set up before the world different models of behavior to be emulated at
every possible turn in the ever-bending path of life. Such cross-roads
are usually met in man's journey. At every bend, it is possible that the
traveler might take the wrong road and thus strays. The study of the
biographies of these Infallible Leaders viz. the Prophet and his holy
Progeny, consisting of Fatima and the twelve Imams from her descendants,
is now available to the discreet reader on the pages of this book. Its
size could not permit comprehensive details; therefore, we had to be
satisfied with narrating the basic events only. May God render our
humble effort the means of recognizing the real legacy of the holy
Prophet and his true successors. ALLAHOMMA AMIN.


