The Seventh Imam Musa Al-kazim (as)
===================================

**NAME AND PARENTAGE**

His name is MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) and ABU AL-HASAN are his titles. He is
usually called MUSA AL-KAZIM. IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) was his father
whose lineage, by five generations, reaches the holy Prophet (p). His
mother HAMIDA KHATUN was a North African Berber.

**BIRTH**

He was born on SAFAR 7, 128 A.H. (November 8, 754 A.D.). The knowledge
of his father, IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS), saturated the Islamic world.
Although two elder sons, ISMA'IL and ABDALLAH, had already illuminated
the house, the addition of the new-born brought unparalleled happiness
to the household, probably because the Providence had decided to
maintain the continuity of Imamate through him.

**UPBRINGING AND INSTRUDCTION**

Twenty years of his age passed under the supervision of his father IMAM
JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS). It may be said that the student or trainee, i.e.
MUSA, was a gifted one while the teacher was the Imam who displayed an
exalted character which reflected the moral excellence of holy Prophet.
It was due to these virtues and to the propagation of the teachings of
the Prophet that the SHI'AHS are called "JA'FARIS", taught by IMAM
JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS). It is clear that the capable son might have fully
availed himself of his father's excellent tutoring during his boyhood
and youth.

The scholarly achievements of IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) were so
conspicuous that the world acknowledged them and IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ
(AS) appointed him as his successor. It is proved by this act that
Imamate does not, as a rule, go to the eldest son or be inherited. It is
the blessing bestowed by the Divine Providence upon the Infallibles who
are gifted with celestial learning. The principle is further established
by the fact that this enormous responsibility had once before passed
from IMAM HASAN to his brother IMAM HUSAIN (AS), and not to HASAN'S
descendants. The Imamate of MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS), therefore, illustrates
that Imamate is based on personal perfection, not necessarily on direct
descent.

**IMAMATE**

In 148 A.H. (765 A.D.), upon the death of IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS),
the responsibilities of Imamate devolved on MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS). This was
during the reign of AL-MANSUR AL-DAWANIQI, the tyrant who ordered the
slaying of countless SAYYIDS. The number of those imprisoned, oppressed
thrown into the dark cells of prisons or bricked up in the walls alive
was know only to God. IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) himself had been
subjected to harassment, tyranny and intrigues, the last of which was
poison which ended his life.

In these circumstance, IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) on his death-bed
foresaw that the life of his successor, too, would be ended in the same
way. In order to divert this danger, he nominated, in his will, five
trustees to look after his family. AL-MANSUR the ABBASIDE ruler was one
of them. The other four were MUHAMMAD IBN SULAYMAN, the then governor of
Medina, his own son ABDALLAH AL-AFTAH MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS), and their
respected mother HAMIDA KHATUN. IMAM JA'FAR'S prediction was correct.
When the news of his death reached AL-MANSUR, the latter made a show of
grief by thrice repeating these words: "INNA LILLAHI WA INNA ILAIHI
RAJI'UN", (that is, "We are God's and unto Him is our return"). He also
said: "Who can be JA'FAR'S equal nowâ€¦?" But secretly he wrote to the
governor of Medina saying: "If JA'FAR, by way of a will, appointed any
trustee, put him to death immediately". The governor replied: "He had
appointed five trustees, the first of whom is your majesty". Having read
this reply, AL-MANSUR remained silent, since the sanctity of a will
cannot be violated. Then, pondering over the situation, he said: "In
this case, these persons cannot be slain".

According, for the next ten years, AL-MASUR did not try to harass MUSA
AL-KAZIM (AS) who carried out the duties of Imamate peacefully.
AL-MANSUR was, moreover, preoccupied with building the new capital of
Baghdad which he completed just one year before his death. He had,
therefore, little time to think of harassing IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS).

**PERSECUTION**

AL-MANSUR AL-DAWANIQI died in 158 A.H.(775 A.D.) and was succeeded by
his son AL-MAHDI. In the beginning, AL-MAHDI did nothing to humiliate or
dishonor IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS), but later he fostered the old enmity
against Imam Ali's descendants. In 164 A.H. (781 A.D), when he performed
the HAJJ, he took the Imam with him from Mecca to Baghdad where he
imprisoned him. For one year the Imam suffered the hardship of
imprisonment. Then the ruler realized that he was mistreating a
descendant of the Prophet (p), and he released the pious soul. In 169
A.H., AL-MAHDI died and was succeeded by his brother AL-HADI who ruled
for only 13 months. On his death, HARUN AL-RASHID came to the throne.
The latter's attitude towards IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) was very
antagonistic and it caused AL-KAZIM (AS) to die in imprisonment.

**CHARACTER AND VIRTUES**

IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) was one of the illustrious Imams whom the
Almighty God had set as a paragon of moral excellence. Each member of
this illustrious family possessed cardinal virtues. Naturally in some
individuals a particular virtue is dominant and more conspicuous. The
Seventh Imam excelled in tolerance and forgiveness, so much so that he
was tilted AL-KAZIM (AS), the suppressor of fury. Never was he heard
speaking roughly or sternly. Even in the most unpleasant situations, he
wore a smiling face. This was in accordance with the saying of his
ancestor IMAM ALI IBN ABU TALIB (AS) that the faithful keeps his grief
confined in his heart with a smile on his face.

One government official of Medina was a persistent source of harassment
to IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS). He even used abusive language regarding Imam
Ali (as). But the Imam always directed his followers not to abuse him.
Hen his malicious conduct became too rude to be tolerated, they sought
permission to retaliate against him. The Imam appeased them, promising
to decide the matter himself.

Pacifying his followers thus, he went to the fellow on his farm and
treated him with such noble benevolence that the man felt ashamed of his
conduct and subsequently changed his attitude and altered his conduct.
Explaining this policy to his followers, the Imam asked: "Was my
behavior better than the methods you suggested?" They admitted that it
certainly was. He thus carried out the instruction of his great ancestor
Imam Ali (as) which is recorded in NAHJ AL-BALAGHA to subdue the enemy
with benevolence since it is more effective than vanquishing him with
force. No doubt this requires a correct judgment of the enemy's nature.
Imam Ali (as) has, therefore, warned not to use this policy with the
vile and the mean, or they will be encouraged to do m ore mischief.

To vanquish foe with goodness certainly requires the foresight the Imam
possessed. Strictness is permissible only when the enemy's continuous
vile conduct justifies retaliation or the use of force. If not, these
dignified souls preferred to deal with him gently, so as to have a valid
pretext against the opponent and leave no ground for him to justify his
aggression.

This was the noble method usually adopted by this House of
Prophet-hood. Imam Ali (as), even on his death-bed, behaved liberally
with IBN MULJIM who had dealt him a mortal blow only the day before.
IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) showered his generosity on MUHAMMAD IBN ISMA'IL
who carried out the orders of the ABBASIDE caliph to put an end to the
Imam's life. It was IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) who aided him for his
journey with a grant of 400 DINARS and 1,500 DIRHAMS although he
undertook this journey to poison the ears of the caliph against him.
IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) had to undergo hard times. The academy of
learning which his father IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) established could
not longer be maintained. Other means to disseminate knowledge were
beyond his reach. It was only his noble personal behavior which was able
to introduce the teachings of Prophet Muhammad (p) and his Progeny (AS)
to the public.

He used to observe silence at gatherings or seminars, and he never
spoke unless somebody put up some scientific problem to him. Nor did he
ever initiate a conversation. In spite of this, he was regarded with an
awe of respect by friend and foe alike. All acknowledged his knowledge
and noble bearing. In view of his excessive worship at night, he was
called "AL-ABD AS-SALIH", i.e., the pious worshipper of God. No less
famed was his generosity. He used to help the beggars and destitute
secretly. After the morning prayers, he used to lower his forehead in
prostration and remain in that position till the sun declined. His
recitation of the holy QUR'AN was attractive; he wept as he recited, and
his audiences were deeply waved.

**HARASSMENT OF IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS)**

In 170 A.H. (787 A.D.), HARUN AR-RASHID succeeded as the caliph. His
ancestors' traditional cruelty towards the descendants of Imam Ali (as)
and Fatima was well in his view. He knew quite well the plans of his
father against IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) as well as his own intentions
to do away with the Imam's successor. On one hand, the sagacious and
wise will of IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS), whose moral obligations had
rendered AL-MANSUR'S designs futile, safeguarded IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM'S
life; on the other hand, the building of the new capital of Baghdad
totally absorbed the attention of his antagonist. But HARUN had no such
obstacles or engagements. The only plan he could think of was to secure
his power and abolish the academy of spiritual excellence which stood in
the HASHEMITES' center in Medina. However, the calm and cautious policy
of IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS), as well as the internal problems of
government, did not allow HARUN to harass the Imam openly.

Meanwhile, the revolt of YAHYA IBN ABDALLAH IBN AL-HASAN took place.
Violating all agreements and covenants, HARUN first threw YAHYA into the
choking dark dungeons and then slew him. IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) was in
no way connected with YAHYA'S uprising. He had, instead, advised him
against opposing the government. But YAHYA'S action served to intensify
the enmity which HARUN bore towards Imam Ali's descendants including, of
course, IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS). To make the matters even worse, the
Prime Minister YAHYA IBN KHALID AL-BARMAKI poisoned HARUN'S ears by
pointing out that JA'FAR IBN AL-ASH'ATH (tutor of HARUN'S son AL-AMIN
and a political rival of YAHYA) was a SHI'AH of the Imam who planned to
bring the Imam to power. Although YAHYA IBN KHALID intended just to
enrage HARUN against JA'FAR IBN AL-ASH'ATH, his plan proved to be fatal
to IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS). In the same year, HARUN came to Mecca to
perform the HAJJ, and so did IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS). Here HARUN watched
with jealous eyes the sublime popularity which numerous Muslim
multitudes showed for that sage. It was sufficient to flare up his rage.
MUHAMMAD IBN ISMA'IL'S opposition worsened the situation.

To understand these complications, let us ponder on the following:
ISMA'IL, Muhammad's father, was the eldest son of IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ
(AS), and he was expected to succeed his father as the Imam. But he died
during the lifetime of the Imam. The common notion was thus shattered.
Yet some simpletons still held the view that IMAM JA'FAR'S successor
should be one of ISMA'IL'S offspring. MUHAMMAD IBN ISMA'IL and his
followers, therefore, never acknowledged the Imamate of MUSA AL-KAZIM
(AS). Since his followers were a small minority, he outwardly expressed
his loyalty to the family. To discuss all possible means of annihilating
IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS), HARUN consulted YAHYA AL-BARMAKI whom he
instructed to collect complete reports about the Imam through one of the
descendants of Imam Ali (as). YAHYA, an avowed foe of the Prophet's
Progeny, recommended Muhammad IBN ISMA'IL as the person who would supply
all the details correctly. Accordingly, he was summoned to Baghdad.

When MUHAMMAD IBN ISMA'IL received the caliphs' letter, he considered
it a passport to power and prosperity, and he resolved to go to Baghdad.
But he was penniless and unable to prepare for the journey. He was,
therefore, obliged to approach the same generous saint who demonstrated
benevolence to friend and foe alike. He told the Imam that he intended
to go to Baghdad. The Imam knew well the motives behind the journey. He
nevertheless inquired about its purpose. Muhammad explained that he was
having hard times, being deeply in debt, and that he thought that the
journey might bring his prosperity. The Imam said: "You need not go
there; I promise to pay off all your debts and provide adequately for
your sustenance".

But Muhammad would not change his decision to go to Baghdad. Upon
leaving, he paid the Imam a visit and requested a useful piece of
advice. IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) remained silent. On his repeated
request, the Imam said: "Please see that you do not become a party in
slaying me, and please do not be the cause for making my children
orphans". Muhammad tried to turn from the point and asked for some
appropriate advice. But the Imam refused to say anything more. When he
got up to depart, the noble soul granted him 450 gold DINARS and 1,500
silver DIRHAMS for the journey.

The result was exactly what the Imam had foreseen. MUHAMMAD IBN ISMA'IL
reached Baghdad and stayed at the house of YAHYA, the Prime Minister who
introduced him to HARUN who surrounded him with honors HARUN inquired
about the pace of events in Medina. Muhammad stated the circumstances
most incorrectly, adding; "I never saw or heard that a country is ruled
by two kings". On being asked to explain, he asserted: "As you are
ruling here in Baghdad, MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) rules there in Medina. From
every town, revenues are delivered to him, and he claims to be your own
equal in power". These were the words YAHYA AL-BARMAKI had instructed
Muhammad to say to HARUN who felt very much provoked. He sent Muhammad
back after granting him ten thousand DINARS. But God wished that
Muhammad should not avail of this wealth. On that very night, he
suffered pain in his throat, and when the day dawned, the darkness of
death closed on him. HARUN heard the news and ordered to retrieve the
cash. Muhammad's statement was not erased from HARUN'S memory and he was
resolved to put an end to the Imam's life.

When in 179 A.H. (795 A.D) HARUN went to Mecca and Medina, he stayed in
the latter city for a day or two after which he sent his men to arrest
IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS). The Imam was not at home when the caliph's men
came, so they went to the Prophet's tomb where he used to say his
prayers. Totally disregarding the sanctity of the Prophet's grave, they
arrested his descendant there and brought him before HARUN. It was on
the 20th of SHAWWAL of 179 A.H. that the Prophet's pious son was being
fettered and taken prisoner while not even one MEDENITE dared to raise a
finger against the tyrant. This lethargy of the unfeeling Muslims had
also been witnessed on several occasions before that incident.

Being apprehensive of any attempt which might be made to rescue the
Imam, HARUN ordered two camel-domes to be prepared in one of which he
seated the Imam and sent him to Basra escorted by a sizeable military
detachment. The other empty dome was sent to Baghdad with an equal
number of soldiers in order to confuse any prospective rescuers and
distract the attention of people by keeping the place of imprisonment
unknown. Was it not a shocking event that the Imam's family could not
even see the Imam or bid him farewell? They only received the news that
he had been imprisoned by the government. They were distressed to hear
it and the Imam, too, was equally grieved for being separated from his
loved ones without being able to bid them farewell. But his power of
endurance welcomed his dilemma.

Nobody knows what a zigzag route was followed that the journey to Basra
took full 47 days. There the Imam remained in confinement for one year.
The city's governor was 'ISA IBN JA'FAR, a cousin of HARUN. In the
beginning he carried out HARUN'S orders. But he often wondered about the
reasons for the imprisonment of the pious descendant of the Prophet
Muhammad (p). He therefore, became curious about the Imam's life,
character and attributes. The more he studied them and noticed his
forbearance, the more he was impressed by his noble conduct.

He conveyed his views to HARUN In good faith, but the latter only
became suspicious of the intentions of his own cousin. He therefore
ordered that the imam must be transferred to Baghdad where he put him
under the custody of AL-FADL IBN AR-RABI'. Having come to know that FADL
was inclined towards SHI'ISM, he put the Imam under the custody of YAHYA
AL-BARMAKI, the notorious enemy of AHL AL-BAYT (AS). It seems that the
Imam's sacred personality impressed everybody and the tyrant thought it
necessary to change his jailers.

**DEATH**

The imam was finally imprisoned in the dungeon under the charge of
AS-SINDI IBN SHAHIK who was the ruthless and stone-hearted Chief of
Police of HARUN AR-RASHID. He died on the 25th of RAJAB 183 A.H.
(September 2, 799 A.D.) at the age of 55. No honor was shown at the
burial either. Rather, the corpse was borne to the grave-yard by men who
were announcing his death in degrading tones. By this time the people
felt depressed about the fate of the elevated Imam and they accompanied
the coffin with full display of respect. They buried him in a suburb of
Baghdad now bearing his name as KAZIMIYYA, city of IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM
(AS) where his magnificent mausoleum now houses a reputed school of
theology.


