The Eighth Imam 'ali Ar-rida (as)
=================================

**NAME AND PARENTAGE**

His name is 'ALI IBN MUSA. AR-RIDA (AS) and ABU AL-HASAN are his
titles. His mother was the pious lady UMM AL-BANIN AT-TAHIRA.

**BIRTH**

He was born on the 11th of THU AL-QI'DA 148 A.H. (December 29, 765
A.D.). His grandfather IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) died one month before
the birth of the Imam to-be ALI BIN MUSA AR-RIDA (AS). The family may
have been consoled by his birth which took place after such a great
loss.

**UPBRINGING**

He was brought up and instructed by his affectionate father under whose
supervision he passed his boyhood and youth. He availed himself of the
instruction of his learned parent for thirty-one years till the latter
was taken to Baghdad to suffer the hardship of imprisonment for four
years till his death.

**SUCCESSION**

IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) could foresee that the hostile government would
not to allow him to live peacefully and circumstances would take such a
turn that his followers would not be able to see him or inquire about
his successor prior to his death. So while free and undisturbed in
Medina, he felt the need to introduce his successor to his followers.
He, therefore, assembled seventeen prominent dignitaries from the
descendants of Imam Ali (as) and proclaimed that IMAM ALI IBN MUSA
AR-RIDA (AS) would succeed him. He also wrote his will on which 60
respected elders of Medina signed as witnesses. Such elaborated
arrangements were never made by any other Imam, and they proved to be
most appropriate due to controversy about the Imamate which ensued after
the death of IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS).

**IMAMATE**

IMAM AR-RIDA (AS) was 35 when his father died and the responsibilities
of Imamate devolved on him. At the time, HARUN AR-RASHID was the
absolute ruler of Baghdad and the descendants of Imam Ali (as) were
passing through trials and tribulations because of him. Yet IMAM AR-RIDA
(AS) carried on the responsibility of administering the Divine Law of
SHARI'AH.

**PROFOUND KNOWLEDGE**

All the Imams who descended from the Prophet of Islam (p) achieve the
highest among of knowledge; they therefore were revered by friends and
respected by foes. But some members had better chances to propagate the
divine teachings than others. After IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS), IMAM
AR-RIDA (AS) was blessed with the most conducive environment for this
purpose. IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) used to exhort the whole family to
refer all religious problems to his son IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) whom he
saw to be the most learned among the descendants of the Prophet,
instructing them to confine to memory whatever Imam Ali (as) said.
Similarly, all Muslim scholars came to him seeking solutions to delicate
theological problems. MUHAMMAD IBN MUSA AL-QUTAINI states that only the
written questions to which he replied in writing numbered 18,000.

**VARIOUS PHASES OF LIFE**

After putting an end to the life of IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS), HARUN
lived for ten years. He had less tolerance for the existence of IMAM ALI
AR-RIDA (AS) than he did for that of his revered father. But the
government had already lost face due to its prolonged maltreatment and
eventual assassination of IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS), or perhaps the tyrant
felt the stings of conscience which kept him from harassing IMAM ALI
AR-RIDA (AS). It is said that once YAHYA IBN KHALIK AL-BARMAKI, in order
to gain the ruler's favor, informed HARUN that IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS)
claimed Imamate in the same way his father had done. HARUN coldly
replied: "We have already inflicted cruelties on his father; do you
expect me to annihilate this family altogether?"

Still, HARUN was antagonistic towards the Prophet's progeny and he
persisted in mistreating them; therefore, the local officers who wished
to please the ruler could not afford to be fair to AHL AL-BAYT (AS).
People could not visit IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) freely to seek his
knowledge, and he had little chance to publicly disseminate the true
Islamic teachings.

The last years of HARUN'S life were embittered by the political rivalry
of his sons AL-AMIN and AL-MA'MUN. AL-AMIN was his elder son by ZUBAIDA,
the granddaughter of ABU JA'FAR AL-MANSUR AL-DAWANIQI, He had,
therefore, the support of all Arab nobility. AL-MA'MUN was born of a
Persian maid, so the Persian nobility supported his cause. The struggle
between the two brothers chafed his soul. In order to settle the
dispute, he divides the kingdom between the two: Baghdad and the
territories surrounding it, Syria, Egypt, what is now Saudi Arabia, and
Yemen, he put under AL-AMIN'S rule.

AL-MA'MUN was put in charge of ruling the eastern provinces of Persia,
KHURASAN and Trans-Saxony This settlement could have worked had the two
brothers respected the principle of "Live and let live". In the present
tussle, hissed the dragon of rivalry. The ABBASIDES, who were accustomed
to inflicting atrocities on the Progeny of Imam Ali (as), had learned
gladiator at home. They were bound to strike each other since they never
knew the qualities of compassion, sacrifice and the public good which
characterized the conduct of Imam Ali descendants and for which they
gave up their own rights quite often. So immediately after HARUN'S
death, civil war flared up. After strife and bloodshed which continued
for four years, AL-MA'MUN got the upper hand. AL-AMIN was killed in
MUHARRAM of 198 A.H. (September 813 A.D.) and AL-MA'MUN now ruled the
whole ABBASIDE empire.

**THE POLITICAL DILEMMA**

After AL-AMIN'S murder, AL-MA'MUN acceded to the throne, but, as
already stated above, he was half Persian on his mother's side, while
AL-AMIN was of full Arab blood. AL-AMIN'S slaying had annoyed the Arab
elite. Those ABBASIDE regime from time to time and were slain,
imprisoned or exiled. This group, however weak, was also opposed to the
ABBASIDE monarchy.

In Persia, things had taken a different turn. About seventy years prior
to that era, ABU MUSLIM AL-KHURASANI had created hatred there against
the UMAYYADS by telling the stories of atrocities meted by them to IMAM
HUSAIN (AS) and to the rest of Imam Ali's descendants. The Persians,
therefore, had compassion for the latter. But when the tables were
turned on the UMAYYADS, the ABBASIDES took advantage of the situation
and seized the government, depriving the descendants of Imam Ali (as) in
whose name their coup was brought about. But by and by, the Persians
were gradually disillusioned. They had a full view of this political
jugglery. AL-MA'MUN might have heard of the Persians' sympathy for the
Prophet's Progeny. Along with the danger of revolt of the Arab nobles,
caused by AL-AMIN'S slaying, AL-MA'MUN also feared an uprising in
Persia. He, therefore, considered it a political necessity to outbalance
the Arabs by pleasing the Persian element and to patronize the
Descendants of Imam Ali (as) by giving them a towering position in the
government. In order to conceal these political designs, he wrapped them
up in the sacred cloak of "love for the Prophet's Progeny" and tried to
prove that he sincerely wished to hand over the power to IMAM ALI
AR-RIDA (AS).

ASH-SHAIKH AS-SADUQ writes that in order to display his honesty of
purpose, AL-MA'MUN propagated the story of the odds he had faced. There
are his own words:

"When I was struggling against AL-AMIN and was in a precarious
situation, the people of SISTAN and KIRMAN revolted. There was unrest in
KHURASAN. My treasury was empty, so I could not rely on my soldiers whom
I did not pay. In such perilous circumstances, I prayed to God, taking
the oath that if overcame all those odds and acceded to the throne, I
would hand the caliphate over to its real and rightful master, i.e. the
most suitable among Imam Ali's descendants. It was after taking such an
oath that my affairs began to improve".

AL-MA'MUN might have related this story to demonstrate that his actions
were based on sincerity. As regarding the rightfulness of the
Descendants, everybody knew the fact that they deserved to wield the
authority by the dint of their own virtues. But merely this knowledge is
not sufficient to label one as SHI'AH. It rather demands the obedience
and love of the Prophet's Progeny. Some writers say that despite all the
pretensions AL-MA'MUN made, he did not really intend to obey the word of
the Imam; rather, he persisted in imposing his will on him. Proclaiming
that he had appointed IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) as his heir-apparent, he
summoned him from Medina. At best, this appointment was a political
pressure exerted by the ruling monarch on the Imam.

**DEPARTURE FROM MEDINA**

IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) had to comply with AL-MA'MUN'S orders and leave
Medina just as his father was summoned according to the order of
AL-MA'MUN'S father twenty-one years ago. His sorrow and grief knew no
bounds. At the eve of his departure from the Prophet's tomb site, his
woe was the same as that of IMAM HUSAIN (AS) when the latter had to
leave that sacred place never to return again. The onlookers saw that in
his desperate dismay, he went into the tomb several times, complained of
the community with wailing, then he came with the intention of going
home, but he reentered the tomb and clung to his ancestor's grave. This
happened many times. An eye witness later sated that when he went near
the Imam, the Imam complained to the Almighty saying: "O Lord! I am
being torn forcibly away from my ancestor's tomb. I shall never have the
chance to come back".

In 200 A.H. (815 A.D.), IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) started his journey,
leaving all his family members including his son MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS,
who was only five years old, in Medina. When he reached MARW,
AL-MA'MUN'S capital at that time, he was entertained for a few days as
AL-MA'MUN'S guest. Then AL-MA'MUN normally asked the Imam to take over
the caliphate, but the Imam refused. AL-MA'MUN then asked him to agree
to be his heir-apparent. The Imam, who knew the purpose of AL-MA'MUN,
refused that offer too. But now AL-MA'MUN insisted most sternly,
explaining that another refusal might entail his own death.

For the members of this illustrious Family, death was always welcome,
provided it guaranteed to safeguard the dignity of Islam: otherwise, the
Divine Law of SHARI'AH directs to preserve one's life. At this juncture
the Imam said: "Since I am being compelled, I accept the offer but I
shall not handle the administration. I shall, however, give counsel if I
am consulted".

The offer was indeed nothing more than a diplomatic jugglery which
might have served some political purpose. The Imam's position in those
days was the same as that of his ancestor IMAM ALI (AS), who during the
regimes of the first three caliphs, gave wise counsel when consulted.
Neither of the conduct of these two Imams endorses the legitimacy of the
government. IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) did accede to AL-MA'MUN'S wish but
kept himself aloof from the administrative polices of that government.

The ABBASIDES did not approve AL-MA'MUN'S scheme, and they tried to
undermine it. But when AL-MA'MUN asked them to recommend someone else
better than IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS), they could not meet the challenge.
Some expostulations, too, took place, but who could vie in knowledge
with the learned Imam? AL-MA'MUN was determined to make his decision
public. None could make him change his mind.

**AS HEIR-APPARENT**

On the first of Ramadan, 201 A.H. (March 23, 817 A.D), a meeting for
the purpose of naming the heir-apparent was convened. The occasion was
marked with full pomp and decoration. First of all, AL-MA'MUN required
his son to take the oath of allegiance. Then others were instructed to
do likewise. Gold and silver coins were thrown over the Imam's head
according to the tradition of the time. All the nobles and attendants
received awards. AL-MA'MUN ordered that the currency be struck with the
Imam's name on it. DINARS and DIRHAMS were accordingly struck and
circulated throughout the country. His name was proclaimed during the
Friday sermons.

**THE IMAM'S CONDUCT**

Usually, the destitute and the poor who cannot afford to enjoy the
pleasures of life are held with contempt or tolerated with patience, but
those who assume a hermit's simple austerity in spite of wealth and
power are the real saints. The Prophet's Progeny adopted a peculiar
policy. Those whose means were limited dressed nicely because otherwise
the enemies would taunt them as destitute which would injure the dignity
of their piety;

but blessed are those who by chance become wealthy, and who assume
simplicity and austerity so that their simple life becomes a source of
consolation for the poor and a model of the rich. This can be
illustrated by the life of IMAM ALI BIN ABU TALIB (AS). For five years,
he ruled the Muslim world as caliph. He ate and dressed himself as a
hermit would. IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS), too, led a simple life, although he
was heir-apparent of that vast empire compared to which the Roman Empire
or the Persian territories would certainly not be a match - a vast chain
of countries whose caliph, upon watching a passing cloud, would
haughtily assert: "Go and pour your waters anywhere you please; the
revenues of that land shall ultimately be brought to us".

The appointment of IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) as heir-apparent demonstrated
to the world how the saints fare when the treasures of the world are put
at their disposal. He felt he was orally bound to abandon riches and
pomp. History repeated itself, and the austerity of IMAM ALI IBN ABU
TALIB (AS) once more shone in the calm and content personality of IMAM
ALI AR-RIDA (AS). He did not like to decorate his dwelling with costly
carpets; instead he covered its floor with rough mats during the winter
and grass mats during the summer. When food was served, he called all
his servants including the gate-keepers and the grooms, to sit and eat
with him, the prince that he was.

ALLAMA AL-MAJLISI mentions on p. 101 vol. 49, of his BIHAR AL-ANWAR,
that the Imam insisted on eating his meal only after the entire members
of the family, young and old, and the servants and grooms, were present.
One day someone who was more fond of royal formalities than the
fraternity of Muhammad's religion, suggested that it would be better to
make separate eating arrangements for the servants. The Imam replied:
"All are created by God, Adam is their father and Eve is their mother.
Everyone will be dealt with by God according to his deeds; why should
there be any discrimination in this world?".

RAJA' IBN ADH-DHAHHAK accompanied the Imam during his entire journey
from Medina to MARW. He is quoted on p. 18, vol. 2, of 'UYUN AKHBAR
AR-RIDA and by AS-SADUQ as saying: "I was with him the whole time from
Medina to MARW. By God I have never seen a man more fearful of God than
him, or remembering God more during all times. In the early morning he
performs the prayers, then he sits praising God, pronouncing HAMD and
TAKBIR and sending blessing unto the Prophet till sunrise. Then he
prostrates till late in the morning. Then he comes to people to narrate
HADITH and preach to them till time of non prayers approaches". On p.
258 of AL-FUSUL AL-MUHIMMA of IBN AL-SABBAGH AL-MALIKI, AL-MA'MUN
described IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) thus: "His excellences are surpassing,
his knowledge is vast, his piety is quite obvious, his asceticism is
well-known, his renunciation of the world is apparent…; put simply, he
is unique".

Within a few decades, the ABBASIDE rulers had grown so haughty and
cruel that people began to realize that they had exceeded the UMAYYADS
in their atrocities. They based their right to rule upon the basis of
their blood relationship to the Prophet. But such monarchs never cared
to be pious or to do their duty as caliphs. IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) was
living in this luxurious environment yet he never indulged himself in
it. He repeatedly asserted that mere relationship or lineage was nothing
to pride in. it is personal good conduct that matters. It was not a
display of humbleness on the part of IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) but a
challenge to the anti-Islamic mentality of arrogant ABBASIDE rulers.
These demonstrations of simple, compassionate, humane ways of life were
very effective as they were now made by an important member of the
empire.

IMAM ALI AR-RIDA'S life contains countless anecdotes of this sort. Once
a man said to him: "By God, there is none who is superior to you in the
nobleness of ancestry". The Imam said to him: "My ancestors are honored
merely for their Godliness, piety and worship". Another fellow once
declared: "By God, you are the best in the world". The Imam checked him
by saying: "Don't you declare an oath. Any man who is more pious than me
can be better than me". IBRAHIM IBN AL-ABBAS once related that he heard
IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) saying: "I do not consider myself better than this
black salve only on account of my relationship with the Prophet. It is
only when I do good deeds that I become better in the eyes of God".

Short-sighted people may ascribe this behavior to the Imam's natural
humbleness. But the sagacious and learned head of the ABBASIDE Empire
surely knew that the Imam's silent behavior and its logic was a fatal
blow to the wayward and arrogant ABBASIDE monarchy. He had proclaimed
him his heir only as a political measure which he took just to
strengthen his regime. Now he felt that if the Imam lived long enough,
his life would bring about a popular revolution which may result in the
fall of the empire.

**PROPAGATION OF INCIDENTS OF KARBALA'**

IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) had now the chance to recite the narration of
IMAM HUSAIN'S events. This tradition was initiated by IMAM MUHAMMAD
AL-BAQIR (AS) and IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS). But during their time, only
those who came to their gatherings respected them as Imams or scholars.
IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) was respected both as Imam and heir-apparent.
MARW, the capital and central town of Persia, was the meeting place of
people from all walks of life and corners of the earth. As soon as the
crescent of MUHARRAM was sighted, KARBALA, seminars began. Everybody was
expected to recite the sad events that befell the Prophet's descendants
and maintain a serious atmosphere of sorrow. He further declared that
those who were sympathetic towards the Prophet's Progeny would rise on
Doomsday with a composed heart.

It was IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) who called these KARBALA' seminars
"MAJALIS". He himself convened those MAJALIS in which he sometimes was
the speaker and sometimes as one of the audience. ABDALLAH IBN THABIT
and DI'BIL AL-KHUZA'I were the poets whom he ordered to recite poems
narrating the tragic events. At the end, he bestowed on DI'BIL a costly
shirt. The high-spirited poet refused to accept that precious gift,
requesting that the Imam be gracious to grant him his used shirt
instead. The good-natured saint insisted on granting him both shirts.
This incident proves two things: first, that the speaker must not decide
or demand any payment for his address; second, that if the convener
presents something as a gift or payment, the speaker may accept it.

**DEATH**

AL-MA'MUN'S expectation did not materialize. A report says that he
decide to put and end to IMAM ALI AR-RIDA'S life by applying the same
soundless weapon which had so often been used against these saintly
persons. Poisoned grapes were offered to the Imam which ended his life
on the 17th of SAFAR 203 A.H. (August 24, 818 A.D.). AL-MA'MUN put on a
show of grief and ordered that IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) be buried with the
great pomp near the tomb of his own father.

In the sacred city of MESHHED, the mausoleum of IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS)
is now a center of religious studies and a mausoleum where kings and
commoners come to pay homage. In the same vicinity lies HARUN AR-RASHID,
the most distinguished ruler of his time. The visitors do not know who
he was nor where his corpse now rests.


