The Ninth Imam Muhammad At-taqi (as)
====================================

**NAME AND PARENTAGE**

His name is MUHAMMAD; ABU JA'FAR, AT-TAQI and AL-JAWAD are his titles.
He is sometimes called ABU JA'FAR II, the first being IMAM MUHAMMAD
AL-BAQIR (AS). His father's name is IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS); his respected
mother is known as SUBAIK or SUKAINA. He was born in Medina on the 10th
of RAJAB 195 A.H. (April 8, 811 A.D.). At that time, AL-AMIN son of
HARUN was the monarch of Baghdad.

**UPBRINGING AND INSTRUCTION**

It is sad story that IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) had to face series of
misfortunes since his early boyhood. For only a very brief peaceful
period, he enjoyed the love and availed himself of the teachings of his
father. He was five years old when IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) was forced to
leave Medina for KHURASAN. The sire never saw his son again since then,
for IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) died in MARW three years after this
separation. The world duly thought that the young boy would never reach
the peaks of knowledge once graced by IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) and
sealed by his forefathers, and that the pedestal of knowledge would
remain vacant. But the astonishment of people knew no bounds when a few
years later, they saw the boy arguing and expostulating with the
renowned scholars of FIQH, TAFSIR, and KALAM, and subduing them all in
the presence of AL-MU'MUN. They had to confess that God-gifted knowledge
never depends on material resources, nor on age.

**FIRST JOURNEY TO BAGHDAD**

Political exigencies had compelled AL-MA'MUN to cultivate relations
with the descendants of IMAM ALI (AS) and Fatima in order to win the
support of the SHI'AHS. After all, being a HASHEMITE himself, he was
related to them though remotely. So he was aware of the political need
of maintaining close relations with them; therefore, at one of the
gatherings of heir-apparent-ship, he married his sister UMM HABIBA to
IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) and betrothed his daughter UMM AL-FADL to the son
of IMAM AR-RIDA (AS) MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS). He thought those steps would
enable him to win over IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) completely.

But AL-MA'MUN soon realized that IMAM AR-RIDA (AS) continued to lead
the same simple and saintly life which characterized the descendants of
the Prophet. The pattern of his true Islamic life, which was bound to
spread the spirit of fraternity and equality, was obviously harmful to
AL-MA'MUN monarchy, especially when IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) was now a
member of the royal family. It was at this point that he decided to put
an end to the Imam's life. But as he thought it expedient to keep the
SHI'AHS and particularly the Persians on his side, he expressed extreme
sorrow at IMAM ALI AR-RIDA'S death. This was also necessary to prove
that he had no hand in killing him. In order to isolate himself from any
suspicion though remote, he summoned AR-RIDA'S son MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS)
from Medina to Baghdad to marry him to his daughter UMM AL-FADL although
she was already engaged.

OPPOSITIONS

The appointment of IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) as heir-apparent had been an
intolerable affair for the ABBASIDES; so, when IMAM AR-RIDA (AS) died,
they sighed in relief. They also succeeded in causing AL-MA'MUN to
appoint his son Trencherman as his successor who later came to be known
as Caliph AL-MU'TASIM BILLAH. During the time of IMAM AR-RIDA'S
heir-apparent-ship, the color of the caliph's court and royal robes had
been changed from black to green. After the Imam's death, they changed
it again to black which signaled the restoration of ABBASIDE traditions.
All these steps undertaken by AL-MA'MUN sufficiently satisfied the
ABBASIDES who thought that he was acting in accordance with their own
desires. But when AL-MA'MUN proclaimed that he was going to marry his
daughter to the son of IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS), their tribal attitude was
stimulated. They could no longer hide their feelings, and they
approached AL-MA'MUN in the form of a delegation. They complained in
most obvious words that the favors showered on IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) had
grieved them, and that they tolerated it because the Imam could be
respected in view of his age, learning and other virtues, and that he
deserved those honors only to an extent.

But elevating his son-a raw lad-so much as to prefer him over all other
dignitaries and learned scholars did not befit the caliph. Furthermore,
the marriage of AL-MA'MUN'S sister the IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) did not
prove prosperous. Why did the caliph then wish to offer the hand of the
princess to AR-RIDA'S son anyway? AL-MA'MUN told them that AR-RIDA'S son
Muhammad was no doubt a boy of tender age, but he had inherited his
father's virtues and qualities in full; the learned scholars of the
Islamic world could not vie with him, and that if they doubted, they
could put the said boy to test. This reply, though totally said in jest,
amounted to a challenge. Impulse by AL-MA'MUN'S taunt, they consented to
judge the boy's knowledge in contest with the most learned authority of
Baghdad then, namely YAHYA IBN AKTHAM. AL-MA'MUN convened a magnificent
gathering for this open expostulation. There was anxiety to see this
unequal match where a boy of eight was to contend with the seasoned and
renowned Chief Justice of the land. People crowded from every quarter.
Historians have recorded that apart from dignitaries and nobles, 900
seats were reserved only for scholars. AL-MA'MUN'S reign was described
as the golden age of learning; experts of every trade and profession had
assembled in that great capital from every corner of the world.

AL-MA'MUN had a carpet laid by the side of his throne to seat IMAM
MUHAMMD AT-TAQI (AS). In front of him was accommodated the Chief Justice
YAHYA IBN AKTHAM. There was pin drop silence among the audience who
waited to hear the arguments. Silence was broken by YAHYA who said:
"Will His Majesty allow me to put some questions to MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI?"
AL-MA'MUN answered; "You may seek that permission from MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI
himself. YAHYA (to MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI): "Do you allow me to put some
problem?" MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI: "Yes you may ask whatever you please".
YAHYA: "What is the atonement for a person who hunts a game while he is
dressed in the pilgrimage garb?" The question itself indicated that
YAHYA underestimated the scholarly attainments of his opponent. During
with the pride of position and knowledge, he thought that the young boy
might well be aware of simple daily routine problems of prayer or
fasting, but the possibility that he might be totally ignorant of the
statues of pilgrimage or of the atonements of the sins or mistakes
committed by a pilgrim never entertained his mind.

The sagacious, young Imam was clever enough for the old seasoned
inquirer. Instead of giving a general or a vague reply, he analyzed the
different aspects of the problem so dexterously that the audience
immediately had a true estimate of the Imam's knowledge and of YAHYA'S
shallow-mindedness. YAHYA, too, was puzzled and felt humiliated when the
Imam addressed him thus:

"Your question is utterly vague and lacks definition. You should first
clarify whether the game killed was outside the sanctified area or
inside it; whether the hunter was aware of his sin or did so in
ignorance; did he kill the game purposely or by mistake; was the hunter
a slave or a free man; was he adult or a minor; did he commit the sin
fro the first time or had he done so before; was the hunted game a bird
or something else; was it a small animal or a big one; is the sinner
sorry for the misdeed or does he insist on it; did he kill it secretly
at night or openly during daylight; was he putting on the pilgrimage
grab for HAJJ or for the 'UMRA?! Unless you clarify and define these
aspects, how can you have a definite answer?" Whatever YAHYA'S knowledge
might have been, he was undoubtedly a well-read man in jurisprudence.
While the Imam was unfolding all such details of the problem, he had
judged that he was no match for his ingenious opponent. His lips were
sealed and he made no reply. AL-MA'MUN fully assessed his condition and
thought it was useless to put any further pressure on him. He, rather,
requested IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) to solve all the aspects of the
question one by one so that the listeners might gain knowledge. The
Imam, in spite of his young age, explained the various aspects of the
question. YAHYA, silent and puzzled, gazed at the Imam. But AL-MA'MUN
was bent on carrying the matter to its very extreme. He, therefore,
requested the Imam to put some questions to YAHYA if he liked. The Imam
accordingly said; "May I ask you a question?" Disillusioned YAHYA who
now had a correct estimate of the Imam's capacity and had now no
misunderstanding about himself, said in a humble tone: "Your grace can
ask; I shall reply if I can or I shall get it solved by your own self".
Then the Imam put up a question in reply to which YAHYA admitted his
ignorance. The Imam explained it too. AL-MA'MUN'S joy knew no bounds.
What he had asserted came true. Addressing the audience, he said: "Did I
not tell you that this Progeny has been gifted by God with limitless
knowledge? None can cope with even the children of this elevated
House".

The excitement of the gathering was great: all unanimously exclaimed
that AL-MA'MUN'S guess was correct and that IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS)
was a matchless person. AL-MA'MUN then thought it advisable to marry his
daughter to IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) there and then. The Imam recited
the marriage sermon in person. This address, as a remembrance, is being
recited at weddings everywhere throughout the Muslim world ever since.
Overjoyed at this auspicious occasion, AL-MA'MUN displayed his full
generosity, giving away millions in charity to the poor. Common people
were favored with regards to the grants.

RETURN TO MEDINA

For one year after the marriage, IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) lived in
Baghdad. Then AL-MA'MUN allowed him to return to Medina with his
daughter UMM AL-FADL surrounded with great pomp.

CHARACTER AND VIRTUES

IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) occupied the highest position in human
virtues and moral attainments as this was the marked feature of the
Prophet's family. To meet everyone humbly, fulfill the needs of the
poor, maintain Islamic equality and simplicity, help the destitute
secretly, treat even the foes fairly, extend hospitality, impart
knowledge to the scholars of religion and the like were all the
occupations that marked his saintly life - in full conformity with other
members of this sacred series of Infallibles.

Common people who could not appreciate such heights of moral
excellence, might have thought that the new relationship; i.e. to become
son-in-law of the most influential monarch of his time, must influence
the pattern of life of the Imam and change his manners altogether.
AL-MA'MUN, too, might have thought on the same lines because
spiritualism which was the chief characteristic of this Progeny was
against the practices of worldly rulers. Neither the UMAYYADS nor the
ABBASIDES had any personal grudge against the Prophet or his progeny,
but they were at war with the moral standards set by them. They always
tried to destroy that center of moral excellence and human values which
shone as the polar star of ideal spiritual perfection, overshadowing
their royal glory.

In order to uphold their imperialistic and luxurious norms of life,
these monarchs wanted to do away with these Godly saints who
demonstrated righteousness, compassion, faith, piety, fraternity and
justice as the main teachings of Islam. YAZID'S demanding obeisance from
IMAM HUSAIN (AS) or AL-MA'MUN'S appointment of IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) as
his heir-apparent were two different aspects of the same phenomenon. The
procedures were different but the purpose was the same. IMAM HUSAIN (AS)
did not bow to pay homage, so he was slain in the battlefield. IMAM ALI
AR-RIDA (AS) did not serve the cause of ABBASIDE imperialism, so he was
silenced with poison.

AL-MA'MUN, however, took it as a great opportunity to serve his
objectives to patronize IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS), a lad of eight who
was separated from the parental care three years earlier. The political
sagacity suggested that it would be by far easier to cast a young boy
into the desired mould and thus it would be possible to demolish the
center of the Prophet's teaching in Medina which, although working
silently, was dangerous to the imperialistic designs of the antithesis
called Muslim monarchy.

No doubt IMAM AR-RIDA (AS) did not conform to AL-MA'MUN'S designs, nor
to his desires, but this could not disappoint him. AR-RIDA'S mature way
of thinking and simple norm of life could not be changed. But there was
the hope that in all probability a tender boy, who was brought up in the
luxurious atmosphere of a royal palace, would grow into an ambitious,
merry- making prince - altogether against his ancestral ways and views.
With the exception of a few enlightened persons, everybody would think
on the same lines. But the world stood aghast to see that the young
son-in-law of the most distinguished monarch of his time refused to stay
in the royal palace and lived instead in a rented house, thus
maintaining his ancestral anti-monarchical manners of a simple and
humble life.

It is usually seen that if the bride's people are comparatively rich,
they wish that the groom might live with them; if not in the same house,
at least in the same town. The will-power of the Imam can be judged from
the fact that he lived in a separate dwelling. And after one year, when
AL-MA'MUN perceived that his son-in-law was not pleased with staying in
Baghdad, he had to allow the Imam to go to Medina with UMM AL-FADL. On
his return to Medina, he maintained the same ancestral, unimposing
behavior: no body-guards, no pomp, no restrictions, no visiting times,
no discrimination. He spent most of his time sitting at the Prophet's
Mosque, where Muslims came to avail from his preaching. The narrators of
HADITH and other students of theology came to inquire about religious
sciences, and the Imam guided them by explaining every complicated
matter. All the world saw that IMAM JA'FAR'S successor, seated on the
same mat, was guiding the people towards faith and piety.

IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) allowed the same amount of freedom to his
wife UMM AL-FADL and imposed the same restriction on her as his
ancestors had done in the case of their wives. He did not care much
about the fact that UMM AL-FADL was a princess. Although she lived with
him, he married another lady who was a descendant of AMMAR IBN YASIR.
God had intended to continue the line of Imamate through her, and she
gave birth to IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS), the tenth Imam UMM AL-FADL
complained about this to her father. Surely this would have passed
heavily on AL-MA'MUN'S heart but he could not interfere in the matter
and he wrote back to his daughter saying; "Do not make such complaints
to me in future. I cannot stop IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) from those
things which God has made lawful".

There are precedents, no doubt, that in view of the high personal
virtues of a woman, her husband does not marry another lady. For
example, while KHADIJA lived, the holy Prophet did not marry any other
wife. Similarly, Imam Ali (as) married no other woman during the
life-time of FATIMA AZ-ZAHRA'. But the same distinction could not be
given to the daughter of a king because it was against the spirit of
Islam which the Prophet's descendants were to preserve.

**PUBLIC GUIDANCE**

IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI'S speech was very charming and effective. Once
during the HAJJ season he addressed a gathering of Muslims and stated
the commandments of the Divine Law of SHARI'AH. The audience included
learned scholars who admitted that they had never heard such a
comprehensive speech.

During the days of IMAM AR-RIDA (AS), there was a group which believed
that the Imamate had come to an end with IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS). They
were called the WAQFIYYA. IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) instructed them so
nicely that they gave up their wrong beliefs. Nobody of that creed
persisted in adhering to such beliefs as long as the Imam lived. Many
scholars came to learn the teachings of AHL AL-BAYT (AS). A collection
of brief and wise saying is also left by him, resembling and ranking in
wisdom next to the saying of his ancestor IMAM ALI IBN ABU TALIB (AS).
Some profound discourses on theology and monotheism are also to his
credit.

**JOURNEY TO BAGHDAD**

AL-MA'MUN died in 218 A.H. (833 A.D). He was succeeded by his brother
MU'TAMAN, the second heir-apparent after IMAM AR-RIDA (AS). He came to
be known as AL-MU'TASIM BI ALLAH AL-ABBASI. His niece UMM AL-FADL now
began to send him more complaining letters than she did during the days
of her father. As AL-MA'MUN had given her in marriage to IMAM AT-TAQI
9AS) in spite of the opposition by all the tribe, he paid no attention
to her letters. Rather, he silenced her with disappointing replies. But
AL-MU'TASIM was jealous of IMAM AR-RIDA (AS). He had also led the
opposition in the matter of IMAM AT-TAQI'S marriage with his niece.

AL-MU'TASIM now got a chance to settle his difference in this matter.
IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI'S fame as a great scholar and people's gathering
around him, as well as the fame of his world-renown noble character,
annoyed him. The failure of the political tactics, too, intensified his
resentment. All these factors irritated him into enmity. In the second
year of his reign he summoned IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) from Medina to
Baghdad, writing to the governor of Medina expressly in this regard.
IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) was compelled to set out for Baghdad leaving
his son IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) with his mother in Medina.

**DEATH**

For one year after IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI'S arrival in Baghdad,
AL-MU'TASIM inflicted no harm on him. But the Imam's stay in Baghdad was
a forcible act which can be called plain custody. Thereafter he was
killed with the very same soundless weapon which was quite frequently
used against his ancestors. He died of poison on the 29th of THU
AL-QI'DA 220 A.H. (November 24, 835 A.D.) and was buried near his
grandfather IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS). It is due to these two saints'
tombs that the place is called KAZIMAIN (the two KAZIMS, enduring
ones).

**RADAWI SAYYIDS**

It is a fact all the SAYYIDS known as RADAWI are actually TAQAWI. IMAM
AR-RIDA (AS) had no son other than IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS). Had he
had other sons, their offspring would call themselves RADAWIS. IMAM
MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) being his only son, his offspring ought to be
called TAQAWIS. But as IMAM AR-RIDA (AS) had been famous as the
heir-apparent of AL-MA'MUN, his descendants wish to be introduced as
RADAWIS.


