The Tenth Imam Ali An-naqi (as)
===============================

**NAME AND PARENTAGE**

His name Ali is usually suffixed by his titles ABU AL-HASAN and
AN-NAQI. As both IMAM ALI AL-MURTADA and IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) were also
called ABU AL-HASAN, IMAM ALI AN-NABI is known as ABU AL-HASAN III. His
mother's name is SUMANA KHATUN.

**BIRTH AND UPBRINGING**

He was born on the 5th of RAJAB of 214 A.H. (September 8, 829 A.D.) in
Medina. He enjoyed the love of his father IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) for
only six years because his father had then to leave for Baghdad where he
died on the 29th of THU AL-QI'DA 220 A.H. (November 24, 835 A.D) and the
responsibilities of Imamate devolved on his young son's shoulders.
Providence was the only tutor and instructor that reared and raised him
to the extreme height of learning.

**CHANGES OF REGIME**

IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) was still young when the ABBASIDE ruler
AL-MU'TASIM died. He was succeeded by AL-WATHIQ BI ALLAH who died in 236
A.H. Then came to the throne AL-MUTAWAKKIL, the most cruel and deadly
enemy of AHL AL-BAYT (AS). He died in 250 A.H. (864 A.D.) and
AL-MUNTASIR BI ALLAH assumed the caliphate. He reigned for any six
months. On his death, AL-MUSTAIN was enthroned. The latter had to pant
with his crown as well as his head when he was beheaded in 253 A.H. (867
A.D.). He was succeeded by AL-MU'TAZZ BI ALLAH during whose regime IMAM
ALI AN-NAQI (AS) died.

**HARDSHIPS AND MISFORTUNES**

AL-MU'TASIM remained preoccupied with was against the BYZANTINIANS and
also with the troubles created by the ABBASIDE tribesmen in Baghdad.
Anyway, he did not harass the young Imam who carried out his
responsibilities peacefully. After him, AL-WATHIQ BI ALLAH too, treated
him fairly. But when the latter was succeeded by his brother
AL-MUTAWAKKIL son of AL-MU'TASIM, the period of persecution and
misfortune began on full scale. This ruler exceeded all his predecessors
in bearing animosity towards AHL AL-BAYT (AS).

During the 16 years of his Imamate, IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) had become
famous throughout the Islamic world. Those who loved to learn the
teachings of AHL AL-BAYT (AS) always flocked around him. In the 4th year
of AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S reign, the governor of Medina, ABDALLAH IBN HAKIM,
started harassing the Imam. After persecuting him personally, he sent
hostile reports against him to Baghdad. He wrote the central government
saying that he Imam was assembling apparatuses of kingdom and that his
followers were in such numbers that he could rise against the government
whenever he wished.

IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) became aware of such antagonism in sufficient
time. In order to counteract, he too wrote a letter to AL-MUTAWAKKIL
explaining the personal enmity the lying governor had borne against him.
As a political step, AL-MUHAWAKKIL was quick to dismiss the governor. At
the same time he sent a regiment under the command of YAHYA IBN HARTHAMA
who explained to the imam in a friendly way that the caliph wished him
to stay in the capital for a few days and then go back to Medina.

The Imam knew well the motives behind this request. He knew that the
polite invitation actually meant his banishment from his ancestral city.
But to refuse was useless, as it would involve a forcible departure
later. Leaving the sacred city was as painful to him as it had been for
his respected forefathers viz. IMAM HUSAIN (AS) IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS),
IMAM ALI AR-RIDA (AS) and MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS). This type of harassment
had almost become a heritage. Still the observers stated that leaving
that native place was so heavy on his heart that friends and followers
were shocked to see his plight. AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S letter to the Imam was
full of respect and endearment. The military detachment sent to escort
him as retinue or body-guards was actually a deceitful show.

So when the Imam reached SAMARRA (SURRA MAN RA'A), and AL-MUTAWAKKIL
was informed, he neither arranged for his reception nor for his stay. He
ordered to accommodate him in a wilderness where the city's beggars
usually dwelt. Although the Prophet's descendants gladly associated with
the poor and the destitute, and they did not covet luxurious living,
AL-MUTAWAKKIL meant to thus insult the Imam who stayed there for three
days; thereafter, AL-MUTAWAKKIL handed him over to the custody of his
secretary RAZAQI, and prohibited his meeting with others.

It has been seen that during the imprisonment of IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM
(AS), his moral charm had softened the stone hearts of the guards. In
the same way, RAZAQI also was impressed by the greatness of IMAM ALI
AN-NAQI (AS) and he began to provide for his comfort. This leniency
could not remain hidden from AL-MUTAWAKKIL who transferred the Imam to
the custody of SA'ID, a cruel and ruthless man in whose imprisonment he
spent full twelve years. In spite of all the hardships he had to suffer
there, he passed all his time worshipping his Maker. He fasted during
the day and prayed during the night. Although confined within the four
walls of a dark dungeon cell, his fame was on the wing. It was known in
every house of SAMARRA', rather throughout Iraq. Millions hated the
cruel who had put such a man of noble character in prison.

AL-FADL IBN KHAQAN, a lover of the Prophet's Progeny, had risen to the
post of Minister in the cabinet of AL-MUTAWAKKIL solely by virtue -of
his intellectual and administrative merits. On his recommendation,
AL-MUTAWAKKIL ordered that the Imam's imprisonment be changed to house
arrest. He granted him a piece of land and allowed him to build his
house and live in it. But he was forbidden from leaving SAMARRA'. SA'ID
was directed to keep a close watch on his movements, contacts and
correspondence.

During this period, too, IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) set an admirable example
of trust in God, ignoring all worldly gains. In spite of permanent
residence in the capital, he neither made a protest to the caliph, nor
did he ever ask him for a favor. The same worshipping and hermit-like
life that he led during his imprisonment was passed in confinement as
well. The tyrant had changed his behavior but the saint had maintained
his own. Even in such circumstances, he was not allowed to live
peacefully. He was not harassed physically but psychologically. His
house was searched for arms or dissenting correspondence undermining the
position of the government. Such an act is certainly painful for a man
of an innocent and noble character.

To top all this, the Imam was once summoned to the royal palace where
the cups of wine were in rotation. Surrounded by his courtiers,
AL-MUTAWAKKIL was very much given to merry-making, so much so that in
the excess of vanity and lewdness, that arrogant and shameless ruler
handed the cup of wine to the Imam and asked him to drink. This order
was surely more painful than a thousand strokes of the sword, but the
guardian of faith said with unruffled dignity: "Spare me this order, for
the flesh and blood of my forefathers and my own have never mixed with
wine". Had there been a slight sense of faith in AL-MUTAWAKKIL,

he would have been impressed by the dignity of this saintly reply. But
he was dead to such a feeling; he therefore said: "Well, if you do not
like it, then sing a song for us". The Imam replied: "I do not know that
art, either". At last the haughty monarch said: "You shall have to
recite a few verses of poetry, then, in any tone you like". This crude
and ridiculous behavior would have maddened any ordinary person, but the
dignified Imam remained undisturbed and sought to do what he was
compelled to. He turned the ruler's order for recitation of poetry into
an opportunity for preaching, and he recited the following verses with a
firm and impressive tone:

The glories of our blood and stat,
Are shadows, not substantial things.
There is no armor against the fate;
Death lays its icy hand on kings.
Scepter and crown
Must tumble down.
And in the earth be equal made
With the laborer's scythe and spade.
No fortress on the mountain peak
Could save the kings from the jaws of death.
Their pomp and power proved too weak;
The cold earth asks them in contempt;
"Whither is the robe, the crown, the throne?!
"Did cruel Death thy beauty exempt?!
"Did it respect thy royal blood and bone?!"
The grave replies
With sorrowful sight:
"Those beautiful forms
"Are but food for the worms!"

Having heard these lines recited by the Imam so profoundly, the
gathering became spell-bound. The drunkards making merry just a moment
before now burst into tears. Even the proud king began to weep and wail.
As soon as he recovered a bit, he allowed the Imam to go home.

Another event that caused a great deal of unrest to him was the
oppressive order of AL-MUTAWAKKIL forbidding the public from visiting
KARBALA, and NAJAF. Throughout his territories ran the order that people
should not go to visit the tombs of Imam Ali (as) and IMAM HUSAIN (AS).
Anybody disobeying this order would do so under the penalty of death. He
further ordered that the buildings in NAJAF and KARBALA' be leveled to
the ground, that all the mausoleums be razed and all the land around
IMAM HUSAIN'S bomb be ploughed. It was not, however, possible to stop
the fond lovers of AHL AL-BAYT (AS) from visiting those holy shrines.
They disobeyed, and thousands of them were put to death
indiscriminately. No doubt the Imam was as sorry for each one of them as
he could have been on the death of a near relative of his. Due to this
oppressive and choking environment, he could not even preach or convey
to the faithful the necessary instructions. This sorrowful situation
lasted till AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S death.

In the court of AL-MUTAWAKKIL, IMAM ALI IBN ABU TALIB (AS) was mimicked
and mocked by the buffoons while AL-MUTAWAKKIL and his courtiers burst
into laughter. It was such an insulting scene that once AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S
son could not help protesting and saying: "It was somewhat tolerable if
you spoke ill of Imam Ali (as) yourself, but since you yourself say that
he was related to you, how do you suffer these wretched buffoons to mock
him?" instead of being sorry, AL-MUTAWAKKIL jested with his son and
composed two couplets abusive of his mother which he instructed the
singers to sing. They used to sing those lines while AL-MUTAWAKKIL
laughed heartily.

Another event of those wretched times is equally painful. IBN AS-SAKKIT
of Baghdad, the acknowledged scholar of lexicography and syntax, was the
tutor of AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S son. One day the cruel ruler asked him: "Are my
two sons more respectable than HASAN and HUSAIN (AS)?" IBN AS-SEKKIT was
a lover of AHL AL-BAYT. On this question, he could not control his
feelings and flatly replied: "Not to speak of HASAN and HUSAIN (AS),
Imam Ali's slave QANBAR is more respectable than both of your sons".
Hearing these words, AL-MUTAWAKKIL flew into a passion and ordered that
IBN AS-SEKKIT'S tongue be cut off. The order was carried out immediately
leading to the death of one of the lovers of the Prophet's Progeny. IMAM
ALI AN-NAQI (AS) was not physically connected with these events.

But each of these was like a blow of the sword, not striking his neck
but torturing his soul. AL-MUTAWAKKIL'S cruelties caused common hatred
and even his own children set their hearts against him. One of them,
AL-MUNTASIR, conspired with his chief slave BAQIR AR-RUMI to murder
AL-MUTAWAKKIL while the latter was asleep, using his own sword, thus the
world heard a sigh of relief; the death of the tyrant and the caliphate
of AL-MUNTASIR were proclaimed. After assuming the throne, AL-MUNTASIR
revoked the unjust orders of his father. Visiting the shrines of NAJAF
and KARBALA' was permitted without any restriction. The tombs received
minor repairs. AL-MUNTASIR'S conduct towards IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) was
fair. But his life proved to be short and he died after a brief rule of
only six months. After him, AL-MUSTA'SIM too displayed no maltreatment
of the Imam.

As stated, IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) had built a house in SAMARRA' and did
not go back to Medina either out of his own free will or under the
orders of these rulers. Due to his continued stay there and the lack of
interference by the regime, the students of the teachings of AHL AL-BAYT
(AS) thronged around them. This alarmed AL-MU'TAZZ who put an end to his
life.

**CHARACTER AND VIRTUES**

IMAM ALI AN-NAQI'S conduct and moral excellence were the same as those
displayed by each and every member of this sacred series of Infallibles.
Imprisonment, confinement or freedom, in every case these sacred souls
were engaged in worship and in helping the poor. Totally refraining from
desire, greed or worldly ambitions, they lived dignified in misfortune;
to deal fairly even with the foes and to help the destitute were the
qualities making their conduct. The same virtues were reflected in the
life of IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) as well.

During imprisonment, the Imam had a grave dug ready by the side of his
prayer-mat. Some visitors expressed their apprehension or surprise. The
Imam explained: "In order to remember my end, I keep the grave before my
eyes". Be it so, but in reality it was a silent, un-worded protest
against those cruel rulers who wanted the Imam to give up his pure
Islamic teachings. It was a negation of their demand of obeisant. It
showed that the worldly rulers who can frighten common men with death
can never bend a saint who is himself ready to embrace death at any
moment. In spite of this fearlessness, he never took part in any secret
or subversive activity against the government. Living permanently in a
capital where daily conspiracies were sapping the roots of the ABBASIDE
regime, he could never be accused of treason by the strong secret
intelligence of those kings.

Can you imagine the extent of the political turmoil of those unstable
days? AL-MUTAWAKKIL was opposed by his own son AL-MUNTASIR and he ended
in being slain by his own slave BAQIR AR-RUMI. After AL-MUNTASIR'S
death, the court nobility decided to take away the government from the
ruling dynasty. The regime of AL-MUSTA'IN was troubled by the uprising
of YAHYA IBN UMER IBN YAHYA IBN ZAID AL-'ALAWI in KUFA, and by the
occupation of TABARISTAN by HASAN IBN ZAID (titled DA'I AL-HAQQ) and his
establishment of a permanent government there; the revolt of the Turk
salves in SAMARRA' and AL-MUSTA'IN'S flight to Baghdad to take refuge in
its fort, and in the end his compulsory abdication and his murder by
AL-MU'TAZZ; the BYZANTINE aggression during the reign of AL-MU'TAZZ who
feared the danger of his own brother; MUAYYAD'S demise; MUWAFFAQ'S
imprisonment in Basra - it was a continuous chain of chaos of which an
opportunist could easily take advantage.

But IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) could not b suspected even of taking part in
any of these temporal struggles for power. A common opportunity seeker,
excited by greed or revenge will always take arms against a regime which
not only harassed him but also exiled, insulted and imprisoned him. Yet,
these sacred souls considered it below their spotless honor and
mountain-high dignity to partake in those vainglorious bids for power.
They looked down upon all these struggles and always rose above the vile
level of temporal temptations, declaring that all such acts were below
them and their standard of virtue.

**DEATH**

The Imam died during the reign of AL-MU'TAZZ BI ALLAH in SAMARRA' on
the 3rd of RAJAB 254 A.H. (June 28, 868 A.D.). He was attended only by
his son IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI who led the funeral prayers and arranged
his burial, laying him to rest in his personal apartment. Now high
stands his mausoleum which is being visited daily tens of thousands of
pilgrims from all over the world.


