The Eeleventh Imam Hasan Al-'askari (as)
========================================

**NAME AND PARENTAGE**

His name is AL-HASAN, ABU MUHAMMAD. Being a resident of 'ASKARI, a
suburb of SAMARRA', he is titled AL-'ASKARI. His father was IMAM ALI
AN-NAQI (AS) and his mother was SALIL KHATUN, an ideal woman impiety,
worship, chastity and generosity. He was born in Medina on the tenth of
RABI' AL-AKHIR, 232, A.H. (December 4, 846 A.D.)

**UPBRINGING AND INSTRUCTION**

He lived under the care of his respected father up to the age of 11.
Then his father had to leave for SAMARRA' and he was to accompany him
and thus share the hardships of the journey with the family. At
SAMARRA', he passed his time with his father either in imprisonment or
in partial freedom. He had, however, the chance to benefit from his
father's teaching and instruction.

**IMAMATE**

His father died in 254 A.H. (868 A.D.) when he himself was twenty-two.
Four months before his death, the father declared his son to be his
successor and executor of his will, asking his followers to bear witness
to the fact. Thus the responsibilities of Imamate were vested upon him
which he fulfilled even in the face of great difficulties and hostile
environment.

**BEHAVIOR OF CONTEMPORARY KINGS**

As stated above, it is peculiar to IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) that he
partook in all misfortunes and hardships suffered by his father, whether
imprisonment or confinement. In the early days of his Imamate,
AL-MU'TAZZ AL-ABBASI was the caliph. When the latter was deposed, he was
succeeded by AL-MUHTADI. After his brief reign of only eleven months and
one weak, AL-MU'TAMAD came to the throne. During their regimes, IMAM
HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) did not enjoy peace at all. Although the ABBASIDE
dynasty was involved in constant complications and disorders, each and
every king thought it necessary to keep the Imam imprisoned.

One of the holy Prophet's traditions ran that the Prophet would be
succeeded by twelve princes, the last of whom would be the MAHDI, QA'IN
ALLI MUHAMMAD. The ABBASIDES knew well that the true successors of the
Prophet were these very Imams. AL-HASAN (AS) being the eleventh of this
serried, his son would surely be the 12th or the last. They, therefore,
tried to put an end to his life in such a way which would ensure that
there would be nobody to succeed him. Therefore the simple confinement
inflicted on IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) was considered inadequate for IMAM
HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS),

so he was imprisoned, away from his family. No doubt the revolutionary
intervals between two regimes gave him brief periods of freedom. Yet as
soon as the new king came to the throne, he followed his predecessor's
policy and imprisoned the Imam again. The Imam's brief life, therefore,
was mostly spent inside dungeon cells.

The hardship of imprisonment reached its extremity during the reign of
AL-MU'TAMAD, although the latter knew the rank and righteousness of the
Imam as did all other preceding rulers. Once during a devastating
drought, a Christian hermit was able to demonstrate that he could being
rain whenever he prayed to God. This led many Muslims to convert to
Christianity. In order to save Islam from this calamity, IMAM HASAN
AL-'ASKARI (AS) was brought out of jail. He noticed how that Christian
hermit raised his hands in prayers, and how as soon as he did so rain
started pouring down. Approaching him, the Imam opened the Christian's
hand and took away from it a piece of bone the hermit was holding.
Turning to the crowd, the Imam explained that it was that piece of
bone,

not the Christian that caused the rain to pour. He told them that that
piece of bone belonged to the corpse of one of the Prophets of God, and
he proved his point upon raising it himself in his hand, an upon doing
so, lo, rain started pouring down again, as if the skies were weeping
for the prophet. The Imam thus removed the common doubts from the hearts
of the people and kept them firmly on Islam. AL-MU'TAMAD was so
impressed that he felt too ashamed to send the Imam back to prison; so,
he put him under house arrest instead. Complete freedom, however, was
not granted.

**APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTIES**

Under all circumstances, the Imams carried out their duties of guiding
the people. IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) was subjected to numerous
restrictions, so much so that those who sought to learn the teachings of
AHL AL-BAYT (AS) and their SHI'AH point of view could not reach him. In
order to solve this problem, the Imam appointed certain confidants as
his deputies in view of their knowledge of jurisprudence. These persons
satisfied the curiosity of inquirers as much as they could. But if they
could not solve certain theological problems, they would keep them
pending the acquisition of their solutions from the imam whenever they
got the opportunity to see him. Of course the visit to the imam by a few
individuals could be allowed by the government but certainly not by
groups who wished to see the Imam on a regular basis.

The KHUMS (1/5 of total savings) which was being paid to the Imams by
the believers who cherished these Imams and regarded them as
representatives of the Divine Law was spent by these sacred saints on
religious matters, and to sustain the Prophet's descendants. This KHUMS
was now secretly collected by these deputies who spent it according to
the directives of the Imam. They accordingly were in constant danger of
being identified as such by the government's secret intelligence
service. In order to divert this danger, UTHMAN IBN SA'ID and his son
ABU JA'FAR MUHAMMAD, two prominent deputies of the Imam in the capital
Baghdad, ran a big shop trading in oils. This provided them with free
contact with the concerned people. It was thus that even under the very
thumb of the tyrant regime that those devotees managed to run the system
of the Divine Law unsuspected.

**CHARACTER AND VIRTUES**

IMAM HASAN AL'ASKARI (AS) was one of that illustrious series of the
immaculate Infallibles each member of whom displayed the moral
excellence of human perfection. He was peerless in knowledge,
forbearance, forgiveness, generosity, sacrifice and piety. Whenever
AL-MU'TAMAD asked anybody about his captive IMAM HASAN AL'ASKARI (AS),
he was told that the Imam fasted during the day and worshipped during
the night, and that his tongue uttered no word but remembrance of his
maker. During the brief periods of freedom and stay at home, people
approached him hoping to avail from his benevolence, and they went back
well rewarded. Once when the ABBASIDE caliph asked AHMED IBN ABDALLAH
IBN KHAQAN, his Minister for Charities (AWQAF), about the descendants of
Imam Ali (as), he reported: "I do not know anybody among them who is
more distinguished than HASAN AL-ASKARI.

None can surpass him in dignity, knowledge, piety and abstinence, nor
can anybody match him in the point of nobleness, majestic grandeur,
modesty and honesty".

When his father IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) died and the family was busy
arranging his burial, some servants stole certain articles, thinking
that none would notice it. When the burial was over, he called the
servants and said: "I ask you about some items; if you tell me the
truth, I shall pardon you; but if you speak falsely, I shall get all
those items from your possession and punish you fully". Then he asked
each for the items he had stolen. When they confessed their guilt, he
got the articles back from them and spared them the penalty.

**AS CENTER OF LEARNING**

IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) had a brief span of life, only twenty-eight
years, but even in this short period, which was ruffled by a chain of
troubles and tribulations, several high ranking scholars benefited from
his ocean of knowledge. He also stemmed the flood of atheism and
disbelief which ensued from the philosophers of that age, winning
conspicuous success over them. One of those was ISHAQ AL-KINDI. He was
writing a book on what he called "self-contradictions" in the holy
QUR'AN. When the news reached the Imam, he waited for an opportunity to
refute and rebut him. By chance, some of ISHAQ'S students came to him.
The imam asked them: "Is there anyone among you who can stop ISHAQ from
wasting his time in this useless effort fighting the holy QUR'AN?" The
students said: "Sir, we are his students; how can we object to his
teaching?" The Imam urged that they could at least convey to their
teacher what he had to tell them. They replied that they would be ready
to cooperate as much as they could in that respect.

The Imam then recited a few verses from the holy QUR'AN which the
philosopher thought as contradictory of one another. He then explained
to them thus: "Your teacher thinks that some of the words in these
verses have only one meaning. But according to the Arabic tongue, these
words have other meanings too which, when taken into consideration,
indicate no contradiction in the overall meaning. Thus, your teacher is
not justified for basing his objections and claim of contradictions on
the premises of the 'wrong meaning' he himself selects for such verses".
He then put up some examples of such words before them so clearly that
the students conceived the whole discussion and the precedents of more
than one meaning.

When these students visited ISHAQ AL-KNIDI, and after routine talk,
reproduced the disputed points, he was surprised. He was a fair-minded
scholar and he listened to his students' explanations. Then he said:
"What you have argued is above your capacity; tell me truly who has
taught you these points?" The students said that it was their own
reflection, but when he insisted that they could never have conceived
those points, they admitted that it was explained to them by ABU
MUHAMMAD IMAM AL-'ASKARI (AS). The instructor said: "Yes, this level of
knowledge is the heritage of that House, and only that House". Then he
asked the students to set fire to all such works of his. This and so
many other religious services were performed silently by the Prophet's
descendants. The ABBASIDE dynasty, which unfairly claimed to be "the
defender of the faith", was deeply drunk with lustful merriment. Had it
ever come to its senses, it would not have thought that those sincere
and saintly souls were a "danger" to its power. Therefore, it gave
orders to put some more restrictions on them. IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI
(AS), that mountain of dignity, bore all this with determined
fortitude.

IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) was a reliable authority for traditionalists
who have recorded several traditions in their collections on his own
authority. One tradition about drinking runs thus: "The wine drinker is
like an idolater". It has been recorded by IBN AL-JAWZI in his book
TAHRIM AL-KAMR (prohibition of wine drinking) with continuous chain of
references tracing its narrators. ABU NA'IM FADL IBN WAKI states that
the tradition is true as it has been narrated by the Prophet's
descendants and some of his companions such as IBN ABBAS, ABU HURAYRA,
ANAS, ABDALLAH IBN 'AWF AL-ASLAMI and others.

SAM'ANI in his KITAB AL-ANSAB states that "ABU MUHAMMAD AHMED IBN
IBRAHIM IBN HASHIM AL-'ALAWI AL-BALATHIRI heard many traditions in Mecca
from the Imam of AHL AL-BAYT (AS) IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) and
recorded them". The names of some of his prominent students who,
availing of his discourses, speeches and addresses, became authors of
some books, are given here:

1- ABU HASHIM DAWUD IBN AL-QASIM AL-JA'FARI, one of the deputies of the
imam, was a scholar of advanced age. He acquired learning from IMAM
AR-RIDA (AS), his son IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS), his son IMAM ALI
AN-NAQI (AS) and his son IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS).

2- DAWUD IBN ABU ZAID AL-NAYSHABURI. He often visited IMAM ALI AN-NAQI
(AS) and IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS).]

3- ABU TAHIR MUHAMMAD IBN ALI IBN BILAL.

4- ABU AL-ABBAS ABDALLAH IBN JA'FAR AL-HUMAIRI AL-QUMMI. He was a
scholar of a high caliber. He authored many books including QURB
AL-ASNAD which is a major source of AL-KAFI, etc.

5- MUHAMMAD IBN AHMED IBN JA'FAR AL-QUMMI was the Imam's chief
deputy.

6- JA'FAR IBN SUHAIL SAIQAL was one of the most distinguished
deputies.

7- MUHAMMAD IBN AL-HASAN AS-SAFFAR AL-QUMMI. He was high ranking
scholar, author of several books including BASA'IR AD-DARAJAT, a famous
book. He sent written inquiries to the Imam and received their answers
from him.

8- ABU JA'FAR HAMANI AL-BARMAKI; he obtained written answers to his
questions in jurisprudence from the Imam and compiled a book.

9- IBRAHIM IBN ABU HAFS ABU ISHAQ AL-KATIB is a companion of the Imam
and author of a book.

10- IBRAHIM IBN MEHR-YAR. He has a book to his credit.

11- AHMED IBN IBRAHIM IBN ISAM'IL IBN DAWUD IBN HAMDAN AL-KATIB
AL-NADIM. He was an authority on literature and lexicography, author of
many books, and a confidant of the Imam.

12- AHMED IBN ISHAQ AL-ASH'ARI, ABU ALI AL-QUMMI was an acknowledged
scholar and author of several books including HILAL AS-SAWM, etc. These
are but a few names; the details of all the students and companions'
would require a whole volume. ABU ALI AL-HASAN IBN KHALID IBN MUHAMMAD
prepared a commentary of the holy QUR'AN which should be considered the
work of the Imam himself. The Imam used to dictate its contents and ABU
ALI went on writing down his dictation. Scholars indicate that the book
consisted of 1,920 pages.

Unfortunately, these storehouses of knowledge are not available. A book
recently published under the title TAFSIR AL-HASAN AL-'ASKARI is a
separate work which was traced and rendered to the 4th century A.H.
SHAIKH AS-SADUQ MUHAMMAD IBN ALI IBN BABAWAIH AL-QUMMI says it was
actually dictated by the Imam. But the SHAIKH'S sources from which he
copied are obscure. The biographers are not, however, sure in ascribing
it to the Imam and we are inclined to think that it is not the Imam's
dictation. A considerable collection of his wise sayings, discourses and
speeches, and a lengthy letter to ISHAQ IBN ISMA'IL AL-ASH'ARI have been
preserved in the book TUHAF AL-'UQUL' AN 'AL AR-RASUL, an excellent
source of knowledge for the seekers of enlightenment.

These are the details of the Imam's scholarly attainments, a wonderful
performance when one reflects on the fact that he died at the young age
of twenty-eight, having served as Imam for only six years, a period
constantly disturbed by the troubles already stated above.

**DEATH**

A busy man who is engaged in the service of religion and scholarship
usually does not have time for politics or subversive activities. But
the Imam's spiritual supremacy and his increasing popularity made him
intolerable to his contemporary monarchs. AL-MU'TAMAD, the ABBASIDE
ruler, administered his poisoning and the Imam martyred on the 8th of
RABI' AL-AWWAL, 260 A.H. (January 1, 874 A.D.) and was buried in
SAMARRA' by his father's side. His mausoleum in spite of hostile
circumstances has been a sacred shrine for his admirers ever since.


