The Twelfth Imam Sahib Al-'asr Wa Al-zaman
==========================================

**AL-HUJJAH AL-MUNTAZAR, AL-MAHDI (AS)
NAME AND PARENTAGE**

Muhammad son of HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) is a facsimile of his name-sake
and great ancestor the holy Prophet Muhammad (p) in form and manners.
His mother was NERJIS KHATUN, granddaughter of the contemporary
Byzantine king who was a descendant of Prophet SHAM'UN (trustee of Jesus
Christ, p). He was born on the 15th of SHA'BAN 255 A.H. (July 29, 869
A.D.). His father IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) instructed his pious sister
HALIM KHATUN to tutor this child in the Divine Law

**TITLES**

He is usually called by his titles rather than his first name. These
are numerous, second in number to those of IMAM ALI IBN ABU TALIB (AS).
Famous among them are:

1- AL-MAHDI: this is the title which has got the status of a name to
which reference is made in the prophecies of the holy Prophet (p) and
the Imams (as). Hence, the concept of AL-MAHDI, the Guided One,
AL-MUNTAZAR, the Awaited One, is commonly acknowledge by Muslims. No
doubt, there are some differences of opinion among scholars in his
regard, but these deal with his life events or qualities. The belief in
the reappearance of IMAM AL-MAHDI (AS) is entertained by all Muslims.
"AL-MAHDI" means "the guided one". It indicates that God is the real
Guide, all the creatures are guided by Him. In the is sense, the Prophet
and all Imams are MAHDIS, but in reality this title is exclusively used
for the 12th Imam.

2- AL-QA'IM. This title is based on some traditions (AHADITH) where the
Prophet Muhammad asserts that "this world will not come to its end
unless there rises a QA'IM from my offspring who will fill it with
equity and justice after being filled with injustice and oppression".

3- SAHIB AZ-ZAMAN (master of the time). This is in view of the fact
that he is the real guide of our time.

4- HUJJAT ALLAH. Every Prophet or Imam is the "proof" or "sign" of the
Mercy of the Creator; he fulfills the responsibility of guiding
humanity, thus leaving for people no excuse to do wrong. As in our time
the responsibility of guiding the world is fulfilled by the 12th Imam,
he will be called HUJJAT ALLAH till Doomsday.

5- AL-MUNTAZAR (the expected or awaited one). All Muslim scholars have
been repeating the prophecies regarding the appearance of IMAM AL-MAHDI
(AS). Not only the Muslim but even people of other religions too believe
in a "comer" to come in the last days. Names may be different but the
coming of such a person is universally accepted.

He was expected before his birth, and after birth and disappearance.
Now his reappearance is awaited, hence his title.

**AL-MAHDI IN THE HOLY QUR'AN**

Those who deny AL-MEHDI (AS) base their denial on the incorrect claim
that there is no reference to AL-MAHDI in the holy QUR'AN. There are two
considerations to be borne in mind while studying the holy QUR'AN:

FIRST: names of individuals are not always stated explicitly. For
example, the holy Prophet of Islam (p) is mentioned by name only four
times; Muhammad, Ahmed, TAHA and YASIN; whereas he is mentioned
implicitly throughout the entire holy QUR'AN. SECOND: scholars of the
holy QUR'AN tell us that there are at least four meanings for each
QUR'ANIC verse: "MA'NAZAHIR" an apparent or explicit meaning, "TANZIL",
revelation (the circumstances under which that particular verse was
revealed), and "AT'WIL", interpretation. In order to fully comprehend a
verse, we have to fathom all these four meanings; otherwise, our
understanding of it will be extremely shallow, and "little knowledge is
a dangerous thing".

The following references are all quoted from the most reliable SUNNI
sources:

On p. 443 of YANABI' AL-MAWADDAH, the HANAFI HAFIZ SULAYMAN AL-QANDUZI
quotes JABIR IBN ABDALLAH AL-ANSARI narrating a lengthy HADITH in which
a Jew named JANDAL IBN JUNADA IBN JUBAIR accepted Islam at the hands of
the Prophet and the new convert asked the Prophet who his WASIS were.
The Prophet counted them for JANDAL till he said: "â€¦ and after him (i.e.
IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) his son Muhammad, who shall be called
AL-MAHDI and AL-QA'IM and AL-HUJJA. He shall occult, then shall he come
back. When he comes back, he shall fill the world with justice and
equity just as it was filled with injustice and iniquity; blessed are
those who persist in their love for them, who persevere during his
occultation (GHAYBA, or absence); blessed are those who persist in their
love for them, for they are the ones whom God described in His book
saying: in it guidance sure, without doubt, to those who fear God, who
believe in the Unseen (GHAYB)' (QUR'AN, 2: 2-3)"

On p. 505 of the same work, the author, who belongs to the major Sunni
sect the HANAFI, quotes MUHAMMAD IBN MUSLIM who cites IMAM JA'FAR
AS-SADIQ (AS) explaining the meaning of verse 155 of the same SURA which
states; "We shall test you with something of fear and hunger; some loss
in goods or lives or the fruits (of your toil), but give glad tidings to
those who patiently persevere" (QUR'AN, 2:155)

IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) indicated that there would be signs
indicating the coming (reappearance) of AL-MAHDI (AS) which are means
whereby God tests the faithful:

"something of fear" is a reference to masses perishing by contagious
diseases; "hunger" is a reference to high prices of foodstuffs;
"some loss in goods" is reference to scarcity and famines;
"lives" is reference to mass destruction (of human lives, probably due
to global wars);
"fruits" is reference to lengthy periods of droughts; so when all that
happens, then "give glad tidings to those who patiently persevere".

"this is its interpretation", continued the Imam, quoting verse 7 of
ALLI 'IMRAN (QUR'AN, 3:7), which indicates that only those who are
"firmly grounded in knowledge" are capable of interpreting the verses of
the holy QUR'AN, adding, "We (AHL AL-BAYT) are the ones firmly grounded
in knowledge".

On p. 321 of same work, the author quotes IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS)
interpreting verse 83 of Chapter III of the holy QUR'AN and commenting
thus; "When the QA'IN, AL-MAHDI, reappears, there will be no land on
earth where the SHAHADA (LA ILAHA ILLA ALLAH MUHAMMADUN RASULULLAH) is
not said".

This could be a reference to the fact that by the time AL-MAHDI
reappears, all continents of the world will have Muslim populations.
They already do. At the end of vol. 2 of FARA'ID AL-SIMTAIN, and on p.
269 of IBN KHALDUN'S Introduction, IBN ABBAS, may Allah be pleased with
him, is quoted saying that the Messenger of God (p) said: "IMAM ALI IBN
ABU TALIB (AS) is the Imam of my nation and my successor therein after
me, and among his offspring is the awaited QA'IN who shall fill the
world with justice and equity as it was filled with injustice and
iniquity. By the One Who sent me in truth a bearer of glad tidings, and
a Warner, I swear that those who persist adhering to his Imamate even
during his GHAYBAT (occultation) are more rare than red sulfur". JABIR
IBN ABDALLAH AL-ANSARI stood then and asked the Messenger of God: "O
Messenger of God! Will there be a GHAYBA for that QA'IM among your
offspring?" He (p) answered: "Ay by my God! (then he quoted this verse):
'God's objective is to purge those that are true'. O JABIR! This is one
of God's orders and a secret of His own which is obscure from His
servants: therefore, beware of doubting, for to doubt the order of God,
the Mighty and the Sublime, is apostasy (KUFR).

On p. 507, the HAFIZ AL-QANDUZI states in his YANABI' AL-MAWADDAH the
explanation of verse 89 of chapter 6 (AL-AN'AM) quoting MUHAMMAD IBN
JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) saying: "The person implied in this verse is the
QA'IN AL-MAHDI, who is safeguarded by God; even if all people perish,
God will being him and his companions about, for they are the ones who
are entrusted by God and who do not disbelieve therein".

Another author, who follow the SHAFI'I sect, and who enjoys the title
'ALLAMA, is AL-SHIBLINJI, author or NUR AL-ABSAR. He quotes ABU JA'FAR
(AS) explaining verse 86 of chapter 11 (HUD) in a lengthy HADITH in
which the Imam says: "When he (AL-MAHDI) reappears, he shall lean on the
KA'BA, and three hundred and thirteen men of his companions shall join
him there, and the first statement he shall utter will be: 'That which
is left for you by God is best for you (QUR'AN, 11:86)'. Then he shall
say: 'I am what is left for you by God, His vicegerent (a descendant of
Adam), and His Proof (HUJJAT ALLAH) over you'; so whenever someone
greets him, he says: 'Peace be with you. O the one left for us by
God'".

The SHAFI'I FAQIH ABD AR-RAHMAN IBN ABU BAKR AL-SEYUFI, quoting the
SUNAN of ABU DAWUD, cites ABU SA'ID AL-KHUDRI on p. 50, vol. 6, of his
AD-DURR AL-MANTHUR, saying that the Messenger of God (p) had said; "The
Hour shall not come till AL-MAHDI takes charge on earth on my own
behalf; he shall have a high forehead, a straight nose, and he shall
fill the world with justice and equity after being filled with injustice
and iniquity".

He also indicates that IMAM AHMED IBN HANBAL (founder of one of the
four Sunni sects, i.e. the HANBALI) quotes ABU SA'ID AL-KHUDRI quoting
the Messenger of God saying: "I bring you the glad tidings of AL-MAHDI;
God shall send him to my nation, in time quite different from your own,
and after series of earthquakes, and he shall fill the world with
justice and equity as it was filled before with injustice and iniquity,
and all the residents of the world shall be pleased with him, and he
shall distribute the wealth equitably".

'ALLAM AL-BAHRANI, quoting the SHAFI'I FAQITH IBRAHIM IBN MUHAMMAD
AL-HAMAWAYNI who in turn quotes ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS (cousin of the
Prophet p), on p. 692 of GHAYAT AL-MARAM saying that the Messenger of
God (p) had said; "My successors, WASIS and HUJAJ (proofs) are twelve:
the first of them is my brother and the last is my son". He was asked;
"O Messenger of God! Who is your brother?" He answered: "ALI IBN ABU
TALIB". Then who is your son?" "AL-MAHDI who shall fill the world with
justice and equity after being filled with injustice and iniquity. By
the One Who sent me in truth a bearer of glad tidings and a Warner. I
swear that if there is only one day left in this world, God will prolong
that day till my son (descendant) AL-MAHDI reappears, and the Spirit of
God Jesus son of Mary shall say his prayers behind him (then he quoted
verse 69 of chapter 39); 'And the earth will shine with the glory of its
Lord' and his domain shall encompass the East and the West".

**PROPHECIES**

Before the Imam's birth, predictions regarding him were put forth by
the holy Prophet and the Infallible Imams. Several scholars of the Sunni
School of Muslim Law have written volumes exclusively on this topic. For
example, HAFIZ MUHAMMAD IBN YUSUF AL-KANJI ASH-SHAFI'I has compiled
AL-BAYAN IF ADHBAR SAHIB AZ-ZAMAN (the clear evidence regarding the
tidings of the Master of Age). HAFIZ ABU NA'IM AL-ISFAHANI has written
NA'T AL-MAHDI (title of AL-MAHDI). ABU DAWUD AL-SIJISTANI has devoted
one complete chapter titled "KITAB AL-MAHDI" in his SUNAN, and AL-HAKIM
in his MUSTADRAK. One tradition recorded by MUHAMMAD IBN IBRAHIM
AL-HAMAWI (of HAMAH, Syria ASH SHAFI recoded in his work FARA'ID
AS-SIMTAIN says: "IBN ABBAS heard the Prophet saying: 'I am the chief of
the Prophets, and Ali is the chief of the Trustees (WASIS). My trustees
(or successors) after me are twelve: the first of them is Ali and the
last is AL-MAHDI".

JABIR IBN ABDALLAH AL-ANSARI narrated that FATIMA AZ-ZAHRA had a tablet
on which the names of all the succeeding Imams were written down; three
of them were named Muhammad and four of them were named Ali all being
her offspring, and the last was named AL-QA'IN. SHAIKH AS-SADUQ MUHAMAMD
IBN ALI BIN BABAWAIH AL-QUMMI records in his IKMAL AD-DIN WAS ITMAM
AN-NI'MA this tradition on the authority of IMAM AR-RIDA (AS) who
narrated it from his ancestors. It states that IMAM ALI (AS) addressed
his son IMAM HUSAIN (AS) once saying; "The ninth from your descendants
shall rise defending the truth; he shall protect the faith and promote
justice".

AS-SADUQ in his IKMAL AD-DIN also quotes the Prophet saying: "When the
ninth among the descendants of my son HUSAIN is born, God will extend
his life-span during the period of absence (occultation) and will
project him at the appointed time".

IMAM HUSAIN (AS), the chief of martyrs, is quoted saying: "The ninth of
my descendants is the Imam who will rise with the truth. God will grant
life to earth through him after its death. The true faith will supersede
all religions through him. His absence shall be lengthy during which
multitudes would go astray. Only a few will be on the Right Path. They
shall suffer pains. People will pressure them, saying: 'Let us know when
this promise is fulfilled!' Those who will bear the pains and denials
patiently will get the same rewards as those who accompanied the Prophet
during his expeditions for JIHAD. IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS) has said: "Of
us one will be born whose birth will remain secret, so much so that
people will say that he was not born at all". IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR
(AS) is quoted by AL-KAFI of AL-KULAYNI as saying: "Nine Imams after
HUSAIN are destined; the last of them will be AL-QA'IM". IMAM JA'FAR
AS-SADIQ (AS) is quoted in 'ILAL AL-SHARA'I' saying; "The fifth
descendant of my son MUSA will be the QA'IM, a descendant of the
Prophet".

As recorded in IKMAL AD-DIN of SHAIKH AS-SADUQ, IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS)
was asked once: "Are you the QA'IM with the truth?" the Imam replied: "I
also rise truthfully, but the real QA'IM is he who will remove the
enemies of God from earth and will fill it with justice. He shall be my
fifth descendant. His absence will be lengthy during which multitudes
will turn away from the faith while only a few will uphold it". When
DI'BIL the poet recited his poem to IMAM AR-RIDA (AS) which included
these lines:

"The Riser will appear, I do confess,
With grace he will rise, blessed and good;
Will deal with faithful and faithless,
Distinguish between truth and falsehood;

IMAM AR-RIDA (AS) wept. Then, raising his head, he said: "O DI'BIL,
these lines have been inspired to you by Gabriel. Do you know who this
Riser (QA'IM) is and when he shall rise?" DI'BIL said that he did not
know the details, but that he had been hearing that there would come an
Imam who would purge the world from evils and fill it with justice. The
Imam explained; "O DI'BIL, my son Muhammad will come when I am gone.
After him will come his son AL-QA'IM. He will be awaited during his
absence. When he appears, the world shall bow down before him".

IMAM MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) has said: "The QA'IM will be from amongst
us, the third of my descendants".

IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) has said: "My successor is my son IMAM HASAN; but
what will be your condition during the reign of IMAM HASAN'S successor?"
Those who were present asked: "Why, what do you mean by that?" IMAM ALI
AN-NAQI (AS) said: "You will not have the chance to see him; later, you
will not be allowed even to mention his name". Then he was asked as to
how they should mention him. He said: "You may say the last of
Muhammad's (Infallible) descendants".

Some people asked IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS): "Your revered forefathers
have said that the earth would never be without a Sign of Allah (HUJJAT
ALLAH) till Doomsday, and he who dies without knowing the Imam of his
time will die the death of the days of ignorance" IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI
(AS) said that that was as true as the shining day. They inquired as to
who would be the Imam and who would be the Sign of the Mercy of God
after his death. IMAM HASAN explained: "He will be my son, the namesake
of the holy Prophet. He who dies without knowing him will die the death
of the days of ignorance. His absence will be so lengthy that the
ignorant would wander puzzled and would surely stray; the false will
fall into eternal destruction. Those who will foretell the exact date of
his appearing will be wrong.

All these predictions were recorded since the time of the holy Prophet
who prophesied the advent of the MAHDI. The anecdote of DI'BIL
demonstrates that the concept was quite common. History tells us that
friends and foes of AHL AL-BYAT (AS) knew the fact, and sometimes tried
to take wrong advantage thereof. For example, one of the ABBASIDES named
Muhammad had assumed the title of AL-MAHDI. Muhammad son of ABDALLAH
AL-MAHD, an offspring of IMAM HUSAIN (AS), too, was considered by some
people as the MAHDI. The KAISANIS had attributed the same to MUHAMMAD
IBN AL-HANAFIYYA.

But these suppositions were refuted by the Imams who condemned them and
explained the qualities of the true MAHDI and asserted his absence. The
aforementioned events clearly indicate that the idea about the advent of
the MAHDI was unanimously acknowledged. Besides, the traditions of the
holy Prophet continuously affirmed that he would be succeeded by 12
persons. This number itself sufficed to refute the claims of the false
pretenders. But when the eleventh IMAM AL-HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) had
come, people keenly awaited AL-MAHDI who was sought even prior to his
birth with same eagerness as he is now awaited since his absence.

**BIRTH**

The awaited Imam at last came into the world on the 15th of SHA'BAN 255
A.H. (July 29, 869 A.D.). His father IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) gave
away loaves of bread and meat as charity and sacrificed several goats
for 'AQIQAH, birth celebration.

**UPBRINGING AND INSTRUCTION**

Precedents already existed that many of the Imams got no outward
opportunity for education; still, Providence Divine made arrangements to
adorn them with learning and moral accomplishments elevated then to
Imamate. For example, IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) was six years old when his
father MUHAMMAD AT-TAQI (AS) died. IMAM AT-TAQI (AS) was eight years old
at the time of the death of his father IMAM AR-RIDA (AS). Outwardly, a
boy of this age cannot be proficient in learning. But once we
acknowledged that God had specially gifted the Prophet's Progeny, the
question of age stands no more. If Jesus Christ could speak in his
cradle and assert his prophet-hood (see QUR'AN, 19:24 and 19:30-33), a
believer cannot think that the childhood of IMAM AL-MAHDI (AS) would
negate or render his Imamate faulty. IMAM AL-MAHDI (AS) could enjoy his
father's love and instruction for a very short period of time because he
was only five years old when his father died in 260 A.H. (874 A.D.).
Even at that young age, Providence crowned him with Imamate.

**GOVERNMENT'S INQUISITION**

When the pharaoh of Egypt heard the prophecy that a child would soon be
born who would destroy his kingdom he tried his best to obstruct the
child's birth or kill him after his birth. Likewise, the ABBASIDE ruler
had learnt that a child would be born to IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) who
would destroy his unjust kingdom. He, therefore, made every possible
arrangement that the child would not be born, keeping IMAM HASAN
AL-'ASKARI (AS) in continuous imprisonment and away from his wife. But
even the greatest worldly power cannot fight Providence. In spite of all
the efforts of pharaoh, Moses was born; similarly, in spite of the
efforts of the ABBASIDE government, the awaited Imam came into the
world.

His birth and upbringing were kept secret and as Providence so wished,
it remained so. Only a few moments did he appear in public. It was the
time when his father's coffin was ready for the funeral prayers. All the
prominent SHI'AHS were present. The ranks had been formed. IMAM HASAN
AL-'ASKARI'S brother JA'FAR had stepped forward to lead the prayer and
was at the point of reciting the TAKBIR when suddenly a boy came out
from behind the curtains, passed the ranks quickly and took hold of
JA'FAR'S robe and said: "Get back uncle; I am more than you worthy of
leading the funeral prayer for my father". JA'FAR at once withdrew and
the boy led the prayer. Having performed this duty, the boy went back.
It was not possible that the ABBASIDE ruler could remain ignorant of the
fact. The search for him was carried out more seriously than ever before
in order to arrest and slay the boy. Some may ask: "How can a boy lead
the funeral prayer in the capacity of an Imam?" The question is provided
by the holy QUR'AN. These are referred to research the holy QUR'AN to
see how another boy, namely YAHYA (John the Baptist), became a Prophet
of God even while being a young boy. See verse 12 of chapter 19 (SURAT
MARYAM)

**THE MINOR OCCULTATION**

The Prophet and the Imams had predicted AL-MAHDI'S occultation
(disappearance and absence) as has already been narrated. His
occultation is divided into two periods. The first period is known as
the minor occultation and it extends from 260 A.H. to 329 A.H. (874-941
A.D.) when extremely pious persons nominated by the Imam himself acted
as his deputies. Their duty was to convey to the Imam all problems of
the SHI'AHS, get their solutions from the Imam or solve them themselves
according to their own discretion, collect ZAKAT and KHUMS and spend
them in the proper way, and convey the Imam's instructions to the
trusted persons. The persons so deputized were the most pious and
learned, and they were the trusted confidants. They were four in
number:

1- ABU AMR UTHMAN IBN SA'ID IBN AMR AL-AMRI AL-ASADI. He was a deputy
of IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS), then of his son IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS).
Having performed the same duty for a few years for IMAM AL-MAHDI also,
he died in Baghdad and was buried there.

2- ABU JA'FAR MUHAMMAD IBN UTHMAN IBN SA'ID AL-AMRI (son of the above).
IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS) foretold his being deputized. Then his
father, at the time of his death, proclaimed under the orders of the
Imam his appointment as deputy. He died in JUMADA AL-'ULA 305 A.H.
(November 917 A.D.) 3- AUB AL-QASIM HUSAIN IBN RUH IBN ABI BAKR
AN-NAW-BAKHFI. A member of the famous NAW-BAKHFI family, he was
distinguished for his knowledge, philosophy, astrology and KALAM. He was
a top ranking scholar and a pious man. Under the directions of IMAM
AL-MAHDI, ABU JA'FAR Muhammad IBN UTHMAN appointed him as his successor.
After having served for fifteen years in that capacity, he died in
SHA'BAN of 320 A.H.

4- ABU HASAN ALI IBN Muhammad AL-SAMARI. He was the last deputy,
succeeding HUSAIN IBN RUH as directed by the imam. He performed this
duty for nine years only and died on the 15th of SHA'BAN of 329 A.H.
(May 15, 941 A.D.). Having been asked on the deathbed as to who would
succeed him, he replied; "Providence now wishes to give the matter
another shape the duration of which is known by God Alone".

After ABU AL-HASAN there was no deputy. In this sorrowful year, i.e.
329 A.H. (941 A.D.), ALI IBN BABAWAIH AL-QUMMI, the revered father of
SHAYKH AS-SADUQ, and Muhammad IBN YA'QUB AL-KULAYNI, the learned
compiler of AL-KAFI, also expired. Besides these sad events, an
extra-ordinary phenomenon was also witnessed. In the sky so many stars
did shoot that it seemed as if Doomsday had come. That year was,
therefore, named "the year of the dispersal of the stars". After this
followed a dark period because none was left to approach IMAM AL-MAHDI
(AS)

**THE MAJOR OCCULTATION**

The period since 329 A.H. (941 A.D.) is called "the major occultation"
because there is none deputized by the Imam. It was for this period that
IMAM AL-MAHDI (AS) directed "to refer to those who know our traditions
the lawful and the unlawful matters because they will guide you on our
own behalf". It is in view of this advice that the scholars and
MUJTAHIDS are called the Imam's successors. But this succession rather
means general guidance of the people and is in no sense by the way of
personal nomination. They are, therefore, quite different from the
deputies who served as such during the minor occultation.

The predictions about these occultation had been made by the
Infallibles. The holy Prophet affirmed: "He will have an occultation in
which many groups will wander astray; in this period, the number of
those who believe in and follow him will be meager". IMAM ALI IBN ABU
TALIB (AS) said: "The QA'IM will have a long period of absence
(occultation). The scene is full in my view when the friends of AHL
AL-BAYT (AS) will wander during his absence as animals wander in search
of a meadow". Another tradition says that "He will reappear after such a
long period of absence during which only true and sincere believers
would uphold their religion". IMAM AL-HASAN (AS) said: "God will prolong
his life-span during his absence". IMAM AL-HUSAIN (AS) said: "He will
remain absent during which period so many parties will go astray". IMAM
Muhammad AL-BAQIR (AS) said; "His absence will be so lengthy that many
would go astray".

IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) said: "AL-MAHDI will be the fifth descendant
of the seventh Imam. He will remain unseen to your eyes". On another
occasion, he said that SAHIB AL-'AMR (the master of command) will have
an occultation during which everybody must remember God, do good deeds
and uphold his religion.

IMAM MUSA AL-KAZIM (AS) said; "His person will remain unseen to the eye
but the believers will never forget him; he will be the Twelfth of our
line".

IMAM AR-RIDA (AS) predicted that he would be awaited during his
absence. IMAM Muhammad AT-TAQI (AS) explained: "AL-MAHDI is he who will
be awaited during his absence and will be obeyed upon his
reappearance".

IMAM ALI AN-NAQI (AS) clarified: "The Master of Command will be the one
about whom people would say: 'He has not been born yet". IMAM HASAN
AL-'ASKARI (AS) said: "My son's absence will cause doubts and disbeliefs
in the minds of people, except those whom Allah guides". IMAM Muhammad
AL-BAQIR (AS) had also explained that the QA'IM of ALLI MUHAMMAD would
have two periods of absence, a very lengthy one and a relatively short
one. IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) too had predicted in a similar way: "One
of the two periods of absence will be quite lengthy". It was due to
these predictions that after the death of IMAM HASAN AL-'ASKARI (AS),
his followers and sincere believers had no doubts. Instead of
acknowledging the Imamate of some present false claimant, they only
believed in IMAM AL-MAHDI, the Absent, the Occulting.

Although absent and unrepresented, IMAM AL-MAHDI still guides people
and defends the faith. Even-though unseen, he supervises the world's
affairs and guides it. This curtain will exist as long as Providence
deems it necessary; the time will come soon (though "soon" may occur to
many too late) when the curtain of absence will be removed, IMAM
AL-MAHDI will reappear and fill the world with justice and equity,
discarding all the prevailing injustices and iniquities. May God
Almighty bring about his early reappearance and ease his coming,
ALLAHOMMA AAMIN.


