The Supreme Among the Prophets
==============================

**MUHAMMAD THE CHOSEN ONE (PEACE BE UPON HIM AND HIS PROGENY)**

**NAME AND LINEAGE**

Prophet Abraham, the Friend of God, had two sons: ISHAQ (ISAAC), whose
descendants included BANI (children of) Israel, Moses, Jesus and many
other prophets arising from his tribe, and also Samuel (Ishmael) who had
twelve sons one of whom was QAYDAR whose offspring inhabited HIJAZ
(northern Arabia). Among his other sons was 'ADNAN who earned a high
reputation. Prophet Muhammad's family tree reaches up to 'ADNANA as
follows: He is Muhammad son of 'ABD-ALLAH son of 'ABD AL-MUTTALIB son of
HASHIM son of 'ABDU MANAF son of QUSAY son of KILAB son of MURRA son of
KA'B son of LUAYY son of GHALIB son of FEHR son of MALIK son of NADR son
of KANANA son of KHUZAYMA son of MUDRIKA son of ILYAS son of MUDAR son
of NEZAR son MA'AD son of 'ADNAN.

The descendants of NADR son of KANANA were known as QURAYSH. Prophet
Muhammad's mother was 'AMINA daughter of WAHAB son of 'ABD MANAF son of
ZUHRA son of KILAB son of MURRA. This shows that on both maternal and
paternal sides, the Prophet belonged to the distinguished tribe of
QURAYSH.

**BIRTH**

In 570 A.D., ABRAHA AL-ASHRAM, then vice-gerent of Yemen on behalf of
the ABYSSINIAN king the NEGUS, was a staunch Christian who had built a
magnificent cathedral in SAN'A' and had ordered the Arabs to go there
for the pilgrimage instead of Mecca. He had marble brought to it from
one of the derelict palaces of the Queen of SHEBA. In it, he set up
crosses made of gold and silver, and pulpits of ivory and ebony. He
wrote to his master the NEGUS saying: "I have built thee a church, O
King, the like of which was never built for any king before thee; and I
shall not rest until I have diverted unto it the pilgrimage of the
Arabs". Not only was his order totally ignored, and man from KINANAH, a
relative tribe of QURAYSH, went to SAN'A' to deliberately defile the
church, which he did one night, returning safely to his people.

ABRAHA'S fury knew no bounds and he vowed to raze the KA'BA to the
ground in revenge. He advanced with a large army in the van of which he
placed an elephant, hence the Year of the Elephant which started a whole
era of reckoning. That system of reckoning continued to be followed
until the days of UMAR IBN AL-KHATTAB, the second caliph, when, upon the
suggestion of IMAM ALI IBN ABU TALIB, the era of the HIJRI calendar was
introduced. It was on a Friday, the 17th of RABI' AL-AWWAL in that year
(corresponding to April 28, 570 A.D.) that the holy Prophet was born in
Mecca, the main metropolis of HIJAZ. Earth received the greatest
blessings from Heaven and mankind was exalted by the advent of its
greatest Law-giver ever.

But this great child, destined to be the supporter of the poor, the
helpless and the orphans, could not enjoy the bliss of his father's
love.

'ABD-ALLAH passed away in the full bloom of youth only a few months
before Prophet Muhammad (P) was born. Some historians say that
'ABD-ALLAH died from an unidentified sickness only two months before the
birth of his son Muhammad. The sadness of the situation is yet further
aggravated when we learn that at the age of six he was deprived of his
mother's affection as well. Providence had perhaps decided that he who
would one day encompass every creature of the world in his affection,
would have to taste the bitterness of the loss of his parent's affection
in the tender years of childhood. As was the custom, a good-natured
nurse of the tribe of BANI SA'D was appointed as a foster-mother to
nurse Muhammad in the healthy climate of her desert village.

After weaning, he came back to Mecca to live with his mother 'AMINA.
After her death, his grandfather ABD AL-MUTTALIB took him into his
personal care and brought him up with fatherly affection. But after two
years, this noble family-head also died. In the last days of his life,
his major concern had been the safe upbringing of that child who he
thought would grow up into a great personality. While breathing his
last, he called his son ABU TALIB and entrusted Muhammad to his care.
Other sons, older in age, stood by, but the far-sighted chief could see
that none would look after his grandson as sincerely as ABU TALIB.
History tells us that right up to his last breath, ABU TALIB fulfilled
the promise which he had made to his respected father at the time when
the life's lamp of the latter flickered.

In fact he extended the same love to Prophet Muhammad (p) as he did to
his own children. He fostered him from the young age of eight years up
to the time when he was a ripe, seasoned man of fifty-three, protecting
him at the obvious risk of jeopardizing both his own life and that of
his dear sons. His wife Fatima daughter of ASAD, too, was so
affectionate to him that the Prophet tasted the flavor of maternal love
from her. It was, therefore, only natural that when that noble lady
died, Prophet Muhammad (p) uttered sorrowfully: "She was a mother to me
after my real mother".

**FIRST TRIP TO SYRIA**

When Muhammad was twelve years old, ABU TALIB undertook a trade trip to
Syria. Being an ambitious boy, he accompanied him. It was during this
journey that BUHAIRA, a Christian hermit, met him and observed the signs
of which he had read in previous Scriptures, and predicted: "This boy is
destined to be a Prophet of great power and prestige". It was a very
brief and fleeting encounter. They never stayed with BUHAIRA as some
people mistakenly suggest.

**PARTICIPATING IN THE 'LEAGUE OF THE INTERVENERS'**

When Muhammad was twenty years old, the elders of the tribe of QURAYSH,
headed by ZUBAIR son of ABD AL-MUTTALIB, drafted a covenant which they
called "HILF AL-FUDUL", that is, "the league of the interveners",
promoting chivalric principles. In the aftermath of 'ABD AL-MUTTALIB'S
death, the Arabian tribes took to lawlessness. The anarchy and chaos
reached such a level that the lives and property of strangers were no
longer safe in Mecca. Resenting this situation, the HASHEMITES, the
Prophet's clansmen, called upon the tribes of ZOHRA and TAYM to suppress
the shameful disorder. They assembled at the house of 'ABD-Allah son of
ADNAN and took an oath that: "We will always defend the oppressed,
redress the grievances at all cost, and cooperate with one another to
achieve this noble cause". Muhammad was one of the participants, and he
held this agreement in high esteem. Even in the hey-day of Islam, when
all other covenants of the Days of ignorance had been cancelled, he held
himself bound by the said agreement and used to say: "If somebody were
to appeal to me today in the name of that charter, I would surely
respond to his appeal".

Yet in spite of such noble efforts, the vicious circle of evil was in
full rotation. Women were regarded as inferior creatures; many of them
were reduced to prostitution. Drinking, gambling, idolatry, adultery and
usury were the order of the day. Murder, inter-tribal feuds and endless
chains of revenge incidents were devastating the land. Life was neither
safe nor peaceful. These were the moral and social conditions which the
sensitive youth Muhammad was watching with very profound concern.

**TRADE JOURNEY**

The Prophet was twenty-five years old when he made a journey to Syria
to sell KHADIJA'S merchandise there. The trip was so successful that
KHADIJA obtained twice the profit she usually accrued every year.

**MARRIAGE**

KHADIJA daughter of KHUWAILID was deeply impressed by the moral
excellence, honesty, and respectable personality of Prophet Muhammad (p)
He, too, admired her fair dealing and noble character. So when an
intermediary suggested that he should marry her, Muhammad reflected upon
it and said, "She is a wealthy lady while I am too poor to be considered
by her". But when he was assured of her agreement should he propose, he
gladly made the forma request. KHADIJA acceded to it and a date was
fixed for the marriage ceremony. AMR IBN ASAD acted as the trustee of
his niece KHADIJA. ABU TALIB, on behalf of his nephew Muhammad, recited
the marriage sermon and paid the matrimonial dower. Thus, the most
sacred wedlock was executed. Although she was senior in age, Prophet
Muhammad (P) esteemed her so much that he never thought of taking
another wife during her lifetime.

**EXCELLENCE OF CONDUCT**

The MECCANS had seen and tested the Prophet from boyhood to youth. They
were so much impressed by his honesty and righteousness that they called
him "the truthful" and "the trustworthy". They entrusted their cash and
precious articles to him with full confidence. His opinion was eagerly
sought in disputed affairs of contending tribes.
