Fatima Az-zahra' the Sublime Among All Women
============================================

**NAME, TITLES AND PARENTAGE**

Her name is Fatima (as) and her most popular title is AZ-ZAHRA' (The
Lady of Light). She was given many other titles the most popular of
which are: SAYYIDATU NISA' AL-ALAMIN (Mistress of Womankind), KHATUN
AL-JANNAH (Lady of Paradise), KHATUN AL-QIYAMA (Lady of the Day of
Judgment), MA'SUMAT AL-ALAM (The Infallible Lady of the World), SIDDIQA
(Truthful), TAHIRA (Purified). She was the only daughter of the Prophet
form KHADIJA and it was her son Imam HUSAIN (AS) who perpetuated the
Cause of Islam, and we can say without any hesitation that she provided
the mainstay to support the mission of her illustrious father.

**BIRTH**

There is a difference of opinion regarding the dates of her birth and
death. Some historians say that was born in the 5th year before
Prophet-hood, while other biographers place it five years earlier. Based
on AHL AL-BAYT references, one can safely say that she was born on the
20th of JUMADA AL-AKHIR in the fifth year of Prophet-hood (615 A.D.) or
the 8th year before the HIJRA.

**INSTRUCITON AND STATUS**

Up to the age of five, she enjoyed the love and teaching of both
parents. Then she was deprived of her mother's love and was looked after
by her affectionate father, the Prophet of mercy. Aged ladies of the
household, that is, Fatima daughter of ASAD, SAFIYYA daughter of 'ABD
AL-MUTTALIB (the Prophet's aunt), and UMMU SALAMA was requested to tutor
the child Fatima (as), the wise woman replied: "How can I tutor one who
is the personification of high virtues and purity? It is I who should
learn from her!" Her childhood, therefore, was passed in a very chaste
and modest environment. Both Imam AHMED IBN HANBAL and AT-TABARI quote
the Messenger of God (p) saying to his daughter Fatima (as): "I and you,
and these two (i.e. Imam HASAN and Imam HUSAIN, (as), and this sleeping
man (i.e. Imam Ali (as)) shall be in the same place on the Day of
Resurrection". P. 219, vol. 2, of KANZ AL-'UMMAL quotes the Messenger of
God (P.B.U.H.) saying that she was named Fatima (as) because God
protected her and those who cherish her from Hellfire. 'A'ISHA is quoted
on p. 319, vol. 2, of TIRMIDHI'S SAHIH saying: "I have never seen anyone
who was so similar to the Messenger of God in his dignity and guidance,
whether sitting or standing, more than Fatima daughter of the Messenger
of God".

**PREVAILING CIRCUMSTANCES**

It was then that she saw her revered father preaching Islam in an
un-conducive atmosphere. The hostility of the infidels and the death of
ABU TALIB and KHADIJA were the shocks that broke the heart of the
Prophet (p) Fatima (as) sometimes saw and dressed the wounds sustained
by her father due to the stones flung at him by hostile infidels. She
might have heard that certain wretches hurled rubbish on her noble
father. She might also have learnt of the plans made to put an end to
his life. But from all these things, Fatima (as) was neither frightened
nor disheartened. She comforted her father even at that tender age, so
much so that he gave her the title of "UMMU ABIHA", mother of her own
father. She was dismayed at seeing the whole world around her hostile to
her father, bent upon ending his life. The entire family was blanketed
with clouds of sorrowful grief as a result of the almost daily
humiliation and mockery to which her most revered father was
subjected.

**MIGRATION**

When the Migration took place, Fatima (as) was left under the care of
Fatima daughter of ASAD. It was a horrible test for the girl of eight to
see a group of blood-thirsty enemies surrounding the house with drawn
swords. The departure of the loving father whose life was at stake was
no less shocking, but Fatima (as) went successfully through this ordeal
by virtue of God-gifted courage and fortitude.

**MARRIAGE**

It was after one year's stay at Medina that Fatima (as) came of age.
The Prophet loved and esteemed her a great deal, so much so that
whenever she came to him, he respectfully stood up for her. Many
dignitaries, including some companions of the Prophet, sought the honor
of marrying her, and some made their request formally, but the Prophet
rejected all of them saying that he awaited God's Decree in that
matter.

Fatima (as) was the model of the Prophet's teaching among women just as
Imam Ali (as) was the best embodiment of his instructions and manly
qualities among men. Judged from this point of view, they were the most
suitable couple. But Imam Ali (as) was too modest to speak on this
subject; therefore, some individuals encouraged him to make the formal
request. Some historians say that she was nine, others say she was
eleven, when her cousin Imam Ali (as) finally proposed to marry her. Her
holy father said to her upon that occasion: "Ali has sought your hand
for marriage. You are perfectly aware of his kinship to you and devotion
to Islam. I have sought the permission from the Almighty God to give you
in wedlock to Ali. Tell me if you approve of the same". Out of modesty,
Fatima (as) kept silent. The holy Prophet said: "God is great! Her
signifies her approval!" The Prophet asked Imam Ali (as) if he had some
property of his own. The youth explained that he possessed a horse, a
sword and armor. The Messenger said: "The sword and the horse are
indispensable for a warrior like you, but the armor is superfluous; so
go and sell it".

Historians say that the armor was sold for 480 silver DIRHAMS which he
presented as his bride's MAHR (dower). The Prophet arranged his
daughter's matrimony. The Messenger of God told ANAS IBN MALIK to invite
a group of SAHABA (companions) including ABU BAKR, UMER IBN AL-KATTAB,
UTHMAN IBN AFFAN, 'ABD AR-RAHMAN IBN AWF, SA'D IBN ABU WAQQAS, TALHA,
AZ-ZUBAIR IBN ABD AL-MUTTALIB, and some men of the ANSARS. ANAS says:
"When they all came and were seated, while Ali was absent on an errand
for the Prophet, the Prophet said: 'All praise belongs to God Who is
praised through the bounties He bestows, worshipped due to His Might,
obeyed due to His Authority, Whose torment and Might are feared, Whose
command is obeyed in heavens as on earth, Who created everything by His
own Might. He distinguished them through His commandments, dignified
them through His religion, was generous unto them through His Prophet
Muhammad. God, praised is His Name, Sublime is His Might, has made
marriage the means towards maintaining a family line, and a matter
whereby He enjoined to link the relations and He made it an obligation
on His servants, saying: He it is Who created man from (congealed) water
then He established relationships of lineage and marriage: for thy Lord
has power (over all things) (QUR'AN, 25:54).

God's commandment leads to its implementation, and its implementation
is His commandment, and for each there is timing, and for each timing
there is a record. God obliterates what He wishes and fixes what He
desires, and He has the Mother of the Book. God has commanded me to
marry Fatima daughter of KHADIJA to ALI IBN ABU TALIBâ€¦' Then he ordered
a platter of unripe dates to be brought to him of which we ate, and
while we were eating, Imam Ali (as) entered, whereupon the Prophet
smiled in his face and said: 'God has commanded me to marry you to
Fatima for (the dower of) four hundred (or five hundred according to
other traditions) ounces of silver if you agree'. He said: 'I agreed to
that, O Messenger of God!".

ANAS continued his tale by quoting the Prophet praying thus for the
newly weds: "May God safeguard your tie and make happiness the reward of
your toil and bless you both and bring about out of both of you a great
deal of good". ANAS comments, as AT-TABARI quotes him on p. 30-31 of his
History, saying, "By God, a great deal of good did indeed come out of
them both". A traditionalist stated that God Almighty had granted a
great portion of his universe river water as the MAHR of Fatima (as). In
view of the spiritual excellences of the Messenger's daughter, this
saying cannot be dismissed altogether, but the implication of the amount
of silver stated above is that Muslims should not fix fabulously large
amounts as their daughter's MAHR or consider the MAHR to be the scale of
respect for and admiration of the brides. The meager weight of silver
was to change the mentality of pride-indulging fathers. If Muslims keep
the details of this marriage in view, they will never ruin their
financial position by indulging extravagant customs at the marriage of
their children.

**CHILDREN**

Fatima (as) lived only nine years after her marriage. In the second
year, she gave birth to IMAM HASAN, and in the year after she gave birth
to IMAM HUSAIN (as). Probably in the fifth year, her daughter ZAINAB was
born, and in the seventh year, her daughter UMMU KULTHUM was born. The
above-named sons later became the Imams of the Muslim community. Her
daughter ZAINAB and UMMU KULTHUM proved to be the facsimiles of their
noble mother.

**CHARACTER AND VIRTUES**

In form and features, in courage and eloquence of speech, Fatima (as)
was the true copy of her holy father. Especially in truth and trust, she
was an exact model of the great sire. During the brief span of her life,
she left visible marks of her noble conduct that will serve as a model
to lead women forever towards a sense of duty, patience, obedience and
chastity. Her husband, upon being asked to describe her after she had
already left this world, said, with tears in his eyes, "She was a
fragrant flower of Paradise. Her fragrance perfumed my mind even after
she herself had withered".

**HOUSEHOLD DUTIES**

After her marriage, she did all household work in person. Sweeping the
floor, cooking, wheel-spinning, flour-grinding, raising and educating
the children, in addition to many other household chores, were all
carried out by Fatima (as) single-handedly. She neither complained of
the overwhelming rush of work, nor did she request her husband Imam Ali
(as) to get her a helper. Once she asked her father if she could have a
maid. The Prophet instead of acceding to her request gave her a moral
counsel. He taught her a special prayer through the use of rosary beads
which is still called "TASBIH AZ-ZAHRA". It consists of thanksgiving and
calling upon the Glory of God the Great. Fatima (as) was so content with
this celestial instruction that she gave up her desire for a helping
hand.

It was her habit to be the last to take a meal, waiting till her
husband and children were through. Her revered husband asked her one day
for something to eat. She lowered her head with silence. He left. Coming
back home, he found her busy in prayers and prostrations to God,
invoking His mercy. She was not mindful of hunger but of adoration to
the Almighty. On a similar occasion, the Imam expressed his surprise at
not knowing the state of affairs in the house. Lowering her head, she
said: "My revered father had bidden me on his departure (from this
world) not to embarrass you by making any demand on you. It is for this
reason that I was careful not to upset you on account of any household
need".

Later, when Islam brought a measure of prosperity to the Prophet, he
granted her a maid named FEDDA whom she always treated as a companion,
never degrading her. Islam certainly requires a woman to take equal part
with her husband in the struggle of life. But due to differences in
physique, their duties are different. This division of work was so
nicely demonstrated to the world by Imam (as) and Fatima (as). All the
outdoor functions. Fetching water, watering the gardens and earning a
living for his family by the sweat of his brow, fell to the lot of Imam
Ali (as) who never hesitated to even assist his wife in some of her
household chores. All indoor duties were performed by Fatima (as). In
most countries, this division of work is still followed. Requirements of
time may change this practice to some extent, but the spirit and motives
that make the difference between indoor and outdoor duties should always
be taken into consideration.

**INDIFFERENCE TO ADORNMENT**

It is only natural that women are inclined towards ornamentation and
adornment. This creates anxiety for men who cannot afford it and spoils
the balance of income and expenditure, sometimes resulting in financial
and psychological problems. Fatima (as) always desisted from this,
making her life a model for the women of poor families. She never
allowed elaboration or adornment in dress or household articles because
this was the instruction of her father the holy Prophet (p). Some
traditions even that once she had somehow managed to acquire two silver
bracelets, one necklace, a pair of ear-rings and a new door curtain.
When the Prophet came to visit her, his meaningful silence was
sufficient to instruct the pious daughter to accordingly give away all
these things as an act of charity. When the Prophet came to know of it,
he was so pleased that he exclaimed three times in joy: "May her father
be sacrificed for her! She did exactly what I wished!". And undoubtedly
it was only this high-minded daughter of the greatest teacher of
humanity who could give a practical shape to her father's exalted
teachings and bring high moral excellence to its climax.

SELFLESSNESS IN WORSHIP AND PRAYER

She was a devoted worshipper of God and indeed she set a noble example
for humanity in this matter. Worshipping is a negotiation between man
and the Creator. Some people can sacrifice their wealth and even their
hard-earned bread for others; as regards their worship, they are more or
less "selfish"; they do it for their own good. But the Prophet's Progeny
were the exception. Whenever they stood humbly before the Almighty for
prayers, they bore compassionate feelings for His creatures in their
hearts. According to Imam HASAN (as), Fatima (as) once spent a whole
night praying. At the end of the night, she prayed for God's mercy for
the believers, imploring nothing for her self. When Imam HASAN made a
mention of that to her, she said; "The neighbors must take preference",
meaning that a noble person should seek the welfare of others, negating
his own personal interests for their sake.

THE VEIL

Fatima (as), the chief of the ladies, put a great deal of emphasis on
PURDAH, or veiling both by her conduct and word of mouth. In those days,
some ladies took part in congregational prayers in the mornings,
standing behind the last row of men and leaving the mosque immediately
before the men did. Fatima's house adjoined the Prophet's Mosque but she
never took part in those prayers or in the sermons delivered by her
revered father. She, rather, managed to hear the contents of those
sermons through her son Imam HASAN when he came back home. Once the
Prophet, while on the pulpit, asked the audience as to what could be the
best thing for a woman. When Fatima (as) was informed of this, she
simply uttered: "The best thing for woman is that she neither views a
stranger, nor is she viewed by him". When these words reached the
Prophet, he proudly remarked; "Naturally, quite correct; she is, after
all, a part of my own being".

**SERVICES TO ISLAM**

In Islamic teachings, women's sphere of work is quite different from
that of men. Women are not required to take a combative part in JIHAD.
Reliable historians say that Fatima (as) never went to a battlefield.
But indirectly she contributed to it as much as she could. For example,
when the Messenger of God came back home after being injured during the
battle of UHUD, she washed his face and dressed his wounds. When Imam
Ali (as) came back home from the same battle, holding his victorious
weapon, he exultingly said: "Take this sword; it has exceeded all the
limits of faithfulness today". The Prophet also remarked: "Yes, Fatima!
Take the saber from his hand. Your husband discharged his duty at the
most critical moment. And it is his sword which put to death the
prominent chiefs of the infidels". Fatima (as) heard all this with calm
modesty and took the sword. She left exalted, thinking that her faithful
husband hand fulfilled all the requirements of JIHAD because her
personal contribution to the religious battles was only that which she
made within the four walls of her home. Undoubtedly she had once gone
out in a peaceful expostulation known as the MUBAHALA, but she was
completely veiled in her long garb and was accompanied by her husband,
father, and children. The details of this event are as follows: A
delegation of Christian scholars and spirituals of Yemen came to Medina
to argue with the Prophet about the truthfulness of Islam. The
discussions with the m continued for several days, and though all points
of argument were completely covered, they were not prepared to
acknowledge the supremacy of Islam. At this juncture, the following
verse was revealed to the Messenger:

"but whoever disputes with you in this matter after what has come to
you of knowledge, then say to them: "Come, let us call our sons and your
sons, our women and you women, and our (dearest) souls and your
(dearest) souls. Then let us pray earnestly to God, calling His curse
upon the liars". (QUR'AN, 3:60).

The Christian deputation accepted this challenge. On DHU AL-HIJJAH 24,
10 A.H. (March 22, 632 A.D) the two parties appeared in a plain outside
Medina. From one direction came those spiritual leaders of NAJRAN,
Yemen, who were the elite among Yemen's clergy, and from the other came
the messenger f Allah and his sacred progeny, graceful and dignified.
The Prophet was foremost, bearing Imam HUSAIN (as) on his arm while Imam
HASAN was holding him by the finger. Behind them was Fatima (as)
followed by her husband Imam Ali (as). When the Christian spirituals saw
the angelic faces of this assembly, they were struck with grave awe.
Fearing the certain and unsparing curse of God in case of a spiritual
contest, they gave in and made a treaty on reasonable conditions. The
event shows that if once or twice Fatima (as) came out of her house, she
was thoroughly veiled, and it was just to carry out the order of God and
His Messenger.

**THE PROPHET'S TREATMENT**

It was due to the heavenly virtues of Fatima (as) that the Prophet was
extremely affectionate to her. He also respected her in a degree never
shown by any other sage. One of the demonstrations of his love for her
was that whenever he proceeded to battle, he bade her farewell the last
of all; and when he returned, she was the first he would visit. As
regards respect, he stood up to receive her whenever she came into his
presence and seated her in his own place, an honor never shown to anyone
else by the Prophet.

**DISTINCTIONS**

The traditions of the Prophet, affirming her virtues are so numerous
that with the exception of Imam Ali (as), none can vie with her. Many of
them are undisputed, equally acknowledged by all Muslim scholars. Among
such traditions are:

- Fatima is the chief of all the women of Paradise.
- Fatima is the chief of all the women of the worlds.
- God is pleased with whomsoever she is pleased.
- Whoever harms Fatima is as though he harms God.

Even her name, which means "redeemer", indicates that God will free
from sins a multitude that emulates Fatima (as). Countless traditions
like these are recorded in books of tradition.

ON THE PROPHET'S DEATH

In the beginning of the 11th year A.H. (May 632 A.D.), her affectionate
and revered father passed into Mercy of God. The shock was so
devastating that she lived for only a few months after that sad event.
During those days none saw her smile or heard her laugh.

ADVERSE CIRCUMSTANCES

It is the most heart-rending fact that the same lady whom the Prophet
always stood to receive, began to feel that the world-seeking
opportunists had deserted her. Her accomplished husband Imam Ali (as)
was deprived of the caliphate which was vested upon him by the Prophet.
That was sad enough, but still sadder was the fact that those who
snatched if from him asked him to pay them homage and endorse their
regime. They even subjected him to oppression and at one time tried to
set his house on fire, but they did not. According to some reports,
Fatima's rib was fractured as she hid behind the door which was forced
open by the intruders. Imam Ali (as) refused to swear allegiance to them
in spite of their pressure as long as Fatima (as) was alive. It was only
after her death that Imam Ali (as) felt compelled, in order to safeguard
the unity of the Muslim nation, to do so. All these affairs pressed so
heavily on her noble heart that she could not bear it and consequently
died. The seriousness of these calamities can be sensed in a couplet she
composed which roughly says:

Calamities befell me that would turn the most bright Of daylight into
the pitch of the darkest night

**FADAK**

The physical and spiritual shocks which distressed her were intensified
by the confiscation by both ABU BAKR and UMER IBN AL-KHATTAB of the land
of FADAK left for her by her father the Prophet as inheritance. It meant
depriving her of a supplementary source of livelihood which was badly
needed in addition to its sentimental value. Still heavier pressed on
her heart the fact that when she asked ABU BARK, the ruling caliph then,
why he deprived her of her father's inheritance, he told her that he had
heard the Messenger of God say that prophets do not leave inheritance.
In vain did Fatima (as) try to convince ABU BAKR that he misunderstood
her father's statement which meant that Prophet-hood is not a matter of
inheritance, that the sons of Prophets are not necessarily prophets too.
She reminded him of the references in the holy QUR'AN to SULAYMAN
(Solomon) being DAWUD'S (David's) heir (holy QUR'AN, SURAT AN-NAML,
verse 16),

and the inheritance for which ZAKARIYYA had prayed (holy QUR'AN, SURAT
MARYAM, verses 6 and 7). Indeed, what the Prophet had meant was simply
that Prophets are not supposed to hoard silver and gold in order to
leave it as inheritance for their descendants after them as is the
practice of monarchs and those who love this vanishing world. She felt
deeply disappointed and never forgot it till the last moment of her
life. Fatima's children felt the same way, and they kept trying to get
FADAK back and finally succeeded at the hands of the just ruler the
UMAYYAD caliph UMER IBN ABD AL-AZIZ. FADAK at that time was an
agricultural village situated near KHAYBER in the outskirts of Medina.
The Prophet (p) had made peace with its residents in exchange for half
of its crops, and it was the property of the Prophet (p) which God
permitted him to have without having to fight or wage a war for it.
According to ABU SA'ID AL-KHUDRI, when the verse "and grant the near in
kin his right" (QUR'AN, 17:26) was revealed, the Messenger of God (p)
called Fatima (as) and granted her FADAK. This is recorded on p. 136,
vol. 3, of FADA'IL AL-KHAMSA IF AS-SIHAH AS-SITTA (virtues of the five
persons in the six SAHIH books), in AL-HAKIM'S TARIKH, in IBN AN-NAJJAR,
and it is also recorded on p. 158, vol. 2, of KANZ AL-'UMMAL by
AL-MUTTAQI AL-HINDI.

HER WILL

Fatima (as) died while still quite young due to being profoundly
disappointed with how things went in the world of Islam immediately
after the death of her father the Messenger of God. Prior to her death,
she made a most moving dialogue with her husband IMAM ALI IBN ABU TALIB
(AS) which is recorded in several books of history and quoted by HASAN
AL-AMIN in his Encyclopedia. In it, Fatima (as) said: "Cousin! My first
will is that you marry after me my niece 'UMAMA (daughter of her sister
ZAINAB, after whom she named her own daughter ZAINAB), for she will
treat my children just as I have, fro women are a necessity to men, not
a commodity".

Who is this ZAINAB? According to HASAN AL-AMIN, who quotes prominent
historians of Islam, ZAINAB was daughter of KHADIJA BINT KHUWAILED (the
Prophet's first wife) by her former husband whose biography seems to
have slipped the attention of historians. Before the Prophet had
received the first revelation, ZAINAB was married to her cousin ABU
AL-'AAS IBN AL-RABI' IBN ABD AL-UZZA IBN ABD SHAMS. ZAINAB believed in
Muhammad immediately after her mother KHADIJA did, while her husband
remained polytheist. ZAINAB'S only offspring were Ali, who died young,
and UMAMA, whom Imam Ali (as) married in deference of his wife's will.
Fatima (as) emphasized the importance of veiling even in the last days
of her illness. One day when she seemed to be very upset, her aunt ASMA'
daughter of UMAYS (the widow of JA'FAR AT-TAYYAR) asked her for the
reason. She said she did not like the custom of carrying a dead woman on
a plank which discloses her size and physique. ASMA' said she had seen
in ABYSSINIA a better method. She made for her a semblance of the
covered plank or coffin in which a woman's body was carried in that
country. Fatima (as) was glad to know it and smiled for the first time
since her father had died. She indicated in her will that her corpse
should be carried in such a manner. Historians record that it was the
first corpse should be carried away in that way. She also indicated that
her corpse should be carried away at night, and that those persons whose
behavior had wounded her heart and with whom she was extremely
displeased when she died should not be allowed to accompany it.

**DEATH**

Realizing that her end was coming near, she asked her husband to
arrange for her last (pre-burial) bath. Having bathed, she put on neat
clothes, applied perfume and asked her husband to give her the funeral
bathe without removing those clothes (see HILYAT AL-AWLIYA'. Part II. P.
43). After she had left this vanishing world to the eternal one, her
husband did as she had requested him, using seven pieces of cloth as her
shroud and applying whatever remained of the holy Prophet's camphor to
perfume her with. Those present at the time of the ceremonial funeral
bath were ASMA' daughter of UMAYS, both of her sons, her daughter ZAINAB
and UMMU KULTHUM, and her maid FEDDA. When the news of Fatima's death
became known in the city, a large number of the faithful gathered
outside Imam Ali's house awaiting the funeral, but Imam Ali (as) sent
them both SALMAN AL-FARISI and ABU DHARR AL-GHIFARI to ask them to
disperse, for Fatima (as), in her last will and testimony, emphatically
expressed her desire that she must not be buried in public or be mourned
by the crowds as customary. The funeral prayers therefore were conducted
by Imam Ali (as) with five TAKBIRS. He buried her at midnight,
obliterating thereafter all the signs of her grave and leveling the
ground, just as she had requested in her will.

At the time of the funeral prayers, none was present besides Imam Ali
(as) except both his sons, AMMAR IBN YASIR, AL-MIQDAD IBN AL-ASWAD
AL-KINDI, AQIL IBN ABU TALIB, AZ-ZUBAYR IBN ABD AL-MUTTALIB, ABU DHARR
AL-GHIFARI, SALMAN AL-FARISI, BURAIDAH, and a few members of the clan of
BANU HASHIM. Her will also indicated that her grave should not be
visited by anyone with whom she was displeased during her lifetime.
Finishing the burial, the bereaved Imam stood up, turned his face
towards the holy Prophet's sepulcher and said:

"O Messenger of God! I offer salutations to you on my own behalf and on
your daughter's. She has come to be your neighbor. She will be resting
in your vicinity under the dust. The Almighty God has arranged a quick
reunion between you both. O Messenger of God! I have lost patience
because of separation from your beloved daughter. I put up with the
shock of being separated from you. I repeat the same attitude now with
this new separation. I laid you to sleep in your grave. The separation
of your soul from your body came about when your body was resting
between my chest and neck. The command of the holy QUR'AN suffices me:
"Verily we are God's, and verily unto Him is our return".

It was on JUMADA AL-AKHIR 3, 11 A.H. (August 26, 632 A.D.), three
months after her father's death, that this most noble lady passed into
the Mercy of God. She was buried in the graveyard of JANNAT AL-BAQI'.
Her tomb, built later, was razed to the ground along with other tombs of
the Prophet's family by the WAHHABI monarch of SAUDI ARABIA the bigoted
IBN SA'UD on SHAWWAL 8, A.H. (April 21, 1926 A.D).


