The Second Imam Al-hasan Al-mutaba (a.s.)
=========================================

**NAME AND PARENTAGE**

His name is IMAM HASAN; "AL-MUJTABA" and "ABU MUHAMMAD" are his titles.
He was the elder son of Imam Ali (as) and Fatima (as), the revered
daughter of the holy Prophet (p).

BIRTH

He came into this world on RAMADAN 15, 3 A.H. (March 1, 625 A.D). This
was the first joyful event of its nature in the Messenger's immediate
family. In Mecca, when the Prophet's sons passed away during their
infancy and only his daughter Fatima (as) survived, the infidels taunted
him by calling him ABTAR, (issueless, sonless). It grieved the Prophet a
great deal, but soon a prediction was revealed to him through the verses
of SURAT AL-KAWTHAR that he would have many descendants and that his
enemy would instead become "issueless".

So Imam HASAN'S birth in the third HIJRI year was the first
manifestation of SURAT AL-KAWTHAR. The world knows that through Imam
HASAN and Imam HUSAIN (as), the Prophet's descendants spread to every
corner of the globe. In such great numbers are they that towns are
brimming with them. The UMAYYADS and other dynasties tried to eliminate
them by murder or hanging on crosses and successfully poisoned many of
them, yet in every village or town of the world they are still bearing
the standard of the Faith. On the other hand, the Prophet's enemies,
once rejoicing in the plentitude of their own offspring, have effaced so
completely that historians find it hard to trace them. This is also one
of the proofs which bear testimony to the truthfulness of the holy
QUR'AN.

**INSTRUCTION**

IMAM HASAN (AS) had the opportunity to be contemporary to his
grandfather the holy Prophet (p) for eight years, enjoying his great
affection. History records several accounts of the Prophet's love for
Imam HASAN (as) and for Imam HUSAIN (as), the younger brother of Imam
HASAN (as). Many QUR'ANIC verses and traditions testify to the virtues
and qualities these descendants of the Messenger share in common. The
following are samples of such verses: On p. 25 of YANABI' AL-MAWADDA,
the HANAFI HAFIZ AL-QANDUZI, quoting AL-MUFADDAL, says: "I asked JA'FAR
AS-SADIQ (AS) about verse 124 of Chapter 2 (AL-BAQARA): 'IBRAHIM was
tried by His Lord with words'. And he said: 'They are the words Adam
received from his Lord before is repentance was accepted, that is, that
he said: 'Lord! I implore Thee in the name of Muhammad and Ali and
Fatima and HASAN and HUSAIN (to accept my repentance)'". Then he asked:
"What about 'and He completed them?'". The Imam answered: "It means that
He completed them up to the QA'IN AL-MAHDI, twelve Imams, nine of them
being the offspring of HUSAIN (AS)".

The traditions in praise of Imam HASAN (AS) and Imam HUSAIN (AS) are
numerous. These are excerpts of the sayings (AHADITH) of the holy
Prophet of Islam (p):

- HASAN and HUSAIN are the chieftains of the youths of Paradise.
- They both are the decoration of Heaven.
- Both are my two bouquets.
- Lord! They are dear unto me; so hold them dear too.

These and many other traditions indicate the greatness of Imam HASAN
(AS) and Imam HUSAIN (AS). According to the common customs of the world,
the lineage or descent is traced through male children, but the Prophet
explicitly indicated that his grandsons could be rightfully called his
own sons. Another tradition which is unanimously acknowledged by the
traditionalists of all Muslim sects affirms that the Prophet said: "God
defines everyone's children as his offspring; in my case, He has defined
Ali's sons as my own". In view of the above, the Prophet looked after
the instruction of these two children with special care. The two
brothers were undoubtedly rendered sanctified and infallible through
AYAT AT-TATHIR (holy QUR'AN, 33:33). Both brothers, even while still
children, were miniature models of the Prophet's own conduct and
behavior. The Prophet, explaining their characteristics, said: "HASAN
possesses my majesty and grandeur of leadership, while HUSAIN has
inherited my courage and generosity". The word "leadership" represents
and reflects a number of manly qualities. One of them was demonstrated
by the Messenger himself, as commanded by God, even during Imam HASAN'S
childhood, when he carried him to take part in the MUBAHALA, i.e. the
spiritual contest with the YEMENITE Christians based on the asserting of
one's own truthfulness and calling for the Lord's curse on the liars.
This also shows that under God's guidance, the Prophet intended his
progeny to carry on his sacred mission after his death.

The Prophet passed away on the 28th of SAFAR (or on the 12th of RABI'
AL-AKHIR according to other traditions) of the year 11 A.H. (May 25, 632
A.D) and Imam HASAN (AS) was deprived of his cherishing love. After
three months, he had to suffer the calamity of the death of his dear
mother. His instruction was now carried on totally by his father IMAM
ALI IBN ABU TALIB (AS). In this atmosphere of learning, Imam HASAN (as)
grew up to be a graceful and highly accomplished youth. After the
Prophet's death, Imam Ali (as) led a secluded life for twenty-five
years. During those years, he did not involve himself in political
affairs except when expressly requested for consultation by the three
caliphs. On 'UTHMAN'S tragic death, the Muslim community of Medina
repeatedly requested him to assume the caliphate. As soon as Imam Ali
(as) became the caliph, a series of battles ensued: JAMAL, SIFFIN and
NAHRAWAN. In all these battles, IMAM HASAN (AS) assisted his father with
feats of valor of his own.

**CALIPHATE**

Imam Ali (as) was martyred on 21st of Ramadan, 40 A.H. (January 28, 661
A.D.). The Muslims then unanimously acknowledged IMAM HASAN (AS) as
their caliph. He had to shoulder such a great responsibility while still
grieved by the loss of his revered father. When he addressed the nation
from the pulpit for the first time, he described his qualities in
detail, highlighting his indifference to property and wealth. He was
quite emotional while saying that, so much so that tears choked his
throat and his audience, too, burst into tears. Then he reminded people
of his ancestors and their virtues. ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS stood up and,
after a short speech, invited people to take the oath of allegiance to
Imam HASAN (AS). All obeyed willingly. IMAM HASAN (AS), before whose
eyes the coming events were already their shadows, put to the eager
audience the condition that they should follow him sincerely; that if he
wanted to fight, they should all join him against the foe, and observe
peace if he made a treaty. All agreed to these terms; IMAM HASAN (AS)
took up the administration, appointed governors and officials, and began
to issue his verdicts in disputed matters.

During that time, MU'AWIYA was firmly seated on his throne in Damascus,
Syria. The battles he fought with IMAM ALI (AS) had been a profitable
bargain for him through the cunning arbitration of AMR IBN AL-'AS.
Northern Arabia and Iraq, which used to be ruled by Imam Ali (as), were
now under the control of Imam HASAN (AS). Soon disunity and dissension
started prevailing due to the intrigues and plots of MU'AWIYA. Even Imam
Ali's orders in the last year of his life were being ignored as is
obvious from reviewing his sermons during that year. The KHARIJITES,
whose power had been crushed by Imam Ali (as) at the battle of NAHRAWAN,
were scattered throughout various parts of Arabia and were bent on
ruffling the peace of the nation. It was a member of this very group who
had wounded Imam Ali (as) at the Mosque of KUFA and had been the cause
of his death.

The nation was still morning Imam Ali (as), and Imam HASAN (as) had not
yet straightened out the administration, when MU'AWIYA started ambushing
the highways in the territories under the rule of Imam HASAN (AS). His
secret agents were already busy conducting anti-Islamic activities. For
example, a man of the tribe of HUMAIR was arrested in KUFA at the house
of a butcher and was found guilty of such conduct; another, belonging to
BANI SALIM, was arrested in Basra, and both admitted that they had come
from Syria to create unrest and a disagreeable atmosphere against IMAM
HASAN (AS), and to send intelligence reports to Damascus. Both were
caught red-handed and were punished accordingly.

At this stage, IMAM HASAN (AS) wrote to MU'AWIYA warning him in the
following tone: "You have sent your agents to create trouble and
rebellion in my territory; your spies are busy in various quarters. It
appears that you are bent on fighting. If it is really so, be prepared
for it as its stage cannot be far away. I have also come to know that
you spoke tauntingly at my father's death. Such taunting does not suit a
wise person. Death is destined for all of us. If we face it here today,
you shall confront it there tomorrow. In reality, we think that our dead
have just left one place to go to rest in another". After this, a good
deal of correspondence was exchanged between IMAM HASAN (AS) and
MU'AWIYA. The latter had learned through his agent that the people of
KUFA were disunited, that they were divided among themselves and were
very weakened. MU'AWIYA, therefore, thought that the time was opportune
to attack Iraq. Accordingly, he led his forces to the border. IMAM HASAN
(AS), too, made preparations for battle. He sent HIJR son of 'ADIISON of
HATIM AL-AT'I to tour the territories and expedite the government
officers for war, and to persuade people to enlist for JIHAD. But as
IMAM HASAN (AS) had already expected, his appeal received the cold
shoulder. The army, which was formed anyway, consisted of KHARIJITES,
trouble-seeking soldiers who desired nothing but booty, and some
warriors who joined only because their tribal chiefs had compelled them
to. Those who could be taken as faithful SHI'AS of Imam Ali (as) and
Imam HASAN (as) formed only a tiny minority.

MU'AWIYA sent ABDALLAH IBN AMR IBN KARIZ as his vanguard. He camped at
ANBAR. Imam HASAN (as) set forth to meet him and he camped at SABAT near
DIYAR BAKR. In order to know the people's intentions, he assembled them
and delivered a sermon saying:

"Know that I don't bear a grudge against any Muslims. I seek your
welfare as keenly as that of my own. I have formed a decisive opinion
about you and I think you will not contest it. I see that many of you
have lost the courage to fight the enemy. Accordingly, I do not think it
is wise to goad you into warfare".

At the conclusion of the sermon, some of his men burst into revolt. The
gallant son of Imam Ali (as) could have suppressed the tumultuous mob
personally had they been his open enemies. But these were his own
soldiers whom he would not antagonize. His father Imam Ali (as), too,
had to face a similar situation during the Battle of SIFFIN. He was
likewise unable to control his own men when the enemy raised copies of
the holy QUR'AN on their lances according to the trick invented by IBN
AL-'AS. IMAM ALI soldiers had surrounded him and demanded that he should
stop the fighting or else they would take hold of him and hand him over
to the enemy. In such a situation, Imam Ali (as) did not like to wield
his sword on his disobedient soldiers; he preferred to postpone the
battle. The same or even more serious situation now threatened Imam
HASAN (as). The revolting mob assaulted him. They pulled away the prayer
mat from underneath his feet. One of them pulled away his mantle from
his shoulders. The Imam had to mount his horse and call loudly upon the
tribes of HAMDAN and RABI'A to come to his rescue. The faithful warriors
of these two tribes speedily repelled the mutiny. Imam HASAN (as) then
marched from SABAT to MADA'IN. a KHARIJITE named AL-JARRAH IBN QABAISA
AL-ASADI lay in ambush and attacked the Imam with his dagger, wounding
him in the thigh. He was arrested and punished. After having been under
treatment at MADA'IN for a few weeks, Imam HASAN (as) recovered and made
preparations to fight MU'AWIYA

**TERRORISM OF MU'AWIYA**

Besides the weekly cursing of Imam Ali (as) from the pulpits of Syria
and the degradation of the dignity of the Messenger's family, MU'AWIYA
ruled with an iron fist, he once summoned SUFYAN IBN AWF AL-GHAMIDI, one
of the commanders of his army, and said to him: "This army is under your
command. Proceed along the river Euphrates till you reach Hit. Any
resistance in the way should be crushed, then invade ANBAR. After that,
penetrate deep into MADA'IN. O SUFYAN! These invasions will frighten the
Iraqis and please those who like us. Such campaigns will attract
frightened people to our side. Kill whoever has a different opinion from
ours; loot their villages and demolish their houses. Indeed, the war
against their financial interest is similar to killing but is more
painful to their hearts".

BISHR IBN ART'A, another commander, was summoned and ordered to proceed
towards HIJAZ and Yemen. MU'AWIYA instructed him thus: "Proceed to
Medina and expel its people. Meanwhile, people in the way who are not
from our camp should be terrorized. When you enter Medina, let it appear
as if you are going to kill them. Make it appear that your aim is to
exterminate them. Then pardon them. Terrorize the people around Mecca
and Medina and scatter them".

**TREATY**

MU'AWIYA had come to know the condition of Imam HASAN'S army and the
mutiny of his men. He concluded that the Imam was not in a position to
carry on any battle. He also knew that the son of Imam Ali (as) and
Fatima (as) and the grandson of the Prophet, however powerless or
forlorn he might be, would never stoop to make peace on such conditions
as might be against righteousness a promotion of KUFR. With all these
facts in view, he sent a message through ABDALLAH IBN AMIR to the
followers of Imam HASAN (as), asking them not to endanger their lives,
and he dissuaded them from further bloodshed. Some he won over to his
side by bribing while some cowards were frightened by a reference to the
overwhelming numbers of MU'AWIYA'S forces. Besides this, he sent a
message to Imam HASAN (as) requesting him to conclude a peace treaty on
any terms he chose. Imam HASAN'S decision not to fight MU'AWIYA was a
most painful one. He confided to a few of his followers: "By God, I did
not give up the fight except due to the absence of supporters. Had I had
sufficient supporters, I would have fought him (MU'AWIYA) day and night
till God judges between us".

IMAM HASAN (AS), who fully and painfully aware of the disloyalty of
most of his men, thought it would be completely unwise to continue the
fighting, yet he was cautious enough not to act in such a way that would
result in encouraging the faithless enemy. The Prophet's progeny never
hankered after power; they only desired the welfare of humanity and the
implementation of the Divine Law. Now that MU'AWIYA himself made him an
unconditional offer for peace, IMAM HASAN (AS) could not afford to
refuse it because such a refusal would have been interpreted as a desire
for bloodshed. The grandson of the Prophet was placed in exactly the
same situation as had the Prophet himself been placed prior to
concluding the treaty of HUDAYBIYYA. Still before sending his reply to
MU'AWIYA, IMAM HASAN (AS) assembled his followers and addressed them
thus:

"Know that two battles have already been fought in which countless
warriors fell. Some of them were slain at SIFFIN whom you are still
mourning; others died at NAHRAWAN whose blood-money you are still
demanding. Now if you do not fear death, let us refuse this offer of
peace; rely on God and let our swords decide the matter. But it life is
dearer to you, then let us accept this offer of peace". In response,
most people began to shout: "We prefer to live! Make peace with the
foe!" as a result, Imam HASAN (as) drafted the terms of the treaty and
dispatched them to MU'AWIYA.

**TERMS OF THE TREATY**

The conditions of peace were as follows:

1- That MU'AWIYA shall rule in accordance with the QUR'AN and the
SUNNAH of the Prophet throughout the territories under his control.
2- That MU'AWIYA shall have no right to nominate his successor.
3- That all people in Syria, Iraq, HIJAZ, and Yemen shall lead their
lives safely and securely.
4- That the lives and properties of the SHI'AHS of Imam Ali (as), as
and where they are, shall remain safe.
5- That MU'AWIYA shall not try, openly or secretly, to do harm to or
kill Imam HASAN (as), his brother Imam HUSAIN (as) or other members of
the Prophet's family, nor shall they be threatened or terrorized.
6- That the abusive phrases, the cursing of Imam Ali (as) during prayer
services which were already taking place at the Grand Mosque of
Damascus, be stopped. (This cursing had started immediately after
'UTHMAN had been murdered and Imam Ali (as) was unfairly accused of
murdering him. MU'AWIYA agreed not to permit it as long as Imam HASAN
(as) was in power. It continued not only during MU'AWIYA'S reign of
terror but also during that of all the succeeding UMAYYAD rulers till
the days of UMER IBN ABD AL-AZIZ).

This treaty was signed in RABI' AL-AWWAL or JUMADA AL-AKHIR of the
HIJRI year 41 (July or September of 661 A.D.). In a letter Imam HASAN
(as) wrote to HIJR IBN 'ADII AL-KINDI, he said: "I found the people
wishing to reconcile, and they disliked war, I did not want to go
through something which they disliked. I therefore reconciled especially
for the sake of our followers so that they would be spared from being
killed. However, I have only postponed the war, and God has a surprise
every day".

**AFTER THE TREATY**

As a result of peace, the forces dispersed. MU'AWIYA'S authority was
now recognized throughout all Muslim territories. Syria, Egypt, Iraq,
HIJAZ, Yemen and even Persia were all under his sway. As a result of
this treaty, Imam HASAN (as) had to hear very insolent and taunting
phrases from his followers which none but a forbearing person like Imam
HASAN (as) could tolerate. Those who once greeted him as "chief of the
faithful" now labeled him as "The Humiliate of the faithful". As for
MU'AWIYA, he entered Iraq, came to NUKHAILA at the border of KUFA and,
after the Friday sermon, he proclaimed:

"O people of Iraq! By fighting HASAN, I did not mean to pressure you to
observe the prayers or the fast or to pay ZAKAT or to perform the
pilgrimage, for you were already doing them. My purpose of fighting was
to make you acknowledge my superiority which has been fully served by
this very treaty with Imam HASAN (as). God gave me success although you
are not pleased with it. As to the terms of the treaty, they are all
henceforth under my feet".

The audience stood aghast but none could speak against the arrogant
self-imposed ruler. He even spoke insolently of Imam HASAN (as) and his
father Imam Ali (as) at which his brother Imam HUSAIN (as) stood up to
check the tongue of the haughty tyrant. But Imam HASAN (as) made him sit
down and he stood instead to reply to MU'AWIYA with a brief yet
convincing speech. MU'AWIYA, however, persisted in violating all the
terms of the treaty. Although Imam HASAN (as) led a peaceful life, he
was constantly harassed by the UMAYYADS. Their false propaganda
interpreted his deeds so scornfully that he was degraded in the public
esteem. The taking by MU'AWIYA of several wives and his divorcing of
some of them without taking into consideration the rules of the SHARI'A
was justified in the most hideous manner, claiming that what he did was
within the limits of the Divine Law, and on account of the "prevailing
circumstances". Moreover, the UMAYYADS continued their inhuman behavior
towards the descendants of the Prophet, cursing and abusing them. One
event will suffice to depict how things went in those days:

While Imam HASAN'S coffin was being carried to the graveyard, MARWAN
went weeping along with the others. Imam HUSAIN (as), tortured by the
past behavior of this man, said to him: "Now you weep after HASAN'
death, but during his life you made him drink the bitter cups of grief
and sorrow, such as only our hearts know". MARWAN replied: "I admit
that. But whatever I did, I did it with the one whose tolerance is more
than the mountain can bear".

**CONDUCT AND VIRTUES**

Apart from other saintly virtues, the outstanding quality of IMAM HASAN
(AS) which was acknowledged by friend and foe alike was his tolerance
which even an enemy like MARWAN had to admit. The flatterers of the
Syrian regime intentionally provoked Imam HASAN (as) with their abusive
language so that his rage might flare up and they would have an excuse
for bloodshed. But Imam HASAN (as) demonstrated such patience and
tolerance in those situations as could not be shown by anyone else. His
hospitality and generosity, too, were famed throughout Arabia. Thrice
did he give away his entire wealth to please God. Twice he gave away in
charity half of his belongings, including the bedding and garments.

IMAM HASAN (AS) used to give to some destitute thousands of DIRHAMS at
one time. Some historians claimed that in his treaty with MU'AWIYA, one
of the conditions was that MU'AWIYA should pay him a certain amount of
his collected revenues every year. If this is correct, Imam HASAN'S
condition might have been just to enable him to distribute a portion of
the treasury to deserving destitute of HIJAZ. Surely he did not mean to
spend the amount to satisfy his personal whims. It was his custom to
give away to the beggar whatever money he had. On being asked why he did
not reject the beggar's requests, though he himself was in need, he
replied: "I myself an a beggar in the Kingdom of God. I feel too shy to
reject the requests of other beggars like me. If I do not grant them
what they want, how can I expect that God would grant me my boon?".
Besides the above-mentioned virtues, Imam HASAN (as) was a great
scholar, ABDALLAH IBN ABBAS, the renowned scholar of the Divine Law, had
attained a high position in learning as he had availed of Imam Ali's
companionship. He was the unquestioned monarch of the realm of religious
sciences. But in comparison with Imam HASAN'S knowledge, he admitted his
subordination to the Imam, and the world would have to acknowledge that
the Prophet's family had no peer. Once a person came to the Prophet's
Mosque and inquired about the commentary regarding a certain verse. He
approached ABDALLAH IBNABBAS first, then he consulted ABDALLAH IBN UMER
IBN AL-KATTAB. Finally, he came to Imam HASAN (as). He stated that Imam
HASAN'S explanation was definitely better than what he had heard from
all the others.

He spoke several times in the hostile court of his opponent MU'AWIYA on
the virtues of AHL AL-BAYT and the qualities of Imam Ali (as) so
fluently that the enemies lowered their heads in respect and were
impressed by his matchless eloquence, based as it was on truth. His
piety, too, commanded appreciation. He made the pilgrimage to Mecca
twenty or twenty-five times barefoot. Upon the mention of death, the
grave, and Doomsday, he used to burst into tears. When he reflected on
the reckoning of good and bad deeds, he cried till he lost his
consciousness. Whenever he stood to say his prayers, his whole body
shook.

**DEATH**

In spite of leading a calm life, without harming anyone, his presence
was intolerable to the Syrian monarchy which finally put him to death
using the same soundless weapon which was quite often used by the
UMAYYAD regime, that is, poison. JU'DA daughter of AL-ASH'ATH IBN QAYS
was wife of IMAM HASAN (AS). The tribal enmities were working in her
blood. MU'AWIYA allured her with the promise of one hundred thousand
DIRHAMS as a reward for her complacency and promised to marry her to his
son and heir-apparent YAZID. She was tempted enough to poison IMAM HASAN
(AS). Physicians who had a chance to examine his corpse said that his
liver was so fatally affected that it was split by poison into bits and
pieces. Before breathing his last, he called his younger brother IMAM
HUSAIN (AS) to his side and made his will that he should be buried near
his grandfather the holy Prophet provided it would not be resisted by
the enemies; otherwise, IMAM HUSAIN (AS) should refrain from any
bloodshed and bury him at JANNAT AL-BAQI' instead.

IMAM HASAN (AS) passed into God's mercy on the 28th of SAFAR, 50 A.H.
IMAM HUSAIN (AS) took his coffin to the Prophet's tomb. But as IMAM
HASAN (AS) had expected, both UMM AL-MU'MININ A'ISHA and MARWAN IBN
AL-HAKAM resisted his burial there, so much so that their hooligans shot
arrows at him, some of which fell close to the coffin. IMAM HUSAIN (AS),
in accordance with his brother's will, took his brother's corps to
JANNAT AL-BAQI' where he buried him.


