The Fifth Imam Muhammad Al-baqir Son of Zain Al-abidin
======================================================

**PARENTAGE**

He was named after his great grandfather Prophet Muhammad, peace be
upon him and his progeny, and he was given the title of "AL-BAQIR" which
means "splitter of knowledge". His father is IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS)
and his mother is Fatima daughter of IMAM HASAN (AS), the Prophet's
grandson. His lineage therefore reaches the Prophet of Islam (P) on both
parents' sides. IMAM HUSAIN (AS), the younger grandson of the Prophet,
is his grandfather. He has the unique attribute of having inherited the
qualities of IMAM ALI IBN ABU TALIB (AS) and Fatima daughter of the
Prophet Muhammad (p).

**BIRTH**

He was born on RAJAB, 1, 57 A.H. (May 10, 677 A.D.), seven years after
the demise of IMAM HASAN (AS), and he spent more than three years in the
company of his grandfather IMAM HUSAIN (AS). He was an eye-witness to
the tragedy of TAFF, and he was contemporary to his father IMAM
AS-SAJJAD (AS) during the entire period of his Imamate. The tragedy of
KARBALA' was a troublesome and tumultuous period of time for the
Prophet's offspring and their SHI'ITES, supporters of AHL AL-BATY (AS).
Imam Ali's friends were being hunted, arrested, then hanged. His birth
during such a stormy epoch paved the way for his presence in the battle
of KARBALA'.

According to AL-IRSHAD of AL-MUFID, AL-FUSUL AL-MUHIMMA of IBN
AL-SABBAGH AL-MALIKI, vol. 3 of AL-YA'QUBI'S TARIKH (history), and
TADHKIRAT AL-KHAWASS of IBN AL-JAWZI, the great SAHABI JABIR IBN
ABDALLAH AL-ANSARI narrates saying: "The Messenger of God, peace be upon
him and his progeny, said to me: 'You shall live long enough to meet one
of the descendants of HUSAIN who shall be named Muhammad and who shall
split the core of knowledge: so, convey my SALAM to him".

According to IKMAL AD-DIN WAS ITMAM AN-NI'MA, and on p. 252 of SHAYKH
AS-SADUQ'S work, JABIR IBN ABDALLAH AL-ANSARI asked the Messenger of God
(p) saying: "O Messenger of God, who are the Imams from the descendants
of IMAM ALI IBN ABU TALIB (AS)?" He answered: "AL-HASAN, AL-HUSAIN,
masters of the youths of Paradise, then the master of the forbearing of
his time ALI IBN AL-HUSAIN, then AL-BAQIR Muhammad IBN ALI, and O JABIR!
You shall live to see him! So when you do so, convey my SALAM to him".
BIHAR AL-ANWAR, vol. 42, p. 25, and also both A'LAM AL-WARA and KASHF
AL-GHUMMA IF MU'RIFT AL-A'IMAM, when IMAM ALI IBN ABU TALIB (AS) was on
his death-bed, his will to his oldest son AL-HASAN was: "O son! The
Messenger of God (p) ordered me to give you my books and weapons just as
he had ordered me to take his books and weapons and to tell you to pass
them over to your brother HUSAIN before you die". Then he turned to IMAM
HUSAIN (AS) and said: "… and the Messenger of God (p) ordered that you
(IMAM HUSAIN (AS) should pass them on to your son MUHAMMAD IBN ALI and
to convey to him the SALAM from the Messenger of God and from me".

**KARBALA'**

For three years, IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) enjoyed the cherished love of his
grandfather IMAM HUSIAN (AS), and when he had to leave Medina, AL-BAQIR,
too, was one of the family members who made the journey across the
desert, IMAM HUSAIN (AS) left for KUFA and his journey terminated at
KARBALA'. From the 7th of MUHARRAM, when the Prophet's family was denied
access to the water of the Euphrates, IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) suffered from
the pangs of thirst till the tragedy was over. Providence, however,
intended to preserve the Imamate by safeguarding his life while even a
baby such as ALI AL-ASGHAR had already been pierced and killed by an
enemy arrow. Like his father IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS), IMAM AL-BAQIR
(AS) could not physically participate in the battle. The 10th of
MUHARRAM of 61 A.H. (October 10, 680 A.D.) brought its hideous events
with IMAM HUSAIN (AS) gathering the corpses of his slain warriors all
day long, the women wailing, the children crying because of being
extremely thirsty, startled and bewildered, then came the last farewell
bidden by IMAM HUSAIN (AS), the murder of his baby ALI AL-ASGHAR, the
return of IMAM HUSAIN'S horse to his master's tent without his master….
Young IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) witnessed all these events. AL-BAQIR witnessed
the tents being burnt, the children reeling in panic, the heartless
enemy plundering, and the ladies of the Prophet's family being deprived
even of their sheets and scarves. Who can possibly imagine how young
IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) felt, or what a permanent impression such scenes had
left on his mind?

On the next day, IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) witnessed the ladies of the
Prophet's family being shackled with chains, hand-cuffed, then
transported as captives by the enemy the entire distance from KARBALA'
to KUFA, then to Damascus. He witnessed their journey back to Medina,
again passing by KARBALA', after being released. The profoundly sad
impressions could never have been erased from the memory of young IMAM
AL-BAQIR (AS).

**UPBRINING**

After KARBALA', IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS) led a very calm life, staying
aloof from the pursuits of this materialistic world. Secluded from the
society, he spent his time either in weeping as he reminisced on the
agonies of his father IMAM HUSAIN (AS), or in worshipping the Almighty,
while the heart of his son IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) was being squeezed
painfully as he watched helplessly. In this sad environment, IMAM
AL-BAQIR (AS) grew up studying the manners of his saintly father and
availing himself from his knowledge and noble conduct.

**FATHER'S DEATH AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF IMAMATE**

IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) was in the full bloom of youth, ascending the
heights of physical and spiritual perfection, when his revered father
died. On his death-bed, IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS) handed over to IMAM
AL-BAQIR (AS) a box containing books of religious sciences exclusively
known to this illustrious House. Calling together all his offspring, he
resigned them to the care of IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS), now named the fifth in
the successive series of the successors of the holy Prophet. He was 38
years old then.

**ENVIRONMENT**

The UMAYYAD monarchy was heading towards its decline and decay. The
cruelties inflicted on the HASHEMITES, especially the massacre at
KARBALA', had produced shock waves throughout the Muslims world. YAZID
witnessed the aftermath of KARBALA' and may have regretted his heinous
sins. After a brief rule, he died in 64 A.H., and his son MU'AWIYA
abdicated.

The later UMAYYAD rulers, therefore, were fully aware of the battles
waged by "HARAKAT AT-TAWWABIN", movement of the penitents, led by
SULAYMAN IBN SURAD AL-KHUZA'I and later by AL-MUKHTAR, led to a powerful
uprising against the UMAYYADS and to the call to avenge the holy blood
of IMAM HUSAIN (AS) and those who defended the Prophet's family. That
movement ruffled the peace of the ruling despots and shook the
foundation of their government. The good result was that IMAM MUHAMMAD
AL-BAQIR (AS) had the opportunity to free himself from the clutches of
the tyrannical government. He had at that time better chances to
peacefully guide the Muslim nation to the Right path.

**THE KARBALA' RECITATIONS**

IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) had witnessed the tragedy of KARBALA'. He had also
studied the occupations of his father who mourned IMAM HUSAIN (AS)
continuously. He was agonized by the fact that his father had to freedom
to convey his personal feelings about the gruesome event to the others,
or to ask them simply to recite the saddening tales of the tragedy. As a
result of these feelings, and due to the lack of freedom of speech, the
IMAM paid a special attention to such recitations. He used to convene
these gatherings, and call AL-KUMAIT IBN ZAID AL-ASADI, a follower of
AHL AL-BAYT (AS) and the poet of his time, to compose and recite verses
on those occasions. This was the beginning of the "MAJALIS" (mourning
assemblies) which flourished a great deal particularly during the days
of IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS).

**STATUS OF KNOWLEDGE**

The torrent of a river can be blocked by a dam, but when the dam
breaks, its water gushes forth with full force. The Imams, the Prophet's
leading offspring had rivers of knowledge in their bosoms which were
blocked by the oppressing government and thus their waters could not
moisten the lips of the thirsty. In the days of IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS), when
the grip of the oppressive government loosened a little bit, the
confined river of knowledge gushed forth. Irrigating the fields of
faith-seeking hears. Having displayed his great skill in solving tough
religious problems, he was called AL-BAQIR (AS) reached thousands. Many
others, belonging to different schools of thought such as IMAM AZ-ZUHRI,
IMAM AL-AWZA'I, ATTA IBN JARIH, or HAFIZ IBN GHYATH the judge, who all
are considered a outstanding traditionalists of the SUNNI seeks, came to
seek knowledge from him and are counted among his students.

Volume 3 of MANAQIB ALI ABI TALIB states that ABDALLAH son of the
second caliph UMER IBN AL-KATTAB was asked once for the solution of a
complex theological problem, and he could not provide one. "Go to that
young boy", son of UMER said to the person who raised the question,
pointing to IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS), "Ask him and tell me what his answer
will be". The inquirer approached IMAM BAQIR (AS) , obtained the answer,
and went back to the son of 'UMER IBN AL-KHATTAB to tell him what
treasures of knowledge he had just acquired, and ABDALLAH commented:
"They are a family immersed in knowledge".

AL-IRSHAD by AL-MUFID, in a chapter on the Imamate of AL-BAQIR (AS),
and in HILYAT AL-AWLIYA' and TADHKIRAT AL-KHAWASS, "ABDALLAH IBN 'ATA'
AL-MAKKI says: "I never saw scholars shrink as I saw them in the
presence of ABU JA'FAR MUHAMMAD IBN ALI IBN AL-HUSAIN. And I saw
AL-HAKAM IBN UYAINHA, despite his greatness, looking like a young boy
before his teacher". One of the testimonies to the excellence of his
political thought is his advice to the renowned UMAYYAD caliph UMER IBN
ABD AL-AZIZ in which he said: "I advise you to regard young Muslims as
your sons, the adults as your brothers, and the elderly as your parents;
therefore, be kind to your sons, stay in touch with you brothers, and be
generous to your parents".

One of his students, MUHAMMAD IBN MUSLIM, is quoted in vol. 46, as
saying, "Every time I face a complex (theological problem), I had to
seek its solution from ABU JA'FAR, till I asked him about thirty
thousand questions". One of his companions, JABIR IBN YAZID AL-JU'IF,
may God be pleased with him, said one, as quoted in the same references
which also quoted AL-IKHTISAS, saying, "ABU JA'FAR narrated to me as
many as seventy thousand traditions". Advising JABIR IBN YAZID AL-JU'IF,
he said:

"I admonish you regarding five things: If you are wronged, do not
commit wrong-doing to others; if you are betrayed, do not betray anyone;
if you are called a liar, do not be furious; if you are praised, do not
be jubilant; if you are criticized, do not fret and think of what is
said in criticism; if you find in yourself what is criticized about you,
then your falling down in the eyes of God when you are furious about the
truth is a much greater calamity than your falling down in the eyes of
people, and if you are the opposite of what is said (in criticism) about
you, then it is a merit you acquired without having to tire yourself in
obtaining it".

**DISSEMINATING THE KNOWLEDGE OF AHL AL-BAYT**

The dissemination of religious and scientific knowledge of AHL AL-BAYT
(AS) was achieved by IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR (AS). Out of the benefits
gained from such a high-ranking mentor, the students wrote several books
on various branches of knowledge. Here is a brief description of some of
his disciples and their works which reflects the extent of Islamic
learning imparted by the Imam:

1- ABAN IBN TAGHLIB. He was the famous lexicographer and reciter of the
holy QUR'AN who wrote the work GHARA'IB AL-QURAN, the first book
explaining the intricate diction of the holy QUR'AN. He died in 141 A.H
(758 A.D.).

2- ABU JA'FAR MUHAMMAD IBN AL-HASAN IBN ABI SARH AL-RAWASI, the famous
scholar of recitation, syntax and exegesis, KITAB AL-FAISAL and MA'ANI
AL-QUR'AN are two among five books which he authored. He died in 101
A.H. (720 A.D.).

3- ABDALLAH IBN MAIMUN, ABU AL-ASWAD AL-DU'ALI, a biography of the holy
Prophet and another book ex-pounding on Paradise and Hell are among his
works. He died in 105 A.H. (723 A.D.).

4- 'ATIYYA IBN SA'ID AL-AWFI. He wrote an exegesis of the holy QUR'AN
in five volumes. He died in 111 A.H. (729 A.D.).

5- ISMA'IL IBN ABD AR-RAHMAN AS-SADDI AL-KABIR, the well-known author
of TAFSIR. He is frequently referred to by all Muslim writers of TAFSIR
books as AS-SADDI. He died in 127 A.H. (745 A.D.).

6- JABIR IBN YAZID AL-JU'IF. He committed to memory 50.000 (or 70.000
according to some biographers) traditions which he had heard from IMAM
AL-BAQIR (AS). He is quoted in MUSLIM'S SAHIH. He wrote several volumes
on tradition, TAFSIR and jurisprudence. He died in 128 A.H. (746 A.D.).
7- 'AMMAR IBN MU'AWIYA AL-WAHNI. A book on jurisprudence is his
contribution. He died in 133 A.H. (752 A.D.).

8- SALIM IBN ABI HAFSAH (ABU YOUSUF) AL-KUFI. He is the writer of a
book on jurisprudence. He died in 137 A.H. (754 A.D.).

9- ABD AL-MU'MIN IBN AL-QASIM (ABU ABDALLAH) AL-ANSARI. He is the
writer of a book on jurisprudence. He died in 147 A.H. (764 A.D.).

10- ABU HAMZA AL-THUMALI. He wrote a book on TAFSIR (exegesis) of the
holy QUR'AN. KITAB AN-NAWADIR and KITAB AZ-ZUHD are among his works. He
died in 150 A.H. (767 A.D.).

11- ZURARA IBN A'YUN, a high-ranking SHI'AH scholar who wrote several
books on tradition, jurisprudence and KALAM. He died in 150 A.H (767
A.D.).

12- MUHAMMAD IBN MUSLIM. He was a great scholar who recorded 30.000
traditions which he learned from IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS). He wrote many
books, including the "Four hundred problems of HALAL and HARAM". He died
in 150 A.H. (767 A.D.).

13- YAHYA IBN AL-QASIM (ABU BASIR) AL-ASADI. He was a revered scholar
who wrote KITAB MANASIK AL-HAJJ and KITAB YAWMUN WA LAILAH. He died in
150 A.H. (767 A.D.).

14- ISHAQ AL-QUMMI. He has a book on jurisprudence.

15- ISMA'IL IBN JABIR AL-KHASHIAMI AL-KUFI. He wrote many volumes on
HADITH (tradition) and one on jurisprudence.

16- ISMA'IL IBN ABD AL-KHALIQ. He was a high ranking jurist and had a
book to his credit.

17- BARD AL-ASQAF AL-AZDI. He authored a book on jurisprudence.

18- AL-HARITH IBN AL-MUGHIRA. He authored a book on the problems of
jurisprudence.

19- HUDHAIFA IBN MANSUR AL-KHUZA'I. He had a book on jurisprudence.

20- HASAN IBN SIRRI AL-KATIB. He authored one book.

21- HUSAIN IBN SAUR IBN ABI FAKHITTA, author of KITAB AN-NAWADIR.

22- HUSAIN IBN MUHAMMAD AL-ABIDI AL-KUFI. He is author of one book.

23- HUSAIN IBN MUS'AB AL-BAJALI. He has a book to his credit.

24- HAMMAD IBN ABI TALHA. He wrote one book.

25- HAMZA IBN HAMRAN IBN A'YUN. He was nephew of ZURARA and was author
of one book.

These are but a few of the many scholars, traditionalists and jurists
who learned the arts of AHL AL-BAYT (AS) from IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR
(AS) and preserved them in their books. Later, in the days of the Imam's
son, IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ, hundreds of volumes were written - the
sources from which such valuable collections of HADITH as AL-KAFI, MAN
LA YAHDARUHU AL-FAQIH, TAHDHIB AL-KHASA'IL, AL-ISTIBSAR, etc. were
compiled which now from the fundamentals of SHI'AH learning. In addition
to these, you may read about him, his biography, and the AHADITH he
narrated in AT-TABARI'S TARIKH, AL-BALADHIRI, AL-SALAMI, AL-KHATIB, ABU
DAWUD'S SUNAN, AL-ASFAHANI, AL-ZAMAKHSHARI, and in others.

**CHARACTER AND VIRTUES**

His moral excellence was admired even by his foes. A Syrian lived in
Medina and used to come to IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) frequently declaring that
he was opposed to the Household. Yet, despite his prejudice, he admitted
that, "The high morality and eloquence of IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) are too
attractive to resist'.

TUHAF AL-UQUL quotes IMAM AS-SADIQ (AS) saying: "I entered the house of
my father once and found him doling out eight thousand DINARS as SADAQA
to the poor, then he freed eleven slaves who belonged to one of the
families'. In a chapter on the merits of IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR (AS) in
vol. 3 of MANAQIB ALI ABI TALIB, and in vol. 46 of BIHAR AL-ANWAR,
SULAYMAN IBN QARAM is quoted saying: "ABU JA'FAR MUHAMMAD IBN IMAM ALI
(AS) used to give us as much as five or six hundred or even a thousand
DIRHAMS, and he never tired of visiting his brethren".

**AS COUNSELOR TO THE GOVERNMENT**

To rule and administer the Muslim world was certainly the right of the
Prophet's progeny, but as the common people succumbed to the temporal
power, the Imams had to lead calm and quiet lives. As such, they could
have refused to counsel the government. But the moral height of these
noble souls rose above the standard of commoners. Like IMAM ALI IBN ABU
TALIB (AS) who cooperated with his contemporary caliphs and offered
sound counsel concerning the affairs of the Muslims, all the Imams
followed the same example and never hesitated to give well-balanced
pieces of advice to their contemporary rulers. IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) was no
exception. The UMAYYAD government had till then no currency of its own.
The Byzantine currency of the eastern section of the then Roman holy
Empire were the valid tender in Damascus as well. But during the reign
of AL-WALID IBN ABD AL-MALIK, there rose a rift between him and the
Byzantine ruler when the latter decided to stamp a new currency with a
phrase which AL-WALID considered to be derogatory to the holy Prophet.

This created suspense among Muslims. AL-WALID convened a committee in
which prominent Muslim scholars participated. IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS)
expressed his opinion that the Muslim government ought to strike its own
currency on one side of which it should stamp the statement "LA ILAHA
ILLA ALLAH" and on the other the statement "MUHAMMAD RASUL ALLAH",
(There is no god but Allah; Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah). The
opinion was unanimously approved and new Islamic coins were minted.

It was only during the caliphate of UMER IBN ABD AL-AZIZ the UMAYYAD
caliph, that the Prophet's progeny enjoyed a brief period of peace which
lasted for only two years and five months which is the period of UMER'S
government. He lifted from them a great deal of atrocities and
prohibited the cursing of IMAM ALI IBN ABU TALIB (AS) on the pulpits on
Friday, substituting is with this verse of the holy QUR'AN: "God
commands justice, the doing of good, and liberality to kith and kin, and
He forbids all shameful deeds, and injustice and rebellion: He instructs
you, that ye may receive admonition". [QUR'AN, 16:90 AN-NAHL]

When the Imam met the caliph UMER IBN ABD AL-AZIZ, he found him weeping
for the injustice inflicted by his predecessors upon their subjects. The
Imam admonished him with pieces of wisdom till the caliph sobbed, knelt
down and begged for more. Then the Imam told UMER what wrong- doing he
came to ask him to rectify, and it was none other then FADAK which the
Messenger of God (p) had left as inheritance to his daughter Fatima and
her descendants. According to vol. 4 of BIHAR AL-ANWAR, UMER took some
writing material and wrote: "In the Name of God, Most Gracious, Most
Merciful. This is what UMER IBN ABD AL-AZIZ had handed back to MUHAMMAD
IBN ALI to rectify the wrong-doing: FADAK".

**HARASSED BY THE UMAYYAD GOVERNMENT**

HISHAM IBN ABD AL-MALIK succeeded UMER IBN ABD AL-AZIZ, and he was a
stone-hearted, immoral miser and a racist. His prejudice against
non-Arab Muslims caused him to double the taxes they had to pay, and his
reign was a replay of the bloody days of YAZID IBN MU'AWIYA and
AL-HAJJAJ IBN YOUSUF ATH-THAQAFI. It was then that the revolution of
ZAIN IBN ALI broke out as a continuation of the revolution of IMAM
HUSAIN IBN ALI BIN ABU TALIB (AS), but HISHAM was swift in putting it
out. Dr. HASSAN IBRAHIM HASSAN, in his work TARIKH AL-ISLAM (History of
Islam), quotes contemporary historians testifying that HISHAM ordered to
crucify ZAID IBN ALI and then burn his corpse and throw the ashes in the
Euphrates.

Although IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) never expressed any interest nor
participated in political matters except when the rulers invited him,
since his peaceful way of living was devoted to people's spiritual
guidance, he was not tolerated by the government. HISHAM IBN ABD
AL-MALIK wrote to his governor over Medina instructing him to send IMAM
AL-BAQIR (AS) together with his son JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) to Damascus,
intending to insult them. So when they reached Damascus, he kept them
waiting for three days. On the fourth day, he called them in his
presence. He sat on a throne surrounded by his nobility, fully armed. In
the center of the courtyard, a target was set on which the elite were
shooting arrows on bet. Immediately the Imam entered, HISHAM bluntly
asked him to shoot arrows with others.

IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) tried to evade HISHAM'S order, but the latter kept
insisting and he planned to ridicule the Imam. Since the Imam led a
secluded life, HISHAM thought he might not have any connection with
martial arts. He did not know that each descendant of the Prophet had
inherited the might of IMAM ALI (AS) and the courage of IMAM HUSAIN
(AS). He could not realize that their calm and quiet life was lived in
fulfillment of the demands of Divine Providence.

Compelled by HISHAM, IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) took the bow. Hading it
skillfully, he shot a few arrows continuously, all sitting straight in
the very heart of the center. A shout of praise burst from the throats
of the astonished elites standing right and left. HISHAM, thus
outwitted, began to discuss the problems of Imamate and the virtues of
AHL AL-BAYT (AS). Now he clearly saw that the Imam's stay in Damascus
might lead to popular respect of AHL AL-BAYT (AS), so he permitted the
Imam to return home to Medina. Inwardly, his enmity of the Prophet's
family had increased. HISHAM harassed not only the Prophet's family but
also their followers, dignitaries and scholars. He issued an order to
execute JABIR IBN YAZID AL-JU'IF, the most distinguished among the
Imam's scholars, but the Imam foiled his attempt by advising JABIR to
feign madness as the only way to escape execution.

**DEATH**

The more the UMAYYAD government learned about the Imam's prestige and
popularity, the more intolerable his existence became. At last they
resorted to the same soundless weapon, poison, which used to be applied
by those cunning monarchs quite often to eliminate their opponents or
suspects. A saddle was presented to the Imam in which poison was applied
most skillfully. When he mounted on it, poison affected his whole body.
After passing a few days in painful ailment, he expired on the seventh
of DHU AL-HIJJA, 114 A.H. (January 28, 733 A.D.). According to his will,
he was shrouded with three pieces of cloth. These included a YEMENI
sheet which he used to put on for Friday prayers and a shirt which he
always wore. He was laid to rest underneath the same dome in JANNAT
AL-BAQI' where IMAM HASAN (AS) and IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS) already
lay.


