The Sixth Imam Ja'far As-sadiq (a.s)
====================================

**NAME AND PARENTAGE**

His name is JA'FAR. He is also known as AS-SADIQ and ABU ABDALLAH. He
is son of IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR (AS) son of IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS)
son of IMAM HUSAIN (AS). His mother was UMMU FARWAH daughter of AL-QASIM
son of Muhammad son of ABU BAKR who was one of the seven most prominent
jurists of Medina. Thus, the sixth Imam has an impressive historical
background of lineage.

**BIRTH**

He came to this world on RABI' AL-AWWAL 17, 83 A.H. (April 20, 702
A.D.), the same lunar date when his great grandfather, the holy Prophet,
was born. At his birth, his father, IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS), was 26, and his
grandfather IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS) was still alive. The Prophet's
family joyfully welcomed this auspicious addition.

**UPBRINGING**

Up to the age of twelve, JA'FAR was brought up under the guidance of
his grandfather IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS) whose main concern was to
worship his Maker and reflect on the tragic events of KARBALA.
Twenty-two years had lapsed since then, yet the remembrance of that
shocking tragedy was still quite fresh in his memory. So, as soon as
JA'FAR gained understanding, he was profoundly impressed by the
continuous grief of his grandfather, so much so that he felt as if he
himself was present during that tragedy. He also contemplated on the
presence of his father, IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR (AS), although only three
years old, at that gruesome scene. JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) considered it as
his duty to convene the recitation gatherings (MAJALIS) about that
sorrowful event.

He was twelve years old when his grandfather IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS)
expired. Thence up to the age of 31 he passed his time under the
supervision of his father IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS). It was the time when the
UMAYYAD politics were tottering and Muslims were approaching IMAM
MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR (AS) in thousands. JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) was one of
them, but he was a student devoted to worships and learning. Whether at
Medina or in travels, he was always with his father. When HISHAM son of
ABD AL-MALIK summoned IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR (AS), JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS)
accompanied him, as stated above.

**IMAMATE**

In 114 A.H. (732 A.D), IMAM MUHAMMAD AL-BAQIR (AS) died, and the
responsibilities of Imamate devolved on the shoulders of IMAM JA'FAR
AS-SADIQ (AS). HISHAM IBN ABD AL-MALIK was ruling in Damascus and
political disturbances were afoot. The passion of taking revenge on BANI
UMAYYA was strong and several descendants of IMAM ALI (AS) were
preparing themselves to overthrow the regime. Most prominent among them
was ZAID, the respected son of IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN (AS). His religious
zeal and piety were known throughout Arabia. He was a well versed HAFIZ
of the holy QUR'AN and he had taken the field against the tyranny of the
UMAYYADS.

This was a precarious juncture for IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS). As
regarding hatred of the UMAYYADS, he agreed with his uncle ZAID for whom
he had a great deal of respect. Since his far-sighted judgment could
clearly see that his rising against the well-organized royal forces was
of no avail; therefore, he did not join him for all practical reasons.
But he was compassionate towards him and sympathetic to his cause, and
he asked him to be judicious. As a great host of Iraqis had sworn their
allegiance to him, ZAID was now quite optimistic. He gave gallant battle
to the royal forces but was killed in the end. The vengeful enemies were
not satisfied with ZAID'S death. They exhumed his dead body from the
grave, severed his head, sent it as a trophy to HISHAM and hanged the
body at the gate of KUFA where it remained for several years. One year
after ZAID'S martyrdom, his son YAHYA gained the same ancestral honor.
IMAM JA'FAR was surely moved by these pathetic events, but he was
destined to carry out the duties of spreading the religious sciences of
AHL AL-BAYT (AS).

**REVOLUTION**

The last days of the UMAYYADS were ruffled by political disturbances.
Changes in government were many and IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) witnessed
the rise and fall of many kings. After HISHAM, AL-WALID IBN YAZID IBN
ABD AL-MALIK, then YAZID son of AL-WALID, then IBRAHIM IBN AL-WALID,
then MARWAN AL-HIMAR came to the throne. The capture and death of the
latter terminated the monarchy of tyrannical UMAYYADS. When the internal
disorders and disintegration shake the foundations of a cruel
government, those who are oppressed usually turn against the cruel
oppressors. Only those who are above such fiery sentiments can control
their passion. Usually those who seek revenge are heedless of all
consequences. This is a weak point of the human nature from which only
the selected few can be exempted.

During the last phase of tottering UMAYYAD rule, HASHEMITES were
actively engaged in their anti-UMAYYAD activities. The ABBASIDES took
advantage of their efforts and secretly formed an association, the
members of which had pledged the oath to transfer the government from
UMAYYADS to the HASHEMITES who really deserved it. It is clear that to
rule the Islamic world was not the job of every HASHEMITE. It was the
right of those divinely appointed descendants of the holy Prophet and
IMAM ALI (AS) whom God had chosen to lead humanity. But these
high-thinking souls never wished to take undue advantage of the
situation with the aid of cunning tactics. In short, the Imams, the
descendants of Imam Ali (as), never tried to acquire power through
political trickery. But the ABBASIDES, who too were HASHEMITES. No doubt
took the opportunity by the forelock. Availing themselves of the silence
shown by the Imams, and of the compassion the people had for the
HASHEMITES, they ABBASIDES saw their chances to rise to power. And when
they established themselves on the throne, they became enemies of Imam
Ali's posterity in the same degree or more than that which had been
adopted by the heartless UMAYYADS. Details of this will be narrated in
the biographies of later Imams.

The first to start the movement among the ABBASIDES was MUHAMMAD IBN
ALI IBN ABDALLAH IBN AL-ABBAS who sent his agents throughout Persia to
secretly obtain the oath of allegiance to the HASHEMITES' cause from the
Persians. On Muhammad's death, his son IBRAHIM succeeded him. Meanwhile,
the martyrdom of ZAID and his son YAHYA had fanned the flames of revolt
against the UMAYYADS. The ABBASIDES took advantage of it and increased
their influence in Iraq through ABU SALAMA AL-KHALLAL. Slowly but
steadily, their power base increases. Through the sincere support of ABU
MUSLIM AL-KHURASANI, all Western Persia and KHURASAN came under their
control and the UMAYYAD governor had to flee. The name of the UMAYYAD
ruler was dropped form Friday sermons, having been replaced by that of
IBRAHIM IBN MUHAMMAD.

The UMAYYAD government till then was under the impression that the
disturbances were merely local protests, but now the spies reported that
it was a full-fledged movement initiated by IBRAHIM IBN MUHAMMAD IBN
ABBAS who was residing at JABULQA. Soon IBRAHIM was arrested, imprisoned
and killed ruthlessly. His family escaped the royal rage with other
ABBASIDES and sought quarters with ABU SALMA in Iraq. When the news
reached ABU MUSLIM AL-KHURASANI, he sent an army to Iraq which defeated
the UMAYYAD forces and annexed Iraq.

ABU SALAMA AL-HKALLAL, dubbed as the Minister of the Prophet's Progeny,
was especially compassionate towards Imam Ali's offspring. He wrote
letters to the prominent heads of this Household inviting them to accept
and share the royal power. One of such letters was addressed to IMAM
JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS). In political struggles, such opportunities are
considered golden, but the Imam, who was the embodiment of selflessness
and self-respect, declined the offer and remained devoted to his duty of
imparting knowledge. The supporters of the ABBASIDES cause and the
followers of ABU MUSLIM AL-KHURASANI then took the oath of allegiance at
the hand of ABU AL-ABBAS AS-SAFFAH. On RABI' II 14, 132 A.H. (November
30, 749 A.D), he was acknowledged as the ruler and caliph of the Muslim
world. Establishing themselves in Iraq, they advanced towards Damascus.
MARWAN assembled his forces and confronted them, but soon his army was
defeated. He had to flee for his life but was later captured in Egypt
and slain while fighting for his life. Then followed a reign of terror:
the UMAYYADS were massacred publicly; the dead bodies of the monarchs of
their dynasty were exhumed and treated in a most shocking manner; thus,
the revenge upon the oppressors, the law of nature, was implemented
through the ABBASIDES. In 136 A.H., AS-SAFFAH, the first ABBASIDE
caliph, died. He was succeeded by his brother ABU JA'FAR AL-MANSUR,
commonly known as AD-DAWANIQI.

**ATROCTIES ON THE SAYYIDS**

It has already been indicated that the ABBASIDES took advantage of the
popularity of the SAYYIDS (descendants of HASHIM, grandfather of the
holy Prophet of Islam, peace and blessings be upon him and his progeny).
They made it their slogan to stand and protect the rights of AHL AL-BAYT
(AS). They had gathered the public around them on this very pretext, and
it was their war-cry as well. So when they came to power and destroyed
the UMAYYADS, they naturally feared lest the world should be
disappointed and disillusioned with them, or lest a movement should
start demanding that the caliphate must be vested upon the descendants
of Imam Ali (as) and Fatima instead of the ABBASIDES. ABU SALAMA was
leaning towards the descendants, and he was a candidate to support such
a movement. Therefore, in spite of all the favors he had done to the
ABBASIDES, he was the first to fall a victim to their ingratitude. He
was put to death during the reign of AS-SAFFAH. Persia was under the
control of ABU MUSLIM AL-KHURASANI. AL-MANSUR arranged to have him
murdered most treacherously. AL-MANSUR was no longer apprehensive of the
interference of any influential person in his government. He, therefore,
turned all his tyranny against the SAYYIDS themselves. SHIBLI AL-AYSAMI
writes this in his book SIRAT AL-NU'MAN:

"On mere suspicion, AL-MANSUR began to destroy the SAYYIDS. The
prominent among them were subjected to atrocities. Muhammad son of
IBRAHIM, who was the most handsome among them and was therefore called
'the silken', was walled alive. The narration of such lengthy series of
atrocities demands a stone-heart to tell".

IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) was sadly touched by those events. When once
the descendants of IMAM HASAN IBN ALI (AS) were all fettered, shackled
and banished from Medina, he watched their plight with a saddened heart
form the roof-top of his house. With flooded eyes he was heard saying:
"Oh! Medina is no more a sanctuary or a place of peace…" Then he
expressed his sorrow for the inactive descendants of the ANSARS thus:
"The early MEDENITES (ANSARS) had invited the holy Prophet to Medina
under the oath that they would protect him and his descendants just as
they would protect their own kith and kin. But today the descendants of
those very ANSARS act as silent onlookers and none stands up to protect
the Prophet's offspring".

Having said these words, he returned to his house and fell ill, unable
to move from bed for twenty days. Among the aforesaid prisoners was the
aged ABDALLAH AL-MAHD, son of IMAM HASAN IBN ALI (AS) who had to suffer
the hardships of a prolonged imprisonment. His son Muhammad (THU AN-NAFS
AZ-ZAKIYYA) rose against the oppressive government and fell fighting
near Medina in 145 A.H. The head of the young warrior was sent to his
aged father in prison a shocking sight which the worn out old man could
not bear, and he died shortly thereafter. Another son of ABDALLAH
AL-MAHD, named IBRAHIM, also fought against MASUR'S army and fell
fighting near KUFA. In the same way, ABDALLAH son of THU AN-NAFS
AZ-ZAKIYYA, were all killed mercilessly. Many SAYYIDS were used alive as
part of the building materials of walls.

**MALTREATMENT OF IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS)**

In spite of all these atrocities which have been described very briefly
here, IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) went on silently propagating the
teachings of AHL AL-BAYT (AS). As a result, even those who did not
acknowledge him as the Imam nor knew his prestige and lineage, bowed
before his knowledge and prided in being counted among his students.

AL-MANSUR wanted to decrease or remove the esteem in which IMAM JA'FAR
AS-SADIQ (AS) was held by the people. He tried to bring persons to
compete with him who all proved incapable of arguing with his own
students. These fellows admitted that their counterparts had acquired
the religious learning from the Prophet's Progeny. The haughty ruler,
therefore, ignored them but continued to undermine the popularity of the
Imam. Failing in all his efforts, he decided to harass, arrest or murder
him. In every town and city, hired agents were posted to monitor the
activities of the SHI'AHS so that anyone suspected of supporting the
Imam would be arrested. AL-MU'ALLA son of KHUNAIS was one of the many
SHI'AHS who were thus arrested and murdered in cold blood.

The Imam himself was summoned from Medina to the royal palace five
times, each time being in one way or another nothing but harassment.
AL-MANSUR, however, could never find sufficient grounds to order his
imprisonment or assassination. On the other hand, the consequent stay of
the Imam in Iraq only expanded the circle of those who wanted to learn
the teachings of AHL AL-BAYT (AS) from him. Perceiving this, AL-MANSUR
ordered him to be sent back to Medina. Even there, he was not spared
from persecution. Through saboteurs, his house was once set on fire but
Providence soon put it out and nobody was harmed.

**CHARACTER AND VIRTUES**

IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) was one of those Infallible souls who were
created by the Almighty to be models of moral excellence. The character
and conduct of all those sages in different stages of their lives was
the standard of excellence. The particular virtues of IMAM JA'FAR
AS-SADIQ (AS) which were recorded by the historians included
hospitality, charity, the helping of the needy in secrecy, the fair
treatment of the relatives, forgiveness, patience and fortitude. Once a
pilgrim visiting the Prophet's mosque in Medina fell asleep there. On
waking up, he hurriedly searched his belongings and found out that his
purse containing one thousand DINARS was missing.

Looking around, he saw IMAM JA'FAR AS-SADIQ (AS) saying his prayers in
a corner of the mosque. Bewildered and ignorant of the greatness of the
Imam, he accused him of having picked his purse. The Imam asked about
its contents and was told that it contained one thousand DINARS. The
Imam asked the stranger to follow him to his house where he paid him the
amount from his own money. When the stranger came back to the mosque
satisfied, once more he checked his property and found his purse intact
in bundle. Greatly ashamed of his conduct, he came to the Imam's house,
apologized and asked him to take his money back. The Imam appeased him
with these words: "We never take back what we once give away". Another
event of the Imam's trust in God, the Sustainer, deserves mention here.
During the days of scarcity, one naturally tries to hoard up as much
provisions as might suffice his needs for a long time. Once on such an
occasion, the Imam said to his household manager TRENCHAB: "The price of
corn is rising day by day.

How much corn is there in our warehouses?" TRENCHAB said that the Imam
should have no reason to worry since there was a large quantity of it to
sustain them over a long period of time. The noble Imam then ordered:
"Sell out all the corn today and let us face the situation along with
others". Then he directed: "Pure wheat flour shall not be used in my
kitchen. Let it be mixed with an equal quantity of oat flour. We must
share the misfortune with the needy as long as it takes".

He used to respect the poor more than the rich and esteem their hard
work. Trade was his occupation and the liked to do manual work in his
gardens too. One day while wielding the spade and sweating profusely
from top to toe, someone offered to do the work for him, but the
labor-loving leader said: "It is no insult to bear the heat of the
summer sun for the sake of my household".

To be kind to the slaves and maids was the main characteristic of this
Progeny. SUFYAN ATH-THAWRI'HAS narrated a surprising event in this
regard: "One I went to pay him a visit. I saw his complexion fading. On
my asking him the reason, the Imam explained: 'I had forbidden my folk
from ascending the stairs to the roof-top. Just now, as I entered the
house, I saw a nursing maid with my babe in her arms ascending the
stairs. She was so much frightened that she became nervous, and the baby
fell down and died. I do not grieve on the death of the baby as much I
grieve on her fright". Then he prepared to arrange for the shrouding and
burial of the baby.

**DISSEMINATING KNOWLEDGE AND LEARNING**

His profound knowledge of religious and other sciences was famed
throughout the entire Islamic world. People came from distant regions to
learn from him. The number of his students reached once four thousand.
Among them were scholars of jurisprudence, TAFSIR (exegesis), HADITH,
etc. Heads of other religions also came there to expostulate with his
students. When they went away vanquished and defeated, the Imam used to
explain to his students their own weak points so that they might be
careful in the future.

Sometimes he himself argued with the opponents especially the atheists.
Apart from religious sciences, he used to teach some students
mathematics, chemistry, medicine, etc. JABIR IBN HAYYAN of TARUS, the
famous pioneer of physics, chemistry and mathematics, was his disciple
who wrote about four hundred treatises based on his mentor's
instruction. The jurists who learned from him and authored several
volumes of books on jurisprudence can be counted by the hundreds.

**DEATH**

Such a great and scholar can never be ambitious for power. But the
government considered his popularity to be a constant threat, even
though the monarchs knew that this Progeny really deserved to rule the
Islamic worlds. Exhausting all its efforts, the ruling class could not
find any grounds to take action against the Imam. It finally resorted to
the use of their soundless weapon, poison. The governor of Medina was
directed to offer him poisoned grapes, the efficacy of which ended his
life on fifteenth of SHAWWAL of 148 A.H (December 4, 765 A.D.) at the
age of 65. His funeral was arranged by his son successor IMAM MUSA
AL-KAZIM (AS) who led the burial prayers. He was laid to rest in that
compound of JANNAT AL-BAQI' where IMAM HASAN (AS), IMAM ZAIN AL-ABIDIN
(AS) and IMAM AL-BAQIR (AS) lay buried.


