Instead of a Preface: Introduction
==================================

Introduction: Fatimah Zahra (p.b.u.h.) and the “Night of Divine Decrees”
------------------------------------------------------------------------

<sup>[^1]</sup>

After the completion of this booklet I was thinking of writing a preface
for it that would be both an articulation of the magnificence of this
great lady of the world of humanity, and also be closely related to the
books’ contents. Nothing occurred to me than the traditions of the Pure
Imams (p.b.u.h.), which were related to their mother Zahra (p.b.u.h.). I
opened Volume forty three of the book “Bihar-al-Anwar” and my eyes fell
upon this sentence, in which Imam Sadiq (p.b.u.h.) said in a tradition
recorded in the commentary of “Forat-bin-Ibrahim” speaking of the
meaning of the Quranic verse:

English Interpretation:

“The night of (Qadr), i.e. Divine Decrees is Fatimah (p.b.u.h.),
therefore whoever knows Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) well has understood the Night
of Divine Decrees, and the reason for Fatimah being named Fatimah is
that mankind has been “Prevented from obtaining” her acquaintance!”[^2]

*(Bihar-al-Anwar; volume 43, page 65; tradition 58)*

**(Interpretation by the Translator)**

I saw that this was a very unusual interpretation! Fatimah (p.b.u.h) is
the very Night of Divine Decrees. Anyone Who really knows Fatimah
(p.b.u.h.) as she is, has understood. the Night of Divine Decrees. Very
few persons have known Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) as she is and was.

We know that Quranic verses have a literal meaning and a figurative
meaning, and many interpretations. Without a doubt the literal
interpretation of the chapter “Qadr” tells of the night in which the
Holy Quran was descended upon the pure heart of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.),
and in which the divine decrees (destinies) of human beings are
ascertained for a year, according to Divine Wisdom. As such, what was
said in the tradition above is a figurative interpretation of this
chapter’s meaning, or the second meaning of the chapter “ghadr”.

And what a close relationship there is between the existence of “The
lady of Islam” and the “Night of Divine Decrees”.

1. The Night of Divine Decrees is (the disguised or unknown of “Qadr”),
undoubtedly this great Lady, who the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) would call a
part of his flesh and reckoned her pleasure to cause God’s pleasure, and
her anger God’s anger, is also the disguised or unknown of Qadr.

2. The Night of “Qadr” is hidden among the nights of the year.[^3] The
grave of the Lady of Islam is unknown among the graves of the great
Personages of Islam, and when those who wish to pay pilgrimage to her
enter Medina and visit the shrines of all the other great ones but seek
her grave not to find it, will well understand the heavy load of this
sorrow.

3. The Night of “Qadr” is better than one thousand flight worship  and
the virtue of it’s worship is greater than that of a long life of eighty
years. The virtue of this great Lady is also greater than thousands upon
thousands of virtuous persons and her rank is more superior.[^4]

4. The “Night of Qadr” was the time in which the Quran was descended
upon the pure heart of the Prophet of Islam, a sudden, all together
revelation, even though its gradual descent took over twenty three
years.

The “Night of Qadr” may also therefore be named as the Night of the
descent of virtue and perfection, knowledge and wisdom. The being of
Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) is also the source for the luminosity of the
guardianship and Imamat and also divine knowledge and wisdom.

5. The “Night of Qadr” is the night in which by command of God, the
Angels ascertain the destinies of all human beings and present them to
“Valy-ye-Amr” (the guardian of his command. It is a night of which in
its entirety is peace and good.

The brief life of this Lady of Islam was also from beginning to end,
goodness, soundness and blessing and was given the attention and
interest of the Angels.

The close relationship between the “Night of Qadr” and the being of
Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) deems it necessary for all of us to strive harder in
knowing her, and obtaining greater benefit from the blessings of her
radiance.

\* \* \*

Indeed how painful is the encounters that spiteful enemies and
uninformed persons had with this “Night of Qadr” and friends of God. One
example of the most curious of these encounters is their encounter with
that Hazrat in the matter of Fadak. By studying it, many mysteries and
questions enshrouding the issue of “Fadak” will be resolved.

What you will be reading in this booklet is a condensed explanation and
analysis of this matter. In this discussion of the naked historical
facts related to Fadak, any interpretations that could cause a
misunderstanding or excite sentiments have been avoided. Especially the
majority of its sources are taken from the very well known Sunni
sources.

God willing, this is an effective step for a re-evaluation of the
history of Islam and a greater understanding of Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) the
great Lady of Islam.

Qum - Howzeh Elmieh,

**Nasser Makarem Shirazy**

**1407, 2Oth Jamadi Al Sanieh.**

**“The happy Birth date of Fatimah Zahra (p.b.u.h.)”**


