Part One: The story of Fadak
============================

The story of Fadak is one of the most heart-rending and tumultuous
stories in the life of Fatimah the Lady of Islam (p.b.u.h.) in
particular, and the family of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) in general, and in
the history of Islam in a widespread and disseminating way. it is
mingled with political conspiracies and many ups and downs and is a
hatchway for the unraveling of a part of the important mysteries
surrounding the early scene of Islam’s history.

However, first, before beginning this discussion, it is necessary to
know what Fadak was and where it was located?

“Fadak”, as many of the historians and writers have written, was a
flourishing, fertile village in the land of “Hejaz” near Khaibar, being
two or three days’ journey from Medina, Some have reported this distance
as 140 Kilometers, and in which there was a bubbling spring and many
date palms[^5] and after Khaibar it was known as the stronghold of the
Jews in Hejar.

As to how Fadak, this pleasant, prosperous village, was transferred to
the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.), it is well known that after the messenger
of God (p.b.u.h.) returned from the conquest of Khaibar God placed fear
and panic in the hearts of the inhabitants of Fadak who were of the
headstrong Jews. They sent a representative to the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
and made to him a proposition of peace. In return for their transferal
of half of Fadak to the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.), he accepted and signed
the peace treaty.

As such, Fadak became the public domain of the Prophet (p.b.u.h) because
according to an explicit Quranic verse, something that is obtained by
the Muslims without war is the exclusive right of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)
and unlike spoils of war is not divided.[^6] In this way the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.) took Fadak and spent its earnings on the fatigued wayfarers
and the like.

This has been mentioned by  in  and  in  and others in their own books.

Also, Tabari in his book and Ibn Athir in the book “Kamel” made a
reference to this.[^7] It was also mentioned by many historians
confirming that the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) during his own lifetime granted
Fadak to the Lady of Islam Fatimah Zahra (p.b.u.h.).[^8]

Strong evidence of this transferal is that many commentators, including
the famous Sunni commentator Jalal-Al-Din Sayuti in the commentary book
(Dar-Al-Mansour) under the Quranic Verse;  (give the near of kin their
due), has quoted from “Abu Saeed Khadri” that, because this verse was
descended, the Apostle of God (p.b.u.h.) asked for Fatimah and granted
Fadak to her. The words of this tradition are as follows:

Translation:

When the word of God was revealed saying that; “O’ Prophet! Give your
near of kin their due”, the Apostle of God (p.b.u.h.) granted Fadak to
Fatimah (p.b.u.h.).

Under that same verse another tradition is narrated from “Ibn Abbas”
which contains the same information.

Another eye - witness to this claim is the remark of Amir al Momeneen
(p.b.u.h.) in “Nahjul Balaghe” in relation to Fadak, in which he says:

**(“Nahiul Balagheh”, letter 45, translation into English by: “Ali
Naqi-un-Naqvi”)**

**Translation:**

“Of course, all that we had in our possession under this sky was Fadak,
but a group of people felt greedy for it and the other party withheld
themselves from it. Allah, is after all the best arbitrator.”

This remark clearly shows that in the Prophets (p.b.u.h.) time Fadak was
under the control of Ali (p.b.u.h.) and Fatimah Zahra (p.b.u.h.).
However, later a group of the Hakems jealous men feasted their eyes upon
it and Ali (p.b.u.h.) and his wife-the Lady of Islam-were forced to
overlook it, and of course this over looking did not occur of their own
free will. If other than this was true then the calling of God as
arbitrator i.e. to say  would have been meaningless.

Among the great Shia scholars, a large group have also mentioned
traditions related to this section in their own creditable books. Among
them the following scholars may be mentioned;

The late “Kolainey ” in “Kafey ”, and the late Sadugh   and  in their
commentary and  in , and also another large group in books of
commentary, history and traditions, of which mentioning all of them
would be too lengthy.

Now let us see why and for what reason they took Fadak away from Fatimah
(p.b.u.h.).


