Part Two: The political factors for the usurpation of Fadak
===========================================================

The seizing of Fadak from the lady of Islam Fatimah Zahra (p.b.u.h.) was
not a simple matter only of an economic nature. On the contrary, its
economic aspect was outshone by the political matters governing the
Islamic community after the death of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.). Indeed,
Fadak can-not be separated from the other events of that era. On the
contrary, it is a link from a lengthy chain and a phenomenon from a
total, enveloping current!

The following factors may be cited for this serious historical
Usurpation:

1. The possession of Fadak in the hands of the prophet’s family was
calculated as a great meaningful distinction for them. This was in
itself proof of their elevated position and superiority in the presence
of God and the earmarking of their intense closeness to the Prophet
(p.b.u.h.). This is especially because, according to the shia and sunni
narratives mentioned above, when the Quranic verse  was descended the
Prophet (p.b.u.h.) sent for Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) and granted to her the
land of Fadak.

It is clear that the possession of Fadak in the hands of the Prophets
family in view of this historical background would cause the people to
search for the Prophet’s (p.b.u.h.) other vestiges in this family
especially the matter of caliphate or the successor of that Hazrat
(p.b.u.h.). This was not a situation, which could be tolerated by those
who supported the transferal of the caliphate to other persons.

2. This matter was also important from an economic stand-point, and it
affected its political aspect. This was due to the fact that if Ali
(p.b.u.h.) and his supporters were placed under severely straightened
economic circumstances, their political power would be reduced
proportionately According to another interpretation, the existence of
Fadak. in their hands made resources available to them that could have
been supportive of them in the matter of the guardianship (leadership).
This was just as the wealth of Khadijeh (p.b.u.h.) was backing for the
progress of Islam at the beginning of the Prophet’s (p.b.u.h.) mission.

All the world over it is customary that whenever they wish to shut - out
an important person or country they place him under economic embargo.

In the history of Islam this has come to us in the Story of “Abu-Talib’s
camp”, and the severe economic siege inflicted on the Muslims by the
infidels of Quraish.

In the interpretation of the Quranic chapter “The Hypocrites” under the
verse;

**Translation:**

“If we return to Medina, surely the mighty will drive out the meaner
there from.”

*(M. H. Shakir)*

Here is a reference to a plot similar to this plot, by the hypocrites,
which, by the mercy of God was nipped in the bud. As such it is not
surprising that the enemies should try to take this investment from the
Prophet’s family, secluding them and emptying their hands of wealth.

3. If they had been willing to give Fadak to Fatimah Zahra (p.b.u.h.) as
her inheritance, or a gift of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.) to her; the way
would have been made clear for her to also request the matter of the
caliphate from them.

This point has been subtly reverberated by “Ibn Abil-Hadeed Motazaly” in
his account of the “Nahjul Balaghe” He says:

I asked my professor Ali-bin-Fareghie - teacher of theology in Baghdad
school: “Was Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) truthful in her claim of the ownership
of Fadak?”

He replied: “Yes.”

I then said: “Then why didn’t the first caliph give her Fadak when she
was truthful to him?”

He then smiled and spoke a beautiful, subtle and joke-like utterance,
even though he was not in the habit of joking, saying:

** ( on the  volume 4, page 70)**

**Translation:**

“If at that time, Abi Bakr on hearing Fatimah’s claim would have given
Fadak to her, the next day she would have come to him and claimed the
caliphate for her husband! She Would have set him aside from his
position, and he would have set him aside from his position, and he
would have had no defense or justification for himself, because by
giving “Fadak” he would have accepted that whatever Fatimah (p.b.u.h.)
claimed was the truth, needing no proof or evidence.**(English
translation by the translator)**

Then Ibn Abil Hadeed adds:

“This was a fact, even though my teacher related it as a joke.”

This obvious confession by two Sunni scholars is a living witness for
the Fadak story’s, “Political essence”.

If we look at this village’s fate in the first few decades of Islam’s
history how it constantly changed hands and how each of the caliphs held
a particular position in relation to it, this matter is better
clarified. God willing in the following discussion we will refer to
this.


