Part Three: Fadak throughout History
====================================

How Fadak was returned to the Prophets descendents
--------------------------------------------------

The historical journey of Fadak is one of the mysteries of Islamic
history. Each of the caliphs had a position regarding it. One would take
it and the other gave it hack, arid this situation continued to the
point where this land was laid waste and was ruined. In order to
discover the ebbs and summits that occurred in this flourishing village
we have only to study the sections listed below:

1. Just as we know, Fadak, in tile beginning after the fall of Khaibar
was transferred to the prophet (p.b.u.h.) by way of compromise by tile
Jews. By command of the verse:

Its complete ownership becoming that of the prophet (p.b.u.h.) and by
order of this verse it became his right.

2. According to reliable historical records. During his lifetime, by
command of the Quranic verse;  the Holy Prophet (p.b.u.h.) gave it to
Fatimah Zahra (p.b.u.h.) In this way it came under the authority of the
respectable daughter of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.).

3. During the rule of the first caliph, this village was usurped and
came under the control at the ruling government, arid they showed
strange stubbornness in the preservation of this situation.

4. This situation continued as such until the time of “Omar ben Abdul
Aziz” the Umayyed caliph, who had a more moderate stance in relation to
the family of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.). He wrote to his governor in
Medina  telling him to return Fadak to the children of Fatimah
(p.b.u.h.).

The governor of Medina wrote to him in reply:

“The children of Fatimah are numerous and have married into many
different tribes. Which group should I return it to.”

Omar bin Abdul Aziz became enraged and wrote a harsh letter with these
contents to the governor of Medina in reply:

**Translation:**

“Every time I order you in a letter to sacrifice a sheep, will you
immediately write in reply, should it be horned or without horns? And if
I should write sacrifice a cow, will you ask what color should it be? As
soon as this letter reaches you, immediately divide Fadak among the
children (offspring) of Fatimah (p.b.u.h.)!”**( translation by
translator from the Farsi)**

In this way, with one great rotation, after many long years, Fadak was
returned to the hands of Fatimah’s offspring.

5. It wasn’t long before the Umayyed caliph “Yazid bin Abdul Malik” once
again usurped it.

6. Eventually, Bani Umayyed was over thrown and bin Abbas came into
power. The famous Abbasid caliph  returned it to “Abdullah ben Hassan
ben Ali (p.b.u.h.)” as a representative of Bani Fatimah (p.b.u.h.).

7. Barely no time had passed when “Abu Jaffar Abbasi” took it from the
family of Hassan (p.b.u.h.). (because they had revolted against Bani
Abbas)

8. “Mahdi Abbasi” the son of “Abu Jaffar” returned it to the offspring
of Fatimah (p.b.u.h.).

9. “Musa Al-hady” another Abbasid caliph once again usurped it, and
“Haroon Al-Rashid” continued in this.

10. Mamoon, in order to make a show of great affection for the Prophets
descendents and the children of Ali (p.b.u.h.) and Fatimah (p.b.u.h.),
returned it to the offspring of Fatimah with much pomp and circumstance.

It has been recorded in History that Mamoon wrote as such to his
governor in Medina .

**Translation:**

“The messenger of Cod (p.b.u.h.) granted “Fadak” to his daughter
“Fatimah” (p.b.u.h.) and this was a well know open matter among the
Prophets family. After that Fatimah was its consistent claimant and her
word is more worthy than any ones of confirmation and acceptance, and I
see it fit that it be given to the representative of that at Hazrat
(p.b.u.h). Return it to Muhammad ben Yahya and Muhammad ben Abdullah
(the grand-children or Imam Zain al-Abedeen) so that they may distribute
it among her descendents.”

“Ibn Abi Al-hadid” says:

Mamoon was sitting in attendance to the people’s complaints. The first
complaint, which came to him and was regarded by him, dealt with Fadak.
As soon as he read the complaint he began to cry and said to one of his
officers, “call and see where Fatimah’s (p.b.u.h.) lawyer is”. An old
man came forward and spoke for a long while with Mamoon. Mamoon gave an
order. A decree was written and Fadak was handed over to him as a
representative of the Prophets Family (p.b.u.h.).

When Mamoon signed this decree De’bal rose and recited a poem of which
the first verse is as follows:

**English Interpretation:**

The face of time took on a smile

Because Mamoon returned Fadak to Bani Hashem. (**by Ibn Abi Al-hadid,
vol. 16; Page 217)**

The author of the book “Fadak” writes that on authority of the single
tradition of Abu Said Khidri which says: “The Prophet (p.b.u.h.) granted
Fadak to Fatimah.” Mamoon gave orders that Fadak be returned to
Fatimah’s ( p.b.u.h.) offspring. (“**Fadak”, page 6)**

11. But Motavakkel Abbasi because of his intense hatred of the Prophet’s
family once again usurped Fadak from them.

12. The son of Motavakkel Mansour, ordered that it be once again
returned to the children of Imam Hassan (p.b.u.h.) and Hossein
(p.b.u.h.).

Evidently, a village that rotates as such from hand to hand, everyday
being the plaything in the hands of spiteful politicians will quickly be
laid waste. Eventually this very fate encompassed Fadak and all of its
inhabited places became ruined arid its trees withered and dried up.

However, at any rate, these quotations explain this reality that the
caliphs were especially sensitive in relation to Fadak, and according to
his political policies, each showed a special position and reaction
regarding it.

This is all proof of what was said previously that the usurping of Fadak
from Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) and her descendents had more of a political
nature than an economic one. Its aim was to exclude them from the
Islamic society and weaken their position. It was also a declaration of
enmity towards the family of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.). This was just as
the return of Fadak to them, an act repeated several times in the length
of Islamic history, was a “Political Maneuver” meant to be a show of
sympathy and affection for the Prophet’s family (p.b.u.h.).

Fadak’s importance in Muslim public opinion was such that in some
historical reports it is related; that in the time of “Motavakkel
Abassi” before Fadak was taken from Bani Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) the dates of
its produce were brought among the pilgrims at the time of Hajj and were
bought by them at exorbitant prices as good luck gifts!

**( Ibn Abi Al-hadid, volume 16, page 217)**


