Part Five: One Historical Trial
===============================

Just as we have said, during the Prophet’s life time, Fadak was turned
over to Fatimah Zahra (p.b.u.h.) after the revelation of the verse:

This is a matter not only reported by shi’ite commentators, but also
reported by a group of sunni scholars from the words of the famous
companion of the Prophet (p.b.u.h.)  of which its documents have been
previously spoken of.

After the Prophet’s death the government of that time laid hands on it
and threw out Fatimah’s representatives. This is a matter which has been
reported by the famous sunni scholar “Ibn Hajar” in the book , and by
“Samhoody” in  and also Ibn Abil Hadid in .

For the attainment of what was rightly hers, the lady of Islam
(p.b.u.h.) brought up two points; First by declaring it as the prophet’s
gift to her, and the other was as her inheritance (when the matter of it
being the Prophet’s gift was seen an unacceptable).

First of all, the lady of Islam invited the commander of the faithful,
Ali (p.b.u.h.) and Umm Emen to go to the first caliph as witnesses. But
the caliph did not accept these with-nesses using the excuse that
witnesses for the proof of a litigation must be two men.

Then by claiming a tradition of the prophet (p.b.u.h.)which was supposed
to have said:

“We prophets leave no inheritance and everything that remains after us
will be for alms”;

He also refrained from accepting the proposal of it being inheritance.

This even though in a brief study becomes evident that in this action of
theirs, the ruling usurping government is guilty of ten big mistakes.
These are brought up as a list below, even though their explanations
need much more discussion.

1. Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) was  meaning that the laud of Fadak was in her
possession, and according to the views of all Islamic laws and the
existent laws among the intelligent people of the world; witnesses are
never required of a .

This is of course unless reasons are adduced that the property, or
his/her possession of it, is void.

For example, if someone lives in a particular house and claims ownership
of it, so long as no reasons are adduced that deny his ownership, it
cannot be taken from him. There is no necessity for him to produce
witnesses for his ownership, because possession itself (either by
himself or his representatives) is his best proof for ownership.

2. The witness of the lady of Islam (p.b.u.h.) was in this instance
enough in itself This being because as the honoured verse states, she
was:

** (Koran; Chapter 33, verse 33; M. H. Shakir - translation )**

“Allah only desires to keep away the uncleanliness from you, O people of
the house! And to purify you a (thorough) purifying.

And the well-known tradition “Kasa”, which is reported in many of the
creditable books of the sunni, and their books of integrity, speaks of
the innocent ones. God kept all forms of uncleanliness and undesirable
acts away from the Prophet (p.b.u.h.), Ali (p.b.u.h.), Fatimah
(p.b.u.h.), Hassan and Hossein (p.b.u.h.) and made them free of sin. How
could it be possible for the testimony or claim of such a person to be
put to doubt and questioned?!

3. The witness given by Ali (p.b.u.h.) was also by itself enough,
because he was also possessed of the degree of purity. In addition to
the purification verse and other verses and narrations attesting to this
fact, there is this famous tradition:

**( Ibn Abi al-hadid, volume 16, page 219)**

“Ali is just, and justice is with Ali, and wherever he is, justice is
with him”**(English interpretation from the Persian, by the
translator)**

Which is itself enough; how is it that justice revolves around the axis
of Ali’s being but his testimony is not accepted?!

Who has the nerve to refute his witness in the face of this saying of
the Prophet (p.b.u.h.), which has been reported by both shia and sunni?

4. The testimony of Umm Emen was also enough in itself, just as ibn Abi
al-hadid reported:

Umm Emen said to them, don’t you swear to the fact that the prophet
said:

“I am of the dwellers of Heaven”, (If you accept this then how can you
refute my testimony?)**( Ibn Abi al-hadid translation by translator)**

5. Even not to mention the previous; the ruling knowledge, when obtained
from different proofs (sense -, or similar to sense, proofs), is
sufficient for judgment. The possession and “in hand”, on the one side,
the testimony of these witnesses, each of whose testimonies should be
enough proof, on the other side, don’t they form knowledge and
certainty?

6. The tradition about the lack of inheritance being left by Prophets is
actually in another form and having a different meaning, not the way
that the usurpers of Fadak reported or interpreted. In other sources
this tradition is reported as such:

** ( volume 1 page 34)**

**English Interpretation:**

“The prophets have not left dirhams and dinars as a memorial, but rather
the inheritance of the Prophets was knowledge and learning, whoever
obtains a greater portion of their knowledge and learning has received a
greater inheritance from them.”**(Interpretation from the Persian by the
translator)**

This is an observance of the prophet’s spiritual intellectual
inheritance and has nothing to do with the inheritance of their
property. This is exactly what is meant in another narration that has
come to us.

**English Interpretation:**

“Scholars are the Prophet’s heirs.’

In particular, the sentence  was certainly not included at the bottom of
this tradition. Is it possible for a tradition to be issued from the
prophet, which goes against categorical Quranic verses? This because
there are several verses in the Holy Quran which testify to the fact
that the Prophets left inheritance, and in these verses there exist
clear indications that this not only means spiritual inheritance but
also consists of material inheritance.

Therefore, in her famous sermon, which she delivered in the Prophet’s
mosque, before the “Muhajereen” and “Ansar” the lady of Islam (p.b.u.h.)
resorted to these verses, and none of them could disagree with her. This
is all proof of the falseness of this tradition.

7. If this tradition was valid, then why hadn’t ant of the Prophet’s
wives heard of it; since they came to the caliph requesting their
portion of the Prophet’s inheritance.**( Ibn Abi al-hadid; volume 16,
pg. 228 This tradition has also been narrated by  in )**

8. If this tradition was valid, then why eventually did the first caliph
give orders in a letter to return Fadak to Fatimah (p.b.u.h.); a letter
which the second caliph took and tore up.**( volume 3 pg. 391)**

9. Furthermore, if this tradition had any reality and Fadak should have
been divided among the poor as alms; then why did the second caliph in
his own time (after everything was over), send for Ali (p.b.u.h.) and
Abbas and told of willingness to give Fadak to them. This being a very
well - known event in Islamic History. (**chapter on the merit of Ibn
Hajar; pg. 9)**

10. In creditable books of both shia and sunni it has been reported that
after the incident of the prohibition of Fadak, the lady of Islam
(p.b.u.h.) became angry at these two and said:

“I will never speak as much as one word to you.”**( of  pg. 14)**

And this situation continued until with great sorrow she closed her eyes
to this world.

This was even though this Prophetic tradition is well known in Islamic
sources:

** (Same as 3; English interpretation by the translator)**

English Interpretation:

“Whoever likes my daughter Fatimah, likes me; whoever makes her happy
has made me happy: and whoever angers her, has angered me.”

According to this, can the right which Fatimah (p.b.u.h.) requested be
prohibited, and can excuses be found in a tradition, which shows no
traces of truthfulness? And this, in contrast to Quranic text which says
that the Prophets heirs receive inheritance from them.

At any rate, no justification can be found for the usurpation of Fadak,
and no acceptable reason exists for this deed.

On one side we have the possession of the property by Fatimah Zahra
(p.b.u.h.).

On another, reliable reputable witnesses, on the third side, the
testimony of the “Book of God” (the Holy Quran).

And, on the fourth side, the various Islamic narrations which all attest
to the validity of the lady of Islam’s argument for her indisputable
right in Fadak.

Besides, the general verses in the Quran related to inheritance which
gives all people the right to inherit from their parents, (which cannot
be denied unless creditable reasons are found to its nullification), is
counted as another proof.


