Author's Biography
==================

Only a few names of men, who were distinguished for their gifts and
genius which lifted them to the highest peaks of recognition, are etched
upon the horizons of our Islamic world. Such names, like bright stars,
have kept glittering in the depth of the skies.

As for those whose names are portrayed in every horizon of the Islamic
world, these, indeed, are even fewer. They are a minority. They are none
other than those whom nature has elevated, achieving such rare genius
that made them unique throughout all Islamic lands. Among such people is
our master- author, may Allah rest his soul in peace.

The Supreme Will has decreed to bless his knowledge and pen, producing
from them the best intellectual output. I may not exaggerate if I allow
my pen to record this: the master-author is advanced through what he
produced to the very front row of Shi’a scholars. The latter dedicated
their entire lives to the service of their religion and school of
thought. He, therefore, deservedly occupies the front seat among the
Muslim world's contemporary elite.

Within such a limited undertaking, I do not find myself inclined to
elaborate on what Sayyid ‘Abdul­Husayn Sharafuddin had accomplished in
life's spheres and undertakings. The task may have been easier had the
author being discussed been someone else. It would have been easier had
the author been among those men whose lives and works were limited.

But a man whose calibre is as vast as this author makes it very
difficult for any writer to describe and be fair to. When the writer
stands for such an undertaking, he will surely feel as though he is
facing an entire generation reverberating with hues of life, overflowing
from all sides and directions. He can hardly refer each hue to its
source except through research with full responsibilities of logic and
knowledge. This may even be beyond the capacity of trustworthy
historians to tackle.

The Author’s Birth and Upbringing
---------------------------------

Sayyid ‘Abdul­Husayn Shrafuddin, may Allah expand his shade, was born in
Kazimiyya (north Baghdad, Iraq) in 1290 A.H. for good parents linked to
one another by kinship and united through a family­tree of good roots.
His father is noble Yousuf son of noble Jawad son of noble Isma’il. His
mother is the virtuous Zahra daughter of Sayyid Hadi son of Sayyid
Muhammad ‘Ali, ending in a short kinship to Sharafuddin, one of the
renown dignitaries of this good family.

He grew up in a house for which the avenues of scholarly mastership had
been paved, whose pillars were erected upon renown dignitaries of good
reputation, whose favour and services are acclaimed and appreciated
throughout the Islamic world.

He grew up in that lofty house, nurtured in the gardens of knowledge and
ethics, ascending the heights of dignity. When he reached tender
adolescence, he became fully acquainted with the causes of goodness, the
following of which made him the embodiment of virtue. Upon making his
first stride in the scholarly life, he was distinguished by notable
accomplishments and achievements. His students and admirers kept him
company. He had a reverberating voice in the learning centers of Samarra
and al-Najaf al­Ashraf where he achieved distinction.

Ever since that day, his star had always been shining amidst the circles
of knowledge, its light extending far and wide as his knowledge
expanded. He advanced his stages until the scholarly life was cultivated
for him at the hands of many a genius among the pillars of knowledge in
al-Najaf al­Ashraf and Samarra such as Tabataba'i, Khurasani, Fath­Allah
al­Asfahani, Shaykh Hasan al­Karbala'i, and many other renown pillars of
religion and imams of knowledge.

At ‘Amila
---------

When his maturity received recognition, his star in the circles of
research and meetings of debate and learning started shining, he, at
thirty­two, went back to the mountain of ‘Amil, south Lebanon,
dignified, renown, self­satisfied, promising, articulate, glowing in
brilliance. The day of his arrival was memorable. ‘Amila sent her sons
to welcome his arrival, so luminous in lands and skies, welcoming him in
demonstrations containing men of scholarship and public leadership, up
to the borders of the mountain from Syria's highway, celebrating as
though it was ‘Id.

His Reforms
-----------

A new life started in ‘Amila aiming at strict implementation of
religion, improvement of manners, the strengthening of right with might,
kindness to the weak, the enjoining of right and the forbidding of
wrong, comfort with the masters of religion and humbleness towards the
men of knowledge.

His Eloquence
-------------

His eloquent lectures and terse methods of directives had the largest
share in producing the much desired reform. This comes as no surprise
when we know that the Sayyid possessed such an eloquence of speech which
made him the envy of Arabia's orators. Religion, scholarship and ethics
are all proud of him.

He was great, besides his eloquence, in choosing the jewels of his
thoughts, the garbs of his opinions which he masterly fitted and
organized, breathing life into whatever he desired of arguments,
explanations, logic, expositions, additions, and into all his works
which are organized through harmony and equilibrium.

His Services
------------

As regarding his contributions to the struggle against foreign
colonialism, you may elaborate on these as you please. This undertaking
does not allow us to go into such struggle in detail; however, I may
summarize it in one statement: His great services during the Turkish
regime, then the French occupation, then the post­independence, were
simply extensions of the movements of liberation.

He raised their level of effectiveness and directed them towards the
noble objectives of securing justice and stability, thus bringing fresh
hope to the masses. All authorities during these regimes, however,
spared no effort to oppose him and undermine his plans through the
implementation of whatever plots, persecution and harmful means they
could improvise.

The calamities from which this great imam suffered while trying to make
his people happy may not have been endured except by the most
outstanding Arab chiefs and leaders, those who struggled heroically and
suffered a great deal in the process.

I do not need to elaborate on the surprise the occupying French
authorities had in store for him when they felt sick and tired of him.
They instructed some of their hoodlum hardliners to assassinate him. Ibn
al­Hallaj suddenly broke into his house when he, together with members
of his family and kin, had none of his supporters around.

Allah the Glorious and Sublime willed for him the opposite of their
will. He kept their evil away from him, and they retreated in
humiliation, stumbling in their failure and shame. As soon as the news
of this surprise attack was broadcast in ‘Amila, crowds rushed to Sur
from each and every direction in order to be under the command of their
master as to what to do about that incident. Yet the Sayyid dispersed
them after thanking them, advising them to simply overlook it.

This incident was succeeded by many, many other similar ones. The gap
became wider, and dissension exploded until, eventually, the Sayyid,
together with his kith and kin among the chiefs of ‘Amila, had to seek
refuge in Damascus which he reached despite the French army's attempt to
close the highway in his face.

The aggressive authority was chasing him with some of its armed troops
in order to forbid him from reaching Damascus. When it lost hope of
capturing him, it went back to set his house in Shahur on fire, leaving
it in ashes strewn in the air; then it set its hands on his big house in
Sur after allowing the sinful hands to plunder and loot it until they
left nothing valuable or otherwise in it. The most damaging in that
tragedy was the burning of the Sayyid's library with all its precious
books and most distinguished works including nineteen of his own which
were still hand­written manuscripts.

Then he travelled to Egypt during the climax of upheavals which
inflicted the region. When he arrived there, the Egyptians warmly
welcomed him and recognized him in spite of his disguise behind a
kaffiyya and iqal, outfits common to the bedouins of the desert. He took
in Egypt certain stands which attracted the attention of the elite among
the scholars of knowledge, the pillars of literature, and the men of
politics, according to the demands of his revered personality.

That was not his first visit to Egypt. Egypt knew him eight years
earlier when he visited it at the close of 1329 A.H., staying in it till
the year 1330 A.H. during a trip in pursuit of knowledge. He met then
with the researchers and master­minds of learned Egyptians. After that,
he and Shaykh Salim al­Bishri, the then rector of al­Azhar, met quite
often and exchanged discussions dealing with the significant matters of
*Kalam* (logic) and *Usul* (basics of jurisprudence). Among the results
of those meetings are the Muraja’at with which we are dealing here.

His Quest for Knowledge
-----------------------

Noting the preface above, you may first get the impression that the
social problems surrounding him have diverted his attention from
pursuing knowledge and kept him away from literary work. In fact, anyone
who is inflicted as our Sayyid was is normally diverted from attainable
knowledge and authorship. The problems surrounding him would have indeed
limited his chances to look into the library, or to write. But the fact
is that his time is blessed, his heart is spacious, and his mind is
powerful.

While dealing satisfactorily with the problems which he encountered, he
also quenched his thirst for knowledge. He obtained from his library the
portion of knowledge his practical life demanded. Ever since leaving
al­Najaf al­Ashraf, he continuously kept researching, reading, writing
and debating. During his leisure hours, he daily went to his library in
order to find his peace of mind in its subjects and forget whatever busy
and exhausting life lay beyond its precincts.

His Works
---------

1) *Al­Muraja’at* is but a true specimen of his writing, and I cannot
tell you enough about it here. His own tongue is indeed much more
eloquent and outspoken than mine. It was printed at al­‘Irfan Press,
Saida (Lebanon), in 1355 A.H., and all its copies were immediately sold
out. It was translated into Persian, and I have heard that it has been
translated into English by Dr. Zayd, an Indian, and also into Urdu.

2) *Al Fusul Al Muhimmah fi Tal'if Al Ummah* ["The Important Chapters in
Unifying the Nation"] is one of the best Islamic books which deal with
controversial matters regarding which Sunnis and Shi’as dispute in the
light of *Kalam*, reason, deduction and analysis. It was finished in
1327 A.H. and was twice printed in Saida, ‘Amil mountain. The text of
its second edition (1347 A.H.) was increased. In its own subject­matter,
*Al Fusul Al-Muhimmah fi Ta'lif Al-Ummah* suffices for an entire
library. It contains 192 small size pages.

3) *Ajwibat Masa'il Musa Jar­Allah* ["Answers to Musa Jar­Allah's
Questions"]. Although small in size, this is a magnificent book of
tremendous knowledge. As the title suggests, it contains answers to
twenty questions put forth by Musa Jar­Allah to Shi’a scholars.

He thinks they include some embarrassing questions such as why Shi’as
consider some Companions *kafir* and denounce them, and the allegation
that Shi’as altered the text of the Qur'an and made *Jihad* unlawful,
and also matters like *Bada'* (change of destiny by Allah), *mut’a*
(temporary marriage), *bara'a* (dissociation from the enemies of Allah),
*‘awl* (a law of inheritance adopted by the Sunnis), etc.

His answers were most authentic, derived from abundant knowledge and
based upon proofs and logic, leaving no room for doubt. It has an
Introduction about the call for unity and a Conclusion regarding the
ignorance of those who raise such issues and propagate such allegations
about Shi’a literature, and also of the confusion which exists in some
Sunni books. It is in 152 small pages, printed at al­‘Irfan Press,
Saida, in 1355 A.H./1936 A.D.

4) *Al Kalimah Al Gharra' fi Tafdil al­Zahra'* ["The Convincing
Statement in Preferring al­Zahra'"]. Its 40 half­size pages have
combined with the text of the second edition of *Al Fusul al­Muhimmah*.
It contains the deepest studies. It is most authentic in style and
derivation. It testifies to the overflow of the writer's pen, his
fountain­head.

5) *Al Majalis Al Fakhirah fi Ma'atim al­‘Itrah Al Tahirah* ["The
Magnificent Commemorative Speeches in Honour of the Purified Progeny"].
The Introduction to this book has already been printed. The total number
of its half­size pages is 72. The author explains in it the philosophy
of conducting commemorative Husayni ceremonies, and the secrets of the
Taff martyrdom are very nicely and precisely explained.

6) *Abu Hurairah*, printed in 1365 A.H. at Al-’Irfan Press, Saida. It is
a new method in authorship and a victory in the world of biographies
because of its absorbant analytical style. In its depth and style, it
may well be compared with the most respectable works of its category. It
deals in the light of knowledge and reason with the life of Abu
Hurairah, his time, circumstances, friends, traditions, and the special
attention meted to him by the six *sahih* books which quote his
traditions.

7) *Bughyat Al-Raghibin* ["Quest of the Willing"] is a unique family
manuscript tracing the Sharafuddin family tree and close relatives. It
stands as a grand, magnificent and excellent work among the literature
of diaries in its own accomplished method of classification. He narrates
in it the biographies of some renown master­authors, as well as their
times and circumstances. You will, therefore, find it an excellent and
interesting literary book, nay, an entire history of generations and
dignitaries.

8) *Thabt Al Athbat fi Silsilat Al Ruwat* ["The Ultimate Proof in the
Chain of Narrators"]. In this book, the author lists his mentors among
renown Muslim sects in a sequence which goes back to the Prophet (pbuh)
and Imams (as), to works and their authors traced through various
nUmarous avenues. He narrates some of them by way of reading or hearing,
or depending on the authority of renown men belonging to the Shi’a
Ithna­Asheri or Zaydi creeds, as well as from renown Sunnis. To
elaborate on all his methods here will require lengthy details;
therefore, I content myself with referring to the contents of *al­Thabt*
which was twice printed in Saida.

He has authored other books not mentioned above such as *Masa'il
Khilafiyya* ["Caliphate-Related Issues"] and *Risaleh Kalamiyya*
[Dissertation in Theological Philosophy (i.e. derived from ‘ilm
al­Kalam).

His Lost Works
--------------

Besides all these immortal jewels, he has written other precious works.
Had they not been burnt or shredded during the 1920 raid, they could
have been included among the few distinguished treasures of reason and
thought. But alas; these were lost during such painful events;
therefore, the institute of knowledge has suffered a severe loss. I wish
our master's time will extend in order to compensate by bringing them
back to life anew. Here we list them as the author does at the end of
his commentary on *Al­Kalemah Al­Gharra'* (The Precious Word):

1) *Sharh Al-Tabsirah* ["Explicating the *Tabsirah* Book], i.e. Proofs
in *Fiqh* Concerning Enlightening Deductions: They are three bound
volumes containing chapters on cleanliness, justice, witness and
inheritance.

2) His commentary, in one volume, on the topic of *Istishab* from Shaykh
al­Ansari's letters deals with the principles of jurisprudence (*Usul
al­Fiqh*).

3) *Risalah fi Munjazat Al-Marid* ["Dissertation on A Sick Person's Road
to Recovery)"] written in a rationalizing approach.

4) *Sabil Al-Muminin*, in three volumes, deals with the topic of
Imamate.

5) *Al-Nusus Al-Jaliyyah* ["The Obvious Texts"] also deals with Imamate,
and it contains forty texts unanimously agreed upon by Muslims in
addition to forty others narrated through Shi’a ways polished by
analysis and philosophy.

6) *Tanzil Al-Ayat Al-Bahira* ["Revelation of the Dazzling Verses"] also
deals with the topic of Imamate. It is written in one volume based upon
one hundred Qur'anic verses revealed in praise of the holy Imams (as)
according to *sahih* books.

7) *Tuhfatul Muhaddithin fima Akhraja* *‘anhu Al-Sittah minal
Muda’’afin* ["Ornament of the Entertainers from the hadith Regarded by
the Authors of the Six (*sahih*s) as ‘Weak'"]. This is a book totally
new in its subject­matter, one the like of which has never been written
before.

8) *Tuhfatul Ashab fi Hukm Ahlel­Kitab* ["The Companions' Ornament in
Judging the People of the Book"].

9) *Al-Thari’a* ("The Pretext") is a book rebutting al­Nabahani's
*Badi’a*.

10) *Al-Majalis Al-Fakhira* ["The Excellent Sessions"] is a four-volume
book. Its first volume deals with the Prophet's biography, the second
with the biographies of Amirul­Muminin, al­Zahra and al­Hasan (as), the
third with the biographies of Imam Husayn (as), and the fourth with the
biographies of the nine Imams, Allah's peace be upon all of them.

11) *Mu'allifu Al-Shi’a fi Sadr Al-Islam* ["Shi’a authors at the Dawn of
Islam"]. Some of this book's chapters were published in Al-’Irfan
mgazine of Saida (see Al-’Irfan, Vols. 1 & 2).

12) *Bughyatul Fa'iz fi Naql Al-Jana'iz* ["The Winner's Quest in Coffin
Bearing"]. Most of this book's text was published in Al-’Irfan.

13) *Bughyatul Sa'il* *‘an Lathm Al-Aydi wal Anamil* ["Quest of the
Inquirer about Hand and Finger Kissing"]. This is a scholarly thesis in
literary and intelligent humour containing eighty traditions from our
way and the way of others.

14) *Zakat al-Akhlaq* ["Behavioural Purification"]. Al-’Irfan published
some of its chapters.

15) *Al-Fawa'id wal Fara'id* ["The Benefits and the Rareties"] is a
useful inclusive book.

16) His commentary on Bukhari's *Sahih*.

17) His commentary on Muslim's *Sahih*.

18) *Al-Asalib Al-Badi’ah fi Rujhan Ma'atim Al-Shi’a*: ["The Witty
Methods in the Properiety of Shi’as' Commemorations"] is a book based on
logical and traditional proofs, and it is, in its subject­matter, a new
production.

He has written an Introductions, besides these, dealing with different
topics some of which were lost while others were resurrected and are yet
to be finished.

His books are characterized by keen observation, vast investigation,
inclusive research, authentic conclusion, good finish, honest quotations
and inter­relation of chapters in qualities which wear the critic out
and challenge the mischievous.

His Manners and Gifts
---------------------

He is very patient, dignified, open­minded, gentle, brave, and
highly­respected. He inspires an awe which forces you to respect and
love him even if you do not know him.

He does not compromise justice, nor does he admit relaxation or leniency
when an effort is exerted to counter injustice or wrong­doing, yet he
remains humble, generous, maintaining a pleasant countenance.

Even­handedness has such a position within him that he is fair to both
strangers and kin; doing right is his motive and motto.

He is a model of piety, self­ease, clarity of conscience, and the
speaking of what is right. Besides, he is wise in his views,
far-sighted. He sifts people's temper and reaches the reality and depth
of affairs. He cannot be deceived by appearances, nor can he be cheated
outrightly. He does not deviate from accuracy nor be tempted into
hypocrisy.

These good manners may have contributed to his accomplishments,
influence, and true qualifications. He is, then, counted among the most
eloquent Arabs when he talks, the most outspoken when he lectures, the
most heart­touching when he preaches, the most efficient in implementing
the law, the most fair in judgment and clarity of argument, and he is
the most deep in philosophy of life.

His Travels
-----------

In 1329/1330, he undertook a scholarly visit of Egypt, as we mentioned
above. During that visit he met with the most distinguished
intellectuals in Egypt headed by Shaykh Salim al­Bishri al­Maliki, the
then rector of Al-Azhar Mosque. The outcome of meeting him and
corresponding with him is this book which suffices to be the sweet fruit
of that visit.

By 1338, he made his religio­political migration about which you have
learned a short while ago. In it he visited Damascus, Egypt, and
Palestine. In all these countries, he reaped the fruits of knowledge and
delivered invaluable lectures.

He was the first learned Shi’a to lead the thronged stampeding masses
which assembled at the Haram mosque (the Sacred Mosque) in the holy
precincts of Mecca for prayers. It was the first time that people in
thousands openly prayed behind a Shi’a Imam without resorting to
*taqiyya*.

This is why the news of his performing the pilgrimage earned such a
great fame that people kept talking about it in all Muslim lands. King
Husayn son of ‘Ali offered him the best welcome, and they met more than
once and together washed the Ka’ba.

By the close of 1355 A.H., he visited the Imams' shrines in Iraq and had
a reunion with his family and kinfolk. On the day of his arrival, the
Iraqi cabinet ministers, dignitaries, and chiefs, headed by his holiness
Sayyid Muhammad Baqir al­Sadr, welcomed him and escorted him the entire
distance from Baghdad to Falluja's bridge in motorcades. At Kerbala and
Najaf, he was met with a magnificent welcome from learned men as well as
the general public. The similitude of that fantastic welcome is indeed
rare.

I imagine him saying, when he reached the playgrounds of his childhood
and youth:

Tears overcame me when the Tawbad did I see;

And it glorified the Merciful upon seeing me...

It was only natural that he would burst into eager tears because of his
anxiety to see such heart­comforting institutes, and the latter would
glorify Allah while welcoming him, ecstatic at his arrival after an
absence which lasted for many long years.

Had he not left them satisfied? Had they not acclaimed him when he was
filling their halls with the best that fills an institute thronged with
outstanding students?

Yes, indeed. They both exchanged passion, eagerness, anxiety and
greetings. Such a purely spiritual exchange was reciprocated by all
elements of goodness and sincerity at Najaf, Kerbala, Kazimiyya and
Samarra'. There were many merry and colourful celebrations from which
time had kept him away and obstructed him from seeing them and their
distinguished dignitaries.

His meetings with the distinguished pioneers of knowledge and research
were full of benefits in the different scholarly branches of knowledge.

He proceeded travelling from Iraq to Iran. In the latter country, he was
blessed by visiting the mausoleum of Imam Rida, peace be upon him. While
he was en route, he passed by Qum and Tehran and other Iranian cities.
In all of those cities, he was met with all sorts of welcome his beloved
personality deserved.

His Legacies and Construction Projects
--------------------------------------

1) He inaugurated his construction projects with a *waqf* Husayniyya
which he built so that people might meet there on different occasions
and circumstances to uphold the tenets and receive religious education
and spiritual guidance, and also to offer their prayers. Shi’as, when he
visited Sur, did not have a mosque there.

2) He erected, in the first stages, six stores at the city's entrance.
He had a spacious house built on their rooftops wherein he planned that
it would hopefully be converted into the desired school. Unfortunately,
the completion of the project was not possible then because of the
ruling authority's opposition as well as that of seekers of
self­interest who followed its line; therefore, he had to content
himself with that portion, waiting for the opportune chance.

3) Over the other side of the building he had a unique club erected
which he named Imam Jafar al­Sadiq Club, 22.5 meters long and 15.5
meters wide, which he reserved for celebrations, learning, religious,
social and academic occasions. Then he established in 1361 A.H. a school
for girls. Like the one for boys, this school implemented a curriculum
which promoted the education of useful topics that would secure a more
ideal norm of life.

The location of the school and the club is the best in beauty, landscape
and spacious openness. The view is the beautiful water, extending
endlessly, and if you are tired of the sea and its waves, look in
another direction: towards the plains and mountains embracing the
villges as far as your eyes can see. Your sight will wander from here to
there, active, dazzled, dreaming of that captivating and enchanting
beauty of natural scenery, extending in felicity, roaming unobstructed
in pleasure and joy.

If you stand by the row of all these huge adjacent buildings, you will
see in them a great structure very well put together, strongly erected,
inspiring an awe within you because of their engineered beauty and
magnificent design. Then your awe will increasingly intensify when you
come to know its fertile output which combines both abundance of
quantity with goodness of quality.

All of this, in its completion and perfection, is but a seed,
considering the ambition of our master­author who purchased to the south
of its location a vast tract of land and linked it to the institution in
order to complement through it his charitable projects and achieve his
Islamic objectives. He hoped that in the end he might lay the foundation
of a university that would teach its students the best principles in the
widest fields of knowledge.

He saw that that way was the best to deal with any imminent danger, to
protect the new generation descending from our own to generations which
might force it to be an enemy to ours. May Allah take his hands and lead
him to whatever brings forth the well­being of this life and religion
and the welfare of Islam and Muslims; praise be to Allah, Lord of the
Universe.

Murtada Al­Yasin,

Kazimiyya, Iraq

1365 A.H./1946 A.D.


