Letter 98
=========

**Rabi’ al-Thani 11, 1330**

I Glittering Proofs
-------------------

1) Consider the Hudaybiya Treaty, Hunayn's booties, the taking of ransom
from the captives of the Battle of Badr, his (pbuh) order to slaughter a
few camels when they had a severe shortage of food rations during the
Battle of Tabük, some of their own affairs on Uhud and its valley, the
incident when Abu Hurayrah started conveying glad tidings to all those
who believed in the Unity of Allah, the incident of performing ritual
prayers for a hypocrite, the incident of their questioning the *sadaqat*
and their inquiries about debauchery, their interpretation of the verses
dealing with the *khums* and *zakat*, the two verses dealing with the
*mut’a* [temporary] marriage.

The verse dealing with the divorce thrice, their interpretation of the
traditions regarding the extra prayers during the month of Ramadan, the
latter's methods and numbers, the method of calling the *athan*, the
number of *takbirs* during funeral prayers..., to the end of the list
that is too lengthy to be dealt with in detail here. Add to this their
opposition regarding the matter pertaining to Hatib ibn Balta’ah, their
opposition to what the Prophet (pbuh) did at Ibrahim's *maqam*, the
addition of the houses of some Muslims to the building of the mosque,
the enforcement of the blood money of Abu Khirash al-Hathli to be paid
by the people of Yemen, the banishment of Nasr ibn al-Hajjaj al-Salami,
the penalty enforced on Ja’dah ibn Salam,[^1] the method to regulate the
*jizya*, the covenant to conduct the *shüra* in the well-known manner,
roaming at night and spying during day-time, the compensation in
performing the rituals..., to the end of the list of innUmarable issues
in which they aspired to achieve power and control, as well as special
interests. We have dedicated in our book *Sabil al-Mu'minin*[^2] *a
lengthy chapter to deal with them.*

II Reference to Other Incidents.
--------------------------------

2) Yet there are other texts dealing particularly with ‘Ali and the
purified progeny (as) besides the ones related to the caliphate which
they did not honour either; rather, they acted to the contrary of the
latter, as researchers know very well.

So, no wonder to see how they used their own judgment to interpret the
texts related to his caliphate; after all, isn't it just another text
which they subjected to their own views and preferred their own thinking
rather than acting upon it? Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: Refer to ‘Umar's biography in Ibn Sa’d's Tabaqat and you will see
how Ja’dah was executed for no complaint brought against him nor a
witness other than a sheet on which there were verses written by an
anonymous poet accusing Ja’dah of committing adultery.

[^2]: If you did not have a chance to read Sabil al-Muminin, try not to
miss reading Al-Fusül al-Muhimma, for it contains precious benefits
which no other book contains. We have dedicated a complete chapter to
those who interpret it; it is Chapter 8, pages 44 to 130 of the second
edition, where these matters are explained in detail.


