Glossary
========

*Athan*: the call for prayers; *muaththin* is one who performs *athan*.

*Athbat*: plural of *thabat*, one who is widely recognized as an
authority in his own field.

*‘Atiyya*: gift, present, grant, boon

*‘Awl*: one sought during the time of need, a reliable helper

*Bada'*: starting point, the very beginning of something, the onset

*Bara'ah*: dissociation or renunciation

*Baytul-Mal*: Islamic government's state treasury

*Diwan*: a collection of poems

*Faqih*: jurist, one who is knowledgeable in Islamic jurisprudence

*Fatawa*: plural of *fatwa*, a religious edict or decision

*Fiqh*: the science of Islamic jurisprudence

*Firqa*: group, party, sect

*Furü’*: branches of the faith

*Hadith*: (singular:) tradition, a statement made by Prophet Muhammad
(pbuh); its plural is: *ahadith*

*Hajj*: Islamic pilgrimage to Mecca during the prescribed period

*Ihram*: pilgrimage garb, white unwoven cotten shroud worn by pilgrims

*Ijtihad*: the degree one reaches in order to be qualified as a
*mujtahid*, one who is capable of deriving religious decisions on his
own

*Imam*: leader of an *ummah*, a group of people (small or big); he may
be the one who leads others in congregational prayers, or a supreme
relgious authority, or one of the Twelve Infallible Imams (as)

*Isnad*: the method whereby one *hadith* is traced and in the end
attributed to a *muhaddith*, traditionist, one who transmitted it the
first time

*Jahiliyya*: pre-Islamic period of ignorance

*Janaba*: uncleanness caused by seminal discharge

*Jihad*: a struggle, an effort exerted, or a war waged in defense of
Islam

*Jizya*: a protection tax paid by non-Muslims living under Muslims'
control in exchange for their exemption from the military service

*Kafir*: infidel, apostate, atheist, one who does not believe in the
existence of the Creator

*Kalam*: the science of logic

*Kalima*: synonymous to "shahada," it is a Muslim's declaration of faith
(that is, to testify that there is no god except Allah, and that
Muhammad (pbuh) is the Messenger of Allah), and it is always pronounced
in Arabic

*Khiraj*: the combination of all religious taxes collected at the end of
the Islamic lunar year

*Khums*: one-fifth of one's savings (usually paid by Shi’a Muslims) set
aside from annual income

*Khutba*: lecture, sermon; a speech delivered on a specific occasion

*Kufr*: apostacy, infidelity, disbelief

*Kunyat*: usually applied for a parent, it is the way of calling him or
her by the name of his or her oldest son (such as saying "father of
so-and-so" or "mother of so-and-so"), or it may be applied out of
respect, a tradition usually followed in Arab countries, and it is
applied as a prefix to one's name.

*Maqam*: standing place, a place where one usually stands to preach or
address the public

*Mawla*: depending on its usage, it may mean either "master" or "slave,"
or it may mean one who is most fit for a specific position of honor and
prestige. Derived from the adjective *awla* (one who is best qualified),
it means: the person who is best suited to be the religious and temporal
leader of all Muslims.

*Mu'min*: believer, one who has *iman*, conviction, true belief

*Mujtahid*: one who acquires the degree of *ijtihad* and thus becomes
capable of deriving religious decisions on his own

*Musnad*: a compilation of traditions (*ahadith*) which are
consecutively and chronologically traced to their transmitters

*Mut’a*: temporary marriage

*Mutawatir*: consecutively reported, traced by a perfect chronological
chain of ascertained narrators of *hadith*

*Najasa*: uncleanness, impurity

*Najwa*: a silent supplication

*Nuthur*: plural of *nathr*, one's pledge to do something very good to
show appreciation for the Almighty's favorable response to his
supplication and the attainment of his worldly wish

*Qayyim*: person in charge of something, one charged with authority

*Qibla*: direction towards the Ka’ba, Mecca

*Sadaqa*: (singular:) charity offered voluntarily; its plural is:
*sadaqat*

*Sahabah*: (singular:) companions of the Holy Prophet Muhammad (pbuh);
its plural is: *sahabi*

*Shari’a*: Islam's legislative system

*Shubha*: (singular) doubt, suspicion; its plural is: *shubuhat*

*Shüra*: the principle of mutual consultation, Islam's form of democracy

*Siqaya*: the act of providing water to the thirsty free of charge

*Sunan*: plural of *sunnah*: a highly commended act of worship or way
whereby a Muslim seeks nearness to Allah

*Tabi’i*: (singular:) one who accompanied for a good period of time and
learned from a *sahabi*, a companion of the Holy Prophet Muhammad
(pbuh); its plural is: *tabi’in*

*Tafsir*: (singular:) exegesis or explanation of Qur'anic verses; its
plural is: *tafasir*

*Tahara*: purification, the act of removing *najasa*, uncleanness or
impurity

*Takbir*: the act of glorifying Allah by declaring in an audible voice:
"Allaho Akbar!" Allah is Great!

*Taqiyya*: one's way of exerting precaution in order to save his life
when it is in jeopardy, Shi’as' way of trying to survive against the
presence of sure perils

*Taqlid*: the concept of following a *mujtahid* or an authority
recognized as the *a’alam*, the most knowledgeable in Islamics

*Tashahhud*: the testimony regarding Allah being the Lord and Muhammad
(pbuh) being His Servant and Messenger; it is the uttering of "Ashhadu
an la ilaha illa-Allah, wa anna Muhammad abdoho wa rasooloh"

*Tawatur*: consecutive reporting, the tracing of one particular *hadith*
to its respective chronological chain of narrators

*Tawhid*: the concept of the absolute Unity of God, the belief that God
is One and indivisible, One - and Only One - God

*Tawwabin*: the penitent ones, those who repented their reluctance to go
to the rescue of Imam Husain (as) when he was confronted with Yazid's
armies and who enlisted under the military command of al-Mukhtar and
pursued those who massacred Imam Hussain ibn Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) and
killed them

*Thiqat*: plural of *thiqah*, a trustworthy authority

*‘Ulema*: plural of *‘alim*, scholar-theologian

*Usül*: the basics of jurisprudence

*Waqf*: a piece of property dedicated for the promotion of any
particular good cause

*Wilayat*: supreme authority that combines both temporal and religious
authority

*Zakat*: Literally, it means "purification;" it is a compulsory 2.5% tax
on one of three categories of wealth: 1) metal coins (gold, silver,
etc.), 2) grain crops (barley, wheat, grain, rice, etc.), and 3) animals
raised for food consumption. *Zakat* is somehow a complicated issue, and
for details, readers are advised to consult books dealing with *fiqh*.
Among its types are: *zakat al-mal* (taxable wealth accumulated during
one full year), and *zakat al-fitr* (a tax to be paid by the head of a
household at the commencement of the fast of the month of Ramadan).

And surely Allah knows best...


