Letter 19
=========

**Thul-Hijjah 5, 1329**

I No Fair Arbitrator Would Call Followers of Ahl al-Bayt Strayers,
------------------------------------------------------------------

1) No; any fair arbitrator would never label those who have upheld the
rope of Ahl al-Bayt, who follow in their footsteps, as "strayers," nor
are they, by any means, inferior to other Imams.

II Following Their Sects is Carrying out the Responsibility,
------------------------------------------------------------

2) Adherence to their sect obligates them and clears their conscience,
just like adhering to any of the four sects; there is no doubt about
that.

III It Could be Said that They Have the Priority to Lead,
---------------------------------------------------------

3) It may be said that your Twelve Imams are even more worthy of being
followed than the four Imams or any others, since all of them follow one
sect which they have scrutinized and agreed upon by consensus.
Contrariwise, the four Imams' disagreements among themselves exist in
all departments of jurisdiction, leaving its sources exclusive,
unchecked. It is well known that if one person verifies something, his
effort cannot equate that of twelve Imams. This is clear to any fair
minded person, ant it leaves no argument for any unjust peron. Yes, the
Nasibis may dispute referring your sect to the Imams of Ahl al-Bayt, and
I may, at a later time, ask you to prove their error.

IV Requesting Texts Relevant to the Khilafate.
----------------------------------------------

4) For the time being, I request you to go ahead and indicate what you
claim to be statements nominating Imam â€˜Ali ibn Abu Talib (as) as the
successor to the Prophet (pbuh). Derive your arguments from Sunni
references, and peace be with you.

Sincerely,

S


