Letter 24
=========

**Thul-Hijjah 15, 1329**

I Why Relying on this Hadith,
-----------------------------

1) Sunnis rely on every correct hadith to confirm their concept of
succession, be it *mutawatir* or not. We rely on the authenticity of
this hadith in our argument against theirs simply because they
themselves testify to its authenticity, thus binding themselves to what
they have considered to be binding. Our own proof regarding succession
from our viewpoint depends on its tawatur from our own sources, as is
obvious to everyone.

II Restricted Succession is Unanimously Rejected,
-------------------------------------------------

2) The claim that ‘Ali is the successor of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
only in his household is rejected due to the fact that whoever believes
that ‘Ali is the successor of the Messenger of Allah in his household
also believes that he is his successor among the public as well, and
whoever denies his succession over the public also denies his succession
among his family. There is no way to separate one from the other; so,
why bring up a philosophy which runs contrary to the consensus of all
Muslims?

III Revocation is Impossible
----------------------------

3) I cannot overlook your statement that this hadith is revoked, which
contradicts both reason and Shari’a, since in order to abrogate, a
statement has to be made before the effect of its precedent becomes
manifest, as is clear to everyone. The only pretext for abrogation here
is the allegation that the Prophet (pbuh) supposedly refrained from
[publicly] expounding on the gist of this hadith.

The hadith itself proves that he, peace and blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny, did not refrain from doing so; rather, texts in
this meaning are consecutive, supporting one another. If we suppose that
there is no text in the same meaning after this one, then how can it be
proven that the Prophet (pbuh) had changed his mind or refrained from
its enforcement?

***"They follow nothing other than their own whims and desires, after
guidance from their Lord has already come unto them (Qur'an, 53:23),"***

and peace be with you.

Sincerely: *Sh*


