Letter 26
=========

**Thul-Hijjah 17, 1329**

I Clear Texts Recounting Ten of ‘Ali's Exclusive Merits,
--------------------------------------------------------

1) Suffices you, besides the hadith of the Household, what Imam Ahmad
has indicated in Vol. 1 of his book *Al-Mustadrak*, and al-Thahbi in his
Concise, who both admit its authenticity, as well as other authors of
the *sunan* from generally accepted avenues. They all quote ‘Umar ibn
Maymun saying: "I was sitting once in the company of Ibn ‘Abbas when
nine men came to him and said ‘O Ibn ‘Abbas! Either come to debate with
us, or tell these folks that you prefer a private debate.' He had not
lost his eye-sight yet. He said: ‘I rather debate with you.' So they
started talking, but I was not sure exactly what they were talking
about. Then he stood up and angrily said: ‘They are debating about a man
who has ten merits nobody else ever had. They are arguing about a man
whom the holy Prophet (pbuh) has said, ‘I shall dispatch a man whom
Allah shall never humiliate, one who loves Allah and His Messenger
(pbuh) and who is loved by both,' so each one of them thought to him
such an honour belonged.

The holy Prophet (pbuh) inquired about ‘Ali. When the latter came unto
him, with his eyes swelling in ailment, he (pbuh) blew in his eyes,
shook the standard thrice and gave it to him. ‘Ali came back victorious
with Safiyya bint Huyay [al-Akhtab] among his captives.'" Ibn ‘Abbas
proceeded to say, "Then the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) sent someone with
surat al-Tawbah, but he had to send ‘Ali after him to discharge the
responsibility, saying: ‘Nobody can discharge it except a man who is of
me, and I am of him.'" Ibn ‘Abbas also said, "The Messenger of Allah
(pbuh), with ‘Ali sitting beside him, asked his cousins once: ‘Who among
you elects to be my *wali* in this life and the life hereafter?'

They all declined, but ‘Ali said: ‘I would like to be your *wali* in
this life and the life to come,' whereupon he (pbuh) responded by
saying: ‘You are, indeed, my *wali* in this life and the life
hereafter.'" Ibn ‘Abbas continues to say that ‘Ali was the first person
to accept Islam after Khadija, and that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
took his own robe and put it over ‘Ali, Fatima, Hasan and Husayn, then
recited the verse saying:

***"Allah wishes to remove all abomination from you, O Ahl al-Bayt
[people of my household] and purify you with a perfect purification
(Qur'an, 33:33)."***

He has also said: "‘Ali bought his own soul. He put on the Prophet's
garment and slept in his bed when the infidels sought to murder him,"
till he says: "The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) went on Tabuk expedition
accompanied by many people. ‘Ali asked him: ‘May I join you?' The
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) refused, whereupon ‘Ali wept. The Prophet
(pbuh) then asked him: ‘Does it not please you that your status to me is
similar to that of Aaron's to Moses, except there is no Prophet after
me? It is not proper for me to leave this place before assigning you as
my vicegerent.' The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has also said the
following to him: ‘You are the *wali* of every believing man and
woman.'"

Ibn ‘Abbas has said: "The Messenger of Allah closed down all doors
leading to his mosque except that of ‘Ali who used to enter the mosque
on his way out even while in the state of *janaba*. The Messenger of
Allah (pbuh) has also said: ‘Whoever accepts me as the *wali*, let
him/her take ‘Ali as the *wali*, too.'"

As a matter of fact, al-Hakim, having counted the sources from which he
quoted this hadith, comments by saying, "This is an authentic hadith
according to *isnad*, yet both shaykhs did not narrate it this way."
Al-Thahbi has quoted it in his *Talkhis* and described it as an
authentic hadith.

II Why Rely Upon it.
--------------------

2) Clear and irrefutable proofs highlight the fact that ‘Ali was the
Prophet's vicegerent. Have you noticed how the Prophet (pbuh) has named
him *wali* in this life and the life to come, thus favouring him over
all his kin, and how he regarded his status to himself as similar to
that of Aaron to Moses, without any exception other than Prophethood,
and exception which reflects generality?

You also know that what distinguished Aaron from Moses was mostly his
being the vizier of his brother, his *de facto* participation in his
brother's Message, his vicegerency, and the enforcement by Moses of
people's obedience to Aaron as his statement, to which references is
included in the Holy Qur'an (20:29-32), and which clearly says: "And let
my brother Aaron, from among my household, be my vizier, to support me
and take part in my affair," and his statement:

***"Be my own representative among my people; reform them, and do not
follow the path of corrupters (Qur'an 7:142),"***

and the Almighty's response:

***"O Moses! Granted is your prayer (Qur'an 20:36)."***

According to this text, ‘Ali is the Prophet's vicegerent among his
people, his vizier among his kin, his partner in his undertaking - not
in Prophethood - his successor, the best among his people, and the most
worthy of their leadership alive or dead. They owed him obedience during
the Prophet's lifetime as the Prophet's vizier, just as Aaron's people
had to obey Aaron during the lifetime of Moses.

Whoever becomes familiar with the status hadith will immediately
consider its deep implications without casting any doubt at the gist of
its context. The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has made this very clear when
he said: "It is not proper for me to leave this place before assigning
you as my vicegerent."

It is a clear text regarding his succession; nay, it even suggests that
had the Prophet (pbuh) left without doing so, he would have done
something he was not supposed to have done. This is so only because he
was commanded by the Almighty to assign him as his own successor
according to the meaning of the verse saying

***"O Messenger! Convey that which has been revealed unto you from your
Lord, and if you do not do it, then you have not conveyed His Message at
all (Qur'an 5:67)."***

Anyone who examines the phrase "then you have not conveyed His Message
at all," then examines the Prophet's statement: "It is not proper for me
to leave this place before assigning you as my vicegerent," will find
them both aiming at the same conclusion, as is quite obvious.

We should also not forget the Prophet's hadith saying: "You are the
*wali* of every believer after me." It is a clear reference to the fact
that he is the Prophet's *wali* and the one who takes his place, as
al-Kumait, may Allah have mercy on his soul, has implied when he said:
"A great Vicegerent, a fountain-head of piety, an educator!" And peace
be with you.

Sincerley,

*Sh*


