Letter 28
=========

**Thul-Hijjah 19, 1329**

I The Status Hadith Stands on Most Solid Grounds,
-------------------------------------------------

1) Al-Amidi has done nobody injustice except his own self by casting
doubt about the authenticity of this hadith which is one of the most
accurate *sunan* and a most solid legacy.

II Binding Proofs,
------------------

2) Nobody else has doubted its accuracy, nor did anyone else dare to
argue about its grounds. Even al-Thahbi, who is a most prejudiced
narrator, has admitted its accuracy in his *Talkhis Al-Mustadrak*[^1]*.*
Ibn Hajar al-Haithami, in spite of his antagonistic views embedded in
his *Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa*, has quoted this hadith in his chapter on
"Al-Shubuhat," citing statements by the foremost narrators of hadith
testifying to its accuracy; so, refer to that book. Had this hadith not
been accurate, al-Bukhari would not have included it in his book, in
spite of his prejudice when it comes to counting ‘Ali's merits and those
of Ahl al-Bayt (as).

Mu’awiyah was the leader of the oppressive gang. He stood in enmity
against the Commander of the Faithful (as), fought him, cursed him from
Muslims' pulpits and ordered people to do likewise. Yet, in spite of his
insolent hostility, he never doubted the status hadith. Nor has Sa’d ibn
Abu Waqqas exaggerated when he, according to Muslim, was asked by
Mu’awiyah why he hesitated to denounce "Abu Turab;" he answered him by
saying:[^2] "

I remember three ahadith of the Messenger of Allah which I have
personally heard, because of which I shall never curse him. Had I had
just one of his exclusive merits, it would have been more precious for
me than a herd of the choicest red camels. I have heard the Messenger of
Allah (pbuh), who was then accompanied by a few people participating in
some of his campaigns, saying to ‘Ali: ‘Are you not pleased that your
status to me is similar to that of Aaron to Moses except that there will
be no Prophet after me?'"[^3] Mu’awiyah was dumbfounded, and he could
not utter a word or pressure Sa’d.

In addition to all of this, Mu’awiyah himself has narrated the same
hadith. Ibn Hajar says in his book *Al-Sawa’iq Al-Muhriqa*:[^4] "Ahmad
has said that a man once asked Mu’awiyah a question and his answer was:
‘Forward your question to ‘Ali because he is more knowledgeable.' Yet
the man said: ‘Your own answer to this matter is dearer to me than that
of ‘Ali.'

Mu’awiyah was angry, and he said: ‘What a bad statement you have
uttered! You hate a man whom the Messenger of Allah used to gorge with
knowledge? He even told him that his status to him was like that of
Aaron to Moses except that there would be no Prophet after him? Whenever
‘Umar was confused about a matter, he sought ‘Ali's advice....'"[^5] In
short, the status hadith is considered, according to the consensus of
all Muslims, regardless of their sects and inclinations, to be
authentic.

III Its Sunni Narrators,
------------------------

3) Authors of both *Al-Jami’ Baynal Sihah Al-Sitta* and *Al-Jami’ Bayna
Rijal al-Sahihain* have quoted it, and it is included in Bukhari's
chapter on the Battle of Tabuk in his *Sahih*, in Muslim's chapter on
‘Ali's merits in his *Sahih*, in a chapter on the attributes of the
Prophet's companions in Ibn Majah's *sunan*, and in a chapter on ‘Ali's
merits in Hakim's *Al-Mustadrak*. Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal has quoted it in
his *Musnad* from several different reporters. Ibn ‘Abbas, Asma' bint
‘Amis, Abu Sa’d al-Khudri, Mu’awiyah ibn Abu Sufyan,[^6] and many other
companions have all narrated it as recorded in the *musnad*.

Al-Tabrani has quoted it as narrated by Asma' bint ‘Amis, Umm Salamah,
Habis ibn Janadah, Ibn ‘Umar, ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib (as),[^7] and many
others. Al-Bazzaz has included it in his *Musnad*,[^8] and so has
al-Tirmithi in his *Sahih*[^9] *depending on the authority of Abu Sa’id
al-Khudri. In Al-Isti’ab*, in a chapter dealing with ‘Ali, the author
quotes Ibn ‘Abdul Birr narrating it, then he comments thus: "This is one
of the most reliable and accurate ahadith narrated about the Prophet by
Sa’d ibn Abu Waqqas." Sa’d's references are nUmarous and are enUmarated
by Ibn Abu Khayth’amah and others. Ibn ‘Abbas, Abu Sa’id al-Khudri, Umm
Salamah, Asma' bint Amis, Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah, and quite a few other
traditionists have all narrated it."

As a matter of fact, whoever researches the Battle of Tabuk and refers
to books of traditions and biographies will find them mentioning this
hadith. Those who have written biographies of ‘Ali, among authors of
glossaries of ancient as well as modern times, regardless of their
inclinations and sectarian preferences, have all quoted this hadith. It
is also quoted by anyone who writes about the merits of Ahl al-Bayt,
those of the Imams among the companions of the Prophet (pbuh) such as
Ahmad ibn Hanbal, and by others before or after his time. It is a hadith
taken for granted by all past Muslim generations.

IV Why al-Amidi Suspects It.
----------------------------

4) There is no lesson to learn about the doubt cast by al-Amidi
regarding this hadith in his *Musnad*, since the man knows nothing about
the science of traditions, and his knowledge about *musnad*s and
narrators is the knowledge of illiterate commoners who do not know the
meaning of hadith. In fact, his own extensive knowledge in the science
of usul is the reason why he has fallen in such a dilemma. According to
the requirements of usul, he saw it to be a correct hadith which he
could not get rid of except by suspecting its isnad, thinking that that
would be possible. Indeed, that was only his unattainable desire, and
peace be with you.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: Letter No. 26 contains his admission of its authenticity.

[^2]: This occurs in his section dealing with ‘Ali's virtues at the
beginning of page 324, Vol. 2, of his Sahih.

[^3]: Al-Hakim, too, quotes it at the beginning of page 109, Vol. 3, of
his Al-Mustadrak, admitting its authenticity due to its being endorsed
by Muslim.

[^4]: This occurs in the fifth maqsad of Al-Maqasid when the author
discusses verse 14 in Section 11, page 107, of Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa.

[^5]: He says that others have quoted it, and that some added to it "Get
up; may Allah never allow you to stand up," and his name is omitted from
the diwan, to the end of his quotation on page 107 of his Al-Sawa’iq
al-Muhriqa. This proves that a group of late traditionists besides Ahmad
has quoted the status hadith from Mu’awiyah.

[^6]: As we mentioned in the beginning of this Letter, quoting the fifth
maqsad of the Maqasid of verse 14 of the verses discussed in Chapter 11,
Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, page 107.

[^7]: As Ibn Hajar describes in the first hadith of the forty ones which
he discusses in the second section of chapter 9, page 72, of his
Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa. Al-Sayyuti has stated the following while
discussing ‘Ali (as) in his chapter on the righteous caliphs:
"Al-Tabrani has quoted this hadith from all these men, adding to them
Asma' bint Qays."

[^8]: Al-Sayyuti indicates so while discussing ‘Ali (as) in his chapter
on the caliphs on page 65.

[^9]: As attested to by hadith 2504 of the hadith of Kanz al-’Ummal,
page 152, Volume 6.


