Letter 30
=========

**Thul-Hijjah 22, 1329**

I Arabs Regard it General,
--------------------------

1) We refer their argument that the hadith lacks a general application
to Arabs who are very well familiar with their language and grammar. You
are the Arabs' authority whose view is invincible and undisputed. Do you
see your nation doubting the generality of this status hadith? I do not
think so. You are above that. Persons of your prestige do not doubt the
generality of the additive gender and its inclusion of all implications.

If you, for example, say: "I have granted you my judicial power," will
your power be restricted to a few matters rather than others? Or will
your statement be general and inclusive of all implications? Allah be
Praised! You do not see it other than general, and its meaning as
inclusive! If the Muslims' ruler says to one of his subjects: "I have
appointed you my own vicegerent over people," or "granted you my own
status, or position, over them, or granted you my own wealth," will it
come to mind anything other than the general meaning of such a
statement? Or will the speaker wish to select some matters rather than
others? If he said to one of his ministers: "You may enjoy during my
lifetime the same position ‘Umar enjoyed during the lifetime of Abu
Bakr, but you are not my friend," would this statement be seen,
according to common rules, as implying a few situations rather than all?

I do not see you saying accepting anything other than its general
application, and I do not doubt at all that you interpret the statement
of the holy Prophet: "Your status to me is like that of Aaron to Moses"
except as indicative of generality of application, following the
guidelines of its similar texts in the Arabic language and its norms of
speech, especially when he excluded Prophethood, thus making its
generality inclusive of everything else quite clear. You are surrounded
by Arabs; so, ask them if you wish.

II Disproving Claim of Restriction,
-----------------------------------

2) As regarding the debater's statement claiming that this hadith is
restricted to its context, this claim is rejected on two grounds:

First, the hadith itself is generalizing, as you know. The assumption
"If we presume that it is specific" does not exclude it from its general
meaning, because whoever makes an assumption does not confine his
assumption to only one single possibility. Say, if one person in the
state of *najasa* (impurification) touches Surat al-Kursi [verse of the
Throne] for example, and you tell him: "Nobody in the state of *najasa*
should touch the holy Qur'an," will your statement be confined to Surat
al-Kursi only, or will it be general regarding the entire text of the
holy Qur'an?

I cannot imagine that anyone will understand that it is restricted to
Surat al-Kursi in particular. If a physician sees his patient eating
dates and forbids him from eating anything sweet, will the prohibition
be taken to imply only dates, or will it be general to include
evertything sweet? I do not consider the one who claims its meaning to
be restricted as one adhering to the common concepts of the basics of
language; rather, he will then be distant from its grammar, far from
commonsense, a foreigner to our world. So is the one who claims that the
status hadith is applied specifically to the Battle of Tabuk alone;
there is no difference between both cases.

Second, this hadith was not articulated by the Prophet (pbuh) upon
leaving ‘Ali (as) as his representative in Medina during the Battle of
Tabuk; otherwise, the debater will have had the right to claim its
restricted application. Our *sahih* books are sequential through the
Imams among the Prophet's purified progeny (as) proving that it was said
on other occasions to which the researcher may refer. Sunni *sunan* bear
witness to this fact, as researchers know. We say that the wording of
this hadith testifies to the fact that the claim that it was said only
during the Battle of Tabuk is groundless, as is already obvious.

III Disproving its Non-Binding Application
------------------------------------------

3) Their claim that the specified generalization cannot be binding over
the rest is an obvious mistake and a serious error. Nobody would say so
except one who approaches matters like someone riding a blind animal in
a dark night. We seek refuge with Allah against ignorance, and we thank
Him for our sound health.

Specifying the general does not exclude it from being applied as a
testimony against the rest as long as the specified matter is not
general, especially if it is related to this hadith. If a master tells
his servant: "Be generous to everyone who is visiting me today save
Zayd." If the servant surrounds only Zayd with generosity, he will not
only be disobeying his master and become liable for his error, according
to the judgment of all the wise, he will also deserve to be punished a
punishment commensurate with his mistake.

No wise man would listen to his excuse if he produces one; nay, even his
excuse will seem to them to be even worse than his guilt. This is so
only because of its obvious general implication, having been specified,
regarding the rest, as is obvious.

You very well know that Muslims have always been accustomed to use as
proof the specified generalizations without any exception. The ancestors
among the companions and the tabi’in, as well as those who followed the
latter, and so on till today, especially the Imams among the progeny of
the Prophet (pbuh) and all other Imams among the Muslims, do just that.
This is a matter which does not need raising any doubts.

Suffices you for proof what the four Imams and other Mujtahids have said
in their chapters on being aware of the branches of legislative rules as
proofs of their explanations. The wheel of knowledge has been spinning
on acting upon generally accepted facts. There is nothing general that
does not have room for a specification. If these generalities are
dropped, the door of knowledge will be shaken. We seek refuge with
Allah, and peace be with you.

Sincerely,

*Sh*


