Letter 32
=========

**Thul-Hijjah 24, 1329**

I Among Its Sources: the Prophet's Visit to Umm Salim,
------------------------------------------------------

1) One of its sources is the discourse of the Prophet (pbuh) with Umm
Salim,[^1] a woman of lengthy achievements, a woman of wisdom who
enjoyed a special prestigious status with the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
due to being among the foremost in accepting Islam, and because of her
sincerity, contributions, and sacrifices in the cause of Islam.

The Prophet (pbuh) used to visit her and talk to her at her own house.
One day, he said to her: "O Umm Salim (mother of Salim)! ‘Ali's flesh is
of mine, and his blood is of my own; he is to me like Aaron to
Moses."[^2] It is obvious that this hadith is only an excerpt of his
lengthy hadith which is stated for the purpose of conveying the truth
and providing advice for the sake of Allah in order to highlight the
status of his vicegerent, the one who would take his own place (of
responsibility) once he is gone, and it cannot be confined to the Battle
of Tabuk.

II The Case of Hamzah's Daughter,
---------------------------------

2) A similar hadith was made in the case of Hamzah's daughter in whose
regard ‘Ali, Ja’far and Zayd disputed. The Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
said then: "O ‘Ali! You are to me like Aaron to Moses, etc."

III Leaning on ‘Ali,
--------------------

3) Another incident occurred when Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and Abu ‘Ubaydah ibn
al-Jarrah were in the company of the Prophet (pbuh) who was leaning on
‘Ali. The Prophet (pbuh) patted ‘Ali's shoulder and said: "O ‘Ali! You
are the strongest among the believers in faith, the first (man) to
embrace Islam, and your status to me is similar to that of Aaron to
Moses."[^3]

IV The First Fraternity,
------------------------

4) The ahadith narrated during the First Fraternity also include this
text. These were made in Mecca prior to the migration, when the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) consummated brotherhood among the emigrants in
particular.

V The Second Fraternity,
------------------------

5) On the occasion of the Second Fraternity, while in Medina, five
months after the migration, the Prophet (pbuh) made fraternity between
the emigrants (Muhajirun) and the supporters (Ansar). In both events, he
(pbuh) chose ‘Ali as his brother,[^4] thus preferring him over all
others, saying to him: "You are to me like Aaron to Moses except there
will be no Prophet after me." Narrations in this regard are
consecutively reported. Refer to what others state about the First
Fraternity such as the hadith narrated by Zayd ibn Abu ‘Awfah. Imam
Ahmad ibn Hanbal has included it in his book *Manaqib ‘Ali*, Ibn ‘Asakir
in his *Tarikh*,[^5] al-Baghwi and al-Tabrani in their *Mujma’s*,
al-Barudi in his *Al-Ma’rifa*, by Ibn ‘Adi[^6] and others.

The hadith under discussion is quite lengthy, and it contains guidelines
about how to establish brotherhood. It ends with: "‘Ali said: ‘O
Messenger of Allah! My soul has expired, and my spine has been broken,
having seen what you have done for your companions while leaving me
alone. If this is a sign of your anger with me, then I complain only to
you and beg your pardon.' The Messenger of Allah said: ‘I swear by the
One Who sent me to convey the truth about Him, I have not spared you
except for my own self. You are to me like Aaron to Moses, except there
will be no Prophet after me. You are my Brother, heir and companion.'
‘Ali (as) asked him: ‘What shall I inherit from you?'

He (pbuh) answered: ‘Whatever Prophets before me left for those who
inherited them: the Book of their Lord, and the Sunnah of their Prophet.
You will be my companion in my house in Paradise together with my
daughter Fatima. You are my Brother and Companion.' Then he, peace be
upon him and his progeny, recited the verse: ‘They are brethren seated
conveniently facing each other,'" referring to the brethren whose hearts
Allah has joined in affection who look at each other with sincere
compassion.

Refer also to the events of the Second Fraternity. Al-Tabrani, in his
*Al-Tafsir Al-Kabir*, quotes Ibn ‘Abbas reporting one hadith stating
that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) said to ‘Ali (as): "Are you angry
because I have established brotherhood between the Ansar and the
Muhajirun and have not selected a brother for you from among them? Are
you not pleased that your status to me is like that of Aaron to Moses,
except there will be no Prophet after me?"[^7]

VI Closing the Doors,
---------------------

6) The same hadith was also said when the companions' doors overlooking
the Prophet's mosque in Medina were ordered closed except that of ‘Ali.
Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah quotes the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and
his progeny, saying: "O ‘Ali! It is permissible for you to do at this
mosque whatever is permissible for me, and you are to me like Aaron to
Moses, except there will be no Prophet after me."

Huthayfah ibn ‘Asid al-Ghifari has said that the Prophet, peace be upon
him and his progeny, once delivered a *khutba* on the occasion of
closing those doors in which he said: "There are some men who have
disliked that I got them out of the mosque while keeping ‘Ali. Allah,
the Dear and Mighty, inspired to Moses and his brother to reside with
their people in Egypt and make their homes a *qibla* and say their
prayers," till he said: "‘Ali to me is like Aaron to Moses. He is my
Brother, and none of you is allowed to cohabit therein other than he."

The sources of this hadith are nUmarous, and they cannot all be counted
in a brief letter like this, yet I hope that what I have stated here
suffices to falsify the claim that the status hadith is confined only to
the Battle of Tabuk. How much can such a claim weigh in the light of
abundance of sources of this hadith?

VII The Prophet Comparing ‘Ali and Aaron to the Two Stars
---------------------------------------------------------

7) Anyone who is familiar with the biography of the Prophet (pbuh) will
find him, peace be upon him and his progeny, describing ‘Ali and Aaron
as the two bright stars arranged alike, neither one differing from the
other. This by itself is a testimony to the generality of status of this
hadith, yet the generality of the status is what comes to mind
regardless of any pretext, as we have explained above, and peace be with
you.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: She is daughter of Milhan ibn Khalid al-Ansari and sister of Haram
ibn Milhan. Her father and brother were martyred in the company of the
Prophet (pbuh). She possessed a great deal of accomplishment and wisdom.
She narrated a few ahadith of the Prophet (pbuh), and she is quoted by
her son Anas, in addition to Ibn ‘Abbas, Zayd ibn Thabit, Abu Salamah
ibn ‘Abdul-Rahman, and by others. She is considered to be in the first
row of those who accepted and supported the Islamic faith, and she
herself was a caller to Islam. During the pre-Islamic period of
jahiliyya, she was in love with Malik ibn al-Nadar from whom she
conceived her son Anas ibn Malik. At the dawn of Islam, she was among
the foremost to embrace it, and she invited her husband Malik to believe
in Allah and His Messenger, but he refused; so, she deserted him, and he
in his rage moved to Syria where he died as a kafir. She advised her
son, who was then ten years old, to serve the Prophet (pbuh), and the
Prophet (pbuh) accepted his service in order to please her. Many Arab
men of prestige sought her hand, but she always used to say: "I shall
not get married except when Anas reaches manhood;" so, Anas always used
to say: "May Allah reward my mother, for she took very good care of me."
Due to her own influence, Abu Talhah al-Ansari became Muslim. He sought
her hand when he was still kafir, but she refused to marry him unless he
embraced Islam; so, he accepted her invitation to embrace the new faith,
and his dowery to her was his own acceptance of Islam. She conceived a
son by him, but the baby fell sick and died; so, she said: "Nobody
should mention his death to his father before me." When her husband came
home and inquired about his son, she said: "He is in most content;" so
he thought that she meant their son was asleep. She served him his
dinner, then she put on her best clothes and perfume, and he went to bed
with her. The next day she said to him: "Pray for your son's soul." Abu
Talha narrated this story to the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) who said to
him: "Allah blessed you last night." She continues to say that he (pbuh)
invoked Allah to provide me with what I wanted and even more. In that
same night, she conceived ‘Abdullah ibn Abu Talha upon whom Allah
showered His blessings. He is the father of Ishaq ibn ‘Abdullah ibn Abu
Talha, the faqih, and his brothers were ten; each one of them was a man
of knowledge. Umm Salim used to participate in the Prophet's military
campaigns. On the Day of Uhud, she had a dagger to stab any infidel who
would come near her. She rendered Islam a great service, and I do not
know any woman besides her whom the Prophet (pbuh) used to visit in her
own house and she would offer him a present. She was aware of the status
of his progeny, knowledgeable of their rights... May Allah shower His
choicest mercy on her.

[^2]: This hadith, I mean Umm Salim's, is number 2554 of the ones
numbered in Kanz al-’Ummal as narrated on page 154 of its sixth volume.
It also exists in Muntakhab al-Kanz; so, refer to the last line of the
footnote on page 31 of Volume 5 of Ahmad's Musnad, where you will find
it verbatim.

[^3]: This is quoted by al-Hasan ibn Badr, al-Hakim in his chapter on
kunyat, al-Shirazi in his chapter on surnames, volume six, and by Ibn
al-Najjar. It is hadith 6029 and also 6032 of the ones numbered in Kanz
al-’Ummal, page 395.

[^4]: Discussing the biography of ‘Ali (as) in his Isti’ab, Ibn ‘Abd
al-Birr describes him thus: "He made brotherhood with the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, among the immigrants, then
between the immigrants and the supporters. In each of these instances,
he (pbuh) said to ‘Ali (as): ‘You are my brother in this life and the
life hereafter,' then he made brotherhood between himself and ‘Ali
(as)." The details are in the books of traditions and history. For the
details of the first brotherhood, refer to page 26, Vol. 2, of Al-Sira
al-Halabiyya, and in the second brotherhood on page 120, Vol. 2, also of
Al-Sira al-Halabiyya, where you will find how the Prophet (pbuh)
favoured ‘Ali (as) in both occasions over everyone else. In Al-Sira
al-Dahlaniyya, the details of the circumstances of the first brotherhood
and those of the second are similar to what is published in Al-Sira
al-Halabiyya. The author also stated that the second brotherhood took
place five months after the migration.

[^5]: This is quoted from Ahmad and Ibn ‘Asakir by a group of trusted
authorities such as al-Muttaqi al-Hindi; so, refer to hadith 918 of his
Kanz al-’Ummal at the beginning of page 40 of its fifth volume. It is
also quoted on page 390, Vol. 6, from Ahmad's book Manaqib ‘Ali,
numbering it hadith 4972.

[^6]: This is quoted from these Imams by a group of trusted authorities
such as al-Muttaqi al-Hindi at the beginning of page 41, Vol. 5, of of
his Kanz al-’Ummal, numbering it hadith 919.

[^7]: This is quoted by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in his Kanz al-’Ummal and
Al-Muntakhab; so, refer to the Muntakhab's footnote on page 31 of its
fifth volume regarding Ahmad's Musnad, and you will find it verbatim
just as we have quoted it here. It is not difficult to sift the gist of
the phrase "You have angered ‘Ali (as)" and comprehend the meanings of
companionship, compassion, and the love of a compassionate and kind
father to his son. If you wonder how ‘Ali had some doubts in the second
time he was left behind, although in the first time he had some doubt,
too, then he found out that the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, had kept him there just for himself, and why he did not
consider the second incident in the light of the first. The answer is
that the second incident could not be compared with the first one, for
the first was regarding the immigrants in particular; so, the comparison
did not forbid the prophet (pbuh) from creating brotherhood with ‘Ali
(as), contrary to the second which was between the immigrants and the
supporters. One immigrant in the second instance may be joined in
brotherhood to a supporter, and vice versa. Since the prophet and the
wasi were both immigrants, the assumption in the second instance was
that they should not be brothers; so, ‘Ali thought that his brother
would be a supporter, just like others by way of comparison. When the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) did not create brotherhood between him and any
of the supporters, some doubt entertained his mind, but Allah and His
Messenger insisted on favouring him, and so it was: he and the Messenger
of Allah (pbuh) became brothers, contrary to the common norm of practice
among all the immigrants and supporters at that time and place.


