Letter 34
=========

**Thul-Hijjah 27, 1329**

Research the biography of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, and you will find him describing ‘Ali and Aaron as two bright
stars in the heart of the skies, the eyes positioned in the face,
neither of them is distinguished in his nation from the other.

I The Occasion of Shabar, Shubayr, and Mushbir,
-----------------------------------------------

1) Have you noticed how he, peace be upon him and his progeny, had
insisted that ‘Ali should name his sons just like Aaron did, calling
them Hasan, Husayn, and Muhsin? He (as) has said: "I have named them
after Aaron's sons, Shabar, Shubayr, and Mushbir,"[^1] intending thereby
to emphasize the similarity between himself and Aaron, and generalizing
such a similarity in all areas and aspects.

II The Occasion of Fraternity,
------------------------------

2) For the same reason, ‘Ali has cherished his brother and favoured him
over all others, thus achieving the goal of generalizing the similarity
of both Aarons to their respective brothers, making sure that there must
be no difference between them.

He, peace be upon him and his progeny, created brotherhood among his
companions, as stated above, making, in the first incident, Abu Bakr
brother of ‘Umar, and ‘Uthman brother of ‘Abdul-Rahman ibn ‘Awf. In the
Second Fraternity, Abu Bakr became brother of Kharijah ibn Zayd, and
‘Umar was made brother of ‘Atban ibn Malik. Yet on both occasions, ‘Ali
was made brother of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, as you have come to know.

There is no room here to quote all verified texts citing Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn
‘Umar, Zayd ibn Arqam, Zayd ibn Abu ‘Awfah, Anas ibn Malik, Huthayfah
ibn al-Yemani, Makhduj ibn Yazid, ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab, al-Bara' ibn
‘Azib, ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, and others narrating this hadith as such. The
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has also said to ‘Ali: "You are my Brother in
this life and the life hereafter."[^2] In Letter No. 20, we stated how
he (pbuh) took ‘Ali by the neck, saying: "This is my Brother, vicegerent
and successor among you; therefore, listen to him and obey him." He,
peace be upon him and his progeny, came out to meet his companions with
a broad smile on his face. ‘Abdul-Rahman ibn ‘Awf asked him what pleased
him so much. He answered: "It is due to a piece of good news which I
have just received from my Lord regarding my brother and cousin, and
also regarding my daughter. The Almighty has chosen ‘Ali a husband fot
Fatima."

When the Mistress of all women of the world was wed to the master of the
Prophet's progeny (as), the Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny,
said: "O Umm Ayman! Bring me my brother." Umm Ayman asked: "He is your
brother, and you still marry him to your daughter?!" He said: "Yes,
indeed, Umm Ayman." She called ‘Ali in.[^3]

Quite often, the Prophet (as) used to point to ‘Ali and say: "This is my
brother, cousin, son-in-law, and father of my descendants."[^4] Once he
spoke to him and said: "You are my brother and companion." In another
occasion, he said to him: "You are my brother, friend, and companion in
Paradise." He once addressed him in a matter that was between him, his
brother Ja’far, and Zayd ibn Harithah, saying: "O ‘Ali! You are, indeed,
my brother and the father of my descendants. You are of me and for
me."[^5]

He made a covenant with him once saying: "You are my brother and vizier;
you complete my religion, fulfill my promise, pay my debts on my behlf,
and clear my conscience."[^6] When death approached him, may both my
parents be sacrificed for him, he said: "Fetch me my brother." They
called ‘Ali in. He said to him: "Come close to me." ‘Ali (as) did. He
kept whispering in his ears till his pure soul departed from his body.
‘Ali even caught some of the Prophet's saliva.[^7]

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, has also
said: "It is written on the gate of Paradise: ‘There is no god but
Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, ‘Ali is the Brother of the
Messenger of Allah.'"[^8]

The Almighty, when the Prophet left ‘Ali sleeping in his bed while the
enemies were outside plotting to murder him, addressed Gabriel and
Michael thus: "I have created brotherhood between both of you and let
the life-span of one of you be longer than that of the other. Which one
of you wishes to have the life of the other be longer than his own?"
Each held his own life dearer. The Almighty said: "Why can't you be like
‘Ali ibn Abu Talib between whom and Muhammad (pbuh) I have created
brotherhood, and he has chosen to sleep in Muhammad's bed, offering to
sacrifice his own life for his brother? Go down to earth and protect him
from his foes." They both came down. Gabriel stood at ‘Ali's head while
Michael stood at his feet. Gabriel cried:

***"Congratulations! Congratulations! Who can be like you, O son of Abu
Talib? Even Allah brags about you to His angels!" Regarding that
incident, the verse "And there are among men those who trade their own
lives for the Pleasure of Allah (Qur'an, 2:207)"***

was revealed.[^9]

‘Ali himself is quoted saying: "I am the servant of Allah and the
Brother of His Messenger. I am the strongest in believing in the
Prophet. Nobody else can say so except a liar."[^10] He has also said:
"By Allah! I am his Brother and *wali*, his cousin and the inheritor of
his knowledge; who else is more worthy of it than me?"[^11]

On the Day of Shura, he said to ‘Uthman, ‘Abdul-Rahman, Sa’d, and
al-Zubayr: "Do you know of anyone among the Muslims other than myself
with whom the Messenger of Allah established Brotherhood?" They
answered: "We bear witness, no."[^12] When ‘Ali stood to duel with
al-Walid during the Battle of Badr, the latter asked him: "Who are you?"
‘Ali answered: "I am the servant of Allah and the brother of His
Messenger."[^13]

When ‘Umar was caliph, ‘Ali asked him:[^14] "Suppose some Israelites
come to you and one of them told you that he was cousin of Moses, would
he receive a preferred treatment than the others?" ‘Umar answered: "Yes,
indeed." ‘Ali said: "I, by Allah, am the brother of the Messenger of
Allah and his cousin." ‘Umar took off his mantle and spread it for ‘Ali
to sit on, saying: "By Allah, you will sit nowhere else other than on my
own mantle till each one of us goes his way." ‘Ali did so while ‘Umar
was pleased by that gesture of respect for the brother and cousin of the
Messenger of Allah as long as he was in his company.

III The Occasion of Closing the Doors.
--------------------------------------

3) ‘Well, I seem to have lost control over my pen. The Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, ordered the doors of his companions' houses
overlooking the mosque to be closed for good, as a measure to protect
the mosque's sanctity against *janaba* or *najasa*, but he allowed
‘Ali's door to remain open, permitting him to cross the mosque's
courtyard even while being in the state of *janaba*, just as Aaron was
permitted to do, thus providing another proof for the similarity of
positions of both men, peace be upon them, in their respective creeds
and nations.

Ibn ‘Abbas has said: "The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, ordered all the doors of his companions closed except that of
‘Ali who used to enter even while in the state of *janaba*, having no
other way out."[^15] ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab has narrated an authentic
hadith which has been reproduced in both *sahih* books wherein he
says:[^16] "

‘Ali ibn Abu Talib was granted three tokens of prestige; had I had one
of them, it would have been dearer to me than all red camels [of
Arabia]: his wife Fatima daughter of the Messenger of Allah, his
residence at the mosque neighbouring the Messenger of Allah and feeling
at home therein, and the standard during the Battle of Khaybar."

Sa’id ibn Malik, as quoted in an authentic hadith, once mentioned a few
unique merits of ‘Ali and said: "The Messenger of Allah turned out
everyone from the mosque, including his uncle al-’Abbas and others.
Al-’Abbas asked him: ‘Why do you turn us out and keep ‘Ali?' He, peace
be upon him and his progeny, answered: ‘It is not I who has turned you
out and kept ‘Ali. It is Allah who has turned you out while keeping
him.'"[^17]

Zayd ibn Arqam has said: "A few companions of the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh) used to have the doors of their houses overlooking the mosque.
The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, then said:
‘Close down all these doors except ‘Ali's.'

Some people did not like it, and they talked about it. So, the Messenger
of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, stood one day, praised the
Almighty then said: ‘I have ordered these doors to be closed save
‘Ali's, and some of you have disliked that. I have not closed down a
door nor opened it, nor gave any order, except after being commanded by
my Lord to do so.'"[^18]

Quoting Ibn ‘Abbas, Al-Tabrani has said that the Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him and his progeny, stood up once and said: "I have not
turned you out acting on my own personal desire, nor have I left a door
open out of my own personal preference. I only follow whatever
inspiration I receive from my Lord."[^19] And the Messenger of Allah
said once to Ali (as): "O ‘Ali! It is not permissible for anybody other
than your own self to be present [in the mosque] while being in the
state of *janaba*."[^20]

Sa’d ibn Abu Waqqas, al-Bara' ibn ‘Azib, Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn ‘Umar, and
Huthayfah ibn al-Yemani, have all said: "The Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him and his progeny, came out to the mosque once and said:
‘Allah inspired to his Prophet Moses to build Him a pure mosque in which
nobody other than Moses and Aaron would live. Allah has inspired to me
to build a sanctified mosque wherein only I and my brother ‘Ali are
permitted to sleep.'"[^21]

There is no room here to state all the ascertained texts narrated by Ibn
‘Abbas, Abu Sa’id al-Khudri, Zayd ibn Arqam, a companion from the tribe
of Khath’am, Asma' bint ‘Amis, Umm Salamah, Huthayfah ibn Asid, Sa’d ibn
Abu Waqqas, al-Bara' ibn ‘Azib, ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, ‘Umar, ‘Abdullah ibn
‘Umar, Abu Tharr al-Ghifari, Abul Tufail, Buraydah al-Aslami, Abu Rafi’,
freed slave of the Messenger of Allah, Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari,
and others have all narrated the same hadith. It is also well known that
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, invoked the
Almighty once saying:

***"O Lord! The my brother Moses had prayed you saying: ‘Lord! Remove
depression from my chest, untie my tongue's knot so that people may
understand my speech, and let my brother Aaron be my vizier from among
my household to support me in my undertaking and participate therein,'
and you, Lord, responded with: ‘We shall support you through your
brother and bestow upon you a great authority (Qur'an, 28:35).'***

Lord! I am your servant Muhammad; therefore, I invoke you to remove
depression from my chest, to make my undertaking easier to carry out,
and to let ‘Ali be my brother from among my household."[^22]

Al-Bazzaz has likewise indicated that the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his progeny, took ‘Ali's hand and said: "Moses had prayed
his Lord to purify His mosque through Aaron, and I have prayed my Lord
to purify mine through you." He then sent a messenger to Abu Bakr
ordering him to close down his door which overlooked the mosque, and Abu
Bakr responded expressing his desire to honour the Prophet's command.

Then he sent another messenger to ‘Umar to do likewise, and another to
al-’Abbas for the same purpose. Then he, peace be upon him and his
progeny, said: "It is not I who has closed down your doors, nor have I
kept ‘Ali's door open out of my own accord; rather, it is Allah Who has
opened his door and closed yours."

This much suffices to prove the similarity between ‘Ali and Aaron in all
circumstances and conditions, and peace be with you.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: This is quoted by the traditionists according to their own
authentic sources of the traditions of the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his progeny. Refer to pages 265 and 168, Vol. 3, of
Al-Mustadrak, and you will find the text of this hadith described as
authentic according to the endorsement of both Shaykhs. Imam Ahmad has
also quoted it from ‘Ali's hadith on page 98, Vol. 1, of his Musnad. Ibn
‘Abdel-Birr, too, quotes the biography of the grandson of the Prophet
al-Hasan (as) from Isti’ab, and even al-Thahbi quotes it in his Talkhis,
taking its authenticity for granted, in spite of his fanaticism and
deviation from this nation's Aaron, and from its Shabar and Shubayr. It
is also quoted by al-Baghwi in his Mu’jam, and ‘Abdul-Ghani from his
Idah, as is recorded on page 115 of Al-Sawaiq al-Muhriqa, from Salman
whose text is almost similar, and also from Ibn ‘Asakir.

[^2]: Al-Hakim has quoted it on page 14, Vol. 3, of his Al-Mustadrak as
narrated by Ibn ‘Umar from two authentic sources and endorsed by both
Shaykhs. Al-Thahbi has also quoted it in his Talkhis, taking its
authenticity for granted. Al-Tirmithi, too, quotes it as cited by Ibn
Hajar on page 72 of his Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa; so, refer to the seventh
hadith of the ones included in Section 2 of Chapter 9 of Al-Sawa’iq
al-Muhriqa. All those who have discussed the brotherhood hadith among
writers of traditions and chronicles have accepted it without any
argument.

[^3]: This is quoted by al-Hakim on page 159, Vol. 3, of his
Al-Mustadrak. Al-Thahbi, too, has quoted it in his Talkhis, admitting
its authenticity. Ibn Hajar copies it in Chapter 11 of his Al-Sawa’iq
al-Muhriqa. All those who wrote about the wedding of al-Zahra' (as)
have, without any exception, mentioned it.

[^4]: This is included by al-Shirazi in his chapter on surnames, and by
Ibn al-Najjar who quotes Ibn ‘Umar. Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi has transmitted
it in his Kanz al-’Ummal and Al-Muntakhab which he attaches to the
footnote of his Musnad; so, refer to the second line of the footnote on
page 32 of its fifth volume.

[^5]: Al-Hakim quotes it on page 217, Vol. 3, of his Mustadrak, the
authenticity of whose narrators is endorsed by Muslim. Al-Thahbi has
admitted the same in his own Talkhis.

[^6]: Al-Tabrani has quoted it in his Al-Kabir from Ibn ‘Umar, and it is
transmitted by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in his Kanz al-’Ummal as well as
Al-Muntakhab; so, refer to Al-Muntakhab to see the inclusion of the
footnote on page 32, Vol. 5, of the Musnad.

[^7]: This is quoted by Ibn Sa’d on page 51, Part Two, Vol. 2, of his
Tabaqat, and also on page 55, Vol. 4, of Kanz al-’Ummal.

[^8]: This is quoted by al-Tabrani in his Al-Awsat, by al-Khatib in his
Al-Muttafaq wal-Muftaraq, and it is transmitted by the author of Kanz
al-’Ummal; so, refer to Al-Muntakhab and see the inclusion of a footnote
on page 35, Vol. 5, of Ahmad's Musnad. It is also transmitted by Ibn
‘Asakir in his footnote on page 46.

[^9]: This is quoted by authors of books of traditions in their
respective works, and it is briefly referred to by Imam Fakhrul-Din
al-Razi as he interprets this verse of Surat al-Baqara, on page 189,
Vol. 2, of his Al-Tafsir al-Kabir.

[^10]: This is quoted by al-Nisa'i in Al-Khasa'is al-’Alawiyya, and by
al-Hakim at the beginning of page 112, Vol. 3, of his Al-Mustadrak, by
Abu Shaybah and Ibn Abu ‘Asim in Al-Sunnah, and by Abu Na’im in
Al-Ma’rifa. It is also transmitted by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi in Kanz
al-’Ummal and Muntakhab al-Kanz. Refer to Al-Muntakhab and read what
Ahmad has included in the footnote on page 40, Vol. 5, of his Musnad.

[^11]: Refer to page 126, Vol. 3, of the Al-Mustadrak. It is quoted by
al-Thahbi in his Talkhis, where the author does not dispute its
authenticity at all.

[^12]: This is quoted by Ibn ‘Abdl al-Birr in ‘Ali's biography in the
Isti’ab, in addition to many other trusted authorities.

[^13]: This is quoted by Ibn Sa’d while discussing Badr's military
campaign in his Tabaqat, page 15, part One, Vol. 2.

[^14]: As Dar Qutni quotes in the fifth maqsad of the Maqasid of the
verse enjoining kindness to the Prophet's kin, and it is verse 14 of the
ones counted by Ibn Hajar in Part 11 of his Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa; so,
refer to page 107 of Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa.

[^15]: This hadith is quite lengthy, and it contains ten exclusive
merits of ‘Ali, and we have quoted it Letter No. 26.

[^16]: It exists on page 125, Vol. 3, of Al-Mustadrak. It is quoted by
Abu Ya’li, as stated in Part 3, Chapter 9, of Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa; so,
refer to page 76 of this book. It is also quoted in this meaning in
almost similar wording by Ahmad ibn Hanbal while quoting ahadith by
‘Umar and his son ‘Abdullah, and by many other trusted traditionists
through various avenues.

[^17]: As stated at the beginning of page 17, Vol. 3, of Al-Mustadrak.
This hadith is included in Sunni books of traditions, and it is quoted
by many trusted Sunni authorities.

[^18]: As quoted about him by Ahmad on page 369, Vol. 4, of the Musnad.
It is also quoted by al-Diya as stated in Kanz al-’Ummal and its
Muntakhab; so, refer to Al-Muntakhab to see what is included in the
footnote for page 29 of the fifth volume of the Musnad.

[^19]: As he is quoted by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi at the end of the footnote
on the page referred to above.

[^20]: As quoted by al-Tirmithi in his Sahih and quoted from him by
al-Muttaqi al-Hindi as we have stated when referring to his Muntakhab.
It is also quoted by al-Bazzaz from Sa’d, as stated in hadith 13 of the
ahadith which Ibn Hajar quotes in Section 2, Chapter 9, of his
Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa; so, refer to page 73 of the same.

[^21]: As they are quoted by ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Khatib, the Shafi’i
faqih who is better known as Ibn al-Maghazli, in his book Al-Manaqib
from various sources, and transmitted by the trusted researcher
al-Balkhi in Chapter 17 of his Yanabi’ al-Mawaddah.

[^22]: This is quoted by Imam Abu Ishaq al-Tha’labi from Abu Tharr
al-Ghifari in his interpretation of the following verse of Surat
al-Ma'ida: "Verily, your wali are: Allah, His Messenger, and the
Believers," in his Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, similar to which is transmitted
from Imam Ahmad's Musnad by the Balkhi researcher.


