Letter 38
=========

I Explaining the Implications of "Wali"
---------------------------------------

II Proving its Connotation
--------------------------

**Thul-Hijjah 29, 1329**

1) You have indicated, while explicating the meanings of "wali," that
whoever takes charge of anyone becomes the latter's *wali*. This,
indeed, is the connotation of "wali" in as far as those ahadith are
concerned. It is the same that comes to mind. Its meaning is similar to
saying "The minor has had for his *wali* both his father and his
paternal grandfather, then he was put in the custody of either of them,
then in the custody of the legal administrator." This implies that these
persons are the ones who are in charge of looking after him and
administer his affairs on his own behalf.

2) The proofs testifying to the meaning connoted in the word concealed
from the discreet. His statement, peace be upon him and his progeny,
"And he is your *wali* after me" clearly restricts "wilayat" to him and
only him. This mandates that we should underscore the meaning which we
have just attached to this word, a meaning which does not agree with
that of any other interpretation.

Support, love, friendship, and the like are not confined to one single
person, and the believers, men and women, are *walis* of one another.
What merit, other than what we have just indicated, could the Prophet
(pbuh) have emphasized in this hadith regarding his brother and *wali*
if we say that the meaning of the word *wali* is something else that
differs from what we have indicated above? What a hidden matter has the
Prophet (pbuh) decided to unveil through the medium of such ahadith had
the meaning of "wali" been the supporter, the loved one, or the like?

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, is above
clarifying what is already clear, or pointing out what is already taken
for granted. His wisdom is vast, his infallibility is incumbent, his
Message is conclusive and is more than what some people think. Yet these
ahadith are quite clear in stating that *wilayat* is assigned for ‘Ali
after the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny.

This, too, requires applying the same meaning which we have suggested.
It simply is not conducive to the meanings of supporter, loved one,
etc., since there is no doubt that ‘Ali is known to have been supported,
loved, and befriended by Muslims due to his being raised in the lap of
prophethood, to his contributions to the promotion of its message, till
he, peace be upon him, passed away. Supporting, loving and befriending
the Muslims, therefore, are not confined to ‘Ali alone after the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, as is quite
obvious.

Suffices you for a testimony to this meaning what Imam Ahmad has stated
on page 347 of Vol. 5 of his *Musnad* through the correct path of
narrators who cite Sa’id ibn Jubayr quoting Ibn ‘Abbas citing Buraydah
saying: "I participated in ‘Ali's invasion of Yemen, and I found him to
be cool to me; so, when I came to the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him and his progeny, I mentioned ‘Ali and belittled him; thereupon, I
saw the Messenger's face changing colour, and he asked me: ‘O Buraydah!
Do I not have more authority over the believers than the believers have
over their own selves?' I answered: ‘Yes, indeed, O Messenger of Allah'.
He (pbuh) then said: ‘To whomsoever I have been *mawla*, ‘Ali, too, is
his *mawla*."

This hadith is also quoted by al-Hakim on page 110, Vol. 3, of his
*Mustadrak*, where he considers it authentic relying on the authority of
Muslim. Al-Thahbi has quoted it in his Talkhis, taking its authenticity
for granted for the same reason thatbe Muslim, too, considers it
authentic. You yourself know the implication the introductory question
"Do I not have more authority over the believers than they themselves
have?" carries, a meaning that supports what we have suggested. Anyone
who scrutinizes these ahadith, as well as all matters relevant to them,
will have no doubt in what we have stated, and praise be to Allah.

Sincerely,

*Sh*


