Letter 40
=========

I The Verse of Wilayat and its Revelation in ‘Ali's Honour,
-----------------------------------------------------------

**Muharram 2, 1320**

II Why it was Revealed,
-----------------------

1) Yes, indeed, I would like to recite unto you one of the perfect
verses of Allah, the Exalted, the Almighty, in His great Book which
distinguishes right from wrong. It is one of the verses of Surat al
Ma'ida (Table of Viands):[^1]

***Only Allah is your*** ***wali*** ***and His Messenger and those who
believe, those who say their prayers and offer*** ***zakat*** ***(even)
while prostrating (in prayers). And whoever takes for*** ***wali***
***Allah, His Messenger, and the believers, they, indeed, are the party
of Allah; they are the ones who shall achieve victory.*** (Qur'an,
5:55-56)

Nobody doubts the fact that these verses were revealed in honour of ‘Ali
who offered his own ring in the way of Allah while engaged in performing
the prayers.

III Why Using it as a Testimonial.
----------------------------------

2) The *sahih* books consecutively report, through the authority of the
Imams from among the Purified Progeny, stating that it was revealed in
honour of ‘Ali when he, out of charity, offered his ring while
prostrating in prayers. Refer to what has been said in this regard by
others such as Ibn Salam who quotes hadith from the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny. Refer to it as published in Nisa'i's *Sahih*,
or in *Al-Jami Bayna al-Sihah al-Sittah*, in a chapter dealing with the
interpretation of Surat al Ma'ida.

Likewise, refer to the hadith of Ibn ‘Abbas who explains the meanings of
these verses in imam al-Wahidi's book *Asbab al-Nuzul*. Al-Khatib has
included it in *Al-Muttafaq*.[^2] Also refer to ‘Ali's hadith in the
*musnads* of Ibn Mardawayh and Abul-Shaykh. If you wish, refer to it in
*Kanz al-’Ummal*.

Its revelation to honour ‘Ali is a matter of consensus among scholars of
the exegesis of the Holy Qur'an. Such consensus is attested to by many
Sunni scholars like Imam al-Qawshaji in his chapter on imamate in *Sharh
al Tajrid*. Chapter 18 of *Ghayat al-Maram* includes one hadith narrated
through the Sunnis testifying to our claim.

Had I not aspired to be brief, in addition to the fact that this issue
is as clear as the sun in midday, I would have quoted for you many
comments thereupon in authentic chronicles, but, praise to Allah, it is
a matter which does not entertain any doubt. Despite that, we do not
like to let this letter be without a few ahadith narrated by the
majority of Muslims.

Suffices us what Imam Abu Ishaq Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al-Nisaburi
al-Tha’labi[^3] has stated in his *Al-Tafsir al-Kabir*. When the writer
comes to this verse, he quotes Abu Tharr al-Ghifari saying:

"I have heard the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny,
with these ears - may I be deaf if I tell a lie - and saw him with these
eyes - may I be blinded if I lie - saying: ‘Ali is the leader of the
pious, the annihilator of infidels; whoever supports him is supported by
Allah, and whoever abandons him is abandoned by Allah.' I have, indeed,
said my prayers once in the company of the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his progeny, when a beggar came to the mosque and nobody
gave him anything. ‘Ali was in the state of ceremonial prostration when
he beckoned to him to take his ring. The beggar came and took it from
‘Ali's finger, whereupon the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and
his progeny, invoked Allah, the Almighty, the Omniscient, and prayed Him
on behalf of ‘Ali saying: ‘Lord! My Brother Moses had prayed to you
saying: Lord! Remove the distress from my bosom, render my mission easy
for me, and untie my tongue's knot so that people may understand me, and
let me have a vizier from my own kin, my brother Aaron, to support my
endeavour and participate in my undertaking, so that we may both praise
you a great deal and mention your Name a great deal; You have been most
Kind unto us (Qur'an, 20:25-35);-thereupon, You inspired to him: Verily,
your prayer has been granted, O Moses! (Qur'an, 20:36).

Lord! I am Your servant and Prophet; therefore, remove my distress,
render my mission easy for me, and grant me a vizier from my kin, ‘Ali,
to support my endeavour'. By Allah, the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his progeny, had hardly finished his supplication before
Gabriel, the trusted one, brought him this verse:

***‘Only Allah is your*** ***wali*** ***and His Messenger and those who
believe, those who say their prayers and offer*** ***zakat*** ***(even)
while prostrating (in prayers). And whoever takes for*** ***wali***
***Allah, His Messenger, and the believers, they, indeed, are the party
of Allah; they are the ones who shall achieve victory (Qur'an,
5:55-56).'"***

3) You, may Allah support righteousness through your own person, know
that the meaning of the word "wali" in such a context is "one who has
the top priority in faring with one's affairs." We say "Such and such is
the minor's *wali*." Lexicographers have made it clear that whoever
takes charge of someone's affairs is the latter's *wali*.

The meaning of the verse, therefore, is as though Allah says that "the
ones who take charge of your affairs and have priority even over your
own lives in faring with the latter are: Allah, the Almighty and
Omniscient, His Messenger, and ‘Ali," for in ‘Ali alone have all these
qualities been combined: faith, saying the prayers, and offering *zakat*
even while prostrating in prayers, and for whom these verses were thus
revealed.

The Almighty has in these verses reserved *wilayat* for Himself and for
both His Messenger and *wasi* in the same manner. The *wilayat* of
Allah, the Almighty and Omniscient, is general and inclusive. So is the
*wilayat* of the Prophet as well as his *wali*; it carries the same
meaning. It is not possible to apply to it in this context the meanings
of "supporter, loved one, etc.," since such a restriction [of
application] is groundless, as is quite obvious. I believe this is a
quite clear matter, and praise to Allah, Lord of the Worlds.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: This is why people in Syria call a Shi’ah "mutawali," due to his
taking for mawla Allah, His Messenger, and those who have truly
believed, that is, those in whose honour the same verse was revealed.
Linguistically, the "mutawali" is singular, and the "mutawla" are the
Shi’ahs. They are so-called because they accepted the wilayat of ‘Ali
and Ahl al-Bayt (as).

[^2]: It is hadith number 5991 of the ones cited in Kanz al-’Ummal on
page 391, Vol. 6.

[^3]: He died in 337. Ibn Khallikan mentions him in his Wafiyyat
al-A’yan saying: "He was the unique authority of his time in the science
of exegesis; he wrote Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, which surpassed all other
books of tafsir," and he goes on to say: "He is mentioned by
‘Abdul-Ghafir ibn Isma’il al-Farisi in his book Siyaq Nisabur, where the
author lauds him and describes him as ‘accurate in transmitting,
trustworthy.'"


