Letter 42
=========

**Muharram 4, 1330**

I Arabs Address the Singular Using the Plural Form,
---------------------------------------------------

1) The answer to your question is that Arabs apply the plural expression
while addressing an individual due to the nice effect it produces [i.e.
respect].

II Testimonials,
----------------

2) A testimony to this fact is what the Almighty says in Surat
Al-i-’Imran:

***Those to whom some people said: "A large army has been raised against
you; so, fear them," yet it only increased their faith, and they said:
"Allah suffices us, and He is the One upon Whom we depend most."***
(Qur'an, 3:173)

The person implied in these verses of Al-i-’Imran is none other than
Na’im ibn Mas’ud al-Ashja’i, according to the consensus of scholars of
exegesis, traditionists, and chroniclers. Yet Allah Almighty has applied
to him, the singular person that he is, the plural form just to express
respect for those who did not listen to his statements nor heeded his
dissuading calls.

Abu Sufyan had given him ten camels in order to demoralize and frighten
the Muslims regarding the strength of the polytheists, and he did just
that. Among his statements then was: "People have gathered a mighty
force to attack you; so, fear for your own lives."

Many Muslims disliked the idea of fighting that force just because of
his statement, but the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, came out accompanied by seventy cavaliers to meet them, and
they all returned from the battle-field safely, whereupon this verse was
revealed praising the seventy believers who came out with the Messenger
of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, heedless to the dissuasion
of those who wished to demoralize them.

In applying the word "people" for just one individual, a nice and divine
point is made which is complimenting the seventy men who came out with
the Prophet. This surely sounds more eloquent when used as such; it is
better than saying: "Those to whom a man said that a large army had been
raised..., etc.," as is obvious. There are nUmarous verses in the Holy
Qur'an similar to this one, as well as in the Arabic language as a
whole. The Almighty Allah says: "O you who believe! Remember Allah's
blessing unto you when some folks intended to lay their (evil) hands
upon you, and He protected you against their harm."

In fact, the person who intended to lay his evil hands upon them and
hurt them was a man from the tribe of Muharib named Ghawrath - others
say it was ‘Amr ibn Jahsh of Banu al Nadir - who unsheathed his sword
and shook it intending to strike the Holy Prophet (pbuh), but Allah, the
Almighty and the Glorified, foiled his attempt, according to the
narration of the incident as recorded by traditionists, authors of
chronicles, and scholars of exegesis, and as transmitted by Ibn Hisham
in the campaign of That al Riqa' in Vol. 3 of his book titled *Sirah*.
Allah has applied the collective plural "people" for this lone man just
to express His blessings, the Dear One, the Omnipotent, upon the Muslim
masses manifested in the safety of the Prophet, peace be upon him and
his progeny.

In the Mubahala verse, He has applied both the singular and the plural
forms to the "sons," "women," and "selves" to both the Hasanain, Fatima,
and ‘Ali in particular, just to honour to their lofty status, may Allah
be pleased with them. Examples for the application of the plural form
for the individual wherever necessary are innUmarable and beyond
recounting, and they all prove the license to use the plural form while
talking about one individual whenever there is a nice eloquent effect
thereto.

III Quoting Imam al-Tibrisi,
----------------------------

3) In his interpretation of this verse, in *Mujma’ul Bayan fi Tafsir
al-Qur'an*, Imam al-Tibrisi comments on the usage of the plural form to
refer to the Commander of the Faithful as a token of respect and
veneration, stating that lexicographers describe the singular using the
plural form to show respect and veneration. He says: "Sucn an
application is too well known in their language to require proofs."

IV Quoting al-Zamakhshari,
--------------------------

4) In his *Kashshaf*, al-Zamakhshari mentions another nice point when he
says: "If you wonder how it can be accurate to use the plural with ‘Ali,
may Allah be pleased with him, I will tell you that he is addressed in
the plural form, although he is only one man, so that people may follow
his example and earn rewards like his, and so that Allah may point out
the fact that a believer's attitude should be like ‘Ali's, that is,
being eager to do deeds of righteousness and goodwill by looking after
the poor, so much so that even the performance of something which does
not permit any delay, such as saying the prayers, should not make them
postpone it till they are through."

V What I have Stated.
---------------------

5) I personally have a nice and more precise point. When the Almighty
applied the plural rather than the singular form, as many do, then those
who hated ‘Ali as well as all those who were envious of and in
competition with Banu Hashim would not be able to tolerate hearing it in
the singular form, for they would then be unable to hide the truth or
water it down. Because of their desperation, they might even do
something quite harmful to Islam. It is quite possible that it was for
this reason that the verse was revealed in the plural form though
applied to the singular: in order to avoid the harm resulting from
disgracing those folks.

The verses after that particular one vary in form and status, gradually
preparing them for *wilayat*, till Allah perfected His religion and
completed His blessing, as was his usual habit, peace be upon him and
his progeny, and that of the wise in attaining what otherwise is quite
difficult to attain. Had the verse come in the singular form, those
folks would have then put their fingers in their ears, covered
themselves with their own clothes and become stubborn, arrogant, and
naughty.

This is a sublime wisdom manifested in all the verses of the Holy Qur'an
which were revealed to highlight the attributes of the Commander of the
Faithful and those among his purified household, as is quite obvious. We
have explained these statements and brought irrefutable proofs and
obvious testimonies in our books *Sabil al-Muminin* and *Tanzil
al-Ayat*, and praise be to Allah for His Guidance and Support, Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*


