Letter 44
=========

I Context is not Indicative of "Supporter," or the Like,
--------------------------------------------------------

II Context does not Outweigh the Proofs.
----------------------------------------

**Muharram 5, 1330**

1) Here is my answer: This verse, if one were to scrutinize it,
overlooking the verses which precede it and which prohibit taking the
infidels for *walis*, does not connote praising the Commander of the
Faithful or recommending him for leadership and imamate by threatening
dissidents with his might or by warning them against being punished by
him. This is so because in the preceding verse, if and when scrutinized
independently, Allah Almighty states:

***"O ye who believe! If anyone of you relinquishes his religion, then
Allah will raise a people whom He loves and who love Him, soft-hearted
with the believers, mighty against the unbelievers, struggling in His
Path, not fearing anyone while doing so. This, indeed, is Allah's
favour; He grants it to whomsoever He pleases, and Allah is vast in
knowledge (Qur'an, 5:54)."***[^1]

This verse is revealed on behalf of the Commander of the Faithful (as),
warning others of his might and that of his followers, as the Commander
of the Faithful has himself stated on the Battle of the Camel and is
stated by Imams al-Baqir and al-Sadiq.

The same meaning is applied by al-Tha’labi in his *Tafsir al-Qur'an*. It
is also narrated by the author of *Muj'maul Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an*
from ‘Ammar, Huthayfah, and Ibn ‘Abbas. It is interpreted in this way
according to the consensus of Shi’as who narrate it consecutively from
the Imams of the Purified Progeny (as).

The verse of the *wilayat* will thus come after hinting to his *wilayat*
and referring to the necessity of accepting his imamate. Its context
would then be an explanation of that hint, and an elaboration on the
hint that preceded it which suggests his government; so, how can it be
said that this verse was revealed in the context of prohibiting taking
the infidels for *walis*?

2) The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, has
himself equated the status of the Imams among his descendants to that of
the Holy Qur'an, indicating that they both shall never separate from
each other, and that they are equal in significance to the Book (Qur'an)
itself; through them can right be distinguished from wrong. To them,
taking this verse as a proof is consecutively reported. The meaning they
have always applied to the word "wali" in such a context is identical to
the one which I have applied above; therefore, context does not bear any
weight if you take it to contradict their texts,[^2] for all Muslims are
in consensus regarding the application of context as a proper argument.

When context and proof collide with one another, they abandon the
connotation of the context and yield to the judgement of the proof. This
is so due to the fact that the connotation of this verse's context is
not relied upon, since the Glorious Book itself is not arranged in the
order of its compilation, according to the consensus of all Muslim
scholars, but according to the sequence of the revelation of its verses.

As such, there are quite a few verses which give a meaning that
contradicts their context. Take, for example, the Verse of Purification.
The fact that the chapter where it exists deals with women is quite
clear in restricting its connotation to the five individuals [men and
women] who were covered with the mantle. Generally speaking, to
interpret a verse in a way which contradicts its context does not in any
way violate its miraculous aspect, it does not harm its eloquence, and
it does not hurt to resort to it whenever irrefutable proofs demand it,
Wassalamo Alaikom.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: This is similar in meaning to the hadith of the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, saying: "You, folks of
Quraysh, shall never cease feuding till Allah sends you a man the
sincerity of whose faith He has tested to strike your necks with his
sword, while you run away in fear like frightened cattle." Abu Bakr
asked: "Is it I, O Messenger of Allah?" He answered: "No." ‘Umar asked:
"Is it I, O Messenger of Allah?" He answered: "No; but it is he that
mends the sandal." The narrator continues to say: "‘Ali then had in his
hand the Prophet's sandal which he was mending for the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny." This hadith has been recorded
by many authors of books of traditions, and it is hadith number 610 at
the beginning of page 393, Vol. 6, of Kanz al-’Ummal. Also similar to it
is his saying, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Among you is a man
who shall fight for the implementation of the Qur'an just as I have
fought for its revelation." Abu Bakr asked: "Am I the one?" He answered:
"No." ‘Umar asked likewise, and the Prophet (pbuh) answered: "No, but it
is the man who is inside mending the sandal," whereupon ‘Ali came out of
the room carrying the Prophet's sandal after having finished mending it.
This hadith is quoted by Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal in his Musnad as
transmitted by Abu Sa’id, and it is narrated by al-Hakim in his
Al-Mustadrak, Abu Ya’li in his Musnad, and by many authors of books of
traditions. Al-Muttaqi al-Hindi quotes it from them on page 155 of the
sixth volume of his book.

[^2]: What weight can a superficial interpretation have if it
contradicts the spirit of the entire text?


