Letter 3
========

**Thul Qi’da 7, 1329 A.H.**

I Why do Shi’as not Uphold the Majority's Sects?
------------------------------------------------

1) I ask you now about the reasons why you (Shias) do not follow the
sect of the majority of Muslims, I mean the sect of al­Ash’ari, in
determining the principles of the creed, and the four sects in its
branches. Muslims agreed to abide by them in each time and clime,
unanimously acclaiming their founder's fairness and *ijtihad*, their
trustworthiness, piety, renunciation of worldly riches,
straightforwardness, good morals and lofty status in knowledge and
deeds.

II The Need for Unity
---------------------

2) How great our need today for unity and uniformity is! This can be
achieved through your own adherence to these sects according to the
general consensus of Muslims, especially when the religion's enemies
have made up their minds to harm us by all possible means.

They have set their minds and hearts upon such goals while Muslims are
heedless, as if they are overcome by slumber, assisting their enemies
against their own selves by letting them split their own ranks and tear
their unity apart through partisanship and fanaticism, leaving them
disunited, divided, leading each other astray, excommunicating one
another; hence, wolves preyed on us while dogs coveted our flesh.

III Unity Achieved Only by Adhering to the Majority's Sects
-----------------------------------------------------------

3) Do you see other than what we state here, may Allah lead your steps
to unite our ranks? Tell me, for you will be heard when you speak and
obeyed when you command, and peace be with you.

Sincerely,


