Letter 48
=========

Forty Ahadith Supporting the Texts
----------------------------------

**Muharram 8, 1330**

Consider forty such supporting ahadith:

1) Consider the statement of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him
and his progeny, while holding ‘Ali's neck, "This is the Imam of the
righteous, the slayer of the debauchees; victorious is whoever supports
him, forsaken (by Allah) is whoever abandons him." He (pbuh) raised his
voice while saying the last phrase. This is included by al-Hakim as
narrated by Jabir on page 129, Vol. 3, of *Al-Mustadrak*,[^1] where the
author comments saying: "This is one hadith the authenticity of which is
attested to by its own chain of narrators, though both authors (of
*sahih* books) did not record it."

2) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "It has
been revealed to me that ‘Ali has three exclusive merits: that he is the
chief of the Muslims, the Imam of the righteous, and the leader of those
whose foreheads radiate with the mark of faith."

It is included by al-Hakim at the beginning of page 138, Vol. 3, of his
*Mustadrak*[^2] *where the author comments: "This is one hadith the
accuracy of which is attested to by its own chain of narrators, though
both authors (of the sahih* books) did not record it."

3) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "It has
been revealed to me that ‘Ali is the chief of the Muslims, the *wali* of
the pious, and the leader of those whose foreheads radiate with the mark
of faith." It is recorded by Ibn al-Najjar][^3] and many other authors
of books of traditions.

4) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, to ‘Ali:
"Welcome, chief of the Muslims, Imam of the pious!" It is included by
Abu Na’im in *Hilyat al-Awliya'*.[^4]

5) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "The first
to enter through this door is the Imam of the pious, the chief of
Muslims, the head of the religion, the seal of the *wasis*, and the
leader of those whose foreheads radiate with the mark of faith,"
whereupon ‘Ali entered and he, peace be upon him and his progeny, stood
up happily excited, hugged him and wiped his sweat saying: "You shall
fulfill my covenant, convey my message, and after me clarify whatever
seems to be ambiguous."[^5]

6) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Allah has
promised me that ‘Ali is the standard of guidance, the Imam of whoever
accepts my *wilayat*, the light for whoever obeys me, and the word which
I have mandanted unto the pious."[^6] As you see, these six ahadith
contain obvious texts regarding his imamate and the obligation to obey
him, peace be upon him.

7) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, pointing
to ‘Ali, "This is the first to have believed in me, the first to shake
hands with me on the Day of Resurrection; he is the foremost friend, and
he is the *faruq* of this nation who distinguishes between right and
wrong; he is the chief of the believers."[^7]

8) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "O you
group of the Ansars! Shall I lead you to that which, as long as you
adhere to it, you shall never go astray? It is ‘Ali; love him as you
love me, and respect him as you respect me, for Gabriel has commanded me
to say so to you on behalf of Allah, the Almighty, the Omniscient."[^8]

9) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "I am the
city of knowledge, and ‘Ali is its gate; whoever aspires to attain
knowledge, let him approach through the gate."[^9]

10) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "I am the
house of wisdom and ‘Ali is its gate."[^10]

11) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "‘Ali is
the gateway of my knowledge, the one who is to explain to my nation
after me what I have been sent with; loving him is a mark of genuine
faith, and hating him is hypocrisy."[^11]

12) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, to ‘Ali:
"You shall clarify to my nation all matters wherein they differ." This
is recorded by al-Hakim on page 122, Vol. 3, of his Mustadrak[^12] as
reported by Anas. The author then comments: "This is an authentic hadith
according to the endorsement of both Shaykhs [Bukhari and Muslim],
although they did not quote it themselves."

In fact, whoever scrutinizes this hadith and others similar to it will
come to know that ‘Ali's status with relevence to the Messenger of Allah
is similar to that of the Messenger of Allah to the Almighty Himself,
for Allah says to His Messenger: "We have sent you Our revelations only
so that you may clarify for them all the matters in which they dispute,
and as guidance and mercy unto those who believe;" while in this hadith
the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) tells ‘Ali: "You shall clarify to my
nation all matters wherein they differ after me."

13) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, as
recorded by Ibn al-Sammak from Abu Bakr, "‘Ali's status to me is similar
unto that of mine to my Lord."[^13]

14) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, as
recorded by al-Dar Qutni in *Al-Afrad* where the author quotes Ibn
‘Abbas citing the Prophet saying: "‘Ali ibn Abu Talib is (like) the gate
of salvation to the Israelites; whoever enters through it becomes a true
believer [mu'min], and whoever gets out of it becomes infidel."[^14]

15) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, on the
day of ‘Arafat during Hijjatul Wada’ [the farewell pilgrimage]: "‘Ali is
of me, and I am of ‘Ali, and nobody pays my debts other than I or
‘Ali."[^15]

***"It is the statement of a glorious Messenger empowered by the One Who
manifests the Throne, Able, Obeyed: how trustworthy He is! Nay! Your
fellow is not possessed at all." (Qur'an, 81:19-22)***

***"He does not speak out of his own personal inclination; it is but a
revealed inspiration." (Qur'an, 53:3-4)***

So, whither are you going? And what shall you say about these clear
arguments and explicit texts?

If you carefully scrutinize this much, examine the wisdom behind making
such an announcement during the supreme pilgrimage in front of the
witnesses, truth will then appear to you most manifestly. And if you
examine his words how few, and their meaning how encompassing, you will
then have a great reverence for him, for he has learned a great deal and
digested and researched what he has learned.

None other than ‘Ali remains to be worthy of discharing any
responsiblity. No wonder, then, that he, and only he, executes the
Prophet's own will, taking his own position of leadership as vicegerent
and vizier; praise be to Allah Who has guided us to all this, for
without Allah's guidance, we would not have been thus guided.

16) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Whoever
obeys me obeys Allah, and whoever disobeys me disobeys Him; and whoever
obeys ‘Ali obeys me, too; and whoever disobeys ‘Ali also disobeys me."
This is recorded by al-Hakim on page 121, Vol. 3, of his *Mustadrak*,
and by al-Thahbi in his *Talkhis*. Both authors have relied on the
authority of both Shaykhs to endorse this hadith.

17) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "O ‘Ali!
Whoever abandons me abandons Allah; and whoever abandons you abandons
me, too." This is recorded by al-Hakim on page 124, Vol. 3, of his
*Sahih*, where he comments saying: "This hadith is authentic through
*isnad*, though the Shaykhs did not record it."

18) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, as quoted
by Umm Salamah, "Whoever denounces ‘Ali denounces me, too," which is
recorded by al-Hakim at the beginning of page 121, Vol. 3, of
*Al-Mustadrak* as ascertained by both Shaykhs, and it is narrated by
al-Thahbi in his *Talkhis* where the author testifies to its
authenticity.

It is recorded by Ahmad among the *ahadith* narrated by Umm Salamah on
page 323, Vol. 6, of his *Musnad*, and by al-Nisa'i on page 17 of
*Al-Khasa'is al-Alawiyya*, in addition to many other traditionists. So
is the statement of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, as included among the ahadith narrated by ‘Amr ibn Shash thus:
"Whoever harms ‘Ali harms me, too."[^16]

19) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Whoever
loves ‘Ali loves me, too; and whoever despises ‘Ali despises me, too."
This hadith is recorded by al-Hakim who describes it as authentic on
page 130, Vol. 3, of *Al-Mustadrak*, and it is narrated by al-Thahbi in
his *Talkhis* where he admits reference to its authenticity for the same
reason. Such is the case of ‘Ali's statement:[^17] "I swear by the One
Who has cleft the seed [so that a plant may grow therefrom] and created
the breeze from nothing, the Ummi Prophet (pbuh) has promised me that
nobody loves me except a true believer (*mu'min*), and nobody hates me
except a hypocrite."[^18]

20) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "O ‘Ali!
You are a leader in this life and the life hereafter; whoever loves you
loves me, too, and whoever loves me is loved by Allah; your foe is my
foe, and my foe is Allah's foe; woe unto whoever despises you after
me."[^19] This is recorded by al-Hakim at the beginning of page 128,
Vol. 3, of *Al-Mustadrak*, and its authenticity is ascertained by both
Shaykhs.[^20]

21) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "O ‘Ali!
Glad tidings to whoever loves and believes in you, and woe unto whoever
hates you and tells lies about you." This is recorded by al-Hakim on
page 135, Vol. 3, of his *Al-Mustadrak*, where he comments saying: "This
hadith is authentic by way of its being consecutively reported (through
*isnad*, consecutive reporting). Neither shaykh records it."

22) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Whoever
wishes to live the way that I have lived and die the way that I shall
die and reside in the Eternal Garden, which is promised to me by my
Lord, let him accept ‘Ali as his/her *wali*, for surely he never gets
you out of guidance, nor will he ever hurl you into misguidance."

23) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "I enjoin
whoever believes and trusts in me to be mindful of the *wilayat* of ‘Ali
ibn Abu Talib, for whoever accepts him as the *wali* accepts me as such,
and whoever accepts me as the *wali* has indeed accepted Allah as such;
and whoever loves him loves me, and whoever loves me loves Allah; and
whoever hates him hates me, too, and whoever hates me hates Allah, the
Almighty, the Omniscient."

24) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Whoever
is pleased to live my life and die my death, and then reside in the
Garden of Eden, planted for me by my Lord, then let him take ‘Ali as the
*wali* after me, and let him accept the authority of whoever ‘Ali places
in charge, and let him follow the examples of my progeny after me, for
they are my offspring: they are created out of my own mould and blessed
with my understanding and knowledge; therefore, woe unto those who deny
their favours from among my nation, who cut their ties with them; may
Allah never grant them my intercession."

25) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Whoever
loves to live my life and die my death and enter the Garden my Lord has
promised me, the Garden of Eternity, then let him take ‘Ali and his
descendants after him as his *walis*, for they shall never take you out
of guidance, nor shall they ever drag you into misguidance."[^21]

26) At the beginning of page 156, Vol. 6, of *Kanz al-’Ummal*,
al-Daylami quotes Ammar citing the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) telling
‘Ammar the following: "O ‘Ammar! If you see ‘Ali walking on one path
while other people walk on another, walk with ‘Ali and leave the people,
for he shall never lead you to destruction, nor shall he ever take you
out of right guidance."

27) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, according
to one hadith narrated by Abu Bakr, "My hand and ‘Ali's are equal when
it comes to justice." This is hadith 2539 recorded on page 153, Vol. 6,
of *Kanz al-’Ummal*.

28) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "O
Fatima! Are you not pleased that Allah, the Unique, the Sublime, has
looked unto the inhabitants of the earth and chose from among them two
men: one of them is your father and the other is your husband?"[^22]

29) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "I am the
Warner, and ‘Ali is the Guide; through you, O ‘Ali, shall guidance be
attained after me." This is recorded by al-Daylami who quotes Ibn
‘Abbas, and it is hadith 2631 on page 157, Vol. 6, of *Kanz al-’Ummal*.

30) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "O ‘Ali!
Nobody is permitted to remain in the state of *janaba* other than I and
you."[^23] Likewise is the hadith recorded by al-Tabrani as quoted by
Ibn Hajar in his *Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa* as narrated by Umm Salamah,
al-Bazzar, and Sa’d; so, refer to hadith 13 of *Al-Arba’in al-Nawawiyya*
which he quotes in Chapter 9. The latter quotes the Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him and his progeny, saying: "Nobody is permitted to be in
the state of *janaba* in this mosque except I and ‘Ali."

31) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "I and
this (meaning ‘Ali) are the Proofs unto my nation on the Day of
Judgement." This is recorded by al-Khatib as narrated by Anas. How could
the father of al-Hassan (as) be Proof just like the Prophet (pbuh) was,
had he not been his vicegerent and successor?

32) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "It is
written on the gate of Paradise: ‘There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is
the Messenger of Allah, ‘Ali is the Brother of the Messenger of
Allah.'"[^24]

33) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "It is
written on the Throne's leg: ‘There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is the
Messenger of Allah, I (God) have supported him (Muhammad) through ‘Ali,
and I have aided him through ‘Ali."

34) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Whoever
wishes to discern Noah's determination, Adam's knowledge, Ibrahim's
clemency, Moses' discretion, Christ's asceticism, then let him look unto
‘Ali." This is recorded by al-Bayhaqi in his *Sahih* and by Imam Ahmad
ibn Hanbal in his *Musnad*.[^25]

35) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "O ‘Ali!
There is a resemblance in you to Jesus (as) who was hated by the Jews to
the extent that the latter even cast doubts about his mother's honour,
and loved by the Christians to the extent that they attributed to him a
status which is not his."

36) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "The
foremost (among believers) are three: Joshua son of Nun [of the tribe of
Ephraim - tr.] who was the foremost to believe in Moses, the believer
implied in Surat Yasin [Chapter 36 of the Holy Qur'an] who was the
foremost to believe in Jesus, and ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib who was the
foremost in believing in Muhammad (pbuh)."[^26]

37) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "The
foremost in testifying (to the Prophets' truth) are three: Habib
al-Najjar, the believer implied in Surat Yasin, who said: ‘O my people!
Follow the Messengers (of God);' Izekiel [whose name means "Strength of
God" - tr.], the believer from the family of Pharaoh, who said: ‘Do you
intend to kill a man just for saying that his Lord is Allah?,' and ‘Ali
ibn Abu Talib, who is superior to all of them."[^27]

38) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, to ‘Ali:
"The nation will turn treacherous to you; you shall live adhering to my
faith and will be murdered for safeguarding it; whoever loves you loves
me, too, and whoever hates you hates me, too, and this (‘Ali's beard)
will be drenched with blood from this (‘Ali's head)."[^28] ‘Ali (as)
himself has said: "One of the Prophet's predictions is that the nation
will be treacherous to me after his demise."

Ibn Abbas has quoted the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, telling ‘Ali, "You will certainly encounter a great deal of
hardship after me;"[^29] ‘Ali inquired: "Shall I be able to keep my
faith intact?" and the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, answered him in the affirmative.

39) Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Among
you is one who will fight for its (Qur'an's) interpretation just as I
fought for its revelation." The audience was very excited. Among them
were Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. Abu Bakr asked: "Am I the one?" and the
Prophet's answer was negative. ‘Umar inquired: "Is it I?" and the
Prophet (pbuh) answered: "No; but it is the one who is mending the
shoes," meaning thereby ‘Ali; therefore, we visited ‘Ali to convey the
good news to him, but he did not even raise his head, as if he had
already heard it from the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny."[^30]

Similar narrative is the hadith narrated by Abu Ayyub al-Ansari during
‘Umar's caliphate. According to al-Hakim, who relies on two references
which he indicates on page 139 and the page that follows it, Vol. 3, of
his *Mustadrak*, ‘Umar has said that the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his progeny, ordered those who reneged from their faith,
and who dissented, to be fought. Ibn ‘Asakir, as indicated in hadith
2588 on page 155, Vol. 6 of *Kanz al-’Ummal*, states that ‘Ammar ibn
Yasir has said that the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, has said, "O ‘Ali!

The oppressive gang will fight you; but you are on the right track;
whoever refrains from supporting you is not of me." Abu Tharr
al-Ghifari, as al-Daylami is quoted at the close of page 155, Vol. 6, of
*Kanz al-’Ummal*, has quoted the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him
and his progeny, saying: "I swear by the One in whose hands my life is
placed that among you is a man who shall fight after me for the
interpretation of the Qur'an just as I fought the polytheists for its
revelation."

Muhammad ibn ‘Ubaydullah ibn Abu Rafi’, as indicated by al-Tabrani in
his *Mujma’ al-Kabir* and indicated on page 155, Vol. 6, of *Kanz
al-’Ummal*, has quoted his father and grandfather Abu Rafi’ saying that
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, has addressed
him thus: "O Abu Rafi’! A group of people shall fight ‘Ali after me;
Allah has made mandated that they should be fought. Whoever is unable to
fight them with his hands, let him fight them with his tongue; if he
still is unable to do so, then by his heart." Al-Akhdar al-Ansari[^31]
has quoted the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny,
saying: "I fight for the revelation of the Qur'an, while ‘Ali fights for
its interpretation."

40) He, peace be upon him and his progeny, has said: "O ‘Ali! I am
superior to you due to my being a Prophet, while you are superior to all
other people due to seven merits: You are the foremost among them to
believe in Allah, the most just in fulfilling Allah's Promise, the most
obedient to the Commandments of Allah, the most equitable, the most fair
in dealing with the public, the most far-sighted in all issues, and the
one who enjoys the highest status in the sight of Allah."

Abu Sa’id al-Khudri quotes the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and
his progeny, saying: "O ‘Ali! You possess seven qualities about which
nobody can dispute with you: You are the first to truly believe in
Allah, the most just in fulfilling Allah's Promise, the most obedient to
Allah's Commandments, the most compassionate to the public, the most
informed of all issues, and the highest among them in status."[^32]

There is no room here to quote all such traditions which, as a whole,
support one another and are all indicative of one meaning, and that is:
‘Ali is second only to the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, in faring with this nation, and that he is next only to the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, in leading it.
These traditions convey such a meaning, even if their texts are not
consecutively reported, and this much should suffice as an irrefutable
proof, Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: This is hadith number 2527 of the ones cited in Kanz al-’Ummal,
page 153, Vol. 6, and it is quoted by al-Tha’labi from Abu Tharr when
the author attempts to interpret the verse of wilayat in his book
Al-Tafsir al-Kabir.

[^2]: It is also quoted by al-Barudi, Ibn Qani’, Abu Na’im, and
al-Bazzar. It is hadith 2628 of the ones cited in Kanz al-’Ummal, page
157, Vol. 6.

[^3]: It is hadith 2630 of the ones cited in Kanz al-’Ummal, page 157,
Vol. 6.

[^4]: It is news item number 11 of the ones Ibn Abul Hadid states on
page 450, Vol. 2, of Sharh Nahjul Balaghah, and it is hadith number 2627
of the ones cited in Kanz al-’Ummal, page 157, Vol. 6.

[^5]: This is quoted by Abu Na’im in his Hilyat al-Awliya' from Anas and
transmitted in detail by Ibn Abul Hadid on page 450, Vol. 2, of his
Sharh Nahjul Balaghah; so, refer to news item 9 on that page.

[^6]: This is quoted by Abu Na’im in his Hilyat al-Awliya' from one
hadith narrated by Abu Barzah al-Aslami and Anas ibn Malik, and it is
transmitted by the Mu’tazilite scholar on page 449, Vol. 2, of his Sharh
Nahjul Balaghah; so, refer to the third news item on that page.

[^7]: This is quoted by al-Tabrani in his Kabir from the ahadith
narrated by Salman and Abu Tharr. It is quoted by al-Bayhaqi in his
Sunan, and by Ibn ‘Uday in his Al-Kamil; it also is hadith number 2608
of the ones included in Kanz al-’Ummal, Vol. 6, page 156.

[^8]: This is quoted by al-Tabrani in his Kabir, and it is hadith number
2625 of the ones included in Kanz al-’Ummal, Vol. 6, page 157, and the
tenth on page 450, Vol. 2, of Sharh Nahjul Balaghah by Ibn Abul Hadid;
so, look and see how he has made their right guidance conditional upon
upholding ‘Ali; thus, those who do not do so would certainly stray. See
how he has commanded them to love him just as they love the Prophet
(pbuh), and to respect him in the same way they respect the Prophet
(pbuh). This is so only because of his being his successor, the one to
take charge after him. If you consider the verse "Gabriel has commanded
me to tell you so," then truth becomes manifest to you.

[^9]: This is quoted by al-Tabrani in his Kabir from Ibn ‘Abbas as
stated on page 107 of Al-Jami’ al-Saghir by Sayyuti. It is also quoted
by al-Hakim in Manaqib ‘Ali, page 226, Vol. 3 of his authentic Mustadrak
from two sources: one of them is Ibn ‘Abbas from yet two authentic
sources, and the other from Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari. He has
brought forth irrefutable proofs for its authenticity. Imam Ahmad ibn
Hanbal ibn al-Siddiq al-Magharibi, of Cairo, has dedicated an entire
book only to prove the authenticity of this hadith, and he has crammed
it with information and titled it Fath al-Malak al-’Ali Bisihhati Hadith
Babul ‘Ilm ‘Ali, printed in Egypt at the Islamic Press. It is worthy of
the attention of researchers, for it contains invaluable information.
Views of the Nasibis and their likes are worthless vis-a-vis this hadith
that is as commonly used as a popular proverb by both the elite and the
common residents of the urban districts and the countryside. We have
even considered their criticism, and we have found it to be sheer
submission to sentiment, lacking in proof, full of extreme fanaticism,
as declared by al-Hafiz Salahud-Din al-’Ala'i when he quoted the false
allegation of al-Thahbi and others who charge that it is incorrect. He
comments saying: "These have not produced any proof for their claim
except its being a fabrication so that it may not indict them."

[^10]: This is quoted by al-Tirmithi in his Sahih, in addition to Ibn
Jarir, and from them it is quoted by several authorities such as
al-Muttaqi al-Hindi on page 401, Vol. 6, of his Kanz al-’Ummal, where he
quotes Ibn Jarir saying: "This is a tradition of whose authenticity we
are quite sure." It is also quoted from al-Tirmithi by Jalalud-Din
al-Sayyuti while discussing the "hamza" in language in his Jami’
al-Jawami’ and Al-Jami’ al-Saghir; so, refer to page 170, Vol. 1, of
Al-Jami’ al-Saghir.

[^11]: This is quoted by al-Daylami from Abu Tharr's hadith as stated on
page 156, Vol. 6, of Kanz al-’Ummal

[^12]: Ibid.

[^13]: This is quoted by Ibn Hajar in the fifth maqsad of the maqasid of
chapter 14 of the ones discussed in Chapter 11 of his Al-Sawa’iq
al-Muhriqa; so, refer to page 106 of the same.

[^14]: This hadith is number 2528 among the ones cited in Kanz
al-’Ummal, page 153, Vol. 6.

[^15]: This is quoted by Ibn Majah in his chapter on the virtues of the
Prophet's companions on page 92, Vol. 1, of his Sunan, by al-Tirmithi
and al-Nisa'i in their respective sahihs, and it is hadith number 2531
among the ones cited in Kanz al-’Ummal, page 153, Vol. 6. It is also
quoted by Imam Ahmad on page 164, Vol. 4, of his Musnad from hadith
narrated from various authentic sources by Janadah. Suffices you the
fact that it is quoted from a chain of narrators which includes: Yahya
ibn Adam, Isra'il ibn Younus and his grandfather Abu Ishaq al-Subay’i
who quotes Habashi. All of these men are authorities relied upon by both
Shaykhs in their respective sahihs. Whoever studies this hadith in
Ahmad's Musnad will come to know that it was said during the Farewell
Pilgrimage which shortly preceded the departure of the Prophet, peace be
upon him and his progeny, from this vanishing world. Prior to that, he,
peace be upon him and his progeny, had sent Abu Bakr to recite ten
verses of Surat Bara'a to the residents of Mecca, then he, according to
Imam Ahmad on page 151, Vol. 1, of his Musnad, said to him: "Go see Abu
Bakr before he discharges his mission, and as soon as you meet him, take
the message from him, then carry it yourself to the people of Mecca and
read it to them." ‘Ali met Abu Bakr at the Juhfa and took the tablets
from him. Abu Bakr went back to the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, and asked him: "O Messenger of Allah! Have you received any
message from Allah against me?" He answered: "No, but Gabriel has come
to me and told me that nobody conveys Allah's Message except I or a man
of my own family." Another narration, recorded by Ahmad on page 510,
Vol. 1, of his Musnad from ‘Ali (as), says that when the Prophet
dispatched him with Surat Bara'a, he said to him: "Either I should carry
it, or you." ‘Ali said: "If it cannot be avoided at all, then I will
go." He (pbuh) said: "Then proceed, for Allah will make your tongue
firm, and He will guide your heart."

[^16]: You have come to know by now the hadith narrated by ‘Amr ibn
Shash with our commentary in Letter 36.

[^17]: As quoted by Muslim in his chapter on iman, page 46, Vol. 1, of
his Sahih. Ibn ‘Abd al-Birr explains its gist while narrating ‘Ali's
biography in the Isti’ab from a group of companions. Buraydah's hadith
has been quoted in Letter No. 36 above. His hadith, peace be upon him
and his progeny, "O Allah! Befriend whoever befriends ‘Ali, and be the
enemy of whoever sets himself as the enemy of ‘Ali" is consecutively
reported (mutawatir), as admitted by the author of Al-Fatawa
al-Hamidiyya in his treatise titled "Al-Salat al-Fakhira fil Ahadith
al-Mutawatira]."

[^18]: Narrated, through al-Azhar, by ‘Abdul-Razzaq, Mu’ammar, al-Zuhri,
‘Ubaydullah, and Ibn ‘Abbas, each from the other, and all are reliable
authorities. For this reason, al-Hakim, having labelled the hadith as
"sahih" because of its endorsement by both Shaykhs, says: "Abul-Azhar,
according to their consensus view, is trustworthy, and if authorities
unanimously agree on the authenticity of one hadith, then it has to be
held authentic," then he continues to say: "I have heard Abu ‘Abdullah
al-Qarashi saying that he heard Ahmad ibn Yahya al-Halwani saying: ‘When
Abul-Azhar came from San’a and started narrating this hadith to the
people in Baghdad, Yahya ibn Ma’in rejected it. When he opened his place
to the public, as usual, he inquired about the Nisaburi writer who
quotes ‘Abdul-Razzaq stating such ahadith, Abul-Azhar stood up and said
that it was he. Yahya ibn Ma’in laughed at his statement, stood up, and
brought him to sit closer to him and inquired of him about how I
personally came to be the only one who heard such hadith from
‘Abdul-Razzaq. I told him that I had just come from San’a, and when I
bade him farewell, he told me that he owed me a unique hadith which
nobody else had ever heard, and by Allah it was this hadith verbatim.
Yahya ibn Ma’in then believed him and apologized to him.'"

[^19]: We have quoted this hadith in Letter No. 10 above.

[^20]: We have quoted this hadith, too, in Letter No. 10; so, refer to
our commentary about it and about the one that precedes it.

[^21]: Refer to our comment on this hadith and the one that precedes it
in our Letter No. 10.

[^22]: This is quoted by al-Hakim on page 129, Vol. 3, of his authentic
Al-Mustadrak, and it is narrated by quite a few authors of books and
traditions, all testifying to its authenticity.

[^23]: Refer to our comment on this hadith in Letter No. 34, and also
scrutinize the books of traditions to which we have referred.

[^24]: This is quoted by al-Tabrani in his Awsat, and by al-Khatib in
his Al-Muttafaq wal-Muftaraq, as stated at the beginning of page 159,
Vol. 6, of Kanz al-’Ummal. We have quoted it in Letter No. 34 and
commented on it in a way which hopefully benefits the researcher.

[^25]: This is transmitted from both of them by Abul-Hadid in the fourth
news item of his news to which he has referred on page 449, Vol. 2, of
Sharh Nahjul Balaghah. It is also quoted by Imam al-Razi while
discussing the meaning of the verse of Mubahala in his Al-Tafsir
al-Kabir, p. 288, Vol. 2, taking for granted the authenticity of this
hadith according to the views of those who act upon it as well as those
who do not. This hadith is also quoted by Ibn Battah from Ibn ‘Abbas's
hadith, as stated on page 34 of Fath al-Malik al-’Ali Bisihhati Babil
‘Ilm ‘Ali by Imam Ahmad ibn al-Sadiq al-Hasani al-Magharibi of Cairo.
Among those who have admitted that ‘Ali is the one who is acquainted
with the secrets of all prophets combined is the Shaykh of all men of
knowledge, namely Muhiyud-Din ibn al-’Arabi, as quoted by the learned
al-Sha’rani in Section 32 of his book Al-Yawaqit wal-Jawahir, page 172.

[^26]: This is quoted by al-Tabrani and Ibn Mardawayh who rely on the
authority of Ibn ‘Abbas. It is also quoted by al-Daylami from ‘Ayesha,
and it is one of the lengthy traditions.

[^27]: This is quoted by Abu Na’im and Ibn ‘Asakir from Abu Layla, and
quoted also by al-Najjar from Ibn ‘Abbas; so, refer to ahadith 30 and 31
of the forty ahadith cited by Ibn Hajar in Part Two, Section 9, of his
Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, at the conclusion of page 74 and the page
following it.

[^28]: This is quoted by al-Hakim on page 122, Vol. 3, of his
Al-Mustadrak where the author admits its authenticity. Al-Thahbi quotes
it in his own Talkhis, admitting its authenticity.

[^29]: This hadith and the one succeeding it, i.e. Ibn ‘Abbas's hadith,
are quoted by al-Hakim on page 140, Vol. 3, of his Mustadrak, and
al-Thahbi quotes him in his Talkhis al-Mustadrak. Both authors admit the
authenticity of this hadith due to its endorsement by both Shaykhs.

[^30]: This is quoted by al-Hakim on page 122, Vol. 3, of Al-Mustadrak,
saying that it is an authentic hadith according to its endorsement by
both Shaykhs who have not included it in their books. Al-Thahbi has
admitted its authenticity for the same reason when he quoted it in his
Talkhis al-Mustadrak. Imam Ahmad has produced it from Abu Sa’id on pages
82 and 33, Vol. 3, of his Musnad, and al-Bayhaqi has quoted it in Shu’ab
al-Iman. Imam Ahmad has included Abu Sa’id's hadith on pages 82 and 33,
Vol. 3, of his Musnad, and al-Bayhaqi quotes it in his Shu’ab al-Iman,
Sa’id ibn Mansur in his Sunan, Abu Na’im in his Hilyat al-Awliya', and
Abu Ya’li in his Sunan numbering it 2585, page 155, Vol. 6, of Kanz
al-’Ummal.

[^31]: His name is Ibn Abul-Akhdar. Ibn al-Sakan mentions him and quotes
this hadith in his regard from al-Harith ibn Hasirah from Jabir al-Ju’fi
from Imam al-Baqir from his father Zaynul-’Abidin, peace be upon them,
from al-Akhdar from the Prophet (pbuh). Ibn al-Sakan says: "He is not
quite famous among the Prophet's companions, and his traditions ought to
be verified." This is quoted by al-Asqalani in his biography of
al-Akhdar in Al-Isabah. Al-Dar Qutni has produced this hadith in his
Ifrad, saying: "This hadith is narrated only by Jabir al-Ju’fi, who is a
Rafizi."

[^32]: Abu Na’im has quoted it among the traditions reported by Ma’ath,
as well as the hadith succeeding it, that is, that of Abu Sa’id, in his
Hilyat al-Awliya', and they are on page 156, Vol. 6, of Kanz al-’Ummal.


