Letter 50
=========

Why Interpret Texts on His Behalf as Indicative of His Imamate
--------------------------------------------------------------

**Muharram 13, 1330**

Anyone like you, who is deep in thinking, gifted with a far insight, an
authority on linguistic sources and derivatives, aware of its meanings
and connotations, deriving guidance from the Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him and his progeny, believing in his wisdom and conclusive
prophethood, appreciative of his deeds and statements

***("He does not speak of his own inclinations (Qur'an, 53:3),***

" certainly cannot miss the gist of such texts, nor do their
conclusions, which are derived from logic and common sense, remain
secret to him. It is not possible that you, the recognized authority on
Arabic (i.e. *athbat*[^1]*)* that you are, fail to perceive that these
texts have all granted ‘Ali a very sublime status, one which Allah
Almighty and His Prophets do not grant except to the successors of such
Prophets, to the ones they trust most to take charge of their religion,
to the custodians of such religion.

If they do not explicitly indicate the caliphate for ‘Ali, they
undoubtedly hint to it, leading to such conclusion by necessity. Such an
obligation is quite obvious from their precise meaning. The Master of
Prophets (pbuh) is above granting such a lofty status to anyone other
than his successor, his vicegerent.

Yet whoever deeply scrutinizes the texts concerning ‘Ali (as) and very
carefully and fairly digests their implications will find their vast
majority aiming at endorsing his imamate, indicative of it either
through explicit announcements, such as the previously quoted ones, and
such as the Covenant of al-Ghadir, or by virtue of necessity, such as
the ones stated in Letter No. 48.

Take, for example, his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny,
"‘Ali is with the Qur'an and the Qur'an is with ‘Ali; they both shall
never separate from each other till they meet me by the Pool [of
Kawthar],"[^2] and his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny,
"‘Ali to me is like the head to the body,"[^3] and his statement, peace
be upon him and his progeny, according to a tradition narrated by ‘Abdul
Rahman ibn ‘Awf,[^4] "I swear by the One in Who hold my life, you will
have to uphold the prayers, pay the zakat, or else I shall send you a
man of my own self, or like my own self," then the Prophet (pbuh) took
‘Ali's hand and said: "This is he;" up to the end of countless such
texts. This is an obvious benefit to which I attract the attention of
all seekers of the truth, one which unveils what is ambiguous, delves
deeply in independent research. He (pbuh) has only followed what he
himself comprehends of the moral obligations of such sacred texts,
without being overtaken by his own personal emotions or inclinations,
Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: "Athbat" is the plural of "thabat," and "asnad" is he plural of
"sanad," and the latter means "hujjah," i.e. proof or authority.

[^2]: This is quoted by al-Hakim on page 124, Vol. 3, of his
Al-Mustadrak, as well as by al-Thahbi in his Talkhis al-Mustadrak. Both
authors testify to its authenticity. It is one of the few elaborate
ahadith. Anyone who is ignorant of the fact that ‘Ali is with the Qur'an
and the Qur'an is with ‘Ali, after having studied the authentic
traditions dealing with the Two Weighty Things, i.e. the Book and the
‘Itrat (Progeny), he should be referred to what we have quoted in this
regard in our Letter No. 8 above, and let him recognize the rights of
the Imam of the Prophet's Progeny, and their undisputed and undoubted
chief.

[^3]: This is quoted by al-Khatib in the ahadith narrated by al-Bara',
and by al-Daylami in those narrated by Ibn ‘Abbas. It is transmitted by
Ibn Hajar on page 75 of his Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa; so, refer to hadith
number 35 of the forty ahadith which he quotes in Section Two, Chapter
9, of Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa.

[^4]: It is hadith number 6133, page 405, Vol. 6, in Kanz al-’Ummal.
Suffices you for a proof that ‘Ali's soul is akin to that of the Prophet
(pbuh) to study the verse of Mubahala according to the explanations
stated by al-Razi in his tafsir titled Mafatih al-Ghayb, page 488, Vol.
2, and refer also to what we have mentioned while dealing with this
verse.


