Letter 56
=========

**Muharram 22, 1330**

Suffices to prove its application as an argument what we have mentioned
in Letter No. 24 above.

I Natural Laws Necessitate the Consecutive Reporting of Hadith al-Ghadir
------------------------------------------------------------------------

1) The consecutive reporting of the Ghadir hadith is necessitated by the
natural laws which Allah has created. Its similitude is like that of any
great historical step undertaken by the most important man of a nation
who announces, in the presence of thousands of his nationals, the
undertaking of a major step, so that they may convey its news to various
lands and nations, especially if such an undertaking enjoys the concern
of his own family and their supporters in all generations to come, so
that such an announcement might receive the widest possible publicity.

Can such an announcement, as significant as it is, be transmitted by,
say, just one single person? Certainly not. Its news would spread as
widely as the early morning sun rays, encompassing the plains as well as
the oceans;

***"And you shall never find any alteration to Allah's order (Qur'an,
33:62)."***

II The Almighty's Benevolence
-----------------------------

2) Hadith al-Ghadir has won the divine concern of Allah, the Dear One,
the Sublime, Who inspired to His Messenger, peace be upon him and his
progeny, including it in His Qur'an which is recited by Muslims even
during the late hours of the night or the early hours of the day, in
public and in private, in their supplications and ceremonial prayers,
from the top of their pulpits and the heights of their minarets,
stating:

***"O Messenger! Convey that which has been revealed unto you from your
Lord, and if you do not do so, then you have not conveyed His Message at
all, and Allah will protect you from (evil) men." (Qur'an, 5:67)***[^1]

When he, peace be upon him and his progeny, conveyed the divine Message
(implied in this verse), appointing ‘Ali as the Imam and entrusting him
with the caliphate, Allah Almighty revealed the following verse:

***"Today have I perfected your religion (Islam) for you, completed my
blessing unto you, and accepted Islam as your religion." (Qur'an,
5:3)***[^2]

So, congratulations upon congratulations to ‘Ali; this is Allah's
favour; He grants it to whomsoever He pleases. Anyone who looks into
these verses will be profoundly impressed by such divine favours.

III Concern of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
--------------------------------------------

3) If divine concern is as such, no wonder, then, that the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, expressed such a profound
concern when death approached him, may my life be sacrificed for his
sake. It was then that, according to the order which he received from
Allah Almighty, he set to announce ‘Ali's *wilayat* during his supreme
pilgrimage, in the presence of so many witnesses, without being
satisfied with similar previous announcements such as his warning in
Mecca, or on other occasions with some of which you have by now become
familiar. He, therefore, invited the believers to participate in his
very last pilgrimage, known as the Farewell Pilgrimage. People from far
and wide responded to his invitation, and no less than one hundred
thousand pilgrims left Medina with him.[^3]

On the standing day at ‘Arafat, he informed the attendants that: "‘Ali
is of me, and I am of ‘Ali, and nobody discharges the responsibility [of
my religion] on my behalf except I and ‘Ali."[^4] And when he came back
from the pilgrimage and arrived at the valley of Khumm, trusted Gabriel
descended upon him with "ayat al-tabligh," verse of conveying the
Message, from the Lord of the Worlds.

Immediately thereupon, he alighted there till those who lagged behind
him, as well as those who went ahead of him, joined him. When they all
assembled, he conducted the obligatory prayers then delivered a sermon
about Allah, the Dear and the Omniscient, emphasizing the significance
of ‘Ali's *wilayat*. You have already heard a glittering report of its
news, and what you have not heard is even more exact and more explicit;
yet what you have heard should suffice you. Its news was carried on
behalf of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, by
all those masses who were present with him there and then and who are
estimated to have been over one hundred thousand pilgrims from various
lands.

The order of Allah, the Dear and Sublime, which does not suffer any
alteration in His creation, necessitates the consecutive reporting of
this hadith in spite of all obstacles in conveying it. Yet the Imams of
Ahl al-Bayt (as) follow their own wise methods of disseminating it and
publicizing for it.

IV Concern of the Commander of the Faithful
-------------------------------------------

4) Referring to the latter, I suggest that you may consider the measure
taken by the Commander of the Faithful (as), then Caliph, in gathering
people in the spacious meeting place, the Rahba plain. He then said: "I
ask in the Name of Allah each Muslim who heard what the Messenger of
Allah (pbuh) said on the Ghadir Day to stand and testify to what he
heard. Nobody should stand except those who saw the Prophet with their
own eyes and heard him with their own ears."

Thirty *sahabis*, twelve of whom had particiated in the Battle of Badr,
stood and testified that the Prophet (pbuh) took ‘Ali by the hand and
asked people: "Do you know that I have more authority over the believers
than the believers themselves have?" They answered in the affirmative.
He, peace be upon him and his progeny, then said: "To whomsoever I have
been *mawla*, this (‘Ali) is his *mawla*; O Lord! Befriend whoever
befriends him, and be the enemy of whosoever chooses to be his enemy."
You know that accusing thirty *sahabis* of being liars is rejected by
reason; therefore, the achievement of consecutive reporting through
their testimony is an irrefutable and undeniable proof.

The same hadith was transmitted from those thirty *sahabis* by all those
crowds who were then present at the Rahba, and who disseminated it after
their dispersal throughout the land, thus providing it with extremely
wide publicity. Obviously, the Rahba incident took place during the
caliphate of the Commander of the Faithful (as) who received the oath of
allegiance in the year 35 A.H.

The Ghadir event took place during the Farewell Pilgrimage, 10 A.H. The
time period separating the first date from the second is twenty-five
years during which many events took place such as a devastating plague,
wars, the opening of new countries, and the invasions contemporary to
the three righteous caliphs.

This time period, one fourth of a century, merely due to its duration,
wars and invasions, in addition to a sweeping and devastating plague,
had ended the lives of many of those who had witnessed the Ghadir event,
especially the elderly among the *sahabah* as well as their youths who
were eager to meet their Lord through conducting *jihad* in His way, the
Exalted, the Omniscient, and in the way of His Messenger, peace be upon
him and his progeny, so much so that their dead outnumbered their
survivors.

Some of them were scattered throughout the land, and many of those were
not present at the Rahba except those who kept company with the
Commander of the Faithful (as) in Iraq, and these were only males.

In spite of all this, thirty *sahabah*, twelve of whom were participants
in the Battle of Badr, had heard hadith al-Ghadir from the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny.

There may have been others who hated to testify, such as Anas ibn
Malik[^5] and others who received their due punishment in lieu of the
prayers of the Commander of the Faithful to Allah to punish those who
hid the truth while knowing it.

Had he been able to gather all *sahabis* who were alive then, males and
females, and address them in the same way which he employed at Rahba,
several times that many would have testified; so, what if he had asked
people in Hijaz before the passage of such a long time after the
incident of the Ghadir? Contemplate upon this fact and you will find it
a very strong proof testifying to the consecutive reporting of hadith
al-Ghadir.

The books of tradition should suffice you in their documentation of
hadith al-Ghadir. Take, for example, what Imam Ahmad has quoted on page
370, Vol 4, of his *Musnad* from Abul Tufayl who has said: "‘Ali
gathered people at the Rahba, then he said to them: ‘I adjure in the
name of Allah every Muslim who heard what the Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him and his progeny, had said on the Ghadir Day to state his
testimony.' Thirty persons stood up."

Abu Na’im has said: "Many stood up and testified how the Prophet (pbuh)
took ‘Ali by the hand and asked people: ‘Do you know that I have more
authority over the believers than the believers themselves have?' They
answered: ‘We do, O Messenger of Allah!' Then he said: ‘To whomsoever I
have been a *mawla*, this ‘Ali is his *mawla*; O Lord! Befriend whoever
befriends him and be the enemy of whoever sets himself as his enemy.'"

Abul-Tufail continues to say: "I left the place dismayed (disgusted with
many people's ignorance of this hadith), and I met Zayd ibn Arqam and
said to him: ‘I have heard ‘Ali say such and such.' Zayd said: ‘Then do
not deny that you have heard the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him
and his progeny, say so about him.'"

Zayd's testimony stated above, and ‘Ali's statement in this regard, may
be added to the testimony of the thirty *sahabis*, thus bringing the
number of narrators of this hadith to thirty-two *sahabis*. Imam Ahmad
has recorded ‘Ali's hadith on page 119, Vol. 1, of his *Musnad* as
transmitted by Abdul-Rahman ibn Abu Layla. The latter says: "I saw ‘Ali
at the Rahba abjuring people to testify, emphasizing that only those who
had seen and heard the Prophet (pbuh) should stand and testify. Twelve
participants in the Battle of Badr, whom I remember so well as if I am
looking at them right now, did so."

Abdul-Rahman quotes the latter testifying that they had all heard the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, asking people on
the Ghadir Day: "Do not I have more authority over the believers' lives
than they themselves do, and my wives are their mothers?" The audience
responded: "Yes, indeed, O Messenger of Allah!"

Then he said, as Abdul-Rahman quotes him, "Then whosoever takes me as
his *mawla* must take ‘Ali as his *mawla*; O Mighty Lord! Befriend
whoever befriends him and be the enemy of whoever bears animosity
towards him!"

Another narration is recorded by imam Ahmad on the same page. It quotes
the Prophet (pbuh) saying: "O Lord! Befriend whoever takes him as his
*wali* and be the enemy of whoever antagonizes him; support whoever
supports him, and abandon whoever abandons him." The narrative goes on
to state that with the exception of three men, the witnesses stood to
testify. ‘Ali invoked Allah to curse those who hid the truth, and his
invocation was heeded.

If you add ‘Ali and Zayd ibn Arqam to the afore-mentioned twelve
participants in the Battle of Badr, then fourteen is obviously the
number of witnesses. By tracing the traditions regarding the Rahba
incident, ‘Ali's wisdom becomes manifest in disseminating hadith
al-Ghadir and publicizing for it.

V al-Husain's Concern
---------------------

5) The Master of Martyrs, Abu Abdullah al-Husain, peace be upon him, has
left us a legacy of a very memorable stand which he took during the
reign of Mu’awiyah. It was then that truth became manifest. It was
similar to the stand taken by ‘Ali at the Rahba.

During the pilgrimage season, al-Husain (as), surrounded by throngs of
pilgrims, praised his grandfather, father, mother and brother, and
delivered an unprecedented, wise and eloquent speech that captivated his
audience and won their hearts and minds. His sermon was inclusive, one
wherein he reawakened the masses, traced and researched history, and
paid the Ghadir incident its fair and just dues. His great stand,
therefore, produced great results, and it became equivalent to hadith
al-Ghadir in its fame and wide publicity.

VI Concern of the Nine Imams (as)
---------------------------------

6) His nine descendants, all sinless Imams, applied their own methods to
publicizing and propagating the same hadith. Their methods reflect their
wisdom which is comprehended by by all those who possess sound senses.
They used the eighteenth of Thul-Hijjah as a special annual feast to
congratulate and congratulate one another, merrily and humbly seeking
nearness to Allah, the Exalted, the Mighty, through fasting, prayers and
supplications.

They go beyond limits in their deeds of goodness and acts of
righteousness, thanking Allah for the blessings which He bestowed upon
them on that Day by virtue of the text that nominated the Commander of
the Faithful (as) as Caliph, and His divine promise for him to be the
Imam. They used to visit their kin, give more generously to their
families, visit their brethren, look after their neighbours, and enjoin
their followers to do likewise.

VII Shi’as' Concern
-------------------

7) For this reason, the eighteenth of Thul-Hijjah of every year is
celebrated as a feast by the Shi’as of all times and climes.[^6] It is
then that they rush to their mosques to offer obligatory and
supererogatory prayers, recite the Glorious Qur'an, and read the most
celebrated supplications as a token of thanking Allah Almighty for
perfecting His religion and completing His blessings upon them by
nominating the Commander of the Faithful (as) as the Imam [in the
theological as well as the secular sense].

It is then that they exchange visits and happily wish each other the
best, seeking nearness to Allah through righteousnes and goodness, and
through pleasing their kin and neighbours. On that day, every year, they
visit the mausoleum of the Commander of the Faithful (as), where no less
than a hundred thousand pilgrims come from far and wide. There, they
worship Allah on that day in the same way their purified Imams used to
worship Him: through fasting, prayers, and remembrance of Allah. They
seek nearness to Him through acts of righteousness and the payment of
*sadaqat*.

They do not disperse before addressing the sacred shrine with a highly
commended address authored by some of their Imams. It includes
testifying to the glorious stand taken by the Commander of the Faithful
(as), honouring his feats and struggle to lay the foundations of the
principles of the faith, his service of the Master of Prophets and
Messengers (pbuh), and his virtues and merits, among which was the
honour which he had received from the Prophet on the Ghadir Day. This is
the custom of the Shi’as every year.

Their orators have always been referring to hadith al-Ghadir, quoting
its traditon or even without reference to them, and their poets are
accustomed to compose poems in its commemoration in old as well as
modern times;[^7] therefore, there is no way to cast doubts about its
being consecutively reported from the sources of Ahl al-Bayt (as) and
their Shi’as.

Their motives to memorize it by heart, their efforts to maintain its
pristine text, safeguard its authenticity, publicize and disseminate
it.., all have indeed resulted in the achievement of their most aspired
objectives. Refer to all the four major Shi’a *Musnad*s, as well as
other Shi’a references, containing well-documented and supported
traditions, and you will find each one of them reverberating with the
same meaning, and each tradition supporting the other. Whoever acquaints
himself with these traditions will find out that this hadith is
*mutawatir* through their precious sources.

VIII Its Consecutive Reporting Through the Masses
-------------------------------------------------

8) There is no doubt about its being consecutively reported through
Sunni sources, according to natural laws, as you have come to know;

***"Allah's creation suffers no alteration; this is the Right Guidance,
but most people do not know." (Qur'an, 30:30)***

The author of *Al-Fatawa alHamidiyya*, in spite of his stubbornness,
admits the consecutive reporting of this hadith in his abridged
dissertation titled *Al-Salawat al-Fakhira fil Ahadith al-Mutawatira*."
Al-Sayyuti and other scholars of exegesis all admit the same. Refer to
Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari, author of the famous works titled "Tafsir"
and "Tarikh,"

Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Sa’id ibn Aqdah, Muhammad ibn Ahmad ibn ‘Uthman
al-Thahbi, have all written critiques of the sources of this hadith.
Each one of them has written an entire book on this subject. Ibn Jarir
includes in his own book as many as one hundred and five sources for
this hadith alone.[^8] Al-Thahbi, in spite of his fanaticism, has
testified to the truth of many of its sources. In chapter sixteen of
*Ghayat al-Maram*, as many as eighty ahadith transmitted by Sunnis
testify to the authenticity of the Ghadir hadith.

Yet he did not quote al-Tirmithi, al-Nisai, al-Tabrani, al-Bazzar, Abu
Ya’li, or quite a few other reporters who transmit this hadith.
Al-Sayyuti quotes this hadith while discussing ‘Ali in his book *Tarikh
al-Khulafa*' transmitted by al-Tirmithi, adding, "This hadith is also
recorded by Ahmad as transmitted by ‘Ali (as), and also by Ayyub
al-Ansari, Zayd ibn Arqam, ‘Umar [inb al-Khattab], and Thu Murr. Abu
Ya’li quotes it from Abu Hurayrah, al-Tabrani from Ibn ‘Umar and from
Ibn Abbas as transmitted by Malik ibn al-Huwayrith, Habshi ibn Janadah,
and Jarir, and also by Ammarah and Buraydah."

A proof of the fame of this hadith is evident from the fact that imam
Ahmad records it in his *Musnad* from Riyah ibn al-Harish as transmitted
by two sources. It states that a group of men once came to ‘Ali (as) and
said: "Assalamu Alaikum, our *mawla*."

The Imam asked who they were, and they answered him by saying that they
were his subjects. The Imam asked them: "How can I be your *mawla*,
while you are [stranger] bedouin Arabs?" They said: "We have heard the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, on the Ghadir Day
saying: ‘Whoever I have been his *mawla*, ‘Ali is his *mawla*.'"

Riyah says that when they left, he followed them and asked them who they
were, and that they said to him: "We are a group of the Ansar (Medenite
Supporters) in the company of Abu Ayyub al-Ansari." Another proof of its
fame is what has been recorded by Abu Ishaq al-Tha’labi while explaining
Surat al-Ma’arij in his book *Al-Tafsir al-Kabir*, relying on two very
highly respected sources, and stating the following:

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, ordered
people on the Ghadir Day to assemble, then he took ‘Ali's hand and said:
"Whoever accepts me as his *mawla*, ‘Ali is his *mawla*." The news of
this announcement spread throughout the land, and al-Nu’man al-Fahri
came to know about this hadith. Riding his she-camel, he came to meet
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny.

Having alighted, he said the following to the Prophet: "O Muhammad! You
ordered us to bear witness that there is no deity except Allah and that
you are the Messenger of Allah, and we obeyed; then you ordered us to
offer prayers five times a day, and we agreed; then you ordered us to
pay *zakat*, and we agreed; then you ordered us to fast during the month
of Ramadan and we agreed; then you ordered us to perform the pilgrimage
and we agreed; then, as if all of this is not sufficient, you favoured
your cousin to all of us and said ‘Whoever accepts me as his *mawla*,
‘Ali is his *mawla*;' is this one of your own orders, or is it Allah's?"

He, peace be upon him and his progeny, answered: "I swear by the One and
only God that this is the command of Allah, the Exalted and
omni-Scient;" whereupon al-Harith left heading towards his animal
murmuring softly to himself: "O Lord! If what Muhammad (pbuh) says is
true, then let it rain stones, or let a severe torment descend upon us."

He hardly reached his animal before Allah caused a stone to cleave his
head, penetrate his body and come out of his anus, leaving him dead on
the spot. It is in reference to that incident that Allah Almighty
revealed the following verse:

***"A man who brought a question (to the Prophet) asked for a sure
penalty - which cannot be warded off by those who reject the truth -
from Allah, Lord of the Ways of Ascent."***[^9] ***(Qur'an, 70:1-3)***

This is how the tradition, quoted *verbatim*,[^10] concludes. Its
authenticity is accepted by many Sunni scholars as a common fact,
Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: We do not dispute its revelation in reference to ‘Ali's wilayat on
Ghadir Khumm Day, and our narratives from the sources of the purified
progeny are consecutive. Suffices you for reference to its narration by
others besides the latter what Imam al-Wahid has quoted in his exegesis
of Surat al-Ma'ida on page 150 of his book Asbabul Nuzul from two
respected sources: ‘Atiyyah and Abu Sa’id al-Khudri. The author says:
"This verse [that is, the one reading: "O Messenger! Convey that which
has been revealed unto you from your Lord"] was revealed on Ghadir Khumm
Day in reference to ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib (as)." The same is narrated by
al-Hafiz Abu Na’im who interprets it in his book Nuzul al-Qur'an relying
on two sources one of which is Abu Sa’id and the other is Abu Rafi’. It
is also narrated by Imam Ibrahim ibn Muhammad al-Hamawaini al-Shafi’i in
his book Al-Fawa'id from various sources ending with Abu Hurayrah. It is
quoted by Imam Abu Ishaq al-Tha’labi while explaining the meaning of
this verse in his Al-Tafsir al-Kabir from two respected sources. What
testifies to its reference to ‘Ali (as) is the fact that prayers had
been already established, zakat was enforced, fasting was legislated,
the pilgrimage to the House was being conducted, what is permissible was
clarified and so was what is forbidden, the Shari’ah was already
regulated and its injunctions enforced; so, what else required Allah to
place so much emphasis other than on the issue of caliphate, one which
prompted Him to pressure His Prophet in a way which was almost similar
to threatening? And regarding what, if not caliphate, could the Prophet
(pbuh) feel presentiment of dissension if he did not convey it,
something which required God's own immunity against any harm that might
result from discharging it?

[^2]: sahihs documenting the occasion that necessitated the revelation
of this verse are consecutive from the sources of the purified progeny
(as). We do not doubt what the purified progeny of Muhammad (pbuh)
narrates even when al-Bukhari claims that the verse was revealed on the
day of ‘Arafat, for the members of the Prophet's house know what is
revealed in their house.

[^3]: Sayyid Ahmad Zayni Dahlan, in a chapter on the Farewell Pilgrimage
in his book Al-Sirah al-Nabawiyya [Biography of the Prophet], writes:
"Ninety thousand - some say a hundred and twenty-four thousand, while
others say more - accompanied him, peace be upon him and his progeny,
from Medina, and this is just a rough figure of the number of people who
accompanied him," to the end of his statement from which you come to
know that those who went back with him were more than a hundred
thousand, and they all witnessed the Ghadir hadith.

[^4]: We have quoted this hadith in our Letter No. 48; so, if you refer
to it, you will find it verbatim numbered 15 in the said reference; the
same Letter refers to and comments on it in a way worthy of the
attention of researchers.

[^5]: He, peace be upon him, said to him then: "Why don't you stand with
other companions of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) and testify to what
you heard of him then?" He answered: "O Commander of the Faithful! I
have grown old, and I have forgotten it." ‘Ali (as) said: "If you are
telling a lie, then may Allah strike you with a white [disease, i.e.
leprosy] which your turban cannot conceal." He hardly left before his
face was filled with the marks of leprosy; so, he used to say: "I have
become the object of a curse invoked by the Righteous Servant." This
incident is quite famous, and a testimony for its authenticity exists
when Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal quotes it at the end of page 119, Vol. 1, of
his Musnad, adding: "They all, except three men, rose to testify; and
those three fell under the effect of his curse."

[^6]: Ibn al-Athir, while narrating the significant events that took
place in the year 352 in his Kamil, says the following on page 181, Vol.
8, of his history book: "On the eighteenth of Thul-Hijjah of that year,
Mu’izz al-Dawla ordered decorations to be installed in Baghdad, fires to
be lit at the police quarters, and all merriments be displayed; so,
market-places were opened at night just as is customary during ‘Id
nights; he did all that to celebrate ‘Iid al-Ghadir, Ghadir Khumm. Drums
were beaten; and trumpets were sounded, and it was quite a memorable
day."

[^7]: Al-Kumait ibn Zayd has said: On the day of the dawh, the Ghadir
dawh day, Caliphate was made manifest for him: were they to obey... Abu
Tammam, in a poetic masterpiece which he includes in his diwan, says: On
the Day of Ghadir, truth looked clear and bright; Redolently, with no
curtains nor bars to hide; The Messenger of Allah stood there to invite
Them to come close to what is just and right, Gesturing with his hands,
introducing your wali And mawla; yet see what happened to you and me! He
brings the news to people so eloquently, While they come with grudge and
depart grudgingly, Yet he made the truth eloquently shine, While they
usurped even your right and mine. You made its destiny the sharp blades
of your sword: And the grave for whoever wanted the truth to uphold...

[^8]: The author of Ghayat al-Maram says near the conclusion of Chapter
16, page 89, of his book: "Ibn Jarir has quoted the Ghadir hadith from
ninety-five sources in a book which he dedicated to this subject,
calling it Al-Wilayat, and Ibn ‘Uqdah has quoted it from one hundred and
five sources written down in a book which he also dedicated solely for
this subject-matter. Imam Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn al-Siddiq al-Magharibi
has stated that both al-Thahbi and Ibn ‘Uqdah have dedicated a special
book solely for this hadith;" so, refer to the sermon in his valuable
book titled Fath al-Malik al-’Ali Bisihhati Babil ‘Ilm ‘Ali.

[^9]: This is quoted from al-Tha’labi by a group of Sunni dignitaries
such as scholar al-Shiblinji of Egypt in a biography of ‘Ali in his book
Nurul Absar; so, you may refer to its eleventh page if you wish.

[^10]: Refer to what al-Halabi has quoted of the narratives related to
the Farewell Pilgrimage in his book of biography known as Al-Sira
al-Halabiyya and you will find this hadith at the end of page 214 of its
third volume.


