Letter 4
========

I Juristic Proofs Mandate Adherence to the Sect of Ahl al­Bayt,
---------------------------------------------------------------

**Thul Qida 4, 1329 A.H.**

1) Our adherence, in the principles of the creed, to a sect other than
that of al­Ash’ari, and our following in the branches of Islam of a sect
other than those four sects, has never been due to partisanship nor
fanaticism, nor has it been because of doubting the *ijtihad* of the
Imams of these sects, of their fair mindedness, trustworthiness,
integrity, or loftiness in knowledge and deeds.

Juristic proofs, rather, have mandated upon us to follow the sect of the
Imams from the Household of Prophethood, the cradle of the Message, and
the place the angels frequent, the abode of revelation and inspiration.

We have always, therefore, referred to them in order to comprehend all
matters related to the creed's branches and doctrines, in the roots and
in the bases of *fiqh*, in the knowledge of ethics, behaviour, and
manners. We have done all this in accordance with the judgment of
evidence and proof, following the Sunnah of the Master of Prophets and
Messengers, peace of Allah be upon him and all his progeny.

Had the proofs allowed us to differ from the Imams of Muhammad's
progeny, or had we been able to achieve nearness to Allah, Glory to Him,
by following others' sects, we would then have followed in the general
public's footsteps, asserting the friendship and strengthening the ties
of fraternity. On the contrary, positive proofs stand in the believer's
way, diverting him from following his own inclinations.

2) Still, the majority cannot prove that their own sect must be
preferred over those of others, let alone making it obligatory. We have
looked into Muslims' pretexts as one inquiring in depth with keen eyes,
but we have found no proof for your argument except what you mentioned
of their *ijtihad*, trustworthiness, fair mindedness and loftiness.

You, however, know that *ijtihad*, trustworthiness, fair mindedness and
loftiness of status are not a monopoly of them only; therefore, how,
since the case is as such, can their sects be obligatory by your merely
pointing them out?

I do not think that there is anyone who dares to advocate their
preference in knowledge or deeds over our Imams who are the purified
*‘itra*, the nation's life-boats, the Gate of Salvation, the security
against dissension in religion, the flags of its guidance, the
descendants of the Messenger of Allah and his remnant in his nation.

He, Allah's peace be upon him and his progeny, has said: "Do not go
ahead of them lest you should perish, nor should you lag behind them
lest you should perish. Do not teach them, for they are more learned
than you." But it is the dictates of politics at the dawn of Islam.

I wonder about your claim that the good previous generations adhered to
those sects, finding them the most fair and the best of sects, and that
they agreed to adhere to them in every time and clime. You say so as if
you do not know that our predecessors, the good past generations that
followed the progeny of Muhammad and that, literally, constituted half
the Muslim population, followed only the faith of the Imams among the
descendants of Muhammad, peace of Allah be upon him and his progeny.

They did not find for it any substitute, and they have been this way
ever since the days of ‘Ali and Fatima, when neither al­Ash’ari nor any
Imam of the other four sects, or even their fathers, existed, as you
very well know.

3) The generations of the first three centuries, then, never followed
any of those sects at all. Where were those sects during those three
generations, the best generations ever? Al­Ash’ari was born in 270 A.H.
and died in 320 A.H. Ibn Hanbal was born in 164 A.H. and died in 241
A.H. Al­Shafi’i was born in 150 A.H. and died in 204 A.H. Malik was born
in 95 A.H.[^1] and died in 179 A.H. Abu Hanifah was born in 80 A.H. and
died in 150 A.H.

Shi’as follow the sect of the Imams from the Prophet's Household, and
the household surely know what their house contains. Non­Shi’as follow
the sects of the learned *sahabah* and *tabi’in*; so, what makes it
"mandatory" on all Muslims, after those three centuries had gone by, to
follow those sects instead of the one followed before them?

What made them divert their attention from those who were peers only to
the Book of Allah and its own companions, the descendants of the
Messenger of Allah and his trustees, the nation's ark of salvation, the
leaders, the security, and the Gate of Salvation?

4) What caused the door of *ijtihad* to be shut in the face of Muslims
after it had been kept widely open during the first three centuries
other than resorting to reluctance, comfort, laziness, the acceptance of
deprivation and the satisfaction with ignorance?

Who would permit himself, knowingly or unknowingly, to say that Allah,
Dignity and Glory to Him, has not sent the best of His Messengers and
Prophets with the best of His religions and codes, nor has He revealed
unto him His best Books and Tablets, judgment and doctrines, nor has He
completed His Religion for him and perfected His blessing unto him, nor
has He taught him the knowledge of the past and the present, except for
the sole purpose that the whole matter would end to the Imams of those
sects to monopolize for their own selves?

They would then forbid all others from acquiring it from any other
source, as if the Islamic faith, in its Book and Sunnah, and in all
other signs and testaments, a property of their own, and that they
forbade faring with it in any way contrary to their own opinions... Were
they the Prophets' heirs, or had Allah sealed through them the
successors and Imams, or taught them the knowledge of the past and the
present, and that He bestowed upon them what He had never bestowed upon
anybody else among all human beings?

No! They were just like many others, pillars and care­takers of
knowledge, ministers and callers. Those who call for knowledge are far
above closing its doors against others or forbidding others from
reaching it. They never curb the minds, nor confine public attention
only to their own selves, nor can they seal people's hearts or make
others deaf, blind, dumb, handcuffed, or chained. This can never be
attributed to them except as a liar's allegation, and their own
statements bear witness to ours.

5) Let us now concentrate on the matter to which you attracted our
attention: the unity of Muslims. What I see is that this matter does not
depend on Shi’as forsaking their faith, nor the Sunnis forsaking their
own. Asking Shi’as to do so without asking others (Sunnis) to do
likewise is to prefer without preponderance, or even to favour the less
preferable. It is demanding what is beyond one's capacity as it is known
from our Introduction.

Yes. Unity and uniformity can be achieved if you release Ahl al­Bayt's
sect and view it as you view any of your own sects so that the Shafi’is,
Hanafis, Malikis and Hanbalis may consider the followers of Ahl al­Bayt
just as they consider each other. Only then can the unity of Muslims be
achieved, and they will be unified in one fold.

The difference among Sunni sects is not less than it is between the
Sunni and Shi’a schools of thought as thousands of books on the
principles and branches of the creed of both groups testify; therefore,
why have several people among you condemned the Shi’as for differing
from the Sunnis? Why have they not, by the same token, condemned the
Sunnis for differing from the Shi’as, or even for differing from one
another?

If sects can be four, why cannot they be five? How come it is alright to
have four sects but not five? How can four sects be considered as
"unifying" Muslims, and when they increase to five unity is shattered
and Muslims are divided unto themselves?

I wish when you invited us to "sectarian unity" you also invited the
followers of the four sects to the same. The latter will be a lot easier
for you and for them. But why have you singled us out for your
invitation anyway? Do you find the followers of Ahl al­Bayt breaking the
unity while the followers of others unite the hearts and determination
eventhough their sects and minds are different, their tastes and
inclinations are numerous? I think of you to be above that, knowing your
love for your kinfolk, and peace be with you.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: In his biography of Malik, Ibn Khallikan indicates in his Al-a’yan
that the man lingered in his mother's womb for almost three years. The
same is mentioned by Ibn Qutaybah who includes Malik among wise sages on
page 170 of his book Al-Ma’arif, recounting him on page 198 among men
whose mother's pregnancy outlasted the normal period.


