Letter 58
=========

**Muharram 27, 1330**

I Hadith al­Ghadir Cannot be Interpreted,
-----------------------------------------

1) Somehow I have the feeling that your heart is not satisfied with what
you yourself have stated, and your soul is not thereby pleased! You
revere the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) and cherish his pristine wisdom,
infallibility, conclusive Prophethood, believing that he is the master
of the wise, and the seal of the prophets:

***"He does not speak of his own inclination; it is but a revealed
inspiration; he has been taught by one mighty in power (Qur'an,
53:3-5)."***

Suppose a philosopher from another faith asks you about the Ghadir Day
saying:

"Why did he (pbuh) stop all those thousands of companions from
proceeding, confining them in midday heat in such a sun­baked plain? Why
did he make sure to call back whoever advanced, and wait for whoever
lagged behind? Why did he camp with them in such a desolate place where
neither water nor vegetation was available? Then why did he preach to
them about Allah Almighty in that place and enjoined those who were
present there to convey, upon dispersing, what they had heard to those
who had not, and why did he start with a self­eulogizing sermon, saying:
‘It looks like my Lord's Messenger [angel of death, Isra'il] is about to
come to call me [to return to my Lord] and I will respond to the call; I
am responsible, and so are you,' and what message was the Prophet (pbuh)
enjoined to convey and which the nation was enjoined to heed?

Why did he ask them: ‘Do not you believe that there is no god but Allah
and that Muhammad (pbuh) is His Servant and Messenger, that His Paradise
is just and His Fire is just, that death is just and the life after
death is just, that the Hour is undoubtedly approaching, that Allah will
bring to life all those who are lying in their graves?' and they
responded in the affirmative? Why did he immediately take ‘Ali's hand,
lift it till the white hair in his arm­pit became visible, saying: ‘O
people! Allah is my *mawla*, and I am the *mawla* of the believers;'
then why did he explain his statement ‘I am the *mawla* of the
believers' by asking them: ‘Do not I have more authority over your lives
than you yourselves have?'

Then why did he say, having made such an explanation, ‘Whoever has
accepted me as his *mawla*, this (‘Ali) is his *mawla*; O Lord! Befriend
whosoever befriends him and be the enemy of whosoever antagonizes him;
support whosoever supports him and betray whosoever betrays him,' and
why did he specifically choose him and pray for him in such a manner
which is worthy only of just Imams and truthful successors?

And why did he require them to testify by asking them: ‘Do I not have
more authority over you than you yourselves have?' and they answered in
the affirmative; then he said: ‘To whomsoever I have been a *mawla*,
‘Ali is his *mawla*,' or ‘To whomsoever I have been a *wali*, ‘Ali is
his *wali*, and why did he link the Qur'an to his progeny, thus making
them the examples for the wise to follow till the day of Judgment?

Why so much concern from such a wise Prophet? What was the mission that
necessitated all these introductions, and what was the aspired objective
from such a memorable stand? What was the message which Allah Almighty
ordered him to convey when He said:

***‘O Messenger! Convey what has just been revealed unto you from your
Lord, and if you do not do so, then you have not conveyed His Message
(at all), and Allah will protect you from (evil) men (Qur'an, 5:67),'***

and what mission required so much emphasis from Allah Who demanded, in a
tone so close to threatening, to be conveyed? What was the affair
regarding which the Prophet feared dissension if not conveyed by him,
one the announcement of which required a profound protection from Allah
against the harm of the hypocrites...?"

I ask you, in the name of your grandfather, if you are asked all these
questions, will you answer them by saying that Allah, the omni­Scient,
the all­Powerful, simply wanted to explain to the Muslims how ‘Ali had
been supporting them, and how friendly he was to them? I do not think
that you would give such an answer, and I do not think that you would
interpret Allah's words, or the words of the master of the wise, the
seal of messengers and prophets, as such.

You are above thinking that he (pbuh) would exhaust his means and
resources in explaining something too clear, according to reason and
common sense, to require such an explanation. There is no doubt that you
look at the actions and statements of the Prophet (pbuh) in a better
light, one which is not derided by the discreet, nor criticized by
philosophers or sages. There is no doubt that you appreciate the value
of his statements and actions and render them to wisdom and
infallibility.

Allah the Almighty has said:

***"He is a blessed Messenger endowed with strength from the One with
the Throne, obeyed, able, and trustworthy; certainly your fellow is not
possessed (Qur'an, 81:19-22)."***

You are above accusing him of clarifying what is already clear, or
expounding upon what is already common knowledge, or bringing unusual
introductions for such clarifications, or introductions having no
bearing over nor correlation thereto. Allah and His Messenger are above
that. You, may Allah support the truth through your person, know that
what suits such measures, undertaken in the midday heat of that place,
ones that are conducive to his actions and statements on the Ghadir Day,
is nothing less than the conveying of the divine Message, and the
appointment of his vicegerent.

Logical proofs and rational explanations unequivocally prove that what
he intended to do on that day was nothing other than the appointment of
‘Ali as his vicegerent and successor. This hadith, supported by proofs,
is an explicit text regarding ‘Ali's caliphate, one which does not even
require an interpretation, and there is no way to understand it
otherwise. This is quite clear for anyone who is

***"... with a sound mind, attentive, and a witness (Qur'an, 50:37)."***

II Pretext for its Interpretation is Speculative and Misleading.
----------------------------------------------------------------

2) As regarding the pretext they claim, it is nothing but a speculation
and an adulteration. It is the sophistry of confusion and embellishment.
The Prophet (pbuh) dispatched ‘Ali to Yemen twice, the first took place
in 8 A.H. It was then that scandal­mongers spread rumours about him, and
some people complained about him to the Prophet (pbuh) upon their return
to Medina. It was then that he resented their complaints,[^1] and they
saw the sparkle of anger on his face; yet they did not refrain from
trying again.

The second time took place in 10 A.H. It was then that the Prophet
(pbuh) tied a knot on ‘Ali's standard, fixed his head­wear with his own
hands, and said: "Proceed, and do not be distracted;" whereupon ‘Ali
(as) proceeded to his destination as the divinely guided leader of the
rest till he discharged the responsibility entrusted to him by the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny.

Then he participated in the Prophet's Farewell Pilgrimage. It was then
that the Prophet welcomed him very warmly and even shared with him his
own offering. It was then that no scandal­monger dared to open his
mouth, nor did any unfair person charge him with anything; so, how can
this hadith be necessitated by the objections of those in the opposition
party? Or how could it be only an answer to their charges, as some
people claim?

Yet mere antagonism to ‘Ali is not sufficient for the Prophet to pile
praises on him in the way which he has done from a pulpit of camel
saddles on the Ghadir Day except, Allah forbid, that he risks his own
deeds and statements, responsibilities and mission, just to please ‘Ali.
His divine wisdom is way above that, for Allah, praised be His Name,
says: "It is the saying of a glorious Messenger; it is not the speech of
a poet; little do you believe; nor is it the speech of a monk; little do
you remember; it is but revelation from the Lord of the Worlds."
(69:40-43)

Had he desired to just show ‘Ali's contributions, and to rebut those who
bore grudge against him, he (pbuh) would simply have said: "This is my
cousin, my son­in­law, the father of my descendants, the master of my
household; therefore, do not harm him," or something like this to show
mere admission of status and dignity.

But the way this hadith is worded gives no impression other than what we
have suggested. It points out rational and deductive proofs. Let the
reason be whatever it may be, the statements quite obviously bear
explicit meanings which demand no inquiry into their causes.

As regarding his reference to his household in hadith al­Ghadir, it is
only to support the same meaning which we have suggested, since he
correlated them to the Glorious Book of Allah, setting them as examples
for all the wise, saying: "I am leaving with you these which, as long as
you adhere to, shall never let you stray: the Book of Allah, and my
progeny, my household." He did not do that only so that the nation might
realize that it had none to refer to, nor rely upon, after the Prophet,
other than both of them.

Suffices you for a testimony regarding the Imams from the Prophet's
purified progeny (as) is that they are correlated to Allah's Book which
no wrong can approach from front nor from back. Just as it is not
possible to refer to any book which differs in its judgment from the
Book of Allah, the Praised One, the Sublime, it is not possible likewise
to refer to an Imam who opposes in his judgment the Imams from the
purified progeny (as).

Consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "They shall
never separate till they join me at the Pool;" it is a proof that the
earth shall never be without an Imam from his loins who is equivalent to
the Book. Anyone who scrutinizes this hadith will find it restricting
the caliphate to the Imams from the purified progeny of the Prophet
(pbuh).

This is supported by the hadith reported by Zayd ibn Thabit and quoted
by Ahmad in his *Musnad* at the beginning of page 122, Vol. 5. It states
that the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, has
said: "I am leaving you with two successors: the Book of Allah, like a
rope extending from heavens to earth, and my household, for they both
shall never part from each other till they join me at the Pool."

Such a statement is indeed indicative of assigning the caliphate to the
Imams from the purified progeny, peace be upon them. You know that the
text which emphasizes following the Prophet's progeny implies following
‘Ali's leadership, since ‘Ali, after the Prophet (pbuh), is the
undisputed master, and the obeyed Imam of his household. On one hand,
hadith al­Ghadir and others like it imply that ‘Ali is the Imam of the
Prophet's household whose status, according to Allah and His Messenger,
is equal to that of the Holy Qur'an. On the other hand, it gives credit
to his own great personality because of which he became the *wali* of
all those whose *wali* is none other than the Messenger of Allah (pbuh),
Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: We have clarified the same in our Letter No. 36; so, refer to it
and do not overlook our comment in this regard.


