Letter 59
=========

**Muharram 28, 1330**

I Truth Manifests
-----------------

1) I have never seen, in the past or in the present, anyone more gentle
in his tone, more strong in his argument, than your own self. Now truth
has manifested itself due to the proofs which you have brought forth,
thus uncovering the mask of doubt, revealing the pleasant countenance of
conviction.

No longer do we claim that the meaning of "wali" and "mawla" in hadith
al­Ghadir is "foremost," or that it implies the "supporter," or the
like, nor anything akin to what that man who asked for a sure torment
had suggested; your view regarding the "mawla" stands on firm grounds,
and is taken for granted.

II Evasion
----------

2) I wish you agree to our interpretation of the said hadith which is
endorsed by a group of learned *‘ulema*, including imam Ibn Hajar in his
*Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa*, and al­Halabi in his *Sirat*. They argue that
even if we agree that he (‘Ali) is the most worthy of imamate, the
[Prophet's] intention here is futuristic; otherwise, he would have
become the Imam in spite of the presence of the Prophet (pbuh) [which is
an impossible situation, since the Prophet, as long as he was alive, was
the sole Imam­tr.], who did not mind the forthcoming of an Imam after
him.

It is as though the Prophet (pbuh) had said: "‘Ali shall be the Imam as
soon as he receives the oath of allegiance;" so, such a situation will
not collide with the precedence of the three Imams; it thus safeguards
the honour of the good ancestors, may Allah Almighty be pleased with
them all.

Sincerely,

*S*


