Letter 62
=========

Forty Ahadith
-------------

**Safar 2, 1330**

Yes, we will narrate to you consecutively reported ahadith with which
the Sunnis are not familiar. These are narrated by members of the
purified progeny of Muhammad (pbuh), of which we relate forty:[^1]

1) Al­Saduq Muhammad ibn ‘Ali ibn al­Husayn ibn Babawayh al­Qummi has
included in his book *Ikmal ad­Din wa Itmam al­Ni’mah*, as transmitted
by ‘Abdul­Rahman ibn Samrah, one particular hadith in which the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, addresses
‘Abdul­Rahman thus: "O Abu Samrah! If views differ and opinions vary,
then refer to ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, for he is my nation's Imam, and my
successor over them after me."

2) In the same reference, i.e. the *Ikmal*, al­Saduq quotes Ibn ‘Abbas
narrating one hadith in which the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him
and his progeny, says: "Allah, the Praised One and the Sublime, cast a
scrutinizing look at the inhabitants of the earth and chose me from
among them to be the Prophet, then he cast another look and chose ‘Ali
as the Imam and commanded me to take him as my brother, and appoint him
as the *wali* and vizier."

3) Al­Saduq, also in the *Ikmal*, traces one hadith to Imam al­Sadiq
(as) who quotes his father and ancestors citing the Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him and his progeny, saying: "Gabriel has told me that the
Lord of Power, exalted is His Greatness, has said: ‘Whoever comes to
know that I am the Lord without any partner, and that Muhammad is my
Servant and Messenger, that Ali ibn Abu Talib is Muhammad's successor,
and that the Imams from his descendants are My Arguments, then I would
let him enter Paradise through My Mercy.'"

4) Al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal*, traces another hadith to Imam al­Sadiq
(as) who quotes his father and grandfather citing the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, saying: "The Imams after me
are twelve: The first is ‘Ali and the last is al­Qa'im [al­Mahdi]; they
are my successors and the executors of my will."

5) Al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal*, traces yet another hadith to al­Asbagh
ibn Nabatah who says that the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali ibn Abu
Talib (as) once approached, his hand in the hand of his son al­Hasan,
and said: "The Messenger of Allah once came to us and his hand was in
mine like this, saying: ‘The best of creation after me, and their
master, is this brother of mine who is the Imam of every Muslim, the
prince of every believer after me.'"

6) Al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal*, tracing one hadith to Imam al­Rida
(as) who quotes his forefathers citing the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his progeny, saying: "Whoever likes to uphold my religion
and embark upon the Ark of Salvation after me, let him follow the
example of ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, for he is the executor of my will, and my
vicegerent over my nation during my lifetime and after my demise."

7) Al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal*, attributes another hadith by the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, to Imam al­Rida
(as) who quotes his ancestors stating that the Prophet (pbuh) once said:
"I and ‘Ali are the fathers of this nation; whoever knows us very well
also knows Allah, and whoever denies us also denies Allah, the Unique,
the Mighty. And from ‘Ali's descendants are my grandsons al­Hasan and
al­Husayn, who are the masters of the youths of Paradise, and from
al­Husayn's descendants shall be nine: whoever obeys them obeys me, and
whoever disobeys them also disobeys me; the ninth among them is their
Qa'im and Mahdi."

8) Al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal*, traces another hadith through *isnad*
to Imam al­Hasan al­‘Askari (as) who quotes his ancestors up to the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, addressing Ibn
Mas’ud thus: "O Ibn Mas’ud! ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib is your Imam after me; he
is my successor over you."

9) Quoting one hadith related by Salman, al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal*,
says that once Salman visited the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him
and his progeny, and found al­Husayn ibn ‘Ali (as) sitting on his lap,
and the prophet was kissing him and saying: "You are a master, son of a
master, an Imam and son of an Imam, brother of an Imam, father of Imams,
and you are Allah's Argument, the son of His Argument (*Hujjah*), and
father of nine Arguments from your loins, the ninth of them is their
Qa'im."

10) Al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal*, quotes another hadith traced also to
Salman who quotes a lengthy hadith by the Messenger of Allah in which he
(pbuh) says: "O Fatima! Have you not come to know that we are Ahl
al­Bayt? Allah has made the Hereafter dearer to us than this life, and
Allah the Exalted, Praised is His Name, cast a look at the inhabitants
of the earth and chose me from among His creation; then he cast a second
look and chose your husband and inspired me to marry you to him and take
him as *wali* and vizier, and to make him my successor over my nation.
So, your father is the best of prophets, your husband is the best of
*wasis*, and you are the first to join me."

11) Al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal*, quotes a lengthy hadith and mentions
in it that a meeting of over two hundred men from the Muhajirun (Meccan
Immigrants) and the Ansar (Medenite Supporters) were seeking knowledge
and studying jurisprudence, and that each one of them started bragging
about himself, while ‘Ali (as) remained silent.

They asked him: "O father of al­Hasan, what stops you from saying
something?" In response to their question, he (as) only reminded them of
a statement made by the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) in which he said:
"‘Ali is my brother, vizier, heir, executor of my will, successor over
my nation, and the *wali* of every believer after me; so, admit all of
this about him."

12) Al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal*, quotes a lengthy hadith narrated by
‘Abdullah ibn Ja’far, al­Hasan, al­Husayn, ‘Abdulllah ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Umar
ibn Abu Salamah, Usamah ibn Ziyad, Salman, Abu Tharr al-Ghifari, and
al­Miqdad who all say that they heard the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
saying: "I have more authority over the believers than the believers
themselves have; my brother ‘Ali has after me more authority over the
believers than the believers themselves have."

13) Al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal ad-Din wa Itmam al-Ni’mah*, quotes
al­Asbagh ibn Nabatah who cites Ibn ‘Abbas saying that he heard the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, saying, "I, ‘Ali,
al­Hasan, al­Husayn, and nine from the progeny of Husayn are Purified."

14) Al­Saduq has also quoted in his *Ikmal* Ibn Abayah ibn Rab’i citing
Ibn ‘Abbas saying that the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, has said: "I am the master of the Prophets, while ‘Ali is the
master of the *wasis*."

15) Al­Saduq has also quoted in his *Ikmal* one hadith transmitted by
Imam al­Sadiq (as) through *isnad* stating that the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh) has said: "Allah, the Exalted, the Almighty, favoured me over all
other prophets, and favoured ‘Ali over all other *wasis*, and favoured
from ‘Ali's descendants al­Hasan and al­Husayn, and chose from
al­Husayn's progeny the *wasis* who safeguard the faith against the
distortion of extermists, the adulteration of liars, and the
misinterpretations of those who have strayed."

16) Al­Saduq, also in his *Ikmal*, has quoted ‘Ali (as) citing the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, saying: "The
Imams after me are twelve: the first of them is ‘Ali, and the last is
al­Qa'im through whom Allah, the Exalted and the Mighty, shall open the
east of the earth as well as the west."[^2]

17) Al­Saduq has also quoted in his *Amali* a lengthy hadith narrated by
‘Ali (as) in which the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, says, "‘Ali is of me, and I am of ‘Ali who is created of my own
mould; he solves people's disputes regarding my Sunnah; he is the
Commander of the Faithful, the leader of the foremost among all men, and
the best of *wasis*."

18) Al­Saduq, also in his *Amali*, has quoted another lengthy hadith
reported by ‘Ali (as) in which the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him
and his progeny, says: "‘Ali is the Commander of the Faithful according
to the Wilayat of Allah, the Exalted and the Mighty, which He tied in a
knot upon His Throne and required the angels to witness; ‘Ali is Allah's
Vicegerent and Proof [Hujjatullah]; he is the Imam of the Muslims."

19) Al­Saduq, also in his *Amali*, has quoted Ibn ‘Abbas relating that
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, has said: "O
‘Ali! You are the Imam of the Muslims, the Commander of the Faithful,
the leader of the foremost renown of all men, Allah's Proof after me,
and the master of all *wasis*."

20) Al­Saduq, also in his *Amali*, has cited Ibn ‘Abbas quoting the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) saying: "O ‘Ali! You are my successor over my
nation, and you are to me like Seth to Adam."

21) Al­Saduq, also in his *Amali*, has quoted Abu Tharr al­Ghifari
saying, ""We were once in the company of the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
at his mosque when he said: ‘A man will enter through this door who is
the Commander of the Faithful and the Imam of the Muslims,' whereupon
‘Ali ibn Abu Talib came in, and the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) welcomed
him, turned his glorious face to us and said: ‘This is your Imam after
me.'"

22) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has cited Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al­Ansari
quoting the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) saying: "‘Ali ibn Abu Talib is the
foremost among them in accepting Islam, and he is the most learned... He
is the Imam and successor after me."

23) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has also quoted one hadith correct through
*isnad* related by Ibn ‘Abbas who quotes the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
saying: "O people! Whose words are better than Allah's? Your Lord,
Mighty is His Grace, has commanded me to assign ‘Ali over you as the
most outstanding Imam, as my own successor and executor of my will, and
that you should regard him as my brother and vizier."

24) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq also quotes one hadith correct through
*isnad* narrated by Abu ‘Ayyash who says: "The Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
once ascended the pulpit and delivered a sermon in which he said: ‘My
cousin ‘Ali is also my brother, vizier, successor, and the one who pays
my dues on my own behalf.'"[^3]

25) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has also quoted one hadith correct through
*isnad* reported by the Commander of the Faithful who says: "Once, the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) delivered a sermon in which he said: ‘O
people! The month of Allah has approached,' and he continued his sermon
recounting the attributes of the month of Ramadan. I asked: ‘O Messenger
of Allah! What is the best of deeds in this month?' He replied: ‘It is
staying away from whatever Allah has forbidden you,' then he burst
weeping, so I inquired: ‘What grieves you, O Messenger of Allah?' and he
answered: ‘O ‘Ali! I am grieving at what horrible forbidden things that
will happen to you in the same month,' adding, ‘You are my *wasi*, the
father of my descendants, and my successor over my nation during my
lifetime and after my death; your bidding is as good as mine, and so is
your forbidding.'"

26) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has quoted another hadith narrated by ‘Ali,
peace be upon him, thus: "The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said: ‘O
‘Ali! You are my brother and I am yours; I have been chosen to be the
Prophet while you have been chosen to be the Imam; I take charge of the
revelation [of the Holy Qur'an] while you take charge of its
implementation; you are the father of this nation. O ‘Ali! You are my
*wasi* and vicegerent, my vizier and heir, and the father of my
offspring.'"

27) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has also quoted one hadith the *isnad* of
which is authentic as transmitted by Ibn ‘Abbas who says: "While the
Ansar were assembling at Quba' Mosque, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
said: ‘O ‘Ali! You are my brother and I am yours; you are the executor
of my will and my own successor, and the Imam of my nation after me:
Allah will assist whoever assists you, and He will be the enemy of
whoever antagonizes you.'"

28) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has also quoted a lengthy hadith narrated
by Ummu Salamah in which the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) addresses her
thus: "O Ummu Salamah! Listen and bear witness: This ‘Ali ibn Abu Tlib
is the executor of my will; he is my successor, the one who tries my
enemies, and the one who safeguards my Pool [of al­Kawthar]."

29) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has also quoted Salman al-Farisi saying, "I
have heard the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) saying: ‘O Muhajirun and Ansar!
Shall I lead you to that which, as long as you adhere to, shall never
let you stray after me?' They said: ‘O yes, Messenger of Allah!' He
(pbuh) said: ‘This ‘Ali is my brother and the executor of my will, my
vizier, heir and successor; he is your Imam; therefore, love him as much
as I love him, and respect him as much as I respect him, for Gabriel has
enjoined me to say so to you.'"

30) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has also quoted through *isnad* one hadith
related by Zayd ibn Arqam in which the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is
quoted saying: "Shall I lead you to that which, as long as you adhere
to, will protect you against annihilation and straying? Your Imam and
*wali* is ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib (as); therefore, do support him, listen to
his counsel, and believe in him, for Gabriel has ordered me to say so to
you."

31) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has quoted Ibn ‘Abbas relating one hadith
in which the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) says: "Allah, the Praised, the
Sublime, has inspired to me: ‘I have selected from your nation a brother
and heir for you, a successor and executor of your will.' I inquired: ‘O
Lord! Who is he?' He replied: ‘It is he who loves me and I love him...,'
till He said in His divine statement: ‘It is ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib.'"

32) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has quoted Ibn ‘Abbas citing another hadith
related by his ancestors in which the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) says:
"During my *isra'* (night journey), my Lord, Exalted is His Might,
promised me that ‘Ali is the Imam of the pious, the leader of the
foremost among renown men, the religion's chief."

34) In his *Amali*, al­Saduq has quoted one hadith through *isnad* to
Imam al­Rida (as) who quotes his ancestors citing the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh) saying: "‘Ali is of me, and I am of ‘Ali; may Allah wage war
against those who fight ‘Ali; ‘Ali, indeed, is the Imam of creation
after me."

35) Abu Ja’far Muhammad ibn al­Hasan al­Tusi, the sect's *shaykh*, in
his *Amal* quotes one hadith narrated by ‘Ammar ibn Yasir in which the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) is quoted telling ‘Ali, "Allah has decorated
you in a way that is most dear to Him: through asceticism to the extent
that you do not feel deprived of any of this life's pleasures, and none
of them feels deprived of you, and He has endowed you with the love for
the destitute, making their fellowship welcomed by you, and they welcome
you as their Imam; therefore, congratulations to whoever loves you and
believes in you, and woe unto whoever hates you and tells lies about
you."

36) In his *Amali*, Shaykh al­Saduq has also quoted one hadith through
*isnad* to ‘Ali (as) who has said while preaching from Kufa's pulpit: "O
people! The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) granted me ten attributes that are
dearer to me than anything upon which the sun shines: He (pbuh) has said
to me: ‘O ‘Ali! You are my brother in this life and the life hereafter,
and you are the closest to me among all creation on the Day of
Resurrection; your residence in Paradise faces mine; you are my heir,
the executor of my will after me, faring with both my foes and family;
you protect my family on my own behalf during my absence; you are my
nation's Imam; you execute justice among my followers; you are my
friend, and my friend is the friend of Allah; your enemy is my enemy,
and my enemy is surely the enemy of Allah.'"

37) In al­Saduq's book titled *Al-Nusus ‘ala al-A'Imma*, which contains
texts relevant to the Imams, al­Hasan ibn ‘Ali (as) is quoted saying: "I
have heard the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) say the following to my father:
‘And you are the inheritor of my knowledge, the substance of my own
judgment, and the Imam after me.'"

38) Also in his work containing texts about the Imams, al­Saduq quotes
‘Umran ibn Hasin saying: "I have heard the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) say
to ‘Ali, ‘You are the Imam and successor after me.'"

39) Also in his same work, al­Saduq quotes ‘Ali (as) citing the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) saying to him: "O ‘Ali! You are the *wasi*
over those who have died among my household, and the caliph of those who
are alive among my nation."

40) Also in the same reference cited above, al­Saduq quotes al­Husayn
ibn ‘Ali (as) saying: "When Allah revealed the verse: ‘And those who are
kin of each other are more worthy of each other in the Book of Allah,' I
asked the Messenger of Allah to interpret it, and he said: ‘You are the
kin; when I die, your father ‘Ali is the most worthy of me and my
station; when your father dies, your brother al­Hasan is most worthy of
it; and if al­Hasan dies, then you are most worthy of his station.'"

This is the conclusion of what we wanted to quote in such a hurry. Its
ratio to the remainder of the texts is like that of one bouquet to the
remainder of all flowers, or the drop of water to the ocean; yet a
portion should suffice; praise be to the Lord of the worlds, Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: This much suffices due to the fact that we have narrated quite a
few ahadith from sources such as the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali ibn
Abu Talib (as), ‘Abdullah ibn ‘Abbas, ‘Abdullah ibn Mas’ud, ‘Abdullah
ibn ‘Umar, Abu Sa’id al-Khudri, Abul-Darda', Abu Hurayrah, Anas ibn
Malik, Ma’ath ibn Jabal, quoting various sources, all stating that the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, has said:
"Whoever teaches my nation forty ahadith related to its faith, Allah
will resurrect him on the Day of Judgment in the company of the faqihs
and the learned." In another wording of the same hadith, "Allah will
resurrect him as a learned faqih." According to Abul-Darda', the
statement reads: "I will include him in my intercession on the Day of
Judgment, and he shall be a witness." According to Ibn Mas’ud, "It will
be said to him: ‘Enter Paradise from whichever gate you please.'"
According to Ibn ‘Umar's narration, "... he will be included with the
men of knowledge, and be resurrected in the company of martyrs."
Suffices us in learning these forty ahadith and others included in all
our Letters his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Allah
will look after whoever listens to my statement, comprehends it and
conveys it just as he heard it." And also his hadith: "Let those of you
who witness [my Sunnah] convey it to those who are absent."

[^2]: This hadith and the ones before it exist in a chapter containing
what has been narrated about the Prophet (pbuh) regarding the Qa'im, and
that he is the twelfth in the line of Imams; it is Chapter Twenty-Four
of Ikmal ad-Din wa Itmam al-Ni’mah, pages 149-167.

[^3]: This hadith, together with the four preceding it, is quoted from
al-Saduq's Ghayat al-Maram. These are quite lengthy, and we have quoted
from them whatever testifies to our argument. As regarding the ahadith
which succeed it, they are to be found in Chapter 13 of Ghayat al-Maram.


