Letter 64
=========

**Safar 4, 1330**

I Above Texts were Quoted upon Request,
---------------------------------------

1) We have cited those texts in order to acquaint you with them and in
response to your own request.

II Sahihs are Proofs against the Majority,
------------------------------------------

2) Our own testimonial against your argument is what we have already
quoted from your own *sahih*s.

III Not Quoted Because of Their Existence in Our Own Sahihs.
------------------------------------------------------------

3) The reason why those texts were not included is due to the prejudice,
with which we are familiar, of those who concealed their grudge, and hid
their animosity, from the party of Pharaoh during the early epoch of
Islam, worshippers of authority and domination who spent everything they
possessed of might and means to hide the contributions of Ahl al­Bayt
and put out their light in every land.

They forced people to deny their feats and attributes through means and
methods of both tempting and terrorizing, through their wealth once, and
through their positions and political stature another. They bestowed
their favours upon those who denied these merits, dismissing, banishing
or even murdering those who believed in them.

You know that the texts related to the imamate, and the promises of
caliphate, are held with apprehension by those who fear that such texts
may jeopardize their thrones or undermine the very foundations of their
governments. The safety of these texts against the tampering of such
people, of that of their followers and flatterers, and their ability to
reach us through many sources and methods, is, indeed, a miracle
testifying to their own truth. This is so due to the fact that those who
denied the status of Ahl al­Bayt, usurped the positions rightly and
divinely assigned to them, used to incur the worst punishment upon
anyone who showed love for Ahl al­Bayt.

They would shave his beard, convey him on the back of a donkey and tour
the market­places, humiliating him, beating him and depriving him of
even the most simple and basic human right, till he would lose all hope
for justice from those rulers and despond of having friends in the
community.[^1]

So, if anyone spoke well of ‘Ali (as), he would be disowned, and
retribution would fall upon him; therefore, his possessions would be
confiscated, and he would be executed. How many tongues praising ‘Ali
were cut off? How many eyes which looked at him with respect were
gouged? How many hands which pointed out to him were amputated? How many
feet which walked towards him affectionately were sawed? How many homes
of his followers were burnt? And how many of their families were
banished...?

Among the narrators of hadith and "protectors of the legacy" were people
who worshipped those monarchs and tyrants as well as their rulers other
than worshipping Allah, the Exalted, the Sublime, and they sought
nearness to them with all their resources of scholarship, thus
distorting, testifying for the authenticity of this or against the
authenticity of that, just like many whom we see these days of
flatterers among shaykhs, hired scholars, bad judges who race to please
the rulers by endorsing their policies, be they just or unjust, calling
their edicts correct, be they truly correct or corrupt; so, the ruler
does not even have to ask them for a verdict in support of his regime or
to indict his opponents, for they do so according to his own wish and
according to the requirements of his policy, even if this means opposing
the Book and the Sunnah, thus violating the nation's consensus, out of
their own eagerness to safeguard their positions, or due to their
coveting of a position they aspire to acquire. What a distance separates
these from those!

The latter did not value their governments, while the others needed
their monarchs so badly, since they would use them to fight Allah and
His Messenger. For this reason, they enjoyed with the monarchs and
rulers a special lofty status, and their word was heeded; therefore,
they commanded authority and prestige, and they were fanatical against
the accurate ahadith if the latter pointed out to an attribute of ‘Ali
(as) or of other members of the household of Prophethood; so, they would
reject it strongly, dropping it violently, attributing to its narrators
Rafidism - and Rafidism is the worst vice according in their judgment.
This is their policy towards the traditions lauding ‘Ali, especially if
they are held in high esteem by the Shi’as.

As regarding the flatterers, these have had friends in the specially
high class in every land; they would speak highly of them, and they have
for followers secular scholars who would publicize their views, from
among those who make a show of asceticism and piety, among the leaders
and tribal chiefs.

When the latter hear what they say regarding rejecting those authentic
ahadith, they would hold their statements as gospel­revealed and would
publicize them among the commoners and the ignorant, thus making them
well­known in every land and using them as principles upheld in every
time. There is another group of people who were custodians of hadith in
those days, and who were forced by fear to overlook the ahadith praising
‘Ali and Ahl al­Bayt (as).

If those poor folks were asked about what those flatterers were saying
regarding rejecting the accurate *sunan* containing ‘Ali's contributions
and those of Ahl al­Bayt (as), they would fear, if they told the general
public of what they knew, that a blind, deaf and dumb dissension might
occur.

They were, therefore, forced out of fear to seek shelter by
side­tracking the subject for fear of being rebuked by the flatterers
and those who publicize for them, and for fear of those who repeat their
words like parrots from among the populace and ignorant commoners.

Kings and rulers ordered people to denounce the Commander of the
Faithful. They pressured them to do so once by tempting them with money,
and once by threatening them with their armies and dreadful promises of
retribution, thus forcing them to belittle him and his lineage, so much
so that they painted a disgusting picture of him in their books and
narrated ahadith whereby ears feel offended, making the cursing of his
name from the pulpits a tradition followed by the Muslims during both
‘Iids and on Fridays.

The Light of Allah cannot be put out, and the contributions of His
*walis* cannot be hidden; otherwise, those traditions would not have
reached us through the sources of both groups, accurately and explicitly
implying his caliphate. No texts are more consecutively reported than
the texts in his praise, and I, by Allah, wonder about the favours which
He has bestowed upon ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, His servant and the brother of
His Messenger, how his light pierced through the clouds, the pitch of
darkness, and survived the tumultuous waves, letting its ray shine on
the world like midday sun!

4) You may refer, in addition to all the irrefutable proofs you have
heard, to the text of inheritance, for it by itself is an irrefutable
proof, Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: Refer to page 15, Vol. 3, of Sharh Nahjul Balaghah by Ibn
Abul-Hadid, and you will find out what atrocities befell Ahl al-Bayt
(as) and their Shi’ahs in those days. Imam al-Baqir (as) has made a
statement in this regard to which we refer the researchers.


