Letter 66
=========

Ali is the Prophet's Heir
-------------------------

**Safar 5, 1330**

There is no doubt that the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, has left ‘Ali with a legacy of knowledge and wisdom as much as
the Almighty permitted His prophets and *wasis* to inherit, so much so
that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has said: "I am the city of knowledge
and Ali is its gate; therefore, whoever wishes to attain knowledge, let
him approach through the gate."[^1]

He, peace be upon him and his progeny, has said: "I am the storehouse of
wisdom, and ‘Ali is its door... ‘Ali is the gateway of my knowledge, the
one who explains after me the Message with which I have been sent;
loving him is indicative of genuine faith, and hating him is hypocrisy."

According to Zayd ibn Abu ‘Awfah, he, peace be upon him and his progeny,
has addressed ‘Ali thus: "You are my brother and heir;"[^2] whereupon
‘Ali inquired: "And what will you bequeath unto me?" He, peace be upon
him and his progeny, answered: "Whatever Prophets before me used to
bequeath." In another hadith, he, peace be upon him and his progeny,
according to Buraydah, has said: "The heir of my knowledge is ‘Ali."[^3]

Refer also to the hadith on the day of warning. During the lifetime of
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, ‘Ali (as)
used to say: "By Allah, I am his brother, successor and cousin, and the
heir of his knowledge; so, who is more worthy of all this other than
myself?"[^4]

Once ‘Ali was asked: "How did you come to inherit your cousin rather
than your uncle?" He answered: "The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon
him and his progeny, gathered the descendants of ‘Abdul Muttalib, who
were quite a few, and each one of them had such an appetite that would
consider tree trunks edible and would drink water though not potable,
and he prepared for them a mudd of food (a dry measure approximately
Tangier 46.61, about one and three­quarters of a pound); yet they all
ate till they were satisfied, while the food looked as if it was not
touched.

Then he, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: ‘O descendants of
‘Abdul­Muttalib! I have been sent to you in particular, and to all
people in general; so, who among you pledges to be my brother, friend
and heir?' Nobody stood; so, I stood, though the youngest among the
attendants, but he (pbuh) told me to sit. He repeated his statement
twice, and each time, I was the only one who stood up, and every time he
would tell me to sit. On the third time, he shook hands with me; thus
did I come to inherit my cousin instead of my uncle.'"[^5]

According to al­Hakim's *Al-Mustadrak*,[^6] and to al­Thahbi's
*Talkhis*, who both testify to its authenticity, Qatham ibn al­‘Abbas
was asked once: "How did ‘Ali come to inherit the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh) rather than your own selves?" He answered: "It is so due to his
being the foremost among us in following him, and in keeping company
with him more than anyone of us."

It was well­known that ‘Ali, rather than his uncle al­‘Abbas or any
descendant of Hashim, was the heir of the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his progeny. They accepted that as a fact, though they were
informed of the reason why such inheritance was confined to ‘Ali alone,
who was the Prophet's cousin, rather than to al­‘Abbas, his uncle, or to
any other uncle or relative of the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny. For this reason, they used to ask ‘Ali (as) once and once
Qatham, and the latter used to answer them as stated above in a way that
is satisfactory to the understanding of those inquirers.

Otherwise, the answer would be that Allah, the Exalted and omni­Scient,
looked upon the people of the earth and chose from among them Muhammad
(pbuh) and elevated him to be the Prophet, then He cast another look and
selected ‘Ali and inspired to His Messenger, peace be upon him and his
progeny, to take him as his heir and successor.

On page 125, Vol. 3, of *Al-Mustadrak*, al­Hakim, having quoted Qatham
stating the above, says: "The judge of judges [supreme judge, or grand
mufti], Abul-Hasan Muhammad ibn Salih al­Hashimi, has told me that he
once heard Abu ‘Umar the judge saying: ‘I heard Isma’il ibn Ishaq the
judge, having been informed of what Qatham had said, saying that a man
inherits another through either a blood relationship or sincere loyalty,
and men of knowledge do not dispute the fact that [under normal
circumstances] a cousin does not become the heir while the uncle [his
father] is still alive.'

According to such consensus, ‘Ali inherited the Prophet's knowledge
rather than they." As a matter of fact, chroniclers are sequential in
narrating such a fact, especially through the sources of the purified
progeny, and suffices us for proof is the Will and its clear texts,
Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: We have quoted this hadith and the couple before it in Letter No.
48 above. Refer in that Letter to ahadith number 9, 10 and 11, and do
not overlook our comments.

[^2]: We have quoted the said hadith in Letter No. 32.

[^3]: Refer to it in Letter No. 68 above.

[^4]: This statement verbatim is confirmed as being ‘Ali's. It is quoted
by al-Hakim on page 126, Vol. 3, of his Al-Mustadrak through a narration
endorsed by al-Bukhari and Muslim. Al-Thahbi, in his Talkhis
al-Mustadrak, has admitted the same.

[^5]: This hadith stands on firm grounds, and it is a lengthy one. It
has been quoted by al-Diya' al-Maqdisi in his Al-Mukhtara, and by Ibn
Jarir in his Tahthib al-Athar. It is hadith number 6155 on page 408,
Vol. 6, of Kanz al-’Ummal. It is also quoted by al-Nisa'i on page 18 of
his Al-Khasa'is al-’Alawiyya, and it is transmitted by Ibn Abul-Hadid
from al-Tabari's Tarikh near the end of the commentary on the "qasi’a"
sermon, page 255, Vol. 3, of Sharh Nahjul Balaghah. Refer also to page
159, Vol. 1, of Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal's Musnad where you will find the
same hadith conveying this meaning.

[^6]: It occurs on page 125 of its third volume. It is also quoted by
Ibn Abu Shaybah, and it is hadith number 6084 on page 400, Vol. 6, of
Kanz al-’Ummal.


