Letter 68
=========

The Will's Texts
----------------

**Safar 9, 1330**

1) The texts regarding the will are consecutively reported through the
Imams of the purified progeny (as); so, refer to what has been stated in
this regard by others as mentioned in Letter No. 20 that quotes the
statements of the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny,
who took ‘Ali (as) by the neck and said: "This is my brother and
successor; he shall succeed me in faring with you; therefore, listen to
him and obey him."

Muhammad ibn Hamid al­Razi quotes Salamah al­Abrash, Ibn Ishaq, Abu
Rabi’ah al­Ayadi, Ibn Buraydah, ending with the latter's father Buraydah
citing the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny,
saying: "For every Prophet there is a successor and an heir; my
successor and heir is ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib."[^1]

In his *Kabir*, and through *isnad* to Salman al-Farisi, al­Tabrani
quotes the latter citing the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and
his progeny, saying: "My successor, my confidant, the best man I leave
behind me to fulfill my promise and implement my religion, is ‘Ali ibn
Abu Talib (as)."[^2]

This is a clear text proving that he is the successor, and an obvious
testimony that he is the best of people after the Prophet (pbuh). It
contains an obligatory instruction that he should succeed him, and that
people should obey him, as is clear to the wise.

Abu Na’im al­Hafiz, in his *Hilyat al­Awliya'*,[^3] quotes Anas saying
that the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, said to
him: "O Anas! The first to enter this door is the Imam of the pious, the
leader of Muslims, the chief of religion, the seal of successors of
prophets, and the leader of the most pious among renown men." Anas says
that ‘Ali came in, and the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, stood up with excitement, hugged ‘Ali and said to him: "You
will discharge my responsibility, convey my instructions, and explain
all that in which they will dispute after me."

Al­Tabrani, in his *Al­Kabir*, quotes Abu Ayyub al­Ansari citing the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, saying that the
Prophet (pbuh) addressed Fatima once thus: "O Fatima! Have you not come
to know that Allah, the Dear One, cast a look at the inhabitants of the
earth and chose your father from among them and sent him as His
Messenger, then He cast a second look and selected your husband and
inspired me to marry him to you and appoint him as my successor?"[^4]

Notice how Allah selected ‘Ali (as) from among all other inhabitants of
the earth, immediately after selecting from among them the Seal of His
Prophets (pbuh), and see how the selection of the successor is conducted
in the same sequence to the selection of the Prophet.

Also see how Allah inspired His Prophet to solemnize his marriage and
appoint him as his successor. See if successors of prophets were any
other than the latter's own *wasis*. Is it fitting to push aside [when
it comes to selecting a caliph] one who is the best among Allah's
servants, the *wasi* of the master of His Prophets, and prefer someone
else over him?

Is it fitting if someone else, other than he, should rule the Muslims
and make him simply one of his own commoners and subjects? Is it
possible, by virtue of reason, that one elected by people should be
obeyed by that who was selected by Allah, just as He selected His
Prophet? How is it possible that both Allah Himself and His Messenger
choose him while we elect someone else?

***"No believing man nor woman, after Allah and His Messenger have
decreed an edict, should practice free will regarding their affairs; and
whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger surely strays manifestly
(33:36)."***

Narratives abound that state that as soon as those who were
hypocritical, envious, and interest­seeking came to know that the
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, was going to
marry his daughter Fatima al­Zahra', mistress of the women of paradise
and equal only to Mary (as), to ‘Ali, they envied ‘Ali and were
extremely concerned, especially after many of them had unsuccessfully
sought her hand.[^5]

They said that that was indicative of ‘Ali's status; so, nobody had any
hope of being his peer, and they even plotted and schemed. They sent
their women to the Mistress of the Women of the World trying to turn her
against ‘Ali. Among what they said to her was that ‘Ali was poor and did
not have much of this world's possessions, but she, peace be upon her,
was quite aware of their scheming and ill intentions as well as those of
their men. In spite of all this, she did not offend them in any way,
till the Will of Allah Almighty and omni­Scient and of His Messenger was
carried out.

It was then that she desired to show those women the status enjoyed by
the Commander of the Faithful (as) whereby Allah will shame his enemies,
and she said: "O Messenger of Allah! Why did you marry me to a poor man
who has no money?" He, peace be upon him and his progeny, answered her
in the way stated above.

When Allah wishes to publicize

A virtue hidden from the eyes,

He facilitates to it one very well­known

To covet and envy everyone.

Al­Khatib quotes one author whose *isnad* is unanimously agreed upon,
and who is very highly respected, namely Ibn ‘Abbas, saying: "When the
Prophet (pbuh) solemnized the marriage of Fatima and ‘Ali, Fatima said:
‘O Messenger of Allah! You have married me to a poor man who does not
have anything.' The Prophet (pbuh) said to her: ‘Are you not pleased
that Allah has chosen from among the inhabitants of the earth two men
one of whom is your father and the other is your husband?'"[^6]

Recounting the attributes of ‘Ali, al­Hakim, on page 129, Vol. 3, of his
*Al-Mustadrak*, quotes Sarij ibn Yunus citing Abu Hafs al­Abar,
al­A’mash, Abu Salih, and ending with Abu Hurayrah who quotes Fatima
(as) saying: "O Messenger of Allah! Why have you married me to a poor
man with no money?" He (pbuh) answered: "O Fatima! Are you not pleased
that Allah, the Exalted and Sublime, cast a look at the inhabitants of
the earth and chose two men one of whom is your father and the other is
your husband?"

Ibn ‘Abbas is also quoted saying that the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) has
said the following to Fatima: "Are you not pleased that I have married
you to the one who is the foremost among Muslims in accepting Islam and
the one endowed with more knowledge? You are the Mistress of the women
of my nation, just as Mary was the mistress of the women of her nation;
are you not pleased, O Fatima, that Allah cast a look at the people of
the earth and chose two men from among them: one of them is your father
and the other is your husband?"[^7]

The Messenger of Allah (pbuh), whenever the Mistress of the women of the
world suffered any hardship, would remind her of Allah's favour and that
of His Messenger unto her, since he married her to the best of his
nation, thus solacing her and removing from her chest whatever pain time
had brought her.

Suffices you for a testimonial on this subject what Imam Ahmad has
stated on page 26, Vol. 5, of his *Musnad* where he quotes one
particular hadith narrated by Ma’qil ibn Yasar in which the Prophet
(pbuh) is reported to have visited Fatima (as) when she fell sick and
said to her: "How do you feel?" She answered: "By Allah, my grief has
intensified, my want has worsened, and my sickness has lasted for too
long." He (pbuh) said to her: "Yet are you not satisfied that I have
married you to the one who is the foremost among my nation in accepting
Islam, the one endowed with more knowledge, and the greatest in
clemency?" Narratives relating this issue are nUmarous, and there is no
room to state all of them in this letter, Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: Al-Thahbi has quoted this hadith while discussing the biography of
Sharik in his book Mizan al-I’tidal, falsifying it and alleging that
Sharik could not have tolerated narrating such a hadith. He said:
"Muhammd ibn Hamid al-Razi is not trustworthy." Our answer to his
allegation is that Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal, Imam Abul Qasim al-Baghwi,
Imam Ibn Jarir al-Tabari, the Imam of critics and verifiers Ibn Ma’in,
and others of their caliber, have all trusted Muhammad ibn Hamid and
narrated his hadith, for he is their mentor. A reliable authority such
as al-Thahbi admits the same in his biography of Muhammd ibn Hamid in
his Al-Mizan. The man cannot be charged with Rafidism or Shi’ism, but
the critic is a predecessor of al-Thahbi; so, there is no reason for
initiating such an accusation regarding this hadith.

[^2]: This hadith verbatim is numbered 2570 at the end of page 155, Vol.
6, of Kanz al-’Ummal, and the author quotes it again in his Muntakhab
al-Kanz; so, refer to Al-Muntakhab, footnote on page 32, Vol. 5, of
Ahmad's Musnad.

[^3]: It exists on page 450, Vol. 2, of Sharh Nahjul Balaghah, and we
have quoted it in Letter No. 48.

[^4]: This hadith, verbatim, as well as its source are also in hadith
number 2541 on page 143, Vol. 6, of Kanz al-’Ummal, and it is quoted in
Muntakhab al-Kanz as well; so, refer to the latter and read the footnote
on page 31, Vol. 5, of Ahmad's Musnad.

[^5]: Ibn Abu Hatim has quoted Anas saying: "Abu Bakr and ‘Umar sought
Fatima's hand from the Prophet, but he remained silent and did not tell
them anything; so, they went to ‘Ali to inform him." It is also
transmitted from Ibn Abu Hatim by many reliable authorities such as Ibn
Hajar at the beginning of Chapter 11 of his Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa. Many
other authorities have quoted something similar to it from Ahmad through
isnad to Anas. Abu Dawud al-Sajistani, as stated by Ibn Hajar in Chapter
11 of his Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa, while discussing the twelfth verse,
says that Abu Bakr sought Fatima's hand, and the Prophet (pbuh) turned
him down; then ‘Umar did the same, and he turned away from him, too; so,
they both informed ‘Ali of it. ‘Ali himself is quoted saying: "Abu Bakr
and ‘Umar sought Fatima's hand from the Messenger of Allah, but he
(pbuh) rejected them. ‘Umar then said: ‘You, ‘Ali, are worthy of her.'"
This hadith is quoted by Ibn Jarir. Al-Dulabi has quoted it, admitting
its authenticity while discussing the Prophet's purified progeny, and it
is hadith number 6007 on page 392, Vol. 6, of Kanz al-’Ummal.

[^6]: This hadith, verbatim, with reference to its narrator, is hadith
number 5992 on page 391, Vol. 6, of Kanz al-’Ummal, where the author
admits the reliability of its narrator.

[^7]: This hadith, verbatim, with reference to its narrator, is hadith
number 2543 on page 153, Vol. 6, of Kanz al-’Ummal, where the author
quotes it from Ibn ‘Abbas and Abu Hurayrah. Al-Tabrani, in his
Al-Muttafaq, has transmitted it from al-Khatib who quotes Ibn ‘Abbas;
so, refer to Al-Muntakhab and read the first line of footnote on page
39, Vol. 5, of Ahmad's Musnad.


