Letter 69
=========

Argument of the Will's Deniers
------------------------------

**Safar 10, 1330**

Those who follow the Sunnah and consensus deny this will simply because
of what al­Bukhari has narrated in his *Sahih* where he quotes al­Aswad
saying, "It was said once to ‘Ayesha, may Allah be pleased with her,
that the Prophet (pbuh) had made a will regarding ‘Ali,[^1] and she
responded: ‘Who said so? I have seen the Prophet, while I was reclining
him to my chest, when he ordered a washbowl to be brought to him; I
hardly noticed how fast he collapsed and died; so, how could he have
made a will to ‘Ali?"[^2]

In the same reference, the author quotes other sources citing ‘Ayesha
saying, "The Messenger of Allah breathed his last while being between my
stomach and under my chin," and she is often quoted saying, "He died
reclining on my chest," and she may have said: "He died while his head
was on my thigh."[^3] So, had there been any will, she would have come
to know about it. In Muslim's *Sahih*, in a treatise on the subject of
wills on page 14, Vol. 2, the author quotes ‘Ayesha saying, "The
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) left neither a dinar nor a dirham, nor a male
nor a female camel, nor did he leave any will."

In both *sahih*s, in a treatise on wills, Talhah ibn Masrif is quoted
saying, "I asked ‘Abdullah ibn Abu ‘Awfah: ‘Did the Prophet leave any
will at all?' He answered: ‘No.' I asked him: ‘How did he enjoin people
to write their wills while he himself did not do so?' He answered: ‘His
will is the Book of Allah.'" Since these ahadith are more authentic than
the ones which you have cited, and are included in both *sahih*s, while
the ones you have cited are not, they can be brought forth as
irrefutable arguments, Wassalam.

Yours,

*S*

[^1]: This hadith is quoted by al-Bukhari in his treatise on "Al-Wasaya
(wills)," page 83, Vol. 2, of his Sahih, and in his chapter on the
sickness and demise of the Prophet (pbuh), page 64, Vol. 3, of the same
book. It is quoted by Muslim on page 64, Vol. 3, of his Sahih, and it is
also quoted by Muslim in his treatise of the Prophet's will on page 14,
Vol. 2, of his Sahih.

[^2]: You probably already know that both shaykhs have intentionally
narrated this hadith while discussing the Prophet's will to ‘Ali, for
those who stated at that time that the Prophet had left a will to ‘Ali
had not yet split from the ranks of the nation. They were either among
the sahabah or the tabi’in who had the courage to reveal what would make
the mother of believers unhappy and would oppose the politics of the
time; for this reason, she, may Allah be pleased with her, was shaken a
great deal when she heard their hadith. Such a reaction is seen in her
own statement in response to it, a statement which is one of the most
feeble of answers. Imam al-Sindi, in his comment on this hadith in
al-Nisai's Sunan, as indicated on page 241, Vol. 6 (the Egyptian Press
at al-Azhar), said: "It is quite obvious that such hadith [by the mother
of the believers ‘Ayesha] does not rule out the existence of the will
prior to her statement, nor does it prove that he (pbuh) had died
suddenly without being able to leave a will or could have thought of
doing so, since he came to know that his end was approaching even before
falling sick, then he remained sick for days...," up to the conclusion
of his statement. If you scrutinize this statement, you will find it
quite strong.

[^3]: Her statements "He died on my chest," and "He died between my
belly and chin," are recorded in a chapter dealing with his sickness and
demise (pbuh) in Bukhari's Sahih. As regarding her statement "He died
while his head was on my thigh," this exists in another chapter in which
the author discusses his sickness and demise without an intervening
chapter.


