Letter 75
=========

**Safar 17, 1330**

I Mother of the Believers is not Ruled by Emotions,
---------------------------------------------------

1) The axis upon which your argument, regarding the mother of the
believers in her frank hadith denying a will to ‘Ali, revolves is
two­folded:

One is your allegation that her biased indisposition against the Imam
bids her to deny the will. Our rebuttal is that those who are familiar
with her life­style deny the allegation that she yields to emotion while
narrating hadith about the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, or that she seeks a special interest; so, she cannot be accused
while quoting the Prophet's hadith, albeit if the subject­matter of such
hadith is someone she likes or someone she does not.

God forbid that interests dominate her mind to the extent that she lies
while quoting hadith from the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and
his progeny, preferring to promote her own interest rather than telling
the truth.

II The Pleasant and the Ugly are Denied by Reason,
--------------------------------------------------

2) The other is that reason alone refuses your claim that this hadith is
authentic, for it is neither logical nor permissible to conclude that
the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, would leave
the religion of Allah, the Exalted and the Sublime, in its cradle, while
Allah's servants are following a new creed, without having made a will
instructing them regarding their affairs.

The answer to your claim is that this matter is based on rational
goodness and ugliness, and the Sunnis disclaim it, for reason according
to their judgment does not at all determine whether something is
pleasant or ugly; rather, they believe that jurisdiction is the one that
determines it. They believe that whatever the jurisdiction labels as
good, they accept it as good, and whatever the jurisdiction describes as
bad, they consider it as such, and reason cannot be relied upon at all
in such matters.

III Why Oppose the Claim of the Mother of Believers?
----------------------------------------------------

3) As regarding what you have mentioned at the conclusion of your Letter
74,

concerning your rejection of the claim of the mother of believers that
the Prophet died on her chest, we are not familiar with any hadith
narrated by Sunnis which disproves it; so, if you are aware of any such
hadith, please oblige and state it, Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*S*


