Letter 6
========

**Thul-Qi’da 12, 1329 A.H.**

You, thanks to Allah, can be convinced by a mere hint, without the need
for an explanation, and you are above doubting the very fact that the
purified offspring (*‘itra*) are superior to all others. Their case is
quite clear: they have surpassed those with qualifications and have
distinguished themselves from seemingly equal peers. They have carried
from the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, the
knowledge of the prophets, and from him have they digested secular and
religious jurisdictions.

I References to Proofs Mandating Following the ‘Itra
----------------------------------------------------

1) The Prophet, hence, has made them equal only to the Glorious Book and
set them models of conduct for those endowed with reason, and the ark of
safety when hypocricy with its tumultous waves overwhelms the security
of the nation, safeguarding it against dissension if the tempests of
division rage, the Gate of Salvation: whoever enters it is forgiven, and
the strong Rope of Allah which is unbreakable.

II The Commander of the Faithful (as) Invites to Ahl al­Bayt's Sect
-------------------------------------------------------------------

2) The Commander of the Faithful is quoted in sermon 86 in
*Nahjul­Balagha* as saying:

***"‘Where are you heading (Qur'an, 81:26),'***

and

***‘where are you straying (Qur'an, 6:95, 10:34, 35:3, 40:62),'***

since the flags are poised up high, the Signs are clear, and the
light­house is erected? So, where are you straying? Nay! How can you be
blindfolded while you have among you the household (*‘itra*) of your
Prophet?

They are the reins of righteousness, the religion's flags, and the
tongues of truth; therefore, accord them as you accord the Qur'an and
approach them as thirsty camels approach the water. O people! Take
this[^1] from the last of the Prophets, Allah's peace be upon him and
his progeny: ‘whoever among us passes away, he is not really dead, and
whoever disintegrates (after dying) from among us does not really
disintegrate; therefore, do not say what you do not know, for there is
the greatest truth in what you deny.

Accept the argument of one against whom you have no argument and it is:
‘Have I not dealt with you according to the Greatest Weight[^2]
(Qur'an)? Have I not left among you the Lesser Weight (Ahl al­Bayt) and
laid firm among you the flags of faith?'"

He, peace be upon him, said, in sermon 96 of *Nahjul­Balagha*, "Behold
the Household of your Prophet; emulate their example and follow in their
footsteps, for they shall never take you out of guidance, nor shall they
ever bring you back into destruction; halt when they halt, and rise when
they rise, and do not go ahead of them lest you should stray, nor should
you lag behind them lest you should perish."

He, peace be upon him, has mentioned them once, as stated in sermon 237
of *Nahjul-Balaghah*, saying: "They are the life of knowledge and the
death of ignorance; their forbearance informs you of their knowledge,
and their outward appearance informs you of their conscience. Their
silence indicates the wisdom of their speech. They neither differ from
truth, nor do they differ among themselves about it. They are the
pillars of Islam and the gateways to salvation. Through them, justice
was achieved and wrong­doing was removed, and its tongue was uprooted.
They comprehended the creed with care and concern, not like hearing and
reporting, for the ‘reporters' of knowledge are many indeed, but those
who safeguard it are few."

He, peace be upon him, as stated in sermon 153 in *Nahjul-Balaghah*, has
also said, "His offspring (*‘itra*) is the best, and his family is the
best. His tree is the best of trees: it was planted in the sacred place
(*Haram*), and it grew like a vine; it has long branches and its fruit
is not unattainable."

He, peace be upon him, is quoted in sermon 153 of *Nahjul-Balaghah*
saying: "We are the banner, the companions, the trustees and the gates.
Houses are not supposed to be approached except through their gates:
whoever approaches them otherwise is called a thief," until he said,
describing the purified offspring (*‘itra*), "They are the vital
portions of the Qur'an, and they are the teasures of the Merciful. They
tell the truth when they speak, or when they remain silent; none can
speak ahead of them. Therefore, let the forerunner speak the truth to
his people, maintaining his reason."

He has said in sermon 146 of *Nahjul-Balaghah*: "You should know that
you will never know guidance unless you know who abandons it, nor will
you abide by the Book (Qur'an) unless you know who contradicts it, and
you will never uphold it unless you know who has discarded it; so, seek
that from those who possess it, for they are the life of knowledge and
the death of ignorance.

They are the ones whose judgment informs you of their knowledge, their
silence of their power of speech, their outer appearance of their inner
selves; they neither violate the religion, nor do they differ among
themselves about it, while it is among them a truthful witness and a
silent speaker."

There are many similarly impressive statements of his, peace be upon
him, in this regard; consider this one which is excerpted from sermon 4
in *Nahjul-Balaghah*: "Through us you received guidance in the darkness,
ascending the zenith of nobility, and through us you reached the light
and dissipated the gloomy night. May the ears that do not listen to the
summoner be deafened."[^3] He is quoted in sermon 104 of
*Nahjul-Balaghah* saying: "O people! Secure your light from the flame of
the lamps of a preacher who follows what he preaches, and drink from a
spring cleansed from impurity."

He has also said the following in sermon 108: "We are the tree of
Prophethood, the place of the Message, the ones to whom the angels make
a pilgrimage, the treasures of knowledge, the springs of wisdom. Our
supporter and lover awaits the mercy, while our enemy or antagonist us
awaits the wrath."[^4]

Among what he has said in this regard is sermon 143 of *Nahjul-Balaghah*
wherein he says: "Where are those who claimed to be deeply versed in
knowledge other than our own selves?[^5]

It is a lie and a transgression against us, for Allah has raised us high
while putting them down; He bestowed upon us while depriving them, and
He permitted us to enter (in the fortress of knowledge) while turning
them out. Through us, guidance is achieved and blindness is removed.
Surely the Imams from Quraysh have been planted in Hashim's loins.
Imamate can never fit anyone else, nor can government either."

Then he stated: "But they preferred a speedy gain to a later one,
forsaking a pure well to drink from an impure one," up to the end of his
statement. He has also said at the conclusion of *khutba* (sermon) 189
of *Nahjul-Balaghah*h: "Whoever among you dies on his bed knowing the
rights of his Lord and knowing the rights of His Messenger and his
family (Ahl al­Bayt) dies as a martyr, and his reward will be incumbent
upon Allah, and he deserves the reward of what good deeds he has
intended to do: his own intention will make up for his use of his sword
(in *jihad*)."

Also, he, peace be upon him, has said: "We are the virtuous; our
descendants are the descendants of Prophets; our party is the party of
Allah, the Sublime, the Glorified, while the transgressing party is the
devil's; whoever equates us with our enemy is certainly not of us."[^6]

Imam al­Mujtaba Abu Muhammad al­Hasan, the patient, master of the youths
of Paradise (as), has said the following in one of his sermons: "Fear
Allah regarding us, for we are your rulers."[^7]

III Relevant Statement of Imam Zainul­‘Abidin
---------------------------------------------

3) Whenever Imam Abu Muhammad, ‘Ali son of al­Husayn Zainul­‘Abidin,
master of those who prostrate in prayer, used to recite this verse of
the Almighty: "O ye who believe! Fear Allah and be with the Truthful,"
he would make a lengthy invocation to Allah containing his plea to be
included among "the Truthful" to attain the high ranks. He would then
count the calamities and innovations of the group that split from the
Imams of Faith and the Tree of Prophethood.

Then he would say: "Some people went as far as underestimating us,
making excuses for the Qur'anic verses which seem to them to be alike,
giving their own interpretation thereof, and casting doubts about the
transmitted narrarations in our honour," until he would say: "With whom
shall people in this nation seek refuge, since the pillars of this creed
have been forgotten and the nation has divided upon itself with
dissension, each party accusing the other of *kufr*, while Allah says:

***‘Do not be like those who became divided and disagreed (with each
other) even after receiving the Clear Evidences (Qur'an, 3:104)?'***

Who can be trusted to convey the Divine proofs and interpret the
Judgment other than the peers of the Qur'an and the descendants of the
Imams of Guidance, the lamps amidst the darkness, those whom Allah made
as His Arguments against His servants?

He has never left His creation alone without a Proof. Do you know them
or find them except from the branches of the Blessed Tree, the remnant
of the Elite from whom Allah has removed all impurity, purifying them
with a perfect purification, clearing them from sinning and decreeing
their love in His Book?"

That was his own speech, peace be upon him, *verbatim.*[^8] Look into it
and into our quotations from the speech of the Commander of the
Faithful; you will find them both representing the Shi’a School of
Muslim Thought in this regard very clearly. Consider this much of their
speech as a specimen for all such speeches of the Imams from Ahl
al­Bayt. They all are unanimous in this respect, and our *sahih* books
quoting them are *mutawatir* (consecutively reported), and peace be with
you.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: He means to say: "Learn this from the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his progeny: ‘When a member of the Prophet's Household
dies, he in reality does not die," that is, his soul remains shining in
the real world. This is also stated by Shaykh Muhammad ‘Abdoh and
others.

[^2]: The Commander of the Faithful (as) acted upon the Greater Weighty
Thing, namely the Holy Qur'an, leaving the Lesser Weighty Things, i.e.
both his sons, behind. It is also said that his progeny are the models
of conduct for others, as stated by Shaykh Muhammad ‘Abdoh and other
commentators of Hahjul Balaghah.

[^3]: In his commentary, Shaykh Muhammad ‘Abdoh says: "The ‘sarar,'
pronounced like ‘sahab' and ‘kitab,' is the last night of the lunar
month during which the moon disappears. The meaning would be: ‘You
entered into the dawn,' meaning ‘You used to live in utter darkness, the
darkness of polytheism and misguidance, till you emerged into the light
through our guidance and instruction,' a reference to Muhammad, peace be
upon him and his progeny, and his cousin Imam (as), the one who
supported his mission.

[^4]: See the conclusion of sermon 105, page 214, Vol. 1, of Nahjul
Balaghah. Ibn ‘Abbas has said: "We are members of the Prophet's
Household whose homes are the visiting places of the angels, the Ahl
al-Bayt of the Messenger of Allah, and members of the household of mercy
and knowledge." He is quoted saying so by a group of most reliable Sunni
traditionists and as stated at the conclusion of his chapter on the
characteristics of Ahl al-Bayt (as), on page 142 of Ibn Hajar's
Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa.

[^5]: See also Qur'an, 3:7 and 4:162

[^6]: This statement is quoted by many authors, including Ibn Hajar at
the conclusion of his chapter on the characteristics of Ahl al-Bayt (as)
near the conclusion of page 142 of Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa where he makes
quite a few lies about them, being grossly unfair to them.

[^7]: Refer to it at the conclusion of his chapter on the will of the
Prophet (pbuh) in their regard on page 137 of Ibn Hajar's Al-Sawa’iq
al-Muhriqa.

[^8]: Refer to it on page 90 of Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqa where Ibn Hajar
explains the meaning of the fifth verse: "And uphold Allah's rope all of
you together" as one of many others which he explains in Section 1,
Chapter 11.


