Letter 86
=========

**Rabi’ul-Awwal 8, 1330**

I Thursday's Calamity,
----------------------

1) The incidents in which they did not follow the texts of hadith are
innUmarable. Take, for example, the calamity on Thursday, which is the
most famous of such incidents and the most abominable among them. It is
narrated by all authors of *sahih*s and *sunan*, and it was documented
by all traditionists and historians.

Suffices you what al-Bukhari, in his section dealing with the statement
of the ailing Messenger (pbuh): "Get away from me," on page 5, Vol. 4,
of his *Sahih*, where the author relies on the authority of ‘Ubaydullah
ibn Abdullah ibn ‘Utbah ibn Mas’ud who quotes Ibn ‘Abbas saying that
when death approached the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, his house was full of men including ‘Umar ibn al-Khattab. The
Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, said: "Let me
write you something that will forever protect you against straying after
me."

‘Umar said: "The Prophet is under the influence of pain, and you have
with you the Qur'an; so, the Book of Allah suffices us." Those who were
present there argued among themselves, and their argument developed into
a dispute. Some of them said: "Come close to the Prophet so that he may
write something for you that will safeguard you against straying after
him," while others repeated what ‘Umar had said.

When the argument and dispute intensified in the presence of the
Prophet, the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, said
to them: "Get away from me." Ibn ‘Abbas used to say: "The calamity, the
real calamity, is what caused the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) to desist
from writing what he wished to write, due to their argument and
dispute."

There is no dispute regarding the authenticity of this hadith nor the
occasion whereupon it was invoked. Al-Bukhari quotes it in his treatise
on knowledge on page 22, Vol. 1, of his work, and it exists in many
other places with which the researchers are familiar. He quotes it in
several places of his *Sahih*. Muslim, too, quotes it at the conclusion
of the Prophet's will in his *Sahih* on page 14, Vol. 2.

Ahmad narrates Ibn ‘Abbas's hadith in his own Musnad. Refer to page 325
of its first volume. It is narrated by all authors of traditions and
books of history, each writer editing it yet retaining its gist,
reiterating the fact that the Prophet (pbuh) was described as
"hallucinating," or "delirious." But they also mentioned that ‘Umar had
said: "The Prophet (pbuh) has been overcome by pain" just to sanitize
the statement and undermine the sentiments of those who found it
abominable.

Supporting this fact is what Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn ‘Abdul-’Aziz al-Jawhari
has said in his book titled *Al-Saqifah*, relying on the authority of
Ibn ‘Abbas and quoting him saying, "When death approached the Messenger
of Allah, there were men present at his house among whom ‘Umar ibn
al-Khattab was one. The Messenger of Allah said: ‘Bring me ink and a
tablet so that I may write you something that will safeguard you against
straying after me.'

Those present at his house differed among themselves and disputed, some
saying ‘Come close and watch the Prophet write you something,' while
others repeated what ‘Umar had said. When the argument and dispute
increased, the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny,
became angry and said: ‘Get away from me," as stated on page 20, Vol. 2,
of *Sharh Nahjul Balaghah* by the Mu’azilite scholar [Ibn Abul Hadid].

As you notice from this narrative, it is explicit in indicating that
some individuals reported ‘Umar's opposition in meaning, not *verbatim*.
This also proves that the traditionists who did not wish to state the
name of the person who opposed had nontheless quoted his statement
*verbatim*. In a chapter on rewarding the envoys, in his book *Al-Jihad
wal Siyar*, page 118, Vol. 2, al-Bukhari states:

"Qabsah narrated a tradition to us from Ibn ‘Ayinah, Salman al-Ahwal,
and Sa’id ibn Jubayr, all consecutively quoting Ibn ‘Abbas saying: ‘On a
Thursday - what a day that Thursday was...,' and he burst sobbing till
his tears drenched the stones, then he went on to say, "...the pain of
the Messenger of Allah intensified on a Thursday; so, he ordered us to
bring him some writing material so that he might write us something
whereby we would be protected against straying after him, but people
disputed, knowing that nobody should dispute in the presence of any
Prophet, and they said: ‘The Messenger of Allah is delirious.'

He, peace be upon him and his progeny, then said: ‘Leave me, for the
pain which I am suffering is more tolerable than what you are
attributing to me,' and he left in his will prior to his demise three
items: to get the polytheists out of the Arab land, to reward the envoys
the same way he (pbuh) used to reward them,' and I forgot the third
one."[^1]

The same hadith is narrated also by Muslim at the conclusion of a
chapter dealing with the will in his *Sahih*, and by Ahmad in Ibn
‘Abbas's ahadith on page 222, Vol. 1, of his work, and by all other
traditionists. In his chapter on the will, in his *Sahih*, Muslim quotes
Sa’id ibn Jubayr in one place, and Ibn ‘Abbas in another, saying, "That
Thursday, O what a day that Thursday was...," and his tears kept pouring
down till they looked like pearls arrayed in a formation, then he
continued to say: "The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, said: ‘Bring me a tablet and an ink-pot,' or a plate and some
ink, ‘so that I may write you something whereby you shall never be
misguided;' so, some people said: ‘The Messenger of Allah is
delirious.'"[^2]

Anyone who researches this abominable incident in the *sahih*s will soon
come to find out that the first person who said that the Messenger of
Allah was delirious was indeed ‘Umar, and some of those who were present
there and then followed suit. In the first hadith, you have heard Ibn
‘Abbas saying:[^3] "Those present at his house differed among themselves
and disputed, some saying ‘Come close and watch the Prophet writing you
something,' while others repeated what ‘Umar had said," i.e. "The
Messenger of Allah is delirious." In another tradition narrated by
al-Tabrani, in his *Awsat*, and on page 138, Vol. 3, of *Kanz
al-’Ummal*, ‘Umar is quoted saying: "When the Prophet became sick, he
said: ‘Bring me a tablet and an ink-pot, so that I may write you
something after which you shall never stray;' so, the women behind the
curtain said: ‘Have you not heard what the Messenger of Allah, peace be
upon him and his progeny, is saying?'"

‘Umar goes on to say: "I said to them: ‘You are like the women who
admired Joseph; when the Messenger of Allah falls sick, you squeeze your
eyes, and when he is healthy, you ride his neck!" He also continues to
say: "The Messenger of Allah then said: ‘Leave them, for they are better
than you.'"

You can see that they never implemented the spirit of this hadith. Had
they done so, they would have been protected against misguidance. We
wish they had stopped at just being insubordinate and not answering him
by saying: "The Book of Allah suffices us," as if he did not know the
status of Allah's Book among them, or that they were more knowledgeable
than him about its characteristics and merits.

We wish they had been satisfied with all of that rather than surprising
him with their rude statement: "The Messenger of Allah is delirious,"
just when he was suffering the agony of death. What a farewell statement
to the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)! They did not follow the Prophet's
command due to their being satisfied with the Book of Allah as they
claimed, as if they never read the verse:

***"Whatever the Messenger hands over to you, take it, and whatever he
forbids you therefrom, obey him (Qur'an, 59:7)."***

They said: "The Messenger of Allah is delirious," as if they never read
the verse:

***"It is the speech of an eminent Messenger, empowered by the One with
the Throne, peaceful to those who obey Him; verily, your fellow is not
possessed (Qur'an, 81:19-22),"***

and His statement, the Exalted, the omni-Scient,

***"It is the speech of an eminent Messenger, not of a poet; little do
you believe; nor is it the speech of a priest; little do you remember;
it is but the Revelation from the Lord of the Worlds (Qur'an,
69:40-43),"***

and His statement, the Almighty, the Sublime,

***"Your fellow has neither strayed, nor has he yielded to temptation;
he utters nothing out of his own inclination; it is but what is revealed
unto him of the Revelation; he is taught by One mighty in powers
(Qur'an, 53:2-5),"***

in addition to many such verses laden with divine wisdom, all testifying
to his being divinely protected from delirium.

Yet even reason by itself testifies to the same, but they were aware of
the fact that he, the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, wished to strengthen the covenant of caliphate, and emphasize
its being the monopoly of ‘Ali in particular, and the Imams among his
purified progeny in general; so, they stood as a stumbling block in his
way to do so, as admitted by none other than the second caliph himself
in a private conversation which he held with Ibn ‘Abbas...! It exists in
line 27, page 114, Vol. 3, of *Sharh Nahjul Balaghah* by Ibn Abul Hadid.

If you consider his statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, "Bring
me a tablet and an ink-pot, so that I may write you something whereby
you shall never stray after me," and his statement in the hadith of the
Two Weighty Things: "I am leaving with you that which, as long as you
uphold, will never let you stray: the Book of Allah and my progeny, my
Ahl al-Bayt," you will come to know then that the purpose of both
traditions is the same, and that he, peace be upon him and his progeny,
wished, even while being sick, to write for them the details of the
injunctions implied in the hadith of the Two Weighty Things [*al
thaqalain*].

II The Reason Why the Prophet Repealed His Order Then.
------------------------------------------------------

2) He repealed his order to them due to their statement with which they
surprised him, forcing him to change his mind, since after uttering it
there would be no effect for his writing them anything other than
dissension and dispute, leading them to argue be he really delirious -
God forbid - or not, just as they did even in his own presence and while
he could still see things, so much so that he could not tell them more
than to get away, as you have heard.

Had he insisted on writing it, they would have resorted to their claim
that he had written it in delirium, and many of their followers would
have gone to extremes in their attempts to prove that he did so while
being delirious - God forbid - and fill their books with such
allegations, only to reject his writing and use it as a pretext for not
implementing it.

For these reasons, his marvellous wisdom decreed that he, peace be upon
him and his progeny, should forget about such writing for fear those
opposing his wish and their followers might open a door to casting
doubts about Prophethood itself; we seek refuge with Allah, and we pray
for His protection.

He, peace be upon him and his progeny, saw how ‘Ali (as) and his
followers submitted to the spirit of such writing, whether he had
written it down or not, while others would not act upon it anyway even
if he had written it. Wisdom, therefore, necessitated abandoning it
since it would have no effect at all over the opposition that arose
other than dissension, as is obvious, Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: The third is none other than the matter which the Prophet (pbuh)
desired to write down in order to protect them from misguidance, but
politics forced the traditionists to "forget" it, as the Hanafi mufti of
Sur, Hajj Dawud al-Dadah, suggested.

[^2]: This hadith is quoted verbatim by Ahmad on page 355, Vol. 1, of
his Musnad, in addition to many other reliable authors of books of
traditions.

[^3]: This is what al-Bukhari has quoted from ‘Ubaydullah ibn ‘Abdullah
ibn ‘Utbah ibn Mas’ud from Ibn ‘Abbas, and it is also quoted by Muslim
and others.


