Letter 88
=========

Pretexts Refuted
----------------

**Rabi’ul-Awwal 11, 1330**

Any fair minded person ought to yield to the truth and utter what is
right. There are other views regarding the rejection of these arguments
which I desired to put forth to you, so that the final judgment will be
left entirely to you.

Their first pretext states that he, peace be upon him and his progeny,
having ordered them to bring the ink-pot, did not really intend to write
something but rather desired to test them, that's all. We say, in
addition to what you yourself have stated, that this incident took place
shortly before his demise, as the tradition itself suggests; there was
simply no time for testing, but there was time for a last minute warning
and justifying, time for a will containing a very significant matter, a
piece of complete advice for the nation. Anyone who is dying is
certainly far from testing or jesting; he would be concerned about his
affairs and those of his own kin, especially if he is a Prophet.

If he, as long as he lived, did not have enough time to test them, how
could he have found time to do so when he was about to die? His
statement, peace be upon him and his progeny, telling them to get away
from him when they fussed and argued in his presence, is surely
indicative of his disappointment with them. Had those who opposed him
been right, he would have appreciated their opposition and expressed his
pleasure therewith.

Anyone who studies this tradition, especially their saying that the
Messenger of Allah was delirious, will be positively sure that they were
aware of his intention to do something they hated; so, they surprised
him with such a statement, and they persisted fussing, arguing, and
disputing, as is quite obvious. Ibn ‘Abbas's tears, and his labelling
the incident a catastrophe disprove this argument.

Those who seek excuses by arguing that ‘Umar was divinely inspired in
assessing the public interest of Muslims, that he was inspired by Allah,
are talking nonsense, and their argument is dismissed in such a
discussion since it suggests that he, not the Messenger of Allah, peace
be upon him and his progeny, was on the right track in this incident,
and that his so-called "inspiration" was more accurate than the
revelation which he (pbuh), the truthful and trustworthy that he was,
uttered.

They say that it was intended to relieve the Prophet, peace be upon him
and his progeny, from the burden of writing while feeling sick. You, may
Allah support the truth through your person, know that writing such
matters would only bring the Prophet peace of mind, tranquility, and the
pleasure of his eyes. He would feel happy for ensuring a security for
his nation, peace be upon him and his progeny, against misguidance.

The commands to be obeyed, the divine will, and the physical presence
were all his. He, being more precious than my parents, wished to have
access to a sheet of paper and an ink-pot; he issued an order and nobody
was supposed to oppose his wish;

***"Neither a believing man nor a believing woman has any right, when
Allah and His Messenger decree a matter, to follow their own views, and
whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger is surely in manifest
misguidance (Qur'an, 33:36)."***

Yet their insubordination in such an extremely significant matter, and
their fussing, arguing, and disputing in his presence, were to him more
painful than writing what he wished to write in order to protect his
nation against misguidance. How can anyone who feels pity for him
because of the pain of writing something oppose him and surprise him by
saying that he was speaking in delirium?

They say that ‘Umar thought that not to bring the sheet and the ink-pot
was wiser. This is a most odd statement. How can it be wiser while the
Prophet himself had ordered that they should be brought forth? Did ‘Umar
think that the Messenger of Allah would order something which would be
better left out?

Yet even more strange is their argument that ‘Umar feared that the
Prophet might write things which would be impossible to implement and
whose abandoning would require chastisement. How can it thus be feared
in spite of the Prophet's statement "... you shall never stray"? Do
people who thus argue think that ‘Umar assesses the consequences more
correctly than the Prophet himself, and that he is more cautious about
and compassionate to his nation than the Prophet (pbuh)? Certainly not.

They also say that it is possible that ‘Umar feared the hypocrites might
cast doubts about the authenticity of such writing, since it would be
written during the Prophet's sickness, and that it would be a cause for
dissension.

You, may Allah support the truth through your person, know that such an
insinuation is impossible since the Prophet, peace be upon him and his
progeny, has stated: "... you shall never stray," thus clearly stating
that such writing would bring them security against straying; so, how
can it be a reason for dissension just because the hypocrites might cast
doubts about its authenticity?

Had he [‘Umar] feared such hypocrites and their casting doubts about the
authenticity of what the Prophet wished to write, why did he then plant
the seed of such doubts himself when he opposed and objected and even
said that the Prophet was delirious?

As regarding their interpretation of verses cited in support of ‘Umar's
statement: "The Book of Allah suffices us," such as the verse:

***"We have left nothing unexplained in the Book (Qur'an, 6:38),"***

and

***"Today have I completed for you your religion (Qur'an, 5:4),***"

it is erroneous, for neither verse suggests a security against
misguidance, nor do both verses guarantee guidance for people; so, how
can relying on these verses justify abandoning the implementation of the
texts whose writing the Prophet wished to record? Had the presence of
the dear Qur'an been to bring security against misguidance, then neither
misguidance nor dissension, the removal of which is as hopeless as can
be, would have ever taken place.[^1]

In their final argument, they say that ‘Umar did not understand the
tradition to imply that such writing would be a cause for protecting
each and every member of his nation from misguidance; and that rather he
understood that it would, after its writing, safeguard them against
erring in their consensus.

They claim that ‘Umar, may Allah be pleased with him, knew that the
error in their consensus would never occur, albeit if such writing had
taken place or not, and that for this reason he opposed its writing
thus.

Besides what you have said, we may add that ‘Umar did not lack such a
degree of understanding, and he was not blind to the implication of the
tradition which became obvious to all people. Urban residents as well as
bedouins understood the intention of the Prophet (pbuh) that it would be
a complete prescription for the protection of every individual against
misguidance... only had it been written.

This is the meaning which anyone can comprehend of this tradition. ‘Umar
knew for sure that the Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, was not worried about his nation making an error in its
consensus views, since he, may Allah be pleased with him, had heard him,
peace be upon him and his progeny, saying: "The consensus of my nation
shall never be in misguidance nor in error," and his statement: "One
group from my nation shall always stand opposing what is just," and he
was aware of the verse saying:

***"Allah has promised those who believe among you and do good deeds
that He will let them inherit the earth just as He let those before them
be the successors, and He will firmly set the roots of the faith which
He has approved, and He will exchange their fear with security; they
shall worship Me, without associating anything with Me (Qur'an,
24:55),"***

In addition to many such texts in both the Book and the Sunnah. They all
are clear in implying that NOT the entire nation shall err in its
consensus views; so, it is not feasible, in spite of all this, that
‘Umar or anyone else would conceive that when the Prophet, peace be upon
him and his progeny, asked for a blank sheet of paper and an ink-pot,
was worried about his nation erring in its consensus views.

What ‘Umar is liable to have understood of this hadith is what anyone
else would, not what is contrary to the authentic Sunnah, nor to the
perfect verses of the Qur'an. But the disappointment of the Prophet,
peace be upon him and his progeny, was obvious when he told them to get
away from him, and it proved that what they had shunned was indeed a
sacred obligation.

Had ‘Umar's objection been due to his misunderstanding of this hadith,
as they claim, then the Prophet would have helped him remove his
misunderstanding, and he would have clarified his objective to him.

Nay, even if the Prophet was convinced that he would be able to convince
them to carry out his order, he would not have ordered them out. Again,
Ibn ‘Abbas's tears and genuine agony provide the greatest rebuttal to
such claims.

Justice refuses to find an excuse for those who had permitted such a
calamity to take place. Had it been, as you described, a simple slip
like another one before it, and a rare occurrence, the matter would have
been a lot more tolerable, but it was the catastrophe of the century
that split the nation's spine; so, we are Allah's, and to Him is our
return.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: You, may Allah support the truth through your person, know that
the Prophet (pbuh) did not say: "I would like to write down the tenets,"
so that it may be said to him: "Suffices us the Book of Allah, the
Exalted One." Even if we suppose that he wished to write down those
tenets, it could very possibly be that his own writing thereof would be
a cause for security against misguidance; therefore, there is no reason
to avoid his text and be satisfied with the Qur'an alone. If the text he
wished to write was only to safeguard them against misguidance, it would
not be appropriate to leave it, shun it, and rely on the fact that
Allah's Book includes everything. You know very well how the Muslim
nation has no option besides referring to the sacred Sunnah in spite of
the fact that it holds the Book of Allah, the Exalted, as indispensable,
and although it is inclusive and is divinely protected, for deriving
injunctions from it is not within the reach of every ordinary person.
Had the Book of Allah been completely sparing us from referring to its
own explanations as put forth by the Prophet (pbuh), then Allah Aighty
would not have commanded him to explain it to people when He said: "We
have revealed unto you the Book so that you may explain to people what
has been revealed for them."


