Letter 91
=========

**Rabi’ al-Awwal 19, 1330**

I Justifying Their Behaviour Towards Usamah's Regiment,
-------------------------------------------------------

1) Yes, the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) had urged them to rush to
participate in Usamah's campaign, ordering them to expedite, as you have
mentioned, emphasizing his order till he told Usamah to invade Ubna in
the morning, not allowing him to wait till the evening, telling him to
go and emphasizing his order once more by telling him to rush.

But he, peace be upon him, according to all narrations, fell sick and
started breathing very heavily, so much so that they started worrying
about him and feeling too upset to leave him in such condition. They
remained at Jurf waiting to know the condition of his health out of
their own fear for his life and due to their attachment to him. They,
therefore, are excused for having waited, and they should not be blamed.

As regarding their questioning the Prophet's appointment of Usamah after
his death, in spite of what they remembered of his statements and his
emphasis by word and by action, with which they were familiar, it was
nothing more than their objection to his being too young, to his being a
youth among middle-aged and old men.

The latter naturally find it very difficult to receive orders from the
young, and they by nature feel resentful towards submitting to their
judgment. Their hatred of his appointment was not an innovation but
simply due to the human nature; so, consider that.

As regarding their demand after the demise of the Messenger to depose
Usamah, this is justified by some scholars among those who expected the
Siddiq [Abu Bakr] to agree with them. These persons thought that such
deposition would, in their view, serve the public interest.

Yet, for the sake of fairness, I personally cannot rationalize their
request to depose him after seeing how angry the Prophet (pbuh) was when
they requested the same, and his going out, feverish, bandaged and
wrapped in a blanket, to denounce such a notion in his sermon from the
pulpit. They knew that such an incident was, indeed, a historical
milestone; so, their real motive is not known except by Allah.

As regarding their determination to cancel the campaign, and their
pressuring al-Siddiq to do so, in spite of seeing how much emphasis the
Prophet had placed on its dispatch, his concern about expediting its
departure, as well as his repeated statements to this effect, is but
their own caution about the capital of Islam else it should be assaulted
by the polytheists around it once vacated from a protecting force, while
the army was far away from it, especially since hypocrisy surfaced as
soon as the Prophet (pbuh) died, and the hopes of the Jews and
Christians were revived, and a group among the Arabs renegated, while
other groups refused to pay *zakat*.

The companions of the Prophet, therefore, spoke to our master al-Siddiq
and requested him to forbid Usamah from leaving, but he refused and
said: "It is better for me that birds snatch my flesh away rather than
start my rule by overruling the command of the Messenger of Allah
(pbuh)."

This is what our fellows have said regarding al-Siddiq. As regarding
others, they are not to be blamed for trying to stop the campaign since
their objective was nothing other than a genuine concern about the
safety of the religion of Islam.

As regarding the question why Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and others who were
drafted in the regiment, lagged behind when Usamah proceeded, it was
only to lay the firm foundations of the Islamic government, support the
law of Muhammad (pbuh), and protect the caliphate, which was the only
protector of both faith and the faithful.

II No Hadith Curses its Draft Dodgers.
--------------------------------------

2) As regarding what you have quoted of Shahristani's book *Al-Milal wal
Nihal*, we have found it to be narrated without the name of its
narrator. Both al-Halabi and Sayyid al-Dahlani, in their respective
books of traditions, have said that in fact there was no such hadith at
all in that meaning. If you, may Allah protect you, are able to narrate
hadith from Sunnis supporting it, then lead me to it, Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*S*


