Letter 92
=========

**Rabi’ al-Awwal 22, 1330**

I Their Pretexts do not Contradict our Statement,
-------------------------------------------------

1) You have, may Allah Almighty protect you, admitted that they lagged
behind Usamah's regiment and were at Jurf reluctant to proceed in spite
of being ordered by the Prophet (pbuh) to rush and expedite. You also
admit that they did, indeed, raise questions about the [Prophet's]
wisdom in appointing Usamah in spite of what they had seen and heard of
deeds and words regarding his appointment.

You have further admitted that they did, indeed, request Abu Bakr to
depose him even after seeing how angry the Prophet (pbuh) was when he
noticed their questioning his appointment, his going out to them,
feverish, bandaged, wrapped in a blanket, to deliver a sermon from the
pulpit in which he repudiated their grumbling, a sermon you yourself
have described as one of the significant historical events, one wherein
he described Usamah as being worthy of such a post.

You have accepted the fact that they requested the caliph to cancel the
regiment dispatched by the Messenger of Allah (pbuh), and untie the knot
he, with his own eminent hands, had tied, in spite of seeing his concern
about dispatching it and his complete care about expediting it, in
addition to several statements he made regarding the necessity of doing
so.

You have, moreover, admitted that some of those who had been drafted in
that army by the Prophet (pbuh) himself who ordered them to enlist under
Usamah's leadership had lagged behind. You have admitted all these facts
which are written down in the books of history and are matters of
consensus among the traditionists and historians, saying that they were
not to be blamed for all what they had done.

The summary of their pretext, as you have put it, is that they had
preferred in those matters the interest of Islam according to their own
views, not according to the Prophet's statements in their regard. We did
not intend in this matter to state anything more than that. In other
words, the topic of our discussion is whether they used to follow all
the Prophet's statements or not. You have chosen the first, while we
have chosen the second, and now your admission that they did not follow
such statements proves our own viewpoint. Their being excused or not is
obviously besides the point.

Since it has been proved according to your views that they preferred, in
the incident of Usamah's regiment, the interest of Islam, following
their own views rather than those of the Prophet as embedded in his
statements, then why don't you likewise say that they preferred in the
issue of caliphate to follow their own views regarding what is good for
Islam to those of the Prophet (pbuh) as stated in his Ghadir hadith and
the like?

You have found excuses for those who cast doubts about Usamah's
appointment, saying that they did so only because of his young age and
their being middle-aged and old, and that old folks are naturally made
to resent taking orders from the young; so, why don't you apply the same
argument to those who did not follow the Ghadir texts appointing Ali
(as), who was a young man, to take charge of middle-aged and elderly
companions, who considered him young at the time when the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, died just as they considered
Usamah young when the Prophet (pbuh) appointed him as their commander in
that regiment?

What a big difference between caliphate and the leadership of a
regiment! If their nature refused to accept the leadership of a youth in
commanding one regiment, they were more liable to refuse the lifetime
leadership of a youth in all religious and secular matters.

But your argument that middle-aged and elderly folks naturally resent
receiving orders from the young is rejected if you apply it to all
matters, since those whose faith is strong among elderly believers
certainly do not resent being commanded by Allah and His Messenger to
take orders from a youth, or in any other matter.

***"Nay! By thy Lord, they shall never truly believe till they totally
accept your judgment in all their disputes, then they do not feel any
hardship in accepting your judgment, submitting thereto wholeheartedly
(Qur'an, 4:65)."***

***"Whatever the Messenger grants you, take it, and abstain from
whatever he forbids you (Qur'an, 59:7)."***

II Al-Shahristani's Hadith is Documented.
-----------------------------------------

2) As regarding al-Shahristani who discusses those who dodged the draft
in Usamah's army, narrating their story as a generally accepted fact, it
has been narrated in one hadith documented by Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn
‘Abdul-Aziz al-Jawhari in his book *Al-Saqifa*, from which I quote here
this much for you *verbatim*:

"Ahmad ibn Ishaq ibn Salih has narrated a tradition to us from Ahmad ibn
Siyar from Sa’d ibn Kathir al-Ansari whose men quote ‘Abdullah ibn
‘Abdul-Rahman saying that when the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) fell sick
shortly before his death, he appointed Usamah ibn Zayd ibn Harithah to
take charge in leading an army most of which were men from the Muhajirün
and the Ansar. Among them were: Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, Abu ‘Ubaydah ibn
al-Jarrah, ‘Abdul-Rahmn ibn ‘Awf, Talhah, and al-Zubayr, and ordered him
to invade Mu'ta, where his father Zayd had been murdered, and to invade
the valley of Palestine.

Usamah slackened, and so did the rest of the army, and the Messenger of
Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, though sick, kept emphasizing
that the army must rush there, till Usamah said to him: ‘O Messenger of
Allah! Would you permit me to stay for a few days till Allah Almighty
heals you?' He answered: ‘Go and proceed, supported by the blessings of
Allah.' He said: ‘O Messenger of Allah! If I proceed while you are sick
like that, I will be going with a heart swollen with pain.' He (pbuh)
said: ‘Proceed towards victory in good health.'

Usamah persisted: ‘But I hate to keep asking the travellers about your
condition.' He said: ‘Proceed to carry out my orders,' then he, peace be
upon him and his progeny, fainted. Usamah left and prepared to proceed.
When the Messenger of Allah (pbuh) regained his consciousness, he
immediately inquired about Usamah, and he was told that he and his men
were preparing to proceed, whereupon he kept repeating: ‘Carry out
Usamah's mission; the curse of Allah be upon whoever dodges its draft.'

Usamah finally left the city, the flag above his head, surrounded by the
companions, till he reached Jurf. In his company were Abu Bakr, ‘Umar,
and most of the Muhajirün and the Ansar such as Asid ibn Hadr, Bashir
ibn Sa’d, and many other dignitaries. Then he received a messenger sent
by Umm Ayman who informed him to go ahead and enter the city because the
Prophet (pbuh) was dying. He immediately left for Medina with the
standard still in his hand. Having reached the Prophet's residence, he
planted it at the door just when the Prophet (pbuh) had died."

This has been written down by a group of historians such as the
Mu’tazilite scholar Ibn Abul-Hadid at the conclusion of page 20 and the
succeeding page in Vol. 2 of his *Sharh Nahjul Balaghah*, Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*


