Letter 94
=========

His Order (pbuh) to Kill the Renegade
-------------------------------------

**Rabi’ al-Awwal 25, 1330**

Suffices you in response to your request what is recorded by a group of
the nation's scholars and the imams of narrators, such as imam Ahmad ibn
Hanbal who writes on page 15, Vol. 3, of his *musnad*, quoting Abu Sa’d
al-Khudri saying that Abu Bakr once came to the Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him and his progeny and said: "O Messenger of Allah! I was
passing through a valley when I saw a man, solemn and properly attired,
saying his prayers."

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said to him: "Go and
kill him." So Abu Bakr went there, and when he saw the man like that, he
hated to kill him; therefore, he returned to the Messenger of Allah,
peace be upon him and his progeny, without carrying out his order.

The Prophet, peace be upon him and his progeny, said to ‘Umar: "Go and
kill him," and ‘Umar went there and saw him in the same way Abu Bakr had
described, and he, too, came back without killing the man and said: "O
Messenger of Allah! I have seen him saying his prayers very solemnly;
so, I hated to kill him."

The Prophet (pbuh) then said to ‘Ali: "‘Ali, you go and kill him,"
whereupon ‘Ali went to the place and returned only to say: "O Messenger
of Allah! I could not find the man." The Prophet, peace be upon him and
his progeny, then said: "This man and his friends read the Qur'an only
pronouncing its words [just to impress people]; they depart from the
faith as swiftly as the arrow departs from the bow, and they do not go
back till the arrow goes back to the bow anew. Kill them, for they are
the worst among the living."

In his *Musnad*, Abu Ya’li, as stated in the biography of Thul-Thadya by
Ibn Hajar in his *Isaba*, quotes Anas ibn Malik saying: "We used to
admire the piety and *ijtihad* of a man who was contemporary to the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh), and we mentioned him by name to the Messenger
of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, but he did not know him. We
described him to the Prophet (pbuh), but he still did not recognize him.

While we were talking about him, he came into sight and we said that it
was he. He (pbuh) said: ‘Are you talking to me about a man on whose face
Satan has placed his mark?' The man approached till he stood before them
without greeting them. The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his
progeny, asked him: ‘I ask you in the Name of Allah if you have told
yourself when you approached that there is nobody among us better than
or superior to you?' The man answered: ‘Indeed, I have,' and he came in
to say his prayers.

The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him and his progeny, asked who
would be willing to kill the man, and Abu Bakr said he would. When Abu
Bakr entered, he found the man engaged in saying his prayers; so, he
wondered how he could kill a man who was saying his prayers. When the
Messenger of Allah (pbuh) asked him what he did, he answered: ‘I hated
to kill him while he was saying his prayers, and you yourself had
ordered us not to kill those who pray.'

The Prophet (pbuh) asked for a volunteer, and this time ‘Umar responded.
‘Umar entered and found the man prostrating and said to himself that Abu
Bakr was better than him; therefore, he went out. When the Prophet
(pbuh) asked him if he did what he had promised to do, he told him that
he had found the man placing his forehead on the ground prostrating to
God.

The Prophet (pbuh) once more asked: ‘Who can kill this man?' ‘Ali
answered in the affirmative, and when he entered looking for him, he
found out that he had already left; so, he went back to the Messenger of
Allah (pbuh) and told him that the man had already left. It was then
that the Prophet (pbuh) said: ‘Had this man been killed, no couple among
my nation would have disputed with one another.'"

This incident has been recorded by al-Hafiz Muhammad ibn Müsa al-Shirazi
in his book wherein he combines the *tafasir* of Y’aqüb ibn Hayyan, ‘Ali
ibn Harb, al-Sadi, Mujahid, Qatadah, Waki’, and Ibn Jurayh. Its
authenticity is considered common knowledge by trustworthy traditionists
such as Imam Shihabud-Din Ahmad, who is better known as Ibn ‘Abd Rabbih
al-Andalusi, who quotes it at the conclusion of his chapter on those who
follow their own inclinations in the first volume of his book *Al-’Iqd
al-Farid*.

At the conclusion of this incident as he narrates it, he says that the
Prophet (pbuh) has said: "This is the first horn [of the devil] coming
out in my nation. Had you killed him, no two men would have disputed
with each other. The children of Isra'il split into seventy-two groups,
and this nation shall split into seventy-three groups all of which,
except one, will go to Hell."[^1]

Another almost similar narration of this incident is recorded by authors
of books of traditions[^2] who cite ‘Ali (as) saying: "Some people from
Quraysh came once to the Prophet (pbuh) and said: ‘O Muhammad! We are
your neighbours and allies, and some of our slaves had come to you
without a genuine desire to learn your religion or jurisprudence; they
simply escaped from our possession; so, return them to us.'

He asked Abu Bakr his opinion, and Abu Bakr said: ‘They are right in
saying that they are your neighbours;' whereupon the Prophet's face
changed colour [i.e. became red with anger], and he asked ‘Umar what he
thought. ‘Umar repeated Abu Bakr's words, and again his face changed
colour and said: ‘O people of Quraysh! By Allah! Allah will send you a
man the faith of whose heart is tested by Allah, and he will fight you
in order to safeguard the faith.'

Abu Bakr inquired if he meant him, and his answer was negative. Then
‘Umar inquired if it was he about whom the Prophet (pbuh) was talking,
and his answer was: ‘No, it is the man who is mending the sandal;' the
Prophet (pbuh) had given me his sandal to mend," Wassalam.

Sincerely,

*Sh*

[^1]: The words "firqa" and "Shi’ah" are, if you count the times each
one of them is repeated, synonymous, for the total number of each one of
them is 385, making the majority of that group hopeful.

[^2]: Such as Imam Ahmad near the conclusion of page 155, Vol. 1, of his
Musnad, Sa’id ibn Mansür in his Sunan, and Ibn Jarir in Tahthib
al-Athar, all testifiying to its authenticity. It is quoted from all of
them by al-Muttaqi al-Hindi on page 396, Vol. 6, of his book Kanz
al-’Ummal.


