Chapter Two Fadak in Its Real and Symbolic Meaning
==================================================

 

*Yes, Fadak was in our hands out of all what was under the sky but some
people felt greedy for it and others withheld themselves from it.*

*(Fatima’s husband)  
 Amirul Mu’mineen**[1]***

The location
------------

Fadak was a village in Hijaz. Between Fadak and Medina there was a
distance of two days and it was said three days. It was a Jewish land in
the beginning of its history.**[2]** It was inhabited by some Jews until
the seventh year of hijra when Allah cast terror into their hearts and
they made peace with the Prophet by giving him a half of Fadak. Also it
was mentioned that they gave him the entire Fadak.**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Nahjul Balagha; Arranged by Subhi as-Salih, p.416   
 **[2]** Mu’jamul Buldan by Yaqout al-Hamawi, vol.4 p.238-239.  
 **[3]** Refer to Futoohul Buldan by al-Balatheri p.42-46 to see that
the people of Fadak had made peace with the Prophet for the half of
Fadak and that it was a pure property of the Prophet because he did not
get it by war to be considered as booty for the Muslims. In page 46 the
author said: “In two hundred and ten of hijra the Abbasid caliph
al-Ma’moon bin Haroon ar-Rasheed paid it back to the Fatimites. He wrote
to his wali of Medina Qathm bin Ja’far ordering him to do that…”

Fadak in its first stages
-------------------------

The Islamic history of Fadak started from that when it became a property
of the Prophet (s) because it was not possessed by war.**[1]** Then the
Prophet donated it to Fatima.**[2]** It remained in Fatima’s possession
until her father died. Then the first caliph (Abu Bakr) snatched it from
her according to the author of *as-Sawa’iqul Muhriqa***[3]** and became
as part of the general finance and source of the state’s income. When
Omar became the caliph, he gave Fadak back to the heirs**[4]** of the
Prophet (s). It remained in the Prophet’s heirs’ hands until Othman
became the caliph. He took it from its real possessors and gifted it to
Marwan bin al-Hakam.**[5]** Then history ignored the matter of Fadak
after Othman without mentioning anything about it. But the true fact was
that Imam Ali recovered it from Marwan among all the other things that
the Umayyads had plundered during the reign of their caliph Othman.

During the rule of Imam Ali
---------------------------

Some of those, who defended Abu Bakr concerning the matter of Fadak,
mentioned that Imam Ali did not recover Fadak and he left it for the
Muslims following the same way of Abu Bakr, so if Imam Ali knew that
Fatima’s allegation (of Fadak) was true, he would not do that!

I do not want to wide-open, in this answer, the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]**According to the holy Quran: *(And whatever Allah restored to His
Apostle from them you did not press forward against it any horse or a
riding camel)* 59:6.  
 **[2]** Futoohul Buldan, p.44.  
 **[3]** Refer to page 38.  
 **[4]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha by ibn Abul Hadeed, vol.16 p.213.  
 **[5]** Futoohul Buldan p.44 and Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.216.

door of taqiyya**[1]** and to try to find an excuse for Imam Ali’s
doing, but I never believe that Imam Ali had followed the way of Abu
Bakr. History did not show anything of that, but in fact it showed that
Imam Ali thought that Fadak was the Prophet’s heirs’. Imam Ali recorded
this clearly in his letter to Othman bin Hunayf[2] as you will see in a
next chapter.

Perhaps Imam Ali intended that the yields of Fadak concerned Fatima and
her heirs, who were her children and husband, and so the news did not
need to be spread because Fadak was in its legal possessors’ hands, who
were him and his children. And probably that he spent its yields in the
interest of the Muslims out of his and his children’s content[3] or they
might dedicate it and made it as charity.

During the reign of the Umayyads
--------------------------------

When Mu’awiya bin Abu Sufyan became the caliph, he went too far in
sarcasm and slighting relating to the wronged right (Fadak). He gifted
one third of Fadak to Marwan bin al-Hakam, one third to Omar bin Othman
and the last third to his son Yazeed. It was still circulated**[4]**
among them until it was totally possessed by Marwan during his rule.
Finally it came to Omar bin Abdul Aziz bin Marwan. When Omar became the
caliph, he paid it back to the Fatimites. He wrote to his wali of Medina
Abu Bakr bin Amr bin Hazm ordering him to give Fadak back to the
Fatimites. Abu Bakr bin Amr wrote to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** To hide one’s true beliefs when life is in danger.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha by ibn Abul Hadeed, vol. 16 p.208.  
 **[3]** This was the most acceptable possibility because the first was
rejected by the letter of Imam Ali to Othman bin Hunayf when he said:
“*and others withheld themselves from it…*” and the third was rejected
by the acceptance of Fadak by the Fatimites.  
 **[4]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.216 and Futoohul Buldan p.46.

the caliph Omar bin Abdul Aziz: “Fatima has sons (grandsons) from the
family of Othman and so and so. To whom would I give it?” The caliph
wrote to him: “If I ordered you to slay a cow, you would ask about its
color! If my letter reached you, divide Fadak among Fatima’s Sons
(grandsons) from Ali.”**[1]**

The Umayyads became angry with Omar bin Abdul Aziz and blamed him for
that. They said to him: “You distorted the rulings of the two sheikhs
(Abu Bakr and Omar)”. It was mentioned that Omar bin Qayss came to the
caliph with a group of the people of Kufa and blamed him for that. He
said to them: “You ignored while I perceived, you forgot but I
remembered. Abu Bakr bin Muhammad bin Amr bin Hazm told me from his
father from his grandfather that the Prophet (s) had said: “Fatima is a
part of me. Whatever displeases her displeases me and whatever pleases
her pleases me.”**[2]** Fadak was in Abu Bakr and Omar’s possession
during their reigns until it reached Marwan, who gifted it to my father
Abdul Aziz. I and my brothers inherited it. I asked them to sell me
their shares. Some of them sold me and some gifted me their shares. When
I had it all, I decided to give it back to the Fatimites.” He (Omar bin
Qayss) said to him: “If you ought to do that, then keep it but divide
its yields” and he did so.**[3]**

Then Yazeed bin Abdul Melik seized it again from the Fatimites and it
remained in the family of Marwan’s hands until their state (the Umayyad
state) declined.**[4]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sarh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.278.  
 **[2]** At-Taj aj-Jami’ lil Ossool, by Mansour Ali Nassif, vol.3
p.353.  
 **[3]** Futoohul Buldan p.46 and Sharh Nahjul Blagha vol. 16 p.278.  
 **[4]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha vol.16 p.216.

During the Abbasid reign
------------------------

Abul Abbas as-Saffah, the first Abbasid caliph, gave Fadak back to
Abdullah bin al-Hassan bin al-Hussayn bin Ali bin Abu Talib. Then Abu
Ja’far al-Mansour seized it during his reign from al-Hassan’s family.
Al-Mahd bin al-Mansour gave it back again to the Fatimites, whereas Musa
bin al-Mahdi seized it again from them.**[1]**

It remained in the Abbasids’ hands until al-Ma’moon came to the
caliphate in 210 AH and gave it back to the Fatimites. He wrote to his
wali of Medina Qathm bin Ja’far: “Amirul mu’mineen (al-Ma’moon) in his
position to the religion of Allah and the caliphate of the Prophet and
his kinship with him is worthier to obey the Prophet’s Sunna and to
carry out his orders. He has to submit to those, whom the Prophet had
donated or gifted with gifts or charities. Amirul mu’mineen looks
forward to the blessing of Allah and His safeguard and to be able to do
what may bring him closer to Allah. The Prophet had given Fadak to
Fatima and that was a very well-known matter without any doubt about it
among the Prophet’s family. She kept on claiming that Fadak was hers and
she was the worthiest to be believed. Amirul mu’mineen thinks that he
has to give it back to Fatima’s heirs approaching to Allah by achieving
His justice and to the Prophet by carrying out his order and donation.
So he (al-Ma’moon) ordered this matter to be fixed in his books and to
be sent in letters to his walis. If it was announced in every season (of
hajj) after the death of the Prophet (s) that whoever had a charity, a
gift or he was promised of that, he was to mention that and to be
granted what he was promised of, so  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.216-217.

Fatima was worthier to be believed in her claim about what the Prophet
had granted her. Hence amirul mu’mineen writes to al-Mubarak at-Tabari
ordering him to give Fadak back to the heirs of Fatima, the daughter of
the Prophet, with all of its limits, rights, slaves, yields and others
relating to it. It is to be given to Muhammad bin Yahya bin al-Hussayn
bin Zeid bin Ali bin al-Hussayn bin Ali bin Abu Talib and Muhammad bin
Abdullah bin al-Hassan bin Ali bin al-Hussayn bin Ali bin Abu Talib,
whom amirul mu’mineen entrusts with to be responsible of it and to hand
it over to its possessors. Know well that this is the opinion of amirul
mu’mineen and this is what Allah has inspired him with obeying Him and
to be closer to Him and to His messenger (s). Try to inform of it and
treat Muhammad bin Yahya and Muhammad bin Abdullah as you treated
al-Mubarak at-Tabari before. Help them to repair it and to improve its
yields inshallah. With my salaam.”**[1]**

When al-Mutawakkil became the caliph, he seized Fadak from the Fatimites
and gave it to Abdullah bin Omar al-Baziyar. It had eleven date-palms
planted by the holy hands of the Prophet himself. Abdullah bin Omar
al-Baziyar sent a man called Bishran bin Abu Umayya ath-Thaqafi to
Medina. He cut off those date-palms. When he came back to Basra, he was
afflicted with hemiplegia.**[2]**

The relation between the Fatimites and Fadak ended in the days of
al-Mutawakkil when he donated it to Abdullah bin Omar al-Baziyar.**[3]**

This was a summary account about the confused history of Fadak, which
was woven by the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Futoohul Buldan p.46-47.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha vol.16 p.217.  
 **[3]** ibid.

inclinations and formed by the fancies according to what was required by
the covetousness and the temporary policies. In spite of that, history
did not miss moderation and fairness in some different times and
circumstances where Fadak was given back to its real possessors. It was
noticeable that the problem of Fadak took a great importance in the
Islamic society and the rulers’ attention. Hence you see that its
solution differed according to the different policy of the state and
submitted to the mainstream of the caliph towards the Prophet’s family
directly. If the caliph had a fair look and a moderate thought, he would
give Fadak back to the Fatimites but if he was not so, seizing Fadak was
on the top of the caliph’s list of priorities.

The symbolic and material value of Fadak
----------------------------------------

One of many things that led us to know the symbolic value Fadak had in
the Islamic account was a poem said by the famous poet Di’bil
al-Khuza’iy, which he composed when al-Ma’moon (the Abbasid caliph) gave
Fadak back to the Fatimites. Here is its opening verse:

*The face of the time smiled,  
 When Ma’moon gave back Fadak to the Hashimites.****[1]*****

In the end, a point worth noting; Fadak was not a little piece of land
or a small field as some people thought. What I am certain of is that
Fadak yielded a great sum generating important wealth to the possessors.
I do not have to quantify its outcome although it was mentioned in the
historians’ books that it was very great sums.

Here is some of what confirmed the high material value of Fadak:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The descendents of Hashim, Prophet Muhammad’s grandfather. For
the poem refer to Sharh Nahjul Balagha vol.16 p.217

**First:** Omar (as you will see later) prevented**[1]** Abu Bakr from
leaving Fadak to Fatima (s) because of the failure in the finance of the
state, which was in need of support because of the wars against the
apostates and the revolts of the mutinous polytheists.

It is clear that such a land, which was considered so important to
assist the finances of the state in the difficult circumstances like
wars and revolts, must be of a great production.

**Second:** the saying of Abu Bakr to Fatima in a dialogue between them:
“This property was not the Prophet’s but it was for the Muslims, with
which the Prophet equipped the soldiers and spent for the sake of
Allah.”**[2]** Equipping the soldiers would not be possible except with
great sums of money required to be expended on the army.

**Third:** once Mu’awiya divided Fadak into three thirds[3] and gave a
third to each of Yazeed, Marwan and Amr bin Othman. It showed clearly
the great production of this land. It must be great wealth to be divided
among three emirs, who were very rich and wealthy people.

**Fourth:** considering it as village**[4]** and estimating some of its
date-palms as much as the date-palms of Kufa in the sixth century of
hijra.**[5]**

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Seera al-Halabiya vol.3 p.391 and Sharh Nahjul Balagha vol.16
p.234.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha vol.16 p.214.  
 **[3]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, p.216.  
 **[4]** Mu’jamul Buldan by al-Hamawi vol.4 p.238 and Futoohul Buldan
p.45 that Surayj bin Yunus said: Isma’eel bin Ibrahim told from Ayyoub
from az-Zuhri about the saying of Allah: *(..you did not press forward
against it any horse or a riding camel)* he said: they were some Arabic
villages for the Prophet (s); Fadak and so and so…  
 **[5]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha vol.16 p.236.
