Chapter Four Lights From the Fatimite Speech
============================================

On the day when she came to Adiy and Taym,**[1]**

 

*Moved with passion, how prolonged was her weeping*

*Preaching people with perfect speech,*

*Imitating al-Mustafa,**[2]** as if he was the preacher.*

 

We quote here some statements from the speech of Fatima az-Zahra’ (s) to
analyze and explain them in order to understand them as they are in the
world of immortality and as they are in their wonderful reality.

The greatness of the leading Prophet
------------------------------------

“Then He caused him to pass away mercifully, willingly, desiringly and
preferably. Muhammad became safe from the sufferings of this world. He
was surrounded by the reverent angels and the contentment of the
forgiving God, enjoying the neighborhood of the Almighty King”.

Look at this eloquent lady, how she did leave all the material ease and
the sensible comfort when she wanted to praise her father’s eternal
Paradise. She found in her father what sanctified him above all that.
What would the value of the material pleasure  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Adiy was the tribe of Abu Bakr and Taym was the tribe of Omar.  
 **[2]** Muhammad (s).

whether worldly or paradisiacal be in Muhammad’s spiritual account, when
no one raised the human soul to the highest level of values like he did
and no one took it to its pinnacle except him? (No reformer, except him,
had fed the soul with the complete divine belief, which was the aim of
the minds in their mental flight and in their final round of roving for
the sacred human truth, with which the conscience would rest and the
soul would be comforted).**[1]**

He was, then, the greater educator of the soul and the unique leader,
under whose banner the morals had achieved the immortal victory against
the material effects in their struggle since mind had started its living
with materials.

And as long as he was the hero of the battle between the morals and the
materials, that hero, by whose mission the missions of the Heaven were
ended, it was no wonder that he would be the center of that great world
of morals. This was what Fatima wanted to say in her speech when
describing the Muhammadan Paradise: “Muhammad became safe from the
sufferings of this world…” Certainly he was the pivot in the worldly
life and in the hereafter but he was, in the first, tired for he kept on
struggling to build the fair human life in an immortal way, and in the
second he became at ease for he was the pivot surrounded by the angels
to offer in front of him the signs of praise and honor.

And as the Prophet was from the highest kind, so his Paradise must be
like him. It was full of material ease or in fact it was full of the
moral ease. Was there spiritual ease higher than to be beside the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It was quoted from The Divine Belief in Islam by the author
himself.

Almighty King and to gain the contentment of the Forgiving God?

Such Fatima described her father’s paradise in two sentences to clarify
his fact that he was the axis connected to the origin of the light and
the sun surrounded by the angels in a world of radiance.

Greatness of Imam Ali and his excellences
-----------------------------------------

 She said (addressing the public):

“You were on the brink of a pit of fire. You were as a drink for the
drinkers, as an easy prey for the greedy, as a firebrand, from which
someone took a piece hurriedly and so it would be put out in a short
time. You were as foothold.**[1]** You used to drink from the rain
water, in which animals urinated, and eat from the leaves of the trees.
You were low and subservient. You were afraid of the nations around you.
Then Allah saved you by Muhammad after the misfortunes and calamities he
faced and after he was afflicted with the courageous men,**[2]**
highwaymen and the insolent hypocrites of the Jews and the Christians.
Whenever they kindled a fire for war, Allah put it out. Whenever the
Satan’s followers revolted or a trouble came out of the polytheists the
Prophet (s) sent his brother (Ali) into its flames. He would not be back
until he treaded the war with his sole and put out its flames with his
sword. He (Ali) tired himself out for the sake of Allah. He overworked
to achieve the orders of Allah. He was the nearest to the
Prophet.**[3]** He  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** She wanted to say that they were so low and subservient and that
they were as a ready bite for the Romans, the Persians and some of the
Arab tribes.  
 **[2]** The strong courageous men stood against him in the beginning of
the mission.  
 **[3]** Ali was the Prophet’s cousin, son-in-law and guardian. He was
to be the caliph after him. He was the most aware of the Prophet’s

was the master of the guardians. He always was ready, sincere, diligent
and striving while you were living in luxury, ease and safety”.**[1]**

How wonderful the comparison that Fatima made between the highest kind
of the military quality in the world of Islam at that time and the
manliness attached to the qualities of the hero and the qualified
soldier was! A comparison between bravery, whose signs the Heaven and
the earth announced, and it was written with the pen of eternality in
the index of the human idealities and between a personality (Abu Bakr
and others..) satisfied with jihad by standing in the last line of the
battle and would it was satisfied with that rather than to commit the
prohibited fleeing according to the law of Islam and the law of
sacrifice to unite the divine government on the earth!

We have never known throughout the history of mankind a skilled military
talent having so excellent effects on the life of this planet like Ali’s
among all heroes’ history. Imam Ali’s situations**[2]** in the fields of
jihad and struggle were indeed the stilt, on which the world of Islam
was erected and gained its great history.

Ali was the first Muslim in the first moment of the history of
prophethood when the divine voice was echoed by Muhammad’s lips.**[3]**
Then he was the first in being zealous and the first defender, to whom
the Heaven entrusted the dealing**[4]** with the unbelieving community.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

knowledge. They both knew each other so closely. **  
 [1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.250-251.  
 **[2]** At-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.2 p.25, 65-66.  
 **[3]** Referring to Ali’s being a Muslim, his assisting the Prophet
and his infinite readiness to sacrifice for the sake of Islam.
As-Sawa’iqul Muhriqa, p.185, at-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.3 p.218-219.  
 **[4]** At-Tarmithi’s Sahih, vol.8 p.596.

The victory of Imam Ali in this comparison meant that he had the right
to be the caliph for two reasons:

The first: he was the only soldier among all the Muslims of that time,
who never separated the highest political position from the military
positions.

The second: his wonderful jihad showed a great sincerity that had no way
of doubt at all and a burning firebrand of faith that extinction could
not find a way to it. This eternal burning firebrand and that immortal
profuse sincerity were the two basic conditions for the leader, on whom
the umma would depend to guard its morals and to keep its honor along
the history.

A comparison between Imam Ali’s situations and the others’
----------------------------------------------------------

If you study the life of the Prophet (s) and the history of his jihad,
you will find that Ali astonished the earth and the heaven with his
support to the Prophet**[1]** and you will find that Abu Bakr resorted
to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tabari mentioned in his Tareekh, vol.2 p.65-66 that when Imam
Ali had killed (the keepers of the banners), the Prophet noticed some of
the polytheists of Quraysh and said to Ali: “Attack them”. Ali attacked
them. He scattered them and killed Amr bin Abdullah aj-Jumahi. Then the
Prophet noticed another group of the polytheists of Quraysh. He said to
Ali: “Attack them”. Ali attacked them. He scattered them and killed
Shayba bin Malik. Gabriel said: “O messenger of Allah, this is the real
support”. The Prophet said: “He is from me and I am from him”. Gabriel
said: “And I am from you both”. Then a voice was heard saying: “No sword
but Thulfaghar, and no youth but Ali”. Let us think of the Prophet’s
answer to notice how he raised Ali above the concept of support that
required multiplicity; Muhammad and Ali, to the unity and mixture when
he said: “He is from me and I am from him”. He did not want to separate
Imam Ali from himself because they were a unity that did never separate.
Allah had made this unity as example for the human beings to imitate and
for the heroes and reformers to be guided

the high leadership position surrounded by many heroes of the Ansar to
guard him**[1]** in order to be safe from the calamities of the war.

It was he (Abu Bakr) himself, who fled from the battle of Uhud**[2]** as
did Omar**[3]** and left the Prophet to die at that terrible hour where
the helpers became rare and the banner of the Muslims declined. Only
eight persons promised the Prophet to die for him; three from the
Muhajireen and five from the Ansar, whom Abu Bakr was not one of as it
was mentioned by the historians.**[4]** In fact no one of the historians
mentioned that he ever fought in that situation any kind of
fighting.**[5]**

Why was he with the returning people if he had not fled? Was not
fighting the duty at that moment where the number of the defenders was
not enough to stand against the enemy, who struck the Prophet with many
strikes that made him offer the prayers while sitting?

We all might know that if someone was in the middle of the battlefield,
he would not be safe from death by his enemy, unless he fled or he
actually defended himself in the battle. Since Abu Bakr did not do any
of these two things and yet he was safe, so it would mean that an
opponent stopping in front of his enemy without defending and his enemy
did not kill him. Did the polytheists pitied Abu Bakr  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

according to its light to get to the top of highness. I do not know how
the companions or some of them tried to disassemble this unity and to
put between these two heroes three persons (the three caliphs, Abu Bakr,
Omar and Othman) that they had better not to separate between Muhammad
and Ali. **  
 [1]** Oyoonul Athar by ibn Sayyid an-Nass, vol.1 p.336.  
 **[2]** As it was mentioned in the books of the Shia.  
 **[3]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.3 p.389-390.  
 **[4]** Shar Nahjul Balagha, vol.3 p.388 and al-Imta’ by al-Maqreezi
p.132.  
 **[5]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.3 p.389.

and did not pity Muhammad, Ali, az-Zubayr, Abu Dijana and Sahl bin
Hunayf?

I have no reasonable interpretation for this situation except to say
that he might stand beside the Prophet and got a safe place because it
was the farthest point from the danger as the Prophet was then
surrounded by his sincere companions. This was not unlikely because we
knew Abu Bakr’s tact. He always liked to be beside the Prophet (s) in
the war because the place of the Prophet (s) was the safest where the
sincerest Muslims safeguarded and defended him devotedly.

If you studied the life of Imam Ali and the life of Abu Bakr, would you
find in the life of the first any kind of extinction in his sincerity or
a weakness in his rush for the sacrifice or leaning on ease and comfort
at the hour of the sacred war? Let you ponder again, would you find any
languor? *(Then turn back the eye again and again; your look shall come
back to you confused while it is fatigued.* 67:4*),* because he would
find splendor and death defiance in the way of Allah that you would
never find the like and you would find a man that falsehood would never
come to, neither from before him nor from behind him. He had the
readiness for eternality like his great teacher Muhammad because they
were but one!**[1]**

Then if you study the life of Abu Bakr during the Prophet’s lifetime,
will you find but weakness and ineffectuality in the ideological life
and in the military life? It was clear when he fled from the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** According to the verse: *(Then say: Come let us call our sons
and your sons and our women and your women and ourselves and yourselves,
then let us be earnest in prayer, and pray for the curse of Allah on the
liars).* 3:61.

battle of Uhud and the battle of Hunayn**[1]** and it was clear from his
lagging to do his duty when the Prophet ordered him to go with the army
under the leadership of Ussama**[2]** and from his defeat at Khaybar
when the Prophet (s) sent him as the leader of an army to occupy the
fort of the Jews and he fled back. Then the Prophet (s) sent Omar, who
did the same as his friend.**[3]**In that terrible situation the
enthusiasm of Omar and his wonderful heroism during the peacetime, with
which Islam became so strong as they claimed, evaporated. Omar went back
with his fellows, one cowarding the other.**[4]** Then the Prophet (s)
said: “Tomorrow I will give the banner to a man, whom Allah and His
Messenger love and he loves Allah and His Messenger. He will not come
back until he wins”.**[5]** The Prophet, in his speech, gave a hint to
crush the feelings of the two unsuccessful leaders and a frank pride on
great Ali, who loved Allah and His Messenger and Allah and His Messenger
loved him.**[6]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to as-Seera al-Halabiya, vol.2p.126 and refer to
al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.3 p.67. Al- Bukhari mentioned that someone of
those, who fought in the battle of Hunayn, had said: “The Muslims fled
and I fled with them. I saw Omar among them. I said to him: What is
wrong with the people? He said: it is the will of Allah. This showed
that Omar was among the fleers.  
 **[2]** As-Seera al-Halabiya, vol.3 and ibn Sa’d’s Tabaqat, vol.2
p.248-250.  
 **[3]** Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.5 p.253, al-hakim’s Mustadrak, vol.3 p.27,
Kanzul Ommal, vol.6 p.394 and at-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.2 p.136.  
 **[4]** This was Ali’s description of the failed leader and the languid
soldiers, who knew the weakness of each other; therefore they began to
terrify the situation in order to find an excuse for their flight. Refer
to at-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.2 p.136.  
 **[5]** Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.5 p.18, Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.5 p.353,
at-Tarmithi’s Sahih, vol.5 p.596 and Muslim’s Sahih, vol.4 p.1873.  
 **[6]** It was very probable that the army, which Ali led to conquer
the Jewish colony, was the same army, which fled a day ago. We
understand from this the great effect of the leader on his army and the
connection between their feelings and his. Ali could make

O you the two caliphs of the Muslims-or of some of the Muslims-, did
your Prophet, whom you replaced, behave so? Did not you learn from him
some of his lessons in jihad and suffering for the sake of Allah? Was
not in your companionship with him for two decades any deterrent
preventing you from doing what you did? Did not you hear the Quran,
which you were entrusted with to guard and to spread its high
idealities, saying: *(And whoever shall turn his back to them on that
day, unless he turn aside for the sake of fighting or withdraws to a
company, then he, indeed, becomes deserving of Allah's wrath, and his
abode is hell; and an evil destination shall it be)* 8:16.

You might agree with me that the important position of Abu Bakr and Omar
in Islam made them above committing the prohibited fleeing, so they
might have interpreted and found an excuse for their fleeing. We know
that the space of interpretation was wide for the caliph Abu Bakr like
when he justified the sin of Khalid bin al-Waleed when he killed a
Muslim intendedly by saying: “He (Khalid) issued a fatwa but he
misjudged”.**[1]**

We may apologize if what we have said above requires an apology, but we
were obliged to mention that because the Fatimite comparison needed
detailed explanations.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

those soldiers, who cowarded Omar in the previous attack, victorious
heroes by pouring in their souls some of his great soul effusing with
enthusiasm and sincerity. **  
 [1]** At-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.2 p.273. Omar said to Abu Bakr: “In
Khalid’s sword there is injustice. If it is not right, he deserves to be
punished”. He insisted on that…Abu Bakr said: “O Omar, excuse him! He
interpreted and misjudged”. Refer to Tareekh of ibn Shuhna printed on
the margins of al-Kamil, vol.11 p.114.

The ruling party
----------------

Fatima said: “You lurk to bring us adversities and look forward to
hearing bad news (which bring misfortunes to us)”.

This speech was addressed to the ruling party, which claimed that what
Fatima ascribed to her addressees, made them hasten the homage for fear
of sedition to occur. Her speech was a clear accusation for this party
to prepare the terrible plot and to compact the plans waiting for the
suitable opportunity in order to seize the rule and to divest the
Hashimite house of it.

It was shown in the previous chapters that the secret agreement between
Abu Bakr, Omar and Abu Obayda**[1]** was proved by the historical facts.

We did not have to expect material evidence more perfect than Fatima’s
speech for she lived with those difficult circumstances. Certainly she
perceived the events of that time really, correctly and accurately more
than the researchers, who came hundreds of years later to analyze those
events.

And for the right of the research, we have to record that Fatima (s) was
the first-if her husband was not the first -to declare the partisan
assortment of the ruling party. She accused them of political plotting
then she was followed, in this thought, by some of her contemporaries
like Imam Ali**[2]** (s) and  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** We apologize to our master Abu Obayda for mentioning his mere
name without a title. It was not my mistake but the death, which took
his soul before he got the caliphate that people might give him any of
the titles. As for the title (the faithful), I think that he got it
neither from the Prophet (s) nor from people but he got it in special
occasions that had nothing to do with the official decorations!  
 **[2]** With reference to Imam Ali’s saying: “O Omar, you milk a
milking that you will have a half of it! Support him today to recompense
you tomorrow…”. Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.6 p.11 and p.12 Abu Obayda’s
saying to Imam Ali.

Mu’awiya bin Abu Sufyan.**[1]**

As long as this party, which Fatima (s) confirmed its existence, Imam
Ali (s) referred to and Mu’awiya glimpsed at, was controlling the rule
and the fate of the umma and as long as the following ruling families,
which directed all the public utilities to their interests, followed the
same basis of that policy and the elements of that partisan method,
which dazed the Islamic world, it is very natural that we do not see in
history or at least the general history a clear image of that party,
whose first partisans tried their best to color their deeds with the
pure legal color, which was too far from their political colors and
secret agreements.

Fatima (s) said: “Then you branded other than your camels and went to
other than your drinking places. You did so and the age (of the Prophet)
was still recent, the wound was still wide and not yet healed, and the
Prophet was not yet buried. Did you so quickly claim the fear of
sedition? Surely into sedition have they already tumbled down, and most
surely hell encompasses the unbelievers. By Allah, it was impregnated so
wait until it bears then milk its blood…then they will perish who say
false things and the successors will know what bad the earlier ones have
established. Be at ease and wait relaxedly for the sedition. Rejoice at
a sharp sword, general commotion and despotism, which will make your
victuals so insignificant and your gathering separate. Alas for
you!”**[2]**

If Abu Bakr and his two friends formed a party having special intents,
it would be vain for us to expect that they would declare of it or
announce the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Murooj ath-Thahab,vol.3 p.199 and Waq’at Siffeen by
Nasr bin Muzahim p.119-120.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.234.

basic lines of their program, by which they would justify their
situation on the day of the saqeefa; nevertheless there must be a
justification and an interpretation!

It was clear that they hastened and longed eagerly to complete the
homage to one of them and to seize the high positions in a way that it
was not expected from such companions! It was supposed that they were
prudent and having minds that did not think except of the benefit of
Islam and did not care for keeping high positions. The possession of
authority and seizing of ranks would not be the aim of Muhammad’s
disciples.

The rulers felt that and perceived that their situation was somewhat odd
so they wanted to patch it by claiming their keeping to the high aims
and fearing for Islam from a sedition that might do away with it. What
they forgot was that the patch always would expose itself and the new
threads inserted in the dress would lead to show the patch. Therefore
Fatima (s) declared her eternal word: “You claimed that you feared of
sedition *(Surely into sedition have they already tumbled down, and most
surely hell encompasses the unbelievers.* Quran, 9:49*)* Yes, it was the
sedition or the source of seditions definitely.

How wonderful you were O daughter of the Prophet, when you took the mask
off the bitter truth and predicted for your father’s umma a terrible
future, in whose sky red clouds would lighten to make rivers of blood
full of skulls! How wonderful you were when reproached those persons
with their bad deeds by saying: *(Surely into sedition have they already
tumbled down, and most surely hell encompasses the unbelievers)*.

The great sedition
------------------

The political performances at that time were sedition and were the
source of all seditions occurred thereafter.**[1]**

It was a sedition according to Fatima’s opinion-at least-because it was
against the legal Islamic government, which was Ali’s right, who was the
Prophet’s Aaron and was worthier to the Muslims than themselves.**[2]**

Among the ironies of the fate was that Omar justified his situation that
he feared for sedition and he forgot that extorting the right from its
legal keeper that the Prophet (s) had decided with the confession of
Omar himself, was the very sedition with all meanings of sedition!

I do not know what prevented those, who feared from sedition to occur
and had no greed for the rule except as much as related to the interests
of Islam, from asking the Prophet about the caliph after him and asking
him to appoint for them the higher authority of the Islamic government
after him, where he was sick for many days and he said many  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As it was cleared by the saying of Omar: “The homage of Abu Bakr
was a slip that Allah kept the Muslims safe from its evils”. Refer to
at-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.2 p.235 and it was mentioned in as-Sawa’iqul
Muhriqa p.36: “…and whoever does it (the homage) again must be
killed”.  
 **[2]** According to the tradition of al-Ghadeer, which was narrated by
one hundred and eleven companions, eighty-four of the successors and was
mentioned by three hundred and fifty-three of our brothers of the Sunni
authors as mentioned in the book al-Ghadeer by al-Ameeni. I would like
to notice here that much of the holy Quran was not narrated by such
number of narrators as those, who narrated the tradition of al-Ghsdeer.
So whoever suspected this tradition, would suspect the holy Quran. The
evidence proving the imamate and caliphate of Ali was so clear that had
no way for doubt and suspicion. Refer to al-Muraja’at by Sayyid Abdul
Hussayn Sharafuddeen and refer to as-Sawa’iqul Muhriqa p.122.

times that he would leave for the better world nearly and some of his
companions gathered around him asking him about how to wash him
(ghusl)**[1]** and how to prepare the procedures of the burial?**[2]**
Did not those, who insisted on Omar (when he was about to die) to
appoint for them the caliph after him in order not to leave the umma
without a ruler for fear of sedition,**[3]** think of asking for that
from the Prophet (s)? Did they ignore the dangers of the situation in
spite of that the Prophet had warned them of seditions like the dark
night? But as the Prophet (s) joined his Exalted Companion, their zeal
for the religion shined and their hearts were filled with fear from
sedition and evil results! Do you agree with me that the Prophet had
chosen for the ship the best captain and therefore no one of them asked
him any question?

Let us leave this aside and try to find for them whatever excuses that
may justify their actions. Those people, zealous for Islam, not only
were satisfied with not asking the Prophet, but also they prevented him
from saving them from the expected dangers when he wanted to write a
decree, by which (the Muslims would never deviate at all).**[4]**
Deviation did mean sedition and then there would be no sedition after
that decree so did they suspect the Prophet not to be truthful?! Or did
they think that they were more zealous for Islam and more able to do
away with the seditions and commotions than the Prophet and the first
man of Islam?  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Washing a dead man in a special manner according to the Islamic
rules.  
 **[2]** Al-Kamil fit-Tareekh by ibnul Atheer, vol.2 p.122 and as-Seera
an-Nabawiya by ibn Katheer, vol.4 p.527.  
 **[3]** At-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.2 p.580, al-Iqd al-Fareed, vol.4
p.260.  
 **[4]** Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.1 p.371 and vol.8 p.161.

It would be better for us to ask about what the Prophet (s) had meant by
seditions when he addressed those buried in the cemetery of
al-Baqee’**[1]** in the last days of his honored life: “How lucky you
are by being here! Seditions will come like pieces of dark
nights”.**[2]**

Perhaps you might say that it referred to the sedition of the apostates.
This justification would be accepted if the Prophet was afraid that the
deads of al-Baqee’ would apostatize but if he was not afraid of that-as
it was real-because they were good Muslims and many of them were
martyrs, so why did he congratulate them for not attending those days?
And definitely the Prophet (s) did not mean the Umayyad riots done by
Othman and Mu’awiya**[3]** for they were nearly three decades after that
date.

So that sedition, the Prophet (s) referred to, must be after his
departure immediately and that it would concern the deads of al-Baqee’
more than the sedition of the apostates and of those, who claimed to be
prophets.

Hence it was the very sedition that Fatima (s) referred to when saying:
(Surely into sedition have they already tumbled down, and most surely
hell encompasses the unbelievers).

Is it then wrong to call it the first sedition in the Islamic history
after the Prophet (s) had called it sedition?

The political performances of that days were sedition from another side
that they imposed on the umma a caliphate, with which no one was
satisfied except a few,**[4]** who had no right to decide the fate of  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The graveyard of the Muslims in Medina.  
 **[2]** At-Tareekh al-Kamil by ibnul Atheer, vol.2 p.318.  
 **[3]** At-Taj aj-Jami’ lil-Ussool, vol.5 p.310.  
 **[4]** At-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.2 p.233.

the government neither according to the Islamic laws nor according to
all the civil laws.

It was the caliphate of Abu Bakr, when he came out of the saqeefa (and
Omar trotting in front of him shouting until his mouth foamed)
surrounded by his group (wearing San’ani**[1]** aprons and passing by no
one unless they hit him and brought him (in front of Abu Bakr). They
extended his hand to touch Abu Bakr’s hand to pay homage to him
willingly or unwillingly).**[2]**

This showed that the rulers had carried to the Muslims a caliphate that
was neither blessed by the Heaven nor accepted by the Muslims. Abu Bakr
did not gain his authority by a decree from the Prophet nor by the
consensus of the umma as long as Sa’d did not pay homage until Abu Bakr
died and as long as the Hashimites did not pay homage until six months
of Abu Bakr’s caliphate.**[3]**

It was said that those in power had paid homage to him and that was
enough.

Did this concept not need an explanation or a reference to be concerned?
Who did consider those, who had paid homage to Abu Bakr such and had
given them that unlimited authority?

It was neither the umma nor the Prophet (s) because we knew that the men
of the saqeefa had not followed the normal method of elections and had
not permitted the Muslims to choose secondary candidates, who were
considered men in power according to the traditions of that time.

It was not mentioned that the Prophet (s) had granted this wide
authority to any special group.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Related to Sana’a.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.1 p.74.  
 **[3]** Al-Bukhari’s Sahih (the virtues of the companions) chap.35 p.66
and chap.43 p.8.

Then how would it be granted to a few Muslims, who would control the
affairs of the Muslims without their consent, in a constitutional regime
like the Islamic government as they claimed?

How wonderful of the political tradition it was that the government
itself would appoint those in power**[1]** and then it would gain its
final opinion from them.

And more wonderful it was that they excluded Ali, al-Abbas and all the
Hashimites, Sa’d bin Obada, az-Zubayr, Ammar, Salman, Abu Tharr,
al-Miqdad and all those gifted with intellect and prudence**[2]** from
those in power if actually there was such class in Islam that had the
right of deciding exclusively.

Putting this word in the dictionary of the Islamic life paved the way
for the aristocracy to appear, which was too far from the essence of
Islam and its reality that was purified from caste and discrimination.

Would that great wealth, with which the sacks of Abdur Rahman bin Ouff,
Talha and the likes were filled, be heaped unless those rulers adopted
this ugly aristocracy, which was ill-omened for Islam, and saw that they
were the high class deserving to have the millions and to control
people’s rights as  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.2 p.233. Abu Bakr said: “I accepted to
you one of these two men; Omar and Abu Obayda (to be the caliph)… and I
myself choose Abu Obayda”. Omar stood up and said (to the people in the
saqeefa): “Who of you would refuse the two feet (Abu Bakr) that the
Prophet had preferred?” Then Omar paid homage to Abu Bakr and then
people paid homage too…the Ansar said: “We do never pay homage except to
Ali”.  
 **[2]** According to the saying of ibn Abbas to Omar: “As for those
gifted with intellect and intelligence they still consider him (Ali) as
perfect man since Allah have raised the banner of Islam, but they
consider him as being wronged and deprived of his rights”. Refer to
Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.3 p.115.

they liked?

They said: “The majority is the criterion of the legal government and
the principle, on which the caliphate is based”.

But the holy Quran did not pay attention to the majority and did not
consider it as evidence or true proof. Allah said:

*(And if you obey most of those in the earth, they will lead you astray
from Allah's way)* 6:116.

*(And most of them are averse from the truth)* 23:70.

*(And most of them do not follow (anything) but conjecture)* 10:36.

*(But most of them are ignorant)* 6:111.

It was mentioned in the Sunni books of Hadith that the Prophet (s) had
said: “While I am (at the pond on the Day of Resurrection) a group of
people will come. When I recognize them, a man will come between me and
them. He will say to them: “Let us go.” I will ask: “Whereto (are you
taking them)?” He will say: “To Hell.” I will say: “What for?” He will
say: “They apostatized after you…” until he (the Prophet) said: “I do
not think that many of them will be saved except as much as the lost
livestock”.**[1]**

So that majority of Hell that the Prophet talked about could not be the
source of the Islamic government because they would form a caliphate
impressed with their own morals.

If we considered that this majority did not concern the people of Medina
only, about whose eternal seats in Hell we knew from the Prophet’s
tradition, and we considered the majority of the Muslims in general to
be the true criterion, so we  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.8 p.68. The lost livestock means very
little.

had to notice that whether Medina was the only inhabitance of the
Muslims, by whom the quorum would be enough to certify the caliphate of
Abu Bakr or he was not satisfied with them and he sent for all the
Muslims all over the Islamic state counseling and taking their votes
into account? Certainly not! Nothing of that happened. He imposed his
government over the entire state forcibly and there was no way of
reviewing or arguing until the hesitation in submitting to the
government became an unforgivable crime.**[1]**

They said: “The homage could be valid if some of the Muslims paid it and
undoubtedly this happened with Abu Bakr’s homage”.

This would not be acceptable by any standard of proper political
thinking because those some could not control the affairs of all the
umma and the fate of the umma could not be hanged by so thin thread like
this. The sanctities and the high position of the umma could not be left
to a government established by a group of companions, who were not
recommended by the public consensus nor by a sacred decree but they just
were ordinary people of the companions. We know well that: *(And there
are some of them who molest the* *Prophet and say: He is one who
believes every thing that he hears)* 9:61 *(And there are those of them
who made a covenant with Allah: If He give us out of His grace, we will
certainly give alms and we will certainly be of the good. But when He
gave them out of His grace, they became niggardly of it and they turned
back and they withdrew. So He made hypocrisy to follow as a consequence
into their hearts till the day when they shall meet Him because they
failed to perform towards Allah what they had promised with Him and
because they told lies*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.8 p.68.

9:75-77) and among them were some, whom Allah kept knowing their bad
intents and hypocrisy to Himself when saying to the Prophet (s): *(and
from among the people of Medina (also); they are stubborn in hypocrisy;
you do not know them; We know them)* 9:101.

A group that included hypocrites, liars and some, who hurt the Prophet
(s) could not have the right to decide the highest position of the
Islamic world or the fate of the entire umma.

Commenting on this information we say: the caliphate of Abu Bakr was not
done according to a prophetic tradition or the approval of the majority
or a result of direct or indirect elections. Yes, some of the Muslims
tried their best to secure this caliphate, around which some people
gathered and many groups of the people of Medina supported, but all
those were not but some of the Muslims and the some could not represent
the entire umma. The legal rule that would represent all the umma had to
be approved by all the umma or by the great majority of the umma.
Secondly there were among the Muslims many hypocrites, whom no one knew
but Allah according to the holy Quran, and to determine that this
minority, who would form the political entity of the umma, were not
hypocrites would have to be according to the Quran, the prophetic
traditions or the opinion of the umma.

So let Abu Bakr permit us to incline towards Fatima’s opinion partially
or totally because we did not find a meaning for the sedition clearer
than the dominating of one man over the umma without any legal
justification and controlling all its public utilities as Abu Bakr had
done in the days of his caliphate or the first months or the first weeks
of his rule when Fatima did her speech.

I do not know whether the hasty despots thought about the results of
their despotism and not paying any attention to those, who definitely
had an opinion about the matter if they began to oppose and if the
Hashimites got ready to resist the government. This thing was possible
and might happen at any moment so why did not they take care of this
side when they decided and got their final result in not more than an
hour?

Why would we sanctify the situation more than its heroes had sanctified
it? Omar exceeded in sanctifying it to a point that he ordered to kill
whoever would do like the homage of Abu Bakr**[1]** and he himself did
it.

If we regarded this speech and understood it as speech of an imam caring
for the constitution of Islam, we would perceive that he found the
situation of Abu Bakr and his friends in the saqeefa as sedition and
corruption because killing was prohibited except for these reasons.

It was after all the source of every sedition because it made the
caliphate of Allah as a fancy that the pious and the dissolute began to
look forward to it as Aa’isha, who undoubtedly represented the ruling
party, declared.**[2]** It was this sedition that paved the way for the
political fancies. The parties were formed, the policies fought each
other, the Muslims separated and divided so badly**[3]** that their
great entity and glory was lost.

What would you think about this umma, which formed in a quarter of
century the first state allover the world because the leader of the
opposition at that time-Ali- did not activate the opposition, which  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As-Sawa’iqul Muhriqa p.56.  
 **[2]** Ad-Durr al-Manthoor, vol.6 p.19.  
 **[3]** Al-Milel wen-Nihal by ash-Shahristani, vol.1 p.30-31.

would have shaken the entity and the unity of the umma?

What glory, what authority and what domination over the world the umma
would have if it was not afflicted with the conflicting lovers of the
rule and the drunken emirs affected with the ecstasy of authority and if
it was not a field for the bloody fights, which were unequalled
throughout history, and if the rulers did not exploit all the wealth of
the umma for their pleasures and eases and after that they despised the
values and the traditions of the umma!**[1]**

Abu Bakr and Omar did not think beyond their own time. They imagined
that their power would guard the Islamic entity, but if they thought
better of their view and studied the situation prudently as Fatima (s)
did, they would know the truthfulness of the warn she warned them with.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Murooj ath-Thahab by al-Mas’oodi, vol.3 p.214, al-Iqd al-Fareed
by ibn Abd Rabbih, vol.5 p.200-202 and The Social Justice in Islam by
Sayyid Qutub.
