Chapter Five the Court of the Book
==================================

 

*Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners and that
when you judge between people you judge with justice; surely Allah
admonishes you with what is excellent; surely Allah is Seeing, Hearing.*

**Quran, 4:57**

If we wanted to raise our study to an adequate level, we would have to
follow the methods of the scientific research in studying two sides:

Abu Bakr’s situation on the Prophet’s inheritance
-------------------------------------------------

The first side: Abu Bakr’s situation regarding the inheritance of Fatima
(s) that he justified according to a tradition, which he alone narrated
from the Prophet (s) about the matter of inheritance. He narrated the
tradition in different ways and different statements for the
confrontations between him and Fatima (s) were many, so each saying of
his had a different form and different statements according to the
phrases that came to his mind at the time of each confrontation between
them.**[1]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Sunan of al-Bayhaqi, vol.6 p.297-302 and Sharh Nahjul
Balagha, vol.16 p.214, 218, 219, 221, 227.

1. Before all we want to note how certain the caliph was of the
truthfulness of the tradition, which he found that it showed that the
Prophet (s) did not bequeath. How certain was he that he had heard it
from the Prophet (s) and whether he changed his mind or not?

We can understand that from the traditions**[1]** saying that the caliph
gave Fadak back to Fatima and the case was about to be ended unless Omar
came and said to the caliph: “What is this?” Abu Bakr said: “It is a
document I wrote for Fatima confessing her right of her father’s
inheritance”. Omar said: “What will you spend on the Muslims and as you
see that the Arabs stand against you?” He (Omar) took the document and
tore it.**[2]** We quote this tradition cautiously although we may
believe in its truthfulness because every thing would encourage not
narrating this story unless it had something of reality. If it was true,
it would mean that (the attempt of) giving Fadak to Fatima (s) occurred
after Fatima’s eternal speech and when Abu Bakr denied the Prophet’s
inheritance by narrating his odd tradition, because of the wars of
apostasy, Omar referred to in his saying, took place ten days after the
day of the saqeefa**[3]** and Fatima’s speech was in the tenth day
too.**[4]**

2. Abu Bakr showed his regret for not giving Fadak to Fatima when he was
about to die.**[5]** He was  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sibt bin aj-Jawzi in his book as-Seera al-Halabiya, vol.3 p.363,
Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.234.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.234-235.  
 **[3]** Murooj ath-Thahab, vl.2 p.193.  
 **[4]** This may weaken the tradition mentioned above because if Abu
Bakr was ready to recall, he would have responded to Fatima in the
mosque when she scolded him so bitterly.  
 **[5]** At-Tabari’s Tareekh, vo.2 p.353, Sumoow al-Ma’na fe Sumoow
ath-That by al-Alayili, p.18.

so moved that once he said to the people gathering around him: “Revoke
your pledge of homage to me!” We perceive by this that the caliph was so
worried, feeling that he had committed a great mistake in his judgment
against Fatima without a certain evidence. His conscience became so
excited and he could not find a justification that might quiet his
worried soul. He was unable to bear this bitter condition so his soul
was brimmed to express the regret for his situation towards Fatima at
the last hour of his life; the critical hour, in which one would review
all the scenes one had acted on the stage of life when feeling that the
curtain was about to be lowered, and the different threads of one’s life
gathered in one’s memory that were about to be cut and nothing would
remain but the burden of the sins committed.

3. Let us not forget that Abu Bakr had recommended in his will**[1]** to
be buried beside the Prophet’s tomb. This would not be except if he had
recalled his tradition, in which he had narrated that the Prophet (s)
did not bequeath, and then he asked his daughter (Aa’isha) permission to
be buried in her share of the Prophet’s inheritance (in the house)-if
the wife would have a share of land and if that share of land would be
enough for Abu Bakr-or if he thought that what the Prophet (s) had left
was to be as common charity for all the Muslims, then he had to ask
permission of all of them. Suppose that the adults permitted him, what
about the minors and the children at that time?

4. We knew well that Abu Bakr had not seized the Prophet’s wives’
houses, in which they lived during the Prophet’s lifetime, so what was
the reason that made him seize Fadak from Fatima (s)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** At-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.3 p.349.

and make its yields for the public interests while he let the Prophet’s
wives make use of their houses as real keepers so that he asked Aa’isha
permission to let him be buried in her house? Did the verdict of not
bequeathing concern the Prophet’s daughter only? Were the wives’ houses
their donations? We are to know what made the caliph do that without any
evidence despite that no one of the wives had claimed that the house was
hers. Inhabiting a house by a wife during the Prophet’s lifetime did not
mean that she became the owner because it was not private ownership but
it was as part of the Prophet’s ownership as for any wife and a husband.
This verse *(And stay in your houses.* 33:33*)* did not mean that the
houses were theirs because a little after that the houses were ascribed
to the Prophet where Allah said: *(O you who believe! do not enter the
houses of the Prophet unless permission is given to you.* 33:35*)* If
the order of the Quran was sufficient evidence, this verse must be taken
into account. It was mentioned in the Sunni books of Hadith that the
house was ascribed to the Prophet when he had said: “Between my house
and my minbar there is a garden of Paradise”.**[1]**

5. Let us ask the caliph about the verdict that the prophets did not
bequeath. Did it concern Muhammad (s) only and he kept it secret until
it would be required to be applied to Fatima only from among all the
heirs of the other prophets? Did the other prophets ignore it? Did they
not inform their successors and heirs of it because of their greed of
the transient wealth in order to remain with their sons and families? Or
did they follow the verdict of not bequeathing but it was not mentioned
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.2 p.236.

in all the histories of the nations? Or did the actual policy at that
time establish this verdict?

6. On the other hand could we accept that the Prophet (s) would bring
distresses and disasters for his most beloved one, at whose displeasure
he would be displeased, for whose delight he would be delighted and for
whose distress he would be distressed?**[1]** Nothing would cost him to
keep all those distresses away from his daughter more than to tell her
the truth if there was such a thing. Would the Prophet (s) be pleased if
his daughter suffered and faced ordeals and that ordeals would widen to
be a cause for disagreement among all the Muslims whereas he was sent by
Allah to be a source of mercy? Did he conceal it from his daughter while
he had revealed it to Abu Bakr?

The variations of Abu Bakr’s tradition
--------------------------------------

1. In order to have a look at the tradition from the moral side, we
divided the way of narrating the tradition into two parts:

**The first**: It was mentioned that Abu Bakr cried when Fatima (s)
talked with him and said: “O daughter of the messenger of Allah, I swear
by Allah that your father did not bequeath a dinar or a dirham and he
said that the prophets did not bequeath”.**[2]** It was mentioned too
that when Fatima did her speech he said: “I have heard the Prophet
saying: We, the prophets, do not bequeath gold and silver nor lands,
properties or houses but we bequeath faith, wisdom, knowledge and the
Sunna”.**[3]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Bukhari’s Sahih, vol.5 p.83, Muslims Sahih, vol.4 p.1902,
History of Baghdad by al-khateeb al-Baghdadi, vol.17 p.203 and Ahmad’s
Musnad, vol.1 p.6.  
 **[2]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.316, al-Bayhaqi’s Sunan, vol.6
p.301.  
 **[3]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.252, 214, al-Bayhaqi’s Sunan,

**The second**: Abu Bakr narrated that the Prophet had said: “We do not
bequeath. What we leave is to be as charity”.**[1]**

2. The important point in this research is to know whether these ways of
the tradition lead clearly, without any doubt or other
interpretation-the proviso (nass)**[2]** according to the scholars of
Hadith-to that what the Prophet (s) had left would be as inheritance or
it could lead to another meaning even if it apparently gave an
impression showing the verdict of not bequeathing. The matter had a
third account that was not to outweigh the meaning that served the
caliph more than the other meanings the wording might have, which was
called (mujmal) summary.**[3]**

3. If we noticed the first variations of the tradition, we would find
that the tradition might not refer to the legislation of bequeathing by
the prophets but to another thing that the Prophet (s) wanted to clear;
that was to glorify the prophethood and to exalt the prophets. There was
no clearer aspect of the spiritual loftiness and the divine greatness
than to be ascetic with regard to the evanescent luxuries and pleasures
of the worldly life. Could not we suppose that the Prophet (s)  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

vol.6 p.300.**  
 [1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.224, 218, al-Bayhaqi’s Sunan,
vol.6 p.301.  
 **[2]** Proviso: ar-Razi said: if the wording refers to one meaning and
has no possibility to refer to another it is proviso (nass).  
 **[3]** Mujmal means that the wording refers to two meanings equally.
Refer to at-Tafseer al-Kabeer by al-Fakhr ar-Razi, vol.7 p.18. It was
mentioned in Ma’arij al-Ussool by al-Hilli p.105 that: “Proviso (nass)
is the wording that refers to its very meaning and not to any other than
what it is said for but the (mujmal) summary refers to some meanings and
it is not limited to its wording…”. Refer to Bayan an-Nussoss
at-Tashree’iyya by Badran Abul Aynayn, p.5 and al-Misbah al-Muneer,
vol.2 p.654.

wanted to show that the prophets were angelic people or people of the
highest rank that they would not be affected by the earthly egoism or
the human tendencies, because their nature was derived from the elements
of the Heaven flowing with goodness and not from the elements of the
earthly world? They always and for ever were the sources of good and
light. They were devisors of faith and wisdom. They fixed the divine
authority on the earth. They were not the sources of material wealth and
they did not look forward to its values. So why did not we consider his
saying: “We the prophets do not bequeath gold or silver nor lands or
properties or houses” as metonymy referring to this meaning? Their
bequeathing of these things did mean owning them and leaving them after
their death whereas in fact they turned away from all these things.
Hence the wording showed not bequeathing because the prophets did not
have anything to bequeath as if we said: “the poor men do not bequeath”
not because the verdict of inheritance does not include them but because
they do not have anything to bequeath. The real aim of the Prophet’s
saying was to show the loftiness of the prophets. This style of
eloquence agreed with the wonderful styles of the Prophet’s speech,
which were full of such great meanings in short statements.

4. In order that you agree with me on a certain interpretation for this
tradition, we have to know the meaning of bequeathing so that we can
understand the sentence that negated bequeathing in the tradition.
Bequeathing means leaving something as inheritance; that is to say that
the legator is he, who becomes a cause of transmitting a property

from the dead to his relative.**[1]** This transmitting depends on tow
conditions:

First: the existence of the patrimony.

Second: the law that lets the heir have a share of the dead’s property.
The first condition happens by means of the dead himself and the second
condition happens by means of the legislator, who establishes the law of
inheritance, whether he is an individual, who is entrusted with the
legislative competence by people, or a society responsible for that or a
prophet legislating according to the orders of the Heaven. Each of the
dead and the legislator has a share in deciding the inheritance but the
real legator is the dead, who founds the matter of the inheritance,
because it is he, who prepares for the inheritance its second condition
whereas the legislator is not a real legator because by establishing the
law he cannot generate any inheritance. In fact he just legislates a law
saying that if the dead leaves a property, it will be for his relatives.
This is not enough to find inherited wealth unless the dead actually has
left some of his own properties after his death.

So the legislator is like that, who adds a special nature to an element
that enables it to burn whatever it meets. Then if you throw a piece of
paper into it and the paper burns, you will be the one that burns it and
not that one, who adds the burning element to that nature. The principle
justifying that is to say that everything is ascribed to the final
influence on it. In the light of this principle we know that ascribing
bequeathing to somebody means that he is the final influence on the
inheritance and it is he, who founds the patrimony.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Al-Misbah al-Muneer, vol.2 p.654.

It is understood from the statement (the prophets do not bequeath) that
they do not prepare for the inheritance its final condition for they do
not try to gather wealth and then to leave them for their heirs after
their death. So the meaning of (the prophets do not bequeath) does not
deny the legislative bequeathing because the verdict of the inheritance
is not the real bequeathing but the real bequeathing is to prepare the
patrimony, which is the matter of the inheritance. It is this, which was
denied by the tradition.

On the other way, if the bequeathing that the Prophet denied was the
legislative bequeathing it would mean canceling the law of bequeathing
from the Sharia of the Heaven. This could not be because the legislative
bequeathing did not concern the prophets’ heirs only. If the denial
referred to the real bequeathing it would mean that the prophets had no
wealth in order to bequeath and so Abu Bakr’s justification would be in
vain.

5. In the first narration of the tradition Abu Bakr said: “By Allah,
your father did not bequeath a dinar or a dirham”.**[1]** It showed
clearly that the Prophet (s) did not leave any money. If Abu Bakr used
that statement to refer to this meaning, then the tradition would lead
to denying the patrimony and not the legislative bequeathing.

6. If we noticed the examples mentioned in the second variation of the
tradition, we would find what confirmed the importance of this
interpretation because mentioning gold, silver, properties and houses
did not agree with the tradition that the patrimony was not to be
bequeathed whereas every thing, even the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.216.

insignificant things, must be mentioned to show that the verdict
included every thing. If we wanted to show that the unbeliever was not
to inherit from his (Muslim) father’s inheritance, we would not say that
he was not to inherit gold, silver or a house but we would say that he
was not to inherit anything of his dead father’s patrimony. It was clear
that showing the generality of the verdict required showing some kinds
of properties in order that no one would think that these kinds of
properties were not among the patrimony, which would not be bequeathed.
Saying that the prophets do not bequeath or the unbelievers were not to
inherit their fathers’ inheritance shows that properties, houses, gold,
silver and other valuable things of inheritance do not move to the
heirs. Mentioning these things in the tradition might show that the
meaning of (the prophets do not bequeath) was to confirm that the
prophets did not pay any attention for such transient things of this
limited worldly life, for which the rabble competed, for it was suitable
for this purpose to mention these significant properties, whose owning
and bequeathing contradicted the concept of asceticism and the high
spiritual ranks. As for informing of not bequeathing in the Sharia, it
would be more appropriate to mention the insignificant kinds of
patrimony rather than the clear significant kinds.

7. Another thing that confirmed what we said about the interpretation of
the tradition was the second part in the tradition: (but we bequeath
faith, wisdom, knowledge and the Sunna).**[1]** It did not show the
legislation of inheriting these things but it showed that the prophets
had these things that they  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.214.

could spread among people. Then we could understand from the first
sentence, which denied bequeathing, that the prophets did not try to
gain gold, properties and the likes, therefore they did not have any to
leave for their heirs as inheritance.

8. We are not to compare the Prophet’s tradition: (People are not to
bequeath anything to the unbeliever of their relatives)**[1]** with that
tradition but we have to differentiate between the two because if the
legislator talks about those, for whom he legislates laws, it is clear
from his speech that he imposes on them a verdict. When the Prophet
informs of that people do not bequeath to the unbeliever of their
relatives, it is not to be considered as just informing but it shows
that the unbeliever is not to inherit according to the Prophet’s Sharia.
It is different from that one narrated by Abu Bakr because that
tradition talks about the prophets and not a group of people included in
the Prophet’s legislations and verdicts. So there is nothing referring
to a verdict behind the informing of not bequeathing by the prophets.

9. You are not to object by saying that the prophets often owned
something of what were mentioned in the tradition for it would mean that
the tradition was untrue. You may remember that what was denied related
to the prophets was bequeathing, which had a special meaning that was to
say: ascribing the patrimony to the legator. This ascribing depended on
that the legator sought to gain properties, which would be left as
inheritance  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** This tradition was mentioned in other wording having the same
meaning. The Prophet (s) said: “The believer is not to inherit from the
unbeliever and the unbeliever is not to inherit from the believer”.
Refer to Sunan of ibn Maja, vol.2 p.164 and Sahih of Abu Dawood, vol.2
p.19.

after his death, exactly as the meaning of the educator, which depended
on using the means of the education. If someone could read the thoughts
of one of the ethicists and educated himself according to those thoughts
then we would not call that ethicist as educator because founding
anything whether it was educating, bequeathing, teaching or the like
would not be ascribed to a person unless that person had a positive
action and a noticeable influence on the achievement of that thing. Even
if the prophets had some properties or houses, it was not because of
their seeking to gain wealth like other people. The tradition did not
show that the prophets did not bequeath or did not leave properties but
it showed their high ranks and excellences. As long as the tradition
referred to this meaning and its main aim was not behind the literary
meaning of the words so it was not impermissible that the prophets might
have some properties for the good intents. In the past he, who described
a generous man as “he had a lot of ashes”,**[1]** was not to be
considered as liar whether there was ash in the generous man’s house or
not because he did not want actually to describe him so but he wanted to
refer to his generosity because the clearest sign of generosity in those
days was the amount of food cooked, which would leave a lot of ashes.
And so not bequeathing was the clearest sign of asceticism and piety.
Hence the Prophet (s) might have referred to the piety of the prophets
by saying: “The prophets do not bequeath”.

10. In order to perceive the meaning of the second variation of the
tradition we have to distinguish between three possible meanings:  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Jawahir al-Balagha by Ahmed al-Hashimi p.363.

**First**: the patrimony of the dead is not inherited. This means that
what the dead owned until his death will not move to his heirs but it
becomes as charity after his death.

**Second**: what the deceased had paid during his lifetime as charity or
what he had given to certain parties would not be inherited but would
remain as charity and entail (waqf). The heirs would inherit other than
the charities of the properties that the dead owned during his lifetime.

**Third**: the dead had no properties to be inherited and what he would
leave would be charities and entails.

If we recognized the differences between these three meanings, the
tradition would appear unclear and in need of researching and testing.
In fact in its interpretation there were many possibilities and it could
include all the items mentioned above. The second half of the tradition
(what we leave is to be as charity) might be an independent sentence
with full meaning or a complement for the sentence (we, the prophets, do
not bequeath). In the first case the tradition agreed with the first and
the third meanings because the sentence (what we leave is to be as
charity) might mean that the patrimony would not transfer to the heirs
after the owner’s death but it would be considered as charity or it
might refer to the third meaning that all the patrimonies would be
considered as charity and the dead had not owned anything to bequeath as
if the dead before his death referred to the properties and said: “All
these properties are not mine. They are for charity and I am just
responsible for them”. If we considered the entire tradition as having
one independent meaning, it would refer to the second meaning that the
charities, which the dead had given during his life,

would be excluded from the other parts of the inheritance. The same
would be understood from the tradition if the wording was reversed as
the following: (we do not bequeath what we leave as charity). It showed
that only the charities would not be inherited but not the rest of the
patrimonies were charities. Hence the tradition would be as evidence to
prove that the charity was not to transfer to the heirs and not to
cancel the legislation of bequeathing at all.

11. So we have put many meanings for the tradition in order to show its
real content. Saying that the Prophet’s properties were to be as charity
after his death, would not be preferred to the other two meanings. In
fact we would prefer the second meaning: (what was left as charity would
be excluded from the other parts of inheritance) if we pondered on the
plural pronoun the Prophet (s) used in the tradition. The use of this
pronoun by the Prophet to refer to himself would not be acceptable
unless it was used metaphorically. Moreover it was far away from the
Prophet’s humbleness in all his sayings and doings. The evidences
confirmed that the pronoun referred to a group and the verdict decided
by the tradition concerned the group and not the Prophet (s) alone.
According to the principles of expression it was most suitable for this
statement to refer to the group of the Muslims and not the group of the
prophets because the tradition had no any context referring to the
prophets. You cannot object by saying that the tradition might have a
context when it was said by the Prophet (s) or it was preceded by an
indication showing that the pronoun related to the group of the prophets
because Abu Bakr had not mentioned anything of that, although the
narrator of any tradition had to

mention every thing concerning it in order to make interpreting it easy
therefore your objection will be vain. Furthermore, ignoring these
details was not for Abu Bakr’s benefit. So let the actual wording of the
tradition be identical to the actual situation of Abu Bakr no more no
less.

It was understood that the pronoun referred to the group of the Muslims,
who were attendant when the Prophet (s) said the tradition. It was
ordinary that if a speaker wanted to say something among a group of
people and used the plural pronoun of the first person, he would refer
by the pronoun to the attendant group. If a jurisprudent was among his
friends and he began to talk to them using the plural pronoun, it would
be understood that he meant by the pronoun himself and the attendant
friends and not the group of the jurisprudents, whom he was one of. If
he wanted to refer to another group, his speech in this matter might be
considered mysterious and unclear. In the light of this account, what
would you think about this verdict that the tradition had determined for
the Muslims, whom we established that the pronoun concerned? Could it
show that a Muslim was not to bequeath his patrimony? Were the
properties every Muslim had not his own but they were to be considered
as charities? Certainly not! This did not agree with the necessities of
the Islamic Sharia. According to the holy Quran the Muslim had the right
to own in different ways and had the right to bequeath what he would
leave after his death *(after (the payment of) a bequest he may have
bequeathed or a debt).***[1]** Perhaps  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** With reference to the Quranic verse*: (Allah enjoins you
concerning your children: The male shall have the equal of the portion
of two females; then if they are more than two females, they shall have
two‑thirds of what the deceased has left, and if there is one, she shall
have the half; and as for*

it is clear now that the verdict is not but that the charity is not to
be inherited. This is an important thing and it does not concern a
certain charity but it concerns all the charities of the Muslims. It was
no wonder in showing the verdict of not bequeathing the charities in the
first age of legislation, because the laws and the verdicts of the
Sharia were not yet fixed and widespread among the Muslims and there was
a possibility of revoking the charities and entails and they would
transfer to the heirs when the owner died. This interpretation could not
be undermined even though Fatima (s) did not mention it and did not
protest by it against the caliph.

Firstly because the critical situation of Fatima (s) in those difficult
times did not let her debate these minute arguments because the ruling
authority, which wanted to carry out its decisions strictly, controlled
the situation with firmness and determination that did not accept any
argument. Hence we found that Abu Bakr did not answer Fatima (s) when
she protested by the Quranic verses talking about the matter of
inheritance with more than to say: “It is so”.**[1]** So the fate of
these arguments, if they had a share in the revolt, would face but
denial and failure.

And secondly because these arguments had nothing to do with Fatima’s
aim, which was to do away with the entire regime of the new caliphate.
It was natural that she depended on the means that were nearer to
achieve her aim. You found her in  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*his parents, each of them shall have the sixth of what he has left if
he has a child, but if he has no child and (only) his two parents
inherit him, then his mother shall have the third; but if he has
brothers, then his mother shall have the sixth after (the payment of) a
bequest he may have bequeathed or a debt)*. 4:11.**  
 [1]** Ibn Sa’d’s Tabaqat, vol.2 p.315.

her eternal speech talking to the minds and the hearts of people
together but she did not exceed in her protest the intuitive methods,
which was ignored by the caliph. This indifference of the caliph was
about to be denied by everyone which would lead to a fierce opposition.

She denied the availability of any evidence in the holy Quran confirming
the rule of the caliph Abu Bakr. Then she mentioned the verses
legislating the succession among all the Muslims.**[1]** Then she
mentioned the verses talking about the succession of some prophets like
Prophet Yahya (John) and Prophet Dawood (David). Then she argued the
case in another way that if what Abu Bakr followed was true, he would be
more aware than the Prophet (s) and his guardian Imam Ali because they
both had not told her of that verdict and if they had known it, they
would definitely have told her of it. It was definitely that Abu Bakr
could never be more aware of the Prophet’s inheritance than the Prophet
(s) or than Ali, whose guardianship**[2]** to the Prophet (s) was
confirmed by her saying: “O ibn Abu Quhafa,**[3]** is it mentioned in
the Book of Allah that you inherit your father but I do not inherit my
father? Surely you have done a strange thing! Did you intendedly desert
the Book of Allah and turned your back on it? Allah said: *(And Sulaiman
was Dawood's heir* Qur’an  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** It was clear that if only one respected truthful man narrated a
tradition, the tradition would be regarded as true but as Fatima
protested by the Quranic verses it was clear that she did not recognize
the truthfulness and fairness of Abu Bakr.  
 **[2]** The guardianship of Imam Ali was proved by many evidences. As
for the Shia, they agreed on that unanimously and they agreed that it
included the caliphate also. As for the others, it was also proved but
in the special meaning. Refer to at-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.2 and
al-Muraja’at by Abdul Hussayn Sharafuddeen p.236.  
 **[3]** Ibn Abu Quhafa was the surname of Abu Bakr.

27:16*)* and said about Yahya bin Zachariah: *(Grant me from Thyself an
heir, who should inherit me and inherit from the children of Yaqoub.*
Qur’an 19:5-6*)* and said: *(And the possessors of relationships are
nearer to each other in the ordinance of Allah.* Qur’an 8:75*)* So did
Allah distinguish you with a verse, from which He excluded my father? Or
do you say: people of two religions do not inherit each other? Am I and
my father not of one religion? Or are you more aware of the Quran than
my father and my cousin?”**[1]**

The more prominent side of Fatima’s revolt was the sentimental side. It
was no wonder that Fatima (s) tried her best to gain the battle of the
heart for it was the first ruler of the soul and it was the cradle, in
which the spirit of revolt grew up. Fatima (s) had succeeded in forming
a wonderful image, by which she shook the feelings, electrified the
sentiments and dominated the hearts. It was the best weapon for a woman
having the same circumstances of Fatima (s).

In order to enjoy that wonderful image painted with the finest colors,
let us listen to Fatima when she addressed the Ansar by saying: “O
high-born people, you are the strong guards of the religion and the
nourishers of Islam. What is this languor in helping me, this slowness
in assisting me, this indifference to my right and this dozing towards
my being wronged? Did not the Prophet say: “Being loyal to a man is by
being loyal to his offspring”? How quickly you changed the Sunna and how
hurriedly you achieved your own intents. Was it because the Prophet died
that you made his religion  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** We quoted this passage in short. Imam Ali’s wide knowledge about
every thing of the Quran was so famous for every one. Refer to
al-Ittiqan by as-Sayooti, vol.4 p.233, ibn Sa’d’s Tabaqat, vol.2 p.338
and as-Sawa’iqul Muhriqa by ibn Hajar, p.173.

die? By Allah, his death was a great calamity, whose effect became
greater. Its rip became obscure and there was no one to mend it. The
earth became so dark. The mountains submitted. The hopes died. The
sanctities were lost after him. The inviolabilities were profaned. It
was a great misfortune that the Book of Allah informed of it even before
the Prophet’s death. Allah said: *(And Muhammad is no more than an
apostle; the apostles have already passed away before him; if then he
dies or is killed will you turn back on your heels? And whoever turns
back on his heels, he will by no means do harm to Allah in the least and
Allah will reward the grateful.* Quran 3:144*)* Ah, people of Ouss and
Khazraj,**[1]** my father’s inheritance was extorted in front of your
sight and hearing. My call reaches you and you are with great number of
men and arms.**[2]** You are the elite that Allah preferred and the
choice that He chose…etc.”**[3]**

Hence the arguments about the interpretation of the tradition would not
be accepted by the ruling authority nor did it have anything to do with
the main aim of the revolt of Fatima (s). This explained for us why
Fatima did not mention the donation (of Fadak) in her speech.

The situation of the caliph towards the matter of the inheritance

1. Now we have to clarify the caliph’s situation towards Fatima about
the matter of the inheritance and to show his opinion about it after we
have clarified the meaning of the tradition through the different ways
of narrating whether the meaning was clear or ambiguous. His situation
seems to be somehow complicated if we study the historical  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The greatest two tribes of the Ansar.  
 **[2]** She means: why do not you help me and defend my right?  
 **[3]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.212-213.

documents of the case thoroughly. Although the documents are many, it is
ambiguous to know the point, on which the two opponents disagreed and it
is difficult to unify this point.

People thought that the object of the disagreement between Abu Bakr and
Fatima was the matter of the prophets’ inheritance. Fatima claimed that
they bequeathed and Abu Bakr denied that. Accounting the situation in
this way would not solve the matter and would not interpret many issues:

**First**: the saying of Abu Bakr to Fatima when she asked for Fadak:
“This property was not the Prophet’s but it concerned the Muslims. The
Prophet (s) spent from it on the soldiers and for the sake of Allah.
When the Prophet died I managed it as he did”.**[1]** This saying showed
clearly that he was arguing about something else than the prophets’
inheritance.

**Second**: his saying to Fatima in another dialogue: “By Allah, your
father is better than me and you are better than my daughters but the
messenger of Allah had said: “We do not bequeath. What we leave is to be
charity”.**[2]** This explanatory sentence that the caliph added to the
tradition needs some attention. It makes us understand that the caliph
thought that the verdict determined in the tradition concerned Prophet
Muhammad and it was not certified to concern the inheritance of the
other prophets or the rest of the Muslims. He defined the patrimony that
would not be bequeathed and mentioned that the Prophet meant it by the
tradition. According to this, we understand that Abu Bakr did not mean
not bequeathing the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.214.  
 **[2]** ibid.

charities, because this was a general verdict and did not concern the
Prophet only. It was clear also that Abu Bakr did not interpret the
tradition as: (the Prophet’s properties were not to be inherited but
they were to be considered as charities after his death) because if he
thought so in understanding the tradition, his interpretation would
refer to another matter. The subject of the tradition then would refer
to all of the Prophet’s patrimonies and not to the actual property,
which Fatima asked for. By this I mean that if these properties were
excluded from the Prophet’s ownership before his death, the verdict of
not bequeathing would not affect them. In the same way, if the Prophet
had other properties, he would not bequeath them to his relatives too.
So not bequeathing of the Prophet’s properties, if it was proved, would
concern all the Prophet’s properties whether those, which he left or
others. It would not be right to say that he meant by the inheritance
the specific properties that Fatima asked for.

As if you said to your friend: “honor every one visits you tonight!”
Then two persons visited him. You did not mean by your saying these two
persons in particular yet the order complied with these two persons by
chance. So limiting the patrimonies that would not be inherited to
certain properties required that the verdict mentioned in the tradition
to concern these certain properties only.

No doubt if the Prophet’s patrimonies were not to be inherited, the
verdict would not be assigned to those certain properties but it would
be applied to every property that the Prophet (s) would leave after his
death. With regard to the scientific relevance of the research, I want
to ask about the use of the explanatory sentence and the aim behind

it whether the opinion of the caliph about the tradition was that the
Prophet’s properties were not to be inherited. Was it suspected that the
meaning of patrimony referred to the actual properties, which Fatima
asked for, or not and then he wanted to remove the suspicion in order
that the tradition would agree with the meaning so that the verdict of
not bequeathing would be proved? If this account was true, the suspicion
would be in the interest of the caliph because if it was not certain
that an asset was a part of the dead’s patrimony, it would not transfer
to the heirs. Hence it was not possible that the caliph wanted to remove
this suspicion and it was not possible that he wanted to prevent Fatima
from arguing about the application of the tradition to the properties
she asked for because as long as she asked for the properties as
inheritance so she obviously acknowledged that they were among the
Prophet’s patrimonies. Let us suppose that those properties were a part
of the Prophet’s patrimony and not all what the Prophet (s) had left-it
might refer to the real estate like Fadak-so can we guess that the aim
of the caliph was to limit the properties that Fatima had no right to
inherit? I do not think so because the Prophet’s patrimonies did not
differ in bequeathing or not bequeathing. We derive from these
reflections a result that the caliph’s intent from this tradition of the
Prophet that these properties were not his property and he described
them by saying: “What we leave is to be charity”, so he was, in this
respect, as that, who gathered his heirs and said to them: “All my
patrimonies are to be for charity” trying to tell them that they were
not his properties so they could not inherit them. This is the meaning
that can be understood from the caliph’s tradition.

**Third**: the caliph’s answer to a messenger sent by Fatima to ask for
the Prophet’s properties in Medina and Fadak and the remainder of the
khums of Khaybar when he said to the messenger: “The Prophet (s) said:
“We do not bequeath. What we leave is to be charity. Muhammad’s family
spends from this money”. By Allah, I will not change anything of the
Prophet’s charities. They will remain as they were during the Prophet’s
lifetime”.**[1]**

If we supposed that the meaning of the tradition according to Abu Bakr’s
opinion was that the Prophet (s) did not bequeath his properties, then
Abu Bakr’s speech would be contradicted because his conclusion in the
beginning of the tradition showed that he confessed that what Fatima
asked for was among the Prophet’s patrimonies and properties he left
after his death, but his last sentence of the tradition: “By Allah, I do
not change anything of the Prophet’s charities. They will remain as they
were during the Prophet’s lifetime” opposed this meaning because what
Fatima wanted to change-as Abu Bakr claimed-was Fadak, the Prophet’s
properties in Medina and the remainder of the khums of Khaybar. When Abu
Bakr said: “By Allah, I do not change anything of the Prophet’s
charities” he meant the properties that Fatima asked for and he saw that
she asked to change them from their previous condition. When he called
them as the Prophet’s charities it meant that he thought they were not
the Prophet’s properties but they were charities that the Prophet (s)
managed during his lifetime. Abu Bakr’s conclusion in the beginning of
the tradition showed that he did not want to prove that the Prophet’s
properties were not to be inherited but he wanted  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.218.

to prove that those properties, which Fatima asked for, were not among
the Prophet’s properties because he mentioned that they were charities.

2. We can conclude out of some variations of Abu Bakr’s tradition that
he argued about the prophets’ properties and he did not limit the
dispute to the previous point because the tradition, which mentioned
Fatima’s speech and the conclusion of Abu Bakr when he mentioned the
Prophet’s saying; “We, the prophets, do not bequeath…..etc.” and when
Fatima protested against him by mentioning the general Quranic verses
talking about the matter of inheritance and the special verses talking
about the succession of some of the prophets, uncovered a new side of
the dispute where Abu Bakr denied the bequeathing of the Prophet’s
properties to his heirs and insisted on his denial whereas Fatima
insisted on arguing him**[1]** and defended her opinion on the matter.

3. So the caliph had two traditions:

The first: “We do not bequeath. What we leave is to be charity”.**[2]**

The second: “We, the prophets, do not bequeath gold or silver”.**[3]**
He therefore claimed two things:

One of them that Fadak was charity and so it was not to be inherited.

The other was that the Prophet’s properties were not to be inherited. He
used the first tradition to prove that Fadak was charity and the second
tradition to prove that the Prophet did not  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.211.  
 **[2]** ibid.vol.16 p.218 and refer to al-Bayhaqi’s Sunan, vol.6
p.300-301. (In Arabic this tradition may have another form : “We do not
bequeath what we leave as charity”) The translator.  
 **[3]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.252.

bequeath.

The results of the argument
---------------------------

1. It might be not difficult to sue the caliph after his situation
became clear and the notes we noticed in the two traditions narrated by
Abu Bakr, claiming that the Prophet (s) had said them, were fixed. The
censure we got against Abu Bakr until now related to many points. We
refer to them here to conclude the results:

**First**: the caliph was not certain about his tradition as we
explained at the beginning of this chapter.

**Second**: it would be implausible to imagine that the Prophet (s)
confided the verdict of his inheritance to Abu Bakr and hid it from his
daughter and the rest of his heirs. How did the Prophet confide this
verdict to Abu Bakr?**[1]** The Prophet was not used to meet Abu Bakr
alone unless he told him this news in a deliberate privacy so that it
would be ignorant by his heirs and especially his daughter, who would
receive a new ordeal-because of that-in addition to her other pains!

**Third**: Ali was the Prophet’s guardian undoubtedly according to the
true tradition narrated recurrently by the great companions and recited
in their poetry. Among those, who narrated the tradition were Abdullah
bin Abbas, Khuzayma bin Thabit al-Ansari, Hujr bin Adiy, Abul Haytham
bin al-Tayhan, Abdullah bin Abu Sufyan bin al-Harth bin Abdul Muttalib,
Hassaan bin Thabit and Imam  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Aa’isha said: “They disagreed about his inheritance (the
Prophet’s inheritance). We did not find any one knowing about it. Then
Abu Bakr said: “I heard the Prophet saying: We, the prophets, do not
bequeath…etc.” Refer to as-Sawa’qul Muhriqa by ibn Hajar p.34 and
Tareekh al-Khulafa’ by as-Sayooti, p.73.

Ali.**[1]** The guardianship was one of the highest Islamic decorations
that no doubt only Ali possessed.**[2]**

Ali’s followers and Abu Bakr’s followers disagreed on the meaning of
guardianship. The first great companions believed that it was a decree
for Ali’s caliphate but the others interpreted it and said: “Ali is the
guardian of the Prophet’s knowledge, Sharia and affairs.” Now we do not
want to oppose these or to support those but we want to discuss the
tradition as much as concerning the subject of this research and then to
decide what result comes out of each interpretation.

Let us suppose first that the guardianship meant the caliphate to try
Abu Bakr’s situation in the light of the tradition. We will find that he
had usurped the most precious Islamic values and had disposed of the
fates of the umma without any legal authority. So this man had no right
to rule or judge between people and any tradition of his could not be
believed. Let us abandon this interpretation for it would be so severe
to the caliph. Let us say: “Ali was the guardian of the Prophet’s
knowledge and Sharia.” Then could we, while confessing such kind of holy
guardianship, believe in a tradition denied by the guardian himself? And
as long as he (Ali) was the wakeful guard of the divine Sharia**[3]** so
his  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.1 p.47-48 and vol.3 p.15.  
 **[2]** Ibn Abul Hadeed said in his book Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.1
p.46: “we believe undoubtedly that Ali was the Prophet’s guardian,
although some ones, whom we consider as resistants, opposed that”.  
 **[3]** Refer to the Prophet’s saying: “Ali is with the Quran and the
Quran is with Ali. They will not separate until they came to me at the
pond (in Paradise)”. Refer to al-Mu’jam as-Sagheer by at-Tabarani. The
Prophet (s) chose Ali among all his companions and relatives in
entrusting him with seventeen decrees that he did not entrust any one
with other than Ali. The Prophet (s) said: “Ali is

opinion had to be obeyed in every matter as an indisputable decree
because he was the most aware of what the Prophet (s) had recommended
and entrusted him with. And if Ali was the guardian of the Prophet’s
patrimonies and affairs, so what would be the meaning of plundering the
Prophet’s patrimonies by the caliph whereas the Prophet’s guardian was
available and he was more aware of their verdict and legal fate?

**Fourth**: the nationalization of the Prophet’s inheritance was one of
the caliph’s initiatives in history. It was unprecedented in any of the
(prophets’) nations’ histories. If it was a basis followed by all, who
ruled after the prophets, it would be so famous and all the nations of
the prophets would know that.

Denying the Prophet’s ownership of Fadak by Abu Bakr-as it was shown by
some of his arguments with Fatima-had much hastiness because Fadak was
not gained as booty in war but its people gave in because of fear as it
was mentioned by all the historians;**[1]** Sunni and Shia. Each land,
whose people gave up like that (without fighting), was to be pure
property of the Prophet (s).**[2]** Allah declared in the holy Quran
that Fadak was of the Prophet (s) by saying: *(And whatever Allah
restored to His Apostle from them you did not press forward against it
any horse or a riding camel.* Quran 59:6*)* It was not proved that the
Prophet (s) had granted Fadak as charity or  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

with the truth and the truth is with Ali”. He (s) also said: “Ali is
from me and I am from him. No one is to carry out my tasks except
him…”.Refer to as-Sawa’iqul Muhriqa by ibn Hajar p.122 and ibn Assakir’s
Tareekh, vol.17 p.256-. **  
 [1]** Futooh al-Buldan by al-Balathari, p.46, ibnul Atheer’s Tareekh,
vol.2 p.321, Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.4 p.78 and ibn Hisham’s Seera,
vol.2 p.368.  
 **[2]** Tafseer al-Kashshaf by az-Zamakhshari, vol.4 p.502.

he entailed it.

**Fifth**: both of the traditions that Abu Bakr protested with in this
concern had no any evidence certifying what he wanted to prove. We have
already studied both variations of the tradition and shown that their
meanings had nothing to do with the caliph’s intent. If this is not
acceptable, let us suppose the two meanings to be equal and then no one
could be preferred to the other in order to depend on it.

2. These were the objections we already got. We add to them now a sixth
objection after supposing that the phrase (We, the prophets, do not
bequeath) is closer to denying the verdict of bequeathing than to deny
the existence of the patrimony to be inherited and to suppose the phrase
as following: (We do not bequeath what we leave as charity), which will
be in the interest of the caliph and to cancel the interpretation saying
that the charity left is not to be inherited and then to study the case
in the light of these accounts. The clearest meaning of the caliph’s
tradition, after interpreting it according to all the possibilities,
determines that the prophets were not to bequeath their patrimonies as
it was clear in his saying: (We, the prophets, do not bequeath). Let us
have a look at his saying: (We do not bequeath. What we leave is to be
charity). The pronoun refers to the plural that the verdict concerns a
group. Since the verdict in the tradition concerns not bequeathing of
the patrimony then it is clear that it relates to the group of the
prophets because there is no another group that we can think that their
patrimonies are not to transfer to their heirs. The holy Quran declared
the matter of bequeathing by the prophets. Allah, the Almighty, said
about Zachariah: *(And surely I fear my cousins after*

*me, and my wife is barren, therefore grant me from Thyself an heir, who
should inherit me and inherit from the children of Yaqoub, and make him,
my Lord, one in whom Thou art well pleased.* 19:5-6*)* The inheritance
in the verse means the inheritance of wealth because it is wealth, which
actually transfers from the bequeather to the heir but knowledge and
prophethood do not transfer in the real sense.**[1]** It is definitely
clear that knowledge does not transfer according to the theory of the
union of the apprehender and the apprehended data.**[2]** But if we
acknowledge the existential difference between them, then there is no
doubt of the abstractness of the scientific images**[3]** and that they
(the scientific images) are existing in the soul in an emanational  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.241.  
 **[2]** The concept of this theory is that the apprehended images,
which are abstract, have no material aspects except that they are
apprehended. Apprehension is the essence of these apprehended images.
Divesting these data of the apprehender means divesting the data of
their very essence. This is the sign of the existential unity. So the
graduation of the soul in the ranks of knowledge is its graduation in
the stages of the existence. Whatever the psychic existence becomes a
confirmation for a new concept; it will be increased in its essential
integration and will become of a higher rank. There is nothing at all
preventing from the union of many concepts in the existence. This is not
like the existential union of two existences or the conceptional union
of two concepts. These two unions are impossible and not like that of
the apprehender and the apprehended data.  
 **[3]** The truth is that all the ranks of knowledge and all the
apprehended images are abstract but they are different in the ranks of
abstractness. The thing apprehended by the ego will not be the very
actual thing with its material identity, even that, which is apprehended
by the sense of sight, has a way of abstractness and may be not defined
exactly by the emanation of the ray or by the impression. What was
proved about the seeing related to the science of mirrors and the
researches of physics, which interpreted the optical perception
philosophically, confirmed the thought of abstractness. We have to
acknowledge it besides imagination and mind. We have explained this ism
in our book *The Divine Belief in Islam.*

existence,**[1]** which means that it is an effect of the soul and the
one effect according to the soul-not by connection only-is rectified by
its cause and connected with it identically so it is impossible for it
to transfer to another cause. And if we supposed that the apprehended
images were symptoms and qualities existing in the apprehender
immanently, it would be impossible to transfer because of the
impossibility of the movement of the symptom from a subject to another
as it was proved by philosophy whether we thought of its abstractness or
materiality in accordance with our acknowledgement that the apprehended
images included the general aspects of the material object like the
ability of division and the likes.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** and not immanental existence, which means to be as symptoms for
the soul. Some philosophers adopted this ism in order to solve the
problem, which occurred to the researchers when they wanted to adapt the
evidences of the mental existence to what was known about science as it
was quality, which meant that if the apprehended image was quality so
what we would perceive of a human being was not essence because it was a
quality and not a human being while every human being was to be essence.
When all of the answers, which was put to solve the problem of denying
the mental existence, determining the idealism, choosing multiplicity,
considering science as symptom and the apprehended data as essence and
interpreting the essence as it was the outside independent existent and
not the mental existent failed, the later researchers became obliged to
determine that the apprehended image was of the essence and not of the
quality but the great Islamic philosopher, Sadruddeen ash-Shirazi
mentioned in his *Asfar* that it was essence in its quiddity and quality
in its presentation. We could object to him by saying that all what was
in the presentation would end to what was in the soul. Then we had to
suppose a real quality united with the image to be quality in the
presentation. Then the theory would get to one of two things; either
keeping to the multiplicity of what was there in the soul or colliding
with the first problem itself. It would be better to determine that the
image apprehended by man was to be essence and not in presentation at
all and its connection with the soul was as the connection between the
cause and effect and not the presentation with its subject.

So it is impossible for knowledge to transfer according to the
philosophical isms concerning the scientific images.

And if we consider prophethood, we will also find that it cannot be
transferred whether we interpret it according to the ism of some
philosophers to say that it is a rank of the spiritual perfection and a
degree of the virtuous human existence, to which the human essence
ascends towards the infinite perfection or we interpret it according to
the general concept understood by people that prophethood is a divine
position unlike the position of a king or a vizier and that spiritual
perfection is a condition for that divine position. Hence in the first
sense transfer cannot occur because it is the very existence of the
prophet with his personal perfections and prophethood in the other sense
is impossible to be transferred too because it is a moral matter with
its specified aspects and it is not possible for any aspect to transfer
except by the change of the individual himself into another individual.
For example the prophethood of Zachariah (S) concerned Zachariah
himself. It was not possible that it would refer to other than him for
it would not then be Zachariah’s prophethood but a new position or a new
prophethood.

In fact the initiative look at the matter determines that it is
impossible for prophethood and knowledge to transfer with no need for
prospect or lengthy discussion on the matter. Reason decides easily that
wealth is the only thing that transfers by bequeathing and not
prophethood and knowledge.

3. Someone might object that the interpretation of inheritance in
Zachariah’s speech might not refer to wealth because Yahya (Prophet
John) was

martyred during his father’s life and did not inherit his father’s
wealth. So it must be interpreted to refer to prophethood because Yahya
inherited the prophethood and that Allah responded to the prayer of his
father then. But this objection should not have to concern one
interpretation rather than the other because as Yahya did not inherit
his father’s wealth, neither did he succeed him in prophethood. The
prophethood of Yahya was not hereditary and it was not the wish of
Zachariah. Zachariah asked his God to grant him an heir inheriting him
after his death when saying according to the holy Quran: *(And surely I
fear my cousins after me)*.**[1]** He meant: (after my death). It was
clear from his saying that he wanted an heir succeeding him and not a
prophet coeval with him otherwise his fear from his cousins after his
death would remain. We have to explain the verse in a way free from
objection that the phrase *(Who should inherit me and inherit from the
children of Yaqoub.* 19:6*)* was to be an answer for his prayer. His
prayer meant: “O my God, grant me a son to inherit me!” So what he asked
his God for was realized when he got a son. Bequeathing him wealth or
prophethood was not included in what Zachariah asked his God for but it
was as a result of what he asked for in his prayer.

If we noticed the story of Zachariah in its other place of the holy
Quran, we would find that he did not ask his God but for good offspring.
Allah said: *(There did Zachariah pray to his Lord; he said: My Lord!
grant me from Thee good offspring.* Quran 3:38*)*

The best way of understanding the holy Quran is what is explained by the
Quran itself.**[2]** Hence we  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Quran 19:5. Refer to *Tafseer al-Kashshaf*, vol.3 p.4.  
 **[2]** Al-Ittiqan by as-Sayooti, vol.4 p.200.

understand from the verse that Zachariah did not ask his God but for
good offspring. The Quran gathered Zachariah’s prayer in one phrase one
time and made individual phrases at another time for each of the
offspring and his description when saying: *(…grant me from Thyself an
heir)* to show his asking for the offspring and: *(...and make him, my
Lord, one in whom Thou art well pleased)* to show that he prayed Allah
that his offspring would be good. If we gathered these two phrases, they
would refer to the same meaning of the phrase *(My Lord! grant me from
Thee good offspring)*. Then the phrase of *(inherit me)* would get out
of the prayer after comparing between the two phrases of the Quran. It
must be then as the answer of the payer.

4. According to that it was clear that the word of inheritance mentioned
in the Quranic verse was burdened with usage to mean inheriting the
prophethood because it would be the answer to the prayer if it was
inherent in what was asked for (in the prayer) and it would be realized
always or more often whenever the required thing was available. But
inheriting the prophethood was not inherent in the availability of the
offspring at all. In fact it might not happen for hundreds of millions
of people because prophethood required nonesuch qualification and great
perfection therefore prophethood with its unique loftiness could not be
put as an answer for asking Allah for a good offspring because the
proportion between the human beings and those, who were well-qualified
to undertake the divine mission, was as the proportion between the units
and the millions. But as for inheriting wealth, it could be as the
answer to Zachariah’s prayer because the offspring might live after the
father’s death at most and so inheriting

wealth could be as a result of the availability of the offspring in the
most cases. In addition to that, Zachariah himself did not think that
prophethood was inherent in his offspring nor any of the spiritual ranks
lower than prophethood, therefore he asked his God after that to make
his son be content.

5. Let us leave that away to study the subject of the inheritance in the
verse. The word *(inherit)* referred to inheriting wealth undoubtedly.
What determined this meaning for the word were two things:

The first: If Zachariah had asked his God to grant him a son to inherit
his prophethood, he would not have asked Him after that to make his son
be content because he had asked in his first prayer for something higher
than contentment.

The second: if ignoring the matter of inheritance in the story of
Zachariah mentioned in the sura of Aal Imran did not show that
inheritance was out of the prayer, it would, at least, show that the
meaning of inheritance mentioned in the story in the other place of the
Quran referred to the inheritance of wealth and not prophethood because
if Zachariah had asked his God for two things; one was to grant him a
good content son and the other thing was to make his son inherit his
prophethood, the holy Quran would not be limited to the first thing
Zachariah had asked for because it had no value in comparison with
prophethood. In order to agree with me on this, suppose that someone
asked you for a garden and a dirham and you granted him both. When you
wanted to relate the story, would you mention the dirham? I do not think
you would do that unless you were too humble. The preference of the
garden to the dirham in the account of the material values is less than
the preference of

prophethood to the goodness of the offspring in the account of the
spiritual morals. Hence the story of Zachariah mentioned in the sura of
Aal Imran, which had nothing much or little about inheritance, was as
evidence of that inheritance referring to the inheritance of wealth and
not prophethood, otherwise it would be the most important part of the
story that would not be ignored.

**Sixth**: some of the researchers noticed in the holy verse two points
interpreting inheritance as the inheritance of prophethood:

The first: Zachariah’s saying after *(inherit me)*: *(and inherit from
the children of Yaqoub)* that Yahya was not to inherit wealth from the
offspring of Yaqoub (Jacob) but he might inherit prophethood and wisdom.

The second: what Prophet Zachariah said as a preface for his prayer:
*(And surely I fear my cousins after me)* that he feared for religion
and wished it to last by the lasting of the prophethood because this was
the most suitable for the prophets to fear for and not the properties
whether they reached their heirs or not.

Our fellows (the Shia) objected to the first point by saying that
Zachariah did not ask God that his son was to inherit all the properties
of Yaqoub’s offspring but some of them. So this would not be as evidence
to their claimed interpretation.

As for the second point, it is an inference confirming the
interpretation we chose because fearing for religion and knowledge from
the cousins had no meaning because the divine mercy would not leave
people in vain without any guide. The religion and the word of Heaven
would be protected by Allah and prophethood was always granted to the
few highly distinguished people with no any fear for

being extorted or stolen. So what would Zachariah think of his God to do
if He did not grant him Yahya? Was it possible that Allah would entrust
Zachariah’s cousins with the divine mission in spite of that they were
not well qualified to undertake this divine task and they did not
deserve this honor? Or did he think that Allah would ignore the affairs
of His people so that they would have the evidence to protest against
Him (on the Day of Punishment)? Neither this nor that would be possible
for any prophet to think of. Zachariah was afraid of his cousins to
seize his wealth, therefore he asked his God to grant him a contented
son in order to inherit his wealth. He would not be blamed for that
because he might wish to turn his properties away from his cousins, who
would spend them wrongly in the way of sin and corruption as long as
they were wicked and immoral until it was said that they were the worst
among the Israelites.

Ibn Abul Hadeed (the author of Sharh Nahjul Balagha) tried to show a
side of Zachariah’s fear for religion in two ways:

The first: according to the beliefs of the Shia when he mentioned that
the prophet’s fear for religion would not be acceptable in the Shia
point of view because people were deprived, by the absence of the
Imam,**[1]** of many mercies related to the legal matters like
punishments, Friday prayer and Eids. They (the Shia) said that people
were to be blamed for that because they themselves deprived themselves
of those mercies. So Zachariah had not to worry about changing the
religion and spoiling the legal laws because Allah had to inform of His
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The twelfth and final infallible imam, whom the Shia have been
expecting to come in order to spread justice all over the world.

mission to the people by the prophet and if the people changed the
religion and spoiled the divine verdicts, Allah would not have to keep
the religion because people themselves deprived themselves of the
mercies.**[1]**

I would like to record my note about this speech before I move to the
second point. I say: the worry about the desistance of prophethood,
according to the beliefs of the Shia, would be true if it arose from the
possibility of that people might spoil their religion in a way that they
would not deserve mercies as it was during the absence of the expected
Imam (s) and not because there were no ones well qualified for
prophethood when the people were in need of it. In this case sending a
prophet or appointing someone replacing him would be necessary for Allah
to do because He Himself promised to spread mercy among His people. So
the insufficiency of the cousins to gain the divine position would not
lead Zachariah to expect the desistance of prophethood and the
effacement of the religious properties if people deserved the divine
mercies. And if people did not deserve the divine mercies, it would be
possible for the connection between the Heaven and the earth to be cut
whether the cousins (of Zachariah) were good or bad and whether Allah
granted Zachariah a son or let him remain sterile. The Quranic verse
showed that the cause, which made Zachariah worry, was the corruption of
his cousins and not the corruption of people.

The second: by interpreting the word *(mawali)***[2]** mentioned in the
verse to mean emirs. It would  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.257.  
 **[2]** *Mawali* is the word, which was interpreted as cousins.

mean that Zachariah feared that the emirs and the rulers after his death
might spoil the religion, therefore he asked Allah for a son, who was to
be granted prophethood and knowledge in order to preserve the
religion.**[1]**

We are to ask about those rulers, whom Zachariah feared that they might
spoil the religion. Were they the prophets, who would succeed him, or
the rulers, who had nothing to do with the Heaven? If they were the
prophets, so there would be no need for fear because they would have
been infallible prophets but if they were the kings, they might have
been a threat to religion. But we should notice if the existence of the
prophet would prevent them from playing with the Sharia and
disrespecting the divine laws or not. If the existence of the prophet
would suffice to safeguard the Sharia and keep its dignity, then why did
Zachariah fear those emirs whereas the divine mercy promised to keep the
continuity of prophethood throughout the human history and to keep the
eternality of the connection between the Heaven and the earth as long as
the earth would be ready to receive the divine instruction? And if the
existence of the prophet was not sufficient to safeguard the religion,
so the existence of Zachariah’s son, who was to inherit the prophethood,
would not remove fearing the rulers as long as the prophet would be
unable to stand against the ruling power and as long as the emirs would
be of the trickers whereas the verse showed that Zachariah’s fear would
be removed if he was granted a contented son to inherit him.

The result of this research showed that the inheritance mentioned in the
verse referred to the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.257-258.

inheritance of wealth undoubtedly. It showed that some prophets
bequeathed while the tradition of Abu Bakr determined that all the
prophets did not bequeath.

The Quranic verse and Abu Bakr’s tradition were contradicted and
whatever contradicted**[1]** the holy Quran must be null.

We were not to exclude Zachariah from the rest of the prophets because
the tradition of Abu Bakr did not accept such exclusion or differentiate
between Zachariah and the others. If prophethood required not
bequeathing so all the prophets would not bequeath. We do not think that
the prophethood of Zachariah had a special aspect that made him bequeath
rather than the rest of the prophets. What was the guilt of Zachariah,
or what was his virtue that gave him this excellence? Then why do we
have to burden the word (prophets) mentioned in the tradition with more
than its actual meaning? In any case it is just an interpretation so why
do we interpret the tradition as the Prophet’s patrimony was not to be
inherited and then to be obliged to say that Prophet Muhammad (s) meant
by (the prophets) other than Zachariah? Let us take the other
interpretation to understand the tradition as that the prophets had
nothing of value to bequeath and so we will keep the truth that the
wording of the tradition refers to.

If the tradition actually had the meaning that Abu Bakr intended to
show, it would contradict the holy Quran and then it must be brushed
aside. The matter had no any way to consider the tradition as  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Prophet Muhammad (s) said: “Whatever contradicts the Book of
Allah, you are to brush aside,… or to leave aside…” Refer to Ussool
al-Kafi by al-Kulayni, vol.1 p.55 and ar-Radd ala Siyer al-Awza’ei by
Yousuf al-Ansari p.25.

legal evidence about the subject of bequeathing and so the caliph did
not have any answer to defend himself against his opponent, who
protested with the previous Quranic verse, and no one of his companions
succeeded in defending him. It was so because they realized that the
tradition, which justified the rulers’ situation, contradicted the
Quranic verse.

It could not be possible to justify the caliph’s situation by saying
that he chose one of the contradicted forms of the tradition and carried
it out as some Muslim jurisprudents thought, because whatever
contradicted the holy Quran would definitely be null.

The matter of donation
----------------------

It was the dispute between the caliph and Fatima (s) when she argued
that the Prophet (s) had donated Fadak to her. Imam Ali and Umm Aymen
witnessed of that but the caliph refused Fatima’s claim**[1]** and was
not satisfied with these two witnesses and asked her to bring two men or
a man and two women as witnesses.

1. The first thing that we would blame Abu Bakr for was his situation in
this case as a ruler in spite of that his caliphate did not gain the
legal quality until that day at least.**[2]** But now we do not want to
study this blame because such argument will take us to wider horizons.

2. The second note about the subject is that if Fadak was with Fatima,
then she would not have to have any evidence. There were two things
about this  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.216.  
 **[2]** After ten days of the caliphate that yet the Hashimites and
some of the great companions did not pay homage to Abu Bakr to be the
legal caliph. Refer to at-Tabari’s Tareekh, vol.2 p.233.

note:

First: in whose possession Fadak was? Was it really in Fatima’s
possession? We could understand that from the letter of Imam Ali to
Othman bin Hunayf: “Yes, Fadak (only) was in our possession away from
all what were under the heaven but some *people* became stingy with it
and others turned away from it”.**[1]** This means that Fadak was in the
Prophet’s family’s possession. This was confirmed by the traditions of
the Shia.

The meaning of Imam Ali’s speech showed that Fadak was in Imam Ali and
Fatima’s possession and it could not be interpreted as it was in the
Prophet’s possession; first because the Prophet’s possession meant the
Prophet’s family’s possession and second because the Prophet had his own
properties other than Fadak.

Second: was possession as evidence of ownership? Yes, the Muslims agreed
on this unanimously.**[2]** If it was not so, the social system of the
human life would be disordered.

Someone might object by saying that if Fadak was in Fatima’s possession,
so why she did not protest with this evidence. It would suffice for her
than to claim it was donated to her and to protest with the Quranic
verses of the inheritance. In the documents of the Shia about this case
there was an answer to this objection for they mentioned the protest of
the Prophet’s family against the caliph by means of the very evidence
but we did not want to  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.208.  
 **[2]** Refer to al-Qawa’id al-Fiqhiyya by Hassan al-Bajnawardi, vol.1
p.113, al-Muhalla by ibn Hazm, vol.9 p.436, al-Muhaththab by ash-Shirazi
ash-Safi’ee, vol.2 p.312, al-Furooq by al-Qirafi al-Maliki, vol.4 p.78
and Tahreer al-Majalla by sheikh Muammad Hussayn Kashif al-Ghita’, vol.4
p.150.

study the case in the light of something of that.

But we should notice that Fadak was a very wide land and was not like
small properties, whose possession would be known easily. If we supposed
that Fadak was in Fatima’s possession and it was undertaken by her
agent, who managed it, so who would know this other than the agent?

We knew well that Fadak was not near Medina so that the people of Medina
would know about its affairs or the person, who managed it. It was at a
distance of some days from Medina and it was a Jewish village. **[1]**
It was not in the Islamic environment to be known among the Muslims that
it was in Fatima’s possession.

Fatima thought if she claimed her possession of Fadak that the caliph
would ask her for evidence as he asked her about the donation as long as
he-in her opinion-was controlled by a prevailing power of his tendency
that did not make him confess anything.

It was easy for the (whale) on that day to swallow Fatima’s agent of
Fadak and anyone else, who knew the truth, as it swallowed Abu Sa’eed
al-Khidri and prevented him from telling the truth of the donation of
Fadak whereas he told of it after that as it was mentioned in the Sunni
and Shia books, or it was easy for the jinn to kill as they killed Sa’d
bin Obada and relieved the caliph Omar**[2]** from him, or to accuse
anyone of being apostate if he refused to give the zakat to the caliph
as those, who refused to give the zakat of the Muslims to the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Futooh al-Buldan by al-Balathari, p.42-43.  
 **[2]** The tradition showed clearly that Omar sent a messenger to kill
Sa’d if he did not pay homage (to Omar) and when Sa’d refused to pay
homage, the messenger killed him. (They claimed that the jinn had killed
him). Refer to al-Iqd al-Fareed by ibn Abd Rabbih, vol.4 p.247.

caliph Abu Bakr, were accused.**[1]**

3. Let us leave this argument aside to get to the basic matter, which
is: did Abu Bakr believe in the infallibility of Fatima and the verse of
purification, which purified the Prophet’s family, among which was
Fatima, from any sin or not?

We do not want to discuss in details the concept of infallibility or to
prove it for Fatima by the verse of purification because the books of
the Shia about the virtues of the Prophet’s family suffice the task. We
do not doubt that the caliph was aware of that because his daughter
Aa’isha herself often narrated that the verse of purification concerned
Fatima, her husband and her two sons**[2]** as it was declared by the
Sunni and Shia books of Hadith. Whenever the Prophet (s) went to the
mosque to offer the Fajr**[3]** prayer, after the revelation of this
verse, he passed by Fatima’s house and called out: “O people of the
house, it is the (time for) prayer. *(Allah only desires to keep away
the uncleanness from you, O people of the House! and to purify you a
(thorough) purifying.* Quran 33:33*)”* He kept on that for six
months.**[4]**

So why did Abu Bakr ask Fatima for evidence? Did the claim, whose
truthfulness was certified, need evidence?

Those, who objected to Abu Bakr, said: “Evidence is needed to confirm
the truthfulness of the claimant, but being certain (of the claimant’s
truthfulness) is firmer (than the evidence). If it is necessary to judge
for the one, who has true  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** As in the story of Malik bin Nuwayra. Refer to at-Tabari’s
Tareekh, vol.2 p.273 and the edited one, vol.2 p.28.  
 **[2]** Muslim’s Sahih, vol.3 p.331, al-Mustadrak, vol.3 p.159 and
at-Taj aj-Jami’ lil Ussool by Mansoor Ali Nassif, vol.3 p.333.  
 **[3]** The dawn.  
 **[4]** Ahmad’s Musnad, vol.3 p.295, al-Mustadrak, vol.3 p.172.

evidence, it must be judged for the one, whose truthfulness is known by
the judge.”

There is a weakness in this justification because the comparison did not
occur between the evidence and the certainty of the judge in addition to
the actual reality, but it considered the effect of each of them on the
judge and the result was that knowledge was to be firmer than the
evidence because certainty was firmer than supposition. The comparison
had to regard the nearest of the two to the truth that was to be
regarded in every dispute. The knowledge of the judge, in this kind of
comparison, was not to be preferred to the evidence because a judge
might mistake as evidence might mistake. Both of them were equal in the
regard of falling into error.

But there was something in the matter that the researchers ignored. It
was impossible for the caliph’s knowledge about Fatima’s
truthfulness**[1]** to be but the truth because the reason behind his
knowledge of her truthfulness was not of those reasons that might lead
to errors or mistakes but it was the holy Quran, which declared her
infallibility.**[2]** In the light of this quality of knowing Fatima’s
truthfulness, we could determine that the evidence, even if it was the
legal proof, on which the judgment would depend, might fall into error.
But the knowledge that could never fall into error, because of the
witness of Allah, was worthier to be relied on when judging.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to Abu Bakr’s saying about the truthfulness of Fatima in
Sharh Nahjul Balagha, vol.16 p.216.  
 **[2]** As in the verse: *(Allah only desires to keep away the
uncleanness from you, O people of the House! and to purify you a
(thorough) purifying)* 33:33.Refer to al-Mustadrak, vol.3 p.160-161 and
Muslim’s Sahih, vol.5 p.37.

In another way we say: if the holy Quran had declared Fatima’s ownership
of Fadak, then the matter would not have had any way of doubting or
hesitating for any Muslim to judge. It was much clear that declaring the
infallibility of Fatima by the holy Quran would strongly confirm her
claim about her donation because the infallible would never lie and
whenever claiming, the claim was definitely true. There would be no
difference between determining the infallibility and determining the
donation as related to the case, except that the ownership of Fadak by
Fatima (s) was the literary meaning of the second text (the tradition)
and the perceived concept of the first text (the verse) via its literary
conception.

4. None 0f the Muslims ever doubted about Fatima’s truthfulness and no
one ever accused her of fabricating but the dispute arose between the
disputers that whether knowing the truthfulness of the claim would be
sufficient evidence for judgment or not. Let us put the verse of
purification aside for a moment and suppose that Abu Bakr was like
anyone of the other Muslims and then his knowledge of Fatima’s
truthfulness did not have the quality we referred to in the previous
point but it was as the rest of thoughts, which would be liable to
errors and mistakes.

But nevertheless the ruler might judge according to his knowledge**[1]**
or he might depend on the evidence as it was mentioned in the holy
Quran. Allah said: *(..and that when you judge between people you judge
with justice.* 4:58*)* and: *(And of those whom We have created are a
people who guide with the truth and*  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** l-Bayhaqi’s Sunan, vol.10 p.142, Tanqeeh al-Adilleh by Muhammad
Reza al-Ha’iri and Bidayet al-Mujtahid by ibn Rushd, vol.2 p.465.

*thereby they do justice.* 7:181*),* which means that they judge with
justice.

There are two notes about truth and justice:

First: truth and justice as an actual and real matter.

Second: truth and justice according to the judicial criteria. So
judgment according to the evidence is right and just in the light of
this note even if it fails in error. In opposition to that, judgment
according to the witness of a sinner (fasiq) is neither right nor just
even if the sinner is truthful in his saying.

If the two previous verses referred to the first meaning of truth and
justice then they would show that judgment according to the actual
reality was to be true with no need to the evidence. If the ruler found
someone’s ownership of a certain property, he could judge of that
because he thought it was the fixed truth according to the actual
reality. His judgment for that person of being the owner of that
property would be the confirmation-in his opinion-of judgment with truth
and justice that Allah had ordered to be followed. But if we interpreted
the two verses according to the second meaning that was according to the
judicial criteria hence the two verses could not be of any use in this
concern because they did not prove-then-that any judgment would be right
and according to the criteria! And which judgment would be but so?

It was clear that the concept understood from the verses referred to the
first meaning and specially the word *truth* because whatever was
described by this word would be understood that that thing was a fixed
true matter. So to judge with truth was as determining a fixed fact. The
form of the first verse showed that. It included judgment

with justice. It was clear that the application of the Islamic rules in
the case of a dispute would not need a legal order because their very
legislation as law for judgment meant that they must be applied. And so
the order of keeping to the law would not be but to remind and to warn
and had nothing to do with the essence of the matter. The order of
judging according to the actual facts, whether they had evidence and
witness or not, was a part of the essence of the matter because it was a
new determination showing that the reality was the basis of the Islamic
judgment and the axis, around which it should turn without being limited
to formalities and special evidences.**[1]**

Then the two verses were considered as evidence of respecting the
judge’s knowledge in the Islamic judicial laws.**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** If we want to translate this meaning into the scientific
language we say: according to the second account the order is a guiding
order (optional) and there is no possibility for the obligatory order
because the thing ordered to be followed is itself enough to be an
incentive to acting. Regarding the order as obligatory determines to
turn the word (justice) to the second meaning because there is a
possibility for the order to be obligatory by following the reality if
the evidence confirms it and a possibility of following the order at
all.  I apologize for not using the scientific idioms concerning logic,
philosophy, jurisprudence and fundamentals of Islam unless I am obliged
to do that because I try to make the research be understood by the
ordinary readers.  
 **[2]** If it was said that the tradition narrated by the Prophet’s
family about that, who judged with truth and he did not know the real
judgement that he would deserve punishment and then it showed that
judgement did not rely on the actual reality. Hence the matter would
turn between casting the tradition away from showing not executing the
judgement and considering the punishment to be unjustified and between
considering the two verses to refer to the second meaning. I would say:
no one of these two interpretations was true but the tradition kept to
the verses in regard to the judge’s knowledge. And so the subject of the
judgement would be combined of the actual reality and the knowledge of
it or in other

In addition to that Abu Bakr himself often was satisfied with claims
without any evidence. It was mentioned in al-Bukhari’s Sahih**[1]** that
when the Prophet (s) died, Abu Bakr received a sum of money from al-Ala’
bin al-Hadhrami. Abu Bakr announced: “Whoever the Prophet (s) was in
debt for or that the Prophet had promised a gift, let him come to us”.
Jabir said: “The Prophet had promised to give me so and so and so…” He
extended his hand three times. Jabir said: “He (Abu Bakr) put in my hand
five hundred (either dirham or dinar) then five hundred then five
hundred”.

It was mentioned in at-Tabaqat al-Kubra by ibn Sa’d**[2]** that Abu
Sa’eed al-Khidry had said: “I heard the caller of Abu Bakr, when he
received a sum of money from Bahrain calling in Medina: “Let whoever the
Prophet (s) had promised to gift, come to us”. Many men came to him and
he gave them money. Abu Basheer al-Maziny came to Abu Bakr and said:
“The Prophet (s) said to me: O Abu Basheer, come to us if we get
something (of money)”. Abu Bakr gave him two or three handfuls. After
counting them they found that they were one thousand and four hundred
dirhams”.

If Abu Bakr did not ask anyone of the companions about any evidence so
why did he ask Fatima for evidence regarding her gift?

Did the judicial system apply to Fatima alone or were there special
political circumstances behind all that?

It was really odd to accept a companion’s claim of being promised by the
Prophet (s) to be given a sum of money and to deny the claim of Fatima,
the  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

words it would be the result of the actual reality. **  
 [1]** Vol.2 p.953.  
 **[2]** vol.2 p.318.

Prophet’s daughter, just because she did not find evidence to prove what
she claimed.

And if knowing the truthfulness of the claimant permitted to give him
what he claimed, was not Fatima more deserving of not being suspected by
he, who did not suspect Jabir or Abu Basheer of lying?

If the caliph did not give those, who claimed that the Prophet had
promised them of what they asked for according to their claim but
according to the possibility of their truthfulness-and the imam had the
right to give anyone any sum-then why would not he do the same with the
case of Fadak?

Thus the caliph fulfilled the Prophet’s promises, which had no evidence,
and ignored his (the Prophet’s) donation to his daughter, the head of
the women of the world. The question about the difference between the
debts and promises on one hand and the donation on the other remained
without an acceptable answer!

5. Let us resume our argument in a new way: that the ruler could not
judge the claim that he already knew its truthfulness if the claimant
could not find any evidence proving his claim and let us for now ignore
the result we got in the previous point to ask according to this
account:

First: What prevented Abu Bakr from witnessing to the donation of Fadak
if he had known the truthfulness of Fatima (s)? He could join his
witness to Imam Ali’s witness**[1]** and so the evidence would be
sufficient and the right would be fixed. And since he himself was the
judge, it would not annul his witness because the witness of the
judge**[2]**  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** So that the witness would be of two men, which was the legal
condition for the witness to be accepted.  
 **[2]** The witness of the judge is permissible. Refer to al-Bayhaqi’s
Sunan, vol.10 p.131.

was to be taken into account and it was not irrelevant to the legal
evidence, which would be the reference in the disputes.

Second: about the acceptable interpretation showing that the caliph
ignored the reality that was well known for him. In order to explain
this point, we had to differentiate between two things that confused the
researchers, who studied the case.

One: it was to judge for the claimant what she claimed.

The other: it was to carry out the effects of the actual reality.

If we supposed that the first was limited to the evidence, the other
would be obligatory because it was not a judgment to be bound to its
limits. If someone knew that his house belonged to another and he handed
it over to him, this would not be a confession of his ownership but it
would be carrying out the judgments determined by the law. Also if
someone claimed before the judge that the house, which was in his
possession, was his own then the judge and anyone of the Muslims had to
consider that house as any of the other properties of that claimant.
This did not mean that the judge judged that the house was the
claimant’s property according to the principle of the possession of the
hand**[1]** or being under one’s control. The Muslims got themselves to
follow this judgment. In fact even if there was no judge among them,
they must keep to that. Neither the controlling of a property nor the
possession of the hand were among the criteria of judgment in the Sharia
but they made it necessary to apply the judgments of the actual reality.
 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** The principle of the hand means proving the ownership by the
hand, which means the full control over that certain property.

The difference between the judgment of the judge about someone’s
ownership, or his sinfulness or any of the other affairs, which the
judge’s authority held, and between the application of the effects of
these matters was that judgment decided the dispute that was to be
considered as an excellence of the judgment. It meant that if the judge
pronounced a judgment, it would be prohibited for all the Muslims to
annul it and it would be obeyed without looking for any other excuse but
to the very judgment.

But as for the judge’s application of the effects of the ownership
without judgment, would not have that regard and not every Muslim had to
follow it and to carry out those effects except if he (any Muslim) got
the knowledge of that as what the judge got.

The result: if the caliph knew of Fatima’s ownership of Fadak, it would
be compulsory for him not to make use of it in any way she disliked and
he was not to extort it from her whether it was permissible for him to
judge according to his knowledge or not. There was no any other disputer
in the case, who would dispute Fatima about Fadak, in order to be asked
to swear and then he would deserve it if he swore because the property
that Fatima asked for was either hers or the Muslims’.

We assume that Abu Bakr was the legal caliph of the Muslims at that
time; therefore he would be their guardian, who was to be responsible to
guard their rights and properties. If Fatima was truthful according to
his opinion and there was no one to litigate her, then the caliph had no
right to extort Fadak from her. Deciding the case according to the
evidence only prohibited the judgment and would not permit seizing the
property from its owner.

Then the impermissibility of a judgment decided by a judge according to
his own knowledge**[1]** would not commute the punishment and would not
take the caliph out of the test successfully.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** Refer to al-Bayhaqi’s Sunan, vol.10 p.143-144.
