Reference Books
===============

*A’lam an-Nissa’* by Omar Reza Kahala, ar-Rissala Establishment-Beirut,
tenth edition 1412 AH.

*Ad-Durr al-Manthoor fit-Tafseer bil-Ma’thoor* by Jalaluddeen
as-Sayooti, al-Maymaniyya Press-Egypt 1314 AH.

*Al-Bidayeh wen Nihayeh* by Isma’eel bin Katheer ad-Damashqi, Dar
Sadir-Beirut.

*Al-Imama wes-Siyassa* by Ibn Qutayba Abdullah bin Muslim Abu Muhammad
ad-Daynouri, last edition-Cairo-Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabi Press 1969
A.D.

*Al-Iqd al-Fareed* by ibn Abd Rabbih al-Andalussi, Dar al-Hilal Library,
first edition 1986.

*Al-Itqan fee Oloom al-Quran* by Jalaluddeen as-Sayooti, edited by Dr.
Muhammad Abul Fadhl Ibrahim, the general Egyptian institution of books
1975 A.D.

*Al-Kamil fit-Tareekh* by ibnul Atheer, Dar Sadir-Beirut 1399 AH.

*Al-Kashshaf* by Jarullah Mahmood az-Zamakhshari, checked by Mustafa
Hussayn, Dar al-Kitab al-Arabi, second edition-Beirut.

*Al-Manaqib* by Ahmad bin Muhammad al-Makki al-Khawarizmi, edited by
al-Mahmoodi, Qum.

*Al-Milel wen Nihel* by Abul Fat~h Muhammad bin Abdul Kareem
ash-Shahristani, Anglo-Egyptian Library-Cairo.

*Al-Missbah al-Muneer* by al-Fayyoomi, Darul Hijra-Qum.

*Al-Muraja’at* by Abdul Hussayn Sharafuddeen,

edited by Hussayn ar-Radhy, Islamic Book House.

*Al-Mustadrak alas-Sahihayn* by al-Hakim an-Nayssaboori, edited by
Mustafa Abdul Qadir Ata, the Scientific Books House, first
edition-Beirut.

*As-Saqeefa wel Khilafa* by Abdul Fattah Abdul Maqsood, Dar
Ghareeb-Cairo.

*As-Sawa’qul Muhriqa* by Ahmad bin Hajar al-Haytami, al-Qahira Library,
second edition 1385 AH and a new edition-Beirut.

*As-Seera al-Halabiyya* by Ali bin Burhanuddeen al-Halabi ash-Shafi’e,
Islamic Library-Beirut.

*As-Seera an-Nabawiya* by ibn Hisham, edited by Mustafa as-Saqqa and
others, Dar al-Kunooz al-Adabiyya and Dar Ihya’uat-Turath
al-Arabi-Beirut.

*As-Sunan al-Kubra* by Abu Bakr Ahmad bin al-Hussayn bin Ali al-Bayhaqi,
Dar al-Fikr.

*At-Tabaqat al-Kubra* by Muhammad bin Sa’d, Dar Beirut 1985 A.D. and Dar
Sadir.

*At-Tafseer al-Kabeer* by Imam Fakhruddeen ar-Razi, the Scientific Books
House-Tehran, third edition.

***At****-Taj aj-Jami’ lil Ossool fee Ahadeeth ar-Rassool* by sheikh
Mansoor Ali Nassif, one of al-Azhar’s ulama, Dar Ihya’ at-Turath
al-Arabi, third edition-Istanbul 1962.

*Balaghat an-Nissa’* by Abul Fadhl Ahmad bin Abu Tahir Tayfoor,
ash-Shareef ar-Radhiy Publications-Qum-Iran.

*Futooh al-Buldan* by Ahmad bin Yahya bin Jabir al-Balathari, with
comment and review of Razwan Muhammad Razwan, the Scientific Books
House-Beirut 1978.

*Hilyatul Awliya’* by Abu Na’eem al-Isfahani, the Arabic Book House,
fifth edition-Beirut 1407 AH.

*Kifayatut Talib* by Muhammad bin Yousuf al-Kanji ash-Shafi’e, Dar Ihya’
Turath Ahlul Bayt-Tehran

1404 AH.

*Ma’arijul Ossool* by al-Muhaqqiq al-Hilli, Aalul Bayt
Establishment-Qum.

*Mu’jamul Buldan* by Yaqoot al-Hamawi, Dar Ihya’ut Turath-Beirut 1399
AH.

*Mukhtassar Tareekh ibn Assakir* by ibn Mandhoor al-Afreeqi (the author
of *Lissanul Arab),* edited by Ibrahim Salih, Dar al-Fikr-Damascus 1989.

*Murooj ath-Thahab* by al-Mass’oodi, edited by Abdul Ameer Muhanna,
al-A’lami Establishment-Beirut and also the one edited by Charles
Bla-Beirut 1970.

*Musnad of Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal* Dar Sadir-Beirut and Dar al-Fikr’s
edition.

*Ossool al-Kafi* by Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Ya’qoob al-Kulayni ar-Razi,
edited by sheikh al-Aamuli, the Islamic Library-the Islamic Press 1388
AH.

*Sahih al-Bukhari* by Muhammad bin Isma’eel al-Bukhari, Dar at-Tiba’a
al-Aamira-Istanbul 1315 AH and Dar al-Qalam, first edition-Beirut 1987
A.D.

*Sahih at-Tarmithi* by Abu Eessa Ali bin Eessa at-Tarmithi, edited by
Kamal al-Hoot, Dar al-Fikr-Beirut and Dar Ihya’ut Turath
al-Arabi-Beirut.

*Sahih Muslim* by Muslim bin al-Hussayn al-Qushayri, edited by Muhammad
Fu’ad Abdul Baqi, Dar Ihya’ut Turath al-Arabi-second edition 1978.

*Sahih Sunan al-Mustafa (Sunan Abu Dawood)* by Abu Dawood, Dar al-Kitab
al-Arabi-Beirut.

*Sharh Nahjul Balagha* by ibn Abul Hadeed al-Mu’tazili, an edition
edited by Muhammad Abul Fadhl Ibrahim, Dar Ihya’ al-Kutub
al-Arabiyya-Egypt and an old edition, not edited.

*Sunan ad-Darimi* by Abu Muhammad Abdullah bin Abdur Rahman bin Bihram
ad-Darimi, Dar al-Fikr-

Cairo 1398 AH.

*Sunan ibn Maja* by al-Qazweeni, edited by Muhammad Fu’ad Abdul Baqi,
Dar al-Fikr-Beirut.

*Tareekh al-Khulafa’* by Jalaluddeen as-Sayooti, edited by Muhammad
Muhyiddeen Abdul Hameed, as-Shareef ar-Radhiy Publications-Qum.

*Tareekh at-Tabari* by Abu Ja’far Muhammad bin Jareer at-Tabari:  
 a. the edition edited by Muhammad Abul Fadhl, Dar at-Turath-Beirut.  
 b. the first edition, al-Hussayniyya Press-Egypt.  
 c. the edition of al-Istiqama Press-Cairo 1357 AH.  
 d. the second edition of the Scientific Books * *House-Beirut 1408 AH.

*Tareekh Baghdad* by al-Khateeb al-Baghdadi, the Scientific Books House.

*Tareekh ibn Shuhna* (in the margins of *Tareekh* al-Kamil) an old
edition.

*Tathkiratul Khawass* by Sibt ibn aj-Jawzi, Ninawa New Libray-Tehran.

*Thakha’rul Oqba* by Muhibbuddeen at-Tabari, Dar al-Ma’rifa-Beirut.
