Section One: Rulings of the Sighting the New Crescent Moon
==========================================================

1. As you know, one of the following three conditions occurs at the
beginning or end of the each month: The crescent sets before the sunset;
or the crescent sets along with the sunset; or The crescent sets after
the sunset. Please clear the following matters: First, which one of the
three above-mentioned conditions would be considered the beginning of
the month according to Islamic law? Second, if we take into
consideration that these three conditions are accounted for in the
farthest places of the world using accurate calculations, is it possible
to benefit from these computations to figure out the beginning of the
month in advance, or it is necessary to observe it with the naked eye?

A: The basis of determining the beginning of the month is the crescent
that sets after sunset which can be observed before sunset in the
customary way. The astronomical calculations are not reliable unless
confidence is obtained through them.

2. If the crescent marking the beginning of Shawwal is not observed in
a city by the local people, and if the radio or television announces the
beginning of Shawwal, should the local people act upon the radio
announcement, or should they ascertain by investigating whether Shawwal
has commenced?

A: If the radio or television announcement makes them feel sure that
Shawwal has commenced, or if there is a decree by the Supreme Religious
Authority [wali al-faqih] announcing the beginning of Shawwal, then
there is no need for investigating further.

3. If it is difficult to ascertain the beginning of the month of
Ramadan, or Eid al-Fitr, because of the inability to observe the
crescent at the beginning of the month due to clouds or for some other
reason, and if the count of the month of Shaban or the month of Ramadan
did not add up to 30 days, is it permissible for us in Japan to go by
the horizon in Iran or should we rely on the regular calendar? What is
the rule?

A: If the crescent has not been ascertained by being sighted even in
the regions located at the same longitude with your city, or on the
evidence of two just witnesses, or on the basis of a decree by a
religious authority announcing the end of Ramadan, it is obligatory to
observe precaution by ascertaining the beginning of Shawwal. The
sighting of the crescent in Iran, which is to the west of Japan, cannot
be a basis regarding the beginning of Shawwal for one residing in
Japan.

4. Is the sameness of horizon (the longitude) considered to be a
condition in regards to observing the crescent?

A: It is sufficient that the crescent be sighted in the areas of the
same horizon, or nearby, or in the areas to the east.

5. What is meant by sameness of horizon?

A: When certain areas are located on the same longitude, according to
astronomy, they are said to share the same horizon.

6. If the twenty-ninth day of the month was the day of Eid al-Fitr in
Tehran and Khorasan, is it permissible for the residents of areas like
Bushehr to break their fast too, though the horizon of Tehran and
Khorasan differs from the horizon of Bushehr?

A: If the difference between the longitude of two cities is such that
the new moon cannot be seen in one of them when sighted in the other,
its sighting in the city located to the west of the other is not
sufficient for the residents of the city to the east, where the sun sets
earlier than in the city to the west, and is sufficient when the case is
the reverse.

7. If the Islamic scholars of a city differ regarding the end of
Ramadan, and one considers all of them to be just and precise in their
investigations, what is the duty of the city''s inhabitants?

A: If the difference between the two testimonies is one of
contradiction, in the sense that one of them claims the crescent to have
been sighted and the other claims that certainly it has not been
sighted, the duty of the inhabitants is to decide the matter through
other means. However, if the first group testifies to the sighting of
the new moon, but the second group does not claim to have seen it, the
inhabitants have to accept the view of the first group if they are known
o be justs. Also, the people have to follow if the Supreme Religious
Authority [hakim al-shari] issues a decree announcing the end of
Ramadan.

8. If a person who sees the new moon knows that the city''s religious
authority is not able to see the crescent for some reason, is it his
duty to inform the religious authority that he has observed the
crescent?


A: It is not his duty to do so, unless his not doing so can cause some
depravity.

9. As you know, most Islamic scholars have written in their book of
practical laws [Risalahs] that the beginning of Shawwal can be proved
only through five methods. However, announcement of the end of Ramadan
by a religious authority is not among those methods. Such being the
case, how can most of the people break their fasts when the beginning of
Shawwal has been ascertained by the major marjis? What is the duty of a
person who is not convinced of the new moon''s sighting by such means?

A: Unless a religious authority issues a decree announcing the sighting
of the new moon, the mere ascertaining of it by him is not sufficient
for others to follow him, unless they are convinced thereby of the end
of Ramadan.

10. If the Guardian of the Muslims'' affairs [Wali Amr al-Muslimeen]
issues a decree announcing the next day as Eid al-Fitr and the media
report that the crescent has been cited in certain cities, does it
determine the Eid for all the cities or only those cities and for others
on the same longitudes?

A: If the decree issued by the religious authority includes all the
cities, his decree is Islamically reliable for all of them.

11. If on the evening of Eid al-Fitr, the moon appears as a very fine
crescent, does it mean that the next day is the first of Shawwal and
that the Eid was declared by mistake? Is one required to make up [do
qada] for the last day of Ramadan?

A: The thinness or thickness of the moon and also its position in the
sky are not lawful evidence in deciding the first or second of a month.
But if it brings conviction to the person bound by religious obligation
[mukallaf], he is obliged to act in accordance with his knowledge in
this case.

12. Can the night of the full moon, which is the night before the
fourteenth of the month, be taken as a reliable basis for calculating
the first day of the month so as to determine whether the Day of Doubt
was the thirtieth of Ramadan, for example, so that whoever did not fast
on that day may have evidence concerning the necessity to make up [do
qada] for the thirtieth day of Ramadan and whoever fasted that day,
considering Ramadan to continue, may know that he is free of
obligation?

A: That which has been mentioned does not constitute a lawful evidence
for anything mentioned. However, if it brings knowledge to the person
bound by religious obligation [mukallaf], his obligation is to act in
accordance with his knowledge.

13. Is watching out for the new moon a wajib kifa''i [a duty that if
done by someone, it is ceased to be obligatory upon the others] or
something to be done as an obligatory precaution?

A: It is not Islamically a legal duty in itself.

14. What are the methods adopted to ascertain about the sighting of the
crescent of the beginning and end of Ramadan?

A: Deciding the beginning of any lunar month is only possible through
one of the following methods: sighting the new moon by the person bound
by religious obligation [mukallaf] himself; the testimony of two just
witnesses to that effect; numerous reports that bring conviction that
the moon has been sighted; completion of 30 days since the month''s
beginning; or the decree of a religious authority.

15. Suppose it is permissible to follow certain government''s
announcement about the sighting of the crescent which could act as a
scientific standard for other countries, then, is it necessary for it to
be an Islamic government in order to ascertain that the moon has really
been sighted, or can one accept it even from a tyrannical government?

A: The criterion in this regard is the person''s assurance that the new
moon has been sighted in the area where its sighting is sufficient in
relation to the person bound by religious obligation [mukallaf].

16- If the crescent is seen in one country, would the sighting become
generalized for all other countries, especially regarding the crescent
of the Holy month of Ramadan?

A: It would become generalized for neighboring countries or these
countries in which sunset occurs later i.e. to the west of that country.
17- If one saw the crescent before the zawal time, would this day of
sighting be considered to be from the coming month?

A: The mere sighting of the crescent during the day, even though before
the zawal time, is not a shari evidence that this day belongs to the
coming month. However, if this sighting has made one certain that this
day belongs to the coming month, the ruling of the coming month would be
applied to it.

18- Is the presence of the lunar halo an evidence that it is the
crescent of the second night?

A: The lunar halo is not a shari evidence that the crescent is of the
second night.

19- What is the ruling regarding the prisoner or the captive who could
not become certain about the beginning of the holy month of Ramadan?

A: If they suspect that Ramadan had begun, they are obliged to act
according to this suspicion. Otherwise, they are permitted to delay
their sawm until the certainty is there that their sawm occurred either
during or after Ramadan and not before it.

20- Is the delay of the setting of the crescent moon after the evening
twilight an evidence that it is of the second night?

A: The setting after the evening twilight would not prove this.

21- If one had broken his fast and then it is appeared that the
crescent had been sighted through one of the legally accepted methods,
is he obliged to abstain from food for the remaining of the day?

A: He is obliged to abstain from food for the remaining of the day from
the moral aspect.

22- Is the sighting of the new crescent through a binoculars or
telescope or the like is sufficient?

A: The sighting of the new crescent with these means is also reliable
and its ruling does not differ from that of the naked eye since the
standard is to say it has been by eyes. However, computerized
photographing of the crescent moon or the like which could not be
considered as real sighting is problematic.


