Situations in Which Only Qada (not Kaffarah) Is Obligatory
==========================================================

33- Is kaffarah obligatory for a person who had a nocturnal seminal
emission and he slept the second sleep until the fajr time while he was
used to waking up before?

A: In the given question only qada is obligatory and he is not obliged
to pay the kaffarah.

34- If a saim had invalidated his sawm by showing the act of, or with
the intention of, breaking the sawm (e.g. he intended to neglect the
sawm of that day) and he did not take any thing, or do any practice,
that would break the fast, then is kaffarah obligatory in addition to
the qada? A: It is sufficient to do qada only.

35- If the saim had taken something which would break the fast before
paying attention to the time of fajr and later it appeared that the fajr
had already arrived and he had the power to pay attention to it, then
what is the ruling?

A: In the given question, only qada is obligatory.

36- If a saim had eaten something depending on someone who told him
that it was still night while the fajr had already arrived, then would
kaffarah rest upon him in the given question?

A: There is no kaffarah upon him.

37- If a saim had broken his sawm before the time of maghrib due to the
darkness which he suspected to be maghrib although there were no clouds
or other things in the sky, then what is ruling of his sawm?

A: He is obliged to do qada and kaffarah, as well, unless he had broken
the fast because he was certain that the maghrib had arrived, in such a
case only qada would rest upon him.

38- If 2 people, or one person, just had told the saim that maghrib had
arrived because they were certain about it, and he broke his fast
depending on this and it appeared later that maghrib had not arrived
yet. What is the ruling of this?

A: There is nothing upon him (neither qada nor kaffarah) in the given
question.

39- A mukallaf upon whom the debt of an obligatory sawm is resting
(like qada of Ramadan or something else) and he wanted to fast a
mustahabb sawm. Would this sawm be correct?

A: Sawm al-mustahabb would not be acceptable from those upon whom the
debt of an obligatory [wajib] sawm rests like the qada of Ramadan,
kaffarah, etc. Then, if he fasts it and then remembered during the day,
his sawm would be considered void and if this was before zawal, he could
shift to the niyyah of qada, and his sawm would be correct.

40- If a mukallaf who is ignorant about the ruling, had fasted during
his journey, what is the ruling of his fasting?

A: Sawm during a journey is incorrect.

41- If an elderly man or woman were unable to fast or it was difficult
for them, are they allowed to break the fast?

A: If they were unable to fast, they are allowed to break the fast and
nothing would be upon them, while if the sawm was difficult for them,
then they should pay kaffarah of one mudd for each day.

42- What is the kaffarah for every elderly man and woman and those with
parching thirst?

A: For each day they should pay one mudd of food only in cases where if
the sawm was difficult for them and not if they were unable to fast. 43-
Is one, who was unintentionally unconscious, obliged to do qada of the
missed sawm during the period of unconsciousness?

A: There is no qada upon him for the missed sawm during
unconsciousness.

44- Should a person who was originally a non-believer (kafir), do qada
of the missed sawm during his non-belief?

A: There is no qada upon him after he had converted to Islam.

45- Is the Sunni obliged to do qada of his previous sawm when he
becomes Shiite?

A: If he was observing his sawm according to the rulings of his
previous school of thought, there would no qada upon him after he had
converted, otherwise, the qada would rest upon him.

46- Is it obligatory to hasten to do qada?

A: It is not obligatory, but it is not permissible to delay it without
an excuse until the next month of Ramadan. 47- If a person, who broke
his fast for an excuse, died before the end of the month of Ramadan, is
it obligatory to do qada on his behalf? A: In the given question, doing
qada on his behalf is not obligatory.

48- If a person had broken his sawm in the month of Ramadan due to an
excuse and then the excuse continued to the next Ramadan, what is the
ruling?

A: If the excuse was a disease which continued till the next Ramadan,
the qada would fall from his debt and he should pay the kaffarah of a
mudd for each day. And if the excuse was not a disease, whether the
delaying of doing qada was due to an illness or another excuse, there
would be nothing upon him other than observing qada.

49- What it would be the consequences if one had delayed doing qada
till the next month of Ramadan?

A: If the delaying did not have an excuse, he is obliged to pay the
kaffarah of one mudd of food for each day in addition to the qada.

50- Would the kaffarah [fediyah] be repeated with the repetition of the
delay?

A: It would not be repeated.

51- Is it permissible to break the fast before zawal in the sawm of the
qada of the month of Ramadan?

A: It is permissible if the time is sufficient.

52- Is it obligatory for the oldest son to do qada on behalf of his
dead parents regarding the sawm days they had missed?

A: He is obliged to do the qada of those days of the qada which was
obligatory on his parents.

53- Is it permissible to pay the kaffarah of several days of Ramadan to
one needy person?

A: There is no objection in doing so.

54- We are a great number of those who remained on the taqlid of imam
Khomeini (q.) and who refer to you in the new issues and we are waiting
for your permission to deviate to your taqlid completely. There is
another group of those who follow Sayyid Khu''i and Ayatullah Araki, and
all of us are mujahidin in the army corps of Badr.

When we were under the corrupt and oppressive regime of Iraq, we had
missed the sawm of the month of Ramadan for a period ranging
approximately, from 5 to 15 months due to ignorance and harassment on
the side of the regime especially for those involved in official, namely
military, jobs, and it seems that we have to do qada and pay kaffarah.
Some of us had finished their qada and some others were still doing it
but the problem is with paying the kaffarah because we could not pay the
kaffarah of 15 or more months due to our economic conditions and low
income. So, is there a way to escape the payment of kaffarah?

A: For the kaffarah related to the intentional breaking of the sawm of
Ramadan, if a person is unable to fulfill its 3 options (i.e. releasing
a slave, a sawm of 60 days and the feeding of 60 needy persons), he
could suffice with paying alms [sadaqah] of any amount he could afford
and in case he could not, he should ask Allah for forgiveness.

55- One had attained puberty but he was ignorant of his obligations
regarding ghusl al-janabah and its method, and 10 years had passed
before he became aware about the matter of taqlid and the obligation of
ghusl. What would be the consequences related to him regarding the qada
of sawm and salat?

A: He is obliged to do the qada of the salats he prayed in a state of
janabah and also the sawm if he had knowledge of the occurance of
janabah and the emission of semen (whether by nocturnal seminal emission
or other practices which entail its occurance) but was ignorant about
the obligation of ghusl for the junub for his salat and sawm. It is even
more likely that kaffarah would be obligatory on him if his ignorance
was due to negligence. While if he was originally ignorant about whether
janabah had happened or not and he was not aware that he was junub at
the time of fajr, then not only would kaffarah not be obligatory upon
him but even qada.

56- If one had made a nadhr to fast a certain day or to pray a certain
salat or he had made an oath of that, then he broke his oath or nadhr,
is he obliged to do qada of that sawm or salat in addition to the
kaffarah? And is there a difference between an oath and a nadhr in this
regard?

A: In breaking one''s nadhr of sawm or salat, in addition to the
kaffarah, qada is more likely to be obligatory in sawm and a
precautionary obligation with respect to salat. It is not remote, as
well, in this case, to append breaking an oath with breaking a nadhr.

57- A mukallaf was ignorant about the obligation of paying zakat
al-fitrah. Is he obliged to do qada of its payment for that period in
which he was ignorant? And how is the amount to be calculated for each
year?

A: It is based on obligatory precaution to pay and the standard be the
present price.


