Section Two: Rulings of the Day of Doubt (the Last Day of Shaban)
=================================================================

1- If the mukallaf fasted on the day of doubt with the intention that
it is Shaban, qada or nadhr and then it appeared that it was in the
month of Ramadan, then what is the ruling in this case?

A: This sawm is valid and could be considered as part of the month of
Ramadan and there is nothing upon him.

2- If the mukallaf had fasted the day of doubt with the intention of
hesitation (i.e. to say: if it is being from Shaban, it will be a
recommended (mustahabb) sawm, while if from Ramadan, it will be
obligatory), then is sawm in such a way correct?

A: His sawm is correct if he was serious in the intention that he would
fast in any way, and it is valid to be considered from Ramadan if the
day later appeared to be in Ramadan.

3- If the mukallaf had fasted the day of doubt with the intention of
the real divine command directed to him (either obligatory or
recommended), then what is the ruling about the sawm of this day?

A: His sawm is correct if he intended to do sawm in any way, and it is
valid to be considered from Ramadan if it appeared, later, that it is in
it.

4- If the mukallaf had fasted the day of doubt with the intention that
it is in Ramadan, is his sawm correct?

A: This sawm is not correct.

5- If the mukallaf intended to break fasting on the day of doubt and
then it appeared, during the day, that it is in the month of Ramadan,
then what is the ruling if:

a- He ate something?

b- It appeared after zawal and he did not eat anything?

c- It appeared before zawal and he did not eat anything?

A: In the first 2 cases he is obliged to abstain from food for the
remainder of the day, from the moral aspect, and compensate the sawm for
this day.

In the 3rd case he should intend sawm from that time and it would be
correct and valid to be considered from the month of Ramadan.

6- What is the ruling about a person who fasted the day of doubt with
the intention of being from Shaban and he ate food inattentively and it
appeared later that it is in the month of Ramadan?

A: His sawm is correct and it is valid to be considered from the month
of Ramadan.


