Rulings of Fasting On Travel
============================

1. A person who is fasting had planned to reach his place of residence
before time of the afternoon prayers [zawal]. But, along the way he came
across an accident that delayed him, hence he did not reach his
residency in time. Is his fast valid? Does he have to pay kaffarah or
will performing the qada be sufficient?

A: His fast is invalid while traveling and it is only obligatory upon
him to perform qada (of fasting) for the day in which he did not reach
his place of residency, and he does not have to pay kaffarah.

2. A passenger or a crewmember aboard an airplane flying at a high
altitude and bound for a distant city - a 2:30 to 3 hour journey - has
to drink water every 20 minutes to maintain his equilibrium. Does he/she
have to pay kaffarah in addition to performing the qada?

A: If fasting causes harm, one can break the fast to drink water. He
will have to perform its qada, but kaffarah will not be obligatory on
him in this case.

3. Is it permitted for a person to travel intentionally during the
month of Ramadan in order to break the fast and relieve himself of its
burden?

A: There is no problem in doing that. Therefore, when traveling, even
to escape the duty of fasting, he must break the fast.

4. A person responsible for performing an obligatory fast decided to
fulfill his duty, but could not because of unforeseen circumstances. For
example, he prepared to travel after sunrise - he travels, but failed to
return home before noon. He had not done anything that invalidates the
fast, except that the time for making intentions of an obligatory fast
has elapsed; and that day is one in which fasting is recommended. Is it
valid if he makes intention to perform a recommended fast?

A: When one is responsible for the qada of Ramadan fasting day, it is
invalid to make intentions to perform a recommended fast, even if the
time for making intentions for performing an obligatory fast has
passed.

5. I am addicted to smoking. No matter how much I try not to be
irritable in the blessed month of Ramadan, I can not abstain from a
conduct that disrupts the peace of my family and puts me into a nervous
state. What is my duty in this situation?

A: It is obligatory upon you to fast in the month of Ramadan and it is
not permissible for you, as per obligatory precaution, to smoke while
fasting. Also, acting irritably with others without justification is
unlawful.

6. A person finished his fast in his hometown after sunset. Then on
traveling to another city, he found that the sun there had not set yet.
What will be the rule regarding his fasting? Can he eat and drink in the
new place before sunset?

A: His fast is valid and he can eat and drink in the new place before
sunset since he had broke his fast at maghrib in his city.

7. A person performing military service could not fast during the month
of Ramadan last year because of frequent traveling and being stationed
on base (in the service). As Ramadan approaches this year, he is still
serving in the same area and does not think he will be able to fast this
year, either. Does he have to pay the kaffarah after leaving the
service, in addition to performing the qada of those fast?

A: When someone forgoes fasting in the month of Ramadan because of the
excuse of traveling, which extends until the next Ramadan, his only duty
is to perform qada and no kaffarah is obligatory upon him.

8. A person who lives in the port of Dayyir kept fast from the first
day of Ramadan until the twenty-seventh. On the morning of the
twenty-eighth day he traveled to Dubai. Arriving there on the
twenty-ninth, he noticed that they had declared that day as the first of
Shawwal and Eid al-Fitr there.

Now that he has returned to his hometown, does he have to make up [do
qada] for the fast he missed? If he does qada of only one day then the
month of Ramadan for him will be only twenty-eight days, and if he makes
up for two days, then on the 29th day he was present in a place where
Eid was declared. What is the ruling for such a person?

A: If the twenty-ninth day of Ramadan was declared Eid in accordance
with valid legal [shari] criteria, then he does not have to perform qada
for that day. But it indicates that he missed fasting at the month''s
beginning, which he has to make up, the number of days he is sure of
having missed.

9- A person who is committed to a job in a center in Beirut and he is
asked to stay in the battle-field or go and return back without
determining the place or the time?

A: If he went to his job without staying for 10 days in a single place
and repeated his travel for the job covering the shari distance in each
time, his prayer [salat] should be full [tamam] and his sawm would be
correct.

10- A person who is committed to a job in a place outside his homeland
and he is always compelled to go and return back from the work center to
his home covering the shari distance, what is his duty at home, at the
traveling way or at his place of work?

A: The ruling here is that of work in traveling, i.e. salat should be
full and sawm is correct.

11- One whose job is traveling in such a way that he might stay at home
for twenty days and at his work place for some days, like that of the
mujahidin, then what is the ruling concerning his salat and sawm?

A: In the given question, he should pray full salat and fast in his
work place as long as he is intending to reside there for 10 days,
otherwise he should pray qasr and break fasting.

12- Some of the mujahidin have no specific time for their duties i.e.
sometimes they stay in the battle-field for three days to return home
and stay for fifteen days and, then, they go again to the battle-field
for 3 days or sometimes 10 days or more and return home again and stay
for 10 days or more. What is the ruling regarding their salat and
sawm?

A: The standard is what was mentioned i.e. if his travel was for work,
after he had stayed for 10 days in a place, he should pray qasr on the
first journey, unless he intended to stay for 10 days in the work place.
While if he traveled without separating his two journeys with a 10 days
stay, he should pray full and fast.

13- His Eminence, the Leader of the Muslims Ayatullah al-dhma Sayyid
Ali Khamenei (m.): There is a group of the brothers in Lebanon who have
devoted themselves to the work with the Islamic Opposition Movements.
The nature of their job is that it does not have a specific place, time
or program. They are compelled to move about from one place to another
and to be always ready to be present and act in certain places where
they are requested, in certain places in which they may stay for 1 day
or more according to the conditions.

1) According to this type of work, what is the ruling regarding their
salat and sawm?

2) What is the ruling regarding those who have newly joined such a
work?

A: If the work in the Islamic Opposition Movements is considered
conventionally as a work or job and it requires frequent traveling here
and there, then as long as there is no separating period of 10 days
stay, in a single place, between the two journeys, they should pray
their full salat and fast. While if the 10 days staying period
interferes, they should pray qasr and break fast in the first journey
after the staying period.

15- I am in the taqlid of Imam Khomeini (q.) and living in the city of
Beirut for more than 15 years. I had been born in the city of Sur in the
south of Lebanon and since I have no intention of staying for 10 days in
Beirut, I pray qasr and cannot fast because I go weekly to the south
more or less often. Is there a way to pray full and fast without
intending the residency in the city of Beirut? Knowing that if I lost my
job in Beirut I should return to my birthplace on the south. Then,
should I pray qasr and break fast for all the time of my staying in
Beirut or what?

A: If you were frequenting between the city of Sur and Beirut (your
work place) every week, you are obliged to pray full and fast, i.e., in
general, any person who frequents between his homeland and working
place, at least once every 10 days, covering a shari distance, his
ruling would be a complete salat (full) and his sawm would be correct
whether during traveling the distance, being at the work place or home.
However, if he, for once, stayed for 10 days in a single place, he
should pray qasr during the first journey after the 10 days stay.

16- a) Before the end of 10 days I went to the city of Bakhtaran for
important work and stayed there for 2 hours then returned to my work
place. b) After this 10 days stay was finished, I traveled to the city
of Bakhtaran aiming to go to a certain place there without exceeding the
shari distance.

I had passed the night at that place and then returned to my place of
residence. c) After a complete 10 days stay at my work place, I traveled
to a certain place in the city of Bakhtaran where my intention was
changed, after the arrival, to go to another place which is located at a
distance more than the shari distance from my place of residency. d) if
the ruling in case (b) and (c) was the abrogation of my residency, then
what is the ruling regarding my salat and sawm in my place of residency
when I was ignorant about the abrogation?

A: (a & b) After the settlement of the ruling of your residency, even
by just offering one full salat in this place, going out for a distance
shorter than the shari distance, even for more than one or two hours or
1 or 2 days, would not harm this residency. So you could pray full salat
and fast till a new travel is issued.

(c) If the distance from the point of changing the intention to the
destination was equal to 4 farsakhs (1/2 the shari distance) or more, or
the returning distance from the destination to the place of residency
was equal to 8 farsakhs (= shari distance), the ruling of the last
residency would be abrogated with this journey and you should renew your
intention of residency after you reach the place of residency,
otherwise, you are still under the ruling of the last residency when you
should pray full and fast.

17- I am frequenting to my home and work place every day without
covering the shari distance. Am I in need to intend residency for 10
days to pray full salat?

A: If frequenting between the 2 places was after the settlement of the
correct intention of residency in one of these places, it will never
harm the validity of the continuance of the residency and the act of
praying in full and fasting.


