(3). Masturbation While Fasting and in Other Instances
======================================================

1. About seven years ago I intentionally invalidated my fast for
several days during the month of Ramadan by masturbating. However, I do
not know for sure how many days of fasting I violated in this way during
the course of three Ramadans. I do not think they were less than 25 to
30 days. What is my obligation and the kaffarah that I should make?

A: Invalidating a day''s fast in the blessed month of Ramadan by
masturbating, which is prohibited by Islamic law, requires one kind of
kaffarah:

(1)fasting for sixty days; or (2)feeding sixty poor persons, although
it is a recommended precaution to observe both of the two. As far as
feeding sixty persons is concerned, you can give each of them one mudd
(750 grams) of food for each day missed. Giving money is not a
substitute unless it is given to a poor person to buy food on your
behalf; thus, his acceptance to buy the food for himself is considered
as kaffarah. Determining the price of the food given as kaffarah depends
on the kind of food you choose to give, either in the shape of wheat,
rice, or any other kind of food. As for the number of fasts you
invalidated by masturbating, you are allowed in performing its qada and
giving kaffarah to consider the number of days that you are certain
about.

2. A person bound by religious obligation [mukallaf], knowing that
masturbation does invalidate the fast, and does masturbate; does he have
to offer the two-fold kaffarah? What is the rule if he does it without
knowing that masturbation invalidates the fast?

A: In both cases he must offer just one kind of kaffarah, if he
masturbates intentionally, although it is a recommended precaution to
observe the two fold kaffarah.

3. I had an emission of semen during the blessed month of Ramadan for
no reason other than excitement that I felt during a telephone
conversation with a non-mahram woman. If the phone conversation was not
for the purpose of pleasure, was my fast invalid? And if it was, do I
have to pay kaffarah as well?

A: If it was not a previous habit of yours to have an emission of semen
while conversing with a woman, and the phone conversation was not
intended for pleasure and the emission was involuntary, then your fast
is valid, and you are not liable to anything.

4. A person had the habit of masturbating for a number of years while
fasting in the month of Ramadan and at other times. What is the rule
regarding his prayers and fasts?

A: Masturbation is absolutely prohibited, and when it leads to
ejaculation it causes one to become in the state of major impurity
[junub]. If this done during fasting, it amounts to breaking the fast by
unlawful means. If one performs prayers and fasts in the state of major
impurity [janabah], without performing major ablution [ghusl] or dry
ablution [tayammum], his prayers and fasting are void and he must make
them up [do their qada].

5. Someone at the beginning of legal maturity [bulugh] fasts during the
month of Ramadan, and masturbates while fasting, continuing in fasting
for some days without knowing that fasting requires a state of purity
[taharah], that is not being in the state of major impurity [janabah].
Is it sufficient for him to perform qada of the fasts of those days, or
some other rule applies to him?

A: In the light of the question, he has to perform both qada and
kaffarah.

6. If someone who is fasting looks at a sexually arousing scene during
the month of Ramadan, does it void his fast?

A: If he looks with the purpose of having an orgasm, or if he knows
that it will cause him to become in the state of major impurity [junub],
and it had been his habit before, and still he views it intentionally
and becomes junub, then the rule that applies to him is the one that
applies to someone who makes himself junub intentionally.


**(4) Sexual Intercourse**

1- How would sexual intercourse be achieved?

A: It would be achieved by the complete penetration of the glans penis
inside the vulva or the anus of a human being or an animal.

2- If a saim [fasting person] intended to have sexual intercourse but
he did not do it, would this intention invalidate his sawm?

A: This intention is considered like the intention of doing practices
or taking things that would break the fast, and the sawm would not be
invalidated just by this intention.

3- If a saim had sexual intercourse in a state of forgetfulness, what
is the ruling regarding his sawm?

A: His sawm would not be invalidated.

4- If a saim is forced to have sexual intercourse and becomes deprived
of his volition, what is the ruling about his sawm? A: If he had been
really forced to the extend that he is deprived of his volition; his
sawm would not be invalidated.

(5) Plunging

1- If a saim had plunged his head into water while his body was out,
what is the ruling of his sawm?

A: It is haram for saim to do this and his sawm would be invalidated
according to the obligatory precaution.

2- If he introduced his head into water gradually until the entire head
was in the water, was the strict meaning of plunging be applied here? A:
After the entire head was under the water, it will be counted as
plunging. 3- If he plunged the right side of his head into water and
then got it out to plunge the left side, would this act invalidate the
sawm? A: There is no objection to it and the ruling of plunging would
not be applied here.

4. A fasting person was unaware that he was in the state of janabah
[major ritual impurity - caused by discharged semen] until the time of
the afternoon prayers. He then performed the major ablution via
submerging the whole body in water [ghusl al-irtimasi]. Does this
invalidate his fast? And if he realizes what he has done only after
performing ghusl al-irtimasi, does he have to perform the qada of the
fast? A: If one performs ghusl al-irtimasi out of forgetfulness or
unintentionally (to the fact that he is fasting), then both his fast and
the major ablution [ghusl] are valid; thus, he does not have to perform
qada of the fast.

5. What rule applies to someone who immerses himself in water wearing
waterproof clothing such as a diving suit which does not allow the body
to become wet?

A: If the clothing has close contact with his head, there is a problem
in his fast being valid. Hence, as an obligatory precaution he should
perform its qada.

6- What are the boundaries of the head in the issue of plunging?

A: What is meant by the head, plunging of which while fasting is haram,
is the entire head till the neck.


7- If one plunges the upper part of his head down to the ears, would
this harm the correctness of his sawm?

A: Unless the entire head is plunged into the water, the sawm would not
be harmed.

8- If a saim had plunged his head into water sparing his hair, what is
the ruling of his sawm?

A: Plunging by sparing just the hair is considered haram and would
invalidate fasting.

9- Plunging the head in adulterated water [mudaf], would it validate
the sawm?

A: There is no objection in plunging the head in mudaf liquid. However,
it is according to precaution to avoid plunging of the head in
rose-water (maul-ward).

10- If a saim had smeared his head with a substance that would prevent
water reaching it and then plunged it into water, then what is the
ruling about his sawm?

A: The standard is the actual plunging of the head into water even if
one had smeared it with such a substance. 11- If one had plunged while
he was putting his head in a bottle, then what is the ruling of his
sawm?

A: If this was in such a way that it would not be applied correctly to
the plunging of the head i.e. he put his head into a bottle and then
plunged the bottle into the water, it would not harm his sawm.

12- If a saim had jumped into a water imagining that he would not
plunge but plunging occurred, then what is the ruling?

A: If the water was not of the kind that which usually necessitates
plunging or he was not aware that it would necessitate it, it would not
harm the correctness of his sawm, but he is obliged to get his head out
of the water immediately.

13- If a saim was in state of janabah and he could not perform his
ghusl but by plunging, then what could he do? A: If he could not perform
sequential ghusl (tartibi) his duty will be diverted to tayammum and he
is not allowed, as per obligatory precaution, to plunge into water for
ghusl.

14- If a saim had plunged into water for ghusl, then what is the ruling
if?a) The sawm was mustahabb or a wajib [obligatory] but unspecified for
a certain time.


b) The sawm was wajib but specified for certain time.

A: In a mustahabb and unspecified wajib sawm, his ghusl is correct but
the sawm would be invalidated. While in a specified wajib sawm if it was
a sawm of the month of Ramadan, both ghusl and sawm would be invalidated
unless he repented after plunging and then intended to do ghusl even at
the time he was getting out of the water, then his ghusl will be correct
even though that his sawm had been invalidated by the plunging.


