Section Six: Things That Must Be Avoided
========================================

1. If a person who is fasting bleeds in the mouth, does it invalidate
his fast?

A: Bleeding in the mouth does not void fast. However, the blood should
not be swallowed.

2. Please, give your opinion concerning the use of snuff by a person
who is fasting.

A: If the use of snuff causes anything to go down the throat from the
nose, then it will be forbidden for a person who is fasting.

3. Some people use ''Naas'', which is made up of tobacco and other
constituents, and they put it under their tongues for a few minutes,
then they spit it out. Does that void the fast?

A: If they swallow the saliva mixed with Naas, then their fast will
become void.

4. There is a medicine for asthma patients, which is in the form of a
spray containing a vapor-borne powder which enters the patient''s lungs
through the mouth providing him relief. At times, asthma patients need
to use it several times a day. Is it permissible to fast while using
such a spray?

A: If what goes into their lungs through the mouth is only air, then
their fast is not harmed. But if the air is mixed with medicine, be it
in the shape of a powder or dust, the validity of the fast is
problematic. However, if fasting without it is difficult or harmful,
using the medicine is permissible, but it is based on obligatory
precaution not to use anything else which would break fasting and if one
becomes able, later on, to fast without using this medicine, he should
observe qada of these days.

5. My gums often bleed and the blood gets mixed with saliva. At times I
am not sure whether the saliva that enters my throat is mixed with blood
or not. Please tell me what I am supposed to do to overcome this
problem?

A: If the blood from your gums gets mixed with saliva in a way that it
can no longer be distinguished, then the saliva is pure [tahir] and can
be swallowed. if you are not sure whether the saliva is mixed with blood
or not, it can still be swallowed without affecting the correctness of
the fast.

6. Once in the holy month of Ramadan, I forgot to brush my teeth, and
some tiny bits of food remained in my mouth. I swallowed the bits
unintentionally. Do I have to perform the qada'' for that day''s fast?

A: If you did not know that some bits of food remained in your mouth,
or you did not know that they might be swallowed, and they were
swallowed unknowingly and unintentionally, then you are not liable to
anything in respect of your fast.

7. The gums of a person who is fasting bleed a lot. Does that
invalidate his fast? Moreover, is it permissible to pour water over
one''s head with a jug?

A: The blood coming out of the gums does not invalidate the fast unless
it is swallowed. Also one''s fast is not affected by pouring water over
his head with a jug or something else.

8. There are certain medicines for feminine illnesses that are applied
through the vagina. Does their use invalidate the fast?

A: The use of such medicine does not invalidate the fast.

9. Please explain your view on injections given by dentists or other
physicians to persons fasting during the blessed month of Ramadan?

A: It is based on obligatory precaution for the fasting person to avoid
having himself injected with any kind of supportive or nutritional
injections in addition to all kinds of injections and fluids given
intravenously, while there is no objection in using anesthetic
injections and the like..

10. Is it permissible to take pills for high blood pressure during
fasting?

A: If taking these pills during Ramadan is necessary for controlling
high blood pressure, it is permissible, but it will invalidate the fast.
11. Since taking tablets for treatment is not commonly regarded as
eating or drinking, would taking pills void the fast?

A: Taking pills through the mouth invalidates the fast. However,
inserting suppositories through the anus does not affect the fast.

12. During the month of Ramadan my wife forced me to have intercourse.
What is the rule concerning us?

A: The rule of intentional breaking of the fast applies to both of you.
Hence it is obligatory for the two of you to perform its qada '' along
with its kaffarah.

13. When a man has foreplay with his wife during the day in the month
of Ramadan, does it invalidate his fast?

A: As long as it does not result in ejaculation, his fast is not
affected, otherwise it is not permissible for him to do that and his
fast will be void as well.


