Section Seven: Rulings of Making Up For Missed Fast (qada) and Kaffarah
=======================================================================

1. Due to a journey made for an important religious mission, I became
liable to qada of 18 days of Ramadan. What is my duty? Is it obligatory
for me to perform qada of the missed fasting?

A: You must perform qada of the Ramadan fasting days missed due to
traveling.

2. A person was hired to perform qada fasts of the month of Ramadan for
somebody else, and he breaks the fast in the afternoon. Does he have to
pay the kaffarah?

A: No kaffarah is required.

3. Those who could not fast due to their journey for religious mission
during the month of Ramadan, and now want to make up after years of
delay, do they have to pay any kaffarah?

A: If delaying the qada of fasting of Ramadan until the next Ramadan
was due to a continuing legitimate excuse, then they should perform only
qada of the missed fasting days and no redemption money [fiidyah] is
required, although precaution lies in giving fediyah as well. But, if
the delay was for no legitimate reason and a result of negligence, then
they are liable both to their qada as well as redemption money
[fediyah].

4. A person did not perform prayers or fast for about 10 years due to
ignorance. Now he has repented, turning to God, the Exalted, and decided
to compensate for his past. But he cannot perform qada of all the days
he did not fast, nor has the means to pay for the kaffarah. Is it enough
for him to ask for forgiveness [istighfar] alone?

A: He is not relieved from the duty of performing qada of the missed
fasting by any means. As to the kaffarah for each day that he did not
fast, if he is not able to fast for 60 days and also unable to feed 60
needy persons, he must give as much as he can to the poor and if he
could not do that, as well, he would ask Allah for forgiveness.

5. What is the duty of a person who did not know that performing qada
of missed fasting is required before the next Ramadan, and so did not do
it?

A: Ignorance of the obligation to perform qada before next Ramadan does
not relieve one of the redemption money [fediyah] for the delay.

6. A person did not fast for 120 days. What must he do? Does he have to
fast for 60 days for every day missed, and does he have to pay
kaffarah?

A: He has to perform qada for the Ramadan fasting days he missed. If he
broke the fast intentionally and not for some legitimate reason, then he
has, in addition to performing their qada, to pay the kaffarah, which is
fasting for sixty days or feeding 60 needy persons, or giving one mudd
(750 grams) of food to each of the sixty.

7. I fasted almost for one month with the intention of carrying out the
qada of any fast that I might have missed, or to be counted as a means
of nearness to God. Does this month of fasting count as qada for the
fasting that I missed?

A: If you fasted with the intention of carrying out whatever counts as
your present duty, an obligatory or a recommended fast, it would be
counted as the qada of the fasts missed if you were liable to any.

8. If a person, not knowing the number of fasts missed, performs fasts
with the intention of performing a recommended fast believing that he is
not liable to any qada, does this fasting count as qada for missed
fasting days if he is liable to qada of some fasts?

A: The fasting days kept with the intention of recommended fasting do
not count as qada for fasts whose qada one is liable to perform.

9. If due to ignorance of the rules a person intentionally breaks his
fast due to hunger or thirst, does he only have to perform qada of the
fast or should he pay the kaffarah as well?

A: If his ignorance was due to negligence, then as per precaution he
should pay kaffarah in addition to performing its qada as well.

10. A person at the outset of the age of legal maturity [taklif] was
not able to fast due to physical weakness and inability. Is it enough
for him to perform the qada of the fast, or is he required to offer the
kaffarah as well?

A: If fasting did not cuase unbearable hardship for him and he did not
fast intentionally, then he has to offer qada as well as paying
kaffarah. 11. A person does not know the exact number of days he has
failed to fast in the past nor the prayers he missed. What should he do?
And what rule applies if he does not know whether be missed the fast
intentionally or due to a legitimate excuse?

A: It is permissible for him to confine to performing the qada of the
prayers and fasting he is sure of having missed. When there is doubt as
to whether the fast was broken intentionally or not, kaffarah is not
required.

12. A person fasting during Ramadan did not wake up one day to eat the
meal taken before the dawn. Therefore, he could not continue fasting
until sunset. During the day there happened an event that caused him to
break his fast. Does he have to give the single or the twofold kaffarah?
A: If he kept the fast until the time he broke it when it was harmful
for him to continue, due to severe hunger and thirst or some other
reason, he has only to perform qada of the fast and no kaffarah is
required.

13. If one is not sure whether one has done qada of all the missed
fasting settled in his debt, what is one''s duty?

A: If one is sure of having missed some fasting days in the past, then
it is obligatory to ascertain that has done qada for those days. 14. A
person did not fast on reaching maturity [bulugh]. He had fasted for 11
days then broke the fast one day at noon and did not fast for the
remaining 18 days. Also, he did not know that kaffarah was obligatory
for the days not fasted. What is the ruling concerning him?

A: If he intentionally and voluntarily failed to fast in the month of
Ramadan, he has to perform qada and pay kaffarah as well, regardless of
whether he knew he had to give a kaffarah or not.

15. The physician told a patient that fasting is harmful for his
health. However, after a few years, he realized that fasting was not
harmful for him and the physician was wrong in excusing him from
fasting. Does he have to pay kaffarah in addition to performing qada?

A: If he had refrained from fasting due to fear for his health on the
basis of an experienced and reliable physician''s diagnosis or some
other reasonable basis, he has to only perform qada of the missed
fasting.

16. While going on a trip someone who is fasting breaks his fast before
crossing the allowance border [hadd al-tarakhkhus] with the notion that
he is a traveler, without knowing that he may break his fast before noon
only when he has gone beyond the hadd al-tarakhkhus. What is the rule
concerning his fast? Does he have to perform its qada or is he liable to
something else as well?

A: The rule that applies to him is same as that for one who
intentionally breaks the fast.


**The Atonement for Fasting and it''s amount**

17. Is it sufficient to give a needy person the money to buy the one
mudd (750 grams) of food instead of giving him the food itself?

A: If one is sure that the needy person receiving the money will buy
the food on one''s behalf and then take it as kaffarah, there is no
problem in it.

18. A person was appointed as a representative [wakil] to take charge
of feeding a group of needy persons. Can he take his wages for the work
and cooking he does from the kaffarah money he was entrusted with?

A: He can demand the wages for his work and for the cooking. But he
cannot count it as part of the kaffarah or obtain it from the money that
must be given to the needy persons as a kaffarah.

19. A woman could not fast due to pregnancy and the approaching
delivery. She knew that after delivery she must perform qada for the
days she did not fast before the next Ramadan, If she did not fast after
delivery, intentionally or otherwise, for several years, does she have
to pay only the kaffarah for that year or for all the years she delayed
the fasting?

A: The redemption money [fediyah] for delaying the qada, even if it is
for several years, is required only once. It is one mudd (750 grams) of
food for each day, and is required only if the qada was delayed until
another Ramadan without any legitimate excuse. If one had an excuse for
the delay preventing one from performing valid fasts, no redemption
money [fediyah] is required.

20. A women could not fast due to illness. Also, she could not perform
their qada until the next Ramadan. Does she or her husband have to pay
the kaffarah?

A: In this case, the redemption money [fediyah], one mudd (750 grams)
of food for each day, has to be given by her, not her husband. 21. A
person was liable to perform qada of ten Ramadan fasting days and he
started them on 20th of Sha''ban. Can he break the fast intentionally
before or after the noon? And, if he does, what is the kaffarah for
breaking it before or after the noon?

A: It is not permissible for him to break his fast intentionally in
this case. However, if he does break his fast intentionally before noon,
he does not have to pay any kaffarah. But if he breaks it intentionally
in the afternoon, his kaffarah is to feed ten needy persons. If he
cannot afford to do so, he shall fast for three days.

22. A woman was pregnant during two consecutive Ramadans and could not
fast during those two years. Now. When she is able to fast what is her
duty. Does she only have to perform the qada for the two months, or does
she have to carry out the twofold kaffarah as well? What is the rule
concerning her delaying the fasting?

A: If she did not fast during the month of Ramadan due to a legitimate
reason, then she is only liable for their qada. However, if she did not
fast because she feared it might harm the fetus or the baby, she has to
give the redemption money [fiidyah], one mudd (750 grams) of food for
each day, in addition to making their qada and if she delays the qada
beyond the next Ramadan without a legitimate excuse, then she shall also
give its redemption money [fiidyah], one mudd (750 grams) of food for
each day.

23. If someone has to perform qada and give kaffarah for the days that
he did not fast, must he observe their sequence?

A: It is not obligatory.

24- If a saim on the same day had repeatedly took something which would
break the fast, would this entail the repeating of kaffarah?

A: This would not entail the repeating of kaffarah. However, if he
broke fasting by masturbation or sexual intercourse, it would be an
obligatory precaution to repeat the kaffarah.

25- In doing qada of the month of Ramadan, what is the kaffarah of
breaking the fast after zawal?

A: Its kaffarah is to feed ten needy persons (1 mudd for each) and if
he could not afford it, he should fast for 3 days.

26- If an individual bound by religious obligations [mukallaf] was to
fast for a certain nadhr and he breaks the fast intentionally, what is
the kaffarah then?

A: The kaffarah here is equal to that of breaking the fast of the sawm
of Ramadan intentionally.

27- Is it obligatory to hasten to pay the kaffarah or is the time is
open?

A: Hastening is not obligatory unless one is afraid of the passing of
time.

28- If a man had sexual intercourse with his wife during the day of
Ramadan while both were saims, what is the ruling regarding the
kaffarah?

A: If she agreed, the kaffarah of intentionally breaking the fast would
rest upon her as well as the husband, in addition both would submit to
tazir.

29- One has a kaffarah and he did not pay it until 2 years had lapsed,
would it be repeated?

A: It would not be repeated by the passage of time.

30- If a man was not fasting [muftir], for a travel or a disease, is he
allowed to force his wife to have sexual intercourse?

A: He is not allowed to do so and if he did so, he would have to pay
the kaffarah on her behalf according to obligatory precaution.

31- Is it sufficient to feed 1-2 needy persons with the share of 60?

A: If one is able to feed 60 needy persons, feeding one, two, or more
with the share of 60 would then be invalid.

32- Is it permissible to volunteer to pay the kaffarah on behalf of the
dead?

A: Yes, it is permissible and it would be valid.


