From The Publisher
==================

**In His Most Exalted Name**

The Disciplines of **Salat** (The Islamic Prayer), which was finished on
Monday, the 2nd of Rabī' ath-Thānī, 1361 L.H. (Lunar Hijrī Year) [30th
of Farvardīn, 1321 S.H. (Solar Hijrī year)], is a detailed explanation
of the *Salat*'s strict disciplines and moral secrets. Three years
before the writing of this work, the Imām (*s*) [*salāmullāhi 'alayh* =
may Allah's peace be upon him] had written a book under the title: *The
Secret of the Salat*, which contained the same concepts, but it was
concise and in the terms of the elect gnostics.[^1] Nevertheless, the
late Imām, believing that more people should benefit from the subjects
of the book, set upon writing this book in a simpler language. He says:

Before this, I prepared a paper in which I wrote on the secrets of the
*Salat* as much as was feasible. But as it was not suitable for the
common people, I decided to write parts of the cordial disciplines of
this spiritual ascension, so that my brothers in faith may have a
remembrance, and my hard heart may be affected by it.

Formerly, the folds [*matāwī*] of the book *Ādāb as-Salat*, with
explanations and revisions, had been published under the title: *Flying
in the Heavenly Kingdom*. Then the book itself was published. The former
editions, however, were not agreeable, for some reasons. One of the
reasons might probably have been the lack of a manuscript. Therefore,
The Institute for Compilation and Publication of Imām Khomeinī's Works
set forth to publish this work, with complete precision, faithfulness,
and reference to the available copies, and collating them with the
original MS (manuscript) copy which is within the reach of this
Institute.

The book includes two prefaces, which the Imām wrote in 1363 S.H.,
dedicating this work to his respected son, Hujjatul-Islām wal-Muslimīn,
Hāj Sayyid Ahmad Khomeinī, and to Mrs. Fātimah Tabātabā'ī (wife of Hāj
Sayyid Ahmad Khomeinī).

This edition is accompanied by footnotes and explanations, in which the
sources and the references of the *Hadiths* and statements are stated,
and the Arabic texts are translated. All these marginations except a few
which the Imām himself had written down and are marked by an asterisk
(\*) (in the Persian copy) as well as the different indexes of the book,
have been prepared and arranged by this Institute.[^2]

Certain Islamic and gnostic terms have been printed in italics or in
bold (beside the titles of the books). Some of these terms have been
explained in English in the GLOSSARY at the end of the book.

A thousand copies of the first edition of the book (in Persian) are
accompanied with the photostatic copy of the complete MS (manuscript) to
be sent to the libraries and those interested in keeping specimens of
the Imām's handwritten works. Other copies include only a printed sample
of the MS.

We cordially thank the management and the staff of The Scientific and
Educational Publishing Company for the help they accorded us.

Sending our greetings to the late Imām, we pray Allah, the Great, to
bestow upon us His help to be more serviceable to Islam.

**The Institute for Compilation and Publication**  
**of Imām Khomeinī's Works**  
**(International Affairs Department)**

[^1]: The complete and revised text of The Secret of the Salat,
including its Photostatic copy, comments and different indexes, has
already been published by this Institute.

[^2]: The numbers on the (left) side of the printed pages (of the
Persian text) represent the numbers of the MS (manuscript) pages, which
are the same as those of the printed pages. We draw the attention of the
respected readers of the Persian text to the fact that the Imām, by
oversight, had repeated the two page-numbers 172 and 278, and next to
the number 263 he had written 267. We could have renumbered them
correctly on the printed pages (of the Persian text), but as this would
have made it a bit difficult to find the MS's page numbers, besides the
fact that the readers might, during their reading of the book, forget
this warning and get lost in finding out a particular page of the MS,
therefore, we had but to retain the same numbering on the printed pages
(of the Persian text) as are on the Imām's hand-written pages. That is,
the numbers 172 and 178 were repeated, and after the number 263 comes
number 267.


