Chapter 3: Concerning Submissiveness [Khushū‘]
==============================================

One of the things necessary for the *sālik* in all his worships,
especially in the *Salat*, which is at the head of all worships and has
a position of comprehensiveness [*jāmi'iyyat*], is submissiveness
[*khushū'*]. It is, in fact, a complete submission [*khudū'*] mixed with
love or fear. It is the result of comprehending the Greatness, Power and
Majesty of Beauty and Glory. The detail of this generality is that the
hearts of the people of *sulūk* are different according to their
disposition and nature:

Some of the hearts are amorous and of the manifestations of Beauty
[*jamāl*] and, driven by their nature, they are attracted to the Beauty
of the Beloved. When, in the *sulūk*, they comprehend the shadow of the
Beautiful, or witness the origin of the Beauty, the Greatness hidden in
the secret of the Beauty effaces them, and they go into rapture, for in
every beauty there is a hidden glory, and in every glory there is a
covered beauty.

There is probably an allusion to this point in his saying when the
guardian of the gnostics and of the *sālik*s, Amīr al-Mu'minīn
(Commander of the Faithful), may Allah bless him and all his offspring,
says: “**Glory be to the One whose compassion is vast for His friends
despite His severe revenge, and whose revenge is severe for His enemies
despite His vast compassion,”**[^1]

Thus, the Majesty, Greatness and Power of Beauty envelop them and they
fall into a state of submission [*khushū'*] before the Beauty of the
Beloved. This state, at the beginning, causes agitation to the heart and
engenders anxiety. Then, after submission [*tamkīn*], it changes to a
state of familiarity, and the agitation and anxiety, caused by the
Greatness and Power, turn into familiarity and peace, and there happens
a state of tranquility, as was the state of the heart of *khalīl
ar-Rahmān* (Allah's Friend = Ibrāhīm) ('*a*).

Some other hearts are “fearing” and they are of the manifestations of
Glory [*jalāl*]. They are in continual understanding of the Greatness,
Grandeur and Glory. Their submission is of fright, and the Subjugative
and Majestic Names are manifested to their hearts, as was the state of
Prophet Yahyā (may Allah's peace be upon him and our Prophet and his
progeny). So, submission is sometimes mixed with love, and sometimes
with fear and fright, though in every love there is fear, and in every
fear there is love.

The degrees of submission are according to the degrees of understanding
the Greatness, Majesty and Beauty. Now as we, in our case, are deprived
of the light of visions, we have but to indulge in acquiring submission
by means of knowledge and faith [*īmān*]. Allah, the Exalted, says:

*“**Successful, indeed, are the believers who are submissive in their
Salats.”***[^2]

Submission in the *Salat* is regarded as a sign of faith [*īmān*]. So,
whoever is not submissive in his *Salat*, will, according to Allah's
saying, be excluded from the faithful [*ahl-i īmān*]. Our *Salat*s which
are not accompanied by submission are caused by a deficiency of faith or
by lacking it. Belief [*i'tiqād*] and knowledge are other than faith,
our knowledge of Allah, His Names and Attributes and of other divine
knowledge [*ma'ārif*], is other than faith.

Satan according to the testimony of Allah, has information about the
Beginning and the Resurrection, yet, he is a disbeliever. He said:

*“**You have created me of fire, while You created him of dust,”***[^3]
  
 So, he believes in Allah and in His being the Creator; and he says:
“**Respite me until the day they are resurrected.”** [^4] So, he
believes in the Day of Resurrection, too. He knows about the Books, the
Messengers and the angels. Nevertheless, Allah addresses him as a
disbeliever, excluding him from the group of the believers [*mu'minīn*].

Thus, the people of knowledge are distinct from those of faith. Not
every man of knowledge is a man of faith. Therefore, after acquiring
knowledge, one has to join the believers, and to convey the Greatness,
Majesty, Brightness and Beauty of Allah, the Most Exalted and High, to
his heart, so that it may become submissive, since mere knowledge does
not result in submission. You can realize it in yourself: although you
do believe in the Beginning and the Resurrection and in Allah's Majesty
and Glory, your heart is not submissive.

As to Allah's saying:

*“**Has not the time yet come for those who believe that their hearts
should be submissive when remembering Allah and what has come down of
the truth,”***[^5]

it may be that it is the formal faith the very belief in what the
Prophet (*s*) has brought which is intended here, for the true faith is
accompanied by a degree of submission; or the submission in the noble
*āyah* may refer to a submission at its complete degree, as sometimes
they apply the word, ‛*ālim* (erudite) to the one whose knowledge has
reached the limit of faith.

In the noble *āyah*:

*“…**verily only the erudite among Allah's servants fear Him,”***[^6]

The reference may be to them. In the terms of the Book and the *Sunnah*,
knowledge, faith and Islam refer to different degrees, the explanation
of which is out of the scope of these papers.  
 Generally speaking, the *sālik* on the way to the Hereafter specially
if with the *mi‛rāj* (ascending) step of the *Salat* will have to make
his heart submissive by the light of knowledge and faith, so as to
strengthen, as much as he can, this divine gift and the beneficent
gleam, in his heart, trying to keep this state during the whole length
of the *Salat*. This state of consolidation and stability, though a bit
difficult at the beginning for people like us, it becomes quite possible
by practice and by exercising the heart.

My dear, acquiring perfection and the provision for the Hereafter
requires demand and seriousness, and the greater the demand, the more it
deserves being serious about it. Certainly, with such a state of
weakness, laxity and carelessness, one cannot ascend to the divine
proximity and to be in a place neighboring the Lord of Might.

One has to manly set forth in order to reach what one wants. Since you
do believe in the Hereafter, and find no way of comparability between
that world and this whether regarding their happiness and perfection, or
their sufferings and calamities, as that world is eternal, with no death
and perishing, where the happy live in comfort and dignity and in
everlasting bliss, a comfort which has no like in this world, a divine
glory and sovereignty, the like of which cannot be found in this life,
and a bliss which never occurs in anybody's imagination, and similarly
regarding the sufferings of that world, its pains, torments and evils
can have no match in this world you should know that the way to
happiness runs through obeying Allah, the Lord of Might.

None of the acts of worship and obedience can be on the same footing as
that of the *Salat*, which is a comprehensive [*jāmi'*] divine mixture
[*ma‛jūn*] undertaking the happiness of humanity. If it is accepted, all
other acts (of worship) will be accepted. So, you are to exert utmost
seriousness in obtaining it, never to feel tired in the quest, and to
bear whatever hardship there may be, though there will be none.

Actually if you continued it for a while and got cordially familiar with
it, you would get, in this very world, so much pleasure out of your talk
with Allah a pleasure which cannot be compared with anyone of this
world's pleasures. This will be quite obvious if we study the states of
the people supplicating to Allah.

In general, to sum up our discussions in this chapter, we may say that,
having comprehended the Greatness, the Beauty, and the Majesty of Allah,
either by means of reasoning and proofs, or through the explanations of
the prophets ('*a*), one must remind his heart of it, and then, by
gradual remindings, cordial attention and continual remembering Allah's
Greatness and Majesty, he has to bring about the state of submission in
his heart, so as to attain the required result.

At any rate, the *sālik* should not suffice himself with his present
station, as any station which we may obtain is not worth a farthing in
the market of the people of knowledge, nor is it worth a grain of
mustard in the bazaar of “the people of heart”. The *sālik* must, in all
situations, remember his own faults and deficiencies, so that he may
find, through this, a way to his happiness. And praise be to Allah.

[^1]: Nahj al-Balaghāh, sermon 90.

[^2]: Sūrah al-Mu'minūn 23:1-2.

[^3]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:12.

[^4]: Ibid., 7:14.

[^5]: Sūrah al-Hadīd 57:16.

[^6]: Sūrah Fātir 35:28


