Chapter 4: Tranquility
======================

Of the important cordial disciplines of worships, especially the
invoking worships, one is tranquility [*tuma'nīnah*], which is not the
same tranquility as demanded by the jurisprudents (may Allah be pleased
with them) in the *Salat*. It is that the *sālik* should perform his
worship with a quietude of the heart and a tranquility of the mind,
because if the worship was performed in a state of anxiety and with
shaky heart, the heart would not have any reaction, and no effects of
worship would appear in the dominion of the heart, and the reality of
the worship would not become an inner image of the heart.

One of the significances of the repetition of worships and the increase
of supplications and invocations is that the heart is affected by them
and there will be an emotion until, gradually, the reality of worship
and supplication forms the innermost part of the *sālik*, and his heart
unites with the spirit of worship. Should the heart lack tranquility
[*itmīnān*], quietude and serenity, there would be no effect of the
supplications and the rituals on it, and they would not pass from the
outer appearance and limits of the body to the dominion of the inner
soul, and the cordial parts of the truth of worship would not be
effected.

This is one of the clear matters that need no explanation, as it could
be understood by a little contemplation. If a worship was such that the
heart could have no information whatsoever about it, and there was no
effect at all in the interior, it would not be kept in other dominions,
nor would it ascend from the kingdom of this world to the kingdom of the
heavens. And it may be that at the time of the throes of death and its
horrible agonies, and the terrors and calamities of after death, the
image of such a worship may completely be effaced God forbid! From the
plane of the heart, and that man may stand at the sacred presence of
Allah empty-handed.

For example, if one recites the noble supplication: *Lā* *ilāha*
*illallāh*, *Muhammadun* *Rasūlullāh* (There is no god but Allah;
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah) with a calm and tranquil heart and
teaches his heart to repeat it, the tongue of the heart will gradually
become talking, and the outer tongue will be a follower of the heart's
tongue, and then the heart will supplicate first, and the tongue will
follow it.  
 This is referred to by Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) as is stated in *Misbāh*
*ash*-*Sharī'ah* (the Torch of the Islamic Law). He said: “Let your
heart be your tongue's *qiblah*, and do not move it except by the
heart's order, the reason's assent and the faith's consent.” [^1]

At the beginning, before the tongue learns talking, the *sālik* on the
way to the Hereafter is to teach it and to instruct it, in tranquility
and quietude, with the supplications. As soon as the heart finds its
tongue, it becomes the *qiblah* (the focus of attraction) of the mouth's
tongue and of the other organs of the body. When it starts supplication,
the whole kingdom of the human existence becomes supplicant.

But if the noble supplication is recited without the tranquility and
calmness of the heart, but with haste, trouble, and unbalanced senses,
it will have no effect on the heart, and will not pass the limits of the
animal tongue and ear of the outer body to the interior and the human
hearing, and its truth will not be implemented in the core of the heart,
nor will it become a perfect and non-transitory image of the heart.
Thus, when there are terrors and difficulties, especially the terrors of
the agonies of death and the difficulties of the throes of the last
breaths, one completely forgets supplication and it will be erased from
the plane of the heart.

Even the name of Allah the Exalted, the Seal of the Prophets (*s*), the
noble religion of Islam, the divine sacred Book, the Imāms of guidance
('*a*) and other knowledge [*ma'ārif*] which have not been conveyed to
the heart, will be forgotten, and when he is questioned in the grave, he
cannot answer, and the *talqīn* will be of no avail, because he does not
find in himself any trace of the truth of Lordship, prophethood or other
knowledge [*ma'ārif*], and that what he used to chatter about, and had
no image of in his heart, vanishes from his memory, and thus he will
have no share of testifying the Lordship, prophethood and other
knowledge [*ma'ārif*].

It is stated in a *hadīth* that a group of the people [*ummah*] of the
Messenger of Allah (*s*), on being entered into Hell, forget the name of
the Prophet because of the fearfulness of the Hell-keeper, despite the
fact that the same *hadīth* states that they are of the believers and
their hearts and features glitter brightly because of the light of
faith. [^2]

The great narrator, the late Majlisī, in *Mir'āt al-'Uqūl* explaining
the expression: “I will be his hearing and his seeing,” says: “One who
does not dedicate his eyes, ears and other organs to the way of obeying
Allah, will not obtain spiritual eyes and ears, as his corporeal eyes
and ears will not go to the other world, and so he will be without ears
and eyes in the worlds of the grave and the Resurrection, whereas the
criterion for the questionings of the grave is those spiritual organs
(the end of the sum of his translation).” [^3]

In short, the noble *Hadiths* about this kind of tranquility and its
effects are many. The Glorious Qur'an orders that it (the Qur'an) should
be recited in *tartīl*, and it is stated in the noble *Hadiths*:
“Whoever forgets a *sūrah* from the Qur'an, it will appear before him in
Paradise in a most beautiful image. When he looks at it he says: “What
are you? How wonderful you are! I wish you were mine.” It will reply:
“Do you not know me? I am so-and-so *sūrah*. If you had not forgotten
me, I would have lifted you to this high rank”. [^4]

In another *hadīth* it is stated: “Whoever learns the Qur'an as a young
man, it will mix with his flesh and blood.” This is because the heart of
a young man is less engaged and less tarnished, and so, it is affected
quicker and easier, and the effect remains longer.

There are many *Hadiths* in this respect, to which we shall refer when
we discuss “recitation,” *inshā' Allāh*. In a noble *hadīth* it is said:
“Nothing is more loved by Allah than a deed which is done persistently,
no matter how small the deed may be.”[^5] Its important point may be
that such a deed becomes the inner image of the heart, as it has already
been noted.

[^1]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 5, “On Supplication”; Mustadrak
al-Wasā'il, “Book of as-Salat,” sec. on “Supplication,” ch. on
“Rarities,” hadīth 2. 

[^2]: 'Ilm al-Yaqīn, vol. 2, p. 1039.  

[^3]: Mir'āt al-'Uqūl, vol. 10, p. 392.

[^4]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 4, p. 410, “Book of the Merit of the Qur'an,”
ch. “One who Learnt the Qur'an then Forgot it,” hadīth no. 2.

[^5]: Ibid., vol. 3, p. 137, “Book of Faith and Infidelity,” ch.
“Economy in Worshipping,” hadīth 2.


