Chapter 5: Protecting The Worships From Satan’s Intrusion
=========================================================

One of the important cordial disciplines of the *Salat* and other
worships which is of the chief cordial disciplines, and to implement it
is one of the great affairs and minute problems, is protecting the
worships against the intrusion of Satan. The noble *āyah*:

*“**And those who keep guard on their Salats”***[^1]

Probably refers to all degrees of keeping guard, a degree of which, or
rather the most important one of them, is to guard against Satan's
intrusion.

To go into details, we say that it is quite explicit to the people of
knowledge and the men of heart that as bodies require material food for
nourishment, and that the food should be suitable for their disposition
so that they may be brought up corporeally and have vegetable growth,
similarly the hearts and the souls require a particular food to suit
them both, so that they may be educated with it, and feed on it to grow
up spiritually and progress inwardly.

The nutrition suitable for the growth [*nash'ah*] of the souls is the
divine knowledge [*ma'ārif*] from the beginning of existence till the
ultimate end of the system of existence. It is expressed in defining
philosophy by the great experts that: “It is man's development into a
mental world matching the material world in its form and
perfection.”[^2] This is an indication of the said spiritual nutrition,
as the hearts feed on spiritual merits and divine rites.

It must be noted that each one of these foods, if kept away from Satan's
intrusion and prepared by the hands of the guardianship of the Seal of
the Prophets and Allah's great friend (*s*), the soul and the heart
would be nourished by them and would attain the perfection becoming of
humanity and ascend to the proximity of Allah.

Getting rid of Satan's intrusion, which is a preliminary step to
sincerity, cannot really be brought about, unless the *sālik* is in
quest of Allah in his *sulūk*, and tread upon his selfishness and
self-conceit, which are the origin of all evils and the inner diseases.
This, in its full meaning, is not possible except by the Perfect Man,
or, rather, by the sincere holy men [*awliyā'*] ('*a*).

But the *sālik* must not despair of the inner kindness of Allah, because
to despair of Allah's mercy is the beginning of all coldnesses and
weaknesses, and it is one of the great sins. That which is possible for
the common people, too, is the delight of eyes of “the people of
knowledge” [*ahl-i ma‛rifat*].

So, it is a must for the *sālik* on the road to the other world to act
very seriously to rid his knowledge [*ma‛ārif*] and rites [*manāsik*] of
the intrusion of Satan and the commanding soul [*nafs-i ammārah*], and
to go deep into his doings, quests and desires, with strictness and
examination, so as to find out the ultimate objective of his journey,
learning the principles of his inner activities and spiritual nutrition.

He is not to neglect the tricks of the soul and Satan, as well as the
snares of the commanding soul and *Iblīs*. He is always to distrust his
self in all his doings and activities, and never to let it go willfully.
It is quite possible that, with a little negligence, it may overcome
man, knock him down and drive him to perdition and annihilation. If the
spiritual foods were not free from Satan's intrusion, and if he shared
in preparing them, the souls and hearts would not be educated with them
nor can they reach their becoming perfection, let alone the irreparable
insufficiency that would befall them.

Such foods may probably cause man to join the group of Satans or the
quadruped and beasts of prey. Then whatever is the capital of happiness,
the source of the human perfection and the means of attaining to high
ranks, results in the opposite, and drives man to the dark abyss of
misfortune. Actually we did come across some of the so called gnostics
who had been led astray because of their deep indulgence in the gnostic
terminology, such that their hearts became inverted and their interiors
were darkened.

Their gnostic practices strengthened their selfishness and Oneness, and
they uttered improper allegations and abnormal expressions. Similarly,
among the ascetics and the devotees there were persons who practiced
asceticism and self-purification, yet their exercises only aggravated
their hearts' impurity and their interiors' darkness. This is because
they did not keep on their divine spiritual journey and migration to
Allah, and their scholarly and ascetic *sulūk* (journey) was subject to
the intrusion of Satan and the self's desire, and so, it was to Satan
and self.

We also noted that among the students of religious sciences there were
some who had badly been affected by their studies, which increased their
moral corruption; and knowledge, which should have guided them to
success and salvation, had driven them to annihilation and led them to
ignorance, hypocrisy, arrogance and deception.

Likewise, it is seen that among the people of worship and ceremonies,
who persist in observing disciplines and traditions, there were those
whose worship and sacrifices which are the source of reforming the
conditions and souls had affected their hearts with impurity and
darkness, causing them to be conceited, egotistic, arrogant, pampered,
slanderous, ill-tempered and distrusting the servants of Allah. These
are also caused by neglecting to observe those divine mixtures
[*ma‛ājīn*].

Naturally, the mixture [*ma‛jūn*] prepared by Satan's filthy hand and
the meddling of the obstinate self can give birth to nothing but Satanic
character, and since the heart gets its nourishment from them, in any
case, and they become the inner image of the soul, after a while of
man's continuing so, he becomes an offspring of Satan, and will be
brought up under his patronage. And when the visible eye of such a man
is closed and his invisible eye is opened, he will see himself among the
Satans. Thus, the result will be nothing but a loss, and his regret and
repent will avail him to nothing.

Consequently, the traveler on the road to the Hereafter, notwithstanding
his religious branch or divine method, has, firstly to be on the alert,
like a kind doctor or a compassionate nurse, to take full care of his
moods, looking for the faults of his conduct with strictness, and
secondly, as he does so, he is not to neglect seeking refuge in the
Sacred Essence of Allah, the Glorified and Most High, in his privacy,
and supplicating in the presence of His Sanctity and Majesty.

O Lord! You do know our weakness and helplessness. You do know that
without your helping hand we cannot find our way out of the hands of
such a powerful enemy who covets the great prophets and the perfect and
high holy men. Without Your spark of kindness and mercy, this
strong-handed enemy will knock us down on the ground of annihilation and
hurl us into the pit of darkness and wretchedness.

We adjure you by your distinguished favorites and intimate confidants to
extend Your helping hand to us, the bewildered in the valley of error
and the fallen down in the desert of seduction. Purge our hearts of
rancor, deceit, polytheism and doubt. Surely you are the Patron of
Guidance!

[^1]: Sūrah al-Ma'ārij 70:34; Sūrah al-Mu'minūn 23:9.

[^2]: Mullā Sadrā and his disciples used this expression to define
philosophy, to which some added the phrase: “in its image and
perfection.”


