Chapter 7: On Informing The Heart
=================================

A cordial discipline of worship, especially the invoking worship, is
“informing” [*tafhīm*]. It is to take the heart, at the beginning, as a
child not yet able to speak, and is wanted to be taught. So, each of the
invocations, recitations, facts and secrets of worship is to be taught
to the heart with strict accuracy and effort, and whatever the degree of
perfection, one has to teach to the heart the facts which he has so far
recognized.

Even if one was unable to understand the meanings of the Qur'an and the
invocations, and had no share of the secrets of worship, he,
nevertheless, would have to teach his heart the very general meanings,
such as telling it that the Qur'an is the words of Allah, that the
invocations are remembrance of Allah, and that worship is obeying the
Creator. He has to teach his heart such general information.

Should he be of those who understand the apparent meanings of the Qur'an
and the invocations, such as the promises, warnings, biddings and
forbiddings, as well as the information about the Source [*mabda'*] and
Resurrection [*ma'ād*], he must inform his heart of whatever has been
understood from them by him. Should a fact of knowledge or a secret of
worship be exposed to him, he is to inform it to his heart carefully and
strictly.

The result of such information is that after a period of perseverance
the tongue of the heart will open to speaking and will become an invoker
and a reminder. At the beginning the heart is a learner and the tongue a
teacher. Whenever the tongue invokes, the heart also becomes an invoker,
and so the heart is a follower of the tongue.

But after that the heart's tongue learns to speak, the contrary happens:
the heart becomes invoker and the tongue follows it in invocation and in
movement. Rather, sometimes it happens that even when man is sleeping,
his tongue starts invocating in pursuit of his heart's invocation, as
the heart's invocation is not confined to the state of wakefulness, and
when the heart remembers, the tongue, having become its follower, starts
invocating after it, and it leaks out from the dominion of the heart:

*“**Say: Every one acts according to his own manner…”***[^1]

In short, at the beginning man must observe this discipline, that is,
“informing,” so that the tongue of the heart starts speaking, which is
the real objective. The sign denoting that the heart's tongue has been
released is that the tiredness and the hardship of the invocation are
removed and replaced by animation and pleasure.

It is like a baby, who has not yet started talking, its tutor feels
tired and bored before it speaks. No sooner the baby starts prattling
than his tutor's fatigue goes away and the teacher follows up the
child's utterances without tiredness or trouble. Similar is the heart.
It is a mere infant at the start, knowing not how to speak. It is to be
taught, and the invocations and the recitations are to be placed on its
tongue. Then, as it begins talking, man begins to be its follower, and
there will remain neither pain of teaching nor any tiredness of
invocating. This discipline is quite necessary for the beginners.

It must be noted that one of the secrets of repeating the invocations
and benedictions and continuing the remembrance and worshipping is that
the heart's tongue gets untied, and the heart becomes an invoking
devotee. Without observing this discipline the tongue of the heart would
remain tied up.  
 Some noble *Hadiths* refer to this. The noble *al*-*Kāfī*, quoting Imām
as-Sādiq ('*a*), who quoted Imām 'Alī ('*a*) who, referring to some
disciplines of recitation, said: ”…But strike with it (the Qur'an) your
hardened hearts, and do not be eager to get to the end of the *sūrah*.”
[^2]

In another *hadīth* in *al*-*Kāfī*, Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) told Abū
Usāmah: “O Abū Usāmah, call your hearts [*qulūb*] to remember Allah, and
avoid what displeases Him.” [^3]

Even the most perfect godly men ('*a*) used to observe this discipline.
A *hadīth* relates that Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) (once) was subject to a fit
during the *Salat* and fainted. When he came to his senses and he was
asked about the reason, he said: “I kept repeating this *āyah* to my
heart until I heard it from the one who spoke it, and so, my body could
not bear to see His power.” [^4]

Abū Dharr is quoted to have said that the Messenger of Allah (*s*) was
one night repeating this Qur'anic verse:

*“**If you should torment them, then they are, indeed, your servants,
and if you should forgive them, then you are, indeed, the Mighty, the
Wise.”***[^5]

In short, the reality of invocation and remembrance is the invocation of
the heart, without which the invocation of the tongue will be futile and
worthless. This is referred to in a number of *Hadiths*. The Messenger
of Allah (*s*) informed Abū Dharr: “O Abū Dharr, two *rak'at*s of
*Salat* in contemplation are better than spending the whole night with
an inattentive (or forgetful) heart.” [^6]

The Messenger of Allah (*s*) is also quoted to have said: “Allah, the
Exalted, would not look at your faces, but at your hearts.” [^7]

In the *Hadiths* concerning the presence of heart it is stated that the
more the presence of heart in the *Salat*, the better it is accepted,
and the more the negligence of the heart, the less it is acceptable. As
long as the said discipline is not observed, no cordial invocation will
happen, and the heart will not come out of its being inattentive and
negligent.

It is narrated that Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) said: “Make your heart a
*qiblah* to your tongue and do not move it except by a sign from the
heart.”[^8] But the heart would not become a *qiblah* nor would the
tongue and the other organs follow it unless the said discipline was
observed. Should it happen without the observance of this discipline, it
would be a rarity, and one must not take pride in it.

[^1]: Sūrah al-Isrā' 17:84.

[^2]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 4, Book on “The Merit of the Qur'an,” ch. on
“Reciting the Qur'an in a Melodious Voice,” hadīth 1, p. 418. 

[^3]: Al-Kāfī, (Rawdah), vol. 8, p. 167; Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 67, Book
on “Faith and Disbelief,” ch. 44, hadīth, 38, p. 59.

[^4]: Al-Mahajjat ul-Baydā', vol. 1, Book on “The Secrets of the Salat,”
ch. on “The Merit of Submission and its Meaning,” p. 352.

[^5]: Sūrah al-Mā'idah 4:118. Rūh ul-Ma'āni fī Tafsīr al-Qur'ān by
'Allāmah al-Ālūsī vol. 7, p. 70, quoted from the Sunans of an-Nasā'ī and
al-Bayhaqī.

[^6]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 74, Book of ”Ar-Rawdah” ch. on “The Prophet's
Admonitions,” hadīth 2, p. 82, quoted from Makārim al-Akhlāq, p. 465.

[^7]: Ibid.; Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 67, p. 248, quoted from Jāmi'
al-Akhbār, p. 117 (with a slight addition).

[^8]: Refer to footnote 34.


