Chapter 11: On Curing The Wandering Imagination
===============================================

**Concerning Showing an Effective Cure for the Treatment of the
Wandering and Escaping Imagination that Brings about the Presence of
Heart**

Know that each one of the inner and outer powers of the soul can be
educated and taught by way of practicing a particular austerity. For
example, human eye is unable to gaze at a point or at an intense light,
such as the disk of the sun, for a long time, without blinking. But if a
man educates his eye, such as that which is done by some of the people
of false asceticism for certain purposes, he can look into the sun for
several hours without blinking or getting tired.

Similarly, he can gaze at a certain point for hours without any
movement. This is also true of the other faculties, like stopping
breathing, which, as they say, is seen among the people of false
asceticism, as there are some who can stop breathing for an
extraordinary period.

Of the faculties that can be educated are the faculties of imagination
and fancy. Before educating them, they are like two ever-jumpy and
restless birds flying from a branch to another, and from one thing to
another. If one tries to watch them for a single minute, he will see
their many successive movements of very slight and far-fetched
connections.

Many think that to control the bird of imagination and tame it is out of
the limits of possibilities, and falls within the realm of the common
impossibilities. But, as a matter of fact, it is not so. With hardship,
practice and time-taking education, it can be tamed, and the bird of
imagination can be put under one's control and will be such that it can
be confined for several hours and for a certain purpose, according to
one's will.

The principal way of taming it is to act to its contrary. That is, at
the time of the *Salat* one is to prepare himself to control the
imagination during the *Salat* and confine it to action, and, as soon as
it tries to slip out of his hand, to recapture it. One should carefully
watch it in all the actions, recitations, invocations, etc. of the
*Salat*, observing it so as not to be obstinate. At the beginning, this
seems to be a difficult task.

But after a while of strict practice and treatment, it will certainly
become tame and obedient. You should not, of course, expect yourself, at
the beginning, to be able to control the bird of imagination along the
*Salat* completely. Actually, this is impossible. Perhaps those who
stressed this impossibility had such expectations. The situation
requires deliberateness, careful patience and gradual training.

It is possible that you can first control your imagination during only
one-tenth of the *Salat* or even less than that, in which you can have
the presence of heart. Then, if one pays more attention, and if he feels
himself in need of that, he can attain a better result, and can
gradually overcome the Satan of fancy and the bird of imagination, such
that they come under his control in most of the *Salat*. However, you
should never despair, as despair is the origin of all weaknesses and
inabilities, whereas the flash of hope guides man to his complete
happiness.

The important thing in this respect, however, is to feel being in need a
mood that is little felt by us. Our heart does not believe that the
source of the happiness in the Hereafter, and the means of a
long-lasting life, is the *Salat*. We take the *Salat* to be an
additional burden on our lives. We think it an imposition and an
obligation. The love of a thing is seen from understanding its
consequences. We understood its consequence and the heart believes in
it, and, therefore, we are not in need of any advice or admonition in
acquiring it.

Those who think that the message of the Seal of the Prophets, the
Hāshimite Messenger (*s*), has two dimensions: one belonging to this
world and the other to the Hereafter, and take this to be a pride of the
bringer of the *Sharī'ah* and the perfection of prophethood, know
nothing of the religion and are unaware of the message and far from
understanding the purpose of the prophethood.  
 Inviting to worldly things is quite alien to the objectives of the
great prophets, since desire, sense of anger and the interior and
exterior Satans are sufficient for such an invitation and it does not
need the sending of messengers. The administration of desire and anger
is in no need of a Qur'an or a prophet. The prophets, actually, have
come to keep people back from this world to curb the release of the
desire and anger, and to limit the sources of worldly interests.

An ignorant person thinks that they invited the people to this world.
They say: “Do not acquire wealth by whatever means. Do not satisfy your
desire in whatever way available there should be marriage, and there
should be (lawful) trade, industry and agriculture though the door of
the center of desire and anger is opened by letting them free.”

So, the prophets demand them to be chained, not to be set free, and they
do not invite to worldly things. They ask for a lawful business so as to
prohibit the unlawful ones. They call to marriage in order to curb the
nature and prevent debauchery and releasing the power of desire
[*shahwat*]. As a matter of fact, they are not absolutely against them,
because it would be against the perfect system.

In short, as we feel we need this world, regarding it to be the capital
of life and the source of pleasure, we get ready to attend to it and to
acquire it. But if we believe in the Hereafter-life and feel we are in
need of that life, and regard worship, especially the *Salat*, to be the
capital for living there, and the source of happiness in that world, we,
naturally, will try to do our best to acquire it, and we will not feel
any difficulty and fatigue in ourselves; or rather, we will hurry to
acquire it with complete eagerness and craving, and endure every
hardship and undergo all circumstances for that purpose.

Now, this coldness and weakness, which are manifest in us, are caused by
the coldness of the radiance of our faith and the weakness of its
foundation. Had all the news of the prophets and holy men [*awliyā'*]
('*a*) and the arguments of the elite and learned men (may Allah be
pleased with them) created “sufferance” [*ihtimāl*] in us, we could have
done better in our attempts and acquirements.

So, we have to regret a thousand times for letting Satan overcome our
inside and conquer the whole of our heart and the hearings of our
interior, preventing us from hearing the sayings of Allah and His
Messengers, and those of the scholars, as well as the admonitions of the
divine Books. Such being the case, our ears are changed to those of
worldly animals, and the divine admonitions would not go beyond the
apparent and the animal ear to the inside

*“**Most surely there is a reminder in this for him who has a heart or
he gives ear and is a witness.”*** *(Surah al-Qaaf, 50:37)*

One of the great duties of the traveler to Allah and the striver for the
sake of Allah is to completely give up self-reliance during the striving
and *sulūk*, and, by nature, to pay attention to the Cause of the
causes, and by disposition, to belong to the Origin of the origins,
asking from His Sacred Existence protection and immunity from sin, and
depending on the help of His Sacred Essence. In his privacy he is to
implore Him and very seriously request Him to improve his condition, for
there is no refuge save Him. And praise be to Allah!


