Chapter 12: Explaining That Loving This World Causes Distraction Of The Mind
============================================================================

**A Reference to that Loving this World is the Origin of the Distraction
of the Imagination and Prevents the Presence of Heart, and Explaining
its Remedy as Much as Possible**

It must be noted that the heart, according to its nature and
disposition, looks at what it loves and is inclined to that beloved to
have it as its *qiblah*. If an affair distracted the heart from thinking
of the beauty of its cherished beloved, no sooner the engagement
slackens and the distraction stops than the heart flies towards its
beloved and clings to his skirt.

Should the people of knowledge and the divinely attracted enjoy strength
of heart and be firm in absorption and love, they would recognize the
Beauty of the Beloved in every mirror, and would discern the wanted
perfection in every being: “I discerned nothing unless I recognized
Allah in it and with it,”[^1] and if their leader [the Prophet (*s*)]
says: “Sometimes my heart is enveloped by a cover of dust, and I ask
Allah's forgiveness seventy times every day,”[^2] it is because to see
the Beauty of the Beloved especially in an impure mirror like the Abu
Jahl mirror is in itself a sort of impurity with respect to the perfect
ones.

If their hearts are not strong enough, and their engagement in
multiplicity prevents the presence (of heart), no sooner the engagement
lessens than their hearts' birds fly back to their sacred nests and
cling to the Beauty of the Beautiful.

As to those who look for other than Allah who, in the eyes of the people
of knowledge, all seek for this world they are also attracted to their
want and cling to it. If they, too, are extremely in love with their
quest, and the love of this world has completely possessed their hearts,
they will never relax in their attraction towards it, and, whatever the
situation, they remain beside the beauty of their beloved.

Should their love be less, their hearts would return, in their leisure
time, to their beloved. Those who cherish in their hearts the love of
wealth, rule and position, dream of them in their sleep, too, and, in
their wakefulness, they live thinking of their beloved. As long as they
are engaged in worldly matters, they live hugging their beloved, and
when the time of the *Salat* arrives, the heart feels a kind of vacancy
and sticks to its beloved, as if the *takbīrat ul-ihrām* (the first
*Allāhu* *akbar* uttered aloud at the start of the *Salat*) is the key
to the shop, or the remover of the curtain between it and its beloved.

So, he comes to himself only when he has just uttered the *taslīm* (the
finishing words of the *Salat*), whereas he had paid no attention to the
*Salat* itself, and during it he had been engaged in thinking of this
world. That is why our *Salat*s for forty or fifty years have no result
whatsoever in our hearts except darkness and impurity, and what should
have been a cause for ascension to the proximity of Allah's presence and
a means of becoming familiar with His sanctity, has, on the contrary,
driven us out of His proximity and taken us miles away from ascending to
be familiar with His presence.

Had our *Salat* a smell of servitude, its result would have been modesty
and humility, not self-conceitedness, ostentation, arrogance and pride,
each one of which can possibly be a separate cause of man's misfortune
and perdition.

In short, when one's heart becomes mixed with the love of this world,
with no objective or aim except building it up and developing it, this
love will inevitably prevent the heart from being vacant and present in
the presence of Allah. This deadly disease and ruinous corruption can be
cured by useful knowledge and good deed.

The useful knowledge suitable for this ailment is to think of the fruits
and outcomes of curing it, and compare them with the harmful and
destructive consequences resulting from it. In my commentaries on the
*Forty* *Hadiths* in this respect I have explained this topic in details
as was possible. Here I will suffice myself with explaining some
*Hadiths* of the infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* ('*a*):  
 In *Al-Kāfī*, Abū 'Abdullāh (as-Sādiq) ('*a*) is quoted to have said:
“The origin of every sin is the love of this world.”[^3] Other *Hadiths*
on this subject, though in different wordings, are plenty.[^4]

Yet, this noble *hadīth* is quite enough for the wakeful man, and it is
enough for this big and pernicious sin to be the source of all sins and
the root and basement of all corruptions. By a little contemplation it
can be realized that almost all moral and practical corruptions are the
fruits of this vile tree. No false religion was established in the
world, and no corruption has ever happened, unless it stemmed from this
grave sin.

Murders, plunders, injustice and transgressions are of the offspring of
this sin. Debauchery, atrocities, theft and other crimes are the
outcomes of this germ of corruption. The man who is afflicted with this
love is void of all moral virtues. Courage, chastity, generosity and
equity, which are the origin of all the spiritual virtues, are not
compatible with the love of this world. Divine knowledge [*ma'ārif*],
unity of Names, Attributes, Actions and Essence, truth-seeking and
truth-discerning are contrary to the love of this world.

Tranquility of the soul, calmness of the mind and repose of the heart,
which are the spirit of happiness in both worlds, cannot come along with
loving this world. Richness of the heart, greatness, self-respect,
freedom, and manliness are of the requisites of ignoring this world,
whereas poverty, humility, covetousness, greed, servitude and flattery
are of the requisites of loving this world. Kindness, mercy, observing
kinship relations, affection and amity are not in harmony with the love
of this world. Hatred, rancor, despotism, severing kinship relations,
hypocrisy and other evil characters are of the progeny of this “mother
of diseases”.

As-Sādiq ('*a*), as stated in *Misbāh ash*-*Sharī'ah*, said: “This world
is like a portrait: its head is arrogance, its eye is greed, its ear is
covetousness, its tongue is pretence, its hand is desire, its leg is
conceit, its heart is negligence, its being is perishing and its destiny
is decline. Whoever loves it, it gives him arrogance, whoever approves
of it, it grants him greed, whoever demands it, it drives him to
covetousness, whoever praises it, it clothes him with pretence, whoever
wants it, it offers him conceit, whoever trusts it, it neglects him,
whoever admires its properties, it ruins him, and whoever accumulates it
and does not spend it, it turns him down to its dwelling place, the
Fire.”[^5]

Daylamī, in *Irshād al*-*Qulūb*, quoting Amīr al-Mu'minīn ('Alī) ('*a*),
says that the Messenger of Allah (s) said: “On the night of the
*mi'rāj*, Allah, the Exalted, said: “O Ahmad, if a servant performs the
*Salat* as much as that of the people of the earth and the heaven, and
fasts as much as that of the people of the earth and the heaven, and
refrains, like the angels, from food, and wears the apparel of a
devotee, then I see in his heart a bit of love for this world or for
worldly reputation, leadership, celebrity and ornaments, he will not be
in an abode in My neighborhood and I will drive My love out of his heart
and make it dark until he forgets Me. I will not let him taste the
sweetness of my love.”[^6]

It is quite clear that loving this world and loving Allah cannot meet
together. In this respect there are too many *Hadiths* to be contained
in these pages.  
 Now as it has become clear that the love of this world is the origin of
all evils, it becomes incumbent on a man of reason, who cherishes his
happiness, to uproot this tree from his heart. The practical way to
treat it is to do the contrary, i.e., if he has a longing for wealth and
position, he can get rid of it by way of being open-handed and spending
obligatory and recommended alms and charities.

By the way, one of the characteristics of alms-giving is lessening the
love of this world. That is why it is recommended to give charity out of
what you love most, as stated in the Glorious Qur'an:

*“**You shall not attain goodness until you spend out of what you
love”*** *(Surah aal-Imraan, 3:92).*

If he desires pride, priority, authority and power, he is to act against
that, to turn the nose of the evil-commanding soul into the dust to
reform it.

Man should know that the world is such that the more one is attached to
it and in pursuit of it, the more his affection to it and the more his
regret for parting company with it. It seems as if one is in quest of
something, which is not in his possession. Man thinks he is in need of a
certain portion of the world, which he pursues, no matter what
difficulties and risks he will have to endure to attain his goal, and,
as soon as he obtains it, it loses its attraction and becomes an
ordinary matter, and his love and attachment turn into something else
more sublime than the previous one, and he starts his toil and endeavors
anew.

In this way his anxiety will never be subdued. Actually, his love gets
ever stronger, and his hardships ever increase. This natural disposition
never stops. The people of knowledge use this inborn nature to prove a
lot of disciplines, which are out of the scope of these papers to
explain. This subject is referred to by some noble *Hadiths*, such as
that which is stated in the noble *al-Kāfī*, quoting. Imām al-Bāqir
('*a*) who said: “The parable of a man greedy of this world is the
parable of the silk worm: the more it winds the thread round itself the
farther it becomes from salvation, until it dies of grief.”[^7]

Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) is quoted to have said: “This world is like
sea-water; the more a thirsty man drinks from it the thirstier he gets,
until it kills him.”[^8]

[^1]: A quotation from Amīr al-Mu'minīn ['Alī] ('a) in 'Ilm al-Yaqīn,
vol. 1, p. 49.  

[^2]: Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, “Book of as-Salat,” sec. on “Invocations,”
ch. 22, hadīth 1.  

[^3]: Usūl al-Kāfī, “Book of Faith and Infidelity,” ch. on “Loving this
World and Being Attached to it,” hadīth 1.  

[^4]: Ibid., hadīths 1-17.

[^5]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 32 “On This World's Attribute(s)”.  

[^6]: Irshād al-Qulūb, vol. 1, p. 206

[^7]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 3, “Book of Faith and Infidelity,” ch. on
“Dispraising this World and Neglecting it,” hadīth 20, and ch. on
“Loving this World and being Greedy of it,” hadīth 7, p. 202.  

[^8]: Ibid, hadīth 24.


