Completion: On Turning The Soul Away From The World
===================================================

So, O seeker of the truth and traveler to Allah, as you have tamed the
bird of imagination, chained the Satan of fancy, given up the love of
wife, children and other worldly affairs, got familiar with the
attraction of the fire of the natural divine love and said: “**Lo! I see
a fire [afar off],”**[^1] seen yourself with no barriers in the way and
prepared the requirements of the journey, get up, then, leave this dark
room of nature and the narrow passage of the world, break off the chains
of time, save yourself from this prison and let the bird of sanctity fly
to “the meeting place of intimacy.” [*mahfil*-*i 'uns*].

A whistle is calling you from the turret of the '*Arsh*, I wonder what
keeps you into this place of traps![^2]

So, be resolute and strengthen your will, since the first condition of
*sulūk* is resolution ['*azm*], without which no distance can be covered
and no perfection can be reached. The great Shaykh, Shāhābādī [^3] (may
my soul be his ransom) called it as the core of humanity. It can also be
said that one of the great points of fearing Allah, avoiding the desires
of the appetitive soul, the lawful austerities, and the divine worship
and rituals, is strengthening the resolution and defying the worldly
powers under the sovereignty of the soul, as has already been mentioned.

We now close this discourse with praising and glorifying the Sacred
Essence of Allah, the Exalted, and with praising the attributes of the
Chosen Master, the elected Prophet, and his pure offspring ('*a*). We
ask the help of the holy souls of those sacred personalities in our
spiritual journey and faithful ascension.

[^1]: A part of Moses' conversation with his people. “When he saw a
fire, he said to his people: “Stay here! Lo! I see a fire [afar off].” ”
Sūrah Tā-Hā 20:10 and Sūrah an-Naml 27: 7.  

[^2]: A poem by Hāfiz Shīrāzī.

[^3]: The late Āyatullāh Mīrzā Muhammad-'Alī Isfahānī Shāhābādī, a
jurist, methodist, gnostic and prominent philosopher, son of the late
Āyatullāh Mīrzā Muhammad Jawād Husaynābādī Isfahānī, was born in Isfahan
in 1292 L.H. After finishing his preliminary learning in Isfahan and
Tehran, he traveled to study in the theological circles of Najaf
al-Ashraf and Sāmirrā' (in Iraq). There his tutors were great scholars,
such as the late writer of Al-Jawāhir, Ākhūnd Khurāsānī and Sharī'at
Isfahānī. He soon attained the degree of ijtihād. He reached a high
position in fiqh, philosophy and gnosticism, and he taught these
branches of knowledge. His class was one of the most powerful scholarly
circles in Sāmirrā'. After returning from Iraq, he settled first in
Tehran, and then he moved to the sacred town of Qum, where he dwelt for
seven years. During his stay in Qum, Imām Khomeinī (may Allah be pleased
with him and send peace upon him) benefited so much from his lessons on
ethics and gnosticism. The Imām of the nation, in many places in this
book and in his other books and writings, refers to his great teacher
with utmost respect and esteem, and relates his scholarly emissions.
Besides teaching different branches of knowledge and educating his
distinguished disciples, the late Shāhābādī wrote many books in
different fields. At the age of seventy-seven, that man of knowledge and
action died in 1369 L.H. in Tehran, and was buried in the neighborhood
of the shrine of 'Abd al-'Azīm al-Hasanī, in the graveyard of the late
Shaykh Abū 'l-Futūh ar-Rāzī. May Allah resurrect him together with the
Prophet Muhammad and his pure progeny.


