Chapter 1: On Purification In General
=====================================

As it has already been said, besides the outer appearance of the
*Salat*, it has a reality, and apart from its exterior it has an
interior. And as its outer form has its formal disciplines and
conditions, its interior has its disciplines and conditions, too, which
are to be observed by the *sālik*. Thus, purification has also its outer
form and formal disciplines, the explanation of which is out of the
scope of these pages.

The *faqīh*s (jurists) of the Ja'farī school (may Allah make high their
words and raise their ranks) have explained them. As regards the inner
disciplines and purifications, they shall be explained in general:  
 It should be noted that the reality of the *Salat* is ascension to the
Proximity, and reaching the Presence of Allah, the Almighty and Most
High. Thus, to attain this great objective and ultimate goal, one should
practice certain purifications, which are other than the outer
purifications. The thorns of this road and the obstacles in the way of
this ascension are such impurities that if the *sālik* were marked by
one of them, he would be incapable of ascending to the peak and
completing the ascension.

Such impurities are the hindrances in the way of the *Salat* and the
plagues of Satan. But what is a help to the *sālik* in his journey and
is a discipline of the Presence is the condition of this reality. The
traveler to Allah has first to remove the obstacles and impurities so
that he may be purified and attain purity which belongs to the world of
light. Unless all the impurities, outer and inner, open and hidden, are
purified, the *sālik* will have no chance of attending the Presence (of
Allah).

Thus, the first kind of impurities is that of the outer instruments and
powers of the soul which may be polluted with obstinacies and acts of
disobedience to “the Benefactor” [*waliyy un-ni'am*] this is an apparent
snare of *Iblīs*. As long as man is trapped in this snare, he is
deprived of being in Allah's Presence and attaining His Proximity. No
one may have the notion that without purifying the outside of his
kingdom he can reach the state of the truth of humanity, or he can
purify his inner heart, as this will be a Satanic vanity and of *Iblīs'*
big tricks.

This is because the heart's impurity and darkness will be increased by
disobediences, which mark the triumph [*ghalabah*] of nature over
spirituality. Unless the *sālik* conquers the kingdom of the outside, he
will remain deprived of inner conquests, which are the big objective,
and no way will be opened for him to happiness. Thus, one of the big
obstacles of this *sulūk* is the impurities of the acts of disobedience,
which must be purged and purified with the water of sincere repentance.

It should also be noted that all the external and internal powers which
Allah, the Exalted, has bestowed upon us from the invisible world are
divine deposits free from all impurities and are purged and purified,
and even illuminated with the light of the God-given disposition, and
excluded from Satan's dark and impure influence.

Yet, since they have descended in the dark abode of the world of nature,
and the influential hands of the devil of imagination and fancy have
reached them, they have deviated from the original purity and primary
disposition, and got polluted with diverse Satanic filths and
impurities. So, if the *sālik* to Allah could, by adhering to the care
of Allah's *Walī*, repel Satan's influence, purge the kingdom of the
outside and return the divine trusts as they had been given to him with
no treason, he would be forgiven and protected, and, as far as the
outside is concerned, he need not worry, and then he would turn to the
inside to purge it from the impurities of corrupt moralities.

This is the second kind of impurity, which is more corrupt and more
difficult to cure, and thus, it is more important to the people of
austerity, because as long as the inner moralities of the soul are
corrupt and encircled by spiritual impurities, it will not deserve the
state of holiness and “the private place of intimacy” [*khalwat*-*i*
*uns*], as the origin of the corruption of the exterior kingdom of the
soul is its corrupt morals and its vile habits.

And, unless the *sālik* changes his vile habits to good ones, he will
not be safe from the evil acts. If he is successful in repentance (while
still having vile habits), its stability which is a matter of grave
importance cannot be achieved. So, the outer purification depends on the
inner purification, besides the fact that the interior impurities cause
deprivation of happiness, and originate the Hell of morals, which, as
the people of knowledge say, is worse and more intense in burning than
the Hell of deeds. This question has frequently been mentioned in the
*Hadiths* of the infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* ('*a*).  
 Therefore, it is a must for the *sālik* to Allah to carry out this
purgation. After he has cleansed his soul of the corrupting impurities
of the morals with the pure water of useful knowledge and lawful, good
austerity, he will have to set upon purifying the heart, the capital
which, if reformed, all kingdoms will be reformed, and if it is corrupt,
all will be corrupt. The impurities of the world of the heart are the
origin of all impurities, such as being attached to other than Allah, to
oneself and to this world.

This is originated by the love of this world, which is at the head of
all sins, and by self-love, which is the mother of all diseases. As long
as the roots of this love are still deep in the heart of the *sālik*, he
will see no marks of the love of Allah in it, and he will find no way to
his destination and objective. So, as long as there are remnants of this
love in the heart, his journey will not be to Allah, but to the self, to
the world, and to Satan. So, being purged of the love of self and of the
world is the first stage of purifying the journey to Allah in reality,
because before this purgation the journey would not be to Allah, and it
would be a sort of carelessness to refer to *sālik* and *sulūk* in this
instance.

After this stage there are other stages, after which there will appear a
model of 'Attār's *Seven Cities of Love*, the reciter of which, as a
*sālik*, could see himself at the bend of a lane, while we remain behind
walls and thick veils, and think that those “cities” and “kings” are
nothing but of the weavings of our presumption. I have nothing to do
with Shaykh 'Attār or Maytham at-Tammār, but I do not deny the original
(gnostic) stations, and I cordially love their owners, and, by this
love, I hope to be relieved. You yourself be whom you may, and bind
yourself to whom you like.

The pretender wanted to come to look at the Beloved [Friend], The hand
of the invisible came and pushed off the stranger.[^1]

But I do not approve of disloyalty by brethren in faith and by spiritual
friends to the gnostic friends, and I will not refrain from offering
advice, which is the right of the believers to one another.  
 At the top of the spiritual impurities, which cannot be purged even
with the seven seas, and which caused despair to the great prophets
('*a*), is the impurity of “the compound ignorance” [*jahl-i murakkab*],
which is the origin of the incurable disease of denying the stations of
the people of Allah and of knowledge, and is the source of doubting the
people of the heart.

As long as man is polluted with such impurities, he will not take a step
towards knowledge [*ma'ārif*], or rather, this impurity so often
extinguishes the inborn light [*nūr*] of disposition, which is the light
[*chirāgh*] for the road of guidance, and puts out the fire of love,
which is the heavenly horse [*burāq*] for ascending to high stations,
causing man to eternally stick to the earth of nature.

Therefore, it is necessary for man, through thinking about the status of
the prophets and the perfect holy men [*awliyā'*] ('*a*), and by
contemplating their stations, to wash those impurities away from his
heart, and not to be satisfied with the status he is in, because this
satisfaction with the knowledge [*ma'ārif*] one has, and remaining
stagnant, are of the great tricks of *Iblīs* and the evil-commanding
soul. We take refuge in Allah from them. Now, as this thesis is written
according to the taste of the common people, I refrain from the three
purifications of the holy men [*awliyā'*]. And praise be to Allah.

[^1]: A poem by Hāfiz. In the printed copies it is stated: ”…to come to
the show place of the Secret.”


