Chapter 2: Concerning The Stages Of Purification
================================================

Know that as long as man is in the world of nature and in the abode of
the primary [*hayūlānī*] matter, he is under the rule of the divine
soldiers and the satanic soldiers. The divine soldiers are the soldiers
of mercy, safety, happiness, light, purity, and perfection. The soldiers
of *Iblīs* are on the opposite side. But as the divine aspects have
mastery over the satanic aspects, at the beginning, man's disposition
possesses natural divine light, safety and happiness, as is openly
stated in the noble *Hadiths* and hinted at in the noble divine
Book.[^1]

As long as man is in this world, he can, on his own free will, put
himself at the disposal of either of the two. So, if from the beginning
of the God-given disposition till the end, Satan had no way of
intruding, man would be divine, luminous from head to foot with purity
and happiness, his heart being the light of Allah, observing nothing but
Allah.

His inward and outward powers would be luminous and pure, and no one
would use them but Allah, and Satan would have no share in them, nor
would his soldiers be able to control him. Such an honorable being is
absolute purity and pure light, and his past faults and the future ones
are forgiven.[^2]

He is an absolute conqueror, enjoying the station of original “great
infallibility” ['*ismat-i kubrā*], and the other infallibles have the
same station as the followers of that sacred essence. He is the Seal of
the Prophets and possesses the station of absolute perfection. His
vicegerents, though of separate substance, join him in disposition and
completely follow him in absolute infallibility.

As to some of the infallible prophets and holy men [*awliyā'*] ('*a*),
they have no absolute infallibility and are not protected against
Satan's intrusion, such as Adam's act with respect to the “tree,” which
was one of the intrusions of the great *Iblīs*, the chief of the
*Iblīs*es, and despite the fact that the “tree” was a paradisiac divine
tree, yet it was marked by a multiplicity of names, which is contrary to
the state of complete humanity. This is one of the meanings, or of the
ranks, of “the forbidden tree”.

If the light of the divine disposition was polluted with the formal and
spiritual impurities, it would be at a distance from the court of the
Proximity and “the Presence of Love” [*hadrat-i uns*] in proportion to
its pollution, until the light of disposition completely goes out, and
the kingdom becomes altogether Satanic, and its inside and outside,
secret and open, are put at the disposal of Satan.

Thus, Satan becomes its heart, ear (hearing), eye (seeing), hand, and
leg, and all his other organs become Satanic. If somebody reaches this
stage take refuge in Allah from it he becomes absolutely wretched and
will never see the face of happiness. Between these two limits there are
so many stages which only Allah, the Exalted, knows. Whoever is nearer
to the horizon of prophethood, is of “those on the right hand” [*ashāb-i
yamīn*], and whoever is nearer to the satanic horizon, is of “those on
the left hand” [*ashāb-i yasār*].

It should be noted, however, that even after the pollution of the inborn
disposition, it is possible to purify it. As long as man is still in
this world he can get out of Satan's domain and can easily join the
party of Allah's angels, who are the soldiers of the divine mercy.  
 The reality of *jihād-i nafs* [self-struggle] which, according to the
Messenger of Allah (*s*), is more meritorious than struggling against
the enemies of the religion, and is the greater *jihād* [^3] is this
getting out of Satan's domain and entering the domain of Allah's
soldiers.

So, the first stage of purity is the observance of divine laws and the
obedience to Allah's commands.

The second stage is to be adorned with virtuous morals and faculties.

The third stage is the purity of the heart, which means submitting the
heart to Allah, after which the heart becomes luminous, or rather it
becomes of the world of light and a degree of divine light. The
luminosity of the heart flows to other organs and inner powers, and the
whole kingdom turns into light, and light upon light, till the heart
becomes divine and godly and the Divinity [*hadrat-i lāhūt*] manifests
in all the inner and outer stages.

In this case, servitude completely vanishes and is annihilated, and
Lordship explicitly appears, in which case, the heart of the *sālik* is
overcome by a state of tranquility and familiarity, and he loves the
whole world, and experiences divine trances, and the sins and faults
become forgivable to him, and will be covered by the shelter of “love
manifestations” [*tajalliyāt-i hubbī*, and primary holiness [*wilāyat*]
begins to appear in him, and he becomes worthy of attending “the
Presence of Intimacy” [*mahdar-i uns*]. Then, there are other stages,
mentioning which does not suit these papers.

[^1]: For example, the noble verse: “So set your face to the religion,
as a man of pure faith Allah's nature upon which He originated mankind.”
(Sūrah ar-Rūm 30:30). See the hadīths in Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 3, p. 276;
vol. 64, p. 130, and in At-Tawhīd, ch. 53, p. 321.

[^2]: A hint at the noble verse: “…That Allah may forgive your past
faults and those to come.” (Sūrah al-Fath 48:2). 

[^3]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 67, p. 65; vol. 19, p. 182.


