Chapter 3: The Cordial Disciplines Of The Sālik When Coming To Water For Purification
=====================================================================================

In this chapter we translate a noble *hadīth* from *Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah*
so that the pure hearts of the people of faith may get from it some
lumination.

It is stated in *Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah* that Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) said:
“When you intend purification and *Wudu'* [ritual ablution], proceed to
the water as you proceed to Allah's mercy, because Allah has made water
the key to His proximity and supplication, and a guide to the court of
His service. And, as Allah's mercy purifies the sins of the servants,
similarly the outer filths are purified by water and by nothing else.
Allah, the Exalted, says:

*“**And He it is Who sends the winds as good news heralding His mercy,
and We send down purifying water from the sky”*** *(*Sūrah al*-*Furqān
*25:48).*

*He also says:*

*“**And we made every living thing of water. Will they not then
believe?”*** *(*Sūrah al*-*Anbiyā' *21:30).*

So, as He has given life with water to everything of the blessings of
this world, likewise, He has made obedience the life of the hearts, out
of His mercy and grace. Think of the clarity, softness, purity and
blessing of water and of its tender mixing with everything. Use it to
purge the organs that Allah has ordered you to purify, and observe their
disciplines in His obligations and advantages. So, if you use them
respectfully, the springs of the advantages will burst out for you
presently.  
 Then, mix with the creatures (servants) of Allah like the mixture of
water with things: It gives to everything its due without any change in
its own meaning. And learn a lesson from the Messenger of Allah (*s*)
(who said): “A sincere believer is like water.” Let your clearness with
Allah, the Most High, be like the clearness of water as He sent it down
from the sky and called it “purifier” [*tahūr*]. Purify your heart with
fear of Allah [*taqwā*] and certitude [*yaqīn*] as you cleanse your
organs with water.”[^1]

In this noble *hadīth* there are delicate points and facts, which
enliven the hearts of the people of knowledge, and bestow animation on
the clear souls of “the people of heart” [*ashāb-i qulūb*].

Describing water, in this *hadīth*, as Allah's mercy, or interpreting it
to be so, denotes that water is one of the great manifestations of
Allah's mercy, which He sent down to the world of nature, and made it
the source of life for the beings. Rather, the vast divine mercy, which
descended from the high heaven of His Names and Attributes, and with
which the lands of the individual entities [*ta'ayyunāt-i a'yān*] were
revived, is called “water” by the people of knowledge.

And as the vast divine mercy is more obvious in the apparent substance
of water than in other things, Allah, the Exalted, has assigned to it
the task of purifying the outer filths, and made it the key to the door
of His proximity and of the supplications to Him, and the guide to the
court of His service, which is the door of the doors of the inner
mercies.

Actually, the water of Allah's mercy descends and appears in every
growth [*nash'ah*] of existence and in every visible and invisible scene
to purify the sins of Allah's servants according to that growth
[*nash'ah*] and suitable to that world. So, the invisible sins of the
individual entities are purified with the water of mercy which descends
from the heaven of His Oneness [*ahadiyyat*], and the sins of the
non-existence of “the outer quiddities” [*māhiyyāt-i khārijiyyah*] are
purged with the water of the vast mercy descending from the heaven of
His Unity [*wāhidiyyat*] in every stage of existence according to that
stage.

In the stages of human growths [*nasha'āt*], too, the water of mercy has
different manifestations, as with the water descending from His Essence
onto “the purgatorial collective individuations” [*ta'ayyunāt-i
jam'iyyat-i barzakhiyyah*] the sins of the “existential secret” [*sirr-i
wujūdī*] are purified: “Your existence is a sin incomparable with any
other sin.” With the water descending from His Names and Attributes and
the manifestation of Act, the vision of the attribute and the act is
purged.

With the water descending from the sky of His “Decree of Justice”
[*hukm-i 'adl*] the inner moral impurities are purified. With the water
descending from the sky of His Forgiveness the sins of the servants are
purged. And with the water descending from the sky of “the kingdom of
heaven” [*malakūt*] the formal impurities are purged. So, it is clear
that Allah, the Exalted has made water the key to His proximity and the
guide to His court of mercy.

Then, in the noble *hadīth* there is another instruction, which opens
another way to the people of *sulūk* and of observance. It says:”…Think
of the clarity, softness, purity and blessing of water and of its
tenderly mixing with everything. Use it to purge the organs, which Allah
has ordered you to purify, and observe their disciplines in His
obligations and traditions, as under each one there are many advantages.
So, if you use them respectfully, the springs of the advantages will
burst out for you presently.”

This noble *hadīth* refers to the degrees of purity in general and puts
it in four general degrees, of which one is that which is mentioned so
far in the noble *hadīth*, i.e. purifying the organs. It also notes that
the people of observance and the *sālik*s to Allah should not stop at
the apparent form of the things. They have to regard the appearance as a
mirror reflecting the inside, to detect the facts from the forms and not
to be satisfied with formal purification, which is a satanic snare.

So, in the purity of water they discover the purity of the organs, which
they have to purge and clarify by way of performing the obligatory
duties and the divine laws, whose fineness is to be used to make fine
the organs and to take them out of the coarseness of disobedience, and
to let purity and blessing flow into all the organs.

And, from the tenderly mixing of water with things, they realize how the
divine heavenly powers are mixed with the world of nature, preventing
the impurities of nature from affecting them. When the organs are
clothed with the divine obligations and laws and their disciplines, the
inner advantages gradually appear, the springs of the divine secrets
burst out and a part of the secrets of servitude and purity uncover
themselves for the *sālik*.

After explaining the first stage of purification and its instruction,
the *hadīth* gives the secondary instruction, saying: “…then mix with
the creatures (servants) of Allah like the mixture of water with things:
It gives to everything its due without any change in its own meaning.
And learn a lesson from the Messenger of Allah (*s*) (who said): “A
sincere believer is like water.”

The first instruction concerns the *sālik*'s managing his organs and
inner powers. The second instruction mentioned in this noble *hadīth*
concerns man's relation with Allah's creatures. This is a comprehensive
instruction telling how the *sālik*'s behavior with the creatures should
be, which is also an implication of the reality of privacy [*khalwat*];
that is, the traveler to Allah, while treating each group of the people
with kindness, giving them their natural dues, and dealing with anyone
of them according to his disposition, is to strictly observe the divine
rights, and never to lose his own meaning, which is servitude and
attending to Allah.

At the same time of being in multiplicity [*kathrat*], he is to be in
privacy [*khalwat*], and his heart which is the lodging of the Beloved
is to be free from others and empty of all designs and paintings. Then
the *hadīth* refers to the third instruction, which concerns the
*sālik*'s connection with Allah, the Exalted. It says: “Let your
clearness with Allah, the Most High, be like the clearness of water when
He sent it down from the sky and called it 'purifier' [*tahūr*].”

That is, the traveler to Allah should be free from the intrusion of
nature, and its impurity and darkness should not be allowed into his
heart, and all his acts of worship should be free from all external and
internal polytheism. As the water is pure when descending from the sky,
and the hands of impurity have not extended to it, the heart of the
*sālik*, which has descended pure from the heaven of the invisible, is
to be protected against the intrusion of Satan and nature, and to be
prevented from being polluted with the impurities.

After this instruction, the *hadīth* comes to the last and the
comprehensive instruction for the people of austerity and of *sulūk*. It
says: “Purify your heart with fear of Allah and certitude as you cleanse
your organs with water.”

Here is a reference to two lofty stations of the people of knowledge:
one is “God-fearing,” which is perfected by abandoning everything other
than Allah. The other is certitude, which is perfected by discerning the
Presence of the Beloved.

[^1]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 10, on “Purification”.


