Chapter 4: Concerning The Purifier
==================================

The “purifier” is either water which is, in this respect, basic or
“earth”.

Know that the traveler to Allah, generally speaking, has two ways to
take him to the loftiest goal, the station of proximity to the Divinity:
The first of them, which is the principal and original one, is the
journey to Allah by turning towards the Absolute Mercy, especially the
compassionate mercy, which is the compassion that takes every being to
its appropriate perfection. It is of this kind of compassionate mercy
that the prophets ('*a*) were sent to lead on the roads and to help
those lagging behind.

To the people of knowledge and the people of heart, the House of
Realization is the form of divine mercy. The creatures are perpetually
and completely drowned in the oceans of Allah's mercy, yet they do not
make use of it.

The Great Divine Book which has descended from the divine invisible
world and the proximity of the Lord, and has appeared in the form of
words and speech so that we, the deserted, the prisoners in the jail of
nature and put in the fetters of the crooked chains of the soul's
desires and whims, make use of it and rescue ourselves is one of the
greatest manifestations of the absolute divine mercy, of which, we, the
blind and deaf, have in no way made use.

The Messenger the Seal of the prophets, the honorable absolute guardian,
who came from the Sacred Presence of the Lord and the company of the
divine proximity and familiarity to this abode of estrangement and
dread, where he had to keep company with the people like Abū Jahl (the
Prophet's uncle and his bitter enemy) or even worse, and whose sigh:
”…My heart is enveloped by a cover of dust…”[^1] has burnt the hearts of
the people of knowledge and friendship is Allah's vast mercy and the
divine absolute generosity, who had come into his (worldly) body as an
all-embracing mercy for the dwellers of this lower world, in order to
take them out of this abode of terror and estrangement, like a
“ring-dove”[^2] which throws itself into the net of blight to save its
flock.

The traveler to Allah should take the purification with the water of
mercy as a form of using the descending divine mercy, and to make use of
it as long as it is possible for him to do so. Should his hand become
short of it, because of inertia or negligence, and be bereaved of the
water of mercy, he would have but to pay attention to his own humility,
indigence, poverty and destitution.

When he has in full view of his humility of servitude and is aware of
his need, his poverty and his own potentiality, and discards his
haughtiness, conceit and selfishness, a door of mercy opens to him, and
the earth of (his) nature changes into the white earth of mercy, and
becomes the dust which is one of the “two purifiers”[^3], and becomes
the object of Allah's mercy and kindness. The stronger this state in
man, i.e., his awareness of his humility, the more he receives of mercy.

Should he decide to depend on himself and on his action in his journey,
he would perish, since there might be no one to extend help to him, like
an infant which boldly starts walking alone, taking pride in its own
steps, and depending on its own ability, without its father offering it
any help, rather leaving it to itself. But when it recognizes its
inability and inefficiency, it turns to its affectionate father,
distrusting its own power, and entrusts itself to the care of its
father, who offers his help, hugs it and guides it step by step to
walking.

So, it is better for the traveler to Allah to break the leg of his
journey and completely renounce his self-confidence, austerity and
action, and abolish himself, his power and ability. He should always
remember his mortality and dependence in order to become an object of
Allah's care, and to cover a hundred-year distant road in a single night
by the attraction of the Lord, and the tongue of his inside and his
state say, in the Presence of the Lord's Sanctity, imploringly and
helplessly:

*“**Oh, who responds to the distressed, when he calls unto Him, and
removes the evil…?”***[^4]

[^1]: Refer to footnote 88.

[^2]: See Kalīlah wa Dimnah, ch. “Ring-Dove.”

[^3]: It refers to a narrative related by the late Ākhūnd Khurasānī (may
Allah sanctify his soul) in Kifāyat al-Usūl, vol. 1, p. 130, to the
effect that: “Dust is one of the two purifiers, and is enough for you
for ten years.”

[^4]: Sūrah an-Naml 27: 62.


