Chapter 6: Concerning The Ghusl And Its Cordial Disciplines
===========================================================

“The people of knowledge” [*ahl-i ma'rifat*] say that the (state of)
*janābah* (major ritual impurity) is getting out of the homeland of
servitude and entering exile [*ghurbat*]. It is “declaring lordship”
[*izhār-i rubūbiyyat*] and claiming I-ness and entering within the frame
[*hudūd*] of the Patron [*mawlā*] and acquiring the quality of mastery
[*siyādat*]. The *ghusl* (ritually washing the whole body) is a
purification of this filth and a confession of the shortcoming. One of
the religious personalities has enumerated one hundred and fifty states,
in ten chapters, saying that the *sālik* should purify himself from them
during his practicing the *ghusl*. Most of them, or rather all of them,
stem from might ['*izzat*], power [*jabarūt*] and haughtiness of the
soul, selfishness, and self-conceit.[^1]

The writer says that the (state of) *janābah* is vanishing [*fanā'*] in
nature and neglecting spirituality. It is the ultimate end of the
complete sovereignty of animality and bestiality, and falling down to
the lowest of the low. The *ghusl* is purging from this sin, turning
away from the rule of nature, and attaining the divine authority and
power. This is brought about by cleansing the whole kingdom of the soul,
which has vanished in nature and been afflicted with Satan's conceit.

So, its cordial disciplines are that the traveler to Allah, at the time
of *ghusl*, should not stop at the outer purification and washing the
body, as it is a low superficial crust and belongs to this world. His
paying attention to the *janābah* of the inside of the heart and the
secret of the spirit and purifying them from that impurity should be
more important to him.

Therefore, he must avoid letting his bestial soul and animal concern
[*sha'n*] overpower the human soul and the divine concerns [*shu'ūn*-*i
rahmānī*], and to repent of Satanic impurity and arrogance, and to
purify the inside of the spirit which is a divine blow breathed in him
by “the Breath of the Compassionate” [*nafas-i rahmānī*], from Satanic
tastes, which mean paying attention to other than Allah, being the root
of the forbidden tree, so that he may deserve his father Adam's
Paradise.

He must also know that eating of this tree of nature, desiring this
world and attending to multiplicity are the origins of *janābah*, and,
unless he purifies himself from this *janābah* by immersion in, or by
complete purification with, the water of Allah's mercy, which flows from
the pillar [*sāq*] of the Divine '*Arsh* and is free from Satan's
intrusion, he will not be fit for the *Salat*, which is the reality of
ascension to (Allah's) proximity, as there can be no *Salat* without
purification.[^2]

This is referred to in the noble *hadīth* in *al*-*Wasā'il*, quoting
Shaykh as-Sadūq (may Allah be pleased with him), who said with
authorities:

“A group of Jews came to the Messenger of Allah (*s*). The most learned
among them asked him some questions. Among his questions was: “What for
did Allah command that one should perform *ghusl* because of the
*janābah*, but He did not command it after relieving oneself from feces
and urine? The Messenger of Allah (*s*) said: “When Adam ('*a*) ate from
the (forbidden) tree, it crept into his veins, hair and skin.” During
sexual intercourse water would come out of every vein and hair in his
body. So, Allah made it incumbent upon his offspring to perform the
*ghusl* of the *janābah* till the Day of Resurrection…”[^3] as the
narrative goes.

In another narrative, Imām ar-Ridā ('*a*) said: “They were ordered to
perform the *ghusl* because of the *janābah*, but they were not ordered
to do it after the *khalā'* (relieving oneself from feces and urine),
though it is filthier than the *janābah*, because the *janābah* pertains
to the soul of man, and what comes out is something from the whole body,
while the *khalā'* does not pertain to the soul of man, and what comes
out is the food that goes in through an inlet and comes out from an
outlet.”[^4]

The appearance of these *Hadiths* to “the people of the appearance”
[*ashāb-i* *zāhir*] denotes that as the semen is from the whole body,
the whole body needs the *ghusl*, and this coincides with the opinion of
a number of physicians and natural philosophers. But giving it the cause
of eating from the tree, as in the first *hadīth*, and ascribing the
*janābah* to the soul, as in the second *hadīth*, open a way to
information for the people of knowledge and allusion, because the
question of the 'tree' and Adam's eating of it are of the secrets of the
sciences of the Qur'an and the infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* ('*a*), in which
many sciences are occult.

For this reason in the noble *Hadiths* the causes of legislating many
rituals are ascribed to the said case of the 'tree' and Adam's eating of
it, such as the *Wudu'*, *Salat*, *ghusl*, fasting during the month of
Ramadān and its being thirty days, and many of the *hajj* rituals. The
writer has for many years been thinking of writing a thesis on this
subject, but other engagements have prevented that. I ask Allah, the
Exalted, success and happiness.

Generally speaking, you are an offspring of Adam, a seed for meeting
(Allah) and created for knowing (Him). Allah, the Exalted, has chosen
you for Himself and has shaped you with His two hands of Beauty and
Majesty, and told the angels to fall down bowing to you, and caused
*Iblīs* to envy you.  
 So if you want to get out of the state of the *janābah* of your father,
who is your origin, and to be worthy to meet the Beloved [*hadrat-i
mahbūb*] and to become ready to attain “the state of familiarity”
[*maqām-i uns*] and “the Presence of the Divine Sanctity” [*hadrat-i
quds*], you are to ritually wash the interior of your heart with the
water of mercy, and to repent from attending to this world, which is of
the manifestations [*mazāhir*] of the forbidden tree, and to completely
wash your heart, which is the meeting place of the Beautiful and the
Beauty of the Majestic, from loving the world and its evil affairs,
which are Satanic impurities, for the paradise of meeting the *Haqq*
(Allah) is a place for the pure: “No one enters Paradise except the
pure.”[^5]

“Wash yourself, then walk to the tavern.”[^6]

[^1]: He refers to Shaykh Muhyi 'd-Dīn ibn al-'Arabī in his al-Futuhāt
al-Makkiyyah, vol. 1, p. 363. 

[^2]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 1, “Book of Purification,” sec. on
”Wudū',” ch. 4, hadīth 1, p. 261. 

[^3]: Ibid., sec. on ”Janabah,” ch. 2, hadīth 2, p. 466, quoted from Man
lā Yahduruh al-Faqīh, vol. 1, p. 22; Al-Majālis, p. 115; Al-'Ilal, p.
104. 

[^4]: Ibid., hadīth 4, quoted from al-'Ilal, vol. 1, p. 281 and 'Uyūnu
Akhbār ar-Ridā, p. 291. 

[^5]: “Paradise is not entered except by the good.” Usūl al-Kāfī, vol.
3, “Book on Faith and Disbelief,” sec. on “Sins,” hadīth 7, p. 371. 

[^6]: Wash yourself, then walk to the tavern, That this ruined convent
may not be polluted by you. Hāfiz Shīrāzī


