Chapter 7: Some Cordial Disciplines For Removing Filth And Purifying Impurities
===============================================================================

Be aware that removing the *hadath* (impurity), as already stated, is
getting out of I-ness and selfishness and parting with carnality
[*nafsiyyat*] or rather it is complete separation from the house of the
soul, since, as long as there are remnants of a servant's self, he will
be polluted with *al-hadath al-akbar* (the major impurity) and the
worshipper and the worshipped in him are Satan and the soul. If the
stages of the journey of the people of the Road and *sulūk* were for
getting ranks and ascension to high degrees, they would not be out of
the intrusion of Satan and the soul, and the journey and *sulūk* are
justified [*mu'allal*].

Thus, the *sulūk* is within the stages of the self, and the journey in
the very inside of the house. Such a *sālik* is not a *sālik*, not a
wayfarer, nor is he an emigrant to Allah and His Messenger, and he has
not yet been purged from the major impurity, which is “the servant
himself” ['*ayn-i 'abd*]. Should he become completely purified from this
*hadath*, the worshipper and the worshipped would be the *Haqq* [Allah],
and “I would be his ear (hearing) and his eye (seeing),”[^1] which is
the result of the proximity by the *nāfilah* (supererogatory act of
worship), would take place.

Therefore, as far as purification from the *hadath* is concerned, the
*ghusl* of the whole body is necessary, because as long as “the very
servant” ['*ayn-i 'abd*] is still there in a way, the *hadath* is not
yet removed, as “under each hair there is a *janābah*.”[^2]

So, purification from the *hadath* is purification from the *hudūth*
[novelty] and perishing in the sea of ancientness [*qidām*]. Its
perfection is in getting out of the multiplicity of names, which is the
interior of the 'tree'. By this getting out he will get out of Adam's
infectious sin, which is the origin [*asl*] of the offspring.

So, the *hadath* is of the spiritual impurities, and its purification is
of the inner invisible affairs and is a light. *Wudu'* is a limited
light, while the *ghusl* is an absolute light. “Which *Wudu'* is purer
than the *ghusl*?”[^3]

But removing the external filth and impurities has no such position,
because it is a superficial cleaning and an external purification. Its
cordial discipline is that the wayfarer servant, who wants to be present
in the Presence of Allah, is to know that with Satanic filth and
impurity one cannot find his way there, and unless he comes out from the
big moral dispraised acts, which are the source of the corruption of the
human utopia, and the origin of the external and internal sins, he will
have no way to the wanted goal.

Satan, who was in the neighborhood of the world of sanctity and was
regarded of the cherubim, yet, at last, because of evil inclinations, he
was dismissed from the position of the favorites, and was cursed by:

*“**Then get out of it, for surely you are accursed.”*** *(*Sūrah Sād
*38:77 and* Sūrah al*-*Hijr *15:34).*

So, we, the survivors of the caravan of the invisible world, the sinking
ones in the deep pit of nature, and the returned to the lowest of the
low, how can we, with our Satanic, evil inclinations, deserve being in
the Presence of His Sanctity and in the neighborhood of the godly and
the companions of the favorites?  
 Satan became self-conceited, recognized his being of fire, then said:

*“**I am better than him…”***[^4]

This self-admiration led to self-worship and arrogance, which drove him
to despise and insult Adam ('*a*), and said:

*“**…and him you created of dust,”***

And made a false analogy. He did not see Adam's goodness or his perfect
spirituality. He looked only at Adam's appearance, his being of clay and
of dust, while of himself he looked at his being of fire, disregarding
his polytheism of egoism and egotism. Self-love prevented him from
discerning his shortcomings and hid his faults from his eyes. This
selfishness and self-conceit led him to self-love, arrogance,
ostentation, hypocrisy, obstinacy, and disobedience, driving him from
the sacred ascension down to the desert of the abode of darkness of
nature.

So, it is on the wayfarer to Allah, as he cleans himself from external
filth, to purify himself from the origins of vileness and internal
Satanic impurities, and thoroughly cleanse, with the divine water of
mercy and lawful austerity, his utopia, his virtuous city, and purify
his heart, the place of divine manifestation, and to take off the shoes
of ambition and loving pomposity, so as to become worthy of entering the
sacred valley of *ayman* and of being a place for the Lord's
manifestation.

Unless he is cleaned from evil filths, purification from impurities
[*ahdāth*] cannot take place, as purifying the exterior is a preliminary
step to the purification of the interior. Unless a complete, mundane and
visible *taqwā* according to the instructions of the pure *sharī'ah*
happens, no cordial *taqwā* will take place; and unless the cordial
*taqwā* is brought about by the already named affairs, no real, secret
and spiritual *taqwā* can happen. All the stages of *taqwā* are
preliminaries to this stage, which is neglecting everything other than
Allah.

As long as there are in the *sālik* remnants of selfishness, his heart
will not discern Allah's manifestation. It is, however, possible that
sometimes, owing to the precedence of (Allah's) mercy and the prevalence
of the “near-to-Allah” [*yalillāhī*] aspect, invisible help is extended
to the *sālik* such that the remnants of his I-ness are burnt out by the
Divine firebrand [*jadhwah*].

It is probable that in the way Allah manifested His glory to the
mountain, crushing it to pieces and in the falling down of Moses
senseless, there are references to what has been said; and there is a
similar difference between the *sālik-i majdhūb* (the *sālik* attracted
by Divine Grace), and the *majdhūb*-*i sālik* (the attracted one who is
traveling to Allah). The people of truth understand from this an
important point worthy of knowing, since knowing nothing about it would
be the cause of many errors, goings astray and deviations from the right
path. No one of those who are in quest of truth is to ignore it or be
unaware of it.

It is this: The *sālik* who is in quest of truth must declare himself
innocent from the extremities of some ignorant Sūfis and some negligent
phenomenalists, so that it may become possible for him to travel to
Allah. As a matter of fact, some sects of the first group believe that
the external knowledge and act are formal, and stuffed moulds, intended
for the ignorant and the common people, and that those who are the
people of the secret, heart and truth, and are of good background, need
not practice such acts, and that the external acts are required for the
purpose of acquiring cordial truths and attaining the looked-for
destination, and so, when the *sālik* reaches his destination,
practicing those preliminaries will be departing, and engaging in the
multiplicities will be a veil.

The second group, on the other hand, rose to face the first group and
went to the other end of extremity by denying all the spiritual stages
and divine secrets, and rejected all affairs, except the mere external
appearance and the superficial form, alleging that everything else is
nothing but imagination and fancy. These two groups are still in dispute
and argument, each one accusing the other of being against the
*sharī'ah*. In fact, both groups have somewhat exceeded the limits and
they have gone to the extremes. In my *Sirr as-Salat* I have referred to
this point, and I show, here, a moderate and middle way, which is the
straight path.

It should be noted that the formal rituals and the external worships are
not only for acquiring perfect spiritual characters and cordial truths,
but that is actually one of their fruits. To the people of knowledge and
of heart, all worships transfer the divine knowledge from the inside to
the outside and from the secret to the public.

And as the blessing of mercy of the Beneficent [*ar-rahmān*], or rather
of the Compassionate [*ar-rahīm*], covers all human cordial and formal
growths [*nasha'āt*] and each one of these stages has a share of the
general divine blessings, each has to do a part of praising Allah, and
thanking Him for the beneficent and merciful favors of His Absolute
Necessary Being. As long as the soul has a share of the formal mundane
growth [*nasha'āt*] as well as of the visible life, the carpet of
multiplicity will not be completely rolled away, and the shares of
nature will not be done with.

As the traveler to Allah must not engage his heart with other than
Allah, he is also not to make use of his bosom, imagination and nature
in other than Allah's way, so that his *tawhīd* (monotheism) and
glorification may become firm in all the growths [*nasha'āt*]. And if
the spiritual attraction has any result other than serving Allah and
submission to Him, it will indicate that there are still some remnants
of selfishness, and the *sālik*'s journey is inside the house of the
soul, and not to Allah.

The goal of the journey of the people of Allah is to color the nature
and the kingdom of the body with Allah's color. There is a noble
*hadīth* in which Allah, the Great and Almighty, says: “I am Allah! I am
*ar*-*Rahmān* (the Beneficent)! I created *rahīm* (the womb,
relationship) and derived its name from mine. So, whoever observed it
(i.e., observed kinship relations), I would observe him, and whoever
severed it, I would sever him.”[^5]

One of the interior concepts of this *hadīth* is, perhaps, this severing
the nature, which is the mother of the spirits, off the original
homeland, and observing (connecting) it is its austerity and returning
it to its homeland of servitude. Abū 'Abdullāh (as-Sādiq) ('*a*) is
quoted to have said: “I advise you to take care of your aunt, the
date-palm, as it was created of Adam's clay.”[^6] This noble *hadīth*
refers to that kinship relations mentioned before.

In short, taking out the kingdom of the exterior from the homeland of
servitude, and leaving it to itself, is a deep ignorance of the stations
of the people of knowledge, and is of the temptations of the accursed
Satan who deviates each group from Allah, the Exalted, in a particular
way. At the same time, denying the stations and blocking the way to
knowledge, which is the delight of the eye of the holy men [*awliyā'*]
('*a*), and confining the divine laws to the exterior, which is the
world's share.

The kingdom of the self and the animal state, and disregarding the inner
secrets and disciplines of worship which result in purifying the inside,
reforming the heart and developing the interior are utmost ignorance and
negligence. Both of these two groups are far away from the way of
happiness and the straight path of humanity, and both are cut off from
the stations of the people of knowledge.

The one, who is aware of Allah and knows the stations, must observe all
the inner and outer rights and help everyone who has a right to get it.
He must purify himself of exaggeration, fault and going to the extremes,
remove the filth of denying the outside of the *sharī'ah*, which is, in
fact, limitation, and remove the filth of denying the inside of the
*sharī'ah*, which is restriction, and both of which are of the
temptations of Satan and his treacheries, so that the road of traveling
to Allah and attaining the spiritual stations become easy for him.

Thus, one of the stages of removing filth is removing the filths of the
false fancies, which prevent Allah's proximity, and the ascension of the
believers. One of the concepts and positions of the universality of the
ultimate prophethood, or rather, of the proofs of the finality of the
prophethood, is that he (the Last Prophet) attained, in all the
spiritual states to all their rights and shares as regards all the
affairs of the *sharī'ah*. As in the knowledge of the affairs of the
Lordship, the Glorified, He is known in the highest height and in the
nearest nearness to the state of universality:

*“**He is the First and the Last and the Manifest and the
Hidden,”***[^7]

*“**Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth…,”***[^8]

“If you are lowered down with a rope to the lowest of the earth, you
will come down onto Allah,”[^9] and

*“**…Wherever you turn, there is Allah's Face…,”***[^10]   
 Through which the knower of the divine knowledge, attracted by the
divine attractions, feels invisible delight and divine ecstasy.
Similarly the practical-cordial monotheism is permeated into the last
stage of the horizon of the nature and the corporeal body, and no being
is deprived of a share of knowing Allah.

In short, the people of Sufism unknowingly speak of 'Īsā's (Jesus')
wisdom, while the phenomenalists speak of the wisdom of Moses. The
*Muhammadan*s, however, are, by limitation, innocent of both of them. To
expand on this brief is out of the question and does not suit these
pages.

Connection
----------

Quoting Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) it is narrated in *Misbāh ash*-*Sharī'ah*,
thus: “The *mustarāh* (washing closet or toilet where one relieves
oneself) is called so because the people are relieved there from the
weights of the filths, and they clear out there the dirts and
impurities. The believer learns from this that the pure of the ephemeral
things of this world (i.e., food) will finally have such an (impure)
end. Then, he will be relieved by abandoning this world and turning away
from it. He empties his soul and his heart from being engaged with it,
and disdains collecting and possessing it, as he disdains the
impurities, the feces and filth. He thinks, of himself, how he is
honored in an instance and feels humiliated in another.

He then realizes that adhering to contentedness and *taqwā'* gives him
relief in both worlds, that comfort is in neglecting this world, in
refraining from enjoying it and in removing the impurity of (wanting)
the unlawful and the doubtful, and so, he closes the door of arrogance
to himself after knowing it, runs away from sins, opens the door of
modesty, remorse and shyness, strives to carry out His commands and to
refrain from the forbidden, hoping for a good return and a delightful
proximity. He imprisons himself in the prison of fear, patience and
abstinence from (satisfying) the desires until he arrives, with Allah's
custody, in the eternal abode, and tastes His pleasure, as this is what
is reliable (counted), and everything else is nothing.”[^11] This is the
end of his noble speech.

In this noble speech there is a comprehensive order for the people of
knowledge and *sulūk*, and it is that a conscious person, on his journey
to the Last Abode, must, in whatever state he may be, demand all the
spiritual pleasures, and not neglect, in any condition, to remember his
ultimate goal and return. That is why the wise men have said: “The
Prophet serves the (divine) decree [*qadā'*] as the physician serves the
body.”

As the great prophets and holy men [*awliyā'*] ('*a*) have no care
whatsoever except for Allah's decree [*qadā'*] and the “near-to-Allah”
[*yalillāhī*] aspect, and the heavenly Kingdom [*malakūt*] of the divine
decree governs their hearts, they believe that the management of all
affairs is in the hands of Allah's angels, who are the divine soldiers,
while the physical physician, being far from this stage and discarded
from this valley, ascribes the running of the affairs of nature to the
natural powers.

In brief, a *sālik* should, in all conditions, make use of all the
aspects of his *sulūk*. So, as he sees that the trivial matters and the
pleasures of the visible world are destined to annihilation and change,
and realizes that their fate is corruption and vanishing, he will easily
have his heart turn away from them and free his heart from thinking of
them and being engaged with them, and he will be disgusted with them as
he is with filths. The inside of the world of nature is filthy. Filth
and dirt seen in a dream which is a door of revelation [*mukāshafah*]
are interpreted to mean worldly positions and wealth, and, according to
the revelations [*mukāshafah*] of 'Alī ('*a*), this world is but a
carrion.[^12]

So, as the believer empties himself from the loads and excretions of
nature and relieves the natural town from their harm, he is also to
relieve his heart from being attached to it (nature) and getting engaged
with it. He is to remove from his heart the burden of loving the world
and position, and empty the spiritual utopia and relieve it from those
impurities. Let him think how being engaged in the world will, after few
hours, humiliate the honorable soul and force it to undergo the worst
and most disgraceful state.

Let him know that to busy the heart with the world, after a while, when
the curtain of visibility is drawn up and the veil of nature is pushed
aside, will humiliate man and bring him to the reckoning and punishment.
He is to know that adherence to *taqwā'* and contentment brings comfort
in both worlds a comfort which is a result of neglecting the world, by
slighting it and rejecting its pleasures and entertainments. Having
purged himself of the formal filths, he is also to purify himself from
the impurities of the *harām* (the unlawful) and the doubtful cases.

Having understood himself and recognized the humility of his need, he
has to close to himself the door of arrogance and haughtiness, to run
away from recalcitrance and sin, and to open to himself the door of
modesty, remorse and shyness. He is to strive to obey Allah and refrain
from disobedience, so as to return to Allah good and well, and to attain
Allah's proximity with purity and serenity of the soul.

He is to imprison himself in the prison of fear and patience and curb
his soul of its desires, so as to be saved from the prison of Allah's
punishment, and to join Allah's custody in the eternal abode, and, thus,
to taste Allah's contentment. This is the ultimate hope of the people of
*sulūk*, and everything else is nought.

[^1]: Refer to footnote 21.

[^2]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 78,“Book of Purification,”sec. on “The
Incumbency of the Ghusl of Janabah,” hadīth 23, p. 51.

[^3]: Jāmi' Ahādīth ash-Shī'ah,“Book of Purification,”sec. on “The Ghusl
and its Regulations,” ch. 12.

[^4]: “I am better than him. You have created me of fire, and him You
created of dust.” (Sūrah Sād 38:76).

[^5]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 71, p. 95, quoted from Ma'āniy al-Akhbār, p.
302.

[^6]: Ibid., vol. 66, p. 129, quoted from al-Mahāsin, p. 528.

[^7]: Sūrah al-Hadīd 57:3.

[^8]: Sūrah an-Nūr 24:35.

[^9]: 'Ilm al-Yaqīn, vol. 1, p. 54.

[^10]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:115.

[^11]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 9, on “Privy”.

[^12]: Nahj al-Balāghah, edited by Fayd al-Islām, sermon 108: “They fell
upon a carrion by eating of which they were exposed.” Or as in sermon
151: “They are falling upon an easy carrion.”


