Dedication
==========

**In The Name Of Allah, The Beneficent, The Merciful**

I dedicate *Ādāb as-Salat* the book from which I had no benefit except
regret because of my failure and negligence of the days on which I could
have made myself, and except contrition and remorse during old age,
being empty-handed, with a heavy burden, and a long way to go, with a
lame leg, while the call of departure is ever resounding in my ears to
my dear son, Ahmad. He is in the prime of life, and thus, he may,
*inshā'* *Allāhu* *Ta'āla* (if Allah, the Exalted, wills), avail himself
of its contents, which are taken from the Glorious Book, the Noble
Sunnah (The Prophet's traditions) and the statements of the
distinguished.

Haply he will succeed in finding his way to the real ascension through
the guidance of “the people of knowledge” [*ahl*-*i* *ma'rifat*], and
tear off his heart from this dark dungeon, and head for the original
destination of humanity, along the road on which the great prophets, the
noble “holy men” [*awliyā'*] may Allah's blessing and peace be upon them
all and the “people of Allah” [*ahlullāh*] trod, and to which they
invited the others.

O my son! Hasten to comprehend yourself, which is fermented in “the
divine disposition” [*fitratullāh*]. Save yourself from the ruining
whirlpool of the formidable waves of self-conceit and selfishness. Get
on board Noah's Ark, which is the light of “Allah's guardianship”
[*wilāyatullāh*], because: “Whoever got on board it was safe, and
whoever stayed behind it perished.”

O my son! Try hard to be moving along the Straight Path which is the
path of Allah even with a limping leg. Try to tinge the movements and
the stillness of your heart and body with the divine spiritual tint, and
to serve the creatures (just) because of their being Allah's creatures.
The great prophets and the close “friends” [*awliyā'*] of Allah, despite
their daily works like others, were never on good terms with the world,
because they worked with Allah and for Allah.

The Last Messenger may Allah bless him and his household and give them
peace is quoted to have said: “My heart is sometimes covered (as if with
unmindfulness), so I ask forgiveness from Allah seventy times every
day.”[^1] He probably regarded discerning Allah in multiplicity as
opacity [with respect to Allah].

O my son! Prepare yourself, after me, to face unkindness from those who
will burden you with the worries they had on my part. If you settle your
accounts with Allah and take refuge in remembering Him, you need not
fear any creature, as the reckoning of creatures is transitory, while
the reckoning before Allah is eternal.

My son! After me you may receive an offer for service. If you intend to
serve the Islamic Republic and dear Islam, then do not refuse it. But if
your intention is Allah forbid! To serve your sensual desires or to
satisfy your passions, eschew it, for the worldly positions are too
trivial to deserve perishing yourself for their sake.

O Allah! Make Ahmad, his offspring and family, who are of your servants
and of the offspring of the Holy Messenger, happy in this world and in
the Hereafter, and cut off the hands of the accursed Satan, so that he
may not hurt them!

O Allah! We are weak, unable and lagging behind the caravan of the
devotees on the road to you. O Allah! You yourself help us. O Allah!
Treat us with your grace and do not treat us with your justice. Peace be
upon the righteous servants of Allah.

**Rūhullāh al-Mūsāwī al-Khomeinī**  
**23 Rabī' al-Awwal 1405/ 25 Āzar 1363 S.H.**

[^1]: Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, “Book of as-Salat,” sec. on “Invocations,”
ch. 22, hadīth 1. 


