Objective Two: Some Disciplines Concerning the Clothes
======================================================

Covered under Two Stations

Station 1: General Disciplines For The Clothes
----------------------------------------------

Know that man's rational soul is a reality which at the same time of its
unity and perfect simplicity has diverse aspects (growths = *nasha'āt*),
the principal ones of which are, generally, three:

The first aspect (growth = *nash'ah*) is the external mundane visible
aspect, displayed in the apparent senses, and its lowest surface is the
body.

The second is the aspect [*nash'ah*] of the *barzakh* world (the
Isthmus, or the intermediate, world) displayed in the internal senses,
the *barzakhian* (intermediate) body and “the mould of the ideal”
[*qālib-i mithālī*].

The third is the invisible internal aspect [*nash'ah*], displayed in the
heart and in its affairs.

The relation of each of these aspects to the other is that of the
external to the internal, and of the manifestation to the manifested.
This is the reason for the effects, the characteristics and the
reactions of each of these aspects to permeate into the other aspects.
For example, if the sense of seeing discerns something, it will have an
effect on the *barzakh*ian sense of seeing according to its aspect
[*nash'ah*].

Then the effect is transmitted to the internal seeing sense of the heart
according to its aspect [*nash'ah*]. In the same way the effects of the
cordial aspect appear in the other two aspects. This, besides being
proved by a strong and firm evidence, coincides with the conscience,
too. Consequently, all the formal disciplines of the Shar' have their
effect, or effects on the interior; and each of the good characters
which belong to the *barzakh*ian status of the soul also has its effects
on the exterior and interior.

All the divine knowledge [*ma'ārif*] and the true beliefs also have
their effects on the two *barzakh*ian and external aspects. For example,
this belief that to have control over the kingdom of existence as well
as the invisible and visible worlds belongs to Allah, and no other being
has any control over them, except that permitted shadowy control, brings
about so many spiritual perfections and good human moralities, such as
depending on Allah and trusting Him, and pinning no hope on any
creature.

This is the mother of perfections and the cause of so many good deeds
and commendable acts, and prevents one from committing evil practices.
Likewise other sorts of knowledge, which are so numerous that these
pages, as well as the broken pen of the writer, have no patience to
count them nor to relate the effects of each one of them, since it needs
writing a huge book which can be expected only from the powerful pen of
the people of knowledge, or from a warm soul of “the people of ecstasy”
[*ahl-i hāl*]: “My hand is short, while the dates are (high) on the
date-palms.”[^1]

Similar is, for example, contentment [*ridā'*] as a character, which is
one of the human moral perfections. It is effective in purifying and
polishing the soul, rendering the heart a place for special divine
manifestations, elevating faith to a perfect faith, the perfect faith to
tranquility [*tuma'nīnah*], tranquility to its perfection, its
perfection to vision [*mushāhadah*], the vision to a perfect vision, its
perfection to “reciprocal love” [*mu*'*āshaqah*] (with the Beloved), the
reciprocal love to its perfection, its perfection to courting
[*murāwadah*], the courting to its perfection, its perfection to union
[*muwāsalah*], the union to its perfection, and to what neither you nor
I can imagine.

The character of contentment has a surprising effect on the kingdom of
the body and on the formal marks and acts, which are leaves and
branches. It changes hearing, seeing and other powers and organs into
divine ones, and the secret of “I will be his hearing and seeing”[^2] is
somewhat manifested.  
 As those stages have an effect, or rather, effects, on the appearance,
they are also affected so surprisingly by the outer shape, all the
ordinary and extraordinary movements and pauses, and all the acts and
abstentions, so that it sometimes happens that a scornful glance by a
*sālik* at a servant of Allah causes the *sālik* to fall from his high
status to the lowest of the low, and this will need him years to make up
for it.

Now, as our helpless hearts are weak and shaky, like the weeping
willows, losing their stillness, by every gentle breeze, it would be,
therefore, necessary, even in ordinary situations one of which is the
instance of choosing one's clothes to observe the conditions of the
heart and to take care of it. As the soul and Satan have quite firm
snares and clever delusions which we are unable to understand, we have
to do our best, as much as we can and is in our capacity, to resist
them, and to ask, in all cases, Allah's help and support for success.

So, we say that as it has become clear that the exterior and the
interior have reciprocal effects, the seeker for the truth and spiritual
elevation has to avoid choosing such clothes and models which have bad
effects on the spirit, deviate the heart from perseverance and
remembering Allah, and turn the soul's direction to worldly matters.

Do not think that Satan's delusions and the tricks of the
evil-commanding soul are confined only to expensive and nice clothes and
luxurious articles. Actually even by old and worthless clothes they may
disgrace a man. Therefore, one should avoid seeking fame through
clothes; or rather he should avoid all conducts contrary to the normal
and the customary. He is to abstain from wearing highly luxurious
clothes made of expensive materials and attractively and notoriously
tailored, because our hearts are very weak and inconstant, and they slip
by slightest distinction and deviate from moderation.

It may often happen that a wretched, helpless man, devoid of all degrees
of honor, humanity, dignity and perfection, just because of a few meters
of silk or woolen cloth, well tailored in a foreign style, and which
might have been obtained through shameful and dishonorable bargains,
looks down upon the servants of Allah with scorn, arrogance and
haughtiness, devaluating the people. This is caused only by a completely
powerless soul with so small a capacity that it takes the spit of a worm
or the apparel of a sheep to be a cause of honor and dignity for itself.

O helpless man! How wretched and indigent you are! You should be the
pride of the world of possibility, and the gist of space and place. You
are the offspring of Adam, and you should teach the names and the
attributes. You are the child of (Allah's) vicegerent; so, you should be
of the brilliant signs (of Allah). “A whistle calls you from the turret
of the '*Arsh*.[^3] You, unfortunate degenerate! You have usurped a
handful of remnants and apparels of helpless animals, by which you take
pride. This pride of yours is that of a silk worm, a sheep, a camel, a
squirrel or a fox. Why do you feel proud of others' clothes, and show
arrogance by others' pride?

In short, as the quality, the value and the decoration of the clothes
have their effects on the souls, Amīr al-Mu'minīn ('*a*), as quoted by
the late Qutb al-Rāwandī, said: “Whoever wears luxurious clothes, he
will be, inevitably, arrogant, and the Fire is inevitably for the
arrogant.”[^4] There are effects in their fashion and tailoring.

It sometimes happens that the one, who wears the clothes cut similar to
those of the foreigners, gets a feeling of ignorant attachment to them,
and thus, he repulses and abominates the friends of Allah and His
Messenger, and loves their enemies. In this respect, Imām as-Sādiq
('*a*) is quoted to have said: “Allah, the Exalted and Most High,
inspired one of the prophets, commanding him: “Tell the believers not to
wear the clothes of My enemies, not to eat like My enemies, and not to
walk like My enemies, so as not to be My enemies as they are My
enemies.”[^5]

As the too luxurious clothes affect the souls, similarly, low and shabby
clothes, both in material and quality, also affect them. It is most
probable that this is more corruptive, by many degrees, than the
exquisite clothes, as the soul can have quite crafty plots. When one
sees himself distinguished from others by wearing rough, denim clothes,
while others wear fine, soft clothes, he tries, as he loves himself, to
neglect his defects, regarding this accidental and irrelevant affair as
a matter of pride.

He may probably get to admire himself and look down at the servants of
Allah, alleging that the others are out of Allah's holy sanctum,
thinking himself to be among the most sincere and favorite servants of
Allah. It is also most probable that he will be afflicted with hypocrisy
and other big corruptions. So wretched he is that, out of all the
degrees of knowledge, *taqwā* and spiritual perfections, he suffices
himself with rough, shabby wears, unaware of thousands of his big
faults, the biggest of which is this very bad effect resulting from
these clothes.

He thinks himself, who is of Satan's friends, of the people of Allah,
regarding the servants of Allah as nothing and worthless. It also
happens that the style and the way he wears his clothes throw him into
many mischiefs, such as wearing them in such an arrangement as to make
him famous as an ascetic and a holy man.

In short, to wear clothes for distinction, on either side of the
extremities, is a matter that shakes the weak hearts, and deprives them
of good moralities, and causes conceit, hypocrisy, arrogance and pride,
each one of which is a mother of spiritual vileness. They further lead
to being attached to this world and loving it, which is the head of all
sins and the source of all evils. Many *Hadiths* also refer to many of
the said affairs, as is stated in the noble *al*-*Kāfī* quoting Imām
as-Sādiq ('*a*) saying: “Allah, the Exalted, becomes angry with one's
getting famous through clothes.”[^6]

He is also quoted to have said: “The famous, good or bad, is in the
Fire.”[^7]

He is further quoted to have said: “Allah becomes angry with two fames:
the fame of clothes and the fame of the *Salat*.”[^8]

A *hadīth* is quoted from the Messenger of Allah (*s*), saying: “Whoever
wears an apparel of fame, Allah will make him wear, in the Hereafter, an
apparel of humility.”[^9]

Station 2: Some Disciplines Concerning The Musallī’s Clothing
-------------------------------------------------------------

Explained in Two Chapters.

[^1]: My leg is lame, while the destination is so far, My hand is short,
while the dates are (high) on the date-palms. Hāfiz Shīrāzī

[^2]: Refer to footnote 21.

[^3]: Refer to footnote 96.

[^4]: Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, “Book of as-Salat,” sec. on “The Rules on
the Clothes,” ch. 16, hadīth 5, quoted from Qutb al-Rāwandī, Lubb
al-Albāb.

[^5]: Al-Jawāhir as-Saniyyah, ch. on “Abū 'Abdullāh Ja'far ibn Muhammad
as-Sādiq,” hadīth 60.

[^6]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 3, “Book of as-Salat,” sec. on “Rules
Concerning the Clothes,” ch. 12, hadīth 1, p. 354.

[^7]: Ibid., hadīth 3

[^8]: Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, “Book of as-Salat,” sec. on “The Rules on
the Clothes,” ch. 8, hadīth 2.

[^9]: Ibid., hadīth 1.


