Chapter 2: Concerning Cordial Considerations Of Covering The Nakedness
======================================================================

The traveler to Allah finds himself present in the Holy Presence
[*mahdar*] of Allah, the Almighty and Most High, or rather, he sees that
his interior and exterior, his covertness and overtness are the very
presence [*hudūr*], as it is narrated in *al-Kāfī* and *at*-*Tawhīd*
that Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) said: “The spirit of a believer is more
connected to the spirit of Allah than the connection of the sunbeam to
the sun.”[^1]

Yet, strong evidential arguments in the high sciences stress that the
entire circle of existence, from the highest invisible stages to the
lowest visible ones, is the very connection and mere dependence and want
(poverty) in its relation to the Absolute Self-Existent, the Glorified
and Most High. It is probable that the reference is to this in the
*āyah*:

*“**O men! It is you who are in need of Allah, and it is Allah Who is
the Self-Sufficient, the Praised One.”***[^2]

because if a being among the beings, in a state of states, in a moment
of the moments and in an aspect of the aspects, had no connection to the
Might of the Holy Lord, it would be out of the spot of self-potentiality
and poverty, and into the sanctuary of Self-Necessity and
Self-Sufficiency.

The one who knows Allah and is journeying to Him will have to engrave
this true evidential subject, this divine gnostic delicacy, by way of
cordial austerities, disregarding the limits of reason and argument, on
the face of the heart, in order to bring it to the borders of gnosis
['*irfān*], so that the truth of faith and its light become manifest in
his heart. The people of heart and of Allah step past the limit of faith
onto the stage of revelation [*kashf*] and vision [*shuhūd*]. This would
be possible through intense self-mortification [*mujāhadah*], privacy
with Allah and loving Him.

It is stated in *Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah* that Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) said:

“The informed one (the gnostic), his person is with the people and his
heart is with Allah. Should his heart be inattentive of Allah for a
twinkle of an eye, he would have died of craving for Him.

“The informed one (the gnostic) is the entrusted with Allah's trusts. He
is the treasure of His secrets, the source of His light, the evidence of
His mercy on His creatures, the mount of His knowledge, and the
criterion of His favor and justice. He is not dependent on the people,
nor is he in need of them for his wants and the world. He feels intimate
only with Allah, and gives no utterance, makes no gesture and draws no
breath except by Allah, for Allah, from Allah and with Allah.”[^3]

In short, when the *sālik* finds himself, in all aspects (affairs,
states = *shu'ūn*), being the very Presence [*hudūr*], he covers all his
internal and external kinds of nakedness ['*awrāt*] in order to observe
the Presence and the discipline of Presence. He realizes that the
exposure of the internal nakedness in the Presence of Allah is much more
hideous and disgracing than the exposure of the external nakedness, as
in the *hadīth*: “Allah does not look at your forms, but He looks into
your hearts.”[^4]

The internal kinds of nakedness ['*awrāt*] are the dispraised
characters, vile customs and immoralities, which deprive man of being
worthy of the Presence [*mahdar*] and of the discipline of Presence
[*hudūr*]. This is the first stage of violating the covers and the
exposure of the nakedness ['*awrāt*].

It must be noted that if one does not cover himself with Allah's veiling
and forgiveness, and if he does not put himself under the Names of “the
Concealer” and “the Forgiver,” demanding concealment and forgiveness, it
frequently happens that when the visible curtain is rolled up, and the
worldly veil is removed, they cause his exposure in the presence of the
favorable angels and the appointed prophets ('*a*). Allah alone knows
how much the exposed internal nakedness is ugly, disgraceful, stinking
and scandalous.  
 O dear, do not compare the conditions of the Hereafter with this world,
as this world can never have the capacity of the appearance of a single
blessing or punishment of that world. This world, with all its vast
heavens and kingdoms ['*awālim*], cannot take in the appearance of a low
invisible world such as the world of the grave, let alone the high
kingdom of heaven, of which the resurrection world is a sample.

In a detailed *hadīth* narrated by the Shaykh ash-Shahīd ath-Thānī (may
Allah be pleased with him) in *Munyat al-Murīd* quoting Fātimah
as-Siddīqah ('*a*), who, quoting the Messenger of Allah (*s*), said:
“The Messenger of Allah (*s*) said: “The scholars of our followers will
be resurrected wearing coats of honor according to their knowledge and
to their efficiency in guiding the servants of Allah, such that some of
them are given thousands of coats of light.”

Then he added: “Some of those gifts are better than the best thing on
which the sun may shine, by thousands of times”.[^5] So much for its
blessings. As to its punishments, Fayd (may Allah have mercy upon him),
in '*Ilm al-Yaqīn*, has quoted a *hadīth* from the late as-Sadūq, on his
authority, quoting Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) who said that in a *hadīth*
Gabriel said to the Messenger of Allah (*s*): “If a single link of the
chain, whose length is seventy cubits, is placed on the world, the world
will melt by its heat. Or if a drop of the *Zaqqūm* and *Darī'*
(repulsive stinking drink) is dropped into the waters of this world, the
people will die of its bad smell.”[^6] We take refuge with Allah from
the wrath of *ar*-*Rahmān*.

Therefore, the traveler to Allah has to replace his bad characters and
evil habits with the perfect ones, and to vanish them in the stormy and
endless sea of Allah's perfect attributes, and to change the dark
Satanic land of (his) nature [*tabī'at*] to a white and bright land, and
to find out in himself:

*“**And the earth shines with the light of its Lord,”***[^7]

and to bring about the state of the names of Beauty and Majesty of the
Holy Essence in the kingdom of his existence. In this state he will be
under the shelter of Beauty and Majesty, and will acquire the divine
moralities; and the vices of “personal individuations” [*ta'ayyunāt*-*i
nafsiyyah*] and the darkness of fancy will be completely concealed.

Having attained this state, he will be favored with the special care of
Allah, the Most High, Who will help him with His special secret
protection (kindness) [*lutf*], and conceal him under the cover of His
Majesty such that no one, except Himself will know him, and he will know
none but Allah: “My friends are under My *qibāb* (domes); no one knows
them except Me.”[^8]

The sacred Book of Allah has many references to this point for those
worthy of it, such as:

*“**Allah is the Protector of those who believe. He brings them out of
the darkness into the light…”***[^9]

The people of knowledge and of past good records know that all the
creational individuations [*ta'ayyunāt*-*i khalqiyyah*] and the
essential multiplicities [*kathurāt-i 'ayniyyah*] are darkness
[*zulumāt*], and the absolute light cannot happen except by discarding
the annexations and breaking the individuations which are the idols in
the way of the *sālik*.

When the darkness of the actual and participial multiplicities is
effaced and vanished in “the Essence of Union” ['*ayn-i jam'*], all the
nakedness will be covered, and the absolute presence and the complete
attainment will take place, and the *musallī*, being concealed by the
*Haqq* (Allah), will be performing the *Haqq*'s (Allah's) *Salat*. The
ascending *Salat* of the Seal of the Messengers (*s*) was probably of
this type, in its particular states and stages. Allah knows better.

Connection
----------

It is stated in *Misbāh ash*-*Sharī'ah* that Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) said:
“The most decorative clothing for the believer is the clothing of
*taqwā*, and the finest one is faith. Allah, the Almighty and Glorified,
said: “**And the clothing of taqwā, that is the best.”** As to the
exterior clothing, it is a blessing from Allah, as it covers the
nakedness of the children of Adam ('*a*). It is a grace granted by Allah
to His servants, the children of Adam, which He did not grant to other
than them.

To the believers, it is a means to perform the duties imposed by Allah
upon them. The best of your clothing is that which does not distract you
from Allah, the Almighty and Glorified, rather it brings you nearer to
thanking, remembering and obeying Him, and it does not bear you to
conceit, hypocrisy, decoration, taking pride and boasting, as these are
among the pests of the religion and bring cruelty to the heart.

When you put on your dress, remember Allah, the concealer of your sins
by His mercy. Clothe your interior with truthfulness, as you dressed
your exterior with your dress. Let your interior be under the protection
of fear, and your exterior under the protection of obedience. Take a
lesson from the favor of Allah, the Almighty and Glorified, as He
created the means for making clothes to conceal the apparent nakedness,
and He opened the doors of repentance and imploring in order to cover
the internal sins and evil characters.

Do not uncover anyone's faults, as Allah has covered your greater
faults. Attend to your own faults, and forgive that whose state and
affair do not concern you. Beware of perishing your life for the action
of others, letting the others trade with your capital, while you destroy
yourself. Forgetting the sins is of the gravest punishments from Allah
in this world, and of the most effective causes for the punishments in
the Hereafter.

As long as the servant is engaged in his obedience to Allah, the
Exalted, in recognizing his own defects and abandoning what is
disgraceful in the religion of Allah, he will be isolated from the
plagues, plunging in the sea of the mercy of Allah, the Almighty and
Glorified, and will win the gems of the advantages of wisdom and
expression. But as long as he is forgetting his sins, unfamiliar with
his defects, resorting to his own might and force, he will never be
successful.”[^10]

[^1]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 3, “Book of Faith and Infidelity,” ch. on “The
Believers' Brotherhood to One Another,” hadīth 4, p. 242.

[^2]: Sūrah Fātir 35:15.

[^3]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 95, on “Knowledge”.

[^4]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 67, p. 248, quoting Jāmi' al-Akhbār, p. 117
(with a slight addition). 

[^5]: Munyat al-Murīd, p. 24.

[^6]: 'Ilm al-Yaqīn, vol. 2, p. 1033.

[^7]: Sūrah az-Zumar 39:69.

[^8]: A hadīth al-qudsī (divine saying) in Ihyā' 'Ulūm ud-dīn, vol. 4,
p. 256. In the MS (manuscript) both the words qibābī and qibā'ī are
stated.  

[^9]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:257.

[^10]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, sec. 7, on “Clothing”.


