Objective Three: On the Cordial Disciplines Concerning the Place of the Musallī
===============================================================================

Discussed in Two Chapters

Chapter 1: About Knowing The Place
----------------------------------

Know that the wayfarer to Allah has, according to his existential
growths [*nasha'āt*-*i wujūdiyyah*], certain places, each of which has
its particular disciplines. The *sālik* have to know them before
attaining the *Salat* of the people of knowledge.

The first is the natural growth and the apparent mundane stage, and its
place is the earth of nature. The Messenger of Allah (*s*) said: “The
earth is made for me a place for prostration and a purifier.”[^1]

The *sālik*'s discipline [*adab*] at this stage is to make his heart
understand that his descending from the invisible growth [*nash'ah*] and
the coming down of the soul from its high and lofty place to the lowest
earth of nature and his being reduced from “the best stature” [*ahsan-i
taqwīm*] to the lowest of the low are for the voluntary journey to Allah
and the ascension to the *mi'rāj* of Proximity and reaching the Court of
Allah and the Threshold of His Lordship, which is the objective of
creation and the final end of the people of Allah. “May Allah have mercy
upon one who knows where he has come from, where he is and where he is
going.”[^2]

The *sālik* must realize that he has come from the house of Allah's
munificence [*karāmat*], and is now in the house of worshipping Allah,
and will go to the house of Allah's recompense. The gnositc says: “From
Allah, in Allah and to Allah.” So, the *sālik* must tell himself, and
his spirit, that the house of nature is a mosque for worshipping Allah,
and that he has been brought to this world for this purpose, as Allah,
the Almighty and Glorified, says:

*“**And I have not created the jīnn and the ins [mankind] except that
they should worship Me.”***[^3]

After realizing that the house of nature is the mosque for worship, and
finding himself in seclusion [*mu'takif*] in it, he is to observe the
relevant disciplines and abstain from remembering other than Allah. He
is not to leave the mosque of worship, unless there is a need, such as
for relieving himself, and then to return, and not to be familiar except
with Allah, nor to have any affiliation with others, as these are
contrary to the disciplines of cleaving to the door of Allah.

In this stage the knower of Allah will have certain moods [*hālāt*]
which cannot be written down, and as the writer is out of “the innate
disposition of humanity” [*fitrat-i insāniyyat*], indulging in the
overflowing darkened sea of nature, void of truth and reality, as well
as of all the stations of the *sālik*s and of the gnostics, the best
thing for him is not to disgrace himself in the Presence of Allah, the
Almighty, and his close friends, but to go past this stage and take his
complaint against the evil-commanding soul to the Sacred Threshold of
the Lord of Majesty, as perhaps He would extend to him a helping hand
out of His general kindness and all-embracing mercy, and thus he would
compensate during the rest of his life for what has passed:

*“**Our Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves, and if you forgive us
not and have not mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the
losers.”***[^4]

The second stage is the state of the external and internal powers, which
are the visible and invisible soldiers of the soul, whose place is the
ground (earth = '*ard*) of man's nature, i.e., his structure and body.
The *sālik*'s discipline in this respect is to inform the inmost of the
heart that the ground ('*ard*) of his nature is the mosque of divinity
and the place for the prostration of the soldiers of the Beneficent
[*ar-Rahmān*].

Therefore, the mosque should not be smeared with the filths or *Iblīs'*
intrusion, and the divine soldiers should not be put under the influence
of *Iblīs*, so that the ground ['*ard*] of the nature is illuminated
with the Lord's light, and be freed from the darkness and the impurity
of being away from the Court of the Lord.

So, let him believe that his visible and invisible powers are in
seclusion in the mosque of the body, and he is to treat his body as he
treats a mosque, and to look at his powers as being in seclusion in the
Court of Allah. In this stage, the obligations of the *sālik* are more,
because it is his own responsibility to undertake cleaning and purifying
the mosque, as he also is to observe the disciplines of seclusion on the
part of those (visible and invisible powers) that are in seclusion in
this mosque.

The third stage is the *sālik*'s cordial invisible growth [*nash'ah*],
whose place is the invisible *barzakh*ian body of the soul, which is
created and developed by the soul itself. The *sālik*'s discipline, in
this instance, is to make himself realize that this stage greatly
differs from other ones, and to preserve it is of the *sālik*'s
important duties, because the heart is the leader of those in seclusion
in the Court (of Allah), and with its corruption all of them will be
corrupted: “If the scholar is corrupt, the world will be corrupted.”[^5]

The heart of a scholar is a small world, while the scholar is the heart
of the big world. In this stage the *sālik*'s duties increase, because
the building of the mosque is also added to his responsibilities and it
maybe that God forbid! His mosque will be a mosque of harm [*dirār*],
disbelief and disunity of the Muslims. In such a mosque it is not
allowed to worship Allah, and it must be pulled down.

Having established the divine invisible mosque with the hand of the
Beneficent and of the guardianship, and purified it from all impurities
and satanic intrusions, and begun his seclusion therein, the *sālik* is
to strive to take himself out of his seclusion in the mosque in order to
seclude in the Court of the Owner of the mosque.

And, after purging himself from self-love and getting out of his own
fetters, he himself will become the house of Allah, or better to say, he
will become the mosque of the Lord, and Allah will glorify Himself
through Manifestation of Action, then of Names and of Essence in that
mosque, and this glorification is the *Salat* of the Lord, saying:
*Subbūhun* *quddūs*, *rabb 'ul-malā'ikati* *war-rūh* (All-Glorious,
All-Holy, the Lord of the angels and the spirit).[^6]

The traveler to Allah has, in all the stages of the journey, another
duty to perform, neglecting which is not permissible at all, for
actually it is the core of the cores and the objective of the *sulūk*.
This duty is not to forget to remember Allah in any situation or stage,
and to seek to know Allah from all rituals and worships, and to see Him
in all phenomena, and not to let the blessings and munificence prevent
him from the company [*suhbat*] and privacy, as this is a kind of
*istidrāj* (being engaged in other than the *Haqq*).

In short, he is to take the spirit and the interior [*bātin*] of the
worships and rituals to be knowing Allah, and to look into them for the
Beloved so that the attachment of loving and being loved becomes fixed
in his heart, and he may be favored with hidden graces and secret
associations.

### Connection

It is stated in *Misbāh ash*-*Sharī'ah* that Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) said:
“When you arrive at the door of the mosque, know that you have come to
the door of a great King. No one may walk into His Courtyard save the
purified, and no one is admitted to His Company [*mujālasah*] but the
truthful. So, attach reverence to your coming to the ground of serving
the King, as you would be exposed to a great danger if you were
negligent.[^7]

Know that He is capable of doing what He likes of justice and grace with
you and by you. So, if He were kind to you with His mercy and favor, He
would accept from you little worship and give you much reward for it.
But if He demanded from you a share of truth and sincerity, to be just
with you, He would block you and reject your worship, even if it is
much. He is the doer of what He wants. Confess to His Presence your
inability, shortcoming, humility and poverty, as you have come to Him to
worship and to get His Intimacy [*mu'ānasah*].

Expose your secrets to Him, knowing that nothing, covert and overt, of
the entire universe, is hidden from Him. Before Him, be the poorest of
His servants. Empty your heart of all occupants that keep you away from
your Lord, as He does not accept except the pure (st) and the (most)
sincere. Find out in which register your name is recorded. If you tasted
the sweetness of supplication and the delight of addressing Him, and
drank from the cup of His mercy and generosity out of His good reception
of you and response to you, then you would become suitable for His
service.

So, enter, as you will have permission and protection. Otherwise, stop,
like the one whose rope has snapped, whose hope has come short, and time
has got the better of him. So, if Allah found in your heart true
recourse to Him, He would look at you with the eye of kindness, mercy
and leniency, and cause you to be successful in attaining what He likes
and is pleased with, since He is generous and loves generosity for His
servants who distressfully resort to Him and burn out at His door for
the want of His pleasure. Allah, the Most High, says:

*“**Or, who answers the distressed one, when he calls upon Him, and
removes the evil…?”***[^8]

I have related the complete text of this noble speech because it is a
comprehensive set of instructions for the people of knowledge and the
wayfarers to Allah, who, by contemplating on it may acquire a different
state.

Chapter 2: On Some Disciplines Concerning Permissibility [Ibāhah] Of Place
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Having understood the stages of the place according to his states and
existential growths [*nasha'āt*], the sālik is to exert his effort, in
respect with the cordial disciplines of their permissibility, so that
his *Salat* may come out of the usurping intrusions of the evil *Iblīs*.
In the first stage he is to perform the formal disciplines of worship
and servitude, and to fulfill his former promises of the world of
pre-existence and the Day of Covenant, cutting Satan's intruding hand
from the kingdom of his nature.

So as to establish amicable relations with the Owner of the House, and
his actions [*tasarrufāt*] in the world of nature may not be usurping.
Some of the people of good aptitude say that the inner meaning of the
noble *āyah*,

*“**O you who believe! Fulfill the obligations. The cattle quadruped are
allowed to you,”***[^9]

Is that allowing the cattle quadruped is conditioned by the fulfillment
of the guardianship obligation. Noble *Hadiths* relate that all land is
the Imām's, and that other than the *Shī'ah*s are its usurpers.[^10]
People of knowledge regard the *walī* *al-amr* (the religiously legal
authority) as the owner of all kingdoms of the existence, and the stages
of the visible and the invisible, and regard using them without the
Imām's permission to be wrong.

The writer says: The accursed *lblīs* is the enemy of Allah, and his
conducts and all the satanic intrusions in the world of nature are
tyrannical and usurping. So, if the wayfarer to Allah could bring
himself out of the control of that wicked one, his conduct would be
divine, and his place, clothing, food, and matrimony would be
permissible and clean. And as much as he remains under Satan's control,
his permissibilities become less, and satanic polytheism [*shirk*] will
affect them.

So, if man's external organs become under Satan's control, they will be
Satanic organs, usurping Allah's kingdom, as the seclusion of the
invisible powers in the mosque of the body can only be permissible and
right when those powers are of the soldiers of Allah, in which case
*Iblīs'* soldiers will not have the right to intrude into the kingdom of
the human body, which is the property of Allah, the Exalted.

Having cut the intruding hand of Satan short off the kingdom of the
heart, which is the private residence of Allah, and cleared his heart
for Allah's manifestation, and excluded other than Allah, such as
*Iblīs*, from it, the external and internal mosques and the visible and
invisible places become permissible for him, and his *Salat*s become
like those of the people of knowledge, and consequently, the purity of
the mosque is realized, too.

[^1]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 3, “Book of as-Salat,” sec. on “What One
can Prostrate upon,” ch. 1, hadīth 8, p. 593.

[^2]: Refer to footnote 141.

[^3]: Sūrah adh-Dhāriyāt 51:56.

[^4]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:23.  

[^5]: In Ghurar al-Hikam vol. 7, p. 269, it is said: “A scholar's slip
corrupts the world.”

[^6]: “…[Y]our Lord prays…He says: “All-Glorious, All-Holy, I am the
Lord of the angels and the Spirit”,” Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 2, “Book of the
Proof,” sec. on “Histories,” ch. on “The Birth of the Prophet (s) and
his Death,” hadīth 13, p. 329. 

[^7]: Hāfiz says: O the wayfarer in the lane of our Beloved, Be aware
that head breaks its wall.

[^8]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 12, on “Entering the Mosque”. The
Qur'anic verse at the end of the hadīth is verse 62 of Sūrah an-Naml
(chapter 27).

[^9]: Sūrah al-Mā'idah 5:1.  

[^10]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 2, “Book of the Proof,” narratives in ch.
“Concerning that All Land is the Imām's,” p. 266.


