Objective Four : On the Cordial Disciplines of the Time
=======================================================

Discussed on Two Chapters

Chapter 1: Times of Salat
-------------------------

Know that the people of knowledge and of observance pay attention to,
and take care of, the times for the *Salat*s according to the depth of
their knowledge of the Sacred State of the Lord, and according to their
longing for supplication with the Creator, Honored be His Name, as these
times are for supplication and meeting Allah.

Those who are attracted by the Beauty of the Beautiful, and are fond of
the beauty of eternity, and are drunk with the cup of affection, and are
in a state of ecstasy by (drinking) a goblet from *alastu*

***(Am I not…?)***[^1]***,***

Are delivered from both worlds, closing their eyes against the regions
of existence and joining the Majesty of the Sanctity of Allah's Beauty.
To them the Presence is continual, and they do not forget, even for a
single moment, remembrance, contemplation, perception and observance.

The people of knowledge, virtues and honorable learned souls, and of
good disposition, would prefer nothing to supplication to Allah. They
demand supplication and privacy with Allah. They take glory, honor,
virtue and knowledge to be in supplication and remembering Allah. Should
they look at the universe and the world, their look would be gnostic. In
the world they are in quest of Allah and want Him.

To them, all beings are the manifestations of Allah and the charms of
the Beautiful: “I love the whole world as the whole world is from
Him.”[^2] They watch for the times of the *Salat*s with all their
hearts, and eagerly wait for the time of supplication to Allah,
preparing themselves to be present at a fixed time to meet Him. Their
hearts are present, and from the Presence [*mahdar*] they demand the
Present, as they respect the Presence [*mahdar*] for the sake of the
Present. They believe that servitude is association and sociability with
the Absolute Perfect and their eagerness for worship is due to this
fact.

And those who believe in the invisible and the other world, and are
fascinated by the generosity of Allah, the Exalted, and who would not
change the eternal heavenly blessings and the everlasting pleasures and
the permanent cheerfulness for mundane perishing chances and the
temporal, incomplete and suspected delights, at the times of worship
which is the seed of the blessings relating to the other world they
prepare their hearts and perform it whole-heartedly and anxiously.

They wait for the times of the *Salat*s which are the times for getting
the results and winning the treasures and take nothing for the eternal
blessings. As their hearts are aware of the invisible world and they
cordially believe in the eternal blessings and the continual pleasures
of the Hereafter world, they fully utilize their time and do not waste
it. Those are the owners of Paradise and the lords of grace in which
they will remain forever.

Those groups that have been mentioned, and the others which have not
been mentioned, obtain pleasure from worshipping itself, in proportion
to their ranks and their knowledge. They never feel the heaviness of the
obligations, but it is we, the helpless, who are in the chains of hopes
and desires, and in the fetters of whims and wishes, drowned in the
overflowing dark sea of the world of nature, where neither a smell of
affection and love has reached the sense of smell of our spirit, nor has
our heart's sense of taste tasted any delicacies of knowledge and
virtue.

We are neither of the people of Gnosticism and vision, nor of the people
of faith and tranquility. We take the divine worship to be a heavy
obligation, and regard supplication unto Allah a burden. We trust
nothing but this world, which is a manger for animals, and are attached
to nothing except to this house of nature, which is the seclusion place
of the unjust. The eye of our heart's insight is blind to the Beauty of
the Beautiful, and the taste of our spirit is void of the taste of
Gnosticism.  
 The master of the circle of the people of knowledge, and the gist of
the people of affection and truth says: “I spend the night with my Lord
Who feeds me and gives me drink.”[^3] O Lord! What a night which
Muhammad (*s*) spent in the House of Private Intimacy with You! What
food and drink were those, which You, with Your own hand, fed that
honorable being and freed him from all worlds! It is proper for that
master to say: “I have with Allah a time which is not within the
capacity of any favorable angel and prophet.”[^4]

Was that time of the times of this world and the other world? Or was it
the time of the Privacy of *qāba* *qawsayn* (the distance of two bows'
length) and discarding the two worlds? Moses, the interlocutor with
Allah, fasted for forty days and could attain a meeting with Allah, and
Allah said:

*“**So, the appointed time of his Lord was complete forty
nights.”***[^5]

Yet, he could not attain a meeting like Muhammad's, and it cannot be
compared with that of him. In the meeting place Moses was told:

***“Take off your shoes,”***[^6]

Which is interpreted to mean “affection to family,” while the Seal of
the Prophets was told to love 'Alī. In my heart, of this secret, there
is a firebrand, of which I would not talk. You yourself, from this
brief, read its detailed talk.

Chapter 2: On Watching Over The Time
------------------------------------

Dear, you too, are to seize this opportunity for supplication, as
available and according to the possible measure, and apply its cordial
disciplines, informing your heart that the origin [*māyah*] of the
eternal Hereafter life, the source of the spiritual virtues and the
capital of the unlimited generosities are in the Proximity to, and
Intimacy with, Allah, the Exalted, and in supplication to Him,
especially in the *Salat* which is a spiritual mixture [*ma'jūn*]
prepared by the hand of Allah's Beauty and Majesty.

It is the most comprehensive and perfect worship among all types of
servitude. So, take care, at your best, to keep its times, and select
its virtuous times, for in them is a sort of luminosity not found in
other times. In those times you are to lessen, or even sever, your
heart's engagements, and this can be achieved by arranging your times
and assigning special times for the *Salat*, which guarantees the
eternal Hereafter life for you, such that in those assigned times you
would have nothing else to do, and the heart could have no other
attachments that might rival the *Salat*, and the heart can be prepared
and made present with ease.

Now I am going to relate some of the *Hadiths* about the conditions of
the infallibles [the Imāms] ('*a*), as needs be, so that contemplating
their conditions may lead to being awake, and perhaps the importance of
the situation and seriousness of the state can be recognized by the
heart and it can be awakened from its sleep of negligence.

Some wives of the Messenger of Allah (*s*) were quoted to have said:
“The Messenger of Allah (*s*) used to talk to us and we used to talk to
him. But when the time for the *Salat* arrived he appeared as if he did
not know us and we did not know him, as his attention was completely
directed to Allah.”[^7]

It is said that Amīr al-Mu'minīn 'Alī ('*a*), when it was time for the
*Salat*, used to writhe and tremble. Asked once about his uncommon
state, he said: “The time has come for the trust which Allah, the
Exalted, offered to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but
they refused to carry it and were afraid of it.”[^8]

Sayyid Ibn Tāwūs (may his soul be sanctified) says in *Falāh as-Sā'il*,
that when Imām Husayn ('*a*) used to perform the *Wudu'*, he changed
colors and his joints trembled. Asked about the reason, the Imām said:
“When one is going to stand before the Owner of the '*Arsh*, his color
is ought to turn pale and his joints to tremble.”[^9]

Imām Hasan had a similar condition.[^10] It is narrated that Imām
as-Sajjād (the fourth Imām) ('*a*) used to get pale at the arrival of
the time of the *Wudu'*. He was once asked: “What is this state which
happens to you whenever you want to perform the *Wudu'*?” He said: “Do
you not know before whose presence I am to stand?”[^11]

If we, too, think a little and tell our veiled and discarded heart that
the times of the *Salat*s are the times of being present at the Holy
Threshold of the Owner of Majesty, the times in which Allah, the
Exalted, the Master of the Kings and the Absolute Great, invites His
helpless and worthless servant to supplication, admitting him to His
House of Generosity, so that he may win the eternal happiness and
permanent pleasures and cheerfulness, we will have pleasure and
cheerfulness, according to our level of knowledge when the time of the
*Salat* arrives.

If the heart understands the greatness and the importance of the
situation, there will be fear and dread in proportion to the extent of
its understanding of the greatness. But as the hearts of the holy men
[*awliyā'*] and their conditions are different, according to the
gracious and the overpowering manifestations and feeling the greatness
and mercy, sometimes their longing for the meeting, and their feeling
the mercy and beauty excite them to display pleasure and cheerfulness,
and they hail: “Relieve us, O Bilāl!”[^12] And sometimes (divine)
manifestations of Greatness, Power and Sovereignty, drive them to
ecstasy, trembling and shivering.

In short, O you helpless! The cordial disciplines of the times are in
preparing yourself for entering into the Presence of the Master of this
world and the Hereafter, for conversing with Allah, the Almighty and
Most High. So, cast a glance at your weakness, helplessness, humility
and indigence, and at the Greatness, Glory and Majesty of the Sanctified
Essence, Glorified be His Majesty, in Whose Court of Greatness the
prophetic Messengers and the favorite angels go into rapture, and
confess their incapability, humility and wretchedness.  
 Having so looked, and taught your heart, it would feel afraid and you
regard yourself and your worship trivial and worthless. Then,
contemplate the extent of the mercy, complete kindness and all-embracing
affection of His Sacred Essence, to realize that such a helpless
servant, with all his impurities and wretchedness, is invited to His
Sacred Court, received by the ceremonies of sending down of angels,
heavenly Books and Prophets and Messengers ('*a*), who call him to the
meeting of intimacy, without this helpless possible servant having any
previous aptitude, or there being imaginable, in this invitation to His
Presence, any benefit for Him we take refuge in Allah or for the angels
of Allah and the Prophets ('*a*).

It is natural, however, that the heart is pleased with this
contemplation, and it is filled with hope and expectancy. Therefore,
with steps of fear and hope, desire and dread, prepare yourself for the
Presence and have ready the required provisions for the Attendance, the
most important of which is to attend the Meeting [*mahdar*] with a shy
and fearing heart, feeling broken, humiliated, weak and helpless, and
believing yourself unworthy to worship and servitude and to be admitted
into the Presence, and regarding that giving you permission to enter
into worship and servitude was only because of the general mercy and the
all-inclusive kindness of the One, the Almighty and Glorified.

If you put your humility before your eyes, and humbly and heartily
submitted to the Sacred Essence of Allah, and if you considered yourself
and your worship worthless and trivial, Allah, the Exalted, would be
kind to you, raise you and bestow His graces upon you.

[^1]: This is a reference to the āyah: “And made them bear witness
against their own souls: “Am I not your Lord?” They said: “Yes, we bear
witness.” “(Sūrah al-An'ām 6:172).

[^2]: “By the world I am pleased, since the world is pleasant by Him, I
love the whole world, as the whole world is from Him.” Sa'dī

[^3]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 7, p. 388, with a slight difference;
Sahīh al-Bukhārī, vol. 4, “Book of Wishes,” p. 251. Mawlawī, in a
couplet says: “As 'I spend the night with my Lord' became knowledge, 'He
feeds and give drinks' afterwards became porridge.”

[^4]: 'Awāliyy ul-La'ālī, vol. 4, hadīth 7, p. 7; Bihār al-Anwār, vol.
18, “Book of the Prophet's History,” ch. on “Proving the Mi'rāj,” p.
360.

[^5]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:142.

[^6]: “I am your Lord; take off your shoes,” Sūrah Tā-Hā 20:12.

[^7]: Mustadarak al-Wasā'il, “Book of as-Salat,” sec. on “The Acts of
the Salat,” ch. 2, hadīth 17.

[^8]: Ibid., hadīths 5 and 14.

[^9]: Sayyid Ibn Tāwūs (may his soul be sanctified) has stated this
point in his Falāh as-Sā'il, quoting al-Lu'lu'iyyāt, concerning the
conditions of Imām Hasan ibn 'Alī ('a).

[^10]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 77, “Book of Purification,” sec. on ”Wudū',”
ch. 34, hadīth 34, p. 346, quoting Falāh as-Sā'il.

[^11]: Mustadarak al-Wasā'il, “Book of as-Salat,” sec. on “The Acts of
the Salat,” ch. 2, hadīth 35.

[^12]: Al-Mahajjat al-Baydā' fī Tahdhīb al-Ahyā, vol. 1, p. 377. Bilāl
was the Prophet's mu'adhdhin, or the caller for the Salat. Mawlawī, in a
couplet, says: “The soul is perfect and perfect is its call, The Chosen
One said: “Relieve us, O Bilāl!”


