Chapter 1: General Secret And Disciplines Of The Adhān And Iqāmah
=================================================================

Know that the *sālik* to Allah has to announce attending the Meeting
[*mahdar*], in the *adhān*, to the heart, which is the sultan of the
covert and overt powers, and to other soldiers scattered throughout the
visible and invisible realms. As the time of the presence and meeting
has drawn near, he is to prepare them, so that, if he is of the eager
lovers, he may not lose control at the sudden appearance of a
manifestation; and if he is of the veiled, he may not enter the Sacred
Presence [*mahdar*] without making ready the means and the disciplines
for the occasion.

Thus, the general secret of the *adhān* is the announcement to the overt
and covert powers and the divine armies to attend the Meeting. Its
general discipline is to be aware of the greatness of the position, its
significance and the majesty of the Presence and the Present, and it is
the servility, helplessness, poverty, incapability, and shortcoming of
the “possible” (existent) in carrying out orders and deserving to attend
the Meeting [*mahdar*], unless the kindness and mercy of Allah, the Most
High, extend the helping hand to make up for the shortcomings.

The *iqāmah* is to set up the visible and invisible powers in the
Presence and to make them present in the Meeting; and its discipline is
fear, awe, shyness, shame, and a firm hope in the boundless mercy. The
*sālik*, during all the chapters of the *adhān* and the *iqāmah*, is to
continually inform the heart about the greatness of the Meeting,
Presence and the Present, and to continually think of his own humility,
inability and shortcoming, in order to bring about (in the heart) fear
and awe, while, on the other hand, he is to show to his heart Allah's
vast mercy and generous kindness, in order to bring about (in it) hope
and eagerness.

So, eagerness and attraction will conquer the loving hearts, and with
the steps of love and affection they (the *sālik*s) will proceed to the
Presence of Intimacy, and their hearts, by means of that invisible
attraction, will, till the end of the *Salat* and through their love of
the Presence and the Present, practice mutual embracing and fondling
with remembering Allah and thinking of Him.

Imām 'Alī ibn Abū Tālib ('*a*) is quoted to have said: “The best of the
people is the one who adores worship, embraces it, whole-heartedly loves
it, touches it with his body and disengages himself for it. He would not
care whether he gains his share of this world with difficulty or with
ease.”[^1]

And the fearing hearts will be overpowered by the manifestation of the
Greatness, and overwhelmed by the attraction of the Omnipotence, so that
they (the *sālik*s) will be led to ecstasy, their hearts will melt with
fear and awe, and their personal shortcomings and their feeling of
humility and inability will hold them back from everything.

In a *hadīth* Mūsā ibn Ja'far ('*a*) is quoted to have said: “Amīr
al-Mu'minīn ('Alī) ('*a*) said: “Allah has servants whose hearts are
broken by fearing Him, causing them to keep silent.”[^2]

Sometimes Allah, the Exalted, manifests Himself to His perfect friends
in a kind manifestation, and the attraction of love becomes their guide,
as the *hadīth* says that the Messenger of Allah (*s*) used to be
waiting for the time of the *Salat*, his longing ever increasing, until
at last he would say to Bilāl (the Messenger's *mu'adhdhin*): “Relieve
us, O Bilāl.”[^3] Sometimes He would manifest Himself through greatness
and sovereignty, such that they feel they are filled with fear and awe.

Such states are related from the Messenger of Allah (*s*) and the Imāms
of guidance ('*a*). Sometimes He manifests Himself in “the Collective
Oneness” [*jam'ī-i ahadī*] according to the endurance of the hearts and
the capacities of their vessels. We, the veiled, the busy with the
world, the imprisoned in the prison of nature and in the chains of
desires and hopes, and the deprived of the divine intellectual
happiness, who, because of being drunken with nature, will not come back
to sobriety nor get up from the deep sleep till the dawn of eternity,
are out of the calculations of these divisions, and excluded from this
declaration.

Thus, the disciplines of the Presence, which suit us are different, and
the performance of the cordial duties has a different form. But what
should be the first and foremost, before all else, is to drive out of
the heart the despair of Allah's mercy, and prevent it from losing hope
for His generosity, for these are of *Iblīs'* dangerous soldiers and of
the inspirations of the human and jinn Satans. We should not imagine
that those stations have been cut to suit particular persons, such that
our hand of hope is too short to attain them, or man's treadings cannot
reach them.

Hence, we should not mistake hand for foot, and with coldness and
weakness, remain sticking to the land of nature forever. No, it is not
like what has been imagined! But I still say that the special station of
the perfect people of Allah is not possibly attainable by everybody.
Yet, the spiritual stations and divine knowledge have unlimited degrees
and many ranks. Many of those stations, sciences, states and stages are
available to the (human) species, if only their coldness and weakness
let them, and if only the obstinacy and fanaticism of the people of
ignorance and obstinacy take their hands off the hearts of the servants
of Allah, and they turn not to be Satans on the road of their travel to
Allah.

So, the discipline of the Presence for us is that at the beginning, as
we have not yet passed through the stage of sensation and the
appearance, and think of nothing except the mundane greatness and
splendor, while knowing nothing of the Divine Invisible Greatnesses, we
have to look at Allah's Presence [*mahdar*] as we look at a great
sultan's presence whose greatness has been realized by the heart,
informing it that all kinds of greatness, majesty and glory are but
manifestations of the greatness of the heavenly world which have
descended to this world, and the heavenly world ['*ālam-i malakūt*] is
of little importance compared with the invisible worlds.

Thus, we are to inform the heart that the world is the Sacred Presence
of Allah, the Exalted, since He, the Glorified, is Present at all places
and spaces, especially the *Salat* which is a special permission for
attending the Presence, and a special date for meeting and intimacy with
Allah, the Exalted. Now, having incited the heart to feel the Greatness
and the Presence, even if at the beginning it was not so easy to do so,
the heart gradually becomes familiar with it, and the imagery becomes
real.

So, by observing the formal disciplines of dealing with the King of the
kings and the Sultan of the sultans, and applying the disciplines of the
apparent Presence, the heart will also be affected and will feel the
greatness, and will gradually attain man's desired results. Similarly,
inciting love and adoration can be achieved by means of perseverance and
austerity.

So, at the beginning, one should exhibit the formal mercies and sensual
blessings of Allah, the Exalted, to the heart, and then introduce to it
the state of Mercifulness, Compassionateness and Bountifulness, until
the heart gradually becomes intimate, and the exterior affects the
interior, and the kingdom of the interior is illuminated by the effects
of the Beauty, and then the desired results will be achieved.

If a man carried out the matter and strove in the way of Allah, the
Exalted, He would help him and save him by His invisible hand from the
darkness of the world of nature, and would throw the light of His Beauty
to the dark earth of his heart, and turn him into a spiritual heaven:

***“And whoever does a good deed, We add unto its good for him. Surely
Allah is Forgiving, Thankful.”***[^4]

[^1]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 1, “Book of Purity,” sec. on
“Preliminaries to Worships,” ch. 19, hadīth 2, p. 61, quoted from the
Messenger of Allah (s).

[^2]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 75, “Book of ar-Rawdah,” ch. 25, hadīth 1, p.
309, as cited from Tuhaf al-'Uqūl.

[^3]: Refer to footnote l78

[^4]: Sūrah ash-Shūrā 42:23.


