Chapter 2: Some Disciplines And Secrets Of Takbīrs In The Adhān And Iqāmah
==========================================================================

Know that, as the *adhān* (call to the *Salat*) is the announcement of
the presence [*hudūr*] of the external and internal powers of the soul
in the Presence [*mahdar*] of Allah for the sake of praising His Sacred
Essence according to all the Names, Attributes, Affairs and *āyah*s
since the *Salat*, as has already been mentioned, is a comprehensive
praising of the Sacred Essence according to the manifestation of the
Greatest Name, which is the state of “the Collective Oneness of the
Names” [*ahadiyyat-i jam'-i asmā'*] in His Unity [*hadrat-i
wāhidiyyat*], and the state of manifestation through the collectivity
[*jam'*] differentiation [*tafrīq*], overtness [*zuhūr*] and covertness
[*butūn*] in the essences [*a'yān*] and essential names [*asmā'-i
'ayniyyah*] the *sālik*'s attention is first directed to the Majesty of
the Sacred Essence according to this general affair [*sha'n-i jāmi'*].

So, at first, he introduces the said Greatness and Majesty to the
invisible and visible powers of his own kingdom. Then, secondly, to the
angels of Allah in charge of the invisible powers spread in the kingdom
of the soul. Thirdly, to the beings of the invisible and visible worlds,
and fourthly, to the angels of Allah in charge of the Kingdom of the
heavens and the earths (lands = *aradīn*). So, through these four
*takbīr*s (saying: “Allah is Greater”) he announces the Majesty of the
Grand Name (Greatest Name) to all the dwellers of the invisible and
visible worlds of the inward and outward kingdoms.

And this, by itself, is an announcement of his being incapable of
undertaking the duty of praising the Sacred Essence, and an announcement
of his falling short of performing the *Salat*. This, in itself, is one
of the general affairs of the *sulūk* and of the comprehensive
disciplines concerning praising and worshipping, which must be before
the *sālik*'s eyes during the whole period of performing the *Salat*.

That is why the *takbīr* is repeated in the *adhān* and the *iqāmah*, as
well as in the *Salat*. It is also repeated when passing from one stage
to another so that the *sālik*'s innate inability, and the Greatness and
the Glory of the Sacred Essence are confirmed in his heart.

As such, its discipline, as it appears, is that the *sālik* should, in
each *takbīr*, remind himself of his inability and Allah's Majesty. On
another supposition, it is possible that each one of these preliminary
*takbīr*s of the *adhān* points to a state: The first *takbīr* means: He
is Greater than the attributive Essence; the second means: He is Greater
than the attributive Attribute; the third means: He is Greater than the
attributive Name; and the fourth means: He is Greater than the
attributive Act. Thus, it is as if the *sālik* says: *Allāhu* *akbar*
[Allah is Greater] than your description of His Essence, or of His
Essence-manifestations, and He is Greater than your describing
Attributes, His Names and His Acts, or their respective manifestations.

In an elaborated speech quoted from Amīr al-Mu'minīn 'Alī ('*a*) it is
said: “…The other aspect is that *Allāhu* *akbar* implies negation of
His quality, as if he (the *mu'adhdhin* = the one who speaks out the
*adhān*)” says: “Allah's attribute, with which He is qualified, is far
above being comprehended by the describers,” for the describers describe
Him according to their own measure, not according to the measure of His
Greatness and Majesty. He is far above His quality being understood by
the describers…” as the *hadīth* goes.[^1]

Another important discipline of the *takbīr*s is that the *sālik* is to
strive, and, by cordial austerities, he is to prepare his heart to be
the place for the Majesty of Allah, the Glorified, and to regard
Greatness, Glory, Sovereignty and Majesty to be exclusively ascribed to
the Sacred Essence of Allah, the Most High, and to exclude the others
from Majesty. If he feels in his heart even a tiny bit of anyone else's
greatness, without taking it to be the light of that of Allah's, his
heart is sick and is controlled by Satan.

It is quite possible that Satan's intrusion would cause the sovereignty
of the majesty of other than Allah, in the heart, to be more than that
of Allah's, and the heart would regard him greater than Allah. In this
case, man would be counted among the hypocrites. The symptom of this
devastating disease is that man regards the pleasure of the creatures to
be preferred to the pleasure of Allah, and in order to obtain the
pleasure of the created, he would incur the displeasure of the Creator.

As-Sādiq ('*a*) is quoted to have said: “When you say: *Allāhu* *akbar*,
slight whatever is there between the high (heaven) and the earth,
regarding it below His Majesty, because if Allah looked into the heart
of the servant while telling the *takbīr*, and saw therein something
contradicting his *takbīr*, He would say: “O you liar! Are you deceiving
Me? By My Might and My Majesty, I will deprive you of (tasting) the
sweetness of remembering Me, and I will exclude you from My proximity
and from getting pleasure through your supplication.”[^2]

My dear, the fact that our wretched hearts are deprived of the sweetness
of remembering Allah, the Exalted, and that the enjoyment of
supplication to the Sacred Essence is not tasted by our spirit, and that
we are prevented from reaching the proximity of His Threshold and
deprived of the manifestations of His Beauty and Majesty, is because our
hearts are sick and faulty, attracted by the world, stuck to it and
wrapped in the veils of the darkness of nature. And this fact deprives
us of recognizing Allah's Majesty and of discerning the lights of His
Beauty and Glory.

As long as our look at the beings is Satanic and independent, we shall
never drink of the wine of intimacy, not attain the pleasure of
supplication. As long as we believe that in the world of existence there
can be glory, might, majesty, greatness and dignity for any created
being, and as long as we are wrapped in the veils of the created
specifications [*ta'ayyunāt*], the dominion [*sultān*] of the Majesty of
Allah, the Glorified, will not manifest in our hearts.

So, of the disciplines of *takbīr* is that the *sālik* should not stop
at its outer form, or be satisfied with its wordings and with mere
pronunciations of the tongue. First, he is to prove to the heart, with
the power of argument and the light of divine knowledge, Allah's Glory
and the confinement of greatness and majesty only to the Sacred Essence
of Allah, Most High, informing it of the poverty, humility and
helplessness of all the possible dwellers and all the corporeal and
spiritual beings.

After that, with the power of austerity, frequent intimacy [*murāwadah*]
and complete familiarity, he is to enliven the heart with this divine
grace and grant it spiritual and intellectual life and happiness. When
the *sālik* realizes the poverty and the humility of the possible (the
creatures) and Allah's Greatness and Majesty, and puts that before his
eyes, while his contemplation and remembrance reach their assigned
limit, and the heart attains familiarity and tranquility, he will see
with the eye of insight the effects of Allah's Glory and Majesty in all
beings, and the diseases and faults of his heart will be cured.

Only then will he taste the deliciousness of supplication and the
sweetness of remembering Allah, and the heart will affirm Allah's
Sovereign Majesty, and the effects of Majesty will appear in the
exterior and in the interior of the kingdom, and the heart, the tongue,
the outside and the inside will go in harmony. So, all the external and
internal powers, visible and invisible, recite *Allāhu* *akbar*, and one
of the thick curtains is drawn away, and he gets one stage nearer to the
truth of the *Salat*.

There is a reference to some of what has been said in a lengthy *hadīth*
in '*Ilal ash-Sharā'i'*, quoting Imām Ja'far as-Sādiq ('*a*) describing
the *mi'rāj*. He said: “Allah, the Glorified and Almighty, sent down to
the Prophet a carriage of light comprised of forty sorts of light which
were around the '*Arsh*. The '*Arsh* of Allah, Blessed and Most High,
blurs the eyes of the onlookers. One of them was yellow, and it became
the cause of the yellowness of the yellow.

Another one was red, and it became the cause of the redness of the red…”
Then he added: “… He [the Messenger (*s*)] sat in it and it ascended him
to the lower heaven. The angels ran to the outskirts of the heaven, and
then they fell in prostration, and said: “All-Glorified and All-Holy is
our Lord, the Lord of the angels and the Spirit. How this light is like
the light of our Lord!” Jibrā'īl (Gabriel) said: “*Allāhu* *akbar*!
*Allāhu* *akbar*!” The angels stopped talking, and the heaven was
opened. The angels gathered and came to pay tribute to the Prophet (*s*)
group after group…” as the *hadīth* goes.[^3]

In this noble *hadīth* there are great secrets to which the hand of our
hopes is too short to reach, and what can be said is now out of our
purpose, like the secret of the descension of the carriage of light, the
secret of the many lights, the secret of their diversity, the secret of
the figure forty, the secret of its being sent down by Allah, the secret
of their gathering around the '*Arsh*, the truth of the '*Arsh* in this
respect, the secret of the yellowness of the yellow and the redness of
the red caused by them, the secret of the angels' running, their bowing,
praising and glorifying, and likening his light to Allah's, and the
like. To speak about each of them would be lengthy.  
 Yet, that which suits this occasion and testifies to our subject is
that the angels of Allah quieted down as they heard Gabriel's *takbīr*,
and gathered around the candle of the meeting of the Absolute Guardian.
By that *takbīr* the first heaven opened, and one of the curtains, which
blocked the way to Allah, was drawn away. It should be noted that the
curtains, which are pushed aside by the *adhān* are other than the
curtains, which are in the opening *takbīr*s. We shall probably refer to
this concept later on, *inshā'* *Allāh* (Allah willing).

Concerning there being only two *takbīr*s in the *iqāmah*, it is
probably because the *sālik* has set up his powers in the Presence, and
has somewhat advanced from multiplicity toward unity, magnifying the
Essence and the Names, or the Names and the Attributes; and it may be
that the magnification of the Essence and the Names implies the
magnification of the Attributes and the Acts.

[^1]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 81, p. 131, “Book of the Salat,” ch. on “The
Adhān and the Iqāmah,” hadīth 24.

[^2]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 13, on “Finishing the Salat”; al-Mahajjat
al-Baydā', printed by as-Sadūq Library, vol. 1 , p. 385; Mustadarak
al-Wasā'il, “Book of as-Salat, sec. on “The Acts of the Salat,” ch. 2,
hadīth 9.

[^3]: 'Ilal ash-Sharā'i', vol. 2, p. 312, sec. on “The Causes of the
Wudū', the Adhān and the Salat,” hadīth 1, p. 312.


