Author’s Preface
================

In His Most Exalted NameIn His Most Exalted Name  
 Alas! My life has passed in vain,  
 Loaded with sins, with no devotional gain;  
 Tomorrow when I am brought to the Scene of Judgment,  
 They will say that repentance chance did not remain.

The book *Ādāb as*-*Salat*, which I present to my dear daughter
[-in-law], Fātī [Fātimah Tabātabā'ī, wife of Hujjatul-Islām wal-Muslimīn
Hāj Sayyid Ahmad Khomeinī], whom may Allah make one of the *musallīn*
(*Salat* performers), was finished more than forty years ago. A few
years before that, I had completed the book of *Asrār as*-*Salat* (The
Secrets of the *Salat*). From that time till now more than forty years
have elapsed, while I have neither perceived the secrets of the *Salat*
nor applied its disciplines, for “perceiving” is other than
“conceiving”, and “forming” is different from “performing”.

These books are as a proof [*hujjat*] from the Lord on this poor
servant. I take refuge in Allah from being among those referred to by
these back-breaking noble *āyah*s (Qur'anic verses):

*“**O you who believe, why do you say what you do not do? It is most
detested in the sight of Allah that you say what you do not do”***
*(*Sūrah *61:2-3).*

I have no refuge but His vast mercy.

O my daughter, I hope you will be successful in applying the disciplines
of this grand divine ascension, and be guided by this divine *Burāq*
(the Prophet's heavenly horse) through a migration from the dark room of
the self to Allah. I entrust you to Allah's custody lest reading these
papers should increase your sensual longings, or make you like the
writer a plaything in Satan's hands.

Dear daughter, although I found in you, thank Allah, such a spiritual
fineness that I hope you will be guided by Allah, the Glorified and
High, favored with His patronage, and be saved from nature's deep pit to
the straight path of humanity, yet do not be heedless of the deceit of
Satan, and of that of your own soul, which is even more dangerous. Take
refuge in Allah, the Great, for He has mercy upon His servants.

My daughter, if there was no result from reading these pages Allah
forbid! Except self-conceit, pretence and intrusion, it would be better
to forgo reading them, or rather beware of them, so that you may not,
like me, be subject to remorse and regret. But if you Allah willing
prepare yourself to be benefited by the subject-matters of this book,
which have been taken from the Book, the Sunnah, the *hadīth* of the
infallible *Ahl* *al-Bayt* (The Prophet's progeny) and the statements of
the people of knowledge, and to make use of your delicate God-given
talent, then here you are!

Here is the ball and here is the ground! I hope you will, by this human
ascent and divine mixture, empty your heart from others, rinse it with
the water of life, say four *takbīr*s (*Allāhu* *Akbar* = Allah is
Greater!) and release yourself from selfness in order to reach the
Friend:

***“And whoever leaves his home migrating to Allah and His Messenger,
and then death overtakes him, his reward is indeed with Allah”
(*****Sūrah** ***4:100).***

O Allah! Make us of the immigrants to You and to Your Messenger, and
take us to “annihilation” [*fanā'*]. Grant Fātī [Fātimah] and Ahmad Your
assistance to serve (Your servants), and let them attain happiness.

Was-Salām.

**Rūhullāh al-Mūsawī al-Khomeinī**  
**2nd** **of Safar al-Muzaffar 1405 A.H.**


