Chapter 3: Some Disciplines Concerning Testifying Divinity And Its Connection With The Adhān And The Salat
==========================================================================================================

Know that divinity has many states [*maqāmāt*], which, according to
“collectivity” [*jam'*], are explained in two: **First:** Divinity of
Essence. **Second:** Divinity of Action. If by testifying that divinity
is confined to Allah we mean the Divinity of Essence, its truth, with
that of *takbīr*, will come close to each other if *ilāh* (divinity) is
derived from *aliha* *fī 'sh*-*shay'*, i.e. “He became perplexed about
it,” or derived from *lāha*, i.e. “He became lofty” or derived from
*lāha* *yalūhu*, i.e. “He concealed himself.”

In this case its connection to the *adhān* and the *Salat* becomes known
by referring to the chapter of *takbīr*, and so does its discipline. But
to repeat it again, though not void of some advantage, is contrary to
brevity. If we take *aliha* to mean: “He worshipped,” and *ma'lūh* to
mean: “the worshipped,” then the *sālik* must make the formal testimony
of the confinement of deity to Allah, the Most High, comply with the
inner cordial testimony, and he should know that should there be in the
heart a deity other than Allah, he would be a hypocrite in his
testimony.

So, the *sālik* is to convey to his heart, by whatever austerity, his
testimony about divinity, and to smash in his heart the big and small
idols which have been engraved by the intruding hands of Satan and the
evil-commanding soul, and to sweep them away, so that he may become fit
to be in the Presence of His Sacred Essence. As long as the idols of
loving the world and mundane affairs are still in the *ka'bah* of the
heart, the *sālik* will find no way to his goal. So, testifying to
divinity is to announce to the worldly and heavenly powers that the
false deities and the crooked objectives should be trod upon so as to be
able to ascend to Allah's Proximity.

But if the confinement of divinity is intended for Divinity of Action,
which is management and effectiveness, the meaning of the testimony will
be: I testify that there is no manager and no effective influence in the
world of achievement, and in the visible and the invisible save the
Sacred Essence of Allah, the Most High. If the *sālik*'s heart cherished
dependence on any being among the beings, and trusted any individual
among the individuals, his heart would be diseased and his testimony
false.

Thus, the *sālik* must first strengthen, with judicial proof, the fact
that “There is no effecter [*mu'aththir*] in the (world of) existence
except Allah.” He must not evade the divine knowledge, which is the
objective of sending prophets, and not turn away from remembering Allah
and from the affairs of the Essence and Attributes, for the source of
all (kinds of) happiness is the remembrance of Allah:

*“**And whoever turns away from remembering me, his shall surely be a
straitened life.”***[^1]

After attaining the truth of this divine delicacy, which is the source
of the divine knowledge and the door of the doors of the hidden facts,
by way of thinking and reasoning, he is to make his heart, through
remembrance and austerity, familiar with them until it believes in them.
This would be the first stage of the truthfulness of his words, and it
is marked by complete dependence on Allah, and by taking the eye of
greed and hope away from all beings, a fact which results in believing
in Allah's Unity of Action, being one of the great states of the people
of knowledge.

Having ascribed all effects to Allah, and closed the eye of greed
against all beings, save His Sacred Essence, the *sālik* becomes worthy
attending the Sacred Presence, or rather his heart becomes, by nature,
attentive to that Presence. Repeating the testimony may be for
confirming it, and by the testimony we mean one of the two testimonies,
or it may not be a repetition, but one may refer to the Divinity of
Essence and the other to the Divinity of Action. In this instance, its
repetition at the end may be to confirm them, and that is why it is not
mentioned there with the very words: “I testify.”

A Gnostic Note
--------------

Know that testimony is of many stages, of which we shall be satisfied
with referring to a few, as suits these pages.

The first is the verbal testimony [*shahādat-i qawliyyah*], which is
already known. If the verbal testimony is not accompanied by cordial
testimony, even in a lower stage, it will not be a testimony, but a
deception and hypocrisy, as it was mentioned in the *hadīth* concerning
*takbīr*, quoted from Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*).[^2]

The second is the Practical Testimony [*shahādat-i fi'liyyah*], which
means that man testifies through the practices of his organs. For
example, he is, in the type and method of his action, to apply the fact
that: “There is no effecter [*mu'aththir*] in the (world of) existence
save Allah,” and, as his verbal testimony requires him to think that
nobody is effective, he should work out the plan of his acts
accordingly. Hence, he should not extend the hand of need to anybody
except to the Sacred Presence of Allah, the Most High, nor should he
open the eye of expectation at any being. He should show himself rich
and in no need, before the weak servants, and keep aloof from weakness,
humility and inability.

This is frequently referred to by noble *Hadiths*, as is in a narrative
stated in the noble *al*-*Kāfī*: “A believer's dignity is to manage
without the help of the people.”[^3] Showing oneself well off and
prosperous is one of the religious commendable practices, while
demanding things from people is undesirable. In short, one must put to
practice the divine grace: “There is no effecter in the (world of)
existence except Allah” in his external kingdom.

The third is the Cordial Testimony [*shahādat-i qalbiyyah*], which is
the source of the practical and verbal testimonies, as without it, these
would not come to actuality. And it is that Allah's Unity of Action
manifests in the heart, which realizes, by way of its inner secret, the
truth of this grace, and separates itself from other beings.

Most of the narratives quoted from the infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* ('*a*)
concerning abandoning looking with greed at what is in the hands of the
people, and despairing of the servants, and trusting and confiding in
Allah, the Exalted and Most High refer to this situation.

It is in *al*-*Kāfī*, on the authority of 'Alī ibn al-Husayn ('*a*) that
he said: “I found that the entire goodness is gathered in cutting one's
coveting what is in the hands of others, and whoever placed no hope on
the people in anything, and entrusted himself to Allah, the Exalted, in
all his affairs, Allah would respond to him in all the things.”[^4]
*Hadiths* of this kind are many.

The fourth is the Essence Testimony (Personal Testimony = *shahādat-i
dhātiyyah*), i.e. the existential testimony, and it appears in the
perfect holy men. To the holy men, this testimony is present in all
beings, in one way or another. Perhaps the *āyah*:

*“**Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, and (so do) the
angels and the possessors of knowledge,”***[^5]

Is a hint at the Essence Testimony, for Allah, the Exalted, in the state
of “the Collective Oneness” [*ahadiyyat-i dhātiyyah*] gives Personal
testimony to His own Unity [*wahdāniyyat*], because mere existence by
itself denotes the Essence-Oneness [*ahādiyyat-i dhātiyyah*], and in the
rising of the Day of Resurrection it appears in Complete Unity
[*wahdāniyyat*-*i tāmmah*].

This Oneness [*ahādiyyat*] appears first in the mirror of the
Collectivity [*jam'*], then in the mirror of distinctness [*tafsīl*].
For this reason He said: “**…and the angels and the possessors of
knowledge.”** In this instance there are many states of knowledge
[*ma'ārif*] that are out of the obligation of these pages to explain.

Connection
----------

In the exegesis of Muhammad ibn Mas'ūd al-'Ayyāshī, quoting 'Abd
as-Samad ibn Bashīr, it is said: “The beginning of the *adhān* was
mentioned to Abū 'Abdullāh (Imām as-Sādiq) ('*a*), and he said: “The
Messenger of Allah (*s*) was (once) sleeping in the shadow of the
*ka'bah*, when Gabriel came to him with a bowl of water from Paradise.
He woke him up and told him to wash himself with it.

Then he (the Prophet) was put in a carriage with a thousand colors of
light, and he was taken high up to the doors of the heaven. When the
angels saw him, they ran away from the doors of the heaven, exclaiming:
“Two gods, a god in the earth and a god in the heaven!” Allah commanded
Gabriel to shout: ”*Allāhu* *akbar!* *Allāhu* *akbar!”* So the angels
returned to the doors of the heaven.

The door was opened, and he proceeded until he reached the second
heaven. The angels ran away from the doors of the heaven. There he said:
“I testify that there is no god but Allah! I testify that there is no
god but Allah! “The angels returned, as they realized that he was a
creature. Then the door was opened and he went in…” as the *hadīth* goes
on.[^6]

A similar concept is stated in a narrative in '*Ilal ash*-*Sharā'i'*.
[^7] These *Hadiths* denote that testifying to Allah's Divinity opens
the doors of the heaven and penetrates the barriers, and causes the
angels of Allah to gather. The veil which is penetrated through by
testifying to His Divinity and by confessing it to be exclusively His,
is of the thick veils of darkness, and, as long as the *sālik* is
wrapped in it, he will have no way to attend the Presence, and unless
this door opens to him, he will not be admitted.

That barrier is the veil of the multiplicity of acts, and to fall in
this multiplicating veil results in taking the created beings to be
effective and influential, which means regarding them to be independent
in their action, which is admitting, the impossible and is a great
polytheism, while, on the other hand, the result of testifying to the
divinity to be exclusively Allah's, is testifying to the Unity of Action
and annihilating the multiplicities in Allah's Act, and denying anyone
else to have any effect or effectiveness, and believing that
independence belongs to Allah, the Exalted.

It was by means of this testimony that the angels of the heaven came out
of the veil of the multiplicity of “A god in the earth and a god in the
heaven,” and returned from fleeing away and dispersing to familiarity
and gathering, and then the doors of the heaven opened to them. So, the
*sālik* must also penetrate through this veil of his darkness by way of
this testimony and open the doors of heaven to himself, and step out of
the heavy veil of the independence, so that the way of ascension to the
*mi'rāj* of His Proximity becomes closer.

But this cannot be brought about by mere verbal utterances of
remembering Allah, as that is why our acts of worship do not cross the
limit of the mundane formality, and, thus, no door will be opened to us
and no veil will be pushed off our faces.

[^1]: Sūrah Tā-Hā 20:124.

[^2]: Refer to footnote 190.

[^3]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 3, “Book of Faith and Disbelief,” ch. on “Doing
without the People,” hadīth 1, p. 218.

[^4]: Ibid., hadīth 3.

[^5]: Sūrah Āl-i 'Imrān 3:18.

[^6]: Al-'Ayyashi's Exegesis (on the Qur'an), vol. 1, p. 157, Commenting
on Sūrah al-Baqarah, narrative 530.

[^7]: 'Ilal ash-Sharā'i', vol. 2, p. 312.


