Chapter 4: Some Disciplines Of Testifying To The (Prophet’s) Messengership Implying Testifying To The Guardianship
==================================================================================================================

Be aware that this spiritual journey and faithful ascension cannot be
made with this broken leg, ruptured reins, blind eyes and lightless
heart:

*“**And whomever Allah has not given light, for him there is no light” –
(Surah Nur, 24:40)**.*

Therefore, in setting off upon this spiritual road and ascending to this
gnostic *mi'rāj*, it is a must to adhere to the spiritual state of the
guides along the ways of knowledge [*ma'rifat*] and the lights [*anwār*]
of the road of guidance, who are the devotees and the attainers to
Allah. If anybody tries, depending on his selfishness and without
clinging to their guardianship, to tread upon this road, his journey
will be to Satan and to the pit (of hell) [*hāwiyah*].

Scientifically speaking, to connect between the novel [*hādith*] and the
Eternal [*qadīm*], the changing and the Unchanging, there should be an
intermediate, a connector, with the characteristic of being unchanging
and changing, eternal and novel. Without such an intermediate, the
Emanation of the Eternal and the Unchanging would not pass to the
changing and the novel in the divine law, and the universal and
existential connection would not take place.

As regards the connector between these two, the scientific opinions of
the experts in the evidential knowledge ['*ulūm-i burhānī*] are diverse,
as the gnostic taste is different, to give the details of which is out
of the scope of these papers. In the gnostic taste, the connector is the
Sacred Emanation [*fayd-i muqaddas*], the Expansive Existence [*wujūd-i
munbasit*], which has the position [*maqām*] of the big isthmus
[*barzakhiyyat-i kubrā*] and the great intermediate [*wasatiyyat-i
'uzmā*], and it is the very position of the spirituality and the
guardianship of the Seal of the Prophets, which is united with the
position of 'Alī's General Guardianship [*wilāyat-i mutlaq-i
'Alawiyyah*].

The relevant details are stated in the *Misbāh al-Hidāyah* by the
writer.[^1]  
 Similarly, in the ascending spiritual connection which is the opposite
of the descending existential connection, or in other words, it is “the
contraction of existence” [*qabd-i wujūd*] and returning to the
Beginning there is need for an intermediate, without which it does not
take place, and the connection of the imperfect and the chained hearts,
and of the limited descending spirits, with the Complete, Super Complete
and the Absolute from all aspects, is not implemented without the
spiritual intermediates and the invisible connectors.

If somebody thinks that Allah, the Exalted, is self-subsisting
[*qayyūm*] with each being and encompassing each of the entities
[*akwān*] without the intermediation of the intermediates, as is
referred to in the noble *āyah*:

*“**There is no living creature but He holds it by the forelock,”***[^2]

He is mixing up the states [*maqāmāt*] and is making a mistake in the
status [*i'tibārāt*], mingling the state of the multiplicity of the
stages of existence with the vanishing [*fanā'*] of the individuations
[*ta'ayyunāt*]. This discussion, however, is not so much connected to
this paper, and, actually, what has already been said was caused by the
overflowing of the pen.

In short, adhering to the masters of graces [*awliyā'-i ni'am*] who have
themselves found the way of ascension to *ma'ārij* and completed their
journey to Allah is a must for the travelers to Allah, as is frequently
mentioned in the noble *Hadiths*, such that in *Wasā'il* (*Wasā'il
ash-Shī'ah*) there is a chapter concerning the invalidity of worship
without adhering to the guardianship of the Imāms (the 12 Imāms) and
believing in their Imamate.

In *Wasā'il* it is quoted from the noble *al-Kāfī*, on the authority of
its writer quoting Muhammad ibn Muslim who said: “I was told by Imām
Baqīr al-'Ulūm (the fifth Imām) ('*a*) who said: “Know, O Muhammad, that
the leaders of despotism and their followers are isolated from Allah's
religion. They are misleading and misled. So, their deeds are like the
ashes at which a violent wind blows on a windy day and it disperses
them.”[^3]

In another narrative from Imām al-Bāqir, he said: “If a man spent his
nights performing the *Salat*, spent his days fasting, gave out all his
wealth in charity, and went to *hajj* every year of his life, yet he did
not know the guardianship of Allah's friend to follow him and return to
him in all his deeds, he would have no right to ask Allah, the Glorious
and Almighty, for any reward, nor would he be of the people of
faith.”[^4]

Shaykh as-Sadūq, quoting Abū Hamza ath-Thumālī, says that he said: “Imām
'Alī ibn al-Husayn ('*a*) asked us: “Which spot is most preferred?” We
said “Allah, His Messenger and the son of His Messenger know better.” He
said: “The best of spots for us is that which is situated between the
*rukn* and the *maqām* (two places in the *Ka'bah*). If some one lives
as long as the life of Nūh who lived among his people for a thousand
years less fifty and spends it in fasting in daytime and in worshipping
at nights in that spot, and then goes to meet Allah without accepting
our guardianship, he will not be benefited by it whatsoever.”[^5]

The narratives on this topic are too many to be contained in this
summary.  
 The discipline of testifying to the Messengership is to convey to the
heart the testimony of the Messenger's being sent by Allah, as well as
the greatness of the state of the Messengership, especially that of the
Last Messenger, since the whole circle of existence, the invisible and
visible worlds, from the viewpoints of creation, legislation, existence,
and guidance, are living on the crumbs of his table.

That great man is the means of Allah's Emanation and the connection
between Allah and the creatures. Had it not been for his spiritual
status [*maqām*] and absolute guardianship, no existing being could have
been worthy of being benefited by the state of the Invisible Oneness
[*ghayb-i ahadī*], and Allah's grace would not have passed over to any
being, and the light of guidance would not have shone onto anyone of the
internal and external worlds. He is the light mentioned in the *āyah* of
*Nūr* (Light):

*“**Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth.”***[^6]

When the greatness of the legislator of the religion and of the
Messenger of the Lord of the worlds enters a man's heart, the importance
of his precepts and rules enter the heart, too. Then, when the heart has
comprehended that greatness, the other visible and invisible powers
would submit to it, and the sacred *sharī'ah* would be observed in the
entire human kingdom. The sign of the truthfulness of the testimony is
that its effects will appear in all the invisible and visible powers,
and they will keep adherent to it, as has already been stated.

From what has so far been stated, the reason of testifying to the
Messengership in the *adhān*, the *iqāmah* and the *Salat* has become
clear, for the traveler on this spiritual road is in need of adhering to
that sacred being, so that he may accompany him and have his helping
guidance in performing this spiritual ascension.

Another aspect of this testimony is the announcement to the mundane and
heavenly powers that the *Salat*, which is the reality of the ascension
[*mi'rāj*] of the believers and the source of the knowledge of the
people of gnosticism and of faith, is the result of the complete
revelation [*kashf*] of Muhammad (*s*), who, with his spiritual journey,
divine attractions and the embers of the Beneficent, attained a
position  
*“**At the distance of two bows or closer still,”***[^7]

Revealing its truth, following the Essential, Nominal and Attributive
manifestations and intimate inspirations in the Invisible Oneness. In
fact, this is a souvenir, a gift that he brought from his moral and
spiritual journey for his *ummah*, which is the best of the *ummah*s,
and by that he favored them and overwhelmed them with blessings.

When this belief sets inside the heart and is fixed by repetition, the
*sālik* will, as a matter of course, understand the greatness of the
state and the place, and will proceed, with fear and hope, to cover this
stage, and it is hoped, *inshā' Allāh* (Allah willing), if he does his
best to perform it, that master will assist him and lead him to the
state of “the Proximity of the One” [*qurb-i ahadiyy*], which is the
original innate objective. In the divine sciences it has been proved
that the return of all beings is implemented by means of the Perfect
Man:

*“**As He brought you forth in the beginning, so shall you also
return.”***[^8]

“With you Allah started and with you He will end, and the return of the
creatures is up to you.”[^9]

A Gnostic Note
--------------

In the honorable *hadīth* in '*Ilal ash-Sharā'i'*, which gives details
about the *Salat* of the *mi'rāj* and describes it, it is said that when
the Messenger of Allah (*s*) mounted on the mount of light, which had
been sent down by the Lord of Might, and ascended accompanied by
Gabriel, and reached the third heaven, the angels ran away, bowed and
glorified Allah.

Gabriel said: “I testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. I
testify that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah.” The angels gathered
and greeted the Messenger of Allah, and asked him about Amīr al-Mu'minīn
('Alī). The doors of the heavens opened and the Messenger ascended to
the fourth heaven. There, the angels of Allah said nothing. Then the
doors of the heaven opened, and the angels gathered, and Gabriel
finished reciting the *iqāmah*…” [^10] etc.

Al-'Ayyāshī, in his exegesis of the Qur'an, relates almost the same
context.

From this *hadīth* one may gather that the angels of each of the heavens
were incapable of enduring to see the Ahmadian Beauty, and they fell
bowing at seeing his sacred light, and dispersed, thinking it was the
light of Allah. Then, as they heard the chapters of the *adhān* and the
*iqāmah* they came back to his intimacy, the doors of the heavens opened
and the veils were lifted.

Hence, the *sālik* is to come out from these veils by means of the said
testimonies by testifying to the Messengership he is to completely come
out from the veil of the creational individuality [*ta'ayyun-i khalqī*],
because the position of Messengership which He assigned to the most
honorable of the creatures, is the position of absolute annihilation
[*fanā'*] and complete dependence, since the final absolute
Messengership is the big divine isthmus *khilāfah* (vicegerency,
succession).

It is a vicegerency [*khilāfah*] in respect of appearance,
manifestation, genesis, and legislation. The vicegerent [*khalīfah*] is
not to be independent nor to have individuality in any way; as
otherwise, the vicegerency becomes the principalship itself, which is
not possible for any of the beings.

So, the *sālik* is to convey the great state of the Ahmadian *khilāfat*
to the innermost of his heart and soul, by means of which he is to
remove the veil and penetrate the barriers, and to completely come out
of the veils of the creational individuation. Then, the doors of all the
heavens will open to him and he will attain, unveiled, his objective.

A Juristic Branch and a Gnostic Principal
-----------------------------------------

In some unreliable narratives it is stated that after testifying to the
Messengership in the *adhān* one is to say: “I testify that 'Alī is
*waliyullāh* (Allah's friend)” twice. In other narratives, one is to
say: “I testify that 'Alī is truly Amīr al-Mu'minīn' twice. In some
others, one is to say: “Muhammad and his progeny are the best of
people.” Ash-Shaykh as-Sadūq (may Allah have mercy upon him) took these
narratives to be invented and he denied them.[^11]

It is well known among the '*ulamā'* (may Allah be pleased with them)
that these narratives are not reliable. Some narrators regard them among
the commendables, due to “the negligence of the proofs of the laws”.
This opinion, however, is not far from being true, although if “absolute
proximity” [*qurbat-i mutlaqah*] is intended, reciting it is better and
more admired, because after testifying to the Messengership, it is
desirable to testify to the guardianship and the leadership of the
believers.

In the *hadīth* of *ihtijāj* (argumentation) it is said that Qāsim ibn
Mu'āwiyah said: “I said to Imām as-Sādiq that the people of the *Sunnah*
relate a *hadīth* about the *mi'rāj*, that when the Messenger of Allah
was taken on the *mi'rāj*, he saw upon the '*Arsh*: “There is no god but
Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and Abū Bakr as-Siddīq.” He
said: “Glory be to Allah! They changed everything even this!” He said:
“Yes”. Then he continued: “When Allah, the Exalted, created the '*Arsh*,
He wrote upon it: “There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger
of Allah, and 'Alī is the Commander (Leader) of the Faithful.

He ordered these to be written on the water, on the Chair (Throne), on
the Tablet, on *Isrāfil*'s forehead, on the two wings of Gabriel, on the
shoulders of the heavens and the earth, on the top of the mountains, on
the sun and on the moon.” Then the Imām added: “When anyone of you says:
“There is no god but Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah,” let him
say:”'Alī is the Commander (Leader) of the Faithful.”[^12]

In short, this noble remembrance, after testifying to the Messengership
is generally recommendable. In the chapters of the *adhān* especially,
it is probably commendable. Nevertheless, as the notable '*ulamā'* have
denied those narratives, one may pronounce it by way of precaution and
with the general intention of proximity (to Allah), not as a feature of
the *adhān*.

As to the gnostic note concerning “writing these words on all the
beings, as from the High '*Arsh* to the low earth,” it is that the truth
of the *khilāfah* and *wilāyah* (successorship and guardianship) is the
manifestation of divinity, which is the origin of existence and its
perfection. Every being which has a share of existence also has a share
of the truth of divinity and its manifestation, which is the truth of
the *khilāfah* and *wilāyah*, and the divine grace is fixed on the
foreheads of all beings all over the universe, as from the invisible
worlds to the end of the visible world.

The said divine grace is the truth of “the Expansive Existence”
[*wujūd-i munbasit*], “the Breath of the Beneficent” [*nafas ar-rahmān*]
and “the Created-in Right” [*haqq-i makhlūqun bihī*], which are the very
inside of the Last Successorship and of 'Alī's General Guardianship. On
this, the gnostic Shaykh Shāhābādī (may his spirit be sanctified) used
to say that the testimony to Messengership implies the testimony to
Guardianship, because Guardianship is the inside of Messengership.

The writer says that these two testimonies are both implied in the
testimony to His Divinity, and the testimony to Messengership implies
the other two testimonies, and also the testimony to Guardianship
implies the other two testimonies. Praise be to Allah at the beginning
and at the end.

Chapter 5: Some Disciplines Of The Hayya ‘Alā(S)
------------------------------------------------

When the wayfarer to Allah has announced by his *takbīr*s that Allah is
greater than any description, and by testifying to His Divinity has
exclusively confined all attributes and praise, or, actually, every
influence and effect, to Allah, and confessed his incapability of
managing the *amr*, and by the testimony to the Messengership and
Guardianship, he has chosen his comrade and company and adhered to the
sacred position of successorship and guardianship as it is said: “The
companion (first) then the journey”[^13] then, with quite an explicit
tone, he is to prepare his visible and invisible powers for the *Salat*,
announcing the presence to them by saying: ”*Hayya* '*alā 's-Salat*,”
(come to the *Salat*) twice.

Its repetition is intended to complete awakening [*tanbīh*] and waking
up [*īqāz*], or one is for the inner powers of the kingdom, and the
other is for the outer powers of the kingdom, since they also accompany
the *sālik* on his journey, as has already been said, and will follow,
too.

In this stage, the discipline of the *sālik* is to tell his heart and
powers, even the innermost of the heart, that the time of presence is
near so as to prepare himself for that, fully observing the formal and
the spiritual disciplines. Then he is to announce the general secret and
result of the *Salat*, by the calling: “*Hayya 'alā 'l-falāh*” and
“*Hayya 'alā khayr 'il-'amal”* (come to the best of deeds) so as to wake
up the *fitrat* (disposition = nature), because prosperity and salvation
are absolute happiness, and all the human beings love absolute happiness
by nature.

The innate nature [*fitrat*] is in quest of perfection and comfort. The
truth of happiness is the absolute perfection and absolute comfort, and
that is brought about in the *Salat*, which is the best of deeds,
cordially, formally, outwardly, and inwardly.

This is because the *Salat*, according to its form and appearance, is a
great and comprehensive remembrance and a praise of the Greatest Name,
which encompasses all the divine affairs [*shu'ūn*]. For this reason,
the *adhān* and the *iqāmah* open with the word “Allah” and end with it,
and *Allāhu akbar* (Allah is Greater) is repeated in all stages of the
*Salat*, and the three *tawhīd*s (professions of the Unity of Allah),
which are the delight of eyes of the holy men, are effected in the
*Salat*, in which the form [*sūrat*] of absolute annihilation and
complete return are mixed.

According to the interior and the truth, it is ascension to the
proximity of Allah, the truth of reaching the Beauty of the Absolute
Beautiful and vanishing in that Sanctified Essence, dearly loved by the
inborn nature [*fitrat*]. It is by the *Salat* that the complete
calmness, absolute comfort and the complete mental happiness are
achieved:  
*“**Surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts set at rest.”***[^14]

Therefore, the absolute perfection, which is attaining to Allah's Court,
joining the Necessary Limitless Sea, discerning the Eternal Beauty, and
being immersed in the Sea of Absolute Light, is effected in the *Salat*,
in which absolute comfort, complete rest and perfect calmness also
appear, bringing about the two corners of happiness.

So, the *Salat* is perfect prosperity, and it is the best of the deeds.
The *sālik* will have to repeat this divine grace, to remind the heart
and to wake up his disposition [*fitrat*], and after having it in his
heart, his inner nature would attach importance to it and observe it,
since it looks for perfection and happiness. The same point is true in
respect of the repetition.

When the *sālik* reaches this stage, he announces his presence by
saying: “*qad qāmati’s-Salat*” (The *Salat* has just started). Then, he
is to see himself at the Presence of the Master of the kings of the
worlds of existence and the Sultan of the sultans and the Absolute
Great, and to inform his heart about the dangers of the Presence, all of
which are due to the incapability and the inefficiency of “the
possible”, and to feel ashamed of not carrying out the *amr*,
approaching, with the steps of fear and hope, towards the Generous.

He is not to regard himself possessing traveling provisions and company.
He is to see his heart empty of safety, not to think his deeds good
ones; rather, worth not a penny. Should this state become firm in his
heart, he would hope to get Allah's care:

*“**Or who answers the distressed one, when he calls unto Him, and
removes the evil?”***[^15]

Connection and Completion
-------------------------

Muhammad ibn Ya'qūb, quoting Abū 'Abdullāh as-Sādiq ('*a*), says: “When
you recite the *adhān* and the *iqāmah*, two rows of angels will perform
the *Salat* behind you, but if you said the *iqāmah* (only), one row of
the angels would perform the *Salat* behind you.”[^16] There are many
other *Hadiths* to the same effect, some of which say that the length of
each row is as the distance between the east and the west.[^17]

Another *hadīth* says that when Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) was asked about the
length of each row, he said: “The length of the shortest row is as the
distance between the east and the west, and the length of the longest is
as the distance between the heaven and the earth.”[^18] In some
narratives it is said that if he said the *iqāmah* without the *adhān*,
an angel would stand at his right side and another at his left
side[^19], and other similar narratives.

The difference among the narratives may be due to the difference among
the knowledge and the sincerity of the *musallīn*, as can be inferred
from some narratives in this respect, such as the narrative concerning
performing the *Salat* with the *adhān* and the *iqāmah* in the desert
or wasteland.[^20]  
 In short, when the *sālik* sees himself the leader of the *Salat* for
the angels of Allah, and his heart as the leader of his visible and
invisible powers, and gathers, with the *adhān* and the *iqāmah*, his
visible and invisible powers, together with the angels of Allah, he is
to regard his heart which is the best of the external and internal
powers, and the intercessor for the other powers as an *imām*.

And, as the heart is liable for the recitings of the *ma'mūmīn*
[*musallīn*] after its leadership, and as their faults are undertaken by
it, the *sālik* is to be quite keen and a good observant of its
presence, and to completely guard the disciplines of the Sacred
Presence, making the most of this Sanctified Meeting, admitting the
great importance of the attention and the support of the angels of
Allah, taking them to be of the favors of the Real Benefactor, and
acknowledging his incapability of giving the due thanks to His Sacred
Majesty for these great blessings. Surely He is the Benefactor!

[^1]: Misbāh al-Hidāyah is a book written in the Arabic language by Imām
Khomeinī (may Allah sanctify his honorable soul), explaining some truths
and knowledge concerning the caliphate and guardianship. In the Preface
to this honorable book he says: “I like to uncover for you, in this
paper, by the help of Allah, the guardian of guidance in the beginning
and in the end, an indication of the Muhammadan caliphate, and an
exudation of the truth of the 'Alawian guardianship (upon them be the
greeting from the beginning to eternity) and how they spread through the
invisible and visible worlds…,or rather it should be named: Misbāh
al-Hidāyah to Caliphate and Guardianship. I ask Allah success, as He is
the best assistant and company, and I ask His pure guardians their
patronage in this world and in the other world…” The writer finished
writing the book in the month of Shawwal, 1349 A.H.  

[^2]: Sūrah Hūd 11:56.

[^3]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 1, sec. on “Preliminaries to Worship,”
ch. 29, hadīth 1, p. 90. Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, “Book of Proof,” ch. on
“Knowing the Imām and Returning to Him,” hadīth 8, p. 259.  

[^4]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol.3, “Book of Faith and Infidelity,” ch. on “The
Pillars of Islam,” hadīth 5, p. 30.

[^5]: 'Iqāb al-A'māl, ch. on “He Who Ignores the Merits of Ahl al-Bayt,”
hadīth 2; Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 1, sec. on “Preliminaries to
Worship,” ch. 29, hadīth 12, p. 93.

[^6]: Sūrah an-Nūr 24:35.

[^7]: Sūrah an-Najm 53:9.

[^8]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:29.

[^9]: 'Uyūnu Akhbār ar-Ridā, vol. 2, p. 272 (Al-Jāmi'ah al-Kabīrah
invocation).

[^10]: Refer to footnote 191.

[^11]: Man lā Yahduruh al-Faqīh, vol. 1, “Book of the Salat,” ch. on
“The Adhān, the Iqāmah and the Reward of the Mu'adhdhins (Those who call
for the Salat), comment on narrative 35, p. 188.

[^12]: Al-Ihtijāj, vol. 1, p. 230.

[^13]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 8, “Book of Hajj,” sec. on “The Manners
of Travel,” ch. 30, hadīth 11, p. 299, as quoted from al-Barqī's
Mahāsin, p. 357. Similar concepts are in some other narratives, such as:
“Inquire about the company before the journey” as in Nahj al-Balāghah,
ed. by Fayd al-Islām, p. 936, and “The company (first), then the
journey,” in al-Ash'athiyyāt, ch. on “Bad Neighboring,” p. 164.

[^14]: Sūrah ar-Ra'd 13:28

[^15]: Sūrah al-Naml 27:62.

[^16]: Furū' ul-Kāfī, vol. 3,“Book of the Salat,”ch. on“Starting the
adhān and the iqāmah,”hadīth 8, p. 303.

[^17]: Thawāb al-A'māl, “The reward of the one who performs the Salat
with the adhān and the iqāmah,” hadīth 2, p. 54.

[^18]: Ibid.

[^19]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 4, “Book of the Salat,” sec. on “The
Adhān and the Iqāmah,” ch. 4, hadīth 4, p. 620.

[^20]: Ibid., hadīth 9: “O Abū Dharr, your Lord boasts over His angels
for three persons: a man in a waste land…”


