Section Two:Concerning the Qiyām (the Standing Position in the Salat)
=====================================================================

Discussed in Two Chapters

Chapter 1: The General Secret of the Qiyām
------------------------------------------

Know that the people of knowledge regard the *qiyām* (the standing
position in the *Salat*) to be a sign of Unity of Actions. Similarly,
they see that the *rukū'* (bowing in the *Salat*) refers to the Unity of
Attributes, and the *sujūd* (prostration) refers to the Unity of Essence
these will be explained in their proper places. But *qiyām*'s reference
to the Unity of Action is in the very standing position as well as in
the wordings recited while standing.

As to the standing position and its reference to the Unity of Action, it
is because it denotes the servant's observation of his duty toward
Allah, as well as His position [*maqām*] of Self-Existence, manifested
in the Sacred Emanation as a manifestation of Action. In this
manifestation the position of Allah's Activeness [*fā'iliyyat*] is
displayed, and all the beings are absorbed in the manifestation of
Action and perished under the Manifest Majesty.

In this instance, the gnostic discipline of the *sālik* is to remind his
heart of this divine grace and to give up, as much as he can, his
personal individuations [*ta'ayyunāt-i* *nafsiyyah*], and to explain to
his heart the truth of the Sacred Emanation, and to bring to the core of
his heart the fact concerning Allah's Self-Existence [*qayyūmiyyat*] and
that the creatures are dependent upon Him.

Hence, after the fixation of this fact in the *sālik*'s heart, his
recitation will be by the tongue of the *Haqq* (Allah), and the praiser
[*dhākir*] and the praised [*madhkūr*] will be the *Haqq* (Allah)
Himself, and some of the secrets of the Fate will be exposed to the
gnostic's heart, and “You are as You praised Yourself” [^1] and “I take
refuge in You from You”[^2] will be disclosed to him in some degrees,
and the heart of the gnostic will receive some of the secrets of the
*Salat*, such as looking at the place of prostration, which is of dust,
the principal origin (of man), or subjugating the neck and declining the
head, as required, implying humility and destitution of “the possible”,
and the annihilation under the Might and the Sovereignty of (His)
Majesty.

*“**O mankind! It is you who are in need of Allah, and Allah is He who
is the Self-Sufficient, the Praised One.”*** [^3]  
 As concerning the wordings of the recitation being a reference to the
Unity of Action, we shall explain that in details when we come to
comment on the blessed *sūrah* of *al-Hamd*, *inshā' Allāh* (Allah
willing).

Chapter 2: On The Disciplines Of The Qiyām
------------------------------------------

These [disciplines] are such that the *sālik* is to consider himself
present in the Presence [*mahdar*] of Allah, and regard the world as His
Presence, and himself one of the audience at that gathering, standing
before Allah, trying to convey the Greatness of the Present and the
Presence to his heart, letting it understand the importance and the
significance of supplicating to Allah, the Exalted, and, by thinking and
contemplating, before starting the *Salat*, to prepare the heart to
understand the importance of the situation, obliging it to humbleness,
submission, calmness, fear, hope, humility and modesty till the end of
the *Salat*.

He is to stipulate that his heart should be keen on observing these
affairs, and think about the great holy men and guides, and about their
moods and how their conducts with the Master of the kings were, so as to
learn a lesson from the Imāms of guidance and imitate them as his
models, not being satisfied with just knowing the names of the
infallible Imāms, the date of their birthday, death day, the length of
their honorable lives and similar details, which are of little
advantage.

Actually, he is to go through their biography and godly conducts, in
order to find out the method of their worship and how their journey to
Allah was carried out, and how their gnostic stations, which can be
inferred from their miraculous speeches, were.

It is much regretted that we are negligent, intoxicated by nature, empty
self-conceited and the stooges of the vile Satan in all matters, without
there being any sign of our getting up from our deep sleep and endless
forgetfulness. We get so little benefit from the positions and the
knowledge of the Imāms of guidance ('*a*) that it is negligible,
satisfying ourselves with the outer appearance of their lives,
completely disregarding the objectives for which the prophets have been
sent, and, actually, we are covered by the proverb: “To take a swelling
for a fleshy.”[^4] We shall, therefore, relate some of the relevant
narratives, so that some of the believing brethren may have a
remembrance. Praise be to Allah and thanks to Him!

Muhammad ibn Ya'qūb, quoting Imām as-Sadiq ('*a*), says: “Whenever 'Alī
ibn al-Husayn ('*a*) used to stand for the *Salat*, his face turned
pale. Going down for prostration, he would not raise his head until he
was wet with perspiration.”[^5]

On the same authority he says: “My father used to say, when 'Alī ibn
al-Husayn ('*a*) used to stand for the *Salat*, he looked like a trunk
of a tree, nothing of which would move unless the wind would move
it.”[^6]

In *al-'Ilal*, Abān ibn Taghlīb, quoting Muhammad ibn 'Alī ibn
al-Husayn, says: “I said to Abū 'Abdullāh [as-Sadiq] ('*a*): 'I noticed
that when 'Alī ibn al-Husayn ('*a*) stood for the *Salat*, his color
changed.' He said to me: By Allah, 'Alī ibn al-Husayn knew before whom
he was standing.' [^7]

In a *hadīth* in *Falāh as-Sā'il*, on the authority of as-Sayyid 'Alī
ibn Tāwūs, it is said: “...then Abū 'Abdullāh ('*a*) said: 'The *Salat*
will not be complete except for the one who has a full purity and a
mature completeness, and is away from temptation and deviation, and
knows [Allah] and [so] stands [before Him], submits [to Him] and
persists.

He, thus, stands between despair and hope, [between] patience and worry,
as if the promises to him have been done, and the threats upon him have
happened, lowering his fame ['*ird*] and manifesting his aim. He
sacrifices for Allah his soul, treads upon the road to Him as his goal,
not unwillingly, severs the relations of interest for the sake of the
One to Whom he bounds and comes, and from whom he seeks help. Should he
achieve all these, the *Salat* would be of the ordered type and of the
informed about, and it is the very *Salat* which forbids evil and
vice.”[^8]

Muhammad ibn Ya'qūb, quoting our master, Zayn al-'Ābidīn ('*a*), says
that he said: “As regards the rights of the *Salat*, you are to know
that it is a visit to Allah and that in it you are standing before Him.
If you realized that, you would deserve to be, through it, in the
position of a slave who is humble, desirous, horrified, frightened,
hopeful, distressed, imploring, and glorifying the state of the One in
front of Whom he stands with complete stillness, solemnity,
submissiveness of the limbs, humility, well supplicating to Him for
himself, requesting Him to free his neck, which is encircled by his
faults and consumed by his sins; and there is no power except by
Allah.[^9]

The Prophet (*s*) is quoted to have said: “Worship your Lord as if you
see Him. If you do not see Him, He sees you.[^10]

In *Fiqh 'ur-Ridā* it is stated: “When you want to perform the *Salat*,
do not go to it lazily, sleepily, hurriedly, or unmindfully. You are to
approach it calmly, solemnly and slowly. You are also to display
submission, imploringly and humbly, to Allah. You are to show awe and
sings of fear and hope, with caution and apprehension. Thus, you are to
stand before Him, as an escapee and sinful slave stands at attention
before his master, on the alert, with joined heels, erected trunk, not
looking to right and left, reckoning as if you see Him, and if you do
not, He certainly does see you…” as the *hadīth* goes.[^11]

In '*Uddat 'ud-Dā'ī* it is stated: “It is narrated that the imploring
moanings of Ibrāhīm ('*a*) used to be heard from a mile's distance, such
that Allah praised him by saying:

*“**Ibrāhīm was mild, imploring, penitent.”***[^12]

When performing his *Salat*, a sound of fizz, like that of a boiler, was
heard coming from his chest. A similar sound was also heard from the
chest of our Prophet (*s*). Fātimah ('*a*) used to pant in the *Salat*
because of her fear of Allah.”[^13] And there are other similar
*Hadiths*.

There are too many noble narratives on these subjects to be covered in
these papers. Contemplating these few narratives suffices the people of
thought and remembrance, in respect of the formal, cordial and spiritual
disciplines, as well as concerning the way of standing before Allah.  
 Think a little of the conditions of 'Alī ibn al-Husayn, the
supplications of that great man and his implorings to Allah, the Exalted
as well as his elegant invocations, by which he taught the disciplines
of servitude to the servants of Allah. I do not allege that the
supplications of those great men were intended to teach how to worship,
for it would be an empty and meaningless statement prompted by being
ignorant of the state of Lordship and of the knowledge of *Ahl al-Bayt*
('*a*).

Their fear and awe were much greater than anybody else's, and the
Greatness and Majesty of Allah were manifested in their hearts more than
in anyone else's heart. I only say that the servants of Allah should
learn from them how to worship Allah and how to travel to Him. When you
read what they used to say in their supplications and invocations, you
should not read them as mere pronunciations of the tongue. They should
be pondered upon, and their behavior with Allah, their displaying
humility, inefficiency and destitution, are also to be noted.

By the Beloved! 'Alī ibn al-Husayn was one of the greatest blessings
which Allah, the Most High, had bestowed upon His servants as a grace,
bringing him down from the sacred world of Proximity, for the sake of
teaching the ways of servitude to His servants:

*“**Then, on that Day, you shall most certainly be questioned about the
bliss.”***[^14]

If we are asked: “Why did you not appreciate the value of that bliss and
did not get benefit from that great man?” we shall have no reply but to
droop down our heads for being ashamed, and to be burnt with the fire of
remorse and regret, when no regret would avail.

### A Piece of Good Advice

My dear, now that the chance is available, and you are still in the
prime of life, the way of journeying to Allah is open, the doors of His
mercy are not closed, the soundness of the organs and powers is obtained
and the land of planting [*dār az-zar'*] in the material world is still
there, strive to realize the value of these divine favors in order to be
benefited by them. Try to acquire the spiritual perfections and the
eternal happiness.

Take advantage of all these branches of knowledge which the honorable
divine Qur'an and the infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* ('*a*) have spread in the
land of the dark nature, and illuminated the world with their divine
bright light. Enlighten the land of your dark nature, as well as your
eyes, ears, tongue and your other external and internal powers, with the
light of Allah, the Exalted, and change this dark earth to another one,
luminous, or rather to an intellectual heaven:

*“**On the day when the earth shall be changed to a different
earth,”***[^15]

*“**And the earth shall beam with the light of its Lord.”***[^16]

On that day, if your earth is not changed to a different one, and if it
is not lighted with the light of the Lord, you will encounter darkness,
difficulty, horror, pressure, humility and torture.  
 At present, our external and internal powers are darkened with satanic
darkness. Should we remain so, our material earth with its inborn light
will gradually change into a dark dungeon, empty of the inborn light and
veiled from the rules of the divine disposition.

This is misfortune entailing no happiness, a darkness which comes to no
luminosity, a horror which does not see the face of tranquility, and a
torment which has no comfort with it:  
*“**…And to whomsoever Allah does not give light, he has no
light.”***[^17]

I take refuge in Allah, the Exalted, from the satanic conceitedness and
from the evil-commanding soul.

The principal objective of the great prophets, in legislating the laws,
in establishing the rules and in the coming down of the heavenly books
especially the all-embracing Holy Qur'an, the projector of whose pure
light is the Seal of the Messengers (*s*) is spreading monotheism and
divine knowledge, and uprooting infidelity, atheism, hypocrisy and
dualism, for the secret of monotheism and abstraction is flowing in all
the cordial and formal worships.

The Shaykh, the gnostic and perfect, Shāhābādī, (may my soul be his
ransom), used to say: “Worship is the operation of *tawhīd* [monotheism]
in the kingdom of the body from the inside of the heart.”

In short, the sought-for result of worship is acquiring knowledge,
confirming monotheism and other knowledge in the heart. This objective
cannot be attained except when the *sālik* vindicates his cordial shares
of worship, and passes from the shape and form to the core and the
truth, without lingering in this world and the surface, for loitering in
such affairs is a hindrance [thorn] in the way of mankind.

Those who call for the mere external appearance [*sūrat*], preventing
the people from the internal disciplines, alleging that religion has no
meaning and no reality other than its appearance and surface, are but
the satans on the road to Allah, and the thorns in the way of humanity.
To be saved from their evil, one has to take refuge in Allah, the
Exalted, for they extinguish the divine inborn light, which is the light
of [divine] knowledge, *tawhīd*, guardianship and other kinds of
knowledge, and draw the covers of imitation, ignorance, tradition
['*ādat*] and fancies [*awhām*] on it, deter the servants of Allah, the
Exalted, from advancing to His threshold, and from reaching to His
Beautiful Beauty, and block the way of knowledge.

They direct the pure and sincere hearts of Allah's servants in which He,
with His hand of Beauty and Majesty, hid the seeds of knowledge in their
disposition, and sent the great prophets and heavenly Books to breed and
bring them upto the world, to its ornaments, to its materialities and
corporalities, and to its falsities, and divert them from spiritualities
and intellectual happiness, confining the invisible world and the
promised paradises exclusively to food, drink, sex and other animal
desires.

They think that Allah, the Exalted, has laid out His table-cloth of
mercy, sent down, with so much ceremony, His Books, employed His noble
angels and assigned great prophets, just for the sake of satisfying
hunger and sex. The most they know is: Take care of your stomach and sex
drive so that you may satisfy your desire in the other world. The
importance which they attach to a sexual intercourse lasting for five
hundred years [in Paradise according to a narrative] they do not attach
to *tawhīd* and prophethood, and they take knowledge to be a preliminary
to satiate their libido and gluttony.

If a godly philosopher, or a divine gnostic, wanted to open a door of
mercy to the servants of Allah, or to read a paper of divine wisdom to
them, they would spare no abuse, curse and forged accusations without
throwing them at him. They are so indulged in mundane affairs, and so
concerned about sex and stomach, unknowingly, that they do not desire
any other happiness in this world except satisfying their animal lust,
despite the fact that the intellectual happiness, should they care for
it, would not injure their lust for sex and food.

Like ourselves, since we have not yet crossed the limit of animality, we
think of nothing but food and sex, to which we may attain by the grace
of Allah, the Exalted. We are not, however, to believe that happiness is
confined to that, and that the paradise of Allah, the Exalted, is
restricted only to this paradise of animals. As a matter of fact, Allah,
the Exalted, has such worlds that no eye has ever seen, no ear has ever
heard of, and never occurred to any heart. Yet, the people of divine
love and knowledge pay attention to none of those paradises, and are
interested in neither of the invisible and visible worlds. To them,
paradise is meeting Allah.

If we want to relate the relevant Qur'anic *āyah*s and the *Hadiths*
quoted from the infallible *Ahl al-Bayt*, it would not be within the
scope of these papers. Actually, even what has been said was out of the
overflowing of the pen. Our major objective is to direct the attention
of the hearts of the servants of Allah to what they have been created
for, that is, to know Allah, which is superior to all sorts of
happiness, and everything else is but a preliminary to it.

By referring to “the thorns on the road of the *sulūk*”, we did not mean
the great '*ulamā'* of Islam, nor the honorable *faqīh*s of the Ja'farī
school (may Allah's contentment be upon them), but we do mean some of
the people of ignorance and those who pretend to be of the people of
knowledge by means of insufficiency [*qusūr*] and ignorance [*jahl*],
not by means of negligence [*taqsīr*] and abstinacy ['*inād*],and who
became highway robbers of the servants of Allah. I take refuge in Allah
from the evil of an overflowing pen, bad intention and false objective.
Praise be to Allah at the beginning and the end, externally and
internally.

[^1]: Of an invocation from the Messenger of Allah (s) in his
prostration. Furū' ul-Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 324; Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 5;
'Awāliy 'ul-La'ālī, vol. 1, p. 389, hadīth 21

[^2]: Ibid.; Misbāh al-Mutahajjid wa Silāh al-Muta'abbid, p. 308.

[^3]: Sūrah al-Fātir 35:15.

[^4]: It means: “To be by the appearance” or “To take an unreal matter
for a real one.”

[^5]: Furū' ul-Kāfī, vol.3, p. 300. 'Book of the Salat,”ch. On
“Submission in the Salat and Disapproving Toying,”hadīth 5.

[^6]: Ibid.,hadīth 4.

[^7]: 'Ilal 'ush-Sharā'i' p. 88, as in Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 4 p.
685, “Book of the Salat” sec. on “The Acts of the Salat” ch. 2, hadīth
4.

[^8]: Falāh 'us-Sā'il, ch.2, “On the Description of the Salat”, p. 23.

[^9]: Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, “Book of the Salat,” sec. On “The Acts of
the Salat,” ch. 2, hadīth 3.

[^10]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 74, p. 74, Book of Flower Garden,” “The
Prophet's Preachings,” ch. 4, hadīth 3; Makārim al-Akhlāq, p. 59.

[^11]: Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, “Book of the Salat,” sec. on “The Acts of
the Salat,” ch. 1. hadīth 7, extracted from Fiqh ar-Ridā, p. 101, ch. On
“The Obligatory Salats.”

[^12]: Sūrah Hūd 11:75.

[^13]: Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, “Book of the Salat,” sec. on “The Acts of
the Salat,” ch. 2, hadīth 15.

[^14]: Sūrah at-Takāthur 102:8.

[^15]: Sūrah Ibrāhīm 14:48.

[^16]: Sūrah az-Zumar 39:69.

[^17]: Sūrah an-Nūr 24:40.


