Section Four: The Discipline Of Reverence
=========================================

One of the important disciplines of reciting the Divine Book, shared by
the gnostic and the common man, and which brings about good results
causing luminosity for the heart and the interior life, is to regard it
with “reverence”, which depends on realizing its greatness and majesty.

This, however, is actually out of the scope of explanation and beyond
the human capacity, because understanding the greatness of a thing
depends on understanding its truth, while the truth of the Divine Holy
Qur'an, before being sent down to the stages [*manāzil*] of creation and
before undergoing practical modes [*atwār*], is of the affairs
[*shu'ūn*] of His Essence and of the facts of Knowledge in His Unity
[*hadrat-i wāhidiyyat*]*.*

It is the truth of a “Self-Speech” [*kalām-i nafs*]*,* which is the
“Essential Argument” [*muqāri'at-i dhātiyyah*] in His Names. This truth
appears to no one, neither by means of formal sciences or cordial
knowledge nor by unseen disclosure, except through complete divine
revelation to the blessed person of the Final Prophet (*s*), in the
intimacy of *qāba qawsayn* [at the distance of two bows' length], or
even in the secret privacy of *aw adnā* [or nearer].

The hand of hope of the human species is short of that, except, that of
the sincere of Allah's friends who, according to the spiritual lights
and the divine facts, share in the spirituality of the Prophet's sacred
essence and, through their complete subordination, they vanished in him.
They receive the disclosing knowledge by inheriting it from him, and the
truth of the Qur'an may be reflected in their hearts, with the same
luminosity and perfection with which it appeared in the heart of that
great personality, without its descending to [mundane] stations and
taking [mundane] forms.

That Qur'an is without change and alteration, and it is of the book of
divine revelation. The one capable of carrying this Qur'an is the noble
person of the absolute friend of Allah, 'Alī ibn Abi Tālib ('*a*).

Others cannot take this fact in, unless it descends from the station of
*ghayb* [the invisible] to the station of visibility and takes the seen
form, wearing the apparel of mundane words and letters. This is one of
the meanings of “changing” [*tahrīf*] or alteration which has occurred
in all Divine Scriptures as well as the Qur'an, changing all the noble
*āyah*s, which, with a change, or rather many changes, according to the
stations and stages which continue from His “Names” to the last of the
worlds of vision and visibility, are placed within the reach of man.

The number of the stages of the change corresponds to the number of the
stages of the *butūn* of the Qur'an exactly. The meaning of the change
[*tahrīf*] here is the descent from absolute *ghayb* to absolute
visibility, in accordance with the degrees of the worlds, whereas the
*butūn* is the return from absolute visibility to absolute *ghayb*. So,
the beginning of the change, and the beginning of the *butūn* are
opposed.

Whenever a *sālik* attains a stage of the *butūn,* he gets rid of a
degree of the change. When he arrives at the absolute *butūn,* which is
the seventh, according to the general classification, he absolutely gets
rid of the change [*tahrīf*]*.* So, perhaps the Qur'an appears to some
to be full of different changes. To another, it may appear with few
changes, while to a third it appears with no change at all. It may also
appear to somebody changed in some instances and unchanged in some
others, or with some sorts of changes in a third instance.

As you know, understanding the greatness of the Qur'an is beyond the
capacity of the intellect. Yet, a general hint at the greatness of this
Divine Book, which is within the reach of everybody, is of many
advantages.

Do know, dear, that the greatness of a speech or a book is derived from
the greatness of the speaker and the writer, from the greatness of its
contents and objectives, from the greatness of its results and fruits,
from the greatness of its intermediate conveyer, from the greatness of
its receiver and its carrier, from the greatness of its keeper and
protector, from the greatness of its commentator and explainer or from
the greatness of the time of its being sent down and how it was sent.

Some of these, however, are by nature the causes of greatness, others
are indirectly so, and some are proofs of the greatness. All the said
matters are contained in this luminous Book in their very best and
satisfaction or, actually they are its distinguished characteristics. No
other book shares them with it, or covers all of them comprehensively.

As regards the greatness of the speaker, the composer and its owner, He
is the Absolute Great, for all kinds of greatness that can be imagined
on the earth and in the heavens, and all powers descending in the
visible and the invisible, are but seepage of the manifestations of the
greatness of the act of His Sacred Essence.

Allah, the Exalted, would not show Himself to anybody through
manifesting His Greatness from behind thousands of veils and curtains,
as a *hadīth* says: “Allah has seventy-thousand veils [of light and
darkness; if removed away, the lights of His Face would burn everything
other than Him.].”[^1] To the people of knowledge, this noble Book has
been issued from Allah, the Exalted, the Origin of all affairs of the
Essence, Attributes and Acts, and of all manifestations of Beauty and
Majesty. The other divine Books do not enjoy a similar status and
position.

As regards the greatness of the contents, objectives and subjects, it
requires a separate chapter, or, say, separate chapters, sections, a
thesis or a book, so that one may relate only a part of that. We shall,
nevertheless, generally refer, in a separate chapter, to its universal
principles. In the said chapter we shall point out, *inshā' Allāh*, its
greatness in respect of its results and outcome.

As regards the greatness of the messenger and the conveyer of its
revelation, he is the Faithful Gabriel, the Great Spirit. After that the
noble Messenger of Allah (*s*) had quitted the apparel of the nature of
the flesh and directed the heart towards His Majesty, he got in touch
with that Great Spirit.

He is one of the four pillars of the House of Realization; or rather he
is the greatest of its pillars and the most honorable of them, since
that noble and luminous Archangel is the guardian of knowledge and
wisdom, and the conveyer of the spiritual provisions and moral
nourishments. From the Book of Allah and the noble *hadīth*s one
realizes the greatness of Gabriel and his preference to other
angels.[^2]

As regards the greatness of its receiver and carrier, it is the pure and
pious, Ahmadian single [*ahmadi-yi ahadī*]*,* Muhammadan collective
[*jam'i-yi muhammadī*] heart, to which Allah, the Exalted, appeared in
all affairs [*shu'ūn*] of the Essence, Attributes, Names and Acts. He
[the Prophet] is the Seal of prophethood and the absolute guardian, the
most generous of all creation, the best of the human beings, the gist
[*khulāsah*] of the universe, the essence [*jawharah*] of existence, the
substance ['*usārah*] of the House of Realization, the last brick and
the owner of the big isthmus and great vicegerency [*khilāfat*].

As regards the greatness of its keeper and guardian, He is the Sacred
Essence of Allah, the Exalted as He says in the noble *āyah*:

*“**It is we who have sent down the Reminder [the Qur'an], and verily we
are its keeper.”***[^3]

As regards its commentators and explainers, they are the pure infallible
ones beginning with the Messenger of Allah and ending with “the Proof of
the Time” [*hujjat-i 'asr*]*,* may Allah enhance his advent who are the
keys of existence, the repositories of dignity, the sources of wisdom
and inspiration, the origins of knowledge and learning, and the
possessors of the state of collectivity [*jam'*] and distinctness
[*tafsīl*]*.*

As regards the time of revelation, it is *Laylat al-Qadr* [The Night of
Majesty]*,* which is the greatest of nights and “**better than a
thousand months”.** It is the most luminous of times. In fact, it is the
time of the attainment [*wusūl*] of the General Guardian [*walī-yi
mutlaq*] and the Seal of the Prophets (*s*).

As regards how it was revealed and its relevant ceremonies, they are
beyond the limits of the capacity of these few papers. They require a
special chapter, which, owing to its elaboration, will have to be
omitted.

[^1]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 55, p. 45. This hadīth is (also) related by
the Sunnī sources.

[^2]: See Sūrahs ash-Shu'arā' 26:193, an-Najm 53:5-9 and at-Takwīr
81:19-24. See also Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 56, “Book of the Heaven and the
World,” sec. on “The Angels” and “Another Chapter on Describing the
Favorable Angels,” hadīths 23-24, p. 258.  

[^3]: Sūrah al-Hijr 15:9


