Section Six: How To Be Benefited By The Qur’an
==============================================

Now that you have got acquainted with the subjects and the objectives of
the Divine Book (the Qur'an), you will have to take into consideration
an important point, as by doing so the door of being benefited by it
will be opened to you, and the passage to knowledge and wisdom will be
wide open to your heart. This point is to look at this Glorious Book as
an educational one, a teaching book by which you should be benefited,
regarding it your duty to learn from it.

By learning, teaching, benefiting and being benefited we do not mean its
different literary, syntactical and morphological aspects, nor its
eloquence and rhetoric and other stylistic points, nor being interested
in its stories, tales and episodes from the historical point of view in
order to get information about the past nations. None of these is
included in the objectives of the Qur'an, and they are, in fact, far
away from the main objective of this divine Book.

The fact that our advantage from this great Book is quite small is
because we usually do not take it to be a book of teaching and
education. We recite the Qur'an just for its reward. So, we pay
attention only to our intonation when reciting it. We want our
recitation to be perfect and correct so as to obtain its reward, and
then we stop at that and feel satisfied with it. Thus, we spend some
forty years reciting the Qur'an without being benefited by it, except
the reward for reciting it.

If we do look at its teaching and educational side, we concern ourselves
with its eloquence and syntax and its miraculous aspects, or even
somewhat higher, we engage ourselves with its history, the occasions of
the revelation of the *āyah*s, the times of their revelation, which
*sūrah* or *āyah* was revealed in Mecca and which in Medina, the
differences in recitations and in the exegeses of the Sunnis and the
Shī'ah and other secondary affairs which are outside the main objective
and they themselves cause us to be barred from the Qur'an and to neglect
remembering Allah. Even our great commentators of the Qur'an are very
much concerned about one or another of the said affairs, without opening
the door of learning to the people.

The writer believes that so far no *tafsīr* [exegesis] has yet been
written to the Book of Allah. Generally, to write a *tafsīr* for a book
means to explain the objectives of the book and to draw the attentions
to what its author wants to say. This noble Book, which Allah, the
Exalted, testifies to be a book of guidance and teaching, and the light
of the road of man's journey, its exegete should find in each one of its
stories, or even in each *āyah*, a directive guiding to the invisible
world, so as to show to the learner the road to happiness, to knowledge
and to humanity.

A *mufassir* (commentator or exegete) is the one who tells us what was
the “objective” of the revelation, not the “occasion” of the revelation
as is explained in the exegeses. In the very story of Adam and Eve and
their affairs with *Iblīs*, from the very moment of their creation till
their descent to the earth, story of which is repeated by Allah several
times in the Qur'an**,** there are so many overt and covert teachings
[*ma'ārif*] and admonitions, and it reminds us of so many of spiritual
faults and Satanic characters, as well as many perfections of the soul
and human knowledge which it introduces to us, whereas we still
disregard them.

In short, the Book of Allah is a book of knowledge and ethics, and an
invitation to happiness and perfection. So, its exegesis should also be
a book of gnosticism and ethics, explaining the gnostic and ethical
points of view, and other aspects of inviting to its happiness
[*sa'ādat*]*.* The commentator who neglects these points, disregards
them or attaches no importance to them, is actually neglecting the
objective of the Qur'an and the main aim of revealing the (divine) books
and sending the messengers.

This is a grave mistake that has prevented the *ummah* for many
centuries from being benefited by the Glorious Qur'an, and it has
blocked the road of guidance in their faces. We have to learn the
objective of the revelation of the Qur'an disregarding the intellectual
and argumentative aspects, which show us the goal by themselve s from
the Qur'an itself. The author of a book knows better his own objective.

So, let us have a glance at what the author of this Book Himself says
concerning the affairs of the Qur'an. He says:

*“**This is the Book, wherein is no doubt, a guide for the muttaqīn
(those who fear Allah).”***[^1]

He describes His Book as being a book of guidance. In a short *sūrah* He
repeats saying:

*“**We have made the Qur'an easy for remembrance, but is there any one
who will mind?”***[^2]

He says:

*“**…We have revealed to you the Reminder that you may explain to
mankind what has been sent down to them and that haply they will
reflect,”***[^3]

And

*“**A Book We have revealed to you, blessed, that they may ponder over
its āyahs*** ***and that men of understanding may remember,”***[^4]

And many other noble *āyah*s, to restate which would be lengthy.

This opinion of ours is not intended to criticize the *tafsīr*s, as
every one of their authors has taken great pains and striven hard in
order to write a noble book, so, may Allah bless them and grant them
good reward. We intend just to say that the door must be open before the
people to be benefited by this Book, which is the only one leading to
Allah and the only one for educating the souls with the divine
disciplines and laws, the greatest means of connection between the
created and Creator, the strong handle and the firm cord of adhering to
the Might of Divinity.

Let the scholars and commentators write Persian and Arabic exegeses with
the aim of explaining the gnostic and ethical teachings and
instructions, showing the way of connecting the created to the Creator,
and expounding the migration from *Dār al-Ghurūr* (the House of Conceit
= this world) to the *Dār as-Surūr wal-Khulūd* (the House of Pleasure
and Eternity)], according to what has been deposited in this noble Book.

The author of this Book is not as-Sakkākī or the Shaykh, whose
objectives were eloquence and rhetoric, nor is He Sībawayh or al-Khalīl,
whose objectives were grammar and syntax, nor is He al-Mas'ūdī or Ibn
Khillakān, whose objectives revolved around the history of the world.
This Book is not like the stick of Moses or his White Hand, nor is it
like the breath of Christ who could raise the dead (by Allah's
permission), to have been sent down only as a miracle to prove the true
prophethood of the Holy Prophet.

This divine Book is, as a matter of fact, a book of enlivening the
hearts with the everlasting life of divine knowledge. It is Allah's Book
that invites to divine affairs. So, the commentator has to teach these
divine affairs to the people, and the people have to refer to his
commentary to learn those affairs, so that they may attain its
advantage:

*“**And we reveal of the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy to
the believers, and it adds only to the perdition of the
wrongdoers.”***[^5]

Which perdition is graver than that we keep reciting the Divine Book for
thirty or forty years and refer to the exegeses, and yet we do not get
its real objectives?

*“**Our Lord! We have wronged ourselves. If you do not forgive us and
have mercy upon us, we shall certainly be of the losers.”***[^6]

[^1]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:2

[^2]: Sūrah al-Qamar 54:17

[^3]: Sūrah an-Nahl 16:44

[^4]: Sūrah Sād 38:29

[^5]: Sūrah al-Isrā' 17:82

[^6]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:23


