Section Seven: The Obstacles And Barriers Preventing Being Benefited By The Qur’an
==================================================================================

Now that the greatness of the Book of Allah has been understood by
considering all the required aspects of greatness, and the way of being
benefited by it has been opened, it will be necessary for the learner
of, and the benefit-deriver [*mustafīd*] from, the Book of Allah to
apply a further important discipline in order to get [the best]
advantage. It is removing the causes which prevent the advantage, and
which we call “the veils” between the benefit-deriver and the Qur'an.
These veils are many, to some of which we shall refer presently.

One of these thick veils is self-conceit, through which the learner sees
himself, because of this veil, in no need of getting any benefit from
the Qur'an. This is one of Satan's important masterpieces, by which he
always tries to inspire man with imaginary perfections, telling him to
be contented with what he has, and to disregard everything other than
that which he already has.

For example, he makes the people of *tajwīd* [reciting the Qur'an with
intonation] contented with this small knowledge which they have, making
it quite big in their eyes, slighting other knowledge to them, and
making them compare the carriers of the Qur'an with themselves, causing
them to be deprived of understanding the luminous divine Book and of
getting any advantage from it. Similarly, he causes the men of letters
to be contented with the meaningless from making them believe that all
the Qur'anic affairs are only those that they have.

He engages the exegetes, as usual, with the ways of recitation, the
different opinions of the linguistics, the times of revelation, the
occasions of revelation, whether the *āyah* was revealed in Mecca or in
Medina, the number of the *āyah*s, their letters and the like. The
scholars are also kept indulged in only learning the different aspects
of indications, the diverse ways of arguments and the like.

Even the philosopher, the wise man and the gnostic are imprisoned by
Satan behind the thick veil of terminology, concepts and so on. The
benefit-deriver [*mustafīd*] must tear open these veils in order to look
at the Qur'an from behind them, taking care not to stay at any one of
these veils, so as not to be left behind the caravan of the travelers to
Allah, nor be deprived of the sweet divine invitations.  
 The Glorious Qur'an itself instructs that one should not remain still
and should not be satisfied with a certain limit.

This is frequently referred to in the stories of the Qur'an. Moses
('*a*), a great prophet as he was, was not contented with that position,
nor was he satisfied with his high position of knowledge. He no sooner
met that perfect man, al-Khidr, than he addressed him, quite humbly and
modestly, saying:

*“**May I follow you that you may teach me right knowledge of what you
have been taught?”***[^1]

He kept following him and acquired the knowledge he wanted to learn.
Prophet Abraham ('*a*) also was not satisfied with the great state of
faith and the special knowledge of the prophets ('*a*). He asked the
Lord:

*“**My Lord! Show me how you give life to the dead.”***[^2]

He wanted to proceed from the state of cordial faith up to the state of
tangible confidence. Higher even than that is when Allah, the Exalted,
told the Seal of the Prophets, the most learned person of all Allah's
creatures, to say:

*“**…Say: O my Lord! Increase me in knowledge.”***[^3]

Such instructions of the divine Book and relating the stories of the
prophets, are but for us to learn from them, and to bring us to
conscience and wake us from our negligent sleep.

Another one of the veils is that of the false ideas, and the *bātil*
ways, which are sometimes caused by the inabilities of the person
himself, and they are mostly the outcome of subordination and imitation.
This veil particularly conceals from us the Qur'anic knowledge. For
example, if, by listening to our fathers, mothers, or some ignorant
preacher, we got a false idea fixed in our hearts, it would be a veil, a
barrier between us and the noble divine *āyah*s [of the Qur'an].

Thus, even if there were thousands of *āyah*s and *hadīth*s defying that
idea, we would either dismiss them on the basis of their exoteric
meanings, or we would not consider them with the aim of understanding.
Regarding beliefs and knowledge there are numerous examples, but I shall
abstain from counting them, as I do know that this veil cannot be torn
by the sayings of someone, like me.

Nevertheless, just to present a sample, I will refer to one of them,
which is somewhat easier to understand: Despite all the *āyah*s which
have been revealed in respect of meeting Allah and knowing Him, all the
narratives that were related to the same subject and all the indications
and allusions, open and hidden, in the invocations and the supplications
of the Imāms ('*a*), some uninformed and vulgar persons have spread the
belief that the way to knowing Allah was completely closed.

The door of knowing Allah and discerning the Beauty [of Him] is
interpreted to be the same as meditating upon the very Essence of Allah,
which is prohibited, or rather impossible. They may even refrain from
entering this field and prefer not to acquaint themselves with such
knowledge, which is the delight of the eyes of the prophets and holy men
[*awliyā'*].

It is much to be regretted by the people of Allah to see a chapter of
knowledge, which can very aptly be described as the goal of sending the
prophets and the most cherished demand of the holy men, should be so
prohibited to the people that a simple mentioning it would be regarded
complete disbelief and mere heresy. These people take the knowledge
[*ma'ārif*] of the prophets and the holy men [*awliyā'*] to be the same
as the knowledge [*ma'ārif*] of the common people and [unlettered old]
women about Allah's Essence, Names and Attributes.

Sometimes they say even more than that: “So-and-so has good, vulgar
beliefs. We wish we kept to the same vulgar belief.” This is quite
correct, because when this wretched person utters these words, he has
already lost his vulgar beliefs, and, at the same time, regards other
beliefs, which are the beliefs of the elite and the people of Allah, to
be false. This wish is quite similar to the wish of the disbelievers
who, as in the noble *āyah*, say:

*“**…and the disbeliever shall say: O would that I were dust!”***[^4]

Should we want to relate in detail the *āyah*s and the narratives
concerning the meeting with Allah, in order to expose this corrupt
belief caused by ignorance and Satanic conceit, we would need to write a
separate book. Especially, if we wanted to explain the knowledge which
has been neglected due to this thick satanic veil, it would be clear
that this negligence is one of the stages of neglecting and discarding
the Qur'an, and it is probably the most regretful stage, as is described
in the Qur'an:

*“**And the Messenger said: O my Lord! My people have treated this
Qur'an as a forsaken [thing].”***[^5]

Forsaking the Qur'an has many stages and countless degrees, and we may
possess a good number of them.

If we bound this divine Book in a nice and valuable cover, and we kissed
it and put it on our eyes whenever we wanted to recite it or to take an
*istikhārah* (consulting the Qur'an to do or not to do something) with
it, would it mean that we did not forsake it?

If we spent most of our lives perfecting our intonation when reciting
the Qur'an, and improving our linguistic and rhetorical knowledge of it,
would it mean that we brought the Qur'an out of being forsaken?

If we learnt the different ways of reciting the Qur'an and other
relevant subjects, would we be declared not guilty of deserting it?

If we took in all the aspects of the miraculousness and the artistic
beauties of the Qur'an, would we be excluded from the complaint of the
Messenger of Allah? Never! None of these is intended by the Qur'an and
its Great Revealer! The Qur'an is a divine Book, and it contains divine
affairs.

The Qur'an is the string connecting the creatures to their Creator, and
through its instructions there should be a spiritual and invisible tie
between the servants of Allah and their Lord. From the Qur'an there
should emerge divine sciences and intuitive knowledge. The Messenger of
Allah, according to a narrative in the noble *al*-*Kāfī*, said:
“Knowledge is of three kinds: a clear *āyah*, a fair obligation and a
current tradition.”[^6]  
 The Glorious Qur'an is the bearer of these sciences. If we could take
them in, we would not be deserting the Qur'an. If we accepted the calls
of the Qur'an, and learnt from the stories of the prophets ('*a*) which
are full of admonishments, information and philosophies, and if we
absorbed the admonitions of Allah, the Exalted, of the prophets and of
the wise men, as stated in the Qur'an, we would not be deserting it, as
indulging in the formal picture of the Qur'an is also keeping to the
earth, and is of Satan's whisperings, from which one must seek refuge
with Allah.

Another veil that prevents us from being benefited by this luminous Book
is to believe that except what the exegetes have written or understood,
no one has the right to make use of the noble Qur'an. Contemplating and
thinking about the noble *āyah*s are mistakenly regarded to be
interpretation, as interpretation according to one's own opinion is not
allowed, and thus, because of this false belief and invalid opinion, the
Glorious Qur'an was deprived from being utilized in any way and,
consequently, it was completely deserted, despite the fact that to
utilize it morally, faithfully and gnostically has nothing to do with
exegesis, be it according to opinion or else.

For example, suppose someone could get out some lessons from the
dialogue between the prophets Moses and al-Khidr ('*a*), how they talked
to one another, how severely Moses, great a prophet as he was, traveled
in order to acquire the knowledge which he lacked, and he implored
al-Khidr ('*a*) in the way stated in the noble *āyah*:

*“**May I follow you that you may teach me right knowledge of what you
have been taught?”***[^7]

Then al-Khidr's reply, the excuses of Moses ('*a*), the greatness of the
station of knowledge, and how a student should behave toward his tutor,
in which there may be twenty disciplines. What connection all these have
with exegesis, or exegesis according to opinion? Many advantages of the
Qur'an are of this kind. Take, for example, someone, who, in respect of
Islamic teachings, understands from Allah's saying: “**All praise is for
Allah, the Lord of the worlds”** that all praise and extolments are
exclusively Allah's.

He learns from it His Unity of Actions, and says that from the noble
*āyah* he deduces that every perfection, beauty, might and majesty which
are in the world and which the eye of the squint-eyed and the heart of
the veiled ascribe to the beings are Allah's and no being has itself any
share of them. Therefore, praise and extolment are solely Allah's, and
nobody shares them with Him.

But has this anything to do with exegesis, be it according to opinion or
not? There are so many other affairs from which many usages can be
obtained, though having no connection with exegesis whatsoever.

Besides, to exegete according to opinion is still arguable, as probably
it does not concern the *āyah*s about knowledge and the speculative
sciences, which conform with the criteria of intellectual proofs, nor
the ethical *āyah*s which have to do with intellect, since such exegeses
coincide with the strong intellectual proofs or with explicit rational
indications, such that if an exterior does not conform with them, they
are to be turned away from that exterior.

For example, the noble *āyah*s:

*“**And your Lord comes, and the angels rank on rank,”***[^8]

Or

*“**The Beneficent has settled on the Throne,”***[^9]

In which the conventional ['*urf*] understanding contradicts the proof,
to refute the exterior and to explain them by proof is not explaining
according to opinion, and can never be prohibited.

Therefore, it is possible, or believed, that exegesis according to
opinion concerns the *āyah*s of precepts, of which the hand of opinion
and intellect is short, and they must be devotionally and obediently
taken from the treasurers of revelation and the descending places of the
angels of Allah, as most of the noble *hadīth*s in this respect defy the
Sunni jurisprudents who wanted to comprehend Allah's religion by way of
their own intellects and by comparisons.

Some noble narrative says: “Nothing is farther away from the intellects
of men than the exegesis of the Qur'an.”[^10] Another noble narrative
says: “Allah's religion cannot be conceived well by intellects.”[^11]
Such narratives prove that by “Allah's religion” they mean devotional
obedience to the religious precepts, or else, proving the Maker,
*tawhīd*, Glorification, the Resurrection Day and Prophethood, or rather
all sorts of knowledge are within the intellect's lawful right and field
of specialty.

That which is in the expressions of some notable narrators who said that
proving monotheism depends on traditional proof is strange, or, more
aptly, it is one of the disasters from which we must take refuge with
Allah. This speech does not need to be condemned and disgraced, but our
complaint is to Allah.

Another veil that prevents understanding this heavenly Book and being
benefited by its knowledge and admonitions is the veil of disobediences
[*ma'āsī*] and the opacity caused by rebellion against the sanctity of
the Lord of the worlds. By this veil the heart is prevented from
understanding the truths.

It must be noted that just as there is a corresponding image for each of
the good and bad deeds in the heavenly world, there is a similar one
inside the soul, through which the innermost part of the soul gets
either luminous and likewise the heart gets purified and luminous, in
which case the soul becomes clear and polished like a mirror, prepared
to receive the invisible manifestation and the appearance of the truths
and knowledge, or the soul gets dark and devilish, in which case the
heart becomes like a rusty and tarnished mirror, unable to reflect any
divine knowledge and invisible truths.

A heart in such a condition will gradually fall under the authority of
Satan, and *Iblīs* becomes the possessor of the kingdom of the spirit,
and the hearing and seeing, and the other senses and powers, too, become
at the disposal of that evil creature. The hearing becomes completely
blocked against the divine teachings, and the eyes do not see the
splendid divine signs and they become blind to Allah's truth, signs and
*āyah*s.

The heart does not become learned in religion, and is deprived of
meditating on the clear signs of Allah, His Names and His Attributes, as
Allah, the Exalted says:

*“**They have hearts, with which they do not understand, and they have
eyes with which they do not see, and they have ears with which they do
not hear. They are as cattle nay, they are even worse…”***[^12]

Their look at the world is like the look of the cattle and the animals
at it, void of value and deliberation. Their hearts, like the hearts of
the animals, lack meditation and remembrance, or rather, the more they
think of the *āyah*s and hear admonitions and instructions, the more
their negligence and haughtiness increase. Thus, they are even lower
than the beasts and graver in going astray.

Another one of the thick veils, which is a heavy curtain between us and
the teachings and admonitions of the Qur'an, is the veil of loving this
world, which causes the heart to be completely devoted to it, and the
inclination of the heart entirely turns towards mundane matters,
neglecting remembering Allah and turning away from both remembrance and
the One to be remembered. The more the love for this world and its
affairs, the thicker the veil and the curtain on the heart.

Sometimes this love so overwhelms the heart, and the power [*sultān*] of
endearing post and position becomes so influential that the light of the
divine nature [*fitrat 'ullāh*] in the heart is put off, and the doors
of happiness are closed to man's face. It is, however, possible that the
locks of the hearts mentioned in the noble *āyah*:

*“**Will they, then, not meditate on the Qur'an, or are there locks on
the hearts?”***[^13]

Are those locks of mundane attachments. The one who wants to be
benefited by the Qur'anic knowledge and to make use of the divine
admonitions will have to purge the heart from such impurities, and drive
away the pollution of cordial sins, which are being engaged with other
than Him, because the non-purified [heart] is no place for these
secrets. Allah, the Exalted, says:

*“**It is surely a noble Qur'an, in a protected Book; none shall touch
it save the purified ones.”***[^14]

Just as the touching of the external body of this Book is not allowed
for the one whose external body is not purified, by both legislation and
obligation, similarly its knowledge, admonitions and secrets are
prohibited to the one whose heart is smeared with the filths of the
mundane longings. Allah, the Exalted, says:

*“**This is the Book, wherein is no doubt, a guide for those who fear
Allah.”***[^15]

The one who does not fear Allah and is faithless according to the
God-fearing and faith of the common people is deprived from the formal
lights of the admonitions of the Qur'an and of its true beliefs, while
the one who does not fear Allah and is faithless according to other
degrees of fearing Allah, which are the fearing of the elite, of the
upper elite and of the uppermost elite is deprived from the other
degrees of the Qur'an.

However, going into the details and relating other *āyah*s to the same
effect would lengthen the subject. Nevertheless, we are going to end
this chapter with an honored *āyah*, which will be sufficient for the
wakeful people, provided that it is well pondered upon.

Allah, the Exalted, says:

*“**…Indeed there has come to you from Allah a light, and a clear Book,
with which Allah guides him who seeks His pleasure unto the ways of
safety, and brings them out of darkness into the light by His
permission, and guides them unto a straight path.”***[^16]

There are many specific points in this noble *āyah*, and to explain them
we would need to write a separate thesis, for which there is no
opportunity now.

[^1]: Sūrah al-Kahf 18:66

[^2]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:260

[^3]: Sūrah Tā-Hā 20:114

[^4]: Sūrah an-Naba' 78:40

[^5]: Sūrah al-Furqān 25:30

[^6]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, “Book of the Merits of Knowledge,” ch. on
“The Description of Knowledge and its Merits,” hadīth 1, p. 37.

[^7]: Sūrah al-Kahf 18:66

[^8]: Sūrah al-Fajr 89:22

[^9]: Sūrah Tā-Hā 20:5

[^10]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 89, “The Book of the Qur'an,” ch. 8, hadīth
48, p. 95; 'Ayyāshī's Exegesis, vol. 1, p. 12.

[^11]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 2, “Book of Knowledge,” hadīth 41, p. 303,
as quoted from Ikmāl ad-Dīn (Completing the Religion).

[^12]: Sūrah al-An'ām 6:179

[^13]: Sūrah Muhammad 47:24

[^14]: Sūrah al-Wāqi'ah 56:77-79

[^15]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:2

[^16]: Sūrah al-Mā'idah 5:15-16


