Section Eight: Meditation
=========================

One of the disciplines of reciting the Qur'an is the presence of heart,
to which we have already referred in this book, when we discussed the
general disciplines of the acts of worship; so, there is no need to
repeat it.

Another one of its disciplines is meditation, by which we mean that the
reciter of the noble *āyah*s should look for the destination and the
objective. Now as the objective of the Qur'an, as the very luminous Book
says, is guiding the people to the ways of safety, bringing them out of
the stages of darkness into the world of light, and leading them to the
straight path, one must, by way of meditating on the noble *āyah*s,
attain the stages of safety, from its lowest stage, which belongs to
worldly dominion, up to its final stage, which is the realization of a
sound heart [*qalb-i sālim*]*,* according to the explanation received
from *Ahl al-Bayt* ('*a*) saying that a sound heart meets Allah when it
is occupied by none other than Him.[^1]

The soundness of the worldly and heavenly powers should be the quest of
the reciter of the Qur'an, as he will certainly find it in this heavenly
Book if he meditates on it. When the human powers become safe from
Satan's intrusion, and when the way to safety is found and followed,
man, in each stage of safety, will be saved from a degree of darkness,
and the bright light of Allah will inevitably shine in him.

If he gets rid of all sorts of darkness, the first of which is the
darkness of the world of nature, with all its affairs, and the last of
which is the darkness of being inclined to multiplicity with all its
affairs, the absolute light will shine in his heart, leading him to the
straight path of humanity, which is, in this instance, the path of the
Lord:

*“**Surely my Lord is on a straight path.”***[^2]

Contemplation is very much invited to, praised and applauded in the
Glorious Qur'an. Allah, the Exalted, says:

*“**And we have revealed to you the Remembrance that you may explain to
mankind what has been sent down to them and that haply they may
reflect.”***[^3]

In this noble *āyah* reflection is strongly applauded, because the aim
of sending down this great heavenly Book, the great luminous paper, is
that “**haply they may reflect.”** This is quite significant that the
mere possibility of reflection causes the revelation of this great
generosity [*karāmat*]*.* In another *āyah* He says:  
*“**Therefore, narrate the narratives*** *[**qasas**]* ***that they may
reflect.”***[^4]

There are so many *āyah*s of this like or almost the like, as well as
narratives [*riwāyāt*] which invite to reflection. The Messenger of
Allah (*s*) is quoted to have said, on the revelation of the *āyah*

*“**Surely in the creation of the heavens and the earth and the
alternation of the night and the day there are signs for men of
understanding”***[^5]

“Woe to the one who reads it and does not reflect upon it.”[^6] An
important point in this respect is that one should know what the
commended reflection is, as there is no doubt in the fact that it is
praiseworthy to think about the Qur'an and the *hadīth*s**.** The best
expression for it is that of the Khājah 'Abdullāh al-Ansārī (may Allah
sanctify his soul).

He says: “Do know that reflection is the insight's attempt to understand
the purpose.”[^7] That is, reflection is a seeking by the “insight”
[*basīrat*]*,* which is the eye of the heart, wanting to attain the aim
and the result, which are the utmost perfection. It is quite clear that
the destination [*maqsad*] and the aim [*maqsūd*] are the absolute
happiness, attainable through theoretical and practical perfection.

Therefore, it is man's duty to obtain the humane objective and result,
being happiness, from the noble *āyah*s of the divine Book and from its
stories and tales. And, since happiness is to attain absolute safety,
the world of light and the straight path, man should find through the
honored Qur'an the ways to safety, the source of the absolute light and
the straight path, as was stated in the previously mentioned noble
*āyah.*

When the reciter gets the aim, he becomes clear-sighted in getting to
it, and the door of being benefited by the Qur'an opens to him and with
it the doors of the mercy of Allah open, too. He, then, would not spend
his dear and short years and his capital for obtaining happiness on
matters which are not intended by the Message, preventing himself from
indulging in useless discussion and talk about such an important
subject.

Having directed his heart's eye for some time to this purpose,
neglecting other matters, the eye of the heart gets sharp in observing,
and meditating on the Qur'an becomes common to him, and the ways of
utilization open to him, and there open to him such doors that had not
already been open to him, and he obtains from the Qur'an such matters
and knowledge that he had never obtained before. At that time he can
understand the meaning of the Qur'an being a cure for the spiritual
ailment, as is confirmed by the noble *āyah*:

*“**And we reveal from the Qur'an that which is a healing and a mercy to
the believers and it adds only to the perdition of the
wrongdoers,”***[^8]

And the meaning of the saying of Imām 'Alī ('*a*): “Learn the Qur'an,
for it is the spring [*rabī'*] of the hearts; and seek cure with its
light, since it is the cure for the hearts.”[^9] He does not seek from
the Qur'an the cure of only the physical ailments, but regards the main
aim to be the cure of the spiritual ailments, which is the very
objective of the Qur'an.  
 The Qur'an has not been sent down to cure the physical ailments,
although such ailments do get cured by it. The prophets ('*a*), too, did
not come to cure physical ailments, although they did cure them. As a
matter of fact, they were the doctors for the souls, and the curers of
the hearts and the spirits.

[^1]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 3, p.26, “The Book of Faith and Disbelief”, ch.
on “Sincerity,” hadīth 5.

[^2]: Sūrah Hūd 11:56

[^3]: Sūrah an-Nahl 16:44

[^4]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:176

[^5]: Sūrah Āl-i 'Imrān 3:190

[^6]: Nūr ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 1, p. 350 (with a slight literal
difference).

[^7]: Manāzil as-Sā'irīn, section “The Beginnings,” ch. on “Reflection.”

[^8]: Sūrah al-Isrā' 17:82.

[^9]: Nahj al-Balāghah, sermon 109 (with some change in the wording).


