Introduction
============

**In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful**

*Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and may Allah send blessing
onto Muhammad and his pure progeny, and may His curse be upon all their
enemies, from now till the rise of the Day of Judgment.*

O Allah! Our steps of traveling are too short to reach Your Sacred
Court, and our demanding hand is unable to touch Your Skirt of Intimacy.
The veils of desire and negligence have blocked our insight from Your
Most Beautiful Beauty, and the heavy curtains of loving this world and
devilry have secluded our hearts from attending to the Glory of Your
Majesty.

The road to the Hereafter is narrow, and the path of humanity is
tortuous, while we, the helpless, like the spiders, think of the jerked
meat. We, like the silkworms, are perplexed, tying ourselves with the
chains of desires and hopes, completely closing our eyes against the
unseen world and the sociable gathering, except for the divine
brightness with which You may light our hearts, and for Your unseen
firebrand with which You may take us into rapture.

*O Allah! Grant me to be exclusively dedicated to You. Light the eyes of
our hearts with the light of looking at You, until the eyes of the
hearts penetrate through the partitions of light so as to reach the
origin of greatness, and our souls become hanging onto the glory of Your
Sanctity.*[^1]

Now then, some years ago, I prepared a paper [^2] in which I inserted as
much as was possible of the secrets of the *Salat*. But as it was not
suitable for the common people, I decided to write parts of the cordial
disciplines of this spiritual *mi'rāj*, so that my brethren in faith may
have a remembrance and my hard heart may be affected by it. I take
refuge with Allah, the Blessed and Most High, from Satan's conduct and
from failure, for He is a powerful guardian. I have arranged in this
book a preface, a few discourses and a conclusion.

[^1]: “Munājāt-i Sha'bāniyyah,” Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 91, p. 99.

[^2]: He refers to the book Sirr as-Salat (Mi'rāj as-Sālikīn wa Salat
al-'Ārifīn). The author (may Allah sanctify his honorable tomb, at its
beginning, after praising (Allah), sending blessings (to the Prophet)
and invoking, has written: “Now then, I, the bewildered in the valley of
perplexity and ignorance, and tied to the wishes of I-ness and egoism,
indulged in the intoxicating selfness and egotism, knowing nothing of
the spiritual stations and the kingdom of existence, have sincerely
decided to write about some of the spiritual stations of the great
guardians in this spiritual sulūk (spiritual travel) and mi'rāj
(ascension) of faith …” He has finished the said honorable book on the
21st of Rabī' ath-Thānī 1358 L.H. (19 Khordād, 1318 S.H.).


