Conclusion
==========

Hereunder the translation of some noble narratives are related to
complete the advantage and to have the blessings of the sayings of the
[Prophet's] pure progeny:

The noble *al-Kāfī* on the authority of Sa'd, quotes Imām al-Bāqir
('*a*) to have said: “O Sa'd, learn the Qur'an, for it comes on the
Resurrection Day in the best of forms,” then he added to the same
effect, saying that it would pass through each rank of the masses of the
believers, the martyrs, the prophets and the ranks of the angels, and
all of them say: “This is brighter than us,” until the Messenger of
Allah (*s*) introduces it… as the *hadīth* goes.[^1]

Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) is quoted to have said: “When Allah, the Exalted,
gathers all the first and the last peoples, they suddenly see a person
proceeding, having an image the better of which has never been seen
before.”[^2]

There are many other *hadīth*s of similar content that prove the sayings
of the people of knowledge to the effect that for each being in this
world there is a matching image in the Hereafter.

From the *hadīth*s of this chapter it is deduced that the deeds also
have their images in that world. The noble *al-Kāfī*, on the authority
of Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*), says: “The Messenger of Allah (*s*) said: “I,
the Book of Allah and my progeny will be the first to come to the
Almighty, the Omnipotent, then my *ummah* will come after us. Then I
ask: What did you do with the Book of Allah and my *Ahl al-Bayt*?”[^3]

In another *hadīth*, the Almighty, the Glorified, says to the Qur'an:
“By My Omnipotence and Majesty, and by My High State, I will surely
honor him who has honored you, and I will disdain him who has disdained
you.”[^4]

We must know that if we did not revive the precepts and the teachings of
the Qur'an by putting them to practice and understanding their truth, we
would not be able to reply the question of Allah's Messenger on that
day. Which disdain is worse than discarding its objectives and
neglecting its calls? Honoring the Qur'an and its people, who are the
infallible *Ahl al-Bayt*, is not done only by kissing its cover or their
holy shrines.

This is a weak sign of honoring and respecting, which will only be
acceptable if done according to its instructions and their teachings.
Otherwise they would be more like scorning and sporting. Noble *hadīth*s
strongly warn those who recite the Qur'an and then do not practically
follow its teachings.

In '*Iqāb al-A'māl*, by Shaykh as-Sadūq (may Allah be pleased with him),
quoting the Messenger of Allah (*s*), it is stated that he said in a
*hadīth*: “The one who teaches the Qur'an and does not act according to
it, and loves this world and prefers worldly pleasures to it, is worthy
of Allah's wrath and is placed on the same level with the Jews and the
Christians who threw the Book of Allah behind their backs.

The one who recites the Qur'an with the intention of obtaining
reputation [*sum'ah*] and mundane gains will meet Allah with a bony,
fleshless face, and the Qur'an will slap his nape to push him into the
fire and let him join those before him. And the one who recites the
Qur'an without following its instructions, will be raised blind on the
Resurrection Day. He will ask: 'O my Lord, why have You raised me blind
whereas I was a seeing one?' He will reply:

***'It is so because our signs came to you but you forgot them, and so
you are forgotten this day'***[^5]

Then he is ordered to be thrown into the Fire. But the one who recites
the Qur'an for the pleasure of Allah and for learning the features of
the religion, his will be a reward, the equal of the reward given to all
the angels and the prophets and Messengers ('*a*).

“The one who learns the Qur'an to show off, seeking reputation by way of
arguing with the fools, to take pride in his knowledge against the
scholars and to seek with it mundane matters, Allah, on the Resurrection
Day, will separate all his bones from one another, and there will be no
torture in the Fire severer than his, and there will be no sort of
torment unless he is subjected to it, owing to Allah's strong anger and
displeasure.

“If the one who learns the Qur'an is humble with his knowledge, teaches
the servants of Allah and asks Allah for whatever reward there is with
Him, there will be in Paradise no one whose reward is more than his, and
there will be in Paradise no high rank and lofty state unless his share
of it is higher and his state is loftier.”[^6]

Concerning meditating on the meaning of the Qur'an, learning lessons
from it and being affected by it there are many narratives, such as the
*hadīth* in the noble *al-Kāfī*, on the authority of Imām as-Sādiq
('*a*), that he said: “It is in this Qur'an the stand of the guiding
light and the torches for the dark nights. So, let the scrutinizer roam
with his wide open eyes to see clearly, because thinking is the life of
the discerning heart, like the enlightened one who walks with light in
the dark.”[^7]

The Imām means that as man needs common light to see his way in the dark
so as not to fall over in a precipice, with the Qur'an, which is the
light that guides and the torch which lights the road of gnosticism and
faith, he is to advance on the dark road to the Hereafter and to Allah
so as not to tumble down into devastating precipices.

In *Ma'āniy 'ul-Akhbār* there is a *hadīth* from Imām 'Alī ('*a*)
saying: “The true jurisprudent is the one who would not leave the Qur'an
reluctantly and turn to something else. Beware that there is no good in
a knowledge without understanding; there is no good in the reciting
without contemplation; and there is no good in a worship without deep
knowledge of it.”[^8]

In *al-Khisāl* and *Ma'āniy 'ul-Akhbār*, the Messenger of Allah (*s*) is
quoted to have said: “The bearers of the Qur'an are the informed ones
['*urafā*] among the people of Paradise.”[^9] It is obvious what is
meant by “the bearers” of the Qur'an. It means the bearers of the
Qur'anic knowledge and teachings, the result of which in the Hereafter
is to regard them among the learned and the people of heart. To merely
bear the external form of the Qur'an, without getting its lessons and
being benefited by its teachings, and to convey its knowledge and
admonitions, without putting its precepts and laws into application,
would be like that which is said by Allah, the Exalted:

*“**The likeness of those who are entrusted with the Torah, yet they
apply it not, is as the likeness of the ass carrying books.”***[^10]

Noble *hadīth*s on the Glorious Qur'an, its affairs and disciplines are
too many to be contained in this small book. Peace be upon Muhammad and
his progeny.

[^1]: Usūl al-Kāfī ,vol. 4,p. 394, “Book of the Merits of the Qur'an,”
ch. 1, hadīth 1.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 4, p. 400, “Book of the Merits of the Qur'an,”
ch. 1, hadīth 4.

[^4]: Ibid., hadīth 14.

[^5]: Sūrah Tā-Hā 20:125-6.

[^6]: 'Iqāb al-A'māl, pp. 332, 337 and 366.

[^7]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 4, p.400, “Book on the Merits of the Qur'an,”
ch. 1, hadīth 5.

[^8]: Ma'āniy 'ul-Akhbār, p. 226, ch. on “The Meaning of the True
Jurisprudent,” hadīth 1.  

[^9]: Ma'aniy 'ul-Akhbar, p. 323, ch. on “The Meaning of the Informed
Ones of the People of Paradise,” hadīth 1; Al-Khisāl, vo1.1, p. 28, ch.
on “The One,” hadīth 100.

[^10]: Sūrah al-Jumu'ah 62:5


