Degrees Of Recitation And The Groups Of Reciters
================================================

Know that for the recitation during this spiritual journey and divine
ascension there are degrees and stages, and here we shall suffice
ourselves with some of them.

First, the reciter is one who pays no attention to other than improving
the recitation and bettering the expression. His only care is for the
good utterance of these words and correct pronunciation of the letters
from their correct outlets so that a duty can be performed and an order
be fulfilled. It is well known that the task for such persons is heavy
and difficult; their hearts are unwilling and their insides are
deviated.  
 These have no share of worship, though they are not punished with the
punishment of the deserter [of the *salāt*], unless from the invisible
treasure a grace appears and the said chattering receives a beneficence
and a favor. It sometimes happens that this group, while their tongues
are busy remembering Allah, their hearts are completely away from that,
engaged in the mundane multiplicity and worldly matters.

As a matter of fact, the people in this group are outwardly in the
*salāt*, while inwardly and actually they are busy with this world and
worldly desires and whims. Sometimes it also happens that their hearts
busy themselves thinking about correcting the formal shape of the
*salāt*. In this case they are busy, by both the tongue and the heart,
with the form of the *salāt*, and it is acceptable and agreeable from
them.

The second group is those who would not be contented with that limit and
take the *salāt* to be a means of remembering Allah, and the reciting to
be praising and glorifying Him. This group is of many ranks and degrees,
the mentioning of which would be lengthy. Probably it is this group to
which the following Divine *Hadīth* refers:

“I have divided the *salāt* between Me and My servant, half of it for Me
and half of it for My servant. When he says: 'In the name of Allah, the
Beneficent, the Merciful,' Allah will say: 'My servant has remembered
Me,' and when he says: 'All praise is for Allah,' Allah says: 'My
servant has praised and glorified Me,' and this is the meaning of 'Allah
hears from the one who praises Him.'

And when he says: 'The Beneficent, the Merciful,' Allah says: 'My
servant aggrandized Me. And when he says: 'Master of the Day of
Judgment,' Allah says: 'My servant glorified Me.' [In another version:
'My servant has entrusted himself to Me']. And when he says: 'you do we
worship and You do we seek help from,' Allah says: 'This is between Me
and My servant.' And when he says: 'Guide us to the straight path,'
Allah says: 'My servant has this right, and it is granted to him.”[^1]

Now as the *salāt*, according to this noble *hadīth*, is divided between
Allah and the servant, the servant has to completely pay what is due to
Him, according to the discipline of servitude stated in this noble
*hadīth*, so that Allah, the Exalted, may treat him as is becoming of
His Lordly graces, since He says:

*“**And fulfill my covenant; I shall fulfill your covenant.”***[^2]

Allah, the Exalted, confined the disciplines of servitude in recitation
to four pillars:

The first one is “remembrance” [*tadhakkur*] which is to happen by “In
the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful,” and the *sālik*
servant should look at the entire “House of Realization” [*dār-i
tahaqquq*] as a name perished in the Named [*musammā*].

He should teach his heart to be seeking the *Haqq* and wanting the
*Haqq* in every particle of “the possibles” [*mumkināt*], and bring the
natural disposition of learning the names which is fixed in the nature
of his essence according to the requirement of the universality of the
growth [*nash'ah*] and its being the manifestation of the Great Name of
Allah, to which Allah refers by saying: “**And He taught Adam all the
names,”**[^3] to the state of actuality and manifestation. Such a state
is the result of having privacy with Allah and of deep remembrance and
contemplating the divine affairs [*shu'ūn*], to the extent that the
heart becomes a complete divine servant such that there can be found in
every nook of it no name except that of Allah, the Exalted.

This is a stage of perishing in divinity that (even) the relapsed and
hard hearts of the deniers cannot deny what we have just said, unless
their denial be satanic, for such hearts feel repulsion, by nature, on
hearing Allah's name or His remembrance, may God save us from that! If a
word of divine knowledge or one of Allah's Names was mentioned, they
would feel distressed.

They would not open the eyes of their hearts except at the desires of
the appetites of the stomach and sex. There are among these people those
who admit for the prophets and holy men [*awliyā*] ('*a*) nothing other
than corporeal states and bodily Paradise, i.e. satisfying the animal
desire. They take the greatness of the states of the other world to be
similar to the greatness of this world, with vast orchards, running
rivers and a multitude of houris and youths and palaces.

When there is a talk about love, affection and divine attraction, they
assault the speaker with vulgar language and ugly words, as if they
themselves have been insulted and they were retaliating. These people
block the way of humanity and they are the thorns of the road to knowing
Allah, and the satans who deceive men, hindering groups upon groups of
the servants of Allah from Allah, His names, His attributes, His
remembrance and remembering, and directing their attentions to the
animal stomach and sexual desires.

They are satanic agents who sit in ambush on the straight path of Allah
according to the *āyah*:

*“**I shall surely lurk in ambush for them on your straight
path,”***[^4]

In order to prevent the servants of Allah from getting familiar with
their Lord and from ridding themselves of the darkness of animal
desires, including inclination towards houris and palaces. These people
may resort to evidences from the invocations of the prophets and the
infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* ('*a*) in which they also demand houris and
palaces.

But this is due to the shortcomings of this group who recognize no
difference between loving Allah's grace, which is loved because it is
the gift of the Beloved, in itself being a sign of affection and care,
and merely loving the houris and palaces independently, which is within
the nature of the animal desire. Loving Allah's gifts is Loving Allah,
which consequently covers the favors of Allah and His graces:

I love the whole world, for the whole world is of Him.[^5]

The love of the abode did not infatuate me, but the love of the one who
resides therein.[^6]  
 Otherwise, what would, 'Alī ibn Abī Tālib ('*a*) do with houris and
palaces? How could that great man be associated with the appetites of
the self and the animal desires? The one whose worship is that of a free
man, his reward cannot be that of traders. The rein of the pen snapped
and I wandered away from the main subject.

In general, the one who is accustomed to reciting divine *āyah*s and
names from the Book of divine genesis and record, his heart will
gradually take the form of remembrance and of an *āyah*, and the
interior of his essence will turn out to be Allah's remembrance, His
name and His *āyah*, as they interpret “remembrance” to be the noble
Prophet and 'Alī ibn Abī Tālib ('*a*), and “The Beautiful Names” to be
the Imāms of guidance ('*a*). Āyatullāh is also interpreted to be those
great men and it is conformed to them.

They are the divine *āyah*s, the Beautiful Names of Allah and the great
remembrance of Allah. The state of “remembrance” is such a high one that
it is beyond the patience of explanation and the limits of writing and
recording. It suffices for the people of knowledge and divine
attraction, and the people of affection and love, as in the *āyah*:

*“**Therefore remember Me; I shall remember you.”***[^7]

Allah, the Exalted, tells Moses ('*a*): “**I am the companion of whoever
remembers Me.”**[^8] A narrative in *al-Kāfī* says that the Messenger of
Allah (*s*) said: “Whoever remembers Allah frequently, He will like
him.”[^9]

In *Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah*, Imām Ja'far as-Sādiq is quoted to have said
that Allah, the Exalted, said: “O son of Adam, remember Me in yourself;
I will remember you in Myself. O son of Adam, remember Me in privacy, I
will remember you in privacy. O son of Adam, remember Me in public, I
will remember you in a public better than yours.” He also said: “No
servant remembers Allah in the presence of the people unless Allah
remembers him in the presence of the angels.”[^10]

The second pillar is “praising” Allah [*tahmīd*], as is the *musallī*'s
saying: “All praise is for Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.”

Know that when the *musallī* attains the state of “remembrance”, and
regards all the particles of the beings, and the high and low creatures,
to be divine names, and when he dismisses from his heart the idea of
being self-sufficient, and looks at the beings of the visible and
invisible worlds with the eye of dependence, he will be in the stage of
“praising,” and his heart will confess that all kinds of praising
exclusively belong to the Divine Essence, and the others have no share
of it, because they have no personal perfection requiring any sort of
praising and glorifying. We shall explain in detail this divine grace,
in our interpretation of this blessed *sūrah*, *inshā'allāh* (Allah
willing).

The third pillar is “magnifying” [*ta'zīm*], which is established by
“The Beneficent, the Merciful.” When the servant traveling to Allah has,
under the pillar of “praising”, confined all praise to Allah, excluding
the existential multiplicities from perfection and praise, he will get
nearer to the horizon of Oneness, his eye of plurality will gradually
get blind to multiplicity, and the form of Beneficence [*rahmāniyyat*]
which is the expansion of the existence and the form of Mercifulness
[*rahīmiyyat*] which is the expansion of the perfection of the existence
will be manifested to his heart, and he will call Allah by the two
names, which are all-embracing and comprehensive, and in which
multiplicities are vanished. So, the manifestation of perfection causes
the heart to feel awe from the Beauty, and thus, Allah's greatness is
implanted in his heart.

As this condition is fixed, he will move to the fourth pillar, which is
the state of “sanctifying” [*taqdīs*], and it is actually “glorifying”
[*tamhīd*]. In other words, it is entrusting the affairs to Allah, that
is, discerning the position of Ownership and Omnipotence of Allah, and
the falling down of the dust of plurality [*kathrat*] and the breaking
of the idols of the heart and the appearance of the owner of the house
of the heart, and possessing it with no Satanic intruding.

In this condition he reaches the stage of privacy, and there will be no
veil between the servant and Allah, and “**You do we worship and You do
we seek help from,”** takes place in that particular privacy and the
meeting of familiarity. For this reason He said: “This is between Me and
My servant.” And when the everlasting favor encompasses him and awakens
him, he will demand consistency of this stage and establishment
[*tamkīn*] of His Presence, by requesting: “**Guide us to the straight
path,”** in which, “**Guide us”** is interpreted to mean: “Make us firm,
consistent and steady.”

This is for those who have slipped out of the veil and attained “the
Eternally Wanted” [*matlūb-i azal*]. As to us, the people of the veil,
we will have to ask Allah, the Exalted, for guidance with its ordinary
concept. This may further be explained in the exegesis of the blessed
*sūrah* of *al-Hamd*, *inshā'allāh* (Allah willing).

### Completion

From the noble Divine *Hadīth*[^11] [*hadīth-i qudsī*] it appears that
the *salāt* is completely divided between Allah and the servant, and
only the *sūrah* of *al-Hamd* was given as an example. So, we may add,
for example, that the *takbīr*s of the *salāt*, whether the opening
*takbīr*s or the other ones which are said during changing states in the
*salāt*, are the share of Divinity, the portion of the Sacred Essence.

If the servant traveling to Allah performed this duty of servitude and
carried out what was due to Divinity as his capacity was capable of,
Allah, the Exalted, with His everlasting special favors, would also
grant His servant his due share, which is the opening of the door of
intimacy and revelation, as is referred to in the noble *hadīth* in
*Misbāh ash*-*Sharī'ah*: “As you utter the *takbīr*, regard small all
creatures in relation to the greatness of Allah,” and it adds: “Examine
your heart during the *salāt*.

If you tasted the sweetness of the *salāt*, and if in your soul you felt
pleased and gay by it, and your heart enjoyed the supplication to Allah
and conversing with Him, know that Allah has approved your *takbīr*s.
Otherwise, without feeling pleasure in supplication, and being deprived
of tasting the sweetness of worship, you should know that Allah has
denied you and dismissed you from His Threshold.”[^12]  
 Consequently, in each one of the acts and states of the *salāt*, there
is a share for Allah, and the servant is to perform it, being the
disciplines of servitude at that stage. The servant also has his share,
which, after performing what the discipline of servitude requires,
Allah, out of His covert grace and overt mercy, will bestow upon him His
favor. If in these divine times he found himself deprived of His special
favors, he must know that he did not act according to the disciplines of
servitude.

The relevant sign for the common people is that the heart does not taste
the sweetness of supplication and the delicacy of worship, and he is
deprived of the cheerfulness, pleasure and devotion to Allah. The
worship that is void of delight and pleasure is spiritless, and it will
not be useful for the heart.

So, dear, make your heart familiar with the disciplines of servitude,
and let your soul [*rūh*] taste the sweetness of remembering Allah. This
divine grace, at the beginning, takes place through intense remembrance
and intimacy. During remembrance the heart must not be dead or overcome
by negligence. Having taught your heart to be familiar with remembrance,
the divine favors will gradually be bestowed upon you, and the heavenly
doors will be opened to you, and this is marked by repulsion from this
world, by inclination towards the world of eternity, and by preparedness
for death before its arrival.

O Allah! Grant us to have a share of tasting the pleasure of
supplicating to you and the sweetness of conversing with you. Place us
among the remembering group and in the circle of those who are devoted
to Your Glorified Sanctity, and bestow upon our dead hearts an
everlasting life, and make us break off the others and make us inclined
to be devoted to You, surely You are the Giver of favor and grace.

[^1]: Al-Mahajjat al-Baydā', vol. 1, p. 388; Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 92, p.
226. Sahīh Muslim, vol. 2, p. 92, with differences in expression. 

[^2]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:40.

[^3]: Ibid., 31.

[^4]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:16.

[^5]: This is the second hemistich of a line from Sa'dī's poetry, as
below:  By the world I am cheerful as the world is cheerful by Him,   I
love the whole world as the whole world is of Him.

[^6]: A line from the poetry of Majnūn 'Āmirī (Qays ibn al-Mulawwah
al-'Āmirī). Jamī' ash-Shawāhid, p. 220, ch. “The W with the M.”

[^7]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:152

[^8]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol.4, p.255,“Book of Invocation,”ch. on “That Which
is Obligatory of Remembering Allah,” hadīth 4.

[^9]: Ibid., hadīth 3.

[^10]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 4, “Book of the Salāt”, sec. on
“Remembrance,” ch. 7, hadīth 4, p. 1185.

[^11]: Refer to footnote 351

[^12]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 13, “At Ending the Salāt”; Al-Mahajjat
al-Baydā,' printed by as-Sadūq Library, vol. 1, p. 385; Mustadrak
al-Wasā'il, “The Book of as-Salāt,” sec. on “The Acts of the Salāt,”
ch.2, hadīth 9.


