Some Disciplines Of Isti‘adhah
==============================

Allah, the Exalted, says:

*“**And when you recite the Qur'an take refuge in Allah from the outcast
Satan. He has no authority over those who believe and on their Lord
rely. His authority is only over those who befriend him and those who
associate partner with Him.”***[^1]

Among the important disciplines of recitation, especially the recitation
in the *salāt*, which is a spiritual journey to Allah, the real
ascension and the ladder to reach the people of Allah, is the
*isti'ādhah*, seeking refuge in Allah, from the outcast Satan, who is
the thorn of the road to knowledge, and the one who blocks the way of
the *sālik*'s travel to Allah, as Allah, the Exalted, says through him,
in the blessed *sūrah* of *al-'Arāf*:

*“**He said: 'As you have led me astray, I shall lurk in ambush for them
on your straight path.”***[^2]

He has sworn to lurk for the sons of Adam on the straight path to
prevent them from entering it. So, the *salāt*, which is the straight
path of humanity and the ascension for reaching Allah, cannot take place
without *isti'ādhah* from this brigand, and without taking refuge in the
fortified fort of Divinity from his evil, there can be no security. This
*isti'ādhah*, this taking refuge, cannot be implemented with empty
utterances, a lifeless form or a world with no Hereafter.

It is observed that there were people who did utter these words for
forty or fifty years, yet they were not saved from the evil of this
bandit, and, actually, in their conducts and acts, and even in their
beliefs they followed Satan and imitated him. Had we really taken refuge
from the evils of this wicked one, the Sacred Essence of Allah, the
Exalted, Who is the Absolute Gracious, the Omnipotent, the All-Merciful,
the All-Knowing and Generous, would have granted us His protection, and
our faith, moralities and deeds would have been amended.

So, we must know that our being left behind the travelers on the road to
Allah is due to Satan's temptations and because we have fallen under his
control owing to our own shortcomings and inefficiency in applying the
spiritual disciplines and acquiring the required conditions of the
heart. So, it is because of this that we get nothing of the spiritual
results and the external and internal effects of our invocations,
supplications and worships.

From the noble *āyah*s of the Qur'an and the noble *hadīth*s of the
infallible Imāms (*s*) many disciplines can be discovered. But to count
them all would need a complete scrutinizing research, which prolongs the
discussion. It suffices us to mention only a few of them.

One of the important disciplines of *isti'ādhah* is “sincerity,” as
Allah the Exalted, quotes Satan to have said:

*“**By your Might I will tempt them all, except Your sincere servants
from among them.”***[^3]

This “sincerity,” as is clear from this noble *āyah*, is something
higher than the practical sincerity, whether by the heart or by the
limbs, because, it is in the objective case [in its Arabic form =
*mukhlasīn*]. Had it been for sincerity in action, it should have been
in the nominative case.

Therefore, this sincerity is intended to denote the purification of the
human personality with all the visible and invisible affairs, of whose
emissions is the practical sincerity, although, at the beginning of the
*sulūk*, this fact and divine grace would not easily take place except
by difficult practical austerities, especially the cordial ones, which
are its origin, as is referred to in the well-known *hadīth*: “The one
who keeps being sincere to Allah for forty mornings, fountains of wisdom
will flow from his heart to his tongue.”[^4]

So, whoever could sincerely devote himself to Allah for forty mornings
which is the period of fermenting [*takhmīr*] the clay [*tīnat*] of
which Adam was created, and the connection between these two is
well-known to the people of knowledge and of heart and dedicate his
cordial and formal acts sincerely to Allah, his heart will become godly,
and the godly heart produces nothing other than fountains of wisdom.

Then, his tongue, which is the greatest interpreter of the heart, will
speak wisdom. So, at the beginning, sincerity of the act leads to the
purification of the heart, and when the heart becomes purified, the
lights of Majesty and Beauty which are deposited by divine fermentation
[*takhmīr*] in the human clay are reflected in the mirror of the heart
and become manifest there, and from the innermost of the heart they
appear on the external body.

In short, the sincerity, which frees one from the satanic authority, is
devoting the identity of the soul [*rūh*] and the innermost of the heart
to Allah, the Exalted. It is a reference to this that Imām 'Alī ('*a*),
in his *Sha'bāniyyah Supplication,* says: “O Allah, grant me complete
devotion to you.”[^5]

When the heart reaches this stage of sincerity and it is cut off other
than Allah, and in the kingdom of his existence there is no admission to
other than Allah, Satan who approaches man by other than Allah's way
will have no power over him, and Allah will admit him into His shelter,
and he will be placed in the fortified fortress of divinity, as He says:
“The expression 'there is no god but Allah' is My fort, so whoever
enters My fort is safe from My torture.”[^6]

Entering the fort of 'there is no god but Allah' is of several degrees.
Likewise, being safe from the torture is also of several degrees. So,
the one who, externally, internally, cordially and formally, is admitted
to Allah's fortress and under His protection, will be safe from all
degrees of torture, including being veiled off Allah's Beauty and being
separated from meeting the Beloved, the Most High and Almighty which
veiledness and separation are at the top of the tortures.

Imām 'Alī ('*a*), in the Kumayl Invocation, says: “Suppose that I can
patiently bear your torment, how can I patiently bear separation from
you?” Our hand is short of that. The one who could reach that stage
would be a real servant of Allah, under the vaults [domes] of divinity,
and Allah, the Exalted, would manage his kingdom, getting him out of the
*Taghūt*'s patronage.

This is the dearest state for the men of Allah and the most special
degree for the pure, and the others have no share of it. It is most
likely that the owners of hard hearts among the deniers and of stiff
souls among the obstinate, who are far away from such a state, deny it
altogether and regard any talk about it to be false and in vain. Or they
rather take such affairs, which are the delight of the holy men
[*awliyā'*], and which are frequently mentioned by the Book and the
*Sunnah*, to be God forbid! of the fabrications of the sūfis and false
rumors of the literalists.

We, by referring to these states, which are, in fact, the states of the
perfect ones, do not claim to have a share of them or look at them
covetously, but we do so because to deny them is not agreeable to us,
and we believe that mentioning the holy men [*awliyā'*] and their
positions is effective in purging, saving and reforming the hearts,
because good mention of the people of guardianship and knowledge causes
affection, familiarity and close connection.

Such connection leads to mutual attraction [*tajādhub*], which, in its
turn leads to co-intercession [*tashāfu'*], whose outward is getting out
of the darkness of ignorance to the lights of guidance and knowledge,
and its inward is the intercession in the Hereafter, because the
intercession of the intercessors would not happen without close
connection and inward co-attraction [*tajādhub*], since it would not be
based on guess and *bātil* [falsehood].

However, despite the fact that this stage is not but for the perfect
ones among the holy men [*awliyā'*] and the chosen ones [*asfiyā'*]
('*a*), and that the perfect state of this stage is, in the origin
[*bil-'isālah*]*,* exclusively for the Seal of the Prophets (*s*), the
luminous and pure Ahmadian single [*ahadī-yi ahmadī*]*,* Muhammadan
collective [*jamī'-i muhammadī*] heart, and subordinately [*bi
't-taba'iyyah*], it is for the perfect and pure ones of the *Ahl
al-Bayt,* yet the believers and the sincere ones are not to give up
hoping for some of its degrees, and to be satisfied with formal and
practical sincerity, and the external and juristic purity, because
stopping in the stations is one of the masterpieces of *Iblīs* who is
sitting at the entrance of the path of man and humanity, trying every
possible means to prevent him from ascending to perfections and reaching
higher stages.

So, one has to double his vigilance and strengthen his will, so that
this divine light and grace may move from the outside to the inside, and
from the visible to the invisible. The more stages of sincerity one
passes, the better he will be stationed under Allah's protection, and
the truth of *isti'ādhah* will be implemented, and the hands of the
devilish Satan will be short of reaching him.

Hence, if you devoted the visible human form exclusively to Allah, and
if you placed the external mundane armies of the soul, which are the
powers dispersed in the kingdom of the body, under the shelter of Allah,
and if you purified the seven earthly realms, which are the eye, the
ear, the tongue, the stomach, the sexual organ, the hand, and the leg,
from the impurities of disobedience and placed them at the disposal of
Allah's angels, who are the divine armies, these realms would gradually
become divine and under the command of Allah, until they also become
Allah's angels, or get like Allah's angels

*“**Who do not disobey Allah in what He commands them, and do as they
are commanded.”***[^7]

Hence, the first degree of *isti'ādhah* takes place, and Satan and his
soldiers leave the external kingdom and turn to the inside, assaulting
the invisible powers of the soul. Thus, the *sālik*'s task becomes
harder and his *sulūk* stricter. So, his steps should be stronger, and
his watchfulness more perfect. He is to take refuge in Allah, the
Exalted, from the spiritual destructions, such as self-conceit,
hypocrisy, arrogance, pride and the like, and to gradually start
purifying his inside from the moral opacities and internal impurities.

In this stage, or rather in all stages, he is to be attentive to Allah's
Unity of Acts, and to remind his heart of this divine grace and heavenly
table [*mā'idah*], which are of the important matters of *sulūk* and of
the pillars of '*urūj*. He is also to make his heart taste the fact that
Allah, the Exalted, is the owner of the heavens, the earth, the inside,
the outside, the visible, and the invisible, so that the heart may get
accustomed to His Unity in deity and deny any association in management
[*tasarruf*] and be divinely concocted and theistically educated.

In this state the heart will find no asylum, refuge, sanctuary and help
except with Allah alone, and, consequently and actually, he will seek
refuge with Allah, the Sanctified State of Divinity. Unless he cuts off
his heart from the others' management, and closes his eye of greed on
other creatures, he cannot truthfully turn to get his refuge with Allah,
and his claim will be a false one, and according to the method of he
people of knowledge he will be regarded among the hypocrites, and
ascribed to deceit and treason.

In this fearful valley [*wādīyy*] and dangerous Deep Ocean, if one takes
advantage of the sayings of a godly wise man or a luminous gnostic,
whose string of knowledge is connected to the perfect friends of Allah,
concerning the Three Unities, it will be a good help to the inner heart.
But the condition for taking that advantage is that he should do it
regarding it as an *āyah*, a sign and *sulūk* to Allah, for otherwise it
would become a thorn on the road and a veil covering the face of the
Beloved. The Messenger of Allah (*s*), as it is stated in the noble
*al-Kāfī*, calls this knowledge an “indisputable *āyah*” [*āyat-i
muhkam*].[^8]

Generally speaking, when the root of Allah's Unity of Acts is strongly
implanted in the heart, and irrigated with the water of knowledge
accompanied with nice deeds, which knock at the heart's door, its fruit
will be remembering the state of divinity, and the heart will gradually
become pure and ready for receiving actual manifestation.

When the house is free from the traitor, and the nest from the alien,
the Owner of the house controls it and Allah's guarding hand brings the
invisible and visible powers of the kingdom of the inside and the heart
and of the outside kingdom of the body under its rule and authority, and
the Satans are completely expelled from this stage, too, and the
internal kingdom returns to its independence, which is being under
Allah's shelter.

This is the second degree of the divine grace, the *isti'ādhah*. After
this stage come other stages, such as, the *isti'ādhah* of the spirit
and the *isti'ādhah* of the secret, which are out of the scope of these
pages. Even what was said was of the overflowing of this servant's pen,
or it was written at the command of the pen of the Lord, Most High and
Almighty, and to Him is the refuge.

Another discipline and condition of *isti'ādhah* is that which is
referred to in the *āyah* stated at the beginning of this chapter, i.e.
“faith” [*īmān*], which is other than knowledge, even though it is
proved by means of philosophic proofs: “The legs of the argumentatives
are of wood.”[^9]

Faith is a matter of the heart, and happens through intense remembrance,
contemplation, intimacy and privacy with Allah. Despite the fact that
Satan had knowledge about the Beginning and the Return, as the Qur'an
says, he is counted with the disbelievers. If faith was this
argumentative knowledge, those who possess this knowledge must be away
from the intrusion of Satan, and the light of guidance of the Qur'an
would illuminate their inside, whereas we notice that despite such
marks, there is no sign of faith.

So, if we want to be out of Satan's control, and be under the protection
of Allah, the Exalted, we must, by intense cordial austerity and
continual, or frequent, proximity and privacy, bring the facts of faith
to the heart in order to let it be divine. Then, having been so, it will
be free from Satan's control, as Allah, the Exalted, says:

*“**Allah is the Guardian of those who believe. He brings them out of
darkness into the light.”***[^10]

So, the believers, whom Allah, the Exalted is the manager, the guardian
of their inside and outside, their secret and their publicity, are free
from Satan's control and enter into the Beneficent's kingdom.

He brings them out of all degrees of darkness to the absolute light from
the darkness of disobedience and insolence, the darkness of the dirty
moral impurities, the darkness of ignorance, disbelief, polytheism,
self-deceit, selfishness, and self-admiration, to the light of obedience
and worship, the light of virtuous characters, the light of knowledge,
perfection, faith, monotheism, godliness, piety, and friendship with
Allah.

Another one of its disciplines is “reliance” [*tawakkul*] on Allah,
which is also part of faith and of the real lights of the grace of
faith. It means entrusting the affairs to Allah, which results from the
heart's belief in the Unity of Acts, whose details are out of the
capacity of this book.

When the *sālik* servant finds no refuge and no shelter other than
Allah, and believes that the management of the affairs is exclusively
confined to His Sacred Essence, a certain condition of devotion, refuge
and trust shows up in his heart, and his *isti'ādhah* becomes real. So,
as he truthfully takes refuge in the strong fortress of the Lordship and
divinity, He shall certainly protect him with His most spacious and
generous mercy, for He is the possessor of great favor!

### Completion and Conclusion

We noted in this chapter that the truth of the *isti'ādhah* is a mood or
state of mind that is created by a complete evident knowledge of Allah's
Unity of Acts, and by believing in that Unity. That is, after he
understood, by way of explicit and strong intellectual proofs and
traditional evidences, quoted from the Qur'anic texts, and through the
signs and the wonders of the Divine Book and noble *hadīth*s, that the
Power of Creation and independence of effectiveness, or rather, the very
origin of effect, is exclusively confined to the Sacred Divine Essence,
and other beings have no share of it, as is proved in its stance, he
should convince his heart of it, and, with the pen of intellect, he
should write on the page of his heart the truth of “There is no god but
Allah, and there is no effecter [*mu'aththir*] in the [world of]
existence except Allah.”

When the heart takes in this grace of faith and proved fact, there
appears in it a state of devotion and exclusivity [to Allah]. Believing
that Satan is the highway robber of humanity and its staunch enemy,
there appears in his heart an apprehensiveness, which is the reality of
the *isti'ādhah.* And, as the tongue is the spokesman of the heart, it
translates that state of apprehensiveness, with complete need and
necessity in words: “**I take refuge in Allah from the accursed
Satan,”** which it utters truthfully.

If there were no effects of these facts in the heart, and it was under
the control of Satan, as well as the other parts of one's existing
kingdom, the *isti'ādhah* also takes place, but with the management of
Satan, and verbally he does say: “**I take refuge in Allah from the
accursed Satan,”** but in fact, as it is an act of Satan himself, it is
actually taking refuge in Satan from Allah, and the *isti'ādhah*
performs its counter function, and Satan mocks at the one who utters the
*isti'ādhah* a mockery whose result is known only after removing the
cover and pushing aside the curtain of nature.

Such a person, whose *isti'ādhah* is merely verbal, is like the one who
wants to take refuge from an endless hostile army in a strong fortress,
but instead, he heads to the enemy turning away from the fortress, while
he continues saying: “I take refuge in this fortress from the evil of
the enemy.” Such a person, besides being inflicted with the evil of the
enemy, becomes subject to the enemy's mockery, too.

[^1]: Sūrah an-Nahl 16:98-100

[^2]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:16

[^3]: Sūrah Sād 38:82-83.

[^4]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol.67, p. 242, “Book of Faith and Disbelief,”
ch.on “Sincerity,” hadīth 10, quoted from 'Uyūnu Akhbār ar-Ridā, vol.2,
p.69(with a slight difference).The same subject is referred to in the
latter book, hadīth 25, p. 249.

[^5]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 91, p. 99.

[^6]: At-Tawhīd, p. 25; Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 3, p.13 and vol. 90, p.
192.

[^7]: Sūrah at-Tahrim 66:6.

[^8]: “Knowledge is of three kinds: an indisputable āyah, a fair
obligation and a current tradition.” Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 37, “Book
of the Merit of Knowledge,” ch. on “The Description of Knowledge and its
Merits,” hadīth 1.

[^9]: The legs of the argumentatives are of wood, Wooden legs are quite
shaky. Mawlawī

[^10]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:257.


