On The Four Pillars Of Isti‘adhah
=================================

One: *al-musta'īdh* [the one who seeks refuge]  
 Two: *al-musta'ādhu minhu* [that from which refuge is sought]  
 Three: *al-musta'ādhu bihi* [the one with whom refuge is sought]  
 Four: *al-musta'ādhu lahū* [that for which refuge is sought]

Do know that there are so much detailed explanations for these pillars
that are out of our intention. Yet, we are satisfied to mention a
summary of them:

The first pillar is concerning *al-musta'īdh*. It is a humanistic truth
from the very first stage of the *sulūk* to Allah till the final end of
self-annihilation [*fanā'-i dhātī*]. “When the absolute annihilation was
complete, Satan would perish and the *isti'ādhah* would take place.”

To expand on this summary we may say that as long as man is dwelling in
the abode of the self and nature, and has not yet started his spiritual
journey and *sulūk* to Allah, and is still under Satan's control in all
degrees and affairs, he has not yet understood the truth of
*isti'ādhah*, and the mere utterances of his tongue are useless, or
rather they fix and strengthen the Satanic authority, unless Allah, the
Exalted, grants him His favor.

When he gets engaged in his journey and *sulūk* to Allah and starts his
spiritual travel, what hinders him on the road and thorns his way, as
long as he is continuing his journey and *sulūk*, is his own Satan,
whether of the Satanic spiritual forces, or of the *jinn* or *ins*, for
when the *jinn* and *ins* become thorns of the road, they will,
actually, be the assistants of Satan and act on his command. Allah, the
Exalted, refers to this in the blessed *sūrah* of *an-Nās*:

*“**…*** ***From the evil of the slinking whisperer, who whispers in the
breasts of men, from among the jinn and men.”***

 If the Satan is from the *jinn*, it is understood from the noble *āyah*
that the slinking whisperer, i.e. Satan, is originally [*bi 'l-isālah*]
a *jinn* and subordinately [*bi 't-taba'iyyah*] an *ins.* But if Satan
is another reality resembling the *jinn*, it appears from the noble
*āyah* that these two species, i.e. the *jinn* and the *ins*, are also
Satanic similitudes [*tamaththulāt*] and his manifestations. In another
*āyah* it is said:

*“**…the Satans of ins*** ***and jinn.”***[^1]

In this blessed *Sūrah* the pillars of *isti'ādhah* are mentioned, as we
stated before and as it is clear.

In a word, before starting the journey to Allah, man is not a
*musta'īdh*. When the gnostic ['*ārif*] comes to the end of the journey,
and there remains no trace, at all, of the remnants of servitude, and he
reaches the stage of the absolute personal annihilation [*fanā'-i
dhātī*], there will remain no trace of the *isti'ādhah*, *musta'ādhu
minhu* and *musta'īdh*, and in his heart there will be nothing except
Allah and His Divine Sovereignty, and he will be unaware of himself and
his heart, and “I take refuge in You from You”[^2] is also out of this
state.

When there is a state of wakefulness [*sahw*], intimacy and return,
there still is a trace of *isti'ādhah*, but not the *isti'ādhah* of a
*sālik.* For this reason, the Final Messenger of Allah (*s*) is also
ordered to do the *isti'ādhah*, as Allah, the Exalted, says:

*“**Say:*** ***I take refuge in the Lord of daybreak,”***[^3]

*“**Say: I take refuge in the Lord of men,”***[^4]

And

*“**Say:*** ***My Lord! I take refuge in you from the evil suggestions
of the Satans, and I take refuge in You, O my Lord, from their
presence.”***[^5]

So, man in two states is not *musta'īdh*: One is before starting the
*sulūk*, which is the state of being completely veiled, at the Satan's
disposal and under his control. The other is when the *sulūk* comes to
the end, which is the absolute annihilation, in which there is no trace
of the *musta'īdh*, *musta'ādhu minhu*, *musta'ādhu lahu* or
*isti'ādhah*.

In two states he is a *musta'īdh*: One is in his *sulūk* to Allah, in
which he takes refuge from the thorns of the road of attainment
[*wusūl*] that are sitting on the straight path, as Satan says in the
Qur'an:

*“**As you have led me astray, I shall lurk in ambush for them on your
straight path.”***[^6]

The other is when he is wakeful and returning from the absolute
annihilation, in which he does the *isti'ādhah* [taking refuge] from the
coloring seclusions [*ihtijābāt*] and others.

The second pillar is concerning *al-musta'ādhu minhu,* which is the
accursed *Iblīs*, the outcast Satan, who prevents man from attaining his
goal and implementing his objective, by means of his diverse snares.
Some great men of the people of knowledge say that Satan, in his
reality, is the entire world in its aspect of being other than Allah.

The writer does not agree with this, because this aspect of being other
than Allah, which is a fancied form that has no truth and is void of any
sort of realization [*tahaqquq*] and reality, is but one of *Iblīs*'
snares in which he gets man engaged. It may be a reference to the point
that is said in the *āyah*:  
*“**Rivalry in worldly increase distracts you, until you come to the
graves.”***[^7]

Or else, *Iblīs* himself is a reality with an abstract ideal, and the
reality of universal *Iblīs*, the head of all *Iblīs*es, is the
universal fancy [*wahm al-kull*], as the universal abstract intellectual
fact, the first man [Adam], is the universal intellect ['*aql
al-kull*]*.* The individual worldly fancies are of the affairs
[*shu'ūn*] and manifestations [*mazāhir*] of the universal *Iblīs*, as
the individual intellects are of the affairs [*shu'ūn*] and
manifestations [*mazāhir*] of the universal intellect ['*aql-i kull*]*.*
A detailed explanation of this subject is out of the capacity of this
thesis.

In a word, what becomes a hindrance and a thorn on the road of the
divine *sulūk* to Allah is Satan or his manifestations, whose acts are
also of Satan's. And what, of the states of the invisible and visible
worlds and of the happenings [*awārid*] that happen to the soul, and of
its different states, becomes a veil on the face of the Beloved
[*janān*]*,* whether of the mundane terrestrial worlds, such as poverty,
and richness, soundness and illness, ability and disability, knowledge
and ignorance, plagues and defects, etc., or of the invisible, abstract
and ideal worlds, such as paradise and hell, and relevant knowledge,
even the argumentative intellectual sciences which belong to *tawhīd*
and glorifying Allah…, all of them are of *Iblīs*' snares by which he
diverts man from Allah and from having intimacy and privacy with Him.

Even diversion through moral [*ma'nawī*] states and standing [*wuqūf*]
in spiritual stages, whose outside is to stand at the path of humanity,
and whose inside is to stand at the path of Allah which is the spiritual
bridge of the hell of separation and parting, and which ends in the
paradise of meeting, the bridge which is exclusive to a small group of
the people of knowledge and of heart are also of the big snares of the
chief *Iblīs*, from which one must seek refuge in the Sacred Essence of
Allah, the Exalted.

In short, whatever diverts you from Allah and secludes you from the
Beautiful Beauty of the Beloved, the Glorified, is your Satan, be it in
the form of an *ins* or a *jinn*. And whatever is used to prevent you
from that goal is of Satan's snares, be it of the kinds of positions and
ranks or of the types of sciences and perfections, or professions and
industries, or luxury and comfort, or hardship and humility, or anything
else.

These are of the dispraised worldly matters. In other words, when the
heart loves something other than Allah, that will be its world, and that
is disapproved. It is a satanic snare from which one should take refuge
in Allah. It is quite likely the point to which the Messenger of Allah
(*s*) referred by his invocation: “I take refuge in Allah's generous
countenance, and with His words, which no pious or impious can pass,
from the evil of what descends from the heaven and ascends to it, from
the evil of what enters into the earth and what comes out of it, from
the evil of the troubles of the night and the day, and from the evil of
the knockers at the night and day, except the knocker who brings
good.”[^8]

Taking refuge in Allah's countenance face and Allah's words means being
drowned in the sea of Beauty and Majesty, and whatever keeps man off it
is of the evils and belongs to the world of Satan and his tricks, from
which one must take refuge in Allah's countenance, be it of the perfect
heavenly truths or of the earthly imperfect ones, unless it is the
knocker that brings good the divine knocker who invites to Absolute
Good, that is, Allah, the Exalted.

The third pillar is concerning *al-musta'ādhu bihi.* Know that the truth
of *isti'ādhah* is implemented in the *sālik* to Allah, and attained
through the travel and *sulūk* to Allah. That is, *isti'ādhah* belongs
to the *sālik* during the stages of the *sulūk.* Therefore, the truths
of *isti'ādhah*, *musta'īdh*, *musta'ādhu minhu* and *musta'ādhu bihi*
differ according to the degrees and the stages of the travelers to
Allah. A reference to this is probably in the noble *sūrah* of *an-Nās*:

*“**Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of men, the King of men, the God of
men.”***

From the beginning of the *sulūk* till the limits of the state of the
heart, the *sālik* takes refuge with the state of the Lordship: It is
possible that this Lordship is the Lordship of Act, so as to conform to
“I take refuge with the complete words of Allah.”[^9] And when the
journey of the *sālik* ends in the state of the heart, the state of the
divine sovereignty appears in the heart, in which case he takes refuge
in the state of “The King of men” from the evils of *Iblīs*' cordial
intrusion and his despotic inner authority, as he took refuge, in the
first state, from the evils of Satan's breast intrusion, as it is said:
“**… who whispers in the breasts of men”** although the “whispering” in
the hearts and the spirits is also by the “slinking” Satan.

Perhaps this is because it is in the instance of a general introduction
and on the basis of an apparent attribute that suits everybody. When the
*sālik* passes the state of the heart to the state of the spirit, which
is of the divine “blowing,” and whose connection to Allah is closer than
that of the sunlight to the sun, in this stage anxiety, passion,
attraction, ardent love, and eagerness, begin to appear, and in it he
takes refuge in the “**God of men.”**

And when he advances higher than this stage and has before his eyes the
Essence without a mirror for the affairs [*shu'ūn*], in other words,
when he reaches the state of the secret, he will be suited to say: “I
take refuge from you in you.”[^10] There are, in this respect, other
details that do not suit this essay.

However, you may know that to take refuge in Allah's Name suits all
stages because of its comprehensiveness, as, in fact, it is an absolute
*isti'ādhah*, while other *isti'ādhah*s are limited ones.

The fourth pillar is concerning *al-musta'ādhu lahu*, i.e. the aim of
the *isti'ādhah*. You may know that what is required essentially [*bi
'dh-dhāt*] by the *musta'īdh* person is of the kinds of perfection,
happiness and good, which differ in accordance with the degrees and
ranks of the *sālik*s. As long as the *sālik* is still within the frame
of the soul and the veil of nature, the aim of his journey is to attain
self-perfections and the low natural kinds of happiness.

This belongs to the early stages of the *sulūk*. Getting out of the
soul's confinement, and having acquired a taste of spiritual states and
abstract perfections, his goal will be higher and his aim more perfect,
neglecting all personal positions, and his objective will be attaining
cordial perfections and internal happiness.

Then, turning the rein of the travel away from this state, and reaching
at the door of the house of the spiritual secret, the beginnings of the
divine manifestations start appearing in his inside, and the tongue of
his inside, at the beginning says: “I direct my face towards Allah's
face,” and later on, “I direct my face towards Allah's Names or towards
Allah,” and after that: “I direct my face to Him.” Perhaps

*“**I direct my face to the One Who created the heavens and the
earth”***[^11]

Is related to the first stage because of the creatorship
[*fātiriyyat*]*.*

In a word, whichever the *sālik*'s stage, his real objective is to
attain essential perfection and happiness. But as with happiness and
perfection, in any given stage, there is a Satan with a snare of his
snares to prevent him from reaching his objective, the *sālik* will have
to take refuge in Allah from that Satan and his evils and tricks in
order to get his original aim and essential objective.

So, the *sālik*'s objective of the *isti'ādhah* is, in fact, obtaining
the looked-for perfection and wanted happiness. The aim of the aims, and
the final want, is Allah, the Glorified, the Almighty. In this stage, or
after it, everything vanishes except Allah, the Exalted, and the
*isti'ādhah* [taking refuge] from Satan will be a consequent and done in
full wakefulness. Praise is Allah's at the beginning and at the end.

[^1]: Sūrah al-An'ām 6:112

[^2]: An extract from an invocation of the Prophet (s) during his Salāt.
See Furū' al-Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 324. Misbāh al-Mutahajjid wa Silāh
al-Muta'abbid, p. 308.

[^3]: Sūrah al-Falaq 113:1.

[^4]: Sūrah an-Nās 114:1.

[^5]: Sūrah al-Mu'minūn 23:97-98.

[^6]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:16

[^7]: Sūrah at-Takāthur 102:1-2

[^8]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 91, p. 215.

[^9]: Iqbāl al-A'māl, p. 640, the invocation recited on the first day of
the month of Rajab.

[^10]: Extracted from an invocation by the Prophet (s) during his Salāt.
See Furū' al-Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 324; Misbāh al-Mutahajjid wa Silāh
al-Muta'abbid, p. 308.

[^11]: Sūrah al-An'ām 6:79


