On Some Disciplines Of Naming [Tasmiyah]
========================================

In *At-Tawhīd*, quoting Imām ar-Ridā ('*a*), it is stated that when he
was asked to explain the *bismillāh*, he said: “When one says
“*bismillāh*” (in the name of Allah), he means: I put on myself a
*simah* (mark) of Allah's *simah*s, which is worship.” Asked: “What is
*simah*?” He said: “It is the mark.”[^1]

Do know may Allah make you and me of those who bear Allah's marks that
to enter in the stage of *tasmiyah* (naming or marking) is not easy for
the *sālik* before entering first the stage of *ist'ādhah* and
completing the steps of this stage. As long as man is under the control
of Satan and his authority, he is marked with satanic marks. If man's
inside and outside were completely overcome by Satan, he would in all
his stages be a sign or a mark of Satan.

If, in this instance, man uttered the *tasmiyah*, he would be uttering
it by Satan's will, power and tongue, and from his *tasmiyah* and
*isti'ādhah* there would be no result except confirming the Satanic
authority. If, with Allah's help, he woke up from his negligence, and
came to conscience, and understood the necessity of continuing the
journey to Allah within the station [*manzil*] of wakefulness through
the divine disposition and the lights of the Qur'anic teachings and the
traditions of the guides along the road of *tawhīd*, and his heart
recognized the obstacles on the road, there would appear in him a state
[*hāl*] of *isti'ādhah*, and then, with the support of Allah, he would
enter the station [*manzil*] of *isti'ādhah*.

When he got purified from the satanic filths, the divine lights would be
manifested in the mirror of the *sālik* in proportion to the extent of
his purifying his inside and outside. At first, the lights would be
mixed with darkness, or the darkness would be overwhelming:

*“**…*** ***they have mingled a good deed and an evil one…**”*[^2]

As the *sulūk* gets steadier, the light overcomes the darkness, and the
marks of the Lord appear in the *sālik,* and his *tasmiyah* appears
somewhat real, and gradually the Satanic marks which, outwardly,
contradict the Virtuous City [*madīnat-i fādilah*], and, inwardly, are
conceit, arrogance and the like, and in the inmost part of the inward,
are egotism, selfishness and the like leave the kingdom of the inside
and the outside, and, in their place come the marks of Allah which,
outwardly, observe the regime [*nizām*] of the Virtuous City, and
inwardly, are servitude and humility of the soul, and in the inmost part
of the inside, wanting Allah and regarding for Him.

Then when the kingdom becomes godly and gets rid of the Satans of *jinn*
and *ins*, and the divine marks appear in it, the *sālik* gets to the
state of *ismiyyat* (nameness, nomination, naming).

So, first, *sālik*'s *tasmiyah* (naming) is to be distinguished by the
divine marks and signs, then he is promoted and attains the state of
*ismiyah*, which is a state in the beginnings of the proximity of the
*nāfilah* (supererogation), and when this proximity of *nāfilah* takes
place, he will enjoy full state of *ismiyah*, and there remains nothing
of servant and servitude. The one who reaches this stage, his complete
*salāt* will be uttered by Allah's tongue, a state that can happen only
to a few of Allah's friends.

As regards the common people and the imperfect ones like us, the
discipline is to brand our heart with the mark of servitude during
uttering the *tasmiyah*, and to inform the heart about Allah's marks,
signs and *āyah*s, not satisfying ourselves with unintentional wordings,
haply we may be covered by the eternal favor and make up for the past,
and there opens before our hearts a door of learning the Names and of
attaining the objective.

It is further possible to say that in the said noble *hadīth*, by a
*simah* of “the *simah*s of Allah,” it is meant the mark or sign of the
mercy of the “Beneficent” and the mercy of the “Merciful.” These two
noble Names are of the all-embracing ones, under whose blessing shadow
the entire world of realization has reached, and does reach, the
existence itself and its perfection, and the mercies of the Beneficence
[*rahmāniyyah*] and Mercifulness [*rahīmiyyah*] cover the whole house of
existence [*dār-i wujūd*]*.*

Even the mercy of Mercifulness, of whose manifestations is the guidance
of all guides on the road of *tawhīd*, covers all, except those who were
diverted from the disposition of rectitude, and, owing to their own
ill-selection, prevented themselves from being benefited by it, not that
the Mercifulness did not cover them. Even in the Hereafter world, which
is the day of harvesting the bad and good cultivations, those who have
bad cultivations are inevitably short of being benefited by the mercy of
the Merciful.

To be short, the *sālik* who wants his *tasmiyah* to be implemented,
will have to convey Allah's mercies to his heart to have it believe in
the favors of the Beneficent and the Merciful, which is marked out on
the heart by his looking with kindness and leniency at the servants of
Allah, desiring goodness and righteousness to all of them.

This look is that of the great prophets and the perfect holy men
[*awliyā'*] ('*a*), although they had two looks: one for welfare and the
happiness of the community, the system of the family and the regime of
the Virtuous City, and the second for the happiness of the individual.
They were very much concerned about the happiness of these two. The
divine laws, which are established, disclosed, enforced and carried out
by them, take complete care of the happiness of those two.

Even in carrying out penalties and punishments and the like, which seem
to have been coined in conformity with the laws of the Virtuous City,
the happiness of both are taken into consideration, because these
affairs are mostly for educating the soul and bringing it to happiness.
Even those who had no light of faith and happiness, and were killed by
the fighters in *jihād* and the like, such as the Jews of Banū Qurayzah,
this killing (being killed) was for their goodness and reformation.

It can be said that killing them was of the complete mercy of the Seal
of the Prophets (*s*), because by their survival in this world they
would prepare every day diverse punishments for themselves, while the
whole life in this world cannot be compared with the tortures and the
hardships of a single day in the Hereafter. This is quite obvious to
those who have knowledge about the extent of the tortures and
punishments in the Hereafter and their reasons and causes. So, the sword
that was put to the necks of the Jews of Banū Qurayzah and their like
was nearer to the horizon of mercy than to the horizon of anger and
wrath.

The chapter of *al-amru bi 'l-ma'rūfi wa 'n-nahyi 'an 'il-munkar*
(Bidding unto honor and forbidding dishonor) belongs to the mercy of the
Merciful. So, the one who bids unto honor and forbids dishonor must make
his heart taste the mercy of the Merciful and his aim of bidding and
forbidding should not be showing off, ostentation, and imposition of the
bidding and forbidding. Should one have such aims in his mind, the
objective of bidding unto honor and forbidding dishonor which is the
happiness of the people and the enacting of Allah's precepts in the land
would not be implemented.

Sometimes it may happen that the result of an ignorant's bidding unto
honor turns out to be contrary to what was intended, and many bad things
happen because of a single ignorant bidding and forbidding, prompted by
a selfish desire and Satanic conduct. But if the sense of mercy, pity
and the right of manhood and brotherhood drive man to guide the ignorant
and awaken the negligent, the quality of the explanation and guidance,
which is the symptom of a kind heart, appears in such a way that its
effect in the deserving materials will be quite obvious and will soften
the hard-hearted and bring them down from their arrogance and denial.

It is much to be regretted that we do not learn from the Qur'an. We do
not look with an eye of contemplation and learning at this Divine Book,
and our benefit from this Wise Reminder is almost nothing. Contemplating
the honored *āyah*:  
*“**Go, both of you, to Pharaoh, for he has become insolent, and speak
to him in a gentle speech, haply he may remember or fear,”***[^3]

Would open ways of knowledge and doors of hope and expectation to man's
heart.

Pharaoh, whose insolence reached the extent of saying:

*“**I am your Most High Lord,”***[^4]

And his haughtiness and corruption were so much that he began to

*“**Slaughter their sons and let their women live”***[^5]

After his dream, which the soothsayers and the magicians interpreted to
be about the appearance of Moses the son of 'Imrān ('*a*), he
immediately separated the women from the men, ordered the innocent boys
to be killed and did so much mischief [*fasād*]*.*

Allah, the Beneficent, through His Mercifulness, cast His look at the
entire earth and chose the humblest and most perfect person, i.e., the
great prophet, the highly generous messenger, Moses the son of 'Imrān
(peace be upon our Prophet and his progeny and upon him), and educated
and taught him with his educating hand, as He says: “**And when he
attained his maturity and became full-grown, We granted him wisdom and
knowledge; and thus do We reward the good-doers,”**[^6] and backed him
by his honorable brother, Aaron ('*a*).

These two honorable, who were the prime of humanity, had been chosen by
Allah, as He said:

*“**And I have chosen you”***[^7]

Or “**… and that you might be formed (brought up) before my eye (in My
sight),”**[^8] or

*“**… and I have brought you up for myself. Go you and your brother with
my signs and do not slacken in remembering me,”***[^9]

and other noble *āyah*s which refer to this subject and we do not need
to relate them, and the heart of the gnostic enjoys them in such a way
that it cannot be talked about, especially the two honorable phrases:
“**and that you might be formed [brought up] before My eye” (in My
sight)** and “**I have brought you up for Myself.”** You, too, if you
open the eye of your heart, you will hear such a nice spiritual melody
that all the hearings of your heart and corners of your being will
become full of the secret of *tawhīd.*

To be short, Allah, the Exalted, with a lot of ceremonies and
preparations, educated Moses, His interlocutor, by spiritual education,
as He says: “**and we tried you with many trials.”**[^10] He sent him to
the old man, Shu'ayb [Jethro], to accompany for years that sage man of
guidance and the elect of the world of humanity. He, the Exalted, says:
“**Then you stayed for years among the people of Madyan, then you came
hither as ordained, O Moses.”**[^11]

Afterwards, for higher (heavier) trying and examining, He sent him into
the desert on the road to ash-Shām (Syria), where He caused him to lose
his way, put him under heavy rains in the deep darkness, and caused his
wife to start having a hard labor. Thus, all the doors of nature were
closed to him.

Then, as his noble heart ached of multiplicity, and, through the pure
natural disposition, he submitted himself to Allah, and as his divine
and spiritual journey in that boundless desert came to an end,

*“**He perceived on the side of the mountain a fire…*** ***and when he
came to it, he was called from*** ***the right side of the valley in the
blessed field, from the tree: O Moses!*** ***Verily I am Allah, the Lord
of the worlds.”***[^12]

After all those examinations and spiritual education, what for did Allah
prepare him? It was in order to invite, guide, preach and save a single
disobedient slave [Pharaoh] who used to shout: “I am your Most High
Lord,” causing so much mischief in the land. Allah could have burned him
down with the flash of a lightning of His anger, but the mercy of His
Mercifulness sent him two great prophets and still advised them to talk
to him with kindness and leniency, such that he might remember Allah and
be afraid of his own deeds and their aftermath.

This is the instruction for how to conduct *al-amru bi 'l-ma'rūfi wa
'n-nahyi 'an 'il-munkar.* It is the way of how to guide someone like
Pharaoh, the *tāghūt* (the tyrant). Now, as you, too, want to bid unto
honor and forbid dishonor, and to guide the creatures of Allah, remember
these noble and divine *āyah*s and learn from them, since they have been
revealed for remembrance and learning. Face the servants of Allah with a
heart full of affection and love, cherishing in the bottom of your heart
their good.

Having found your heart beneficent and merciful, you may then bid unto
honor and forbid dishonor, and guide the people, so that the hard hearts
may become soft with the flash of your emotional heart, and the iron of
the hearts turn supple with the admonitions warm with the fire of your
love.

This valley, however, is other than the valley of Hate on Allah's
behalf, and love on Allah's behalf,” which means that one should bear
enmity for the enemies of the religion, as is stated in the noble
*hadīth*s and the Glorious Qur'an. That is true in its relevant place,
and this is also true in its relevant place, for which there is no space
to explain now.

[^1]: At-Tawhīd, ch. 31, hadīth 1, p. 229; Ma'āniy ul-Akhbār, p. 3.

[^2]: Sūrah at-Tawbah 9:102.

[^3]: Sūrah Tā-Hā 20: 43-44.

[^4]: Sūrah an-Nāzi'āt 79:24

[^5]: Sūrah al-Qasas 28:4. 

[^6]: Ibid.: 14.  

[^7]: Sūrah Tā-Hā 20:13.

[^8]: Ibid.: 39.

[^9]: Ibid.: 41-42.

[^10]: Ibid.: 40

[^11]: Ibid

[^12]: Sūrah al-Qasas 28:29-30.


