A Brief Exegesis Of The Blessed Sūrah Of Al-Hamd And Some Disciplines Of Praising And Recitation
================================================================================================

Scholars differ about the relation of “*bā'*” [ب] in the *Bismillāh
'ir-Rahmān 'ir-Rahīm.* Each one of them says something about it
according to his way of thinking, knowledge and Gnosticism. For example,
men of letters relate it to the entry “beginning” [*ibtidā'*] or
“seeking help” [*isti'ānat*]*.* As to some narratives to the effect that
*Bismillāh* means: “I seek help [from Allah],” it is either in
accordance with the common taste, as is very much current in the
*hadīth*s, and the difference of many *hadīth*s is ascribed to this
predicate, and it is thus that Imām ar-Ridā ('*a*) explained *Bismillāh*
to mean: “I put on myself a *simah* (mark) of Allah's,”[^1] or “seeking
help” denotes too delicate a meaning to be understood by the common
people, as it includes the secret of *tawhīd* in a subtler way.

Some people of knowledge say that it refers to “appeared” [*zahara*]*,*
that is: “Existence appeared by *Bismillāh.*”[^2] This is in accordance
with the people of knowledge, *sulūk* and Gnosticism, who say that all
beings, the atoms of existence and the invisible and visible worlds are
the manifestations of the all-embracing Name of Allah, i.e. “The
Greatest Name.” Consequently, “name,” which means a sign, a mark, or
height and elevation, is Allah's effusive and actual manifestation,
which is called “Effusive Emanation” [*fayd-i munbasit*] and “luminous
annexation” [*idāfa-i ishrāqī*], because, according to this conduct, the
whole of the House of Realization, as from the abstract intellects down
to the lowest degrees of existence, are the phenomenalizations
[*ta'ayyunāt*] of this emanation [*fayd*] and the descents
[*tanazzulāt*] of this grace [*latīfah*]*.*

This conduct is supportable by many noble divine *āyah*s and honorable
*hadīth*s of the infallible and purified *Ahl al-Bayt* ('*a*), such as
the noble *hadīth* in *al-Kāfī* which says: “Allah created the Will
[*mashiyyat*] through the Will itself, then He created all the things
through Will*.*”[^3] This honorable *hadīth* is interpreted according to
the opinion of each interpreter's creed. The most obvious one is that
which is in conformity with the creed saying that “Will” means, here,
the Will in Action, which is the “Effusive Emanation,” and the “things”
are the stages of existence, and which are the phenomena [*ta'ayyunāt*]
and the descents [*tanazzulāt*] of this grace.

So, the *hadīth* will thus mean that Allah, the Exalted, has created the
Will of Act which is the shadow [*zill*] of the Old Essential Will
through the Will itself, without intermediation, and the other creatures
of the invisible and visible worlds have been created in the wake of
that. Yet, Sayyid Muhaqqiq Dāmād (may his grave be sanctified), a great
scholar and strict researcher as he was, interpreted this noble
*hadīth*[^4] in a strange way. Similarly, the explanation of the late
Fayd (may Allah have mercy upon him) is also far from being correct.[^5]

However, “Name” is the very manifestation of Act, with which this House
of Realization is realized (actualized). The term “Name,” referring to
real things, is frequently noticed to be used by Allah, His Messenger
and the infallible *Ahl al-Bayt*, who said: “We are the Beautiful
Names.”[^6]

In the noble invocations one frequently recites: “By Your Name in which
you manifested to so and so.”[^7]

It is possible that the *Bismillāh* at the opening of each *sūrah*
belongs to the same *sūrah*. For example, the *Bismillāh* of the blessed
*sūrah* of *al-Hamd* belongs to the *sūrah* itself. This opinion
coincides with the gnostic taste and the way of the people of knowledge,
as it is to say that the praise of the praisers and the eulogy of the
eulogists point to the self-subsistence of the Name “Allah.”

Therefore, the *tasmiyah* comes as a preliminary to all words and acts
which is an act of religious supererogation and it is to remind that
whatever word or act done by man is by the self-subsistence of the
divine Name, since all the particles of existence are the phenomena of
“Allah's Name,” and, in a way, they themselves are “Allah's Names.” On
this basis, the meaning of the *Basmalah*, according to the majority, is
different in each *sūrah*, each word and each act.

The jurisprudents say that the *Bismillāh* must be defined for each
*sūrah*, that is, if for a *sūrah* a *Bismillāh* was recited, the next
*sūrah* cannot be commenced with that same *Bismillāh.* From the
juristic point of view, this is not without reason, as, actually, it is
reasonable within the scope of this research. But, considering the
vanishing of multiplicities in the Greatest Name of Allah, all
*Bismillāh*s have a single meaning.

These two opinions are also applied to the stages of existence and the
stations of invisibility and visibility. In the view of multiplicity and
seeing the phenomena, all the multiplied beings, the stages of existence
and the phenomena of the world are the different names of the
Beneficent, the Merciful, the Powerful and the Gracious.

In the view of the vanishing of multiplicities and the effacement of the
lights of existence in the eternal light of the Sacred Emanation
[*fayd-i muqaddas*], there is nothing except the Sacred Emanation
[*fayd-i muqaddas*] and the All-Embracing Name of Allah. Both of these
two opinions are also present in the Divine Names and Attributes.
According to the first opinion, the state of Unity [*wāhidiyyat*] is the
state of multiple Names and Attributes, as all multiplicities are from
Him.

According to the second opinion, there is no name and form [*ism wa
rasm*] except the Greatest Name of Allah. These two opinions are wise
and thought upon. But if the view became gnostic through opening the
doors of the heart, and through the steps of conduct and cordial
austerity, Allah, the Exalted, will appear in the hearts of its
possessors through His manifestations in Act, Name and Essence,
sometimes in the Attribute of multiplicity and sometimes in the
Attribute of Unity.

The Glorious Qur'an refers to these manifestations, both overtly, as in
His saying:

*“**And when his Lord manifested (His light) to the mountain, He made it
crumble to dust, and Moses fell down senseless,”***[^8]

and covertly, as in the scenes witnessed by Ibrāhīm ('*a*) and the
Messenger of Allah (*s*), which are referred to in the *sūrah*s
*al-An'ām* and *an-Najm* as well as in the narratives and the
invocations of the infallibles ('*a*) which frequently refer to the same
topic, especially in the great *du'ā* [invocation] called ”*as-Simāt*,”
whose authenticity and text cannot be denied by the deniers, and it is
accepted by both the *Sunnī*s and the *Shī'ah*s, and by both gnostics
and common people.

In this noble invocation there are many high meanings and teachings
smelling which raptures the gnostic's heart, and its breeze blows divine
breath into the *sālik*'s spirit. It says: “By the light of Your Face
with which You appeared to the mountain and made it crumble to dust, and
Moses fell down senseless; by Your Glory which appeared at the mount of
Tūr of *Sīnā*, with which You talked to Your servant and messenger,
Moses the son of 'Imrān ('*a*); and by Your rise in *Sa'īr* and Your
appearance on the mount *Fārān*…”[^9]

In short, the *sālik* to Allah has to inform his heart, when reciting
the *Bismillāh*, that all the outward and inward beings and all the
visible and invisible worlds, are under the education of the Names of
Allah, or rather, they are manifest by the manifestation of the Names of
Allah, and all his motions and stillness, and all the world's, are based
on the self-existence of the Greatest Name of Allah.

So, his praises are for Allah, and his worship, obedience, monotheism,
and sincerity are all because of the self-existence of the Name of
Allah. It is by intense remembrance, which is the aim of worship, that
this state, this divine grace, is established and fixed in his heart, as
Allah, the Exalted, in His intimate meeting and sacred assembly, with
His interlocutor, said:

*“**Verily I am Allah; there is no god but I; so worship Me and perform
the salāt*** ***for My remembrance.”***[^10]

The objective of performing the *salāt* is, He said, to remember Him.
After intense remembrance, another way of knowledge will be opened to
the heart of the gnostic and he will be attracted to the world of Unity
until the tongue of his heart recites: “**Praise is for Allah by
Allah,”** and “**You are as You praised Yourself,”**[^11] and “**I take
refuge in You from You.”**[^12]

That was a summary of the relation of the “B” [*bā'*] in *Bismillāh*,
and some information obtained from it. As to the secrets of the “B”
[*bā'*], and the dot under the “B” [*bā*'] of *Bismillāh*, which, in its
innermost, refers to the 'Alawian position of guardianship, and the
state of the Qur'anic Collective Union [*jam' ul-jam'*], they need a
wider scope to explain.

As regards the truth of the Name, it has an invisible station, an
invisible of the invisible, and it has a secret, a secret of the secret,
a state of manifestation and a manifestation of the manifestation. The
Name is the mark ['*alāmat*] of Allah and is vanished in His Sacred
Essence. So, any name which is nearer to the horizon of the Unity, and
farther from the world of multiplicity, is more complete in nomination
[nameness = *ismiyyat*]; and the most complete name is that which is
innocent from multiplicities, even the multiplicity of knowledge, and
that is the invisible manifestation of “Ahmadian Oneness” [*ahadī-yi
ahmadī*] in the Essence [*hadrati-yi dhāt*] by the state of the “Holiest
Emanation” [*fayd-i aqdas*], which may be what was referred to by the
noble *āyah*:

*“**… Or closer still”**.*[^13]

Then there is the manifestation by the Greatest Name of Allah in the
Unity [*hadrat-i wāhidiyyat*]; then there is the manifestation by the
“Holy Emanation” [*fayd-i muqaddas*]; then there are the manifestations
by the attributes of multiplicity in the essences [*hadarāt-i ayān*],
etc. till the last stage of the House of Realization. The writer has
already explained this brief in *Misbāh al-Hidāyah*[^14] and in the
exegesis of *Du'ā' us-Sahar*.[^15]

“Allah” is the state [*maqām*] of appearance in the “Holy Emanation” if
by “Name” the existential individuations [*ta'ayyunāt-i wujūdiyyah*] are
meant, in which case applying “Allah” to it as a union between the
manifest and the manifestation, and the vanishing of the Name in the
Named, is not objectionable. Perhaps, the *āyahs*

*“**Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth,***[^16]

And

*“**And He it is who in the heaven and in the earth is God,”***[^17]

Are a reference to this state and evidence proving the said application.
It is the state of Unity [*wāhidiyyat*] and the Union [*jam'*] of the
Names. In other words, it is the state of the Greatest Name if by “Name”
the state of manifestation by the “Holy Emanation” is intended. This is
probably more obvious than the other possibilities. Or it is the state
of the Essence or the state of the “Holiest Emanation” if by “Name” the
“Greatest Name” is intended. Consequently, the states of “Beneficent”
[*rahmān*] and “Merciful” [*rahīm*] are different, according to these
possibilities, as is clear.

It is possible that “Beneficent” and “Merciful” are adjectives for
“Name,” or they may by adjectives for “Allah,” but they are more
suitable to be adjectives for “Name,” because in praising they are
adjectives for “Allah,” and thus, it will be immune from repetition,
although their being adjectives for “Allah” is also justifiable.

In repetition there is, however, a point of eloquence. If we take them
to be adjectives for “Name,” it supports the idea that by “Name” the
Essential Names [*asmā'-i 'ayniyyah*] are intended, because only the
Essential Names can bear the adjectives of “Beneficent” and “Merciful.”
So, if by “Name” the Essential Name and the manifestation in the state
of Collectivity are intended, “Beneficent” and “Merciful” will be
attributes of the Essence, which, in the manifestations by the state of
Unity, are confirmed for “the Name of Allah,” and the mercy of the
Beneficent and the Merciful in Act is of their demotions [*tanazzulāt*]
and appearances.

And if by the “Name” the collective manifestation in Act [*tajallī-yi
jam'ī-yi fi'lī*] is intended, which is the state of Will, the
“Beneficence” and “Mercifulness” are attributes of Act. So, the mercy of
the “Beneficence” [*rahmāniyyat*] is the expanse of the origin of the
existence, which is general and for all beings, but it is of the
particular attributes of Allah, because in expanding the origin of the
existence, Allah, the Exalted, has no partner, and the hands of other
beings are short of having the mercy of creating: “There is no effecter
in the [world of] existence except Allah, and there is no God in the
House of Realization but Allah.”

Regarding the mercy of “Mercifulness” [*rahīmiyyat*], of whose
exudations [*rashahāt*] is the guidance of the guides on the road, it is
especially for the fortunate and the high dispositions, but it is of the
general attributes, of which other beings have their share, too, as it
has already been explained that the mercy of Mercifulness is of the
general mercies, and that the wicked [*ashqiyā*] have no share of it
because of their own evils, not because of any limitation.

Therefore, guidance and invitation are for the entire human family, as
is confirmed by the Glorious Qur'an. However, another opinion says that
the mercy of the “Mercifulness” belongs only to Allah, and no one else
has any share of it. The noble narratives, taking into consideration the
different opinions and estimations, also differ in explaining the mercy
of Mercifulness.

Sometimes it is said: “The 'Beneficent' is a particular Name for a
general Attribute, and the 'Merciful' is a general Name for a particular
Attribute.”[^18] In another instance it is said: “(He is) Beneficent to
all His creatures, and Merciful to the believers in particular.”[^19] It
is also said: “O Beneficent of this world, and Merciful of the
Hereafter,”[^20] or “O Beneficent and Merciful of this world and the
Hereafter.”

A Gnostic Research
------------------

Men of letters say that *Rahmān* (Beneficent) and *Rahīm* (Merciful) are
derived from *rahmah* (mercy) and that both denote hyperbole, but in
*Rahmān* the exaggeration is more than it is *Rahīm.* Analogy requires
that *Rahīm* should have preceded *Rahmān,* but since *Rahmān* is as a
personal proper name and cannot be ascribed to other beings, it thus
came first. Some say that both have the same meaning, and the repetition
is for mere confirmation.

The gnostic taste according to the highest levels of which the Qur'an
has been revealed requires that *Rahmān* should precede *Rahīm*, because
the Qur'an, according to the people of heart, is the descendant of the
divine manifestations, and the written form bearing the divine Beautiful
Names, and, as *ar-Rahmān* is the most all-embracing of the divine Names
next to the Greatest Name, and as the people of knowledge are certain
that the manifestations by the embracing Names [*asmā'-i muhītah*] are
prior to the manifestations by the embraced Names [*asmā'-i muhātah*]*,*
and as every Name that is more embracing, its manifestation is prior,
too, therefore, the first manifestation in the Unity [*hadrat-i
wāhidiyyat*] is the manifestation in the Greatest Name of Allah.

Then comes the manifestation in the state of the Beneficence and after
that comes the manifestation in the state of Mercifulness
[*rahīmiyyat*]*.* Similarly, in the manifestation of the appearance in
Act, it is the manifestation in the state of “Will,” which is the
Greatest Name in this scene [*mashhad*] and the appearance of the
Greatest Name of the Essence that has priority over all manifestations.
The manifestation in the state of Beneficence which embraces all the
beings of the invisible and visible worlds and to which the *āyah*:

***“My*** ***mercy encompasses all things”***[^21]

Refers is to precede other manifestations, as the saying, “His mercy
precedes His anger”[^22] refers to that in some aspects.

Generally speaking, as the *Bismillāh,* according to the inside and the
spirit, is the form of the manifestations in Act, and according to the
secret and the secret of the secret, it is the form of the
manifestations of Names, or rather of Essence, and these manifestations
appear first in the state of “Allah,” then in the state of the
“Beneficent,” and then in the state of the “Merciful,” the pronounced
and written forms should also be like that so as to be in conformity
with the divine system.

Regarding the “Beneficent” and the “Merciful” in the noble *Sūrah* of
*al-Hamd*, which come later than “The Lord of the worlds,” it may be
because in the *Bismillāh* the attention is directed to the appearance
of the existence from the hidden and invisible places of existence. In
the noble *sūrah* the attention is paid to the return and the inside.

However, in this possibility there is a problem. Maybe it refers to the
comprehensiveness of the mercy of “Beneficence” and “Mercifulness,” or
there may be another point. In any case, the said point concerning the
*Bismillāh* deserves to be believed in, and probably this is out of the
blessings of the Mercy of the Mercifulness bestowed upon the heart of
this humble person. Praise be to Him for what He has favored.

A Discussion and an Acquisition
-------------------------------

The formalist scholars say that *ar-Rahmān* and *ar-Rahīm* are derived
from *ar-rahmah*, implying compassion and kindness. Ibn 'Abbās (may
Allah be pleased with him) is quoted to have said: “They are two
compassionate words, one of which is more compassionate than the other:
*ar-Rahmān*, the compassionate, and *ar-Rahīm*, the kind to His servants
providing them with livelihood and favors.”[^23] As kindness and
compassion require an emotion [*infi'āl*], certain interpretation is
given for ascribing them to the Sacred Essence, and thus that is
regarded allegorical [*majāzī*].

Some others, concerning such attributes in general, say: “Take the
results and leave the preliminaries.”[^24] Regarding ascribing them to
Allah, the Exalted, it is based on the effects and acts, not on the
beginnings and attributes. So, the meaning of *ar-Rahīm* and *ar-Rahmān*
as ascribed to Allah is the One Who treats His servants mercifully. The
Schismatics [*mu'tazilah*] regard all Allah's attributes as said above,
or something like it, and, consequently, attributing them to Allah is
also allegorical.

But it is, however, unlikely to be allegorical, especially in respect of
*ar-Rahmān*, which, if admitted to be allegorical, would entail
accepting something quite strange. That is, this word is coined for a
meaning which is not allowed to be used allegorically and could not be.
In fact, it will be an allegory with no reality. Think of it. People of
research, in reply to such objections, say that words are coined for
general meanings and absolute facts.

So, to be confined to compassion and kindness is not included in what
the word “mercy” was coined for, but the common mind has fabricated this
attachment, as otherwise it has nothing to do with the coining
[*wad'*]*.* This, as it seems, is far from research, because the one who
coined it was obviously one of these common people, and the abstract
meanings and the absolute facts have not been considered.  
 Yes, if the coiner [*wādi'*] was Allah, the Exalted, or the prophets,
according to divine revelation and inspiration, it would be a
justification. This, however, is not confirmed, and the external form of
this speech is questionable, yet, it is not clear whether this external
form was what the men of research intended. It is even possible to say
that although the coiner [*wādi'*] of the words may not have considered,
during the coining, the general abstract meanings, yet what had actually
been intended for the words were the very general abstract meanings.

For example, the coiner of the word “light” had naturally in mind all
kinds of accidental ['*aradiyyah*] and sensible lights, as he knew
nothing about what is behind these lights. But that which the word
“light” denotes is the luminosity, not the mixture of light and
darkness. If he was informed that those accidental and limited lights
are not pure, but mixed with darkness and torpidity, and if he was asked
whether he had intended the word to denote the luminosity or the mixture
of light and darkness, he would certainly say that he had intended its
luminosity, and the darkness never occurred to him in this respect.

We likewise know that the person who coined the word “fire” he thought
of nothing other than the worldly fires, and that what made it to occur
to him was those fires of this world, and he knew nothing about

*“**The fire kindled by Allah which rises above the hearts,”***[^25]

More so if the coiner did not believe in the other world. Nevertheless,
this occurrence cannot be a means of limiting the fact, as “fire” refers
to the quality of the fire, not that the coiner tried to abstract the
meanings, such that it appears strange and far-fetched. But, actually,
we say that the words denote the meanings for which they were coined,
without any particular limit. Therefore, there is no exception in the
case, and the freer the meaning from the aliens and strangers, the
nearer it will be to the truth, and farther from the shortcomings of
allegory.

Take, for example, the word “light” which was coined for being manifest
by itself and for manifesting the other, despite the fact that using it
for the accidental and mundane lights is not far from the truth, because
by using it for them, the limits and the mixing with darkness are not
intended, only the self-manifestation and the manifestativeness are
intended.

But using it for the heavenly lights whose appearances are more perfect,
nearer to the horizon of the intrinsicness [*dhātiyyah*] and stronger in
manifestativeness in quantity and quality, and whose mixing with
darkness and blemishes is less is nearer to the truth; and using it for
the Lights of Majesty [*anwār-i jabarūtiyyah*] is, for the said reason,
closer to the truth; and also using it for the Sacred Essence of Allah,
the Most High, Who is the Light of the Lights and free from all aspects
of darkness, and is mere Pure Light, is the very pure and absolute
truth.

It can even be said that if “Light” has been coined for “the apparent by
itself and manifesting the other,” using it for other than Allah, the
Exalted, is a reality to the partial intellects, but to the intellects
supported (by Allah), and to the people of knowledge, it is allegorical,
and it is real only when used for Allah, the Exalted.

Likewise are the words that are coined for concepts of perfection, such
as meanings like existence and perfection.

Consequently, we say that in “Beneficent,” “Merciful,” “Compassionate,”
“Kind” and the like, there is an aspect of perfection and completeness,
and an aspect of emotion and shortcoming, and these words have been
devised for that aspect of perfection, which is the origin of that
truth. As regards the emotional aspects, which are of the requisites of
the growth [*nash'ah*] and of the strange and alien things of the truth,
which, after the descent of these truths in the places of possibility
and the low mundane worlds, are concomitant and tangled with them like
the darkness which mingles with the light in the descending growth
[*nash'ah*] have nothing to do with the meaning of the object.

So, using it for a Being Who possesses the Absolute Perfection, and who
is innocent of all aspects of emotion and shortcoming, is the mere pure
truth. This explanation, in addition to its being close to the taste of
the people of knowledge, suits the conscience of the people of
literalism, too.

Hence, it has become clear that such attributes of perfection, which
have by descending in some growths [*nasha'āt*], been mixed and
interrelated with another matter of which the Sacred Essence of Allah is
innocent are not allegorical when ascribed to Allah, the Exalted, in
their absolute concept. And Allah is the Guide.

When He says: “*Alhamdu lillāh*” (All praise is for Allah), it means
that all forms of praise are exclusively for the Divine Sacred Essence.
So, do know, dear, that under this noble word is the secret of the
particular *tawhīd*, or rather the most particular one.

The fact that all forms of praise, that the praisers offer, exclusively
belong to Allah, the Exalted, is quite obvious, by evidence, to the
people of wisdom and the well-versed in high philosophy, because it is
proved that the entire House of Realization is the Expanded Shadow
[*zill-i* *munbasit*] of Allah and His Flowing Emanation [*fayd-i
mabsūl*], and that all the apparent and hidden favors, whoever the donor
may be, as it appears and as the common people think, are Allah's, and
no being participates with Him.

Even the preparatory participation in this respect is the opinion of the
people of the common philosophy, not the high philosophy. So, as praise
is offered for favors, gifts and beneficence, and as there is no
benefactor in the House of Realization except Allah, all praises belong
to Him. And also as there are no Beauty and no Beautiful save His Beauty
and Him, all praises return to Him.

In other words, every praise and extolment by any praiser or extoller is
because of a favor and perfection on the other side. As to the place and
the occasion of the favor and the perfection that diminishes and limits
these, they have no participation in the praise and extolment; rather
they are incompatible and contradictory. So, all praises and extolments
return to the part [*hazz*] of Divinity, which is perfection and beauty,
not to that of the creature, which is deficiency and limitation.

In other words still, eulogizing the Perfect and thanking and praising
the Benefactor [*mun'im*] are of the God-given dispositions, which are
in the innermost of all beings. Among other divine dispositions is the
feeling of disgust with the shortcomings, imperfections and what
decreases the favor. The absolute favor which is free from all fault,
and the complete Beauty and Perfection which are innocent of all kinds
of deficiency, exclusively belong to Allah, while the other beings
decrease the absolute favors and the absolute beauty and limit them, not
that they increase and support them.

Thus, all peoples are disposed to thank and praise the Sacred Essence of
Allah, and disregard the other beings, except those beings who,
according to their journey through the kingdoms of perfection and the
towns of love, have been annihilated in the Glorious Essence of Allah,
since loving them and praising them are the very loving of Allah and
praising Him. “Loving Allah's favorites is loving Allah.”

Up to here we have been explaining the positions of the ordinary people
who are still within the veils of multiplicity and have not yet got rid
of all sorts of hidden, and deeply hidden, polytheism, nor have they
reached the perfect degree of sincerity and purity.

But, according to the knowledge ['*irfān*] of those whose hearts have
been annihilated in certain states, all the favors and all perfection,
beauty and majesty are the form of the manifestation of the Essence, and
all praises and thanks belong to the Sacred Essence of Allah, or rather
praise and thanks are from Himself to Himself,[^26] as is referred to by
the connection of *Bismillāh* (In the Name of Allah) to *al-hamdu
lillāh* (all praise is for Allah).

Know that the *sālik* to Allah, the striver in the way of Allah, should
not be satisfied with the scientific limit of this knowledge
[*ma'ārif*], spending his whole life on induction [*istidlāl*], which is
veil, or rather the greatest veil, for to cover this distance with
“wooden legs,”[^27] or even by the “bird of Solomon,”[^28] is not
possible. It is the valley of the holy men and the stage of the humble
[*wārastegān*]*.* Without

*“**Taking off the shoes”***[^29]

Of loving rank, honor, women, children, and, unless he gives up
dependence and inclination towards other than Allah, he will not be able
to step into the sacred valley, which is the place of the sincere ones
and the godly men. If the *sālik* set his foot in this valley with the
truths of sincerity, kicking off multiplicity and this world which are
fancy upon fancy should there be in him any remnants of selfishness, a
hand from the invisible world would assist him, and his mountain of
Oneness would be shattered by the divine manifestation, and he would
undergo a state of “senselessness” and “annihilation.”

These states in the hard hearts which have no share and no information
except concerning this world, and which know nothing but the Satanic
conceit seem irregular and abnormal, and they ascribe them to fantasies,
despite the fact that the annihilation which we now have in nature and
in this world is stranger and more wondrous than the annihilation which
the people of gnosticism and *sulūk* claim.

We are negligent of all the invisible worlds, which, from all aspects,
are more apparent than this world, or rather of the Essence and
Attributes of the Sacred Essence to Whom appearance exclusively belongs,
while to prove those worlds and the Sacred Essence of Allah, the Most
High, we cling to evidences and induction.  
 Bewilderment upon bewilderment comes from this story,  
 The swoon of the elite is the meanest (or the most special).[^30]

If the word *akhass* is written with the letter *sād* (ص) there can be
not so much bewilderment, because the annihilation of the imperfect in
the perfect is natural and is in accordance with the divine law. But the
bewilderment is when the word *akhass* is written with the letter *sīn*
(س), as this swoon and the annihilation are happening to us all. Our
ears and eyes are so absorbed and annihilated in nature that we are
completely unaware of the uproars of the invisible world.

A Tradition and a Research
--------------------------

Be informed that men of letters and the formalists say that “praising”
[*hamd*] is thanking [*thanā'*] by the tongue for a voluntary favor
[*jamīl*], and, as they are unaware of all tongues except this fleshy
tongue, they regard all praising and glorifying Allah, or rather all the
talks of the Sacred Essence, to be a sort of figurative speech. They
likewise take the talking, the praising and glorifying Allah by all
beings to be allegorical. So, they regard Allah's talking to be creating
talking, while in the other beings they regard praising and glorifying
to be genetic [*takwīnī*] and intrinsic [*dhātī*]*.*

They think that speaking is, in fact, exclusively confined to their own
species, thinking that the Sacred Essence of Allah, the Most High, and
other beings, are unable to speak, or rather they are God forbid! Dumb.
They take this to be declaring the innocence of the Sacred Essence,
whereas this is a limitation [*tahdīd*], or even a disruption
[*ta'tīl*], and Allah is innocent of such innocence, as most of the
glorifications of the common people are limitation and assimilation
[*tashbīh*].

We have already explained how the words were coined for the general and
absolute meanings. Now we add: We are not, however, very keen on
confirming that the divine facts should necessarily come true under
linguistic terminological facts, as it is the correctness of the
application [*itlāq*] and the intellectual truth that are the criterion
in such discussions, even if the linguistic fact is also proved,
according to the former discussion.

Therefore, we say that language, speaking, speech, writing, book,
praising, and thanking are of diverse degrees in proportion to the
existential growths [*nasha'āt-i wujūdiyyah*], as each one corresponds
to its own growth [*nash'ah*] and degree. And praising [*hamd*], in each
instance, is for a favor [*jamīl*] and glorifying [*madh*] is for a
beauty and a perfection. So, when Allah, the Most High, according to His
Self-Knowledge ['*ilm-i dhātī*], saw, in the Invisible Ipseity
[*huwiyyat*], His Beautiful Beauty, in the most complete degree of
knowing and seeing, He was delighted [*mubtahij*] at His Beautiful
Essence at the highest degree of delight [*ibtihāj*].

So, He manifested in the eternal manifestation and at the highest degree
of manifestation in the Essence [*hadrat-i dhāt*] for the Essence. This
manifestation and disclosing the hidden secret and the “Self-Argument”
[*muqāri'at-i dhātiyyah*] is a “Self-Speech” [*kalām-i dhātī*], which
takes place with the tongue of the Essence in the Unseen [*hadrat-i
ghayb*]. Witnessing this spoken manifestation is hearing the Essence.

This praising of the Essence for the Essence of Allah is Allah's praise
which the other beings are incapable of understanding, such that the
sacred person of the Sealing Prophet, the most honorable and the nearest
to Allah, confesses his incapability and says: “I cannot count the
praises for You, You are as You have praised Yourself.”[^31]

It is known that counting the praises is a branch of knowing the
Perfection and Beauty, but as the complete knowledge of the absolute
Beauty is not possible, similarly the real praise cannot be performed.
The utmost knowledge [*ma'rifat*] of the people of knowledge and
Gnosticism is to confess incapability.

The people of knowledge say that Allah, the Exalted, praises and
glorifies Himself with five tongues, which are the tongue of the Essence
as such, the tongue of the Unseen Oneness [*ahadiyyat-i ghayb*], the
tongue of the Collective Unity [*wāhidiyyat-i jam'iyyah*], the tongue of
the Distinct Names [*asmā'-i tafsīliyyah*], and the tongue of the
entities [*a'yān*]*.* These are other than the tongue of manifestness,
the first of which is the tongue of Volition [*mashiyyat*], down to the
end of the ranks of the individuations, which are the tongue of the
existential multiplicities.

Know that all the beings have a share, or even shares, of the invisible
world, which is mere life running throughout the entire House of
Existence. This subject is proved to the people of high philosophy by
proofs and to the people of heart and knowledge by witnessing and
eyeing. The noble divine *āyah*s and the *hadīth*s of the guardians of
the revelation ('*a*) refer to it quite explicitly.

The veiled people of the common philosophy and literalism, who could not
recognize the speech of the beings, resort to interpretation and
justification. It is quite strange that the people of literalism, who
invalidate the people of philosophy for interpreting the Book of Allah
according to their own understanding, they themselves resort, in this
respect, to interpreting so many of the plain ā*yah*s and the outright
correct *hadīth*s, just because they could not recognize the talking of
the beings, even without having a proof at their disposal.

So, they interpret the Qur'an without any proof and only because of
improbability [*istib'ād*]. At any rate, the House of Existence is the
origin of life and the truth of understanding and consciousness. The
glorification of the beings is pronunciational, conscious and
volitional, not genetic, innate, as the veiled claim. All beings are
acquainted with the state [*maqām*] of Allah, the Most High, in
proportion to their share of being.

Now, as there is no being busier with nature and more indulgent in
multiplicity than man, he, thus, is more wrapped in veils than other
beings, unless he takes off his garment of being a human, and pierces
the veils of multiplicity and otherness, so as to be able to witness,
unveiled, the Beauty of the Beautiful, in which case, his praise and
glorification would be more comprehensive than all praises and
glorifications, and he would be worshipping Allah with all His divine
affairs and all His Names and Attributes.

Completion
----------

Know that the noble saying [*kalimah*]: “**All praise is for Allah,”**
according to what had already been said, is of the all-inclusive sayings
[*kalimāt*], and, if with its delicacies and truths one praises Allah,
he will be performing the most that is in the capacity of a human being
to perform. Hence the noble *hadīth*s refer to it. It is narrated that
Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*) once came out of a house and found that his mount
had gone.  
 He said: “If I find the mount, I will praise Allah as praising
deserves.” When his mount was found, he mounted, tidied his clothes and
said: “All praise is for Allah.”[^32] The Messenger of Allah (*s*) is
quoted to have said: “There is no god but Allah” is half of a scale and
'All praise is for Allah' fills the other half of the scale.”[^33] This
is because of what we have said that “All praise is for Allah” includes
monotheism, too.

The Messenger of Allah (*s*) is also quoted to have said: “The servant's
saying, 'All praise is for Allah' is heavier, in His scales, than seven
heavens and seven earths.”[^34] He (*s*) is also quoted to have said:
“If Allah gave to one of His servants the entire world, and then that
servant said: 'All praise is for Allah,; that saying would be better
than what he had been given.”[^35] Further quotation from him (*s*)
says: “Nothing is more loved by Allah than one's saying: 'All praise is
for Allah,' as Allah Himself has so praised Himself.[^36] There are many
similar *hadīth*s.

Allah, the Exalted, said: “*Rabbi 'l-'ālamīn”* (the Lord of the worlds).
If “*rabb*” means: “the Most High” [*muta'ālī*], “the Constant”
[*thābit*] and “the Master” [*sayyid*], then it is of the Names of the
Essence. If it means: “the Possessor” [*mālik*], “the Owner” [*sāhib*],
“the Victorious” [*ghālib*] and “the Omnipotent” [*qāhir*], then it is
of the attributive Names. If it means: “the Educator” [*murabbī*], “the
Benefactor” [*mun'im*], and “the Completer” [*mutammim*], then it is of
the Names of Acts.

”*Al-'Ālamīn*” (the worlds), if it means: “Everything other than Allah,”
which covers all the stages of existence and the stations [*manāzil*] of
the invisible and visible, then we have to take “*rabb*” to be of the
Names of Attributes. If “world” is “the visible world” ['*ālam-i mulk*],
which gradually takes place and reaches its perfection, then “*rabb*”
means a Name of Act. At any rate, here it does not mean a Name of
Essence. Maybe, in a way, “*Ālamīn*” refers to the visible worlds, which
attain their suitable perfection under the divine education [*tarbiyat*]
and management [instruction = *tamshiyat*]. In this case the word
“*rabb*” means educator, being one of the Names of Acts.

Do know that in this paper we refrain from explaining the linguistic,
literary and structural aspects of the *āyah*s, because others have
mostly handled them. Certain points that have not been handled at all,
or inaccurately handled, we shall properly deal with them.

It must be noted that the Names of Essence, Attributes and Acts, which
have been referred to, are according to the terms of the people of
knowledge. A learned man of the people of knowledge, in *Inshā'
ad-Dawā'ir* has divided the Names into the Names of Essence, the Names
of Attributes, and the Names of Acts. He has said:

“The Names of Essence are: *Allāh*, *ar-Rabb* (the Lord), *al-Malik*
(the King), *al-Quddūs* (the Holy), *as-Salām* (the Peace), *al-Mu'min*
(the Faithful), *al-Muhaymin* (the Protector), *al-'Azīz* (the
Almighty), *al-Jabbār* (the Omnipotent), *al-Mutakabbir* (the Haughty),
*al-'Alī* (the Exalted), *al-'Azīm* (the Tremendous), *az-Zāhir* (the
Outward), *al-Bātin* (the Inward), *al-Awwal* (the First), *al-Ākhir*
(the Last), *al-Kabīr* (the Great), *al-Jalīl* (the Majestic),
*al-Majīd* (The Glorious), *al-Haqq* (the Truth), *al-Mubīn* (the
Manifest), *al-Wājid* (the Finder), *al-Mājid* (the Noble), *as-Samad*
(the Everlasting Refuge), *al-Muta'ālī* (the Most High), *al-Ghanī* (the
Independent), *an-Nūr* (the Light), *al-Wārith* (the Inheritor), *Dhu
'l-Jalāl* (the Owner of Majesty), and *ar-Raqīb* (the Watcher).

The Names of Attributes are: *al-Hayy* (the Living), *ash-Shakūr* (the
Grateful), *al-Qahhār* (the Conqueror), *al-Qāhir* (the Subduer),
*al-Muqtadir* (the All-Powerful), *al-Qawiyy* (the Strong), *al-Qādir*
(the Able), *ar-Rahmān* (the Beneficent), *ar-Rahīm* (the Merciful),
*al-Karīm* (the Generous), *al-Ghaffār* (the Forgiver), *al-Ghafūr* (the
Forgiving), *al-Wadūd* (the Affectionate), *ar-Ra'ūf* (the
Compassionate), *al-Halīm* (the Clement), *as-Sabūr* (the Patient),
*al-Barr* (the Righteous), *al-'Alīm* (the Omniscient), *al-Khabīr* (the
Aware), *al-Muhsī* (the Counter), *al-Hakīm* (the Wise), *ash-Shahīd*
(the Witness), *as-Samī'* (the Hearer) and *al-Basīr* (the Seer).

The Names of Acts are: *al-Mubdi' (*the Beginner), *al-Wakīl* (the
Guardian), *al-Bā'ith* (the Resurrector), *al-Mujīb* (the Responsive),
*al-Wāsi'* (the Expansive), *al-Hasīb* (the Reckoner), *al-Muqīt* (the
Nourisher), *al-Hafīz* (the Protector), *al-Khāliq* (the Creator),
*al-Bāri'* (the Maker), *al-Musawwir* (the Shaper), *al-Wahhāb* (the
Giver), *ar-Razzāq* (the Provider), *al-Fattāh* (the Opener), *al-Qābid*
(the Restrainer), *al-Bāsit* (the Spreader), *al-Khāfid* (the Abaser),
*ar-Rāfi'* (the Exalter), *al-Mu'izz* (the Honorer), *al-Mudhill* (the
Humiliator)**,** *al-Hakīm* (the Wise), *al-'Ādil* (the Just),
*al-Latīf* (the Subtle), *al-Mu'īd* (the Restorer), *al-Muhyī* (the
Life-Giver), *al-Mumīt* (the Death-Giver), *al-Wāli* (the Patron),
*at-Tawwāb* (the Relenting, the Accepter of Repentance), *al-Muntaqim*
(the Avenger), *al-Muqsit* (the Equitable), *al-Jāmi'* (the
Comprehensive), *al-Mughnī* (the Enricher), *al-Māni'* (the Deterrent),
*ad-Dārr* (the Harmful), *an-Nāfi'* (the Beneficial), *al-Hādi* (the
Guide), *al-Badī'* (the Magnificent), and *ar-Rashīd* (the
Prudent).[^37]

Concerning these divisions it is said that although they are all Names
of Essence, yet considering the appearance of the Essence, they are
called the Names of Essence, and, considering the appearance of the
Attributes or the Acts they are called the Names of Attributes or of
Acts. That is, whichever of these is more apparent, they are named after
it. Consequently, sometimes in a Name two or three aspects appear at the
same time, in which case it is regarded as a Name of Essence, Attribute
and Acts, or of two of these three, like ”*ar-Rabb*,” as has been said.

But this question does not come to suit the writer's taste, nor does it
suit the gnostic taste. What is apparent in this sorting is that the
criterion for these Names is that when the *sālik* with the steps of
knowledge reaches the stage of complete annihilation in Acts, Allah, the
Exalted, appears to his heart through the manifestations of Names of
Acts. After the annihilation in Attributes, the manifestations will be
in the Names of Attributes, and after the annihilation in Essence, the
manifestations will be in the Names of Essence.

Should his heart have the ability of preservation after coming to
sobriety, whatever he tells of his seeings of Acts would be Names of
Acts. Similarly, whatever he tells of his seeing of Attributes would be
Names of Attributes, and likewise the Names of Essence. There are, in
this connection, details that do not suit these pages. That which is
stated in the *Inshā' ad-Dawā'ir* is not correct according to its own
criterion, as is obvious on having a look at the Names.

It can be said that these divisions of “the three Names” are referred to
in the Glorious Qur'an, in the last noble *āyah*s of the *sūrah* of
“*al-Hashr*.” Allah, the Exalted, says:

*“**He is Allah, other than whom there is no god, the Knower of the
invisible and the visible. He is the Beneficent, the Merciful,”***[^38]

Up to the end of the noble *āyah*s.

Perhaps the first of these noble *āyah*s refers to the Names of Essence,
the second refers to the Names of Attributes and the third refers to the
Names of Acts. Giving precedence to the Names of Essence over those of
Attributes, and these over those of Acts, is according to the order of
the facts of existence and of the divine manifestations, not according
to the witnessings [*mushāhadāt*] of the people of witnessing [*ashāb-i
mushāhadah*] and the manifestations in the hearts of the people of
heart.

It should be realized that the noble *āyah*s have other secrets, but to
mention them does not suit the situation. That the second *āyah* is the
Names of Attributes, and the third is the Names of Actions, is quite
clear.

That “**the Knower of the invisible and the visible,” “the Beneficent”
and “the Merciful”** are of the Names of Essence, is based on the fact
that “the invisible” and “visible” are of the internal and external
Names, and “Beneficence” [*rahmāniyyat*] and “Mercifulness”
[*rahīmiyyat*] are of the manifestations of “the Most Holy Emanation”
[*fayd-i* *aqdas*]*,* not of “the Holy Emanation” [*fayd-i* *muqaddas*].
Confining these Names to the remembrance of Allah, whereas “Living”
[*hayy*], “Constant” [*thābit*] and “Lord” [*rabb*] seem nearer to the
Names of Essence, is probably because of their comprehensiveness, as
they are of the mothers of Names. And Allah knows better.

A Remark
--------

There is a great controversy about the word, the derivation and meaning
of “*al-'ālamīn*,” (the worlds). Some say that “*al-'ālamīn*” is plural;
covering all kinds of creation, material and abstract, and each kind is
a world in itself. It is a plural that has no singular of its root. This
is a well-known opinion.

Some others say that “'*ālam*” is passive participle and “'*ālim*” is
active participle. So, “'*ālamīn*” means “*ma'lūmīn*” (the known). But,
not only that this opinion has no proving evidence and is unlikely, it
is also quite silly and irrelevant to say “*rabb 'ul-ma'lūmīn*” (the
Lord of the known).  
 Some say that “'*ālamīn*” is derived from “'*alāmah*” (sign) which
covers all beings, since everything is a sign and an *āyah* of the
Sacred Essence. The letters “*waw*” (و) and “*nūn*” (ن) refer to the
rational beings, giving them priority to the other beings.

Others say that it is derived from “'*ilm*” (knowledge). At any rate,
regarding it to embrace all creation is correct, as it is justified to
take it to cover the rational beings. But “'*ālam*” is used for
everything other than Allah, and is also used for every individual or
category. If the one who uses it for every individual and category is of
the people of tradition and language, he considers every thing to be a
sign of the Creator: “In every thing He has a sign…”[^39]

And if he is a divine gnostic, he considers every being to be the
appearance of the all-embracing Name covering all the truths, by way of
the appearance of the Collective Oneness [*ahadiyyat-i jam'*] and the
Secret of the Existence. According to this consideration, the entire
world and every part of it, can be regarded as the Greatest Name in the
state of the Collective Oneness. “The Names are all in all, and such are
the signs.”

Consequently, the objection of the great philosopher, *Sadr 'ul-Millat-i
wad-Dīn* [*Sadr 'ul-Muta'allihīn*] (may his soul be sanctified), to
those like *al-Baydāwī* is applicable, because they have not tasted of
this drink [school = *mashrab*]. But to the ways of the people of
Gnosticism it is inapplicable. However, as the argument of *al-Baydāwī*
and that of the philosopher, on this topic are too lengthy, we refrain
from mentioning them. The interested readers may refer to the exegesis
of the said late philosopher on *Sūrah* *al-Fātihah*.

If “*ar-rabb*” is of the Names of Attributes, meaning “Master” or
“Owner” and the like, the meaning of “*al-'ālamīn*” may be “everything
other than Allah*,*” whether the owned were the beings of the kingdom of
the world, or the abstract invisible beings.

If it is of the Names of Acts as it apparently is the meaning of
”*al-'ālamīn*” will only be the kingdom of the visible world, as, in
which case, ”*ar-rabb*” will mean “the Educator” a meaning which is of
gradual effectiveness, while the abstract worlds are innocent of
gradualness, though, to the writer, the spirit of “graduation” in the
world of ”*dahr*” (eternity, perpetual duration) is, in a way, certain;
and, in the same way, we have also proved the temporal contingency
[*hudūth-i zamānī*], meaning the spirit of time and the eternity of
graduation [*dahriyyat-i tadrīj*] in the abstract worlds. In the gnostic
way, the temporal contingency is also proved for all worlds, but not in
the same way as referred to by the theologians and the people of
*hadīth.*

Another Remark
--------------

Do know that “praising” [*hamd*] is for a “favor” [*jamīl*]*.* From the
noble *āyah* it is deduced that praising and extolment are confirmed for
the state of the Greatest Name as the all-embracing Name [*ism-i
jāmi'*], which has the state of being the Lord of the worlds, “**the
Beneficent,”** “**the Merciful”** and “**the** **Master of the Day of
Judgment.”** So, these noble Names, i.e. “*Rabb*,” ”*Rahmān*,” ”*Rahīm*”
and “*Mālik*” should have an effective role in the praising. Later on,
we shall explain in details Allah's saying: “*Māliki yawm 'id-dīn*” (The
Master of the Day of Judgment). Now, we shall talk about the
proportionality of the state of Divinity to “praising.” It is so from
two aspects:

The first is that as the very praiser is a part of the “worlds,” or he
may even be “a world” by himself, and from the point of view of the
people of knowledge, each one of the beings is a world by itself, he
praises Allah, for He, with the hand of divine education, has taken him
out of weakness, deficiency, fear and the darkness of the mass of
non-existence to strength, perfection, security and the luminous world
of humanity.

He has also taken him past the corporeal, elemental, mineral, vegetable,
and animal stations, under a system arranged according to
self-and-substantial movements, and the dispositional and natural
inclinations, to the station of humanity, which is the most honorable
station of beings. Furthermore, He continues to educate him until he
becomes what you can never imagine in your fancy.

“Then I become non-existent such non-existence that the organ says to
me: “Our return is to Him.”[^40]

The second is that educating [rearing = *tarbiyat*] the system of the
kingdom of the world, such as the celestial spheres, elements,
substances and accidentals, is preliminary to the existence of the
perfect man, who is, in fact, the product of the juice ['*usārah*] of
the world of realization and the ultimate end of the beings of the
world, and he is, as such, the last product.  
 And, since the visible world moves according to the substantial
self-movement, and this is a self-completing movement, wherever it ends,
it would be the objective of creation and the end of the journey. If we
look in a universal way at the universal body, [*jism-i kull*],
universal nature, universal vegetable, universal animal and universal
man [*insān-i kull*], we notice that man is the last product who has
been created after the substantial self-movements of the world and they
have ended in him.

So, the educating (rearing) hand of Allah, the Exalted, has been
educating (rearing) man in all the world of realization and man is the
first and the last.

That which has been said was about the minor Acts and according to the
stages of existence, as otherwise, if taken according to the absolute
Act, the Act of Allah, the Exalted, can have no objective except His own
Sacred Essence, as is proved in its relevant instances. Should we look
at the minor Acts, we would realize that the objective of creating Man
is the absolute invisible world, as is stated in the Divine Sayings
[*qudsiyyāt*]: “O son of Adam! I created all things for you, and I
created you for Myself.”[^41]

Allah in the Glorious Qur'an, addressing Moses, son of 'Imrān (peace be
upon him and upon our Prophet and his progeny), says:

*“**I have made you for myself.”***[^42]

He also says: “**And I chose you.”**[^43] So, man is created for Allah
and made for His Sacred Essence. From among all the beings man is the
chosen and the elect. The destination of his journey is attaining the
door of Allah, annihilation in the Essence of Allah, and sticking to the
Court of Allah. His return [*ma'ād*] is to Allah, from Allah, in Allah
and by Allah. In the Qur'an He says:

*“**Surely to Us is their return.”***[^44]

Other creatures return to Allah through Man, or rather their return is
to Man, as it is stated in the *Jāmi'ah* invocation, in which some
aspects of the states of guardianship are explained. It says: “The
return of the creatures is to you and their reckoning is upon you.” It
also says: “With you Allah opened and with you He closes,”[^45] and also
in the noble *āyah*:

*“**Surely to Us is their return, and surely upon Us is their
reckoning.”***[^46]

In the said invocation: “The return of the creatures is to you and their
reckoning is upon you,” is one of *tawhīd*'s secrets, referring to the
fact that to return to the Perfect Man is to return to Allah, as the
Perfect Man is absolutely annihilated and lasts by Allah's everlasting,
having no individuality, I-ness and selfishness of his own, rather he is
of the Beautiful Names and the Greatest Name, to which the Qur'an and
the *hadīth*s frequently refer.

The Qur'an contains such delicate points, facts, secrets, and subtleties
about *tawhīd* that the minds of the people of knowledge are bewildered,
and this is the great inimitability of this heavenly and luminous Book,
besides its excellent syntax, graceful expression, wonderful elegance,
miraculous style, the way of inviting and foretelling the unseen,
perfecting the precepts, controlling and managing the family and the
like, each one of which is independently extraordinary and beyond man's
power.

It can even be said that the Glorious Qur'an's being distinguished for
its eloquence as one of its inimitabilities well-known all over the
world was because the early Arabs were famous for their eloquence, and,
thus, they could understand only that aspect of the Qur'an's
inimitability. The Arabs of that time could not comprehend its other
more important dimensions, which needed a higher degree of
understanding.

Nowadays, too, those who have a similar level of thinking can comprehend
nothing of this divine grace, except its literal elegance, beautiful
rhetoric and eloquent expressions. As regards those who are well versed
in the secrets of knowledge and the graces of *tawhīd* and abstraction,
know that what attracts them, and what is the goal of their hopes, in
this divine Book and heavenly revelation is only its knowledge
[*ma'ārif*], and they are not so much interested in its other aspects.

Whoever casts a glance at the Qur'an's gnosticism, and at the gnostics
of Islam who acquired their knowledge from it, and then makes a
comparison between them and the scholars of other religions, concerning
their works and knowledge, will very well recognize the higher standard
of the knowledge of Islam and the Qur'an, which is the base of the
foundation of religion and faith, and the final objective of sending the
Messengers and revealing the Books. To believe that this Book is a
divine revelation and that its knowledge is divine does not cost him any
difficulty.

A Faithful Awakening
--------------------

Do know that the Sovereignty [*rubūbiyyat*] of Allah, the Exalted, over
the worlds is of two kinds:  
 The first is the “General Sovereignty,” which covers all the beings of
the world, and it is the genetic upbringing (education), which takes
every being out of the limits of its shortcomings to its suitable
perfection, under the control of the Divine Sovereignty.

All the natural and substantial developments and the essential and
accidental movements and improvements are under the control of the Lord.
In short, from the stage of the primary matter till the stage of
animality and the gaining of the corporeal and spiritual powers of
animality, and the genetic evolution, each one of them testifies that
“My Lord is Allah, Glory and Majesty to Him.”

The second is the “Legislative Sovereignty,” which exclusively belongs
to the human species, and the other beings have no share of it. This
education is guiding to the roads of salvation, showing the ways to
happiness and humanity, and warning against what contradicts them, as
explained by the prophets ('*a*).

If somebody voluntarily placed himself at the disposal and education of
the Lord of the worlds, and was brought up by Him, such that the actions
of his organs and powers, external and internal, would not be prompted
by his self, but to be divine, in that case he would attain the human
perfection, which exclusively belongs to the human species.

Up to the stage of animality, man goes side by side with the other
animals. To step out of this stage he will have to choose, on his own
free will, one of the only two ways before him: One is the way to the
stage (abode) of happiness, which is the Straight Path of the Lord of
the worlds:  
*“**My Lord is on the Straight Path.”***[^47]

The other is the way of wretchedness, which is the crooked path of the
accursed Satan. Therefore, if he puts the powers and organs of his
kingdom at the disposal of the Lord of the worlds to be educated by Him,
his heart, which is the sultan of this kingdom, would gradually submit
to Him. When the heart becomes a subject to the Lord of the worlds,
other soldiers [*junūd*] would follow it, and the whole kingdom would be
under His education.

Then his invisible tongue, which is the shadow [*zill*] of the heart,
would be able to say: “My Lord is Allah. Glory and Majesty to Him,” in
reply to the angels of the world of the grave, who ask him: “Who is your
Lord?” And, as such a man has obeyed the Messenger of Allah, imitated
the Imāms of guidance and acted according to the Divine Book; his tongue
would be expressive in saying: “Muhammad (*s*) is my Prophet, 'Alī and
his infallible sons are my Imāms and the Qur'an is my Book.”  
 But if he did not turn his heart to divinity, and the image of *Lā
ilāha illallāh, Muhammadun rasūlullāh, 'Alīyyun walīyullāh* (There is no
god except Allah, Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah and 'Alī is the
friend of Allah) was not engraved on the page of his heart such that to
become the portrait of the inside of the soul, and if there was no
reciprocal spiritual and moral connection between him and the Qur'an as
to act according to it, thinking about it, remembering and contemplating
on it, all his knowledge [*ma'ārif*] would be effaced from his memory
when suffering from the agonies of death, the death-sickness, and in the
death itself that monstrous calamity.

My dear! Man, under a typhoid fever and the deterioration of his mental
faculties, forgets all his knowledge, except things that have become a
second part of his constitution, owing to continual remembrance and
close intimacy with them. Should he be inflicted with a serious incident
or a dreadful accident, he would be neglecting a lot of his affairs, and
the line of forgetfulness would underline his acquired information.

So, how about the agonies, sufferings and difficulties of death? What
would happen to him then? If the hearing and the heart were not opened,
if the heart was not hearing, to instruct him with the necessary beliefs
at the time of dying and after it would be of no avail. *Talqīn*
(reminding the dead of his beliefs) can be useful only to those whose
hearts have acquired the true beliefs and whose hearts' ears are usually
open, but at the very moments of death agonies they may undergo a fit of
forgetfulness, and thus, the *talqīn* will be a means for the angels of
Allah to convey it to their ears. But if man is deaf, with no hearing
ears suitable for the worlds of *barzakh* and the grave, he can never
hear the *talqīn* and it can benefit him naught. There is a hint at some
of these in the noble *hadīth*s.

*Ar-Rahmān' ir-Rahīm* (The Beneficent, the Merciful):

Do know that for all the Names and Attributes of Allah, the Most High,
there are generally two states [*maqām*] and two ranks [*martabah*]:

One is the state of the Names and Attributes of Essence, which are
constant in His Unity [*hadrat-i wāhidiyyat*]*,* such as the Essential
Knowledge, which is of the Essential affairs and manifestations, and the
Essential Power and Will, and other Essential affairs [*shu'ūn-i
dhātiyyah*]*.*

The other is the state of the Names and Attributes of Acts, which are
confirmed for Allah through the manifestation by the Holy Emanation,
such as the “Active Knowledge” ['*ilm-i fi'lī*], which the Illuminists
regard as confirmed, and on it depends the “Detailed Knowledge” ['*ilm-i
tafsīlī*]*.* The most merited of the wise men, Khājah Nasīruddīn (May
Allah make his face bright), has proved this, following the opinion of
the Illuminists who say that the criterion for the “Detailed Knowledge”
is the “Active Knowledge.”[^48]

However, although this subject is contrary to research because the
“Detailed Knowledge” is confirmed for the Essence, and that the exposure
and the details of the Essential Knowledge are higher than the “Active
Knowledge” and more extensive, as is proved and confirmed, in its
relevant place, by a luminous proof yet, the original question, that the
system of the existence is within Allah's Active and Detailed Knowledge,
is proved and confirmed according to the tradition of proving and the
method of gnosticism, despite the fact that the higher method and the
sweeter gnostic taste have, beside such ways, another way: “The lover's
religion is other than that of the others.”[^49]

Generally speaking, for the mercy of “Beneficence” and “Mercifulness,”
there are two ranks and two manifestations: one is in the appearance of
the Essence in His Unity [*hadrat-i wāhidiyyat*] through the
manifestation of the Holiest Emanation. The other is in the appearance
of the cosmic entities [*a'yān-i kawniyyah*] through the Holy Emanation.

If the *ar-Rahmān* and *ar-Rahīm*, in the blessed *Sūrah*, are of the
Essential Attributes as is more obvious it will be possible to regard
them, in *Bismillāh 'ir-Rahmān 'ir-Rahīm*, to be related to “*ism*”
(Name), rather than Attributes of Act. Consequently, there is no
repetition at all that one may claim them to be confirmatory repetition,
or exaggeration. Based on this, the meaning of the noble *āyah* will be:
With His Beneficent and Merciful will, praise be to His Beneficent and
Merciful Essence Allah knows better.

And, as the state of Divine Will is the manifestation of the Sacred
Essence, the state of “Beneficence” and “Mercifulness,” which is of the
determinations [*ta'ayyunāt*] of the state of Divine Will, is the
display [*jilwah*] of the Essential Beneficence and Mercifulness. There
are, however, other possibilities, which we have left out, as the said
one is more obvious.

*Māliki yawm 'id-dīn* (The Master of the Day of Judgment):

Many of the reciters have read: *maliki,* and there are many literary
justifications for both versions, such that even a great scholar (may
Allah have mercy upon him) has written a thesis on preferring *malik* to
*mālik.* But the arguments of both parties are not quite convincing.

That which comes to the writer's notion is that *mālik* is preferable,
or rather, particularly assigned, because this blessed *sūrah* and the
blessed *sūrah* of *at-Tawhīd,* are unlike the other *sūrah*s of the
Qur'an, since these two *sūrah*s are recited by the people in their
obligatory and non-obligatory *salāt*s, and in every era hundreds of
millions of the Muslims have heard them from hundreds of millions of
other Muslims, and these from former hundreds of millions, and so on, by
hearing these two noble *sūrah*s from one another, recited, exactly the
same, with no letter advanced and no letter retarded, no letter
increased and no letter decreased, by the Imāms of guidance and the
Messenger of Allah (*s*).  
 Although most of the reciters read it *malik,* and many of the scholars
prefer *malik*, yet none of those things damaged this certain, necessary
and successively proved fact, and no body imitated them. And although
the scholars allowed imitating anyone of the reciters, no one except the
abnormal [*shādhdh*] whose opinion is negligible necessarily recited
*malik* in his *salāt*s, or if somebody did recite *malik*, it was as a
precaution [*ihtiyāt*], besides saying *mālik*, too, such as my learned
teacher of the traditional science, Hāj Shaykh 'Abd 'ul-Karīm Yazdī (may
his grave be sanctified), who used, at the request of some of his
contemporary scholars, to recite *malik*, too. Nevertheless, this is too
weak a precaution, or, as the writer believes, it is out of question.

The weakness of the said question becomes clear under the saying that in
*Kūfī* penmanship *malik* and *mālik* are mistaken for each other. This
claim can be uttered in respect of the *sūrah*s which are not frequently
recited, though still with difficulty, but not in respect of this
*sūrah* which has been confirmed through hearing and reciting, as is
quite clear. Such a claim is an empty and incredible one.

This very argument is also true in respect of *kufuwan*, as its
recitation with “*w*” [*maftūhah*] and “*f”* [*madmūmah*] which is
'Āsim's recitation alone is also confirmed by way of hearing and
rehearing, and other recitations do not necessarily contradict that,
though some think that they practice precaution by reciting the version
of the majority with “*hamzah*” instead of the “*w*” an irrelevant
precaution.

If there can be any argument in respect of the narratives in which we
are ordered to recite like the people recite[^50] which actually
deserves arguing, as it is believed that these narratives wanted to say:
recite as the people, in general, do, not that you are free to choose
any one of the “seven recitations,” for example in that case, to recite
”*malik*” and ”*kufuwan*” other than the way commonly recited by the
Muslims and written in the Qur'an, is incorrect. At any rate, the
precaution is their recitation as current among the people and written
in the Qur'an, because that way of recitation is correct to every creed.
Allah knows better.[^51]

A Philosophic Research
----------------------

Do know that Allah's ownership is not the same as the ownership of the
servants, nor is it like the kings' ownership of their kingdom, as these
are conventional annexations, while annexing the creatures to Allah is
not of that kind, although to the jurisprudents this sort of ownership
of Allah is longitudinally [*tūlan*] confirmed. This, however, does not
contradict what has been observed in this respect.

Nor does it resemble man's owning his own organs and limbs, nor his
internal and external powers, although this latter ownership is nearer
to Allah's ownership than the aforementioned ones. It is also not like
the soul's owning its own self-action, which is of the soul's affairs,
such as creating mental images, whose contractions and expansions arc
somewhat under the control of the soul's will, nor is it like the
ownership, of the intellectual worlds, of what is of lower ranks, even
if they were effective in those worlds through annihilating [*i'dām*]
and creating [*ījād*], for all the beings of the world of possible
realization, on whose foreheads the humility of poverty is marked, are
bound by limits and restricted by measures, even to the extent of the
essence.

And whatsoever is bound by a limit is isolated from its act, in
proportion to its limitedness, and it enjoys not a true existential
inclusiveness [*ihāta-i qayyūmī*]*.* Therefore, all things, according to
the degree of their own essence, oppose and contradict their passive
elements [*munfa'ilāt*], and because of this they do not enjoy
self-existential inclusiveness [*ihāta-i dhātīyya-i qayyūmīyyah*]*.*

But concerning the ownership of Allah, the Exalted, which is by
illuminative annexation and self-existential inclusiveness, it is the
true real self-ownership [*mālikīyyat-i dhātīyyah*]*,* in which there is
not the least of any defective contradicting isolation in His Essence
and Attributes with any one of the beings.

The ownership of the Sacred Essence of all the worlds is the same,
without treating the beings with discrimination at all, or being nearer
to, and more inclusive of, the abstracts and the invisible worlds, than
of the other worlds, as otherwise it would require limitation and
isolating disunity, accompanied by need and potentiality; High Exalted
is Allah, the Great, above all that! A reference to this is perhaps in
the saying of Allah, the Exalted:

*“**And we are nearer to him than you,”***[^52]

*“**And we are nearer to him than his jugular vein,”***[^53]

*“**Allah is the light of the heavens and the earth,”***[^54]

*“**And He it is who is God in the heaven and God in the earth,”***[^55]

And

*“**Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth.”***[^56]

The Messenger of Allah (*s*) is quoted to have said: “**If you are
lowered down with a rope to the lowest of the earth, you will come down
onto Allah.”**[^57] Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) is also quoted to have said, as
in *al-Kāfī*: “No space can confine Him and no space can accommodate
Him, and He is no nearer to a place than to another.”[^58] Imām 'Alī
an-Naqī is quoted to have said: “You must know that when Allah is in the
lowest heaven He is, at the same time, on the Throne. All things are
equally known, controlled, owned and encompassed by Him.”[^59]

Nevertheless, although the ownership of His Sacred Essence covers all
things and all worlds equally, the noble *āyah* says:

*“**The Owner of the Day of Judgment.”***

This specification is probably because the Day of Judgment is the day of
gathering. So, the Owner of “The Day of Judgment,” which is the day of
gathering, is (also) the Owner of the other days which are dispersed,
and “the dispersed in the visible world are gathered (collected) in the
invisible world.”

Or maybe it is because of the appearance of the Ownership and
Omnipotence of Allah, Glorified be His Majesty, on the “Day of
Gathering,” which is the day of the return of the possibles to the
threshold of Allah, and the ascension of the beings to the Court of
Allah.

Expanding on this brief so as to suit this paper is that as long as the
light of existence and the sun of the truth is descending down from the
hidden places of invisibility towards the world of visibility, it tends
to occultation and being veiled. In other words, in every descent there
is a specification [*ta'ayyun*], and in every specification and
limitation there is a veil. And as man is the composite [*majma'*] of
all specifications and limitations, he is veiled with all the seven dark
veils and the seven veils of light, which are the seven earths and seven
heavens, according to interpretations.

Perhaps returning to the “lowest of the low” means being wrapped in all
kinds of veils. This occultation of the sun of existence, and the mere
light in the horizon of specifications [*ta'ayyunāt*] can be described
as the “night” and “The Night of the *Qadr*.” And as long as man is
wrapped in these veils, he is deprived of seeing the Beauty of the
Eternity and of eyeing the prime light.

When all beings, in their ascending march from the low stations of the
world of nature, with the natural movements which are deposited in their
innate constitution from the light of the attraction of the divine
disposition, according to the determination [*taqdīr*] of the Holiest
Emanation in His Knowledge return to the original homeland and the real
place of promise [*mī'ād*] as is frequently referred to by the noble
*āyah*s they once again get rid of the luminous and dark veils, and the
ownership and the sovereignty of Allah, the Exalted, are manifested, and
He appears in Unity and Sovereignty.

Here, where the Last returns to the First, and the Outside connects to
the Inside, and where the rule of the appearance falls and the
government of the inside is manifested, the absolute owner addresses and
there is no addressed except His Sacred Essence “**Whose is the
Sovereignty this Day?,** and as there is no answer, He says:

***(It is)*** ***Allah's, the One, the Almighty.”***[^60]

This absolute day, the day when the sun of the truth rises from behind
the veil of the horizon of the individuations, is “the Day of Judgment”
in a way, since every being, under the shadow [*zill*] of its suitable
name, vanishes in Allah. When the Trumpet is blown, it appears from that
name and accompanies the followers of that name:

*“**A group in Paradise and a group in Flaming Fire.”***[^61]

The perfect man in this world gets out of these veils according to his
journey to Allah and migration to Him, and the regulations of the
Resurrection, the Hour and the Day of Judgment appear before him and are
proved to him. So, Allah, with His Sovereignty, appears to his heart
through this *salāt* ascension, and his tongue becomes the interpreter
of his heart, and his appearance becomes the tongue of his internal
seeings. This is one of the secrets of confining the Ownership
[*mālikiyyat*] to the Day of Judgment.

An Inspiration Concerning the 'Arsh
-----------------------------------

Do know that concerning the '*Arsh* and its carriers there are different
opinions. Similarly the noble narratives outwardly differ, too, although
inwardly there is no difference, since, according to the gnostic view
and demonstrative way, the '*Arsh* covers so many meanings.  
 One of its meanings which I did not see in the language of “the people”
[*qawm*] is the Unity [*hadrat-i wāhidīyyat*], which is on the level of
the “Holiest Emanation,” and its carriers are four names, of the Great
Names: The First, the Last, the Outward and the Inward.

Another which also I did not see in the language of “the people”
[*qawm*] is the “Holy Emanation,” which is on the level of the Greatest
Name, and its carriers are: *ar-Rahmān, ar-Rahīm, ar-Rabb* and
*al-Mālik.*

Another one of its concepts is the phrase “all that is other than
Allah”[*mā siwallāh*] and its carriers are the four angels: Seraphiel,
Gabriel, Michael and Izrael.

Another is the “Universal Body” [*jism-i kull*], which is carried by
four angels who are the images of the Archetypes [*arbāb-i anwā'*], as
is referred to in *al-Kāfī*.[^62]

Sometimes it is regarded to be the “Knowledge,” which may be Allah's
Active Knowledge ['*ilm-i fi'lī*] which is the state of the great
guardianship [*wilāyat-i kubrā*] and its carriers are four of Allah's
perfect friends from the ancient nations: Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus
(peace be upon our Prophet, his progeny and upon them), and four persons
of the perfect ones of this nation: the Seal of the Prophets, Amīr
al-Mu'minīn 'Alī, al-Hasan and al-Husayn ('*a*).

Now, as this introduction has been understood, do know that in the noble
*sūrah* of *al-Hamd* (the Opening), after the name “Allah” that refers
to His Essence, the four noble names: *ar-Rabb*, *ar-Rahmān*,
*ar-Rahīm*, and *Mālik*, are particularly mentioned, maybe because these
four noble names are the carriers of the '*Arsh* of His Unity
[*wahdāniyyat*] in respect of the inside, while their outer appearances
are Allah's four favorite angels who are the carriers of the '*Arsh* of
“Realization” [*tahaqquq*]*.*

So*,* the blessed name of *ar-Rabb* is the inside [*bātin*] of Michael,
who, as *ar-Rabb*'s manifestation, is in charge of the provisions and
the education in the world of existence. The noble name of *ar-Rahmān*
is the inside [*bātin*] of Seraphiel, who is the caretaker [*munshī*] of
the spirits, the blower of the Trumpet and the spreader [*bāsit*] of the
spirits and the images, as the spread [*bast*] of existence is also in
the name of *ar-Rahmān.*

The noble name of *ar-Rahīm* is the inside of Gabriel, who is in charge
of teaching and perfecting the beings. The noble name of *Mālik* is the
inside of Izrael, who is in charge of taking [*qabd*] the spirits and
images, and of returning the outside [*zāhir*] to the inside
[*bātin*]*.* So, the blessed *sūrah*, up to “**The Owner of the Day of
Judgment,”** includes the '*Arsh* of Unity and the '*Arsh* of
Realization, with reference to its carriers.

Thus, the entire circle of existence and the manifestations of the
invisible and the visible, which are translated by the Glorious Qur'an,
are mentioned up to this part of the *sūrah*. This very concept is also
entirely covered by the *Bismillāh*, which is the Greatest Name. It is
also in the “*bā'*” [ب], which is in the position of causality, and in
the dot of *bism*, which is the secret of the causality. And, as 'Alī
('*a*) is the secret of guardianship [*wilāyat*] and causality,
therefore, it is he who is the dot under the “*bā'*” [ب][^63] That is,
the dot under the “*bā'*” [ب] is the translator of the secret of
guardianship. Contemplate. The reason for contemplation is the
difficulty that is in the *hadīth*. And Allah knows better!

A Gnostic Notice
----------------

Perhaps giving priority to *ar-Rabb* before stating *ar-Rahmān* and
*ar-Rahīm* and then *Mālik* at the end, is a delicate reference to the
way of man's journey [*sulūk*] from the material mundane creation up to
the complete annihilation, or up to the state of the presence before the
Master of the kings. So, as the *sālik* is still at the beginning of the
journey, he is gradually being brought up by *Rabb al-'Ālamīn* (the Lord
of the worlds), for he is of the world and his conduct [*sulūk*] is
under the control of time and graduation.

After leaving the transitory world of nature by the steps of his
conduct, the stage of the inclusive names, which do not belong only to
the world in which the aspect of “differentiation” is predominant, is
established in his heart. And, as the noble name of *ar-Rahmān* is more
particular than the other inclusive names, it is stated then, and, as it
is the manifestation of mercy and the stage of absolute spreading, it
precedes *ar-Rahīm*, which is nearer to the horizon of the interiority.

Hence, in the gnostic conduct, the external names appear first, then
after that, the internal names, because the *sālik*'s march is from
multiplicity [*kathrat*] to singleness [*wahdat*], until he ends up in
the purely internal names, including the name of *Mālik*. Thus*,* with
the manifestation of Ownership, the multiplicity of the invisible and
visible worlds will vanish, and the complete annihilation and Absolute
Presence will take place.

As he frees himself from the veils of multiplicity with the appearance
of unity and Divine Sovereignty, and attains the visual witnessing, he
converses in presence (with Allah) and says: “**You do we worship.”**

Hence, the whole circle of the travelers' journey is also contained in
the noble *sūrah*, from the last veils of the world of nature up to the
removing of all the dark and luminous veils and attaining the Absolute
Presence. This Presence is the *sālik*'s great resurrection and the
rising of his Hour. In the noble *āyah*:

*“**…and all who are in the heavens and the earth swoon away, except him
whom Allah wills…,”***[^64]

The exception may be this group of the people of *sulūk* who would swoon
away and be annihilated before the Trumpet is blown. By saying: “I and
the Hour are like these two”[^65] when joining his two forefingers, the
Messenger of Allah (*s*) may have referred to this concept.

A Literary Notice
-----------------

In the current exegeses that we have seen, or which are quoted from, the
word “*dīn*” is said to mean judgment and reckoning. The lexicons give
these meanings, too. The Arab poets have also used it so, such as the
poet who says: “Beware that you will be judged as you judge,” and there
is a saying ascribed to Sahl ibn Rabī'ah stating:

“There remained but hostility. We so judged them as they did.”[^66] It
is said that “*dayyān*,” which is one of the Divine Names, denotes this
very meaning. Perhaps by “*dīn*” the true religion is intended. And as
on the Day of Resurrection the results of the religion appear and the
religious facts come out from behind the curtain, for this reason it is
called *yawm 'ud-dīn* (the Day of Judgment), the same as “today” is
called *yawm 'ud-dunyā* (the day of this world or the mundane day) on
which appear the results of this world, while the true image of the
religion is not apparent.

This bears a similar concept of Allah's saying:

*“**…and remind them of the days of Allah,”***[^67]

Which are the days in which Allah treats a nation with force and
sovereignty. The Day of Resurrection is a “day of Allah” as well as the
“day of religion,” since it is the day of the appearance of the Divine
Sovereignty and the day of the emergence of the truth of Allah's
religion.

*Iyyāka na'budu wa iyyāka nasta'īn* (**You do we worship and You do we
seek help from):** Do know, dear, that when the servant, the *sālik* on
the road of knowledge, understood that all thanks and praises
exclusively belong to Allah's Sacred Essence, and attributed to Him
contraction [*qabd*] and expansion [*bast*] of the existence, and
regarded the reigns of the affairs, at first and at last, the beginning
and the end, to be in the grasp of His Ownership, and the Unity of
Essence and of Acts manifested in his heart, he would exclusively
confine worship and seeking help to Allah, regard the entire world of
realization submitting, willingly or unwillingly, to the Sacred Essence,
and recognize no able one, in the world of realization, so as to ascribe
to him any help.

What is claimed by some of the people of formalism that to confine
worship [to Allah] is real, but to confine seeking help only to Him is
not real by arguing that the help of other than Allah can also be
sought, and it is in the Glorious Qur'an:

*“**And help one another in goodness and piety**,”*[^68]

And also:

*“**And seek help through patience and salāt,”***[^69]

And it is known that the conduct of the noble Prophet, the Imāms of
guidance ('*a*), their companions and the Muslims was based on seeking
help from other than Allah in lawful matters, such as getting the help
of the beast of mount, the servant, the wife, the friend, the messenger,
the worker and the like is but a talk suitable to the formalists.

But the one who has knowledge about the Unity of Acts of Allah, the
Exalted, and regards the system of the existence to be a form of the
activity of Allah, the Exalted, seeing, either plainly or by rational
proof, that there is no effecter in the [world of] existence save Allah,
regards, with the eye of insight and luminous heart, confining “seeking
help” to be a real confinement, and takes the help of the other beings
to be a form of Allah's help.

According to what these people say, there is no reason for confining the
praises to Allah, the Exalted, since, according to this opinion; other
beings also have their behaviors, options, beauty and perfection which
deserve praising and thanking. They even say that giving life and death,
and providing and creating are some other affairs which are common
between Allah and the creatures.

The people of Allah regard such matters to be polytheism, and in the
narratives they are regarded hidden polytheism, as it is said that
[resorting to] turning the ring in the finger to remember something is
regarded as a hidden polytheism.[^70]

In short, “**You do we worship and you do we seek help from”** is a part
of praising Allah, and it is a reference to real monotheism. The one in
whose heart the truth of monotheism has not yet appeared, and he has not
purged it from polytheism absolutely, his saying “**You do we worship”**
would not be real, and he cannot confine his worship and seeking help to
Allah, and he would not be a godly man and a theist.

When monotheism manifests in his heart, he will, in proportion to the
degree of this manifestation, give up all beings and cling to the Might
of the Sanctity of Allah to the extent he sees that “**You do we worship
and You do we seek help from”** takes place by the name of Allah; and
some facts of “**You are as You praised Yourself”**[^71] manifest in his
heart.

An Illuminative Notice
----------------------

The point of changing from the 3rd person to the 2nd has become clear
from the statements of this thesis. Although in itself it is one of the
ornaments of speech and the characteristics of rhetorics, frequently
seen in the speeches of the eloquent orators, and is a decoration to the
speeches, and, at the same time, by changing from one mood to another,
one removes the addressee's boredom and gives a fresh vividity to his
spirit, yet, as the *salāt* is the ascension for reaching the presence
of Holiness, and the ladder to the state of intimacy, this noble *sūrah*
gives the order to start the spiritual ascension and the gnostic
journey.

The servant, at the beginning of the travel to Allah, is imprisoned and
wrapped in the dark veils of the world of nature and in the luminous
ones of the invisible world, while the travel to Allah is getting out of
these veils by the steps of spiritual conduct. Actually, migration to
Allah is turning away from the house of self and from the house of
creation to Allah, leaving multiplicities, rejecting the dust of
otherness and attaining the Unities [*tawhīdāt*]*.*

It is absence from creation and presence before the Lord. When in the
noble *āyah* “**Owner of the Day of Judgment”** he finds that
multiplicity disappears under the shining light of the Ownership and
Omnipotence, he experiences a state of effacement from multiplicity and
being present before Allah, the Exalted, and, by personally conversing
and witnessing the Beauty and Majesty, he offers himself to servitude,
and presents his quest for Allah and his piety to the Sacred Presence
and the meeting of intimacy.

The fact that the pronoun *iyyāka* is used for this purpose is because
this pronoun returns to the Essence in which multiplicity is vanished.
So, the *sālik* in this situation may have a mood of Unity of Essence,
turning away from the multiplicity of names and attributes, and the
heart turns towards the Essence that is free from the veils of
multiplicity.

This is the perfect monotheism which was referred to by the Imām of the
monotheists, the head of the gnostics, the leader of the lovers, the
pioneer of the attracted and the beloved, Amīr al-Mu'minīn ['Alī], may
Allah bless him and his infallible offspring, who said: “The perfect
monotheism is the negation of ascribing attribute to Him,”[^72] as an
attribute denotes otherness [*ghayriyyat*] and plurality [*kathrat*]*,*
while this inclination, though to the plurality of Names, is far from
the secrets of monotheism and the facts of abstraction. Thus, probably,
the secret of Adam's sin was inclination towards the plurality of Names,
which was the spirit of the forbidden tree.

A Gnostic Inquiry
-----------------

Be informed that the literalists show some opinions in respect of
“*na'budu*” (we worship) and “*nasta'īn*” (we seek help), concerning
their being in the first person plural number, whereas the speaker is
actually a single person.

They say that, in this connection, a lawful trick has occurred to the
worshipper in order to have his worship accepted by Allah, the Exalted.
By using a plural pronoun he places his worship among the worshipping of
other creatures, among whom, of course, are the perfect ones of Allah's
friends whose worship is accepted by Allah, the Exalted, and presents it
to the threshold of Holiness and the Court of Mercy, making sure that
his worship will, implicitly, be accepted, since it is not of the custom
of the Generous to discriminate in the deal.

They also say that as the *salāt* was imposed first in congregation, so
it came in the plural.

Talking about the general secret of the *adhān* and the *iqāmah* we
stated a point from which this secret can be recognized to some extent.
That is, the *adhān* is proclaiming that the visible and invisible
powers of the *sālik* are ready to be present in His Presence, and the
*iqāmah* is to have them stand upright before Him.

When the *sālik* prepared his visible and invisible powers to be present
in the Presence, and the heart, which is their leader, stood upright as
their Imām, then the *salāt* has been started and “The believer alone is
a congregation.”[^73] So, “*na'budu*, *nasta'īn* and *ihdinā*” (“We
worship,” “we seek help” and “guide us”), all would be performed by this
congregation in the Holy Presence. In the narrations and the invocations
of the pure infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* ('*a*) who are the source of
Gnosticism and divine vision, there is a reference to this concept.

Another opinion which occurs to the writer is that the *sālik* regards
all the praises and thanks from every praiser and thanker, in the
visible and invisible worlds, to be exclusively confined to the Holy
Essence of Allah. It is also clearly proved in the proofs of the Imāms
of proofs, and in the hearts of the gnostics that all the beings in the
circle of the existence worldly and heavenly, big and small have the
life of sensibility and understanding of animality, or rather of
humanity, and they praise and glorify Allah, the Exalted, rationally and
consciously. It is fixed in the nature [*fitrat*] of all beings, the
human species in particular, to submit to the Holy Presence of the
Perfect and the Absolute Beautiful, and their foreheads are on the dust
of His Holy Threshold, as is stated in the Glorious Qur'an:

*“**…and there is not a single thing but glorifies Him, but you do
not*** ***understand their glorification.”***[^74]

Other noble *āyah*s, and narratives of the infallibles, which are full
of this divine grace, support this fixed judging proof. So, if the
traveler to Allah could find this truth through argumentative reasoning,
faithful taste or gnostic vision, he would realize, whatever position he
is in, that all the particles of the existence and the dwellers of the
invisible and visible worlds, worship the Absolute Worshipped and seek
their Creator. Thus, the plural form [of the pronoun] is used because
all beings, in all their movements and stillness, worship the Sacred
Essence of Allah, the Exalted, and seek His help.

A Notice and a Point
--------------------

Know that the reason for giving priority to *iyyāka na'budu* over
*iyyāka nasta'īn* despite the usual custom that seeking help for worship
comes before worship is that “worship” is prior to “seeking help,” not
to “helping.” Sometimes “helping” happens without “seeking help.” Also
they say that, as these two are related to each other, advancing or
retarding can make no difference, as it is said: “You did observe my
due, so, you did me good.” or “You did me good, so you did observe my
due.” Furthermore, seeking help is for future worship, not for present
worship. The dullness of these opinions is not concealed from the people
of taste [*ahl-i dhawq*]*.*

Maybe the point is that confining “seeking help” to Allah, the Exalted,
comes, according to the state of the travel to Allah, later than
confining “worship” to Him. It is quite obvious that a good number of
the monotheists in worship, who confine “worship” to Allah, are
polytheists in “seeking help” and do not confine it to Allah, as we have
already quoted some exegetes who believe that confining “seeking help”
to Allah is not real. So, confining “worship” to Allah, in its
conventional concept, is of the first states of the monotheists, and
confining “seeking help” is an absolute rejection of other than Allah.

It should not be hidden, however, that “seeking help” does not mean to
“seek help” only in worshipping, but in all affairs, and this is after
rejecting the means and neglecting multiplicities, and completely
turning to Allah. In other words, confining “worship” is seeking Allah,
wanting Him and giving up turning to other than Him. And confining
“seeking help” is seeing Him, and giving up seeing other than Him. This
“giving up seeing other than Him” comes, according to the stations of
the gnostics and the stages of the *sālik*s, later than “giving up
seeking other than Him.”

A Gnostic Advantage
-------------------

O traveling servant, know that confining “worship” and “seeking help” to
Allah is also not of the states of the monotheists and perfect stages of
the *sālik*s, because it implies a claim contrary to monotheism and
abstraction. They even believe that seeing worship, worshipper,
worshipped, help-seeker, and the one whose help is sought, and seeking
help are contrary to monotheism.

In the real monotheism, which appears in the heart of the *sālik*, such
multiplicities vanish, and seeing such affairs is effaced. Yes, those
who have come to themselves from the invisible attraction and have
attained sobriety, multiplicity does not form a veil for them, because
people are of many groups:

A group consists of the veiled, such as we, the helpless, who are
wrapped in the dark veils of nature.

Another group consists of the *sālik*s, the travelers to Allah, the
emigrants to the Court of Holiness.  
 A third group consists of the united [*wāsilān*], who have come out of
the veils of multiplicity and have been engaged with Allah, neglecting
all creatures and veiled against them, as they have undergone a complete
swoon and an absolute annihilation.

Another group consists of those who have come back to the creatures, and
who have the post of completers and guides, such as the great prophets
and their successors ('*a*). Although they are among multiplicity and in
charge of guiding the people, multiplicity does not veil them, but it
forms an isthmus-like state for them.

Consequently, “*iyyāka na'budu wa iyyāka nasta'īn*” has different
implications in respect of the different groups mentioned above. To us,
the veiled, it is a mere allegation and an image. But if we become aware
of our veil and recognize our shortcoming, our worship becomes more
luminous in proportion to the degree of our awareness of our
shortcoming, and becomes, accordingly, accepted by Allah, the Exalted.
To the *sālik*s, it is nearer to the truth in proportion to the
traveling step. To the united [*wāsilān*], in respect of seeing Allah,
it is the truth, and, in respect of seeing multiplicity, it is a mere
image and a customary act. To the perfect ones, it is mere truth, and
so, they have veil neither against Allah nor against the creatures.

A Faithful Awakening
--------------------

Do know, dear, that as long as we are in this heavy veil of the world of
nature, spending our life on colonizing the world and its pleasures, and
being negligent of Allah, the Exalted, of remembering Him and of
thinking about Him, all our worshippings, invocations and recitations
will contain no truth neither in *al-hamdu lillāh* (praise is for Allah)
we can confine praises to Allah, nor in *iyyāka na'budu wa iyyāka
nasta'īn* can we find a way to the truth.

With these empty claims in the presence of Allah, the Exalted, the
favorite angels, the messenger prophets and the infallible guardians, we
will be disgraced and humiliated. The one whose tongue of state and
speech never stops praising the people of this world, how can he say,
“**All praise is for Allah?”** The one whose heart is inclined to
nature, and is empty of any divine scent, and whose dependence is on the
people, with which tongue can he utter: “**You do we worship and you do
we seek help from.”**

So, if you are the man for this field, then tuck up the skirt of
determination, and, with intense remembrance and contemplation of
Allah's Greatness, and of the creatures' humiliation, inability and
poverty, try first to convey the facts and the delicate matters
mentioned in this thesis, to your heart, and enliven your heart by
remembering Allah, the Exalted, so as to bring to your heart's sense of
smell a scent of monotheism, and, with the help of the Unseen, to find a
passage to the *salāt* of the people of knowledge.

If you are not the man for this field, at least you are to continually
remember your faults, pay attention to your humility and inability,
perform your duties out of shame and disgrace, and avoid claiming
servitude. And these noble *āyah*s, with whose graces you are not
acquainted, recite them either through the tongues of the perfect ones,
or consider yourself merely reciting the form of the Qur'an, so that, at
least, you may not claim a false allegation.

A Juristic Branch
-----------------

Some jurisprudents see that it is not allowed to intend composition
[*inshā'*] in sentences like *iyyāka na'budu wa iyyāka nasta'īn*,
thinking that it would be a contradiction to the Qur'an and reciting it,
since recitation is relating the words of someone else. This talk has no
justification, because as one can praise someone with his own words, he
can use somebody else's words for the purpose.

For example, if we praised somebody using Hāfiz's poetry, it would be
true that we have praised the intended person, and it would also be true
that we have recited Hāfiz's poetry. So, if we, by saying “**All praise
is for Allah, the Lord of the worlds,”** actually compose all the
praises for Allah, and by saying “**You do we worship”** we compose the
confinement of worship to Allah, it will come true that with Allah's
words we have praised Him, and with Allah's words we have confined
worship to Him.

But if somebody emptied the words from their compositional meaning, he
would be acting contrary to precaution, if not to say his reciting would
be *bātil* (invalid). However, if someone did not know it, it would not
be necessary for him to learn it, as the formal reciting with its own
meaning would do.

Some of the noble narratives refer to the fact that the reciter
composes, as is in the *Hadīth Qudsī*: “When he [the servant] says in
his *salāt*: “**In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful,”**
Allah says: “My servant remembered me”, and when he says: “**All praise
is for Allah,”** Allah says: “My servant praised me”…etc.[^75]

If the “*bismillāh*” and “praising” were not composed by the servant,
“remembered me” and “praised Me” would have no meaning. In the *hadīth*s
of *Mi'rāj* it is said: “Now that you have arrived, recite My Name”[^76]
[i.e. say the *bismillāh*]*.* From the moods of the Imāms of guidance
('**a**) on reciting “The Owner of the Day of Judgment,” and “You do we
worship,” and from their repeating these *āyah*s, it is clear that they
were composing, not merely reciting, like: Ismā'īl testifies that there
is no god but Allah.[^77]

One of the important differences of the ranks of the *salāt* of godly
people is due to this very difference in their recitation, as we have
already referred to some of it. This, however, would not come about
unless the reciter was intending the composition in his recitations and
remembrances. Evidences proving this are much more than this. In short,
composing these concepts by the divine words is not objectionable.

An Advantage
------------

The linguists say that “worship” means utmost submission and humbleness.
They also say that since worshipping is the highest degree of
submission, it does not befit except the one who is at the highest
degree of existence and perfection, and the greatest of the degrees of
grace and benevolence, and as such, worshipping other than Allah is
polytheism. Probably, “worshipping” which in the Persian language means
“adoration” and “servitude” actually implies more than that which has
been said, i.e. it is submission to the Creator and the Lord.

It follows that such a submission is inseparable from taking the
worshipped to be the Diety and Lord, or for example, His semblance and
manifestation. Consequently, worshipping other than Allah is polytheism
and disbelief. However, absolute submission, without this belief or
deciding this meaning, even reluctantly, and even if it reached the
utmost submission, would not be a reason for disbelief and polytheism,
although some kinds of it are regarded to be *harām* such as placing the
forehead on the dust by way of submission; though this is not
worshipping, but it is apparently religiously prohibited.

Therefore, the homage paid by the followers of a religion to their
religious leaders, believing that they, too, are servants in need of
Allah, the Exalted, for everything for the existence itself and for its
perfection and that they are good servants who, although can have no
advantage, harm, life and death for themselves, are, through their
servitude, in the proximity of the Court of Allah, the Exalted, and
subject to His care, and a means of His grants, cannot be mixed with any
blemish of polytheism and disbelief. To respect the favorites of Allah
is to respect Him, and “To love Allah's elects is to Love Allah.”

Among the groups of “I call Allah to witness, and Allah is sufficient as
a witness,” the group that is by the blessing of *Ahl al-Bayt* of
revelation and infallibility, the resources of knowledge and wisdom more
excellent in unifying, glorifying and exalting Allah, the Most High,
than all other groups of humanity, is the group of the 12-Imām
*Shī'ah*s.

Their books of the principles of belief such as the honorable book of
*al-Kāfī*, and the honorable book of *at-Tawhīd* by ash-Shaykh as-Sadūq
(may Allah be pleased with him) and speeches and invocations of their
infallible Imāms, which, in unifying and glorifying Allah, the Most
High, are the issues of the said resources of revelation and
inspiration, testify that such sciences were unprecedented among
humanity, and that no one has glorified and exalted Allah, the Most
High, like them, after the holy revelation of the Divine Sacred Book,
the Glorious Qur'an, which is written by the hand of the Omnipotent.

Despite the fact that the *Shī'ah*s, in all countries and times have
been following those infallible, pure and monotheist Imāms of guidance,
and through their explicit reasoning and proofs they have known Allah,
and glorified and unified Him, yet, some groups, whose heresy is quite
clear in their beliefs and books, opened the door of contestation and
abuse against them, and, owing to the inner hostility which they had,
accused the followers of the infallible *Ahl al-Bayt* of polytheism and
disbelief.

Although, in the market of knowledge and philosophy, this is worthless,
yet its corrupting effect is that the incomplete people and the ignorant
and the common, may be driven away from the sources of knowledge towards
ignorance and wretchedness. This is a grave crime against humanity which
is never retrievable.

Concerning this subject, and according to rational and religious
criteria, the responsibility of the crime and the sin of this defective,
ignorant and helpless group is to be upon the conscience of the unfair
who, for their imagined transitory interests prevented the spread of the
divine knowledge and precepts, and were the cause of the wretchedness
and the adversity of the human species, and rendered all the painful
efforts of “the best of men” [*khayr al-bashar*] lost and nill, closing
the door of the House of Revelation and the Qur'an in the face of the
people. “O Allah, curse them an intense cursing and torture them a
painful torment.”

“**Guide us to the straight path,” etc.**

Do know, dear, that there is a reference in the noble *sūrah* of
*al-Hamd* (the Opening) to the conduct of the people of knowledge and
austerity, and up to “**You do we worship”** it covers the complete
journey from creation up to Allah. When the *sālik* proceeds from the
Manifestations of Acts to the Manifestations of Attributes, and thence
to the Manifestations of Essence, and comes out from the luminous and
dark veils, and attains the state of presence and witnessing, there
happens complete annihilation and full consumption [*istihlāk-i kullī*].

When the journey to Allah ends by the setting of the horizon of
servitude and the rise of the sovereignty of ownership in the “**Owner
of the Day of Judgment,”** at the end of this *sulūk* there takes place
a state of establishment and stability, and the *sālik* comes to
himself, and becomes sober and attentive to his own state, but as a
result of being attentive to Allah. This is contrary to the state of
returning [*rujū'*] to Allah, for attending to Allah was a result of
attending to the creatures.

In other words, during the journey to Allah he used to see Allah in the
veil of creation, and after returning from the state of complete
annihilation, which takes place in the “**Owner of the Day of
Judgment,”** he sees the creation in the light of Allah, and thus, he
says: “**You** **do we worship”** giving priority to the object, the
addressee, over himself and his worship. And, as in this position there
may be no stability, and slipping can be imagined, he demands his
stability and firmness from Allah, the Exalted, and says: “**Guide us”**
which means: make us firm, as was explained.

It must be noted that the said position and the said explanation are for
the perfect ones of the people of knowledge. Their first state is that
in the state of returning from the journey to Allah, He, the Exalted,
becomes their veil against the creation. And their state of perfection
is the state of great *barzakh* (isthmus), in which neither the creation
becomes the veil against Allah, such as we, the veiled, nor Allah
becomes the veil against creation, such as the eager united, and the
attracted annihilated.

So, their “**Straight path”** is this isthmus situation, in the middle
between the two creations (worlds) [*nash'atayn*], and it is the path of
Allah. Therefore, “**those upon whom you have bestowed favors”** are the
ones whose aptitude [*isti'dād*] has been established by Allah, the
Exalted, through the manifestation of the “Holiest Emanation” in His
knowledge [*hadrat-i 'ilmiyyah*], and, after complete annihilation, He
has returned them to their kingdom. “**Those inflicted by wrath,”**
according to this exegesis, are those who are veiled before the union
[*wusūl*], and “**Those who have gone astray”** are those who have
vanished in the Presence [*hadrat*]*.*

As regards the imperfect ones, if they have not yet started their
*sulūk*, these matters will not come true in their respect, and their
“path” is the apparent religious form. For this reason “**the straight
path”** is interpreted to mean “religion,” “Islam” and the like. If they
are of the people of *sulūk*, by “guidance” they mean “showing the way,”
and by “**the straight path”** they mean the shortest way of reaching
Allah, which is the way of the Messenger of Allah (*s*) and *Ahl
al-Bayt* ('*a*), as the exegetes say that it means the Messenger of
Allah, the Imāms of guidance and Amīr al-Mu'minīn ['Alī] ('*a*).

In a *hadīth* it is said that the Messenger of Allah (*s*) once drew a
straight line in the middle and other lines at its sides and said: “This
middle straight line is from me.”[^78] The expression “a middle nation”
in the noble *āyah*

“**We have made you a middle nation,”**[^79]

Probably means an absolute middle covering all meanings, including the
middle in knowledge and spiritual perfections, which is an isthmus big
position and a great middle.

For this reason this station belongs to the perfect ones of Allah's
friends. That is why it is in the narrative that by this the Imāms of
guidance ('*a*) are intended, as Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*) says to Yazīd ibn
Mu'āwiyah al-'Ijlī: “We are the middle nation and we are the witnesses
of Allah over mankind.”[^80] In another narrative, he also says: “To us
returns the extravagant [*ghālī*] and to us refers the negligent
[*muqassir*],”[^81] in which *hadīth* there is a reference to what has
been said.

An Illuminative Notice and A Gnostic Illumination
-------------------------------------------------

Do know, you who are in quest of Allah and truth, that when Allah, the
Exalted, created the system of the existence and the demonstrations
[*mazāhir*] of the invisible and the visible, owing to His Essential
love to be known in the Names and Attributes, according to the noble
*hadīth*: “I was a Hidden Treasure, then I liked to be known, so I
created the creatures to become known,”[^82]

He devised a natural love and innovated an inborn longing in the
dispositions of all beings, so that by that divine attraction and godly
fire of love they may be driven to go in quest of the Absolute
Perfection and to long for the Absolute Beautiful. For each one of them
He assigned a divine inborn light with which they may find the way to
the destination and the objective.

These fire and light, the one is the *rafraf* of arrival [*wusūl*], and
the other the *burāq* of ascension both were the heavenly mounts of the
Messenger of Allah (*s*). Perhaps the ”*burāq*” and the ”*rafraf*” of
the Messenger of Allah (*s*) were the means [*raqīqah*] of this grace
[*latīfah*] and the corresponding worldly image [*sūrat-i
mutamaththila-i mulkiyyah*] of this truth, and that is why they were
sent down from Paradise, which is the *bātin* (interior, core) of this
world.

As the beings have descended in ranks of individuations and have been
veiled from the Beautiful Beauty of the Beloved, Glorified His
Greatness, Allah, the Exalted, takes them out of the dark veils of
individuations and the luminous I-nesses, by the said fire and light and
by the blessed name of “the Guide,” which is the reality of these means
[*raqāyiq*], so that they may reach the proximity of their Beloved,
their Real Objective, through the shortest way.

Thus, that light is “the guidance” of Allah, the Exalted, and that fire
is the divine “assistance” and the journey is on the shortest path which
is the “**straight path,”** since Allah, the Exalted, is on that
“**straight path.”** It is probably a reference to this guidance,
journey and destination that the *āyah* says:

*“**There is no living creature but He holds it by its forelock, surely
my Lord is on the straight path,”***[^83]

As it is clear to the people of knowledge.

It must be noted that every being has its own path, light and guidance:
“The ways to Allah are as many as the breaths of the creatures.”[^84]
And, as in every individuation [*ta'ayyun*] there is a veil of darkness,
and in every being and I-ness there is a luminous veil, and as Man is
the meeting place [*majma'*] of the phenomena [*ta'ayyunāt*] and the
collector of entities [*jāmi'-i wujūdāt*], he is the most veiled of the
beings from Allah, the Exalted. The noble *āyah*:

*“**Then we reduced him to the lowest of the low”***[^85]

Is probably a reference to this point. For this reason, the path of
mankind is the longest and darkest of all paths. And, as Man's “Lord” is
the Greatest Name of Allah, to Whom the external, the internal, the
first, the last, mercy, might, and generally, the counter names, all are
the same, Man, himself, has to go through the big isthmus stage at the
end of his journey, and this is the reason why his “path” is the most
delicate of all paths.

A Faithful Notice
-----------------

As has been said and is known, there are stages and degrees for guidance
in respect of the kinds of the journeys of the travelers to Allah and
the stages of the *sulūk*s of the *sālik*s. We shall briefly refer to
some of those stages, so that, meanwhile, the “**straight path,”** the
“path of the immoderates” [*sirāt-i mufritīn*] and the “path of the
extravagants” [*sirāt-i mufarritīn*], who are those who have been
“inflicted by wrath” and those who have “gone astray,” can be
distinguished according to each one of the stages.

First is that the light of guidance is inherent, as has already been
said in the former “notice.” In this stage of guidance, the “**straight
path”** is the *sulūk* to Allah without there being any visible or
invisible veil, or it is the *sulūk* to Allah without being veiled with
body or heart sins, or it is the *sulūk* to Allah without extravagance
[*ghuluww*] or negligence [*taqsīr*], or it is the *sulūk* to Allah
without being veiled with luminous or dark veils, or it is the *sulūk*
to Allah without the veils of unity or multiplicity.

Probably the *āyah*:

*“**He causes whom He wills to go astray, and guides whom He
wills”***[^86]

Is a hint at this stage of guidance and veilings ordained in the Fate
[*hadrat-i qadar*], which, to us, is the stage of Unity [*wāhidiyyat*]
manifested in the immutable essences [*hadarāt-i a'yān-i thābitah*]*.*
Yet, to expand upon this subject is out of the scope of this paper, or
it is even beyond the limits of writing it down: “It is one of Allah's
secrets and one of Allah's covers.”[^87]

Second is guidance by the light of the Qur'an, and on its counter side
is extravagance or negligence in knowing it, or stopping at its exterior
or its interior, as some of the formalists believe that the Qur'anic
Sciences are the very conventional and common meanings and the vulgar
and positive concepts, and, on the basis of this belief, they do not
meditate upon the Qur'an or contemplate it.

Their advantage from this luminous Book which undertakes man's
spiritual, bodily, heart and formal happinesses is confined only to its
formal and external instructions. They disregard all those *āyah*s which
enjoin, or recommend, contemplating and remembering the Qur'an and
making use of the light of it, by which many doors of knowledge can be
opened. It seems as if the Qur'an has been revealed only to invite to
the worldly pleasures and animal needs, and just to confirm the station
of bestial desires.

Some of the Esoterics [*ahl-i bātin*] think that they should turn away
from the external meaning of the Qur'an and its formal calls which are
the instructions of observing the disciplines of being in the divine
presence and how to travel to Allah, of which they are unaware. They
deviate from the exterior of the Qur'an, deceived by the tricks of the
accursed *Iblīs* and the evil-commanding soul, believing themselves to
be adherent to its internal sciences, despite the fact that the way to
the internal passes through observing the disciplines of the external.

These two groups are, at any rate, out of moderation and are deprived of
the light of guidance to the Qur'anic straight path, and are ascribed to
extremism on both sides. The researching scholars and the learned
scrutinizers should consider both the exterior and the interior and
observe the formal and the spiritual disciplines, lighting the external
with the light of the Qur'an, and the internal with the lights of
knowledge, monotheism and abstraction.  
 Let the people of literalism [*ahl-i zāhir*] know that to confine the
Qur'an to the disciplines of the external forms and a handful of
practical moral instructions and common beliefs about *tawhīd,* Names
and Attributes, is unobserving the Qur'an's due respect, and regarding
the *Sharī'ah* of the Seal of the Prophets (*s*) as imperfect, whereas
no *Sharī'ah* should be thought to be more perfect than that, as
otherwise being the “Seal” would be impossible according to the
criterion of justice.

So, as the Islamic Law is the Seal of the divine Laws, and as the Qur'an
is the Seal of the revealed Books, and the last connection between the
Creator and the creatures, the facts of *tawhīd*, abstraction and divine
knowledge, which are the original objective and the essential aim of the
divine religions, laws and the revealed Books, should represent the last
of the stages and the utmost peak of perfection, or else, there must
necessarily be a shortcoming in the Law, in which case, it would be
contrary to the divine justness and the Lord's kindness, which, in
itself, is a dishonorable impossibility and an ugly disgrace, which
cannot be washed off the true religions by the seven seas we take refuge
in Allah from that!

Let the Esoterics [*ahl-i bātin*] know that to reach the original
objective, the real end, is nothing but purifying the outside and the
inside, and without holding to the outer form and the outside one cannot
get to the inside. Without wearing the apparel of the outer form of the
*Sharī*'*ah*, the way to the inside cannot be found. So, neglecting the
outside means invalidating both the outside and the inside of the divine
Law. This is one of the tricks of the Satans of the *Jinn* and *Ins.* We
have explained some aspects of this point in our book “*Explanations of
Forty Hadīth*s,” as said before.

**Third** is guidance by the light of the *Sharī*'*ah.*  
**Fourth** is guidance by the light of Islam.  
**Fifth** is guidance by the light of faith.  
**Sixth** is guidance by the light of certainty.  
**Seventh** is guidance by the light of knowledge ['*irfān*]*.*  
**Eighth** is guidance by the light of love [*muhabbat*]*.*  
**Ninth** is guidance by the light of guardianship.  
**Tenth** is guidance by the light of abstraction and monotheism.

Each one of these has the extremes of excessiveness [*ifrāt*] and
shortcomings [*tafrīt*], exaggeration [*ghuluww*] and negligence
[*taqsīr*]. To go into details would make it lengthy. The noble *hadīth*
in *al-Kāfī* may be a hint at a part, or all, of it. It says: “…We, the
offspring of Muhammad, are the moderate type. The extremist [*ghālī*]
would not perceive us, and the follower [*tālī*] would not outstrip
us.”[^88] In a *hadīth* from the Prophet (*s*), it is said: The best of
this *Ummah* is the moderate type, with whom the followers catch up, and
to whom the extremists return.[^89]

A Gnostic Notice
----------------

Know that for every being of the invisible and visible worlds, and of
this world and the Hereafter, there is a beginning [*mabda'*] and a
destination [*ma'ād*]*.* Although the divine Ipseity [*huwiyyat*] is the
beginning and the destination [*marja'*] of all [beings], the Holy
Essence of Allah, the Most High, as He is, would not manifest to the
high and low beings without the veil of Names.

According to this state, which is a no-state [*lāmaqāmī*] that has no
name and no form, and is not qualified with the Names of Essence, of
Attributes and of Acts, no creature has any relation with Him, nor any
connection and mixing: “How can there be any comparison between dust and
the Lord of the Lords!”[^90] the details of this have been mentioned in
our *Misbāh al-Hidāyah.*

So, the firstness [*mabda'iyyat*] and the originality [*masdariyyat*] of
His Sacred Essence are in the veils of Names, and as the Name is the
very Named itself, it is, at the same time, its veil, too. Therefore,
manifestation in the invisible and visible worlds is according to the
Names and is veiled by them. For this reason, His Sacred Essence has, in
the display [*jilwah*] of the Names and Attributes, manifestations in
His Knowledge [*hadrat-i 'ilmiyyah*], whose individuals the people of
knowledge call “the fixed entities” (figures emblematic of the Names of
Allah = *a'yān-i thābitah*]*.*

Consequently, each nominal manifestation [*tajallī*] in His Knowledge
requires a fixed entity, and each Name has, by the determination
[*ta'ayyun*] of His Knowledge, in the outer world, an appearance
[*mazhar*] whose origin and end are the same Name which is suitable for
it; and the return of every being from the world of multiplicity to the
invisibility of the Name which is its origin and beginning, is its
“straight path.”

So, every one [of the beings] has a special journey and a special path,
as well as a predestined beginning and end, in His Knowledge, willingly
or unwillingly. The difference of the appearances [*mazāhir*] and paths
is due to the difference of the apparent [*zāhir*] and the Names.

It must be noted that man's “stature” [*taqwīm*] in the highest of the
high [*a'lā 'illīyyīn*] is the collection of Names [*jam'-i asmā'ī*]*.*
For this reason he is reduced to the lowest of the low [*asfal-i
sāfilīn*]*,* and his “path” starts from the lowest of the low and ends
up in the highest of the high. It is the path of those who are favored
by Allah with an absolute favor [*ni'mat*], the favor of the perfect
collection of the Names, which is the highest of the divine favors.

Other paths, whether the paths of the happy [*su'adā'*] and the “favored
ones” [*mun'amun 'alayhim*]*,* or the paths of the wretched
[*ashqiyā'*]*,* stand at either end of extravagance or negligence
[*tafrīt*], in proportion to how much they lack of the emanation of the
Absolute Favor. So, the path of the perfect man alone is that of those
who have been absolutely favored.

This path originally is assigned to the holy person of the Seal of the
Prophets (*s*), and, concomitantly [*bittaba 'iyyah*], it is confirmed
for other holy men [*awliyā'*] and prophets. To understand this talk,
and [its connection with] the fact that the generous Prophet is the Last
Prophet, one needs the understanding of the “Names” and the “Entities”
[*a'yān*], explained in the book *Misbāh al-Hidāyah.* Allah is the guide
to the way of uprightness.

Quotings for Further Information
--------------------------------

The dignified Shaykh Bahā'ī (may Allah sanctify his soul), in his
*al-'Urwat al-Wuthqā*, says: “Although the favors of Allah are too
numerous to be numbered by counting, as Allah says:

*“**And if you count Allah's favors, you will not be able to number
them,”***[^91]

Yet, they are of two kinds: the mundane favors and the favors of the
Hereafter. Each one of them is either natural or acquired, and each one
of them is either spiritual or corporeal. So, they are, all in all,
eight kinds:

**First**: mundane, natural and spiritual, such as the blowing of the
spirit and the emanation of the intellect and comprehension.

**Second**: mundane, natural and corporeal, such as the creation of the
organs and their powers.

**Third:** mundane, acquired and spiritual, such as emptying the self
from low affairs, and adorning it with pure morals and high faculties.

**Fourth:** mundane, acquired and corporeal, such as decorating [the
body] with laudable forms and good ornaments.

**Fifth:** of the Hereafter, natural and spiritual, such as His
forgiving the sins of us, and His being pleased with those of us who
have already repented. This is the exact text of the Shaykh in this
example. It seems that it is a mistake on the part of the copier.
Probably he meant to say that Allah, the Exalted, may forgive us without
first repenting. Refer to it.

**Sixth**: of the Hereafter, natural and corporeal, such as rivers of
milk and honey.

**Seventh:** of the Hereafter, acquired and spiritual, such as
forgiveness and pleasure [of Allah] preceded by repentance, and as the
spiritual pleasure which is concomitant to acts of worship.

**Eighth:** of the Hereafter, acquired and corporeal, such as the bodily
pleasures which are obtained by the acts of worship.

The intended favor here is the last four kinds, and the things that are
the means of attaining to these kinds from the first four kinds.[^92]
(The end of the Shaykh's talk, May Allah sanctify his soul).  
 Nice as these divisions of the Shaykh are, the most important one of
the divine favors, the greatest objective of the noble divine Book, has
slipped off the Shaykh's pen. He has satisfied himself with the favors
of the imperfect or the medium class. Although in his talk he refers to
“spiritual pleasure,” yet the spiritual pleasure of the Hereafter which
is obtained by the acts of worship is the share of the middle class, if
not the share of the imperfect.

Generally, apart from what the Shaykh has said concerning the animal
pleasures and the shares of the soul, there are other favors of which
three are important:

One is the favor of knowing the Essence and the Unity of Essence, whose
principle is the *sulūk* to Allah, and its result is the paradise of
meeting [Allah]. But if the *sālik*'s attention is directed to the
result, there can be a default in his *sulūk* because this is the state
of abandoning oneself and its pleasures, whereas caring for the result
is caring for oneself, and this is worshipping oneself, not Allah. It is
multiplication [*takthīr*], not unification [*tawhīd*]*.* It is a
[Satanic] disguise, not abstraction.

Another one is the favor of knowing the Names a favor which is ramified
in as many branches as the multiplicity of the Names. If its items are
individually counted, they will amount to a thousand, and if it is taken
in its two-name or multi-name compounds, it will be uncountable.

*“**And if you count Allah's favors, you will not be able to number
them.”***[^93]

The unification of Names, in this state, is the favor of knowing the
Greatest Name, which is the state of the “Collective Oneness of the
Names” [*ahadiyyat-i jam'-i asmā'*]*.* The result of knowing the Names
is the paradise of Names, [for] each person in proportion to knowing a
single Name or many Names, individually or collectively.

The third is the favor of knowing the Acts, which also has infinitely
many branches. The state of *tawhīd* in this stage is the Collective
Oneness of the manifestation of Acts, which is the state of the “Holy
Emanation” and the state of the “Absolute Guardianship.” And its result
is the paradise of the Acts, which is the manifestations of Allah's Acts
in the heart of the *sālik.* The manifestation that happened to Moses,
the son of 'Imrān, when he said:

*“**I see a fire,”***[^94]

Was probably a Manifestation of Acts, and the saying of Allah, the
Exalted:

*“**And when his Lord manifested His glory to the mountain, He made it
crumble to dust, and Moses fell down in a swoon,”***[^95]

Was a Manifestation of Names or of Essence.

Therefore, the path of those “upon whom favor is bestowed,” is, in the
first place, “the path” of the journey to the Essence of Allah, and the
“favor” in that instance is the Manifestation of the Essence. And, in
the second place, “the path” is the *sulūk* to the Names of Allah, and
the “favor” in that instance is the Manifestation of the Names.

And in the third place, the journey is to the Act of Allah, and its
“favor” is the Manifestation of the Acts. The people of these states do
not seek the common paradises and pleasures, whether spiritual or
corporeal. These states, according to some narratives, are confirmed for
some believers.[^96]

Conclusion
----------

Know that the blessed *Sūrah* of *al-Fātihah* (the Opening), as it
contains all the stages of existence, also contains all the stages of
*sulūk* and, further, it contains, by way of allusion [*ishārah*], all
the objectives of the Qur'an. Delving deep into these matters, though it
needs a complete expansion and a logic other than this one, yet to refer
to each one of them is not profitless, or rather it has many advantages
for the people of knowledge and certitude.

So, in the first place we say that it is possible that “**In the Name of
Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful”** is a hint at the entire circle of
existence and at the two bows of descension and ascension. So, “**Name
of Allah”** is the state of the Oneness of “contraction and expansion”
[*qabd wa bast*]. “**The Beneficent”** is the state of “expansion and
appearance,” which is the bow of descension, and “**The Merciful”** is
the state of “contraction and covertness,” which is the bow of
ascension.

“**All praise is for Allah”** is possibly a reference to the world of
Might ['*ālam-i jabarūt*] and the Higher kingdom, whose realities are
the absolute praisings. “**The Lord of the worlds”** that concerns
“education” and “worlds,” which is the state of differentiation
[*sawā'iyyat*], is probably a reference to the worlds of nature, which,
by the substance of essence, are moving, passing, and under education.
“**The Owner of the Day of Judgment”** refers to the state of Unity,
Omnipotence [*qahhāriyyat*] and the return of the circle of existence.
Up to here the entire circle of existence, descending and ascending, has
been covered.

In the second place we say that the *isti'ādhah*, which is an act of
supererogation, can be a reference to forsaking other than Allah, and
running away from the Satanic domain. And, as this is a preliminary
[stage] to the other states, not a part of them since abandoning is the
preliminary to be adorned [with virtues], and in itself it is not of the
states of perfection therefore, the *isti'ādhah* is not a part of the
*sūrah*, but a prelude to enter into it.

The *tasmiyah* [the *bismillāh*] may point to the state of the Unity of
Acts and of Essence, and joining both together. “**All praise is for
Allah”** up to “**The Lord of the worlds”** may be a reference to the
Unity of Acts. Perhaps “**The Owner of the Day of Judgment”** is a hint
at complete annihilation and Unity of Essence, and from “**You do we
worship”** the state of sobriety and return starts. In other words,
*isti'ādhah* is a journey from the creatures to Allah, a coming out of
the house of the soul.

“*Tasmiyah*” is a reference to “realizing the love of Allah” [*tahaqquq
beh haqqāniyyat*] after taking off creation and multiplicity. “**All
praise is for Allah”** up to “**The Lord of the worlds”** is a reference
to the journey from Allah, by Allah and in Allah. This journey
terminates by “**The Owner of the Day of Judgment.”** In “**You do we
worship”** the journey from Allah to the creatures begins with the
attainment of sobriety and return.

This journey ends with “**Guide us to the straight path.”**

In the third place we say that this noble *sūrah* contains the main
divine objectives in the Qur'an, since the principal objectives of the
Qur'an are: the completion of knowing Allah and acquiring the three
Unities, the connection between Allah and the creatures, how to travel
to Allah, the return of the *raqā'iq* (the divine means) to the “Truth
of the truths” [*haqīqat al-haqā'iq*]*,* introducing the divine
manifestations, collectively [*jam'-an*] and distinctly [*tafsīl-an*],
in single [*fard-an*] and in compound [*tarkīb-an*], directing the
creatures, in *sulūk* and in realization [*tahaqquq-an*]*,* and teaching
the servants, in knowledge, practice, gnosticism and vision. All these
facts are contained in this noble *sūrah*, much brief and short as it
is.

Therefore, this noble *sūrah* is “The Opening of the Book,” “The Mother
of the Book” and the general form of the objectives of the Qur'an. And,
as all the objectives of the Divine Book return to a single objective,
i.e. the truth of monotheism, which is the goal of all prophethood and
the ultimate aim of all the great prophets ('*a*), and the truths and
the secrets of monotheism are contained in the noble *āyah* of
*bismillāh,* so, this noble *āyah* is the greatest of the divine *āyah*s
and contains all the objectives of the Divine Book, as is confirmed by
the noble *hadīth*[^97]*.*

As the “*bā'*” [ب] is the appearance of *tawhīd,* and the dot[^98] under
it is its secret, the, whole Book, its overt and covert, is in that
“*ba'*” [ب]. And the perfect man, that is, the blessed person of 'Alī
('*a*) is the very dot of the secret of *tawhīd.*[^99] There is no
*āyah* in the world greater than that blessed person after the Seal of
the Messengers (*s*), as is stated in the noble *hadīth.*[^100]

Completion
----------

Some noble narratives related about the merit [*fadl*] of this blessed
*Sūrah*:

The Messenger of Allah (*s*) has been quoted to have said to Jābir ibn
'Abdullāh al-Ansārī (may Allah be pleased with him): “O Jābir, don't you
want me to teach you the most merited *sūrah* revealed by Allah in His
Book?” Jābir said: “O yes, may my father and mother be your ransom,
Messenger of Allah, teach me.” He, thus, taught him [*sūrah*]
“*al-Hamd*,” the Mother of the Book. Then he said: “O Jābir, don't you
want me to tell you about it?” “Yes, may my father and mother be your
ransom, Messenger of Allah, tell me,” said Jābir. “It is a cure for
every ailment except death,” he said.[^101]

Ibn 'Abbās related that the Messenger (*s*) once said: “For everything
there is a foundation. The foundation of the Qur'an is 'the Opening'
[*sūrah*] and the foundation of the 'Opening' is *bismillāh 'ir-Rahmān
'ir-Rahīm* (In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful).[^102]

He is also quoted to have said: “The Opening [*sūrah*] of the Book is
the cure for every illness.”[^103]

Imām Ja'far as-Sādiq ('*a*) is quoted to have said that if the *sūrah*
of the Opening did not cure a person, nothing else would cure him.[^104]

Imām 'Alī ('*a*) is quoted to have said that the Messenger of Allah
(*s*) said: “Allah, the Exalted, told me:

*“**O Muhammad, We have given you sab 'ul mathānī [another name of the
sūrah of the*** *“**Opening”] and the great Qur'an.”***[^105]  
 I am graced with a separate favor by the Opening of the Book, which is
put on the same level as the Qur'an. Indeed, the Opening of the Book is
the most honored thing in the treasures of the '*Arsh*, and Allah, the
Exalted, has bestowed its honor upon Muhammad (*s*), sharing no one of
the prophets in it, except Solomon, to whom Allah gave the *Bismillāh*
of the Opening *sūrah*, i.e. *Bismillāh 'ir-Rahmān 'ir-Rahīm,* as Bilqīs
says:

*“**An honorable letter has been thrown to me. It is from Solomon, and
it is: In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.”***[^106]

So, whoever recites it, believing in loving Muhammad and his offspring,
obeying its command and believing in its outside and inside, Allah, the
Exalted, will grant him, for each of its letters a favor, which is, in
fact, preferred to the whole world and whatever is in it of different
kinds of properties and good things. Whoever listens to it being recited
will get one-third of that which is given to its reciter. So, let
everyone of you increase his share of this blessing offered to him, as
it is a chance that you must not be late in taking it, otherwise your
hearts will regret it much.[^107]

Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) is quoted to have said: “It is no wonder if [the
*sūrah* of] *al*-Hamd is recited seventy times over a dead and it comes
back to life.”[^108]

The Messenger of Allah (*s*) is quoted to have said: “Whoever recites
the *sūrah* of 'the Opening of the Book' will get the reward of reciting
two-thirds of the Qur'an.[^109] Another narration says: “It will be like
reciting the whole Qur'an.”[^110]

Ubay ibn Ka'b narrated: “I recited to the Messenger of Allah (*s*) the
*sūrah* of the Opening. He said: “By the One in Whose Hand is my soul,
Allah did not reveal in the Torah, nor in the Gospel, the Psalms or the
Qur'an a *sūrah* like “The Opening of the Book.” It is *ummul kitāb*
(The Mother of the Book) and *as-sab 'ul-mathānī* (the repeated seven
[*āyah*s])*.* It is divided between Allah and His servant, and it is for
His servant to demand whatever he wants.”[^111]

Hudhayfah ibn al-Yamān (may Allah be pleased with him) is quoted to have
said that the Messenger of Allah (*s*) said: “Allah, the Exalted, may
send an inevitable punishment upon a nation. Then one of their children
recites: 'All praise is for Allah, the Lord of the worlds,' in the Book
of Allah. On hearing this, Allah, The Most High, postpones torturing
them for forty years.”[^112]

Ibn 'Abbas said that once they were sitting with the Messenger of Allah
(*s*) when an angel came and said: “Good tidings to you for the two
lights which have been given to you, and never given to the prophets
before you. They are 'The Opening of the Book' and the seals of the
*sūrah* of *al-Baqarah* .No one recites a single word of them unless his
demand is granted.”[^113] This narrative is also related in *al-Majma'*,
with nearly the same content.[^114]

[^1]: Refer to footnote 384.

[^2]: This aspect of the meaning of the Bismillāh is stated by Muhyiddīn
ibn al-'Arabī in his al-Futūhāt al-Makkīyyah, vol. 1, p. 102.

[^3]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 149, “Book of at-Tawhīd,” ch. on “The
Will is Among the Attributes of Action…,” hadīth 4; Bihār al-Anwār, vol.
4, p. 145.

[^4]: Mir'āt al-'Uqūl, vol. 2, p. 19; Al-Wāfī, vol. 1, p. 100.

[^5]: Al-Wāfī, vol. 1, sec. on “Knowing His Attributes and Names, the
Glorified,” ch. on “The Attributes of the Act,” explanation of hadīth 4,
p. 100.

[^6]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, “Book of  at-Tawhīd,” ch. “Rarities,” hadīth
4, p. 196.

[^7]: From the noble invocation called Du'ā as-Simāt. See Misbāh
al-Mutahajjid, p. 376.

[^8]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:143.

[^9]: Extracted from the du'ā of as-Simāt, Misbāh al-Mutahajjid,  p.
376.

[^10]: Sūrah Tā-Hā 20:14

[^11]: Refer to footnote 219

[^12]: Refer to footnote 220

[^13]: “So he was at the measure of two bows or closer still.” Sūrah
an-Najm 53:9

[^14]: Refer to footnote 199

[^15]: The exegesis of Du'ā' us-Sahar is of the exudations of the pen of
Imām Khomeinī (may Allah be pleased with him) in Arabic. The aim of
writing it, as the exegete himself says, was to explain some aspects of
the noble invocation called ”mubāhilah.” (The invocation of Sahar has
been narrated from the pure Imāms ['a]). The writing of this noble book
was completed in 1349, L.H.

[^16]: Sūrah an-Nūr 24:35

[^17]: Sūrah az-Zukhruf 43:84

[^18]: Majma' ul-Bayān, vol. 1, p. 21, quoting Imām Ja'far as-Sādiq
('a), with a slight difference.

[^19]: Ma'āniy ul-Akhbār, p. 3; Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 89, p. 229.

[^20]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 4, p. 340, “the Book of the Invocation,” ch.
on “Invoking on Calamities,” hadīth 6; As-Sahīfah as-Sajjadiyyah,
Invocation 54.

[^21]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:156.

[^22]: 'Ilm al-Yaqīn, vol.1, p. 57.

[^23]: Jalāluddīn as-Suyūtī, Ad-Durr al-Manthūr fī Tafsīri bil-Ma'thūr,
vol. 1, p. 9, quoted from al-Asmā' was-Sifāt by al-Bayhaqī.

[^24]: A current proverb. Asrār al-Hikam, by Sabzewārī, p.52.

[^25]: Sūrah al-Humazah 104:6-7.

[^26]: In the Name of Allah. It must be noted that confining all
praisings or the quality [jins] of praising to the two possibilities in
the ”a” [alif] and ”l” [lām] is contrary to the philosophic causality,
even if the causality is taken by its strict meaning, and it cannot be
justified except by the tongue of the Qur'an and the gnosticism of the
holy men [awliyā'] ('a).

[^27]: This is a reference to a line of poetry by Mawlawī, which has
previously been explained.

[^28]: This refers to a line of poetry by Hāfiz, in which he says: “I
did not reach the far-away palace of the phoenix (of truth) by myself; I
could cover it only by the help of Solomon's bird (the hoopoe, i.e. the
guide of wisdom)”.

[^29]: A reference to āyah 12 of the Sūrah Tā-Hā: “…put off your shoes,
you are in the sacred valley…”

[^30]: In some copies we find the word akhass (whose English equivalent
is “most special”). In some other copies it is akhass (which means “the
meanest”). The line is by Mawlawī.

[^31]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 5; Awāliy al-La'ālī, vol. 1, p. 389.

[^32]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 152, “Book of Faith and Disbelief,” ch.
on “Thanking,” hadīth 18.

[^33]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 90, p. 210, quoted from Shaykh at-Tūsī,
al-Amālī, vol. 1, p. 18.

[^34]: Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, printed by the Ahl al-Bayt Foundation, vol.
5, p. 314.

[^35]: Makārim al-Akhlāq, p. 307, section 10, ch. 3 on praising Allah
(with a slight difference).

[^36]: Reference untraceable.

[^37]: Inshā' ad-Dawā'ir, p. 28.

[^38]: Sūrah al-Hashr 59:22.

[^39]: “In every thing He has a sign proving that He is One.” Kashf
al-Asrār, by Maybudī, vol.1, p. 436. Some ascribe this verse to the Arab
poet, Abū 'l-'Atāhiyah.

[^40]: Poetry by Mawlawī.

[^41]: 'Ilm al-Yaqīn, vol. 1, p. 381.

[^42]: Sūrah Tā-Hā 20:41.

[^43]: Ibid 20:13.

[^44]: Sūrah al-Ghāshiyah 88:25.

[^45]: 'Uyūnu Akhbār ar-Ridā, vol. 2; al-Jāmi'ah al-Kabīrah invocation,
p. 272.

[^46]: Sūrah al-Ghāshiyah 88:25-26.

[^47]: Sūrah Hūd 11:56.

[^48]: Masāri'ul- Masārī', by Khājah Nasīruddīn, edited by Mu'izzī, p.
141.

[^49]: The lover's religion is other than that of the others, The
lovers' religion and creed is Allah. (Mawlawī)

[^50]: Such as: “Recite as the people recite” or “Recite as you have
learnt.” Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 4, “The Book of as-Salāt,” ch. on
“Recitation in the Salāt” ch. 74, hadīths 1-3, p. 821.

[^51]: Apparently, recitation according to any one of the ways of the
recitations is unanimously agreed upon.

[^52]: Sūrah al-Wāqi'ah 56:85

[^53]: Sūrah Qāf 50:16.

[^54]: Sūrah an-Nūr 24:35.

[^55]: Sūrah az-Zukhruf 43:84.

[^56]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:107.

[^57]: 'Ilm al-Yaqīn, vol. 1, p. 54.

[^58]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol., p. 170, “Book of at-Tawhīd,” ch. on “Movement
and Mobility,” hadīth 3.

[^59]: Ibid., hadīth 4.

[^60]: Sūrah Ghāfir 40:16.

[^61]: Sūrah ash-Shūrā 42:7.

[^62]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, pp. 131 and 132.

[^63]: Al-Asfār al-Arba'ah, vol. 7, p. 32; Asrār al-Hikam, p. 559.

[^64]: Sūrah az-Zumar 39:68.

[^65]: Al-Ash'athiyyāt, p. 212, ch. on “What Necessitates Patience;”
Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 2, p. 39, “Book of Knowledge,” hadīth 72. From
Mājālis of Shaykh Mufīd.

[^66]: “When evil appeared, in the morning and in the evening, naked,  
And there remained but hostility,   We so judged them as they did.”
Poetry by Sahl ibn Shaybān, Jāmi'ush-Shawāhid, ch. on “F and L,” p.185.

[^67]: Sūrah Ibrāhīm 14:5.

[^68]: Sūrah al-Mā'idah 5:2.

[^69]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:45

[^70]: Abū 'Abdullāh as-Sādiq ('a) said: “The (hidden) polytheism is
stealthier than the crawling of the ants.” He also said: ”… of it is
(resorting to) turning the ring to remember a thing, and the like.”
Ma'āniy ul-Akhbār, p. 379, ch. on “Rare Meanings,” hadīth 1; Bihār
al-Anwār, vol. 69, p. 96.

[^71]: Refer to footnote 219.

[^72]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 191, “Book of Monotheism,” ch. on
“General Hadīths on Monotheism,” hadīth 6.

[^73]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 5, p. 379, “Book of as-Salāt,” sec. on
“Congregational Salāt,” ch. 4, hadīths 2 and 5.

[^74]: Sūrah al-Isrā' 17:44.

[^75]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 92, p. 226. Muslim's Sahīh, vol 2, p. 92,
with a slight difference in words.

[^76]: 'Ilal ush-Sharā'i', p. 315, of the hadīth “The Salāt of
al-Mi'rāj.” 

[^77]: This is a sentence which, according to narration, Imām as-Sādiq
('a) wrote on the shroud of his deceased son. It is said that a group of
the Muslims, called the Akhbārīs, who used to literally apply the texts
of the akhbār [hadīths], used to write this very sentence on the shrouds
of their deceased. Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, “Book of Purity,” sec. on
“Shrouding,” ch. 29, hadīth 2.

[^78]: A nearly similar narrative is related in 'Ilm al-Yaqin, vol. 2,
p. 967.

[^79]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:143.

[^80]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 270, “The Book of Divine Proof”, ch.
“The Imāms are the Witnesses of Allah over His Creatures,” hadīth 2.

[^81]: Al-Ayyashī's Exegesis, vol. 1, p. 63, hadīth 111.

[^82]: Asrār al-Hikam, p. 20.

[^83]: Sūrah Hūd 11:56.

[^84]: A hadīth ascribed to the Messenger of Allah (s). Sayyid
HaydarĀmuli, Jāmi' ul-Asrār wa Manba' ul-Anwār, pp. 8, 95 and 121;
Lāhijī's Commentary on Gulshan-i Rāz, p. 153; Naqd an-Nusūs, p. 185;
Minhāj ut-Tālibīn, p. 221; Al-Usūl al-'Asharah, p. 31.

[^85]: Sūrah at-Tīn 95:5.

[^86]: Sūrah an-Nahl 16:23 and Sūrah al-Fātir 35:8.

[^87]: Ascribed to Amīr al-Mu'minīn ['Alī] ('a). At-Tawhīd, p. 383, ch.
on “Fatalism,” hadīth 32.

[^88]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 136, “Book of Monotheism,” ch. on
“Forbidding any Attribute,” hadīth 3.

[^89]: Lisān al-'Arab, entry ”namat”, vol. 7, p. 417, quoting Imām 'Alī
('a). 

[^90]: 'Afīf 'Usayrān, the editor of the book, “Preliminaries” of 'Ayn
al-Qudāt, on page 276 of that book, has put it as a hadīth. Asrār
al-Hikam by Sabzewārī, p. 23. 

[^91]: Sūrah Ibrāhīm 14:34; Sūrah an-Nahl 16:18

[^92]: Al-'Urwat al-Wuthqā, p. 38.

[^93]: Sūrah Ibrāhīm 14:34.

[^94]: Sūrah Tā-Hā 20:10; Sūrah an-Naml 27:7; Sūrah al-Qasas 28:29.

[^95]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:143

[^96]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 77, p. 23.

[^97]: Ibid., vol. 92, p. 238. Three hadīths are narrated in this
respect.

[^98]: There may be an objection to our saying: the dot under the ”bā'”
[ب], that in the Kūfī penmanship which was common when the Qur'an was
revealed, there were no dots (in the alphabet). To this, one may say
that this fact and reality will make no difference, although its role
appeared late, which, in fact, had no effect on the facts. Rather, there
is not a decisive evidence in support of the said claim. Mere convention
is not a proof of absolute non-existence. So, think it over!

[^99]: “I am the dot under the ”bā'” [ب],” Asrār al-Hikam, p. 559.

[^100]: As-Sāfi's Exegesis, vol. 2, p. 779, commenting on the noble
āyah: “About the great event” (Sūrah an-Naba' 78:2).

[^101]: Al-Ayyāshi's Exegesis, vol. 1, p. 20, hadīth 9.

[^102]: Majma' ul-Bayān, vol. 1, p. 17.

[^103]: Ibid.

[^104]: Al- Ayyāshi's Exegesis, vol. 1, p. 20; Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 89,
p. 237, hadīth 34.

[^105]: Sūrah al-Hijr 15:87.

[^106]: Sūrah an-Naml 27:29 and 30.

[^107]: 'Uyūnu Akhbār ar-Ridā, vol. 1, p. 301, under the title:
“Concerning the Different Narratives Quoted from Imām 'Alī ibn Mūsā,”
hadīth 60. Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 89, p. 227, hadīth 5.

[^108]: Nūr ath-Thaqalayn Exegesis, vol. 1, p. 4, commenting on the
sūrah of al-Hamd, hadīth 8.

[^109]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 89, p. 259. Majma' ul-Bayān, vol. 1, p. 17.

[^110]: Ibid.

[^111]: Majma' ul-Bayān, vol. 1, p. 17.

[^112]: At-Tafsīr al-Kabīr, vol. 1, p. 178.

[^113]: Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, “Book of as-Salāt,,” sec. on “Recitation,”
ch. 44, hadīth 3.

[^114]: Majma' ul-Bayān, vol. 1, p. 18.


