Some Exegesis Of The Blessed Sūrah Of At-Tawhīd
===============================================

Know that this noble *sūrah* is the lineage [*nasab*] of Allah, the
Exalted, according to the noble *hadīth*s, one of which is in the noble
*al-Kāfī*, on the authority of Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) who said: “The Jews
inquired of the Messenger of Allah (*s*) and said: 'Tell us your Lord's
lineage [*nasab*].' The Prophet remained three days giving no reply.
Then it was revealed to him: '**Say: He is Allah, the One,'** till the
end.”[^1] Consequently, the human mind is incapable of understanding its
facts, subtleties and secrets. Yet, though it is so, the share which the
people of knowledge have of it, and what the hearts of the people of
Allah know, cannot be understood by mere reasoning.

By the Beloved, this noble *sūrah* is one of the trusts which the
heavens of the spirits, the lands of ghosts and the mountains of
I-nesses, are incapable of carrying it. No one is fit to carry it other
than the Perfect Man who has crossed the boundary of “the possible” and
entered the realm of ecstasy. Nevertheless, there is the good news that
would please the people of the End of the Time and offer safety to the
people of knowledge.

There is a *hadīth* in the noble *al-Kāfī*, which says that, asked about
*at-Tawhīd*, Imām 'Alī ibn Husayn ('*a*) said: “Allah, the Almighty and
Exalted, knew that in the End of the Time there would be people of deep
knowledge. Therefore, Allah, the Exalted, revealed the *sūrah*:
'**Say:** **He is Allah, the One…'** and some *āyah*s of the *Sūrah*
*al-Hadīd* up to '**He knows what is in the breasts.'** Whoever wanted
other than that would perish.”[^2]

From this noble *hadīth* one deduces that to comprehend these noble
*āyah*s and this blessed *sūrah* is for the scrutinizers and the owners
of deep insight. They contain the minute secrets of *at-Tawhīd* and
knowledge. The delicate divine knowledge is descended by Allah upon the
worthy. Those who have no share of the secrets of *at-Tawhīd* and divine
knowledge, have no right to look into these *āyah*s. They have no right
to interpret these *āyah*s according to the common and vulgar meanings
which they know, and to which they confine them.

In the first noble *āyah*s of the blessed *sūrah* of *al-Hadīd* there
are delicate things of *at-Tawhīd*, and great information of the secrets
of divinity and abstraction, the like of which is unseen in the divine
revelations, and the books of the people of knowledge and the owners of
heart. Had there been nothing but these *āyah*s to confirm the
truthfulness of the prophethood and the perfection of the religion of
the Seal of the Prophets, they would have been sufficient for the people
of insight and knowledge.

The highest evidence proving that this knowledge is beyond the capacity
of man and out of the limits of human thought is that till the
revelation of these noble *āyah*s and the like, of the knowledge
contained in the Qur'an, such knowledge had not been precedented among
mankind, and there was no way to those secrets.  
 Nowadays, there are the books and the writings of the great
philosophers of the world, who took their knowledge from the source of
divine inspiration the highest and best of them maybe the noble book
called *Ethology* [*Theologia*],[^3] by the great philosopher and
celebrated wise man, Aristotle, to whom great philosophers, such as the
Master Avicenna, the rare wonder of the time, humbly bowed.

Of the emanations of his mind was the logic and its rules, on which
basis he was named “The First Teacher.” Avicenna says that ever since
this great scholar composed the rules of logic, no one has been able to
object to even a single one of his rules or add to them. Despite what
has been said, and although he had written that honorable book in order
to prove the state of divinity, yet, could the whole of that noble book
prove it as the noble *āyah* at the beginning of the *Sūrah* *al-Hadīd*
could do, or even something near it with a scent of the great secret of
monotheism? Has it anything like the saying of Allah, the Exalted:

*“**He is the First and the Last and the Manifest and the
Hidden,”***[^4]

Or the noble saying: “**And He is with you wheresoever you may
be.”**[^5]

Nowadays the deep thinkers and the people of insight and knowledge do
know what secrets there are in these *āyah*s, and with what noble words
and a great secret Allah, the Exalted, has honored and favored the
people of the End of the Time!

Whoever refers to the knowledge of the religions of the world and to the
knowledge common among the great philosophers of each religion, and
compares them, in respect of the Beginning and the Return, with the
knowledge of the upright religion of Islam and of the great philosophers
of Islam and of the well-versed gnostic teachers of this *ummah*, will
certainly admit that the source of the Islamic knowledge is the light of
the Qur'an and the *hadīth*s of the Seal of the Prophets and his *Ahl
al-Bayt* ('*a*), all of whom receive their knowledge from the light of
the Qur'an. Only then will he realize that the philosophy and Gnosticism
of Islam are not taken from the Greek, rather, they have no resemblance
to theirs.

Yes, some of the philosophers of Islam did imitate the method of the
Greek philosophers, such as the Master Shaykh Avicenna. Yet, the
Shaykh's philosophy is not so prosperous in the market of the people of
knowledge, and it has little value with them, as far as the knowledge
about Divinity, the Beginning, and the Return is concerned.

In short, ascribing today's philosophy of the Islamic philosophers, and
the great knowledge of the people of knowledge to the Greek philosophy
denotes the ascribers' lack of information about the Islamic writings,
such as the writings of the great Islamic philosopher, Sadr
'ul-Muta'allihīn (may his soul be sanctified) and his great tutor,
Muhaqqiq Dāmād (may his soul be sanctified), and his great student, Fayd
Kashānī (may his soul be sanctified), and the great student of Fayd, the
great gnostic faithful, Qādī Sa'īd Qummī (may his soul be sanctified).

It also shows their ignorance of the knowledge of the Divine Book and
the *hadīth*s of the infallibles ('*a*), and that is why they ascribed
every philosophy to the Greek, and regarded the Islamic philosophers as
the followers of the Greek philosophy.

We have related a part of the delicate points of the noble *sūrah* of
*at-Tawhīd* and some hints about those noble *āyah*s in our book on
explaining *The Forty Hadīth*s. Furthermore, we also gave a brief
explanation of this noble *sūrah* in our book *The Secret of the Salāt.*
Relying on Allah, we give here another short explanation, and so we say:

If the *bismillāh* of this *sūrah* belongs to this *surah* as we
supposed it so when explaining the blessed *sūrah* of *al-Hamd* it may
be a hint at the fact that to explain the lineage [*nasab*] of Allah and
the secrets of *at-tawhīd* through our selfishness and our own language
is not possible. Actually, unless the *sālik* steps out of his veil,
realizes the state of the Absolute Will and of the Holy Emanation and
perishes in the Absolute Ipseity [*huwiyyat*], he will not be able to
comprehend the secrets of *at-tawhīd.*

“**Say”** is a command from the Collective Oneness [*hadrat-i
ahadiyyat-i jam'*] to the state of the big isthmus [*barzakhiyyat-i
kubrā*] and the mirror of Collectivity [*jam'*] and distinctness
[*tafsīl*]*.* That is, “Say, O Muhammad, mirror of the appearance of the
Collective Oneness, in the state of essential proximity [*tadallī-yi
dhātī*], or the sacred state of “**even nearer”**which can be a
reference to the state of the Most Holy Emanation with a tongue
self-perishing, and subsisting by Allah's subsistence: “**He is Allah,
the One.”**

Do know, O traveler on the road of knowledge and *tawhīd*, and ascender
to the heights of transcendence and abstraction, that Allah's Sacred
Essence, in itself, is innocent of external and internal manifestations,
and of mark, form, attribute and name. The hands of the hopes of the
people of knowledge are short of His Majesty's skirt, and the traveling
legs of the people of heart are too slow to reach the threshold of His
Holiness.

The ultimate knowledge of the Perfect Friends is “We knew you not,” and
the end of the journey of the people of secrets is “We worshipped you
not.”[^6] The head of the circle of the people of knowledge, the prince
of the people of *at-Tawhīd*, Imām 'Alī ('*a*), in this lofty stance
says: “…the perfection of sincerity is to deny Him attributes.”[^7] And
the leader of the people of *sulūk*, the master of the worshippers and
the gnostics, at His mighty threshold says: “The attributes lost their
way to you, and the descriptions fell into contradiction about you.”[^8]

The people of the scholarly *sulūk* and terms, call His Holy Essence
“The Immune *Ghayb*” [*ghayb-i masūn*], “The Hidden Secret,” “The
Wonderful Unknown,” ['*anqā'-i mughrib*] and “The Absolute Unknown”
[*majhūl-i mutlaq*]*.* They say that His Essence would appear in no
mirror without the veil of Names and Attributes, and would be manifested
in no one of the creations nor in any one of the invisible and visible
worlds. But according to

*“**Every day He is in a state,”***[^9]

There are, for His Holy Essence, Names, Attributes and states [affairs
*=shu'ūn*] of “Beauty” and “Majesty.” There are for Him Essential Names
in the state of Oneness [*ahādiyyat*], which is the unseen state. They
are to be called “the Essential Names,” and, by the individuation
[*ta'ayyun*] of the Essential Names, He would be manifested through the
Holy Emanation. From this manifestation in the apparel of the Essential
Names, there would be the individuation [*ta'ayyun*] and the appearance
[*zuhūr*] of the state of “Unity” [*wāhidiyyat*] and “Names and
Attributes,” and the state of “Divinity.”

So, it has become known that after the Holy Essence, as such, there are
other three states and scenes: the state of the Unseen “Oneness” the
state of the manifestation of “the Holiest Emanation,” which may be
referred to by the word '*amā'* in the noble Prophetic *hadīth*s;[^10]
to the state of “Unity” [*wāhidiyyat*], which, according to the
Collective Oneness [*ahadiyyat-i jam'*], is the state of the Greatest
Name, and, according to the “distinct multiplicity” [*kathrat-i
tafsīlī*], is the state of Names and Attributes. To go into the details
of these states requires an expansion that is out of the capacity of
these papers.

Having understood this preliminary, we say that “**He”** [*huwa*] may be
a reference to the state of the “Most Holy Emanation,” which is the
manifestation of the Essence in the individuation of the “Essential
Names.” “**Allah”** points to the state of the Collective Oneness
[*ahadiyyat-i jam'*] of the Names, which is the Greatest Name. ”*Ahad*”
(the One) is a reference to the state of the “Oneness” [*ahadiyyat*]*.*

Therefore, the noble *āyah* intends to prove that these three states
which, in the instance [*maqām*] of nominal multiplication, possess
plurality [*kathrat*], actually possess utmost unity at the same time.
The manifestation in the “Most Holy Emanation,” according to the state
of appearance, is “**Allah,”** and according to the state of interiority
[*butūn*], is the “One” [*Ahad*].

Perhaps “**He”** [*huwa*] points to the state of the Essence. And, as it
is an invisible reference, it is actually a reference to the unknown.
“**Allah”** and “**Ahad”** are references to the state of “Unity”
[*wāhidiyyat*] and “Oneness” [*ahadiyyat*]. So, He introduces the
Essence which is the Absolute Unknown through the Names of Essence, and
the Names of the Unitary Attributes. In fact, it points to the fact that
the Essence is invisible and the hands of hopes are short of reaching
it, and that spending the life in thinking about Allah's Essence leads
to going astray, and that what is known to the people of Allah and to
the knowledge of those who know Allah, is related to the states of
“Unity” [*wāhidiyyat*] and “Oneness” [*ahadiyyat*], the “Unity” being
for the common people of Allah, whereas “Oneness” is for the special
people of Allah.

A Philosophic Note:
-------------------

Do know that there are for Allah “Positive Attributes” [*sifāt-i
thubūtiyyah*] and “Negative Attributes” [*sifāt-i salbiyyah*], as the
philosophers believe. By the “Negative Attribute” they mean the negation
of the negative, i.e. negation of imperfection. Some say that the
“Positive Attributes” are the Attributes of “Beauty” [*jamāl*] and the
“Negative Attributes” are the Attributes of “Majesty” [*jalāl*], and
that “The Owner of Majesty and Generosity” includes all the Negative and
the Positive Attributes. But this talk, in both stages, is contrary to
certainty [*tahqīq*].

Now the first stage: The “Negative Attributes” are certainly not of the
attributes, since concerning the Essence of Allah, there can be neither
any negative nor negation of the negative*.* Allah, the Exalted, is not
attributed with negative attributes, because attributing with negative
attributes is a privative proposition [*qadiyyat-i ma'dūlah*], and
forming a privative proposition is not allowed in respect of Allah, the
Exalted, since it is modification of the possible aspects and it
requires admission of composition [*tarkīb*] in the Holy Essence.

Rather, the negative attributes are through the simple absolute
negation, which is a negation of the attribute, not a confirmation of
the attribute of negating the negation. In other words, Allah, the
Exalted, is deprived of all imperfections in a simple negation, not that
the negation of imperfections be confirmed for Him by way of affirmation
of privation [*ījāb-i 'udūlī*]*.* So*,* as a matter of fact, the
attributes of purification [*tanzīh*] are not “attributes.” Allah, the
Exalted, is only attributed with the positive attributes.

As regards the second stage, the people of knowledge regard the
“Attributes of Beauty” to be those which bring intimacy and affection.
The “Attributes of Majesty” are those which bring fear, bewilderment and
anxiety. So, whatever is affiliated to kindness and mercy is of the
“Attributes of Beauty,” such as “Compassionate,” “Merciful,” “Tender,”
“Affectionate,” “Lord,” and the like.

And that which belongs to sovereignty and grandeur is of the “Attributes
of Majesty,” such as “Owner,” “King,” “Forceful,” “Avenger,” and the
like, although in the inside of every Beauty there is a Majesty, too,
because every beauty has, in the inside, bewilderment and anxiety,
appearing in the heart with the secret of greatness and power, and,
every majesty has, in the inside, mercy, and the heart feels, with it,
intimacy inside. That is why as the heart naturally is attracted to
beauty and the beautiful, it, at the same time, is attracted to power,
greatness, the powerful, and the great. Therefore, both of these kinds
of attributes are positive, not negative, attributes.

Now, as this subject has been understood, do know that although “Allah”
is “The Greatest Name” and that the attributes of “Beauty” and “Majesty”
are of its manifestations and are under its custody [*hītah*], yet
sometimes it is used for the attributes of “Beauty” [*jamāl*] in
opposition to the attributes of “Majesty” [*jalāl*], such that
“divinity” [*ilāhiyyat*] and “godhead” [*ulūhiyyat*] categorically
belong to the attributes of “Beauty,” particularly if they are thought
to oppose the attribute of “Majesty.”

In the noble *āyah*:

*“**Say:*** ***He is Allah, the One,”*** *“**the One”***

May be a reference to one of the important attributes of “Majesty,”
which is the state [*maqām*] of the perfect simplicity of the Holy
Essence, while “Allah” is a reference to the Name of “Beauty.” Thus, the
lineage [*nasab*] of Allah, the Exalted, has been explained in this
noble *āyah***,** in respect of the states of “Oneness” [*ahadiyyat*]*,*
“Unity” [*wāhidiyyat*] and manifestation through “The Holiest Emanation”
the three of which are [covering] all the divine affairs [*shu'ūn*]
according to the first possibility which has already been referred to in
the previous “Note.”

In accordance with the possibility stated in this “Note,” the lineage
[*nasab*] of Allah, the Exalted, is explained in accordance with the
states of the Names of Beauty and Majesty, which encompass all the
Names. And Allah is the Knower.

A Gnostic Note
--------------

Know that the words of every speaker are a demonstration of his self in
accordance with the state of appearance. It is the emergence of his
inner faculties on the mirror of words, in proportion to the capacity of
the composition of words. If a heart becomes luminous and purged of the
pollutions and evils of the world of nature, its words will also become
luminous, or, rather, it becomes light itself, and the very luminosity
of the heart is manifested in the clothing of words.

Concerning the Imāms of guidance it is said: “Your words are
light.”[^11] It is also said: “He manifested in His talk to His
servants.”[^12] In *Nahj al-Balāghah* it is said: “His words are but His
act.”[^13] Action is the appearance of the doer's self [*dhāt*] without
“words.” If a heart becomes dark and polluted, its act and words will
become dark and polluted, too: “**A good word is like a good
tree…;”**[^14] “**And the likeness of a bad word is as a bad
tree.”**[^15]

The Holy Essence of Allah, the Most High, according to

*“**Every day He is in a state [sha'n],”***[^16]

Appears to the hearts of the prophets and the guardians [*awliyā'*] in
the clothing of the Names and Attributes, and His manifestations differ
in accordance with the differences of their hearts. Similarly, the
heavenly Books, which descended upon their hearts by revelation through
the Revelation Angel, Gabriel, are different according to the
differences of these manifestations and of the Names which are the
origins of them as the difference of the prophets and their *Sharī'ah*s
is according to the kingdoms of the Names.

So, the more the Name is comprehensive and embracing, the more
comprehensive and embracing its kingdom, its relevant prophethood and
its revealed Book, and the more comprehensive and permanent its
*Sharī*'*ah*. And, as the Seal of Prophethood, the Glorious Qur'an and
the Islamic *Sharī'ah* are of the phenomena, or of the manifestations
and appearances of the Collective State of the One and of the Greatest
Name of Allah, consequently, they are the most comprehensive
prophethood, Book and *Sharī'ah*, and the most all-inclusive ones, and
nothing can be imagined more perfect and more honorable than them, and
from the world of the unseen a knowledge loftier than that, or like it,
would no longer come down to the expanse of nature.

That is, the last appearance of a scientific perfection, concerning
religions, is this, and there is no possibility of the descension of a
better one to this world. Hence, the very person of the Seal of the
Messengers (*s*) is the most honored one of the beings and is the
complete manifestation of the Greatest Name, and his prophethood is also
the most possible complete one, and is the image of the Kingdom of the
Greatest Name, which is everlasting and eternal, and the Book revealed
to him is also from the stage of the unseen through the manifestation of
the Greatest Name.

For this reason, this noble Book has its “oneness of collectivity and
distinctness” [*ahadiyyat-i jam'u tafsīl*], and it is of “The Collective
Words” [*jawāmi'ul-kalim*]*.*[^17] The words of the Prophet himself were
of the Collective Words, too. By saying that the Qur'an, or the
Prophet's words, are Collective Words we do not mean to refer to their
general instructions and collective principles although considering
this, his *hadīth*s are also collective and of the principles, as is
known to the science of jurisprudence.

The Qur'an is collective because it is revealed for all the human
classes, during all the stages of the human life, and it meets all the
needs of the human race. The reality of this race is the same as the
reality of the society, with all its stations, from the lowest earthly
ones up to the highest spiritual, heavenly and mighty ones. Therefore,
the individuals of this species in this low, mundane world are so
different, and they are so diverse that the like of it is not seen in
any other species.

It is this species that includes the completely wretched and the
completely happy. It is this species in which there are some individuals
who are lower than all kinds of animals, while there are some others who
are more honored than all the favored angels. In short, as the
individuals of this species are different in respect of their
understanding and knowledge, the Qur'an has been revealed in such a way
as to be benefited by everybody in accordance with the degree of the
perfection or weakness of his understanding and knowledge.

For example, the noble *āyah*:

*“**Had there been in them [the heavens and the earth] any gods except
Allah, they would have surely been in [a state of] disorder.”***[^18]

As the common people, the people of letters, and the lexicographers
understand, each a certain concept, the theologians understand something
else, similarly the philosophers, men of wisdom understand a different
meaning, as well as the gnostics and the godly men who benefit from it
differently. The common people take it to be a speech addressed to them
according to their own tastes. They say, for example, two kings cannot
rule a single kingdom, or two chieftains in a tribe cause corruption, or
two headmen in a village would lead to disputes and quarrels.

So, had there been two gods in the world there would have been
corruption, disputes and litigation. But as there is one God, this
difference of the heavens and the earth and their systematic order are
preserved. So, the Manager of the world is One. The theologians use this
as mutual antagonistic demonstration, while the philosophers and the
wise men use it for establishing a decisive reasoning argument based on:
“The one does not issue but the one, and the one is not issued but by
the one.”[^19]

The people of knowledge [*ahl-i ma'rifat*] get to recognize Unity, in a
different way through it, by way of knowing that the world is the mirror
of appearance [*zuhūr*] and the place of manifestation of the *Haqq*
(Allah); and so on, which makes it too lengthy to expand on each of
those ways.

Now that this introduction is understood, you may know that the noble
*sūrah* of “**Say:** **He, Allah, is One”** is, like the other parts of
the Qur'an, of “Collective Words,” and, being so, every one makes use of
it in a way.

The men of letters and of form take “He” to be a pronoun of state, and
“Allah” to be a proper noun, and ”*ahad*” to mean “the One,” or an
exaggeration of “Oneness,” i.e. Allah is One, or He has no partner in
Divinity, or

*“**There is nothing like Him,”***[^20]

or in the divinity and Essential Eternity He has no partner, or His Acts
are One, that is, all of them are based on practicality and benevolence,
with no benefit for Himself. Allah is *as-Samad*, i.e. He is the Great
Master who is sought by the people for their wants to be fulfilled, or
He is *as-Samad*, meaning that He has no inside, and, being such,
nothing can be born of Him, nor can He be born of anything, and no one
is like Him or comparable to Him.

This is a statement on the part of the common people intended to counter
the disbelievers who had many gods, all of which had possible
attributes. The Messenger of Allah (*s*) was ordered to tell them that
his God was different from theirs, and His attributes are those which
have been mentioned.

That was the explanation of this *sūrah* in a traditional and common
way, and suitable for one group, and it is not incompatible with this
fact that there may be another meaning or other scrupulous meanings, as
we have already mentioned some of them.

A Philosophic Explanation
-------------------------

It is possible that for the blessed *sūrah* of “*at-Tawhīd*” which was
revealed for the deep thinkers of the end of the Time there may be a
wise explanation based on theological criteria and philosophic proofs.
This explanation has been revealed to me by the great gnostic Shaykh
Shāhābādī (May he live longer).[^21]

So, “**He”** [*huwa*] is a reference to mere existence and absolute
Ipseity [*huwiyyat*] a fact which proves, in the blessed *sūrah*, six
lofty philosophic subjects:

**First:** The state of “Divinity” [*ulūhiyyat*], which is the state of
containing all perfections, and the “Collective Oneness” [*ahādiyyat-i
jam'*] of “Beauty” and “Majesty,” as in the relevant states of
philosophic findings it has been proved that pure existence and absolute
Ipseity are pure perfection, otherwise it would not be pure existence,
either. As explaining these subjects require lengthy expansion and
further preliminary steps, I suffice myself with the above-mentioned
hints.

**Second:** The state of “Oneness” [*ahadiyyat*], which is a reference
to complete intellectual, external and existential essential simplicity,
and to being above all intellectual compositions, whether genus and
differentia, or matter and mental image, or external, whether matter and
external image or measured parts. The evidence proving this subject is
the same proof of pure existence and absolute Ipseity, because if the
“pure” [*sirf*] is not one in itself, it will by necessity quit its
being pure and part with its identity [*dhātiyyat*].

**Third:** The state of “being the One sought for help” [*samadiyyat*]
which points to negation of quiddity [*māhiyyat*]*.* Having no inside
and being not empty also point to having no quiddity and no possible
imperfection, for in all the possible beings, their essential degree
which is their inside is empty. But as the Holy Essence is the pure
existence and absolute Ipseity, He has no possible shortcoming, whose
origin is quiddity, since quiddity is extracted from the existential
limit, and its conventional status is derived from the existential
individuation, whereas the pure existent is free from limit and
individuation [*ta'ayyun*], because every limited is a fixed
[*muqayyad*] identity [*huwiyyat*] and a mixed existence. It is not
absolute nor pure.

**Fourth:** Nothing separates from Him, because the separation of
something form something denotes materiality, or even measured parts,
which is contrary to absolute identity [*huwiyyat*v] and pure existence.
The existence of the caused from the cause does not happen, however, by
way of separation, but by way of manifestation, appearance, consequence
and issue. And it happens in such a way that nothing is reduced from the
cause, and nothing is added to the cause by its return to it.

**Fifth:** He (Allah) has separated from nothing, which, besides the
formerly stated depravity, is contrary to pure existence and absolute
identity, as otherwise it would necessitate that there should be
something prior to the pure existence, while high philosophy has already
proved that “purity” [*sirf*] is the most ancient, and that
individuation comes later than the absolute.

**Sixth:** Having no match and no equal, and negating His resemblance
and like, which is proved by the proof that the pure existence has no
repetition. So, no dual absolute identity can be imagined, and the
absolute and the limited are neither equals nor matches.

To each of these subjects there are preliminaries and principles which
cannot be explained in these few papers.

An Illuminative Wisdom
----------------------

Know that this blessed *sūrah*, so brief as it is, includes all the
Divine Affairs [*shu'ūn*] and the stages of praising and glorification.
In fact, it is the correlation between Allah, the Exalted, and whatever
can be put into the mould of words and the construction of expressions,
such as: “**He, Allah, is One”** which covers all the Attributes of
Perfection, as well as the Positive Attributes.

And from the word “*as-Samad*” up to the end of the *sūrah*, the words
cover the “Attributes of purity” and denote negation of shortcomings.
Furthermore, the *sūrah* proves being out of “the two limits”: *ta'tīl*
(devesting Allah of all Attributes), and *tashbīh* (assimilation), both
of which are going beyond the limit of moderation and the reality of
*at-tawhīd*.

The first noble *āyah* refers to the negation of *ta'tīl*, and other
parts of the *sūrah* refer to the negation of *tashbīh*. It also
includes the Essence as it is, and the state of “Oneness” [*ahadiyyat*],
which is the manifestation by the Names of Essence, and the state of
“Unity” [*wāhidiyyat*], which is the manifestation by the Names of
Attributes, a suitable explanation of which has already been related.

Completion
----------

Shaykh as-Sadūq (may Allah be pleased with him) quotes Abū 'l-Bukhtarī,
Wahab ibn Wahab al-Qurashī, quoting Imam as-Sādiq ('a), quoting his
great father, Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*), that in Allah's saying: “**Say:**
**He, Allah, is One,” “Say”** means: “Make known what We revealed to you
and informed you about it by the constructed letters recited to you, so
that he may be guided by them whoever lends his ears and sees.

“*Huwa*” (He) is a pronoun of indication referring to the third person,
in which “*hā'*” [ﻫ] denotes an affirmed concept, and the “*waw*” [و]
refers to what is absent from the senses, unlike “*hādhā*” [this] which
refers to what is present before the senses. This pointing to the absent
is because the disbelievers pointed to their gods by the pronoun
indicating a thing present and perceivable.

They said: “*These* are our gods, who are tangible and perceivable by
the eyes. So, you too, Muhammad, point out to your god that we may see
him and understand him, so that we may not feel bewildered about him.”
Hence, Allah sent down that: “**Say, He,”** in which the “*hā'*” [ﻫ]
confirms what is affirmed, and the “*waw*” [و] points out to what is
absent from sight and other senses, for Allah is the Most High, or
rather, He is the Conceiver of the eyes and the Creator of the
senses.”[^22]

Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*) said: “Allah is a Worshipped Diety about whom the
creatures are perplexed as unable to understand His truth and how He is.
The Arabs, when confused about someone and lack concrete knowledge about
him, say: *Aliha-r-rajul* (The man became a deity). They also say:
*Walaha* when they try to take refuge in something from a frightening
thing, while *al-ilāh* denotes that which is covered from the human
senses.”

He also said: “*Ahad* means the One, and *Ahad* and *wāhid* both have
the same meaning, which is the One Who is unique and has no match.
*At-tawhīd* means the acknowledgement of monotheism, that is,
uniqueness**.** One is a heterogeneous [*mutabayyin*] which does not
issue from anything and does not unite with anything. Thus, it is said
that the number is formed of the one, while the one is not a number, as
it is not called a number, but two is a number.

So, the meaning of Allah's saying: “**Allāhu ahad”** is that the
Worshipped, Whom the human beings are confusedly incapable of
understanding and of getting comprehensive knowledge about Him, is
Unique in divinity and far above the creatures' attributes.”[^23]

Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*) has also said: “My father Zayn 'ul-'Ābidīn ('*a*)
told me, quoting his father al-Husayn ibn 'Alī ('*a*), that *as-Samad*
is that which has no inside, and *as-Samad* is the one whose mastery has
reached its maximum, and *as-Samad* is the one who neither eats nor
drinks, and *as-Samad* is the one who does not sleep, and *as-Samad* is
a permanent that has always been and will always be.”

Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*) said that Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyyah used to say:
“*As-Samad* is that which is self-existent and self-sufficient.” Someone
else said: “*As-Samad* is above becoming and decaying. *As-Samad* is
that which does not change.”

Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*) further said: “*As-Samad* is the commanding chief
above whom there is no commander to bid and forbid.” He said: ”'Alī ibn
al-Husayn, Zayn 'ul-'Ābidīn ('*a*), asked about *as-Samad*, said:
“*As-Samad* is the One who has no partner, and preserving of nothing is
difficult or heavy for Him, and nothing is concealed from Him.”[^24]

Wahab ibn Wahab al-Qurashī says that Zayd ibn 'Alī said: “*As-Samad* is
the One Who when desires a thing, He says to it 'Be,' and there it is.
*As-Samad* is the One Who innovates the things, then creates them in
forms unlike each other, or similar to each other, and in pairs, while
He alone is the One Who has no antonym, no shape, no equal and no
likeness.”[^25]

Wahab ibn Wahab further quotes 'Alī ibn al-Husayn ('*a*) explaining
*as-Samad.* He also reports Imām al-Bāqir's explanations concerning the
secrets of the letters of *as-Samad.* He says that Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*)
said: “Had I found bearers for the knowledge which Allah has bestowed
upon me, I would have spread knowledge about *at-Tawhīd*, Islam, faith,
religion, and the laws out of *as-Samad*.

But how can I find bearers of such knowledge, while my grandfather, Amīr
al-Mu'minīn, could find none to carry his knowledge, such that he used
to painfully sigh and tell his followers, on the *minbar* (pulpit): 'Ask
me before you miss me. Behind the ribs of my bosom is a great knowledge.
Alas! That I can find no carriers for it.”[^26]

Conclusion
----------

In concluding this chapter, we relate some noble *hadīth*s concerning
the merits of this blessed *sūrah*, as they are too many to be all
contained in these few pages.

The noble *al-Kāfī* quoting Imām al-Bāqir, says: “Whoever recites
'**Say: He, Allah, is One'** once, will be blessed. Whoever recites it
twice, he and his family will be blessed. Whoever recites it thrice, he,
his family and his neighbors will be blessed. Whoever recites it twelve
times, Allah will build for him twelve palaces in Paradise, such that
the keepers [*hafazah*] say: 'Take us to the palaces of our brother
so-and-so to see them.'

Whoever recites it a hundred times, Allah will forgive his sins for
twenty-five years, except [sins concerning] blood and property. Whoever
recites it four hundred times, his will be the rewards of four hundred
martyrs, the horses of all of whom were killed and their blood shed.
Whoever recites it a thousand times in a day and a night, will not die
unless he sees his seat in Paradise, or it is shown to him.”[^27]

In the same noble *al-Kāfī*, on the authority of Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*) it
is said that the Messenger of Allah (*s*) said: “Whoever recites '**Say:
He, Allah, is One'** a hundred times on his going to bed, Allah will
forgive his sins of fifty years.”[^28]

Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) is quoted to have said that his father said: “[The
*sūrah* of] '**Say: He, Allah, is One'** is one-third of the Qur'an, and
[the *sūrah* of] '**Say: O you, disbelievers'** is a quarter of the
Qur'an.”[^29]  
 He also is quoted to have said that the Messenger of Allah (*s*)
performed the *salāt* over [the body of] Sa'd ibn Ma'ādh, then said:
“Seventy thousand angels, including Gabriel, came down and performed the
*salāt* over Sa'd's body. I asked Gabriel: 'What for did Sa'd deserve
that you performed the *salāt* over him?” He said: 'Because he used to
recite: '**Say: He, Allah, is One'**, standing, sitting, riding, walking
on foot, in coming and going.”[^30]

*Wasa'il ash-Shī'ah*, quoting *al-Majālis wa Ma'āniy al-Akhbār*, on the
authority of Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*), says that the Imām has quoted his
great fathers on the authority of Salmān (al-Fārsī may Allah be pleased
with him) that he heard the Messenger of Allah (*s*) say: “Whoever
recites [the *sūrah* of] '**Say: He, Allah, is One'** once will be as if
he has recited one-third of the Qur'an. Whoever recites it twice, he
will be as if he has recited two-thirds of the Qur'an. And whoever
recites it three times, he will be as if he has completed reciting the
Qur'an.”[^31]

In *Thawāb al-A'māl* it is said: “If a Friday [a week] passes over
somebody without his reciting [the *sūrah* of] '**Say: He, Allah, is
One,'** and he dies, he dies on the religion of Abū Lahab.”[^32]

In *al-Mustadrak* there are many lengthy *hadīth*s relating the merits
of this noble *sūrah*. For further information refer to it and to the
*Wasā'il*.[^33] And praise is for Allah.

[^1]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol.1, p.122, “Book of at-Tawhīd,” ch. on “Lineage,”
hadīth 1.

[^2]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 125, “Book of at-Tawhīd,” ch. on
“Prohibition of Talking on the Quality,” hadīth 4.

[^3]: Dehkhudā's Lexicon, under the entry Aristotle, takes Theologia to
be among the books written by Aristotle, and says: Theologia is a
discourse about Divinity, explained by Porphyrius (Prophyry) of Tyre,
and translated into Arabic by 'Abdul Masīh ibn 'Abdullāh the Nā'imī of
Hims. Then Abū Yūsuf Ya'qūb ibn Ishāq al-Kindī corrected it for Ahmad
ibn al-Mu'tasim. It was printed in Berlin in the year 1882. It was also
printed in Iran in the margin of al-Qabasāt by Mirdāmād, in the year
1314 H. (Lunar year). And under the entry Theologia it says: Theologia
is derived from Greek, meaning “theology.” Mayāmīr is a book by
Plotinus, who is known by the Muslims as ash-Shaykh al-Yūnānī (the Greek
Oldman). This book covers the 4th to 6th book of the ”Enneades.” Some of
the ancients mistakenly ascribed this book to Aristotle. In the year of
1314 H. the book of Theologia, was printed in the margin of al-Qabasāt,
by Abū 'l-Qasim ibn Ākhūnd Mullā Ridā Kamarbunī. The date of composing
the book is mistakenly stated in Dehkhudā's Lexicon to be the date of
its printing.

[^4]: Sūrah al-Hadīd 57:3

[^5]: Ibid. 57:4

[^6]: This refers to a narrative quoted from the Messenger of Allah (s),
saying: “We knew You not as You should be known, and we worshipped You
not as You should be worshipped.” Mir'āt ul-'Uqūl, vol. 8, “Book of
Faith and Disbelief,” ch. on “Thank-Giving,” p. 146.

[^7]: Nahj al-Balāghah, edited by Fayd ul-Islām, Sermon 1.

[^8]: As-Sahīfah as-Sajjadiyyah, Invocation 32.

[^9]: Sūrah ar-Rahmān 55:29.

[^10]: When the Prophet (s) was asked, “Where was our Lord before
creating the heavens and the earth?” he said, “He was in the 'amā”
[high].” Awāli al-La'ālī, vol. 1, p. 54, ch. 4, hadīth 79. 

[^11]: 'Uyūnu Akhbār ar-Ridā, vo1.2, p. 277, quoted from the invocation
of ”Al-Jāmi'ah al-Kabīrah.”

[^12]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 89, p. 107.

[^13]: Nahj al-Balāghah, edited by Fayd ul-Islām, p. 737, sermon 228.

[^14]: Derived from Sūrah Ibrāhīm 14:24.

[^15]: No reference

[^16]: Sūrah ar-Rahmān 55:29.

[^17]: It is a reference to a Prophetic hadīth, saying: “I have been
given the Collective Words.” Al-Khisāl, ch. 5, hadīth 56.

[^18]: Sūrah al-Anbiyā' 21:22

[^19]: A philosophic principle. Al-Ishārāt wat-Tanbīhāt, (explained by
Khājah Nasīr), vol. 3, p. 122. Al-Asfār al-Arba'ah, vol. 2, p. 204, ch.
13

[^20]: Sūrah ash-Shūrā 42:11

[^21]: Refer to footnote 97

[^22]: At-Tawhīd, p. 88, ch. on “Commentary on: “Say, He, Allah, is
One,” hadīth 1.

[^23]: Ibid., hadīth 2.

[^24]: Ibid., hadīth 3

[^25]: Ibid., hadīth 4

[^26]: Ibid., hadīth 6

[^27]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 4, p. 425, “Book of the Merit of the Qur'an,”
ch. on “The Merit of the Qur'an,” hadīth 1.

[^28]: Ibid., hadīth 4

[^29]: Ibid., hadīth 7

[^30]: Ibid., hadīth 13

[^31]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 4, p. 868, “Book of the Salāt,” chs. on
“Reciting the Qur'an,” ch. 31, hadīth 5. Ma'āniy al-Akhbār, p. 234, ch.
on “The Meaning of Salmān's Saying.”

[^32]: Thawāb al-A'māl, p. 156, “The Reward of Reciting 'Say: He, Allah,
is One,' hadīth 2.”

[^33]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 4, pp. 866 and 870, “Book of the Salāt,”
sec. on “Reciting the Qur'an,” chs. 31 and 33; Mustadrak al-Wasā'il,
“Book of the Salat,” sec. on “Reciting the Qur'an,” chs. 24 and 26.


