Some Comments On The Blessed Sūrah Of Al-Qadr As Much As They Suit These Papers
===============================================================================

He, the Exalted, says: “**We revealed it on the night of al-Qadr.”**
Lofty matters are there in this noble *āyah*, to refer to some of which
is not without advantage.

The first matter is that this *āyah* and many of noble *āyah*s ascribe
the revelation of the Qur'an to the Sacred Essence of Allah Himself, as
He says:

*“**We have revealed it in a blessed night,”***[^1]

*“**We have revealed the Reminder and we will be its guardian,”***[^2]

And similar noble *āyah*s. In some other *āyah*s it is ascribed to
Gabriel, the Faithful Spirit, as He says:

*“**The Faithful Spirit descended with it.”***[^3]

The literalist scholars in these instances say that this is
metaphorical, similar to:

*“…**O Hāmān! Build for me a tower…”***[^4]

Ascribing the revelation, for example, to Allah is because His Sacred
Essence was the cause and the one, who commanded it to be revealed, or
the ascription of the revelation to Allah is real, and as the Faithful
Spirit is the means, it is metaphorically ascribed to him. This is
because they regard ascribing Allah's act to the creatures to be like
ascribing a creature's act to another creature.

Thus, the tasks of Izrael and Gabriel are ascribed to Allah, the
Exalted, as the task of Hāmān is ascribed to Pharaoh, and the tasks of
the builders and the constructors to Hāmān. But this is an analogy that
is completely false and differential. Comprehending ascribing (a
creature's) creation to Allah and the act of a creature to the Creator
is among the important branches of theology and philosophy, through
which a lot of problems are solved, including fatalism and free will, of
which this matter is a branch.

It must be noted that it has been proved and confirmed in the high
sciences that all the House of Realization and phases of existence are
the image [*sūrat*] of the Holy Emanation, which is the luminous
manifestation of Allah. As the Luminous Relation [*idāfa-i ishrāqiyyah*]
is mere relation and pure dependence [*faqr*] its individuations and
images are mere relations, too, having neither identity [*haythiyyat*]
nor independence of their own.

In another expression, the whole House of Realization is, essentially,
attributively and actually, vanished in Allah, because if a being was
independent in a personal affair of his, whether in the existential
identity or in any of its other affairs, he would be out of the limits
of possibility, and would be changed into essential necessity, which is
an obvious falsity.

If this divine grace is implanted in the heart and the heart tastes it
as it deserves, a secret of *Qadar* (fate, predestination) will be
exposed to him, and a delicate aspect of the truth of “a matter between
two matters” (*amr-un bayn al-amrayn*) will be disclosed to him.

So, the effects and the acts of perfection can be attributed to the
creature as they similarly can be attributed to Allah, without resorting
to metaphor on either side, and this is realized in the view of Unity
[*wahdat*] and multiplicity [*kathrat*] and joining between the two
matters. But, the one who is in mere multiplicity [*kathrat*] and veiled
off Unity, ascribes the act to the creature, heedless of Allah, as we,
the veiled, are.

The one in whose heart Unity [*wahdat*] is manifested, will be veiled
against the creatures, and will ascribe all acts to Allah, while the
gnostic researcher joins between “Unity” and “multiplicity.” At the same
time of attributing the act to Allah, without resorting to the blemish
of metaphor, he also attributes it to the creature, without the blemish
of metaphor. The noble *āyah*:

*“*…***And you threw not when you did throw, but Allah threw,”***[^5]

In which, while confirming the throwing, negates it, and while negating
the throwing, confirms it, is a reference to the way of the great
gnostics and their strict faithful method. Our referring to the acts and
effects of perfection, excluding the shortcomings, was because the
shortcomings' recourse is to the privations, which are of the
individuations [*ta'ayyunāt*] of existence, and are not attributed to
Allah, except accidentally [*bil'arad*]. Going into the details of this
subject is not possible in these papers.

Now that this introduction has been understood, the attribution of
“revelation” [*tanzīl*] to Allah and Gabriel, and the “bringing to life”
[*ihyā'*] to Seraphiel and Allah, and the “bringing death” [*imātah*] to
Izrael and the angels in charge of the souls and to Allah, can also be
easily understood. There are many references to this matter in the noble
Qur'an.

It is part of the Qur'an's Knowledge [*ma'ārif*] of which there was no
trace in the books of the wise men and the philosophers before this
Glorious Book, and the human family is indebted to the gift of this
Divine Book in this respect, like other divine, Qur'anic Knowledge
[*ma'ārif*]*.*

The second matter is the use of the plural pronoun: “We revealed.” The
point here is to aggrandize the state of Allah, the Exalted, as the
revealer of this noble Book. It may be that this plurality refers to a
nominal plurality denoting that Allah, the Exalted, with all the affairs
of His Names and Attributes, is the originator of this noble Book.

For this reason, this noble Book is the image of the Collective Oneness
of all the Names and Attributes, and is the introducer of the Holy state
[*maqām*] of Allah in all affairs [*shu'ūn*] and manifestations. In
other words, this luminous Book is the image of the Greatest Name, as is
the Perfect Man, or rather, the truth of these two, in the Unseen
[*hadrat-i ghayb*], is the same, while in the world of separation they
separate in respect of the image, although in respect of concept they do
not separate.

This is a meaning of: “They would not separate until they come to me at
the Pool.”[^6] As Allah with the hands of Majesty and Beauty fermented
the clay of the First Man, the Perfect Man, with the hands of Beauty and
Majesty, revealed the Complete Book, the Comprehensive Qur'an.

Probably it is for this reason that it was called the Qur'an, because
the state of Oneness [*ahadiyyat*] is the Union of Unity and
multiplicity, [*jam'-i wahdat wa kathrat*], and it is for this reason
that this Book can neither be abrogated nor ruptured, because the
Greatest Name and its manifestations are eternal and everlasting, and
all *Sharī'ah*s call to this Muhammadan *Sharī'ah* and guardianship
[*wilāyah*]*.*

It is probable that as it is said: “**We revealed,”** on the same basis:

*“**We offered the trust…**”*[^7]

Is said in the first person plural, since “**the trust,”** according to
its inside, is the truth of guardianship, and, according to its outside,
is the *Sharī*'*ah*, Islam, Qur'an or the *salāt.*

The third matter is a brief about the revelation of the Qur'an. It is of
the delicacies [*latāyif*] of divine sciences [*ma'ārif*] and of the
secrets of religious facts that only few can scientifically get some
information about them, except the perfect godly men, at the head of
whom is the very person of the Seal of the Prophets (*s*), and then,
with his assistance, the others of the godly men and the people of
knowledge.

No other one can, by way of intellectual intuition, know this divine
delicacy [*latīfah*], because this truth cannot be discerned except by
attaining to the world of inspiration and getting out of the limits of
the worlds of possibility. We shall, in this stage, refer to this truth
by way of hints and expressive allegories.

It must be noted that the hearts which travel to Allah by way of
spiritual *sulūk* and internal journey, and migrate from the dark
station of the self and from the house of I-ness and selfishness, are,
generally, divided into two groups.

First, those who, after finishing their travel to Allah, death overtakes
them, and they remain in the state of attraction, annihilation and
death. The reward of this group is with Allah, and it is Allah. They are
the beloved who perish under the “domes [*qibāb*] of Allah.” No one
knows them, and they have connection to nobody. They know none but
Allah: “My friends are under My domes, no one knows them other than
Me.”[^8]

The second group is those who, having completed their journey to Allah
and in Allah, became fit to return to themselves and be subject to a
state of sobriety and intelligence. They are those whose aptitude,
according to the manifestation by the Holiest Emanation, which is the
secret of *qadr*, has been predetermined, and they have been chosen for
perfecting the servants and engendering prosperity in the regions.

Having communicated with His knowledge [*hadrat-i 'ilmiyyah*] and
returned to real entities, they disclosed the journey of the entities
and their communication [*ittisāl*] with His Holiness [*hadrat-i
quds*]*,* and their travel to Allah and to happiness, receiving the
honorable robe [*khal'at*] of prophethood. This disclosure [*kashf*] is
a divine revelation [*wahy*], before descending to the world of
Gabrielic revelation.

After turning from this world towards the descending worlds, they
disclose what is in the High Pens and Holy Tablets, in proportion to
their comprehension of knowledge and growth of perfection, which belong
to the Names [*hadarāt-i asmā'iyyah*]*.* The difference of *Sharī*'*ah*s
and prophethoods, or rather all differences, stem from there.

In this stage it sometimes happens that the Unseen Truth and the Holy
Secret, proved in His Knowledge [*hadrat-i 'ilmiyyah*] and the High Pens
and Tablets, descend, by way of the unseen of their souls and the secret
of their honorable spirits, by means of the Angel of Revelation,
Gabriel, into their blessed hearts.

Sometimes Gabriel appears in an “ideal image” [*tamaththul-i mithālī*]
in the “Ideal” [*hadrat-i mithāl*] to them, and sometimes he takes a
“worldly image,” appearing from the hidden place [*makān*] of the
Unseen, by that truth to the scene of the world of visibility, bringing
down that divine delicacy [*latīfah*]*.*

The receiver [*sāhib*] of the revelation, in each of the emergences
[*nasha'āt*], understands and discerns in a certain way: in a way in His
Knowledge [*hadrat-i 'ilmiyyah*], and in different ways in the entities
[*hadrat-i a'yān*], in the Pens [*hadarāt-i aqlām*] in the Tablets
[*hadrat-i alwāh*] in the “Ideal” [*hadrat-i mithāl*], in the Common
Sense, and in the absolute visibilities [*shahādāt*].

These are the seven stages of descension, which may be related to the
*hadīth* that the Qur'an has descended on “seven letters,”[^9] which
does not contradict the *hadīth*: “The Qur'an is one, revealed from the
One,”[^10] as is known. This state, however, requires to be expanded
upon, but not here.

The fourth matter concerns the secret of the third person singular
pronoun “it” [*hā*] in “**We revealed it.”** As is known, the Qur'an has
passed, before being descended to this emergence [*nash'ah*] through
stages and entities [*kaynūnat*]*.* Its first stage was its entity in
the Knowledge [*kaynūnat-i 'ilmiyyah*] in the Unseen by the speaking of
His Essence and by His Self-Arguing [*muqāri'at-i dhātiyyah*] by way of
the “Collective Oneness” [*ahādiyyat-i jam'*]*.*

 And the said pronoun may be a reference to that state, as, in order to
show that precept, He used the third person pronoun, as if to say that
this very Qur'an which was revealed on “the night of *qadr*” is the same
scholarly Qur'an, in the unseen secret hidden in the emergence of
Knowledge [*nash'at-i 'ilmiyyah*], and which was descended from those
stages, in one of which it was united with the Essence and was of the
manifestations of the Names.

This apparent truth is that divine secret, and this Book, which has
appeared in the uniform of words and expressions, in the stage of
Essence is in the image of the Essential manifestations, and, in the
stage of Action, is the very manifestation of Act, as the Commander of
the Believers ('Alī) ('*a*) said: “His words are His act.”[^11]

The fifth matter concerns “the night of *qadr*,” about which there are
many discussions and uncountable pieces of information, which have been
expanded upon by the great scholars (may Allah be pleased with them)
according to their diverse ways and methods. In these pages we shall
briefly relate some of them. As to the matters that they did not
mention, we shall refer to them within our relating other matters.

As regards the naming of “the night of *qadr*,” the scholars have
different opinions. Some say that as it is honorable and great, and as
the Qur'an is great, brought down (in it) by a great angel, to a great
Messenger, for a great *ummah,* it was called “*Laylat 'ul-Qadr*” (the
Night of Majesty).

Some say that it is called “the Night of Measure” because the affairs,
the life-terms and the provisions of the people are “measured” in that
very night.

Some say that as the angels on that night are so numerous (in the earth)
that it is as if the earth is strictly “measured” for them, it is called
*al-Qadr*, and that is like:

*“**And he whose provision is measured.”***[^12]

These are some of the opinions concerning this subject. About each of
them there have been researches, a hint at which is not without
advantage.

As to the first opinion, i.e. that night being honorable and great, know
that many things are said in this respect, to the effect that, as
regards time and place in general, some are honorable and some are not,
some are lucky and some are unlucky. But is this a natural and intrinsic
characteristic of time and place, or is it because happy and unhappy
events happen in them, and, consequently they are so described?

Although this is not a noble and important topic, and to expand upon it
is not advantageous, yet, we shall briefly refer to it. What gives
priority to the first possibility is that some narratives and *āyah*s
which apparently regard time and place either honorable or unlucky,
confirm this to be intrinsic, not a characteristic belonging to the
particular condition. So, as there is no rational objection, they can be
taken according to their apparent meanings.

What gives priority to the second possibility is that the truth of time
and place is a single one, or even their entity (personality) is one,
too. Such being the case, it will not be possible that a single person
can be divided and be different in status [*hukm*]. Therefore, it is
inevitable to take what is said about time and place as lucky or unlucky
as caused by the events and happenings taking place in them.

But this is not provable, because although time is a single entity, yet,
as it gradually expands and is measurable; there can be no objection
that some part of it is different in status and effect from another
part. There is no evidence that a person, whoever he may be, cannot
enjoy two statuses and two effects, rather the contrary is apparent.

For example, the human beings, although every one of them is a single
person, yet, there are many differences in their corporeal features,
like the skin, the brain and the heart, as these are more delicate and
honored than the other organs. Similarly, some of the internal and
external powers are more honorable than others. This is because man, in
this world, is not apparently known as having a complete unity, though
single in person. But as apparently he is known of multiplicity, he can
have different statuses.

The priority of the first possibility is not, however, an agreeably
correct one, because this opinion is based, for example, on “the
originality of appearance” [*isalāt uz-zuhūr*] and “the originality of
the truth,” [*isalāt ul-haqīqah*], whereas methodically it is known that
“the originality of the truth” and “the originality of appearance” are
used when there is a doubt in the objective for the purpose of making
sure of the objective, not that they should confirm the objective after
that it had already been known. So, consider.[^13]

Therefore, both aspects are possible, but the second aspect seems
preferable. Consequently, “the night of *qadr*” was described as “the
honored night” because it was the night of the meeting of the Sealing
Prophet, the night on which the real lover reached his Beloved. In the
former discussions it was noted that the descension of the angels and
the revelation was after the annihilation and the real proximity. From
many narratives and noble *āyah*s it can be gathered that the luckiness
and unluckiness of times and places are because of the events which take
place in them. This can be realized by referring to them, although some
of them also denote their intrinsic honor.

The other possibility for naming “the night of *qadr*” is because the
affairs of the days of the year are measured on that night. So, know
that the truth of “Fate” [*qadā*] and “Destiny” (Divine Decree *=
qadar*), its quality and its stages of appearance, are of the greatest
and noblest divine knowledge, and it is because of their extreme
exactness and nicety that deeply thinking about them is not allowed for
the human race as it causes bewilderment and straying.

Therefore, this truth is to be regarded of the religious secrets and the
deposits of Prophethood, and one is to refrain from conducting
scrutinizing research about it. We refer here only to a subject suiting
this stage. That is, although the measurement of the affairs has been
estimated from the very beginning in the knowledge of Allah, the
Exalted, and it is not of the gradual matters in respect of the pure
state of the divine knowledge, then, what does ”*taqdīr*” in every year
and in a particular night mean?

Know that “Fate” and “Divine Decree” are of degrees, and according to
those degrees and emergences [*nasha'āt*] they differ in their status.
The first degree is the facts that are judged (evaluated) and measured
in His Knowledge by the manifestation in “The Holiest Emanation” in the
wake of the appearance of the Names and Attributes. Afterwards, by the
High Pens and in the High Tablets, according to the appearance, and by
the manifestation of the Act, they are ordained and confirmed.

No changes and alterations may happen in these degrees. The inevitable
and unchangeable decrees [*qadā*] are the abstract facts happening in
the entities [*hadarāt-i a'yān*] and in the emergence [*nash'ah*] of His
Knowledge and descending to the abstract Pens and Tablets. Afterwards,
the facts appear in isthmus [*barzakhiyyah*] and ideal [*mithāliyyah*]
images in other Tablets and in a lower world, which is the world of “the
distinct imagination” [*khiyāl-i munfasil*] and “the universal
imagination” [*khiyāl 'ul-kull*] the world which, according to the
method of the illuminationist philosophers, is called “The World of the
Suspended Ideas” ['*ālam-i* *muthul-i mu'allaqah*].

In such a world changes and differences are possible to happen, or
actually they do happen. After that, the evaluations [*taqdīrāt*] and
measurings take place by means of the angels in charge of the world of
nature. In this Tablet of Fate there are continual changes and
alterations, or rather it is, in itself, a flowing form and a passing,
gradual fact.

In this *lawh* (Tablet) the facts can be strong or weak, and the
movements may be swift, slow, accelerated or decreased. Nevertheless,
the “near-to-Allah” [*yalillāhī*] aspect, the unseen aspect, of these
very things which is the aspect of *tadallī* (suspension) to Allah, and
it is the form of the appearance of the “Spread Emanation” [*fayd-i
munbasit*] and the “Extended Shade” [*zill-i mamdūd*], and the truth of
Allah's “Active Knowledge” there can occur in it no change or
alteration.

In short, all the changes, alterations, additions to the lives, and
measuring (the peoples') provisions are, as the philosophers believe, in
the *lawh* of “the *qadr* of knowledge” [*qadr-i 'ilmī*], which is “the
world of ideas” while to the writer, they are in the *lawh* of “the
*qadr* of objectivity” [*qadr-i 'aynī*], which is the very place of the
measurements done by the angels in charge of it.

Therefore, there is no objection [*māni'*] that, as “the night of
*qadr*” is the night of full attention of the “perfect guardian”
[*walīyy-i kāmil*] and of the appearance of his heavenly sovereignty,
changes and alterations may happen in it, in the world of nature through
the honorable person of the “perfect guardian” and the Imām of each era
and the pole [*qutb*] of the time who, in our time, is “Allah's
Remainder” [*baqiyyatullāh*] in the worlds (earths, lands = *aradīn*),
our Master, Patron, Imām, and Guide, the Proof, the son of al-Hasan
al-'Askarī, may our souls be ransom for his coming.

So, he may accelerate or slow any individual part of nature that he
desires, and enlarge or straiten any provision he wills. And this will
is that of the *Haqq*, and is the shadow and the rays of the Eternal
Will and follows the Divine commands, as the angels of Allah, too, can
do (change) nothing by themselves. Every act (change *= tasarruf*),
rather every particle of existence, is of Allah and of His unseen grace
[*latīfah*]:

*“**So keep straight as you are commanded.”***[^14]

As to what has been said concerning the other possibility of naming “the
night of *qadr*,” i.e. it was so called because the earth seems too much
narrow with the throng of the angels on that night, this point is a
far-fetched one, despite the fact that Khalīl ibn Ahmad,[^15] the wonder
of the time, may Allah's pleasure be upon him, says that what can be
discussed is that the angels are not of the kind of the world of nature
and matter, so what does it mean to say that the earth seemed narrow?

However, such matters have been related in some noble narrations, like
the case of the funeral procession of Sa'd ibn Mu'ādh,[^16] may Allah be
pleased with him, or the angels' spreading their wings for the students
of knowledge.[^17] This is when the angels appear in the assimilation
[*tamaththul*] of “Ideal Images,” descending from the unseen world to
the “World of Ideals” ['*ālam-i mithāl*] and narrowing the dominion of
the earth, or it is probably their worldly assimilation in the kingdom
of the earth, although this still cannot be seen by the natural animal
eyes. However, the narrowing is on the basis of “Ideal” [*mithāliyyah*]
or “worldly” [*mulkiyyah*] assimilation.

The second matter concerns the truth of “the night of *qadr*.” Know that
every spiritual grace has a reality, and for every worldly form there is
a heavenly and unseen interior. People of knowledge say that the stages
of the descension of the truth of the existence, in respect of the
setting of the sun of the truth in the horizon of individuations, are
“nights,” whereas the stages of ascension, in respect of the rising of
the sun of the truth in the horizons of individuations, are “days.”
Hence, the honor and the unluckiness of the “days” and the “nights” are,
accordingly, clearly known.

According to another aspect, the arch of descension is the Muhammadan
“Night of *Qadr*.” and the arch of ascension is the Ahmadian
“Resurrection Day,” because these two arches are the extension of the
light of the “Expanded Emanation” [*fayd-i munbasit*], which is “the
Muhammadan Truth” [*haqīqat-i muhammadiyyah*], and all the
individuations [*ta'ayyunāt*] are of the First Individuation of “the
Greatest Name.”

So, from the point of view of Unity [*wahdat*], the world is the “Night
of *Qadr*” and the “Day of Resurrection,” and it is no more than a
single night and day, which is the entire House of Realization, the
Muhammadan “Night of *Qadr*” and the Ahmadan “Day of Resurrection.” The
one who is assured of this truth will always be in the “Night of *Qadr*”
and in the “Day of Resurrection,” and these two become united.  
 From the point of view of multiplicity, there will be nights and days.
Some nights have *qadr* (greatness, dignity) and some have not. Among
all the nights, the Ahmadan constitution [*bunyah*], the Muhammadan
individuation (*s*) into whose horizon has set the light of the truth of
existence, with all the affairs, Names and Attributes, and with full
luminosity and entire truth is the absolute night of *qadr*, as the
Muhammadan day is the absolute Day of Resurrection. Other days and
nights are limited ones. The Qur'an's revelation [*nuzūl*] to this noble
constitution [*bunyah*] and pure heart is the revelation [*nuzūl*] in
the “night of *qadr*.” So, the Qur'an was revealed both in full in “the
night of *qadr*,” by way of complete and absolute disclosure, and in
parts along twenty-three years in “the night of *qadr*.”

The gnostic Shaykh, the Shāhābādī[^18] (may he live longer), used to say
that the Muhammadan period is “the Night of *Qadr*,” that is, all the
periods of existence are the Muhammadan period, or it is because in this
period the perfect Muhammadan poles, the infallible guiding Imāms
('*a*), are “the nights of *qadr*.” What proves our suggested
possibility concerning the truth of “the night of *qadr*” is the lengthy
noble *hadīth* which is quoted in *al-Burhān Exegesis* from the noble
*al-Kāfī,* in which it is said that when a Christian asked Imām Mūsā ibn
Ja'far about the hidden explanation of

*“**Hā Mīm! (I swear) By the explaining Book. We revealed it on a
blessed night Surely We are ever warning. There in every wise affair is
made distinct,”***[^19]

He replied: As to “**Hā Mīm,”** it is Muhammad (*s*) “The explaining
Book' is Amīr al-Mu'minīn 'Alī ('*a*), and “the night” is Fātimah
('*a*).”[^20]

In another narrative it is said that “the ten nights” are interpreted to
be the pure Imāms from al-Hasan to al-Hasan.[^21] This is one of the
degrees of “the night of *qadr*” to which Imām Mūsā ibn Ja'far referred,
testifying that “the night of *qadr*” was the entire Muhammadan period.

In *Al-Burhān Exegesis* there is a narrative from Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*).
Being a noble *hadīth* referring to several pieces of information,
disclosing important secrets, we, owing to its blessedness, relate it in
full:

The author (may Allah have mercy upon him), quoting Shaykh Abu Ja'far
at-Tūsī, from his men, from 'Abdullāh ibn 'Ajlān as-Sakūnī, said: “I
heard Abu Ja'far ('*a*) say: The house of 'Alī and Fātimah is the room
of the Messenger of Allah (*s*), and the roof of their house is the
'*Arsh* of the Lord of the worlds. And at the bottom of their house
there is an uncovered opening to the '*Arsh*, the *mi'rāj* of
revelation; and the angels bring down revelation upon them in the
morning and in the evening and every hour and twinkle of an eye.

The angels are in ceaseless groups, some descending and some ascending.
And Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, disclosed to Ibrāhīm the heavens
till he saw the '*Arsh* and He increased his seeing power. And Allah
increased the seeing power of Muhammad, 'Alī, Fātimah, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn ('*a*). They used to see the '*Arsh* and they found no roof
over their houses except the '*Arsh.* Their houses were roofed with the
'*Arsh* of the Beneficent, and the ascensions of the angels and the
Spirit in them, with the permission of their Lord, for every affair in
peace. 'I said: “for every affair'.” He said: 'In every affair.' I said:
'Is that revelation?' He said: 'Yes'.”[^22]  
 Contemplating on this noble *hadīth* will open doors of knowledge in
the face of the deserving people and discloses parts of the truth of
guardianship and of the hidden inside of “the night of *qadr*.”

The third matter: Know that as “the night of *qadr*” has a truth and an
inside, as it has been mentioned, it also has a form and an appearance,
or even appearances in the world of nature. But as appearances can
differ in respect of their shortcomings and perfections, from the
narratives and *hadīth*s about specifying “the night of *qadr*” can be
deduced that all the noble nights specified in those narratives are of
the appearances of “the night of *qadr*,” except that they differ from
one another in respect of their honor and perfection of appearance,
while that noble night, which is the full appearance of “the night of
*qadr*,” the night of the complete joining [*wasl*] and the perfect
attainment [*wusūl*] of the Last Prophet, is hidden in the whole year,
in the blessed month of Ramadān, in its last ten (nights) or in the
“three nights.”

The narratives of the Elite [*khāssah*] and the public ['*āmmah*] also
differ. The Elite narrate, with uncertainty, that it is on the nights of
the nineteenth, twenty-first and twenty-third (of Ramadān), and
sometimes they waver between the night of the twenty-first and the
twenty-third.

Shihāb ibn 'Abdu Rabbih says: I asked Imām Ja'far as-Sādiq ('*a*) to
tell me about “the Night of *Qadr*.” He said: “the night of the
twenty-first and the night of the twenty-third.”[^23]

'Abdul Wāhid ibn al-Mukhtār al-Ansārī says: “I asked Imām al-Bāqir
('*a*) about 'the night of *qadr*.' He said: 'it is on two nights: the
night of the twenty-third and the night of the twenty-first,' I said:
'Name only one of them.'He said: 'What if you do something on the two
nights of which one is 'the Night of *Qadr?*' ”[^24]

Hassān ibn Abū 'Alī says: “I asked Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) about 'the Night
of *Qadr*'. He said: “Get it on the nineteenth, twenty-first and
twenty-third.”[^25]

The devotee and pious “Sayyid” (may Allah be pleased with him) in
*Iqbāl* says: “Know that it is the night of the twenty-third of the
month of Ramadān. There are explicit narratives that it is 'the Night of
*Qadr*' by revelation and declaration. Of that I relate, on my authority
up to Sufyān ibn as-Sit (or as-Simt) who said: “I asked Imām Ja'far
as-Sādiq ('*a*) to tell me which was 'the Night of *Qadr*' exactly.” He
said: “The night of the twenty-third.” Another is to narrate, on my
authority up to Zurārah, quoting 'Abdul Wāhid ibn al-Mukhtār al-Ansārī,
who said: “I asked Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*) about 'the Night of *Qadr.*'

He said: “By Allah I tell you with no ambiguity, it is the first night
of the last seven nights.” Zurārah was further quoted to have said that
the month which the Imām mentioned had twenty-nine days.[^26][^27] After
that other narratives are related to the effect that “the Night of
*Qadr*” is the night of the twenty-third (of Ramadān), such as the case
of Juhanī,[^28] which is well known.

A Gnostic Note
--------------

As it has been said in respect of the two previously explained blessed
*sūrah*s, it is more obvious that the *bismillāh* of each *sūrah*
belongs to it. Therefore, in the blessed *sūrah* of *al-Qadr* it means:
“We revealed the noble Qur'anic truth, the Sacred Divine Grace
[*latīfah*], in the Name of Allah, which is the 'Collective Truth of the
Names' and the Greatest Name of the Lord, individuated by the absolute
mercy of *Rahmān* and *Rahīm*, on the Muhammadan night of *qadr.*”

That is, the appearance of the Qur'an follows the “Collective
Appearance” [*zuhūr-i jam'ī*] of the Divinity and the “Contraction”
[*qabd*] and “Expansion” [*bast*] of “Mercifulness” [*rahīmiyyat*) and
“Beneficence” [*rahmāniyyat*]. Rather, the truth of the Qur'an is the
state of the appearance of the Greatest Name of Allah through the
appearance of the “Beneficence” and the “Mercifulness,” and is the
“collector of the union and distinctness” [*jāmi'-i jam'u tafsīl*).

Consequently, this noble Book is “Qur'an” and “Furqān” (distinguisher),
similar to the spirituality of the Seal of the Prophets and his sacred
state of guardianship, which are also ”*Qur'an*” and ”*Furqān*” and the
state of the “Oneness of Collectivity and Distinctness” [*ahadiyyat-i
jam' wa tafsīl*].

So, it seems that the Sacred Essence, according to this possibility,
says: “We have with the manifestation of the state of the Greatest Name,
which is the state of the “Oneness of Collectivity and Distinctness”
[*ahadiyyat-i jam' wa tafsīl*], with the appearance of the mercy of the
Beneficent and the Merciful revealed the Qur'an on the Muhammadan night
of *qadr.*

And as in the world of distinction [*farq*], or rather, the distinction
of distinction, there was a distinction [*furqāniyyat*] between the two
“Qur'ans,” i.e., the revealed and written Qur'an, and the Qur'an
revealed to him, that is, the “Divine Book” and the “Muhammadan truth,”
we united between the two Qur'ans and joined the two *Furqān*s in the
night of union [*wisāl*], and on this consideration, this night was
called 'the night of *qadr*,' but its actual meritorious status, as it
is, cannot be recognized by anybody except by the very Seal of the
Prophets (*s*), who is the owner of 'the night of *qadr*' in person, as
well as his infallible successors, who are its owner, too, through him.”

Completion
----------

**Some Narratives Concerning the Merits of “the Night of Qadr”**

Among them are those narrated by the knower of Allah, Sayyid ibn Tāwūs
(may Allah be pleased with him) in his noble Book *Iqbāl al-A'māl*. He
says: “I found in the book, called *Yawāqīt*, by Abū 'l-Fadl ibn
Muhammad al-Hirawī, some narratives on the merits of “the night of
*qadr*.” Then he quotes from it a narrative from the Messenger of Allah
(*s*) as to have said: “Moses said: 'O Allah! I desire your proximity.'
Allah said: 'My proximity is for the one who keeps awake on 'the night
of *qadr*.' He said: 'O Allah! I wish for your mercy.'

Allah said: 'My mercy is for the one who shows mercy to the poor on
\`the night of *qadr.*' He said: 'O Allah! I want to cross the *Sirāt*
[the (Right) Path]'. He said: 'That is for the one who gives out a
*sadaqah* on 'the night of *qadr.*' He said: 'O Allah.' I want of the
trees and fruits of Paradise.' Allah said: 'They are for the one who
glorifies (Me) on 'the night of *qadr.*' He said: 'I want to be
delivered.' Allah said: 'From the Fire?' 'Yes,' he said. Allah said: 'It
is for the one who asks forgiveness on 'the night of *qadr.*' He said:
'O Allah! I ask for your pleasure.' Allah said: 'I would be pleased with
the one who performs two *rak'ah*s of *salāt* on 'the night of *qadr*'.”

The same book, quoting the Messenger of Allah (*s*), also says: “The
doors of the heaven are opened on 'the night of *qadr.* No servant may
perform the *salāt* on it unless Allah, the Exalted, writes down for
him, for every *sajdah* a tree in Paradise, such that if a horseman
rides under its shadow for a hundred years he will not finish it, for
every *rak'ah* (or *rukū'*) a house, in Paradise, made of quartzes,
rubbies, chrysolites and pearls, for every *āyah* a paradisiac crown,
for every glorifying one of the precious birds, for every sitting one of
the paradisiac degrees, for every *tashahhud* a paradasiac room and for
every *taslīm* a garment from paradise.

And when the column of dawn bursts out, Allah will grant him (in
Paradise) sociable women (wives) whose bosoms bulge out from behind the
dress, educated and good-behaving maids, eternal boys, noble birds,
fragrant flowers, flowing rivers, pleasing graces, gifts, presents,
coats of honor, wonders and whatever the heart desires and pleases the
eye, in which you will eternally live.”

Quoting Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*), the same book says: “Whoever remains in
'the night of *qadr*' awake, his sins will be forgiven, even if as many
as the stars of the sky, and as heavy as the mountains or the weight of
the seas.”[^29] The narratives about its merits are too many to be
included in these papers.

His saying: “And how do you know what the night of *qadr* is!” is a
construction intended to denote honoring, tributing and paying homage to
the greatness of the subject and the truth, especially when considering
the addresser and the addressee. Although the addresser is Allah, the
Exalted, and the addressee is the Messenger of Allah (*s*), yet, the
subject is sometimes so glorious that it is impossible to contain it
with the construction of words and expressions.

It is as if He says, “You know not how great the truth of the night of
*qadr* is!” It cannot be explained in arranged words and letters, as
they are incapable of containing it. Therefore, He just used “How”
[*mā*] to denote that greatness, trying not to describe it, only saying
that “the night of *qadr* is better than a thousand months,” that is, He
introduces it by referring to its characteristics and effects, since
telling its truth is not possible.

Hence, one may well guess that the truth of the night of *qadr* and its
inside are different from its external form, though its external form is
great and important, too, but not to the extent of addressing the
Messenger of Allah, the absolute guardian and the informed of all
worlds, in this way.

If you say: On the basis of the said possibility that the inside of “the
night of *qadr*” is the very truth and constitution of the Messenger of
Allah (*s*), in which the sun of truth, in all its affairs, is hidden,
then the objection will be higher, because it will not be possible to
tell him: “How do you know what 'the night of *qadr*,' which is your own
visible form, is?”

I will say: This subject has a secret. This delicate point has an inner
meaning

*“F**or him who has heart or gives ear and is a witness.”***[^30]

Know, dear, that in the inside of the real “night of *qadr*,” i.e., the
constitution and the visible form, or the immutable essence of Muhammad
['*ayn-i thābit-i muhammadī*] (*s*), there is manifested the Greatest
Name and the Divine Collective Oneness.

Therefore, as long as the traveling-to-Allah servant, that is, the
Sealing Messenger (*s*), is still inside his own veil, he will not be
able to witness that inside and truth, as the same was said about Moses,
the son of 'Imrān, ('*a*) in the Glorious Qur'an:

*“**You will never see me,”***[^31]

Despite the fact that Moses witnessed the manifestation in Essence or in
Attributes, as in: “**When his Lord manifested** (**His glory**) **to
the mountain, He made it crumble to dust, and Moses fell down in a
swoon,”**[^32] or in the great noble invocation of *Simāt,* as is quite
obvious. There is also the note: “O Moses, as long as you are in your
Mūsawiyan veil and in your concealment [*ihtijāb*], you will have no
chance of witnessing.

Witnessing the Beauty of the Beautiful is possible for the one who has
come out of himself, because having come out of himself, he would see
with the *Haqq*'s eye, and the *Haqq*'s eye would be seeing the *Haqq*.
So, the manifestation of the Greatest Name, which is the perfect form of
“the night of *qadr*,” cannot be seen through one's concealment
[*ihtijāb*]*.* Therefore, this expression is, according to the mentioned
verification, correct and fitting.

If you say: “the night of *qadr* is the very Ahmadan constitution in
view of the fact that in him the sun of the truth is hidden, not the sun
itself” that the said justification may be correct.

I will say: “According to the people of insight, the thing-ness of a
thing depends on its form of perfection, and that the things with
reasons, [*asbāb*] especially divine reason [*sabab*], their truth
cannot be recognized without recognizing their reasons.

In view of the people of knowledge, the correlation between the outside
and the inside, manifestation and the manifesting, is not like that of
two separate matters, because a truth may sometimes have an external
manifestation, and sometimes an internal manifestation, as the
well-known gnostic says:

We are non-existents showing existence, you are the Absolute Being and
our existence.

As the gnostic Rūmī says, this talk has no end and it is better to forgo
it.

His saying: “**The night of qadr is better than a thousand months.”** If
we note the worldly appearance of the external form of the night of
*qadr*, we realize that its goodness is more than a thousand months
which have no night of *qadr* in them, or the night of *qadr* and the
acts of devotional worship on it are better than thousand months in
which the Israelites used to carry their weapons and fight for the sake
of Allah, or the night of *qadr* is better than the thousand months of
the rule of the Umayyads (may Allah curse them), as is stated in the
noble narratives.[^33]

If we note the truth of the night of *qadr*, “a thousand months” may be
an allusion to all beings, as “a thousand” is a complete number, and by
“months” the kinds are intended. That is, the respected Muhammadan
constitution, who is the perfect man, is better than the thousand kinds
which cover all beings, as has been said by some people of
Gnosticism.[^34]

Another possibility occurs to the writer, that is, the night of *qadr*
may be a hint at the manifestation of the Greatest Name, i.e., the
complete Muhammadan (*s*) mirror, and “a thousand months” may be the
manifestations of the other Names. And, as Allah, the Exalted has one
thousand and one Names, and as one Name is especially hidden in the
unseen world, similarly, the night of *qadr* is hidden, too, and the
night of *qadr* of the Muhammadan constitution is also a hidden name.
Thus, this especially hidden name is known to nobody except to the
sacred essence of the Sealing Messenger (*s*).

A Gnostic Note
--------------

It must be noted that as the perfect guardian, the Seal of the Prophets
(*s*), is the night of *qadr* because of the interiority [*butūn*] of
the Greatest Name in him and the occultation [*ihtijāb*] of the *Haqq*
with all affairs in him, likewise he is the day of *qadr,* too, since
the appearance of the sun of the truth and the projection of the
all-embracing Name appear from the horizon of his individuation.
Similarly, the “Day of Resurrection” is his person, too.

In short, that sacred essence is the day and night of *qadr* and the Day
of Resurrection is the day of *qadr*, too. Therefore, the point that,
out of all phenomena, the “month” is referred to, and from this complete
and sacred phenomenon it is referred to “the night,” is, perhaps,
because the beginning of the months and years is the day and night, like
the “one” which is the beginning of the numbers.

That master [*sarwar*] in the inside [*bātin*] of the truth, the
Greatest Name, is the beginning of the other names; and, in his
individuation [*ta'ayyun*] and immutable essence ['*ayn-i thābit*], he
is the root (origin = *asl*) of the “Good Tree” [*shajarat-i tayyibah*]
and the beginning of the individuations [*ta'ayyunāt*]. Consider, so
that you may know, and seize the opportunity!

His saying: “**The angels and the Spirit descend in it, by the
permission of their Lord, for every affair.”** In this noble *āyah*
there are points, to some of which we shall refer briefly.

The first point is about the ranks of the angels of Allah, the Exalted,
and their reality in general. Know that there are differences among the
traditionists and researchers concerning the angels whether they are
abstract or corporeal. All the philosophers and researchers, and many of
the juristic researchers, believe in their abstraction and in the
abstraction of the rational soul, which they prove by strong evidences.

There are also many noble narratives and *āyah*s from which (their)
abstraction can be understood, as the traditionist and researcher, our
master Muhammad Taqī Majlisī, the great father of the late Majlisī,
says, in *Sharh 'ul-Faqīh,* commenting on some relevant narratives, that
they confirm the abstraction of the rational sou1.[^35]

On the other hand, some of the great traditionists believe in their
non-abstraction. Their utmost proof is that to believe in their
abstraction is contrary to religion, and they add that there is no
abstract except the Sacred Essence of Allah, the Exalted.

This, however, is a very weak argument, because their most attention is
probably directed to only two points: the first is the case of the
temporal contingency [*hudūth-i zamānī*] of the world, as they think
that the existence of an abstract other than Allah contradicts it. The
second point is the case of the free will of Allah, the Exalted, in His
acts, as they think that this contradicts the abstraction of the world
of intelligence and the angels of Allah, the Exalted.

Both these cases are of the insane [*ma'nūnah*] affairs within the High
Sciences. The non-contradiction of such cases with an abstract being is
quite obvious. Even to believe in the non-abstraction of the rational
souls, the world of intelligence and the angels of Allah is contrary to
many divine affairs and true beliefs, which cannot be explained for the
time being. The temporal contingency of the worlds, as is interpreted by
this group, is contrary to the principle of the temporal contingency,
besides being in opposition to many divine rules, too.

To the writer, the truth, which agrees with reason ['*aql*] and
tradition [*naql*], is that the angels of Allah are of different types.
Many of them are abstracts and many are intermediate [*barzakhī*]
corporeal:

*“**No one knows the host of your Lord save Him.”***[^36]

As to their types, according to their general division, it is said that
the heavenly beings are of two types: Type one has nothing to do with
the corporeal world, belonging to neither incarnation [*hulūl*] nor
management [*tadbīr*]. The other type belongs to one of the said two
aspects.

The first type consists of two groups.

The first groups are those who are called “the Passionate [*muhayyimah*]
Angels.” They are those who are infatuated with the Beauty of the
Beautiful, absorbed in the Essence of His Majesty, unaware of all other
creatures, paying no attention to other beings.

Among the friends of Allah [*awliyā'ullāh*] there is a group like them.
While we are indulged in the dark sea of nature, and are completely
unaware of the unseen world and the Essence of His Majesty, despite the
fact that He is apparent by His Essence [*bi' dh-dhāt*] and that every
appearance is a reflection of His Appearance, they are unaware of the
world and of whatever is in it, and are engaged only in the *Haqq* and
His Beautiful Beauty. A narrative says that Allah has some creatures who
know nothing of His creating Adam and *Iblīs*.[^37]

The second group are those whom Allah, the Exalted, has made the means
of the mercy of His Being. They are the beginning of the series of the
beings and the goal of their longings. They are called *ahl al-jabarūt*
(the Owners of Power), and their chief and leader is “the Greatest
Spirit.” It may be that “**The angels and the Spirit descend,”** is a
reference to this group of the angels of Allah. Describing him as “the
Spirit,” though he is an angel, is a hint at his greatness, as is in the
noble *āyah*:

*“**On the day when the angels and the Spirit stand arrayed.”***[^38]

From a point of view, the Spirit is called “the Highest Pen” [*qalam-i
a'lā*], as it is said: “The first that Allah created was the Pen.”[^39]
According to another point of view, it is called “the First Intellect”
['*aql-i awwal*], as it is also said: “The first that Allah created was
the Intellect.”[^40] Some others take “The Spirit” to be Gabriel. Some
philosophers consider Gabriel to be the last of the Cherubic angels;
some call him “The Holy Spirit;” and they regard the “Spirit” to be the
first of the Cherubic angels.

The noble narratives also state that “the Spirit” is greater than
Gabriel. The noble *al-Kāfi,* quotes Abu Basīr, who said: “I asked Abū
'Abdullāh, as-Sādiq, ('*a*) about the words of Allah, the Exalted”

*'**They will ask you concerning the Spirit. Say: The Spirit is of the
bidding of my Lord'*** *(*Sūrah al-Isrā' *17:85).*

He said: '(It is) a creature [*khalq*] greater than Gabriel and Michael.
It was with the Messenger of Allah (*s*), it is with the Imāms ('*a*),
and it is from the heavenly kingdom'.”[^41] Some narratives say that the
Spirit is not of the angels, it is greater than them.[^42]

Probably “The Spirit” has two meanings in terms of the Qur'an and the
Traditions, as it has its meanings in other terms. A Spirit is of the
angels' type, since it was said to be of “the heavenly kingdom.” Another
Spirit is that of the holy men [*awliyā'*], which is not of the angels,
but greater than them.

Therefore, the Spirit in the noble *sūrah* of *al-Qadr* may refer to
“the Faithful Spirit” [*rūh al-amīn*] or “the Greatest Spirit,” because
the *sūrah* was revealed on “the night of *qadr*.” In the noble *āyah*:

*“**They will ask you about the Spirit,”***[^43]

The reference may be to the spirit of the human beings, which, in its
perfect degree, is greater than Gabriel and other angels. It is of “the
World of Command” ['*ālam-i amr*], and sometimes combined with His
“Will” [*mashiyyat*], which is absolute command.

Another group of the angels of Allah are those who are in charge of the
corporeal beings and of managing them. These are of so many types and
uncountable kinds, because for every being, high or low, celestial or
terrestial, there is a heavenly aspect [*wijhah*] through which it is
connected to the world of the angels and the host [*junūd*] of Allah,
the Exalted, as Allah refers to the heavenly domain of the things in the
noble *āyah*:

*“**Therefore, glory be to Him in whose hand is the dominion of all
things, and to Him you shall be brought back.”***[^44]

The Messenger of Allah (*s*), concerning the host of the angels, say (as
it has been narrated): “The heaven clamored, and it had the right to do
so, as there was no place for a foot without there being an angel bowing
or kneeling down.”[^45] Noble narratives speak much of the multitude of
the angels and their numerous ranks.[^46]

The second point concerns the descent of the angels upon the *waliyy
al-amr* (the legal guardian).

Know that the Greatest Spirit is the greatest creature among the angels
of Allah, i.e. it is placed in the first rank of the angels of Allah,
and is the greatest and most honorable of all. The immaterial (abstract)
angels of Allah, confined to the world of power ['*ālam-i jabarūt*],
would not forsake their states, as for them ascending and descending, as
done by the material bodies, is impossible, because the immaterial
(abstract) is innocent of the material requisites.

Therefore, their descending will be in heavenly or worldly resemblance
[*tamaththul*], whether in the heart, the bosom and the common sense of
the guardian [*walī*], or in edifices of the earth, in the *ka'bah*,
around the grave of the Messenger of Allah (*s*), or in the Populous
House [*bayt al-ma'mūr*]*.* Allah, the Exalted, concerning the
descending of “The Faithful Spirit” to Mary ('*a*), says:

*“**…it assumed for her the likeness of a perfect man.”***[^47]

It is also possible for the holy men [*awliyā'*] and the perfect to
assume heavenly resemblance and spiritual likeness of sovereignty.
Therefore, the angels of Allah have the power and ability to enter the
visible and invisible worlds assuming likenesses, and the perfect holy
men [*awliyā'*] have the power to enter the heavenly world [*malakūt*]
and the world of power [*jabarūt*] assuming spirituality, and to return
from the exterior to the interior.

To believe in this is quite easy for the one who understands the
realities of the abstracts, whether heavenly and powerly abstracts or
the rational souls, which are also abstracts of the worlds of *jabarūt*
and *malakūt*, and who can imagine the stages of their existence and
appearances, and the correlation [*nisbat*] of the outside to the
inside, and the inside to the outside.

One must know that the assumption [*tamaththul*] of the “beings of
*jabarūt*” and the “beings of *malakūt*” in the heart, bosom and sense
of the human being is not possible except after his coming out of the
apparel of humanity and being connected with those worlds. Otherwise, as
long as the soul is engaged in the mundane preparations and is unaware
of those worlds, it is impossible for it to witness those scenes or
assumptions.

Yet, it is sometimes possible that, with a gesture of a holy man, the
soul comes out of this world, and, according to its deservedness, it may
get a spiritual or formal [*sūrī*] understanding of the unseen world.
And sometimes it happens that, due to some stupendous event, the soul is
directed away from nature and perceives an example of the invisible
world, such as the episode of that naïve man who, on his pilgrimage,
received an acquittal from the fire of Hell, as related by Avicenna. The
gnostic Shaykh, Muhyī’d-Dīn, also relates a story like this one.[^48]

Such stories are due to the soul's turning away from the *mulk* to the
*malakūt.* It sometimes happens that the souls of the perfect holy men
[*awliyā'*] after detachment from the worlds and witnessing the Greatest
Spirit or other angels of Allah through the power of soul, come to
themselves, keeping the power of witnessing the invisible and the
visible. In such a case they simultaneously, and in all emergences
(growths *= nasha'āt*), witness the truths of the beings of *jabarūt.*
It may also happen that the perfect *walī*, through his personal power,
will be able to have the angels descend. And Allah is the Knower!

The third point is that since the night of *qadr* is the night of
disclosure [*mukāshafah*] to the Messenger of Allah (*s*) and the Imāms
of guidance ('*a*), all the worldly affairs are uncovered by the unseen
*malakūt* to them, and the angels in charge of every affair appear to
them in the invisible world and the world of the heart, and all the
affairs which are prescribed for the creatures during the year in the
high and low *lawh*s (tablets), appear to them, heavenly writ and
covertly existed, in a disclosure.

And it is a *malakūtī* exposure [*mukāshafah*] covering every particle
of the world of nature, and no affair of the people's is hidden from the
*waliyy al-amr*. There is no discrepancy in their knowing, in a single
night, the affairs of a whole year, or, in an instance, the entire
affairs of the world, or, in a single moment, all the measured
assignments [*muqaddarāt*] of *mulk* and *malakūt.*

Also during the days of the year, all the daily affairs may gradually be
disclosed to them, both in general and in details. For example, it is in
the *hadīth,* concerning the revelation of the Qur'an, that it was
revealed in general (in the whole) in “The Populous House” [*bayt
al-ma'mūr*], then it was revealed to the Messenger of Allah in details
within twenty-three years.[^49] And its revelation in “The Populous
House” was a revelation to the Messenger of Allah (*s*), too.

In short, sometimes the *waliyy al-amr* may become connected to the High
Council [*mala'-i a'lā*], the High Pens and the abstract *lawh*s, where
to him will be exposed all the beings, from the beginning to eternity.
Sometimes the connection is with the low *lawh*s, and for a period he
uncovers the assignments [*muqaddarāt*], and the whole page of the
universe is present before his guardian-like presence, and whatsoever
affair happens will pass before his eyes.

Some narratives refer to the exposition ['*ard*] of the acts to *waliyy
al-amr*. They are exposed every Thursday and Monday to the Messenger of
Allah and the Imāms of guidance ('*a*). Other narratives say that the
acts are exposed every morning, or every morning and night. These
exposures are also in general and in details, collectively and
distinctly. In this respect, there are noble narratives from the
infallible and pure *Ahl al-Bayt*, mentioned in the books of exegeses,
such as *al-Burhān* and *as-Sāfi*.[^50]

His saying: “**Peace it is till the break of the dawn,”** means that
this blessed night is safe from Satanic evils, calamities and
misfortunes till the break of the dawn. Or it is peace upon Allah's
friends [*awliyā'ullāh*] and the worshipping people [*ahl-i tā'at*]. Or
the angels of Allah who meet Allah's friends and the worshipping people
greet them on the part of Allah, the Exalted, till the break of the
dawn.

A Gnostic Note
--------------

As it has formerly been said concerning the truth of “the night of
*qadr*,” the degrees of existence and the visible and invisible
individuations [*ta'ayyunāt*] are regarded “night” because the sun of
the truth has set in their horizon. Consequently, “The night of *qadr*”
is the night in which the *Haqq* (Allah), the Exalted according to all
the affairs and the “Collective Oneness of the Names and Attributes,”
which are the truth of the “Greatest Name”is veiled [*muhtajib*].

That is the individuation [*ta'ayyun*] and the constitution [*bunyah*]
of the perfect *walī*, who was the Messenger of Allah (*s*) in his life,
and then the Imāms of guidance, one after another. Therefore, “the dawn”
of “the night of *qadr*” is when the first rays of the rising sun of the
truth shine from behind the veils [*hujub*] of the individuations
[*ta'ayyunāt*]. The rise of the sun from the horizon of the
individuations is “the dawn” of the Day of Resurrection, too.

As from the time of the setting and veiling [*ihtijāb*] of the sun of
the truth in the horizon of the individuations of these perfect *walī*s
[*awliyā'*], till the time of the break of the dawn, which is the period
of “the night of *qadr*,” that night full of honor is absolutely safe
from the Satanic intrusions, and since the sun rises as it had set,
blemishless and free from the Satanic intrusion, thus, He says: “**Peace
it is till the break of the dawn.”** As to the other nights, they are
either completely peaceless, such as the nights of the Umayyads and
their like, or they have no peace in all its concepts, and these are the
nights of the common people.

Conclusion
----------

From the gnostic statements and faithful revelations [*mukāshafāt*],
which, with the help of the great *walī*s ('*a*), dawned upon the
luminous hearts of the “people of knowledge” [*ahl-i ma'rifat*], it is
obvious that if the noble *sūrah* of *at-Tawhīd* is related to the
Sacred Essence of Allah, the noble *sūrah* of *al-Qadr* is related to
the great *Ahl al-Bayt*, as is stated in the narratives concerning the
*mi'rāj*.

Muhammad ibn Ya'qūb, on the authority of Abū 'Abdullāh [as-Sādiq]
('*a*), concerning the performance of the Messenger of Allah (*s*) his
*salāt* in the heaven, in the *hadīth* of *al-Isrā'*, said: “…Then
Allah, the Most High, revealed to him: Read, O Muhammad, the lineage
[*nisbat*] of your Lord, the Blessed and Most High: '**He is Allah, the
One. He is besought by all. He begets not, nor is He begotten. And none
is comparable to Him.'** This is in the first *rak'ah*. Then, Allah, the
Exalted and Most High, revealed to him: Read: '**All praise is for
Allah.'** He read it as he did first. Then Allah revealed to him: Read:
'**We revealed it'** which is your lineage [*nisbat*] and your
offspring's till the Day of Resurrection.”[^51]

The noble narratives concerning the merits of the blessed *sūrah* of
*al-Qadr* are numerous. Among them is a narrative in the noble
*al-Kāfī,* from Imām al-Bāqir ('*a*) who said: “Whoever recites '**We
revealed it on The Night of Qadr'** openly (with a loud voice), he is
like the one who unsheathes his swords for the sake of Allah. And
whoever recites it secretly, is as if he rolls in his blood shed in the
way of Allah, and whoever recites it ten times, a thousand of his sins
will be forgiven.”[^52]

In *Khawāss al-Qur'an*, the Messenger of Allah (*s*) is quoted to have
said: “Whoever recites this *sūrah*, he will have the reward of the one
who has fasted the month of Ramadan, attaining “The night of *qadr*,”
and he will have the reward of a fighter in the way of Allah.”[^53]
Praise is for Allah, at the beginning and at the end.

An Apology
----------

Despite the fact that the writer's intention in this thesis was to
refrain from referring to those gnostic topics unfamiliar to the common
people, and keep only to the hearty disciplines of the *salāt*, yet, I
realize now that the pen has exceeded the proper bounds, and
particularly in commenting on the noble *sūrah* I have surpassed my own
decision.

Now I have but to apologize to my brothers in religion and spiritual
friends. At the same time, if they found in this thesis a subject not
conforming with their taste, they may not unthoughtfully label it as
false, because each knowledge has its people, and each road has its
treaders. “May Allah have mercy on the person who knows his worth and
does not go beyond his status.”[^54]

It is also possible that some neglect the reality of the condition, and,
as they have no information of the Qur'anic knowledge and of the minute
details of the divine laws, they take some matters of this thesis as to
be interpretation according to one's opinion. This is sheer mistake and
a grave falsity, because:

Firstly, these knowledges [*ma'ārif*] and subtleties [*latā'if*] are all
taken from the noble Qur'an and *hadīth*s, and they are proved through
heard [*sam'iyyah*] evidences, some of which have been referred to in
the discussions, and most of them were left out for brevity.

Secondly, all, or most of them, agree with the rational or gnostic
proofs, and such a thing cannot be interpretation according to one's
opinion.

Thirdly, most of the subjects which we mentioned, or we relate in
explaining the noble *āyah*s, are of the kinds of stating the “evidences
of the concepts” [*masādīq-i mafāhīm*]; and explaining the evidences and
degrees of the facts has nothing to do with interpretation, let alone
its being according to one's opinion.

Fourthly, after all stages, we tried with utmost religious precaution
though unnecessarily to relate any unnecessary subject by way of being
possible and as one of the possibilities. It is clear that the door of
possibility is not shut, and it can have no connection to interpretation
on one's opinion. Here there are other subjects that we refrain from
mentioning, in our attempt to be short.

[^1]: Sūrah ad-Dukhān  44:3

[^2]: Sūrah al-Hijr 15:9

[^3]: Sūrah ash-Shu'arā' 26:193

[^4]: Sūrah Ghāfir 40:36

[^5]: Sūrah al-Anfā1 8:17

[^6]: “The Book of Allah and my 'itrat (progeny) will not be separated
from each other until they come to me at the Pool (of Kawthar).” This is
a part of a well-known and successively related hadīth called Hadīth
ath-Thaqalayn. Usul al-Kāfī, vol. 1, page 299, “The Book of Divine
Proof,” ch. “Concerning What Allah and His Messenger Imposed of Being
with the Imāms ('a),” hadīth 6; vol. 4, p. 141, “The Book of Faith and
Disbelief,” ch. “Concerning the Least by which a Servant may be a
Believer,” hadīth 1.

[^7]: Sūrah al-Ahzāb 33:72

[^8]: Ihyā'u 'Ulūm 'ud-Dīn, vol. 4, p. 256. A Divine utterance. In some
editions it is ”qibābī” (my domes) and in some other it is ”qibā'ī” (my
cloak).

[^9]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 89, p. 83.

[^10]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 4, p. 438, “The Book of the Merits of the
Qur'an,” ch. “The Rarities,” hadīth 12.

[^11]: Nahj al-Balāghah, edited by Fayd ul-Islām, p. 737, sermon 228.

[^12]: Sūrah at-Talāq 65:7

[^13]: It demands consideration because this allegation can be claimed
here from another aspect, and it is that the appearance in ascribing a
predicate to a proposition is that the proposition itself has the same
status and it is the proposition in complete, as the Shaykh, our teacher
in the conventional sciences used, concerning generalization [itlāq], to
call this statement, without needing preliminaries, to prove the
generalization.

[^14]: Sūrah Hūd 11:112

[^15]: Khalīl ibn Ahmad ibn 'Umar ibn Tamīm, Abū 'Abdur-Rahmān
al-Bāhilī, al-Basrī, the grammarian and prosodist, born in the year 100
or 105 AH in al-Basrah, and died in 160, 170 or 175 AH. He was a famous
linguist and a writer. He discovered the meters of poetry. He was an
Imāmī and, as some say, he was a companion of Imām Ja'far as-Sādiq ('a)
and quoted him in his narrations. He wrote many books on diverse arts,
including Zubdat 'ul-'Arūd (the Gist of Prosody), al-'Ayn, a book on
Imamate, al-Īqā' (rhythm), an-Nu'm (tone or softness), al-Jumal
(syntax), ash-Shawāhid (ancient verses as evidences), an-Nuqāt
wash-Shikl (dots and form), and a book on the meanings of the alphabetic
letters. For further information bibliographies and books on rijāl such
as A'yān ash-Shī'ah, vol. 30, p. 50, may be consulted.

[^16]: Furū' al-Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 236, the “Book of Funerals,”ch. on
“Questioning in the Grave,” hadīth 6.

[^17]: This concept is referred to Imām as-Sādiq ('a) through several
channels in Ma'ālim al-Usūl, p. 7.

[^18]: Refer to footnote 97

[^19]: Sūrah ad-Dukhān 44:1-4. Al-Burhān Exegesis, vol. 4, p. 158.

[^20]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 2, p. 326, the “Book of the Proof,” ch. on
“The Birth of the Prophet (s), hadīth 4.

[^21]: Al-Burhān Exegesis, vol. 4, ”Sūrah al-Fajr,” hadīth 1, p. 457.

[^22]: Al-Burhān Exegesis, vol. 4, ”Surah al-Qadr,” hadīth 25, p. 487

[^23]: Majma' ul-Bayān, vol. 10, p. 519; Nūr ath-Thaqalayn, vol. 5, p.
628, ”Sūrah al-Qadr,” hadīth 71

[^24]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 95, p. 149.

[^25]: Majma' ul-Bayān, vol. 10, p. 519; Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 7, p.
263, “Book of Fasting,” ch. 32, hadīth 21.

[^26]: Iqbāl al-A'māl, p. 206.

[^27]:

[^28]: Ibid., p. 207

[^29]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 98, p. 168.

[^30]: Sūrah Qāf 50:37.

[^31]: Sūrah al-A'rāf 7:143

[^32]: Ibid.

[^33]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 94, p. 8, quoting Majālis-i Shaykh, the
Tafsīr of 'Alī ibn Ibrāhīm, p. 732; Al-Burhān Exegesis, vol. 4, p. 486;
Rawdat al-Kāfī, hadīth 280, p. 222

[^34]: Reference unknown.

[^35]: Such as the narrative quoted from Imām as-Sādiq ('a) to the
effect: “When the soul is taken (in death), it remains hovering over the
body…” On this he comments: “This narrative and the one after it, and
the many other similar narratives, and the other successive narratives,
as well as the apparent literal meanings of the Qur'anic āyahs, all
prove the spiritual resurrection, i.e. the survival of the soul after
the destruction of the body…” Rawdat 'ul-Muttaqīn, vol. 1, p. 492.

[^36]: Sūrah al-Muddaththir 74:31.

[^37]: 'Ilm al-Yaqīn, vol. 1, p. 250; Al-Kāfī (ar-Rawdah, hadīth 301),
p. 231.

[^38]: Sūrah an-Nabā' 78:38.

[^39]: Nūr ath-Thaqalayn Exegesis, vol. 5, hadīth 9, p. 389; 'Ilm
al-Yaqīn, vol. 1, p. 154.

[^40]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 1, p. 97.

[^41]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 2, p. 18, “The Book of Divine Proof,” ch. on
“The Spirit by which Allah Directs the Steps of the Imāms” ('a), hadīth
3.

[^42]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 25, “Book of the Imāmah,” sec. on “Their
Creation, Nature and Spirits,” ch. 3, hadīth 45, p. 64.

[^43]: Sūrah Isrā' 17:85

[^44]: Sūrah Yā-Sīn 36:83

[^45]: 'Ilm al-Yaqīn, vol. 1, p. 259.

[^46]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 56, ch. on “The Angels,” p. 144.

[^47]: Sūrah Maryam 19:17.

[^48]: Reference unknown

[^49]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 4, p. 437, “The Book of the Merits of the
Qur'an,” ch. on “Rarities,” hadīth 6

[^50]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 23, pp. 338, 346 and 347; as-Sāfī's
Exegesis.

[^51]: Al-Burhān Exegesis, vol. 4, p. 487, ”Sūrah al-Qadr,” hadīth 22.

[^52]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 4, p. 427, “The Book of the Merit of the
Qur'an,” ch. on “The Merit of the Qur'an,” hadīth 6.

[^53]: Al-Burhān Exegesis, vol. 4, p. 480, ”Sūrah al-Qadr,” hadīth 1.
From Khawāss al-Qur'an.

[^54]: Ghurar al-Hikam, ch. 3, letter R, hadīth 1.


