On The Takbīr Before The Rukū
=============================

Apparently, this *takbīr* (saying: *Allāhu Akbar* = Allah is the
Greatest) belongs to the *rukū'* (obeisance *=* genuflection) in order
to be prepared for the stage of *rukū'*. Its relevant discipline is to
bring to mind Allah's status of Greatness and Majesty and the Lord's
Might and Sovereignty, and considering, at the same time, one's
weakness, inability, poverty, humility and servitude. In such a
condition, and according to one's knowledge of the Lord's Might and the
servant's humility, one will say the *takbīr* of the *Haqq* (Allah), the
Exalted, being above all description.

The description [*tawsīf*] which the *sālik* servant makes of the *Haqq*
(Allah), the Exalted, and his glorifying and extolling, should be out of
pure obedience, and taking them to be by the permission of the *Haqq*
(Allah), the Exalted, to describe and worship Him. Otherwise he would
dare not to vaunt of his describing and glorifying in the presence of
the Lord, weak a servant as he is, and, actually, having nothing of his
own, for whatsoever he has is from his Great Worshipped. When 'Alī ibn
al-Husayn, with such sweet and authoritative a tongue as he had, being
the tongue of Allah, says: “How, with this feeble tongue as I have, can
I thank you?”[^1] “What a thin gnat can do?”[^2]

So, when the *sālik* servant wants to enter the grave stage of *rukū'*,
he has to prepare himself for that stage, throwing behind, with his own
hand, his describing, glorifying, worshipping and conduct [*sulūk*]. He
then has to raise his hands beside his ears, facing his empty palms
towards the *qiblah*, and, empty-handed, with a heart full of fear and
hope fear of failure and deficiency in observing the state of servitude;
and assured hope in the Holy state of Allah Who honored him into such
situations, which belong to the bosom friends of Allah and the perfect
lovers he enters the stage of *rukū'*. Probably, raising the hands in
this way denotes leaving the *qiyām* (standing) position and the stand
[*wuqūf*] in that stage a sign indicating taking no provision from the
stage of *qiyām*.

*Takbīr* denotes glorifying and aggrandizing the descriptions done in
the stage of *qiyām*. As *rukū'*, to the people of knowledge, is the
stage of the Unity of Attributes, the *takbīr* of *rukū'*, to them, is
aggrandizing this Unity, and raising the hands is a sign of rejecting
the attributes of the creatures.

[^1]: Misbāh al-Mutahajjid, an extract from Abū Hamzah's invocation, p.
534

[^2]: Refer to footnote 273


