Concerning The Disciplines Of Bowing In Rukū‘
=============================================

Know that the principal positions of the *salāt* are three. The other
acts and deeds are preliminary and preparatory:

**First:** *qiyām*;  
**Second:** *rukū'*;  
**Third:** *sujūd*.

The people of knowledge regard these three positions to be a hint at the
three Unities [*tawhīdāt*]*.* We, in *The Secret of the Salāt*, referred
to these stages in terms of the gnostic taste. Now, we explain them in
other terms suitable to the common people.

So, we say that as the *salāt* is the believer's perfective *mi'rāj*,
and the bringer of the pious people to Allah's proximity, it stands on
two bases, the one is the preliminary to the other.

The first is abandoning self-conceit and selfishness, as it is the truth
and the inside of *taqwā* (piety).  
 The second is seeking Allah and being in quest of the *Haqq*, as this
is the truth of the *mi'rāj* and proximity. Hence, it is in the noble
narratives that: “The *salāt* is the means of proximity for every pious
person,”[^1] the same as the Qur'an is a light of guidance, but for the
pious:

*“**This is the Book; there is no doubt in it. It is a guide for the
muttaqīn*** ***(the pious).”***[^2]  
 In short, in these three states: the states of *qiyām*, *rukū'*, and
*sujūd*, the said two states (bases) take shape gradually. So, in the
state of *qiyām*, self-conceitedness is forsaken according to the state
of Activity [*fā'iliyyat*], and regarding Allah to be the Absolute
Factor and Eternal. In the state of *rukū'*, self-conceitedness is
forsaken according to the state of Attributes and Names, considering the
state of Allah's Attributes and Names.

In the *sujūd*, the self-conceitedness is forsaken altogether, and it is
entirely Allah seeking and being in quest of the *Haqq*. All the stages
of the *sālik*s are of the affairs [*shu'ūn*] of these three states, as
it is quite obvious to the people of insight, the gnostics and the
*sālik*s.

When the *sālik* along these three states realizes that the secret of
these acts is the three Unities, he will have to pay more attention to
that state which is nicer and more delicate. Naturally, the danger of
the state is greater and it is more slippery. Then, in the state of
*rukū'*, the *sālik* claims that in the house of existence [*dār-i
wujūd*] there is no knowledge, power, life nor will except from Allah a
claim so great and a state so delicate, which we are not (qualified) to
put forth.

We should inwardly turn to the Holy Threshold of Allah, showing
supplication, distress and humility, asking forgiveness for our faults
and failures, and, with seeing eyes and witnessing conscience, admitting
our shortcomings, that perhaps His Sacred Holiness may show kindness to,
and care for, us, and may He, in the time of necessity, extend a hand of
help to us.

*“**Or, who answers the distressed one when he calls upon Him, and
removes the evil…?”***[^3]

[^1]: Furū' al-Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 265, “The Book of as-Salāt,” ch. on “The
Merit of as-Salāt,” hadīth 6.

[^2]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:2.

[^3]: Sūrah an-Naml 27:62.


