Preface
=======

Know that for the *Salat*, beside its form, there is a meaning, and
apart from its exterior it has an interior; and as the exterior has its
disciplines, neglecting which would render the outer form of the *Salat*
invalid or incomplete, likewise its interior has cordial spiritual
disciplines, neglecting which would render the spiritual *Salat* invalid
or incomplete; whereas observing them would inspire the *Salat* with a
heavenly spirit.

It would be possible that after paying attention to and observing the
cordial inner disciplines, the *musallī* would have a share of the
divine secret of the *Salat* of the “people of knowledge and of hearts”
the *Salat* which is the delight of the people of *sulūk*[^1] and the
reality of the *mi'rāj* (ascension) to the proximity of the Beloved.
[^2]

Besides what was just said about the *Salat*'s interior and unseen
divine images, and in addition to its being in conformity with a kind of
proof and the observations of the people of *sulūk* and asceticism,
there are many *āyah*s and narratives, in general and particular, which
denote that, too, and we shall bless the following pages by relating
some of them.

Among them is the saying of Allah, the Most High:

*“**On the day when every soul shall find present what it has done of
good and what it has done of evil, it shall wish that there were a long
duration of time between it and that [day]…”***[^3]

This noble *āyah* says that everybody will see his good and bad deeds
present and he will discern their unseen inner images. In another *āyah*
He says:

*“**… and they shall find present what they have done,”***[^4]   
 And

*“**So, he who has done an atom's weight of good shall see it…,”***[^5]

Which means that the soul shall see its deeds.

As regards the noble *Hadiths* in this respect, they are too many to be
contained in these pages. So, it suffices to state a few of them.

Among them, in the *Wasā'il*, quoting Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*), it is said:
“Whoever performed the obligatory *Salat*s at the beginning of their
times and observed their restrictions, the angel would raise them, white
and pure, to heaven, and the *Salat* would say (to the performer): “May
Allah preserve you as you preserved me and entrusted me to a generous
angel.”

But whoever performed them after their times, with no excuse, and did
not observe their restrictions, the angel would raise them, black and
dark, while the *Salat* shouting at the performer: “You have lost me,
may Allah lose you, and may He not care for you as you did not care for
me”. [^6]

It denotes that the *Salat* is raised by Allah's angels to heaven, white
and pure, when it is performed at the start of its time and its
disciplines are observed. In this case it invokes good for the
*musallī*; or it will be dark and black if it is delayed, without a
reasonable cause, and its disciplines are neglected, in which case it
will curse him.

This *hadīth*, besides denoting the fact that there are heavenly unseen
images, it also denotes that they are alive, as evidenced by *āyah*s and
narratives. Allah, the Most High, says:

*“**… and the next abode, most surely, is the life…”***[^7]

There are many *Hadiths* to the same effect, relating which would
lengthen the subject.

Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) is quoted to have said: “When a believing servant
is put into his grave, the *Salat* stands on his right and the *zakāt*
on his left, his good deeds stand shadowing over him and forbearance
stands aside. When the two angels in charge of interrogation enter the
grave, forbearance tells the *Salat*, the *zakāt* and good deeds: “You
have to help your friend. If you felt unable, I would be with him”.[^8]

This noble *hadīth* is related in the noble *al*-*Kāfī* through two
channels. Shaykh as-Sadūq (may Allah have mercy upon him) has related
this *hadīth* in *Thawāb al*-*A'māl*. It speaks clearly of the unseen
images of the *barzakh*, and their life and common sense. The *Hadiths*
about the heavenly images of the Qur'an and the *Salat* are numerous.

With regard to what has been said that the *Salat* and other forms of
worship have, besides their outward disciplines, other inward
disciplines without which the *Salat* would be incomplete or even
unacceptable to Allah, the following pages will numerate and state those
cordial (inward) disciplines, *inshā' Allāh* (if Allah wills).

What one should know, however, in this stage, is that to satisfy oneself
with the appearance and outer form of the *Salat*, and to be deprived of
its blessings and inner perfections which bring about eternal happiness,
or rather, bring one to the proximity of the Lord of Might, and set up
the ladder of ascent to the stage of meeting the Absolute Beloved the
Ultimate Goal of the godly men and the Final Hope of the people of
knowledge and those who have “hearts”, or rather, the Beloved of the
Master of the Messengers (*s*)[^9] is one of the heavier losses, as it
will be after leaving this world and entering the reckoning (day) of
Allah the cause of so great regrets that our minds are incapable of
comprehending them.

As long as we are enwrapped in the veils of this world, and live in the
covers of nature, we cannot have knowledge of the other world, and
cannot keep warm by a remote fire. What regret, remorse and loss can be
greater than that after forty or fifty years of toiling for the sake of
attaining a thing which is the means of man's perfection and happiness,
and the remedy for the pains of the cordial deficiencies, and it is, in
fact, the image of the human perfection, we cannot be spiritually
benefited by it, and rather, it becomes the cause of tarnishing the
heart and brings dark veils, and what is the pleasure of the Messenger
(*s*) causes the weakness of our insight:

*“**…Alas for me, for what I fell short of my duty to Allah…”***[^10]

So, dear, tuck up the skirt of aspiration, extend the hand of demand,
bear every labor and hardship in order to reform your affairs and
acquire the spiritual conditions of the *Salat* of the people of
knowledge, and make use of this divine mixture [*ma'jūn*], which is
prepared with the complete understanding [*kashf*] of Muhammad (*s*) for
the sake of soothing all the pains and deficiencies of the souls.

Since it is still not too late, try to break camp and leave this dungeon
of darkness, regret and remorse, this deep pit, which is far away from
the holy presence of the Lord, the Exalted and Most High. Release
yourself and try to reach the ascension [*mi'rāj*] of union [*wisāl*]
and the proximity of perfection. Beware! If this means were lost, other
means would fit: “If it was accepted, other deeds would be accepted, and
if it was rejected, other deeds would be rejected, too.” [^11]

We shall explain, as much as possible and necessary, the inner
disciplines of this spiritual *sulūk*, so that someone of the people of
faith may have a share of it. This might as well be a cause for the
divine mercy and the unseen care to be bestowed upon me, lagging as I am
in the way to happiness and humanity, and chained in the prison of
nature and selfishness. Surely Allah is the Patron of generosity and
care.

[^1]: It hints at some narratives, including one from the Messenger of
Allah (s) saying, “My delight has been placed in the Salat.” Furū‛
al-Kāfī, vol 5, “Book of Marriage”, ch. on “Loving Women”, hadīth no.7,
p. 321. 

[^2]: It refers to a narrative from the Messenger of Allah (s) saying,
“The Salat is the mi'rāj of the believer.” 'Allāmah al-Majlisī,
I'tiqādāt, p. 29. 

[^3]: Sūrah Āl-i 'Imrān 3:30

[^4]: Sūrah al-Kahf 18:49

[^5]: Sūrah Zilzāl 99:7

[^6]: Wasā'il ash-Shī‛ah, vol. 3, Kitāb as-Salat, sec. on “Times” ch. 3,
hadīth 17, p. 90 (with a slight difference ).

[^7]: Sūrah al-'Ankabūt 29:64

[^8]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 3, “Book of Belief and Disbelief,” ch. on
“Forbearance,” hadīth 8, p. 143; Thawāb al-A'māl, “Thawāb as-Salat
waz-Zakāt wal-Birr was-Sabr,” hadīth 1, p. 203. 

[^9]: Refer to footnote 7.

[^10]: Sūrah az-Zumar 39:56.

[^11]: Falāh as-Sā'il, p. 127, quoting Man Lā Yahduruh al-Faqīh, in
which the text is: “The first thing about which the servant is
questioned is the Salat, if it was accepted his other (devotional) acts
would be accepted, and if it was returned to him, his other acts would
be returned to him (too).” vol. 1. “The Merit of the Salat,” ch. 30,
hadīth 5.


