The Rukū‘of the Salāt of The Messenger’s Mi‘rāj
===============================================

In respect of the *mi'rāj salāt* of the Messenger of Allah (*s*) it is
stated that after the *rukū'*, the Almighty addressed him, saying: “Look
at My '*Arsh*.” The Messenger of Allah said: “I looked at a greatness
which astounded my soul and I went in a swoon. I was inspired to say:
'Glory be to my Great Lord and praise be to Him' because of the
greatness which I saw. As I said that, I came to myself. I continued to
say it for seven times till I came to myself as before…”[^1] as the
*hadīth* goes.

Consider, dear, the state of the greatness of the *sulūk* of the
“Universal Master” [*sarwar-i kull*] and the Guide to the Paths (*s*),
who, while in the state of *rukū'*, which is a looking down at one's
inferior, sees the light of the '*Arsh*; and, as the light of '*Arsh* to
the *walī*s [*awliyā'*] is the manifestation of the Essence, without
mirror, the self individuation is gone, and a mood of swoon and shock
takes place.

So, the Holy Essence, with eternal care, helped that honorable being,
and with affectionate inspiration taught that noble personality how to
“glorify,” “aggrandize” and “praise,” until after seven times the number
of the veils and the number of man's ranks he came to himself and to
wakefulness. This condition prevailed throughout the *mi'rāj salāt*.

But as we have no admission into the privacy of intimacy, nor into a
place of Holy State, it is good to use our incapability and humility as
a capital for the attainment of the objective, and as a pretext to reach
the goal.  
 We have to keep clinging to the skirt of the intended until we get what
we desire. Or, at least, if we are not the men for the job, we are to
seek guidance from the guides of the road, and find help with the
perfect spiritual men, so that a smell of fragrant of knowledge may
reach the smelling sense of our souls, and a breeze of the graces may
blow into our dead corpses, because Allah, the Exalted, is accustomed to
being beneficent, and His habit is to be graceful and generous.

It must be noted that *rukū'* consists of “glorifying,” “aggrandizing”
(magnifying) and “praising” the Lord, Almighty and Most High. Thus,
“glorifying” is purifying Allah, the Exalted, from description and
definition. “Aggrandizing” and “praising” are refraining from limits of
assimilation and devesting Allah from attributes, because “praising”
denotes the appearance in the mirrors of creation, and “aggrandizing”
negates limitation. Thus, He is apparent and there is no appearance in
the world more apparent than Him. He is not clothed in the apparel of
the individuations of the creation.

[^1]: 'Ilal ash-Sharā'i' , p. 315. A part of the hadīth concerning
al-mi'rāj salāt.


