Delicacies And Secrets Of The Rukū, Sujūd And Their Cordial Disciplines
=======================================================================

It is stated in *Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah* that as-Sādiq ('*a*) said: “No
servant bows in the *rukū'* for Allah, in a true way, unless Allah
adorns him with the light of His Brilliance, and shades him with the
shade of His Majesty, and clothes him with the gown of His chosen
friends. The *rukū'* is first and the *sujūd* is second. The one who
performed the first is fit for the second. The *rukū'* is politeness,
and the *sujūd* is proximity.

So, the one who is not well-mannered, is unfit for proximity. Therefore,
perform the *rukū'* like the one who is submitting to Allah with his
heart, humble and afraid under His Sovereignty, drooping to Him his
limbs like the one who is afraid and grieved for what one loses of the
benefit of those who perform the *rukū'*. It is narrated that ar-Rabī'
ibn Khuthaym used to keep indulged in a single *rukū'* all the night
till dawn.

In the morning he would raise his head and say: 'Oh, the sincere ones
have passed us and we are left behind.' Complete your *rukū'* by
levelling your back, and rebuke yourself for being vigilant in serving
Him except with His help. Protect your heart against Satan's whispers,
deceits and traps. Allah, the Exalted, raises His servants as much as
they show humility to Him, and He guides them to the principles of
humility and submission as much as His Greatness knows of their
secrets.”[^1]

This noble *hadīth* contains signs, good tidings, disciplines and
instructions, as “adorning” with the “light of Allah's Brilliance,”
being under the “shade of Allah's Majesty” and wearing the “gown of
Allah's chosen ones” are good tidings of attaining to the state of
learning the Names:

*“**And He taught Adam all the names.”***[^2]

Of that state is the taking of the state of attributive annihilation and
the state of wakefulness, because Allah's adorning the servant with the
state of “the light of His Brilliance” means taking him to the state of
Names, which is the reality of teaching man. Taking him under the shade
and shadow of “Majesty,” which is of the Names of Power, and placing him
in His Court, refer to annihilating the servant of himself.

After this state, clothing him in “the gown of the chosen ones” is
survival after annihilation. From this it is realized that the *sujūd*
is self-annihilation, as is said by the people of knowledge. The *rukū'*
is first, and it is these states, and the *sujūd* is second, which is
nothing but the state of annihilation in the Essence.

It is also realized that the Absolute Proximity, which happens in the
*sujūd*, is not accessible except through the true *rukū'*. Whoever
wants to be fit for the second, must acquire the discipline of the
*rukū'* and its proximity.

After stating the delicacies and secrets of the *rukū'* and *sujūd*, he
refers to their hearty disciplines to suit the middle class. These are
among the general matters, which we have referred to in the
Preliminaries; and some of them belong to *rukū'*. Now, as most of these
things have already been stated, we leave out further explanation.

Concerning Raising the Head from the Rukū
-----------------------------------------

Its secret is the return from *wuqūf* (standing) in the multiplicity of
names, as it is said: “The perfect monotheism is the negation of
ascribing attributes to Him,”[^3] because after the awakening from the
annihilation in the Names [*fanā'-i asmā'ī*], the *sālik* servant
witnesses his failure and shortcoming, since the beginning of Man's sin
which is to be compensated for by his offspring is the inclination
toward the multiplicities of names, which is the inside of the “tree.”

Having understood the sin of himself, who is Adam's offspring, and the
sin of Adam, who is his origin, he would recognize his state of humility
and need, and get ready to remove the sin by way of behaving with
humility in 'the presence of Allah's Majesty. He would then stand erect
out of this state, and with the *takbīr* after the *rukū'* he would
remove the multiplicities of names, and, empty-handed, he would
comprehend the state of humility, helplessness and the earthly origin.

The important discipline in this respect is to find out the state's
great significance, and to have the heart to taste it through complete
remembrance, and strive to attend [*tawajjuh*] to His Essence, forsaking
attending [*tawajjuh*] to oneself, even to one's state of humility.

Know, dear, that complete remembrance of the *Haqq* (Allah), and
absolute turning, with the inside of the heart, to the Holy Essence,
will open the heart's internal eye, through which meeting Allah the
pleasure of the eyes of the *walī*s [*awliyā'*] takes place:

*“**And those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly guide them
in our ways.”***[^4]

[^1]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, p. 12; Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 89, p. 108. 

[^2]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:31.

[^3]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 191, “The Book of Monotheism,” ch. on
“General Hadīths on Monotheism,” hadīth 6.

[^4]: Sūrah al-'Ankabūt 29:69.


