General Secret Of The Sujūd
===========================

According to the people of gnosticism and of heart, this secret is to be
forsaking oneself and closing one's eyes against anything except Him;
and, with a Jonahian *mi'rāj* which took place by sinking into the
stomach of the fish one can pay attention to his origin without seeing
the veil. And, in putting the head on the dust, there is a hint at
seeing the Beauty of the Beautiful in the inner heart of the dust and
the origin of the world of nature.

Its hearty disciplines are to find one's reality and the original root
of one's existence, and to place the brain, which is the center of the
sovereignty of the soul and the '*Arsh* of the spirit, at the lowest
threshold of the State of Holiness, and to consider the world of dust as
the threshold of the Master of the Kings.

Thus, the secret of the position of the *sujūd* is to give up oneself,
and the discipline of putting the head on the dust is to debase one's
most high position, regarding it to be lower than the dust. Should there
be in the heart a cause for these claims, in respect of the states of
the *salāt*, which are a reference to them, they are, to the people of
knowledge, hypocrisy.

And, as this state is the most dangerous one, the *sālik* to Allah will
have to cling to the skirt of the care of Allah, the Most High, by means
of his personal disposition and innermost nature, humbly and meekly
asking forgiveness for the shortcomings. But this is a dangerous state
that is out of the obligations of people like us.

As we have explained in *The Secret of the Salāt* these states in
details, we refrain from repeating them in this thesis, satisfying
ourselves with relating the *hadīth* narrated in *Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah*
concerning the relevant discipline.


