Contents And Meaning Of The Form, Mood And Invocation Of The Sujūd
==================================================================

It is stated in a narrative that when the *āyah*:

*“**Therefore,*** ***glorify the Name of your Lord, the Great,”***[^1]

Was revealed, the Messenger of Allah (*s*) said: “Recite this in your
*rukū'*,” and when the *āyah*:

*“**Glorify the Name of your Lord, the Most High”***[^2]

Was revealed, he said: “Recite this in your *sujūd*.”[^3]

It is in the noble *hadīth* of *al-Kāfī* that “… the first and foremost
name He assumed for Himself was *al-'Aliyy* (the High) *al-'Azīm* (the
Great).[^4] It may be that “*al-'Aliyy*” was the first of the names of
Essence, and “*al-'Azīm*” was the first of the names of Attributes.

Know that the *sujūd*, like the other positions of the *salāt* has its
form, mood, recitation [*dhikr*] and secret. These matters, in relation
to the Perfect Ones, are as have formerly been related in this thesis,
but to go into the details is not suitable. For the middle class the
form is showing humbleness and forsaking arrogance and self conceit.

Pressing the nose onto dust which is of the confirmed supererogations,
or even neglecting it is contrary to precaution is a token of showing
complete submission, humility and modesty. It also means being aware of
one's origin and creation. And putting the tops of the exposed organs
which are the places of sensation and of the appearance of mobility and
power, being the very seven or eight organs on the dust of humility and
helplessness, is a sign of complete surrender, of offering one's entire
powers, and getting out of Adam's sin.

By strengthening the remembrance of these concepts in the heart, it
becomes affected by them and it acquires a mood of running away from
oneself and from self-conceit. This mood results in a mood of pleasure,
which, in turn, results in a mood of complete privacy and there will be
full love.  
 As regards the recitation [*dhikr*] during the *sajdah*, it is based on
*tasbīh*, which is glorifying (purifying) Allah from description and
observance of the command (*amr*), or it is purifying (glorifying) Him
from multiplicity of names, or purifying (glorifying) Him from
unification [*tawhīd*], which is ”*taf'īl*,” moving from multiplicity to
unity, and it is not free from the blemish of multiplying [*takthīr*]
and associating with Allah [*tashrīk*], as describing Him with the
Essential highness and praising Him are also not free from the blemishes
of these concepts.

“*Al-'Aliyy*” is of the Names of Essence, and, according to the
narrative of *al-Kāfī*, it is the first name adopted by Allah for
Himself. That is, the first manifestation of the Essence is for Himself.
When the *sālik,* in this state, becomes annihilated out of himself and
forsakes the world and what is in it, he will have the honor of this
Essential manifestation.

Know that as the *rukū'* is first and the *sujūd* is second,
glorification and praising in them differ a great deal. Also *rabb* is
different in those two states, because *rabb* as the people of knowledge
say, is of the Names of Essence, Attributes and Acts in three aspects.
Therefore, *rabb* in *al-hamdu lillāhi rabbil-'ālamīn* may be of the
Names of Act in accordance with the state of standing, which is the
state of the Unity of Acts.

In the *rukū'* it is of the Names of Attributes in accordance with the
fact that the *rukū'* is the state of the Unity of Attributes. In the
*sujūd* it is of the Names of Essence in accordance with the fact that
*sujūd* is the state of the Unity of Essence. The “glorifying” and
“praising” in each one of these states are related to that particular
state.[^5]

[^1]: Sūrah al-Wāqi'ah 26:74

[^2]: Sūrah al-A'lā 87:1.

[^3]: Majma' ul-Bayān, vol. 9, p. 224, commenting on āyah 74 of Sūrah
al-Wāqi'ah.

[^4]: Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 1, p. 153, “The Book of at-Tawhīd,” ch. on “The
Originality of the Names (of Allah), hadīth 2.

[^5]: In the MS (manuscript), before starting ”,” the Imām has scribed
nearly two pages under the title “A Gnostic Note,” then these were
crossed out as to be deleted, and in the margin he wrote: “This note is
not needed and it is to be completely effaced.” In the book's latest MS
(manuscript) this part is omitted. But it appears in the former editions
of this book. In this edition that passage is not printed.


