The Moods Of The Sājid During The Sujūd
=======================================

The *sajdah*, as described in the *salāt* of the *mi'rāj*, is a swoon
and a shock resulting from witnessing the lights of the Greatness of
Allah. When the servant feels being raptured and he undergoes a fit
[*hāl*] of annihilation [*mahw*] and shock [*sa'q*], he will be covered
by the eternal care and will receive inspiration from the Unseen
[*ghayb*].

The recitation [*dhikr*] in the *sujūd* and repeating it are for one to
come to himself and turn to the state of wakefulness [*sahw*]. So, when
one comes to himself, the fire of longing for seeing the light of Allah
kindles in his heart, and he raises his head from the *sujūd*. When he
finds in himself residues of his selfishness, he leaves them by a sign
with his hand. Thus, the light of Majesty is manifested to him once
again and the remnants of selfishness are burnt off, and he becomes
annihilated [*fānī*] from the annihilation [*fanā'*], and, while
repeating *Allāhu Akbar*, a state of complete and absolute annihilation
and full real swooning [*sa'q*] happens to him.

So, the unseen help, by the inspiration of the recitations, makes him
firm in his state, and he will attain to a state of sobriety [*sahw*],
which is the sobriety of the state of guardianship [*wilāyat*] and is
free from any sort of veiling and creational [*khalqī*] blemish. The
states of *tashahhud* and *taslīm*, which are of the status of
multiplicity, also happen during this sobriety after annihilation
[*mahw*]. Up to this point, all the circle of man's journey has been
full and complete.


