The Disciplines Of Tashahhud
============================

It is stated in *Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah* that Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) said:
“The *tashahhud* is extolment of Allah, the Most High. So, be His
servant in your inside and submit to Him in your act, as you are His
servant in (your) saying and claim. Join the truthfulness of your tongue
to the purity of the truthfulness of your inside, as He has created you
a servant and ordered you to worship Him with your heart, tongue and
organs, and to carry out your servitude by His being your Lord,
believing that He has in His grip all the creatures; so, they take no
breath nor a glance except by His power and will, and they are incapable
of performing the least act in His Domain except by His permission and
will. Allah, Almighty and Glorious, says:

*“**And your Lord creates what He wills and chooses. They have not the
choice. Glorified is Allah and Exalted above all that they associate
(with Him).”***[^1]

So, be a thankful servant by act, as you are a remembering servant by
word and claim. Join the truthfulness of your tongue to the purity of
the truthfulness of your inside, for He has created you. He is High
above being a volition and will to anybody except with His own prior
volition and will. So, use servitude to be contented with His judgment,
and use worship to perform His commands. He has ordered you to send
blessing upon His Prophet (*s*).

So, join blessing Him to blessing him, and obeying Him to obeying him
and testifying Him to testifying him. Take care not to miss the
blessings of admitting his sanctity, in which case you will be deprived
of the benefit of his blessings, as He ordered him to ask forgiveness
for you and intercede for you, if you performed your duty concerning the
obligatory and the forbidden acts, the laws and good manners, knowing
his great position with Allah, Almighty, Most High.”[^2][^3]

There are, in this noble *hadīth*, hints at the cordial disciplines of
worshippings and their truths and secrets, as he says that the
”*tashahhud*” is praising Allah, Almighty and Most High. Formerly,
however, we have said that all worshippings in general are praising
Allah, either by a Name or Names, by one of the manifestations or by the
origin of the Ipseity [*asl-i huwiyyat*].

At the head of the disciplines he refers to the fact that since you
apparently show servitude and claim to be a worshipper, in your secret
you are also to be serving so that the secret cordial servitude may
spread to the acts of the organs, and that the word and act be the plan
of the secret and the inside, and the truth of servitude may spread
through all the organs, internal and external, and each of the organs,
may have a share of the *tawhīd*.

The tongue of the praiser of Allah conveys the praising to the heart,
and the sincere and monotheist heart conveys the *tawhīd* and sincerity
to the tongue. He seeks Lordship inside the truth of servitude,
forsaking egotism and conveying Allah's divinity to the heart. He knows
that the control of the servants is in the hands of Allah, the Exalted,
that they have no power to breathe and to see except through the power
and will of Allah, the Exalted, and that they are unable to do anything
in the domain of Allah, however slight, except with the permission and
will of His Holy Essence, as He has said:

*“**And your Lord creates what He wills and chooses. They have not the
choice. Glorified is Allah and Exalted above all that they associate
(with Him)”*** *(28:68).*

On conveying this grace [*latīfah*] to the heart, your thanking Allah
will be implemented and it will spread through your organs and acts.
And, as the tongue and the heart should, in servitude, be coordinating,
the truthfulness of the tongue and the purity of the secret of the heart
should, in this unity of acts, be joined together, because Allah,
Almighty and Most High, is the Creator and there is no effective factor
but He, and all wills and volitions are shadows of His prior eternal
will and volition.

After observing the disciplines of testifying to the Oneness and
Divinity of Allah, one turns to the holy state of the absolute servant,
Last of the Prophets, paying attention to the priority of the state of
“servitude” to the state of “prophethood,” since the state of servitude
is the preliminary to all the states of the *sālik*s, and the
prophethood is a branch of servitude.

As the Final Messenger is a true servant annihilated in the *Haqq*
(Allah), to obey him is to obey Allah, and testifying to his prophethood
is connected to testifying to Allah's Oneness. The *sālik* servant
should take care not to fall short of obeying the Messenger, as it is
obeying Allah, lest he may be deprived of the blessings of worshipping,
which is attainment to the Holy Court, with the help of the Absolute
Guardian. And let him know that there will be no admission to the Holy
Court and the place of intimacy without the help of the Patron, the
Messenger of Allah (*s*).

[^1]: Sūrah al-Qasas 28:68.

[^2]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 17, on ”The Tashahhud.”

[^3]:


