State Of The Musallī During Utterance Of The Salām, And The Condition For The Salām To Be Truthful
==================================================================================================

Know that when the *sālik* comes out of the state of *sujūd*, whose
secret is “annihilation,” and comes to himself, and into a state of
wakefulness and attentiveness, returning from the state of being absent
from the world to the state of being present, he offers his *salām*
(peace) to the beings the *salām* of the one who has come back from a
journey, from an occultation. So, as he returns he sends peace upon the
noble Prophet, because after returning from unity [*wahdat*] to
multiplicity [*kathrat*], the first manifestation will be that of the
truth of guardianship: “We are the first preceding ones”[^1]

Thereafter, he will pay attention to the essences [*a'yān*] of other
beings, distinctly and collectively.

The one who has not kept away, in the *salāt*, from the creatures
[*khalq*] and has not become a traveler to Allah, to him the *salām* has
no meaning and is nothing but a chattering of the tongue. So, the
cordial discipline of the *salām* depends on the discipline of the
*salāt* as a whole. If in this *salāt*, which is the truth of the
*mi'rāj*, there was no ascension, and he did not come out of the house
of the soul, he would actually have no *salām*.

Furthermore, if in this journey there was safety from the intrusions of
Satan and the evil-commanding soul, and, if the heart had no ailment
during this real *mi'rāj*, his *salām* would be truthful; if not, he
would have no *salām*. Yes, the *salām* upon the Prophet (*s*) is,
therefore, a *salām* with truthfulness, because, in this ascending
journey, in this travel to Allah, in both ascending and descending, he
enjoys peace, and, along his journey, he is free from the conducts
[*tasarrufāt*] of other than the *Haqq* (Allah), to which we have
referred in our commentary on the *sūrah* of *al-Qadr*.

[^1]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 15, p. 15: “We are the first and we are the
last;” Muslim's Sahīh, vol. 2, p. 585; Al-Bukhārī's Sahīh, vol. 1, p.
36: “We are the last and we are the preceding ones.”


