Concerning The Meaning And The Secret Of The Salām And Its Disciplines
======================================================================

It is stated in *Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah* that Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) said:
“The meaning of the *salām* at the end of each *salāt* is 'security,'
that is, whoever obeys the command of Allah and the tradition of His
Prophet (*s*), with a submissive heart, will be secured from the trials
of this world and exempted from the tortures of the Hereafter. '*Salām*'
is one of the names of Allah, the Exalted. He trusted it to His
creatures so that they may use its concept in their transactions, trusts
and annexations, exemplifying reciprocal companionship among themselves
and the correctness of their association.

If you wish to use the *salām* in its proper place and according to its
meaning, you must fear Allah, and your religion, heart and mind should
be secured on your part. So, do not make them filthy by the darkness of
sinning, and do not cause your protectors (angels) to be vexed, tired
and disgusted with your maltreating them.

Both your friend and, your enemy should be secured from you, as the one
whose close friends are not secured from him, the strangers are
certainly more expected not to be so. And whoever does not put the
*salām* in those proper places, his will be no *salām* and no *taslīm*,
and his *salām* will be a false one, even if he shows it off before the
people**.**[^1][^2]

Being secured from the trials of this world means to be secured from
satanic intrusions, because obeying the commands of Allah secures one
against the intrusion of Satan:

*“**Surely prayer forbids indecency and dishonor.”***[^3]

Then, he refers to one of the secrets of the “*salām*” and says:
“*salām”*' is one of the Names of Allah. He trusted it to His
creatures.” This is a hint at the appearance of beings from the Divine
Names. The *sālik* servant should declare this divine grace, which has
been trusted in the inside of his essence and nature, and use it in all
of his dealings, associations, trusts and relationships, and spread it
throughout his inside and outside domains.

He should use it in his dealings with Allah and His religion so as not
to betray the divine trust. Thus, he is to spread the truth of ”*salām*”
in all his worldly and heavenly powers as well as in his customs,
beliefs, morals, and actions, so that he may be secured from all
intrusions.

The way to this security is, thus, said to be *taqwā*. It should be
realized that *taqwā* is of many degrees and stages:

The external *taqwā*: It means protecting the outside against the
pollution and the darkness of formal sinning. This is the *taqwā* of the
common people.

The internal *taqwā*: This means protecting the inside and purifying it
from extravagance and shortcoming and exceeding the limit of
moderateness in morality and spiritual instincts. This is the *taqwā* of
the elite.

The *taqwā* of the mind: It is protecting and purifying the mind from
being spent on the non-divine sciences. The divine sciences are those
that deal with the divine laws and religion. Other natural sciences and
the like which are required for knowing the manifestations of Allah, are
also divine. But if they are not for that, they are not divine, even if
they are discussions about the Beginning and the Resurrection. This is
the *taqwā* of “the choice of the elite” [*akhass-i khawass*].  
 The *taqwā* of the heart: It is protecting the heart against seeing or
discussing other than Allah. This is the *taqwā* of the *walī*s
[*awliyā'*]. The noble *hadīth* in which Allah, the Exalted, says: “I am
the co-sitter to the one who sits with Me,”[^4] refers to this hearty
privacy, which is the best privacy, and the other ones are preliminaries
to this one.

So, the one who acquires all these degrees of *taqwā*, his religion,
intellect, spirit, heart and all his internal and external powers will
remain sound and safe, and the angels in charge of protecting him will
not be vexed, tired or disgusted with him.

The dealings and the company of such a person with both the friend and
the enemy will be done in peace, or, actually, enmity will be uprooted
from his heart, no matter how much his enemies are hostile to him. But
the one who has not acquired all the degrees of *taqwā*, would
proportionally be deprived of the emanation of *Salam*, and would be
nearer to the horizon of hypocrisy, from which we take refuge in Allah.
With peace! [*was-salām*].

[^1]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, ch. 18, “On Salām”; Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 82,
p. 307.

[^2]:

[^3]: Sūrah al-Ankabūt 29:45.

[^4]: Al-Mawāhib as-Saniyyah, p. 77; Al-Mahajjat al-Baydā', vol. 8, p.
58 (with a slight difference).


