The Secrets And The Cordial Disciplines Of The Four Tasbīhs
===========================================================

There are four *rukns* (pillars) in the *Tasbīhāt*:

The first *rukn* concerns the *tasbīh* (glorification), which is
purifying Allah from descriptions by *tahmīd* (saying: *al-hamdu lillāh
=* praise is for Allah) and *tahlīl* (saying: *lā* *ilāha illallāh =*
there is no god but Allah), which is of the inclusive states. The
*sālik* servant should, in all his worshippings, pay attention to that,
and prevent his heart from the claim of describing and seeking a eulogy
on the *Haqq* (Allah).

He should not think that a servant is able to offer the due servitude to
Allah, let alone paying the due homage to the Lord, which is not hoped
for even by the perfect *walī*s [*awliyā'*], and from reaching which the
hands of the great ones of the people of knowledge are short:

No one can net the phoenix, so undo the net, since there can be nothing
but wind in it,[^1]

That is why it has been said that the perfect knowledge of the people of
knowledge is their knowing their own inability.[^2]

Yes, it is because of the vast mercy of Allah, the Exalted, which covers
us, the weak servants, that He vests us, the helpless, with serving Him
and permits us to enter such a holy and pure state which bent the backs
of even the Cherubim to get near it. This is of the greatest favors and
graces of the Holy Essence, The Provider that bestowed upon His
servants.

The people of knowledge, the perfect *walī*s [*awliyā'*] and the godly
men value it in proportion to their personal knowledge. We the veiled,
left short of all states, the deprived of and kept at a distance from
any perfection and knowledge are completely unaware of that, and regard
the divine commands, which are, in fact, the highest, big unlimited
blessings, as imposition and duty, performing them lazily and with
boredom, and that is why we are completely deprived of and veiled from
its luminosity.

It must be realized that as *tahmīd* and *tahlīl* include Unity of Acts,
in which there is the blemish of limiting and decreasing, or even the
blemish of assimilation and mixing, the *sālik* servant, to be prepared
for entering it, has to enter first the strong fortress of glorification
and purification, telling his inner heart that Allah, Great and Most
High, is innocent of all creational [*khalqiyyah*] individuations
[*ta'ayyunāt*] and of the apparels of multiplicities, so that the
entering into praising Him can be free from the blemish of
multiplication.

The second *rukn* is *tahmīd*, which is the state of Unity of Acts,
suitable for *qiyām* and recitation. In this respect, these
glorifications in the last *rak'at*s take the place of the *sūrah* of
*al-Hamd*, as the *musallī* is free to recite the *sūrah* of *al-Hamd*
(the Opening) instead. The Unity of Acts as has already been explained
in “*al-Hamd”* is to be used to exclusively assign praising to Allah,
completely cutting short the hand of the servant from praisings.

We should convey:

*“**He is the First and the Last and the Manifest and the Hidden”***[^3]

To the ears of the heart, and let:

*“**And you threw not when you did, but Allah threw”***[^4]

Reach the taste of our spirit, treading upon selfishness and
self-conceit by the foot of behavior [*sulūk*], in order to take
ourselves to the state of *tahmīd*, and out of the burden of being
indebted to the creatures.

The third *rukn* is the *tahlīl*, which is of many states:

One is the state of negating the divinity of act, that is “There is no
effecter in the (world of) existence but Allah,” which is a confirmation
of confining the *tahmīd* (to Allah) as its cause and factor, because
the stages of the possible beings are the shadow of the Real Existence
of Allah, Almighty, and mere connection. No one of them, in any way, is
independent or self-sustaining. Thus, effecting existence can never be
ascribed to them, since effectiveness requires independence in bringing
into existence, and being independently effective in bringing into
existence necessitates being independent in existing.

According to the terms of the people of (gnostic) taste, the reality of
the shadow-beings is the appearance of the Power of the *Haqq* (Allah)
in the mirrors of creation. The meaning of *lā ilāha illallāh* (There is
no god but Allah) is witnessing the *Haqq*'s (Allah's) effectiveness and
power upon the creatures, and negating the individuations [*ta'ayyunāt*]
of creation, and annihilating the state of their activity [*fā'iliyyat*]
and their effect in the *Haqq* (Allah).

The other is the negation of any worshipped other than Allah, and *lā
ilāha illallāh* means: There is no worshipped except Allah. Therefore,
the state of *tahlīl* is the result of the state of *tahmīd*, as when
the *tahmīd* is exclusively confined to the Holy Essence of Allah,
servitude places its burden in that Holy State, and all the servitudes,
which people do to one another for the purpose of being praised, become
negated. So, it is as if the *sālik* says that since all praises are
exclusively for Allah, servitude must also be exclusively for Allah, Who
is to be the worshipped, and all the idols are to be broken to pieces.
There are other states for *tahlīl*, which do not suit this situation.  
 The fourth *rukn* is the *takbīr*, which also means that Allah is
greater than any description. The servant, by commencing the *tahmīd*
and the *tahlīl*, denies the description of Allah, and, having finished
that, he again denies describing Allah, and glorifies Him, accompanying
his *tahmīd* and *tahlīl* with humbleness and confession of
shortcomings.

Probably the *takbīr*, in this instance, is a *takbīr* of *tahmīd* and
*tahlīl*, as they contain the blemish of multiplicity, as has already
been said. Probably in *tasbīh* there is *tanzīh* (purification) of
*takbīr* and in the *takbīr* there can be *takbīr* of *tanzīh*, where
the servant's claims turn to be completely invalid, and he becomes in
command of the Unity of Acts, and the state of obeying Allah becomes a
habit in his heart, getting out of changing colors into a state of
stability.

The *sālik* servant, in these noble recitations, which are the spirit of
knowledge, should create in his heart a mood of devotion, supplication,
dedication and humility, and by continual repetition give to his inner
heart the form of remembrance, fixing the truth of remembrance into his
heart such that the heart would be clothed with the clothes of
remembrance, taking off its own wear, which is the wear of remoteness
[*bu'd*] (from Allah). Then, the heart becomes divine, truthful, in
which will be fulfilled the reality and spirit of:

*“**Surely Allah has bought from the believers their lives.”***[^5]

[^1]: Poetry from Hāfiz Shīrāzī.

[^2]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 94, p. 150, “Supplication Eighteen,” “The
Supplication of the Gnostics.”

[^3]: Sūrah al-Hadīd 57:3.

[^4]: Sūrah al-Anfā1 8:17.

[^5]: Sūrah at-Tawbah 9:111.


