Concerning The Cordial Disciplines Of The Qūnūt
===============================================

Know that the *Qunūt* (supplication in the *salāt* with the hands
raised) is one of the recommended supererogations, which is not becoming
to neglect, but to perform it is of precaution, such that some
companions say that it is obligatory. Some narratives also confirm that,
although from the juristic point of view it is not obligatory, as is
common among the great scholars. It is performed as is particularly
common among the Imāmīs [*imāmiyyah*] (may Allah be pleased with them),
i.e., by raising the hands near to the face, with the palms open towards
the sky and reciting common or uncommon invocations. It is allowed to
recite them in any language, Arabic or non-Arabic, though the Arabic is
better and is according to precaution.

The jurisprudents say that the best *du'ā'* (invocation) in this respect
is *du'ā' al-faraj*,[^1] though its preference has not been proved to
the writer by an authentic juristic evidence. Yet, the contents of the
*du'ā'* confirm its preference, because it includes *tahlīl*, *tasbīh*
and *tamhīd*, which are the spirit of *tawhīd* as has been explained.

It also includes the great Names of Allah, such as: Allah, *al-Halīm*,
*al-Karīm*, *al-'Aliyy*, *al-Azīm*, and *ar-Rabb*, besides the *dhikr*
(the wordings to be recited) in the *rukū'* and the *sujūd*, and the
Names of Essence, Attributes and Acts, as well as the stages of the
manifestations of Allah, Almighty and Most High, and sending *salām* to
the Messengers though to neglect this is of the acts of precaution, but
upon a stronger opinion it is allowed. It also includes sending
blessings upon the Prophet and his offspring ('*a*). It seems that this
noble *du'ā'*, short as it is, covers all the *salāt*'s duties of
remembrance.

Its merit can also be confirmed through the sayings of the jurisprudents
(may Allah be pleased with them) or through “Tolerating the Proofs of
the Traditions”[^2][^3] although the writer has a second thought on that
or by means of discovering a creditable evidence which has not occurred
to us regarded by the latecomers to be the basis of unanimity [*ijmā'*].

Among the noble *du'ā'*'s of great merit, which includes the polite
manners of supplication to Allah, and also numerates the full divine
gifts, and completely suits the state of *qunūt*, which is a state of
supplication and devotion to Allah, and some great men (may Allah have
mercy upon them) almost continually practiced it, is the *du'ā'* called
”*yā man azhar al-jamīl*” (O, the One Who manifested the Beautiful),
which is of the treasures of the '*Arsh* and Allah's gift to His
Messenger. Each one of its paragraphs has so much merits and rewards, as
is stated in *at-Tawhīd* by Shaykh as-Sadūq (may Allah have mercy upon
him).[^4]

The best manner of servitude is that, in the state of *qunūt* which is a
state of supplication and devotion to Allah in the *salāt*, all of which
is showing servitude and praising, and in this state the Holy Essence of
Allah, the Exalted and Most High, specially opens the door of
supplication and invocation to the servant and honors him so the *sālik*
servant must also observe the discipline of the Holy State of Lordship,
and take care that his *du'ā'* should include glorifying and purifying
Allah, the Exalted, and His remembrance.

He should ask Allah, in this noble state, to give him those things that
are of the kind of divine knowledge [*ma'ārif*], and to open for him the
door of supplication, intimacy, privacy, and devotion to Him. He should
avoid demanding this world, mean animal matters and selfish desires, so
that he may not feel ashamed in the presence of the pure ones, and not
debase himself in the gathering of the pious ones.

O dear, *qunūt* is giving up other than Allah, and completely turning
towards the Lord's Might, and extending the empty hand of demand to the
Absolute Self-Sufficient. During such a state of devotion, to talk of
the stomach, private parts and mundane matters is but a shortcoming and
a loss.

Darling, now that you are far away from your homeland, blocked from
neighboring the free people and captured in this dark house full of
troubles and perils, do not spin around yourself, like a silkworm.

O dear, Allah, the Beneficent, has fermented your disposition with the
light of knowledge and the fire of love, and supported you with the
lights like the prophets, and the lovers like the *walī*s [*awliyā'*],
so, do not extinguish this fire with the dust and ashes of this low
world, and do not tarnish and darken that light with a world which is a
place of exile.

Probably if you pay attention to the original home, and demand from
Allah to be devoted to Him, and expose before Him your deprivation and
dislike of separation, in a painful tone out of your heart, displaying
the conditions of your helplessness, weakness and distress, an invisible
assistance will reach you and an inside hand of help will be extended to
you, and your shortcomings will be done away with, as it is His habit to
be charitable, and it is His custom to be benefactor.  
 If you recite parts of the *Sha'bāniyyah* supplication by the Imām of
the Pious and the Commander of the Believers and his infallible
offspring, who are the Imāms of the people of knowledge and truths, in
your *qunūt,* especially the part in which he says: “O Allah, grant me
'to be completely devoted to You',”[^5] etc., but in a state of
necessity [*idtirār*], devotion and imploration, not with a dead heart,
like the writer's, it will be quite becoming of the condition.

In short, the state of the *qunūt*, according to the writer's opinion,
is like the state of the *sujūd*. The former is turning towards the
humility of servitude and the remembrance of the state of the Lord's
Might, and the latter is turning towards the Lord's Might and the
remembrance of inability and the humility of servitude. This is in
proportion to the state of the middle class.

But according to the state of the perfect ones, since the *sujūd* is the
state of the servant's annihilation, and neglecting the other [*ghayr*]
and otherness, the *qunūt* is the state of the exclusive devotion to
Allah, and giving up depending on the other, which is the spirit of the
state of “trust in Allah” [*tawakkul*]*.* In short, as *qiyām* is the
state of the Unity of Acts, which is confirmed in the second *rak'at*,
he displays in the *qunūt* its result, and extends his begging bowl
before Allah, and completely parts with, and runs away from, all
creatures.

[^1]: The du'ā' that begins with: ”Lā ilāha illallāh al-Halīm al-Karīm”
(There is no god but Allah, the Clement, the Generous). Wasā'il
ash-Shī'ah, vol. 4, p. 906. “The Book of the Salāt,” sec. on “The
Qunūt,” ch. 7, hadīth 4; Mustadrak al-Wasā'il, “The Book of the Salāt,”
sec. on “The Qunūt,” ch. 6, hadīth 4 and 9.

[^2]: There are many narratives, to the limit of prolixity [istifādah],
to the effect that if somebody gets the information—by hearing or
reading—that to perform a certain act results in getting a reward, and
he performs that act, he will receive the promised reward, even if his
information turned to be incorrect. Such narratives are known as “the
narratives of the attainer” and their contents are called “Tolerating
the Proofs of the Traditions.” Refer to Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 2, p. 256,
“The Book of Knowledge,” ch. 30; Usūl al-Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 139, “The Book
of Faith and Disbelief,” ch. on “The One Who Attained a Reward from
Allah for an Act.”

[^3]:

[^4]: At-Tawhīd, ch. on “The Names of Allah, the Exalted,” ch. 29,
hadīth 14.

[^5]: “Munājāt-i Sha'bāniyyah,” Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 91, p. 99.


