After-The-Salāt Invocation
==========================

It is one of the confirmed *mustahab*s (supererogatories), and to
neglect it is abominable. It is most recommended after the *salāt*s of
the morning and of the afternoon. The after-the*-salāt* invocations are
so many, including the final three *takbīr*s.

The great religious men take care to raise their hands in the *takbīr*s,
like the opening *takbīr*s, to near their ears, with their palms open
and facing the *qiblah*. To prove this is difficult, although some
narratives refer to raising the hands three times. Probably raising the
hands, saying the *takbīr* three times and then reciting the *du'ā'*
which starts with: *lā* *ilāha illallāh, wahdahū wahdah* …[^1] (there is
no god but Allah, alone, alone!) etc., will be enough.

If raising the hands in the way the great men do is a supererogatory
act, it confirms the same secrets which have already been stated, and
maybe it refers to rejecting their *salāt* and worshippings lest they
may admit conceit and self-admiration into their hearts.

The three *takbīr*s may be a reference to magnification(s) [*takbīr*(s)]
showing the shortcomings of the Three Unities which keep the spirit of
the whole *salāt*. So, the hearty discipline of these *takbīr*s is to
reject, with each raising of the hands, one of the three unities, and
magnify and glorify Allah, Almighty and Most High, from his describings
and unifications, displaying his inability, humility, failure and
shortcomings before the Holy Presence of Allah, Almighty and Most High.

In the *Sirr as-Salāt* thesis we related, in a nice [*latīf*] way, the
spiritual secrets of these *takbīr*s and raising the hands. It was of
the graces of Allah, the Exalted, bestowed upon this helpless person.
For Him are the thanks and praise.

Of the other noble after-the*-salāt du'ā*'s are the *tasbīhāt* of the
Pure *Siddīqah* (Fātimah) ('*a*), the daughter of the Prophet (*s*),
which was taught to her by the Messenger of Allah (*s*). It is the best
of the after-the*-salāt du'ā*'s. It is in the *hadīth* that had there
been a better one, the Messenger of Allah (*s*) would have taught it to
Fātimah ('*a*).[^2]

Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) is quoted to have said that these *tasbīh*s every
day after every *salāt* are more loved by me than a thousand *rak'āt*s
of the *salāt* every day.[^3] It is known among the companions that
these *tasbīh*s are arranged as follows: *takbīr* thirty-four times,
*tahmīd* thirty-three times and *tasbīh* thirty-three times. It is most
probable that this arrangement is the best, not positively imposed. One
is free to change the successions of, say, the *tahmīd* and the
*tasbīh*, or replace the *takbīr* by the *tasbīh*. But the best, and
according to precaution, is the said known arrangement.

The relevant cordial disciplines are the same as have been stated
concerning “the Four *Tasbīhs*.”  
 Furthermore, as these noble recitations are for after the *salāt,* and
as their *tasbīh* is magnification [*takbīr*] and glorification
[*tanzīh*] showing failure in due servitude, and magnification
[*takbīr*] and glorification [*tanzīh*] showing incapability in
servitude before His Holy Presence, and magnification [*takbīr*] and
glorification [*tanzīh*] showing the shortcomings of knowledge
[*ma'rifat*] (in knowing Him), which is the objective of servitude, the
*salik* servant should, in the after-the*-salāt* invocation, think about
his shortcomings, his incomplete worship and his negligences during the
state of presence, which are regarded to be sins in the school of love
and affection.

He is to think about his being deprived of his share of the Holy
Presence of Allah, the Exalted, so that he may, in the after-the*-salāt*
recitations*,* which open a new door leading to the mercy of Allah, the
Blessed and Exalted, compensate as much as possible, conveying those
noble recitations to his heart and revive it with them, in which case
his end may be sealed with goodness and happiness. In the *tahmīd*
(praising) of the *tasbīh*s of the (pure) Siddīqah ('*a*), he is to
prove this praising, too, which is the performance of servitude, for the
Divine Ipseity [*huwiyyat-i* *ilāhiyyah*]*,* taking it to be a support,
a power and a success from that Holy Essence.

He is to convey the truths of these matters to the inside of his heart,
letting it taste the secret of these graces, so that the heart may be
enlivened with the remembrance of Allah, and get eternal life by it.

As the morning is the beginning of being engaged in the multiplicity and
entering the world, where man is faced with the danger of getting busy
with the creatures and neglecting Allah, the conscious *sālik*, in this
crucial situation of entering this dark house, has to turn to Allah, the
Exalted, and be devoted to Him. And as he finds himself not so dignified
in the Holy Presence, he is to resort to the guardians of the affairs,
the guards of the times, the intercessors of *ins* and *jinn*, i.e., the
Seal of the Messengers (*s*) and the infallible Imāms ('*a*), asking
those honorable personalities to be his intermediates to, and his
intercessors with, Allah.

Now each day has its guard and shelterer: for Saturday it is the blessed
being of the Messenger of Allah (*s*), for Sunday it is Amīr
al-Mu'minīn, 'Alī ('*a*), for Monday are the two magnificent Imāms, the
grandsons [of the Messenger of Allah (*s*), al-Hasan and al-Husayn
('*a*)], for Tuesday Imāms as-Sajjād, al-Bāqir and as-Sādiq ('*a*), for
Wednesday Imāms al-Kāzim, ar-Ridā, at-Taqī and an-Naqī ('*a*), for
Thursday Imām al-'Askarī ('*a*), and for Friday *waliyy al-amr* (may
Allah hasten his glorious advent) (The 12th Imām ('*a*).[^4]

So, it is suitable for one, in the after-the-*salāt* recitations in the
morning, and for the purpose of entering this deadly dark sea, the awful
Satanic trap-place, to resort to the guards of that day, and, with their
intercession as they are close to the Holy Court and are the favorite
confidents at the door of intimacy ask Allah, the Exalted, to remove the
evils of Satan and the evil-commanding soul, and to have those great
ones as his intermediates for the completion and acceptance of
incomplete worshippings and unworthy rites.

Naturally, if Allah, Highly Exalted, made Muhammad (*s*) and his
offspring our means of guidance, and through their blessings He saved
the *ummah* from ignorance and straying, He would, because of their
intercession, amend our inability and complete our shortcomings, and
accept our unworthy obediences and worshippings, “He is the Lord of
grace and bounty.” Other reported after-the*-salāt du'ā*'s are stated in
the relevant books of invocations. Everybody may select those which suit
him best in order to bring this honorable journey to its good and happy
destination.

[^1]: Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 4, p. 1030, “The Book of the Salāt,” sec.
on “After-the-Salāt Invocation,” ch. 14, hadīth 2. 

[^2]: Furū' al-Kāfī, vol. 3, p. 343, “The Book of the Salāt,” ch. on
“The After-the-Salāt Du'ā',” hadīth 14.

[^3]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 83, p. 332, quoting Thawāb al-A'māl, p. 149;
Wasā'il ash-Shī'ah, vol. 4, p. 1024, “The Book of as-Salāt,” sec. on
“After the-Salāt Invocation,” ch. 9, hadīth 2.

[^4]: Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 24, p. 239, quoting al-Khisāl, vol. 2, ch.7,
p. 394.


