Conclusion And Invocation (Du‘a’)
=================================

It was appropriate to finish this thesis by stating the *salāt*'s moral
obstacles, such as imposture, conceitedness and the like, but as I have
given some explanations in the book *The Forty Hadīths*[^1][^2] about
some *hadīth*s connected to this subject, and also, now, being too much
busy, and owing to distraction of mind, I apologize for not being able
to offer this service. So, I end these papers by admitting my inability
and shortcomings, and ask forgiveness from the people of pure insight
for my mistakes, and request their good *du'ā'* and generous attention.

O Allah, You Who have clothed us, Your weak servants, with the dress of
existence through Your grace and favor and pure mercy and generosity,
prior to any service and worship on our part, and without needing our
worshipping and servitude. You have bestowed upon us diverse kinds of
spiritual and corporeal favors, and different sorts of internal and
external mercies, although our non-existence causes no flaw in your
power and strength, nor our existence adds anything to your greatness
and prestige.

Now that the headspring of Your beneficence gushed forth, and the sun of
Your Beautiful Beauty effulged, drowning us in the seas of mercy and
illuminating us with the lights of Your Beauty, make up for our
shortcomings, sins and failures with the light of internal success and
Your secret help and guidance, and relieve our fully attached hearts
from mundane attachments, and make them cling to Your Holy Might.

O Allah, our unworthy worshipping expands nothing of your domain. Our
disobedience decreases nothing of your kingdom, and torturing and
punishing the sinners benefit you not a bit, and forgiving the fallen
and having mercy upon them lessen nothing of your power. The immutable
essences of the sinners implore for mercy, and the dispositions of the
imperfect ask for perfection. You yourself treat us with your
comprehensive kindness and disregard our inefficiency.

“O Allah, if I am unworthy to receive your mercy, you are worthy of
granting me of your vast favor. O Allah, You have covered for me in this
world sins which I need more to be covered in the Hereafter. O Allah,
grant me to be completely devoted to You, and light our hearts' eyes
with the light of witnessing You until the hearts' eyes penetrate the
veils of light, to reach the source of greatness.”[^3]

Our talk has come to an end here, according to the *taqdīr* of Allah,
Almighty and Most High, with praises and thanks for His graces, asking
Him to send His blessings upon Muhammad and his pure progeny, on the
date of Monday, 2nd of (the month of) Rabī'uth-Thānī, thirteen-hundred
and sixty-one of Lunar year (1361 L.H.).[^4]

[^1]: Refer to footnote 63.

[^2]:

[^3]: “The Sha'bāniyyah  Supplication,” Bihār al-Anwār, vol. 91, p.99.

[^4]: Corresponds to 30th of Farvardīn, 1321 Solar Hijri Year.


