Chapter 1: Cordial Disciplines
==============================

One of the cordial disciplines of the worships and the spiritual duties
of the traveler along the path to the Hereafter is paying attention to
the Might of the Lord and to the humility of servitude. It is one of the
important stages for the *sālik* (traveler). The strength of everybody's
*sulūk* (journey) is in proportion to the strength of this attention, or
rather the perfection or the imperfection of humanity is connected to
the perfection or imperfection of this matter.

The more one is overwhelmed by egoism, egotism, self-conceit and
selfishness, the farther he will be from the human perfection and from
the nearness of the presence of Allah. The veil of self-conceit and
egotism is thicker and darker than all other veils. To tear open this
veil is more difficult than tearing all other veils, and tearing it is a
preparatory step to tearing other veils. In fact, tearing off this veil
is the master key for the invisible, the visible and the great door of
the ascent to the perfect spirituality.

As long as man has his eyes on his own self, his imagined beauty and
perfection, he will be veiled and discarded from the absolute beauty and
pure perfection. The first condition for traveling to Allah is to leave
this house. Actually, it is the criterion for the struggle between right
and wrong. So, every *sālik*, who travels with the steps of selfishness
and self-conceit, and is wrapped in the veils of egotism, his sufferings
would be in vain and his journey would not be to Allah, it would rather
be to his self: “The mother of the idols is the idol of your self.” [^1]

Allah, the Most High, says:

*“**And whoever leaves his house migrating to Allah and His Messenger,
and then death overtakes him, his reward is, indeed, with Allah.”***[^2]

The formal migration, or the form of migration, is the corporeal
migration from the formal house to the *ka'bah* or to the shrines of the
holy men [*awliyā'*] ('*a*), but the spiritual migration is the going
out of the house of the soul and the house of this world to Allah and
His Messenger. To migrate to the Messenger and the guardian [*walī*] is
also a migration to Allah.

As long as one's soul has an inclination to oneself and to egotism, it
is not journeying. And so long as there are residues of Oneness in the
*sālik*'s eyes, and as long as the walls of his own town and the *adhān*
announcing selfishness have not yet disappeared, he is regarded as a
staying one, not a traveler or an emigrant.

It is stated in *Misbāh ash*-*Sharī'ah* that Imām as-Sādiq ('*a*) said:
“Servitude is a gem whose core is Lordship [*rubūbiyyat*]. Whatever is
lost of servitude is found in the Lordship, and whatever is hidden of
Lordship is obtained by servitude.” [^3]

The one who travels on the foot of servitude, and burns his forehead
with the brand of the humility of serfdom, will reach the Glory of (His)
Lordship. The way of attaining to the facts of Lordship is journeying
along the footsteps of servitude, and what is lost of servitude because
of egoism and egotism, can be recovered under the shadow of the
Lordship's patronage, until he reaches a stage in which the *Haqq*
(Allah), the Most High, will become his ears (hearing), eyes (seeing),
hands and legs, as is stated in the true and well-known *hadīth*
accepted by the two sects. [^4]

When the *sālik* forsook his conducts [*tasarrufāt*] and completely
submitted the kingdom of his existence to Allah, leaving the house to
its Owner, and perishing in the Glory of (His) Lordship, the Owner of
the house would Himself manage the affairs. Thus his conducts
[*tasarrufāt*] would become divine, and his eyes would be divine and he
would see with the *Haqq*'s (Allah's) eyes, his ears would become divine
and he would hear with the *Haqq*'s (Allah's) ears.

The more complete the lordship of the soul and the more its glory be
cherished, the more, in the same proportion, the Glory of the (divine)
Lordship decreases and becomes incomplete (in the *sālik*'s kingdom of
existence), because these two stand face to face: “This world and the
next are like the two wives of a man.” [^5]

Thus, the *sālik* to Allah has to recognize his state of humility, and
to place the humility of servitude and the Glory of the Lordship before
his eyes. The stronger this viewpoint, the more spiritual his worship
and the stronger the spirit of his worship, until, if, with the help of
Allah and the perfect holy men [*awliyā'*] ('*a*), he reaches the truth
of servitude and its core; he will catch a glimpse of the secret of
worship.

In all the worships especially (in) the *Salat* which has a position of
comprehensiveness [*jāmi'īyyat*], and is, among the worships, like the
Perfect Man, and like the Greatest Name (of Allah), or rather it is the
very Greatest Name these two positions, i.e. the position of the Glory
of Lordship, which is a fact, and the position of the humility of
servitude, which accompanies it, are occult. Among the recommended acts
the *qunūt*, and among the obligatory acts the *sujūd*, have particular
peculiarities to which we shall refer later *inshā'* *Allāh*.

It should be noted, however, that absolute servitude is of the highest
degrees of perfection and of the loftiest positions of humanity, of
which no one has any share except the most perfect of the creatures of
Allah, Muhammad (*s*) at the top, followed by the perfect *walī*s (the
Guardians). The others are limping in servitude, and their worshipping
and servitude are endued with causes, only with the steps of servitude
one can reach the real absolute *mi'rāj*.

That is why the noble *āyah* says:

*“**Glorified is He who carried his servant by night…”*** [^6]

It was the step of servitude and the attraction of (His) Lordship that
carried that holy person to the *mi'rāj* of proximity [*qurb*] and union
[*wusūl*]. In the *tashahhud* of the *Salat* which is a return from an
absolute “annihilation” [*fanā'*] that was achieved in the *sujūd* there
is once again a tendency to servitude, before paying attention to the
Messengership. It may also be a reference to the position of
Messengership as a result of the essence of servitude. This is a lengthy
subject, which is out of the scope of these papers.

[^1]: “The Mother of the idols is your self's idol, As those are snakes,
and this is a dragon-idol!”  Mawlāwī

[^2]: Sūrah an-Nisā' 4:100

[^3]: Misbāh ash-Sharī'ah, “On the Reality of Servitude,” ch. 100.

[^4]: This is a reference to a narrative about “The Approximation by
Nawāfil”, which reads: ”…He (Allah's servant) keeps trying to get closer
to Me by means of the nāfilah until I love him. Loving him, I will
become his ears with which he hears, his eyes with which he sees, his
tongue with which he speaks and his hand with which he strikes. When he
asks Me I answer him, and if he demands from Me I will give him…” Usūl
al-Kāfī, vol. 4, “Book of Faith and Infidelity,” ch. on “One who Hurts
and Despises the Muslims,” hadīths 7-8, p. 53.

[^5]: 'Awāliy ul-La'ālī, vol. 1, p. 277 and vol. 4, p. 115; Nahj
al-Balāghah, edited by Fayd al-Islām, maxim 100.

[^6]: Sūrah al-Isrā' 17:1.


