Chapter 2: The Stages Of The Stations Of The People Of Sulūk
============================================================

Know that there are for the people of *sulūk*, in this station (i.e.,
paying attention to the humility of servitude and the Glory of His
Lordship) and other stations, countless stages and degrees, only to a
few of which we can generally refer, since comprehensively knowing all
their aspects and counting all the stages are beyond the capacity of
this humble creature: “The ways to Allah are as numerous as the breaths
of the creatures.”[^1]

One of those stages is the stage of Knowledge ['*ilm*], which is such
that it proves, by scientific conduct [*sulūk*] and philosophic
argument, the humility of servitude and the Glory of (His) Lordship.
This is a pure sort of knowledge, since it is clearly proved in the high
sciences and supreme philosophy that the entire House of Realization
[*dār-i tahaqquq*] and the complete circle of existence are mere
relation and attachment and nothing but poverty.

The Glory, Kingdom and Sovereignty belong to His Sanctified Essence of
Majesty. No one can have any share of Glory and Majesty, while the
humility of servitude and poverty is engraved on the forehead of
everybody, and is registered in the innermost part of their truth.

The truth of gnosis and vision [*shuhūd*], and the result of suffering
and *sulūk*, are in lifting the veil off the face of the truth, and
discerning the humility of servitude and the origin of poverty and
lowliness in oneself and in all the creatures. The invocation ascribed
to the master of all beings (the Prophet of Islam) (*s*): “O Allah, show
me the things as they are,”[^2] may be a reference to this stage, i.e.
wishing to see the humility of servitude which requires discerning the
Glory of the Lordship.

Therefore, if the *sālik* on the road of the truth, the traveler in the
way of servitude, covers this distance with the steps of scientific
*sulūk* and the mount of intellectual advance, he will fall in the veils
of knowledge and attain the first station of humanity. But this veil is
a thick one, as it is said: “Knowledge is the greatest veil.” The
*sālik* should not stay behind this veil. He is to tear it, since,
should he be contented with this stage and keep his heart chained by it;
he would fall into *istidrāj* (being engaged in other than the *Haqq*).

*Istidrāj* in this stage, means becoming engaged in the numerous
secondary branches of knowledge, presenting many arguments justifying
his intellectual roamings in that field, and depriving himself of the
other stages, because his heart is attached to this stage only,
neglecting the wanted result, which is attaining annihilation in Allah.

He, thus, would spend his life in the veil of argument [*burhān*] and
its branches. The more these branches are, the thicker the veil and the
greater the distance from the truth. The *sālik*, therefore, should not
be deceived, in this stage, by Satan, secluding himself from the truth
and reality, and stopping his journey to the goal on the pretext of
being a great scholar, a very learned person and a powerful man of
argument. He must set to work briskly, be serious in his quest for the
real demand, and take himself to the next stage, which is the second
stage.

And that is such that he should write what (his) reason has understood
through irrefutable proof and scientific conduct, with the pen of
intellect on the tablet of the heart, to convey the truth of the
humility of servitude and the Glory of Lordship to the heart and free
himself from the chains and the veils of knowledge. We shall refer to
this stage presently, *inshā' Allāh*. So, the result of the second stage
is acquiring belief in the facts.

The third stage is that of “tranquility and calmness of the soul,” which
is, in fact, the perfect stage of faith. Allah, the Exalted, said to his
“friend” [*khalīl*] Ibrāhīm:

*“**Have you not believed [yet]?”*** *He said: “**I have, but just to
have a calm heart.”***[^3]

A reference to this stage may come later.

The fourth stage is that of “vision” [*mushāhadah*], which is a divine
light and a divine manifestation, as a consequence of the manifestations
of the Names and the Attributes appearing in the secret of the *sālik*,
and lightening his complete heart with the visionary light. This stage
comprises many degrees that are out of the capacity of these pages. In
this stage an example of the effect of the *nāfilah*s: (I would be his
hearing, sight and hand)[^4] will appear, and the *sālik* will see
himself drowned in limitless ocean, beyond which there is another very
deep ocean, in which the secrets of “fate” are partly disclosed.

Each one of these stages has its special *istidrāj* (being engaged in
other than the *Haqq*) through which the *sālik* is exposed to great
perishing [*halākat*]. So, he will have to rid himself, in all stages,
of egoism and I-ness. He should not be self-conceited or egotistic, both
of which are the sources of most of evils, especially for the *sālik*.
However, we shall have another reference to this subject presently
*inshā' Allāh* [Allah willing].

[^1]: This hadīth is ascribed to the Prophet (s) in Jāmi' al-Asrār wa
Manba' al-Anwār by Sayyid Haydar Āmulī, pp. 8, 95 and 121. Also in the
Lāhījī's Commentary on Gulshān-i Rāz, p. 153; Naqd an-Nusūs, p. 185;
Minhāj at-Tālibīn, p. 221; Al-Usūl al- 'Asharah, p. 31.

[^2]: In 'Awāliy ul-La'ālī, vol. 4, p. 132, it is stated: “Oh Allah,
show us the facts as they are.” Commenting on the same, quoting
at-Tafsīr al-Kabīr by al-Fakhr ar-Rāzī, vol. 6, p. 26, and in Mirsād
al-'Ibād, p. 309, it is stated as follows: “Show us the things as they
are.”

[^3]: Sūrah al-Baqarah 2:260.

[^4]: Refer to footnote 21


