Imam Hussain's Departure from Medina
====================================

But then, if Hussain and his family were leaving Medina for Ali Akbar's
marriage, they would not be secretive about it. The Holy Prophet's
grandson would in that case have given out the good tidings to the
public. There was not a living being in that town whose heart would not
have been filled with joy to hear about the betrothal of Ali Akbar. And
if marriage of Ali Akbar was the purpose, surely Hussain would not
choose this season when outside the oasis of Medina, the scorching heat
of summer was baking the desert sands!

After long discussions, by a consensus of opinion, it was decided to
approach Hussain in a delegation and to dissuade him from undertaking
the journey. Some of the venerable companions of the Holy
Prophet(S.A.W.) undertook to apprise Hussain of their forebodings and
their recollection of his grandfather's prophecy that, if Hussain
migrated from Medina with his family, he would not return.

The caravan was almost ready to depart. The horses were neighing with
impatience and champing their bits in the oppressive heat of the day.
Hussain was standing near his horse intently watching the arrangements
being made by Abbas and Ali Akbar. He was reflectively following their
movements as they were helping each lady and each child to mount the
camels, as they were lending a helping hand to the ladies with tender
care and affection; as the ladies were graciously and profusely thanking
them for the excellent arrangements they had made for their comfort and
for protecting them from the unbearable heat by holding their own gowns
over their heads as a canopy. This sight had some inexplicable effect on
Hussain, for his eyes were glittering with tears. The solicitude
displayed by his brother and son for the ladies and children should have
filled him with happiness; but instead, the effect on him was just the
opposite. Was he beholding the shadows of some coming events?

At this moment came the representatives of the people of Medina. With
one voice they entreated Hussain to abandon the idea of undertaking this
journey. Their leader, with supplication in his faltering voice,
besought Hussain to tell them why he had decided to leave them and the
Prophet's tomb for which he had so much attachment.

***O Son of the Prophet, if we have displeased you in any way, please
forgive us.***

At this display of love and affection Hussain was moved to tears.
Suppressing his grief he replied:

***My dear brethren, believe me that my heart is bleeding at this
parting, parting from you and from the graves of my beloved grandfather,
my dearest mother and my brother, whom I held dearer than my life. Had
it not been for the call of duty, I assure you I would have abandoned
the idea of leaving Medina. It grieves me most that I cannot for once
grant you your wishes when you all love me so dearly. But Almighty Allah
has so willed it and in His divine dispensation ordained that I should
undertake this journey. I know what hardships await me; but the Prophet
has groomed me from my childhood to face them.***

Seeing that the hand of destiny was snatching away Hussain from them,
they conferred amongst themselves and suggested that, if his decision to
go from Medina was final, he should take with him all the able-bodied
persons of the town so that they could protect him and his people. They
reminded him of the treachery that was pervading the atmosphere in the
adjoining regions. Hussain, obviously moved by their sincere
consideration for his safety, thanked them profusely. But he told them
that, in accordance with the wishes of the Prophet, he had to fulfill
the mission of his fife only with those who were destined to be
associated with him in the task confronting him.

When they received this reply to their entreaties, from Hussain, the
representative of the Medinites requested Hussain to grant them one wish
to leave Ali Akbar behind him in Medina.

***O Hussain," they said, "we cannot bear the thought of parting with
your son Ali Akbar, He is the very image of the Holy Prophet(S.A.W.).
Whenever we feel overcome by the remembrance of Muhammad(S.A.W.), we go
to Ali Akbar to have a look at him and take comfort. We shall look after
him better than we look after our own sons. We promise that we shall
treat his every wish as a command. In fair weather and foul we shall
stand by him. Even if we die, we shall command our children as our dying
wish to attend to all his comforts and needs. His exemplary life has
been an object lesson for our sons who are devoted to him as if he were
their brother.***

These pleading, which had a ring of sincerity and earnestness, rendered
Hussain quite speechless for a time. How could he tell them what was in
store for Ali Akbar who they loved and adored so much? When his sad
reflections had subsided, he replied to them in a tone tinged with
pathos,

***Alas, I only wish I could entrust my Ali Akbar to your care! In my
mission he has to play a role, the importance of which time alone will
tell. I cannot accede to your request for reasons which I cannot reveal
to you; but rest assured that I shall always remember your kindness to
me. I shall carry with me vivid memories of this parting and remember
you in my prayers.***

When the heavens were glowing with the last rays of day, the caravan
left on its long-drawn journey to the unknown destination. Soon darkness
descended upon Medina as if symbolic of the darkness and gloom which the
departure of Hussain had cast on the town, associated with a myriad
memories of his childhood.

Meandering through the desert, the caravan had reached its destination,
a destination which Allah had willed for it. The march of Hussain and
his kinsmen in this world had ended; but it was just the beginning of
their march toward their real goal. With the dawn of the 10th day of the
month of Muharram the events, for which the Prophet and Ali and Fatima
had prepared Hussain, started unfolding themselves. What a day it was
and what fateful events it encompassed!


