At the Battlefield of Karbala
=============================

One by one the faithful followers went out to fight for the cause of
Islam which forces of evil were attempting to stifle, and in the process
faced death. In their glorious deaths they demonstrated what
steadfastness and unflin- ching faith, what courage of conviction can
achieve and attain against all odds. With his devoted supporters now
sleeping the sweet slumber of death from which nothing could awaken
them, the turn of Hussain's sons and brothers and nephews came. In spite
of Hussain's best efforts to send his son Ali Akbar to the battlefield
before all his devoted friends and faithful followers, they would not
even let him mention it. The thought of Ali Akbar, Hussain's beloved
son, laying down his iffy in battle, when they were still alive, was too
much for them. It would be blasphemous for them even to entertain such
an idea!

Ali Akbar went over to his father to ask his permission to go out into
that gory arena from which no person from his camp had returned. Hussain
looked at his face; it would be more correct to say that for a couple of
minutes his stare was fixed on that face which he loved so much; which
reminded him every time of his grandfather whom he resembled every inch.
He tried to say something but his voice failed him. With considerable
effort he whispered with downcast eyes:

***Akbar, I wish you had become a father; then you would have known what
I am experiencing at this moment. My son, how can a father ask his son
to go, when he knows that the parting would be for ever! But Akbar, the
call of duty makes me helpless in this matter. Go to your mother, and to
your aunt Zainab who has brought you up from childhood and loved you and
cared for you more than for her own sons, and seek their permission.***

Ali Akbar entered the tent of his aunt Zainab. He found her and his
mother Umme Laila gazing vacantly towards the battlefield and listening
intently to the battle-cries of the enemy hordes. Their instinct made
them aware that, now that all the devoted followers of Hussain had laid
down their dear lives defending him and them, the turn of his sons, and
brothers and nephews had come. It was now only a question of time. It
was only a question who would go first from amongst them.

The light footsteps of Ali Akbar roused both of them from their reverie.
Both of them fixed their gaze on him without uttering a word. Zainab
broke the silence with an exclamation:

***Oh God, can it be true that Akbar has come to bid me and his mother
the last farewell Akbar do not say that you are ready for the last
journey. So long as my sons Aun and Muhammad are there, it is impossible
for me to let you go.***

Akbar knew what love and affection his aunt Zainab had for him. He was
conscious of the pangs of sorrow she was experiencing at that moment.
Her affection for him transcended everything except her love for
Hussain. He looked at her face, and at his mother's who was rendered
speechless by her surging feelings of anguish. He knew not how to tell
them that he had prepared himself for the journey to Heaven that lay
ahead. He summoned to

his aid his most coaxing manners that had always made his mother and
Zainab accede to his requests and said:

***My aunt, for all my father's kinsmen the inevitable hour has come. I
implore you, by the love you bear for your brother, to let me go so that
it may not be said that he spared me till all his brothers and nephews
were killed. Abbas, my uncle, is Commander of our army. The others are
all younger than me. When death is a certainty, let me die first so that
I can quench my thirst at the heavenly spring of Kausar at the hands of
my grandfather.***

The earnestness of Akbar's tone convinced Zainab and his mother that he
was determined to go. It seemed to be his last wish to lay down his life
before all his kinsmen. Since on no other occasion they had denied him
his wishes, it seemed so difficult to say no to his last desire. With a
gasp Zainab could only say,

***Akbar, my child, if the call of death has come to you, go.***

His mother could only say:

***May God be with you, my son. With you I am losing all I had and cared
for in this world. Your father has told me what destiny has in store for
me. After you, for me pleasure and pain will have no difference.***

With these words she fell unconscious in Ali Akbar's arms.

The battle-cry from the enemy's ranks was becoming louder and louder.
Ali Akbar knew that he had to go out quickly lest the enemy, seeing that
their challenges for combat were remaining unanswered, got emboldened to
make a concerted attack on his father's camp. Even such a thought was
unbearable for him. So long as he was alive, how could he permit the
onslaught of Yazid's forces on his camp where helpless women and
defenseless children were lying huddled together? He gently put his
mother in his aunt Zainab's arms saying:

***Zainab, my aunt, I am leaving my mother to your care. I know, from
your childhood, your mother Bibi Fatima has prepared you for the
soul-stirring events of today and what is to come hereafter. My mother
will not be able to bear the blows and calamities that are to befall
her, unless you lend her your courage. I implore you by the infinite
love you bear for me to show the fortitude that you are capable of, so
that your patience may sustain my mother when she sees my dead body
brought into the camp's morgue. I entrust her to your care because there
will be none to solace her and look after her in the years of dismay and
despondency that lie ahead of her.***

Ali Akbar embraced his loving aunt Zainab with tender love and affection
for the last time. she exclaimed:

***Akbar, go. My child, I entrust you to God, To ease your last moments
I promise you that, so long as I live, I shall after Umme Laila with the
affection of a mother.***

With a heavy heart Ali Akbar returned to his father. There was no need
for him to say that he had bid farewell to his mother and aunt Zainab,
for the sorrow depicted on his face spoke volumes to Hussain. Silently
he rose and put the Prophet's turban on Akbar's head, tied the scabbard
on his waist and imprinted a kiss on his forehead. In a failing,
faltering voice he muttered:

***Go Akbar, God is there to help you.***

Treading heavily Akbar came out of the tent with Hussain following
closely behind him. He was about to mount his horse when he felt
somebody tugging at his robe. He could hardly see, because his eyes were
almost blinded with tears. He heard the voice of his young aster Sakina
supplicating him not to leave her.

***O my brother," she was saying, "do no go to the battleground from
which nobody has returned alive since this mornings."***

Softly Akbar lifted her, gently and affectionately kissed her on her
face and put her down. His grief was too deep for words. Hussain
understood the depth of Akbar's feelings and picked up Sakina to console
her.

The scene of Ali Akbar's march towards the battlefield was such as would
defy description. The cries of ladies and children of Hussain's camp
were rising above the din of battle-cries and beating of enemy drums. It
was appearing as if a dead body of an only son, dead in the prime of
youth, was being taken out of a house for the last rites.


