The Final Battle and His Martyrdom
==================================

Ali Akbar met each and every one of his family. The second parting was
sad as the first one, perhaps sadder. Without being told, every one
realised that this was the last time they were beholding Akbar. Fizza,
the faithful maid of Fatima and Zainab, was as disconsolate with grief
as Zainab and Umme Laila. Hussain followed Ali Akbar out of the tent. As
he rode away, Hussain walked behind him with a brisk pace for some
distance, as a man follows his sacrificial lamb in Mina. When Akbar
disappeared from his sight, he turned heavenwards and, with his hands
raised, he prayed:

***O Allah, Thou art my Witness that on this day I have sent away for
sacrifice one whom I loved and cherished most, to defend the cause of
righteousness and truth.***

He sat on the ground as if trying to listen expectantly to some call
from the battlefield.

It was not very long before he received a wailing call, a call from Ali
Akbar, a call of anguish and pain:

***Father, Akbar has fallen with a mortal wound in his chest. Father,
come to me for I have not long to live. If you cannot reach me, I convey
my last salutations to you and my dear ones.***

Though Hussain was anticipating such a call, what a ghastly effect it
had on him! He rose from the ground and fell; he rose again and fell
again. With one hand on his heart he struggled to his feet. Torrential
tears were flooding his eyes. He rushed in the direction from which the
cry had come. It seemed as Hussain's strength had ebbed away on hearing
that fateful cry of his dearest son, for he was falling at every few
steps. He was sobbing:

***Akbar, give me another shout so that I can follow its direction.
Akbar, my sight is gone with the shock I have received and there is
nobody to guide me to where you lie.***

Abbas came rushing to the aid of his master. Holding his hand he led him
on to the place from where Akbar's dying cry had come.

Now Hussain was stumbling his way onwards resting his hands on Abbas'
shoulders. The distance seemed interminable but at last Hussain and
Abbas reached the place where Akbar was lying in a pool of his own
blood. Ah, that tragic sight! May no father have occasion to see his
young on in such a conditions. With one hand on his chest covering a
deep wound from which blood was gushing out, with his face writhing with
pain, Akbar was lying on the ground prostrate and unconscious. With the
agony he was enduring on account of the wound and the thirst that he was
Offering, he was digging his feet into the sand. With a cry of anguish
Hussain fell on the body of Akbar.

***My son, tell me where you are hurt; tell me who has wounded you in
the chest. Why don't you say something? My Akbar, I have come in
response to your call. Say one word to me, Akbar.***

Seeing that Akbar was lying there without any response to his
entreaties, Hussain turned to Abbas and said:

***Abbas, why don't you tell Akbar to say something to me. My dutiful
son, who used to get up on seeing me, is lying on the ground pressed by
the hand of death.***

Hussain once again flung himself on the body of Akbar. His breathing was
now heavier, a gurgling sound was coming from his throat. It seemed that
his young life was engaged in an uneven struggle with death. Hussain put
his head on Akbar's chest. He lifted it and put his own cheeks against
Akbar's and wailed

***Akbar, for once open your eyes and smile, as you were always smiling
to gladden my heart.***

Though Akbar did not open his eyes, a faint smile appeared on his lips
as if he had listened to his father's request. With the sweet smile
still playing on his lips, he heaved a gasp and with that his soul
departed. The cheeks of the father were still touching the cheeks of the
son, in death as so many time in life.

On seeing his son, his beloved son, breathe his last in his own hands,
Hussain's condition became such as no words can describe. For quite some
time he remained there weeping as only an aged father who has lost a
son, in his prime of youth, in such tragic circumstances, can weep.
Abbas sat there by his side shedding tears. What words of consolation
could he offer when the tragedy was of such a magnitude? All words of
solace and comfort would sound hollow and be in vain when a father, an
aged father, gives vent to his pent up emotions. After a time, Abbas
reverentially touched Hussain on his shoulders and reminded him that,
since he had rushed out of the camp, Zainab and the other ladies of his
house were waiting for him, tormented by anxiety, demented by the
thoughts of the tragedy that had befallen them. Only mention of this was
enough for Hussain. He knew that, as the head of the family, it was his
duty to rally by the side of the grief-stricken mother, his
grief-stricken sister Zainab, and the children for whom this bereavement
was the greatest calamity.

Hussain slowly rose from the ground and tried to pick up the dead body
of Akbar but he himself fell on the ground. Abbas, seeing this, bent
over him and said:

***My master, Abbas is still alive by your side. How can I leave you
carry the body of Akbar and remain a silent spectator. Let me carry his
body to the camp. "***

***No Abbas, replied Hussain, let me do this as a last token of my love.
To hold him by my heart, even in his death, gives me some comfort, the
only comfort that is now left to me.***

Saying this, he made all the efforts that he was capable of and,
assisted by Abbas, he lifted the body of Akbar. Clasping it close to his
bosom, he started the long walk to his camp. How he reached is difficult
to say. It would not be too much to imagine that his grandfather
Muhammad, his father Ali, his brother Hasan and perhaps his mother
Fatima had descended from heaven to help him in this task.

Hussain reached the camp and laid down Akbar's body on the ground. He
called Umme Laila and Zainab and Kulsum, Sakina and Rokayya, Fizza and
the other ladies of the house to see the face of Akbar for the last
time. The loving mother came, the loving aunts came, the children came,
and surrounded the body of Ali Akbar. They looked at Akbar's face and
then at Hussain's. They knew that their weeping would add to Hussain's
grief which

was already brimful. Ali Akbar's mother went up to her husband, and with
stifled sobs and bent head, she said to him:

***My master, I am proud of Akbar for dying such a noble death. He has
laid down his life in the noblest cause and this thought will sustain me
through the rest of my life. I implore you to pray for me, to pray for
ail of us, that Almighty Allah may grant us patience and solace.***

Saying this she turned to the dead body of her son lying on the ground
and put her face on his. Zainab and Kulsum, Sakina and Rokayya had all
flung themselves on Akbar's body. The tears that were flowing from their
eyes were sufficient to wash away the clotted blood from the wounds of
Akbar.

Hussain sat for a few minutes near the dead body of his son; the son
whom he had lost in such tragic circumstances; the son who had died
craving for a drop of water to quench his thirst. He felt dazed with
grief. He was awakened from his stupor by Qasim, the son of his brother,
who had come to seek his permission to go to the battlefield. He rose
from the ground, wiped the tears from his aged eyes and muttered

***Verily from God we come, and unto Him is our return.***


