Translator’s Foreword
=====================

**In the Name of God the Beneficent, The Merciful**

The human being is the most complicated and astonishing creation of
God-Almighty, the creation who in addition to having its primordial
animalistic desires also possesses their peculiar nature and spiritual
personality. The creation that has been assigned the Divine Viceregency
upon earth, [^1] accepted the Divine Trust [^2] when heavens, the earth
and the mountains shrank from bearing it, and in its upward heavenly
ascent [^3]even surpassed the God's Favorite Angels.

A creation that selects and thinks, and through combination of his
mental power and physical endeavors is capable of removing all obstacles
from his path for betterment of his life. The one who creates his own
life history through enrichment of knowledge inherited from his
predecessors and makes, the path smoother for further advancement by the
coming generations in the future.

But unfortunately, in the midst of man's struggle with nature for
improving the quality of his living environment, the most precious
reality that has been forgotten is the self and the jewel of human
personality. Or in other words, what has been forgotten is the man
himself, his training and self-purification and making him an ideal or
perfect human being.

A human being who has been called by God-Almighty, the Most Superior
Creation, [^4]and about whose identification the authentic commentators
of the revelations have said:

*“Whoever has recognized his self -in reality has recognized his
Creator.”* [^5]

Self-forgetfulness, negligence shown towards recognizing the infinite
dimensions of human celestial soul and under estimation of human inner
potential for attaining self-purification or moral perfection is the
pain which has inflicted plenty of suffering upon the modern human
societies.

The domination of technology, fast pace of modern life, usurpation of
power by materialists and world-worshippers over vast regions of the
world on one hand and the failure and incompetency of various school and
ideologies in presenting a clearly illuminated path and satisfactory
interpretation of human being on the other hand have made this journey
of retrogression and self alienation further complicated.

But in the Islamic Ideology, the greatest aim in the life's struggle is
to become victorious over the self. In the Holy Qur’an the God Almighty
after repeated oaths has emphasized the importance of spiritual
purification as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَنْ زَكَّاهَا وَقَدْ خَابَ مَنْ دَسَّاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ***“He is indeed successful who causeth it to grow, (the self) And he
is indeed a failure who stunteth it.”*** ***(91: 9-10)***

In accordance with Divine Islamic Ideology, the most exalted aim is
training and guidance of human beings in their spiritual journey from
the earthly temporary abode towards the Celestial Kingdom.

The aim consists of creation of a society and environment where only
God-Almighty is worshipped; in which the light of servitude, devotion,
and manifestation of faith towards the unseen will destroy the darkness
of selfish whims and passions, thus, enabling the human eyes to witness
God's Infinite Glory all over upon his existence and introducing the
rule of Monotheism (*Tawhid*) and its relevant vast dimensions over all
human relations and transactions. Of course, this is not possible
without self-purification.

The Western people and the Muslim immigrants now settled in Western
countries in general are curious to know more about Islamic Mysticism or
Gnosticism (*Irfan*). Therefore, I had always desired to translate a
suitable book dealing with the Islamic Gnosticism. Thanks God-the
Almighty that He bestowed upon this humble servant His Special Grace for
completing this translation of Ayatullah Amini's Persian Book –*Khud
Sazi, Tazkiyeh wa Tehzibe Nafs.*

The book presents a detailed description of special deeds as per formed
by God's most devoted sincere servants during their lives, the self-
restraint and asceticism practiced by them during these worships, and
the spiritual purification achieved by them. In their spiritual
migration towards God-Almighty the more they endeavored to advance
forward the more nearer they reached to God's Countenance (*Laqa*).

In Islamic Mysticism [^6] the gnostic journey is called ‘*sayr wa
saluk’* and the wayfarer who undertakes this journey is called
‘*salik’*, who strives to utilize all his energy, strength and courage
in his spiritual migration towards God-Almighty; takes all necessary
precautions to remain purified in his march; is not tired of
restrictions and limitations; guards his breaths day and night lest he
transgresses and becomes deviated; strictly supervises all entries
leading to heart's domain lest illicit desires, forbidden thoughts make
their entries thus, making his beloved's promises contaminated with
alien's presence.

The most famous mystic poet of Iran, Hafiz al-Shirazi[^7] has so
beautifully summarized the wayfarer's above mentioned endeavors in his
following verse:

“I remained vigilant guarding the heart’s premises every night. So that
no alien thought (except my beloved's) could make its entry.”

After endeavoring the hardships of his gnostic journey, those who
succeed attain the nearness of their beloved (i.e. God-Almighty); the
Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) have described this gnostic
stage in the following tradition:

*“Truly when a wayfarer (salik) succeeds in making his wisdom alive and
in letting his self die, his body becomes gradually weaker and thinner,
his heaviness turning into slimness. A Divine illumination whose
manifestation was intermittent becomes clearly visible for him, thus
making his path clearly brightened, guiding and moving him through it;
passing through various gates (of asceticism) he eventually reaches to
the permanent abode of prosperity and with a tranquil and contented
heart places his feet in a place of ease and comfort. This is because,
he had utilized his reason properly and had made his Creator
pleased.”*[^8]

A gnostic after attaining God's Learning (*marefah*) becomes some one
whose physical body is with the people but his heart is always engaged
in God's Remembrance. A gnostic is the trustee of God's Trust and is the
treasurer of Divine-Mysteries; is the source of His Light and proof of
His Blessings upon the mankind; is the carrier of Divine Knowledge and
Scale of Divine Mercy and Justice; is needless of mankind, desires and
world; does not have any other companion except God-Almighty; and does
not have any indication, speech and breathing but by means of God, for
the sake of God, from the God and with the God.

The main contents of the book as mentioned earlier are the etiquette and
instructions of gnostic journey, ways and manners of servitude, detailed
descriptions of deeds and worships that must be performed by a wayfarer,
and what sort of behaviors and restrictions they must practice in order
to attain the desired results. The book consists of preface and three
parts covering the following topics:

Self-purification, Human Virtues, What to Be?, Heart in Qur’an,
Hard-heartedness, Self-refinement, Self-struggle, Egotism, Wordliness,
Piety, Characteristics of the Pious, Repentance or Self-cleansing,
Training and Perfection of Self, Faith, Means of Achieving Perfection
and God's Nearness, Invocations, Instructions, Obstacles of the Path,
Nourishment of Moral Virtues, Righteous Deeds etc.

The most prevalent misunderstanding [^9] about Islamic Mysticism which
must be clarified is that relinquishment of worldly involvement,
seclusion, and monasticism are not prerequisites for undertaking a
spiritual migration towards God-Almighty; on the contrary, as it would
be shown in the later part of this book, Islam demands from its
followers that while living among the people a normal social life
discharging the individual and collective obligations, they should not
be negligent of their own selves and must pay special attention towards
their spiritual purification.

I wish to thank all those who have contributed to the realization of
this translation. I am indebted to Ayatullah Ibrahim Amini and Mr.
Ansariyan for support, valuable suggestions, and guidance. I am
sincerely indebted to my wife Fatimah Razavi for proof reading Arabic
text and Mr. Soulat Parviz for his painstaking efforts in type-setting.

For the sake of convenience of readers who are not familiar with Arabic
language the recital of important supplications have been written in
English. Elucidatory footnotes and chapters added by the translator are
identified with [Tr]. Due to pressure of time, as I am leaving tomorrow
for Hajj pilgrimage there might be errors and omissions for which I
apologize to my readers, and welcome their suggestions and comments.

Sayyid Hossein Alamdar  
 Dhiqadh, 23,1417 A.H.  
 April 2, 1997  
 Tehran

[^1]: And when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo! I am about to place a
viceroy in the earth. (20: 30)

[^2]: Lo! We offered the trust unto the heavens and the earth and the
hills, but they shrank from bearing it and were afraid of it. And man
assumed it. (33: 72)

[^3]: When he was on the uppermost horizon Then he drew nigh and came
down Till he was (distant) two bows' length or even nearer And He
revealed unto His slave that which He revealed. (53: 7-10)

[^4]: So blessed be God, the Best of Creators! (23: 14)

[^5]: A narration from the Infallible Imams (a.s.) of the Holy Prophet's
(S) Ahlul Bayt.

[^6]: In order to provide a further glimpse of Islamic Mysticism, the
translation and commentary of a famous mystical verse of Imam Khomeini
(RA) –the most eminent gnostic of our time, has been included at the end
of this book.

[^7]: Khuwaja Shamsuddin Hafiz-i-Shirazi the most eminent mystic poet of
Iran, was born in the year 726 A.H. in Shiraz. All the Gnostics of the
world humble themselves before the exaltedness and sacredness of Hafiz
who is considered as their Qibleh-Gah (patron). His contentment,
surrender, absolute freedom from wants, and truthfulness had bestowed a
unique sacredness upon his poetry. After passage of more than six
hundred years his poetic work Diwan of Hafiz is widely used for
Estekhara (consultation), but only those who have purified their souls
thoroughly may receive guidance from his poetry. Following are some
examples of his poetry: شکر خدا چه طلب کردم ازخدا برمنتحمای مطلب
خودکامران شدم “Thanks God whatever I requested from God, eventually my
wishes were granted.” هرگنج سعادت که خدا داد بحافظ از يمن دعای شب
ووردسحری يود “Each treasurer of prosperity which was bestowed upon Hafiz
by God was due to the blessings of night prayer and dawn supplications.”
Upon knowing Hafiz, Goethe wished to be one of his disciples. He said:
Oh Hafiz, your word is as great as eternity for it has no beginning and
no end. Your word as the canopy of heaven solely depends upon itself. It
is all signs, beauty and excellence.” After studying the lyric poems of
Hafiz, Hitche wrote: “O Hafiz, you have created a tavern of philosophy
greater than any worldly palace. In it you provided a wine of grace and
world beyond the capacity of the world to drink. The highest pinnacle of
any amount is but a sign of your greatness and the unfathomable depth of
any vortex is just a mark of your perfection, and the excellence of your
world.” Hafiz, after blessing the humanity with precious gift of his
poetic works died at the age of 65 years in the year 791 A.H. His tomb
is located in Shiraz. His verses like immortal sign still show light to
the world’s deviated ones whose hearts are full of intense darkness.

[^8]: Sharh Nahjul Balagha, Ibne abi al-Hadid, p.111-127

[^9]: Regarding these misunderstandings Imam Khomeini (RA) in his last
testament writes: “Among the noticeable conspiracies during the present
century and especially during the last few decades and since the victory
of the Islamic Revolution is the vast worldwide propaganda for dismaying
nations and especially the self-sacrificing people of Iran with a view
to making them lose their confidence in Islam and eventually renounce
it. Sometimes they do it directly, albeit crudely, suggesting, for
example, that the edicts of Islam which were established one thousand
and four hundred years ago cannot possibly be relied on as laws on the
basis of which to administer countries in the present century, that
Islam is a reactionary religion opposed to every innovation and to the
manifestation of modern civilization, or that in the present era the
countries in the world cannot discard the world's civilization and its
manifestations. And similar foolish and occasionally malicious and
vicious propaganda nicely wrapped and offered in the form of pro-Islamic
propaganda and under the pretext of support for the sanctity of Islamic
ways, among other things, that Islam and other divine religions are
concerned about the spiritualities, about the moral rectification of
mankind, that they invite them to resign earthly pursuits, that they
invite man to renounce the material world and engage himself in acts of
worship, saying prayers and devotions which, they argue, bring man
nearer to God and distance him from the material world; that involvement
in the administration of state and government and politics is against
that lofty and spiritual goal because the latter activities are solely
for this material world, which is against the teachings of the great
prophets.” Imam's Final Discourse, pp. 22-23.


