Egotism - the Root of all Evils
===============================

The scholars of ethics have defined egotism as the mother of corruption
(*Ummul Fisad*), the root of all vices and sins, and in order to attain
self-refinement one must seriously struggle against it. Here, in the
beginning, its meanings shall be explained and then the evil influences
of this characteristic and confrontation methods against them shall be
discussed.

Meanwhile, it must be understood that each living existence by nature is
an egotist and shows keen interest about his essence, characteristics,
actions, effects, and perfection. Therefore, egotism cannot be condemned
something as absolutely undesirable, but requires further explanation.

Earlier it was pointed out that a human existence consists of two stages
and possesses two selves or two mines, i.e. animal-self and human-self.
The human-self consists of a Celestial Spirit, (blown by God-Almighty),
descended from Heavenly Kingdom to become God's Vicegerent upon earth.
From this point of view it belongs to the category of knowledge, life,
power, blessing, benevolence, perfection, goodness, and by nature
aspires towards these ideals.

Therefore, if a person recognizes himself (the human-self) and discovers
the values incorporated therein, considers them as honorable, strives to
achieve the nearness of the Fountainhead of Absolute Perfection, which
results in his revival of moral decencies, virtues, and goodness.

Considering the above, this type of egotism could not be regarded as
undesirable, rather is something good and praiseworthy, because this
characteristic is not egotism rather in reality it is God-seeking. This
matter has already been explained earlier and a detailed discussion
shall be presented later.

The second stage of human existence consists of his animal-self, and in
this stage he is like an animal exactly, possessing animalistic desires
and passions. Although, in order to remain alive in this world and to
sustain a living, a human being is supposed to provide his animalistic
means of living up to a moderate limit, and up to this extent there does
not exist any prohibition and reproach.

But the most important and determining factor is that whether the body
should be ruled by the wisdom and celestial human spirit or by the
imperious-self and his animal-self. If wisdom and human-self rule, then
the animal-self and his passions are adjusted, optimized, and all of
them are mobilized for journeying on the path of exaltedness and
perfection leading towards God's Nearness.

In this case the human-self which is the same existence attached to
God - assumes his authenticity, whereby revival of moral excellence in
conduct and God's Nearness become the primary goal, and taking care of
one's animalistic requirement will become a secondary aim. Therefore,
egotism and love for self not only has not been condemned, on the
contrary have been praised.

But if the imperious-self and animal-self took over control of bodily
affairs, the wisdom and human-self are subdued and become isolated, in
which case a man gradually takes distance from God and human values,
falling ultimately into deep and dark valleys of ignorance. He forgets
his human-self (i.e. humanism) and recognizes in his place his
unconscious self (*Na-khud*) (i.e. animalism). And these are the
meanings of egotism which is called as the mother of all evils and is
therefore, undesirable.

An egotist sees only his own animal-self and nothing else. All his
actions, efforts, talks, and character revolves around the axis of
satisfying his animalistic passions and desires. He practically
considers himself as an animal and does not recognize any goal in life
except meeting his animalistic requirements.

In order to accomplish these base animalistic objectives considers
himself as independent or renegade and justifies all his actions. His
animal-self is the only thing which he considers something sacred and
honorable.

He demands every thing for his own sake, even truth and justice, which
should back up his animalistic desires, and if they are not on his side,
does not need such justice, rather gives himself the right to wage
combat against them.

He even interprets and comments religious commands and obligations as he
pleases, assigning authenticity to his own opinions and thinking,
whereby the religious laws and obligations are supposed to adopt
themselves in accordance with his whims and passions.

Since an egotist is deprived of real human dignity, virtues and moral
perfection; he keeps himself amused with whimsical, false, and futile
affairs such as: seeking false publicity, ambitiousness, covetousness,
snobbishness, eating, drinking, sexual pleasures, and remains totally
ignorant from God's Remembrance and self-perfection.

Because an egotist is infatuated and obedient to his imperious-self, he
does not have any other aim except satisfying the demands of his
passions in the best possible manner; in order to meet this animalistic
objective is not ashamed of performing the most shameful deeds and
consider them as justified and permissible.

He wants to accomplish his animalistic goals, and in order to achieve
them does not refrain from indulgence in lying, accusing, oppressing,
and breech of commitments, deception, treachery, and any other acts of
transgression.

Therefore, egotism is the mother of all evils which makes all acts of
abjectness justified and permissible, or in other worlds, it can be said
that all acts of transgressions in reality are the by-products of
egotism which are manifested in different manners at different
occasions-. For example, oppression and trampling over the rights of
others could not be anything other than self-centeredness.

Likewise, lying, backbiting, ill-speaking, fault-finding, jealousy, and
revenge all are the vices of egotism which have been manifested in these
manners. It is because of this reason that self-centeredness is called
as the root of all transgressions.

Self-centeredness consists of various degrees and stages the highest of
them leads to the state of self-adoration a self-worshipping. If this
ugly characteristic is not confronted strongly, it gradually becomes so
intense whereby the imperious-self becomes an object of worship, whose
commands must be obeyed absolutely, and a person becomes submissive to
his whims and passions to the extent of adoration. God-Almighty said
about such a person in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلَٰهَهُ هَوَاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Seest thou such a one as taketh for his god His own passion (or
impulse)?”( 25:43).***

Is worship means any thing else except that a worshipper in front of his
object of worship humbles and bows down, and should be submissive to his
commands absolutely without raising least objection? Similar is the case
with an egotist person because he regards his self as an object of
worship and humbles and prostrates in front of him by obeying his
commands without any question. Therefore, an egotistic cannot be
considered as a Monotheist.

1. Worldliness, the Source of all Sins
--------------------------------------

In Islamic narrations and Heavenly verses the world has been defined as
a place of amusement, and an object of arrogance which has been severely
condemned; its attachment is not worthy of the lofty status of
believers, and therefore, they should strictly refrain themselves from
being attached to its adornments. Following are few examples:

The Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا إِلَّا مَتَاعُ الْغُرُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For the life of this world is but goods and chattels of deception
(3:185)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
افلا تعقلونيَتَّقُونَ وَمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا إِلَّا لَعِبٌ
وَلَهْوٌ ۖ وَلَلدَّارُ الْآخِرَةُ خَيْرٌ لِّلَّذِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“What is the life of this world but play and amusement but best is
the home in the Hereafter, for those who are righteous. Will ye not then
understand? (6:32)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا الْحَيَاةُ الدُّنْيَا لَعِبٌ وَلَهْوٌ وَزِينَةٌ
وَتَفَاخُرٌ بَيْنَكُمْ وَتَكَاثُرٌ فِي الْأَمْوَالِ وَالْأَوْلَادِ ۖ
كَمَثَلِ غَيْثٍ أَعْجَبَ الْكُفَّارَ نَبَاتُهُ ثُمَّ يَهِيجُ فَتَرَاهُ
مُصْفَرًّا ثُمَّ يَكُونُ حُطَامًا ۖ وَفِي الْآخِرَةِ عَذَابٌ شَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Know that the life of this world is only play, and idle talk, and
pageantry, and boasting among you and rivalry in respect of wealth and
children: as the likeness of vegetation after rain, whereof the growth
is pleasing to the husbandman, but afterward it drieth up and thou seest
it*** ***turning yellow, then it becometh straw. And in the Hereafter
there is grievous punishment. (57:20)***

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اما بعد فانى احذركم الدنيا فانها حلوة خضرة حفت بالشهوات وتحببت
بالعاجلة وراقت بالقليل وحليت بالآمال وتزينت بالغرور. لاتدوم حبرتها ولا
تؤمن فجعتها، غرارة ضرارة حائلة زائلة نافذة بائدة اكالة غوالة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“So now, certainly I frighten you from this world for it is sweet and
green, surrounded by lusts, and liked for its immediate enjoyments. It
excites wonder with small things, is ornamented with (false) hopes and
decorated with deception. Its rejoicing do not last and its afflictions
cannot be avoided. It is deceitful, harmful, changing, perishable,
exhaustible, liable to destruction eating away and destructive.”*[^1]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
والدنيا دار منى لها الفنا ولاهلها منها الجلا وهى حلوة خضرا وقد عجبت
للطالب والتبست بقلب الناظر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The world is a place for which destruction is ordained and for its
inhabitants departure from here is destined. It is sweet and green. It
hastens towards its seeker and attaches to the heart of the viewer. So
depart from here with the best of provision available with you and do
not ask herein more than what is enough and do not demand from it more
than subsistence.”*[^2]

There are plenty of narrations [^3]and verses in which the world has
been reproached, and the people .are warned to refrain from being
attached to its adornments. Especially, in the precious book of
Nahjul-Balagha (the Path of Eloquence), the world and worldly have been
reproached severely, and it has been emphasized that the people should
not be attached to this perishable transient world, and should pay more
attention towards the Hereafter.

In this book the people have been divided into two groups: the worldly
and the one who is attached to the Hereafter. Each one of these groups
follows their own special program. God-Almighty has said in the Holy
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يُرِدْ ثَوَابَ الدُّنْيَا نُؤْتِهِ مِنْهَا وَمَن يُرِدْ ثَوَابَ
الْآخِرَةِ نُؤْتِهِ مِنْهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoso desireth the reward of the world, we bestow on him thereof and
whoso desireth the reward of the Hereafter, we bestow on him thereof.
(3:145)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَالُ وَالْبَنُونَ زِينَةُ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا ۖ وَالْبَاقِيَاتُ
الصَّالِحَاتُ خَيْرٌ عِندَ رَبِّكَ ثَوَابًا وَخَيْرٌ أَمَلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Wealth and children are an ornament of life of the world. But the
good deeds which endure are better in the Lord's sight for reward and
better in respect of hope. (18:46)***

2. What is World?
-----------------

Anyhow, Islam considers world something as undesirable and demands from
its followers to practice asceticism. Here, it would be appropriate to
throw some light about the Islamic concept of this world, and why it has
been reproached?

Does the world consist of worldly existence such as: earth, sun, moon,
stars, animals, plants, trees, mines, and human beings? Therefore, the
life of this world can be defined as working, eating, drinking,
sleeping, marrying and other related acts of living. Does Islam refrain
from these things? Do earth, sky, animals, vegetables, and trees are bad
things that a human being should avoid them?

Does Islam prohibits earning a living, acquiring of knowledge, business
and production, and sexual relationship? Absolutely this is not the
case, because all of the above things have been created by God-Almighty,
and in case they were bad, He would not have created them. God-Almighty
regards them as His Beautiful Bounties which should be conquered by
human beings and should be utilized for their advantages. The wealth and
property not only is not reproached but on the contrary has been
introduced as blessing in the Holy Qur’an as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِن تَرَكَ خَيْرًا الْوَصِيَّةُ لِلْوَالِدَيْنِ وَالْأَقْرَبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If he leaves wealth, that he bequeath unto parents and near
relatives in kindness. (2:180)***

Earning a genuine living by lawful means not only has not been
reproached, rather has been regarded as one of the best kind of worship.

Following is an example:

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: العبادة سبعون جزا افضلها طلب الحلال.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Worship consists of seventy acts and the best among them is the act of
earning a genuine living through lawful means.”*[^4]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي جعفر (ع) قال: من طلب الرزق فى الدنيا استعفافا عن الناس وتوسيعا
على اهلها تعطفا على جارة لقى الله عز وجل يوم القيامة ووجهه مثل القمر
ليلة البدر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever endeavors sincerely for earning a genuine living (through
lawful means); becomes self-sufficient in taking care of his
expenditures; maintains a reasonably comfortable standard of living for
his family; shows benevolence to his neighbors -such a person will meet
God-Almighty in the Hereafter, while his face will be shining like the
full moon.”*[^5]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابى عبدالله عليه السلام قال: الكاد على عياله كالحماهد فى سبيل الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever strives for earning a living for his family is tantamount to a
warrior engaged in Holy War for the sake of God.”*[^6]

The Islamic traditions emphasize the importance of work, farming,
agriculture, trade, and even marriage. The life styles of Prophet (S)
and Infallible Imams (a.s.) indicate that they too have worked for
earning a living. Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) the leader
of the pious also mode endeavors and worked hard for earning a living in
his life.

Therefore, what is really meant with this reproached world? In the
opinion of some people it is not the world which is reproached rather it
is the attachment to world which has been strictly condemned. e.g. the
Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زُيِّنَ لِلنَّاسِ حُبُّ الشَّهَوَاتِ مِنَ النِّسَاءِ وَالْبَنِينَ
وَالْقَنَاطِيرِ الْمُقَنطَرَةِ مِنَ الذَّهَبِ وَالْفِضَّةِ وَالْخَيْلِ
الْمُسَوَّمَةِ وَالْأَنْعَامِ وَالْحَرْثِ ۗ ذَٰلِكَ مَتَاعُ الْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا ۖ وَاللَّهُ عِندَهُ حُسْنُ الْمَآبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Beautified for mankind is love of the joys (that come) from women
and offspring, and stored-up heaps of gold and silver, and horses
branded (with their mark), cattle, and land. That is comfort of the life
of the world, God-Almighty ! With Him is a more excellent abode.
(3:14)***

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: اياك وحب الدنيا فانها اصل كل خطيئة ومعدن كل بليه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Be careful not to attach your self from this (transient) world,
because love of world is the root of all sins and origin of all
catastrophes.”*[^7]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبدالله عليه السلام قال: راس كل خطيئة حب الدنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Attachment to World is the basis of all sins and transgressions.”*[^8]

From these types of traditions it could be inferred that what is
condemned is the attachment to these worldly affairs and not the affairs
in themselves. Here the question arises whether absolute attachment and
love to worldly affairs is condemned and should not a man have any
attachment to his wife, children, house, wealth, and food? How could
such a thing be expected?

Because, the attachment to these affairs is a natural thing for a human
being; God-Almighty has incorporated these attachment within his
primordial nature, and that is the way human beings have .been created
by Him. Is it possible for a man not to love his wife and children?

Is it possible not to love clothing, delicious foods, and other
beautiful things of this world? If love of these things was prohibited,
God would not have created human being with these tendencies. A human
being in order to keep himself alive requires these things, and
accordingly he has been created in such a manner that he should feel a
natural inclination towards these affairs. The Commander of the Faithful
Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: الناس ابنا الدنيا ولايلام الرجل على حب امه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The human beings are the children of this World and they should not be
blamed for loving their mother.”*[^9]

The Islamic traditions recommend that one must love and show affection
towards his wife and children. The Holy Prophet (S) and Infallible Imams
(a.s.) too had shown affection towards their wives and children. Some of
them liked foods and showed interest in them. Therefore, sky, plants,
trees, mines, animals, and similar other God's bounties are neither bad
nor condemned.

Similarly, wife, children, wealth and property, affection shown towards
these things and life of this world, are not only not condemned, rather
in some of the traditions, the world even has been praised. Following is
the example:

In reply to a person who has condemned the world, the Commander of the
Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان الدنيا دار صدق لمن صدقها ودار عافية لمن فهم عنها. ودار غنى لمن تزود
منها ودار موعظة ولمن اتعظ بها. مسجد احبا الله ومصلى ملائكة الله وحبط
وحى الله ومتجر اوليا الله, اكتسبوا فيها الرحمة ورحبوا فيها الجنة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Verily this world is a house of truth for those who look into it
deeply and carefully, an abode of peace and rest for those who
understand its ways and moods, and it is the best working ground for
those who want to procure rewards for Hereafter. It is a place of
acquiring knowledge and wisdom for those who want to acquire them, a
place of worship for friends of God and for angels.*

*It is the place where prophets receive revelations of the Lord. It is
the place for virtuous people and saints to do good deeds and to be
given rewards for the same, only in this world they could trade with
God's favors and blessings and only while living here they could barter
their good deeds, with His Blessings, and rewards.”*[^10]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابى جعفرعليه السلام انه كان يقول: نعم العون الدنيا على الاخرة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The world is the best support for the Hereafter.”*[^11]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: لا خير فى من لايحب جمع المال من حلال,
ويكف به وجهه ويقضى به دينه ويحصل به رحمه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Anyone who does not like earning a living by lawful means to maintain
his prestige, to pay his obligations and to take care of his relatives,
then -such a person lacks any merit and goodness.”*[^12]

Therefore, what is meant by the condemnation of world and its love and
attachment which is the roots of all evils? From the over all collection
of these verses and traditions it could be inferred that, what is
condemned is the worldliness and becoming infatuated with it, and not
the creatures of the world, its life, and genuine liking of worldly
affairs in themselves.

Islam, demands people to recognize the world the way it is and then they
should appraise its worth accordingly; they should also discover the
exalted Divine Goal behind their own creation as well as the world, and
should move in that direction. If they acted in this manner –they belong
to the Hereafter, otherwise they belong to the worldly group.

3. World's Reality
------------------

In order to explain this matter in the beginning we would discuss the
reality and nature of world from Islamic point of view and then a
conclusion could be reached. Islam believes in the existence of two
worlds: The first one is the same material world where we live and is
called world. The other one is where we will be transferred after death
and is called Hereafter and Next World.

Islam believes that the life of a person does not terminate at his
demise; rather he will be transferred after death to an eternal abode
known as the Next World. Islam regards the world as perishable,
transient, and a temporary abode, while considers the Hereafter and Next
World as a permanent and eternal abode.

Men has not came to this world in order to live for a short while and
finally to die and be destroyed, rather he has come to achieve self
perfection through acquiring knowledge, good deeds, and training –and to
live happily forever in his eternal abode in the Next World. Therefore,
the world is like a form land for cultivation of fruits for Hereafter,
place for acquiring knowledge, and a place for making arrangements for
provisions of a journey.

However, man for the sake of his survival and in order to live in this
world has no other choice except to utilize Divine Bounties which have
been created for his consumption. But utilization of these Divine
Bounties should be regarded as a mean and not an end in itself.

The aim of creation of human beings and world was not just to have
comfortable luxurious life and to take the maximum advantage of worldly
pleasures, rather there was an exalted and superior goal behind it e.g.
the nourishment of the “Jewel of Humanity” (*Jowhar al-Insaniyat*)
through attaining self-perfection and ascending towards God's Nearness.
Following are few examples of Islamic narrations in this matter:

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فان الدنيا لم تخلق لكم دار مقام. بل خلقت لكم مجازا لتزودوا منها العمال
الى دار القرار فكونوا منها على اوفاز وقربوا الظهور للزيال.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Certainly this world has not been made a place of permanent stay for
you. But it has been created as a pathway in order that you may take
from it the provision of your (good) actions for the permanent house (in
Paradise). Be ready for departure from here and keep close your mount
for setting off.”*[^13]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ايها الناس انما الدنيا دار مجاز والاخرة دار قرار فخدوا من ممركم لمقركم
ولا تهتكوا أستاركم عند من يعلم أسراركم واخرجوا من الدنيا قلوبكم من قبل
أن تخرج منها أبدانكم، ففيها اختبرتم ولغيرها خُلقتم. إن المرء إذا هلك
قال الناس: ما ترك؟ وقالت الملائكة: ما قدم؟ لله آبائكم! فقدموا بعضاً
يكن لكم قرضا، ولا تخلفوا كلاً فيكون عليكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Remember that this world is a thoroughfare, a road upon which people
are passing night and day, and the Next World is the abode of permanent
stay. While, passing along this road make provision for the next where
you will reside forever. Do not go with a burden of sins and vices
before the One, Who knows everything about you. Remove vicious ambitions
from your mind before death removes you from your surroundings.*

*Remember, that you are being tried in this world, and are created to be
given a permanent residence in the Next World. When a man dies people
ask what he has left behind as a legacy, and angels want to know what he
has sent forward (good deeds and good words). May God have mercy upon
you, send something in advance to the place where you will have to
follow; it may be a sort of a deposit with God to be repaid to you on
your arrival. Do not leave all of your's behind, it will be a drag upon
you.”*[^14]

He further said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الا إنّ هذه الدنيا التي أصبحتم تتمنونها وترغبون فيها ، وأصبحت تعظكم
وترميكم ليست بداركم ، ولا منزلكم الذلى خلقتم له ، ولا الذي دعيتم إليه.
الاوانها ليست بباقية لكم ولاتبقون عليها وهلى وان غرتكم منها فقد حذرتكم
شرها. فدعو اغرورها لتحذيرها واطماعها لتخويفها وسابقوا فيها الى الدار
التلى دعيتم عليها وانصرفوا بقلوبكم عنها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Remember, that this world which you covet so ardently and attempt to
acquire so earnestly, and which some times annoys you and some times
pleases you so much, is neither your home nor a permanent destination.
You have not been created for it, nor invited to it as your resting
place. It shall neither remain with you forever nor will you remain in
it eternally.*

*“If it has enticed you with its charms, it has also warned and
cautioned you of real dangers lurking in its folds. Take account of the
warnings it has given you and do not be seduced or deceived by its
allurements. These warnings should desist you from being too greedy or
too covetous to possess it. Try, to advance towards the place where you
are invited for eternal bliss, and turn your face away from the vicious
world.”*[^15]

Therefore, as we can see the reality or the nature of the world in these
narrations has been described such as: passage, a house of vanity, and
deception etc. The human beings have not been created for this rather
for the Hereafter, they have came here to nourish their humanism through
knowledge and deeds and to arrange provisions for their eternal journey.

4. The Next Worlders
--------------------

Islam requires that people should discover the reality, essence, and
nature of this world the way it actually is and, therefore, should adopt
their deeds and behavior in accordance to their own perspective.
Whoever, has discovered the nature of such a world will never become
infatuated or would be loosing his heart for its sake. They will never
be deceived by its power of wealth and other allurements.

While living in this very world, and utilizing all of its lawful
pleasures and bounties, will never become slaves and prisoners of this
vicious world. They will never forget God-Almighty and Hereafter even
for a single moment and will endeavor continuously for accumulation of
provisions for their eternal journey through performance of virtuous
deeds.

While they live in this world but with their esoteric hearts eyes look
towards the sublime realities of Upper Heavens. In all situations, at
all times, and in all their deeds they do consider the existence of
God-Almighty and Hereafter and, therefore, are able to take advantage of
these opportunities for enrichment of their eternal life.

They regard the world like a form land for cultivating fruits for the
Hereafter -a place for conducting business and endeavor to collect
provisions for their journey to eternal abode.

They commission all the resources of this transient world to the full
advantage of their Hereafter, even their working, eating, drinking,
marrying, and other worldly deeds are utilized for the Next World. Such
people are not worldly and belong to the Next World. Ibn abi Yafur
narrated from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اين ابى يعفو رقال قلت لابي عبدالله عليه السلام: أنا لنحب الدنيا فقال
لى: تصنع بها ماذا؟ قلت اتزوج منها واحج وانفق على عيالى وانيل اخوانى
واتصدق. قال: ليس هذا من الدنيا, هذا من الاخرة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I said to Imam al-Sadiq:*

*'We like the world.’*

*'What do you do with its wealth' ? Asked the Imam.*

*“I replied. 'By means of this wealth, we get married, go for
Hajj-pilgrimage, take care of genuine family expanses, help our poor
brothers and give alms for the sake of God.’*

*'This is not world, rather it is Hereafter.’ Replied the Imam.”*[^16]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعلموا عبادالله أن المتقين ذهبوا بعاجل الدنيا وآجل الآخرة فشاركوا أهل
الدنيا في دنياهم ولم يشاركهم أهل الدنيا في آخرتهم سكنوا الدنيا بأفضل
ما سكنت وأكلوها بأفضل ما أكلت فحظوا من الدنيا بما حظي به المترفون
وأخذوا منها ما أخذت الجبابرة المتكبرون ثم انقلبوا عنها بالزاد المبلغ
والمتجر الرابح. أصابوا لذة زهد الدنيا في دنياهم وتيقنوا أنهم جيران
الله غدا في آخرتهم لاترد لهم دعوة ولاينقص لهم نصيب من لذة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O creature of God! remember that God fearing and pious persons passed
away from this world after having led a respectable and fruitful life ,
and they are going to be well rewarded in the Next World (when compared
with worldly people, they had equal opportunities of gathering fruits of
this world and utilize them to the best of their abilities, and at the
same time kept away from all wicked and vicious way of life). They did
not jeopardize their salvation like worldly minded persons. They led a
more contended, more respectable and happier life, than those who lived
wickedly.”*

They enjoyed the fruits of their labors, and had more gratifying, sober
and healthy experience of the pleasures of life than the rich and
wealthy had. They regaled and enjoined the joys, the facilities and the
bliss of this world as much as tyrant and vicious people desired to
enjoy.

Yet, while leaving this world, they carried with them all which will be
of .use to them in the Next World. While living in this world they
enjoyed the, happiness of relinquishing its evil ways. They made
themselves sure that in the life to come they will be recipient of His
Grace and Blessings, their requests will not be turned down, and the
favors destined for them in the Heaven will not be lessened or
reduced.”[^17]

Therefore, working as an employee to earn a living, being involved in
trade, business and agriculture, and acceptance of positions involving
social responsibilities not only are not the least incompatible of one's
being a pious or man of Hereafter, on the contrary these very acts could
be utilized as means of achieving God's Pleasure, and accumulation of
provisions for the eternal abode.

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) with all those serious
efforts and endeavors for earning a living was the most ascetic person,
but simultaneously was the ruler over his people. In the darkness of
night he cried at the alter of the worship saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا دنيا، يا دنيا إليك عني، أبي تعرضت؟ أم إلى تشوقت؟ لا حان حينك؟
هيهات! غري غيري، لا حاجة لي فيك, قد طلقتك ثلاثا لا رجعة فيها! فعيشك
قصير وخطرك يسير وأملك حقير. آه من قلة الزاد وطول الطريق وبعد السفر
وعظم المورد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O world, O world ! Get away from me. Why do you present yourself to
me? Or are you eager for me? You may not get that opportunity to impress
me. Deceive some other person. I have no concern with you. I have
divorced you thrice, where after there is no restitution. Your life is
short, your importance is little, and your liking is humble. Alas! The
provision is little, the way is long, the journey is far, and the goal
is hard to reach.”*[^18]

Also he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إليك عني يا دنيا فحبلك على غاربك قد انسللتُ من مخالبك وأفلتُّ من
حبائلك واجتنبت الذهاب في مداحضك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Get away from me O world! Your rein is on your own shoulders as I have
released myself from your ditches, removed myself of your snares, and
avoided walking into your slippery places.”*[^19]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) while accompanying his
soldiers and marching towards the battle field showed a very old and
worn out shoe to Ibne Abbas and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال عبدالله بن عباس -- رضى الله عنه: - دخلت على امير المؤمنين عليه
السلام بذى قار وهو يخصف نعله فقال لى: ما قيمة هذا النعال؟ فقلت: لا
قيمة لها! فقال عليه السلام: والله لهى احب إلى من امرتكم, الا ان اقيم
خقا, او ادفع باطلا, ثم خرج فخطب الناس فقال:
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If I cannot establish a regime of justice and truth and if I cannot
eradicate tyranny and impiety, than the value of this Government and
Caliphate is less to me than the cost of this pair of shoes.”*[^20]

Such were and still are the God's most sincere servants; although, they
live in this very world but they look towards the higher horizons and
are the people who belong to Hereafter. Like other people they too are
engaged in making serious efforts and endeavors for earning a living and
sometimes even accept the highest social positions namely: commander,
governor and ruler. But they accept these responsibilities solely for
the sake of seeking God's Pleasure and fulfillment of their duties.

Within the lawful limits they utilize the God’s Bounties, but at the
same time have divorced this vicious world for three times and cleaned
their hearts from its allurements. They wage war in order to take hold
of the ruling power, but only for the sake of defense of truth and
implementation of social justice and not simply for the sake of enjoying
being a ruler.

5. The Worldly Beings
---------------------

But whoever could not identify the world -the way it is; become carried
away and amused with its adornments; considered it as the main goal of
the creation and after that there is no accountability and Hereafter;
became prisoner of wealth and property, wife and children, and position
and power; took hold of worldly life firm; forgot about the existence of
God and Hereafter; closed his eyes from spiritual values and made sole
aim of his life satisfying animal passions and taking the maximum
advantage from worldly pleasures, then such a person would be considered
belonging to the worldly people.

Even though he might be a poor, destitute, monastic person, and might
refrain from acceptance of positions involving social responsibilities.

God-Almighty said in Holy Qur’an.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْلَمُونَ ظَاهِرًا مِّنَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَهُمْ عَنِ
الْآخِرَةِ هُمْ غَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They know only some appearance of the life of this world, and are
needless of the Hereafter. (30: 7)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ اشْتَرَوُا الْحَيَاةَ الدُّنْيَا بِالْآخِرَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Such are those who buy the life of the world at the price of
Hereafter. (2: 86)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَرَضِيتُم بِالْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا مِنَ الْآخِرَةِ ۚ فَمَا مَتَاعُ
الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا فِي الْآخِرَةِ إِلَّا قَلِيلٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Take ye the pleasure in the life of the world rather in the
Hereafter ? The comfort of the life of the life of the world is but
little than in the Hereafter. (9: 38)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ لَا يَرْجُونَ لِقَاءَنَا وَرَضُوا بِالْحَيَاةِ
الدُّنْيَا وَاطْمَأَنُّوا بِهَا وَالَّذِينَ هُمْ عَنْ آيَاتِنَا
غَافِلُونَ أُولَٰئِكَ مَأْوَاهُمُ النَّارُ بِمَا كَانُوا يَكْسِبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! Those who expect not the meeting with Us, but desire the life of
this world and feel secure therein, and those who are neglectful of our
revelations, there home will be fire because of what they used to earn.
(10: 7-8)***

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبد الله عليه سلام قال: ابعد ما يكون العبد من الله اذاكم
الابطنه وفرجه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The worst condition for the relationship between man and God-Almighty
is the situation, when a person does not have any other aim, except
satisfying the hunger of his stomach, and taking care of his sexual
requirements.”*[^21]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على (ع): حرام على كل قلب مطوله بالدنيا ان يسكنه التقوى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In a heart infatuated with world, presence of piety is
forbidden.”*[^22]

Also he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: ولبئس المتجران ترى الدنيا لنفسك ثمنا ولمالك عند
الله عوضا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is the worst kind of trade, whereby one considers the world worthy
of his self; and purchases the world at the expanses of
Hereafter.”*[^23]

If, the world has been condemned, it is because of the reason of its
being a place of vanity and deceit which makes people its prisoners. It
manifests itself sweet and attractive keeping people amused with its
pleasure, thus, preventing them from God's remembrance and collection of
provisions for their journey towards eternal abode.

The world has been reproached, and this act has been so explicitly
publicized so that people become cautious not to be deceived by its
deceitful manners, and should not allow themselves to become infatuated
with its charms or becoming its prisoners forever. What has been
condemned -is the attachment to transient world; forgetting the real aim
of the creation; becoming totally negligent about the eternal life -and
not the God's Bounties.

6. The Worldly and Next Worlders
--------------------------------

Therefore, whoever works in this world for Hereafter is a man of Next
World, and the one who works for this world will join the worldly group.
The Commander of the Faithful Imam ' ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: الناس في الدنيا عاملان: عامل عمل في الدنيا
للدنيا، قد شغلته دنياه عن آخرته يخشى على من يخلفه الفقر ويأمنه على
نفسه فيفني عمره في منفعة غيره. وعامل عمل في الدنيا لما بعدها فجاءه
الذي له من الدنيا بغير عمل فأحرز الحظين معاً، وملك الدارين جميعاً.
فأصبح وجيهاً عندالله، لا يسأَل الله حاجة فيمنعه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There are two kinds of workers in the world. One is a person who works
in this world for this world and his work of this world keeps him
unmindful of the Next World. He is afraid of destitution for those he
will leave behind but feels himself safe about it. So, he spends his
life after the good of others.*

*The other is one who works in this world for what is to come Hereafter,
and he secures his share of this world without effort. Thus, he gets
both the benefits together and becomes the owner of both* *the houses
together. In this way, he is prestigious before God-Almighty. If he asks
him anything He does not deny him.”*[^24]

Also, he said :

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: الدنيا دار ممر لا دار مقر, والناس فيها رجلان: رجل
باغ فيها نفسه فوبـقها ورجل ابتاع نفسه فاعتقها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“This world is a place for transit, not a place to stay. The people
herein are of two categories. One is the man who sold away his self (to
his passions) and, thus, ruined it, and the other is the man who
purchased his self (by control against his passions) and freed
it.”*[^25]

The difference between worldly and Next Worlders does not consist in
their being rich or poor; occupied in worldly affairs or being without
job; being social or living a monastic life; holder of worldly positions
or not; being a business man, a religious scholar, preacher and writer;
consumer of worldly bounties or otherwise; rather, the real difference
consists of ones being attached to the life of this world or the next
one; paying attention towards God-Almighty or world; considering the
goal of life simply satisfying the animalistic passions or perusal of
superior goals of attaining self-perfection and nourishment of human
virtues.

Every thing, which keeps a man occupied in itself preventing him from
God is remembrance and perusal of affairs related to Hereafter is
considered as world. Although, it could be acquiring education,
teaching, writing, and being a preacher or Imam. Even living a monastic
life, being an ascetic, and being continuously engaged in worship, if is
done for the sake of other than God, will be considered as world.

Therefore, it becomes explicitly clear that all the worldly people do
not possess the same position; similar is the case with the Next
Worlders; some of the worldly people are completely attached to the
world and are totally negligent from God and Hereafter -such people are
called the servants of world or worldly. Opposite to that, there are
pure sincere servants of God-Almighty who are totally committed to Him
and Hereafter and do not have any other goal except seeking His
Pleasure.

Among these two opposite groups there exist various ranks and positions.
The degree of worldliness of each one depends to the extent of his being
attached to the world and is being away from God's Nearness in the same
proportion. On the opposite side, as much as one is busy in God’s
Remembrance and Hereafter, will be considered abandoner of the world in
the same proportion, or in other words it could be said, that being
worldly or being Next Worlder are two relative acts.

[^1]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon -111.

[^2]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon -45.

[^3]: The dryness of eyes is the result of hard-heartedness,
hard-heartedness is caused due to excessive sinning; excessive sins are
the result of consumption of food which is arranged through forbidden
and unlawful income; earning through forbidden and unlawful means is due
to forgetting death; forgetting death is due to lengthy desires; lengthy
desirers are caused because of attachment to world; and world's
attachment is the root of all evils [Tr].

[^4]: al-Kafi, vol. 5, p-78.

[^5]: al-Kafi, vol. 5, p-88.

[^6]: al-Kafi, vol. 5, p-88.

[^7]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-150.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 3, p-7.

[^9]: Nahjul Balagha, saying 33

[^10]: Nahjul Balagha, short saying 130.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 73, p-127.

[^12]: al-Kafi, vol. 5, p-72.

[^13]: Nahjul al Balagha, sermon-123.

[^14]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon-203.

[^15]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon-173.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 73, p-l06.

[^17]: Nahjul Balagha, letter no.27.

[^18]: Nahjul Balagha, saying 77.

[^19]: Nahjul Balagha, letter no.45.

[^20]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon-33.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 73, p-18.

[^22]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-383.

[^23]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon-32.

[^24]: Nahjul Balagha, saying 269.

[^25]: Nahjul Balagha, saying 133.


