Piety, the Most Important Factor for Purification
=================================================

In the Islamic School, piety has been assigned the most important
position and the pious believers are regarded as the most distinguished
and respectable persons in an Islamic Society. The phrase piety in the
Qur’anic verses and narrations, and especially in the glorious book of
Nahjul-Balagha (The Path of Eloquence) has been repeated quite
frequently. The Holy Qur’an considers piety as the sole criteria for
appraising the value and worth of individuals and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَكْرَمَكُمْ عِندَ اللَّهِ أَتْقَاكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! the noblest of you, in the sight of God-Almighty is the best in
conduct. (49: 13)***

The piety has been introduced as the best provisions for the Hereafter,
and greatest means for achieving salvation. the Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِلَّذِينَ أَحْسَنُوا مِنْهُمْ وَاتَّقَوْا أَجْرٌ عَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“For such of them as do right and word off (evil), there is great
reward (3: 172)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَنِ اتَّقَىٰ وَأَصْلَحَ فَلَا خَوْفٌ عَلَيْهِمْ وَلَا هُمْ
يَحْزَنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then whosoever refrainth from evil and amendeth -there shall no fear
come upon them neither shall they grieve. (7: 35)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَسَارِعُوا إِلَىٰ مَغْفِرَةٍ مِّن رَّبِّكُمْ وَجَنَّةٍ عَرْضُهَا
السَّمَاوَاتُ وَالْأَرْضُ أُعِدَّتْ لِلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And vie one with another for forgiveness from your Lord, and for a
Paradise as wide as are the Heavens and the earth, prepared for those
who ward off (evil). (3:133)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْمُتَّقِينَ فِي جَنَّاتٍ وَنَعِيمٍ فَاكِهِينَ بِمَا آتَاهُمْ
رَبُّهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! Those who kept their duty dwell in gardens and delight, happy
because of what their Lord hath given them. (52:17-18)***

Also, in the Nahjul Balagha and other books of traditions, piety has
been assigned the most distinguished position in all ethical matters,
and is the greatest means for achieving prosperity and salvation. The
Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: التقى رئيس الاخلاق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Piety acquires the most prominent position in all ethical
affairs.”*Nahjul Balagha, saying 41.

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: خصلة من لزمها اتعته الدنيا والاخرة
وربح الفوز بالجنة قيل وماهى يا رسول الله؟ قال: التقوى, من اراد ان يكون
اعزا الناس فليتق الله عز وجل ثم تلا: ومن يتق الله يجعل له مخرجا ويرزقه
من حيث لا يحتسب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is a characteristic that whoever acquires it will have the world
and Hereafter in his control. He was asked: 'Oh Prophet of God! What is
that characteristic?*

*“The Prophet (S) replied: 'Piety! Whoever desires to become the most
dearest person should become pious, and then he recited the following
verse:*

***And who so ever keepth his duty to God, He will appoint a way out for
him. And will provide for him from (a quarter) whence he hath no
expectation. (65:2-3)***[^1]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: واعلموا عبادالله أن المتقين ذهبوا بعاجل الدنيا و
آجل الآخرة، فشاركواأهل الدنيا في دنياهم،و لم يشاركهم أهل الدنيا في
آخرتهم. سكنواالدنيا بأفضل ما سكنت و أكلوها بأفضل ما أكلت، فحظوا
من‏الدنيا بما حظي به المترفون وأخذوا منها ما أخذه الجبابرةالمتكبرون.
ثم انقلبوا عنها بالزاد المبلغ و المتجر الرابح أصابوا لذة زهد الدنيا في
دنياهم،و تيقنوا أنهم جيران الله غدا في‏آخرتهم لا ترد لهم دعوة،و لا
ينقص لهم نصيب من لذة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Know, O' creatures of God, that the God-fearing have Shared the joys
of this transient world as well as the Next World, for they shared with
the people of this world in their worldly matters while their people did
not share with them in the matters of the Next World.*

*They lived in this world in the best manner of living and ate the
choicest food and consequently they enjoyed herein all that the people
with ease of life enjoyed, and secured from it what the haughty and the
vain secured.*

*Then, they departed from it after taking provision enough to take them
to the end of their journey and after doing a profitable transaction.
They tasted the pleasure of renouncing the world in this world, and they
firmly believed that on the coming day in their next life they would be
neighbors of God, where their call would not be repulsed nor would their
share of pleasure be small.”*[^2]

The commander of the faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: عليكم بتقوى الله فانها تجمع الخير ولا خير غيرها
ويدرك بها من الخير ما لا يدركك بغيرها من خير الدنيا والاخرة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Don't give up piety because it is the source of all benevolence and
goodness,. blessing except piety does not exist; and the blessing which
is achieved by means of piety can never be obtained without it,. be it
blessing of this world or the Hereafter.”*[^3]

Imam al-Sajjad:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال السجاد عليه السلام: شرف كل عمل بالتقوى وفاز من فاز من المتقين, قال
الله تبارك وتعلى ان للمتقين مفازا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The value and worth of each deed depend upon piety; only pious people
may achieve righteousness and prosperity. God-Almighty said: Verily
righteousness and prosperity belong to pious people.”*[^4]

In some of the traditions, piety has been introduced as the most
important factor for self-perfection and purification as well as the
most effective medicine for curing the psychic diseases. The Commander
of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: فان تقوى الله دوادا قلوبكم وصبر عمى افئدتكم وشفا
مرض اجسادكم وصلاح فساد صدوركم وطهور دنس انفسكم وجلا غشا ابصاركم. امن
فزع جاشكم وضيا سواد ظلمتكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Piety is the only cure for wickedness of your heart. It is the Divine
Light to expel darkness of your heart. It is a remedy for your ailing
mind. It is the only way of improvement for your corrupt soul. It
purifies your conscience. It brings back sight to the eyes blinded by
ignorance of truth.”*[^5]

1. Piety, Objective Behind the Divine Commands
----------------------------------------------

In Islam the piety has been introduced as a genuine moral virtue and the
real aim for explanation of (Divine) Commandments. Following are some of
the examples God-Almighty said in Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ اعْبُدُوا رَبَّكُمُ الَّذِي خَلَقَكُمْ
وَالَّذِينَ مِن قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Oh mankind! Worship your Lord, who hath created you and those before
you, so that you may ward off (evil). (2:21)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُتِبَ عَلَيْكُمُ الصِّيَامُ كَمَا كُتِبَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ مِن
قَبْلِكُمْ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَتَّقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you believe! Fasting is prescribed for you, even as it was
prescribed for those before you, that ye may ward off (evil). (2:183)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَن يَنَالَ اللَّهَ لُحُومُهَا وَلَا دِمَاؤُهَا وَلَٰكِن يَنَالُهُ
التَّقْوَىٰ مِنكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Their flesh and their blood reach not God, but the devotion from you
reacheth him. (22:37)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَتَزَوَّدُوا فَإِنَّ خَيْرَ الزَّادِ التَّقْوَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So make provisions for yourself (Hereafter ); for the best provision
is to ward off evil. (2:197)***

Therefore, it could be seen that the aim behind explaining some of these
commandments or worships is actually to encourage people to acquire
piety by performing those particular acts of worships. Piety in Islam
have been attached so much importance that it has been introduced as the
sole criteria for the acceptance of other deeds, so much so that the
deed without piety shall be worthless and will not be accepted:

The Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللَّهُ مِنَ الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God accepteth only from those who ward off evil. (5:27)***

The Holy Prophet (S) said to Abu Dharr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وعليه: يا اباذر! كن بالعمل بالتقوا اشد
اهتماما منك بالعمل, فانه لايقل عمل بالتقوا وكيف بكل ما يتقبل بقول الله
انما يتقبل الله من المتقين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Try your best to acquire piety, because, nothing accompanied by piety
shall be regarded smaller, and how come a thing accepted by
God-Almighty, could be regarded smaller? Because, the Holy Qur'an said:
God accepts only from pious ones.”*[^6]

Imam al Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: لا يغرنك بكائهم انما التقوى فى القلب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not let their crying deceive you, because, the piety exists only in
heart.”*[^7]

God-Almighty said in Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِن تَصْبِرُوا وَتَتَّقُوا فَإِنَّ ذَٰلِكَ مِنْ عَزْمِ الْأُمُورِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But if ye persevere and ward off (evil}, then that of the steadfast
heart of things. (3:186)***

Therefore, as could be seen that piety in Holy Qur’an and other Islamic
traditions has been mentioned as a genuine moral, virtue, best
provisions for the Hereafter, important medicine for curing the heart's
disease, and greatest means for attaining spiritual purification and
self-refinement.  
 In emphasizing its importance, it is sufficient-to say that it has been
mentioned as the real aim behind explanation of all Divine Commandments
and Regulations. Now let us discuss its meanings in details.

2. Definition of Piety
----------------------

Generally, piety is defined as a negative program i.e. refraining and
avoidance from sins and other transgressions. It is interpreted that
with being pious, participation in social affairs is very difficult
rather impossible. Because, naturally, human-self is inclined towards
sinning and in case of acceptance of social responsibilities, one will
be forced to indulge into sins. Therefore, either one should acquire
piety or must refrain from acceptance of social responsibility.

Or, one must accept social responsibilities and should renounce the
piety, because, they are not compatible with each other and their
combination is not possible. The inevitable result of such thinking is
that –the more one lives an isolated and monastic live the better he
will be prepared to acquire piety.

But piety in some Qur’anic verses, traditions, and in the Nahjul Balagha
has been defined as a positive quality and not a negative virtue. Piety,
not only means renunciation of sins, rather it consists of possessing an
internal energy and power of self-restraint, which are achieved because
of undertaking continuous rigorous self-discipline, whereby self
acquires a super strength, which makes him obedient to God's
Commandments.

The self acquires such strength that he shows resistance and
steadfastness against unlawful whims and passions. Also, the meanings of
piety in the dictionary includes the similar aspect.

The phrase piety (*taqwa*) is derived from the Persian word (*waqaya*),
which means protection and defense. Piety means self-restraint and
self-control which is a positive quality bestowing an immunity upon the
pious, and not a negative act or program. It means commitment of a human
being to obey the religious commandments.

Every act of abstaining from sinning is not called as piety but the
power of self-restraint and self-control responsible behind this
abstaining is called piety; which has been described as the best
provisions of journey for the Hereafter, and naturally making provisions
for a journey is a positive act and not a negative one. Here, it would
be appropriate to quote few narrations from the Commander of the
Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.), in this matter, as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على (ع): اوصيكم عبادالله بتقوى الله فانها الزمام والقوام فتمسكوا
بوثائقها واعتصموا بحقائقها تؤول بكم الى اكنان الدعة واوطان السعة
ومعاقل الحرز ومنازل العز.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O creatures of the Lord! I advise you to be afraid of Him. I advise
you to adopt piety, because, piety is the safest way to salvation and
the best support for religion. Keep yourself attached to it and never
forsake it. It shall lead you to places of safety, to positions of honor
and pursuits bringing you peace and contentment.”*[^8]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: فان التقوا فى اليوم الحرز والجنة وفى وغد الطريق
الى الجنة مسلكها واضح وسالكها رابح ومستودعها حافظ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Piety will act as your shield and defense and in life and Hereafter as
your guide to Heaven. Its ways are clear and simple. Those of you who
espouse it will be benefited by it. And the one who has imposed it upon
you will guard it and will guard you.”*[^9]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: اعلموا عبادالله ان التقوى دار حصن عزيز
والفجور دار حصن ذليل لا يمنع اهله ولايحرز من لجا اليه الا وبالتقوى
تقطع حمة الخطايا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Know O Creatures of God! That piety is strongly forfeited and a
respectable Heaven, and sinful and vicious life is such a undependable
refuge that it can neither protect nor guard those who take shelter
there. Remember that fear of God can protect one against the evils of
sins.”*[^10]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: فان تقوى الله حمت اوليا الله محارمه والزمت قلوبهم
مخافته حيت اسهرت لياليهم واضمات هو اجرهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh people! Piety prevents good people from indulging in sins and
vices; it makes them God fearing, it persuades them to spend their
nights in His Worship, and to pass their days in fasting.”*[^11]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: ان التقوى عصمة لك فى حياتك وزلفى بعد
مماتك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The same piety is shelter for you in this world, and will be a source
of prosperity and salvation in the Hereafter.”*[^12]

As could be seen that the piety in the above mentioned narrations has
been introduced as a positive virtue, a powerful force introducing
restrain and immunity and an important preventing factor. It should be
compared to a bridle used for training a mulish horse for riding or
restraining and controlling the whims and passions of a rebellious-self.

It is like a formidable fortress and firm fortification which protect a
human being from the devastating attacks of internal enemies i.e. the
unlawful selfish whims and passions and Satanic whispers. It is like a
shield [^13] which protects a struggler in the battle-field from the
piercing of poisonous arrows and other Satanic devastating blows.

Piety frees a person from the imprisonment of whims and passions and
cuts off the chains of greed, prejudice, lust, and wrath wrapped around
his neck. Piety is not a limitation, but on the contrary it bestows the
mastership and being in control of one's own-self. It bestows upon a
human being prestige, honor, nobility, power, dignity, and
steadfastness.

It protects the heart from Satanic assaults, thus, making it readied for
the descent of God's angels, illuminating him with Divine-Light and
bestowing upon him peace and tranquility. Piety for human being is like
his home and clothing which protects him from natural calamities, cold
and hot temperatures. God-Almighty, in Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلِبَاسُ التَّقْوَىٰ ذَٰلِكَ خَيْرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But the best raiment is the raiment of righteousness. (7:26)***

Therefore, piety is a virtue, excellence, provision for the Hereafter,
and is not a negative quality .Of course, in the Holy Qur’an and in
traditions piety has also been used in places of fear and avoidance of
sins but these are the requirements of piety -and not piety itself.

3. Piety and Seclusion
----------------------

Therefore, monasticism, and declining acceptance of social
responsibilities not only cannot be considered as manifestations of
piety, but on the contrary in some cases they are contradictory with
righteousness. Islam does not believe in seclusion and monasticism, and
in order to refrain from sins, it does not recommend its followers to
decline acceptance of social responsibilities and living a secluded
life, rather emphasizes them to accept social obligations, while at the
same time by means of piety should practice self-restraint and
self-control for avoiding sins and deviations.

Islam does not say: don't accept lawful positions of power rather says:
do accept them but for the sake of God's Pleasure, serve the people, and
don't be a slave of rank and position. Don't allow your position and
authority as a mean of accomplishing your sole aim of satisfying selfish
whims and passions and don't deviate from the straight path.

Islam does not say: in order to acquire piety close your business
activities and don't make efforts for earning a living, instead it says:
Don't be a slave and prisoner of world. Islam does not say: quite this
world and live a monastic life to worship God-Almighty is seclusion,
rather it says:

Do live in this world and do your best for its development and progress
but don't become worldly or becoming infatuated with its
charms -instead, utilize it for attaining higher exalted spiritual
stations, and ascension towards God's Nearness. This is what piety is
supposed to be in Islamic school, which has been described as one of the
most exalted human virtue or characteristic.

4. Piety and Insight
--------------------

It may be interpreted from the Qur’anic verses and traditions that piety
bestows upon and human being a sense of profound insight and
intelligence enabling him to diagnose, and to follow up his genuine
interests of this world and Hereafter. Following is an example:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِن تَتَّقُوا اللَّهَ يَجْعَل لَّكُمْ
فُرْقَانًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Oh ye who believe! If you keep your duty to God, He will give you
discrimination (between right and wrong). (8:29)***

That is, God-Almighty open his esoteric eyes bestowing upon him a
special insight to enable him to diagnose his prosperity, adversity,
benefits and losses. In other verse God-Almighty said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ ۖ وَيُعَلِّمُكُمُ اللَّهُ ۗ وَاللَّهُ بِكُلِّ
شَيْءٍ عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Observe your duty to God. God is teaching you and God is knower of
all things. (2:282)***

Although, the Holy Qur’an has been descended from the Heavenly-Kingdom
for the common people but especially the pious people receive guidance
and advice. It is in this background that the Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَٰذَا بَيَانٌ لِّلنَّاسِ وَهُدًى وَمَوْعِظَةٌ لِّلْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“This is a declaration for mankind, a guidance and an admonition unto
those who ward off evil. (3:138)***

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) quoted a tradition from his father:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبـدالله عليه السلام قال: كان ابى يقول: ما من شيئ افسد للقلب من
الخطيئة ان القلب ليوقع الخطيئة فما تزال به حتى تغلب عليه فيصير اسفله
اعلاه واعلاه اسفله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“For heart's corruption there is nothing more damaging than sinning, in
which case the hearts struggles and offers resistance against sins until
it becomes completely subdued by sins becoming an overturned
heart.”*[^14]

Therefore, it could be inferred from such verses and traditions that
piety is responsible for enhancement of reason with insight and
brightness as well as strengthening his power of comprehension. The
faculty of reason, a precious Celestial Jewel, has been bestowed to
enable him to correctly identify and diagnose his gains and losses,
prosperity and adversely, welfare and wickedness, and last but not the
least do's and don'ts. The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.)
has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: العقل رسول الحق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The reason within human body is like the messenger of God.”*[^15]

Such an important mission has been assigned to reason, and it is quite
competent to discharge this responsibility, only if, self's whims and
passions accept its rule, ,do not oppose, sabotage, and create problems
in its administration. Unfortunately, passions are bitter enemy of
reason and do not allow it to perform his function in an excellent
manner. The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: الهوى عدو العقل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whims and passions of self are the enemies of reason”*[^16]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: من لم يملك شهوته لم يملك عقله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever does not have control over his passions will not be the master
of his reason.*[^17]*”*

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: العجب يقسد العقل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Self-conceit and egotism corrupts reason.”*[^18]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: اللجوج لا راى له.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“An obstinate person does not have correct opinion.”*[^19]

It is true that the ruling authority over human body has been assigned
to reason (*Aql*) which is quite competent for this job, but self's
whims and passions are the biggest obstacles in its path. If, one of the
passions or all of them became out of control and revolted against it,
than how could the reason will succeed in discharging its function well?
Such a person does possess reason but lacks the sense of comprehension
and correct diagnosis.

He does possess a lamp but the whims, passions, lusts, and wrath like a
dark thick cloud have covered it completely, thus, not making him
appreciate his welfare and control his rebellious passions.

When could an egotistic person find an opportunity to identity his
faults and take the corrective action? Likewise, how could he refrain
himself from moral indecencies such as wrath, jealousy, greed, revenge,
stubbornness, ambitions for wealth, passion, and power?

If one of them or more succeed in taking over self's control, they will
prevent the reason to truly apprehend the realities, and in case it
wants to take action against their wishes, they will oppose it by
creating troubles and mobilizing their partisans for rebellion, making
environment unfavorable for the rule of reason, and ultimately making it
helpless to discharge its obligations properly.

A person who is a prisoner of his whims and passions could not be
benefited by lectures and preaching, rather it produces opposite
reaction, thus, increasing his hard-heartedness. Therefore, piety may be
considered as one of the best and most effective factor of insight,
enlightenment, and conscientiousness. In the end it must be clarified
that when it said that piety is responsible in enhancing the sense of
insight -it means the practical aspects of reason, ability to diagnose
the duties, or in other words recognize the do's and don'ts.

It has nothing to do as for as the theoretical aspects of wisdom are
concerned; it is not so that an impious person would not be able to
understand mathematical and scientific problems, however piety to a
certain extent might be effective in enhancing the power of intelligence
and comprehension in these matters.

5. Piety and Victory over the Difficulties
------------------------------------------

One of the most important effects of piety is the ability to dominate
over the difficulties of day to day life. God-Almighty said in Holy
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَن يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَل لَّهُ مَخْرَجًا وَيَرْزُقْهُ مِنْ حَيْثُ
لَا يَحْتَسِبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whosoever keepeth his duty to God, He will appoint a way out for
him, and will provide for him from (a quarter) whence he hath no
expectation. (65:2-3)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُسْرًا وَمَن يَتَّقِ اللَّهَ يَجْعَل لَّهُ مِنْ أَمْرِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whosoever keepeth his duty to God, He maketh his course easy for
him. (65:4)***

The Commander of the Faithful and Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: فمن اخذ بالتقوى عزبت عنه الشدائد بعد
دنوها واحلولت له الامور بعد مرارتها وانفرجت عنه الامواج بعد تراكمها
واسهلت له الصعاب بعد انصابها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do you know how piety. helps those who make It the basic : principles
of their lives ? It wards off the calamities which have crowded round
them and laid siege of them. It converts bitter* *disappointments of
their affairs into pleasant achievements. It acts as a break water
against the waves of disasters and destruction which want to dash
against lives and ambitions.”*[^20]

Therefore, it can be inferred from the above mentioned verses and
traditions that piety helps a person in solving his problems and
overpowering the obstacles in his day to day life. Now let us see what
influence does piety exert in these matters? The life's hardships can be
divided into two categories:

The problems of first category consist of physical- bodily defects,
incurable fatal diseases, unpredictable natural disasters, and similar
other calamities whose solution and prevention is out of our control.
The problems of second category consist of psychological, physical,
family, and social problems, where our intentions and decisions could be
influential in their solution and even prevention.

Of course, piety could play an important role in offering solutions for
each one of the above mentioned problems. Although, in the farmer case,
even though prevention may be difficult, and total avoidance might be
practically impossible but still the technique of how to encounter these
problems is in our control.

A self-restraint and pious person who completely dominates over his
passions regards this world and its problems as transient and short
lived, while considers the Hereafter as real and permanent abode; rests
his trusts upon the Supreme and Absolute Power of God-Almighty; treats
the hardships and difficulties of this world as insignificant and
temporary; does not become desperate and anxious, rather offers his
absolute surrender to the Divine Will.

A pious person is familiar as well as confident about God-Almighty and
Hereafter; calamities and hardships of day-to-day life do not disturb
his state of ease and tranquility, because, hardships, calamities, and
tragedies in essence are not painful, rather it is the anxiety and
intolerance of self which makes a person uncomfortable, and piety could
be helpful for him in such cases.

But most of the severe problems and catastrophes of the second category
which make the human life bitter like burning Hell are the result of
moral indecencies, self-whims and passions, and domination of Satanic
desires.

In majority of the cases the family problems are created because of
failure on the part of husband, wife, or both of them, in controlling
passions, thus, burning and frightening in the fire, which was ignited
by their own hands. Similar is the case with other problems.

The moral vices such as jealously, revengefulness, stubbornness,
prejudice, egotism, greed, lust, wrath, extravagance, arrogance, and
other similar rascalities are responsible for causing problems and
hardships for human beings, creating pains and anxiety, and turning the
sweetness of life into bitterness. Such a person is a prisoner of his
carnal desires and passions to the extent that he is even helpless to
identify his disease and its treatment.

The best and most effective thing which could prevent such catastrophies
is the same piety, self-restraint or self-control. In the life of a
pious such painful horrible catastrophies do not exist at all; with
tranquility of heart and enlightenment, he lives a peaceful life as well
manages to collect sufficient provisions for Hereafter. The love of
world is the roots of all evils but a pious person does not become
infatuated with its allurements and charms. The Commander of the
Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: اياك وحب الدنيا فانها اصل كل خطيئة ومعدن كل بلية.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Be careful of world’s love because, it is the roots of all
sins.”*[^21]

6. Piety and Freedom
--------------------

It is quite possible that someone may infer that piety deprives freedom
and creates limitations making life difficult and unpleasant, but Islam
rejects this belief and on the contrary consider piety as the source of
freedom, comfort, dignity exaltedness, and regards an impious person
simply as a prisoner or slave. The Commander of the Faithful Imam ' ‘Ali
(a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: فان تقوى الله مفتاح سداد وذخيرة معاد وعتق من كل
ملكة وتجاة من لك هلكة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Verily piety is a key to the doors of righteousness and virtue. It is
a provision for the Next World. It is a source of freedom from slavery
of evil desires and a wall of protection from every ill-luck* *and
misfortune. It is a refuge for those who try to run away from vice and
wickedness and through it a person can achieve his aim.”*[^22]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: لا شرف اعلى من الاسلام ولا عزا عز من التقوى ولا
معقل احسن من الورع.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is no distinction higher than Islam, no honor more honorable
than fear of God'; no asylum better than self-restraint.”*[^23]

In the above traditions piety has been introduced as the key for
solution of problems, bestower of freedom and dignity, rescuer from the
waves of disasters and destruction, and as the most formidable shelter
for human beings.

Therefore, piety does not deprive and create limitations, rather it
revives human personality and free a human being from the imprisonment
of carnal desires, wraths, revengefulness, selfishness, self-conceit,
prejudices, stubbornness, greed, mammonism, egotism, selfishness,
ambitiousness, gluttony, and desire for fame and publicity.

It strengthens wisdom and human personality in order to dominate over
the passions and rebellious self, adjust them in accordance to genuine
requirements, provide leadership to guide them properly preventing
extravagance and dissipation of forces.

The Holy Qur’an considers the persons who become prisoners and slaves of
their desires, endeavored to satisfy their passions, did not recognize
any limits in order to satisfy their carnal desires as idolaters and
self-worshipers. The Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَرَأَيْتَ مَنِ اتَّخَذَ إِلَٰهَهُ هَوَاهُ وَأَضَلَّهُ اللَّهُ
عَلَىٰ عِلْمٍ وَخَتَمَ عَلَىٰ سَمْعِهِ وَقَلْبِهِ وَجَعَلَ عَلَىٰ
بَصَرِهِ غِشَاوَةً فَمَن يَهْدِيهِ مِن بَعْدِ اللَّهِ ۚ أَفَلَا
تَذَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Hast thou seen him who maketh his desire his god, and God sendeth
him astray purposely, and sealeth up his hearing and his heart, and
setteth on his sight a covering ? Then who will lead him after God (hath
condemned him)? Will you rest them heed ?” (45:23)***

Yes! The person who has surrendered himself absolutely to his whims and
passions, in order to accomplish his passionate desires strives
frantically and does not hesitate to indulge into most degrading acts,
does not pay attention to the voice of wisdom and guidance of prophets,
such a person is indeed is a slave and prisoner of his self.

His passions have completely dominated and imprisoned his human
personality and the precious jewel of wisdom, and in order to rescue
them there is no other alternative except piety. Therefore, piety does
not create limitations rather blesses human beings with freedom.

7. Piety and Treatment of Diseases
----------------------------------

It was earlier prove that moral abjectnesses such as: jealousy, hatred,
revenge, fault-finding, wrath, prejudice, greed, egotism, arrogance,
fear , indecisiveness, temptation, and similar other things are
psychological diseases. The hearts of such people are indeed sick. Also,
it has been confirmed that between the man and his self not only there
exists a firm connection rather they are united, and because of this
connection and communication they exert an influence upon each and
other.

Physical sicknesses make the self-disturbed and uncomfortable, and
similarly opposite to that psychological diseases effect human body and
nerves. In majority of cases the psychological diseases and nervous
disorders are the result of moral abjectness. Even some of the bodily
diseases like ulcer and swelling of intestine, indigestion, acidity,
headache, and stomachache are more likely the result of moral abjectness
such as; jealously, hatred, greed, egotism, and ambitiousness.

It is has been proved beyond doubt that excessive indulgence into sexual
activities results in dangerous fatal bodily diseases such as AIDS etc.
Therefore, as was mentioned earlier the sole curing medicine for such
psychological diseases is piety. It could be said that piety plays the
most effective role as far as the treatment of psychological and
physical diseases, hygiene, and fitness of human beings are concerned.
The Commander of the Faithful Imam ' ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فان تقوى الله دوا قلوبكم, وبصر عمى أفئدتكم, وشفا مرض اجسادكم, وصلاح
فساد صدوركم, وطهور دنس انفسكم, وجلا عشا بصاركم, وامن فزع جاشكم وضيا
سواد ظلمتكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Certainly piety is the medicine /or your hearts, sight for the
blindness of your spirits, the cure /or the ailments o/your bodies, the
rectifier o/ the evils of your breasts, the purifier of the pollution of
your minds, the light of the darkness of your eyes, the consolidation
for the fear of your heart, and the brightness for the gloom of your
ignorance.”*[^24]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-285.

[^2]: Nahjul Balagha, letter no.27.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-285.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p-386.

[^5]: Nahjul Balagha, letter no.198.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p-89.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-286

[^8]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 195.

[^9]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 191.

[^10]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 157.

[^11]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 114.

[^12]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-222.

[^13]: An impatient (or impious) person could be compared to a soldier
in the battle-field, who is fighting virtually naked without armor. Such
an ill-equipped soldier is most likely to be killed and disappear from
the scene during the very first encounter, with the same analogy a
patient (pious) person could be compared to a soldier, who is clad in a
coat of mail from head to toe and is fully equipped with all the
required armaments. Obviously, to defeat such a well equipped soldier by
the enemy is relatively a difficult task. Discourse of Patience,
Ayatullah Khamenei, p-l02 [Tr].

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-54.

[^15]: Ghirar al-Hukm, vol. 1, p-13.

[^16]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-13.

[^17]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-702.

[^18]: Ghirar al-Hukm p-26.

[^19]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-31.

[^20]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 198.

[^21]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-150.

[^22]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 230.

[^23]: Nahjul Balagha, saying 371.

[^24]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 198.


