The Characteristics of Pious (Sermon of Hammam)
===============================================

In order to appreciate the attributes of piety and to understand its
profundities in detail, let us quote here the famous sermon of Hammam
from the Nahjul-Balagha explaining the qualities of pious and
God-fearing persons. In this sermon the Commander of the Faithful Imam
‘Ali (a.s.) has explained what piety really means and what sort of human
beings pious people are, describing the graphic details of their ways of
living, thinking, praying, and dealing with other men.

Hammam was one of the companions of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.), a very pious and
God fearing man. He once asked Imam to explain at length the qualities
of pious person. He wanted the explanation to be so graphic and so vivid
that he could get the picture of a pious man in his mind's eyes. Imam
knew that Hammam had a very tender heart and was disinclined to explain
piety in the way that Hammam had requested and evading the subject he
replied.

“*Hammam! Fear God and do good deeds. Remember that God is always a
companion of pious and good people!* “ But Hammam was not satisfied with
this reply and wanted to say something more. He pressed so much and
others joined him and seconded his request that Imam reluctantly
delivered the following sermon. After praising the Lord and praying Him
to bless the Holy Prophet (a.s.) Imam thus, continued the sermon as
follows:

*“When God created mankind He was not in need of their obedience and
prayers, neither was He nervous of their disobedience. Because,
disobedience or insubordination of men cannot harm Him,* *similar
obedience of obedient people cannot do Him any good. He is beyond the
reach of harm and benefit.*

*After creating man He decided for him the variety of food which his
body could absorb and assimilate, and the places which were congenial
for him to live and to propagate. Among these human beings excellent are
those who are pious and who fear God.”*

“They possess pre-eminence and excellence because they always speak
truthfully, rightly and to the point, their way of living is based upon
moderation, and their mode of dealing with other men is founded on their
good will, fellow feeling and courtesy towards them. They deny
themselves the things prohibited by God. They concentrate their minds
upon knowledge of things which will bring them eternal bliss.

They bear hardships and sufferings as happily as they enjoy comforts and
pleasures. If God had not fixed the span of life for each one of them,
their souls in desire of attaining His Heaven and out of fear of falling
into His displeasure, would not have stayed in their bodies for long.”

“They have visualized mentally the glory of God in such a way that
beyond him nothing in this world alarms, frightens or awes them.
Everything other than His might appears to them as insignificant and
humble. They believe in the Heaven and its blessings like a person who
has been there and has actually seen everything of the Heaven with his
own eyes.

Similarly, their faith in the Hell and its torments is as strong as that
of a person who had passed through its sufferings. They feel that the
tortures of the Hell are around them and very near to them.”

“The ways of worldly people make them sorry. They harm nobody. They do
not indulge in excessive eating and pleasure seeking. Their wants are
limited. Their wishes are few. They have accepted patiently sufferings
and adversities in this mortal and transitory life for the sake of
eternal bliss which by the grace of God proved for them a very
profitable transaction.

The vicious world desired their fellowship but they turned their faces
away from it. It wanted to snare them, but they willingly accepted every
trouble and discomfort to free themselves from its clutches.”

“Their nights they spend in carefully studying the Qur’an, because, of
their weaknesses and short-comings, and try to find ways from this Holy
book for improvements of their minds. In the study of the Qur’an when
they came across a passage describing the Heaven they feel highly
attracted towards it and develop such a keen desire to reach it; that
the Heaven with all its blessings is visualized by their minds, while a
passage about the Hell frightens them and makes them feel as if they are
seeing and hearing the raging fire and the groans and lamentations of
those who are suffering the tortures of the Hell.”

“Nights they spend in praying before the Lord and requesting and
beseeching Him to deliver them from the Hell. Days find them occupied
with such works that clearly indicate their wisdom, depth of knowledge,
virtuousness, and piety. Constant fasting, simple diet: avoidance of
every aspect of luxury and regular hard work make them look lean and
haggard, but they possess very sound and robust health.

When people hear them discussing various problems of life they often
take them to be whimsical fanatic or even half-witted. But it is not so,
they are not satisfied with the quality and quantity of the work done by
them in the cause of religion and humanity .The more they work the less
they feel satisfied. Having set up a very high standard of efficiency
for their work they fell nervous that indolence may not make it
impossible for them to attain those heights.”

“If anyone of them is praised for piety, virtuousness and the good deeds
done by him, he does not like to be so complimented; he is afraid that
such praise may not allure him towards vanity, self flattery, and self
glorification. He says, I know my mind and my work more than others, and
God knows much more than me.

O Lord! Please do not hold me responsible for what they have said about
me. You know very well that I did not instigate them for such praises.
Please Lord! Grant me excellence far greater than what they complimented
me for. And Lord! Please forgive those of my sins short-comings which
they do not know.”

“You will find every pious person possessing the following attributes.
He is resolute though tender-hearted and kind. He is unwavering in his
convictions and beliefs. He is thirsty for knowledge. He forgives those
who harmed him, fully knowing that they have wronged him. Even when
owning wealth his ways of life are based upon moderation. His prayers
are models of humility and submissiveness to God. Even when starving he
will maintain his self-respect. He will bear sufferings patiently.”

“He will resort only to honest means of living. Leading others towards
truth and justice, will give him pleasure. He disdains avarice and
greed. Though he does good deeds all the time, yet he feels nervous of
his short-comings. Every night, he thanks God for having passed one more
day under His Grace and Mercy.

Every morning finds him starting the day with the prayers of the Lord.
Of nights he is cautious that he may not carelessly waste those hours in
comfort and ease. He starts his days happy with the thought the Lord has
given him another day to do his duty.”

“If his mind wishes for something unholy and impious he refuses to obey
its dictates. He desires to achieve eternal bliss. Worldly pleasures do
not interest him. His wisdom is mixed with patience. His deeds
reciprocate his words (he does what he says). Inordinate desires do not
trouble him. He has few defects in him. He is courteous to others.

He possesses a contended mind. He eats little, he does not harm anybody.
He is easy to be pleased. He is strong in his faith. His passions are
dead. His temper is controlled.”

“People expect good out of him and consider themselves immune from his
harm. Even if he is found among godless people his name will be written
in the list of Godly persons. If he is in company of those who always
remember God, naturally his name will not be included amongst those who
forget Him. He forgives those who harm him. He helps those who have
forsaken him and have refused to help him.

He is kind to those who have been cruel to him. He does good to those
who do evil to him. He never indulges in loose talks. He has no vice in
him, and his good qualities are outstanding, noticeable, and prominent,
when facing dangers and disasters he is calm and undisturbed. In
sufferings and calamities he is patient and hopeful. In prosperity he is
thankful to God. He would not harm his worst enemy. He will never commit
a sin even for the sake of his best friend.”

“Before anybody has to bear testimony to his fault he accepts and owns
it. He never misappropriates anything entrusted to him. He never forgets
what he has been told. He does not slander anybody. He does not harm his
neighbors.

When misfortunes befall any person he does not blame him, neither is he
happy at the losses of others. He neither goes astray from the right
path nor follows a wrong one. His silence does not indicate,. his
moroseness nor his laughters are loud and boisterous.

He bears persecution patiently and God punishes his oppressor. He is
hard to himself and very lenient to others. He bears hardships in this
life to attain eternal comfort and peace. He never wrongs a fellow
being. If he avoids anybody it is to retain his piety and uprightness.
If he forms contract with anybody it is on account of his kindness and
clemency.

He does not avoid anybody because of his pride and vanity, and he does
not mix with others with ulterior motives of hypocrisy, pretense, and
vile.”[^1]

“The narrator says that Hammam was hearing the sermon very attentively
when Imam reached the above passage, Hammam fainted and died it during
the faint. Seeing this Imam said: “By God, I was hesitating to all this
to Hammam because of this very reason. Effective advises on minds ready
to receive them often bring almost similar result”.

[^1]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 193.


