Supervision - the Most Important Factor for Self-restraint
==========================================================

One of the most important factors for self building and self-refinement
is guarding, supervising, and paying attention towards the self. A wise
person who is concerned about his well-being and prosperity would not
remain ignorant about his own moral abjectness and psychological disease
rather he would be continuously guarding and supervising his self and
would be strictly controlling his habits, etiquettes, actions, deeds,
and even thoughts. We would discuss this matter in details as follows:

1. Recordings of Deeds
----------------------

The Qur’anic verses and traditions from the Holy Prophet (S) and his
Ahlul Bayt (a.s.) indicate that all actions, deeds, sayings, even
breathings, intentions, and thoughts of human beings are recorded in his
letter of deeds, will remain filed for the Day of Resurrection, and each
person will be judged on that Day strictly in accordance to his
performance. For example: God-Almighty said in Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَئِذٍ يَصْدُرُ النَّاسُ أَشْتَاتًا لِّيُرَوْا أَعْمَالَهُمْ فَمَن
يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْرًا يَرَهُ وَمَن يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ
ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“That day mankind will issue forth in scattered groups to be shown
their deeds. And whoso dath good an atom's weight will see it then. And
whoso doth ill on atoms weight will see it then. (99: 6-8)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَوُضِعَ الْكِتَابُ فَتَرَى الْمُجْرِمِينَ مُشْفِقِينَ مِمَّا فِيهِ
وَيَقُولُونَ يَا وَيْلَتَنَا مَالِ هَٰذَا الْكِتَابِ لَا يُغَادِرُ
صَغِيرَةً وَلَا كَبِيرَةً إِلَّا أَحْصَاهَا ۚ وَوَجَدُوا مَا عَمِلُوا
حَاضِرًا ۗ وَلَا يَظْلِمُ رَبُّكَ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And the book is placed, and thou seest the guilty fearful of that
which is therein and they say: What kind of a book is this that leaveth
not a small thing nor a great thing but hath counted it! And they find
all that they did confronting them, and Lord wrongeth no one. (18:
49)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُّحْضَرًا وَمَا
عَمِلَتْ مِن سُوءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَدًا
بَعِيدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the Day when every soul will find itself confronted with all that
hath done of good and all that it hath done of evil (every soul) will
long that there might be a mighty space of distance between it and that
evil. (3:30)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَّا يَلْفِظُ مِن قَوْلٍ إِلَّا لَدَيْهِ رَقِيبٌ عَتِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He uttereth no word but there is with him on observer ready.
(50:18)***

Therefore, if we believe that all our movements, actions, deeds,
sayings, and even thoughts are being registered, recorded, and saved
then how could we remain naive about the consequences arising therein?

2. Accounting on the Judgment Day
---------------------------------

A lot of Qur’anic verses and traditions confirm that human beings will
be accounted for their deeds accurately on the Day of Resurrection. All
their deeds whether small a big shall be checked and even the most
insignificant action shall not be neglected. e.g. God-Almighty said in
the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَضَعُ الْمَوَازِينَ الْقِسْطَ لِيَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ فَلَا تُظْلَمُ
نَفْسٌ شَيْئًا ۖ وَإِن كَانَ مِثْقَالَ حَبَّةٍ مِّنْ خَرْدَلٍ
أَتَيْنَا بِهَا ۗ وَكَفَىٰ بِنَا حَاسِبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And we set a just balance for the Day of Resurrection so that no
soul is wronged in aught. Though it be of the weight of a grain of
mustard seed, We will bring it. And We suffice for reckoners. (21:
47)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنفُسِكُمْ أَوْ تُخْفُوهُ يُحَاسِبْكُم بِهِ اللَّهُۗ وَإِن تُبْدُوا
مَا فِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whether ye make known what is in your minds or hide it, God will
bring you to account for it. (2:284)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْوَزْنُ يَوْمَئِذٍ الْحَقُّ ۚ فَمَن ثَقُلَتْ مَوَازِينُهُ
فَأُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْمُفْلِحُونَ وَمَنْ خَفَّتْ مَوَازِينُهُ
فَأُولَٰئِكَ الَّذِينَ خَسِرُوا أَنفُسَهُم بِمَا كَانُوا بِآيَاتِنَا
يَظْلِمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The weighing on that day is the true (weighing). As for as those
whose scale is heavy, they are the successful. And as for as those whose
scale is light: Those are they who lose their souls because they
disbelieved Our revelations. (7: 8-9)***

The Holy Qur’an describes the Day of Resurrection as the Day of Auditing
and God-Almighty as the one who audits promptly. According to lots of
Qur’anic verses and traditions one of the most difficult stage, through
which we all have to pass over on the Day of Resurrection –is the stage
of auditing of deeds.

During our entire span of life we perform various deeds which are
forgotten by us after a while, but they are registered and recorded in
our letter of deeds by God-Almighty, in a manner that not even the
smallest or insignificant action is removed from the letter of deeds.

All of them are registered and recorded right here in this world and
will remain with the human being forever, although he might be ignorant
of them completely in this world, but after death when his esoteric eyes
will be opened, he will see them all intact written in a single file.
Then he will realize that all the actions, deeds, beliefs, and thoughts
written over there are indeed belong to him and henceforth shall never
be separated from him. God-Almighty said in Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَاءَتْ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّعَهَا سَائِقٌ وَشَهِيدٌ لَّقَدْ كُنتَ فِي
غَفْلَةٍ مِّنْ هَٰذَا فَكَشَفْنَا عَنكَ غِطَاءَكَ فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ
حَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And every soul cometh, along with it a driver and a witness, (and
unto the evil-doer it is said): Thou wast in heedlessness of this. Now
We have removed from thee thy covering, and piercing is thy sight this
day. (50: 21:22)***

The Holy Prophet (S) had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: لا تزول قدما عبد يوم القيامة حتى
يسال عن اربع: عن عمره فيما افناه, وشبابه فيما ابلاه, وعن ماله من اين
اكتسبه وفيما انفقه, وعن حبنا اهل البيت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“On the Day of Judgment, each servant of God will not be able to move
forward even a single step without being questioned about the following
:*

*How he spent his life ? How he spent his youth ? Through what means he
earned the money and how was it spent ? And about the friendship of us
(Ahlul Bayt).”*[^1]

In another narration the Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
في الخبر النبوي: أنه يفتح للعبد يوم القيامة على كل يوم من أيام عمره
أربعة وعشرون خزانة عدد ساعات الليل والنهار - فخزانة يجدها مملوءة نورا
وسرورا فيناله عند مشاهدتها من الفرح والسرور ما لو وزع على أهل النار
لادهشهم عن الاحساس بألم النار وهي الساعة التي أطاع فيها ربه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم يفتح له خزانة اخرى فيراها مظلمة منتنة مفزعة فيناله عند مشاهدتها من
الفزع والجزع ما لو قسم على أهل الجنة لنغص عليهم نعيمها ، وهي الساعة
التي عصى فيها ربه. ثم يفتح له خزانة اخرى فيراها فارغة ليس فيها ما يسره
ولا ما يسوؤه وهي الساعة التي نام فيها أو اشتغل فيها بشئ من مباحات
الدنيا فيناله من الغبن والاسف على فواتها حيث كان متمكنا من أن يملاها
حسنات ما لا يوصف ومن هذا قوله تعالى, ذلك يوم التغابن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One of the Day of Judgment when a servant of God is being readied for
accounting, for each day of his living in the world, twenty four
treasure boxes (each one representing an hour) are brought in front of
him. Then they open a treasure box which is full of light and joy,
whereby seeing it the servant of God becomes so happy that if his
happiness is distributed among all the dwellers of Hell, they will
forget the pain and torture of Hell's fire -this treasure box represent
the hour when he was busy in God's Worship.”*

*“After that another treasure box is opened which is frightening, dark
and full of odor, whereby upon seeing it he becomes so frightened and
sad that if his grief is distributed among the dwellers of Paradise, all
of the blessings of Paradise will become unpleasant for them -this
treasure box represents the hour when he was busy in sinning.”*

*“Then another treasure box is opened before him which is completely
empty and neither contains deeds producing joy nor deeds producing
sadness -this treasure box represents the period when he was either
sleeping or was busy performing allowable religious acts (Mubah) (which
may or may not have been performed).*

*But having seen this empty treasurer a servant of God feels sorry
because he could have utilized this hour for doing righteous and good
deeds. It is because of this reason that the Day of Judgment has been
named by God-Almighty as the Day of Regret.”*[^2]

On the Day of Judgment the accounts of our deeds will be audited swiftly
and most accurately determining the final destinies accordingly; all the
past deeds shall be scrutinized; human limbs and bodily members,
prophets, angels, and even earth will offer their testimonies; it will
be real tough scrutiny indeed, and will determine one's eternal
destination.

Because, of the anxiety of result the hearts palpitate and bodies
tremble in fear -a fear so horrible and frightening that mothers will
ignore the breast feeding of their babies and pregnant women will loose
their conception by miscarriages.

All are anxious and worried to learn about their ultimate consequences.
Is the result of their scrutiny would be God's pleasure, securing a
draft for freedom, being honorable among God's prophets and saints,
eternal living in Paradise in the company of God's most favorite and
descent servants? Or, would it be wrath of God, humiliation and disgrace
before other creatures and eternal living in the Hell?

Therefore, from the above narrations it could be concluded that scrutiny
of people's deed is not same and differs; for some of them it would be
extremely complicated and lengthy while for others it would be swift and
easy. It would be done at various stops several times and at each
station some of the questions would be asked. The most horrible and
difficult station is the stop for oppressors, where the question are
asked regarding trampling of human rights, oppressions and tyrannies.

Here the accounts must be settled completely and everybody should pay
his debt to the creditors. Unfortunately, over there, no one possesses
ready cash to pay for his debt and therefore, he has no choice except to
pay from the account of his righteous deeds. If, he had some in his
account, he may exchange them for clearing his debt. If, he does not
possess righteous deeds in his account then in that case, the creditor's
sins are transferred into the balance sheet of his deeds.

Any way, it is a horrible and tough day indeed, and may God helps all of
us. Of course, the length and toughness of scrutiny is not same for all
and differ in accordance to the magnitude of good and evil deeds, but
for the pious and God's descent servants it would be extremely swift and
easier. In replying to a question regarding the length of Day of
Judgment the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى عليه وآله: لما سئل عن طول ذالك اليوم فقال: والذى
نفسى بيده انه ليخفف على المؤمن حتى يكون اهون عليه من الصلوة المكتوبة
يصليها فى الدنيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“By God! For believers it would be so swift and easy -even easier than
recital of an obligatory prayer.”*[^3]

3. Self-scrutiny Before the Judgment Day
----------------------------------------

Someone who believes in Day of Judgment, scrutiny of deeds, rewards and
punishment, knows that all the deeds are registered and recorded, and
verdict would be issued either good and bad; than how could such a
person would remain naive about his deeds, actions, moral etiquettes,
and thoughts? Wouldn't he really care about what has been done by him
during the days, months, years, and entire span of his life? And what
provisions have been forwarded by him for the Hereafter?

One of the precondition of belief is that it demands from believers to
scrutinize their accounts of deeds in this same world, must ponder
profoundly about what they have done in the past, and what is being done
right now? Acting in a manner like a wise businessman, who cheeks his
accounts each day and each month, in order to determine his profits and
losses. The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: حاسبوا انفسكم قبل ان تحاسبوا ووازنها قبل ان
توازنوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Before being audited on the Judgment Day better self-scrutinize your
deeds in this same world.”*[^4]

Also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من حاسب نفسه ربح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever scrutinizes the account of his self in this world would earn
profit.”*[^5]

Imam al-Naqi (a.s.) [^6]said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابى الحسن الماضى عليه السلام قال: ليس منا من لم يحاسب نفسه فى كل
يوم فان عمل حسنا استزاد الله وان عمل سيئا استغفر الله منه وتاب اليه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever does not scrutinize his actions daily does not belong to us;
then if, he found that he has performed some righteous deeds, he should
request God-Almighty to increase His Grace, and in case if he has done
an evil act, he should seek pardon from God-Almighty by offering
repentance.”*[^7]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: من حاسب نفسه ربح ومن غفل عنه خسر ومن
خاف امن ومن اعتبر ابصر ومن ابصر فهم ومن فهم علم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Whoever scrutinize the account of his self will earn a profit and
whoever will be negligent will suffer a loss, whoever is fearful in this
world will be safe in the Hereafter, whoever will pay heed to counseling
will see the realities; whoever is able to see the realities would
understand; and whoever understands would become wise and
intelligent.”[^8]

The Holy Prophet (S) said to Abu Dharr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فى وصية النبى انه قال: يا ابا ذر! حاسب نفسك قبل ان تحاسب, فانه اهو
لحسابك غذا وزن نفسك قبل ان توزن وتجهز للعرض الاكبر يوم لا تخفى على
الله خافية (الى ان قال:) يا ابا ذر! لا يكون الرجل من المتقين حتى يحاسب
نفسه اشد من محاسبة الشريك شريكه فيعلم من اين مطعمه ومن اين مشربه ومن
اين ملبسه؟ امن حلال او حرام؟ يا ابا ذر! من لم يبال من اين اكتسب المال
لم يبال الله من اين ادخله النار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh Abu Dharr! Before they scrutinize your account of deeds on the
Judgment Day, do your own self-auditing in this world because today's
review would be lot more easier than tomorrow's auditing on the Judgment
Day, try to attain self-purification in this world instead of his being
cleaned on Judgment Day -The Day when the deeds will be presented to
God-Almighty and even the smallest deeds will not be hidden from him.
Then the Holy Prophet (S) continued:*

*“O Abu Dharr! One never acquires piety unless until he self-scrutinize
his own deeds -a scrutiny much more severe than the auditing of accounts
between two business associates. A man must ponder seriously as through
what means has he acquired his means of living ? Were it earned through
lawful means or through forbidden means ?*

*“O Abu Dharr! Whoever does not respect the Divine limitations for
earning a living, God-Almighty too would not have slight hesitation in
dispatching him inside the Hell's fire through either passage.”*[^9]

Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان على بن الحسين عليه السلام يقول: ابن آدم! إنك لا تزال بخير ما كان
لك واعظ من نفسك وما كانت المحاسبة من همك وما كان الخوف لك شعاراً
والحزن لك دثاراً ابن آدم إنك ميت ومبعوث وموقوف بين يدي الله عزوجل فأعد
جوابا.ً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O son of Adam! You will be continuously accompanied by goodness and
blessing so for as you possess a preacher in your heart, practice
self-scrutiny for your deeds and fear God-Almighty.”*

*“O son of Adam! verily you will die, will be raised on the
Resurrection-Day, and your deeds will be judged in accordance with
Divine-Justice. Therefore, get yourself readied for getting scrutinized
for your deeds on the Judgment Day.”*[^10]

A man is like an investor in this world, his limited capital –life
span -consists of these very hours, days, weeks, months, and years. This
most precious capital i.e. one's life span, either willingly or
unwillingly gets consumed and eventually one approaches death. The youth
turns into old age, strength gives up to weakness and sound health
changes into sick- ness.

If, against this spending of capital one has performed righteous deeds
and forwarded some provisions for Hereafter, then in that case he has
not suffered a loss, because he had secured for himself a happy and
prosperous future.

But if he wasted his precious capital consisting his life, youth,
strength and physical fitness, and against all this spending no
righteous deed was deposited for his Hereafter; instead, with moral
abjectness, and indulgence into sins and transgressions, made his heart
dark and contaminated, then he has inflicted upon himself -the most
severe damage and loss, which could never be compensated. God-Almighty
said in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْعَصْرِ إِنَّ الْإِنسَانَ لَفِي خُسْرٍ إِلَّا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا
وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ وَتَوَاصَوْا بِالْحَقِّ وَتَوَاصَوْا
بِالصَّبْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“By the declining day; lo! Man is a state of loss, save those who
believe and do good works, and exhort one another to truth, exhort one
another to endurance (103:1-3)***

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: ان العاقل من نظر فى يومه لغده وسعى فى فكاك نفسه
وعمل لما لا بد له ولا محيص عنه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A wise man is the one who is all anxious today about his
tomorrow -the Resurrection Day, must strive for achieving freedom of
self; Because, of the realities of death and Resurrection Day, he has no
choice except to perform righteous deeds.”***[^11]

Also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من حاسب نفسه وقف على عيوبه واحاط بذنوبه فاستقال
الذنوب واصلح العيوب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoever scrutinizes his deeds will discover his faults and sins.
Then, he will offer repentance for his sins and will strive for
correcting his faults “***[^12]

4. How to Scrutinize?
---------------------

Supervision and management of self is not an easy task and requires
determination, maturity, sincerity, efforts, endeavors, and specific
program. Will the imperious-self offer surrender so easily? Will he
present himself for cross-examination and verdict? Will he agree to pay
his dues so easily? The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من لم يس نفسه اضاعها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever has not programmed his self for performance of righteous deeds
has indeed wasted him.”*[^13]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من اغتر بنفسه سلمته إلى المعاطب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever is not careful of self's frauds and cheating will be destroyed
(by self)”*[^14]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من كان له من نفسه يقظة كان عليه من الله حفظة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever possesses self-awakening and self-enlightenment, God-Almighty
will assign Divine angels for his guidance and protection.”*[^15]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: املكوا انفسكم بدوام جهادها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Subdue your self through continuous struggle and resistance, and
firmly take over his control.”*[^16]

The self-accounting must be accomplished in three steps in order to
acquire this habit gradually:

### 4.1. Making Commitments (Mosharateh)

The self-accounting should be started as follows:

As the early hour of the day before starting daily routine activities
some time must be allocated for this purpose. For example, after
offering morning prayer one may sit alone in an isolated place and
should address to his self in the following manner:

Right now, I am alive but don't know how long it may last, may be for
next one hour or may be little bit more. The time of life already spent
has all been wasted, and the remaining time left might be counted as
capital still at my disposal. For each hour spent out of this remaining
life, I could arrange some provisions for the Hereafter. If right now
the Israel -the angel of death would have arrived for receiving my soul
I would have desired for living one more day or even one extra hour.

Oh helpless poor self! Just imagine that you are in such a condition and
your desire for this living a little longer has been granted and you
have been allowed to return to this world. Oh self! Be kind to me as
well as to yourself and don't waste these precious hours for indulgence
into nonsense amusements. Don't be negligent now, otherwise you will be
ashamed tomorrow on the Judgment Day -the Day when being regretful will
not be of any help.

Oh self! For each hour spent during this life God-Almighty has created a
treasure box in which good and evil deeds will be deposited, to be
opened on the Judgment Day. Oh self! Try to fill this treasure with
righteous deeds. Be careful not to fill this treasure with sins and
transgressions.

Likewise, all the parts of the body should be addressed individually to
comment themselves not to commit sins. For example, the tongue should be
asked that lying, backbiting, tell-bearing, fault finding, abusing,
babbling, insulting, self-praising, disputing, and false testimony are
moral abjectness and divinely forbidden, which destroy eternal life of
human beings.

Therefore, I will not allow it to indulge in these acts. Oh tongue! Be
kind to me and yourself and don't commit immoral acts because everything
said will be taped and deposited into the treasure box containing the
deeds and I will be accountable on the Day of Judgment.

In this manner the tongue should be required to commit itself not to
indulge into sinning. After that the righteous deeds which could be
performed by it should be reminded and their performance should be made
obligatory during each day. For example, it could be said to the tongue:
you may recite such and such invocation (*dhikr*), such and such
supplication, may fill up the treasure box of deeds with joy and
illumination and may receive a good result in the Hereafter.

Therefore, don't be negligent otherwise you will feel terribly sorry
later on. Similarly, all other parts of the body should be required to
commit themselves to perform only righteous deeds and to strictly guard
them against sins and transgressions.

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) narrated a tradition from his father as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الصادق عليه السلام قال: الليل إذا أقبل نادى مناد بصوت يسمعه الخلائق
إلا الثقلين يا ابن آدم اني خلق جديد ، إنّي على ما في شهيد فخذ مني فإني
لو طلعت الشمس لم أرجع إلى الدنيا ولم تزدد فيّ من حسنة ولم تستعتب في من
سيئة وكذلك يقول النهار إذا أدبر الليل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When night approaches it makes an announcement which is heard by all
the creation except human being and jins as follows:*

*Oh sons of Adams! I am a new creation and will testify about all the,
deeds performed during my tenure. Utilize my existence to the best of
your advantage, because, after the sun-rise you will never see me again.
After that you would not be able to increase your righteous deeds and
offer repentance for your sins and transgressions. After the night
departs each coming day repeats the same announcement.”*[^17]

It is quite possible that Satan and imperious-self may tell us: You
cannot live a life with such program. Is it possible to live a life with
such limitations and restrictions? How could you allocate a certain hour
for auditing program every day? With these whispers the Satan and
imperious-self want to deceive, thus, preventing us from taking the
important decision. We must offer resistance against these Satanic plots
and must neutralize them by telling them:

This program is absolutely feasible and does not have any contradiction
with life's daily routine activities, and since it is necessary for
attaining self-refinement and self-purification as well as for
accomplishing the eternal salvation, I must undertake this program. It
is not so difficult either, and once you have decided firmly it would
become easier. Even if it is a little bit difficult in the beginning,
would become easier gradually.

### 4.2. Supervision and Control (Moraqebat)

After passing through the stage of making commitments we enter into the
stage of contact execution. At this stage all the self's actions should
strictly be monitored all along the day to be sure that they are being
performed in accordance to commitments made earlier. A human being
should remain awake in all situations and should strictly guard his
actions.

He should remind himself continuously: that God-Almighty watches all our
actions, and must remember the commitments made earlier. Even, a slight
negligence might provide opportunity for Satan and imperious-self to
make their entry and, thus, disrupting the entire program.

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: إن الحازم من شغل نفسه بجهاد نفسه فأصلحها و حبسها
عن أهويتها و لذاتها فملكها و إن للعاقل بنفسه عن الدنيا و ما فيها و
أهلها شغلا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A wise man offers continuous resistance against the self, endeavors
for self’s correction, preventing him following passions and in this
manner makes him subdued. A wise man with absolute domination over the
self will dejected from the world and its allurements.”*[^18]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من كان له من نفسه زاجر كان عليه من الله حافظ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever possesses a guard to reprimand, with m his self;.
God-Almighty, will appoint for him Divine Protectors.”*[^19]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: الثقة بالنفس من اوثق فرص الشيطان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Being optimistic and confident about self provides the best
opportunities for Satan to deceive us.”*[^20]

A cautious and aware human being is continuously occupied in God is
Remembrance and sees him in His presence. He does not perform any task
hastily without profound thinking and appraising all the consequences.
If he commits a sin or transgression, immediately reminds himself about
God-Almighty and Judgment Day and refrains from its continuation.

Does not forget his earlier commitments and in this manner keeps the
self continuously subdued, preventing him from indulgence into evil and
obscene deeds. This program is one of the best means for attaining
self-refinement and purification.

In addition to that a cautious believer thinks continuously about
obligatory and recommended deeds, fulfillment of duties, righteous
deeds, and charity through out the day; try his best to offer daily
prayer on preferred time with humility, devotion, and presence of mind,
offering in a manner as though this would be the last prayer of his
life; keeps himself occupied with remembrance of God-Almighty in all
situations and involvement.

Does not spent his free time in nonsense amusements, instead utilize it
to the maximum advantages of affairs related to Hereafter; knows the
importance and preciousness of time and endeavors seriously for
utilization of every available opportunity for achieving
self-perfection; strives to perform recommended deeds (*Mustahabbat*) as
much as his capacity permits.

How good it is that a believer should try to become habitual of
performing at least some of the recommended deeds. Remembrance of
God-Almighty and recital of invocation (*dhikr*) is one such recommended
deed which could be done easily in all circumstances.

Also, it is important that a believer with sincerity and pure intention
of God's Nearness (*Qurbat*), should direct all his daily activities for
worship, spiritual migration and ascend towards God is Countenance.
Even, working, eating, drinking, sleeping, marrying, and all other
lawful desired acts through sincerity and pure intention could be made
as part of worshipping.

Work and business if done with the intention of earning a lawful genuine
living and serving the people would became an act of worship. Similarly,
eating, drinking and resting if are preliminaries for living and being a
devoted servant of God are considered as worship. That is the way God's
pure servant used to live and they still live in this manner.

### 4.3. Accounting of Deeds

The third stage is the accounting of deeds performed every day. It is
necessary that a person should fixed a certain hour to scrutinize his
deeds and the most suitable time would be the hour when he has finished
all his daily activities. At this time he should sit alone in a corner
and should think what he has done during this stay. He should begin from
the very first hour till the last hour of the day checking every minor
activity accurately.

If he finds that he has performed a righteous deeds and worship at that
time he should thank God-Almighty for bestowing his Divine grace and
should decide for its continuation. But if finds that he has committed a
sin or transgression he must show his wrath against the self addressing
him:

Oh you wretched self! Look what have you done? You destroyed my letter
of deed and made it totally dark. What will be your reply to
God-Almighty on the Day of Judgment? What are you going to do with the
painful punishment of Hell? God-Almighty bestowed upon you life, health,
and resources in order to enable you to collect provisions for
Hereafter, instead you blackened your letter of deeds with sins. Why
don't you consider the probability of death approaching you at this very
moment? In that case, what are you going to do? Oh shameless self!

How come you are not ashamed from God-Almighty? Oh you liar and wretched
hypocrite! You claim to be a believer in the existence of God-Almighty
and Hereafter then how come your actions reflect contradictions with
your belief?

Then, he should repent sincerely and should decide firmly never to
indulge into sins and transgressions as well as to compensate for his
past omissions. The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على (ع): من وبخ نفسه على العيوب ارتدعت من كثرة الذنوب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever would reprimand self for his faults and sins- would be able to
restrain himself from indulgence into sins.”*[^21]

If he realizes that the self is showing rebellious tendencies and is not
ready for repentance and abstinence from sinning, then he must take a
firm stand against the imperious-self through offering resistance. He
may threaten the self that serious consequences will arise in case he
continued to show disobedience.

For example, if the self has consumed the forbidden (*haram*) an
unlawful food, or has committed other sins then to punish him will
donate some money for charity for God's pleasure, will do fasting few
days, temporarily will refrain himself from eating delicious foods or
cold water, or other food which is self's favorite, or will stay out
side under the burning sun for a certain period.

Any way, one should not show weakness and negligence against the self or
otherwise he will take the upper hand eventually throwing a human being
into the darkest and deepest valleys of deviations and misfortune. But
if you acted strongly offering stiff resistance against him, he will
become subdued.

If he finds that at a particular hour he has neither performed any
righteous deed nor has committed any sin even in that case he should
show his anger and reprimand the self that how come this particular hour
which was the precious capital of the life has been wasted for nothing?
You could have performed righteous deeds in this period and could have
deposited it in the accounts of your deeds for the Hereafter. Oh you
wretched looser!

Why have you wasted this valuable precious opportunity? You will
certainly feel sorry for your this negligence on the Day of Judgment -a
Day when regret will not be of any use. In this manner, acting like a
strict business associate all the daily transactions of the self should
be scrutinized strictly. Of course, it would be better if the result of
this scrutiny could be recorded in a notebook.

Anyway, the matter of supervision and scrutiny for attaining
self-purification and refinement is an important, useful thing that is
absolutely necessary; whoever is serious, and who is serious and aspires
for his salvation and prosperity, should pay special attention to it.

Although, in the beginning it might appear as a difficult task but with
firm determination and perseverance it would become easy and
imperious-self would become subdued surrendering completely to your
supervision and domination. The Holy Prophet (S) once asked his
companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الا انبئكم باكيس الكيسين واحمق
الحمقا؟ قالوا: بلى يا رسول الله! قال: اكـيـس الكـيـسـيـن مـن حـاسـب
نـفـسـه ، و عـمـل لمـا بـعـد المـوت . و احـمـق الحـمـقـاء مـن اتـبـع
نـفـسه هواه ، و تمنى على الله الامانى. فقال رجل: يا رسول الله وكيف
يحاسب الرجل نفسه؟ قال: إذا أصبح ثم أمسى رجع إلى نفسه فقال: يا نفس! إن
هذا يوم مضى عليك لا يعود إليك أبدا والله يسألك عنه فيما أفنيته، فما
الذي عملت فيه؟ أذكرت الله أم حمدته؟ أقضيت حق اخ مؤمن؟ أنفست عنه كربة؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أحفظتيه بظهر الغيب في أهله وولده؟ أحفظتيه بعد الموت في مخلفيه؟ أكففت
عن غيبة أخ مؤمن بفضل جاهك؟ أأعنت مسلما؟ ما الذي صنعت فيهفان ذكر أنه
جرى منه خير، حمد الله عز وجل وكبره على توفيقه. وإن ذكر معصية أو تقصيرا
إستغفر الله وعزم على ترك معاودته، ومحا ذلك عن نفسه بتجديد الصلاة على
محمد وآله الطيبين وعرض بيعة أمير المؤمينن على نفسه وقبولها وإعاد الله
لعن شانئيه وأعدائه ودافعيه عن حقوقه. فاذا فعل ذلك قال الله: لست أناقشك
في شئ من الذنوب مع موالاتك أوليائي، ومعاداتك أعدائي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Shouldn’t I inform you about the most intelligent person among the
intelligent and the most stupid one among the stupid?"*

*“They replied: 'Oh Prophet of God please tell us.’*

*'The most intelligent person is the one who is audits his self's
account and performs righteous deeds for his life after death, and the
most stupid person is the one who is a prisoner of self's whims and
passions and keeps himself amused with long term desires! Replied the
Holy Prophet (S).*

*“He was asked: 'Oh Prophet of God! How the account of self should be
audited ? ' The Prophet (S) replied:*

*'When the day has finished entering into night the!' communicate with
your self as follows:*

*“Oh self! This day too is passed and will never return, God-Almighty is
going to ask you about it as how did you spend it and what deeds were
performed? Did you remember and praise him? Did you discharge your due
obligations as regards to the rights of a brother believer?*

*Did you remove the sorrow from his heart ? Did you take care about his
children and family in his absence ? Did you pay his due share to his
offspring after his death ? Did you help a fellow Muslim ? What have you
done during this day ?*

*“Therefore, remind it to your self one by one whatever you have done,
and if you find that you have done some righteous deed then thanks
God-Almighty for bestowing His grace, but if you find that you have
committed a sin then immediately offer repentance and decide firmly
never to commit any sin again. Through recital of salutation. (Salawat)
upon the Holy Prophet (S) and his Holy Progeny (a.s.) purify your self
from impurities and contamination.*

*“Take the oath of allegiance for the friendship of the Commander of the
Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) and should imprecate his enemies: If one acted
in this manner God-Almighty would tell him: ‘ I am* *not going to have
any controversy with you at the time of auditing your account of your
deeds on the Day of Judgment, because, you were friend with my favorite
saints and showed enmity towards their enemies.”*[^22]

Imam al- Kadhim (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الكاظم عليه السلام قال: ليس منا من لم يحاسب نفسه فى كل يوم فان عمل
خسنا استزاد الله وان عمل سيئا استغفر الله وتاب اليه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whosoever does not scrutinize the account of the self does not belong
to us; thus, if he has done some good deeds should request God-Almighty
for increasing His Favor and if he has sinned should offer
repentance.”*[^23]

The Holy Prophet (S) said to Abu Dharr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فى وصية ابى ذر قال النبى صلى الله عليه وآله: على العاقل ان يكون له
ساعات: ساعة يناجى فيها ربه وساعة يحاسب فيها نفسه وساعة يتفكر فيما صنع
الله عز وجل اليه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A wise person should distribute his hours as follows: One hour should
be assigned for being occupied in Prayers, supplications, and hymns with
God-Almighty. One hour should be allocated for auditing the account of
self s deeds. And one hour should be reserved for pondering the Divine
Blessings bestowed upon him.”*[^24]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: جاسبوا انفسكم باعلماها وطالبوها بادا المفروض
عليها والاخذ من فنائها لبقائها وتزودوا وتاهبوا قبل ان تبعثوا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Let the self be accountable for his deeds, should be demanded to
discharge his due obligations by utilizing this transient world
properly. You should collect provisions for the Hereafter and make
yourself readied for that journey before being forced to be
transferred.”*[^25]

Also, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: ما احق الانسان ان يكون له ساعة لا يشغله عنها شاغل
يحاسب فيها نفسه فينظر فيما اكتسب بها وعليها فى ليلها ونهارها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“How much is it necessary for a person to allocate a free time for
himself to scrutinize the account of his deeds, and see what kind of
good and useful, or bad and harmful deeds, have been performed by him
during the past twenty four hours.”*[^26]

Also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: جاهد نفسك وحاسبها محاسبة الشريك شريكه وطالبها
بحقوق الله مطالبة الخصم خصمع فان اسعد الناس من انتدب خامسة نفسه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبدالله (ص) قال: فحاسبوا انفسكم قبل ان تحاسبوا فان فى القيامة
خمسين موقفا كل موقف مقا ألف ستة ثم تلا هذه الاية فى يوم كان مقداره
خمسين الف سنة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Wage a continuous struggle against the self; like a strict business
associate check precisely the account of his deeds, and like a creditor
force him for payment of God's dues, because, the most prosperous person
is the one who does his own self-scrutiny.”*[^27]

*“Do your own self-auditing for the account of deeds in this world
before being forced to be audited on the Judgment Day, because over
there, this would be done over fifty stops -each stops being one
thousand years long.” Then he recited the following verse:*

***“The day whose length is equivalent to fifty thousands years. (70:
4)*** [^28]

In the end this point should be emphasized that at the time of
self-scrutiny a person should not be optimistic and trust his self
because the deceitful imperious-self with hundreds of deceits and tricks
manifests evils as good and visa versa; does not allow a person to
identify his duties and their fulfillments; justifies refrainment from
worshipping and encourages indulgence into sins and transgressions. He
makes you forget your sins or regard them as minor omissions and
presenting minor acts of worships as great, thus, making you proud about
it.

He cleans the thoughts of death and Resurrection Day from the memory of
your mind, encourages the hopes and long-term desires; and presents
self-scrutiny something as difficult, impracticable, and even
unnecessary. Therefore, because of these considerations a person should
be pessimistic while auditing the account of his deeds, and should
scrutinize strictly with precision without paying least attention to
Satanic justifications and interpretations.

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ' ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: وان للذكر لاهلا اخذوه من الدنيا بدلا فلم تشغلهم
تجارة ولابيع عنه يقطعون به ايام الحياة ويهتفون بالزواجر عن محارم الله
في اسماع الغافلين, ويامرون به, وينهون عن المنكر ويتناهون عنه. فكانما
قطعوا الدنيا الى الاخرة وهم فيها, فشاهدوا ما وراء ذلك فكأنما اطلعوا
عيوب اهل البرزغ في طول الاقامة فيه وحققت القيامة عليهم عداتها فكشفوا
غطاء ذلك لاهل الدنيا حتى كأنهم يرون مالا يرى الناس ويسمعون فلو مثاتهم
لعقلك في مقاومهم المحمودة ومجالسهم المشهودة وقد نشروا دواوين اعمالهم
وفرغوا لمحاسبة انفسهم على كل صغيرة وكبيرة امروا بها فقصروا عنها ففرطوا
فيها وحملوا ثقل أوزارهم ظهورهم فظعفوا عن الاستقلال بها فنشجوا نشيجا
ونحبوا نحيبا يعجون الى ربهم من مقام ندم واعتراف, لرايت اعلام هدى
ومصابيح دجى, قد حفت بهم الملائكة وتنزلت عليهم السكينة وفتحت لهم ابواب
السماء واعدت لهم مقاعد الكرامات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There are some people devoted to the remembrance (of God), who have
adopted it, in place of worldly matters so that commerce or trade does
not turn them away from it. They pass their life in it. They speak into
the ears of neglectful persons warning against matters held unlawful by
God, they order them to practice justice and themselves keep practicing
it, and they refrain them from the unlawful and themselves refrain from
it.”*

*“It is as though they have finished the journey of this world towards
the Next World and have beheld what lies beyond it. Consequently, they
have become acquainted with all that befell them in the interstice
during their long stay therein, and the Day of Judgment fulfills its
promises for them.* *Therefore, they removed the curtain from these
things for the people of the world, till it was as though they were
seeing what people did not see and were hearing what people did not
hear.”*

*“If you picture them in your mind in their admirable positions and
well-known sittings, when they have opened the records of their actions
and are prepared to render an account of themselves in respect of the
small as well as the big things they were ordered to do but they failed
to do, or were ordered to refrain from but they indulged therein.”*

*“They realized the weight of their burden (of bad acts) on their backs,
and they felt too weak to bear them, then they wept bitterly and spoke
to each other while still crying and bewailing to God in repentance and
acknowledgment (of their shortcomings).*

*You would find them to be emblems of guidance and lamps in darkness,
angels would be surrounding them, peace would be descending upon them,
the doors of the sky would be opened for them and positions of honor
would be assigned to them in the place of which God had informed them.
Therefore, He has appreciated their actions and praised their
position.”*[^29]

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 7, p-258.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar vol. 7 p-262.

[^3]: Majma al-Dawaid, vol. 1, p-337.

[^4]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-385.

[^5]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-618.

[^6]: Imam al-Naqi (a.s.): The Tenth Imam ‘Ali ibn Muhammad al-Naqi
(a.s.) son of Imam Muhammad al-Taqi was born on Friday 2nd Rajab 212
A.H. in Suryah in the vicinity of Medina. He was only six years old when
his father Imam al- Taqi was poisoned by Abbasid Caliph al-Mu'tasim. The
Holy Imam devoted himself to the sacred mission of preaching in Medina
and did, thus, earn the faith of people as well as their allegiance and
recognition of his great knowledge and attributes. This reputation of
the Imam evoked the jealousy and malice of Abbasid Caliph al-Mutawakkil
against him. Al-Mutawakkil imprisoned Imam under his strict vigilance
for a number of years during which he was subjected to severe tortures.
But even in this miserable imprisonment, the Imam kept devoting himself
at all times to worship God-Almighty. The watchman of the prison used to
comment that Imam al-Naqi seemed to be an angel in human grab. He was
poisoned by Abbasid Caliph al-Mut'azz billah on 26 Jumada'th-thaniyah
254 AH. The Imam was only forty two years old at the time of his
martyrdom. The period of his Imamat was thirty five years. He was buried
in Samarra in Iraq.

[^7]: Wasail al-Shi’a, vol. 11, p-377.

[^8]: Wasail al-Shi’a, vol. 11 p-379.

[^9]: Wasail al-Shi’a, vol. 11, p-379.

[^10]: Wasail al-Shi’a, vol. 1, p-378.

[^11]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-238.

[^12]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-696.

[^13]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-640.

[^14]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-685.

[^15]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-679.

[^16]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-131.

[^17]: Wasail al-Shi’a, vol. 11, p-380.

[^18]: Ghirar al- Hukm, p-237

[^19]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-698.

[^20]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-54

[^21]: Ghirar al Hukm, p-696.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-69.

[^23]: al Kafi, vol. 1, p-453.

[^24]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-64.

[^25]: Ghirar al- Hukm, p-385.

[^26]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-753.

[^27]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-371.

[^28]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-64.

[^29]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 222.


