Nourishment and Perfection of Self (Tahliyeh)
=============================================

Having cleaned and refined the self a wayfarer is ready for the next
stage known as training and perfection of self (*Tahliyeh*). The logical
sciences have confirmed that the human self is in the state of motion
and growth gradually manifesting his hidden potentials. In the beginning
the self is not complete and perfect, rather gradually develops his
essence.

If, he travels on the straight path gradually becomes perfect,
eventually attaining his ultimate-perfection. But if deviates and
selects the wrong course gradually takes distance from the ultimate
human perfection, thus, eventually crashing into dark valleys of
ignorance and brutality.

1. God's Nearness
-----------------

It should be understood that human movement is a real one and is not a
figurative thing; this movement is related to his Celestial Spirit and
not to his body. Also, this movement takes place within his inner
essence and is not an external phenomenon. In this movement his precious
jewel of human essence moves and becomes metamorphosed.

Therefore, the axis of human movement is also a real axis and is not
something metaphorical, but the axis of movement is not separate from
the mover’s essence, rather the mover moves within his inner essence
carrying the axis of movement along with him.

Now the question arises that every movement carries some goal.
Therefore, the human beings in the world are moving towards which
objective and what is going to be their eventual fate? The traditions
and Qur’anic verses reveal that the ultimate objective or goal destined
for human beings is God's Nearness, but all human beings do not travel
on the straight path and do not attain the exalted position of
God's-Nearness. The Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكُنتُمْ أَزْوَاجًا ثَلَاثَةً فَأَصْحَابُ الْمَيْمَنَةِ مَا أَصْحَابُ
الْمَيْمَنَةِ وَأَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ مَا أَصْحَابُ الْمَشْأَمَةِ
وَالسَّابِقُونَ السَّابِقُونَ أُولَٰئِكَ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ فِي جَنَّاتِ
النَّعِيمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And ye will be three kinds: (First) those on the right hand; what of
those on the right hand? And those on the left hand, what of those on
the left hand ? And the foremost in the race, the foremost in the race:
Those are they who will be brought nigh, in gardens of delight. (56:
7-12)***

The people on the right hand side are the ones who have received eternal
salvation, the people on the left are the ones who have received
adversity and the people foremost in the race are the ones who
distinguished themselves in their journeying on the straight path and
attained the exalted position of God's Nearness. This verse clearly
indicates that the objective or goal behind human movement must be God's
Nearness. And the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَمَّا إِن كَانَ مِنَ الْمُقَرَّبِينَ فَرَوْحٌ وَرَيْحَانٌ وَجَنَّتُ
نَعِيمٍ وَأَمَّا إِن كَانَ مِنْ أَصْحَابِ الْيَمِينِ فَسَلَامٌ لَّكَ
مِنْ أَصْحَابِ الْيَمِينِ وَأَمَّا إِن كَانَ مِنَ الْمُكَذِّبِينَ
الضَّالِّينَ فَنُزُلٌ مِّنْ حَمِيمٍ وَتَصْلِيَةُ جَحِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Thus, if he is of those brought nigh. Then breath of life, and
plenty and a Garden of delight. And if he is of those on the right hand,
{then the greeting) “Peace be unto thee “ from those on the right hand.
But if he is of the rejecters, the erring. Then the welcome will be
boiling water and roasting at Hell fire.” (56: 88-94)***

Further, God-Almighty said in the following verse:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَلَّا إِنَّ كِتَابَ الْأَبْرَارِ لَفِي عِلِّيِّينَ وَمَا أَدْرَاكَ
مَا عِلِّيُّونَ كِتَابٌ مَّرْقُومٌ يَشْهَدُهُ الْمُقَرَّبُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It is not so (as understood by unbelievers), Nay but the record of
the righteous is in Illiyin. Ah, what will convey unto thee what Illiyin
is! A written record. Attested by those who are brought near (unto their
Lord). (83:18-21)***

From the above verse it may be concluded that the exalted position of
God's Nearness and attainment of absolute perfection is the ultimate
goal of people's journeying and movement. Therefore, God's favorite
servants are the most distinguished group among the people who have been
bestowed eternal bliss. The Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذْ قَالَتِ الْمَلَائِكَةُ يَا مَرْيَمُ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُبَشِّرُكِ
بِكَلِمَةٍ مِّنْهُ اسْمُهُ الْمَسِيحُ عِيسَى ابْنُ مَرْيَمَ وَجِيهًا
فِي الدُّنْيَا وَالْآخِرَةِ وَمِنَ الْمُقَرَّبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And remember when the angels said: O Mary! Lo! God-Almighty giveth
thee glad tidings of a word from him, Son of Mary, illustrious in the
world and the Hereafter, and one of those brought near (unto
God-Almighty). (3: 45)***

It can be inferred from traditions and Qur’anic verses that
distinguished and deserving God's servants who have surpassed others in
belief, faith, and righteous deeds shall be blessed with the most
privileged and exalted position of God's Countenance, and in accordance
to the interpretation of some verses has been also named “the Place of
Nearness to the Most Magnificent King” (*Malik Muqtadar*). Also, the
martyrs will be assigned this special position. The Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَا تَحْسَبَنَّ الَّذِينَ قُتِلُوا فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ أَمْوَاتًا ۚ
بَلْ أَحْيَاءٌ عِندَ رَبِّهِمْ يُرْزَقُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Think not of those who are slain in the way of God-Almighty, as
dead. Nay, they are living with their Lord they have provision.
(3:169)***

Therefore, ultimate human perfection and the final destination of the
wayfarers is Nearness of God-Almighty.

2. Meanings of God's Nearness
-----------------------------

Now let us see what is meant by God's Nearness? And how could it be
imagined that a person may reach closer to God-Almighty. The nearness
means being close and could be defined as follows:

### 1. Nearness Relative to Place

The two existence which are closer physically are called near to each
other .

### 2. Nearness Relative to Time

When two things are closer to each other relative to time are called
near to each other.

Of course, it is evident that nearness of (God's) servants with Him
could not belong to the above mentioned two categories, because,
God-Almighty is beyond the limits of time and place rather is the
creator of them, therefore, it is not possible for any thing to have
nearness with Him relative to time and place.

### 3. Metaphorical Nearness

Sometimes it is said that Mr. X is very close and intimate with Mr. Y,
which means that Mr. Y Respects, likes, and accepts Mr. X's
recommendations and suggestions. This sort of nearness is called
metaphorical, figurative, and ceremonial but is not real.

Could this kind of nearness be possible between a servant and God? Of
course, it is true God loves His deserving servants and accepts their
prayers but still this kid of nearness could not be possible between a
servant and God-Almighty, because as was pointed out earlier, that this
has been proved by the logical sciences and Qur’anic verses, and
traditions also support that the wayfarer, his direction, and straight
path all are real things and are not figurative and ceremonial.

Likewise, return towards God-Almighty which has been so much emphasized
in plenty of Qur’anic verses and traditions is a real thing and cannot
be metaphorical or figurative. For example: God-Almighty said in the
Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيَّتُهَا النَّفْسُ الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ ارْجِعِي إِلَىٰ رَبِّكِ
رَاضِيَةً مَّرْضِيَّةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O Thou soul at piece! Return unto thy Lord, content in his good
pleasure. (89:27-28)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُرْجَعُونَ ثُمَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكُمْ وَمَنْ أَسَاءَ فَعَلَيْهَا مَنْ
عَمِلَ صَالِحًا فَلِنَفْسِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoso doth right, it is for his soul, and whoso doth wrong, it is
against it. And afterward unto your Lord ye will be brought back.
(45:15)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ إِذَا أَصَابَتْهُم مُّصِيبَةٌ قَالُوا إِنَّا لِلَّهِ
وَإِنَّا إِلَيْهِ رَاجِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who say, when a misfortune striketh them: Lo! We are God's and Lo!
unto Him we are returning.”(2:156)***

Anyway, return to God-Almighty, straight path, way of God, and attaining
self-perfection are real things and are not metaphorical. A human
being's movement is an aware and optional act whose result will become
manifested after his death.

Since the very beginning of Human existence this movement begins and
continues until death. The nearness to God is real thing and God's
decent servants really become closer to Him and impious and sinner
indeed take distance from God-Almighty.

Therefore, let us see what is meant by nearness to God-Almighty. God's
Nearness is not comparable to other types of nearness, rather it is a
special kind of near'“ ness which might be called nearness relative to
perfection or relative to the rank of exaltedness of that particular
existence. In order to further clarify let us refer to the following
preface.

The books of wisdom and Islamic philosophy have confirmed that existence
'is real and consists of various rank and degrees. It may be compared to
the analogy of illumination which consists of various degrees of lights
varying from low to very high.

The lowest degree of a lighting lamp could be one watt which is also
illumination till the lamp with infinite brightness which is nothing
other than illumination. In between the lowest and highest limits of
illumination there exist various intermediate degrees of light differing
relative to extreme limits in proportion to their weakness and strength.

Existence too consists of various ranks and positions differing in
proportion to their weakness and strength. The lowest degree being the
existence of nature and matter till the highest rank of existence the
essence of God-Almighty which from the point of view of perfection is
infinite and absolute. In between these two extremities there also
exists intermediate degrees of existence varying in proportion to their
weakness and strength.

Here it becomes clear that as much as an existence is stronger and
holder of higher rank, in perfection would be closer relative to the
most supreme existence and the source of absolute perfection -the
Essence of God-Almighty, and opposite to that the weaker an existence
would be, the farther it will be relative to the Essence of Self
Existent (*Wajib al-Wajoud*).

Now in the light of above explanation the meaning of nearness of
servants to God and distance from Him could be imagined. As for as the
Celestial spirit is concerned, a human being is an abstract reality,
which from the point of view of manifestation is related to matter, and
because of that is capable to grow, becoming perfect until attaining the
ultimate degree of his existence.

From the beginning of his movement until arriving at the final
destination he is not more than one person and one reality, but as much
as he achieves perfection and ascension in his journeying with in his
essence, in the same proportion becomes nearer to the source of all
Creation, the Absolute and Infinite Perfection -the Holy Essence of
God-Almighty.

A human being through belief and righteous deeds can make his existence
complete and perfect so that he could attain God's Nearness, thus, being
able to utilize divine blessings and favors to his maximum advantage and
therefore, making his own essence a source of further benevolence and
goodness.


