First Means -God's Remembrance (Dikhr)
======================================

God's-remembrance or invocation (*dhikr*) could be regarded as a
starting 'point for the esoteric movement or spiritual migration, of a
wayfarer towards the Nearness of the Lord of Universe. A wayfarer
through invocation gradually lift himself above the horizons of material
world stepping inside the Celestial World of beauty and illumination,
becomes complete and perfect eventually attaining the highest exalted
position of God's Nearness.

God's invocation is the soul behind all the worships as well is the
greatest aim behind their explanation, because the merit of each worship
depends upon the degree of attention paid by the worshiper towards that
particular act. The Qur’anic-verses and traditions have made plenty of
recommendations about the importance of invocation. For example the Holy
Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ ذِكْرًا كَثِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Oh ye who believe! Remember God-Almighty with much. Remembrance.
(33: 41)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَذْكُرُونَ اللَّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا وَعَلَىٰ جُنُوبِهِمْ
وَيَتَفَكَّرُونَ فِي خَلْقِ السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ رَبَّنَا مَا
خَلَقْتَ هَٰذَا بَاطِلًا سُبْحَانَكَ فَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(such as) Those who remember God-Almighty, standing, sitting;
reclining, and consider the creation of the heavens and the earth (and
say): Our Lord! Thou createdst not this in vain. Glory be to thee!
Preserve us from the doom of fire. (3:191)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَدْ أَفْلَحَ مَن تَزَكَّىٰ وَذَكَرَ اسْمَ رَبِّهِ فَصَلَّىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He is successful who groweth, and remembereth the Name of his Lord,
so prayeth. (87:14-15)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Remember the Name of the Lord at morning and evening. (76:25)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُر رَّبَّكَ كَثِيرًا وَسَبِّحْ بِالْعَشِيِّ وَالْإِبْكَارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Remember thy Lord much. and praise (Him) in the early hours of night
and morning. (3: 41)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِذَا قَضَيْتُمُ الصَّلَاةَ فَاذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ قِيَامًا وَقُعُودًا
وَعَلَىٰ جُنُوبِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“When ye have performed the act of worship. remember God-Almighty
standing, sitting. and reclining. (4:103)***

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابى عبدالله (ع) قال: من اكثر ذكر الله عز وجل اظله الله فى جنته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever offers a lot of invocation. God-Almighty will reward him
Paradise where he would live forever happily under the shadow of His
grace.”*[^1]

'Also, he said to his companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابى عبدالله عليه السلام فى رسالته الى اصحابه قال: واكثروا ذكر الله
ما استطعتم فى كل ساعة من ساعات الليل والنهار, فان الله عَمر بكثرة
الذكر, والله ذاكر من المؤمنين. واعلموا ان الله لم يذكره احد من عباده
المؤمنين الا ذكره بخير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“As much as it is possible do remember God-Almighty at every hour
during day and night because He has ordered His servants to offer a lot
of invocation. Whoever remembers God-Almighty is reciprocated by him.
Know that there is not a single believer who does not remember
God-Almighty but that God-Almighty too remembers him with
goodness.”*[^2]

Imam al-Sadiq further said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابى عبدالله عليه السلام: قال الله لموسى: أكثر ذكري بالليل والنهار
وكن عند ذكري خاشعا وعند بلائي صابرا واطمئن عند ذكري واعبدني ولا تشرك
بي شيئا إلي المصير. يا موسى! اجعلني ذخرك وضع عندي كنزك من الباقيات
الصالحات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God-Almighty said to Moses (a.s.): 'to remember Him a lot throughout
the day and night. During invocation be humble, during calamity be
patient, and during My Remembrance be calm and relaxed. Worship Me alone
and do not associate any partner with Me. Every body shall have to*
*return towards Me. Oh Moses! Regard me as your provision of the
Hereafter and deposit the treasurers of your righteous deeds near
Me.”*[^3]

At another place he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبدالله عليه السلام قال: ما من شئ الا وله حد ينتهي إليه فرض
الله عزوجل الفرائض فمن أداهن فهو حد هن ; و شهر رمضان فمن صامه فهو حده
والحج فمن حج فهو حده إلا الذكرفإن الله عزوجل لم يرض منه بالقليل ولم
يجعل له حداينتهي إليه ثم تلا: يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا
اللَّهَ ذِكْرًا كَثِيرًا وَسَبِّحُوهُ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلًا - فقال: لم
يجعل الله له حد اينتهي إليه، قال: وكان أبي كثير الذكر لقد كنت أمشي معه
وإنه ليذكر الله وآكل معه الطعام وإنه ليذكر الله ولقد كان يحدث القوم
وما يشغله ذلك عن ذكر الله وكنت أرى لسانه لازقا بحنكه يقول: لاإله إلا
الله, وكان يجمعنا فيأمرنا بالذكر حتى تطلع الشمس. (الى ان قال) وقال
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ألا اخبركم بخير أعمالكم وأرفعها في
درجاتكم وأزكاها عند مليككم وخير لكم من الدينار والدرهم وخير لكم من أن
تلقوا عدو كم فتقتلوهم ويقتلو كم؟ فقالوا: بلى، فقال ذكر الله كثيرا. ثم
قال :جاء رجل إلى فقال: من خير أهل المسجد؟ فقال: أكثر هم لله ذكرا. وقال
رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله :من اعطي لسانا ذاكرا فقد اعطي خير الدنيا
والآخرة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“For every thing there is a limit except God's Remembrance which is
infinite and beyond limits. There are religious mandatory obligations
which are performed in accordance to prescribed limits. e.g.: The
fasting during the month of Ramadhan is limited to thirty days, and
similarly the Hajj Pilgrimage is limited to performance of certain
prescribed Hajj rituals , but contrary to all of them God's-Remembrance
does not has any limits and He has not limited himself to a prescribed
or minimum amount of invocation. Then he recited the following verse:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا اللَّهَ ذِكْرًا كَثِيرًا
وَسَبِّحُوهُ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Oh ye who believe! Remember God-Almighty with much remembrance and
glorify him early, and late. (33: 41-42)***

*“In the above verse God-Almighty has not fixed a limit for His
Remembrance. Then he said: 'My father (Imam al-Baqir a.s.) used to offer
a lots of invocation, while walking with him I found him remembering
God, when we used to sit together for eating he was still busy with
invocation, and even while talking to the people he was not negligent
from invocation.*

*I could see his tongue almost attached to his throat while chanting:
there is no god except God-Almighty (la illahi Illallahu). After the
morning prayer he used to assemble all of us together and ordered to
offer invocation until sun rise.*

*“Then he quoted from the Holy Prophet (S) who said: shouldn't I inform
you about your best deeds which would bring for you more distinctions as
compared to any other deed ? Which is purest and most desirable before
God-Almighty. Is much better for you as compared to silver, and gold
even is superior than the Holy struggle for the sake of God-Almighty.’*

*The people asked: “Oh Prophet of God! Please tell us.”*

*“Do a lots of God's Remembrance.” Replied the Holy Prophet (S).*

*“Then the Imam said: A man asked the Holy Prophet (S): “Who is the best
among the believers ?” “The one who offers a lot of invocation.” Replied
the Holy Prophet (S). He further said:*

*“Who possesses a invocating tongue has indeed been blessed with the
goodness of this world and the Hereafter.”*[^4]

The Holy Prophet (S) said to Abu Dharr:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فى وصية ابى ذر قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: عليه بتلاوة والقرآن
وذكر الله كثيرا فانه ذكر لك فى السما ونور لك فى الارض.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Recite the Holy Qur’an and do a lots of invocation, which will became
a means for your remembrance in the Heavens and will produce
illumination for you upon the earth.”*[^5]

Imam al-Hasan [^6] (a.s.) quotes from the Holy Prophet (S)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الحسن بن على عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله:
بادروا الى رياض الجنة, فقالوا: ما رياض الجنة؟ قال: حلق الذكر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Take lead towards the Gardens of Paradise. 'Which are the Gardens of
the Paradise? Asked the companions ? 'The rings of invocation Replied
the Holy Prophet (S).”*[^7]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن الصادق عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ذاكر الله
فى الغافلين كالمقاتل فى الفازين له الجنة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The one who is a reciter of God's invocation among negligent is like a
struggler waging war in the battlefield alone, while the others are
fleeing away. Paradise for such a combatant is compulsory.”*[^8]

The Holy Prophet (S) said to his companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله خرج على اصحابه فقال: ارتعوا فى رياض
الجنة. يا رسول الله وما رياض الجنة؟ قال: مجالس الذكر, ا غدوا وروحوا
اذكروا. ومن كان بحب ان يعلم منزلة عند الله فلينظر كيف منزلة الله تعالى
عنده, ينزل العبد حيث انزل العبد الله من نفسه واعلموا ان خير اعمالكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عند مليككم وازكها وارفعها فى درجاتكم وخير ما طلعت عليه الشمس ذكر الله
فانه تعالى اخبر عن نفسه فقال: انا جليس من ذكرنى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do utilize the gardens of the Paradise.” Which are these gardens of
the Paradise ? Asked the companions.*

*'The assemblies of invocation; remember God-Almighty at morning and
evening. 'Whosoever wants to know about his rank and position before
God-Almighty, must see how is the position of God in his own life.
Because, 'He elevates a servant exactly to the same position -which was
assigned to God-Almighty by the servant in his own life.*

*Know that your best and the most purest deeds which will elevate your
rank and position before the Lord and is better than any thing else of
this universe is - God's-Remembrance, because God-Almighty had said:
“Whoever remembers me -I become his companion.”*[^9]

The above Qur’anic verses and traditions presented here as examples of
invocation show its importance clearly. Now let us investigate what is
the aim behind the invocation.

### A) The Aim of Invocation (Dikhr)

Earlier, it was clearly demonstrated that God's Remembrance is a great
worship and is one of the best method of self-building, self-perfection
and spiritual migration towards God-Almighty. Now let us examine what is
really meant with invocation whose importance has been so much
emphasized in traditions and Qur’anic verses.

Does it means simply recital of sentences like: Glory to God, All
praises belong to God and there is no god but God (subhan allahi,
walhamdu lillahi, wala ilaha illal- lahu) or is there any other aim
behind this?

Do these sentences without paying any inner attention towards their
esoteric meanings could still provide such important effect? The phrase
invocation in the dictionary has been defined in the sense of simply
recital as well as in the sense of recital with heart's presence.
Similarly, is the case in traditions where this phrase has been used
with both meanings i.e. recital with tongue as well recital with heart's
presence.

In traditions it has been narrated that Prophet Moses (a.s.) while
reciting hymns, asked God-Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيما ناجى به موسى عليه السلام ربه: الهى ما جزا من ذكرك بلسانه وقلبه؟
قال: يا موسى اظله يوم القيامة بظل عرشي وأجعله في كنفى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Oh God! What is the reward for some one who remembers you by tongue
and heart? 'I will place him under the shadow of My Thrown and My Own
Protection on the Day of Resurrection.”*[^10]

Therefore, as could be seen in the tradition the phrase invocation has
been used in both senses i.e. invocation by means of tongue as well as
invocation by means of heart. Also, there are plenty of traditions in
which invocation has been used in both meanings, but mostly it has been
used in the sense of heart's presence with esoteric attention -which is
indeed true and perfect invocation.

God’s Remembrance may be defined as a state of spirituality and
discerning the truth with esoteric attention towards the Lord of
Universe, and knowing that He is the Overseer and Supervisor of all our
actions at all times. Someone who remembers God-Almighty in such a
manner, acts according to His commands, performs compulsory obligations
and sustains himself from forbidden acts. Therefore, from the point of
view of these considerations we may conclude that invocation is not an
easy thing. The Holy Prophet (S) said to Imam ‘Ali (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فيما اوصى به رسول الله (ص) عليا: يا على! ثلاث لاتطيقها هذه الامة:
المواسات للاخ فى ماله. وانصاف الناس من نفسه. وذكر الله على كل حال.
وليس هو سبحان الله والحمد لله ولا اله الا الله والله اكبر, ولكن اذا
ورد على ما يحرم عليه خاف الله عنده وتركه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There are three things of special strength for my Ummah:*

*First: Fellowship and equality with brother believer in wealth.*

*Second: Treading others justly against the self*

*Third: God's Remembrance in all situations.*

*“What is meant with invocation is not simply recital sentences life:
Glory to God; All praises belong to God; and there is no god but God
(Subhan allahi, Wal hamdu lillahi wala ilahi illallahu), rather
invocation is defined as the state of being so much in remembrance of
God-Almighty that whenever one is encountered with a forbidden act, he
should fear God-Almighty and should refrain himself from its
commitments.”*[^11]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:[^12]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: لا تذكرالله سبحانه ساهيا ولاتنسه لاهيا واذكره
ذكراً كاملاً يوافق فيه قلبك لسانك و يطابق اضمارك اعلانك ولن تذكره
حقيقة الذّكر حتّى تنسى نفسک فى ذكرك وتفقدها فى امرك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not engage your self in invocation in the state of negligence and
never forget God-Almighty. Remember Him with perfection so that your
tongue and hearts become synchronized and your esoteric and exoteric
affairs are in conformity with each other. One cannot engaged himself in
real invocation but to forget his self completely and while performing
deeds he should think of only God-Almighty and 'should not notice his
own existence.”*

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:[^13]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام: من كان ذاكرا لله تعالى على الحقيقة فهو مطيع
ومن كان غافلا عنه فهو عاص والطاعة علامة الهداية والمعصية علامة الضلالة
واصلهما الذكر والغفلة فاجعل قلبك قبله للسانك لا تحركه بإشارة القلب
وموافقة العقل ورضى الايمان فإن تعالى عالم بسرك وجهرك وكن كالنازع روحه
كالواقف في العرض الأكبر غير شاغل نفسك عما عناك بما كلفك به ربك في امره
ونهيه ووعده ووعيده ولا تشغلها بدون ما كلف به ربك واغسل قلبك بماء الحزن
والخوف واجعل ذكر الله تعالى من اجل ذكره إياك فإنه ذكرك وهو غني عنك
فذكره لك أجل وأشهى وأثنى وأتم من ذكرك وأسبق, ومعرفتك بذكره لك تورثك
الخضوع والاستحياء والانكسار ويتولد من ذلك رؤية كرمه وفضله السابق
وتصغر. عند ذلك طاعتك وان كثرت في جنب منته. وتخلص بـوجهه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ورؤيتك ذكرك له تورثك الرياء والعجب والسفه والغلظة في خلقه وهو استكثار
الطاعة ونسيان فضله وكرمه ولا تزداد بذلك بعدا ولا تستجلب به على معنى
الأيام إلا وحشة. والذكر ذكران: ذكر خالص بموافقة القلب وذكر صادف لك
بنفي غيره كما قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: انى لا احصى ثناء عليك,
أنت كما أثنيت على نفسك فرسول الله لم يجعل لذكر الله تعالى مقدارا عند
علمه بحقيقة سابقة الله عز وجل من قبل ذكره له ومن دونه أولى. فمن أراد
يذكر الله تعالى فليعلم انه ما لم يذكر الله العبد بالتوفيق لذكره لا
يقدر العبد على ذكره.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever remembers God-Almighty truly will become obedient; whoever is
negligent of Him will certainly indulge into sins, His obedience means
guidance and sinning indicates deviation. The invocation and negligence
are the roots of obedience and transgression respectively.*

*Therefore, consider your heart as the worshipping point (Qibla), and
keep your tongue still without motion except by permission of heart, by
approval of wisdom, and with the consent of belief because, God-Almighty
is aware of your apparent and hidden affairs.”*

*“Be like some one whose soul is being confiscated from his body or like
some one who is standing before the Lord to be questioned about his
deeds. Don't let the self-engaged into any other thing except
discharging Divine obligations which are important for you. With the
tears of shame, and grief cleanse and purify the contamination of your
heart.”*

*“Know that God-Almighty has remembered you therefore, you should too
engage yourself in invocation, because, He remembered you while being
absolutely needless of you. Therefore, yours remembrance by God-Almighty
will make you more perfect, exalted, acquainted, and delightful as
compared to God's Remembrance by you.*

*Acquaintance with God's Remembrance will increase your humility,
courtesy, and decency in front of Him, resulting in your being able to
witness His past benevolence and blessings bestowed upon you. At this
stage your obedience might appear to you as more but in front of God' s
favors to you, it will be something very small.”*

*“Therefore, do perform your deeds strictly for the sake of God-Almighty
only. If you perceived your invocation as big it will result in
hypocrisy, egotism, ignorance, harshness, and negligence in appreciation
of Divine blessings and favors. Such invocation will not bear any fruits
except innovator's becoming farther away from God-Almighty and with the
passage of time will not produce any positive effect except fear and
sorrow.”*

*“As the Holy Prophet (S) said: 'I am helpless to hymn your praise (the
way you truly deserves). Your essence is such -the manner you praised
yourself. Therefore, the Prophet (S) did not attach any wo11h to his
invocations because, he was aware of the fact that remembrance of His
servants by God-Almighty is far superior than the God's Remembrance by
His servants.*

*Therefore, those whose rank is much lower than the Holy Prophet (S)
better consider their invocation as insignificant. Because of these
considerations some one who really wants to recite God's Invocation must
understand that unless and until God-Almighty remembers him and bestow
upon him His special grace –he would not be in a position to offer God's
Invocation.”*

As could be seen from these narrations that hearts attention and
esoteric presence have been defined as the real meanings of invocation.
Further simply heart's attention and esoteric presence but ineffective
is not enough, rather what is required is effective esoteric presence
whose indications have been identified as obedience of mandatory
obligations and avoidance of forbidden things. But it does not mean that
only oral recital of sentences like:

“There is no god but God”; “Glory to God”. And “all praises to God,” (la
ilahi illallahu, subhan allahi, and al hamdu lillahi) is not the
evidence of true invocation, because these sentences in themselves
reflect degrees of God's invocation.

Apart from that even this invocation by tongue flows from the heart's
fountainhead. Someone, who recites these invocation by tongue certainly
is having some attention by heart towards God-Almighty however small it
may be, and because of this he is reciting these sentences by his
tongue.

From the point of view of Islam, simply recital of these sentences and
other invocations is desirable and carries spiritual reward subjected to
it being performed with the intention of God's Nearness. Incidentally we
may mention that in case of daily prayers we are strictly obliged to
recite similar sentences by tongue and to perform other related rituals
outwardly while we know that the heart's presence and esoteric attention
is the real spirit behind the daily prayers.

### B) The Degrees of Invocation (Dhikr)

Invocation consists of various degrees or ranks the first and lowest of
them begins with the recital of invocation by tongue, and continues till
the degree of absolute perfection, which terminates into attaining the
stage of feeling being ceased to exist, witnessing the supreme reality
and becoming annihilated into His Essence (*Shahood* and *fana*).

At the very first stage, since the invocator pays heart's attention
towards God-Almighty, starts reciting special invocation by tongue with
the intention of God's Nearness, without paying any attention to their
meanings.

At the second stage, although he, recites invocation by tongue with the
intention of God's Nearness, but at the same time also convey their
meanings to his mind. At the third stage, the tongue follows the heart,
since the heart pays attention towards God-Almighty and in his esoteric
essence believes in the meanings and contents of invocations, therefore
orders the tongue for their recital.

At the fourth stage, the wayfarer attains esoteric presence, and perfect
heart's presence with respect to God-Almighty, considers Him as an
overseer of his actions and witnesses his own existence under God's
exalted presence. At this stage the experiences of wayfarers differs
widely in accordance to the degree of perfection achieved by them.

As much as they become detached from other than God, in the same
proportion they become attached to God-Almighty ultimately achieving the
highest and most exalted positions of being ceased to exist (*inqata*),
countenance (*laqa*), and annihilation (*fana*).

The wayfarer at this stage -which is the most exalted position has
teared off all the veils of ignorance and falseness and has attached
himself to the Supreme Source of all Blessings and Perfection.

He has removed himself from every thing including his self and has
returned towards God-Almighty by cutting all his ties with other than
God and reserving his pure love and affection for God-Almighty. He does
not see any perfection except God-Almighty so that he could become
attached to him, and does not find any companion to become intimate with
him.

These purest servants of God have made their access into the supreme
Infinite Source of Grandeur, Majesty, Perfection, Blessings and
Illumination and ate able to witness the Beauty and Illumination of
God's Essence with their esoteric eyes. They are not ready to attach
their heart and pay attention towards the metaphorical phenomenon of
this world even for an instant.

Because they have reached to the Fountain Head of Absolute Beauty and
Perfection and, therefore, metaphorical and fictitious perfection do not
have any worth in their eyes. They burnt in the love, affection and
countenance of their beloved and are not ready to exchange this pleasure
even if they are offered both the worlds, and if they encounter world's
phenomenon, regards them as reflections of Divine Illumination and signs
of God's Perfect Existence.

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) was asked:[^14]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سئل امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: هل رايت ربك حين عبدته؟ فقال: ويلك ما
كنت اعبد ربا لم اره. قبل: وكيف رايته؟ قال: ويلك لا تدركه العيون فى
مشاهدة الابصار ولكن راته القلوب بحقائق الايمان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Have you seen the God to whom you worship” ?*

*'Woe, be upon you! I do not worship a God who could not be seen '.
Replied the Imam. ' How did you see Him' ? He was asked. 'Woe be upon
you! God-Almighty could not be seen with physical eyes rather hearts
witness His existence through the reality of their faith.” Replied the
Imam.”*

Imam al-Husayn (a.s.) [^15]said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال حسين بن على عليه السلام: كيف يستدل عليك بما هو في وجوده مفتقر إليك
؟ أ يكون لغيرك من الظهور ما ليس لك حتي يكون هو المظهر لك ؟ متي غبت حتي
تحتاج إلي دليل يدل عليك ؟ و متي بعدت حتي تكون الَثار هي التي توصل إليك
؟ عميت عين لا تراك عليها رقيبا وخسرت صفقة عبد لم. تجعل له من حبلك
نصيبا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In order to prove Your Existence how can a thing could be referred as
an argument which in itself is dependent upon You? Is there exist any
manifestation for other than You which You lack, so that* *he would make
You revealed? When were You absent so that an argument will be required?
When were You away so that the indications and circumstances of Your
reappearance would be needed? Blind is the eye which does not see You as
an Overseer upon his deeds. And how unfortunate looser is your servant,
who have been deprived of Your Love.”*[^16]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) in his hymns for the Holy
Month of Shaban said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الهى هب لى كمال الانقطاع اليك وانر ابصار قلوبنا بضيا نظرها اليك حتى
تخرق ابصار القلوب حجت النور فتصل الى معدن العظمة وتصير ارواحنا معلقة
تعز قدسك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh God! Bestow upon me absolute separation from every thing except
You, enlighten the esoteric eyes of our hearts with Your Beauty and
Grandeur ,so that they could tear off the veils of light and become
attached to the Supreme Source of Absolute-Perfection. May our souls
become united with Your Holy-Essence.”*[^17]

Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) describes God's righteous servants as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على بن الحسين عليه السلام: بسم الله الرمان الرحيم. إلهي قصرت
الألسن عن بلوغ ثنائك كما يليق بجلالك ، وعجزت العقول عن إدراك كنه جمالك
، ‏وانحـسرت الأبصار دون النظر إلى سبحات وجهك ولم تجعل للخلق طريقاً إلى
معرفتك إلا بالعجز ‏عن معرفتك . ‏إلهي فاجعلنا من الذين ترسخت أشجار
الشوق إليك في حدائق صدورهم ، وأخذت لوعة محبتك بمجامع قلوبهم ، فهم إلى
أوكار الأفكار يئوون ، وفي رياض القرب والمكاشفة يرتعون ، ومن حياض
‏المحبة بكأس الملاطفة يكرعون، وشرايع المصافات يـردون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قد كشف الغطاء عن أبصارهم وانجلت ظلمة الريب عن عقائدهم وضمائرهم وانتفت
مخالجة الشك ‏عن قلوبهم وسرائرهم وانشرحت بتحقيق المعـرفة صدورهم وعلت
لسبق السعادة في الزهادة هممهم وعذب في معين المعاملة شربهم وطاب في مجلس
الأنس سرهم وأمن في موطن المخافة سربهم ‏واطمأنت بالرجوع إلى رب الأرباب
أنفسهم وتيقنت بالفوز والفلاح أرواحهم وقرت بالنظر إلى ‏محبوبهم أعينهم
وأستقر بـإدراك السؤل ونيل المأمول قرارهم‏ وربحت في بيع الدنيا بالآخرة
‏تجارتهم. ‏ إلهي ما ألذ خواطر الإلهام بذكرك على القلوب ومـا أحلى
المسير إليك بالأوهام في مسالك ‏الغيـوب وما أطيب طعم حبك وما أعذب شرب
قربك فأعذنا من طردك وإبعادك واجعلنا ‏من أخص عارفيك وأصلح عبادك وأصـدق
طائعيك وأخلص عبادك ياعظيم يا جليل يا كريم يا ‏منيل! برحمتك ومنك يا
أرحم الراحمين.‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh Lord! The tongues are helpless to offer Your Praise and Adoration,
worthy of Your Majesty and Splendor,” the faculties of wisdom cannot
comprehend Your Beauty and Glory; the eyes are powerless to be able to
witness the manifestation of Your Beauty. For your servants, in their
search to attain the exalted position of Your Enlightenment, You have
closed all the avenues except to admit their impotence and
helplessness.”*

*“Oh Lord of the Majesty and Splendor! Please consider us among Your
those servants in whose hearts the sapling of Your Countenance has been
planted and whose hearts are saturated with the grief and sorrow of Your
Love.*

*Thus, they are moving towards the nest of most tender and sublime
thoughts with the hope of living in pleasure forever in the most
magnanimous and splendid garden of manifestation and nearness of their
God. They drink the cups of Your Grace from the Fountain Head of Your
Love and entering the wide freeways of fraternity and pleasure.”*

*“The curtains have been rolled up from their esoteric eyes, the
darkness of doubt has been removed from their beliefs and the
palpitations of contradiction have been calmed down in their hearts.
Certainly of Your Knowledge have made them as large hearted,” strive to
surpass others in the race of piety, in their trade with God-Almighty,
have been rewarded with the most delicious and pleasurable drinks,”*

*In their union with their beloved possess a clean and pure inner self
while encountering fearful situation are assured with the Divine
guidance towards safety” In their return to God-Almighty have attained
the most tranquil state; In their journeying towards eternal prosperity
and salvation have attained the stage of certainty; In witnessing the
glory of their beloved their eyes shine with joy, because of
accomplishing the cherished goal, they now possess a peaceful inner self
and have profited themselves in their bartering this world with the
Hereafter.”*

*“Oh God! How pleasing are the memories of inspiration relevant to Your
Invocation for the hearts! How sweet is the journeying towards you by
means of pondering about the unseen! How much delicious is the taste of
Your Love! And how much pleasurable and gratifying is the drinking of
drinks of Your Nearness !”*

*“Therefore, oh God! we seek Your shelter again banishment or getting
lost. And accept us among the most distinguished gnostics, most
righteous servants, most veracious obedient, and most sincere
worshippers. Oh Lord of Majesty and Splendor, and Oh God of Mercy and
Compassion we swore you of your Blessing, oh Thou Who are the Best of
Blessers.”*[^18]

In summary, the fourth position is a position which is most
distinguished and exalted and in itself consists of various degrees and
ranks which are infinite and continue till the very Holy Essence,
Self-Existent (*Wajib al- Wajood*), the Source of Absolute Perfection
and Infinite Beauty. In the language of Godly people these stages are
called namely:

The position of invocation (*dhikr*) the position of love, (*uns*), the
position of being, ceased to exist (*inqata*) the position of intense
desire (*shouq*), the position of pleasure (*raza*) the position of fear
(*khouf*), the position of witnessing, (*shahood*) the position of
absolute certainty (*ain al-yaqin*) the position of assurance (*haq
al-yaqin*) and the eventual position of becoming annihilated in
God-Almighty (*fana wa baqa billah*). These interpretations most
probably have been inferred from traditions and Qur’anic verses and each
one of them requires a commenty e.g.:

When the worshipper pays attention towards the Glory, Splendor, Majesty
and Infinite Perfection of the Holy Essence of Self Existent (*Wajib al-
Wajood*), considers His Love, Favors, and Blessings and realizes his own
helplessness and negligence, and looks at the distance between himself
and that Holy Exalted Essence; it causes .a feeling of love, eagerness,
and sorrow within his existence which is known as the position of strong
desire (*shouq*).

When the wayfarer thinks in retrospective about his gnostic spiritual
journey and discovers the spiritual stations and perfection attained by
him -this revelation makes him happy and pleased, which is known as the
position of affection or love (*uns*).

When the wayfarer pays attention towards the Splendor, Majesty, Glory,
and Absolute Perfection of God's Essence and opposite to that realizes
his own helplessness and shortness for attaining the Nearness of that
Supreme-Reality -his hearts trembles with fear. The agony and grief
overtakes his entire existence, whereby he cries bitterly and sheds
tears. This stage is known as the position of fear (*khouf*), and
similar is the case with other positions.

It would be better if this God's servant -the prisoner of self’s
passions, captive of darkness of materialism, deprived of attaining
higher spiritual stations -does not put his feet inside this profound
and infinite ocean, and let the explanation of these sublime spiritual
stations be left for these who have reached there. Because, so for one
has not tasted the deliciousness of God's Love, Affection, and
Countenance, he is helpless and powerless to explain them.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
احب الصالحين ولست منهم, اللهم ارزقنا حلاوة ذكرك واجعلنا من اهله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh God! I do like the righteous ones, although, I myself is not one of
them, Oh God! Bless me with the sweetness of your invocation and please
do include me among them! “*

Let us hear the words of those who are qualified to speak in this field.
The great philosopher and divine gnostic Sadrudin Shirazi writes:

“If a ray of Divine illumination falls upon a servant, makes him
awakened from the sleep of ignorance and nature, thus, his becoming
aware of the fact that apart from this perceptible world there also
exists another world, and higher than the animalistic pleasures there
also exist other satisfactions.

With this realization he refrains himself from indulging into false and
worthless amusements and returns towards God-Almighty by offering
repentance for his past omissions. Thus, he starts pondering about
Qur’anic verses, listening Divine admonitions, deliberating upon the
Prophet's (S) traditions and performing deeds in accordance with Divine
commands.”

“In order to attain the eternal perfection he restrains himself from
following the worldly allurements such as wealth, power, and positions.
If he is lucky to receive further Divine Guidance and Blessings –
decides seriously to disassociate himself from other than God, starts
journeying towards Him and leaving the habitat of self, his whimsical
attractions ascends towards God-Almighty.

At this stage, a ray of Divine illumination enlightens his horizons; a
door from the unseen world opens for him and gradually the pages from
the Holy Kingdom become apparent for him enabling him to witness the
affairs of unseen.”

“When he tastes these special pleasures of the unseen affairs, starts
liking seclusion and engages himself into invocation continuously. His
hearts becomes detached from material involvement and pays absolute
attention towards God-Almighty with his entire existence.

At this juncture mystical knowledge is gradually bestowed upon him and
spiritual illuminations become occasionally manifested for him, until he
attains absolute certainty in his search discovering the Supreme Reality
whereby, all contradictions, doubts are vanished and a special
tranquility engulfs his entire existence.”

*“At this stage he enters into the Celestial Kingdom and after
witnessing the existence of “Ten-wisdoms.”* [^19]*(Uqool-Mufarqeh)
becomes united with their Celestial Lights and, thus, become
enlightened.*

*Eventually, the Glorious Illumination of the Lord of Majesty and
Splendor becomes manifested upon him, thus, making his existence and
egotism shattered and he surrenders in front of the Glory and
Exaltedness of the Lord of the Heavenly Kingdom. This stage is known as
the position of Monotheism (Tawhid) in which any thing other than
God-Almighty becomes amortized in the wayfarer's eyes and he listen to
the sound of:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لمن الملك اليوم, الله الواحد
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whose is the sovereignty this Day? It is God's the One, the
Al-mighty. (40:16)*** [^20]

The most famous and eminent gnostic late Faiz al-Kashani writes: “The
way for acquiring God's Love and its further strengthening to be worthy
of witnessing His Manifestation and Countenance is -to attain
enlightenment, (marefah) and its further strengthening.

The way of acquiring enlightenment consists of purifying hearts from
worldly occupations and being attached to its allurements through paying
absolute attention towards God-Almighty by means of invocations and
pondering, and cleansing of heart's dwellings from all sort of
attachment towards other than God.

Because, the heart is like a pot, which if filled with water completely
would not have any space left to be filled with vinegar. In order to
fill this pot with vinegar first it must be emptied with water.
God-Almighty has not created anyone with dual heart.”

“Perfection in love demands that one must love God-Almighty with the
entire existence of his heart, because so for as the heart continues to
pay attention towards other things at least a part of it shall remain
occupied with other than God-Almighty.

Therefore, as much as one is attached to other than God -his love
towards Him will be decreased in the same proportion, except where, this
attention towards other than God is related to a situation, whereby “ an
act of God and His created being “ are reflections of one of the
manifestations of God's sacred names and Characteristics.”

God-Almighty in the following verse of Holy Qur’an, has pointed out
about the same meanings:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلِ اللَّهُ ۖ ثُمَّ ذَرْهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say God: Then leave them (6:9)***

A stage which is achieved as a result of strong desire where a human
being strives that whatever have been revealed for him should become
further clearly manifested. While he should remain anxious towards what
have not yet been accomplished, because, the strong desire is related to
a thing which partly have been perceived from some aspects. but from
other dimensions it has not yet been comprehended, and in between these
two, there exists the reality, which is beyond the limits and infinite.

“Because, the degree and ranks of comprehension of what have been
achieved -is infinite. Similarly, whatever magnification has been left
from God' s Splendor and Beauty is also infinite and having attained the
real union with the sweetheart, one still desires strongly that
pleasurable event which is free from all sort of pains. Therefore,
desire never rests at any stage especially when he witnesses so many
ranks and positions beyond the imagination of human intellect.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُورُهُمْ يَسْعَىٰ بَيْنَ أَيْدِيهِمْ وَبِأَيْمَانِهِمْ يَقُولُونَ
رَبَّنَا أَتْمِمْ لَنَا نُورَنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There light will run before them and on their right hands: They will
say: our Lord! Perfect our light for us. (66:8)***[^21]

[^1]: Wasail al-Shi’a, vol. 4. p-1182.

[^2]: Wasail al-Shi’a, vol. 4. p-1183.

[^3]: Wasail al-Shi’a vol. 4, p-1182.

[^4]: Wasail al-Shi’a, vol. 4, p-181.

[^5]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p-154.

[^6]: Imam al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali: The eldest son of Imam ‘Ali and Hadhrat
Fatimah was born on Tuesday, 15 Ramadhan 3 AH in Madina. When the Holy
Prophet received the happy news of the birth of his grandson, he came to
the house of his beloved daughter, took the newly born child in his
arms, recited adhan and iqamah in his right and left ears respectively,
and in compliance with Divine command named him al-Hasan. The martyrdom
of his father Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) on the 21st Ramadhan marked the inception
of Imam Hasan' s imamate. The majority of Muslims pledged their
allegiance to him and finalized the formality of oath of allegiance
(bayah). No sooner had he taken the reins of leadership into his hands
then he had to meet the challenge of Mu'awiyah the Governor of Syria who
declared war against him. In compliance of Divine will and in order not
to refrain from bloodshed of Muslims he entered into a piece treaty with
Mu'awiyah whose terms were not respected and carried out by Mu'awiyah.
Mu'awiyah's malice against Imam Hasan led him to conspire with Imams
wife Ja'dah the daughter of Ash'ath. She was made give the Imam some
poison which affected his liver. Imam Hasan, thus, succumbed to
Mu'awiyah's total mischief and attained his martyrdom on 28th (Safar) 50
A.H. His funeral was attended by Imam al-Husayn and the members of
Hashimite family. His bier while being taken for burial to the Holy
Prophet's tomb was shot at with arrows by his enemies, (under the direct
supervision and consent of A'ishah), and it had to be diverted for
burial to Jannatu'l-Baqi' at Madina.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p-156.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p-163.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p-163.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p-156.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p-151.

[^12]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-817.

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar vol. 93, p-158.

[^14]: Haqayaqe Faiz, p-179.

[^15]: Imam al-Husayn: The younger son of ‘Ali by Fatimah was born in
Medina on Thursday 3rd Sha'ban 4 A.H; like his brother he lived most of
his life quietly in Medina under the watchful eyes of the caliph's
officials and spies. When Mu'awiyah's son Yazid became caliph, he
demanded allegiance from al-Husayn, who refused to give it. Finally
al-Husayn felt it necessary to go into battle against Yazid to protest
against the injustices which were being carried out in the name of
Islam. He and a small group of followers including most of his immediate
family were cruelly massacred at Karbala. The day of his martyrdom l0th
Muharram ' A.H.(Ashura) has become the most solemn day of the Islamic
calendar, marked by processions and universal mourning. He is buried in
Karbala in Iraq [Tr].

[^16]: Iqbal al-Amal, Prayer for the Day of Arafah.

[^17]: Iqbal al-Amal, Monajat al-Shabaniyyah.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p-163.

[^19]: Ten-Wisdoms (Uqool Mufarqheh): Sardar al-Mutalihin and other
Islamic philosophers, regarding the creation of universe, have confirmed
the existence of Ten-Wisdoms (Uqool-Mufarqeh) before the creation of
natural world. And the Divine blessings upon the material world are
bestowed through their means [Author].

[^20]: Mafateeh al-Ghaib, p-54.

[^21]: Haqaiq, p-181.


