Biography of Ayatullah Ibrahim Amini
====================================

He was born in 1925 in the City of Najafabad in the Province of Esfahan.
Having finished his primary studies in Najafabad, he joined the
Religious Learning Center of Esfahan in 1942. After completing his
curriculum of religious studies in Esfahan, he joined the most famous
Religious Learning Center of Qum in 1947, where he learned Dars
al-Kharij[^1], Jurisprudence and principles, under the tutorship of most
eminent religious scholars of that period. He studied the Philosophy
books:

Manzoomeh of Hakim Sabzavari, Isfar of Sadar al-Mutaleheen and Shifa of
Avicena, under the tutorship of most eminent philosophers of that
period. Also, he studied the religious sciences of Kalam (Discourse) and
Tafseer (Commentary) during his stay over there.

While, pursuing his religious studies at Esfahan and Qum he also taught
Literature, Jurisprudence and Philosophy. Because of his special
attitude and inclination towards the sciences namely: Psychology,
Child-Psychology, Education and Training, Family-rights, Family-ethics,
and Traditions of Holy Prophet (S) and Infallible Imams (a.s.), he
pursued advance studies and research in these areas.

Ayatullah Amini from the very beginning was interested in writing and
academic research and therefore, since the year 1945 he has been engaged
intensively in writing and research. Following is a list of some of his
published works:

1. Dad-Gustar al-Jahan (World Administer of Justice) about the life of
Imam al-Mahdi (a.s.).

2. Barrasi Masail al-Kulli Imamat (Over all review of affairs related to
Divinely Appointed Viceregency).

3. Aayeen al-Hamsar Dari (the Code of Marital Relationship).

4. Aayeen al- Tarbiyat dar Tarbiyate-Kudak (The Code of Child-training).

5. Islam wa Talim wa Tarbiyat (Education and Training in Islam).

6. Intekhab al- Hamsar (Selection of Spouse).

7. Bano al-Namuna al-lslam (The Ideal Women of Islam), about the life of
Fatimah az-Zahra (SA) the daughter of the Holy Prophet (S).

8. Khud Sazi dar Akhlaque (Moral Self-building).

9. Aamuzish al-Din (Religious-Education): Roots and Branches of
religion, explained in simple language, consisting of seven volumes, are
included in the curriculum of Primary Education.

10. Droos min al-Saqafateh al-Islamiyah: A complete course of Roots and
Branches of Religion of Intermediate level.

11. Aashnai ba Masail al-Kulli Islam (Acquaintance with over all Islamic
Affairs).

12. Hame Bayad Be Danand (Everybody should know); A small booklet
containing the details of Roots and Branches of the Religion for younger
people.

13. Islam wa Tammudan al-Gharb (Islam and Western Civilization):
Translation from Arabic into Persian of Moududi's Book: Nahn wa
al-Hazarate al-Gharbiyeh.

14. A lot of miscellaneous articles written on various: Ideological,
Political, Social, Ethical and Educational topics for presentation at
National and International Seminars and Conferences. The above listed
books were written in Persian but so far many of them have been
translated into various foreign languages.

Ayatullah Amini, an eminent scholar and jurisprudent is a professor at
the Religious Learning Center at Qum where he is involved in teaching,
writing and research activities. He very frequently represents the
Islamic Republic of Iran at various international conferences. In
addition to his teaching responsibilities he also holds many important
national positions as follows:

Member and Vice President of Assembly of Experts (*Majlis
al-Khubrigan*), Secretary-General of Office and Educational Research
Center of Assembly of Experts, Member Academic Council of Religious
Learning Center of Qum, and Chief of Cultural Affairs, Member Board of
Trustees of World Center for Islamic Sciences, Member, board of Trustees
Imam al-Sadiq University in Tehran and Member Supreme Council of World
Assembly of Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)

[^1]: Dars al-Kharij: The highest level of theological education related
to jurisprudence in the form of lectures, beyond the limited boundaries
of textbooks.


