The Effects and Indications of Invocation (Dhikr)
=================================================

As it was explained earlier that invocation (*dhikr*), witnessing
(*shahood*), and countenance (*laqa*), are esoteric positions; and are
genuine spiritual perfections, whereby a wayfarer really attains an
exalted rank of existence which was not accomplished by him earlier.

If it is said: the position of witnessing is real and similarly, if it
is said: the position of love, the position of compliance, the position
of desire, the position of union, and the positions of countenance are
not metaphorical, rather are real positions; it means that the relevant
position represents a rank and degree of a real existence, which
naturally should be accompanied with new effects and indications, so
that the existence of that perfection could be identified through them.
Here, we would describe the details of the following effects:

1. Commitment for God's Obedience
---------------------------------

When some one attains a position whereby in his esoteric essence
witnesses God's Beauty and sees himself in His presence, without any
doubt will obey His commands absolutely. Whatever, he has been commanded
to do will be performed by him and will refrain himself from things made
forbidden for him.

If, a human being wants to know whether he has attained that position or
not, he must evaluate his commitments towards Divine positive and
negative commands and in accordance to his performance may determine his
relative rank. It is not possible that a human being would have attained
the exalted position of love and witnessing and would not have a total
commitment towards Divine commands. Imam al-Sadiq has defined the
invocation (*dhikr*) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: (فى حديث الى ان قال) ولكن اذ اورد عليك شئ
امر الله به اخذت به واذا ورد عليك شئ نهى عنه تركته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Invocation is meant that when some one encounters an act which has
been made mandatory by God-Almighty he performs it and if it is
forbidden, he refrains from it.”*[^1]

Imam al Husayn (a.s.) in his prayer of Arafah said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا من اذاق احبائه حلاوة المؤانسة فقاموا بين يديه متملقين و يا من البس
اوليائه ملابس هيبته فقاموا بين يديه مستغفرين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh God-Almighty! Thou are the One Who has poured the sweetness of Your
love inside your friend's mouths so that they should stand in prayer in
front of You and must adore You with humility. Oh Thou are the One Who
has dressed your saints with the robe of fear so that they should stand
and repent in front of you.”*[^2]

God-Almighty said in Holy Qur’an

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِن كُنتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ
اللَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: If you do love God follow me: God will love you. (3:31)***

Imam al Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام: من كان ذاكر الله على الحقيقة فهو مطيع ومن كان
غافلا عنه فهو عاص.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever becomes a sincere invocator of God-Almighty, will also become
truly obedient to Him, and whoever is negligent, will be a sinner.”*[^3]

2. Humility
-----------

Whoever witnesses the Power and Majesty of God-Almighty would naturally
humiliate himself in front of him, and will continuously lower his head
in regret while realizing his omissions and negligence.

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) had narrated in a tradition:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام (فى حديث الى قال) ومعرفتك بذكره لك يورثك الخضوع
والاستحيا والانكسار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Your enlightenment because of your being paid attention by
God-Almighty will result in your becoming humble, modest and
prudent.”*[^4]

3. Excitement for Worshipping
-----------------------------

One of the indication of attaining the position of witnessing is the
strong liking for worshipping and feeling intense pleasure during its
performance, because, some one who has witnessed the Majesty and
Splendor of the Lord of the Worlds and considers himself in the presence
of God-Almighty -the Fountainhead of All Magnanimity and Perfection
–would prefer the pleasure of hymns and humming communications with Him
over any other enjoyment.

Those who are deprived of spiritual pleasures keep themselves amused
with transient worldly amusements which in reality are no more than a
pain killer, but those who have tasted the real pleasure of worshipping
and hymns of the Lord of the Worlds would never exchange their pleasant
state and beauty with any other enjoyment.

These are the purest God's servant who worship him only for the sake of
his worthiness to be worshipped and not for the sake of any reward and
punishment. In this regard, you must have heard about the melting and
burning worshipping and intimate humming communications of the Holy
Prophet (S) Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) Imam al-Sajjad and other Imams of Prophets
(Ahlul Bayt) with their Lord.

4. Tranquility and Assurance
----------------------------

The world is a place of pains, sorrows, and sufferings, which can be
classified into the following three categories:

• **First type:** Tragedies like sickness of self or relatives death of
self or next of kills, oppression, prejudices, injustice, discard, and
interference etc.

• **Second type:** Regret and annoyance for lack of worldly things which
are beyond one's reach.

• **Third type:** Fear of loosing whatever have been accumulated, fear
of theft or loss of wealth, fear of loosing children because of
accidents, and fear of getting sick and possibility of death.

All of the above most probably takes away ease and comfort from a human
being, whose roots could be traced to strong attachments to world and
avoidance of God's remembrance. God-Almighty said in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَعْرَضَ عَن ذِكْرِي فَإِنَّ لَهُ مَعِيشَةً ضَنكًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But he who turneth away from remembrance of me, his will be a narrow
life. (20:124)***

But God's sincere servants who have reached the Source of all Blessings
and Perfection, have witnessed the Absolute Beauty and Splendor, are
contented because of God's Remembrance and Affection. They are free from
all sort of worries and sorrows, because of their having God-Almighty,
they possess every thing.

They do not become annoyed or it worried for lack of worldly things
because they do not have any inclinations towards them, instead, they
have attached themselves to the Fountainhead of all Blessings and
Perfection, which lacks nothing. Imam al-Hussain (a.s.) in his prayer of
Arafah had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنت الذي أزلت الأغيار عن قلوب أحبائك، حتى لم يحبوا سواك، ولم يلجئوا
إلى غيرك أنت المونس لهم حيث أوحشتهم العوالم، وأنت الذي هديتهم حيث
استبانت لهم المعالم ماذا وجد من فقدك؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وما الذي فقد من وجدك؟ لقد خاب من رضي دونك بدلا ولقد خسر من بغى عنك
متحولا كيف يرجى سواك وانت ما قطعت الاحسان وكيف يطلب من غيرك وانت ما
بدلت عادة الامتنان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh Lord! Thou are the one who has removed the love of others from the
hearts of your favorite saints, so that they are not attached to any
body except You, and do not seek any other shelter except You. While
encountering terrible calamities they seek refuge in You. If Your
Enlightenment and Nearness have been achieved by them -it was only
because of Your-Guidance.”*

*“Whosoever does not find You what else there remains to be found? And
whoever has found You what else would he be lacking? How much looser is
the one who chooses other than You and how unfortunate is the one who
deviates from You. How can a human being expect thing from others*
*while Your Favors never get cut off from him? How could one pray for
his need before others, while knowing that Your Generosity and
Benevolence surround him.”*[^5]

Any how, the most important effect of one's attaining the position of
invocation, witnessing, and love is the attainment of heart's peace and
tranquility, because, in principle, nothing can rescue the heart's boat
inside the stormy oceans of the life except God’s Remembrance.
God-Almighty said in Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَتَطْمَئِنُّ قُلُوبُهُم بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ ۗ أَلَا
بِذِكْرِ اللَّهِ تَطْمَئِنُّ الْقُلُوبُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who have believed and whose hearts have rest in the remembrance of
God. Verily in the remembrance of God do hearts find rest! (***13:28)

The stronger will be the belief of a person the greater will be his
heart's degree of assurance and tranquility.

5. God's Attention towards the Servant
--------------------------------------

When a God's servant remembers God-Almighty, reciprocally He too bestows
special favor and blessing upon His servant. This matter has been
mentioned in the following verses and traditions, God-Almighty said in
Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاذْكُرُونِي أَذْكُرْكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Therefore, remember me, I will remember you. (2:152)***

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبدالله عليه السلام: قال الله عزوجل: يابن آدم! اذكرنى فى نفسك
اذكرك فى نفسى, يابن آدم! اذكرنى فى خلا اذكرك فى خلا, يابن آدم! اذكرنى
فى ملا اذكرك فى ملا خير من ملاك. وقال: ما من عبد ذكر الله فى ملا من
الناس الا ذكره الله فى ملا من الملائكة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God-Almighty had said: 'Oh son of Adam! Remember me in your self so
that I would remember you in My Self;. Oh son of Adam! Remember me in
solitude so that I may remember you in solitude; Oh son of Adam!
Remember me in congregation so that I remember you in a congregation
much better than yours,” and said: 'Every servant who remembers
God-Almighty among the human beings, God-Almighty remember him among the
angels.”*[^6]

God's attention and special blessings towards a servant is not a
metaphorical thing, rather is a reality whose reasons may be explained
as follows:

### First Reason

When a servants remembers God-Almighty and with this means makes himself
readied for acceptance of His special favors, God-Almighty increases the
level of his perfection and elevates him into higher spiritual
positions.

### Second Reason

When a servant recites God’s invocations and spiritually migrates
towards Him, he is blessed with God's attention and special favors,
whereby He bestows upon him exalted spiritual positions and takes over
the control of his heart, The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن النبى صلى الله عليه وآله قال: قال الله تعالى: إذا علمت أنّ الغالب
على عبدي الاشتغال بي نقلت شهوته في مسألتي ومناجاتي ، فإذا كان عبدي
كذلك فأراد أن يسهو حلتُ بينه وبين أن يسهو ـ وهذا معنى العصمة ـ اُولئك
أوليائي حقّاً ، اُولئك الأبطال حقّا, أولئك الذين اذا اردت ان اهلك اهل
الارض عقوبة زويتها عنهم من اجل اولئك الابطال.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God Almighty said: 'When I find a servant sincerely engaged in my
invocation -makes him further interested into hymns and worshipping, and
if occasionally negligence dominates over him, I prevent such
occurrence, These are my real saints and heroes, If I want to annihilate
all the earthly creations, it is because of their distinguished
existence that My punishment does not descend towards earth.”*[^7]

6. God's Love towards the Servant
---------------------------------

One of the effect of invocation is the God's love towards the servant.
It has been inferred from various Qur’anic verses and traditions that
when a person engages himself in God's remembrance and obeys His
commandments, He too reciprocates and starts loving that person, The
Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قل ان كُنتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ اللَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“If you love God, follow me, God will love you. (3:31)***

Imam al-Sadiq had narrated from the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبد الله عليه السلام: قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: من اكثر
ذكر الله احبه الله ومن ذكر الله كثيرا كتبت له برائتان برائة من النار و
برائة من النفاق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever offers lots of God's invocation will achieve God's affection
towards him, whoever continuously remembers God-Almighty will have two
letters written for him letter of immunity from Hells' fire, and letter
of immunity from discard.”*[^8]

God's affection towards a servant is neither a ceremonial act nor it
could be compared to the meanings of love as related to human beings. In
case of human beings love is meant as heart's attachments and
inclinations towards a desirable object, but for God such interpretation
of love is not correct.

Love of God must be interpreted as His special favors and graces which
further enhance a servants sincerity, attention, and worshipping,
towards Him, and through these means attracts him towards the higher
stages of perfection and nearness. Because, He loves the servant and
likes hearing his humming hymns -bestows upon him the special favor of
motivating further towards prayer, invocation, worshipping, and
supplications.

Since, He likes servant's nearness, accordingly provides the required
means for his perfection, and in nutshell because of His affection
towards the servant -takes over his heart's control, thus, providing him
the opportunities for better and speedy ascent towards His nearness.

7. The Most Important Effects
-----------------------------

At this stage the wayfarer is blessed with most special benefits and
privileges whose explanation is not possible through the pen and tongue
of strangers, and except the recipient of these positions no one knows
any thing about these affairs.

Because, of the effects of self-purification, esoteric cleansing,
worshipping, asceticism, thinking, and continuous recital of invocation,
the wayfarer attains on exalted spiritual rank where, by means of his
esoteric eyes and ears is able to see and hear the most sublime
realities which can not be seen and heard by the apparent eyes and ears.
Sometimes he hears the praise and hymns of other creatures including
angels and joins them.

While he lives in this world and socialize with its people but in his
esoteric essence looks towards upper horizons living in an another world
as though he does not belong to this world. In that World he witnesses
the Hell and Paradise and keeps in touch with angels and spirits of
God's righteous saints. He is familiar with other World, and utilizes
its blessings but does not want to speak about it, because such persons
prefers seclusion and strictly sustain themselves from fame and
popularity.

The higher Divine learning are descended upon the gnostics heart, and
mystical-sciences which are not customary with conventional learning are
witnessed by him. The wayfarer ultimately achieves an exalted spiritual
position whereby he forgets everything including his self and does not
pays attention towards anything except the Holy Names and
Characteristics of God-Almighty. He sees the Lord of the Universe as
Over seer of every thing and every where, Who had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هو الاول والاخر والظاهر والباطن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I am the first, the last, the hidden and the apparent.”*

He sees the world as a manifestation of God's characteristics and
considers every perfection and beauty from God-Almighty. The depravity
of essence of all creatures, the absolute richness of the Self Existent
(*Wajib al-Wajood*) becomes apparent for him and in witnessing the
Supreme Source of Absolute Beauty and Perfection feels fascinated and
absorbed.

Here it should be pointed out that the position of annihilation (*fana*)
in itself consists of various degrees and ranks, and it would be
appropriate if this deprived servant should better refrain himself from
entering into these privileged positions.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93. p-155.

[^2]: Iqbal al-Amal-Prayer of Arafah.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p-158.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 93, p-158.

[^5]: Iqbal al-Amal, Prayer of Arafah.

[^6]: Wasail al-Shi’a, vol 4, p-1185.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol, 93, p-162.

[^8]: Wasail al-Shi’a, vol. 4, p-181.


