Second Means, Nourishment of Moral Virtues
==========================================

One of the ways for gradual nourishment and perfection of self,
spiritual migration, and attaining God's Nearness is to excel in moral
virtues deeply rooted within human primordial nature. Good moral ethics
are values which are incorporated within human Celestial Spirit and with
their gradual nourishment the humanness of a human being attains
perfection until finally ascending towards the exalted sublime position
of God's Nearness.

The Holy Essence of the Lord of the World is the fountainhead of all
perfection; since, a human being also belongs to the Upper Heavens,
through his pure, upright, and uncontaminated nature recognizes the
human perfection which are in proportion to Heavenly Kingdom, naturally
feels attracted towards them.

It is because of these considerations that all human beings at all
times, regarding appreciation of good moral virtues namely: justice,
sacrifice, righteousness, trust, benevolence, bravery, patience and
perseverance, knowledge, defense of deprived, thanks, generosity,
loyalty, reliance (upon God), hospitability, pardon and forgiveness,
politeness, and social service etc. -are in agreement. God-Almighty in
Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا قَدْ
أَفْلَحَ مَن زَكَّاهَا وَقَدْ خَابَ مَن دَسَّاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And a soul and Him who perfected it, and inspired it (with
conscience of) what is wrong for it and (what is) right for it. He is
indeed successful who causes it to grow. And he is indeed a failure who
stunteth it. (91: 7-10)***

Moral virtues when repeated plant themselves firmly with in human self
and like a habit become a part of human existence. It influences the
self-building, what to become, and how to become of a human being. It is
because of these considerations that special attention has been paid
towards moral ethics in Islam, and they constitute a great portion of
Islamic commands.

There are hundreds and thousands of traditions which deal with ethics.
Majority of Qur’anic verses consist of ethical commands; majority of the
Qur’anic stories pursue moral objectives so much so that it could
rightly be called as a book of moral ethics.

In principle, one of the great aim of Divine prophets had been
self-purification and nourishment of. moral excellence. The Prophet of
Islam too had clearly announced the objective behind his prophetic
mission as perfection and nourishment of moral ethics and said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبى صلى الله عليه وآله: انما بعثت لاتمم مكارم الاخلاق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I have been appointed as prophet of God for the completion and
perfection of moral ethics.”*[^1]

Also, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص): عليكم بمكارم الاخلاق فان الله بعثى بها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I recommend to you the importance of good moral conduct because, I
have been appointed by God-Almighty to accomplish this very aim.”*[^2]

[^1]: al-Mustadrak, vol. 2 p-282.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69, p-375.


