Third Means, the Righteous Deeds
================================

It may be derived from the Holy Qur’an that after the belief (*Iman*)
the righteous deeds play the most important role in attaining
self-perfection, God’s Nearness, higher human ranks, and pure delightful
life of the Next World. God-Almighty has said in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَىٰ وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيِّبَةً ۖ وَلَنَجْزِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْرَهُم
بِأَحْسَنِ مَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whosoever doth right, whether male or female, and is a believer, him
verily We shall quicken with good life and We shall pay them a
recompense in proportion to the best of what they used to do. (16:
97)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.وَمَن يَأْتِهِ مُؤْمِنًا قَدْ عَمِلَ الصَّالِحَاتِ فَأُولَٰئِكَ
لَهُمُ الدَّرَجَاتُ الْعُلَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But whoso cometh unto Him a believer, having done good works, for
such are the high stations. (20:75)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَن كَانَ يَرْجُو لِقَاءَ رَبِّهِ فَلْيَعْمَلْ عَمَلًا صَالِحًا
وَلَا يُشْرِكْ بِعِبَادَةِ رَبِّهِ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoever hopeth for the meeting with his lord, let him to
righteous deeds and make none share of the worship due unto his lord.
(18:110)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعِزَّةَ فَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ جَمِيعًا ۚ إِلَيْهِ
يَصْعَدُ الْكَلِمُ الطَّيِّبُ وَالْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ يَرْفَعُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoso desireth power should know that) all power belongeth to God.
Unto Him good words ascend, and the pious deed doth He exalt. (35:10)***

The Glorious God in this verse explains that all power, prestige, and
wealth belong to Him and the sacred word that is the clean and pure soul
of a Monotheist (*Muahid*) and righteous belief in Monotheism (*Tawhid*)
will ascend towards God-Almighty, and this will be made possible through
the righteous deeds.

The righteous deeds performed with pure intention and sincerity affect
the doer's self thus, nourishing him for attaining perfection. The Holy
Qur’an clearly explains that the pure and charming life of the Hereafter
and attainment of the most sublime spiritual position of God's Nearness
and Countenance is possible only through the combination of belief and
righteous deeds.

The Holy Qur’an has emphasized the importance of righteous deeds a lot
and regards it as the only means for achieving eternal salvation and
prosperity. The value and worth of righteous deeds depends upon their
being compatible with religious law and revelations.

Because the Creator of the men as well as of the world who is familiar
with the special creation of human beings knows his path of perfection
and salvation and therefore, accordingly has revealed it to the Holy
Prophet (S) through the revelations so that he may present it to the
people for their utilization. God-Almighty said in Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اسْتَجِيبُوا لِلَّهِ وَلِلرَّسُولِ
إِذَا دَعَاكُمْ لِمَا يُحْيِيكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“O you who believe, obey God and the messenger while he calleth you
to that which quickeneth you. (8:24)***

The righteous deeds are the deeds that have been defined by religious
law (*shariah*) as mandatory (*wajib*) or recommended (*mustahab*)
deeds, and a wayfarer through their performance may undertake his
spiritual migration leading him towards God's Nearness. This is the only
way and all other ways are deviated and misleading and will never take a
wayfarer to his final destination.

A wayfarer must be absolutely obedient to religious law and for his
mystical journey should not follow any other path except the religious
path and should avoid strictly engaging into invocations and
incantations that do not have any authenticity in religious law.

Because, not only they do not take a wayfarer towards his destination
instead, carry him farther apart from his destination since deviation
from religious law is innovation and sin. To start with, a wayfarer
should try his best to perform all religious obligatory obligations
correctly in accordance with regulations, because, their renunciation
will not result in attainment of higher spiritual positions, however
seriously he may endeavor in performing recommended deeds and engaging
into invocations and incantations.

During the second stage the recommended deeds and invocations might be
included in the program. The wayfarer at this stage in accordance to his
spiritual strength and personal capabilities may perform recommended
deeds and the more he endeavors the greater will be the possibilities of
his attaining higher spiritual positions.

From the point of view of superiority, it should be pointed out that all
recommended deeds are not equal rather some of them excel over others
and with the result some of them could be more better and favorite, as
have been mentioned in the books of supplication and traditions.

A wayfarer might select some supplications, prayers, invocations, and
incantations from these books and then may engage himself on a regular
basis. The more and precisely he performs them, the greater will be the
purity and illumination of his soul, enabling him to ascend higher and
higher up toward the exalted gnostic stations.

Here, we will point out to some of the righteous deeds and for the
remaining ones the readers are advised to refer to other books but it
should be reminded that mandatory deeds, recommended deeds, invocations,
and supplications would be considered as righteous and favorite deeds
only if they are performed with sincerity.

The authenticity of a deed and its becoming favorite depends in
proportion to the sincerity of the performer. From this consideration;
firstly we must discuss sincerity (*ikhlas*), and I will describe some
of the righteous deeds later on.

The Sincerity
-------------

The position of sincerity has been described as one of the highest
stages of a wayfarer's gnostic journey and attainment of
self-perfection. It is because of sincerity that the heart becomes
center of illumination for Divine light, whereby wisdom and knowledge
flowing through heart manifest themselves through appearing upon the
tongue. The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ما اخلص عبد اربعين صباحا الا جرت
ينابيع الحكمة من قلبه على لسانه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever devotes himself sincerely for a period of forty days for
God-Almighty, streams of wisdom flowing from his heart will appear upon
his tongue.”*[^1]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: اين الذين اخلصوا اعمالهم لله وطهرا قلبهم لمواضع
نظر الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Where are those who performed their deeds with sincerity for
God-Almighty, and purified their hearts so that they could absorb God's
special attention towards them.”*[^2]

Hadhrate Fatimah al-Zahra[^3] (s.a.) the daughter of the Holy Prophet
(S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قالت سيدة النسا صلوات الله عليها: من اصعد الى الله خالص عبادته اهبط
الله افضل مصلحته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever sends pure and sincere worship for God-Almighty, He too
reciprocates by bestowing upon Him His best favors.”*[^4]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: قلوب العباد الطاهرة مواضع نظر الله سبحانه فمن طهر
قلبه نظر الله اليه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Pure hearts of believers are reserved for Glorious God' s special
attention, therefore, whoever purifies his heart will certainly be
blessed with God's special attention.”*[^5]

The Holy Prophet (S) had narrated a tradition from Arch-Angel Gabriel
who heard it from God-Almighty who said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: مخبرا عن جبرئيل عن الله عز وجل انه
قال: الاخلاص سر من اسرارى استودعته قلب من احببت من عابدى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“That sincerity is a mystery from my mysteries and whoever is loved by
me, I will deposit it in his heart.”*[^6]

Sincerity consists of various grades and degrees, the most lowest grade
of sincerity is that a believer should perform all his worships strictly
for the sake of God-Almighty free from all traces of polytheism,
hypocrisy, and ostentation.

This much amount of sincerity is must for the correctness of worships,
and without it the doer will not be able to receive God's Nearness. The
worth of a deed depends upon pure intentions and sincerity, free from
all traces of Polytheism and dissimulation. The Holy Prophet (S) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ان الله لا ينظر الى صوركم واعمالكم
وانما ينظر الى قلوبكم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God-Almighty does not look at your faces and deeds rather looks inside
your hearts.”*[^7]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: يقول الله: انا خير شريك, من اشرك معى غيرى
فى عمله لم اقبله الا ما كان خالصا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God-Almighty said: ' I am the best partner for You, and whosoever
associates with me some one else in his deeds, then I will handover the
entire deed to that associate, because I do not accept but pure and
sincere deeds.”*[^8]

Also, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: ان الله يحشر الناس على نياتهم يوم
القيامة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“On the Day of Judgment, God-Almighty will associate people in
accordance with their intentions.”*

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: طوبى لمن اخلص لله العبادة الدعا ولم يشغل قلبه بما
ترى عيناه ولم ينس ذكر الله بما تسمع اذناه ولم يحزن صدره بما اعطى غيره.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“How lucky is the one who worships and prays only for the sake of
God-Almighty; does not engage his heart in whatsoever is seen by his
eyes; does not forget God's Remembrance because of whatsoever enters
into his ears,. and does not become envious in seeing things bestowed
upon others.”*[^9]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: امارات السعادة اخلاص العمل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Sincerity in deeds is an indication of doer's salvation and
prosperity.”*[^10]

A worship that is accepted by God-Almighty and earns perfection and His
Nearness for the worshipper -is the worship free from all traces of
self-conceit, dissimulation, Egotism, and ostentation offered for the
sake of Him alone. The only criteria for acceptance of deeds
is -sincerity and devotion. The more is the degree of sincerity the
greater would be the perfection and merit of the deed.

The worshippers may be grouped in to the following three categories:

1. The First Group: Consists of those who worship God-Almighty because
of fear of Divine punishment and Hell’s fire.

2. The Second Group: Consists of those who obey Divine commands for the
sake of bounties of Paradise and rewards in the Hereafter.

Although, worshipping with the above aims does not harm their
correctness in any way and the doer will earn the eternal rewards and
favors, because, the Holy Qur’an and traditions have very often utilized
both of the above methods for the people's guidance.

Apart from that the Holy Prophet (S) himself, infallible Imams (a.s.) of
his Holy Progeny, and God's Favorite Saints too were afraid of Divine
retributions, continuously cried for help and were eager and hopeful for
Paradise and its bounties.

3. The Third Group: Consists of those who worship God-Almighty because
they consider Him worthy of it and want to thank him for His Divine
bounties and blessings. Such aim does not have any contradiction with
sincerity -a criteria for the acceptance of deeds.

Therefore, in traditions, in order to encourage people for God's
obedience, His bounties and favors have been reminded, so that to show
their appreciation, the human beings should obey His commandments. Even
the Holy Prophet (S) himself and Infallible Imam (a.s.) of his holy
progeny sometimes in order to emphasize the importance and seriousness
of worship said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
افلا اكون عبدا شكورا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Shouldn't I be a thankful servant?”*

Although, the deeds of all groups do get accepted, but among them it is
the third group whose deeds carry special distinction because they are
accompanied with a higher degree of sincerity. The Commander of the
Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: ان قوما عبدوا الله رغبة فتلك عبادة
التجار وان قوما عبدوا الله رهبة فتلك عبادة العبيد وان قوما عبدوا الله
شكرا فتلك عبادة الاحرار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The worshiper of God-Almighty may be divided into following three
groups:*

*1 First Group: Consists of those who worship God-Almighty for the sake
of eternal rewards, which is like -worshipping of merchants, (for the
sake of profit).*

*2. Second Group: Consists of those who worship God-Almighty because of
the fear of God and retributions, which is like –the worshipping of
slaves (for the sake of fear).*

*3. Third Group: Consists of those who worship God-Almighty because to
express their appreciation and thanks for His bounties and favors which
is like the -worshipping of freeman.”*[^11]

4. The Fourth Group: Consists of those who worships God-Almighty for the
sake of attaining self-perfection and nourishment of their selves. Of
course, perusal of this objective does not inflict any damage to the
degree of sincerity and devotion that is the criteria for acceptance of
deeds.

5. The Fifth Group: Consists of those who are the most favorite and
distinguished servants of God-Almighty. Since they have recognized Him
very well and consider Him as the Fountainhead of all Blessings and
Perfection -Worship Him.

Because, of their being aware of the Absolute and Infinite Power of the
Lord of Splendor and Majesty, and since they have not discovered any
other effective source of power except Him - consider Him alone worthy
of worshipping, love Him and humiliate and humble themselves in front of
His Exalted Glory, And this is called the highest degree of sincerity
and devotion. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام: ان الناس يعبدون الله على ثلاثة أوجه: فطبقة
يعبدونه رغبة في ثوابه فتلك عبادة الحرصاء وهو الطمع، وآخرون يعبدونه
فرقا من النار فتلك عبادة العبيد وهي الرهبة، ولكني أعبده حبا له عز وجل
فتلك عبادة الكرام، وهو الامن لقوله عز وجل "وهم من فزع يومئذ آمنون"
وبـقوله "قل إن كنتم تحبون الله فاتبعوني يحببكم الله ويغفر لكم ذنوبكم"
فمن أحب الله أحبه الله، ومن أحبه الله عز وجل كان من الآمنين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There are three categories of worshipers:*

*The first category consists of those who worship for the sake of
eternal rewards -which is the worshipping of greedy, because they are
motivated due to greed.*

*The second category consists of those who worship because of fear of
Hell's fire which is the worshipping of slaves, since their motivation
is due to fear. But since I love God-Almighty -I worship Him, which is
the worship of elders, and nobles whose motivation is tranquility and
assurance. God-Almighty has said:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَهُم مِّن فَزَعٍ يَوْمَئِذٍ آمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And such are safe from fear that Day. (27:89)***

And further said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِن كُنتُمْ تُحِبُّونَ اللَّهَ فَاتَّبِعُونِي يُحْبِبْكُمُ
اللَّهُ وَيَغْفِرْ لَكُمْ ذُنُوبَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say (O Muhammad, to mankind): If you love God, follow me, God will
love you and forgive your sins. (3:31)***

Therefore, whosoever loves God-Almighty, He too loves him and (on the
Day of Resurrection) he will be among those who have been blessed with
peace and security”[^12]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: ما عبدتك خوفا من نارك ولا طمعا فى جنتك ولكن وجدتك
اهلا للعبادة فعبدتك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh God! I worship you neither because of fear from the Hell's fire nor
for the greed of Paradise's bounties, but, since 1 believe You are
worthy of adoration and praise -I do worship you.”*[^13]

All of the above mentioned groups are sincere and their deeds are
accepted but still all of them do not hold a single rank, rather from
the point of view of perfection they differ with each other -the fifth
group possessing the most distinguished position.

It should be reminded here that the holder of distinguished ranks are
not disqualified as for as the requirements of lower ranks are
concerned, rather in addition to their being qualified for lower ranks
they also possess higher distinguished credentials.

The righteous and sincere slaves of God-Almighty, too are afraid of Him,
are hopeful of His Mercy and Compassion, are thankful for His Bounties,
and are anxious for attaining spiritual nearness with Him, but their
motivation behind worship is not limited to only above things, instead,
since they have discovered a better understanding of God-Almighty, they
praise and worship Him.

Those distinguished and God's chosen human beings in spite of their
attaining exalted spiritual positions have not given up the lower
positions, because, a wayfarer traveling upon the road of perfection
when reaches relatively higher spiritual stations, also possesses the
qualifications of lower stations which have been attained by him earlier
in his spiritual journey.

Whatever was discussed so far was related to sincerity and devotion in
worship, but sincerity is something which is not limited to worship
only, rather a wayfarer gradually reaches to a point whereby he purifies
himself as well his heart, for God-Almighty, cleansing the heart's
dwelling from all sort of alien existence.

So much so that all actions, deeds and thoughts, are assigned
exclusively to God-Almighty, and the wayfarer does not perform any thing
but for His pleasure. He is not afraid of other than God and does not
trust other than Him, to the extent that even his friendship and enmity
are done exclusively for the God’s pleasure, and this is known as the
highest degree of sincerity. The Commander of the Faithful Imam ' ‘Ali
(a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام:طوبى لمن اخلص لله عمله وعلمه وحبه وتغضه واخذه
وتركه وكلامه وصمته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“How fortunate is the one whose deeds, knowledge, love, grudge,
possession, renunciation speaking, and silence -all are reserved
exclusively for God-Almighty.”*[^14]

Imam al-Sadiq has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: من احب لله وابغض لله واعطى لله ومنع لله
فهو ممن يكمل ايمانه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whosoever loves, grudges, donates, and refrains exclusively for the
sake of God-Almighty -is some one whose faith is perfect.”*[^15]

Also, said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام: ما انعم الله على عبد اجل من ان لا يكون فى قلبه
مع الله غيره.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God-Almighty has not bestowed upon a servant any thing superior
than -that there should not be anything in his heart except
God-Almighty.”*[^16]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: اين القلوب التى وهبت لله وعوقدت على طاعة الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Where are the hearts who have been donated to God-Almighty, and are
committed exclusively for his obedience.”*[^17]

When a wayfarer attains that privileged position, God-Almighty purifies
him for Himself and through Divine Illumination, intuition, and
revelations makes him immune against sins and transgressions. Such a
human being is called God's devoted friend (*Mukhlis*) and they are the
most distinguished servants of God-Almighty. The Holy Qur’an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا أَخْلَصْنَاهُم بِخَالِصَةٍ ذِكْرَى الدَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! We purified them with a pure thought, remembrance of the Home
(of the Hereafter) (38:46)***

The Holy Qur’an says about Prophet Moses (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاذْكُرْ فِي الْكِتَابِ مُوسَىٰ ۚ إِنَّهُ كَانَ مُخْلَصًا وَكَانَ
رَسُولًا نَّبِيًّا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And make mention in the scripture of Moses. Lo! He was chosen, and
he was a messenger of (God), a Prophet. (19:51)***

God's chosen devoted servants ultimately reach to a position whereby
even Satan becomes disappointed in his efforts to make them deviated.
The Holy Qur’an quotes Satan when he speaks to God-Almighty:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ فَبِعِزَّتِكَ لَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ إِلَّا عِبَادَكَ
مِنْهُمُ الْمُخْلَصِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He said: Then by Thy might, I surely will beguile them every one,
save Thy single minded slaves among them. (38: 82-83)***

In the end it must be reminded that attaining such exalted position is
not an easy and simple thing rather it requires self-purification,
endeavors, and struggle in worshipping. The Commander of the Faithful,
Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: الخلاص ثمرة العبادة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Sincerity and devotion are the fruits of worship.”*[^18]

As has been described in traditions that engagements in worshipping and
invocations continuously for a period of forty days and nights might be
effective and useful for attaining inner purity enlightenment of soul,
and the position of sincerity. But, this could not be accomplished in
one single attempt rather should be attempted gradually after passing
through various stages of sincerity.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70. p-242 .

[^2]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-172.

[^3]: Fatimah al-Zahra (s.a.): The beloved daughter of the Prophet from
Khadijah, Fatimah was born in Mecca on Friday, 20th Jumadath-thaniyah in
the fifth year after the declaration of the prophethood (615 A.D.) She
was so loved by the Prophet that he called her “a part of me.” In 2 A.H.
/ 624 A.D. she married ' ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib from whom she bore three
sons, Hasan, Husayn and Muhsin (who died stillborn), and two daughters,
Zaynab and Umme Kulthum. She was at the Prophet's bedside at the moment
of his death and struggled for her husband's succession to the
caliphate. She died at the age of 18 in Medina on 14th Jummaadi al awwl
11 A.H. (633 A.D.); and is buried in the graveyard of Jannatu'l Baqi in
Medina. It is said that when she was born the whole sky became
illuminated; therefore she is called al-Zahra' , the “Radiant.” She is
the mother of the Shi'ite Imams and is considered the most holy of
Muslim women.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-249.

[^5]: the Ghirar al-Hukm, p-538.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70. p-249.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-209.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-243.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70-229.

[^10]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-43.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 70, p-l96.

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-197.

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, p-197.

[^14]: Ghirar al-Hukm p-462.

[^15]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-248.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70 p-249.

[^17]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-172.

[^18]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-17.


