Some Righteous Deeds
====================

As was mentioned in earlier chapters of this books that the only path
that could lead a wayfarer towards perfection and may help him in his
ascend towards God's Nearness is obedience to revelations and following
the path shown by Divine Prophets. The path which they followed
themselves has been defined as performance of mandatory (*wajibat*) and
recommended (*Nawafil wa Mustahabbat*) religious deeds which are called
righteous deeds.

All mandatory and recommended righteous deeds incorporated into Islamic
Cannon Law (*sharia*) and registered in the Holy Qur’an as well as in
other books of traditions are called as righteous deeds. You may better
identity them and might utilize them in following the righteous path.
Here we will discuss some of righteous deeds as follows:

First: Obligatory Prayers
-------------------------

The Prayer is one of the best means for undertaking spiritual migration
towards God-Almighty and attaining the exalted position of His-nearness.
Imam al-Ridha (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الرضا عليه السلام: الصلواة قربان كل تقى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The prayer is a means of attaining God’s nearness for every righteous
human being.”*[^1]

Mu' awiyah bin Wahab asked Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.)

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
معاوية بن وحب قال: سالت اباعبدالله عليه السلام عن افضل ما يتقرب به
العباد الى ربهم واحب ذلك الى الله عز وجل ما هو؟ فقال ما أعلم شيئاً بعد
المعرفة أفضل من هذه الصلاة، ألا ترى أن العبد الصالح عيسى ابن مريم عليه
السلام « وأوصاني بالصلاة والزكوة ما دمت حياً. : قال
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“What is the best deed which brings human beings close to God-Almighty,
and is also liked by Him ? The Imam replied: After enlightenment of
God's Essence, I do not know any thing better than* *the 'prayer”. Did
not you hear that God's righteous servant Prophet Jesus (a.s.) has said:
“God has recommended for me prayer and charity until I remain
alive.”*[^2]

Also, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زيد الشحام عن ابي عبدالله عليه السلام قال سمعته بقول: أحب الاعمال إلى
الله عز و جل الصلاة وهي آخر وصايا الانبياء (عل)، فما أحسن الرجل يغتسل
أو يتوضأ فيسبغ الوضوء ثم يتنحى حيث لا يراه أنيس فيشرف عليه وهو راكع أو
ساجد. إن العبد إذا سجد فأطال السجود نادى إبليس: ياويلاه أطاع وعصيت
وسجد وأبيت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The most esteemed and favorite deed before God-Almighty is - “Prayer”
The Prayer is the last dying will of all prophets. How good it is that a
human being takes a bath or performs ablution, then retires into a
secluded corner where he is not seen by anyone and have the honor of
performing genuflexion and prostration. When a servant bows himself down
into prostration and prolonged it than Satan says:*

*“Oh! Woe upon me! this servant has obeyed God-almighty, while I
transgressed and he has offered prostration which I refused.”*[^3]

Imam al Ridha (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الرضا عليه السلام: اقرب ما يكون العبد من الله وهو ساجد وذلك قوله
تعالى "واسجد واقترب"
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The most nearest position between the servant and God-Almighty is- the
state of prostration* [^4]*because God-Almighty has said:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاسْجُدْ وَاقْتَرِب
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But prostrate thyself; and draw near (to God-Almighty).”*** (96:
19)[^5]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: اذ اقام المصلى الى الصلاة نزلت عليه
الرحمة من اعنان السما الى اعنان الارض وحفت به الملأكة وناداه ملك: لو
يعلم هذا المصلى ما فى الصلاة ما انفتل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When a human being stands for prayers,. God's Blessings descend upon
him from the sky; the angels circle him around and one of them says., If
this prayer-offerer would have known the worth of his prayer, he would
never have broken his concentration (towards God) throughout the
prayer.”*[^6]

The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: إذا قام العبد المؤمن في صلاته نظر
الله إليه أو قال: أقبل الله عليه - حتى ينصرف، وأظلته الرحمة من فوق
رأسه إلى افق السماء, والملائكة تحفه من حوله إلى افق السماء، ووكل الله
به ملكا قائما على رأسه يقول له: أيها المصلي لو تعلم من ينظر إليك ومن
تناجي ماالتفت ولا زلت من موضعك أبدا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When a believer stands for prayer, God-Almighty looks at him until he
finishes it, His blessing covers him from the sky; the angels circle him
around and God-Almighty assigns an angel who says: 'Oh prayer offerer!
If you would have known -who is looking at you and with whom are you
communicating ? You would never have paid your attention towards any
other thing, and you would never have been deviated from this
position.”*[^7]

### 1. Heart's Presence in Prayer

The Prayer is a celestial formula and Divine electuary, every part of
which contains a hidden mystery. It is a means of love, communication,
and remembrance of the Lord of the Universe. It is the best means of
attaining perfection, spiritual ascension, and God's Nearness. According
to Islamic traditions the prayer has been called -a believers heavenly
journey (*Mairaj*) which protects him from moral indecencies.

It is such a pure sparkling stream of spirituality that whosoever enters
into it five times a day will purity his soul from all sort of pollution
and contamination. It is the greatest trust of God-Almighty and is the
criteria of acceptance of all other deeds. The prayer is such a
mysterious heavenly formula, but subjected to its being alive and
possessing spirit, which means heart's presence during prayer, paying
attention towards God-Almighty, and being humble in front of Him.

The invocations, recitals of Qur’anic verses, genuflection, prostration,
the witnessing, and salutations constitute the face and body of the
prayer while the heart's presence and attention towards the Creator form
its spirit. Since a body without a soul becomes a dead body lacking any
characteristic, likewise a prayer offered without heart's presence,
although satisfies as far as the performance of compulsory religious
obligation is concerned, nevertheless, such a prayer does not help in
ascending the prayer offerer towards higher spiritual positions.

In principle, the greatest objective behind the establishment of prayer
may be described as -invocation recitals and engaging in God's
Remembrance. God-Almighty said to the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَقِمِ الصَّلَاةَ لِذِكْرِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And establish worship for My Remembrance. (20:14)***

The Friday-Prayer has been described as an invocation in the Holy
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا نُودِيَ لِلصَّلَاةِ مِن يَوْمِ
الْجُمُعَةِ فَاسْعَوْا إِلَىٰ ذِكْرِ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Oh ye who believe! When the call is heard for the prayer of the Day
of Congregation, haste unto remembrance of God. (62: 9)***

The criteria for the acceptance of prayer is -the heart's presence, and
whatever amount of heart's presence it may contain, the prayer will be
accepted accordingly. It is because of this consideration that
traditions have emphasized a lot about the importance of heart's
presence in prayers.

For example:

The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبى صلى الله عليه وآله: ان من الصلاة لما يقبل نصفها وثلثها
وربعها وخمسها إلى العشر, وان منها لما تلفّ كما يلفّ الثوب الخلق فيضرب
بها وجه صاحبها, وانما لك من صلاتك ما اقبلت عليه بقلبك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Sometimes only half of the prayer gets accepted while at other times
may be one-third, one fourth, one-fifth, and one-tenth of it will be
accepted. Some of the prayers like an old wrapped cloth are pounded upon
the offerer's head. As a matter of fact, only that portion of the prayer
will be accepted from you, in which you have paid heartily attention
towards God-Almighty.”*[^8]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبدالله عليه السلام يقول: ذا قام العبد إلى الصلاة أقبل الله عز
وجل عليه بوجهه فلا يزال مقبلا عليه حتى يلتفت ثلاث مرات فإذا التفت ثلاث
مرات أعرض عنه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When a servant stands of prayer, God-Almighty pays attention towards
him and did not break it until the servant deviates from His-
remembrance for the third time. When this happens, God-Almighty too
turns his face away from the prayer offerer.”*[^9]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: لايقومن احدكم الى الصلاة متكاسلا ولا
ناعسا ولايفكر في نفسه فأنه بين يدي ربه عز وجل ، وانما للعبد من صلاته
ما اقبل عليه منها بقلبه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Do not offer prayer in the state of drowsiness or napping; while
offering prayer do not think about yourself; because, you are standing
in the presence of God-Almighty. Indeed, only that portion of* *the
prayer will be accepted from the servant in which he has paid heartiest
attention towards God-Almighty.”*[^10]

The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال صلى الله عليه وآله: أيما عبد التفت في صلاته قال الله: يا عبدي إلى
من تقصد ومن تطلب؟ أرباً غيري تريد أو رقيباً سواي تطلب؟ أو جواد خلاي
تبغي ؟ و أنا أكرم الأكرمين وأجود الأجودين وأفضل المعطين، أثيبك ثواباً
لا يُحصي قدره. أقبل عليّ فأني عليك مقبل وملائكتي عليك مقبلون. وأن أقبل
زال عنه أثم ما كان منه. فإن ألتفت ثانية أعاد الله مقالته فإذا أقبل في
صلاته غفر الله له وتجاوز عنه ما كان منه. فإن ألتفت ثالثة أعاد الله
مقالته، فإن أقبل في صلاته غفر الله له ما تقدم من ذنبه. فإن ألتفت رابعة
أعرض الله عنه وأعرضت الملائمة عنه ويقول: وليتك يا عبدي الى ما توليت.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Each servant (of God), while standing in prayer pays attention towards
other than Him, God-Almighty says: 'Oh my servant! Which way are you
turning your face ? Who is the one you are looking for ? Do you seek a
God and protector other than me ? Are you looking for a benevolent other
than me?*

*While, I remain to be the Most Merciful among merciful, Most
Compassionate among benevolent and happens to be the Greatest Bestower.
I will bestow upon you such a reward that could not be counted. Pay
attention towards Me, because I and my angels are paying attention
towards you.”*

*“Thus, if the prayer offerer paid attention towards God-Almighty, his
past sins are deleted. But again if he pays attention towards others
(than God), he is reminded by God-Almighty like before. If he turns his
attention towards prayer, his sins and negligence from prayer are
pardoned and their effects are nullified.”*

*“If for the third time he deviates his attention from the prayer,
God-Almighty once more repeats his earlier warning, in case he paid
attention towards the prayer, again his sins are pardoned. But if he
deviated his attention away from the prayer for the fourth time, then
God-Almighty and his angels turn their faces away from the prayer
offerer and God-Almighty says to him: ' Now I have assigned you to the
guardianship of someone who is liked by you.”*[^11]

The value of prayer depends directly upon heart's presence and attention
paid towards God-Almighty; to the extent heart's presence is achieved
during prayer, it will be effective in attaining inner purification and
God's-Nearness. It was not without reason that all Divine Prophets
(a.s.) Infallible Imams (a.s.), and God's favorite saints paid so much
attention towards prayer. About the Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali
(a.s.) it has been written:

“At the time of prayer his body used to tremble and the color of his
face changed. They asked him the reason behind his agitation and fear.
In reply he said: ' The time has arrived for returning of trust -which
was offered to earth and heavens but they declined to assume this
responsibility. But human being accepted this great trust. I am afraid
that whether I would be able to discharge this heavy responsibility of
returning this trust or not. “[^12]

About the Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) and al-Sadiq (a.s.) it has been narrated:
“At the time of prayer their faces used to turn pale and red with fear
of God-Almighty; in their prayer they conversed with God-Almighty as
though they are actually seeing him.”[^13]

About Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) it has been narrated: “When he stood for
prayer the color of his face became pale with fear, and like a humble
slave standing in front of his Master, his body parts trembled. His
prayer was always used to be his parting prayer as though there will
never going to be any other prayer offered by him after this one.”[^14]

About the life of Fatimah al-Zahra (s.a.) the daughter of the holy
Prophet (S) it has been narrated: “Because, of the intensity of fear,
during prayer even the number of her breaths could have been
counted.”[^15]

Regarding the life of Imam al-Hasan (a.s.) it has been narrated: “His
body trembled during prayer. When he remembered Paradise and Hell,
become so restless and agitated as though have been bitten by a snake.
He requested Paradise from God-Almighty and sought His shelter from
Hell.”[^16]

“Ayesheh narrates about the Holy Prophet (S): while I was busy in
talking with him, when the time of prayer arrived, suddenly be become so
indifferent as though neither he recognizes us nor we do recognize
him.”[^17]

About Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) it has been narrated:

“While he was in the middle of prayer his cloak rolled down from his
shoulder but he remained unconscious about it. When he finished his
prayer one of his companion asked: *'Oh son of the Holy Prophet (S) !
While you were offering prayer your clock rolled down but you did not
pay attention to it.’*

“The Imam replied: 'Woe upon you! Do you know in front of whom I was
standing ? Such awareness prevented me from paying attention towards my
clock. Don't you understand that a servant's prayer is accepted only to
the extent he pays attention towards God-Almighty during his prayer?”

'Oh son of the Holy Prophet (S), Therefore, on this basis we all are
going to be doomed?' Asked the companion. 'No! If you offer recommended
prayers (Nawafil) God-Almighty through them will treat your compulsory
prayers as completed.”[^18]

“Regarding the Holy Prophet (S) it has been narrated that during prayer
the color of his face changed completely, and a bubbling sound similar
to the noises coming out from a boiling pot was heard coming out from
his chest. When he stood for his prayer he was motionless like a piece
of cloth fallen upon the ground.”[^19]

### 2. Degrees of Heart's Presence

Heart's presence consists of various ranks and degrees which differ from
each other from the point of view of perfection. A wayfarer has to go
through these various grades gradually so that he may ascent towards the
higher spiritual positions of God's Nearness and Witnessing.

It is a lengthy way containing various positions, whose introduction and
explanation for some one deprived like me, who is looking from a
distance and burning in regret -is not befitting. But some of these
stages will be explained here in brief, which might be useful for
wayfarers.

#### First Stage

This may be defined as a state in which the prayer offerer either
through out the prayer or some part of it pays brief attention to the
fact that he is standing before God-Almighty, speaks and converses with
Him. However, at this stage he does not pay attention towards the
meanings of words and does not understand the details of his
conversation.

#### Second Stage

The second degree of heart's presence may be defined as a state in which
the prayer offer apart from his being aware of the fact that he is
standing before God-Almighty and is communicating with Him, also, pays
attention towards the meanings of words and invocation and knows exactly
what is he saying to God-Almighty. While announcing the worlds,
simultaneously, he is also making his heart to understand its meaning
like a mother who teaches her child how to pronounce a sentence as well
as explains him its meanings.

#### Third Stage

The Third degree of heart's presence may be defined as a state in which
the prayer offerer in addition of his being aware of the earlier stages,
also comprehend very well the realities of Glorification, Adoration,
Praise, Sanctification, Monotheism, and meanings of other invocations.

Further, his understanding of the above is based upon logical arguments,
pays attention towards them during prayer, understand very well as to
what is he saying, what does he want, and with whom is he speaking?

#### Fourth Stage

The fourth stage of heart's presence may be defined as a state in which
the prayer offerer, in addition of his being aware of the early stages,
must also have influenced upon his inner essence the learning and
meanings of invocations, and must have achieved the state of certainty
(*yaqin*) and faith (*iman*). In that case the tongue follows the heart
and since the heart believes in those realities pursues the tongue to
undertake the recital of invocations.

#### Fifth Stage

The fifth stage of heart's presence may be defined as a state in which
the prayer offerer in addition of his being aware of early stages has
achieved the most sublime spiritual positions of revelation, intuition,
and countenance. Through his esoteric eyes witnesses the Sacred Names
and Characteristics of God-Almighty and does not see any thing except
Him, even does not pay attention to himself his actions, deeds, and
invocations.

He speaks with God-Almighty but is unconscious of the speaker and
speech. He has given up his own existence and have become fascinated
after witnessing the beauty of Lord's Holy Essence. Even at this stage
there are ranks and degree varying in distinction relative to the status
of the wayfarers. This stage is like an ocean of infinite depth and for
some one deprived like me, it is better not to enter in it and leave
it's description for those who deserve it:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم ارزقنا حلاوة ذكرك ومشاهدة جمالك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh God! Please bestow upon us the sweetness of your invocations and
the witnessing of your beauty.”*

### 3. Important Factors for Attaining Heart's Presence

In as much as heart's presence is important and worthwhile, in the same
proportion its attainment is extremely difficult. No sooner a person
starts his prayer Satan suddenly whispers in his heart pulling him from
one side to another, and continuously engaging him into all sort of
thoughts and memories.

The heart [^20]engages himself into accounting, planning, reviewing past
and future problems, solving academic problems; very often recollecting
during prayers, topic which were forgotten by him completely and when he
returns to himself discovers that the prayer is over. Even if in between
he pays attention towards prayer he deviates immediately.

It is indeed sad and one must feel sorry about it! What should we do to
dominate over this rebellious and playful self? How should we keep these
scattered thoughts away from us during the prayer and keep our attention
exclusively to remember God-Almighty.

Those who have traveled this path and were able to receive Divine
special favors can better guide us, and it would be better if the pen
would have been in their hands. But, this helpless and veiled servant
too would like to describe some points which may be useful in achieving
heart's presence during prayer as follows:

#### Secluded Place

If one has to offer individual compulsory prayer or recommended prayer
it is better to select an isolated free from noises and interference.
The prayer's place should be free from pictures or any other object
which might attract prayer offer's attention; should not be a public
place, rather a secluded corner inside the home should be selected and
prayer should always be offered over there.

While, offering prayer, one should look at the place of prostration or
may close his eyes, and among these two whichever he thinks is mere
useful for heart's presence should be practiced. It is advisable to
offer prayer in a smaller room a near the wall so that the prayer
offerer's view is restricted. While, offering congregational prayers one
should look at the place of prostration and listen attentively to the
recital of Qur’anic verses, if the congregational leader (*Imam*) is
reciting them loudly.

#### Removal of Obstacles

Before the prayer all obstacles in attaining heart's presence must be
removed and only then one should engage himself into prayer. e.g. If the
prayer offerer needs to go to toilet, he must relieve himself first, and
after performing required ablutions should engage himself into prayer.
If he is not comfortable because of severe hunger and thrust, first he
must satisfy his hunger and thirst by eating and drinking and then
should offer his prayers.

Also, if because of over-eating he lacks the mood, he should wait a
while till he feels ready for prayer. Similarly, if because of being
extremely tired and exhausted or feeling sleeplessness, if he does not
have the mood to offer prayer, he should first rest and sleep, and then
should offer his prayer. If he is busy investigating something or is
disturbed and agitated because of a tragic occurrence, he should try
within the bounds of possibilities to eliminate the causes of concern
before prayer.

One of the greatest obstacles is intense attachment to worldly
allurements namely: Wealth and property, power and position, and woman
and children. Severe attraction of these things causes prayer offerer's
attention turns towards these things deviating from God-Almighty, during
prayer. Therefore, the prayer offerer must seriously endeavor to cut off
these attractions, so that heart's presence and attention towards
God-Almighty become easier for him.

#### Strengthening of Faith

Man's attention towards God-Almighty depends in proportion to his
knowledge and enlightenment relative to Him. If the faith has reached to
the degree of certainty, has completely comprehended God's Majesty,
Power, Presence, Dominion, and Knowledge, naturally will show humility
and humbleness in front of him, and there would be no room left for
negligence and forgetfulness.

Some one who sees God's existence everywhere as his overseer, regards
himself continuously before His presence, while standing in prayer -a
place of talking with Him, will never be negligent from His remembrance.

Suppose, if one has to speak before a powerful king, he will naturally
control all his senses, would know exactly what is he supposed to do,
and what is he going to speak? So, if one recognizes God-Almighty with
Splendor and Majesty, he would never be negligent of Him during prayer.

Therefore, a human being should endeavor for strengthening his faith and
attaining perfect enlightenment so that he may achieve maximum heart's
presence during his prayer. The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبى صلى الله عليه وآله: اعبد الله كانت تراه فان كنت لاتراه فانه
يراك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Worship God-Almighty as though you are actually seeing Him, and even
if you do not see Him, He sees you.”*[^21]

Aban bin Toghlab said that I said to Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ابان بن تغلب قال قلت لابي عبدالله عليه السلام: اني رايت على بن الحسين
عليه السلام اذا قام فى الصلاة غشى لونه لون آخر. فقال لي: والله ان على
بن الحسين كان يعرف الذى يقوم بين يديه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I saw ‘Ali Bin al-Husayn (a.s.) offering prayer in such a manner that
the color of his face changed. Please explain the reason. 'Yes! Because
he recognized completely God-Almighty in front of whom he was standing
in prayer.’ Replied the Imam.”*[^22]

#### Remembrance of Death

One thing which might be useful in achieving heart's presence
is -remembrance of death. If a person thinks about death, and pays
attention to the fact that neither timings nor the circumstances of
death’s arrival are known, it may occur at any time, under any
situation, even it is quite possible that this prayer might be the last
one. In that case he would not offer prayer with negligence.

It is recommended that a prayer offerer should think about death before
the prayer; should imagine that the moment of death has arrived; the
death angel Israel for receiving the soul has already arrived, and it is
only a limited time, say, an hour or few minutes have been left for him,
after which his deeds' register will be closed forever, and he will be
transferred to Eternal World.

Over there, his deeds will be scrutinized and the result would be either
eternal prosperity and happy living near God’s favorites or adversity,
cruelty, punishment, and torture inside the Hell. By imagining and
picturing dying one may better concentrate, may witness himself standing
in front of God-Almighty, and thus may offer prayer with more humility
and humbleness as his farewell prayer. Before beginning prayer create
such conditions for yourself and then prolong it during entire length of
prayer. Imam Al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابوعبدالله عليه السلام: إذا صليت صلاة فريضة فصلها لوقتها صلاة مودع
يخاف أن لا يعود إليها ابدا. ثم اصرف ببصرك إلى موضع سجودك, فلو تعلم من
عن يمينك وشمالك لأحسنت صلاتك, واعلم أنك بين يدي من يراك ولا تراه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Offer compulsory prayer during its time, like someone who is offering
his farewell prayer, and is afraid that after this he will never have
the opportunity to offer the prayer again. While offering the* *prayer,
look at the place of prostration. If one realizes some one nearby is
watching his prayer -he becomes more careful in offering his prayer.
Know ! that you are standing in front of some one who sees you but is
not seen by you.”*[^23]

#### Readiness

After removing all obstacles around him, the prayer offerer should make
himself ready for prayer by retiring into a suitable isolated place.
Before standing he must remind himself about the Majesty and Infinite
power of God-Almighty and his own weakness and incompetence. He must
realize that he is standing in front of the Lords of worlds and is
speaking to him. He is standing in front of such a Magnificent Power
which surrounds everything even is aware of most secret affairs.

Imagine and manifest dying, accounting of deeds, Paradise, and Hell in
your mind's eye; assign a higher probability that death might occur very
soon, and even this very prayer could be the last prayer of his life.
Prolonged these reflections until self became completely tamed and is in
a mood to pay attention. Then with attention and hearts' presence recite
the call for prayer- (adhan) and (aqameh) respectively, recite the
following supplication and during its recital pay attention to its
meaning.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اليك توجهت ومرضاتك طلبت وثوابك ابتغيت بك آمنت وعليك توكلت اللهم
صل على محمد وآل محمد وافتح مصامع قلبى لذكرك وثبتنى على دينك ولا تزغ
قلبى بعد اذ هديتنى وهب لى من لدنك رحمة انك انت الواهب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Allahumma elaika tawwajahato wa marzateka talabato wa thawabaka
ibtaqhazzito wa beka amanto wa elaika tawwakalto allahuma salle ala
Muhammadin wa aley Muhammad waftoh masamea qalbi lezekreka wa sabbatni
ala deneka wa deney Nabiyeha wala tuzqe qalbi bada is hadeytani wa habli
min ladunka rahamate inneka antal wahab.)

*“Oh God! I seek Your refuge; desire whatever pleases Thou. Aspire to
receive Your reward have faith in Thee and trust and rely upon You. Oh
God! send salutations upon Muhammad (S) and his Holy progeny (a.s.),
open my heart's esoteric ears to Your invocation,. make me steadfast
upon Your religion, and the religion of Your Prophet (S). Don't make my
heart deviate after being blessed with Your guidance, and bestow upon me
Your favors and blessings, verily! You are the most benevolent.”*

Then recite the following prayer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا محسن قد اتاك المسيء, يا محسن أحسن الى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(ya Mohsin qadatak al masiyee ya Mohsin ehsan al ati.)

*“Oh Beneficent, verily bless me -the sinner;*

*Oh Beneficent! bestow your favors upon me.”*

If after that one feels like having proper attention and humility he may
say Takbirateh al-Ahram by proclaiming, “God is Great” (*Allahu Akbar*)
and may begin his prayer. But, if he feels that he is not yet ready,
does not feel any change in his mood, should seek refuge[^24] in
God-Almighty from Satanic whispers and should repeat the earlier program
till he gets ready.

At this moment with due attention and heart's presence should say
Takbirateh al-Ahram while paying attention towards its meanings and may
begin his prayer. But, he must pay attention as to whom is he talking
and what is he saying?

Be careful that tongue and heart coordinate each other and do not lie.
Does he know the meanings of “God is Great” (Allahu Akbar) i.e. God is
Greater than -that He could be described. He must pay attention
correctly what is he saying? Does he really believe in it? Imam al-Sadiq
(a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام: اذا استقبلت القبلة فانس الدّنيا وما فيها
والخلق وما هم فيه واستفرغ قلبك عن كلّ شاغلٍ يشغلك عن الله وعاين بسرّك
عظمة الله واذكر وقوفك بين يديه يوم تبلو كلُّ نفسٍ ما أسلفت وردُّوا إلى
الله مولاهم الحقّ. وقف على قدم الخوف والرجاء فإذا كبّرت فاستصغر ما بين
السموات العلى والثرى دون كبريائه: فإنّ الله تعالى إذا اطّلع على قلب
العبد وهو يكبّر وفي قلبه عارضٌ عن حقيقة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تكبيره ، قال : يا كاذب أتخدعني ؟ وعزَّتي وجلالي لأحرمنّك حلاوة ذكري ،
ولأحجبنّك عن قربي و المسارَّة بمناجاتي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When you stand facing Holy Mecca (Qiblah)*[^25] *with prayer
intention -forget the world and whatever it contains, people, and their
affairs absolutely, make your heart free from every thing which prevents
you from God's Remembrance and with esoteric eyes witness God's Majesty
and Splendor. Recollect your stoppage in front of Him on the Day of
Resurrection when each human being will make his earlier deposited deeds
manifested, thus, returning towards God-Almighty.*

*'During prayer be in a state of fear and hope, after making your proper
intention and saying (Takbiratel al-Ahram, i.e. Allahu Akbar), whatever,
the earth and sky may contain, consider it as small and insignificant,
because when prayer offerer says it, God-Almighty looks in his heart,
thus, if he had not paid attention towards the reality of Takbirateh
al-Ahram He says to him*:

*'Oh liar! Do you want to deceit me ?' swear to my splendor and majesty
that will deprive you .from My invocations pleasure and enjoyment of
having private communications with Me.”*[^26]

Of course preparation and getting readied before the prayer, during
making intention and saying Takbirateh al-Ahram are extremely effective
in achieving heart's presence, but still more important than that, is
the continuation of this state through out the prayer. If a slight
negligence is shown, self immediately starts his action of flying from
one side to another one, thus, breaking heart's presence and
concentration.

Therefore, prayer offerer must watch his self carefully all along the
prayer. He must tightly closed his hearts entrance towards all other
than God and must prevent entries of scattered thoughts and memories
should consider himself always standing in God's presence, should offer
prayer as though he is actually talking with God-Almighty, bows down and
prostrates in front of him; while reciting Qur’anic verses and
invocations must pay attention towards their meanings; must realize what
is he saying; with what Majestic Power is he speaking and should
maintain this condition until the prayer is over. It is a difficult task
but with efforts, endeavors, and seriousness it becomes easier.
God-Almighty has promised in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ جَاهَدُوا فِينَا لَنَهْدِيَنَّهُمْ سُبُلَنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And those who strive in Our (cause) -We will certainly guide them to
Our paths. (29:69)***

If one does not succeed in the very first attempt instead of getting
disappointed, he should become more determined and serious in trying
again, until attaining domination over self gradually. The heart should
be cleansed thoroughly from scattered thoughts and should be motivated
to pay attention towards God-Almighty. If such thing is not possible
within one day, few weeks and few months, he should not be disappoint
because after all such a thing is possible.

There were and still are many distinguished personalities who were able
to achieve absolute heart's presence from the beginning till the end of
prayer, and during prayer did not pay any attention towards other than
God.

We would not be disappointed either from attaining such distinguished
position and if achieving absolute perfection is not possible, we must
try to attain at least whatever is attainable within the bounds of
possibilities and should consider even this much as a great bounty.[^27]

Second: Supererogatory Prayers (Nawafil)
----------------------------------------

Earlier it was mentioned that the Prayer happens to be the best means of
spiritual migration, invocation, and God's Nearness. God-Almighty, who
is absolutely more knowledgeable, as compared to any other person, about
the special human creation, and their path of perfection, has defined
prayer, and by means of prophets have handed it over to human beings -so
that they may utilize it for their salvation and attaining perfection.

The path of utilization from this means is always open. The prayer has
not been limited to a certain fixed time, rather one may utilize from it
at any time, any where and under all circumstances. Generally, the
prayer may be classified into following two categories:

1. Mandatory or Compulsory Prayers (*Wajib*).

2. Supererogatory or Recommended Prayers (*Nawafil*).

There are six types of Mandatory or Compulsory Prayers:

1. Daily Prayer (*salat wajib*).

2. Sign Prayer (*salat ayat*), to be recited at the solar or lunar
eclipse

3. Death Prayer (*Mayyit*).

4. Circumambulation Prayer during Hajj pilgrim (*Towwaf*).

5. Prayer which become mandatory upon one's taking an oath or making a
solemn promise to God (*Nazr*).

6. Make up Prayer (*Qadha*). Daily prayers not offered by father become
compulsory upon his eldest son, after his demise.

Daily prayers are compulsory upon all adult Muslims after attaining
puberty, but other compulsory prayers become compulsory during certain
periods under special circumstances. A person who desires to achieve
salvation and perfection, as a very first step must perform all
compulsory obligations strictly in their prescribed manner, and if
performs them with heart's presence and devotion, become best means of
achieving God's favor.

Quitting compulsory obligations and instead indulging into performance
of recommended deeds will never result in achieving God's favor. If
someone thinks, that by quitting compulsory obligation and by means of
some recommended deeds, invocations, and incantations, he may complete
his journey towards perfection and attaining higher spiritual
positions-certainly he is making a mistake.

But after performance of compulsory obligations, he may seek God's
nearness by means of supererogatory prayers and other recommended deeds
for attaining sublime spiritual positions. There are plenty of
supererogatory prayers (*nawafil*), and overall may be divided into two
categories: Daily supererogatory prayers (*nawafil*) and other
recommended prayers.

Daily Supererogatory Prayers consists of thirty four units (Rakats):

1. Supererogatory Prayer Noon (*Dhohr*) -8 units, (before compulsory
(*Dhohr*) prayer, 4 times -2 units).

2. Supererogatory Prayer After-Noon (*Asr*) -8 units (before compulsory
(*Asr*) Prayer, 4 times -2 units).

3. Supererogatory Prayer Evening (*Maghrib*) -4 units (after compulsory
(*Maghrib*) Prayer, 2 times -2 units).

4. Supererogatory Prayer Night (*Isha*) -2 units (in sitting position,
after compulsory (*Isha*) Prayer, and is regarded equivalent to one unit
of standing prayer).

5. Supererogatory Prayer Morning (*Fajr*) -2 units (before compulsory
(*Fajr*) Prayer).

6. Night Prayer (*Namaz al-Shab* or *Salat al Lail*) -11 units.

Tradition books describe the importance of recital of daily
supererogatory prayers; their effects and rewards have also been
specified, and have been introduced as complimentary to compulsory
prayers. But other than daily supererogatory prayers other recommended
prayers during certain special periods, places, and circumstances as
well as their relevant rewards have also been described.

The readers may study the details of different kinds of supererogatory
prayers and recommended prayers and their advantages and rewards in the
books of traditions and supplications [^28]and may utilize them in your
spiritual journey and attainment of self-perfection.

Apart from that prayer is desired and recommended at any time, every
place and under all circumstances and a wayfarer may take its advantage.
The path of taking advantage from this means remains always open. A
human being at any time, any place, and under all conditions may be
benefited from this great blessing and may establish a quick
communication with God-Almighty. The Commander of the Faithful Imam
.’Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابى الحسن عليه السلام قال: صلاة النوافل قربان كل مؤمن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Supererogatory Prayer (Nafilah) results in a believer's becoming near
to God-Almighty.”*[^29]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: إن العبد ليرفع له من صلاته نصفها أو ثلثها
أو ربعها أو خمسها فما يرفع له إلا ما أقبل عليه بقلبه وإنما أمرنا
بالنافلة ليتم لهم بها ما نقصوا من الفريضة..
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Truly sometimes one half; or one third, or one fourth, or one fifth of
prayer ascends upward (i.e. is accepted by God); only those portions of
prayer ascend upwards which are accompanied by heart's presence; and
because of this reason. We are assigned to recite supererogatory prayers
so that through their means the shortcomings of daily prayers could be
compensated.”*[^30]

The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبدالله عليه السلام قال: قال رسول الله صلى عليه وآله: قال الله
تعالى: ما تحبب إلي عبدي بشئ أحب إلي مما افترضته عليه، وإنه ليتحبب إلي
بالنافلة حتى أحبه، فإذا أحببته كنت سمعه الذي يسمع به، وبصره الذي يبصر
به، ولسانه الذي ينطق به، ويده التي يبطش بها، ورجله التي يمشي بها، إذا
دعاني أجبته، وإذا سألني أعطيته، وما  
 ترددت في شئ أنا فاعله كترددي في موت المؤمن: يكره الموت وأنا أكره
مساءته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“In order to become my beloved, my servant does not have any thing
better than performing compulsory obligations- Through performance of
recommended obligations (Nawafil) he becomes so much intimate with me
that I become like his ears through which he hears; become as his eyes
through which he sees; become as his tongue through which he talks,-
become as his hands through which he finds things,- and become as his
feet through which he moves.*

*If he beseech me I accept; if he desires some thing I bestow it upon
him, I have never contradicted anything like contradiction in taking a
believer's soul,- he is disgusted with death and I become disgusted
seeing him unhappy.”*[^31]

Third: Night Prayer (Salatul-Layl)
----------------------------------

Among various recommended deeds (*Nawafil*) the Night Prayer carries
special distinction, and the Holy Qur’an and traditions have made lots
of emphasis and recommendations for its performance. God-Almighty says
to Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ اللَّيْلِ فَتَهَجَّدْ بِهِ نَافِلَةً لَّكَ عَسَىٰ أَن
يَبْعَثَكَ رَبُّكَ مَقَامًا مَّحْمُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And some part of the night awake for it, a largess for thee. It may
be that thy Lord will raise thee to a praised estate. (17:79)***

And in praise of God's Special Servants says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالَّذِينَ يَبِيتُونَ لِرَبِّهِمْ سُجَّدًا وَقِيَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And who spend the night before their Lord prostrate and standing.
(25:64)***

And in defining believers characteristics says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَتَجَافَىٰ جُنُوبُهُمْ عَنِ الْمَضَاجِعِ يَدْعُونَ رَبَّهُمْ خَوْفًا
وَطَمَعًا وَمِمَّا رَزَقْنَاهُمْ يُنفِقُونَ فَلَا تَعْلَمُ نَفْسٌ مَّا
أُخْفِيَ لَهُم مِّن قُرَّةِ أَعْيُنٍ جَزَاءً بِمَا كَانُوا يَعْمَلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who forsake their beds to cry unto their Lord in fear and hope, and
spend of what we have bestowed up on them. No soul knoweth what is kept
hidden for them of joy, as a reward for what they used to do.
(32:16-17)***

The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ان الله جل جلاله اوحى الى الدنيا: أن
أتعبي من خدمك و اخدمي من رفضك. وإن العبد إذا تخلى بسيده في جوف الليل
المظلم وناجاه أثبت الله النور في قلبه فإذا قال: يا رب يا رب! ناداه
الجليل جل جلاله: لبيك عبدي, سلني أعطك و توكل عليَّ أكفك ، ثم يقول جل
جلاله لملائكته: يا ملائكتي انظروا إلى عبدي فقد تخلى بي في جوف الليل
المظلم والباطلون لأهون والغافلون ينامون. اشهدوا أني قد غفرت له.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God-Almighty send revelation to world asking it to be indifferent
towards its admirers and to be in service to its forsakers. When a God's
servant in the darkness of night engages himself in humming
communications with his Creator, God-Almighty enlightens his heart.”*

*“When he says: Oh God! Oh God! (Yarab! Yarab!) God-Almighty responds by
replying -'yes my servant! Whatever you desire I will bestow it upon
you, rely upon Me so that I make you self-sufficient'. Then God-Almighty
says to His angels -'Look at my servant! How in the darkness of night is
he busy in humming private communications with Me, while lovers of
nonsense amusements are busy in pursuing their carnal desires and the
ignorant ones are busy in sleep. Be you witness that I have forgiven my
servant.”*[^32]

The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص): اشراف امتى حملة القرآن واصحاب الليل.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The nobles of my nation (Ummah) are -the carriers of Holy Qur’an and
night vigilants.”*[^33]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبى صلى الله عليه وآله: ما زال جبرئيل يوصينى بقيام الليل حتى
ظننت ان خيار امتى لا يناموا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Angel Gabriel has made so much recommendation about night prayer to
me, that I assume the righteous one of my nation (Ummah) will not sleep
during night.”*[^34]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
انس بن مالك قال: سمعت رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله يقول: ركعتان فى جوف
الليل احب الى من الدنيا وما فيها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Two units of prayer in the middle of night is more beloved to me than
the world and whatsoever it may contain.”*[^35]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبدالله عليه السلام قال: صلاة الليل تحس الوجه وتحس الخلق وتطيب
الريح وتدر الرزق وتقضى الدين وتذهب بالهم وتجلوا البصر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Night Prayer makes face beautiful, conduct righteous, and (prayer
offerer's) body performed; increases sustenance; pays debts; removes
grief and increases shining of eyes.”*[^36]

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: صلاة الليل مرضاة الرب وحب الملائكة
وسنة الأنبياء ونور المعرفة وأصل الإيمان، وراحة الأبدان وكراهية الشيطان
وسلاح على الأعداء وإجابة للدعاء وقبول الأعمال وبركة في الرزق وشفيع بين
صاحبها وبين ملك الموت وسراج في قبره وفراش تحت جنبه وجواب منكر ونكير
ومؤنس وزائر في قبره إلى يوم القيامة، فاذا كان يوم القيامة كانت الصلاه
ظلا فوقه وتأجا على رأسه ولباسا على بدنه ونورا يسعى بين يديه وسترا بينه
وبين النار وحجة للؤمنين بين يدى الله تعالى وثقلا فى الميزان وجوازا على
الصراط ومفتاحا للجنة. لأن الصلاه تكبيروتحميد تسبيح وتمجيد وتقديس
وتعظيم وقرائة ودعاء وان أفضل الاعمال كلها الصلاة لوقتها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Night Prayer is a means of pleasing God-Almighty and achieving
friendship of His angels. It is a tradition and way of prophets; a light
of seeing God and root of the faith (because it strengthens faith).
Makes body relaxed and Satan agitated, it is arsenal against enemies; is
a means for acceptance of prayer and deeds; increases Divine-Bounties
for a human being; acts as an intercessor between prayer offerer and
death's angel; it is the light and floor covering inside the grave as
well as the defender to the questioning of two angels (Munkir and
Nakir).*

*“Inside the grave it will become a companion and pilgrim of the prayer
offerer till the Day of Resurrection. On the Judgment Day, it will
provide a shadow for head; will become a crown upon head; a dress for
body, a front light; and a barrier between prayer offerer and Hell's
.fire. It will be a solid argument before God-Almighty for the believer,
a means for making deeds heavier; a pass for crossing over the Sirat and
a key of Paradise.*

*Because, prayer consists of proclamation of God's Greatness (Takbir),
Praise, Adoration, Worship, to show humility and humbleness in front of
Him, respect, recital of the Holy Qur’an, and supplication. Indeed the
prayer offered at its right time -is the most superior deed.”*[^37]

There are many traditions and Qur’anic verses which describe the special
importance assigned to Night Prayer. Its recital has been the traditions
of prophets and God's favorite saints. The Holy Prophet (S) and the
Infallible Imams (a.s.) of his Holy Progeny have shown special interests
and paid attention towards Night Prayer. God's favorite saints and
mystics through their continuous engagements into Night Prayer,
invocations, and supplications at dawn were able to attain exalted
spiritual positions.

How beautiful and pleasing it is that a God's servant wakes up from
sleep; leaves his soft and comfortable bed; makes ablutions, and in the
darkness of night, while the others are busy in deep sleep, stands up
before the Lord of the worlds; engages into humming communications with
Him; and through this spiritual journey ascends towards Upper Heavens,
thus, joining the angels of Celestial Kingdom in praising, worshipping,
and adoring God-Almighty.

At this moment, his heart becomes center of illumination of Divine light
and with a heart fully saturated with God's desire ascends towards the
most sublime spiritual position of God's Nearness.

### 1. Details of Night Prayer

The Night-Prayer consists of all together eleven units (Rakats) of
prayer. The first eight units are offered as two units prayer (exactly
like 2 units of Morning Prayer), repeated four times with the intention
of Night-Prayer. After finishing these eight units, make intention for
the (Prayer of Shafa) [^38]and offer two units of prayer.

In the end make intention of (Prayer of Witr)[^39] and offer are unit of
prayer with special instructions. There are special etiquettes and
supplications for the Night Prayer that may be found in the books of
traditions and supplications.[^40]

### 2. Etiquette of Night Prayer

The time of Night Prayer begins after midnight and the more nearer it
gets to dawn the better it is. Whenever you are awakened for night
prayer first of all relieve yourself from the call of nature, clean your
teeth, make ablutions (*wadhu*), and make yourself perfumed.

The night prayer consists of 11 units (Rakats) as follows:

8 Rakat (4 times 2 rakat) Night Prayer

2 Rakat Prayer of Shafa

1 Rakat Prayer of Witr

The first eight rakats should be offered like 2 rakats of Morning prayer
repeating four times with a salutation offered after every two Rakats.
In the first Rakat recite Surah Opening:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ اللَّهِ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ الْحَمْدُ لِلَّهِ رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ الرَّحْمَٰنِ الرَّحِيمِ مَالِكِ يَوْمِ الدِّينِ إِيَّاكَ
نَعْبُدُ وَإِيَّاكَ نَسْتَعِينُ اهْدِنَا الصِّرَاطَ الْمُسْتَقِيمَ
صِرَاطَ الَّذِينَ أَنْعَمْتَ عَلَيْهِمْ غَيْرِ الْمَغْضُوبِ عَلَيْهِمْ
وَلَا الضَّالِّينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Bismillah ar Rahman nir Rahim; alhamadu lillahi Rab al alimin; ar
Rahman nir Rahim,' Malike yom iddin,' iyyaka nabudu wa iyyaka nastayeen,
ahede nassratal mustaqeem saratal lazina,' anamta aleyhim,' gharyil
maqdhubeh alehim waladh dhuallin).

***“In the Name of God the Beneficent and the Merciful”, “Praise be to
God, Lord of the worlds,' the Beneficent, the Merciful,” Owner of the
day of Judgment,' Thee (alone) we worship, Thee alone we ask for help,'
show us the straight path,' The path of those whom Thou hast favored,'
Not (the path) of those who earn thine anger nor of those who go astray.
(1:1-7),***

After reciting Surah Opening the prayer offerer may recite any other
surah whatever he likes or may recite Surah “Sincerity” in all 8 Rakats:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قُلْ هُوَ اللَّهُ أَحَدٌ اللَّهُ الصَّمَدُ لَمْ
يَلِدْ وَلَمْ يُولَدْ وَلَمْ يَكُن لَّهُ كُفُوًا أَحَدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Bismillah ar Rahman nir Rahim,. qul ho wallahu ahad Allahus samad,. lam
yalid walam yulad,' walam ya kun lahu kufu one ahad),

***In the Name of God, the Beneficent and the Merciful***

***“Say: He is God, the One! God, the eternally besought of all! He
begeteth not nor was begotten, And there is non comparable unto Him.
(112: 1-4)***

In the second rakat of prayer like all others prayers, Qunoot is
optional and recital of the following, three times is sufficient.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سبحان الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

Subhan Allahi

*“Glory to God”*

Prayer of Shafa

After finishing eight Rakat of Night Prayer as described above, make
intention of two rakats of prayer of Shafa as follows:

In the first Rakat after recital of Surah Opening recite Surah Nas
(Mankind) as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ النَّاسِ مَلِكِ النَّاسِ
إِلَٰهِ النَّاسِ مِن شَرِّ الْوَسْوَاسِ الْخَنَّاسِ الَّذِي يُوَسْوِسُ
فِي صُدُورِ النَّاسِ مِنَ الْجِنَّةِ وَالنَّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Bismillah ar Rahman nir Rahim;

Qul auzu bi Rab bil nas,. Malik in nas ilahin nas,. Min sharril waswasil
Khannas, Allazi yo vis viso fi sudoorin nase,” Min al jinnate onenas.)

***“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful”***

***“Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of mankind; The King of mankind,” The
God of mankind,” from the evil of the sneaking whisperer; who whispereth
in the hearts of mankind; of the jinn and of mankind. (114:1-6)***

In the second Rakat after recital of Surah Opening recite Surah Day
Break as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم قُلْ أَعُوذُ بِرَبِّ الْفَلَقِ مِن شَرِّ مَا
خَلَقَ وَمِن شَرِّ غَاسِقٍ إِذَا وَقَبَ وَمِن شَرِّ النَّفَّاثَاتِ فِي
الْعُقَدِ وَمِن شَرِّ النَّفَّاثَاتِ فِي الْعُقَدِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Bismillah ar Rahman nir Rahim,” Qui a uzu bi Rab bil falaq; min,
sharrin ma khalaq, wa min sharre ghasiqin eza waqab, wa min sharrin
naffasate fil uqad)

***“In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.”***

***“Say: I seek refuge in the Lord of Daybreak, from the evil of that
which He created; from the evil of the darkness when it is intense; and
from the evil of malignant witchcraft and from the evil of envier when
he envieth. (113:1-5)***

#### Prayer of Witr

After finishing two rakat of Prayer of Shaf'a, make intention of one
Rakat of Witr Prayer as follows:

After recital of Surah Opening recite Surah Sincerity one time. Or, one
may recite Surah Sincerity three times, Surah Day-Break one time and
Surah Mankind one time, after Surah Opening. Having finished recital of
the above raise your hands upward for Qunoot, and recite whatever you
prefer or you may recite the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا آتِنَا فِي الدُّنْيَا حَسَنَةً وَفِي الْآخِرَةِ حَسَنَةً
وَقِنَا عَذَابَ النَّارِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Rabana atena fid dunia hasaneh wa fil akhre hasanah wa qena aza bin
nar).

***“Our Lord! Give unto us in the world that which is good and in the
Hereafter that which is good, and guard us from the doom of Fire.
(2:201)***

or, recite the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم كن لوليك الحجة بن الحسن صلواتك عليه وعلى ابائه في هذه الساعه وفي
كل ساعه وليا وحافظا وقائدا وناصرا ودليلا وعينا حتى تسكنه ارضك طوعا
وتمتعه فيها طويلا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Allahumma Kulle Waliyak al Hujjat ibnal Hasan Salawataka aleyhim wa ala
abahe fi hazes saat wafi kulle saat walian wa hafiza wa qaiden wa nasera
wa dalilan wa ayena hatta tuzkenahu arzaka toa wa tamatteahufiha tavila,
be rahameteka ya ar hamar rahimin.)

*“Oh God! Protect Your Vicegerent (Vali al-Asr), and send salutations
upon him, and his Holy ancestors at this time as well as at all the
times, (as our) Imam, guardian, supporter, and guide until such time;
when you bestow upon him the honor of heading the (Divine) Government.
And let the people be delighted in his reign, by bestowing success, and
by extending his reign (as maximum as possible).”*

Or recite the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبَّنَا أَفْرِغْ عَلَيْنَا صَبْرًا وَثَبِّتْ أَقْدَامَنَا وَانصُرْنَا
عَلَى الْقَوْمِ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Rabana afrigh aleyna sabran wa sabbit iqdamana wa unsurna alal qomal
kafiriin)

***“Our Lord! Bestow on us endurance, make our foothold sure; and give
us help against the disbelieving folk. (2:250)***

It is recommended that in the state of Qunoot one should try to cry and
shed tears because, of remembering his past sins and transgressions,
God-Almighty Day of Judgment and the Hell's fire. According to Islamic
traditions, if one prays for forty believers God-Almighty grants his
supplications.

Therefore, in Qunoot it is recommended to ask God's forgiveness for at
least forty believers, (including your parents, relatives, neighbors,
colleagues, scholars, martyrs etc.) in the following manner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهم اغفر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Allahummaghfir )

*Oh God! forgive* (Mention the name of person, and repeat it for forty
people) it has been narrated that the Holy Prophet (S) used to seek God
is forgiveness seventy times. Therefore, while still maintaining your
left hand in the state of Qunoot, and holding a rosary in your right
hand recite the following seventy times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
استغفر الله ربى واتوب اليه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Astagh.frullahi rabi wa atubo elahe)

*“Oh God! Forgive me and accept my repentance.”* The Holy Prophet (S)
used to recite the following sentence seven times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هذا مقام العائذ بك من النار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Haza maqamal aize beka minan nar)

*“Here is some one who has sought your shelter from the Hell's fire.”*

It has been narrated that Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) used to seek God's
forgiveness three hundred times by reciting the following sentence:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
العفو.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Al afoo)

*“(Oh God!) Please Forgive!”*

Therefore, while still holding left hand in the state of Qunoot, crying,
shedding tears of regret and shame for past sins with the rosary in
right hand, recite the above sentence three hundred times. After
finishing it recite the following supplication only one time:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ربنا اغفر لى وارحمنى واتوب اليه انك انت التواب الغفور الرحيم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

(Rubbe naqhfirli warhamni watoubli innaka antal tawwabul ghafoor
urrahim.)

*“Oh God! Please forgive me, be kind to me and accept my repentance.
Indeed you are the one who accepts repentance, forgiver, and the most
Merciful.”*

This completes the Qunoot of Witr prayer. After finishing Qunoot bow
down into genuflection and prostration and finish the prayer in the
usual manner like all other prayers with the recital of witnessing
(*Tashahud*) and salutation (*salam*). Those readers who are not
familiar with these Prayer rituals may refer to the Book: Profundities
of Prayer written by: Ayatullah Sayyid ‘Ali Khamenei; Translated by S.H.
Alamdar and Published by Ansariyan Publications, Qum.

[^1]: al-Ka.fi, vol. 3, p-265.

[^2]: al-Kafi, vol. 3, p-264.

[^3]: al-Kafi, vol. 3, p-264.

[^4]: Prostration: Regarding prostration it is narrated that during
one's entire life if one succeeds during a single prostration to achieve
a real union with the Creator, it will compensate for all the past
omissions. He would receive Divine blessings and would become immune
from the satanic temptations forever. On the contrary if during
prostration, which is the state of renunciation if his heart is
preoccupied with any thing other than Him, he will be listed among the
group of hypocrites and the misled.

[^5]: al-Kafi Vol. 3, p-265.

[^6]: al-Kafi, vol. 3, p-265.

[^7]: al-Kafi, vol. 3, p-265.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-260.

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-241.

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-239.

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-244.

[^12]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-248.

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-248.

[^14]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-250.

[^15]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-258.

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-258.

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84. p.258.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-265.

[^19]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-248.

[^20]: In his book “Sirr-us-Salat” (the Mysteries of Prayers), Imam
Khomeini, describes the presence of heart, as follows: “During prayers
one must try to completely cut off the heart's preoccupation with
worldly affairs. If a person is submerged in love and desires of this
world, naturally his heart is busy continuously from one involvement to
another. The heart behaves like a bird jumping from one branch to
another. So for we have this tree of worldly ambitions or desires
(“Hubb-e Duniya”) in our heart, it will behave restless. If by struggle,
practice, efforts, and thinking about the severe consequences and
losses, if one could succeed in cutting this tree of worldly ambitions
or desires, then the heart will become reposed and peaceful. It will
achieve spiritual perfection. At least the more one tries to free
himself from worldly charms and temptations the more he succeeds in
cutting the various branches of that tree in his heart, with the result,
the presence of heart will be achieved in the same proportion.” Imam
Khomeini further explains the term' love of this world' (Hubb
al-Duniya). “There are people who do not possess anything at all of this
moral world, but still they could be the persons totally submerged in
the love of this world. While on the contrary, one maybe be like Prophet
Sulaiman bin Dawood, (Solomon son of David) king of kings and possessing
all the treasurers of this universe, but at the same time may not be a
man of this world, completely detached from the lure of the world.”
[Tr].

[^21]: Nahjal-Fasahath, p-65.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-236.

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-233.

[^24]: One should recite Istiadha: اعوذ بالله من الشيطان الرجيم “I seek
refuge in God-Almighty from .Satan -the damned one.”

[^25]: Direction to which Muslims turn their face for Prayer. [Tr.]

[^26]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 84, p-230.

[^27]: In order to attain heart's presence during prayer we may utilize
books which have been written about Mysteries of Prayer, like the book
“Sirr-us-Salat” (Mysteries of Prayer) written by Divine Scholar and
Great Leader of the Islamic Revolution, Imam Khomeini (r.a.) [Author].

[^28]: Refer to Kulliyat Mafatteh al-Jinan of (late) Haj Sheik Abbas
Qummi [Tr].

[^29]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 87, p-36.

[^30]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 87, p-28.

[^31]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 87, p-31

[^32]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 87, p-137.

[^33]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 87, p-138.

[^34]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 87, p-139.

[^35]: the Bahar al-Anwar, vol. 87, p-148.

[^36]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 87, p-153.

[^37]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 87, p-161.

[^38]: وَالشَّفْعِ وَالْوَتْرِ “By the Even and Odd (contrasted).”
(89:3) [Tr].

[^39]: Ibid.

[^40]: For the convenience of our readers the [Tr] has prepared
“Etiquettes of Night-Prayer” abstracted from supplication books.


