Fifth Means, Benevolence and Service to Humanity
================================================

According to Islamic doctrine, God's worship and nearness neither can be
summarized simply performance of prayer, fasting, Hajj, pilgrimages,
invocations, and supplications, nor is limited to presence in mosques,
temples, and tombs; instead, discharging social responsibilities,
compassion, goodness, and serving God’s servants, if done with the
intention of God's nearness, are considered as most superior worships
and could become a means for self-building, self-purification, and God’s
Nearness.

In Islam, devotion and undertaking spiritual journey towards
God-Almighty do not necessarily require living in seclusion, rather
could be done together with acceptance of social responsibilities as
well as living a perfectly normal social life.

Cooperation in righteous deeds and benevolence; goodness, endeavors in
fulfilling the needs of believers and making them happier; defense of
oppressed and deprived; taking care of the affairs of Muslims; solving
their problems and extending a helping hand towards God's servants, from
the Islamic point of view are considered a great worship whose reward is
ten times higher than performance of a Hajj pilgrimage.

Their exist hundreds of traditions narrated by the Holy Prophet (S) and
Infallible Imams (a.s.) which emphasize the importance of this matter.
e.g.: the following has been narrated from Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) that
God-Almighty said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: قال الله عزوجل: الخلق عيالى فاحبهم الى
الطفهم بهم واسعاهم فى حوائجهم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“My servants are my children, therefore, the most beloved persons
before me are those who are kindest towards them and do their best in
taking care of their needs.”*[^1]

The Holy Prophet (S) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الخلق عيال الله فاحب الخلق الى الله
من نفع عيال الله وادخل على أهل بيت سرورا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The people are God's children, therefore, the most beloved persons
before God-Almighty are those whose benevolence reach to God's children,
thus, making their families happier full of joy.”*[^2]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابى جعفر عليه السلام قال: تبسم الرجل فى وجه اخيه حسنة وصرف القذى
عنه حسنة وماعبد الله بشيء احب إلى الله من ادخال السرور على المؤمن.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Smiling of a believer while encountering a fellow brother believer as
well as solving his problems are accounted as righteous deeds. There is
no worship more beloved before God-Almighty than making a believer
joyful.”*[^3]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام: من سر مؤمنا فقد سرنى ومن سرنى فقد سر رسول الله
ومن سر رسول الله فقد سر الله ومن سر الله ادخله جنته.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever makes a believer happy has made me happy; whoever makes me
happy has made the Holy Prophet (S) happy,. whoever has made the Holy
Prophet (S) happy has made God-Almighty happy; and whoever has made
God-Almighty happy will enter into Paradise.”*[^4]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابوعبدالله عليه السلام: لقضا حاجة امرى مؤمن احب الى الله من عشرين
حجة كل حجة ينفق فيها صاحبها ماة الف.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Fulfillment of a believer's need before God-Almighty is more beloved
than performance of Hajj pilgrimage for ten times each time spending ten
thousands.”*[^5]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام: مشى المسلم فى حاجة المسلم خير من سبعين توافا
بالبيت الحرام.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“To strive for fulfillment of Muslim's need is better than
circumambulating around the Holy Kaba seventy times.”*[^6]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام: ان لله عبادا من خلقه يفزع العباد عليهم فى
حوائجهم اولئك هم الامنون.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God-Almighty has created some of His special servants, that at the
time of their needs, people take shelter in them. These are the ones who
will be immune from God's Punishment on the Judgment Day.”*[^7]

Therefore, as described above, according to Islamic point of
view -benevolence, goodness, helping God's servants and to solve their
problems are considered as great worships. And if they are done with the
intention of God's pleasure will become means for nourishment and
perfection of self, spiritual migration and ascension towards God's
Nearness.

Unfortunately, a majority of people lack the proper understanding of
true Islam, and therefore, have been deprived from benefits of such a
large and important part of Islamic worship. In their opinion
worshipping and undertaking spiritual journey towards God-Almighty is
not possible, except, through prayer, fasting, pilgrimage, supplication,
invocation, and incantations.

[^1]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-l99.

[^2]: al-Kafi, vol. 2p-164.

[^3]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p-188.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar vol. 74, p-413.

[^5]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-193.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar vol. 74, p-311.

[^7]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 74, p-318.


