Preface
=======

**In the Name of God the Beneficent, The Merciful**

Praise to the Lord of the Worlds, salutations and greetings be upon the
most noble messenger and prophet, God's beloved, Abi al-Qasim Muhammad
(S), who was appointed, to be a blessing for the mankind, to help them
attaining spiritual purification, to teach them the book and wisdom and
salutations be upon his Holy Household, Ahlul Bayt (a.s.)

Oh God! Please guide us towards the straight path leading to perfection:
enlighten our darken hearts with the light of faith and Your Knowledge;
remove the dark intense veils of egotism, selfishness, whims and
passions of self; open our exoteric heart's eyes for witnessing Your
Unique Beauty; strengthen us on the path of self-building and
self-purification, remove from our hearts the love and desires of other
than You; remove the veils of negligence and satisfy our thirst with the
pure fountain of your Love and Nearness.

Oh God! Please enlighten our hearts with the heavenly light of faith and
certainty by awakening us from the deep sleep of ignorance, so that we
may discover our lost selves and do not waste our precious lives in
ignorance like before.

Any how, this servant of God, confused, bewildered, entangled, captive
of selfish whims and passions, ignorant of the existence of various
spiritual stations of perfection and stages of mystical journey towards
God-Almighty was suddenly inspired to move his feet inside this vast
arena of spiritual fields dealing with self-building, refinement, and
purification of human self.

By utilization of enlightened verses of the Holy Qur’an and instructions
given by Holy Prophet (S) and infallible Imams (a.s.) of his Holy
Progeny (Ahlul Bayt)[^1] abstraction of the overall basic principles of
self-purification and spiritual mystic journey towards God-Almighty was
accomplished. May be these efforts would be of some help, and guidance
for the truth seekers and wayfarers in their march on this road of
spiritual perfection.

May Merciful God accept this insignificant work and may hold the hand of
this deprived servant, leading from the intense darkness of ignorance
and egotism towards the illuminated valley of invocations, love,
enlightenment, and countenance of God-Almighty. And if it happened, may
be it will compensate the omissions of the past for the coming life (if
there is any left) of this servant.

An Important Reminder
---------------------

Before entering into discussion, it must be emphasized that the
monasticism, renunciation of worldly affairs, and unacceptance of social
responsibilities are not pre requisite for undertaking a
self-purification program, on the contrary, as will be shown in the book
later on that seclusion and relinquishment of individual and social
responsibilities are inconsistence with the spiritual self-building and
self-purification program.

Islam demands from Muslims that simultaneous to living among the people
and discharging their social obligations they should not be ignorant
about their spiritual requirements and therefore, should pay special
attention towards their self-building and self-refinement.

Ibrahim Amini  
 March, 1984  
 Qum, I.R. IRAN.

[^1]: Ahlul Bayt (a.s.): It refers to the immediate descendants of a
family or such a family of the same house or bayt. In this compound
form, Ahlul Bayt is used in the Holy Qur’an especially in reference to
the immediate family of Muhammad (S). In verse 33: 33 we hear: “And God
only wishes to remove from you all kind of uncleanliness, O members of
the family (of Muhammad) and thoroughly purify you.” All the
commentators of the Holy Qur’an are unanimous in the opinion that the
term Ahlul Bayt in this verse refers to Muhammad's daughter Fatimah, his
cousin and son-in-law ‘Ali, and his two beloved grandsons, Hasan and
Husayn [Tr].


