Appendix 1: A Mystical Poem (Ghazal al-Irfani) of Imam Khomeini
===============================================================

(Added by [Tr].) Since the present book: Self-Building of Ayatullah
Ibrahim Amini deals with Islamic Mysticism, I thought it appropriate to
include here the translation of a famous mystical poem of Imam Khomeini
(r.a.)[^1] -the most celebrated gnostics of our times -as a gift to our
readers.

These verses were composed by the late Imam (r.a.) a little before when
he permanently joined his beloved God-Almighty, leaving this temporary
abode -with a tranquil, and contented heart , a spirit full of joy, and
a conscience hopeful ( of receiving) God' s forgiveness. The following
are the mystical verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من به خال لبت اى دوست گرفتار شدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 چشم بیمـار تـو را دیـدم و بیمار شدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Man beh khale labat al-doost giraftar shudom.

Chashme bimar too ra didam wa bimar shudam.

*Oh my beloved! After witnessing your Infinite Beauty*[^2] *I become
entangled.*

*Seeing, the manifestation of Your Glory, I become saturated with joy
and ecstasy.*

Ibn abi al-Hadid Moatazali writes:

“Whatever the most celebrated gnostics have said has been obtained from
the Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.). He says: 'Sheikh Abu
‘Ali Sina and Qashiri, whatever about the status of wayfarer and his
journey have said is quoted from the words of Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) Following
is an example: Sheikh Abu ‘Ali Sina has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثم انه اذا بلغت به الارادة حدا ما. عنت له خلسات من اطلاع نور الحق إليه
لذيذة كأنها بروق توميض إليه ثم تخمد عنه، وهي التي تسمى عندهم أوقاتا.
وكل وقت يكتنفه وجدان: وجد اليه ووجد عليه. ثم انه لتكثر عليه هذه
الغواشى اذا امعن فى الارتياض.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*'When a wayfarer in his determination reaches to a certain limit
pleasant ecstasies from Divine illumination becomes manifested for him
like the lightening sparks which shines and become silenced.*

*This state has been called by the learned mystics as a situation
whereby a wayfarer is confronted with the joy of union and pain of
separation (with the beloved) alternately. i.e. After the illumination
is silenced the wayfarer is filled with grief and pain. The more deeper
a wayfarer goes into asceticism this situation becomes further
intense.'*[^3]

And these are the meanings of this first verse.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فارغ از خود شدم و كوس اناالحق بزدم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
. همچو منصور خریدار سر دار شدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Farigh az Khud shudam wa koos anal haq bezadam.

Hamchu Mansoor kharidar sare dar shudam.

*I forget my own existence* [^4]*and proclaimed the slogan -'I am the
truth', and like the Mansoor Hallaj volunteered my self for
hanging*[^5]*.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غم دلدار فكنده است به جانم شررى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 كه به جان آمدم و شهره بازار شدم. شدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Ghame dildar fakandeh ast be janam sharari,

ke bejan amadam wa shorahe bazar shudam.

*The agony and pain of your love has burnt*[^6] *my entire existence.*

*That I become fed up with my own self; and my affairs become the talks
of the town* [^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
درِ میخانه گشایید به رویم شب و روز.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 .كه من از مسجد و از مدرسه، بیزار شدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Dare meykhana gooshaid beravim shabo rooz,

ke man is masjido wa az madrase bezar shudam.

*“Let the doors of tavern* [^8]*be opened,*

*and let us go there day and night.*

*Because, I become disgusted with,*

*the Mosque*[^9] *as well as from the School.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جامه زهد و ریا كَندم و بر تن كردم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 .خرقه پیر خراباتى و هشیار شدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Jame zohdo riya kardam wa bar tan kardam,

kharqe pir kharabati wa hashyar shudam.

*“I took off the dress of ascesticm and dissimulation.”* [^10]

*And become awakened* [^11] *after wearing the robe of a tavern's
haunter.”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واعظ شهر كه از پند خود آزارم داد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 .از دم رند مى آلوده مددكار شدم
  </p>
</blockquote>

Waiz shahar, ke az pind khud azaram dad,

Az dome rinde mai allodeh madad kar shudam.

*“The town's preacher*[^12] *with his preaching made me
uncomfortable*[^13]

*Therefore, I sought refuge*[^14] *in some on who was inwardly upright
but outwardly lewd.”*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بگذارید كه از بتكده یادى بكنم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
من كه با دست بت میكده بیدار شدم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Beguzarid ke az butkadeh yadi be kunam,

Man ke ba daste bute malkada bedar shudam.

*“Let me allow to remember the temple's*[^15] *sweet memories.*

*Where I was awakened* [^16]*from the sweet touch of my beloved's
hand.”*

The above translation and commentary of Imam's mystical poetry was a
difficult task indeed for some one like me, but thanks God that it has
been accomplished. I have utilized the most common mystical terms and
phrases which are most conventional among gnostics. However, it must be
admitted that Imam Khomeini 's level of mysticism (*irfan*) is far
higher that its interpretation could be limited to such conventional
mystical boundaries.

[^1]: Imam Ruhollah Musawi Khomeini: Was born on the 20th Jamadi-ul-
Thani 1281 A.H. (1902 AD in Khomein (Isfahan Province), in Iran. His
father was Sayyid Mostafa Khomeini, a well-known and beloved scholar of
his day, martyred by the agents of Reza Khan (the father of the deposed
Shah). His father left three sons and three daughters. Imam Khomeini was
the youngest in the family. Imam Khomeini lost both his tutors, his
mother and aunt at the age of 15. The Father and Founder of the Islamic
Revolution in Iran studied Islamic sciences under the guidance of his
elder brother Ayatollah Pasandideh. Ayatollah Khomeini also underwent
special instructions with the help of Sheik Abdul-Karim Ha'eri Yazdi in
1922. When Ayatollah Ha'eri Yazdi passed away in 1937, Imam Khomeini was
established as a genius scholar of high distinction. Imam Khomeini was
well versed in Islamic Jurisprudence, Philosophy, Mysticism, and
Astronomy. In the earliest” Fatwa” issued by Imam Khomeini in 1963, he
condemned the shah's regime for its complete subordination to foreign
powers specifically the United States. He further criticized the deposed
Shah for maintaining close political, economic, military, and
intelligence ties with Israel and his anti-Islamic policies. Imam
Khomeini was first arrested after the uprising on June 1963 and finally
exiled to Turkey. In October 1965, Imam Khomeini moved to the Holy City
of Najaf (Iraq). From Najaf, Imam Khomeini continued to issue fatwas
(religious guidance). The deposed Shah who hoped that by sending Imam
Khomeini to an exile, he would succeed in preventing the Imam's
influence and totally diminishing his popularity. The Shah was
frustrated. Throughout the fourteen years of the exile in Najaf, Imam
Khomeini continued his ceaseless campaign. The success of Islamic
Revolution of Iran springs out from his untiring endeavors in awakening
and directing the Ummah. It was in December 1978, when one of the
greatest of all the demonstrations took place. It can be said to be an
exceptional demonstration in the history of the world. This
demonstration paved the way for the escape of the Shah, his final
overthrow and ultimate triumph of the Islamic Revolution.

[^2]: During the spiritual migration or gnostic journey (ser wa salook),
away farer (salik) gradually succeeds in witnessing divine illumination
which are revealed to him intermittently. i.e. He witnesses at certain
instants then it disappears. How such things occur are beyond
description and those who have experienced it are helpless to explain it
to others.

[^3]: Share Isharat, vol.3 p-384.

[^4]: When the gnostic journey of a wayfarer ends his interior becomes a
mirror of God-Almighty whereby real pleasures descend upon him. At this
stage he feels happy and joyful with himself, because he sees something
special within his innerself. Sometimes the gnostic looks at
God-Almighty while at other times he looks at him, thus, finding himself
wavering between these two views. Eventually, he reaches to a point
where his ownself disappears and he sees only God-Almighty, which are
the meanings of “forgetting my own existence” .In gnostic terms this
stage is also called being annihilated in God-Almighty (fana fillah).

[^5]: Means being patient, offering resistance, tolerating difficulties,
and hardships, and becoming a target of acquisation by the people for
the sake of God-Almighty. And that is the way Imam Khomeini (r.a.) was,
who suffered a imprisonment, exiles, pains, and suffering for the sake
of his beloved.

[^6]: There is a narration from the Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali
(a.s.): حب الله نار لايمر على شيء الا احترف. “God's love never passes
over a thing without getting it burnt.”

[^7]: The becoming the talks of the town may be explained in the light
of the following tradition quoted from the Holy Prophet (S): إذا أحبّ
الله عبدا من أمتي قذف في قلوب أصفيائه وأرواح ملائكته وسكّان عرشه محبته
ليحبّوه فذلك المحب حقا طوبى له ثم طوبى له; وله عند الله شفاعة يوم
القيامة. “When God-Almighty loves a person from my Ummah He fills the
hearts of His favorite distinguished saints, spirits of angels and other
Heavenly creatures with his love so that all of them love him. How
fortunate is he ? How fortunate is he ? He will have the right of
intercession on the Day of Judgment. So for as a servant is not liked by
God-Almighty he does not become famous.” -Faiz Kashani, al Muhajatul
Baiza, 7-8.

[^8]: The tavern here means the spiritual position of God's Nearness
attained through performance of recommended (nawafil). In accordance
with authentic narrations, after attaining such a position, God-Almighty
becomes the ears and eyes of the servant. The eyes and ears are for
seeing and listening and what pleasure could be greater for a person
than seeing and listening through those special eyes and ears.

[^9]: Here the Mosque and School mean worships which lack the conditions
required for attaining God's Nearness or they might indicate the
preliminaries required for starting the gnostic journey of a wayfarer.
Islam being one of. the most perfect and comprehensive divine religion
consists of degrees and stages containing exoteric and esoteric affairs.
In order to understand its mysteries the condition of confidentiality
(mahram) is essential which is only possible through deeds, struggle,
abstinence, and guidance of Prophet's Infallible Household (a.s.) (Ahlul
Bayt). The school, books and class are preliminaries for understanding,
understanding is preliminary for action and action is preliminary for
acquiring confidentially (mahram). Sayyid Bin Taoos a great Shiite
scholar in his will to his son: "ان عاملت الله - جل جلاله بالصدق
والتحقيق جعل قلبك مرآه تنظر بها ما يريده - جل جلاله - من العلوم من وراء
ستر رقيق; ففى اخبار صاحب الملة: المؤمن ينثر بنور الله." “My son! If you
deal with God-Almighty through the path of truth and reality, He will
make your heart like a mirror in which the knowledge which God-Almighty
desires for you could be seen, because according to the traditions of
the Holy Prophet (S) it has been mentioned that a believer looks at
Divine illumination.” Kashf al-Mohajateh, p-136. In nutshell, it could
be said that the book and school which could not elevate a person to the
level of Sayyid bin Taoos or Imam Khomeini (r.a.) -one should not be
blamed for being disgusted with them which are the meanings of this
verse.

[^10]: Means relinquishment of moral indecencies like deceit etc.,
renunciation of worldly attachments, and reaching to the real asceticism
which makes a wayfarer worthy of receiving Divine mysteries and sublime
realities.

[^11]: Renunciation of world and its allurements and possession of real
piety and ascesticm result in association with the Holy Prophet (S) and
his Infallible Household (a.s.) in this world and Hereafter, which are
the meanings of becoming awakened.

[^12]: Means the pseudo-preachers who prevent people from nearing the
real pious scholars, thus, depriving them from being benefited from
their sacred existence.

[^13]: Means restrictions imposed by them cheap talks and illogical
arguments.

[^14]: Taking shelter with those perfect and pious models who are
intoxicated with God is love. The indication here means towards the
learned teachers of Imam Khomeini (r.a.).

[^15]: Means the Celestial Kingdom and the Celestial Lights representing
the sacred existence of Holy Prophet (S) and his Household Ahlul Bayt
(a.s.) who are the infinite and absolute source of blessing and guidance
for the mankind.

[^16]: Means acceptance of receiving the blessing guidance through the
sacred light of the Holy Prophet and his Holy House Hold (a.s.)


