Appendix 2: Supplication of the Holy Month of Sha'ban (Munajat al-Shabaniyyah)
==============================================================================

The supplication of the Holy Month of Sha'ban-the famous (*Munajat
al-Shabaniyyah*) narrated by the Commander of the Faithful Imam ' ‘Ali
(a.s.) and other infallible Imams of Prophet (S)'s Ahlul Bayt, is one of
the most precious mystic supplication. [^1]

Allahumma salle ala Muhammadin wa ale Muhammad,” wasma , duai eza
dawatoka; wasma' nedai eza nadetoka,” wa aqbbil alliya eza najetoka
faqad harabto elaika,” wa waqfato baina yadeka” Mustakinan laka
muttazzare an elaika” rajeyan lema ladaika thawabi; wa ta'lama ma .fi
nafsi,” wa takhboro hajali; wa ta'refo zamiri wala yakhfa alaika amro
munqallbi,” wa maswaya wama' orido an obdea behi,” min manteqi wa
atafawawhu behi min talebeti; wa arjuho leaqebati,” wa qad jorat maqade
roka aliya. Ya sayyidi! fima yakuno minni ila akhire umri, min savi rati
wa ala niyati,” wa bejadeka la abide ghairaka zeyadati,” wa naqsi wa
nafi wa zarri.

Ilahi inharamtani faman zallazi yarzuqni wa in khzaltani taman lazi
yansurni. Ilahi auzobeka min ghzabeka wa huloole sakhteka. Ilahi in
kunto ghaira mustahilin le rahmanteka fa anta ahlun an tajuda aliya
befazle sa'teka” Ilahi kaanni benalsi waqefatun bena yadeka,” wa qad
azzallaha husno tavakoli alaka faqulta ma anta ahlohu; wa tughmadtani be
afuwaka. Ilahi in afowta faman owla minka bezaleka; wa in kana qad dna
ajali,. wa lam yodneni minka amali faqad ja 'ltol iqrara bezarbe elaika
wasilati.

Ilahi! Qadjurto ala nafsi fin nazare lahafalahal waslo in lam taghfir
laha. Ilahi lam uazal birroka aliya ayama hayatifala taqta'a birraka
anni fi mamati. Ilahi kaifa ayasa min husane nazereka li ba'da mamati,.
wa anta lam tawalleni lllal jamila fi hayati. Ilahi tawwala min amri ma
anta ahlohu wa ud aliya befazleka ala muznebin qad ghamarahu jahalahu.
Ilahi qad satarta aliya zunuban fid duniya, wa ana ahwaju ila saterha
aliya minka fil ukhra izlam tuzjhir-ha leahdin min ebadekassaleheen.
Fala taf-zahani yomal qayamatch ala ra 'usil ashade. Ilahi judoka basata
amali wa afvoka aftalo min amali. Ilahi fasurrani be leqaika yoma taqzi
fehay baina ebadeka. Ilahi etezari elaika etezaro man lam yastaqhney
unqaboole uzrehi faqbal uzri ya akrama mone tazara elaihil musioona.

Ilahi la turudda hajati wala tukhaiyyeb tama'i wala taqta'a minka rajai
wa amali. Ilahi la ard ta havani lam tahdini walou ardta fazihati, lam
to afini. Ilahi ma azunnoka tarud doni fi hajatin qad afneto umri fi
zalabeha minka. Ilahi falakal hamdo abadan daiman sarmodan yazido wala
yabido kama tohibbo wa torza. Ilahi in akhaz tani be jurmi akhaztoke be
afweka wa in akhastana be zunobi akhastoka be maghferateka wa in
udkhaltanin nara alamto ahleha anni ohibboka.

Ilahi in kanna saqhora fi jambe ta'ateka amalifaqad kaborafi jambe
rajaika amali. Ilahi kaifa unqalabo min indeka bil khaibate mahruman wa
qad kana husno zanni be judeka untaqlebani bin najate marhuman. Ilahi wa
qad afneto umri fi shir ratis sah ve unka wa ablato shababi fi sakratit
taba odimneka. Ilahi falam asteqiz aiyyamaqh terari beka wa rukoni ela
sabil sakhateka. Ilahi wa ana abdoka wabno abdeka qaimun baina yadaika
mutawasselun be karameka elaika.

Ilahi ana abdun ata nassalo elaika mimma kunto owajehoka behi min qil
latis tehyai min nazareka wa utlobul afwa minka ezil afwo natun
lekarameka. Ilahi lam ya kunli holum fa untaqila behi un maseyateka illa
fi waqtin aiqastani le mahabbeteka wa kama ard ta unakuna kunto fa
shakartoka be idkhali fi karameka wale tathire galbi min ousakhil
ghaflate unka. Ilahin zur eliyya nazara man na daitaho fa ajabaka
wastamaltaho bema wao nateka fa ataka ya qariban la yabodo ani mughtarre
behi wa ya javadan la yabkhalo amman raja thawabaho.

Ilahi hubli qalban yudnihe minka shoukohu wa lisanan yurfa'a elaika
sidqohu wa nazaran yoqarrebohu minka haqohu. Ilahi inna man ta'rrafa
beka ghairo majhulin man la azabeka ghairo maqhzulin wa man aqbalta
alaihe gnairo mamtukin. Ilahi inna manin tahahoj beka lamustonirun wa
inna mane tasama beka lamastajirun wa qad luz to beka. Ya Ilahi fala
tukhaiyab zanni min rahmateka wala tahjubni unrafateka. Ilahi ogmeni fi
ahle wa vilayateka moqama man raja izziyadata min mahabbateka. Ilahi wal
himni walahan be zekreka ila zekreka wa himmati fi rohe najahe asmaika
wa mahlle qudseka. Ilahi beka alaika ilIa alhaqtani be mahalle ahle ta
ateka wal maswassalehe min marzateka fa inni la aqde ro le nafsi alafan
wala amleko laha nafan.

Ilahi abdohaz zaiful muznebo wa mamlukokal munibo fala tajalni min man
sarafta unho wajhaka wa hajabahu sahwoho on afweka. Ilahi hubli kamala[
inqtai elaika wa unre absara qulobena be ziae Zare ha elaika hatta
takhreqa absarul qulobe hujoban noore fata sela ila ma'dinil azamate wa
tasira arwahona muallaqatan be izze qudseka. Ilahi qojalni mimman
nadetahu fa ajabaka wala khat ta ho fasa eqa le jalaleka fana jetaho
sirrun wa amela laka jahran.

Ilahi lam ossallit ala hosne zanni qunotal ayase walan qat' a rajai min
jamile karameka. Ilahi in kanatil khatoya qad asqatatni ladeka fasfah
anni be hosne tavvakuli alaika. Ilahi in khat tatrniz zunobo min
makareme lutfeka faqad nabbah nani el yaqino ila kareme atfeka. Ilahi in
anamatnil ghaflato aniestedade lil qaika faqad nabbah hatnil ma'refato
bekaramil alyaka. Ilahi inda'ani ilan nare azimo aqabekafaqad da'ani
ilaljannate jazilo thawabeka. Ilahi falaka asalo wa elaika abtahilo wa
arghabo wa as aloka untosal leya ala Muhammadin wa ale Muhammadin wa un
taj alani mimman yodimo zik ra ka wala yan qoso ah da ka wala yaqh folo
un shukreka wala yes takhif-o be amreka- Ilahi wal hiqni be noore
ezzekal abhaje fa' akuna laka arefan wa un sevaka munharifan wa minka
khaifan moraqeban ya zaljalale wal ikrame wa sallallaho ala Muhammadin
rasulehi wa alehit tahirina wa sallama tasliman kasira.

*“In the Name of God the Beneficent the Merciful”*

*“Oh God! Send salutation upon Muhammad and His Holy Progeny and since,
I beseech You (please) grant my prayer; whenever I cry,- please listen
to my cry; whenever I supplicate You please pay attention towards my
condition; Because, I have taken refuge in You, am standing before Thy
Threshold in a state of grief, entangled with hardships shedding tears,
while still remaining hopeful of Your mercy and compassion- Thou are
Knowledgeable about my heart; is aware of my needs, knows thoroughly
about myself; and there is nothing hidden from You as far as my affairs
of this world and next worlds are concerned.”*

*“And whatever I bring upon my tongue to speak about my needs as well as
regarding my being hopeful in Thee for my eternal salvation-Thou know
every thing about it- Oh my Master! Thou will governs all the hidden and
apparent affairs of my life till its very last breath; whatever profit
or loss reaches to me, it is from Thee and not from other than Thee- Oh
God!*  
*If Thou deprive me than who else is there to provide my sustenance ? If
Thou make me abject then who else is there to support me? Oh God!! I
take refuge in Thee from Thy wrath and the severity of punishment- Oh
God! If I don't deserve to receive Your blessing –Thou possesses the
decency of bestowing forgiveness upon me with Thy infinite mercy and
compassion.”*

*“Oh God! As though I am standing before Thy sacred threshold; my good
faith and trust in Thee has already spreaded the shadow of mercy upon my
head,- whatever was befitting from Thy* *magnanimity and benevolence,
Thou have done with me accordingly, forgiveness and blessing has
surrounded my entire existence- Oh God! If Thou pardon me who else is
more befitting than Thee ?”*

*“And In case my death is near and my deeds did not earn Thy nearness,
Then I will present my admittance of sins as a means to receive Thy
forgiveness. O God! I do admit that I have oppressed my self: then woe
be upon the self: if you do not bestow forgiveness upon him.*

*Oh God ! Thy beneficence and merci surrounded me throughout my living;
therefore, do not deprive me from Thy grace in my dying. Oh God! how can
I be disappointed from receiving Thy Favors, after death, because during
my entire life I have not seen any thing from Thee except compassion ?”*

*“Oh God! Be my guardian and supervisor over my affairs the way it is
befitting of Thee (not what I deserve) pay attention with Thy
benevolence and merci towards me -a sinner who has been overtaken
completely by his ignorance. Oh God!*

*Indeed thou have covered all my sins in this world; I need their
cover-up in the Hereafter much more than the covering of this world,
because, Thou were kind and did not expose them to anyone of your
descent servants; therefore, on the Day of Judgment do not insult and
expose me in front of all the humanity.”*

*“Oh God! Thy mercy and compassion have increased my hopes, because Thy
forgiveness is for better than my deeds. Oh God! On the Day when Thou
will issue the final verdict for Thy servants, make me happy with Thou
countenance. Oh God! I beseech Thou for forgiveness like some one who
really is in need of acceptance of his repentance, therefore, accept my
excuse, oh Beneficent!*

*Who is besought by the sinners for atonement. Oh my Master! Do not turn
down my request; do not deprive me from remaining hopeful of Your
forgiveness,” through the grace of Thy magnanimity do not cut off any
hope and desire.*

*“Oh God! If thou had the intention of seeing me despised, would never
blessed me with Thy guidance; if Thou had intended seeing me
contemptible, would not have blessed me with health and happiness. Oh
God! I can never believe it that Thou will turn down my request for
which I have spent an entire life beseeching Thee for its grant. Oh God!
Thou are the only one worthy of praise and adoration -the eternal and
continuous praise always increasing and never ending, only if it could
receive Thy pleasure and acceptance.*

*“Oh God! If Thou will remonstrate me for my offenses I will seek refuge
in Thy forgiveness,” if Thou will take me to task against my sins, I
will take Thee to task for Thy forgiveness, if Thou will send me to Hell
will inform its inmates that I loved Thee. Oh God! If my deeds are
insignificant, but as compared to them my hope and desire in Thy
magnanimity and benevolence is too much.*

*Oh God! How can I return deprived and disappointed from Thy magnanimous
kingdom, while remaining quite hopeful about Thy compassion and merci,
that thou will be kind to me, and would include me among the rescued
ones.*

*“Oh God! I have spend my entire life in ignorance, negligence, and
forgetfulness from Thee, wasted my youth drunken into passions being
ignorant of Thee. Oh God! I did not awake, because of being too proud to
receive Thy forgiveness, and in this manner I followed the path of Your
wrath* *and rage. Oh God! I am your humble servant and son of your
servant who is now standing before Thee, pleading for Thy mercy and
compassion as a means of my salvation.*

*“Oh God! I am your servant who has came to Thy threshold as ashamed and
apologetic, I seek forgiveness and pardon for all my sins and
transgressions, which were committed by me due to my lack of modesty
from Thy presence, because bestowing forgiveness is the characteristic
of Thy magnanimity.*

*Oh God! I do not have the power of relinquishing sins except that Thou
awaken me with love and kindness. Or, if thou desire that I should
become the way Thou want me to be,' must be thankful to Thee for
spreading Thy compassion and cleansing and purifying my heart from the
filthiness of negligence.*

*“Oh God! With Thy Magnanimity treat me like some one to whom Thou
invited -he accepted, and Thou asked him for obedience –he obeyed. Oh
near one who is never away from Thy lovers, Oh Beneficent and Merciful
who never acts miserly towards those who are hopeful of Thy favors.*

*Oh God! Bless with a heart eager and anxious of Thy nearness, a tongue
which should keep itself engaged in sending the words of truth up-ward
towards Thee, and an insight which should bring me closer to Thee.*

*“Oh God! Whoever is known by thee cannot remain un-known; whoever takes
refuge in Thee can never be despised, whoever received Thy attention
would never become servant of anyone else, whoever followed Thy path
become enlightened, whoever sought Thy shelter become secured. And I
have taken refuge in Thee, therefore, Oh God! Don't disappoint me from
Thy blessings and do not deprive me from receiving Thy grace and
favors.”*

*“Oh God! Consider me among Thy favorite saints and bestow upon me the
rank of some one who strives to receive Thy love as much as possible. Oh
God! Reveal upon me the sweetness and pleasure of engaging into Thy
remembrance continuously, bless me with the courage to seek pleasure,
victory, and dependence in Thy Sacred Names and Exalted Essence.*

*Oh God! I swear You by Thy Own Exalted Essence and the right which Thou
possess over the creation to include me among the obedient ones and
bestow upon me a descent position of Your pleasure and consent, because
I am totally incompetent and neither can defend my self while
encountering an evil nor can increase any profit for myself Oh God!*

*I am a helpless servant and repentant sinner full of defects and
faults, therefore, do not include me among those who earned your
displeasure and because of their negligence become deprived of Thy
forgiveness.*

*“Oh God! bestow upon me perfect attention towards Thee; open the
esoteric eyes of my hearts so that they could witness Thy glory and
piercing through the veils of celestial lights may connect them with the
Absolute Source of Majesty; let our souls achieve the union with Thy
Exalted Holy Essence.*

*Oh God! consider me as some one to whom Thou called he accepted Thy
invitation, when Thou paid attention toward him -became infatuated due
to Thy glory and splendor and Thou confided in him secretly -he accepted
it explicitly.*

*'Oh God! Don't impose hopelessness and sorrow upon my good expectations
towards Thee, do not cut off my hopes from your generosity. Oh God! If
my offenses have made me low and abjected before Thee, pardon me for the
sake of my reliance and good faith in Thy forgiveness. Oh God !*

*If my sins have made me distant apart from Thy mercy and compassion, my
belief reminds me about Thy magnanimity. Oh God! If ignorance and
negligence have caused me to remain unprepared for Thy countenance, Thy
bounties and blessings make me aware. Oh God! If Thy wrath and
punishment will send me to Hell's fire, Thy generosity and reward have
invited me towards the eternal Paradise.*

*“Oh God! Therefore, whatever I need I beseech Thee; cry and shed tears
with hope, desire and anxiety before Thy Holy Threshold; I request Thee
to send salutations upon Muhammad and His Holy Progeny; include me among
the ones who are busy in Thy remembrance continuously; never break their
commitments with Thee; don't forget thanking Thee even for an instant;
and don't treat Thy commands lightly.”*

“*Oh God! Enlighten my existence with the illumination of thou Sacred
Essence whose cheerfulness and joy is far superior than any other
pleasure, so that I become absorbed in Thee completely, getting cut off
from others, fearing Thee and paying attention towards Thy commands. Oh
Thou possessor of splendor and majesty and salutations of God and lots
of greetings be upon Muhammad and his Holy Progeny*”

Imam Khomeini (r.a.) the most perfect gnostic of our times, in his
repeated speeches have emphasized the special spiritual importance of
this precious supplication. Those who are blessed with Divine grace of
keeping themselves continuously engaged in supplications and God's
remembrance loves this supplication a lot, and because of this
supplication eagerly await for the arrival of the Holy Month of Sha’ban.

This supplication contains vest sublime themes especially the etiquettes
and manners of servanthood; the manners of how to face God-Almighty; how
to beseech Him; how to tell him about heart's secrets; how to open
tongue for offering apologies and how to remain hopeful.

Also, in these supplications the meanings of interpretation of God's
Countenance (*Laqa*), God's Witnessing (*Shahood*) God's Nearness,
(*Qurb*) have been described in a delicate manner, which do not leave
any doubt or confusion for those wayfarers, who are still double minded,
and who do not want to believe. Regarding self-awareness which is
preliminary for God's learning (*Marefah*), this supplication contains
most meaningful and surprising points.

Since the recital of this supplication, especially, during the Holy
Month of Sha’ban as well as throughout the year for the wayfarers of
spiritual migration have been strongly recommended, I feel it
appropriate to present its English translation for the utilization of
dear readers. For the convenience of those readers who do not know how
to read Arabic, its pronunciation in English has been included.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّـهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلى مُحَمَّد وَآلِ مُحَمَّد، وَاسْمَعْ دُعائي اِذا
دَعَوْتُكَ، وَاْسمَعْ نِدائي اِذا نادَيْتُكَ، وَاَقْبِلْ عَليَّ اِذا
ناجَيْتُكَ، فَقَدْ هَرَبْتُ اِلَيْكَ، وَوَقَفْتُ بَيْنَ يَدَيكَ
مُسْتَكيناً، لَكَ مُتَضرِّعاً اِلَيْكَ، راجِياً لِما لَدَيْكَ ثَوابي،
وَتَعْلَمُ ما في نَفْسي، وَتَخْبُرُ حاجَتي، وَتَعْرِفُ ضَميري، وَلا
يَخْفى عَلَيْكَ اَمْرُ مُنْقَلَبي وَمَثْوايَ، وَما اُريدُ اَنْ
اُبْدِيَ بِهِ مِنْ مَنْطِقي، واَتَفَوَّهُ بِهِ مِنْ طَلِبَتي،
وَاَرْجُوهُ لِعاقِبَتي، وَقَدْ جَرَتْ مَقاديرُكَ عَليَّ يا سَيِّدي
فيما يَكُونُ مِنّي اِلى آخِرِ عُمْري مِنْ سَريرَتي وَعَلانِيَتي،
وَبِيَدِكَ لا بِيَدِ غَيْرِكَ زِيادَتي وَنَقْصي وَنَفْعي وَضرّي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِلـهي اِنْ حَرَمْتَني فَمَنْ ذَا الَّذي يَرْزُقُني، وَاِنْ خَذَلْتَني
فَمَنْ ذَا الَّذي يَنْصُرُني، اِلـهي اَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنَ غَضَبِكَ
وَحُلُولِ سَخَطِكَ، اِلـهي اِنْ كُنْتُ غَيْرَ مُسْتاْهِل لِرَحْمَتِكَ
فَاَنْتَ اَهْلٌ اَنْ تَجُودَ عَليَّ بِفَضْلِ سَعَتِكَ، اِلـهي كَأَنّي
بِنَفْسي واقِفَةٌ بَيْنَ يَدَيْكَ وَقَدْ اَظَلَّها حُسْنُ تَوَكُّلي
عَلَيْكَ، فَقُلْتَ ما اَنْتَ اَهْلُهُ وَتَغَمَّدْتَني بِعَفْوِكَ،
اِلـهي اِنْ عَفَوْتَ فَمَنْ اَوْلى مِنْكَ بِذلِكَ، وَاِنْ كانَ قَدْ
دَنا اَجَلي وَلَمْ يُدْنِني مِنْكَ عَمَلي فَقَدْ جَعَلْتُ الاِقْرارَ
بِالذَّنْبِ اِلَيْكَ وَسيلَتي، اِلـهي قَدْ جُرْتُ عَلى نَفْسي في
النَّظَرِ لَها، فَلَها الْوَيْلُ اِنْ لَمْ تَغْفِرْ لَها، اِلـهي لَمْ
يَزَلْ بِرُّكَ عَلَيَّ اَيّامَ حَياتي فَلا تَقْطَعْ بِرَّكَ عَنّي في
مَماتي، اِلـهي كَيْفَ آيَسُ مِنْ حُسْنِ نَظَرِكَ لي بَعْدَ مَماتي،
وَاَنْتَ لَمْ تُوَلِّني إلاّ الْجَميلَ في حَياتي، اِلـهي تَوَلَّ مِنْ
اَمْري ما اَنْتَ اَهْلُهُ، وَعُدْ عَلَيَّ بِفَضْلِكَ عَلى مُذْنِب قَدْ
غَمَرَهُ جَهْلُهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِلـهي قَدْ سَتَرْتَ عَلَيَّ ذُنُوباً في الدُّنْيا وَاَنَا اَحْوَجُ
اِلى سَتْرِها عَلَيَّ مِنْكَ في الاُْخْرى، اِذْ لَمْ تُظْهِرْها
لاَِحَد مِنْ عِبادِكَ الصّالِحينَ، فَلاتَفْضَحْني يَوْمَ الْقِيامَةِ
عَلى رُؤُوسِ الاَْشْهادِ، اِلـهي جُودُكَ بَسَطَ اَمَلي، وَعفْوُكَ
اَفْضَلُ مِنْ عَمَلي، اِلـهي فَسُرَّني بِلِقائِكَ يَوْمَ تَقْضي فيهِ
بَيْنَ عِبادِكَ، اِلـهىِ اعْتِذاري اِلَيْكَ اعْتِذارُ مَنْ لَمْ
يَسْتَغْنِ عَنْ قَبُولِ عُذْرِهِ، فَاقْبَلْ عُذْري يا اَكْرَمَ مَنِ
اعْتَذَرَ اِلَيْهِ الْمُسيئُونَ، اِلـهي لا َتَرُدَّ حاجَتي، وَلا
تُخَيِّبْ طَمَعي، وَلا تَقْطَعْ مِنْكَ رَجائي وَاَمَلي، اِلـهي لَوْ
اَرَدْتَ هَواني لَمْ تَهْدِني، وَلَوْ اَرَدْتَ فَضيحَتي لَمْ تُعافِني،
اِلـهي ما اَظُنُّكَ تَرُدُّني في حاجَة قَدْ اَفْنَيْتُ عُمْري في
طَلَبَها مِنْكَ، اِلـهي فَلَكَ الْحَمْدُ اَبَداً اَبَداً دائِماً
سَرْمَداً، يَزيدُ وَلا يَبيدُ كَما تُحِبُّ وَتَرْضى، اِلـهي اِنْ
اَخَذْتَني بِجُرْمي اَخَذْتُكَ بِعَفْوِكَ، وَاِنْ اَخَذْتَني بِذُنُوبي
اَخَذْتُكَ بِمَغْفِرَتِكَ، وَاِنْ اَدْخَلْتَني النّارَ اَعْلَمْتُ
اَهْلَها اَنّي اُحِبُّكَ، اِلـهي اِنْ كانَ صَغُرَ في جَنْبِ طاعَتِكَ
عَمَلي فَقَدْ كَبُرَ في جَنْبِ رَجائِكَ اَمَلي،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِلـهي كيف اَنْقَلِبُ مِنْ عِنْدِكَ بِالَخْيبَةِ مَحْروماً، وَقَدْ
كانَ حُسْنُ ظَنّي بِجُودِكَ اَنْ تَقْلِبَني بِالنَّجاةِ مَرْحُوماً،
اِلـهي وَقَدْ اَفْنَيْتُ عُمْري في شِرَّةِ السَّهْوِ عَنْكَ،
وَاَبْلَيْتُ شَبابي في سَكْرَةِ التَّباعُدِ مِنْكَ، اِلـهي فلَمْ
اَسْتَيْقِظْ اَيّامَ اغْتِراري بِكَ وَرُكُوني اِلى سَبيلِ سَخَطِكَ،
اِلـهي وَاَنَا عَبْدُكَ وَابْنُ عَبْدِكَ قائِمٌ بَيْنَ يَدَيْكَ،
مُتَوَسِّلٌ بِكَرَمِكَ اِلَيْكَ، اِلـهي اَنَا عَبْدٌ اَتَنَصَّلُ
اِلَيْكَ، مِمَّا كُنْتُ اُواجِهُكَ بِهِ مِنْ قِلَّةِ اسْتِحْيائي مِنْ
نَظَرِكَ، وَاَطْلُبُ الْعَفْوَ مِنْكَ اِذِ الْعَفْوُ نَعْتٌ
لِكَرَمِكَ، اِلـهي لَمْ يَكُنْ لي حَوْلٌ فَانْتَقِلَ بِهِ عَنْ
مَعْصِيَتِكَ إِلاّ في وَقْت اَيْقَظْتَني لَِمحَبَّتِكَ، وَكَما
اَرَدْتَ اَنْ اَكُونَ كُنْتُ، فَشَكَرْتُكَ بِاِدْخالي في كَرَمِكَ،
وَلِتَطْهيرِ قَلْبي مِنْ اَوْساخِ الْغَفْلَةِ عَنْكَ، اِلـهي اُنْظُرْ
اِلَيَّ نَظَرَ مَنْ نادَيْتَهُ فَاَجابَكَ، وَاْستَعْمَلتُهُ
بِمَعونَتِكَ فَاَطاعَكَ، يا قَريباً لا يَبْعُدُ عَنِ المُغْتَرِّ بِهِ،
وَيا جَواداً لايَبْخَلُ عَمَّنْ رَجا ثَوابَهُ،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِلـهي هَبْ لي قَلْباً يُدْنيهِ مِنْكَ شَوْقُهُ وَلِساناً يُرْفَعُ
اِلَيْكَ صِدْقُهُ، وَنَظَراً يُقَرِّبُهُ مِنْكَ حَقُّهُ، اِلـهي إنَّ
مَنْ تَعَرَّفَ بِكَ غَيْرُ مَجْهُول وَمَنْ لاذَ بِكَ غَيْرُ مَخْذُول،
وَمَنْ اَقْبَلْتَ عَلَيْهِ غَيْرُ مَمْلُول، اِلـهي اِنَّ مَن انْتَهَجَ
بِكَ لَمُسْتَنيرٌ وِاِنَّ مَنِ اعْتَصَمَ بِكَ لَمُسْتَجيرٌ، وَقَدْ
لُذْتُ بِكَ يا اِلـهي فَلا تُخَيِّبْ ظَنّي مِنْ رَحْمَتِكَ، وَلا
تَحْجُبْني عَنْ رَأفَتِكَ، اِلـهي اَقِمْني في اَهْلِ وِلايَتِكَ مُقامَ
مَنْ رَجَا الزِّيادَةَ مِنْ مَحَبَّتِكَ، اِلـهي وَاَلْهِمْني وَلَهاً
بِذِكْرِكَ اِلى ذِكْرِكَ وَهَمَّتي في رَوْحِ نَجاحِ اَسْمائِكَ
وَمَحَلِّ قُدْسِكَ، اِلـهي بِكَ عَلَيْكَ إلاّ اَلْحَقْتَني بِمَحَلِّ
اَهْلِ طاعَتِكَ وَالْمَثْوىَ الصّالِحِ مِنْ مَرْضاتِكَ، فَاِنّي لا
اَقْدِرُ لِنَفْسي دَفْعاً، وَلا اَمْلِكُ لَها نَفْعاً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِلـهي اَنَا عَبْدُكَ الضَّعيفُ الْمُذْنِبُ، وَمَمْلُوكُكَ الْمُنيبُ،
فَلا تَجْعَلْني مِمَّنْ صَرَفتَ عَنْهُ وَجْهَكَ، وَحَجَبَهُ سَهْوُهُ
عَنْ عَفْوِكَ، اِلـهي هَبْ لي كَمالَ الانْقِطاعِ اِلَيْكَ، وَاَنِرْ
اَبْصارَ قُلُوبِنا بِضِياءِ نَظَرِها اِلَيْكَ، حَتّى تَخْرِقَ اَبْصارُ
الْقُلُوبِ حُجُبَ النُّورِ فَتَصِلَ اِلى مَعْدِنِ الْعَظَمَةِ،
وَتَصيرَ اَرْواحُنا مُعَلَّقَةً بِعِزِّ قُدْسِكَ، اِلـهي وَاْجَعَلْني
مِمَّنْ نادَيْتَهُ فَاَجابَكَ، وَلاحَظْتَهُ فَصَعِقَ لِجَلالِكَ،
فَناجَيْتَهُ سِرّاً وَعَمِلَ لَكَ جَهْراً،
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اِلـهي لَمْ اُسَلِّطْ عَلى حُسْنِ ظَنّي قُنُوطَ الاِْياسِ، وَلاَ
انْقَطَعَ رَجائي مِنْ جَميلِ كَرَمِكَ، اِلـهي اِنْ كانَتِ الْخَطايا
قَدْ اَسْقَطَتْني لَدَيْكَ، فَاصْفَحْ عَنّي بِحُسْنِ تَوَكُّلي
عَلَيْكَ، اِلـهي اِنْ حَطَّتْني الذُّنوبُ مِنْ مَكارِمِ لُطْفِكَ،
فَقَدْ نَبَّهَني الْيَقينُ اِلى كَرَمِ عَطْفِكَ، اِلـهي اِنْ
اَنَامَتْنِى الْغَفْلَةُ عَنِ الاسْتْعِدادِ لِلِقائِكَ، فَقَدْ
نَبَّهَني، الْمَعْرِفَةُ بِكَرَمِ آلائِكَ، اِلـهي اِنْ دَعاني اِلى
النّارِ عَظيْمُ عِقابِكَ، فَقَدْ دَعاني اِلَى الْجَنَّةِ جَزيلُ
ثَوابِكَ اِلـهي فَلَكَ اَسْأَلُ وَاِلَيْكَ اَبْتَهِلُ وَاَرْغَبُ،
وَاَساَلُكَ اَنْ تُصَلِّيَ عَلى مُحَمَّد وَآلِ مُحَمَّد، وَاَنْ
تَجْعَلَني مِمَّنْ يُديمُ ذِكَرَكَ، وَلا يَنْقُضُ عَهْدَكَ،
وَلايَغْفُلُ عَنْ شُكْرِكَ، وَلا يَسْتَخِفُّ بِاَمْرِكَ، اِلـهي
وَاَلْحِقْني بِنُورِ عِزِّكَ الاْبْهَجِ، فَاَكُونَ لَكَ عارِفاً،
وَعَنْ سِواكَ مُنْحَرِفاً، وَمِنْكَ خائِفاً مُراقِباً، يا ذَالْجَلالِ
وَالاِكْرامِ، وَصَلَّى اللهُ عَلى مُحَمَّد رَسُولِهِ وَآلِهِ
الطّاهِرينَ وَسَلَّمَ تَسْليماً كَثيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Added by [Tr].


