Self-Purification, the Main Goal of Divine Messengers
=====================================================

The greatest aim of Divine Messengers was to emphasize the importance of
refinement, purification, and training of human selves. God-Almighty
said in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَقَدْ مَنَّ اللَّهُ عَلَى الْمُؤْمِنِينَ إِذْ بَعَثَ فِيهِمْ رَسُولًا
مِّنْ أَنفُسِهِمْ يَتْلُو عَلَيْهِمْ آيَاتِهِ وَيُزَكِّيهِمْ
وَيُعَلِّمُهُمُ الْكِتَابَ وَالْحِكْمَةَ وَإِن كَانُوا مِن قَبْلُ
لَفِي ضَلَالٍ مُّبِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God did confer a great favor on the believers when he sent among
them an apostle from among themselves rehearsing unto them the signs of
God, sanctifying them and instructing them in scripture and wisdom,
while before that, they had been in manifest error. (3: 164)***

Therefore, it is obvious that the subject of human education and
training was of such vital importance that God-Almighty sent Divine
Messengers especially for this purpose thus, conferring a great favor
ul1on the believers.

The individual as well as collective personality, prosperity or cruelty
(of this world and Hereafter) of a human being depends upon how much
efforts he had already made or is still making for self-building. It is
from this consideration that self-building is regarded something of such
vital importance because it determines ones eventual destiny.

The Divine Messengers came to teach human beings regarding the path of
self-building, nourishment, and perfection of self, as well as to
accompany them as their guide and helper in this vital and determinant
task.

They came for cleansing and sanctifying human selves from their indecent
moral characteristics and animal instincts, and bestowing upon them
superior spiritual virtues. The prophets lectured human beings about the
self-building program, acted as helper and knowledgeable guides in
identifying the ugliness in their moral conducts, and showed them the
ways and means for self-control against their selfish whims and
passions.

By timely issuance of warning and intimidating they succeeded in
sanctifying the human selves from the moral obscenities and indecencies.
They came for plantation of sapling of higher moral virtues within human
souls, nurtured and protected it for its eventual blooming, and in doing
so acted as guides, friends, and helpers of the people by encouraging
and pursuing them towards the desired sublime' objectives. The Holy
Prophet (S) has said:

*“I emphasize the importance of good morals for you because God-Almighty
has sent me especially for this purpose.”*[^1]

He further said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن النبي صلى الله عليه وآله انه قال: إنما بعثت لا تمم مكارم الاخلاق
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I was appointed for the Prophethood so that I may accomplish the
important task of moral perfection within human souls.”*[^2]

Imam al-Sadiq[^3] (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال أبوعبدالله عليه السلام: ان الله تبارك وتعالى خص الانبيا بمكارم
الاخلاق, فمن كانت فيه فليحمد الله على ذلك, ومن لم يكن فليتضرع الى الله
وليسيله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*God-Almighty appointed prophets with good morals; therefore, whoever
discovers these virtues within himself should be thankful to God for
this bounty, whoever lacks these virtues must pray, cry, and shed tears
before God Almighty asking for such blessing*.”[^4]

The commander of faithful Imam ‘Ali[^5] (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: لو كنا لا نرجو جنة ولا نخشى نارا ولا
ثوابا ولا عقابا لكان ينبغي لنا ان نطلب مكارم الاخلاق فإنها مما تذل على
سبيل النجاح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Supposedly, if neither there was any desire for Paradise nor there was
any fear of Hell, and also there would have not been any belief about
the reward and punishment in the Next World; even then it would have
been be fitting to strive for moral perfection, because, good morals are
the path towards prosperity and victory.”*[^6]

Imam Baqir [^7] said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي جعفر عليه السلام قال: ان اكمل المومنين ايمانا احسنهم خلقا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The most perfect believers from the point of view of faith are the
ones who excel in moral conduct.”*[^8]

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: ما يوضع في ميزان امرى يوم القيامة
أفضل من حسن الخلق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“There is nothing better than good moral conduct which could be written
on the “Letter of Deeds” on the Day of Resurrection.”* [^9]

And said

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله (ص): اكثر ما تلج به امتى الجنة تقوى الله وحسن الخلق.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“My Ummah will enter into Paradise mostly on the basis of piety and
excellence in moral conduct.”*[^10]

And the following narration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جا رجل الى رسول الله عليه وآله من بين يديه فقال: يا رسول الله ما
الدين؟ فقال: حسن الخلق. ثم اتاه من قبل يمينه فقال: يا رسول الله
ماالدين؟ فقال: حسن الخلق. ثم اتاه من قبل شماله فقال: ما الدين؟ فقال:
حسن الخلق. ثم اتاه من ورايه فقال: ما الدين؟ فالفتف اليه فقال: اما
تفقه؟ هوان لا تغضب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A man approached the Holy Prophet (S) and asked: 'What is religion?'
The Holy Prophet (S) replied: 'Good moral conduct.' The man asked the
same questions from the Holy Prophet (S) alternatively by appearing from
right, left, and behind the Messenger. Finally the Holy Prophet (S) took
a deep look at him and said: 'Why don't you understand?' Religion is
defined as never to get angry.”*[^11]

Islam has attached special importance for moral ethics, and because of
these consideration the Holy Qur’an contains relatively more verses
regarding ethics as compared verses related to obligation. Inside the
books of narrations, one may finds thousands of narrations regarding
ethics as compared to narrations dealing with other topics; if this
number is not regarded greater in quantity, certainly it is not smaller
either.

The rewards and promises mentioned for good moral deeds are certainly
not lesser than the rewards prescribed for other actions, and likewise
the warnings and punishments described for indecent moral actions are
certainly not less than the punishments for other actions.

Therefore, in Islam, ethics constitutes the basics and should not be
treated simply as secondary religious obligations or something related
to the beautification and decoration of religious persons. If religion
has defined do's and don'ts for obligations, it has defined the same for
ethics. If encouragement, persuasion, rewards, punishment, and warnings
have been utilized for obligations, the same approach has been applied
for ethics as well as.

Therefore, there exists no difference between ethics and obligations as
for as religious recommendations are concerned, and in order to achieve
perfection and prosperity one cannot remain ignorant of ethical matters.

The moral obligations cannot be ignored by taking the excuse of treating
them simply as moral obligations, likewise forbidden moral acts should
not be performed either. If performance of daily-prayers is compulsory
and their non-performance is prohibited and brings Divine-Punishment,
equally important is the fulfillment of a promise and its breach is
prohibited and brings Divine-Wrath.

The real religious and prosperous is some one who is committed to his
religious obligation as well as is honest in fulfillment of his moral
commitments. On the contrary ethics play an important role for achieving
prosperity and spiritual perfection that will be explained in the book
later on.

1. Self-awareness and Self-building
-----------------------------------

Although a human being is not more than a single reality, but is the
possessor of different dimensions within his single existence –the
existence which starts from the insignificant dusty material lacking any
sort of sense and feelings and ultimately terminates into a precious
celestial jewel.

God-Almighty said in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِي أَحْسَنَ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ خَلَقَهُ ۖ وَبَدَأَ خَلْقَ الْإِنسَانِ
مِن طِينٍ ثُمَّ جَعَلَ نَسْلَهُ مِن سُلَالَةٍ مِّن مَّاءٍ مَّهِينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ سَوَّاهُ وَنَفَخَ فِيهِ مِن رُّوحِهِ ۖ وَجَعَلَ لَكُمُ السَّمْعَ
وَالْأَبْصَارَ وَالْأَفْئِدَةَ ۚ قَلِيلًا مَّا تَشْكُرُون
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Who made all things good which He created, and He began the creation
of man from clay, then He made his seed from a draught of despised
fluid; then he fashioned him and breathed into him of his spirit; and
appointed for you hearing and sights and hearts; small thanks give ye”
(32: 7-9)***

A human being is the possessor of various facts and parameters within
his existence. From one aspect he is the possessor of physical body and
a name, while from another aspect he is possessor of animal instincts as
well as. Eventually overall, he is a human being possessing superior
human virtues which are not found in other animals.

Therefore, human being is a single reality, a reality that possesses
various dimensions and facts within his single existence. When it is
said: My weight and my face, it is indicative of his body and name; when
it is said: My food and my health, it is also related to his body; when
it is said: movement, anger, and sexual passion, it indicates his animal
self; and lastly when it is said; my wisdom, my thinking and my
thoughts, it indicates to his superior human virtues.

Therefore, a human being possesses different kinds of selves namely;
self related to his physical body, self related to his animal instincts,
and the human-self, but the most valuable and precious self is
his -human-self. What had made human beings, “Vicegerent of God” upon
earth and has distinguished them over other creatures is nothing but the
single heavenly “Spirit” blown into his existence by God-Almighty,
called Human Soul. The wise God has explained the creation of human
beings in the Holy Qur’an as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ خَلَقْنَا الْإِنسَانَ مِن سُلَالَةٍ مِّن طِينٍ ثُمَّ
جَعَلْنَاهُ نُطْفَةً فِي قَرَارٍ مَّكِينٍ ثُمَّ خَلَقْنَا النُّطْفَةَ
عَلَقَةً فَخَلَقْنَا الْعَلَقَةَ مُضْغَةً فَخَلَقْنَا الْمُضْغَةَ
عِظَامًا فَكَسَوْنَا الْعِظَامَ لَحْمًا ثُمَّ أَنشَأْنَاهُ خَلْقًا
آخَرَ فَتَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily we created man from a product of wet earth; then placed him
as a drop (of seed) in a safe lodging; then fashioned we the drop a
clot, then fashioned we the little lump bones, then clothed the bones
with flesh,. and then produced it as another creation. So blessed the
God, the Best of Creators.”*** ***(23:12-14)***

It is about the creation of human being that God-Almighty has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So blessed the God -the Best of Creators.” (23:14)***

It was because of this Heavenly Spirit that human being reaches to an
exalted position that God-Almighty orders the angels as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فإذا سويته ونفخت من روحي فقعوا له ساجدين.
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So when I have made him and have breathed unto him of My Spirit, do
ye fall down prostrating yourself unto him.”*** ***(15: 29)***

If, human beings were bestowed distinction over other creatures and
God-Almighty said about them as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ كَرَّمْنَا بَنِي آدَمَ وَحَمَلْنَاهُمْ فِي الْبَرِّ
وَالْبَحْرِ وَرَزَقْنَاهُم مِّنَ الطَّيِّبَاتِ وَفَضَّلْنَاهُمْ عَلَىٰ
كَثِيرٍ مِّمَّنْ خَلَقْنَا تَفْضِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Verily, we have honored the children of Adam. We carry them on the
land and the sea, and have made provision of good things for them, and
have preferred them above many of those whom we created with a marked
preferment.”*** ***(17: 70)***

Therefore, if a human being should strive for self-building he must
build his human-self and not his animal or physical-self. The aims of
prophets had been to strengthen the human beings in their endeavors for
perfecting their human selves. The Prophets said to the human-beings:

Don't forget that your self is your human-self; in case you sacrificed
your human-self for the sake of whims and passions of your animal-self;
you will inflict upon yourself a terrible loss.

God-Almighty has said in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّ الْخَاسِرِينَ الَّذِينَ خَسِرُوا أَنفُسَهُمْ وَأَهْلِيهِمْ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ۗ أَلَا ذَٰلِكَ هُوَ الْخُسْرَانُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: the losers will be those who loose themselves and their house
folk on the Day of Resurrection. Ah, that will be the manifest loss.”***
***(39:15)***

Those who never think about any thing except their animal existence have
indeed lost their human personality and are not striving for their
recovery either. The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: عجبت لمن ينشد ضالته وقداضل نفسه فلا يطلبها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is indeed strange to see someone so desperately looking for lost
personal things, while making absolutely no efforts to find his lost
(human) self.”*11

There can not be more severe and painful loss than some one's loosing
his human personality and real self; for such a person nothing is left
except animalism.

2. Human-soul and Animal-self
-----------------------------

The verses of the Holy Qur’an and narrations about human-self could be
divided into two categories. Some of the verses define human-self as a
precious valuable jewel possessing Heavenly excellence, descended from
Heaven, which is the source of all superior characteristics and human
virtues. These verses recommend that human beings must strive for
achieving self-refinement and self-perfection through training, and must
be careful for its protection, never to loose such a precious Heavenly
gift. For example God-Almighty in Holy Qur’an defines this precious
jewel as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
 وَيَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الرُّوحِ قُلِ الرُّوحُ مِنْ أَمْرِ رَبِّيوَمَا
أُوتِيتُم مِّنَ الْعِلْمِ إِلَّا قَلِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They will ask the (of Muhammad) concerning the spirit. Say: The
spirit is by command of my Lord, and knowledge ye have been vouchsafed
but little.”(17:85)***

In the above verse the spirit has been defined as an existence belonging
to the celestial world that is superior than the material world. The
Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) about the self said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: ان النفس لجوهرة تهمنية من صانها رفعها ومن ابتذلها
وضعها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Self is like a precious jewel, whoever strives for his protection, he
will help him attaining exalted positions, and whoever acted negligently
in his protection he shall pull him towards humiliation.”*[^12]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من عرف نفسه لم يهنها بالفانيات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever knows the worth of his self will never allow himself to be
indulging into passing worldly amusements and shameful deeds.”*[^13]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من عرف شرف معانة عن دنأة سهوته و زورمناه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever discovers the nobility of self shall guard him against lowness
of passions and false desires.”*[^14]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من شرفت نفسه كثرت عواطفه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever possesses the nobility of self will have more
compassion.”*[^15]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من شرفت نفسه نزهها عن ذلة الطالب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever possesses the nobility of self will become free from
Wants.”*[^16]

From the above quoted verses and narrations whose examples are frequent,
it can be derived that human self is a valuable and precious jewel which
should be carefully guarded protected and nourished.

The second category of verses and narrations defines the self as
something wicked and dangerous enemy responsible for all sorts of evils,
against whom we are supposed to wage a great struggle (*Jihad al-Akbar*)
till it becomes completely submissive, otherwise it will inflict
terrible misfortune and cruelty upon the defeated person.

Following are some examples:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ خَافَ مَقَامَ رَبِّهِ وَنَهَى النَّفْسَ عَنِ الْهَوَىٰ
فَإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But as far him who feared to stand before his lord and restrained
his soul from lust, Lo! The garden will be his home.”***
***(79:40-41)***

The Holy Qur’an quotes from Prophet Joseph (a.s.):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا أُبَرِّئُ نَفْسِي ۚ إِنَّ النَّفْسَ لَأَمَّارَةٌ بِالسُّوءِ
إِلَّا مَا رَحِمَ رَبِّي ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I don't exculpate myself Lo! the (human) soul enjoineth unto evil,
save that whereon my Lord hath mercy. Lo! My Lord is Forgiving,
Merciful.”*** ***(12: 53)***

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبي الله صلى الله عليه وآله: اعتدى عدوك نفسك التي بين جنبيك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Your's greatest enemy is your self, which is located between your two
sides.”*[^17]

Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: إن النفس لامارة بالسؤ فمن ايتمنها خائنة ومن
استنام اليها أهلكته ومن رضي عنها اوردته شر الموارد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Self commands you continuously to indulge into evil deeds, therefore,
whoever trusted his self -he will deceit him, whoever believed his
self -he will destroy him; and whoever is satisfied with his self –he
will lead him to face worst kind of disasters.”*[^18]

He further said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: الثقة بالنفس من أوثق فرص الشيطان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Trusting the self provides the most dependable opportunities for
devil's entrance”*[^19]

Imam al-Sajjad [^20](a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال علي بن الحسين عليه السلام في دعائه: الهي اليك أشكو نفسا بإلسو
امارة والى الخطيئة مبادرة وبمعاصيك مولعة ولسخطك متعرضة تسلك بي مسالك
المهالك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh God! I do complain to you against the self –which continuously
commands; to indulge into sinful acts and deviations,. Stands up against
Your wrath and punishment; and pulls me towards the path of absolute
destruction.”*[^21]

From the above quoted verses and narrations whose examples are frequent,
it can be derived that human self constitutes an evil existence which is
the source of all sort of sins and therefore, should be made submissive
through efforts and waging greater struggle (*Jihad al-Akbar*).

Here it is quite possible that some may consider that these two
categories of verses and narrations are incompatible and contradict each
other; or one might imagine that a human being possesses two selves,
namely: human- self which is the source of all goodness and blessing,
and the other one animal-self which is the source of all evil and
sinfulness.

Both of the above mentioned interpretations are incorrect because
firstly there exists no conflict between the above mentioned verses and
narrations of two categories; secondly, the sciences had already proved
that a human being is not more than a single reality possessing a single
self and it is not such that his animalism and humanism are separate
from each other.

But human self comprises of two stages and two dimensions of his single
existence. At lower the stage, self is an animal possessing all
animalistic characteristic, while at higher stage, the self is a human
possessing Divine-spirit -descended from the Celestial Heavenly Kingdom.
When it is said: Self is noble, precious, source of all virtues and
blessings; one must endeavor for his nourishment and perfection -here
the higher stage of self has been indicated.

But when it is said: Self is your greatest enemy; don't trust him
because he will lead you to eventual destruction, control and make him
submissive through greater struggle -here his animal and lower stage
have been pointed out. If it is said: Nourish and strengthen your self
here the human dimension of the self is meant. When it is said: Wage
greater struggle for his total submission, here the animal dimension of
the self is meant.

There exists a continuous confrontation between these two selves or two
stages of human existence. The animal self continuously strives to
dominate by keeping human being amused with whims, passions and lower
animal desires, thus, closing the path of advancement perfection,
exaltation and movement towards God-Almighty and making a human being
captive of his animal self.

While on the contrary his human self or the higher stage of his
existence continuously strives for attaining the higher sublime
spiritual stations of human perfection leading towards God's
Countenance, and in order to accomplish his cherished goal, tries to
control, and forces the animal-self for his absolute submission. This
internal struggle, within the human existence continues until one of the
combatant becomes victorious defeating his opponent.

If the human or celestial-self gets upper hand -the human values become
alive, thus, leading human being towards the road of spiritual
excellence and perfection ultimately achieving the highest position of
God's Countenance. But, on the contrary if the animal-self becomes
victorious -he turns off the light of wisdom, thus, throwing the human
being into the deepest valley of darkness confusion and deviation. It
was because of this internal confrontation within human existence that
Divine Prophets came to help guide and support the human beings in their
holy struggle which ultimately determines their destiny.

3. Human Virtues
----------------

A human being possesses two types of selves: the human self and the
animal self, but the value of a human being is related to his human-self
and has nothing to do with his animal self. The animal-self may be
regarded some sort of parasitic existence, or like an uninvited guest,
and in reality is the unconscious-self.

Although, a human being is an animal and is obligated to fulfill his
animalistic requirements, but he has not been created to live in this
world like an animal, instead he has been created with the aims and
objectives of utilizing and commissioning his animal existence for
perfecting his human existence.

A human being have some genuine requirements incorporated within his
inner existence for the sake of his animal as well as human existence.
Since he is an animal, he requires food, water, clothing and shelter in
order to motivate him for making serious endeavors for their search,
feelings of thirst and hunger have been incorporated within his
existence.

Similarly, for the sake of continuation of human race, sexual desires
and love for female partner have been incorporated within his nature.

Since men like to live and in order to sustain his life he has no other
choice except to take care of means of living required for his animal
existence. When he sees food he feels hungry and desires to eat and
therefore, he tells himself: I must arrange food for my own consumption
and whatever obstacles are encountered in this path I must try to remove
them.

Of course, these feelings are not bad because for sustenance of life one
must work, eat and drink. In Islam not only this has not been forbidden,
on the contrary it has been recommended and encouraged. But parallel to
that it must be clearly understood that the animal life is a preliminary
and not the desired goal. Or in other words, the animal life is not the
main guest rather some one accompanying him.

Therefore, if some one assigns authenticity to animal existence, strives
and endeavors seriously day and night to fulfill his animal lower
desires and passions; considers the aims of life simply eating,
drinking, sleeping, and reproducing -has indeed fallen into intense
darkness of deviation and wanderness. Because, he has removed the human
wisdom and Heavenly spirit from the position of power and have confined
them into a forgotten place.

Such an individual does not deserve to be called as a human
being -rather he is an animal with a human face. He possesses wisdom but
by his perverted deeds has become so isolated that he can no longer
recognize and follow the superior human virtues and characteristics. In
spite of having eyes he is unable to see the realities; in spite of
possessing ears he cannot hear the facts.

The Holy Qur’an considers such an individual as an animal and even worse
and more deviated than the animals because animal lacks wisdom and does
not understand, while the above mentioned person in spite of having
wisdom does not understand.

The Holy Qur’an describes such individuals, as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِن لَّمْ يَسْتَجِيبُوا لَكَ فَاعْلَمْ أَنَّمَا يَتَّبِعُونَ
أَهْوَاءَهُمْ ۚ وَمَنْ أَضَلُّ مِمَّنِ اتَّبَعَ هَوَاهُ بِغَيْرِ هُدًى
مِّنَ اللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يَهْدِي الْقَوْمَ الظَّالِمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if they answer thee not, then know that what they follow is
their lusts. And who goes farther astray than he who followeth his lust
without guidance from God? Lo! God guideth not wondering folk.”***
***(28:50)***

And:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَقَدْ ذَرَأْنَا لِجَهَنَّمَ كَثِيرًا مِّنَ الْجِنِّ وَالْإِنسِ ۖ
لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ لَّا يَفْقَهُونَ بِهَا وَلَهُمْ أَعْيُنٌ لَّا
يُبْصِرُونَ بِهَا وَلَهُمْ آذَانٌ لَّا يَسْمَعُونَ بِهَا ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ
كَالْأَنْعَامِ بَلْ هُمْ أَضَلُّ ۚ أُولَٰئِكَ هُمُ الْغَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Already have we urged unto Hell many of the Jinn and humankind,
having hearts wherewith they understand not, and having eyes wherewith
they see not, and having ears wherewith they hear not. These are as the
cattle -nay but they are worse! These are the neglectful.”*** ***(7:
179)***

The Holy Qur’an further defines these creatures as follows:

***“Hast thou seen him who maketh his desire his god, and God sendeth
him astray purposely and sealeth up his hearing and his heart, and
setteth on his sight a covering ? Than who will lead him after God (hath
condemned him) ? Will you not then heed ?(45: 23)***

How unfortunate and losers are those who have sacrificed their
heavenly-self, prosperity, and human perfection for the sake of passions
and desires of their animal existence? They have exchanged their human
self with their animalistic pleasures. [^22]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

*“Whoever becomes involved into world's allurements, thus giving up his
gains from his immortal life in the Next World -has indeed been
cheated.”*[^23]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: اكرم نفسك من كل دنية وان ساقتك الى الرغئب, فانك
لن تعتاض بما تبذل من نفسك عوضا ولاتكن عبد غيرك وقد جعلك الله حرا وما
خير خيرلا ينال الا بشر ويسر لاينال الا بعصر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Restrain your self from indulgence into lower shameful deeds no matter
how attractive or appealing they might appear because, in this exchange
or trade you do not receive the genuine value of your self Do not allow
yourself to be slave of other because, God has created you as free. The
goodness which cannot be obtained except through the evil is not
goodness. Also a thing acquired except with serious efforts would not be
easy to retained.”* [^24]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: لبيس المتجران ترى الدنيا لنفسك ثمنا
ومما لك عند الله عوضا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“What a bad trade it is that one exchanges his self for this world
instead of trading it with whatever is available with God-Almighty (in
the Next- World).”*[^25]

But, a human being cannot be summarized only into animal self, because
he also possesses a human self, and on account of this merit he is an
abstract and Celestial Jewel, descended from the Heavenly Kingdom,
cherishing values other then animalistic desires.

If a human being ponders deeply into his Inner existence and really
recognized himself; he will discover that he has arrived from the
kingdom of power, wonder, knowledge, blessing, benevolence,
illumination, goodness, justice, and in one sentence from the kingdom of
absolute perfection, and is originated and belonged to it.

It is here that a human being discovers another prospective and looks
beyond the limit boundaries of created world -towards the supreme source
of absolute perfection and feels attracted towards his higher values.
Hence being committed for aspiration of those cherished values,
accordingly he changes the movement of his self from the animalistic
course towards the exalted path of perfection -which ultimately leads
him towards the highest spiritual station of God's Nearness.

When this internal revolution within him occurs the importance of higher
and moral ethical values becomes explicit. Therefore, if a human being
desires values such as knowledge, favor, welfare, sacrifice, justice,
benevolence, defense of deprived and destitute, truth, goodness, and
honesty- it is because, he considers him belonging to the World of
Absolute Perfection and regards such virtues worthy of his exalted human
position.

It is because, of these feelings that he admires them to the extent,
that he is ready to sacrifice his animal self and its desires for the
sake of those cherished higher virtues.

Good morals, etiquette, and ethics are defined as a series of spiritual
and meaningful perfection, whose proportion for his own spiritual
perfection need, is clearly understood by the human celestial soul. The
soul admits to himself: “I must do these things.”

The ethical musts are derived from the degree of perfection and
nobleness within the self and are utilized for achieving exaltation of
essence and spiritual perfection. When he says: “I must offer sacrifice
on this righteous path.” Because, he understands that sacrifice is
useful for achieving the perfection and exaltation of essence, and
therefore, desires to do that.

As for as the path and means of spiritual perfection are concerned they
are the same for all human beings. Similarly, all of them have been
created identical as for as their sense for recognition of values and
anti values is concerned.

If a human being ponders deep into his own perfection seeker pure
nature, away from the whims and passions of self, he might discover the
moral and ethical virtues as well as the moral vices. All human beings
of all times were created such by God-Almighty. And if some, of them
become deprived of this sacred sense of identification, it was because
their whims, passions, and intense animalistic desires, silenced the
light of their wisdom, leaving them like a sole rider in the fields of
self-struggle.

The Holy Qur’an about the recognition of virtues and vices by the pure
human nature as follows:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَفْسٍ وَمَا سَوَّاهَا فَأَلْهَمَهَا فُجُورَهَا وَتَقْوَاهَا قَدْ
أَفْلَحَ مَن زَكَّاهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And a soul and Him who perfected it and inspired it (with conscience
of) what is wrong for it and what is right for it. He is indeed
successful who causeth it to grow.” (91:7-9)***

The Prophets came with the intention of awakening human nature and to
charge their unconscious-self into conscious-self; they came to help,
support, and guide human beings in recognizing and paying attention to
higher moral values, and utilizing them for attaining God's-Nearness;
they came to remind human beings about their exalted human position and
need for safe guarding and motivating the superior human virtues; they
came to emphasize the important point that:

You are not animals instead are humans and possess the potential of
being superior than the angels. World affairs and animalistic
manifestations are far below before your exalted celestial dignity and
therefore, you should not sell yourself for them.

Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) was asked:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قيل لعلي بن الحسين عليه السلام: من اعطهم الناس خطرا؟ قال: من لم يرى
الدنيا خطرا لنفسه
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Who is the most exalted and most noble person?”*  
*“The one who does not regard the world worthy of greatness of his
self.” Replied the Imam.*[^26]

If man really identifies his true human personality and if his human
self indeed gets upperhand, then good morals and ethics become alive and
dominate over the moral vices and rascalities. And when it occurs, a man
is no longer permitted to ignore human values and follow vices for
example, Ignoring truth and speaking lies, disregarding honesty and
practicing treachery, not care about the honor of self and indulging
into sinful deeds; and ignoring favor and practicing human persecution
etc.

The Commander of Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من كرمت عليه نفسه هانت عليه شهواته
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever consider his self honorable will regard selfish passions low
and mean.”*[^27]

The prophets continuously strived for awakening the upright human nature
so that. they could learn about their jewel of existence and could
discover their dependence and link with God-Almighty; thus spending
everything in their possession for attaining the position of nearness
and pleasure of the Lord of the worlds to the extent that their eating,
drinking.

Sleeping, seeing, speaking, working, living, and dying become sacred and
ethical. Truly, when men become God's servant and do not cherish for any
other goal except his pleasure everything become ethics, worship and
virtue.

The Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّ صَلَاتِي وَنُسُكِي وَمَحْيَايَ وَمَمَاتِي لِلَّهِ رَبِّ
الْعَالَمِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: Lo! My worship and my sacrifice, and my living, and my dying
are for God, the Lord of the worlds.”*** ***(6:162)***

Therefore, because of the above mentioned reasons, recognition of self
in Islam has been assigned a special importance. The Commander of the
Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: معرفة النفس انفع المعارف.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Self-consciousness is one of the most profitable assets of a
person.”*[^28]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من عرف نفسه جل امره
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever succeeds in self -his affairs will be improved.”*[^29]

What is meant with self recognition is not the particulars of one's
identify card rather it means –man’s realization of his true position
within the created world; an understanding that he is not simply an
earthly animal rather is a reflection of heavenly illumination from the
Celestial Kingdom; is the Trustee and Vicegerent of God-Almighty upon
earth.

A celestial being who has been created conscious, empowered and free, is
capable of upward ascent towards the absolute perfection, and his
special creation has been assigned the responsibility of nourishment and
perfection of the self.

It is because of this realization that man feels a sense of greatness
and perfection; discovers the sacredness and virtues within his inner
existence and morals and ethics become valuable and meaningful for him.
In that case he get relieved from the feelings of hopelessness,
depressions, vainness, nonsense, aimless repetitions, and instead life
becomes sacred, precious beautiful, and objective.

4. Esoteric Life
----------------

Man in this world has an outwardly life related to his body. He eats,
drinks, sleeps, moves, and walks but at the same time also possesses a
spiritual life in his inner essence.

While he lives in this world, at the same time within his inner essence
either journeys towards prosperity, perfection and enlightenment, or
moves towards adversity, cruelty and intense darkness; either journeys
on the righteous path of humanity and ascends towards God, or deviates
from the righteous path heading towards darkest valleys where he wanders
in darkness becoming eventually lower than animals; either marches up on
the steps of perfection towards enlightenment, joy, perfection, and
God's Countenance or falls into intense darkness for eternal punishment.

Although, majority of people are ignorant of this reality but it does
exist.

God-Almighty said in Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْلَمُونَ ظَاهِرًا مِّنَ الْحَيَاةِ الدُّنْيَا وَهُمْ عَنِ
الْآخِرَةِ هُمْ غَافِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They know only some appearance of the life of the World, and are
needless of the Hereafter.”*** ***(30: 7)***

But being knowledgeable or ignorant does not change the reality on the
Day of Resurrection when the dark curtain of materialism are rolled up
from the human eyes thus, enabling him to witness the reality and his
own state of affairs. God-Almighty said in Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّقَدْ كُنتَ فِي غَفْلَةٍ مِّنْ هَٰذَا فَكَشَفْنَا عَنكَ غِطَاءَكَ
فَبَصَرُكَ الْيَوْمَ حَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(And unto the evil-doer it is said): Thou wast in needlessness of
this. Now we have removed from thee thy covering and piercing is thy
sight this day.” (50:22)***

Therefore, from the above quoted verses it may be inferred that affairs
related to the Next World all along did exist within human inner essence
right here in this world, but unfortunately man was ignorant to realize
it. However, since in the Next World all the materialistic curtains of
ignorance shall be removed from his sight, he will be forced to see
these realities clearly over there.

We may therefore, conclude from the above mentioned verses and
traditions that the human-self earns things while living in this world,
and these earning shall remain with him eventually determining his
ultimate destiny in his eternal abode. Following are some examples:

God-Almighty said in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّ نَفْسٍ بِمَا كَسَبَتْ رَهِينَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Every soul is a pledge for its own deeds.”*** ***(74:38)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ تُوَفَّىٰ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا كَسَبَتْ وَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Then every soul will be paid. in full what it hath earned; and they
will not be wronged.” (3:161)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَّا يُؤَاخِذُكُمُ اللَّهُ بِاللَّغْوِ فِي أَيْمَانِكُمْ وَلَٰكِن
يُؤَاخِذُكُم بِمَا كَسَبَتْ قُلُوبُكُمْ ۗ وَاللَّهُ غَفُورٌ حَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God will not take you to task for that which is unintentional in
your oaths. But He will take you to task for that which your hearts have
garnered. God is forgiving, clement.” (2:225)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وعليها ما اكتسبت.لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا ۚ
لَهَا مَا كَسَبَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“God tasketh not a soul beyond its scope. For it (is only) that which
it hath earned, and against it (only that which it hath deserved.”***
***(2:286)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ تَجِدُ كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا عَمِلَتْ مِنْ خَيْرٍ مُّحْضَرًا وَمَا
عَمِلَتْ مِن سُوءٍ تَوَدُّ لَوْ أَنَّ بَيْنَهَا وَبَيْنَهُ أَمَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“On the Day when every soul will find itself confronted With all that
it hath done of good and all that it hath done of evil (every soul) will
long there might be a mighty space of distance between it and that
evil.”*** ***(3:30)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ إِلَىٰ رَبِّكُمْ تُرْجَعُونَ وَمَنْ أَسَاءَ فَعَلَيْهَا من عمل
صالحا فلنفسه
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoso doth right, it is for his soul. and whoso doth wrong, it is
against it. And afterward unto your Lord ye will be brought back”.***
***(45:15)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَن يَعْمَلْ مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ خَيْرًا يَرَهُ وَمَن يَعْمَلْ
مِثْقَالَ ذَرَّةٍ شَرًّا يَرَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whoso doth good an atom's weight will see it then, and whoso
doth evil an atom's weight will see it then.”*** ***(99:7-8)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَن لَّيْسَ لِلْإِنسَانِ إِلَّا مَا سَعَىٰ وَأَنَّ سَعْيَهُ سَوْفَ
يُرَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And that man hath only that for which he maketh effort and that his
effort will be seen.”*** ***(53: 39-40)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا تُقَدِّمُوا لِأَنفُسِكُم مِّنْ خَيْرٍ تَجِدُوهُ عِندَ اللَّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And whatever of Good ye send before (you) for your souls, ye will
find it with God.” (2:110)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ لَا يَنفَعُ مَالٌ وَلَا بَنُونَ إِلَّا مَنْ أَتَى اللَّهَ
بِقَلْبٍ سَلِيمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The day when wealth and sons avail not (any man). Save him who
bringeth unto God a whole heart.”*** ***(26: 88-89)***

The Holy Prophet (S) said to one of his companions:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: يا قيس! لا بدلك من قرين يدفن معك وهو حى
وتدفن معه وانت ميت فان كان كريما اكرمك وان كان لئيما المك ثم لا
يحشرالامعه ولاتسال الاعنه فلا تجعله الا صالحا فانه ان صلح آنست به وان
فسد لا تستوحش ألامنه وهو فعلك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh Qais! You will have no other choice except to live with a companion
in your grave. He is alive and you will be buried with him. If he is
good and honorable, will make you honorable, and if he is low and mean,
you will become low and mean as well. After that on that on the Day of
Resurrection you will be associated with him and will be reprimanded.*

*Therefore, be careful and try to select a righteous companion for
yourself; because if he is righteous -you will develop affection for
him. If he is corrupt be assured that all the fear and punishment
inflicted upon you will be through his existence. That companion is
nothing but your actions and deeds in this life.”*[^30]

A human being in this same world is continuously occupied in nourishing
his self as well as accumulating the provisions of his life in the Next
World. Through his belief and thoughts, habits and virtues, love and
liking, interests and desires and by means of actions which affects his
self -he gradually nourishes, trains, and builds himself.

His ultimate outcome is all related to the above mentioned factors,
learning and righteous belief, ethics and good morals, love and
association with God-Almighty, obedience and seeking God's Pleasure, and
performance of righteous deeds in accordance with Divine Commands etc.
are things which are responsible for the ascension of human Celestial
Soul towards the stages of perfection, ultimately achieving the highest
spiritual station of God's Nearness.

A human by means of faith and performance of righteous deeds in this
very world discovers a new life and purity which would be manifested in
the Next World.

God-Almighty said in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ عَمِلَ صَالِحًا مِّن ذَكَرٍ أَوْ أُنثَىٰ وَهُوَ مُؤْمِنٌ
فَلَنُحْيِيَنَّهُ حَيَاةً طَيِّبَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whosoever doth right, whether male or female, and is a believer, him
verily We shall quicker good life.”*** ***(16: 97)***

Man in this world in addition of utilizing material blessings for his
bodily pleasures could also utilize spiritual blessings for the growth,
training and perfection of his soul and innerself, thus, building his
Next World's life in such a manner that the desired result would be
manifested in the Hereafter.

Imam al- Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال النبي صلى الله عليه وآله: يا قيس! لابد لك من قرين يدفن معك وهو حى
وتدفن معه الدنيا فانكم تنعمون بها في الاخرة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*God-Almighty says to his servants:*

*“Oh my righteous servants! Utilize My worship's blessing in this world
so that you could be benefited with them in the Next World as
well.”*[^31]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: مداومة الذكر قوت الارواح.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Continuation of invocation (dhikr) is the nourishment of human
souls.”*[^32]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: عليك بذكر الله فانه نور القلوب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Don't forget invocation (dhikr) of God-Almighty because, it is the
illumination of Hearts.”*[^33]

Paradise and its blessings or hell and its punishments for a human being
are decided in this same world through his beliefs, morals and deeds,
even though he might be ignorant of them; but in the next world when the
materialistic curtains are rolled up, this reality will be manifested.

Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.) in a narration speaks as follows:

“*Be aware! That whoever bears enmity with the prophets and saints;
accepts religion other than God's religion; disregards Divine
Obligations by following his own whims and passions; is indeed engulfed
with eternal flames which consumes human bodies -the bodies who have
given up their spirituality through domination of cruelty over their
inner existence.*

*Alas! They are like dead bodies who do not feel the heat of the fire.
Had they been alive they would have felt the pain and torture of burning
their bodies. Therefore, oh people of insight! Learn a lesson and be
thankful to the Lord of the worlds who has bestowed upon you the
blessing of His Guidance*.”[^34]

God-Almighty said in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الَّذِينَ يَأْكُلُونَ أَمْوَالَ الْيَتَامَىٰ ظُلْمًا إِنَّمَا
يَأْكُلُونَ فِي بُطُونِهِمْ نَارًا ۖ وَسَيَصْلَوْنَ سَعِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo Those who devour the wealth of orphans wrongfully, they do but
swallow fire into their bellies and they will be exposed to burning
flame.”*** ***(4:10)***

A human being in this world either accumulates enlightenment and insight
or cruelty and darkness for the Next World. If he remained blind and
without enlightenment in this world tomorrow he will be raised up in the
Next World with the same condition.

The Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كَانَ فِي هَٰذِهِ أَعْمَىٰ فَهُوَ فِي الْآخِرَةِ أَعْمَىٰ
وَأَضَلُّ سَبِيلًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoso is blind here will be blind in the Hereafter, and yet further
from the road.” (17:72)***

The most eminent scholar ‘Allamah Tabatabai (r.a.) had stated the
following interesting story:

“Once upon a time there used to live a pious ascetic and saintly
personality known as Sheikh Abud in Najaf Ashraf. He was a committed way
farer upon the road of gnosticism, continuously worshipping and reciting
invocation (dhikr). Sometimes he would visit the grave yard located in
the Wadi-us-Salam, spending long hours walking, sitting, pondering, and
looking carefully at the old and new graves.

One day, while returning from such routine visits he was encountered by
a group of curious people, who after offering salutations asked him:
'Sheikh Abud! What is new of Wadi-us-Salam?' 'There is nothing new'.
Replied Sheikh Abud. “But the group insisted to hear some news from the
Wadi-us-salam.

Then the Sheikh Abud said: “I encountered the most strange thing over
there; in spite of careful looking through the new and old graves, I
could not discover any traces of snakes, scorpions, and the food stuff
consumed by them. I therefore, asked one of the grave: in narrations it
has been described that the human beings inside the graves are tortured
by the snakes, scorpions, and other noxious creatures, but I do not see
these creatures within these graves.”

“The grave replied to me: 'Yes! It is true that snakes and scorpions do
not exist among us, instead, you are the one who bring them with you
from the world for your own fortune.”

The internal and spiritual life of a human being is an actual and real
life; a human being in his essence travels a real path which either
leads him towards prosperity and perfection or terminates into cruelty
and total annihilation. For continuation of this action he receives help
and strength from his beliefs, morals and deeds.

God-Almighty in the Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن كَانَ يُرِيدُ الْعِزَّةَ فَلِلَّهِ الْعِزَّةُ جَمِيعًا ۚ إِلَيْهِ
يَصْعَدُ الْكَلِمُ الطَّيِّبُ وَالْعَمَلُ الصَّالِحُ يَرْفَعُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Whoso desireth power (should knows that) all power belongeth to God.
Unto Him good words ascend, and the pious deeds doth He exalt.”***
***(35:10)***

The ultimate status of human self is the outcome of his efforts and
endeavors which depends upon his beliefs, morals, characteristics,
liking, and deeds; the final result of which, whether good or bad, will
be declared in the Next World.

5. What to Be?
--------------

The scientific higher learning had confirmed that the human sprit
consists of a physical occurrence and a spiritual eternal dimension.
That is, the Celestial Spirit is the same earlier physical form, which
after passing gradually through various stages of perfection has now
reached to the level of human soul meaning potential human being.

This movement towards perfection never stops rather continues till the
end of human life. At the beginning he is a celestial abstract superior
than the matter, but at the same time he is not a full or complete
abstract because, for his existence, he is related to a physical body.

The soul consists of two dimensional existences: The material dimension
which is related to body and performs material acts, and because of this
consideration the stages of movements towards perfection have been
attached to it; the other dimension is an abstract superior than the
matter capable of performing non-material acts.

One side of his existence is physical and animal while the other side is
human and celestial. While he is not more than a single existence,
possesses animal passions and desires and accordingly performs
animalistic acts, but at the same times also possesses human desires and
virtues and performs human obligations.

It was because of this wonderful creation that God-Almighty in Holy
Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَبَارَكَ اللَّهُ أَحْسَنُ الْخَالِقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“So blessed be God -the best of creators”*** ***(23:14)***

This wonderful creation at the very beginning is not complete, rather
nourishes himself gradually towards his ultimate perfection. Beliefs,
thoughts, virtues, and desires derived, from his actions and deeds build
his real identity, thus gradually completing his perfection. Virtues and
characteristics are not the sort of things which could be added to his
existence from outside accidentally rather they are the real builders of
his existence's identity from within.

Here it is interesting to note that beliefs, thoughts, and
characteristics not only exert influence upon human existence but, also
are effective in his deciding what to be come? That is, righteous
beliefs and thinking together with good morals and virtues as a result
of righteous actions gradually ascend a human being towards the path of
perfection ultimately his becoming a perfect human being and thus,
attaining God's Nearness.

Similarly ignorance, false ideologies, immoral deeds, and hard
heartedness as a result of evil deeds pull human soul towards weakness
and isolation, and after gradually leading him towards various
animalistic stages eventually throws him inside the deep valleys of
intense darkness. Because of his firmness, influence of animalistic
characteristics and accumulation of ignorances and cruelties he turns
into an animal form in his esoteric essence.

Yes, his essence indeed turns into an animal thus, acquiring an
animalistic personality. He no longer remains a human being but is an
animal or even worst than an animal because, he is an animal who has
acquired his animalism after passing through the superior stage of
humanism. Although, outwardly he lives a human life but, in essence has
turned into an animal without being aware of this internal change.

The animalism of animals is not due to their special faces or features,
rather it is because of their animalistic selves and absolute obedience
to their animalistic instincts and desires without any limitations and
considerations.

A wolf is regarded as a wolf not because of his apparent wolfy face but,
it is because of his brutal nature and his absolute obedience to this
instinct without any limitations that he is regarded as a wolf.
Therefore, if some one is completely subdued by animal brutality in a
manner that his senses of seeing and thinking become out of order, then
such a person in essence turns into a real wolf- a wolf far brutal as
compared to common wild wolfs. Because, now his faculties of wisdom and
thinking are being employed and are at the service of his brutal
animalistic characteristics.

It is because of this reason that there are situations, where human
being are charged with brutal crimes for which the wild wolf could not
be charged. Are such human being not wolves? Yes! They are indeed true
wolves, even though they do not understand and the others regard them as
humans. But, on the Day of Resurrection, when the curtains shall be
rolled up, their inner essence will be exposed.

Obviously Paradise is not a place for wolves, because they can not
become companions for saints and righteous servants of God. Such a wolf
who has been demoted to lower animal status from the superior human
status, deserves to be confined, punished, and tortured inside the dark
and horrible environment of Hell.

Therefore, a human being in this world is an undetermined existence who
builds himself his future personality. Either he becomes human thus,
surpassing in excellence even with the most intimate God's angels, or
descends whereby his inner essence turns into an animal.

This is something whose authencity have been proved by higher scientific
learning as well as confirmed and certified by Divine Prophets. Also,
the Holy Prophet (S) and the Infallible Imams (a.s.) of his Holy Progeny
(Ahlul Bayt) have informed about that.

Holy Prophet (S) had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وفي الحديث النبوى يحشر بعض الناس على صور يحسن عندها القردة الخنازير.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“On the Day of Resurrection the people will reappear in faces that the
faces of monkeys and pigs are far better than theirs.”*[^35]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) about the corrupt
scholar, has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: فالصورة صورة انسان القلب قلب حيوان, لا يعرف باب
الهدى فيتبعه ولا باب العمى فيصد عنه وذالك ميت الحيا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Although, his outward appearance is like a human being but his heart
is like an animal heart. He does not recognize the path of guidance so
that he could follow it, and does not know the path of deviation so that
he could avoid it. Such a person is indeed a dead one living among the
alive.”*[^36]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: ان المتكبرين يجعلون في صور الذر, يتو طوهم
الناس حتى يفرق الله من الحساب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The arrogant people on the day of Resurrection will be transformed
into tiny ants to be trampled by the people till accounts of all the
people are settled.”*[^37]

God-Almighty in the Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا الْوُحُوشُ حُشِرَتْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And when the wild beasts are herded together.”*** ***(81:5)***

Some of the commentators of the Holy Qur’an have interpreted the phrase
“wild animals” in the above verse for human beings who will reappear
with animal faces on the Day of Resurrection, because, unlike human
beings the animals are not required to be judged for their deeds, hence
their appearance does not make any sense.

God-Almighty in Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَوْمَ يُنفَخُ فِي الصُّورِ فَتَأْتُونَ أَفْوَاجًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“A day when the trumplet is blown and ye come in multitudes.”
(78:18)***

According to some of the commentators the above verse has been
interpreted that on the Day of Judgment, human beings will be separated
from each other and will appear in different groups in accordance with
their esoteric faces. There is an interesting narration from the Holy
prophet (S) regarding the interpretation of the above verse:

Ma’z bin Jabal said: “I asked the Holy Prophet (S) about the
interpretation of the above verse. He replied: 'Oh! Ma’z you had asked
about a very important subject while shedding tears from his eyes the
Holy Prophet (S) said: My ummah will reappear in ten different groups on
the Day of Judgment as follows:

“Some of them will reappear as monkeys while some of them will look like
pigs; some of them will reappear while walking up side down,. some will
reappear as blind and wandering,. some of them will reappear as deaf and
dumb understanding absolutely nothing; some will reappear with chewing
their tongues while blood and pus will be coming out of their mouths
making the people around them uncomfortable; some of them will reappear
with their hands and feet cut off; some will reappear as being hanged
upon branches of fire; and while some of them will reappear with dress
of molten lead pressed to their bodies.’

“Then he explained these ten categories as follows:

“Those who will reappear as monkeys are the tale bearers or spies;,
those who will reappear as pigs are the ones who accepted bribes and had
illegal income those who will be walking up side down are the ones who
practiced usury, those who are blind are the judges and officers who
oppressed the people, those who are dumb and deaf are the ones who were
egotistic and ambitious; those who will reappear with their hands and
feet cut off are the ones who pained and troubled their neighbors; those
who are hanged upon the branches of fire were the people who indulged in
slandering and backbiting against the masses for the pleasure of kings
and rulers; those whose odors is worst than dead bodies are the ones who
indulged themselves in worldly desires and passions without paying
Divine Share from their wealth, and those who are dressed with molten
lead dress are the arrogant ones who took pride in themselves.”[^38]

In the light of above, the ethical and moral matters cannot be treated
as minor and insignificant rather are the most important crucial and
determinant matters which build the esoteric and spiritual life of a
human being and even influence his “what to become”? Thus, moral
education not only teaches how to live, but also deals with “what to
become” for human beings.

[^1]: Bihar al-Anwar vol. 69, p-375.

[^2]: al-Mustadarak, vol. 2, p-282.

[^3]: Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (a.s.): The sixth Imam, Ja'far, known as
al-Sadiq (a.s.) was born in Medina on Monday, 17th Rabi-ul-awwal 83 A.H.
The son of the fifth Imam, he lived in an increasingly favorable climate
and was able to teach openly in Median. Large numbers of scholars
gathered around him to learn, including such famous Sunni figures as Abu
Hanifa, the founder of the one of the four Sunni schools of Law. Towards
the end of Imam Ja'far's life severe restrictions were placed upon his
activities, as a result of growing Shi'ite unrest. More traditions are
recorded from him than from all the other Imams together. He is so
important for Twelve-Imam Shi'ite law that it is named the Jafri School
after him. He is buried in the Baqi cemetery in Medina. Ja'far's fame
for religious learning was great, greater than that of his father or of
any other Twelver Imam except for ‘Ali bin Abu Talib (a.s.) himself.
perhaps the earliest historical reference presenting Ja'far as one of
the most respected and highly esteemed personalities of his epoch, and
as having profound knowledge and learning, is Ya'qubi's statement that
it was customary for scholars who related anything from him to say: “The
Learned One informed us”. Even the famous jurist of Medina, the Imam
Malik b. Anas, is reported to have said, when quoting Ja'far's
traditions: “The Thiqa (truthful) Ja'far b. Muhammad himself told me
that. ...” Similar compliments for Ja'far are attributed to the Imam Abu
Hanifa, who is also reported to have been his pupil. Al-Sadiq's (a.s.)
knowledge was great in religion and culture, he was fully informed in
philosophy, he attained great piety in the world, and he abstained
entirely from lusts. He lived in Medina long enough to greatly profit
the sect that followed him, and to give his friends the advantage of the
hidden sciences. He died at the age of 65, in Medina on Monday, 25th
Shawwal 148 H.; poisoned by al-Mansur ad-Dawaniqi, the Abbasid Caliph.

[^4]: al Mustadarak, vol. 2, p-283.

[^5]: “The Commander of the Faithful' ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib (a.s.): Was the
first perfect exemplar of the teachings of the Most Noble Messenger (S)
‘Ali was raised by him from early childhood and followed him like a
shadow until the very end of the latter's life. He was like a moth
before the prophetic flame; the final moment when he was separated from
the Most Noble Messenger (S) was when he embraced his corpse and laid it
to rest. ‘Ali (a.s.) was the first person after the Most Noble Messenger
(S) to approach spiritual realities in the manner of philosophical
reflection, that is, by free exercise of reason. He used many technical
terms and laid out and organized the rules of Arabic grammar in order to
protect the Holy Qur’an from copyist's errors. The exact scholarship,
spiritual culture, and consideration of ethical, social, political, and
even mathematical problems shown in' ‘Ali's (a.s.) discourses, letters,
and other documents that have reached us are astonishing. The wealth of
these documents makes ' ‘Ali (a.s.) the best known individual among
Muslims to have a full realization of the sublime goals of the Holy
Qur’an and the critical and practical concepts of Islam as they should
be realized. They testify to the soundness of the Prophetic saying, ‘I
am the city of knowledge and ‘Ali is its gate'. Furthermore, he combined
this knowledge with action. In short, ' ‘Ali's outstanding character is
beyond description, and his virtues are innumerable. Never in history
has someone's character drawn the attention of the world's scholars and
thinkers to such an extent. R. Compbell, ‘Allamah Sayyed Mohammad Hosayn
Tabatabai, Islamic teachings pp. 123-127.

[^6]: al-Mustadarak, vol. 2, p-283.

[^7]: The Fifth Imam, Muhammad, known as al-Baqir (57/675-114/732) The
son of the fourth Imam, he was present at Karbala at a young age.
Because of changing political and religious conditions, among them the
general revulsion following the events at Karbala, many people came to
Medina to learn the religious and spiritual sciences from him. He
trained numerous well-known men of religion, and mainly for this reason
is the first Imam after' ‘Ali from whom large numbers of traditions are
recorded. He buried in the Baqi' cemetery in Medina.

[^8]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-99.

[^9]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-99.

[^10]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-l00.

[^11]: Mohajateh al-Baiza, vol. 5, p-89.

[^12]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-226. 11 Ghirar al-Hukm p-495

[^13]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-669.

[^14]: Ghirar al- Hukm, p-710.

[^15]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-638.

[^16]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-669.

[^17]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-64.

[^18]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-226.

[^19]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-54.

[^20]: Imam al-Sajjad (a.s.): The son of Imam al-Husayn by the daughter
of Yazdigird the last Sassanid king of Iran was born in Medina on
Saturday, 15th Jamadi al-Ola 36 A.H. He participated in Imam al Husayn's
uprising and accompanied his father to Karbala being a tragic witness to
the tragic event. After his father's martyrdom he was made captive and
taken from Karbala to Kufa and from Kufa to Damascus. His speeches and
protests on necessary occasions made manifest the worthiness and glory
of Ahlal Bayt (a.s.), the cruel injustice suffered by his father, and
the enormities perpetuated by the Yazid's Ummayad regime. Imam al-Shafi
considered Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (a.s.) as the most supreme jurist of
all the people of Medina. His book. Al-Shaifah Al-Sajjadiyyah”
represents and stands out as a profound social work of the time and a
reflection of a supreme endeavor to meet the exigencies of spiritual
ordeals facing the society at the time of Imam. He died at the age of 58
in Medina; poisoned by al-Walid ibn Abdul Malik ibn Marwan on 25th
Muharram 95 A.H., and is buried in Jannatu'l Baqi Cemetery in Medina
[Tr].

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 94, p-143.

[^22]: The Commander of the faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said: This
world is not a place of permanent settlement, it is passage, a road on
which you are passing. There are two kinds of people here; those who
have sold their souls for eternal damnation, the other type are those
who have purchased their souls and freed them from
damnation.” -Nahjul-Balagha, S.M. A Jafri p-543 [Tr].

[^23]: Ghirar al-Hukm, vol. 1, p-88.

[^24]: Nahjul-Balagha, Sabhi Saleh, vol. 31, p-401.

[^25]: Nahjul-Balagha, sermon 32.

[^26]: Tohf al-Aqul, p-285.

[^27]: Nahjul al-Balagha, saying 449.

[^28]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-768.

[^29]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-628.

[^30]: Jameh al-Sadat, vol. 1, p-17.

[^31]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 70, p-253.

[^32]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-764.

[^33]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-479.

[^34]: Qurrateh al-Ayoon, Faiz, p-466.

[^35]: Qurrath al-Ayoon, p-479.

[^36]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 87.

[^37]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 7, p-201.

[^38]: Tafsir Majma al-Bayan, vol. 10, p-423, Ruh al-Bayan, vol. 10,
p-299 and Nur al-Thaqalain, vol. 5, p-493


