Self-refinement
===============

At this stage the following three acts should be performed:

A. Refinement of self from all sort of false beliefs, evil thoughts, and
superstitions.

B. Refinement of self from vices and moral indecencies.

C. Quitting all kind of sins and transgressions.

False beliefs and superstitions are ignorance and deviations that result
in self's darkness and deviation from following the straight path of
perfection and God's Nearness. Because, the believers in false beliefs
never recognize the straight path of human perfection and wander
aimlessly and confused in the darkest valleys of deviations and vices
never reaching to their undefined final destination. How come the heart
which is full of intense darkness can witness the ever shining sacred
Divine illumination?

Also, moral indecencies strengthen the animalistic habits gradually
silencing the light within the celestial human soul. Such a deviated
person will never succeed in accomplishing the most exalted human
objective of reaching the nearness of the supreme source of beauty and
absolute perfection, i.e. God-Almighty.

Similarly, sinning and transgressions makes the human self dark and
contaminated, thus, causing him further to deviate from the exalted path
of human perfection and God's Nearness. Naturally, such a person will
never reach to its ultimate cherished goal.

Therefore, self-refinement determines our final destination and should
be considered as an extremely important matter. We must, therefore,
first identify the moral indecencies and sins and then must take
remedial actions for cleansing and purifying our self from these
impurities.

Fortunately, in the first part we do not have any problem because the
physicians of the self or God’s assigned human specialists -Prophet's
and Infallible Imams have thoroughly defined moral indecencies, and even
have given the prescription for their treatment; have counted various
kinds of sins and taught us how to relinquish them. We all recognize
moral indecencies and understand their ugliness.

We know that hypocrisy, arrogance, jealously, revenge, anger, slander,
treason, egotism, malevolence, backbiting accusation, ill-speaking,
wrath, oppression, fear, stinginess, greed, fault-finding, lying, love
of the world, ambitiousness, deceit, cheating, suspicion, cruelty,
snobbery, self-weakness, and other such habits are bad and undesirable.

Apart from the fact that by features we understand and realize their
ugliness, hundreds of Qur’anic verses and traditions also confirms their
ugliness and indecencies. Our traditions in this field are extremely
vast, rich and comprehensive that there does not exist the least
shortage. Also, all forbidden acts and sins and their relevant
punishments have been explained explicitly and comprehensively in the
Holy Qur’an and traditions, and we do know about all of them.

Therefore, as for as the identification of minor and major sins are
concerned, we do not have any problem at all. But at the same time it
must be frankly admitted that we all are captive of Satan and imperious
self (*nafse- ammarah*), and unfortunately do not find the grace for
purification of self from sins and moral indecencies. This is our real
problem for which a solution must be found.

In my opinion these are two important factors relevant to the above
problem:

First: We don't understand our moral diseases and do not have the
courage to admit this sickness within ourselves.

Secondly: We regards them a minor thing and are negligent about the
severe painful and catastrophic consequences arising thereof, and
because of this reason are not concerned for their treatment. These are
the two factors responsible for our negligence towards self-refinement.
Therefore, these should be discussed in detail and the method of
treatment should be discovered.

1. Negligence from the Disease
------------------------------

We probably understand the moral sicknesses and do appreciate heir
ugliness but only in others, and not within ourselves. If we encounter
impoliteness and moral indecencies in others we are quick to observe
them immediately. While it is quite possible that the same moral
indecency or may be worst than that might exist within ourselves, but we
do not pay the east attention and ignore it completely.

For example, we may regard transgression of others rights as something
bad and might hate the transgressor, but at the same time it is possible
that we ourselves might be transgressor, and may not realize it at all.

We do not consider our own act as a transgression, and on the contrary
it is quite possible, that we might present it something as a glorious
or virtuous act before ourselves, thus, by this means making it
justified. Similar might be the case with other moral shameful deeds,
and in this manner we never think about our own improvement.

Because, if a sick person does not consider himself sick naturally he
will never worry about his treatment. Since, we do not consider
ourselves as sick, we are not concerned about our treatments either, and
this happens to be our biggest problem. Therefore, if we care about our
happiness and prosperity we must think for the remedy of this problem
and by all possible means must endeavor to identity for internal
psychological diseases.

2. Diagnosis of Self-sickness
-----------------------------

Here it would be appropriate to describe the ways and means which could
be useful for identifying the self-sickness.

### 2.1. Strengthening of Reason

The most exalted, celestial distinction of human beings, and the most
perfect parameter of his existence distinguishing him over all other
creatures, which in the terminology of the Holy Qur’an and traditions
has been called by different names such as: spirit, self, heart, and
intelligence, all are manifestations of one single reality, but because
of different considerations have been given different names. But the
fountainhead and origin of all thinking, rationalization, and
intelligence have been named as reason. [^1]

In the books of tradition the reason (*aql*) has been treated with
special distinction, and special chapters have been assigned for its
detailed explanation. Reason in traditions have been titled as the most
noble existence which is the source of all obligations, rewards, and
punishments.

For example: Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي جعفر عليه السلام قال: لما خلق الله العقل استنطقه. ثم قال له:
اقبل, فاقبل. ثم قال له: ادبر. فادبر ثم قال: قعزتى وجلالى! ما خلقت خلقا
احب الى منك ولا اكملتك الا فيمن احب. اما انى اياك آمر واياك انهى واياك
اثيب.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“When God Almighty created the reason, it was blessed with the power of
speech. Then it was ordered by Him to come and it obeyed; then it was
commanded by him to return and again it obeyed. Than God-Almighty said:*

*“By the oath of My Honor and Glory ! I have not created any existence
which is superior and dearer than you. You will not be perfected in
anyone except the one who is dearer to me. Be aware!* *That obedience
and transgression of My Commands depends upon you, and you will receive
the rewards and punishment accordingly.”*[^2]

Also the Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَكُمْ آيَاتِهِ لَعَلَّكُمْ تَعْقِلُونَ كَذَٰلِكَ يُبَيِّنُ اللَّهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Thus, God expoundeth unto you His revelations so that ye may
understand. (2:242)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَلَمْ يَسِيرُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ فَتَكُونَ لَهُمْ قُلُوبٌ يَعْقِلُونَ
بِهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Have they not traveled in the land, and have they hearts wherewith
to feel and ears wherewith to hear.”the Holy- Qur’an (22:46)***

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَعْقِلُونَ إِنَّ شَرَّ الدَّوَابِّ عِندَ اللَّهِ الصُّمُّ الْبُكْمُ
الَّذِينَ لَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! The worst of beasts in God's Sight are the deaf, the dumb, who
have no sense. (8: 22)***

Those who possess ears, tongue, and reason, but do not utilize them in
discovering the realities are introduced by God-Almighty in the Holy
Qur’an in the category of beasts and even worst than them, be cause they
have not used their minds. God-Almighty said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيَجْعَلُ الرِّجْسَ عَلَى الَّذِينَ لَا يَعْقِلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“…He hath set uncleanness upon those who have no sense. (10:100)***

Whatever goodness is possessed by a human being it is due to his reason;
he recognizes God-Almighty by means of reason and worships him; accepts
the Day of Resurrection and makes him readied for it; accepts the
prophets and obeys them; understand the good moral conduct and trains
him accordingly; identity the vices and evil and therefore, avoids them.
It is because of this reason that the reason has been praised in the
Holy Qur’an and traditions e.g. Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) replying to a
beggar said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بعض اصحابنا رفعه الى ابي عبدالله عليه السلام قال: قلت له ما العقل؟
قال: ما عبد به الرحمان واكتسب به الجنان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“It is because of the existence of reason that God-Almighty gets
worshipped, and one makes his entry into Paradise.”*[^3]

He also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: من كان عاقلا كان له دين ومن كان له دين
دخل الجنة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever is wise and intelligent possesses religion, and whoever has
religion will enter into the Paradise.”*[^4]

Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) said to Hasham:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابوالحسن موسى بن جعفر عليه السلام (في حديث): يا هشام! ان الله على
الناس حجتين: حجة ظاهرة وحجة باطنة فاما الظاهرة فالرسل والانبيا
والايمه. واما الباطنة بالعقول.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God-Almighty has blessed the human beings with two proofs:*

*One is apparent and the other one is hidden. The apparent proofs are
Prophets and Imams, and the hidden proof is the reason and intelligence
within our existence.”*[^5]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابوعبدالله عليه السلام: اكمل الناس عقلا احسنهم خلقا
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The most perfect human beings from the point of view of reason are
those who are the best in moral conduct.”*[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابوعبدالله عليه السلام: العقل دليل المؤمن
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The reason is the guide of a believer.”*[^7]

Imam al-Ridha’ [^8] (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الرضا عليه السلام: صديق كل امر عقلة وعدوه جهله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The reason is the friend of everyone and the ignorance is his
enemy.”*[^9]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين (ع): اعجاب المر بنفسه دليل على ضعف عقله
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Egotism of a person is the indication of his wisdom's weakness.”*[^10]

Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) said to Hasham:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال موسى بن جعفرعليه السلام: يا هشام! من اراد الغنى بالامل وراحة القلب
من الحسد السلامة في الدين فليتضرع الى الله في مسالته بان يكمل عقلة.
فمن عقل قنع بما يكفيه ومن قنع بما يكفيه استغنى ومن لم يقنع بما يكقيه
لم يدرك الغنى ابدا.م.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever desires to become contented without possessing health, a
tranquil heart free from jealousy and soundness in religion must cry
before God-Almighty and should ask for perfection of his reason.
Therefore, whoever becomes wise will be contented with modest means of
livelihood, and thus, will become free from wants, and whoever is not
contented with modest means of livelihood will never become free from
wants.”*[^11]

Imam al Kadhim (a.s.) [^12]said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال موسى بن جعفر عليه السلام: يا هشام! ان العقلا تركوا فضول الدنيا,
فكيف الذنوب, وترك الدنيا من الفضل وترك الذنوب من الفرض.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A wise person avoids even extra worldly-affairs what to say about
sins, while quitting extra worldly-affairs is optional and avoiding of
sins is mandatory.”*[^13]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال موسى بن جعفر (ع): يا هشام! ان العقال لا يكذب وان كان فيه هواه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A wise person will never tell a lie, even if his self is tempted to do
so.”*[^14]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال موسى بن جعفر عليه السلام: يا هشام! لا دين لمن لامروة له ولامروة
لمن لا عقل له وان اعطهم الناس قدر الذى لا يرى الدنيا لنفسه خطرا. اما
ان ابدانكم ليس لها ثمن الا الجنة فلا تبيعوها بغيرها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever lacks compassion does not have religion; whoever lacks wisdom
does not have compassion; the most valuable person is the one who does
not consider the entire world worthy of his self Know that: your bodies
could not be traded with anything except Paradise. Therefore, be careful
never to trade yourselves for a price other than Paradise.”*[^15]

From the above tradition the preciousness of the reason, its important
role in acquiring higher learning and sciences, accepting faith ,
worshipping God, recognizing and utilizing good morals, and quitting
sins and other vices, could be understood well. Here, it should be
emphasized that simply the existence of reason is not sufficient as for
as the accomplishment of the above objectives are concerned, rather it
is the commissioning and efficient utilization of the faculty of reason
within human body which produce the cherished results.

Within human body the presence of reason could be compared to like a
righteous judge or expert, but he could only issue the correct judgment
if, the required safe and peaceful environment has been provided in
which the verdict issued by him will be accepted.

Or in other words we may compare reason with an intelligent, competent,
sincere and resourceful governor of a region, but he could succeed only
if his governance is officially certified and backed up by the ruling
administration. The reason could be like a wise, trusted, and sincere
adviser but only if it is being allowed to advice and if the attention
is paid to its words.

If the reason becomes the ruling authority within a human body and could
control the whims and passions of the self- it will govern it in an
excellent manner; will achieve an equilibrium between the supply and
demands; will arrange everything in a proper order, so that they may
achieve perfection by ascending towards God-Almighty. But are the whims
and passions of the self going to surrender themselves so easily and
accept the governance of reason?

No! They won't, on the contrary they will engaged themselves into
sabotage and other destructive work against it till the reason is forced
out of the field of confrontation. There is no choice except that the
reason should be strengthened, because, the stronger it is the better it
recognizes the internal enemies and will be able to subdue and control
them easily. Therefore, it is our utmost duty to endeavor and struggle
for strengthening the faculty of reason.

### 2.2. Thinking before Action

In order to strengthen the reason we must seriously decide that before
undertaking each action its over all worldly and eternal results and
ultimate consequences must be thoroughly reviewed. This should be
practiced till gradually it becomes a habit. It is because of this
consideration that Islam encourages us to think about the ultimate
consequences of our actions. e.g.: Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali
(a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كان امير المؤمنين عليه السلام يقول: نبه بالتفكر قلبك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“By means of pondering deeply, make your heart aware and
knowledgeable.”*[^16]

Also said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: ان التفكر يدعو الى البر والعمل به.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Pondering invites a person towards good works and actions.”*[^17]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: التدبير قبل العمل يؤمنك من الندم.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Thinking about the ultimate consequences before action makes you safe
against feeling sorry later on.”*[^18]

A man approached the Holy Prophet (S) and asked him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان رجلا اتى رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله فقال: يا رسول الله اوصنى.
فقال له: فهل انت مستوص ان اوصيتك؟ حتى قال ذالك ثالثا في كلها يقول
الرجل: نعم يا رسول الله, فقال له رسول الله: فانى اوصيك اذا هممت بامر,
فتدبر عاقبته, فان يك رشدا فامضه وان يك غيا فانته عنه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Oh Messenger of God! Please advise me.*

*The Holy Prophet (S) replied:*

*“Will you follow my recommendation?” 'Yes! I will', Replied the man.
This question and answer was repeated three times. Then the Holy Prophet
(S) said: “My recommendation is that whenever you wanted to decide to
undertake an action, then firstly you must ponder well about its
ultimate* *consequences. In case you found it good then go ahead and do
it, but in case you realized that it is not good, then don't do
it.”*[^19]

Also, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: انما اهلك الناس العجلة ولو ان الناس
تشبتوا لم يهلك احد.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“People were ruined because of being hasty. If they would have pondered
about their actions none of them would have been ruined.”*[^20]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: الاناة من الله العجلة من الشيطان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Delay and thinking about the consequences are blessings from
God-Almighty while haste is from Shaitan.”*[^21]

The following has been quoted from a tradition by the Infallible Imams
(a.s.).

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واروى: التكفر مرآتك ترايك سيأتك وحسناتك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Pondering is like a mirror which shows your goodness and
evilness.”*[^22]

The animals in their actions follow the passions of their instincts and
do not have the power of thinking and reasoning, but since a human being
possesses reason, he must ponder and review the ultimate consequences
before undertaking any action. Nevertheless, a man also possesses the
same desires and animalistic passions, therefore, immediately reacts,
gets stimulated, and absorbed as soon as he is faced with a desirable
animal object of opposite sex from his own species.

In this situation animal passions do not allow him to resort to
thinking, because, once reason enters the scene it will prevent the
action taken in accordance with animalistic passions.

Therefore, if we become habitual of practicing thinking and
rationalizing before undertaking each action, then in that case, we will
be opening a gateway for the reason so that it could be present at the
scene. Once it enters at the scene, it immediately diagnoses our
interest and benefits by subduing the animalistic passions, and will
guide us towards the straight path of human perfection if it is
strengthened and becomes ruler of the country (i.e. human body).

It could diagnose the internal enemies and psychic diseases within his
inner self, and accordingly may take the preventive measures and
necessary treatments for their cure. It is because of these
considerations that thinking pondering, and reasoning have been assigned
special emphasis in Qur’anic verses and traditions.

### 2.3. Being Pessimistic towards the Self

If a human being takes a correct and in-depth review of his inner-self
and investigate his psychic characteristics, most probably he would be
able to discover his psychic diseases, because, after all, one is more
knowledgeable about his ownself as compared to others. God-Almighty has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَلِ الْإِنسَانُ عَلَىٰ نَفْسِهِ بَصِيرَةٌ وَلَوْ أَلْقَىٰ
مَعَاذِيرَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Oh! But man is telling witness against himself, although he tenders
his excuses. (75:14-15)***

But our problem is that while judging we cannot remain impartial,
because, we are optimistic about our souls; consider ourselves, our
characteristics, our actions, and our opinions as faultless. The
imperious-self (*nafse-ammarah*) makes the animalistic passions so
charming, attractive, and appealing before our eyes that the evil deeds
committed by us appears as virtuous acts. The Holy Qur’an said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفَمَن زُيِّنَ لَهُ سُوءُ عَمَلِهِ فَرَآهُ حَسَنًا ۖ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ
يُضِلُّ مَن يَشَاءُ وَيَهْدِي مَن يَشَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Is he, the evil of whose deeds is made fair-seeming unto him so that
he deemeth it good, (other than Satan's dupe)” God verily sendeth whom
He will astray and guideth whom He will. (35:8)***

It is because of this reason that we do not realize our defects and
faults so that we could take remedial measures. Therefore, the solution
of the problem consists that we must continuously be pessimistic and
suspicious about the self; should presume or even must be assured that
we possess vices, plenty of diseases, and with this reality should
investigate the self. The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: ان المؤمن لايصبح ولايمسى الا ونفسه ظنون عنده فلا
يزال زاريا عليها ومستزيدا لها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“A believer is continuously pessimistic about his self, always
criticizes, and demands better deeds from him.”*[^23]

In praising the characteristics of the pious, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على (ع): فهم لانفسهم متهمون ومن اعمالهم مشفقون واذاذكى احد منهم
خال مما يقال له فيقول: انا اعلم بنفسى من غيرى وربـى اعلم منى بنفسى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Their souls before them are always blamed' and criticized and they are
always afraid of their deeds. While one of them is being praised, he is
afraid of such praise and says: 'I am more aware about my own self; and
God-Almighty is more knowledgeable as compared to me.”*[^24]

One of the biggest obstacle which never permits us to discover our
psychic diseases and to seek treatment is our being optimistic and
having a favorable opinion about our souls. Therefore, if this obstacle
could be removed and the self is reviewed honestly, it would be possible
to diagnose the disease and seek its treatment accordingly.

### 2.4. Consulting Spiritual Physicians

In order to diagnose our hidden internal faults and defects we may seek
the assistance of a learned scholar of ethics who after having perfected
his self has achieved a praiseworthy moral conduct. We must explain in
detail the characteristics and internal behavior to him, and should
request him to remind us about our psychic faults and moral indecencies.

A spiritual physician who Is a psychiatrist as well as a scholar of
ethics, whose belief and action coincides, and is a true manifestation
of higher moral excellence is extremely useful and influential for
achieving self-perfection and undertaking a spiritual journey towards
God-Almighty. If, one could succeed in finding such a person one must be
thankful to God-Almighty for this blessing.

Unfortunately, such persons are not available easily and are in
shortage. Also, this point needs to be emphasized that the correct
diagnosis of the self's disease is extremely difficult. Therefore, it is
patient's duty to describe in detail his deeds and internal
characteristics without reservation before such a spiritual physician to
enable him to diagnose his sickness correctly. If the patience did not
cooperate and concealed the realities about him, then in that case, he
will not obtain the desired results.

### 2.5. Consulting a Wise Friend

A good friend who is wise, intelligent, and well wisher is a great
blessing of God-Almighty, and could be helpful in our efforts for
achieving self-refinement and identification of moral indecencies,
subjected to his being competent to identify our good and bad
characteristics. Also, he should be a confident and well wisher.

Because, if he could not diagnose the good and bad characteristics not
only he can not help us, but on the contrary he may regard our
weaknesses as virtues and visa versa. In case, if he is not a trusted
well wisher, it is quite possible that for the continuation of
friendship and not to hurt our sentiments, might conceal our faults and
defects, and even for flattering and appeasement will mislead us by
branding our moral indecencies as our virtues.

If, luckily we succeeded in finding such an ideal friend then we must
demand him to feel free in frankly pointing out to us all our defects
and faults observed by him. We must appreciate his reminders, should
utilize them for improvement of the self, should make him understand
that his criticism is sincerely appreciated and that not only we are not
unhappy of his reminder on the contrary are grateful and pleased.

On the other hand, the person who has been trusted for this task is
obliged to prove his honesty and sincerity through his practical
actions. He must review the characteristics of his friend honestly
without any reservations, and should let him know about his observations
in a friendly and well-wishing manner in strict confidence.

Also, pointing out defects and faults in the presence of others should
be strictly prohibited. His aim should be to present out the facts and
exaggeration should be strictly avoided, because, a believer is supposed
to be like a mirror for another believer reflecting the later's beauty
and ugliness the way they are without making any addition or
subtraction.

Of course, such a friend who for the sake of reform reminds a person
about his faults and defects are in shortages, but if one luckily y
finds such an ideal friend, he indeed has received one of the greatest
blessing. He must appreciate it, should be pleased for his comments,
must thanks him, and must realize that a friend who criticizes for the
sake of his improvement is one of the best and most valuable friend.

God forbids! If instead, a person feels offended with his positive
criticism and for the sake of self defense starts thinking about taking
revenge against him. If, someone reminded you that there are some
poisonous scorpions upon your dress. Will you then feel offended with
such a reminder and will take revenge or will you be pleased and thanks
him?

Yes! The undesirable characteristics are like scorpions and even worst
that this, because they sting and continuously strive their entries
inside the soul. Some one who helps us to against them has indeed done
the greatest services for us.

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام: احب اخوانى الى عيوبى.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The one who points out my faults to me is my best brother.”*[^25]

### 2.6. Learning from Other's Faults

Most probably a human being is unaware of his own defects but sees them
in others clearly and feels their ugliness very well. According to a
famous proverb:

“They see a tiny piece of straw in the eyes of others and makes it big
like a mountain, but can not see the mountain of their own eyes.”

Therefore, one of the method for identifying our psychic defects is to
detect these faults within other people. Once, a human being sees a
defect of others, instead of paying attention towards it or criticizing,
he should investigate his own inner-self for being contaminated with the
same faults, and in case he finds it, should try for its remedial. In
this manner he could learn a lesson from the faults of other people, in
continuation of his efforts for achieving self-refinement. The Holy
Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله: السعيد من وعظ بغيره.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Fortunate is the one who learns a lesson from the faults of
others.”*[^26]

### 2.7. Learning from Criticism

Generally friends decline to point out the defects of a human being but
opposite to that his enemies are quite eager to criticize. Of course,
they are not sincere in their criticism and are motivated with their
feelings of jealousy, enmity, and revengefulness but any way one might
utilize their criticism to his best advantage.

When being criticized by his enemies a man has two options:

**Firstly:** He may take a defending position by taking the excuse that
since the criticism is uttered by his enemies who are not his well
wishers, therefore, he will defend himself by every possible means,
thus, silencing their voices. Such a person had not only corrected his
defects but on the contrary he might contaminate himself by committing
further mistakes.

**Secondly:** He might pay good attention to his enemy's criticism, then
with the aim of truth finding may refer to his own-self by reviewing him
honestly. If, he found out that the enemy was right and his own-self was
at fault, he should resort immediately to his own reform.

In case, if it is feasible, he should even thank his enemy whose
criticism be-came a means of his self-refinement- an enemy who is far
better than those protecting friends who did not point out his defects,
and with their flattering and appeasement kept him in the darkness of
ignorance.

But if after referring to his self and reviewing, if he finds out that
the defect does not exist within his self, then must thanks God-Almighty
and be careful in guarding his self, lest it become contaminated with
this defect later on. In this manner he could be benefited from the
criticism of his enemies. Of course, this method of encounter will not
be an obstacle as for as his utilization of other logical and legal
means for dissipating the treacherous enemy plans are concerned.

### 2.8. Symptoms of Heart's Sickness

One of the best methods for diagnosing a disease is to recognize its
symptoms. The bodily sickness in generally identified by means of two
indications i.e. either by feeling pain or by means of weakness of a
particular part of the body in dischargement of its assigned function.
Every part of the body is supposed to perform a special function, which
in case of being fit performs it very well.

Therefore, if a part of the body is not performing its assigned function
well it means that the part is sick. For example, the human eye in sound
health under particular conditions sees the object, and therefore, if in
spite of having suitable conditions does not see well, indicates that it
is sick.

Similarly, other organs of the body like ears, tongue, hands, feet,
heart, liver, kidney, and others, each one of them is supposed to
perform a particular function, which is performed by them in their being
fit, and their failure to perform their relevant functions indicate
their sickness.

Similar is the case with human self or heart which in accordance to his
primordial nature is assigned to perform a special function. He has
arrived from the Celestial Kingdom with knowledge, blessing, power ,
mercy, justice, love, enlightenment, illumination, and other moral
virtues. By nature he is curious to discover the reasons and realities
and desires God.

Belief, attention, love, attachment, and worship towards God-Almighty
all are symptoms of soundness of self and heart. Likewise, attachment
shown towards knowledge and wisdom, benevolence and service for the
God's Creatures for the sake of God-Almighty, sacrifice, generosity,
seeking justice, and other moral virtues also are indicative of
soundness of the self.

If, a person discovers such characteristics within him, it means that he
possesses a sound heart, but on the contrary if he realized that he does
not pay attention towards God; does not enjoy prayer, supplication, and
worshipping; does not like God; is ambitious for power, wealth, wife,
and children; prefers sexual and carnal pleasures over God's consent;
does not have any other goal in life except to safeguard his own
interests; does not enjoy sacrifice, generosity, kindness, and service
towards others human beings, and does not feel upset while seeing other
people inflicted with calamities.

Such a person must know that he is certainly sick, and if he is
interested in his prosperity must resort to his reform and treatment as
soon as possible.

3. Decision for Treatment
-------------------------

After the psychic sickness is diagnosed correctly, once we become sure
that we are sick then its treatment must be started immediately, and the
most important thing which matters at this stage -is to be able to take
the firm decision. If, we really want and seriously decide that we must
refine ourselves from the moral indecencies -it could be done.

But if we treat. it something as insignificant, and do not decide, then
in that case getting cured and achieving sound health would become
impossible. It is at this stage that Satan and imperious-self enter into
action and by means of playing dirty tricks prevent us from taking the
right decision. But we must be careful and should not become victim of
their treacherous deceit.

It is possible that he may justify the self's ugliness by pointing out:
Don't you want to live with the people? Others do possess the same
characteristics, look at Mr. so and so, they all possess the some
characteristics even greater than yours. Do you alone want to be good?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خواهي نشوی رسوا همرنگ جماعت باش.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If you don't want to be insulted then better join the crowd.”*

But we must take a decisive and firm stand against their treacherous
deceits and must say: The argument that the others are also contaminated
has nothing do with me; there being contaminated does not give mean
excuse or justification; in any case this defect and sickness exist
within me; if I die in this condition; will be inflicted with eternal
doom, and therefore, must endeavor for treatment and attaining
self-refinement.

Sometimes it is possible that the Satan will enter the field with time
killing and delaying tricks, thus, preventing us from taking the right
decision at the right time. He might tell us:

True! This defeat exists within you and must be reminded .But it is not
late. Why hurry up? Take it easy and let the other important works first
be completed and then with complete ease you may engage yourself in
self-refinement. Right now! You are too young. This is the time for fun
and enjoyment. Wait till you become old. Then you may repent. God does
accept repentance any way. Then you may get yourself busy in
self-perfection.

We must, therefore, be intelligent enough to understand that these are
Satanic tricks. Who knows that we will be alive till our old age?
Perhaps, the death might arrive before old age and we might leave this
world contaminated with the psychic diseases. In that case what will be
our destiny?

Any way even if we lived till that time but will the Satan and imperious
self quit their treacherous filthy tricks and leave us free to pay
attention towards the self-refinement? Even at that time by means of
some other tricks they will prevent us from taking the right decision.
Therefore, why not right now, we should take the action to subdue the
rebellious imperious-self.

Sometimes, it is possible that imperious-self would tell us: You have
become addicted to sinning and quitting this addiction is impossible for
you. You are a prisoner of the whims and passions of your self. How
could you free yourself from this imprisonment? Your self has become
totally darkened by means of sins, and therefore, you do not have any
chance for return. But we must better understand that the above argument
is nothing but another treacherous trick of imperious-self.

In response we must tell him: quitting habit is not only impossible but
on the contrary is quite possible. Of course, it is difficult but any
how I must take action and must endeavor for self-refinement. If,
quitting sins and bad characteristics would really have been impossible
then in that case all these moral instructions, about their quitting,
from the Prophet (S) and Infallible Imams (a.s.) would not have been
issued. The path of repentance is never closed and is always open and
therefore, we must decide and must get involved in achieving
self-refinement.

Also, it is possible that the imperious-self may reflect their psychic
diseases and moral indecencies as insignificant and unimportant by
saying: you are committed for the performance of mandatory obligations
as well as also perform such and such recommended obligations. Certainly
you will receive the pardon of Merciful and Beneficent God and will be
sent to Paradise.

The moral indecencies which you possess are not so important to be
concerned, and anyhow they will be compensated with your performance of
recommended obligations (*Mustahabbat*).

Here, too it is important to be careful and to understand that such
justifications are nothing but deludings of Satan and imperious-self. We
must tell them: righteous deeds are accepted only from pious people, and
achieving piety without self-refinement is impossible. If, the self is
not cleansed thoroughly from evilness it could never be a place for
goodness.

Unless Satan is forced out the angels will never enter. If, by means of
committing sins and other carnal desires the heart becomes contaminated
and dark, it will remain without illumination and radiance in the Next
World.

Serious attention should always be paid about the dangerous consequences
of the psychic diseases which have already been summarized earlier.
Apart from that, by referring to literature of moral ethics and
traditions, the dangerous effects and eternal punishments of each
psychic disease must be studied thoroughly; through these means the
treacherous Satanic plans must be resisted by taking a definite and firm
decision for starting a program of self-refinement. If we succeed
passing through the decision stage we will become closer to the stage of
action.

4. Control and Domination of Self
---------------------------------

Human-self is the origin and source of all actions, deeds, sayings,
virtues, and vices. If he is reformed one's success in both worlds is
assured, but if becomes contaminated, will turn into a source of vices
and will bring a catastrophe for this as well as the Next World.

If, he started walking on the righteous path, might even surpass the
God's most favorite angels; but if showed indifference towards the
precious “Jewel-of- Humanity” (*Gowhar al-Insaniyat*), and selected the
animalistic way of life would become even lower then them, falling into
the darkest valleys of ignorance.

The ways and means for following either one of these two paths have been
incorporated within human existence. He has reason and wisdom, and in
accordance with his primordial nature is inclined towards higher moral
human characteristics, but at the same time he is also a biological
animal possessing animalistic passions, desires, and energies.

But it is not so that all of these animalistic characteristics are evil
and damaging responsible for his eventual doom; on the contrary, their
existence is necessary for the continuation of his human life; if
utilized properly they even might be helpful in his journey towards
attaining self-perfection and ascent towards God-Almighty.

But the problem is that animalistic passions and desires do not limit or
stop themselves at certain predetermined level, and do not least care
about the interests of others. Neither they offer any explanation for
human requirements nor care about other desires, and do not follow any
other goal except to achieve a saturation point. The sexual passions
strive to achieve their own absolute climax and pursue this single goal
without pursuing any other objective.

Other animalistic passion such as; pleasure of edible and drinks;
ambitions for position, power, and fame; attachment to wealth, property,
and other luxuries; power of revenge and wrath; and all other
characteristics which arise from them do not stop themselves at a
certain desired limit, rather each one of them demands its own absolute
domination.

It is because of this reason that the human-self becomes a battlefield
where various passions wage war against each other continuously. This
battlefield is never silent until one of them gains victory thus, taking
the self into its absolute imprisonment.

But among them, reason possesses the most important position and power.
By utilizing the religious guidelines might exert control over the
passions and desires of self, thus, preventing their tendencies towards
excessiveness or dissipation, may take control of the power center,
maintain an equilibrium between the desire and passions and in this
manner might rescue self's country from anarchy, disturbances and
extremism, by guiding him towards the straight path of humanity and
ascension towards God-Almighty.

However, taking over center of power by the reason is not an easy task,
because, it is opposed by a most powerful deceitful enemy called the
imperious-self, who is not alone and is supported by many of his friends
and partisans. God-Almighty has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ النَّفْسَ لَأَمَّارَةٌ بِالسُّوءِ إِلَّا مَا رَحِمَ رَبِّي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The (human) soul is certainly prone to evil, unless my Lord do
bestow His Mercy. (12:53)***

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: العقل والشهوة ضدان, ومؤيد العقل العلم ومؤيد
والشهوة الهوى, والنفس متنازعة بينهما. فايهما قهر كانت في جانبه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The reason and lust are opposite to each other; knowledge supports
reason while the lust is supported by the passions and inordinate
desires, self is a battlefield where a war is waged between the reason
and lust; whoever becomes victorious in this fight takes control of the
self.”*[^27]

And, he said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: الشر كامن في طبيعة كل احد فان غلبه صاحبه بطن وان
لم يغلبه ظهر.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Evil and mischief are hidden inside every self; in case the master of
self takes over his control, they remain hidden, but when opposite
happens, they make themselves manifested.”*[^28]

Therefore, reason is a good ruler but requires support and cooperation.
If, we support reason in this confrontation by attacking the forces of
passions and lusts, and handover the ruling of the body to reason then
we indeed had accomplished a great victory. This is what have been de
sired by all the religious pioneers, Divine Messengers, guides, leaders,
and seekers of truth through out the ages, and it was to accomplish this
objective that they had issued plenty of instructions to mankind. e.g.:

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ' ‘Ali (a.s.) had said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: اياكم وغلبة الشهوات على قلوبكم فان بدايتها ملكة
ونهايتها هلكة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Be careful! Passions do not take over control of your hearts; because
in the beginning they will take you as their possessions, and will ruin
you eventually.”*[^29]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: من لم يملك شهوته لم يملك عقله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever does not take possession of his passions and desires will not
be the master of his reason either.”*[^30]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على (ع): غلبة الشهوة اعظم هلك وملكها اشرف ملك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The domination of passions is the -worst kind of catastrophe, and
triumph over them is -one of the most precious possessions.”*[^31]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال الصادق عليه السلام: من ملك نفسه اذا رغب واذا رهب واذا اشتهى واذا
غضب واذا رضى حرم الله جسده على النار.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Whoever at the time of seduction, fear, lust, wrath, and consent, is
in control of his self; God-Almighty will make the Hell' s fire
forbidden for his body.”*[^32]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ' ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: غالبوا انفسكم على ترك المعاصى يسهل عليكم مقادتها
الى الطاعات.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Take control of your self and do not allow him to indulge in sins, so
that it is easier to guide him towards worships.”*[^33]

Therefore, domination over the self and controlling his whims and
passions is a matter of utmost importance and pre-requisite for
achieving self-refinement. Human self is like a mulish horse; if by
means of hard training he becomes disciplined, you have the control of
his straps in your hands, and is mounted upon his back, then in that
case you may be benefited from his commissioning.

But if he is not disciplined and wants to run away freely here and there
without any control, then there is absolutely no doubt that you will
have a crash. Of course, to discipline the rebellious self is an
extremely difficult task; although, in the beginning he will offer
resistance against you, but if you persisted patiently, he will be
subdued eventually.

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: اذا صعب عليك نفسك فاصعب لها تذل لك وخادع نفسك عن
نفسك تنقد لك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“lf self showed stubbornness and did not surrender against you, then
deal harshly till be becomes tame. Act deceitfully against him until
becomes obedient.”*[^34]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: الشهوات اعلال قاتلات افضل دوائها اقتنا الصبر
عنها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Lusts and passions of self are most fatal diseases, and the best
medicines are patience and perseverance against them.”*[^35]

[^1]: “For God's-worship there is nothings superior than the reason. A
believer is not wise until and unless he possesses the following ten
characteristics: 1.The people should expect goodness from him. 2. They
should feel immune from his wickedness. 3. He must evaluate the good
deeds of others as too much even if they are small. 4. Should regard his
good deeds as insignificant even if they re too much. 5. Should never be
tired from acquiring knowledge through out his life. 6. Should never be
annoyed while people approach him demanding fulfillment of their wants.
7. Should prefer seclusion and obscurity more than outwardly fame and
popularity. 8. Poverty in his sight should be more dearer than the
richness. 9. He must rely upon on only one single power in the world.
10. The tenth characteristic which is more important than all is -that
while seeing others he must say: 'He is more better and pious than me. '
Because, the people belong to two categories: Either they are better or
re worst than him. “While encountering the better ones he must show
humility and be courteous so that he could be associated with him.
Regarding the latter who outwardly does not appear good, he must say:
'May his inner self is better than my own inner self or may be he will
become ashamed from his devotion and may return towards God-Almighty
through repentance and thus, might attain a prosperous end. “If some one
pays need to these dimensions he has indeed discovered his dignity and
exaltedness and will be successful over his contemporaries.”-Nasayeh,
Ayatullah Mishkini, p-301.

[^2]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p-10.

[^3]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p-11.

[^4]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p-11.

[^5]: al Kafi, vol. 1, p-16.

[^6]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p-23.

[^7]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p-25.

[^8]: Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha’ (a.s.): was born in Medina on
Thursday, 11th Dhu'l-qi'dah 148 A.H. He lived in a period hen the
Abbasids were faced with increasing difficulties because of Shi'ite
revolts. After al-Mam'un the seventh Abbasid caliph and a contemporary
of Imam al-Ridha’ (a.s.) murdered his brother Amin and assumed office,
he thought he would solve the problems by naming Imam as his own
successor hoping thus, to insure him in worldly affairs and turn the
devotion of his followers away from him. After encouragement, urging and
finally threats, Imam accepted on condition that he be excused from
dismissals, appointments, and other involvement in matters of state.
Making the most of this circumstance, the Imam extended guidance to the
people, imparting priceless elucidation of Islamic culture and spiritual
truths, which have survived in numbers roughly equal to those reaching
us from the Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (a.s.), and in greater
number than those of any other Imam. Finally after al-Ma'mun realized
his mistake, for Shi'ism began to spread even more rapidly he is said to
have poisoned him; he died at the age of 55 in Mashhad Khurasan on
Tuesday, 17th Safar 203 A.H.. He is buried in Mashhad Iran.

[^9]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p-11

[^10]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p-27.

[^11]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p-18.

[^12]: Imam Musa al-Kadhim (a.s.): The son of sixth Imam J'afar al-Sadiq
was born in Abwa' (between Mecca and Medina) on Sunday 7th Safar 128
A.H. He was contemporary with four Abbasid Caliphs as al-Mansur, Hadi,
Mahdi, and Harun. Because of the sever oppression, the necessity of
taqiyya grew more stringent, and since he was under close surveillance,
he admitted only a few elect Shi'ites. Finally he was martyred -poisoned
by owner of the second Abbasid Caliph al-Mansur on 25th Rajab 183 A.H.
He is buried in Kadhimayn in Iraq. Despite of most stringent need for
caution and taqiyya, he enjoyed in promulgating the religious sciences
and made many prophetic sayings available to the Shi'ites, to the extent
that he left more teaching on Jurisprudence than any other Imam with the
exceptions of Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) and al-Sadiq (a.s.) [Tr].

[^13]: al-Kafi, vol. l, p-17.

[^14]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p-19.

[^15]: al-Kafi, vol. 1, p-19.

[^16]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-54.

[^17]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-55.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p-338

[^19]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p-339.

[^20]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p-340.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p-340.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p-325.

[^23]: Nahjul Balagha, sermon 176.

[^24]: Nahjul al-Balagha, sermon 193.

[^25]: Tohof al-Aqool, p-385.

[^26]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p-324.

[^27]: Ghirar al-Hukm, vol. 1, p-96.

[^28]: Ghirar al-Hukm, vol. 1, p-105.

[^29]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-16.

[^30]: Ghirar al-Hukm, vol. 2, p-702.

[^31]: Ghirar al-Hukm, vol. 2, p-507.

[^32]: Wasail al-Shi'a, vol. 6, p-123.

[^33]: Ghirar al-Hukm, vol. 2, p-5-8.

[^34]: Ghirar al-Hukm, vol. 1, p-319.

[^35]: Ghirar al-Hukm, vol. 1, p-72.


