The Stages of Self-refinement
=============================

1. Prevention
-------------

Observance of psychological hygiene and prevention of sins and obscene
moral deeds are the best and easiest stages of self-refinement. At these
stages the self is not yet quite contaminated with sins, still possesses
his natural purity and enlightenment, and is better prepared for
performance of good deeds and acquiring of good morals.

He has not yet blackened and darkened, Satan has not yet made his entry
inside him, and has not accustomed to evil deeds. Because, of these
factors he is better prepared for quitting sinful deeds.

Teenagers and young people, if, decide for purifying their souls and
quitting sinful and moral absence deeds, it is relatively easier for
them, because, they still are at the preventing stage which is easier
than quitting a chronic habit. Therefore, the youth, teens, and even
childhood years are the best period for self-refinement. Likewise, so
far as a man has not tasted the pleasure of a particular sin, he is in a
better position not to commit it.

Therefore, children, youths, and those people who not yet been
contaminated with certain sinful deeds must appreciate this stage as
something very important, guard themselves not to commit sin at all, and
should maintain their state of purity and cleanness, because prevention
is always better than cure.

They should better understand this important point that if they sinned
and acquired obscene moral characteristics within their existence, than
in that case they would have opened the gate for Satan's entry within
their hearts, and onward, quitting a sin for them would become extremely
difficult as compared to earlier.

Satan and imperious-self, therefore, always try to present sinning for
once and twice, something as minor and insignificant, so that by this
mean they could increase their influence and make the self addicted to
sinning.

Therefore, a man who is seriously concerned about his salvation and
welfare must seriously resists self's whims and passions and should not
allow his self to commit a sin even for once. The Commander of the
Faithful, Imam ' ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: لاترحض لنفسك في شيء من سيء الاقوال والافعال.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Don’t let your self allow to make an evil commitment or indulgence
into evil deeds.”*[^1]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: غالب الشوة قوة ضراوتها فانها ان قويت ملكوت
واستقادتك ولم تقدر على مقاومتها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Dominate the passions of your self, before he becomes stronger,
because, once he becomes stronger, he will take-over your control
pulling you in every direction as he pleases, and in that situation you
will not be able to offer resistance against him.”*[^2]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: العادة عدو متملك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Habit is like an enemy who prefers his hegemony over you.”*[^3]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: العادة طبع ثان.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Addiction becomes second nature for a man.”*[^4]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: غالب الهوى مغالب لنصم خصمه وحاربه محاربة العدو
عدوه لعلك تملكه.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Dominate your self’s passions like an enemy dominates his enemy; wage
a war against him like an enemy attacks his enemy; may be, through these
means you might be able to dominate him.”*[^5]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال امير المؤمنين عليه السلام: ترك الخطيية ايسر من طلب التوبه و كم من
شهوة ساعة اورثت حزنا طويلا و الموت فضح الدنيا فلم يترك لذي لب فرحا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Not to commit sin is better than repentance, because, many a times, an
hour of carnal pleasures results in perpetual anxiety and distress.
Death is a mean for discovering the scandalous nature of this world,
which does not leave any pleasure left for an intelligent and aware
person.”*[^6]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال ابو عبدالله عليه السلام: اقصر نفسك عما يضرها من قبل ان تفارقك واسع
فى فكاكها كما تسعى فى طلب معيشتك فان نفسك وهينة بعملك.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Before the soul departs from your body, do not allow your self to
perform harmful deeds,. endeavor for achieving self's freedom the way
you make efforts for earning your living. Because, the same self will be
mortgaged against the deeds (on the Day of Judgement).”*[^7]

God-Almighty has said in the Holy Qur’an.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا مَنْ خَافَ مَقَامَ رَبِّهِ وَنَهَى النَّفْسَ عَنِ
الْهَوَىٰ فَإِنَّ الْجَنَّةَ هِيَ الْمَأْوَىٰ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But as for him who feared to stand before his Lord and restrained
his soul from lust. Lo! the Garden will be his home. (79:40-41)***

Any how, the path of prevention is the best as well as the easiest path,
and therefore, as much as a man endeavors seriously in this path is
worthy of merit. How blessed is a young man, who subdues his
imperious-self, does not allow him to indulge in sinful deeds, and with
a purified and refined self follows the straight path of human
exaltation ascending towards God's Nearness, till the very end of his
life.

2. Sudden Renunciation
----------------------

If the self has already crossed the preservation stage by becoming
contaminated with sins and moral vices, the alternative is to resort to
cleansing, which consists of several methods. One of the best method of
cleansing is the internal revolution and a complete sudden renunciation.
A person who has become contaminated with sins and other moral vices may
decide once to return towards God-Almighty through repentance -washing
and purifying the heart from all sorts of sins and vices.

With a single bold definite decision, one force out devils from the
heart by shutting the doors for their entry forever, thus, making the
heart's dwelling readied for the descend of God's favorite angels and
Divine illumination.

Having inflicted a devastating severe blow the imperious-self and Satan
should be subdued thoroughly, and the power to rule over the self must
be taken into hands firmly and forever. There were many such lucky
individuals who were blessed with Divine Favor of attaining
self-refinement by means of internal revolution within their inner
existence, and remained faithful to their commitment till the last
breath of their lives.

This internal spiritual revolution or awakening (or being reborn) occurs
in the lives of peoples sometimes hearing a short sentence of a preacher
and scholar of moral ethics, hints given by a Divine Guide, happening of
an unusual shattering tragedy, participation in a gathering of prayer
and supplication, and listening to verses, traditions, and pondering for
a few minutes. Sometimes, a minor incident like a sparking illuminates
the heart's dwelling.

There were individuals who were blessed to receive Divine-Grace to
attain self-refinement through internal spiritual revolution in their
lives, and thus, joined the ranks of wayfarers journeying towards
God-Almighty. Following are few examples:

Bashar Hafi, was one of the most famous pious and religious
personalities of his period. In his biography it has been written:
Earlier he was an aristocrat who was continuously busy in world
amusements and sexual pleasures round the clock; his house was the
center of carnal pleasures, drinking, dancing, and loud music. But later
on repented and joined the ranks of most distinguished ascetic and pious
persons. Following is the story of his repentance:

“One day, a maid came out side the door of his house for emptying the
garbage can; coincidentally at the same time Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) was
passing by through the alley near his house and the sound of loud music
reached to his ears. He asked the maid:

'Does the owner of this house is a free man or servant (of God)?'

'Of course! He is a free man as well as a master. ' Replied the maid.

'You are right, because if he was a servant -must have been afraid of
his master and should not have been so bold in committing sins '.
Replied the Imam.

“The maid returned back to the house. Her master, who was busy in
drinking asked the maid:

'What is the reason of your delay?'

“The maid narrated for her master the encounter outside with an
unidentified person and the details of questions and answers exchanged
between them. 'What he said ultimately?' Asked the master. His last
words were: 'You are right! Your master is a free man, because if he
would have considered himself God's servant, then he would have been
afraid of his Master and would not have shown such boldness in
committing sins ,. Replied the maid.

“This short sentence of Imam al-Kadhim (a.s.) like a sharp arrow pierced
Bashar's heart and like a fresh illuminated and metamorphosed his inner
existence. He left his drinking and came out, bare footed running fast
in order to reach the un-identified person. Ultimately reaching near
him, he said:

“'Oh my master! I beg God's as well as your pardon. Yes! I was and still
am God's servant but had forgotten my servitude; because, of that acted
so boldly in committing sins, but right now I have discovered my
servitude, and want to repent for my past sins and omissions. Will
God-Almighty accept my repentance ? I “'Yes! God-Almighty, will accept
your repentance, will for give your past sins, and you must quit sinning
for ever. I Replied the Imam.

“Bashar repented and become one of the most famous pious and saintly
personality of his time, and in order to show his thank for this
blessing used to walk bare-footed till the end of his life.”[^8]

Abu Basir narrated:

“One of the agent of a tyrant king used to live in my neighborhood, who
used to acquire his living through illegal means and had turned his home
into a center of carnal pleasures, dancing, drinking, and music.
Naturally, living next door to him was annoying and painful for me, but
there was no alternative except to bear, because my repeated advises
have not produced any improvement in his behavior. Finally, one day,
when I pressed him hard to change his life style, he replied:

“'I am a prisoner of Satan, because of my addiction to eating, drinking,
and sinning, I cannot quite them. I am sick but can do nothing for
treatment. You are a good neighbor for me, but I am a bad neighbor for
you. I am helpless and have become a prisoner of self's whims and
passions, and don't know how to get myself out of this situation. When,
you visit Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) in the near future, please plead may case
with him, may be he will suggest a solution for my rescue.

Abu Basir continued: “I was deeply influenced with his words, and
remained patient for a while till an opportunity aroused for me to go to
Madina for seeing Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.). When I saw Imam (a.s.) I
narrated the story of my neighbor for him. The Imam replied: 'When you
returned back to Madina, your neighbor will come to see you, then you
must tell him that Jafar bin Muhammad had said:

'Do not commit sins, so that I could guarantee Paradise for you.’

Abu Basir said:

“When I returned back to Kufa after completing the pilgrimage, people
came to see me including my next door neighbor. After exchanging
formalities of greetings and inquiring about my trip when he wanted to
leave, I gave him a hint that I have to discuss something in private.
When other people left my house, I said to him that I narrated his story
to Imam (a.s.), and he replied:

'Upon your return to Kufa, that man will come to see you. Tell him that
Jafar bin Muhammad said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اخرج بما انت فيه وانا اضمن لك الجنة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*'Quit sinning so that I could guarantee Paradise for you:'*

“This short message of Imam (a.s.) so much touched his heart that he
started crying and said to me: 'Do you swear by God that Imam said these
words for me ?

“I swore by God and assured him that these are the exact words of Imam
for him. He replied: 'These words are enough for me. , “He said these
words and left my house. For several days I did not hear any news about
him. One day, he send a message for me to visit him at his home. I
accepted his invitation and went to his house, he opened the door and
hiding behind the door said:

'Oh Abu Basir! Every thing which I acquired through forbidden means have
returned to their owners,. Right now, I possess absolutely nothing even
a pair of clothing to cover myself and that is why I am standing behind
the door. I have quitted all sins and have truly implemented the Imam's
message in my life.

“Abu Basir said:

'I was indeed happy to learn about his repentance and changed condition,
and wondered about the impact of Imam s short message upon him. I
returned back to my home and arranged some clothing and some quantity of
food and brought it for him. After a while he again called me and when I
went to see him, found him sick.

He remained in this condition for quite some time, and during this
period I frequently visited him to take care of his needs, but
unfortunately treatment did not produce any improvement and his
condition continued to deteriorate day by day till one day I found him
in precarious condition hovering between life and death, while I was
sitting on his side, and he was taking his last breaths, he suddenly
opened his eyes and said:

'Oh Abu Basir! Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) had fulfilled his promise. He said
these words and left for his eternal abode.

“After sometimes I had the opportunity for going to Hijaz for Hajj
Pilgrimage, and also to see Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.). When I was about to
enter in his presence and my one foot was inside the hall while another
one still in the yard, the Imam said: 'Oh Abu Basir! I have .fulfilled
the promise for your neighbor and the Paradise which I had guaranteed
for him, was bestowed upon him. ' “[^9]

There were and still are such individuals, who with single definite bold
decision and act of bravery, subdued the imperious-self and took over
the command of their affairs in their own hands, and with the occurrence
of a spiritual internal revolution polished and refined their hearts
from all sort of impurities and vices. Therefore, the above stories
indicate that following the above path is possible for all of us.

The Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال على عليه السلام: غالبوا نفسكم على ترك العادات وجاهدوا اهوائكم
تملكوها.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“For quitting habits subdue the self: by struggling against his whims
and passions; may be you will succeed in making him your
prisoner.”*[^10]

And said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قال علي عليه السلام: افضل العبادة ترك العادة.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Best of the worships are achieving domination over habits.”*[^11]

Imam al-Baqir (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي جعفر عليه السلام قال: كل عين باكية يوم القيامة غير ثلاث: عين
سهرت في سبيل الله و عين فاضت من خشية الله وعين غضت من محارم الله.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One the Day of Resurrection all eyes shall be crying except the
following three kinds:*

*First: The eyes of some one who spent his nights awake in worshipping
for the pleasure of God-Almighty.*

*Second: The eyes of some one who shed tears, because, of fear from
God-Almighty.*

*Third: The eyes of some one who prevented them from looking forbidden
things for the pleasure of God-Almighty.”*[^12]

Imam al-Sadiq (a.s.) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عن ابي عبداللٌه (ع) قال: فيما ناجي اللٌه عز و جل موسي (ع): يا موسي! ما
تقرب الي المتقربون بمثل الورع عن محارمي. فاني ابيحهم جنات عدن لا اشرك
معهم احدا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“God-Almighty said to Prophet Moses (a.s.) through revelation that
nothing is more effective in attaining my nearness as avoidance of
forbidden things. 'The Paradise of Eden' will be bestowed upon them, and
no one else would be allowed to enter therein.”*[^13]

Of course, it must be admitted that self-domination and total avoidance
of sin is not an easy task, but still with foresight, self- awareness,
decisiveness, and pondering it might not be so difficult, considering
the fact that one will be supported and strengthened with Divine
Assistance as promised in the Holy Qur’an:

***“As for those who strive in Our (cause) -We will certainly guide them
to our paths. For verily God is with those who do right. (29:69)***

3. Gradual Renunciation
-----------------------

If we discovered that our inner existence does not have the courage and
boldness required for quitting all sins at once, we may decide for
gradual renunciation in stages. This procedure consists of beginning
with quitting few sins at a time as a test of our will power, and the
struggle should be continued till we become victorious over the self
cutting the roots of those sins forever.

Later on, the same procedure should be repeated regarding some other
sins and should be continued till the final victory is achieved.

Care should be taken that the sins quitted earlier should not be
repeated at all. Obviously, renunciation of each sin makes the
imperious-self and Satan weaker in the same proportion; the place of
each devil, forced out shall be immediately replaced by the entry of
God's angel, and similarly the amount of darkness removed from the
heart's surface shall be replaced with whiteness and illumination in the
same proportion.

The abstinence from sins should be continued, in this manner, till
self-perfection and final victory in controlling the self's desires is
achieved. It is possible that while practicing abstinence of few sins at
a time, we might reach to the limit, where we feel to have the necessary
will power and determination to quit all sins at a time like sudden at
once renunciation, in which case this golden opportunity should be
utilized taking the decision to refrain from all sins.

By forcing out the Satan, the imperious-self should be subdued by
allocating the heart's dwelling for God-Almighty and his favorite
angels. If we struggle and endeavor to achieve the above cherished goal,
we will certainly be victorious. Self-struggle is exactly like waging a
war against an enemy.

A worrier must continuously watch over his enemy's movement, evaluate
his own strength compared with enemy's resources, must strive for
strengthening his forces, and by utilization of suitable opportunities
must attack his enemy inflicting devastating blows, thus, annihilating
his soldiers completely or forcing them out of self's kingdom.

[^1]: Ghirar al-Hukm, vol. 2, p-801.

[^2]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-511.

[^3]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-33.

[^4]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-26.

[^5]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-509.

[^6]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-451.

[^7]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-455.

[^8]: Muntah al-Amal, vol. 2, p-126.

[^9]: Muntaha al-Amal, vol. 2, p-86.

[^10]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-508.

[^11]: Ghirar al-Hukm, p-176.

[^12]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-80.

[^13]: al-Kafi, vol. 2, p-80.


