Life With His Father
====================

Not only was Imam Sadiq (A.S) his father's right-hand person in
conducting classes in his father's madressa, he was also his father's
companion on his journey abroad. Imam Sadiq (A.S) reports one such
journey to Damascus.

Hasham, son of Abdul Malik, son of Marwan, the Ummayyad Caliph,
summoned Imam Baqir (A.S.) to Damascus with the sole aim of rebuking and
then imprisoning him for no other reason than that Hassham was afraid
that the Imam would overthrow Mm.

Details about this journey and the Imam's miracles in the court of
Hasham have been described in the unit covering the life of Imam Baqir
(A.S.). At this juncture, we need to note that Imam Jaffer Sadiq (A.S),
too, was present and his father took this opportunity to introduce his
son to the rest of the world.

Imam Sadiq (A.S) was the main witness in the reporting of the miracles
that his father showed, with the permission and help from Allah, the
Almighty.

**The Effect Of Imam Baqir's Teaching on Imam Sadiq (A.S)**

Admittedly, the divinely appointed Imam gets his knowledge form Allah,
the Almighty and does not learn anything form any human being.

Nonetheless, an Imam does learn from his father who is an Imam
preceding him. By this token Imam Sadiq learnt a lot of things from his
grandfather, Ali Bin Husain (A.S) and his father, Muhammad Bin Ali
(A.S.).

First and foremost, the institution of learning in Medina that Imam
Sadiq (A.S.) developed so successfully was initially started by Imam
Zainul Abidin (A.S) and Imam Muhammad Baqir (A.S).

These two Imams not only laid the foundation of a unique center of
learning, but also defined the educational course that this institute
would take. Also, they produced a comprehensive and concrete
course-work, which was so extensive, so diverse, and so challenging that
it came to attract students from all walks of life from such distant
places as Iraq, Egypt and Persia.

Imam Jaffer Sadiq (A.S), as a young boy, grew-up in this institute as a
scholar and teacher. On the passing away of his father, he took over and
was in full command as dean and manager of this institute.

He then developed this educational structure into an equivalent of a
modern time university, with the curriculum including Science of the
Quran, 'Tafseer' (Exegis), Tiqh' (Jurisprudence), 'Seerah' (Biography of
the Prophet) Philosophy, 'Irfan' (Gnostics), Grammar, Literature, and
Chemistry to mention but a few branches of knowledge.

**PASSING AWAY OF IMAM BAQIR (A.S.): IMAM SADIQ (A.S) AS IMAM OF HIS
TIMES.**

Kulayni writes in his AL KAW that Imam Sadiq (A.S) says that when his
father. Imam Baqir (A.S), was about to pass away from this world, he
said, "Jaffer, I command you to treat my followers well." Imam Sadiq
replied, " May 1 be at your ransom1 By Allah 1 will teach them knowledge
so well that they will become self-sufficient."

Imam Baqir then asked for witnesses to be brought. Four witnessess from
the clan of Qurash were called. The Imam then dictated his testimony,
naming Imam Jafer Sadiq (A.S) as his trustee and successor.

He then let the witnesses depart. Imam Jaffer Sadiq (A.S) inquired from
his father as to why he had called the witnesses. Imam Baqir replied
that he did so, so as to silence those who could claim later on that
Imam Baqir (A.S) had left no successor.


