Teaching Methods of the Institute
=================================

The main 'auditorium' - if you thus want to call the classroom of Imam
Sadiq (A.S) - was the mosque of the Prophet (S.A.W.W.) in Medina. This
is where the Imam (A.S) would conduct his classes, in the morning, in
the afternoon and at night.

Breaks were provided only at the times of daily prayers. Formal
lectures were given by the Imam (A..S.) followed by brief periods of
question - answer sessions.

Special tutorials were given in the mosque at times of break, or in the
house of the Imam (A.S). Fazl Bin Otnar \\lio learnt from the Imam
(A.S.) Biology and several related disciplines as Zoology and Botany did
so at dawn after the Fajr prayers.

In he later years of his life, the Imam (A.S.) was helped in running
these classes by his son, Imam Musa Kadhim (A.S). Imam also trained his
wife Hamida Barbaria to deal with issues related with women 1 here came
a time when Imam (A.S) would refer women to Hamida to have her answer
their questions.

Imam also encouraged some of his extraordinary students to work as his
representatives both in Medina and elsewhere. The names of the students
were mentioned before.

**1)THE EFFECT OF IMAM'S 'REVOLUTION' THRUGH LEARNING**

Diverse and very useful knowledge relating to this world and the
hereafter became available to mankind in general and Muslims in
particular. According to Al Mufeed and Tibrisi, as many as 4000 students
graduated from Imam Sadiq's institute of learning in Medina.

The diversity of the knowledge that Imam helped to generate is
reflected by 4 main factors, (i) The volume of written information that
was produced by the Institute; (ii) The variety of discipline that were
covered in these written document s; (iii) The intellectual levels of
the students who attended and graduated from the institute and iv. The
geographical areas, which were represented in this endeavor to create
and disseminate knowledge.

i). Volume of Information produced by the Institute:

Books were written in thousands by the graduates of the Institute of
which 400 were on USOOL alone. These books existed for many centuries
and were used as sources of information and basis of authority by many
later Muslim scholars.

Details on these documents will be provided when we examine the famous
graduates of the Institute. Suffice it to mention here that Jabbir tbne
Hayyan, who was a prominent student of Imam Sadiq (A.S), collected 500
treatises of the teachings of Imam Sadiq (A.S).

Ibne Hajar e Makki summarizes the effect of the flood of information
flowing from the University of Imam Sadiq (A.S) in these word: "..so
many issues of learning have been transmitted from Hazrat Jaffer Bin
Muhammad, that they are known from city to city and hamlet to hamlet.

Great leaders of learning like Yahyabin Sadeed, Ibne Jaree'h, Malik,
Sufyan, Abu Hanifa..have given narration from him" (SAWAEQA
ALMUHRIKA).

ii). Variety of subjects covered by the curriculum: Professor of
Literature in the University of Cairo, Muhammad SadiqNashaata,
summarizes this aspect so well that his words are reproduced verbatim;
the professor says.

"The house of Hazrat Jaffer Bin Muhammed (A.S) has a status of a
complete university where great scholars of traditions, exegesis,
philosophy and polemics gathered together. Sometimes two thousand
scholars and sometimes four thousand scholars at a time attended the
lectures.

His pupils have collected his teaching in the form of books which have
acquired the status of an Encyclopedia." (quoted form Status of Imam
Sadiq (A.S), Peermohamed Trust Publication).

ii). The intellectual level of students who attended these Institute:

Four thousand graduates from this institute have been recorded by their
names in the annals of history. We shall reproduce here under a few of
these students' names and narrate briefly their contribution to learning
since this will give an indication as to the quality of teaching they
went through under the tutelage of Imam Sadiq (A.S).

NOMAN BIN THABIT (Popularly known as Imam Abu Hanifa). He was a full
time student of Imam (A.S) at Medina for two years. Apart from that, he
attended Imam's classes in Kufa for a short time and would consult the
Imam's guidance from time to time. He states that he would have been
ruined if he had not been the student of Imam Sadiq (A.S) for those two
years.

This is confirmed by no other person than Muhadise Dehlavi in his
TOHFA-E-ITHNASHERIAH.

**• IMAM MALIK BIN ANAS:**

He, too, was the student of Imam Sadiq (A.S). The author of TAHZEEB
quotes Imam Malik to have complemented Imam Sadiq (A.S) in these words:"
In point of learning, a better man has not been seen by eyes or heard by
ears or conceived by imagination."

**• SHOABA BIN HAJJAJ:**

He is regarded as prominent transmitter of traditions which appear in
the SEHAH. Imam Shafi complements him saying that if it had not been for
SHOABA there would have been no knowledge of traditions in Iraq. Imam
Ahmad Bin Hanbal regards him as the embodiment of the Muslim Ummah.

**• HAFS BIN GHIYAS**

Because of his knowledge, he rose to the position of the Qazi (Chief
Justice) in Baghdad and Kufa. He could quote three to four thousand
traditions that he had heard and committed to memory from his student
days in the Institute of Imam Sadiq (A.S).

**• IBRAHIM BIN MlIHAMMAD MADAM**

He was an author of several books from which Imam Shafai copied several
narrations since the latter was Ibrahim's student.

**• IBRAHIM BIN SAAD ZOHRI**

He later became a teacher of Ahmad Bin Hanbal who started his own
Madhab, the followers of which came be known as Hanbalis.

**• SAEED BIN MUSLIMAH**

He became the teacher of Imam Shafai, the founder of the Shafai school
of thought.

**• ABDUL MALEK BIN AAYUN**

He was an expert in astronomy.

**• ISHAQ BIN AMMAR**

He specialized in the Biography of the Prophet and his work is regarded
as highly reliable by the scholars of Biography.

**• MUHAMMAD BIN MUSLIM**

He obtained sixteen thousand traditions from Imam Sadiq (A.S). There
were times when Imam Abu Hanifa would send his students to seek
solutions of problems from Muhammad, such a great authority he was!

**• JABIRBIN HAYYAN AL AZADI**

In the West he is known a GEBER. Imam Jafer Sadiq (A.S) taught him
Chemistry - the discipline in which he is believed to have written at
least 100 books of which 22 are still existing. His published works
include: KITAB AL REHMAN (Book of Mercy) KITAB AL TAJM1 (Book of
concentration), AL ZILAKAL SHARK1 (Book of Eastern Mercury, Book of the
Kingdom, Book of Balances).

His books on Chemistry have been translated into several European
languages, and have influenced tremendously the development of modem
chemistry. The Encyclopedia Speculum Naturale described Jabir in these
words "The influence of GABER is very pronounced."

Max Meyerhof has this to say about Jabir: "His influence may be traced
throughout the whole historic course of European alchemy and Chemistry."
Later chemicalscientists such as Al Tugharia and Abu Al-Qasim Al Iraqi
who flourished during the 12th and 13th centuries respectively regarded
Jabir as~ "Master"

Whereas the scholars of the world regard Jabir as their "Master", he
regards Imam Sadiq (A.S) as the best teacher that he has ever had! He
associated the cause of his success to Imam Sadiq (A.S) referring to him
as "My spiritual guide and master, Jafer Ibne Muhanimaad."

iv). The geographic areas from where the students came.

The four thousand registered students and the unknown thousand of the
non-registered students did not all belong to Medina alone. The fame of
the Institute of Imam Sadiq (A.S) had spread so far and wide that
students of different inclinations, tastes and interests from all over
the known world began to converge in Medina. Eager learners came from
Koofa, Basra, Wasit (In Iraq);

from Egypt, Persia, Bert\>er Africa and Spain. All the major Arabian
tribes sent their learners to Imam Sadiq (A. S). It is reported that
members from the tribes oi Bani Asad, Makharah lay, Saleem Qhattan,
Gaffar, Khazaah, Khashaam, Makhozoom, Bani Zabah and the Quraysh were
all represented in the Institute in Medina.

In his book the History of Arabs Ameer Ali described this aspect of the
Institute in these words: ".. the chief leader of this movement of
learning was Hazrat Imam Sadiq (A.S)..

He had an extensive vision, deep insight and perfect mastery of every
branch of knowledge .. His assembly of learning and knowledge was not
only attended by those who later became Imams of religious school but
also by great personalities from all parts of the world, who graduated
there to avail of his teachings."

**2). THE INFLUENCE OF THIS LEARNING WAS WIDE-SPREAD OWING TO THE
EXTENSION SERVICES OF THE INSTITUTION.**

During his visit to KUFA, BAGHDAD and KERB ALA, Imam (A.S) took upon
himself to run educational courses at formal ancTinformal levels at his
place of abode. Eager learners from those towns and the surrounding
areas would attend Imam's classes and acquire knowledge in those fields,
which were of interest to them.

Over and above that, Imam (A.S) would encourage some of his students to
act as his representatives in those places like Qum where the Imam did
not have the opportunity to visit. Through this system of transmission
of information through such students as MUHAMMAD BIN MUSLIM AND ABU
BASIR AL ASADI, Imam's influence extended to such areas as Egypt, Iraq,
Syria, and Persia.

Through this means, the process of learning was dispersed and its
benefits reaped not only by Muslims and believers alone, but also by
humanity at large. Through the process of dialogue and discussion
several non-believers were converted into firm believers.

It is interesting to note that Caliph Saffah and then Mansoor arranged
for the Imam to undertake these foreign visits with the intention of
harming him. However, the Imam (A.S) turned these visits into teaching
experiences and conveyed the true message of Islam to those distant
places.

**3). MARTYRDOM OF IMAM HUSAIN(A.S.) AS PART OF THE CURRICULUM OF THE
INSTITUTE**

The importance of Martyrdom of ImanvHusain (A.S) was explained and
Muslims were trained to appreciate and uphold the principles and ideals
for which Imam Husain (A.S) gave his life. In his AZA-AL-HUSAINPAR
TARIKH TABSERA, Maulana Syed Ali Naqi narrates several methods which the
Imam used to achieve those goals. Some of the methods are as follows:

i). He encouraged formal and frequent gathering to remember the
martyrdom of Imam Husain (A.S) and the other martyrs of Kerbala. This
was particularly so in the month of Muharram when he would hold such
gatherings in his own home and invite such famous poets as Abu Ammara
Nashd to recite elegies and eulogies on the martyrs of Kerbala.

Abu Amrnar himself reports that on one occasion the Imam (A.S) asked
him to recite a number of such elegies up to the time when the weeping
and wailing would be heard from the house of the Imam (A.S).

Zaid Shilam reports that once when he was in Kufa in presence of Imam
Sadiq (A.S), a poet by the name of Jafar Bin Iffan came to see the Imam.
After a brief conversation, the Imam requested Bin Iffan to recite
elegies on Imam Husain (A.S). Bin Iffan complied.

The effect of these elegies were such that the Imam (A.S) began to weep
and then he thanked Bin Iffan saying, "Do not think that only this
gathering here is listening to your elegies? As a matter of fact,
Allah's angles are present here and are mourning with us. May Allah
bless you for your elegies. Allah will reward you with Paradise for
composing these verses".

The Imam once asked Abdullah Bin Fazl: "Do you ever organize gatherings
and recall events that are based on the martyrdom of Imam Husain
(A.S)?"


Bin Fazl replied that, indeed, he did.

Imam observed "I very much approve of such Majlises" According to
Maulana Ali Naqi lexically 'MAJLIS' means any session but the Imam
(A.S.) used it as proper noun to mean exclusively those gatherings for
the remembrance of the martyrs of Kerbala.

ii). He stressed on the importance of visiting the grave-site of Imam
Husain in Kerbala. He is the only Imam after Imam^Zainul Abideen (A.S) -
to have had an opportunity of visiting the gravesite of Imam Husain
(A.S) in Kerbala. As a matter of fact, he was able to visit Kerbala on
more than one occasion. His first chance came when Saffah, the first
Caliph from the House of Abbass invited the Imam to Kufa.

The Imam (A.S) broke his journey at Quria Ghazaria where he took a bath
in the River Euphrates (The "FOORAT") and then walked to the gravesite
of Imam Husain (A.S) and recited the salutation which is famous by the
name "ZIYARAT WARTTH" which now the believers recite at least every week
on Thursday night.

After this occasion, every time the Imam (A.S) was called to Iraq, he
would make a point to visit the grave site of Imam Husain (A.S).

He also encouraged people to visit the shrine of Imam Husain (A. S), by
stressing the great importance of such visits. To give you an idea of
this fact, we shall narrate one of the traditions from Imam Sadiq (A.S)
regarding the importance of visiting the shrines of the martyrs of
Kerbala.

Kulaini and Sayyid Bin Taoos quote Muawiya Bin Wahhab, one of the most
famous companions of Imam Sadiq (A.S) saying that once he visited Imam
(A.S) and found him busy praying. When the Imam finished his prayers, he
prostrated in a "sajda" and requested Allah to reward handsomely and
forgives the sins of those who left their homes and visited the shrine
of Imam Husain (A.S).

When the Imam finished his prayers, Bin Wahhab expressed his surprise
that there was so much reward here and hereafter for those who ventured
to visit the shrine of Imam Husain (A.S).

Elaborating on the importance of visiting the grave-site of Imam
Husain{A.S), Imam Sadiq said," Oh the son of Wahhab, don't you wishto be
thos£ considered by Allah as the beneficiaries of the supplication of
the Prophet (SAW),

of Ali Ibne Abi Talib, of Fatima (A.S) and we, the Imams from the of
the Prophet (S.W. A.W.W)? Don't you wish to be amongst those who shake
hands with angles? Don't you to be considered as one of those who shall
corne on the Day of Judgement free from all sins? Don't you want to be
one of those who shall be shaking hands with the Prophet (S.A.W.W) on
the Day of Judgement?"

By asking these questions, the Imam (A.S) was stressing the importance
of visiting the grave-site of the martyrs of Kerballa generally, and
that of Imam Husain (A.S) in particular.


