Chapter 3 : Major Historic Events During the Times of Imam Jaffer Sadiq (a.s)
=============================================================================

**INTRODUCTION:**

Imam Jafer Sadiq (A.S) was born in the reign of Abdul Malik Bin Marwan
and was martyred in the times of Mansoor Dawanaqi.
He therefore witnessed the reign of ten rulers from the Ummayades and
two from the Abbasides. Imam Sadiq (A.S) took over as the Imam of his
times from his father during the reign of Hisham Bin Abdul Malik.

To fully comprehend the problems and the prospects that lay in the way
of Imam (A.S) in his obligations to serve mankind in general and the
Muslims in particular, it is important to examine the political,
economic and social climates during the kingship of these rulers all of
whom were usurpers and blood thirsty.

The study of these monarch is also important in tracing the causes of
the decline and the fall of the House of Ummayades and rise of the House
of Abbasides.

**The Last four Caliphs from the Ummayades**

Hisham Bin Abdul Malik (104AH - 123AH)

We have briefly studied the rulership of Hisham when we were dealing
with the biography of Imam Muhammad Baqir (A.S). Suffice it to say that,
during the later years of his 19 years of reign, Hisham became extremely
oppressive towards [mam Jaffer Sadiq (A.S) so much so that imam had to
assume a lower profile in conducting his educational efforts.

Having ruled for 19 years. Hi sham died at the age of 53 at his estate
in Rusafa on the banks of River Euphrates In his lifetime. Hisham had
made an agreement with his brother that the latter’s son. Walid II would
succeed Hishrun Hisham could not change this agreement, though he hated
it, and was therefore succeeded by Walid 11 in 123 AH.

Walid Bin Yezid Bin Abdul-Malk Bin (I23-I26AH):

Robert Payne, the author of The History of Islam recognizes Walid as
the "corrupt emperor". Syed Amir AH portrays him in these words: "….He
waited impatiently to the death of his uncle. Immediately on receiving
the news, he hurried to Damascus, and began his reign by driving out
Hisham's family from the palace.

even the funeral rites of the deceased monarch were not allowed to be
performed without indecent interference …. Suyuti described him as
"Libertine, a wine-drinker, and a breaker of divine commands Masoodii in
his ‘Muruju Zahab’ relates an incident when Walid opened the Quran and
read those verses where Allah reminds faithfuls to submit to His will.

Walid was enraged. He tore the Quran into pieces with his arrow shoots
and composed these verses:

Do you dare to threaten me in my proud rebellion? I am Walid -the most
rebellious of Men!

O, Quran, when you appear at the Judgment Court, Tell Allah who it was
who tore you to shreds. He organized drinking parties on the roof of the
House of Allah - the KAB A. An illustration of his faithlessness is
given by Amir AH who say, "Walid DL once indulged in a prank which
greatly angered the religious people in the capital.

He sent to the Mosque, enveloped in his cloak, a beautiful lad of the
harem with whom he had been entertaining himself, to preside at the
Friday service in his stead.”

He continued his oppression against the household of the Prophet
(S.A.W.W.S.). Yahya, Zaid's son, was killed mercilessly by the orders of
Walid. Yahya's head was cut from the body and sent to Walid. Yahya's
death, according to Ammer Ali, "accelerated the downfall of the
Ommeryades."

His immoral behavior and his cruelty towards his own kith and kin made
his own people turn against him. In 126 A.H., Yezid son of Walid son of
Abdul Malik, rose against Walid H. Walid was killed, ironically holding
on to the Qur' an that he had insulted earlier on, and his body paraded
in the city of Damascus, where hitherto he had ruled as the Caliph of
the Believers! His sons were put in prison and later murdered by the
orders of Ibrahim, Yezid's (EH) brother.

**Yazid (III) Bin Walid Bin Yazid Bin Abdul Malik Bin Merwan (126
A.H.127 A.H.):**

Having overthrown and killed his cousin, Yazid El set to establish
himself as the Caliph of the Muslims. But he ruled only for five months
and died mysteriously in 127 AH. He was succeeded by his brother
Ibrahim.

None but the people of Damascus only recognized him and his rulership
survived only for two months. Merwan bin Mohammad, the grandson of
Merwan bin Hakam, the founder of the Merwani dynasty, rose against
Ibrahim. Ameer Ali describes the events of that time thus: "Demascus was
now in a terrible state of anarchy and confusion, and the arrival of
Merwan was welcomed by the respectable citizenry. He was immediately
proclaimed Caliph..."

Merwan (II) Bin Muhammad (127 - 132 AH,) He was the grandson of the
founder of the Hakamite dynasty, Merwan Bin Hakam. Before being Caliph,
he was governor of Armenia and had shown remarkable skills at
suppressing rebellions from the north. His enormous powers of endurance
earned him the nickname of al-Himar, the ass, not as an insult but as an
acknowledgement of his great physical strength.

His life was simple and spent mostly with his soldiers. Though quite
advanced in age - he was over sixty - he still possessed the physical
powers found rarely in soldiers of his age.

However, as Amir Ali rightly observes, much more than mere soldiets
qualities were required to save the Ommeyad power from destruction. His
obstinacy, his bad temper, and above all, his hatred for the Yemenites
paved his downfall.

No sooner had he taken over the Caliphate, then they were uprisings in
Hems and Palestine. In Iraq, the Kharijis were rebelling against the
government.

Rather than focus on fixing the damages done by his predecessors,
Merwan had to spend his time and energy putting down rebellions at,
Hems, Palestine, Iraq and Hijaz, thereby not only arousing more hatred
in the hearts of people against the Ummayed regime, but also weakening
his abilities to deal with "the enemies of the State" in the garb of the
Abbasides.

In the following chapter, we shall look in some details those people or
a group of people who constituted "the enemies of the state" and the
steps that they took to benefit out of the state of anarchy that had
discended upon the I Smmayde rulership at the time when Merwan al Himar
had come to power.

It was at this time that in Khurasan there was an open war declared in
the name of "AHLUl -BAY'P to replace the Ummayade regime. This outcry
was raised by a man by the name of Abu Muslim, who was none other than a
military agent of Ibrahim Bin Muhammad Bin Ali Bin Ibne Abbas. We shall
learn more about their personalities in chapter 4.

The main motto of Abu Muslim was that the Ummayades were oppressors and
usurpers. The right to rule belonged to "Ahlul Bayt,'" the immediate
family of the Prophet Not only were the Ummayades usurpers, they were
heinous as shown by the way they spilled the blood of the grandchildren
of the Prophet.

They cited the examples of the martyrs of Kerbala and more recent
murders of Zaid Bin AH and his son Yahya.

People were urged to rise and march to overthrow the usurpers. To win
the confidence of the people, the dress code used by Abu Muslim was that
used to mourn the martyrs - black.

The majority of the supporters of Abut Muslim were those who were the
sympathizers of the children and grandchildren of Imam Ali (A.S); all
along they were made to believe that these grandchildren of the Prophet
(S.A.W.W) would be made the rulers to replace the Ummaydes.

However, what many people did not realize at that time was that there
was a hidden motive behind this revolution, namely that the name of
Ahlul Bayt was being used by the family ol Abbas and then conspirators
who were planning 10 take over the Caliphate for themselves when the
opportune moment arrived

I his agenda was not know even to such a prominent member of this
movement as Abu Salnia about whom we shall learnt if the next chapter As
a matter of fact it was during these crucial moments that oath of
allegiance was taken in the name of Muhammad NafseZakkiyah in Medina.

By AH 132, Khorsan had fallen totalK in the hands M Abu Muslim, and his
force under trie command of Hassan bin Kahtaba, now marched into Iraq
and captured Kufa.

In response to these losses, Merwan arrested Ibrahmi who was in
constant touch with Abu Muslim, and got him killed. Ibrahim's brother
Abu Abass (saffah) and Abu Jaffer (Mansoor) escaped to Kufa. They stayed
there till AH 132 when Abu Abbas was declared the Caliph of the
Musiinv.

This forced Merwan to march against the advancing force of the
Abbasides, A fierce battle was fought at Zab where Marwan was defeated
and he fled Soon the entire M us!

ini Empire fell into the hands of the Abbasides Merwan was caught and
killed while he was still on the run. With Merwan ended the 90 years of
the tyrannical rule of the House of Ummayades and began the rulership of
the tyrannical house of Abbas -the Abbasides.

**The First Two Caliphs Ffrom The House Of Abbas**

Abu Abbas (132 AH -136 AH)

We have noted that Abu Abbas became the Caliph even before the end of
the Ommayad dynast under the last caliphate of Merwan Bin Muhammad. With
the murder of Merwan, the Ummayade Dynasty ended except in Spam where a
grandson of Hi sham, by the name of Abdul Rehman, continued to rule
independent from the Abbaside Caliphs in Baghdad.

Abu Abbas was known for his wild temper and vengeance. He showed no
mercy to his enemies. He spared the life of none who belonged to the
House of Ummayades. He shed so much blood that he came to be known as
the "Shedder of Blood" He showed no mercy even to the dead.

Graves of the Ummayade Caliphs were desecrated; whatever that was left
of the dead was dug out and burnt into ashes. He is supposed to have an
executioner standing next to him, ready to be ordered to execute an
unsuspecting victim. Among his renowned poetry are these lines: Our
sword are dripping with blood.

And the hands of our enemies are broken to fragments, Like Smashed
ostrich eggs.

He shifted his capital from Damascus (Syria) to Hashimyah in Northern
Iraq. He appointed his own relatives and close friends to the major
government jobs and named his brother, Abu Jaffer, as his successor.

Having ruled for four years he died from small pox. Fearing that his
dead body would meet the same fate as the one he meted out to his
enemies, his last instructions were that his grave site be kept
secret.

Abu Jaffer (Al-Mansoor) (136 - 158 AH):

Abu Jaffer succeeded his brother Abu Abbass (Saffah) as the Caliph in
136AH He ruled for 22 years, and was truly the founder of the House of
Abbas, the Bam Abbas or the Abbasides. He was shrewd and unscrupulous He
trusted none and would spare the life of no one whom he suspected to be
a threat to his rulership. We noticed how he arranged the killing of his
loyal supporters such as Abu Muslim.

He got murdered his own Uncle Abdullah Bin Abbas who was one of the
persons who fought hard against the Ummayades. Not trusting the people
of Kufa, he shifted his capital from Hashimia, to a new capital that he
built himself at what is now known as of Baghdad.

It is said that he modeled Baghdad on the description of the Paradise
as described in the Quran. According to the historian Tabari, it cost
the Treasury 4,800,033 Dirhams to build [Baghdad - a colossal sum of
money, in those days.

Though Abu Jaffer named himself "Mansoor" - the victorious, historians
know him as Mansoor "Dawanaki" -Mansoor "the father of the farthings"!
This is because he was very stingy when it came to spend money.

Tabari described one such incident in his Tarikh - AI Rasul wal Mulak.
The governor of Barasama had finished his tenure n office but Viansoor
did not want to reward him anything so he used an excuse that the
governor had misappropriated funds while in office.

The governor in his defense argued and swore in the name of Allah that
he had on him only one dirham which he has kept to pay his passage to
his home Mansoor responded: "I do not doubt that you are idling the
truth. Give us our dirham.” Tabari concludes, “Al Mansoor only treated
him harshly in order not to give him anything.”

However, when it came to his own relatives, Mansoor was very generous.
According to Tabari, in one day Mansoor distributed to a group of his
family ten million dirhams, and gave one of his uncles alone one million
dinars. Tabari says “we do not know of any Caliph after him who
conferred that on a single person.” Some of ms cousins such as Suleman.
Isa. Saleh and Ismail (sons of Mi bin Abdullah Bin Abbas) were each
given a salary of a million dinar.

By the same token he treated himself with regal indulgence. Tabari
again tell us that Mansur had extend into a written contract with his
first wife, Umm Musa, that he would not have in his “haram any other
women in her lifetime. When Umm Musa died, Mansoor spent that night in
company of one hundred virgins!.

Shamlessly, he praised those rulers from the Ummayade who had committed
acts of crime against Muslims. For example, he spoke highly of Hayaj Bin
Yusuf, who was responsible for spilling the blood of thousands of
Muslims.

Tabari tells us that when one of Mansoor's courtiers complained
saying,"... I did not think that I would like ;o see the day when
al-Haiiaj would be discussed in your house…”, Monsoor replied, " Why do
you disapprove of (hat^ He was a man whom people trusted with power, and
he served them well.

I would be happy, by God, if 1 could find a man like Hajjaj so that 1
could hand over my responsibilities to him and settle him in one of the
two Harems (Mecca and Medina)..." You can now imagine how hard it must
have been for Imam Jaffer Sadiq (AS) to have served the Muslim
community7 during the reign of this tyrant.

As a matter of fact, Mansoor was after Imam (A.S) and had him called to
Iraq several times with the main object of killing him. It was Allah's
protection exclusively that protected the Imam (A.S)

A man by the name of Muhammed Bin Abdullah Iskandari reports: "'One day
1 went to meet Mansoor and found him worried and sad. 1 asked for the
reason. Mansoor told me that whereas he had succeeded in killing
hundreds of the members from the progeny of the Prophet, he still had
not been able to kill the head of the house, meaning Imam Jaffer Sadiq
(A.S)”. Muhammad inquired as to why would Mansoor want to kill the imam
who was the best person of the times.

Mansoor acknowledged Imam's greatness and innocence. Nevertheless, he
regarded Imam (A.S) as his main cause of worry. Mansoor then sent for
the Imam and instructed his executioner to await for instructions to
behead the Imam (A.S). However, when the Imam (A.S) came to Mansoor, the
latter’s entire attitude changed.

He showed excessive respect towards the Imam (A.S) and expressed
apologies for disturbing the Imam (A.S) at this tune of the night. He
asked the Imam if he needed any thing from him. The Imam (A.S) replied
that the best things that Mansoor could do for him w7as to leave him
alone.

This Mansoor promised to do and he let the Imam (A.S) go home. Then
narrator says that after the Imam's departure, he asked Mansoor as to
why he had spared the Imam's life though he had called the Imam (A.S)
for no other reason than to kill him.

Mansoor explained that with the Imam, appeared 4 huge serpent, which
warned Mansoor that should he do any harm to the Imam (A.S), the serpent
would devour him. Fearing for his own life, Mansoor let the Imam go
unharmed.

Mansoor made several such efforts to harm the Imam (A.S) but he failed.
Finally, he got the Imam (A.S) poisoned in Medina through the Governor
of Medina. Imam (A.S) passed away in 148 A.H at the age of 65 years.

As soon as the news of the martyrdom of Imams Sadiq (A.S) reached
Baghdad, Mansoor wrote to his governor in Medina to find out those whom
the Imam named as his trustees and behead them immediately Imam Jaffer
Sadiq (A.S) had foreseen that a situation like this would arise; he
therefore took a precautionary step to save his successor Imam Musa
Kadhim (A.S) by naming Mansoor and the governor of Medina as two of his
five trustees.

The other three trustees being Hamida (Imam's wife), Abdullah Aftah and
Imam Masa Kadhim (A.S). Therefore Mansoor's instructions could not be
implemented.

After Imam Jaffer Sadiq (A.S) Mansoor ruled yet for another ten years.
He died a station or two from Macca on 6th Zilhajj 158 AH, on his way to
perfom pilgrimage of the ^House of Allah." He was succeeded by his son
Mahdi about whom we shall learn when we discuss the Biography of Imam
Musa Kadhim (A.S).


