Chapter 4 : Major Historic Events During the Life-time of Imam Jaffer Bin Muhammad-alsadiq (a.s) and His Non-political Stand
============================================================================================================================

**INTRODUCTION:**

Imam Jaffer Sadiq (A.S) was that Imam from the progeny of the Prophet
who saw the rulership of the Ummayades and the Abbasides at their peak
and at the lowest point of their power.

Whereas he lived through the entire rulership of Hi sham that stretched
for nineteen long years, he also saw the rise of Mansoor Dawanaqi from
being a fugitive to being one of the strongest rulers of the world of
that time.

Several" opportunities" became available at this time to the Imam
(A.S). In this chapter we shall closely look at these opportunities and
examine why the Imam (A.S) chose some and rejected others.

**OPPORTUNITIES:**

Despite the lengthy and somewhat "successful" rulership of Hisham, it
was clear that the Umrnayed rein was coming to an end. This is because
the Ummayade rulers had proved to be totally ineffective and unfit to
rule.

People were rising against the cruel government through out the Empire.
There were uprisings in Khurasan, Central Asia, Southern Arabia, Spain
and North Africa. These revolts were crushed but at a high price.

Not only did they drain the Treasury, but also made the suffering mass
more determined to fight for their freedom against the tyrant Ummayades.
On the other hand, the Ummayade rulers imposed heavy taxes on people so
as to fill the state's ever-empty treasury.

A situation was being created for people to be more and more pushed
towards a point of overthrowing the Government. This constant "war"
between the government and the people created an opportunity.

A strong person who could organize the people and provide them with
leadership stood a good chance of replacing the Ummayade rulership. Both
Imam Muhammad Baqir (A.S) and Imam Jaffer Sadiq (A.S) saw this
opportunity but refused to go after it for reasons which we shall see in
the course of this chapter. Besides these two Imams, there were others,
too, who saw this plump opportunity of going after the seat of power.

At this juncture we shall briefly relate about those others who went to
exploit this opportunity and the fate which befell them in pursuit of
this option.

**1). Zaid, son of AH bin Husain (A.S.):**

Zaid, the son of Imam Zainul Abideen (A.S), was one such a person who
thought it was time for him to rise against the Ummayades and their
repressive rule. Zaid was a pious person who spent his nights in prayers
and his days fasting.

He went to the court of Hisham to advise him to end cruelty towards
Muslims. Hisham treated him with insults, abusing Imam Baqir (A.S) and
the members of the Prophet's family in general. Zaid could not bear
these insults. He went to Kufa and raised an army to overthrow Hisham.

Hisham sent his army under the commandership of Yusuf BinUmar Saqafi.
In 122 AH after fighting bravely. Zaid was martyred. His uprising
failed. He was buried secretly but Hisham found his burial place and had
the body of Zaid dug from the grave and placed on the cross. Later on,
his body was burnt and ashes thrown in the River Euphrates.

Zaid's son, Yahya, rose again in 125 AH but he too, was defeated,
killed and his body treated with humiliation by the orders of Walid II,
the successor of Hisham.

**2). Muhammad Bin Abdullah Bin Hassan Musannah Bin Hassan (A.S):**

On the death of Hisham in A.H 125, his brother Walid II, took over as
the ruler of the Muslim Empire. Amir Ali described his as "...utterly
oblivious of the ordinary rules of morality and addicted to drinking..."
People were convinced that it was time the rulership be returned to the
members of the House of the Prophet the Ahlul Bait.

Imam Jaffer Sadiq (A.S) refused to get involved in the underground
movement that was getting ready to overthrow the Ummayade regime. Other
members of the Bani Hashim decided to do otherwise; amongst them was
Abdullah Mahaz and his children.

They visited the secret meetings held in Medina where the Bani Abbasi
leaders, Suffah and Mansoor. too were present - all planning to
overthrow the Ummayade. At one such meeting, Muhammad, the son of
Abdullah Mahz was nominated to be the Caliph to replace the Ummayade
ruler.

Muhammad was a very virtuous person, so much so that he was known as
Nafs-U-Zakiyar the "pu^e Soul". As he was considered the head of the
house of Imanj Hassan (A.S) people nominated him as their Caliph.

Saffah and Mansoor were not happy about this but for the time being
they kept quiet, waiting for the right time to come for them to act, and
put forward their owtt claim to the throne.

**3). Muhammad Bin Al Bin Abdullah Bin Abbas (The Abbasides) and his
sons:**

Muhammad was the grandson of the famous Ibne Abbas, the, companion and
cousin of the Prophet (S. A.W.W). He saw the opportunity of seizing the
Caliphate for himself using the name of the "Ahlul-BaiT as away to gain
support from the masses. The followers of Ahlul- Bait were fooled into
believing that Muhammad was fighting to return the rightful Imams to
power.

Little did they suspect that Muhammad had his own hidden agenda of
reserving the Caliphate for himself and his children. He started his
campaign against the Ummayade administration, gaining support day by
day.

However, before he could succeed in his mission, he died in AH 125. At
his death bed he appointed his sons Ibrahim, Abdullah Abu Abbas (later
on surnamed As-Saffah), and Abdullah Abu Jaffer (latter surnamed
Al-Mansoor) as his successors, one after the other.

They continued with their mission with care and caution using the
watch-word "the rights of the Ahlul Bait-People of the House."

The effort of the Abbaside propaganda was helped by the unfit ruler who
succeeded Hisham: Walid II Walid II.

Walid II, in the words of Amir Ali, was of "a fickle temperament and
debased nature which often broke forth in cruel deeds." The cruelty with
which he got Yahya, the son of Zaid killed and his body hung on the
cross, made him very unpopular.

According to Amil Ali: 'Thefateof Yahya created a great sensation in
Khorasan and accelerated the downfall of the Ommeyads... and when Abu
Muslim stood forth as the 'Avengor of the House' they (the people)
flocked to his standard dressed in black, which hereforth became the
Abbaside color..."

Besides these three personalities from among Bani Hashim who had their
eyes on the Caliphate, there were two other personalities who could not
have a direct claim to the Caliphate but who could play the part of
"King-Makers" because of their military strength and skills. These two
personalities were Abu Muslim and Abu Salma.

**Abu Muslim:**

He was native of Isphahan (Iran) and joined the services of Muhammad
Bin Ali Bin Ibne Abas. Because of his organizational skills, he was
incharge of raising the support for the ABBASIDE movement in Khorasan.

He was very successful at his job which became easier at the death of
Hisham and the coming to power of Walid II, as his already been noted.

The martyrdom of Zaid's son, Yahya, offered Abu Muslim yet another
golden opportunity. Young Yahya's martyrdom aroused a lot of sympathy
for him and anger for the Ummayades. Abu Muslim seized this opportunity
and at that very moment came out in the open to oppose the Ummayade's
floundering administration, capitalizing on the sympathy of the
people.

Nasra, the governor of Khorasan was busy putting down other uprisings
in the West, and in Yemen. His garrisons were therefore weak and
defenseless. Soon he lost to Abu Muslim who was now in complete control
of Merv-(Iran).

**Abu Salma Hafs Bin Sulaiman al Kahllal:**

Bakayr Bin Maham was a sympathizer of the Ahlul Bayt and was part of
the Abbaside propaganda machinery in Kufa. On his death, he appointed
his son-in law Abu Salma Hafs to take his place.

According to TABARI, Abu Salma then traveled to Khorasan where he was
welcomed and given a portion of cKhums' collected from the Shias of
Khorasan. He was in constant touch with Ibrahim Bin Al Abbas who was in
Syria. His designation was "the vizier of the descendants of the
Prophet."

Although he was in service of Ibrahim, when the opportunity arose for
the seizure of power from Ummayades, he turned to Imam Jaffer Sadiq
(A.S). He sent a note inviting Imam 10 present himself to be crowned "as
the Caliph" Imam (A.S) didn't even open the note; he burnt it and told
the messenger to tell Abu Salma what he saw.

Abu Salma had no choice but to support Saffah's claim to the
Caliphate.


