Why Did Imam Sadiq (a.s) Turn Down the Opportunity To Accept the Caliphate?
===========================================================================

Whereas others saw only the political opportunity in the form of a ripe
fruit ready to be picked from the tree, Imam Sadiq A.S) saw yet another
opportunity:

the educational one which was better than the political one in more
than one way. He decided to go for the educational opportunity. To fully
understand Imam’s choice, we have to consider the consequences of those
who went for the political opportunity.

**Consequences:**

• Zaid Bin Ali Bin Husain.

He was betrayed by the people of Iraq. Whereas over 15,000 people
pledged to support him, when the actual time for support came only a few
came to help him. He was brutally killed and his body was exposed to
untold humiliation.

His son Yahya, was hunted down like a fugitive until when he, too, was
callously killed. The fate of Zaid and his son Yahya made Imam Sadiq
(A.S.) weep for several days. If only Zaid had heeded Imam Sadiq’s
advice of not seeking the end of the Ummayade oppression through
uprising.

• Muhammad Bin Abdullah Bin Hasan Mussanah Bin Hasan (A.S.):

Imam Sadiq’s refusal to raise a claim on the Caliphate, paved way for
Muhammad Bin Hasan to do that instead. In the earlier stage of the
revolution against the Ummayades, Saffah and Mansoor were amongst those
who recognized his claim and paid their allegiance to him.

However, they did so only out of convenience. They were interested in
acquiring the Caliphate for themselves but were waiting for the right
opportunity to do so. This opportunity came in 132 AH when Saffah, with
the help of Abu Muslim, declared himself the Caliph in Kufa. Mohammed
Bin Abdullah was left out in the cold!

When Mansoor succeeded his brother as Caliph in 136 AH, he took one
more step against the progeny of the Prophet (S.A.W.W.). Remembering the
earlier days of the revolution and the commitment that he had made to
Muhammad Bin Abdullah, he thought it unsafe to let Muhammed live.

Before Mansoor could do anything to Mm, Muhammad and his younger
brother Ibrahim escaped to Medina and Basra respectively. Mansoor sent
his army first to Medina.

Muhammad fought courageously but he was killed. Mansoor then sent his
soldiers to fight Ibrahim, There, too, Monsoor ended up the uprising by
getting Ibrahim killed. He then sent Ibrahim's head to his father who
had been imprisoned in Kufa by Mansoor. This was in the year 145 AH.

Muhammad's son, Abdullah, had earlier gone to the governor of Sindh,
Omar Bin Hafs Al-Sufri, to seek his support for his father.

When the news of the martyrdom of Muhammad reached the governor of
Sindh, he sent Abdullah to a nearby king who had agreed to take the
young man under his protection. However, Mansoor sent his forces that
finally killed Abdullah. This was in the year 152AH.

Mansoor was not yet satisfied. In the words of Amir Ali: "Mansoor now
vented his rage on Medina and Basra. Many notables in Basra who had
joined Ibrahim were caught and executed.

Their houses were rased to the ground; their dategroves cut down. In
Medina, the properties of Bani Hasan and Bani Husain were confiscated...
He even threatened with death the venerable Imam Jafifer as Sadiq for
asking for the release of his properties. He threw into prison Imam Abu
Hanifa and had Imam Malik cruelly flogged..."

• Sons of Muhammad Bin AH Bin Abdullah Bin Abbas:

Muhammad himself died before the revolution. His eldest son, Ibrahim,
was living in Palestine. Marwan Al- Hammar, the last Caliph from the
Ummayades, had him killed oti the grounds that the latter was in contact
with Abu Muslim, the rebel of Khorasan.

Abu Abbas, who became the first Caliph from th^House of Abbas, and his
brother Mansoor, had to adopt some very cruel measures to retrain their
rulership. Abu Abbas shed so much blood that he became known as SAFFAH,
meaning "the Shedder of Blood". Abu Jaffer exceeded even Saffah in his
cruelties.

Despite the fact that Imam Sadiq (A.S) had kept himself totally away
from the movement to over throw the Ummayades and therefore had no
interest in the caliphate, nonetheless, Saffah had suspicions that the
Imam (A.S) could be a political rival. He therefore summoned the Imam
(A.S.) to Kufa, but having no evidence at all to prove Imam's
involvement in matters of statecraft, he let the Imam (A.S) go free, •
Abu Jaffer:

The younger brother of Saffah, and who later assumed the mane "Mansoor"
(the victorious one), succeeded his brother in 136 AH. So as to keep the
Caliphate safe from his rivals, he went after them all.

As we have seen before, he had Muhammad Nafs-U-Zakiyya killed and his
entire family destroyed. Feanng that other members from the progeny of
Imam Hasan (A,S) would raise their heads against his administration to
avenge the murder of Nafs-UZakiyya, Mansoor declared a war on each
member of Imam Hasan's progeny. Thousand of innocent members from the
progeny of the Prophet were thus killed mercilessly.

Tabari; the famous Sunni historian, describes one such incident that
gives us an impression of the extent of cruelty Mansoor had to practice
to remain the Caliph.

Tabari reports that when Mansoor was about to leave for Mecca where he
had expected to retire, he called his niece and sister-in-law (Mehdi's
wife) Rytha (who also was Saffah daughter), and gave her a key to the
treasury. Then he sought a promise from her that she would open
theireasury only in presence of her husband the new Caliph, after
Mansoor's death.

Accordingly, after Mansoor's death, Rytha, accompanied by her husband,
Mehdi, the new Caliph, went into this room of secrecy. To their shock,
the Caliph and the Queen witnessed "a chamber of horrors."

In the long chamber of treasury was a collection of the corpses of the
great grandchildren of Hazrat Abu Talib, and in their ears were tags on
which were written their genealogies. Mehdi ordered that the corpses be
buried, and the treasury be pulled down.

**• Abu Salma:**

His position was "the Vizier of the Ahlul Bayt." He invited Imam Sadiq
(A. S) to accept the Caliphate. He might have been genuine in this offer
and might have truly wished to see Imam Sadiq (A.S) be the Caliph.
However, he overestimated his strength and underestimate the treachery
and evilness of Saffah and Mansoor.

Hardly did he guess that Saffah, Mansoor and Abu Muslim, who outwardly
treated him with honor and respect, were behind his back, planning to
kill him. Tabari records vividly the plot that was being hatched to kill
Abu Salma.

Saffah wrote secretly to Abu Muslim of his fears pertaining to Abu
Salma ind instructed him to get rid of Abu Salma. Saffah invited Abu
Salma to his palace and kept him occupied till late at night and then
let him go. On his way home, Abu Salma was attacked by Abu Mulsim's
hit-man and killed. The depth of Abu Salma was then blamed on the
Khwarjees.

Imagine what would have been the position of Imam sadiq (A.S) had he
accepted Caliphate on the strength of the word to Abu Salma.

**• Abu Muslim:**

Both Saffah and Mansoor knew that without the military help of Abu
Salma and Abu Muslim, they could not end the Uminayade ruler ship.

They also knew that so far as Abu Salma and Abu Muslim lived, there
could not be complete freedom for the Abbaside Caliphs, to rule as they
wished. The Abbaside brothers therefore had their own hidden agenda:
First to use both Abu Salma's and Abu Muslim's services to remove the
Ummayade dynasty, then through craft and treachery to remove from the
scene both Abu Salma and Abu Muslim.

Abu Salma, as we have already seen, was the first one to go. Abu
Muslim's life was spread up to the moment when he finally defeated
Marwan al-Hammer at the Battle of the Zab in 132 AH.

With the final collapse of the Ummayade rulership and the murder of
Marwan, Saffah and Mansoor turned their eyes on Abu iVtulsim. Before
Saffah could act against Abu Muslim, he died in 136 AH. Mansoor took
over the Caliphate arid his first action was to prepare to kill Abu
Muslim.

In 132 AH, Abu Mulsirn had just put down the rebellion at Nasibin,
Syria and was heading back to his station at Khorasan (Merv).

Mansoor requested him to pay him a visut at his court in Baghdad to
advise him on important maters of state. Flattered by such royal
gesture, Abu Muslim visited Mansoor. Mansoor got Abu Muslim arrested and
killed in his very presence. His body was then dumped into the River
Euphrates.

Thus ended the life of one who was key to the demise of the Ummayade
dynasty and the rise of the Abbaside Kingship. • Abu Jaffer (Mansoor)
therefore came out to be the real beneficiary of the revolution whose
successful initiation and completion was the work of many adventurous
people, most important of whom were Zaid, Muhammad Nafs-U-Zakiya, Abu
Salma, Abu Muslim all of whom benefited but little form their efforts.

However, even for Mansoor, the success was but limited. To come to
power and remain at the helm of power, he had to commit so many
atrocious acts and to spill the blood of so many innocent people.

Admittedly, by his efforts the Abbaside dynasty was brought to power
and continued to flourish through repression; it finally came to an end
in 656 AH.

As a matter of fact, the end of the Abbasi dynasty, by the account of
some historian, had ended earlier; in the words of Hamza Isfahani the
Abbaside rulcrship ended in 921 A.D(636 A.H)in the 13th year of the
reign of Mustansir. Robert Payne comments "for more than two hundred
years the pages of history were to be littered with the twitching
fragments of its course."

In light of the negative consequences for all those who went for the
political opportunity vis-a-vis seizing the Caliphate, we can appreciate
the wisdom behind Imam Sadiq's rejection of this option, and his
determination to build his strategy for change on the shoulders of the
education option that we have seen in chapter 2.

**Conclusion:**

During the times of Imam Jaffer Sadiq (A.S), the political situation
was such that the Muslim masses were no longer ready to accept the cruel
rulership of the Ummayades. They had seen the virtuous lives of the
Imams from the household of the Prophet (S.A.W.W) and were prepared to
return them to power.

Unfortunately, there were some people who looked at this situation
differently. Their intention was to overthrow the Ummayades and seize
power for themselves. The mastermind behind tin s movement was Muhammad
Bin AJi Abbasi and his three sons:

fbrahim, Abu Abbas (Saffah) and Abu Jaffer (Mansoor).

Imam Sadiq (A.S) saw this plot clearly and therefore took a very
different approach. Being the representative of Allah on this earth, he
could not and did not want to engage himself in acts of treachery,
cruelty and duplicity, which were the keys to obtain and ep the
Caliphate.

If he truly wanted to stay in power he would be required to stoop as
low as did Saffah and Mansoor. Even then the Imam (A.S.) knew that the
benefits of such evil acts were short lived.

Imam Sadiq (A.S.) therefore chose another opportunity that was hidden
behind the fall and decline of the Ummayades on the one hand and the
rise of the Abbasides on the other hand.

During this period of political turmoil, Imam (A.S.) invested his time
and energy in the establishment of an educational institution of a
magnitude that none had seen before and through it to propagate the true
massage of Islam that had hitherto remained in obscurity.

The best that the Abbasides got was a rulership of about 600 years;
that was at its peak during the times of Mansoor, Haroon and Mamoon and
ended pitifully in with the sacking of Baghdad by Hulagu in 1258 A.D.

On the other hand, Imam Sadiq’s approach strengthened the religion of
Allah and opened up venues of knowledge and learning that continue to
benefit humanity in general and Muslims in particular till this day.


