PREFACE
=======

This age is the space & electronic age, & man is leaping towards stars &
into the depth of this vast universe. But did one ever think who are
those personalities arround whom this universe spins & by one small
finger gesture they split the moon apart. Who are those who commanded
the stars, rocks, mountains, air, water & all the natural & supernatural
ingredients of universe & over & above that the heavens & the entire
metaphysical world.

Those who truely claimed to be the city of knowledge & learning & whose
chest were brimful with wisdom. But then they would not find anyone
capable anough to imbibe & digest it.

Alas, there were only a very few who could take in just a bit of what
they had.

And so that bit taken was just a tiny fraction of what they possessed
has today developed into this huge & gigantic show of knowledge industry
& technology by man.

Of course, it took man centuries to develop the little amount of
knowledge he had recieved.

It was only possible through some highly callibred & genious persons
like Jabbir bi Hayyan the father of todays sciences, Alberuni, Ibne sina
the father of medicine, Abul Haisam & some others who were all the
pupils of the household of Prophet MohammadfP.8.fI.HJ.

So briefly speaking they as the torch bearer & flag holders of knowledge
& learning picked up a drop from the mighty & gigantic ocean of
knowledge, (the city of knowledge & his descendents) & passed it on to
the coming generations for further consideration, contemplation,
research, investigation & ellaboration,

Now, that man has entered the space age he looks back to the real source
of his modern develpments & progresses,

And only then the honest researcher humanists, philoshpers & thinder
like ZHOL Laboom, DENOURT, LORA WAKSIA WAGLARI came to admit the bare &
plain facts, French thinker ZHOL LABOOM says in the book "the detail of
verses" ",knowledge & learning came to our hand from the Muslims"

Renouned orientalist Denort said "It is obligatory for us to admitt that
Physical sciences, astronmy, Philosphy & mathematics which reached their
zenith in Europe are mostly from the beneficiencc of Quranic learning,"

Thus it becomes inevietable to recognise those upon whome this sarcred
book of knowledge & wisdom was revelated, & those are its heir up to
this day.

And can not find a single soul in the universe except Mohammad(P.B.U.H.)
& his rousehold her daughter, the gracious & magnanimous Fatima(A.S),
his cousin Ali(A.S) the grand, splendid & sublime personality known as
the gate of the city of Prophet's knowledge & the eleven Imams who are
his descendents & progeny.

These fourteen channels of knowledge & wisdom are linked up with
Allah(S.w.T) so their knowledge is devine knowledge.

Even today their effects, such as Nehjul balaghah, speach of
Fatima(s.w.A) SAHEEFA E SAJJADIA, SAHEEFA E ALVIA & frame

work of social, moral, etheticul, logical educational, economical norms
& standards for humanity with which it can put a curb & restraint upon
the various evils, vices & misfortunate catastrophes like war, famine,
destruction, illitracy, disease & annihilation. Humanity by curbing the
ever growing lawlessness, & oppression can turn this. world full of
misery into a glorious heaven with all the thinkable & possible
comforts, joys, fraternity & felicitations.

To sum up, the need of introducing & materialising the aspirations of
the holy Prophet of Islam & his progeny, has grown multiply in this age.
The need to translate, propagate & spread their mission of peace &
tranquillity.

So this book is an effort towards this end. Although with its small
volume & limited boundaries it can just be called a symbol & indicator
for the reseachers & a guidline for them to proceed ahead & discover the
genuine & natural phenomenon of the metaphysics & the highway to the
devine light leading to eternal prosperity.

It contains 560 Hadieths which covers many dimensions of the human life
&' for those seeking solution to the today's, world problem, it is a
guide.

Yet there is need to probe into the rest of the Hadieths through
strenous efforts.

As already mentioned this knowledge is 'a beneficience, & benevolence
equally for those in the East or west whether they are white, or black,
yellow or red.

I earnestly pray to Almighty Allah to give us the courage, strength &
sincerity to gather up the I gems from the heritage of
MohammadfP.B.tI.lf) &' his I house hold.

And to put that into practice.

I have put in sincere effort to do the job of translating these
Hadieths.

But it was not an easy thing to do.

Since, :کلام الامام امام الکلام

The speach of the leader (Imam) is the Imam (leader) of all speaches.

But only with their help, &' affection could this job be completed.

Any helping suggestions in improving the short commings of translation
including Islamic terminologe will be appreciated.

JAVED IQBAL QAZILBASH

SEMINERY OF QUM


