THE ELEVENTH INFALLIBLE: NINETH IMAM HAZRAT JAWAD (A.S) & HIS FORTY DISCOURSES
==============================================================================

ELEVENTH INFALLIBLE HAZRAT JAWAD(A.S)
-------------------------------------

Name: MOHAMMED

Renouned Title: JAWAD, TAQI(A.S)

Sub Title: ABU JAFFER

Father & Mother: HAZRAT REZA(A.S) KHAIZRAN*(S.W.A)*

Time & Place of Birth: 10th of Rajab 193 Hijrah in Medina Time & Place
of: End of Ziqadah

Martyrdom: Year 220 lunar Hijrah at the age of 25 years by the effect of
Poison given to him by the order of Motasim Abbasi through Umul Fazl
(his wife) &. the daughter of Mamoon. Martyred at Baghdad.

Tomb: City of Kazmain near Baghdad. Life Duration: Two parts

1. Seven years before Imaate

2. 17 Years after commencments of Imamate coincident with the Government
of two Taghoots (devils) Mamoon &. Motasim the seventh &. Eight Abbasade
caliphs.

His active Imamate Started at the age of seven &. he was martyred at 25.

<p dir="rtl">
اربعون حديثاً عن الامام محمد التقی عليه السلام
----------------------------------------------
</p>

1- مَن وَثِقَ بِاللهِ أَراهُ السُّرُورَ، وَمَن تَوَّکَّل عَلَيهِ کَفاهُ
الأُمُورَ، وَالثِّقَة بِاللهِ حِصنٌ لايَتَحَصَّنُ فيهِ إِلاَّ مُؤمِن
أَمِين وَالتَّوّکُّلُ عَلَی اللهِ نَجاةٌ مِن کُلِّ سُوءٍ وَحِرزٌ مِن
کُلِّ عَدُوٍّ، وَالدِّينُ عِزٌّ، وَالعِلمُ کَنزٌ، وَالصَّمتُ نُورٌ،
وَغايَةٌ الزُّهدِ الوَرَعُ، وَلا هَدمَ لِلّدينِ مِثلَ البِدَعِ، وَلا
اَفسَدَ لِلرَّجلِ مِنَ الطَّمَعِ، وَبِالرّاعی تَصلَحُ الرَّعِيَّةُ
وَبِالدُّعاءِ تُصرَفُ البَليَّةُ... (اعيان الشيعة طبع الجديد ج2 ص35)

2- مَن أَمَّل فاجِراً کانَ أَدنی عُقُوبَتِهِ الحِرمانُ. (إحقاق الحق ج12
ص436)

3- اَوحَی اللهُ اِلی بَعضِ الأنبِياءِ: اَمّا زُهدُکَ فِی الدُّنيا
فَتُعَجّلُکَ الرّاحَة،وَاَمّا انقِطاعُکَ اِلَیَّ فَيُعَزِّزُکَ بِي،
وَلکِن هَل عادَيتَ لي عَدُوّاً وَوالَيتَ لي وَلِيّاً؟ (تحف العقول ص456)

Forty Discourses from Imam Mohammad Taqi Al-Jawad (A.S)
-------------------------------------------------------

1- The one who trusts upon Allah, He shows him pleasure &. felicity
(makes him happy). And the one who depends upon Allah, He suffices the
matters of his life. And the trust upon Allah is a fort where in nobody
except a trustworthy faithful gets accomodated &. placed.

And trust in Allah is the salvation from all evils &. safety from all
the enemies. And religion is the source of honour, &. knowledge is
treasure. And silence is a light. And the apex &. climax of abstinence
is avoiding sin. &. temperance. and fear of God.

And there is no destruction for religion such as innovaton (heresy).

And there is nothing most spoiling &. decaying for man than greed. And
the people (matters) are corrected &. set right by the ruler. And the
suplication moves away (deviates) the calamities &. disasters. (AYAN U
SHIA (modem print) VOL 4, P 35)

2. The one who makes a transgressor hopeful, the least of his punishment
is deprivation. (EHQAQ UL HAQ VOL 12, P 436)

3. Allah revelated to some of the Prophets: Never theless, your piety in
the World makes you easy &. comfortable.

More over, your disconnecting from the world &. turning toward Me makes
you honourable by Me. But have you ever made anyone your enemy for Me.
And made a friend for Me? (ie for my sake)? (TUHFUL AQOOL P 456).

4- مَن شَهِدَ أَمراً فَکَرِهَهُ کانَ کَمَن غابَ عَنهُ، وَمَن غابَ عَن
أَمرٍ فَرَضِيَهُ کانَ کَمَن شَهِدَهُ. (تحف القول ص456)

5- لَو سَکَتَ الجاهِلُ مَا اختَلَفَ النّاسُ.(احقاق الحق ج2 ص432)

6- کَفی بِالمَرءِ خِيانَةً أَن يَکُونَ أَميناً لِلخَوَنَةِ. (اعيان
الشيعة(الطبع الجديد) ج2 ص36)

7-  مَن أَصغی إِلی ناطِقِ فَقَد عَبَدَهُ،فَإن کانَ النّاطِقُ عَنِ اللهِ
فَقَد عَبَدَ اللهَ،وَ إِن کانَ النّاطِقُ يَنطِقُ عَن لِسانِ إِبليسَ
فَقَد عَبَدَ إِبليسَ. (تحف العقول ص456)

8- تَأخِيرُ التَّوبَةِ اغتِرارٌ.وَطُولُ التَّسويفِ حَيرَةٌ.وَالاِ
عِتلالُ عَلَی اللهِ هَلَکَةٌ، وَالاِصرارُ عَلی الذَّنبِ أَمنٌ لِمَکرِ
اللهِ «وَلا يَأمَنُ مَکرَ اللهِ إلاّ القَومُ الخاسِرُونَ». (تحف العقول
ص456)

9- ما عَظُمَت نِعَمُ اللهِ عَلی أَحَدٍ إِلاّ عَظُمَت إِلَيهِ حَوائِجُ
النّاسِ، فَمَن لَم يَحتَمِل تِلکَ المَؤُونَةَ عَرَّضَ تِلکَ النِّعمَةَ
لِلزَّوالِ. (احقاق الحق ج12 ص428)

10- أَربَعُ خِصالٍ تُعِينُ المَرءَ عَلَی العَمَلِ: الصِّحَّةُ وَالغِنی
وَالعِلمُ وَالتَّوفيقُ. (احقاق الحق ج12 ص436)

11- وَاعلَم أنَّکَ لَن تَخلُوَمِن عَينِ الله،فَانظُر کَيفَ تَکُونُ. (تحف
العقول ص455)

4. The peoson who Is present (sees) witnesses a matter & dislikes it is
like the one who is absent about it (hasn't witnessed it) & the person
who is absent (at the occurance) of a matter & Is pleased & approves it
is like someone who has witnessed. (was persent while It occured).
(TUHFUL AQOOL P 456).

5. If the ignoant keeps silent, people would not differ. (EHQAQ UL HAQ,
VOL 12, P 432)

6. It is sufficient for a man's being dishonest that he becomes the
trustee of dishonest ones. (AYAN U SHIA NEW EDmON VOL 2, P 36)

7. The one who lends ear to a speaker he has worshiped him. So if the
speaker is from Allah's side (speaks the word of Allah) then he has
adorned

Allah And if the speaker is speaking from the tongue of satan then he
has worshiped satan. (TUHruL AQOOL P 456).

8. Delaying repentence Is a deception & prolonging the period before
making repentence is an amazementful wandering. And adducing pretexts &
making excuses before Allah is an annihilation. And insisting upon sin
is being (considering oneself) safe from the scheme of Allah. And no one
ever thinks himself safe from the scheme of Allah except the community
of loosers. (TUHFUL AQOOL P 456)

9. The beneficiences & benevolences of Allah do not become great
(abundant) for a person except it that the needs of the people toward
him become greater (in number) so the one who does not bear (the burden
of) those needs, puts his beneficiences into annihilation. (EHQAQ AL
HAQ, VOL 12, P 428)

10. Four qualities assistt one upon practising, health &

wealth & knowledge & devine grace. (EHQAQ UL HAQ, VOL 12, P 436)

11. Do know that you are not away from the sight of

Allah, So see to it that in what condition you are living (sinfulness or
piety). (TUHFUL AQOOL P 455).

12- أَلعامِلُ بِالظُّلمِ وَالمُعِينُ عَلَيهِ وَالرّاضِي شُرَکاءُ. (احقاق
الحق ج12 ص432)

13- مَن استَغنی بِاللهِ افتَقَرَ النّاسُ إِلَيهِ، وَمَن اتَّقی اللهَ
أَحَبَّهُ النّاسُ. (احقاق الحق ج12 ص429)

14- ثَوابُ النّاسِ بَعدَ الثَوابِ اللهِ، وَرِضَا النّاسِ بَعدَ رِضَا
اللهِ. (بحارالانوار ج78 ص360)

15- أَلثِّقَةٌ بِاللهِ تَعالی ثَمَنٌ لِکُلِّ عالٍ،وَسُلَّمٌ إِلی کُلِّ
عالٍ. (بحارالانوار ج78 ص364)

16- کَيفَ يُضَيَّعُ مَنِ اللهُ کافِلُهُ؟ وَکَيفَ يَنجُو مَنِ اللهُ
طالِبُهُ؟ (احقاق الحق ج12 ص436)

17- اِنّا لا تَنالُ مَحَبَّةَ اللهِ اِلاّ بِبُغضِ کَثيرٍمِنَ النّاسِ.
(بحارالانوار ج78 ص363)

18- وَالحِلمُ لِباسُ العالِمِ فَلا تَعرَيَنَّ مِنهُ. (بحارالانوار ج78
ص363)

19- وَالعُلَماُء في اَنفُسِهِم خَانَةٌ إِن کَتَمُوا النَّصِيحَةَ،إِن
رَأَواتائِهاً ضالاً لا يَهدُونَهُ،أَومَيِّتاً لاُ يُحيُونَهُ.
(بحارالانوار ج78 ص361)

12. The one who commits aggression &. tyranny &. the one who helps him
upon it &. the one who is pleased over it, are all party &. participants
in it. (EHQAQ UL HAQ, VOL 12, P 432)

13. The person who gets wealthy by Allah's (help) people will be needy
towards him &. the one who gaurds himself against Allah's forbidden acts
people will love him. (EHQAQ UL HAQ, VOL 12, P 429)

15. Trust in Allah is the price of every valueable commodity &. the
stairs to every lofty place. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 364)

16. How does he, whose guardian is Allah, get perished? And how can he,
who is being persued by Allah, get salvation. (EHQAQ UL HAQ, VOL 12, P
436)

17. Indeed, we do not find access to the love of Allah except by facing
the enemity of lot many people. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 363)

18. And forebearance is the dress of scholar so do not get yourself
dressed off, it. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 362)

19. And if the scholars conceal &. hide their admonition inside
themselves &. seeing the spiritually dead &. gone astray they do not
revive &. give life &. guide them then they are dishonest in their
interiors. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 361)

20- ...فَإِنّي أُوصِيکَ بِتَقوَی اللهِ، فَإنَّ فيهَا السَّلامَةَ مِنَ
التَّلَفِ، وَالغَنَيمَةَ  فِي المُنقَلَبِ، إنَّ اللهَ عَزَّوَجَلَّ يَقي
بِالتَّقوی عَنِ العَبدِها عَزَبَ عَنهُ عَقلُهُ، وَيُجلي بِالتَّقوي عَنهُ
عَماهُ وَجَهلَهُ وَبِاتَّقوی نَجَاه نُوحٌ وَمَن مَعَهُ فِي
السَّفينَةِ،وَصالِحٌ وَمَن مَعَهُ مِنَ الصّاعِقَةِ، وَبِالتَّقوی فازَ
الصّابِرُونَ... (بحارالانوار ج78 ص358)

21- إِيّاکَ وَمُصاحَبَةَ الشِّرِّيرِ، فَإنَّهُ کَالسَّيفِ يَحسُنُ
مَنظَرُهُ وَيَقبُحُ أَثَرُهُ. (بحار ج78 ص364)

22- قَد عاداکَ مَن سَتَرَعَنکَ الرُّشدَ اتَّبَاعاً لمَا تَهواهُ. (بحار
ج78 ص364)

23- عِزُّالمُؤمِنِ في غِناهُ عَنِ النّاسِ. (بحار ج78 ص365)

24- مَن عَمِلَ عَلی غَيرِ عِلمٍ، ما يُفسِدُ أَکثَرُ مِمّا يُصلِحُ. (بحار
ج78 ص364)

25- مَن أطاعَ هَواهُ أَعطی عَدُوَّهُ مُناهُ. (بحار ج78 ص364)

26- أَلمُؤمِنُ يَحتاجُ إِلی ثَلاثِ خِصالٍ:تَوفيق مِنَ اللهِ،وَواعِظٍ مِن
نَفسِهِ، وَقَبُولٍ مِمَّن يَنصَحُهُ. (بحار ج78 ص358)

20. So 1 commend you to have fear of Allah (guarding against sins)
since, there lies in it the safety &: security from perishment &:
annihilation. And it is benefitial in confrontation &: change of
circumstances. Allah (S.W.T) sustains that thing for man in which he is
driven away by his mind through his virtue of piety. And enlightens the
darkness, blindness, &: ignorance of His servant's mind by his piety.
And saved Noah &: his companions in the arc (ship) by &: through piety.
And saved Saleh &: his companions from the lightening &: those having
patience are saved &: secured by piety. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 358)

21. Beware of the company of evil person since he is like a sword which
is apparantly beautiful looking &: it's effect is bad (in spilling blood
on the way of falsehood.) (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 364)

22. The one who conceals the (way of) prosperity &. progress from you
has done enemity to you. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 364)

23. The honour of faithful lies in his needless from the people.

(BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 365)

24. The one who acts without knowedge destroys &. ruins more than
rectifies. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 364)

25. The one who obeys his lustful desire &: passions has helped his
enemy reach (achieve) his wish. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 364)

26. The faithful needs three qualities, the grace &: succour of Allah.

And an admonitioner &: preacher of his own interior. ~ And accepting the
word of the one who admonishes him. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 358)

27- أَلعفافُ زِينَةُ الفَقرِ، وَالشُّکرُ زِينَةُّ الغِنی، وَالصَّبرُ
زِينَةُ البَلاءِوَالتَّواضُعُ زِينَةُ الحَسَبِ، وَالفَصاحَةُ زِينَةُ
الکَلامِ وَالحِفظُ زينَةُ الرِّوايَةِ، وَخَفضُ الجَناحِ زِينَةُ العِلمِ.
وَحُسنُ الأَدَبِ زِينَةُ العَقلِ،وَبَسطُ الوَجهِ زينَةُ الکَرَمِ،
وَتَرکُ المَنِ زِينَةُ  المَعرُوفِ، وَالخُشُوعُ زِينَةُالصَّلاةِ،
وَالتَّقلُّلُ زِينَةُ القَناعَةِ، وَتَرکُ مالا يَعني زِينَةُ الوَرَع.
(احقاق الحق ج12 ص434)

28- اِتَّئد تُصِب أَوتَکَد. (بحار ج78 ص364)

29- إِنَّ إِخوانَ الثِّقَةِ ذَخائِرُ،بَعضُهُم لِبَعضٍ. (بحار ج78 ص362)

30-لا يَنقَطِعُ المَزيدُ مِنَ اللهِ حَتّی يَنقَطِعَ الشُّکرُ مِنَ
العِبادَ. (تحف العقول ص457)

31- أَهلُ المَعرُوفِ إِلَی اصطِناعِهِ أَحوَجُ مِن أَهلِ الحاجَةِ
إِلَيهِ،لِأَنَّ لَهُم أَجرَهُم وَفَخرَهُ وَذِکرَهُ،فَمَا اصطَنَعَ
الرَّجُلُ مِن مَعرُوفٍ  فَإنَّما يَبدَأ فيهِ بِنَفسِهِ. (احقاق الحق ج12
ص437)

32- ثَلاثُ يَبلُغنَ بِالعَبدِ رِضوانَ اللهِ تَعالی: کَثرَةُ
الاِستِغفارِ، وَلِينُ الجانِبِ، وَکَثرَةُ الصَّدَقَةِ. وَثَلاثُ مَن
کُنَّ فيهِ لَم يَندَم: تَرکُ العَجَلَةِ وَالمَشورَة، وَالتَّوکُّلُ عَلَی
اللهِ عِندَ العَزِم. (احقاق الحق ج12 ص438)

27. Modesty is the decoration of poverty &. thankgiving Is the
decoration of am uence &. wealth. And patience &. endurance is the
ornament &. decoration of calamity &. distress. And humility is the
decoration of lineage. And eloquence is the decoration of speach; &.
committing to memory is the decoration of tradition. And bowing the
shoulders is the decoration of knowledge. And the decency &. good morale
is the decoration of mind. And smiling face is the decoration of
munifence &. generosity. And not boasting of doing favour is the
decoration of good deed. And humility is the decoration of service. And
spending less is the decoration of contentment. And abondoning the
meaningless &. unnecessary things is the decoration of abstention &.
fear of Allah. (AHQAQ UL HAQ VOL 12, P 434)

28. Be firm so as to reach the goal or get neared to it. (BIHAR UL ANWAR
VOL 78, P 364)

29. Indeed the trustworthy &. reliable brothers are the provisions &.
reshositores for each other. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P 362)

30. The suply of enhancement &. abundance (of beneficience) from Allah
does not get cut off till the thankgiving of servants gets disconnected.
(TUHf1JL AQOOL, P 457)

31. The people of good deeds are more needy towards practising them then
those who have the need of them. Because they (good doers) have the
reward, pride &. memories of those deeds for themselves &. to their
credit. So the man who performs a good deed first of all it's, benefit
reaches his own self. (EHQAQ UL HAQ VOL 12, P 437)

32. There are three (acts, which make the servants reach the good
pleasure &. approval of Allah

1. Plentifulness of repentence.

2. Soft naturedness &. forbearance.

3. Abundance of alms giving.

And thefe are three acts the doer of which does not repent.

1. Not making hurry.

2. Taking advice.

3. Trusting Allah while making decision. (EHQAQ UL HAQ, VOL 12, P 438)

33- مَن هَجَرَ المُدارَةَ قارَبَهُ المَکرُوهُ. (بحار ج78 ص364)

34- مَن لَم يَعرِفِ المَوارِدَ أَعيَتهُ المَصادِرُ. (بحار ج78 ص364)

35-مَنِ انقادَ إِلَی الطُّمَأنينَةِ قَبلَ الخِبرَةِ فَقَد عَرَّض نَفسَهُ
لِلهَلَکَةِ وَلِلعاقِبَةِ وَالمُتعِبَةِ.

(بحار ج78 ص364)

36- راکِبُ الشَّهَواتِ لا تَقالُ عَثرَتُهُ. (بحارالانوار ج78 ص364)

37- نِعمَةٌ لاتَشکَرُ کَسَيِّئَةٍ لا تُغفَرُ. (بحار ج78 ص365)

38- وَالعافِيَةُ أَحسَنُ عَطاءٍ. (أعيان الشيعه الطبع الجديد ج2 ص36)

39- لاتُعالِجُوا الأَمرَ قَبلَ بُلُوغِهِ فَتَندَمُوا،وَلا يَطُولَنَّ
عَلَيکُمُ الأَمَدُ فَتَقسُو قُلُوبِکُم،وَارحَمُوا ضُعَفاءَکُم،
وَاطلُبُوا مِنَ اللهِ الرَّحمَةَ بِالرَّحمَةَ فيهِم. (احقاق الحق ج12
ص431)

40- وَاعلَموُا أنَّ اللهَ تَبارَکَ وَتَعالی الحليَم العَليمَ إنَّما
غَضَبُهُ عَلَی مَن لَم يَقبَل مِنهُ هُداهُ. (احقاق الحق ج12 ص359)

33. The person who abandons conciliation with people so the undesirable
(gloom misery, distress) gets nearer to him. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P
.364)

34. The man who does not know the ways of arrival &. entry the ways of
exit &. exodus will tire &. irk him. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P .364)

35. The one who get satisfied &. contented with a thing before
recognition &. information so he has presented himself to annihilation,
&. a trouble some &. aweful end. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P .364)

36. The one who rides (the horse of) lusty desire his faults &. slips
are irrepairable &. uncompensatiible. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P .364)

37. The boon &. benevolence which is not thanked for is like the sin not
forgiven.  (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P .365)

38. Good state &. sound health is the best providence &. grant of Allah.
(AYAN U SHIA, MODERN PRINT, VOL 2, P .36)

39. Do not make remedy, for, a matter whose time of remedy has not yet
come, for, you shall repent &. bereave and of course the (span) length
of your ages do not grow &. longivate but your hearts get hard.

Be merciful to your weak &. meak one. And seek the mercy of Allah by
having mercy &. beneficience upon them. (EHQAQ UL HAQ, VOL 12, P 4.31)

40. And do know that indeed Allah is the All clement &. All knowing &.
His wrath is upon the one who does not accept His pleasure. And verily
the one who does not accept His grant is refused that. And the one who
does not accept his guidance goes astray. (BIHAR UL ANWAR VOL 78, P
.359)


