FORE WORD
=========

Please pay attention to the following few points which are briefly
described for the sake of studying this book with a greater &' broader
vision.

1. Essentiality of heeedfuiness to the rich culture of Islam.
-------------------------------------------------------------

We are aware that the base &' foundation of the completion, maturity &'
progress of human beings is a school &' culture which must be
constructive, rich &' affluent &' may be capable to guide man in varient
dimensions towards the total &' multi diretional completion &'
prosperity.

Such a school of thought &' culture must definately come from the
Almighty Allah of humanity who is All Knowing. On this account, the only
school &' culture having grown &' produced from the origin of revelation
can be advantagcous, &' conductive particularly the school &' culture
which has reached us from the arena &' sphere of the last &' final
ambassador of Allah' the Prophet of Islam(J".v..4.) & the last guardians
from God & their successors, the in fallible Imams & Hazrat
zahra(£v..4.J& this must certainly be possessing all the excellencies of
gnosis, cognition & completion & will be the eminent of all the other
cultutures & schools.

On this basis it is essential & definately necessary for us to pay deep
& multi dimensional attention & concentrate upon this rich & man
constructing culture & school while proceeding on the way of guidance,
progress & elevation.

And we considering it the practical programme of our life'must embrace
the prosperity of world & Here after in it's light, since we will
definately not find such a rich, plentiful, exhoberent' & movement
creating school of thought & culture any where in the World. And one can
never at all reach the peak of real completion & attain the open &
obvious prosperity through other cultueres.

On this basis the Prophet of Islam(P.B.IIII.) said:

<p dir="rtl">
تذاکرو وتلاقوا وتحدثوا فان الحديث جلاءُ القلوب، ان القلوب لترين کما يرين
السيف وجلاؤها الحديث.
</p>

Confer., & meet & talk to each other because Hadieth polishes the
hearts. No doubt hearts get rusted like the swords & Hadieth is their
polish[^1] .

Essa (removal of that rust).' Essa (chirst)(s.w.A) at the height & sumit
of his speach told the Bani Israel (sons of Israel):

<p dir="rtl">
لا تحدثوا لجهال بالحکمة فتظلموها ولا تمنعوها اهلها فتظلموهم
</p>

Do not inform ignorants about the word of wisdom so that you may have
commited excess (injustice) to those subjects &: do not refuse &:
conceal them from the sage &: wise ones so that you may have commited
injustice &: excess upon them[^2] .

Imam Ali(A.S) as per his wel known saying said.

<p dir="rtl">
ان هذه القلوب اوعية فخيرها اوعاها فاحفظ عنی ما اقول لک
</p>

These hearts are just like utencils so that the best utencil is the one
which secures &: retains more (than others). There fore do secure &:
memo rise what I tell you.

<p dir="rtl">
الناس ثلاثه فعالم ربانی، ومتعلم علی سبيل النجاة وهمج رعاعٌ
</p>

People are three groups I.the Godly scholars 2. the knowledge seekers
(students) who move. on the way towards salvation. 3. silly rabble, mob.

It is understood from these intresting &: attractive traditions that the
culture of Islam should not be confined &: bonded rather it should be
propagated, &: the people of the world be given to learn it's facts by
divulging it through meditation, consideration &: conference., to polish
the hearts out of their rusty condition. Thus if we do not carry it to
those capable we would have done injustice to them', since we will have
deprived.them of the most supreme &: sublime gifts &: presents of the
life completion[^3] .

This also becomes clear that best of the men are those who welcome &
greet the rich & exhoberant Islamic culture, which is mixed up with deep
& profound wisdoms, with an open & absorbent mind, & make it a pattern
for themselves.

As a whole mankind can be divided into three catagories 1. Godly scholar
2. student 3. silly rabble[^4] & mob.

The devine scholar is like an upstanding tree which has raised & upheld
his head towards the sky of completion. The student is like the plant of
lilly lotus which shows its face leaning along that firmly up standing
tree & moves upwards. But the third form of man is like the weeds
growing mear the root & base of that tree having no course to move on.
And it stays along with the dirt of earth some times under that stinking
dirt & gets drowned into the black mud of the pond.

2. The Emphasis of the leaders of Islam about broad casting traditions.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The proagation & broad casting of Islamic learning & culture has an
elevated & lofty place from the Islamic veiw.

Imam Mohammad Baqir(A.S) said. "The alms giving of knowledge is this
that you teach it to the servants of God."

Moawiyyah Bin Ammar says I submitted to Imam Jaffer sadiq(A.s.) ",one of
your states great number of traditions & propagates them among the
people & makes them firm & steady into the hearts of people & your
shias.

And on the other hand, there is a worshiper among your followers (shias)
who is not active in propagating your traditions amid the people like
that (other) man, so which one of them is better?"

Imam sadiq(A.S) said.

الرواية لحديثنا يشدد به قلوب شيعتنا، افضل من الف عابدٍ.[^5]

"That person who propagates our sayings (traditions) & makes the hearts
of our shias steady & firm (with our culture) is better than a thousand
adorers."

Imam Ali ReZa(A.S) said ",Allah may have mercy upon the person who
revives & establshes our affair." A man asked him ",How must one revive
it?

He replied.

يتعلم علومنا ويعلمها الناس.[^6]

"He may learn our knowledges & teach others" 3. A brief consideration of
learning forty

Hadieths. The Prophet of Allah said "

من حفظ امتی اربعين حديثاً تحتاجون اليه من امر دينهم بعثه الله يوم
القيامة فقيهاً عالماً[^7]

" the one from among my ummah who learns by heart forty Haieths, which
they need for their relegion, Allah will resurge & ressurect him (as) a
wise jurispudent on the dooms day".

Four points must be taken into veiw a about this Hadieth.

1. This tradition has been much narrated with a little amount of
difference & variation both by the shia & sunni traditionalists. And
even some say this is a "Mutawatir" widely transmitted tradition. That
is to say it has been so very much narrated that the sure knowledge of
it's being soundly narrated from the infallible Imam(,f.!J is
achieved[^8] .

2. Allama Majlisi (may God have mercy on him) says about the word
"memorising of tradition", mentioned in the above stated Haieth, ",As a
matter of right, memorising (learning hadieth by heart has many grades.
the rewards of them granted are according to the same grades.

One of it's grades & tages is securing & learning the text of the
hadieth, whether thst securing comes about in the memory securing it
from getting perished like preserving it on papers & correction of its
words & reproducing it.

The second grade is learning the text & meanings of forty Hadieths &
contemplation of their minute points & deduction of religious
injunctions & Islamic learnings from them. The third stage is that the
text of those forty Hadieths may be implemented, practiced upon &
secured.

It is quite clear that each of these carry a reward but if all the three
of them are owned by a person' then it will result in getting the
complete reward. There by he says "Getting resurrected as a wise
jurispudent on the resurrection day takes place when all the three
grades or at least two of the later ones are observed[^9] .

3. In many cases, the title of .forty. is the final limit &: border of
completion of those matters. Allama Haj Mirza Hussain Norri reflects',
.By benefitting from correct &: true traditions it becomes evident that
in the process of preserving practice for progress from a stage to a
higher one, forty days or years have an effective &: total effect. There
by, he pointed out forty cases of the completed affairs &: matters
within the border of forty[^10] .

4. Supplementarily, it may not remain unsaid that .forty Hadieths. means
the Hadieths which are a requirement &: need on the course of guidance.
such as the problems of beliefs, jurispudence, politics, &: ethics. As
already mentioned a wise &: complete jurispudent is the one who gets
benefitted &: saturated in varient dimensions of religion from the
knowledge &: practice.

The Present Book
----------------

The text of this book has been compiled under the title of
.FortylHaieths from each of the fourteen infallibles., by the of Islamic
Propagation organisation, the International relations, Turkish Deeptt.
And published &: circulated in 320 pages' of the Rukkai size, in the
year 1360. (.fA.). The compilation of this book by the said organisation
has taken place, with the co-operation & co-working of two dear
excellent

brothers Aqai Fakharuddin ALTAN & Aqai

Mujahidi who are respectable students of the Qum's seminary, as under:

Following the preface, firstly the particulars of each of the fourteen
infallibles are described & then comes the arabic text of the forty
traditions from each infallible with thier references. There after,
those have been translated into Turkish language in the latin scripture.

And this mat hod is quite interesting, attractive & initiative in it
form, that forty sayings of each infallible concerning various affairs &
dispositions, be narrated.

And since it's translation into persian was quite benefitial in making
us aware & acqainted with the rich, wealth & vast moral, ethical,
political, credence, bilief social & economical culture of the family &
house hold of the Prophethood (S.A. W). was a guide to the healthy &
sound way of Islamic life, so steps were taken to get it done. It has
been endevoured that the translation be in the form of sentence to
sentence although on a few occasions it became inevitable for us to
translate fyeely.

This book cosists of 560 Hadieths, arranged in a manner that their
Arabic text & then persian translation has been put forward.

We hope that all of us shallleam constructive, Jsitive & benefitial
lessons from these 'ofound, deep, lofty & dignified words, & take m,
useful, & positive steps in life to bring about Ie purity & betterment
of our souls & the .ciety, by putting them into practice.

Seminary of Qum. Mohammad Mohammadi Ishtehardi.

Summer 1371 (S.H).


