How Does the Quran Present God?
===============================

When we wish to assess the scientific personality and knowledge of a
scholar, we examine his works and subject them to close study.
Similarly, in order to measure the talent, creativity and ability of an
artist to invent original images, we undertake the study of his artistic
production.

In the same way, we ca n al so perceive the attributes and
characteristics of the pure essence of the Creator from the qualities
and orderliness that pervade all phenomena, together with their subtlety
and precision. Thereby, within the limits set by our capacity to know
and perceive, we can become acquainted with God's knowledge, wisdom,
life and power.

If it be a question of complete and comprehensive knowledge of God,
then, of course, we must accept that man's ability to know does not
extent that far. God's characteristics cannot be placed within given
limits, and whatever comparison or simile we offer for them is bound to
be false, for whatever is observable to science and thought in the
natural realm is the work of God and the product of His will and
command, whereas His essence is not part of nature and does not belong
to the category of created beings. Hence, the essence of the divine
being cannot be grasped by man by way of comparison and analogy.

He is, in short, a being for the knowledge of Whose essence no measure
or criterion exists and for the fixing of Whose power, authority and
knowledge, we have no figures or statistics.

Is man, then, too abject and powerless to perceive anything of the
essence and attributes of so elevated a reality? To concede the weakness
of our powers and our inability to attain complete, profound and
comprehensive knowledge of God does not imply that we are deprived of
any form of knowledge, however relative. The orderly pattern of the
universe loudly proclaims His attributes to us, and we can deduce the
power and unlimited creativity of the Lord from the beauty and value of
nature. Phenomena are for us an indication of His unique essence.

Contemplation of the will, consciousness, knowledge and harmony
inherent in the order of being and all the various phenomena of life,
makes it possible for us to perceive that all these qualities-together
with all the other elements that speak of aim, direction and
purpose-necessarily derive from the will of a Creator Who Himself
possesses these attributes before they are reflected in the mirror of
creation.

That which comes to know God and to touch His being is the remarkable
power of thought-a flash which deriving from that pre-eternal source
shone on matter and bestowed on it the capacity of acquiring knowledge
and advancing toward truth. It is within this great divine gift that the
knowledge of God is manifested.

Islam deals with the knowledge of God in a clear and novel way. The
Quran, the fundamental source for learning the worldview of Islam,
applies the method of negation and affirmation to this question.

First, it negated, by means of convincing proofs and indications, the
existence of false gods, because in approaching the transcendent
doctrine of unity, it is necessary first to negate all forms of
pseudo-divinity and the worship of other-than-God. This is the first
important step on the path to unity.

The Quran says: "Have the ignorant polytheists abandoned the true God
and chosen, instead, the false and powerless gods? Tell them: "Bring
forth your proof!' This call of mine to unity is my saying and that of
all the learned men of the community, as well as the saying of all the
Prophets and learned men before me. But these polytheists have no
knowledge of the truth and constantly avert themselves from
it."(21:24)

"Say, O Messenger, 'You worship one other than God who has no power to
help or to harm you. It is God Who is all-hearing and Who bows the state
of all of creation."(5:79)

The one who has severed his connection with divine unity forgets, too,
his own true position with respect to the world and being and becomes
estranged from himself.

For the ultimate form of self-alienation is the severing of all links
with one's essential nature as man. Conversely, once man has become
alienated from his own essence, under the influences of internal and
external factors, he will also be separated from his God and become
enslaved by other-than-God. Subordination to other-than-God, then, takes
the place of all logical thought. This represents a reversion to the
worship of phenomena, for worshipping an idol and according primacy to
matter both are forms of regression that rob man of his innate capacity
for growth.

Monotheism is the only force that makes it possible for man to
recapture the creativity of human values. By regaining his true rank, he
enters a state of harmony with his own human nature and the ultimate
nature of all being, thus attaining the most perfect form of existence
open to him. Throughout history, all divine summons and movements have
begun with the proclamation of divine unity and the exclusive lordship
of God. No concept has ever occurred to man that is more productive of
creative insights and more relevant to the various dimensions of human
existence, or a more effective brake on human perversity, than the
concept of divine unity.

Using clear proofs, the Quran shows man the way to attaining knowledge
of the divine essence as follows: "Did man emerge from non-being through
his own devices? Was he his own creator? Did mankind create the heavens
and earth? Certainly they do not know God."(52:35-36)

The Quran leaves it to man's reason and commonsense to realize the
falsity of these two hypotheses-that man came into being of himself, or
that he was his own creator-by testing and analyzing them in the
laboratory of his thought. By reflecting on the signs and indications of
God, he will come to recognize with clear and absolute certainty the
true source of all being and to understand that no value can be posited
for any model of the universe unless behind it an organizing and capable
intellect is at work.

In other verses, man's attention is drawn to the manner of his creation
and gradual emergence from non-being. He, thus, comes to realize that
his remarkable creation, with all the wonders it contains, is a sign and
indication of the infinite divine will, the penetrating rays of which
touch all beings.

The Quran says: "We created man out of an essence of clay, then We
established him in a firm place in the form of sperm. Then We made the
sperm into coagulated blood, and then into a formless lump of flesh.
Then we made it into bones, and then clothed the bones with flesh.
Finally We brought forth a new creation. How well did God create, the
best of all creators!" (23:12-14)

When the foetus is ready to receive shape and form" all the cells of
the eyes, the ear, the brain, and the other organs, start to function
and begin their ceaseless activity. This is the truth to which the Quran
is directing men's attention. It, then, poses to man the question of
whether all these wondrous changes are rationally compatible with the
hypothesis that there is no God.

Is it not rather the case that phenomena such as these prove and
demonstrate" with the utmost emphasis, the need for a plan, a design, a
guiding hand inspired by conscious will? Is it at all possible that the
cells of the body should learn their functions, pursue their aim in a
precise and orderly fashion, and crystallize so miraculously in the
world of being, without there being a conscious and powerful being to
instruct them? The Quran answers this question as follows: "He it is Who
creates and brings forth (the totality of parts), Who separates (the
parts belonging to each organ), and Who gives form (to different
aspects)."(59:24)

The Quran describes every sense phenomenon that man sees around him as
something calling for reflection and the drawing of conclusions. "Your
God is but one God.

There is no god other than Him, Compassionate and Merciful In the
creation of the heavens and the earth, in the alternation of night and
day, in the ships that ply the seas to the benefit of man, in the water
sent down from the heavens to revive the earth after its death, in the
different species of animals scattered across the earth" in the rotation
of the winds, in the clouds that are subordinate to God's command
between heaven and earth-in all of this, there are signs for men who use
their intellects."(2:163-164) "Tell men to reflect with care and see
what things the heavens and the earth contain."(10:10)

The Quran also mentions the study of human history and the peoples of
the past with all the changes they have undergone, as a special source
of knowledge. It invites man to pay heed, in order to discover the
truth, to the triumphs and defeats, the glories and humiliations, the
fortune and misfortune, of various ancient peoples, so that by learning
the orderly and precise laws of history, he will be able to benefit
himself and his society by aligning the history of his own age with
those laws.

The Quran thus proclaims: "Even before your time, certain laws and
norms were in force, so travel and examine the historical traces left by
past peoples, to see what urn the fate of those who denied the truths of
revelation and the promises of God."(3:137) "How many were those
powerful ones whom We destroyed in their cities on account of their
oppression and wrongdoing, and We made another people to be their
heirs."(21:11)

The Quran also recognizes man's inner world, which it expressed by the
word anfus ("souls"), as a source for fruitful reflection and the
discovery of truth. It points out its importance as follows: "We make
our signs and indications entirely manifest in the world and in the
souls and inner beings of Our servants so that it should be clear that
God is the True."(41:53) "On the face of the earth there are signs fur
the possessors of certainty, and also in your own selves; will you not
see?"(51:20-21)

In other words, there is an abundant source of knowledge in the beauty
and symmetry of the human body, with all of its organs and capacities,
its actions and reactions, its precise and subtle mechanisms, its varied
energies and instincts, its perceptions, feelings and sensations, both
animal and human, and most especially in the astounding capacity of
thought and awareness with which man has been entrusted-a capacity which
still remains largely unknown, for man has taken only a few steps in
studying this invisible power and its relationship with his material
body.

The Quran proclaims that it is sufficient to reflect on and examine
your own self in order to be guided to the eternal, infinite source that
is free of all need, has unlimited knowledge, skill and power, and a
feeble reflection of which is manifest in your being. You will then know
that it is that infinite reality which has thus brought together in one
place so fruitful a compound of elements and brought it forth onto the
plain of existence.

Given the existence of such vivid indications and decisive proofs,
placed at your disposal and within your own being for you to seek the
knowledge of God, no excuse will be accepted from you for misguidance
and denial.

The Quran also applies the method of negation and affirmation to the
question of God's attributes. Thus, it describes the attributes that the
essence of the Creator possesses as "affirmative attributes." Among them
are knowledge, power, will, the fact that His existence was not preceded
by non-existence and that His being has no beginning, and the fact that
all the motions of the world derive from His will and His power.

The Quran says: "He is God, the One other than Whom there is no god,
the knower of the hidden and the manifest, the Compassionate, the
Merciful. He is God, the One other than Whom there is no god, the
Commander, the All-powerful, Pure and Without Defect, the Bestower of
Safety, the Protector, the Precious; the Mighty, the Sublime, the Most
Elevated. Exempt and purified be He from the partners which they ascribe
to Him."(59:22-23) The "negative attributes" are those from which God is
free.

They include the fact that God is not a body and has no place; His
sacred being has no partner or like; He is not a prisoner to the
limitations set up by the bounds of the senses; He neither begets nor is
begotten; there is neither change nor motion within His essence, for He
is absolute perfection; and He does not delegate the task of creation to
anyone.

The Quran says: "O Messenger, say: "He is God, the One, the God Who is
free of need for all things and of Whom all beings stand in need. No one
is His offspring, and He is not the offspring of anyone, and He has no
like or parallel."(12:14) "Pure and exalted is thy Lord, God the
Powerful and Unique, Who is pure of what men in their ignorance ascribe
to Him."(37:80)

Human logic, which inevitably thinks in terms of limited categories, is
incapable of sitting in judgment on divinity, because we must admit that
it is impossible to perceive the ultimate ground of that being for whom
no observable or comprehensible analogue or parallel exists in the world
of creation. The most profound schools of thought and the greatest
methods of reflection here fall prey to bewilderment.

Just as all existent beings must lead back to an essence with which
existence is identical, to an independent being on which all other
beings depend, so, too, they must derive from a source of life, power
and knowledge, from the infinite being of which all these attributes and
qualities surge forth in abundance.


