Worship, Man's Loftiest of Expression of Gratitude
==================================================

An object of worship can give direction to man's motion and light up
his darkness with its brightness when it is able to give him ideals, is
endowed with a positive and elevated existence, is the cause of effects,
and is the very essence of stability and permanence. Then, the object of
worship produces inner effects in man and guides him in his thought and
his actions. It facilitates for the essence of man, that part of him
nurtured by the divine wisdom, its search for perfection.

Any effort or motion on the part of man to choose a false direction for
himself, to take the wrong path in life, will result in his alienation
from himself, his loss of all content, and the distortion of his
personality. Man cannot possibly come to know himself correctly if he
has separated himself from his Creator. To forget God means to forget
oneself, to be oblivious to the universal purposes of human life and the
world that surrounds one, and to be unable to reflect on any form of
higher values.

Just as attachment to other-than-God alienates man from himself and
transforms him into a kind of moving biological machine, so, too, does
reliance on God and supplication at His threshold draw mono-dimensional
man, lacking all spiritual life, up from the oceanic depths of neglect,
revive him and restore him to himself.

Through worshipping God, the spiritual capacities and celestial forces
in man are nourished. Man comes to understand the lowliness of his
worthless material, hopes and desires and to see the deficiencies and
weaknesses without his own being. In short, he comes to see himself as
he is.

To be aware of God and take flight toward the invisible source of all
being illumines and vivifies the heart. It is utterly pleasurable, a
pleasure that cannot be compared to the pleasures of the three
dimensional material world. It is through orienting oneself to that
abstract, non-material reality that thoughts become lofty and values
transformed.

The Commander of the Faithful, Ali, peace be upon him, discusses the
wonderful effect of awareness of God on men's hearts as follows: "The
Almighty Creator has made awareness of Him the means for purifying the
heart. It is through the awareness of God that deaf hearts begin to
hear, blind hearts begin to see, and rebellious hearts become soft and
tractable."[^3]

He says, too: "O Lord! You are the best companion for those who love
You and the best source of remedy for all who place reliance upon You.
You observe them in their inner states and outer doings and are aware of
the depths of their hearts. You know the extent of their insight and
knowledge, and their secrets are manifest to You. Their hearts tremble
in separation from You, and if solitude causes them fear and unease, the
awareness of You comforts them, and if hardship and difficulty assail
them, You alone are their refuge."[^4]

Imam Sajjad, upon whom be peace, that paragon of purity and justice who
had an unbreakable bond with his Lord, demonstrates to us in his
supplicatory prayers the highest expression of love. This was a sacred
love that had inflamed all of his being, and although his spirit was
sorely pressed by the mortal sorrow of separation, the powerful wing of
love enabled him to soar up into the limitless heavens. With
indescribable sincerity and humility, he thus prayed at the threshold of
God, the Eternal: "O Lord! I have migrated to Your forgiveness and set
out to Your mercy.

I ardently desire Your pardon and rely on Y our generosity, for there
is naught in my conduct to make me worthy of forgiveness, and Your
kindness is my only hope.

"O God, send me forth on the best path and grant that 1 die as a
believer in Your religion and be resurrected as a believer in Your
religion. "O Lord Whom I worship! O You whose aid the sinners supplicate
through Y our mercy! O you in the remembrance of Whose generosity the
wretched seek refuge! O You in fear of whom the wrongdoers bitterly
weep!

"O source of tranquility for the heart of those banished in fear from
their homes! O consoler of those who sorrow with broken hearts! O
succorer of the lonely, helper of the rejected and needy! I am that
servant who responded obediently when You commanded men to call on you.
"O Lord! Here I am prostrate in the dust at Your threshold. O God, if
You show mercy to whomever calls upon You in supplication, then let me
be earnest in my supplications, or if You forgive whomever weeps in Your
presence, then let me hasten to weep.

"O God, do not make hopeless the one who finds no giver but You; do not
thrust me away with the hand of rejection now that I stand here at Your
threshold."[^5]

Anyone who wishes to understand the profound meaning of supplication
must realize that rational explanation and logical deduction are
incapable of yielding a deep understanding of questions touching on
spiritual illumination.

The Noble Quran describes the conduct and way of life of the
unbelievers and materialists as follows: "The deeds of those who are
unbelievers are like a mirage in a flat and waterless desert. A thirsty
man will imagine them to be water and hasten toward them, but when he
reaches them, he will find no water."(24:39)

"God and His Messengers summon mankind to the truth; other than God,
all claims are baseless and vain, for they are unable to meet any of
man's needs. One who relies upon them will be like the one who dipped
his hand in a well to drink from it but found his hand could not reach
the water.

The unbelievers summon men only to misguidance."(13:14) "The dwelling
of those who choose other than God as friends and protectors is like the
dwelling of the spider; were the spider to know, the weakest of
dwellings is his."(29:41) "The deeds of those who disbelieve in God are
like ashes that are swept away by a strong wind; they have no benefit
from all their strivings. This is the path of misguidance, utterly
distinct from the path of salvation."(14:18)

The loftiest expression of thankfulness that man can make at the
threshold of his true object of worship is supplication, the profession
of love for His absolute perfection and devotion to it. This he does in
harmony with all of creation, because all beings praise and glorify
God.

The Quran says: "The seven heavens and the earth and all they contain
praise God. There is no creature not engaged in the praise and
magnification of its Lord, but you do not understand their praise. God
Almighty is forbearing and most forgiving."(17:44)

This worship and praise naturally do not bring God the slightest
benefit, for He possesses all perfections to an infinite degree and
neither the world nor man can add anything to Him or take anything away
from Him. Is it at all conceivable that He would create man in order to
benefit from his worship and praise? On the contrary, it is man who, by
gaining knowledge of the supreme being and worshipping Him in His
sublimity, reaches his ultimate aim and true perfection.

Professor Ravaillet, celebrated philosopher and physicist, has the
following to say about consciousness in the universe: "The new cosmology
says that atoms and molecules know what they are doing; in the normal
sense of the word, they have awareness of the tasks they perform and of
the course of their lives. This consciousness of theirs is superior to
the knowledge of the physicist, because all the physicist knows of an
atom is that if it were not tangible and recognizable, no one would know
anything about it.

"Bodies, motion, speed, the concepts of here and there, radiation,
equilibrium, space, atmosphere, distance, together with many other
things-all came into existence thanks to the atom. If the atom were not
to exist, what would be the origin of all the remarkable phenomena of
creation? There exists the same affinity between consciousness and body
as there does between motion and motion-lessness, or the positive and
negative aspects of motion.

"Now, space, taken as a whole, is not blind. We demonstrated, if you
remember, when examining the field of vision, that the eye is not the
basic and determining factor. Since it is fixed at a given point on the
globe, according to the limited circumstances of the human species and
other terrestrial beings, it has a certain narrow physical field within
which it operates.

But as for the space between the earth and the sun, between the sun and
the galaxies, and between the galaxies and remote gigantic planets,
where huge forces with tremendous range are engaged in exchanging energy
there an organ such as the eye of terrestrial creatures has no
opportunity to show itself or demonstrate its effectiveness.

"But precisely for this reason we cannot believe that lack of
consciousness and awareness prevail in that field for the exchange of
vast energies and forces ruled by the laws of attraction, equilibrium,
motion, light and centrifugal force. Blindness does not exist in these
wondrous phenomena, and even particles of light cannot be regarded as
something akin to an illiterate mailman whose only job is to deliver
messages he cannot read."[^6]


