The Incomparability of the Divine Attributes
============================================

In our efforts to describe the Creator and gain knowledge of His
attributes, we ideally need concepts and expressions that are beyond our
reach. Those terms we do employ are unable to help us in reaching our
goal, a true description of God, for our limited understandings cannot
accommodate a perception of the nature of God's infinite attributes. He
is exalted above all concepts coined and fashioned by the human mind.

Man, who is created and limited in every respect, should not expect to
be able to assess and describe a non-material being by means of material
attributes and characteristics.

A reality that is other than contingent beings and natural beings,
whose absolute power and infinite knowledge encompass all things, who in
the words of the Quran, "has no similarity to finite and deficient
created beings,"(42:11) such a reality naturally can not be discussed in
the same breath as ordinary topics.

Ali, upon whom be peace, the Master of the God-fearing, said:

"Whoever compares and assimilates God to something or refers to His
sacred essence, has not, in reality, had Him in view. Whatever man knows
to be the ground of His essence must necessarily be created. God is the
Creator and Maker. Whatever depend s on other than itself is caused and
created. It is God alone who is only a cause (and not an effect).

"He undertakes creation without any means of instruments. He measures
without having recourse to thought and reflection. He is free of all
need and derives no profit from anything. Time and place do not
accompany Him. Tools and instruments do not aid Him. His existence
precedes all time and His pre-eternity precedes all beginning.

"He is not limited by any limit, for it is phenomena that delimit their
essence by means of the limits peculiar to them and it is bodies that
indicate their likes. His sacred essence does not admit the concepts of
motion and motion-lessness; how is it possible that something created
within phenomena should also exist in His being?

"Were there to be motion and stillness in His essence, He would be
exposed to mutation and change; He would be divisible and the
pre-eternity of His being would be negated.

"'He is the source of all powers, and hence no being can have any
effect upon Him. Finally, He is the Creator Who does not change or
disappear and Who is never hidden from the people of knowledge and
insight."[^7]

The fact that God's attributes are utterly separate from ours and
cannot be examined through a comparison with our attributes is because
the attributes of that fountainhead of being are different from the
attributes of all other beings.

For example, we have the ability to perform certain tasks, but this is
not the same as the power of God; in our case, the attribute is one
thing and the entity it describes is another. When we boast of our
knowledge, we are not one and identical with our knowledge. During
infancy there was no trace of learning or knowledge in our beings, but
later we gradually acquired a certain amount of knowledge by learning.
Knowledge and power form two distinct comers of our being; they are
neither identical with our essence nor are they united with each other
in our being. The attributes are accidents and our essence is a
substance; each is independent of the other.

But the case of the divine attributes is fundamentally different. When
we say that God is all-knowing and all-powerful, what we mean is that He
is the source of knowledge and power: the attribute is not something
other than the entity it describes al though it is conceptually
distinct. In reality, His attributes are identical with His essence; for
His essence does not constitute a substance to which accidents might
adhere.

He is absolute being, identical with knowledge, power, life, stability
and realization; He is not subject to any mental or external limit or
restriction.

Since we are nurtured in the very heart of nature and are, there fore,
familiar with it at all times, and since whatever we see has particular
dimensions and shape, a time and a place, and all the other properties
of bodies-in short, because of the habituation of our mind to natural
phenomena-we try to measure all things with the criteria of nature, even
intellectual and rational concepts. The criteria of nature thus serve as
the point of departure for all scientific and philosophical
investigations.

To imagine a being who has none of the properties of matter and who is
other than whatever our minds might conceive, and to understand
attributes that are inseparable from the essence, not only requires
great precision but also demands of us that we completely empty our mind
of material beings.

Ali, peace be upon him, has spoken eloquently, profoundly and
meaningfully on this matter. He emphasizes that men cannot imprison God
in a description, saying: "Pure monotheism and perfect faith lie in
exempting, negating and excluding from His sacred essence all the
attributes of created beings.

God forbid that He should be described by any such attribute, because
when He is so described, it appears as if each attribute is separate
from its possessor and alien to it. So one who says something in
description of the Creator imagining Him to possess some attribute
superadded to the essence has made Him the partner of something and
suggested He consists of two parts. Such an attempt to describe God
arises from ignorance and lack of awareness."[^8]

Mental concepts cannot describe God by recourse to finite attributes;
being limited, they are inapplicable to God's being. Each attribute,
with respect to the particular meaning it conveys, is separate from all
other attributes. For example, the attribute of life is quite different
from the attribute of power; they are not interchangeable. It is
possible that certain instances might gather all these attributes
together in a single location, but each of them lexically has a
different purport.

When the human mind wishes to ascribe an attribute to a certain thing,
his aim is to establish in a given instance a kind of unity between the
attribute and the entity it describes. But since the attribute is
conceptually distinct from the entity, the mind inevitably decrees that
they remain separate from each other.

The only means for the knowledge of things is to describe them through
the use of mental concepts, which are conceptually separate from each
other and, therefore, necessarily finite. Those concepts cannot,
therefore, be used to gain knowledge of that Most Transcendent Reality.
He is exalted above the possibility of being known by description, and
whoever limits God with a given attribute has failed to gain any
knowledge of Him.

By mentioning a few examples we can understand to some degree how the
attributes are not superadded to the essence. Take into consideration
that the rays of heat proceeding from fire convey heat to everything, so
that one of the qualities and attributes of fire is burning and the
distribution of heat.

Has this quality occupied one corner of the being of the fire's being?
Of course not; the entire being of fire has the attribute of burning and
the distribution of heat.

Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, upon whom be peace, said in answer to someone who
was questioning him about the nature of God: "He is something utterly
other than all things; He alone is identical with the very essence of
being. He is not a body and has no form. The senses cannot perceive Him
and He cannot be sought out Re escapes the grasp of the five senses;
fantasy and imagination are unable to perceive Him. The passage of time
and the succession of ages in no wise diminish Him and He is exempt from
all mutation and change."[^9]


