The Unity of God
================

When the question of divine unity is raised in religious discourse, it
is taken to include many topics including belief in the oneness of the
essence, so, too, the compounding of the attributes and the distinction
between essence and attributes is totally excluded with respect to unity
of the attributes. Distinctness and differentiation derive from
limitation.

If we posit a difference among the divine attributes, it is valid only
from the point of view of our rational thought and reflection; a
multiplicity of directions and of superadded attributes cannot affect
the divine essence as such.

If in the world of nature we look at a body through different colored
pieces of glass" that body will appear to us in a succession of
different colors. Similarly, when we contemplate the unique divine
essence with our reason, we sometimes ascribe knowledge to that infinite
being with regard to the fact that all creatures are at all times
present before Him; we then say that He is all-knowing. At other times
we are aware of His ability to create all things, and we then speak of
His being all-powerful.

So when we perceive through these various apertures, the different
attributes which appear to resemble the properties of our limited
beings, we attempt to separate them from His infinite essence.
Objectively, however, all the concepts conveyed by the different
attributes have a single existence and convey a single reality, a
reality that is free of all defect and deficiency, that possesses all
perfections such as power, mercy, knowledge, blessedness, wisdom and
splendor.

Ali, upon whom be peace, the Commander of the Faithful, says in the
first sermon of the Nahj al-balaghah, "The beginning of religion is the
knowledge of the pure divine essence, and the perfection of such
knowledge lies in faith in that sacred being. Perfect belief" in turn"
lies in sincere devotion at His threshold, and perfect devotion is none
other than the dissociation of that Unique Principle from all the
attributes of contingent beings.

"'Beware, for He cannot be described with any attribute, for then
difference would appear between the name and the attribute. Whoever
attempts to describe Him with an attribute is, in effect, creating a
like and a partner for Him, or rather he is seeing God to be two.
Whoever sees God to be two is attempting to divide His being. Such a
person lacks all knowledge and insight into the nature of God's unique
being and is blind and ignorant.

"The one who is thus deprived of vision will attempt to point to God
(i.e., restrict Him to a given time and place), and whoever does this
posits imprisoning limits for the Creator of all being and makes Him
finite. Whoever limits and restricts Him in this way regards Him as a
measurable quantity. Whoever asks: "Where is God?" unintentionally makes
of Him a body enclosed within another body, and whoever asks, "In what
is God engaged?" unintentionally states that certain places are empty of
His being."

So each attribute is infinite and coextensive with the infinitude of
the essence. God is free of and exempt from finite attributes that might
be distinct from each other and separate from the essence.

Once we realize that God's being derives from Himself, it follows that
an absolute being is infinite in all respects. If being and non-being
are equally conceivable for an entity, it must acquire being from some
external cause to come into being; self-origination is, after all,
impossible. It is, then, only absolute being that derives from itself;
all other realities are subordinate to it and knowable only by means of
it.

Once an essence is identical with its own existence, it is infinite
with respect to knowledge, power, non-origination and everlastingness,
for all of these are forms of being, and an essence that is identical
with existence must necessarily possess all these perfections to an
infinite degree.

The oneness of God is one of His foremost attributes. All the heavenly
religions, in their original and undistorted teachings, have summoned
mankind to a pure affirmation of God's unity, untainted by the
ascription of partners to Him. Such ascription of partners, in all its
forms and dimensions, is the most harmful error to which man is liable.
It has occurred throughout history as a result of ignorance,
unawareness, and turning away from the guidance of reason and the
teaching of the Prophets.

If men believed in God according to correct thought, the proofs of
reason and the guidance of the Prophets, it would be impossible for them
to accept any contingent phenomenon or created thing in His place, and
to imagine that any other being might be His partner or equal in
commanding and controlling the destinies of the world, or even have some
share in administering the order of the universe.

If numerous gods ruled over the world and each of these gods acted and
gave commands in accordance with his own will, the order of the universe
would dissolve into anarchy.

The Quran says: "If there were numerous gods other than the one true
God" the order of the heavens and the earth would collapse. So exalted
be the Lord of the Throne above what they say concerning Him."(21:22)

If we say that God is one, it is because He is not a body. A body is a
compound of a series of different elements, the union of which causes it
to come into being. Compounding, division and generation are all
attributes of contingent beings and bodies; we, therefore, negate them
in the case of God and assert that whatever has come into existence, as
a result of compounding and generation, neither is God nor resembles
Him.

It is feasible to conceive of plurality within a given category once we
speak of limitations such as quantity, quality, and time. God, however,
is not limited by any of these, and it is, therefore, impossible to
conceive of Him having any like or congener.

If we try to imagine the essence of water, without any limiting
attribute, and repeat this exercise several times, nothing will be added
to our original conception. Because in the beginning we conceived of
water in an absolute sense, not limited by any condition, quantity or
quality, it is impossible that in our subsequent attempts to conceive of
it, a new hypothesis should occur to us.

But when we add to the essence of water certain limiting at tributes
which are extrinsic to it, different forms and instances of water will
appear and with them, plurality. Examples of this would be rainwater,
springwater, river water, sea water, all of these observed at different
times and in different places, here and there. If we eliminate all these
limiting attributes and look again at the fundamental essence of water,
we will see that it is exempt from all duality and is a single
essence.

We must be aware that any being which can be contained in a certain
place necessarily has need of that place, and any being that be
contained in a certain time owes its very existence to the defining
conditions of that time: its existence will be realized only within the
specific temporal framework where those conditions obtain.

So, when we come to know a being that is present at all times and in
all places and who possesses the highest conceivable degree of
perfection, and other than whom nothing is perfect or absolute and free
from defect, we must recognize that to impute duality to such a lofty
reality is to make it finite and limited.

Indeed, God is not one in a numerical sense so that we might imagine
Him to be the first member of a category that is followed by a second.
His oneness is such that if we imagine a second to exist with Him, that
second must be identical with the first.

Since the multiplicity of things derives from the limiting
circumstances that differentiate them from each other, it would be
totally irrational to posit a second for a being that is free of all
limits and bounds. The existence of a second would mean that the first
had limits and bounds, and if limits and bounds are excluded, we cannot
possibly have two beings; our conception of the second will simply be a
repetition of the first.

The doctrine of divine unity means that if we consider God alone, to
the exclusion of all phenomenal being, His sacred essence is completely
affirmed. Likewise, if we regard His being together with phenomenal
being, again His existence will be completely affirmed. But if, on the
contrary, we look at contingent phenomena to the exclusion of God, they
cannot in any way be said to be existent, because their existence is
dependent on the Creator for its origination and perpetuation.

So, whenever we ascribe some limit and condition to God, it means that
God will cease to exist whenever that limit and condition cease to
exist. However, God's existence is not subject to condition and
plurality, and reason cannot, therefore, posit a second member of His
category.

Let us give an illustration. Suppose that the world is infinite it has
no bounds and in whatever direction we travel, we never come to its end.
With such a concept of the world of bodies, all of its dimensions being
infinite, can we imagine another world to exist in addition to it,
whether finite or infinite? Certainly we cannot, because the concept of
an infinite world of bodies necessarily excludes the existence of
another such world. If we try to conceive of another such world, it will
be either identical with the first world or a segment of it.

So, considering that the divine essence is absolute being, to posit the
existence of a second being resembling Him is exactly the same as
imagining a second world of bodies to co-exist with an infinite world of
bodies. In other words, it is impossible.

It is, thus, clear that the meaning of God's being One is not that He
is not two; it is that a second is inconceivable and that the exclusive
possession of divinity is necessitated by His essence. He becomes
distinct from other than Himself, not by means of any limit but by means
of His essence itself which can clearly be distinguished from all else.
All other beings, by contrast, attain their distinctiveness not from
their essence but rather from God.

We see clearly that extensive interrelatedness and harmony exist among
all the components of the world. Man produces a carbonic gas that
enables plants to breathe, and trees and plants, reciprocally produce
oxygen that enables man to breathe. As a result of this interchange
between man and plants, a certain amount of oxygen is preserved at all
times; were it not to be so, no trace of human life would remain on
earth.

The amount of heat received by the earth from the sun corresponds to
the need of living beings for heat The speed of the earth's rotation
around the sun and the distance it keeps from that source of energy and
heat have been fixed at a level that makes human life on earth possible.
The distance of the earth from the sun determines a degree of heat that
exactly corresponds to the needs of life upon earth.

Were the speed of the earth's rotation to be a hundred miles an hour
instead of a thousand miles an hour, as it now is, our nights and days
would be ten times as long, and the intensity of the sun's heat would
rise to the point that all plant life would be burnt and the cold nights
of winter would freeze all fresh shoots in the ground.

If, on the one hand, the rays of the sun were to be reduced by half,
all living beings would be frozen in place by the extreme cold. If, on
the other hand, they were to be doubled, the sperm of life would never
come to fruition. If the moon were farther away from the earth, the
tides would become strong and fierce enough to uproot the mountains.

Seen in this light, the world appears to be a caravan in which all the
travellers are joined together like links in a chain. All of its parts,
big or small, are striving cooperatively to advance in a single
direction. Throughout this organism, everything fulfills its particular
function and all things aid and complement each other. A profound and
invisible link joins every single atom to all other atoms.

A world that is thus replete with unity must necessarily be connected
to a single source and principle. Being derives from a single origin; if
the entirety of the universe is one, its creator must also be one. The
fact that the creator has brought forth unity within the multiplicity of
the created world is in itself a convincing proof of His oneness, power
and wisdom.

The Quran says: "Ask them, 'Show me these partners whom you worship in
place of God. Have they created anything from earth or have they shared
with God in the creation of the heavens ? Have we given them a book on
which they rely in their ascription of partners to us?' No, the
wrongdoers deceive each other with their false promises. Certainly it is
God Who preserves the heavens and the earth from collapse and
annihilation; were they about to collapse and be annihilated, there is
none other who could preserve them. Know that God is most forbearing and
forgiving."(35:40-41)

Our innate nature, which is a fundamental dimension of our existence,
also confirms the oneness of God. In severe crises and times of
hardship, our desires are all focused on one point; we turn in one
direction and entrust our hearts to Him.

One of the pupils of Imam Ja'far Sadiq, upon whom be peace, asked him,
"What proof is there for the oneness of God?" The Imam answered him:
"The proof of His oneness is the interrelatedness and continuity of all
creation, the integral order of being that rules over all things. God
says in the Quran: 'Were there a creator in the heavens and earth other
than the One God, their order would vanish and the world would be
destroyed.'"[^10] So the regularity and comprehensiveness of the order
that ruled over all things refutes the theory that there might be
several gods, ruling the same or different spheres.

Although the Quran stresses the unity of God in creation and wisdom, it
also mentions the role of the causes and means that implement the divine
command. It says: "God sent down water from the heavens and revived the
earth thereby after its death. In that is a clear sign for men who pay
heed."(16:65)

Once we reach the conclusion that God alone is engaged in creating,
ordering and managing the entire universe, and that all sources of
effect and causality are subordinate to His will and command, each
having its particular role assigned to it by God once we reach this
conclusion, how can we imagine any other being to be on the same level
as God and bow down in worship before it? The Quran says: "Some men
regard other beings as equivalent to God and love them as if they were
God but the believers devote all of their love to God."(2:165) "Among
His signs are the night and the day and the sun and the moon. Do not bow
down and prostrate yourselves before the sun and the moon. Instead,
prostrate yourselves humbly before the God that created them." (41:37)


