Opinions Concerning God's Justice
=================================

The problem of justice as one of God's attributes has had its own
distinct history. Various schools of thought in Islam have held
different views on the subject, interpreting it in accordance with their
own distinctive principles.

Some Sunnis who follow the views of the theologian Abu'l Hasan Ash'ari
do not believe in God's justice as a matter of faith, and they deny that
justice is accomplished by the divine acts.

In their view, however, God treats a certain person, and whatever
punishment or reward He gives him, irrespective of what he might appear
to deserve, will represent justice and absolute good, even though it
might appear unjust when measured by human standards.

These Ash'aris, thus, distinguish God's attribute of justice from His
acts and they, therefore, regard as just whatever can be attributed to
God. If He rewards the virtuous and punishes the sinful, this is
justice, but so would be the reverse; it would still be in the broad
sphere of His justice.

Their claim that the very terms "justice" and "injustice" are
meaningless when applied to God is no doubt intended to elevate God's
most sacred essence to the position of the highest transcendence. But no
thoughtful person will regard these superficial and inadequate notions
as having anything to do with God's transcendence. In fact, they involve
a denial of order in the world, of the principle of causality both in
the general order of the world and in the conduct and deeds of
individual men.

The followers of al-Ash'ari believe, moreover, that the bright lamp of
the intellect is extinguished whenever it is confronted with the
perceptions and problems of religion, that it is unable to benefit man
or light up his path.

This claim conforms neither to the teachings of the Quran nor to the
content of the sunnah. The Quran considers disregard for the intellect
to be a form of misguidance and repeatedly summons men to reflection and
meditation in order to learn divine knowledge and religious beliefs.
Those who fail to benefit from this bright lamp within them are compared
to the animals. The Quran says: "The worst of creatures in the sight of
God are those persons who are deaf and dumb and do not reflect."(8:22)

The Prophet of Islam says: "God has assigned two guides to man: one
external to him, the messengers of God, and the other internal, his own
power of thought.

The Mutazilites and Shi'ast and in opposition to al-Ash'ari and his
school. Out of all the attributes of God, they have selected justice to
be a principle of their creed. Relying on both transmitted and rational
proofs, they have also refuted and rejected as incompatible with the
principle of justice, the doctrines of the unmediated effect of divine
destiny and the predetermination of man's acts.

They believe that justice is the basis of God's acts, both in the
ordering of the universe and in the establishing of laws. Just as human
acts can be weighed according to the criteria of good and bad, the acts
of the Creator are also subject to the same criteria. Since the logic of
reason determines that justice is inherently praiseworthy and injustice
inherently reprehensible, an object of worship whose characteristics
include infinite intelligence and spirit, will never undertake an act
that reason regards as impermissible.

When we say that God is just, it means that His all-knowing and
creative essence does nothing that is contrary to wisdom and benefit.
The concept of wisdom, when applied to the Creator, does not mean that
He chooses the best means for attaining His goals or remedying His
deficiencies, for it is only man who is called on to move from
deficiency toward perfection. God's concern is to make beings emerge
from deficiency and impel them toward perfection and the aims inherent
in their own essences.

God's wisdom consists of this, that He first implants a form of His
favor within each phenomenon, and then, after bestowing existence upon
it, impels it toward the perfection of its capacities through a further
exercise of His generosity.

Justice has, then, an extensive meaning, which naturally includes the
avoidance of oppression and all foolish acts. Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq,
peace be upon him, says in explanation of God's justice:

"Justice in the case of God means that you should not ascribe anything
to God that if you were to do it would cause you to be blamed and
reproached."[^1]

With man, oppression and all the forms of corrupt activity in which he
engages, derive, without doubt, from ignorance and lack of awareness and
need coupled with innate lowliness; sometimes, too, they are the
reflection of hatred and enmity, which leap forth from man's inner being
like a spark.

Numerous are those people who are disgusted with their own
oppressiveness and corruption. Nonetheless, because of ignorance about
the final outcome of their deeds, they continue, from time to time, to
act with injustice and pollute themselves with all kinds of shameful,
corrupt deeds.

Sometimes man feels that he needs something that he does not have the
resources or ability to acquire. This is the root cause of many evils.
The feeling of need, hunger and greed, the prevalence in ma n of a
desire to harm or dominate-all these are factors leading to aggressive
behavior.

Under their influence, man loses the reins of self-control. He
concentrates all his efforts on fulfilling his desires and violating all
ethical restrictions, he starts squeezing the throats of the
oppressed.

The unique essence of God, that infinite being, is free of all such
tendencies and limitations, for nothing is hidden from His knowledge
without bound, and it is inconceivable that He should suffer from
impotence vis-a-vis anything-He, the Pre-Eternal One Whose eternal rays
bestow life and sustenance on all things and Who assures their movement,
variety and development.

A subtle essence that comprehends all the degrees of perfection stands
in no need of anything so that its absence might induce anxiety in Him
when He conceives a desire for it His power and capacity are without any
doubt, unlimited and they do not fall short of anything so that He might
then be led to deviate from the path of justice and transgress against
someone, or take vengeance in order to quieten his heart or undertake
some inappropriate and illsided act.

None of the motivations for unjust behavior can be found in God, and,
indeed, the very concepts of oppression and injustice are inapplicable
to a being Whose generosity and mercy embrace all things an d the
sanctity o f Whose essence is clearly manifest throughout creation.

The Quran repeatedly negates all idea of injustice by God, considering
Him in His sanctity utterly removed from all unworthy acts. It says:
"God never considers it permissible to act unjustly toward His servants;
it is rather men who commit oppression and injustice."(10:44)

In this verse, God dissociates Himself from all notion of injustice,
something repugnant to men, and, instead, attributes it to them.

In addition, how is it possible that God should call on men to
establish justice and equity while at the same time staining His own
hands with unrighteous deeds? The Quran says: "God commands men to act
with justice and virtue and enjoins upon them generosity to kinsfolk. He
forbids them evil deeds and oppression. He admonishes you out of His
mercy, so that you may accept His advice."(16:90)

Islam values justice so highly that if one group of Muslims wish to
deviate from the path of justice and start engaging in oppression, they
must be repressed, even if this involves war. This is the command of the
Quran: "If two parties of believers fight with each other, make peace
between them. If one of them has committed aggression against the other,
then make war on the aggressor until he returns to observance of God's
command. Once he has so returned, then reconcile them and make peace in
utter justice. Certainly God loves the just."(49:9)

The interesting point that emerges from this verse is that the mediator
is strictly instructed to make sure, when bringing about reconciliation,
that the dispute is settled in accordance with justice, without showing
lenience to the aggressor. It may happen, in cases where war has been
started for aggressive purposes, that a mediator tries to end the
dispute by insisting on leniency and the overlooking of faults, and,
ultimately, persuades one of the parties to renounce its claim in favor
of the other. This lenient approach, although legitimate in itself, may
reinforce the spirit of aggressiveness existing in those who gained by
starting the war. It is, in fact, conventional to satisfy the aggressor
in such cases by granting him some concession.

Although the voluntary renunciation of one's claim is a desirable act
in itself, it will, under such circumstances, have an undesirable effect
on the mentality of the aggressor. The aim of Islam is to uproot force
and injustice from Islamic society and to assure its members that no one
can gain anything by aggression and force.

If we look at the order of creation, we can see that a vast and
comprehensive equilibrium prevails among all physical phenomena. This is
evident in the regularity of the atoms, the haste of the electrons, the
rotation of the planets, and the movements of all bodies. It is visible
in the mineral and vegetable realms, in the precise relations that exist
among the organs of a living being, in the balance among the inner
components of the atom, in the equilibrium among the vast heavenly
bodies and their finely calculated forces of attraction. All these forms
of balance and equilibrium, together with the other precise laws that
science is still seeking to explore, bear witness to the existence of an
undeniable order in the universe, one which is confirmed by mathematical
equations.

Our veracious Prophet has expressed this universal justice and
comprehensive equilibrium-the fact that nothing is irregular or out of
place-in this concise and eloquent statement: "It is true equilibrium
and symmetry that maintain the earth and the heavens."

The Quran attributes the following words to Moses, peace be upon him
and our Prophet: "Our God is the one who endowed all things with the
needful and then guided them for the continuation of their
existence."(20:50)

In this short sentence, Moses expounds to the Pharaoh the manner in
which the world was created together with its orderliness and beauty,
which are among God's signs. His aim was to save him from his erroneous
thoughts and help him perceive the existence of a just and divinely
instituted order in the universe.

One of the norms ruling ineluctably over nature is, therefore, order
and justice, and all things, by virtue of their subordination to the
norms and laws of nature, are engaged in the process of evolution toward
perfection that is specific to each of them. Any deviation from this
universal pattern of order and the relations founded upon it would
result in confusion and chaos.

Whenever some irregularity occurs in nature, phenomena themselves
evince a reaction, and inward or outward factors emerge to remove the
barriers to development and re-establish the order needed to continue on
the path to perfection.

When the body is attacked by microbes and other factors of ill ness,
white globules begin to neutralize them, in accordance with ineluctable
norm. Whatever medicine may be prescribed is an external factor aiding
the white globules in their task of neutralization and re- establishing
equilibrium in the body.

Finally, it is impossible that God, Whose love is infinite and Who
unstintingly grants His favors to His servants, should perform the
slightest unjust or inappropriate act. This is, indeed, what the Quran
proclaims: "It is God Who has made the earth a place of abode for you,
Who has raised the heavens, created you in the best of forms, and given
you delicious and pleasing foods as sustenance. This is God, your
Lord."(40:64)


