An Analysis of Misfortune and Hardship
======================================

The question o f God's justice involves certain problems, such as the
existence of disasters, loss and evil in the natural order, and
inequalities in the social order. This question arouses, in fact, a
whole storm of questions and objections in the minds of many people. The
problems they face are so fundamental that what start out as doubts and
hesitations, ultimately become an indissoluble complex.

Such people ask how it is possible that in a world created on the basis
of intelligence and wisdom, so much suffering, pain and evil should
prevail; that the world should be subjected constantly to the successive
blows of hardship and misfortune, with loss and deficiency always in the
ascendant.

Why is it that in various parts of the world, terrible, overwhelming
events assault mankind, resulting in untold loss and destruction? Why is
one person ugly and another beautiful, one healthy and another sick? Why
are all men not created equal, and does not their inequality point to an
absence of justice in the universe?

Justice in the order of things depends on its being free of oppression,
discrimination and disaster, or the absence from it of all defect,
sickness, and poverty; this, they say, alone would result in perfection
and justice.

We must begin by admitting that our evaluation of the affairs of the
universe does not permit us to penetrate the ultimate depths of
phenomena; it is inadequate for the analysis of the ends and purposes of
things.

Our initial understanding of unpleasant events and disasters is bound
to be superficial; we are not prepared to recognize any truth lying
beyond our initial impression. We cannot, at the outset, delineate the
ultimate aims of those events, and we, therefore, regard them as signs
of injustice. Our feelings become aroused and lead us into the most
illogical analyses.

But if we reflect more profoundly, we will see that this one-sided
evaluation of events we label injustice comes from making our interests
or those of people to whom we are directly or indirectly related, our
criterion and yardstick. Whatever secures our interests is good, and
whatever harms us is bad. In other words, our judgment of good and bad
is based on a short- eyed perception, narrow horizons of thought, and a
lack of precise knowledge concerning the norms of creation.

Is our existence the only issue involved in every occurrence? Can we
make our own profit and loss into the criterion of good and evil? Our
material world is constantly engaged in producing change. Events that
did not exist today will occur tomorrow; some things will disappear and
others will take their place.

It is obvious that what is useful and beneficial for some people today
will cease to exist tomorrow. But for us who are human beings and
attached to our own existence and the things of the world, the
acquisition of things is good and their loss is bad. But despite man and
his attachments, the changing nature of the world produces constantly
changing phenomena. If the world did not comprehend the possibility of
change, phenomena themselves would not exist, and, therefore, there
could also be no question of good and evil.

In such a hypothetical, unchanging world there would be neither loss
and deficiency nor growth and development, no contrast or
differentiation, no variety or multiplicity, no compounding or motion.
In a world without deficiency or loss, there would also be no human,
moral or social criteria, limits, or laws. Development and change are
the result of the motion and rotation of the planets; if they ceased to
exist, there would be no earth, no moon and no sun, no day, no month and
no year.

A somewhat comprehensive view of the world will permit us to understand
that what is harmful for us today, or may be so in the future, is
beneficial for others. The world as a whole moves in the direction
dictated by the overall purpose of being and benefit of being;
individuals may suffer harm in this process, and it may even be that
mankind at large does not stand to benefit.

Were we able to plunge deeply enough into the ocean of knowledge and
turn the pages of its book replete with mysteries with the finger of our
understanding, the ultimate purpose and outcome of all events and
phenomena would be revealed to us. However, our power of judgment is not
sufficiently comprehensive to deal with the complex web that confronts
us: we know neither the chain of preceding causes that have produced the
phenomena of today, nor the chain of future effects those phenomena, in
turn, will produce.

If it were possible for us to look down from above on the broad plain
of the world, in such a way that we could see all the positive and
negative aspects of everything, all the mysteries of everything
occurring in the world; if it were possible for us to evaluate the
effects and results of every event in history, past, present and future
and everything occurring between pre- eternity and post-eternity, and,
if this were possible for us, then we might be able to say that the harm
of a given event outweighed its benefit and brand it as evil.

But does man have such comprehensive awareness of the horizontal and
vertical chains of causality? Can he situate himself on the moving axis
of the world?

Since we do not dispose of such an ability, since we will never be able
to traverse so infinite a distance, however long be our stride; since we
will never be able to lift the veil from all these complexities and take
their due measure, it is best that we refrain from one-sided and hasty
judgments that are based on our own short-sightedness. We should
recognize that we must not make our own benefit the sole criterion for
judging this vast universe. The relative observations we make within the
framework of the limited data at our disposal and the specific
conditions to which we are subject can never furnish criteria for a
definitive judgment.

Nature may often be working toward the fulfillment of a particular goal
that is unimaginable to man, given his conventional circumstances. Why
cannot it not be supposed that unpleasant occurrences are the result of
efforts aimed at preparing the ground for a new phenomenon that will be
the instrument of God's will upon earth? It may be that the conditions
and circumstances of the age necessitate such processes.

If all the changes and upheavals that terrify us did not take place
within a given plan and design and for the sake of a specific aim, if
they were to be extended throughout time without producing any positive
or constructive result, there would be no trace on earth of any living
creature, including man.

Why should we accuse the world of injustice, of being chaotic and
unstable, simply because of a few exceptional occurrences and phenomena
in nature? Should we start objecting because of a handful of
unpleasantnessess, major and minor, forgetting all the manifestations of
precision and wisdom, all the wonders we see in the world and its
creatures, that testify to the will and intelligence of an exalted
being?

Since man sees so much evidence of careful planning throughout the
universe, he must admit that the world is a purposive whole, a process
moving toward perfection. Every phenomenon in it is subject to its own
specific criterion, and if a phenomenon appears inexplicable or
unjustifiable, this is because of man's shortsightedness. Man must
understand that in his finiteness, he lacks the capacity to understand
the aims of all phenomena and their content; it is not that creation has
any defect.

Our attitude to the bitter and unpleasant occurrences of this world
resemble the judgment made by a desert dweller when he comes to the city
and sees powerful bulldozers destroying old buildings. He regards this
demolition as a foolish act of destruction, but is it logical on his
part to think that the demolition is unplanned and purposeless? Of
course not, because he sees only the process of demolition, not the
calculations and plans of the architects and others involved.

As a certain scientist said: "Our state is like that of children who
watch a circus packing up and preparing to move on. This is necessary
for the circus to go elsewhere and continue with its life of excitement,
but those short-sighted children see in the folding of the tents and the
comings and goings of men and animals nothing but the dissolution and
termination of the circus."

If we look a little more deeply and imaginatively at the misfortunes
and disasters that plague man and interpret them correctly, we will
appreciate that in reality, they are blessings, not disasters. A
blessing being a blessing, and a disaster being a disaster is de pendent
upon man's reaction to it; a single event may be experienced quite
differently by two different people.

Misfortune and pain are like an alarm warning man to remedy his
deficiencies and errors;they are like a natural immune system or
regulatory mechanism inherent in man.

If wealth leads to self-indulgence and pleasure-seeking, it is a
misfortune and a disaster, and if poverty and deprivation lead to the
refinement and development of the human soul, they are a blessing. Thus,
wealth cannot be counted as absolute good fortune nor poverty as
absolute misfortune. A similar rule covers whatever natural gifts man
may possess.

Nations who are confronted by various hostile forces and compelled to
struggle for their survival are strengthened thereby. Once we regard
effort and struggle to be a positive and constructive endeavor, we
cannot overlook the role played by hardships in developing man's inner
resources and impelling him to progress.

People who are not obliged to struggle and who live in an environment
free of all contradiction will easily be immersed by material prosperity
in their pleasures and lusts.


