Supplement
==========

How often it happens that someone willingly endures hardship and pain
for the sake of a great goal! Were it not for that hardship and pain,
the goal might not appear so desirable to him! A smooth path along which
one advances blindly and mechanically is not conducive to development
and growth, and a human effort from which the element of conscious will
has been removed cannot produce a fundamental change in man.

Struggle and contradiction are like a scourge impelling man forward.
Solid objects are shattered by the pressure of repeated blows, but men
are formed and tempered by the hardships they endure. They throw
themselves into the ocean to learn how to swim, and it is in the furnace
of crisis that genius emerges.

Untrammeled self-indulgence, love of the world, unrestricted
pleasure-seeking, heedlessness of higher goals-all these Me indications
of misguidance and lack of awareness. In fact, the most wretched of men
are those who have grown up in the midst of luxury and comfort, who have
never experienced the hardships of life or tasted its bitter days along
with the sweet: the sun of their lives rises and sets within, unnoticed
by anyone else.

Following one's inclinations and adhering to one's desires is in
compatible with firmness and elevation of spirit, with purposeful effort
and striving. Pleasure-seeking and corruption, on the one hand, and
strength of will and purposiveness, on the other, represent two contrary
inclinations in man. Since neither can be negated or affirmed to the
exclusion of the other, one must strive constantly to reduce the desire
for pleasure and strengthen the opposing force within one.

Those who have been raised in luxury, who have never tasted the bitter
and sweet days of the world, who have always enjoyed prosperity and
never endured hunger-they can never appreciate the taste of delicious
food nor the joy of life as a whole and they are incapable of truly
appreciating beauty. The pleasures of life can be truly enjoyed only by
those who have experienced hardship and failure in their lives, who have
the capacity to absorb difficulty and to endure those hardships that lie
in wait along every step of man's path.

Material and spiritual ease become precious to man only after
experiencing the ups and downs of life and the pressure of its
unpleasant incidents.

Once man is preoccupied with his material life, all dimensions of his
existence are enchained, and he loses aspiration and motion. Inevitably,
he will also neglect his eternal life and inward purification. As long
as desire casts its shadow on his being and his soul is ensnared by
darkness, he will be like a speck tossed around on the waves of matter.
He will seek refuge in anything but God. He therefore needs something to
awaken him and induce maturity in his thoughts, to remind him of the
transitoriness of this ephemeral world and help him attain the ultimate
aim of all heavenly teachings-the freedom for the soul from all the
obstacles and carriers that prevent man from attaining lofty
perfection.

The training and refinement of the self is not to be had cheaply; it
requires the renunciation of various pleasures and enjoyments, and the
process of cutting loose from them is bitter and difficult.

It is true that such exertions will be for the sake of purifying man's
inner being and allowing his latent capacities to appear. Nonetheless,
patient abstention from sin and pleasure-seeking is always bitter to
man's taste and it is only through obstinate resistance to lower
impulses that he can fulfill his mission of breaking down the barriers
that confront him and thus ascend to the realm of higher values.


