Hardship, a Cause of Awakening
==============================

Those who are drunk on the arrogance of power and success and who have
totally forgotten humane ethics because of the seduction of their soul
and their senses will sometimes find, in various corners of the world,
that the occurrence of unpleasant events makes them open to fundamental
changes and developments that tear away from them the veils of
forgetfulness. They may even be guided to a path leading to some degree
of moral perfection and a future more fruitful than their present They
are people in whom misfortune has induced a profound transformation.

Considering the harmful effects of neglectfulness and the intoxication
of arrogance, on the one hand, and the numerous moral lessons taught by
misfortune, on the other, it can be said that failure and misfortune are
relative insofar as they contain great blessings; they contribute
fruitfully to the building of man's awareness and will.

Hardship is, then, the preliminary to higher, more advanced states of
being; it prepares man for the recompense that awaits him, and from his
response to it, it becomes apparent whether he has attained the lofty
degree of sincerity and devotion or is sunk in decay.

The Quran says: "We have created man in the embrace of hardship."
(90:4) Or, again: "We test you with fear, hunger, the loss of wealth and
possessions, death, and the loss of the fruits of your toil . Give glad
tidings to those who struggle manfully on this path that those who say
when afflicted with calamity and pain, 'We are from God and to Him we
return on our path to perfection,'-that it is they who receive kindness
and mercy from their Lord together with their suffering, and they it is
who are truly guided."(2:155-57)

Without doubt, God could have created a world without hardship, pain
and misfortune, but that would have meant His depriving man of freedom
and choice; he would have been let loose in the world as a creature
without will or the power of decision, just like any other creature
lacking perception and awareness, formed exclusively by nature and
totally obedient to it. Would he then have deserved the name of man?

Having paid the heavy price of losing all his innate capacities and
freedom, his most precious resource, would he have advanced toward
perfection, or decayed and declined? Would no t the world, too, have
lost all goodness and beauty, these being comprehensible only in terms
of their opposites?

It is plain that the power to distinguish and discriminate makes
possible the existence of good and evil, of beauty and ugliness. By
giving man the inestimable blessing of freedom and the ability to
choose, God, whose wisdom is manifest throughout creation, wished to
display fully His ability to create phenomena bearing witness to His
wisdom and power.

He placed within man's being the possibility of doing both good and
evil, and although He compels him to do neither, He always expects him
to do good. God does not approve of evil; it is righteous conduct that
meets with His approval and, in exchange for which He provides abundant,
unimaginable reward. God warns man against following the path of evil
and threatens him with punishment and torment if he does so.

Thus, by using the power of choice that God has bestowed on him, man
can act as he should, conforming both to divine guidance and to his own
conscience.

But, if occasionally his foot should slip and he should commit some
sin, the path remains open for him to return to purity and light, to
God's favor and mercy. This is in itself a further manifestation of
God's generosity and all-embracing justice, one more of the blessings He
bestows on His servants.

Were God to give immediate reward to the virtuous for their righteous
conduct and acts, they would not in any way be superior to the corrupt
and the sinful. And if the evil in thought and in deed were to be always
met with instant punishment and retribution, virtue and purity would not
enjoy any superiority in this world to vice and impurity.

The principle of contradiction, is, in fact, the basis of the created
world; it is what enables matter to change and evolve so that God's
grace flows through the world. Were matter not to take on different
shapes as a result of its encounter with various beings and were being
unable to accommodate new forms within itself, the differentiation and
advancement of being would be impossible. A stable and unchanging world
would resemble stagnant capital that produces no profit For creation,
change is the capital that brings about profit It is, of course,
possible that the investment of a certain portion of capital should
result in loss, but the constant motion of matter as a whole definitely
results in profit The contradiction that takes place in the forms of
matter results in the advancement of the order of being toward
perfection.

There is some question as to whether evil exists in the world in the
real sense of the word. If we look carefully, we will see that the evil
of things is not a true attribute; it is a relative one.

Firearms in the hands of my enemy are an evil for me, and firearms in
my hands are an evil for my enemy. Setting aside me and my enemy,
firearms are in themselves neither good nor bad.

The course of nature can be said to be mathematical; that is, its
system has been established in such a way as no t to answer all of our
needs. We, however, wish to fulfill all our uncountless desires without
encountering the least hindrance, and the forces of nature do not answer
the limitless wishes we cherish, wishes which are in any event worthless
from the point of view of our essential nature. Nature pays no attention
to our desires and refuses to submit to our wants. So when we encounter
unpleasantness in our lives, we become unjustifiably upset and we term
the causes of our discomfort as "evil."


