Supplement
==========

If someone wants to light his lamp when there is no oil in it, he will
not start sighing and complaining or curse the whole universe!

Creation is constantly advancing toward a clear goal, through unceasing
effort and striving. Specific causes determine each step it takes, and
the changes and development it undergoes are not designed to meet men's
approval or satisfy their desires.

It should be accepted that some of the occurrences of this world will
not correspond to our wishes, and we ought not to regard as injustice
things we experience as unpleasant.

Ali, peace be upon him, the Commander of the Faithful, describes the
world as an abode of hardship, but nonetheless a good place for the one
who knows it properly. Although he encountered himself all kinds of
hardship and unpleasantness, he constantly drew men's attention to the
absolute justice of God.[^2]

Another important point which must not be overlooked is that good and
evil do not represent two mutually exclusive categories or series in the
order of creation. Goodness is identical with being, and evil is
identical with non-being; wherever being makes its appearance, non-
existence is also implied.

When we speak of poverty, indigence, ignorance or disease we should not
imagine that they have separate realities: poverty is simply not having
wealth, ignorance is the absence of knowledge, and disease is the loss
of health. Wealth and knowledge are realities, but poverty is nothing
other than the emptiness of the hand and the pocket, and ignorance, the
absence of knowledge. Hence poverty and ignorance have no tangible
reality; they are defined through the non-existence of other things.

The same is the case with calamities and misfortunes that we regard as
evil and the source of suffering. They, too, are a kind of loss or
non-being, and are evil only in the sense that they result in the
destruction or non-existence of something other than themselves. Apart
from this, nothing, insofar as it exists, can in any way be called evil
or ugly.

If calamities did not entail sickness and death, the loss and ruin of
certain creatures, thus preventing their capacities from unfolding, they
would not be bad. It is the loss and ruin arising from misfortunes that
is inherently bad. Whatever exists in the world is good; evil pertains
to non-being, and since non-being does not form a category independent
of being, it has not been created and does not exist.

Being and non-being are like the sun and its shadow. When a body is
turned to the sun, it casts a shadow. What is a shadow? The shadow has
not been created by anything; it consists simply of the sun not shining
in a given place because of the existence of an obstacle; it has no
source or origin of its own.

Things have a real existence by virtue of having been created without
reference to things other than them; in this sense, they are not evil.
For a worldview derived from belief in God, the world is equivalent to
good. Everything is inherently good; if it is evil, it is so only in a
relative sense and in connection with things other than itself .The
existence of every thing is unreal for other than it self, and untouched
by creation.

The malarial mosquito is not evil in itself. If it is described as
such, it is because it is harmful to man and causes disease. That which
is created is the existence of a thing in and of itself, which is a true
existence; speculative or conditional existence has no place in the
order of being and is not real. We cannot, therefore, ask why God has
created relative or conditional existence. Conditional or abstract
entities are inseparable from the real entities that give rise to them;
they are their inevitable concomitants and do not partake of their
being. One cannot then speak of conditional entities having been
created.

That which is real must necessarily derive its being from the Creator.
Only those things and attributes are real that exist outside the mind.
Relative attributes are created by the mind and have no existence
outside it so one cannot go looking for the creator.

Furthermore, that which has the potential to exist is the world as a
whole, with all the objects it contains and the attributes that are
inseparable from it; the world represents an indivisible unit. From the
vantage point of God's wisdom, either the world must exist on the
pattern that is peculiar to it, or it cannot exist at all.

A world without order or lacking the principle of causality, a world
where good and evil were not separate from each other, would be an
impossibility and a fantasy. It is not possible to suppose that one part
of the world should exist and another should not. Creation is a whole,
like the form and figure of man, and its parts are inseparable from each
other.

God is absolutely free of all need, and one consequence of this is that
He freely bestows being, like a generous man whose largess expects no
return, or like a skilled artist who is constantly busy with the
creation of new forms. Such abundant generosity and creativity define
the essence of the Lord Whose signs are manifest and evident in every
phenomenon.


