Some Aspects of Inequality
==========================

Suppose that the owner of a factory employs both skilled and unskilled
workers to operate and administer his factory. When it is time to pay
their wages, he pays the skilled and qualified workers, whose job is at
a higher level, more than the unskilled workers. Now, is this difference
in wages just or unjust? Is the factory owner acting equitably or
inequitably?

Doubtless there is a difference involved here, but we cannot call it
discrimination. Justice does not require the factory owner to pay
unskilled workers the same as skilled workers. It means rather that he
should give to each category what it deserves. Such a rule will clearly
delineate the comparative value of each job and contribute to the
welfare of the workplace.

To make distinctions in such cases is an eloquent and practical form of
justice; not to do so would be equivalent to oppression, discrimination
and injustice; it would be the result of an inadequate appreciation of
the relative value of things in their differentiation.

When we look at the world as a whole and analyze its various parts, we
see that each part has its own special position and function and is
clothed in the qualities that are suitable to it. In the light of this
realization, we can understand the necessity of vicissitudes in human
life, of light and darkness, of success and failure, for maintaining the
general equilibrium of the world.

If the world were to be uniform, without variation or difference, the
varied and multiple species of being would not exist. It is precisely in
this abundant variety and multiplicity that do exist that we see the
splendor and magnificence of the world. Our judgment of things will be
logical, correct, and acceptable when we take into consideration the
equilibrium prevailing in the universe and the interrelations that
beneficially bind its various parts to each other, not when we examine
the part in isolation form the whole.

The order of creation is based on equilibrium, on receptivities and
capacities; what is firmly established in creation is differentiation,
not discrimination. This observation makes it possible for us to examine
the matter more objectively and specifically. Discrimination means
making a difference among objects possessing the same receptivities and
existing under the same circumstances.

Differentiation means making a difference among capacities that are
unequal and not subject to the same circumstances.

It will be erroneous if we say that it would be better for everything
in the world to be uniform and undifferentiated, for all the motion,
activity and lively interchange we see in the world is made possible by
differentiation.

Man has various ways of perceiving and experiencing beauty, once there
is a contrast between ugliness and beauty. The attraction exerted by
beauty is, in a sense, the reflection of ugliness and its power to
repel.

In the same way, if man were not tested and tried in life, piety and
virtue would have no value, and there would be no reason to refine one's
soul and nothing from which to restrain one's desires.


