Supplement 1
============

If a whole canvas is covered in a uniform way, we cannot speak of it
being a picture; it is the variation of color and detail that displays
the skill of the artist.

In order for the identity of a thing to be known, it is essential that
it be differentiated from other things, for the measure by which things
or persons are recognized is the outer or inner differences they have
with each other.

One of the wonders of creation is the variation in the capacities and
gifts with which beings are endowed. In order to ensure the continuance
of social life, creation has given each individual a particular set of
tastes and capacities, the interplay of which ensures the order of
society; each individual meets some of the needs of society and
contributes to solving some of its problems.

The natural difference of individuals with respect to capacity causes
them to need each other. Everyone takes on some of the tasks of society
according to his own taste and capacity, and the social life secured in
that way makes it possible for man to progress and advance.

Let us take a building or an airplane as an example. Each of them has
numerous separate parts, complex and detailed components that differ
greatly from each other in size and form, this difference deriving from
the responsibility that each component has toward the whole.

Were this difference not to exist in the structure of the airplane, it
would no longer be an airplane but a compound of assorted metals. If
differentiation is a sign of true justice in the airplane, it must also
be an indication of divine justice among all the creatures of the world
including man.

In addition, we must be aware that differentiation among beings is
innate to their essence. God does not create everything with a separate
and discrete exercise of His will; His will is not exercised
individually. The entire world from beginning to end came into being
with a single exercise of His will; it was this that enabled creatures
in their infinite multiplicity to come into being.

There is, then, a specific law and order that regulates all the
dimensions of creation. Within the frame work of causality, it as signs
a particular rank and position to everything. God's will to create and
regulate the world is equivalent to His willing order in it.

There are definite philosophical proofs in support of this proposition,
and it is also expounded in the Quran: "We created everything with a
certain quantity and limit; Our act is but one, like the blink of an
eye."(54:49-50)

It would be wrong to imagine that the differentiation and relations
established by God in His creation are the same as the conventional
relations existing in human society. God's connection with His creatures
is not a mere convention or perceptual matter; it is a connection
deriving from the very act of creation. The order that He has placed in
all things is the result of His creating it. Every being receives from
God the amount of perfection and beauty it is able to receive.

If there were no particular order regulating the world, any being
might, in the course of its motions, give rise to any other being, and
cause and effect might switch places. But it must be understood that the
essential interrelations among things are fixed and necessary; the
station and property bestowed on a thing adheres inseparably to it,
whatever rank and degree of existence it may have. No phenomenon can go
beyond the degree that has been fixed for it and occupy the degree of
another being. Differentiation is a concomitant of the degrees of being'
assigning to them differing amounts of weakness and strength, deficiency
and perfection.

It would be discrimination if two phenomena had the same capacity to
receive perfection but it was given only to one of them and denied to
the other. The degrees of being that exist in the order of creation
cannot be compared with the conventional ranks of human society. They
are real, not conventional, and not transferable. For example, men and
animals cannot change places with each other in the same way that
individuals can change the posts and positions they occupy in society.

The relationship connecting each cause with its effect and each effect
with its cause derives from the very essences of the cause and effect
respectively. If something is a cause, it is so because of some property
that is inseparable from it, and if something is an effect, it is so
because of a quality inherent in it, which is nothing other than the
mode of its being.

There is, then, an essential and profound order that links all
phenomena, and the degree of each phenomenon within the order is
identical with its essence' Insofar as differentiation relates to a
deficiency indwelling in the essence, it is not discrimination, because
the effusion of God's bounty is not enough for a reality to come into
being; the receptivity of the vessel destined to receive the bounty is
also necessary. It is for this reason that certain beings suffer
deprivation and do not attain higher degrees; it is impossible that a
thing acquire the capacity for being or some other perfection and that
God not grant it to it.

The case of numerals is exactly similar each number has its own fixed
place. Two comes after one and cannot change places with it. If we
change the place of a number, we will have changed its essence at the
same time.

It is clear, then, that all phenomena possess fixed ranks and
modalities and are subordinate to a series of stable and immutable laws.
Divine law naturally does not form a separate created entity, but an
abstract concept deduced from the manner in which things are seen to
exist. That which has external existence consists of the levels and
degrees of being, on the one hand, and the system of cause and effect,
on the other. Nothing occurs outside of this system, which is none other
than the divine norm mentioned by the Quran: "You will never find any
change in the divine norm."(35:43)


