3. Faith and Ideology
=====================

> 3. مواضيع اعتقادية

The Gracious Owner
------------------

Our God is someone, apart from whom no one else is worthy of being
divine

He is merciful and the one who showers his blessings upon us

I thank him from the bottom of my heart and testify for his oneness

I could not protect my life from sins and spent it in idleness and
non-attention

Now I am requesting Allah to forgive me because I have been cruel to
myself, by being after the worldly desires

Now I am returning back to Allah from my sins of overdoing and ignorance
and ask for his forgiveness.[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
المنان
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلهٌ لاً إلَهَ لَنَا سِوَاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَؤُوفٌ بِالبَرِيةِ ذو امتِنَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُوَحِّدُهُ بِاخلاَصٍ وَ حَمدٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ شُکرٍ بالضَّمِيرِ وَ بِاللِّسَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَفنَيتُ الحَياةَ وَ لَم أَصُنهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ زُغتُ إلي البَطَالَةِ وَ التَّوانِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَسأَلُهُ الرِّضَاعَنِّي فَإنِّي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ظَلَمتُ النَّفسَ فِي طَلَبِ الأمَانِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلَيهِ أتُوبُ مِن ذَنبِي وَ جَهلِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إسرافي وَ خَلعِي لِلعَنَانِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Passing through Mortal World
----------------------------

Auspicious is the God, who is supreme in greatness and immortality. Who
equally divided death among all his creations and all of them are in the
pawns of doom and death

And our world - even if we like it and take long -lasting pleasures in
it- is moving towards doom

Beware! That showing interests in this world out of its charm will end
up in doom

And the ones living in it will have to migrate from here in haste, even
if they wanted to stay here.[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مرور من عالم الفاني
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبارَک ذُو العُلَا وَ الکِبرياءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَفَرَّدَ بالجَلَالِ وَ بِالبَقَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ سَوَّي المَوتُ بَينَ الخَلقِ طُرّاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ کُلُّهُم رَهَائِنُ لِلفَنَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ دُنيانَا- وَإن مِلنَا إلَيهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ طَالَ بِهَا المَتَاع - إلي انقِضَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألاَ إنَّ الرُّکُونَ عَلي غُرُورٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إلي دَارَ الفَنَاءِ مِنَ الفَنَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قَاطِنُهَا سَريعُ الظَّعنِ عَنهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إن کَانَ الحَرِيصُ عَلَي الثَّوَاءِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Sparse Butterflies
------------------

The resurrection day is extremely fearsome. People will be vagrant and
sporadic like moths

With the fear of judgment day, the faces of people will become pale and
their body parts will start shaking

Hence, while you have the time, resolve your flaws and shortcomings. The
thought of income and wealth has corrupted and ruined your soul

Behold! Why are you oblivious to yourself? And why are you in pursuit of
desires and are in pursuit of your body’s welfare and comfort?[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فراشات متناثرة
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَظيمُ هَولُهُ وَ النَّاسُ فِيهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَيارَي مِثلَ مَبثُوثِ الفَرَاشِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِهِ تَتَغَيرُ الألوَانُ خَوفاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ تَصطَکُّ الفَرائِصُ بِار تِعَاشِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُنَا لِکَ کُلُّ مَا قَدَّمتَ يبدُو
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَعَيبُکَ ظَاهِرُ والسِّرُّ فَاشِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَفَقَّد نَقصَ نَفسِکَ کَلَّ يوم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقَد أَودي بِهَا طَلَبُ المَعَاشِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلا لِمَ تَبتَغِي الشَّهَوَاتِ طَوراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ طَوراً تَکتَسي لِينَ الرِّياشِ؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

Frightful Day
-------------

Have you ever heard of a day more difficult than the day of death?

The judgment day is much more difficult and frightful and defamatory
than the day you die

Everyone will be judged on that day. The despots will be abjected and
the aggrieved will get ready for protest and revenge

Lot of people who were poor in this world will take a place among the
noble and honourable people

But of course, Allah will be much more merciful than ever on that day;
great is Allah who is the Creator of every human being.[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يوم المهيب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَم يمرُر بِهِ يومٌ فَظِيعٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَشَدُّ عَلَيهِ مَن يومِ الحِمَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ يومُ الحَشرِ أَفظَعُ مِنهُ هَولاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا وَقَفَ الخَلاَئِقُ بَالمَقَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَکَم مِن ظَالِمٍ يبقَي ذَلِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَظلُومٍ تَشَمَّرَ لِلخِصَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ شَخصِ کَانَ فِي الدُّنيا فَقيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَبَوَّأَ مَنزِلَ النُّجبِ الکِرامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَفوُ اللهِ أَوسَعُ کُلِّ شَيءٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعَالَي اللهُ خَلاَّقُ الأنَامِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Separation due to Death
-----------------------

In every separation there is a hope of re-union, except death; as after
that there is no hope of meeting again

Death is a merciless separator which does not even give us a chance to
say goodbye

Every relation eventually leads to separation. It is true that the
profit of this world is very less and such less profit is of no use

Even such less profit is hard to get as if its hanging between the
teeth’s of wild beasts.[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
افتراق بالموت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِکُلِّ تَفَرُّقِ الدِّنيا اجتِمَاعُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا بَعدَ المَنُونِ مِنِ اجتِمَاعِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِرَاقٌ فَاصِلٌ وَ نَوَي شَطُونٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ شُغلٌ لاَ يلَبّثُ لِلودَاعِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وکُلُّ أُخُوَّةٍ لاَ بُدَّ يوماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إن طَالَ الوِصَالُ إلَي انقِطَاعِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إنَّ مَتَاعَ ذي الدُّنيا قَليلُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَا يجدِي القَلِيلُ مِنَ المَتَاعِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ صَارَ قَلِيلُهَا حَرِجاً عَسِيراً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَشَبَّثَ بينَ أنيابِ السِّبَاعِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Land and the Dead
-----------------

*Ishaq bin Ibrahim says: I was informed that Imam Husayn (as) visited
the graves of martyrs in Baqi’ (graveyard) and said:*

I called upon the inhabitants of the graves and they did not answer and
stayed silent

The small particles of sand and gravels replied in their place

The soil said: Do you know what I did with my inhabitants? I tore their
flesh and their clothes (*kafan*) into thousands of pieces

I filled their eyes with sand, while they used to get hurt by a small
thorn in the living world

I even tore apart their bones until their hands and feet and heads were
separated from each other

Hence, this is how I separated them from this world and left them crying
in a ditch with their ancestors.[^6]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الارض و الموتي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نَادَيتُ سُکَّانَ القُبُورِ فَأسکُتُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَجَابَنِي عَن صَمتِهِم تُربُ الحَصَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَت: أَتَدرِي مَا فَعَلتُ بِسَاکِني
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَزَّقتُ لَحمَهُم وَ خَرَّ قتُ الکِسَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ حَشَوتُ أَعينَهُم تُراباً بَعدَمَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
کَانَت تَأَذّي باليسِيرِ مِنَ القَذَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَمَّا العِظَامُ فَإِنَّني مَزَّقتُهَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّي تَبَاينَتِ المَفَاصِلُ وَالشَّوَي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَطَعتُ ذا زادٍ مِن هَذا کَذَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَتَرَکتُهَا ممّاً يطُوفُ بِهَا البَلاَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Independent of Creatures
------------------------

Have complete faith in Allah and be needless form his slaves

This way you will no longer be dependent on anybody; whether he be
truthful or a liar

Ask Allah for your livelihood and daily bread, because it is only him
who provides human beings with their livelihood and daily bread

Someone who assumes that people make him needless, does not believe in
Allah

Somebody who thinks that he himself has been able to collect all his
wealth (and not with the help of Allah) is exactly like someone who
thinks that it is his shoes that are preventing him from slipping and
falling down from a mountain.[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غنيء عن الخلائق
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَغنِ عَنِ المَخلُوقِ بِالخَالِقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَسُدُّ عَلَي الکَاذِبِ و الصَّادّقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ استَرزِقِ الرَّحمَنَ مِن فَضلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَيسَ غَيرَ الله مِن رَازِقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن ظَنَّ أَنَّ النَّاسَ يغنُونَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَيسَ بالرَّحمَنِ بِالواثِقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَو ظَنَّ أَنَّ المَالَ مِن کَسبِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
زَلَّت بِهِ النَّعلاًنِ من حَالِقِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

What God Wishes
---------------

God protects whatever he wants to protect and destroys whatever he
doesn’t want

If God wants to make someone lucky, but the times are hard on him, those
hard times will be made easy

Take the advice and don’t get fooled by this world.

The good and the bad deeds will have rewards and penalties

The gods servant who puts away the curtain of negligence and ignorance
from his eyes and gets aware of the unseen, will be delivered

Happy is the person who knows that every problem is the result of our
tongue and keeps distance from speaking in vain

Whoever takes shelter in almighty Allah, will not see any harm

Whoever fears Allah will be safe from every atrocity. Fear of Allah is
extremely valuable

O God! Who is aware of the unseen, to the same extent as the seen; send
regards on my grandfather Abul Qasim Mohammad (swaws).

He is more dignified than every other living or dead person

Please send your approval upon us which is your most exclusive blessing.
You are the master of most exclusive blessings

Save us from deviation and loss in the path of religion, the greatest
loss is the loss when someone relies on this world even for one day

Happy is the person who has put away the curtains of ignorance from his
eyes and heart

God is believer’s heralder and whatever he orders will happen.[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ما اراد الله
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يحفَظَا اللهُ يصَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا يضَعِ اللهُ يهَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن يسعِدِ اللهُ يلَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ الزَّمانُ إن خَشن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أخِي اعتَبِر لاَ تَغتَرِر
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
کَيفَ تَري صَرفَ الزَّمَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يجزَي بِمَا أوتِي مِن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِعلٍ قبيحٍ أو حَسَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَفلَحَ عَبدٌ کُشِفَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الغِطاءُ عَنهُ فَفَطِن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قَرَّ عَيناَ مَن رأي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أنَّ البَلاءَ فِي اللِسَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَمَازَ مِن أَلفَاظِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَي کُلِّ وَقتٍ وَ وَزَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ خَافَ مِن لِسَانِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَزباً حَدِيداً فَخَزَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَن يکُ مُعتَصِماً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِاللهِ ذِي العَرشِ فَلَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يضُرُّهُ شَيءٌ وَ مَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يعدِي عَلَي اللهِ وَ مَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن يأمَنِ اللهُ يخَف
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ خَائِفُ اللهِ أَمَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مَا لِما يثمِرُهُ الـ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ـخَوفُ مَنَ الله ثَمَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا عَالِمَ السِّرِّ کَمَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يعلَمُ حَقّاً مَا عَلَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَلِّ علي جَدِّي أَبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القَاسِمِ ذِي النُّورِ المُبَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَکرَمُ مِن حَي وَ مَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لُفِّفَ مَيتاً فَي الکَفَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ امنُن عَلَينَا بالرِّضي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَنتَ أَهلٌ لِلمِنَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اعفِنَا فِي دِينِنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَن کُلِّ خَسرٍ وَ غَبَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا خَابَ مَن خَابَ کَمَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يوماً إلَي الدُّنيا رَکَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوبَي لِعَبدٍ کُشِفَت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنهُ غِيابَاتُ الوَسَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالمَوعِدُ اللهِ وَ مَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يقضي بِهِ اللهِ مَکَن
  </p>
</blockquote>

Lucky is the one whose Lord is You
----------------------------------

Ibne Shahr Ashub says in his book ‘Uyunul Majalis: Imam Hossein (as)
accompanied by Anas Ibn al-Malik went to the grave of Hazrat Khadijah
(sa) and started crying and asked Anas to leave him alone.

Anas said: When his prayers got long, I heard him murmuring:

O Allah! You are the master of your slave; hence show your mercy upon
everyone who does not have any shelter except you

O you the most prefect! You are my sole support. Fortunate is the person
whose master is you

Blessed is the person who is afraid of God and prays at night and
confides in God. And his pains and sorrows will be treated by Allah’s
love and affection

Every time he complains to Allah; Allah will fulfil his wish. Every time
he loses the sight of his path and cries in Allah’s court; Allah will
bring him closer to himself

*Thereafter Anas Ibn al-Malik says: Suddenly I heard that a voice came
from the heavens:* *O Husayn!*

*I have fulfilled your wish and have become aware of your tongue’s and
heart’s wish*

*My angels have become happy with the tune of your prayers and it’s this
voice of your prayers which is enough for me*

*Your prayers are all around me. I have removed the curtains of hidden
realm (ghayb) from your eyes and heart.* *[The light from the heaven has
surrounded Husayn (as)]*

*O Husayn! Don’t be worried and make unlimited demands from me because I
am Allah.*[^9]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نعم الرب انت
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا رَبِّ يا رَبِّ أنتَ مَولاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَارحَم عُبَيداً إلَيکَ مَلجاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا ذَالمَعالي عَلَيکَ مُعتَمَدي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوبي لِمَن کُنتَ أنتَ مَولاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طُوبي لِمَن کانَ خائِفاً أرَقاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يشکُو إلي ذِي الجَلالِ بَلواهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَما بِهِ عِلَّةٌ وَ لا سَقمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أکثَرُ مِن حُبِّهِ لِمَولاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذاَ اشتَکي بَثَّهُ وَ غُصَّتَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَجابَهُ اللهُ ثُمَّ لَبّاهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Mausu’ah Kalimat al-Imam al-Husayn (as), p. 925.

[^2]: Adab al-Husayn wal Hamasah, p. 47.

[^3]: Mausu’ah Kalimat al-Imam al-Husayn (as), p. 911.

[^4]: Mausu’ah Kalimat al-Imam al-Husayn (as), p. 924; Adab al-Husayn
wal Hamasah, p. 53.

[^5]: Al-Bidayah wal Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 208; Al-Imam al-Husayn wal
Maqtalahu (Translation), p. 233.

[^6]: Al-Bidayah wal Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 228; Ahqaq al-Haqqq, vol. 11,
p. 636; A’yaan al-Shia, vol. 1, p. 621.

[^7]: Al-Bidayah wal Nihayah, vol. 8, p. 228; A’yaan al-Shia, vol. 1, p.
621; Maqtal al-Husayn (Khawarazmi), vol. 1, p. 147;Al-Imam al-Husayn wal
Maqtalahu (Translation), p. 231.

[^8]: Bihar Al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 193; Manaqib Aal Abi Talib, vol. 4, p.
69.

[^9]: Bihar Al-Anwar, vol. 44, p. 193; Manaqib Aal Abi Talib, vol. 4, p.
69; Ad-Dam’ah as-Sakibah, vol. 4, p. 63.


