5. In praise of himself and the Descendants of Prophet
======================================================

> 5. في ما وصف نفسه و اهل بيته(ع)

Bright Moon
-----------

Every time someone asks for help from an incapable person; the helper
and the abandoner will both be equivalent

I am the son of a courageous man whose stature near God and His Prophet
you all know about and there are no dark clouds are upon the truth which
is apparent

Is Prophet not my grandfather and my ancestor?

I am the same bright moon, who abandons the stars if he hides

Did Qur’an not used to be revealed upon our house, in the morning and in
the afternoon and at night?

Even if Allah is the overseer between me and Yazid, he (Yazid) is doing
struggle and tussle with me for guardianship and things are not how he
wants them to be

So you! Guides towards Lord; it is you who are his rulers

According to which of the heavenly books and which one of their
traditions, did they take it from its rightful owner?[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قمر المنير
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إذااستَنصَرَ المَرءُ إمرَءاً لايدَي لَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَنَاصِرُهُ والخَاذِلُونَ سَواءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا ابنُ الَّذي قَد تَعلَمُونَ مَکَانَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَيسَ عَاَي الحَقِّ المُبينِ طَخَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَيسَ رَسُولُ الله جَدِّي وَ والِدِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنا البَدرُ إن خَلَا النُّجُومَ خِفَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ألَم ينزُلِ القُرآنُ خَلفَ بُيوتِنا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
صَباحاً وَ مِن بَعدِ الصَّبَاحِ مَسَاءاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ينَازِ عُنِي وَاللهُ بَيني وَ بَينَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يزِيدُ وَلَيسَ الأَمرُ حَيثُ يشَآءُ فَيا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُصَحَاءَ اللهِ أَنتُم وُلاَتُهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ أَنتُم عَلَي أديانِهِ أُمَناءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِأَي کِتَابٍ أَم بِأَيةِ سُنَّهٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَنَاوَلَهَا عَن أَهلِهَا البُعَدَاءُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Is not Fatima my Mother?
------------------------

You the worst of people! You have abused (my rights) and begun to resist
the Mohammad’s (swaws) religion

We, as the only offspring of the most excellent prophet of God, were not
we recommended and approved by him?

What a disgrace you’ve done! Is not Fatima Zahra (sa) my mother, the
only daughter of the best of humankind?

Damn to you and shame! You’ll get soon punishment, fire of hell for what
you’ve done.[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أ ليست فاطمة امي؟!
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَعَدّيتم يا شَرَّ قَومٍ بِبَغيکُم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ خالَفتُم دينَ النَبي مُحمَّد
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما کانَ خَير الرُّسل أوصاکُم بِنا؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما نَحُن مِن نَسل النَّبي المُسُدَّد؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما کانَت الزَّهراءُ اُمي وَيلَکُم؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أما کانَ مِن خَير البَريهِ أحمَد؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لُعِنتُم و أُخزيتُم بِما قَد جَنَيتُم
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَسَوفَ تُلاقوا حَرَّ نارٍ تَوَقَّدُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

The Moon of Arab Land
---------------------

I am Husayn, son of Ali Ibn Abi Talib. In honour and respect, I am the
glowing moon of the Arab land

Didn’t you see and know that my father was the one who killed Umar Ibn
Abdud (the champion of the pagans) and he was the one who killed Marhab
(the champion of Jews)?

And don’t you know that he continuously used to remove enemies away from
the Prophet of Islam, before the pains went away from the newly instated
Islam?

Isn’t it an extraordinary marvellous that the one who is farthest in
faith from amongst all those with the prophet of Allah, - claims the
heritage of prophet?

Swear on God that his prophet testified and recommended and prayed for
the ones who were closest to him among others.[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
القمر لارض العرب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا الحُسَينُ بنُ عَلِي بن أَبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
طالِبِ البَدرِ بِأَرضِ العَرَبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَم تَرَوا وَ تَعلَمُوا أَنَّ أَبي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قاتِلُ عَمروٍ وَ مُبيرُ مَرحَبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَم يزَل قَبلَ کُشُوفِ الکَربِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مُجَلِّياًِ ذلِکَ عَن وَجهِ النَّبِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَيسَ مِن أَعجَبِ عَجَبِ العَجَبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَن يطلُبَ الأَبعَدُ ميراثَ النَّبِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ اللهُ قَد أَوصي بِحِفظِ الأَقرَبِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

Silver out of Gold
------------------

*On the afternoon of Ashura when all the companions of Imam Husayn (as)
were martyred, Imam (as) said good bye to his family members and went
towards the battlefield. During that time, he uttered the following
couplets in loud voice and fought the enemies,*

These people have converted to infidels who have refused established
tradition and ignored reward of God, the creator of man and jinn

They killed Ali (as) and his son Hasan (as), man of generosity, the son
of two nobles

Then excited by hatred and anger, they began to persuade others to fight
Husayn (as)

Shame to those who gathered people for the killing of the descendants of
two blessed shrines

Then they all came together to attack me for the sake of unbelievers

They ignored the anger of God, the almighty for my killing according to
desire of caliph’s representative, Ubeidellah, son of infidels

For the sake of Umar bin Sa’ad, the commander who by hatred shot toward
me, the people numerously like drops of rain rushed against to me. I had
no sin before except being pride in relation to the two noble parents

Relation to Ali (as) of virtue as my father, the first of goodness after
my grandfather, the Prophet of God (swaws) who himself was the origin of
two noble oriented parents of Qureish tribe

Yes my father was the best person of integrity amongst men of God after
the noble prophet, and so was my mother

That’s me the silver (jewel) originated from two roots of original gold

Who can be compared to me, grandson of prophet and son of Ali, the two
nobles of dignity?!

My mother is Fatima Zahra (sa), no one but the beloved daughter of the
Prophet of God and father Ali, the conqueror of Badr and Hunain battles
against the atheists

My father worshiped God when he was a young boy while the Qureish tribe
was in service of idols

They were worshipping the idols of Lat and U’zza (in Arabic, blossom of
light) at the time my young father, Ali was praying to his God facing
towards the two holy shrines (Quds and Mecca)

My father is Sun of universe; my mother Moon and I, as their offspring
am the Moon of the two heavenly planets

In the Badr, the first battle against the infidels Ali, my father broke
the two fortified lines of the army of infidels and did bring the hope
into hearts of the men of God

And later in the battle of Ah’zab (or the army of groups of Arab
tribes), he defeated the infidels and he eventually entered into Mecca
in the battle of conquest of Mecca victoriously.[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فضة مستنتجة من الذهب
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَفَرَ الْقَوْمُ وَ قِدْماً رَغِبُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَنْ ثَوَابِ اللَّهِ رَبِّ الثقلَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَتَلُوا الْقَوْمُ عَلِياً وَ ابْنَهُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَسَنَ الْخَيرِ كَرِيمَ الْأَبَوَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَنَقاً مِنْهُمْ وَ قَالُوا أَجْمِعُوا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
احْشُرُوا النَّاسَ إِلَى حَرْبِ الْحُسَين
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يا لَقَوْمٍ مِنْ أُنَاسٍ رُذَّلٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جَمَعَ الْجَمْعَ لِأَهْلِ الْحَرَمَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ سَارُوا وَ تَوَاصَوْا كُلُّهُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِاجْتِياحِي لِرِضَاءِ الْمُلْحِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمْ يخَافُوا اللَّهَ فِي سَفْكِ دَمِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِعُبَيدِ اللَّهِ نَسْلِ الْكَافِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ ابْنِ سَعْدٍ قَدْ رَمَانِي عَنْوَةً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِجُنُودٍ كَوُكُوفِ الْهَاطِلِينَ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَا لِشَي‏ءٍ كَانَ مِنِّي قَبْلَ ذَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غَيرَ فَخْرِي بِضِياءِ النَّيرَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِعَلِي الْخَيرِ مِنْ بَعْدِ النَّبِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ النَّبِي الْقُرَشِي الْوَالِدَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خِيرَةِ اللَّهِ مِنَ الْخَلْقِ أَبِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ أُمِّي فَأَنَا ابْنُ الْخَيرَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فِضَّةٌ قَدْ خَلَصَتْ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَنَا الْفِضَّةُ وَ ابْنُ الذَّهَبَينِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ لَهُ جَدٌّ كَجَدِّي فِي الْوَرَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَوْ كَشَيخِي فَأَنَا ابْنُ الْعَلَمَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَاطِمُ الزَّهْرَاءُ أُمِّي وَ أَبِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَاصِمُ الْكُفْرِ بِبَدْرٍ وَ حُنَينٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَبَدَ اللَّهَ غُلَاماً يافِعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ قُرَيشٌ يعْبُدُونَ الْوَثَنَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يعْبُدُونَ اللَّاتَ وَ الْعُزَّى مَعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَلِي كَانَ صَلَّى الْقِبْلَتَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَبِي شَمْسٌ وَ أُمِّي قَمَرٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَنَا الْكَوْكَبُ وَ ابْنُ الْقَمَرَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ لَهُ فِي يوْمِ بَدْرٍ وَقْعَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَفَتِ الْغِلَّ بِفَضِّ الْعَسْكَرَينِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ثُمَّ فِي الْأَحْزَابِ وَ الْفَتْحِ مَعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ فِيهَا حَتْفُ أَهْلِ الْفَيلَقَينِ‏
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فی سَبیل اللهِ ماذا صنَعَت اُمُه السَوء معاً بالعِترتَین
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عِتره البرُ النبیُ المُصَطفی و علی الوَرَد یوم الحَجفلَین
  </p>
</blockquote>

We are the Bright Beacons of Guidance
-------------------------------------

The couplets that Imam Husayn (as) recited on the afternoon of Ashura
while he was fighting the enemies.

This is me, son of Ali (as) of virtue from the Family of Hashim clan and
such a pride of such a relationship is sufficient

And my grandfather was the noblest man walked on earth; yes we are
lights of God to lead His people

And Fatima (sa) is my mother, the daughter and offspring of Ahmad, (in
Arabic, the prophet’s named heavenly, the most praised) and my uncle,
Ja’far is called bearer of angel-like wings (*Tayyar*)

In our house the book of God came down with truth and heavenly guidance
and in which the revelation are mentioned

The trusteeship of the blessed fountain in heaven is dedicated to us,
the heaven water what we would give to our devotees to drink by cup of
the Prophet. That’s undeniable

Our devotees would be the most respectable among men while those who
hate us would be the losers.[^5]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نحن المشاعل المنیرة الهداية
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا ابْنُ عَلِي الطُّهْرِ مِنْ آلِ هَاشِمٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَفَانِي بِهَذَا مَفْخَراً حِينَ أَفْخَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ جَدِّي رَسُولُ اللَّهِ أَكْرَمُ مَنْ مَضَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ نَحْنُ سِرَاجُ اللَّهِ فِي الْخَلْقِ نَزْهَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ فَاطِمُ أُمِّي مِنْ سُلَالَةِ أَحْمَدَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ عَمِّي يدْعَى ذَا الْجَنَاحَينِ جَعْفَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ فِينَا كِتَابُ [اللَّهِ أُنْزِلَ صَادِقاً-
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ فِينَا الْهُدَى وَ الْوَحْي بِالْخَيرِ يذْكَرُ]
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ نَحْنُ أَمَانُ اللَّهِ لِلنَّاسِ كُلِّهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُسِرُّ بِهَذَا فِي الْأَنَامِ وَ نَجْهَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ نَحْنُ وُلَاةُ الْحَوْضِ نَسْقِي وُلَاتَنَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِكَأْسِ رَسُولِ اللَّهِ مَا لَيسَ ينْكَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ شِيعَتُنَا فِي النَّاسِ أَكْرَمُ شِيعَةٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ مُبْغِضُنَا يوْمَ الْقِيامَةِ يخْسَر
  </p>
</blockquote>

[^1]: Bihar Al-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 123; Kashf al Ghammah, vol. 2, p. 35;
Al-Fusul al-Muhimmah fi Ma’rifatul Aimmah, p. 171; Ahqaq al-Haqqq, vol.
11, p. 642.

[^2]: Bihar Al-Anwar, vol. 45, p. 41-42, as cited from Zariyah al-Nijat,
p. 260; Ramz al-Musibah: Fi Maqtal man Qaal ana Qatil al ‘Abaraat, vol.
2, p. 229.

[^3]: Bihar Al-Anwar, vol. 78, p. 124; Kashf al Ghammah, vol. 2, p. 36.

[^4]: Bihar Al-Anwar, vol. 45, p. 47-48; Zariyah al-Nijat, p. 280.

[^5]: Bihar Al-Anwar, vol. 45, p. 49; Zariyah al-Nijat, p. 282.


