Translator’s Note
=================

(a) This is a translation of Ma-huwa ’l-Islam? from its 3rd printing in
Beirut in 1414/1993. The book was first published in mid 1960’s.

(b) In the transliteration of Arabic words I have generally followed
current academic usage but I have, however, deliberately avoided macrons
and diacritics which might only confuse the non-specialist, (hence
al-Rida, without a dot beneath the d, which would indicate one of the
letters which have no parallel in English).

Also, the Arabic letter (written like the emphatic ta’ with a dot), I
have rendered as dh but solely as a compromise: hence Kadhim, dhuhr
(noon), ‘adhim (great), since Kazim, zuhr and ‘azim without diacritics
give little idea of the correct pronunciation.

The ta’ marbuta at the end of a word is rendered by an a not ah, as,
for instance, balagha not balaghah, except in a construct when it is
written as a t, e.g. ma‘rifat Allah. The Arabic letters hamza and ‘ayn
throughout are rendered by (’) and (‘) respectively.

(c) The holy cities of Mecca and Medina are rendered according to their
original Arabic: Makka and al-Madina, respectively.

(d) The Arabic text has a few footnotes. These were not the work of the
author. I have revised them, sometimes adding to them as well as adding
new footnotes of my own.

(e) In references from the Holy Qur’an, the number of the sura
(chapter), in italics, precedes that of the aya (verse).

(f) Whenever the author mentions Imam Amir al-Mu’minin, he is referring
always to ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib.

(g) Where two dates are given, the Hijri (Islamic) date precedes the CE
(Common Era) one: i.e. the current year would be rendered 1422/2002. NB
Throughout this book, man and the pronoun he refer to mankind in general
(men and women) and frequently translates the Arabic insan. This is to
avoid the tedious repetition of he/she and so on. Similarly Muslim/the
Muslims, as in Arabic, refers to Muslim men and women in general.

**A biographical sketch**

Grand Ayatollah Muhammad al-Shirazi, who died in Qum on 17 December
2001 at the age of 73, was one of the most prominent Muslim scholars and
spiritual authorities (maraji‘, sing. marja‘) of modern times.

He was a direct descendant of the Prophet Muhammad (God's blessings and
peace be upon him and his progeny) and his genealogy can be traced back
through Zayd "al-Shahid", a son of the fourth imam of the Ahl al- Bayt,
Imam ‘Ali Zayn al-‘Abidin.

For more than a century and a quarter the Shirazi family, so called
because of the long association of their ancestors with the city of
Shiraz in south-western Iran, have played an outstanding role as
religious scholars (‘ulama’, sing. ‘alim) jurists and maraji‘.

A famous member of the family is Mirza Muhammad Hasan Shirazi, known as
al-Mujaddid ("the renewer") because of his outstanding learning, who
played a leading role in the so-called "Tobacco Rebellion" of 1890-1.
His son Mirza ‘Ali Agha was also a marja‘.

Another Shirazi and a leading marja‘ Mirza Muhammad Taqi, the maternal
uncle of Ayatollah Shirazi’s father, was, along with his son Muhammad
Rida, in the vanguard of the revolt of 1920 against the British
occupation of Iraq. A brother-in-law of Ayatollah Shirazi's father,
Mirza ‘Abd al-Hadi al- Shirazi, was an ‘alim and well-known poet who
became a marja‘ briefly after the demise of Grand Ayatollah Sayyid
Burujirdi in 1961.

Sayyid Muhammad was born in Najaf in Iraq in 1928. He was the son of
the renowned marja‘ Grand Ayatollah Mirza Mahdi al-Shirazi. His mother
was Alawiyya Halima, a distant cousin. At the age of nine, the family
moved to Karbala’, 50 miles to the north. There at the Hawza (Religious
Academy, plur. hawzat) he went through the various stages of the
traditional education necessary in order to become a mujtahid (one
competent to make independent juridical decisions).

Among his principal teachers at the highest stage called Bahth
al-Kharij numbered his own father, and the Grand Ayatollahs Sayyid
Muhammad Hadi al-Milani (the future renowned marja‘ of Mashhad in Iran),
Shaykh Muhammad Rida al- Isfahani, Shaykh Muhammad al-Khatib and Sayyid
Zayn al-‘Abidin al- Kashani.

The young Sayyid Muhammad excelled in his studies to such an extent
that before he had reached the age of 20 he had become a mujtahid (one
competent to make independent juridical decisions) and, not yet 30, he
began to teach Bahth al-Kharij. After his father’s death, in February
1961, he published his own collection of juridical edicts (his risala
‘amaliyya), a necessary step if one wishes to be a marja‘, and soon
afterwards he was recognised as one.

Not long after the Ba‘th Party had gained supreme power in Iraq, the
first of the ‘ulama’ to be arrested for their outspoken criticism of the
regime was Shirazi’s brother Ayatollah Sayyid Hasan who, in the spring
of 1969, was imprisoned in Baghdad and savagely tortured. After his
release Sayyid Hasan fled to Lebanon (where a decade later he was
assassinated by the Iraqi regime) and Sayyid Muhammad, forced into
exile, left Karbala’ along with his family for Kuwait. In 1979 he moved
to Qum in Iran.

Shirazi has written more than 1000 works. These deal with every branch
of Islamic studies. His greatest scholarly contribution is perhaps in
the field of fiqh (jurisprudence). Up to his time the most popular work
on fiqh in the hawzat was Najafi’s Jawahir al-Kalam in 44 volumes which
dates from the early 19th century.

Shirazi’s monumental encyclopaedic work on fiqh, which he commenced
when only 25, amounts to 150 volumes, all of which have been published.
For the first time subjects like the environment, economics, politics,
freedom, the system of government in Islam have been studied using
strictly the criteria of jurisprudence. Shirazi believed in the concept
of an Islamic State governed by a consultative system of leadership
(shura).

Since he also encouraged freedom of expression and favoured political
pluralism he was against a one-party state. He eschewed violence and
coercion calling vehemently for a policy of non-violence to be exercised
in every aspect of life: private and public.

Shirazi maintained that Islam was essentially a message of peace and
tolerance to all mankind, stressing that it was better to forgive one's
enemy rather than vilify him or seek revenge. Shirazi promoted the
institution of marriage and traditional family values; was concerned for
human rights and the dignity of the individual, whether Muslim or
non-Muslim;

emphasized the concept of justice, which is a fundamental one in Islam,
and the need to have special care for the environment. His house in Qum
became in effect a Hawza where ‘ulama’ and students alike would come to
attend his lectures in Bahth al-Kharij.

Shirazi had followers throughout the world, especially in Kuwait, the
Gulf States, the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia, Europe, the UK and
North America.

Ayatollah Shirazi was buried in the mausoleum of Fatima Ma‘suma (a
sister of the eighth Imam, ‘Ali Rida) in Qum. He is survived by his wife
who bore him 6 sons and 6 daughters.

Shirazi had always encouraged outstanding mujtahids to publish their
own risala ‘amaliyya. Among these mujtahids figured his own brother,
Sayyid Sadiq. During his lifetime Shirazi, both orally and in writing,
had urged the believers to have recourse to Sayyid Sadiq and to profit
from his knowledge in all aspects of jurisprudence but the latter had
declined to publish his risala out of deference to his elder brother.

However, now after the demise of Sayyid Muhammad it has surprised no
one that Sayyid Sadiq should be recognised as a marja‘, bearing in mind
that his late brother had made it clear that he was eminently qualified
for this great task.

Grand Ayatollah Sayyid Sadiq al-Shirazi was born in Karbala’ in January
1942 and among his teachers were the Grand Ayatollahs, his own father
Mirza Mahdi, his brother Sayyid Muhammad, Sayyid Muhammad Hadi al-
Milani and Shaykh Muhammad Rida al-Isfahani. He became a mujtahid in his
early twenties and for over 20 years he has taught Bahth al-Kharij and
many well-known mujtahids of the present-day had attended his
lectures.

Sayyid Sadiq has already written more than 80 compilations among which
figure his commentary on the monumental work on fiqh, al-‘Urwa alwuthqa,
by the late 19th century/early 20th century marja‘ Sayyid Tabataba’i
Yazdi.

He began to write it in Karbala’ 35 years ago and the first volume on
ijtihad and taqlid, published in Beirut in the 1970s, illustrates
admirably both the depth of Sayyid Sadiq’s learning and his deductive
powers. The remaining 20 volumes, on prayer, have yet to be published.

His Bayan al-usul on the fundamentals of jurisprudence runs into 10
volumes and its fifth volume (la-darar wa-la-dirar: which is the Islamic
principle that “one must do no harm or receive harm”) has been published
and has been printed at least three times.

Grand Ayatollah Sadiq resides in the holy city of Qum from where he
directs the affairs of the Marja‘iyya and of course is in constant touch
with his representatives worldwide. He is also busy teaching Bahth
al-Kharij (higher studies) both in usul al-fiqh (fundamentals of
jurisprudence) and fiqh and also gives public lectures on a whole range
of topics.

Daily, sitting in the same office that his brother used, he receives
visitors who come to Qum to seek his advice and spiritual guidance or
who ask for a fatwa in a particular juridical matter.


Abdelmalik Badruddin Eagle
London
August 2002


