Politics in Islam
=================

**11-POLITICS IN ISLAM**

Question:

Does Islam have a political system?

Answer:

Yes, since Islam, as we have seen, is concerned both with the spiritual
affairs of man and also with the life in this world. Islam has something
to say about all man’s needs and adopts a clear position regarding every
issue.

Question:

What do you mean by Islamic politics?

Answer:

To go into detail about Islamic government would require a large volume
so here we shall summarize the main principles involved, addressing the
following questions:

1. Who should lead an Islamic state?

2. How should government in Islam be carried out?

3. What is the system of government?

Question:

Who then should lead an Islamic state?

Answer:

The head of state is someone who fulfils these conditions:

1. He must have reached the age of legal maturity, is sane, is a
freeman, a male, legitimate in birth and a man of faith.

2. He must be knowledgeable about worldly and spiritual affairs.

3. He must be scrupulously just.

Many jurists also stipulate that he should be the most knowledgeable of
the religious scholars of his day.

Question:

What does Islamic government entail?

Answer:

An Islamic government is concerned with spiritual and material affairs
equally, which means that an Islamic ruler rules in the name of God, not
in his own right or in the name of any aristocracy. The advantage of
such a government lies in the following:

1. It fills the spiritual vacuum in society since rule is not
distributed between a “spiritual authority” and a “worldly authority”
but is, rather, one authority representing both aspects of government
together.

2. It is not possible for the ruler to become corrupt since if he does
he will be exposed immediately, for religion has its own laws which
cannot be changed nor be substituted nor be adjusted.

3. It strengthens the relationship between the people and the
government, which results in complete cooperation since people have a
spiritual side to their nature.

Even if someone proclaims that he is not religious he means that he is
not committed to God’s laws not that he has absolutely no religion or
spirituality, for the meaning of religion is that particular ethical
path which an individual chooses to follow in life. Therefore if a
government can itself unite both religious and worldly authority,
everyone should feel some empathy with it.

4. Following from the above, such a government will last longer since a
government based upon spiritual principles has greater staying power and
lasts longer than a secular one. Question:

Describe an Islamic system of government.

Answer:

This question needs ideally a detailed survey of the various
institutions which appertain to such a government but suffice it here to
outline some of them and some of the factors that will take priority in
a system founded upon Islam:

1. The judiciary.
2. The army.
3. The treasury.
4. Freedom in its various forms.
5. Solving disputes and problems.
6. The prosperity of the nation.

Of these six items, the first three are among the basic constituents of
any nation since the law exists to enforce justice within the country,
the army to repel an enemy and the like and a treasury is required to
provide for the judiciary, the army and other institutions. The last
three concern the welfare of the nation and its progress.

Question:

How does Islam regard the judiciary?

Answer:

The judiciary in Islam is uncomplicated, speedy and free of charge. One
judge is sufficient to deal with the litigations of a large town in the
simplest fashion by people merely having to report to him for a ruling
and, moreover, without paying any legal charges.

The plaintiff is asked if he has evidence for what he alleges. If he
has, then judgement is given accordingly and if he cannot produce
evidence, then judgement will be in favour of the defendant. Once the
judgement has been announced this is the end of the case. In this way
one judge was sufficient for the needs of a large city like al-Kufa for
a period of almost half a century.

Question:

What about the army in Islam?

Answer:

The army in Islam as we gather from various authorities is open to all
and you join it by choice and it is not a great burden on those who
join. The ruler establishes camps outside the cities, sets up the
necessary facilities and commends the idea of military training to the
people. It is clear that the kind of training envisaged will be popular
and there will be great response seeing that a man will only be required
to give up a portion of each day for military service, whereas for the
remaining hours he is free to busy himself as he chooses.

Also military expenditure will not overburden the government since all
it will have to provide are the essential requirements. The concept of
the army in Islam even in a modern context can be likened to a sports
team.

Question:

Describe the treasury in an Islamic state.

Answer:

As has already been noted, taxes in Islam are restricted to khums,
zakat, jizya and kharaj which are all sent to the Treasury and from this
money the various organs of an Islamic state are funded. Seeing that the
administration of the state is run so simply, it does not need that much
money and therefore the people under an Islamic government are happy
since they do not have to pay tax and the government is content because
the burden of expenditure is not heavy.

Question:

What do you mean when you speak of freedom within Islam?

Answer:

Since the apparatus of an Islamic government is uncomplicated, the
people correspondingly enjoy the maximum freedom and thus they have a
free unrestricted rein when it comes to farming, trading, industry,
travelling, building, where to live, the possession of anything that is
permissible (from the standpoint of the Shari‘a) and so forth.

For all this freedom there are no taxes to pay and similarly there is
no obligatory work to do such as military service. Man’s needs are met
simply and in the same way the judiciary is run on uncomplicated lines
and so are trade transactions and those involving pawning and renting
and the like.

For instance, buying and selling is carried out speedily and can be
summed up by the seller saying, “I sell (something or other)”, or to
that effect, and the reply of the purchaser, “I accept” and then writing
down on an ordinary piece of paper what has been transacted with the
signature of two witnesses. This simplicity is a common feature of life
in an Islamic state.

Question:

How does Islam deal with the problems of the people?

Answer:

Because Islam only recognizes the existence of crucial problems, does
not impose any taxes upon commodities or work and also the fact that the
apparatus of government is kept to a minimum, the problems you see today
in the nations around the world would not exist under Islamic rule.

Only issues of prime significance will remain, such as judicial
proceedings, criminal offences and, thirdly, actions which are contrary
to Islamic law such as building a house that overlooks another and the
like, theft, murder, drinking alcohol and so on. These three categories
are dealt with speedily by Islam to the extent that they should no
longer be regarded as problems at all.

Consequently one judge is enough for a whole town. His responsibility
is to make a judgement in legal disputes, look after money belonging to
orphans, oversee the awqaf (religious estates) and witness trade
transactions and business agreements and appoint an official to carry
out judicial punishments. Another factor is that the number of prisons
in an Islamic state is very small and so it is true to say that the
people under Islamic rule have no intractable problems to confront and
consequently they can busy themselves with their own affairs with a
sense of serenity and peace of mind.

Question:

How can Islam make a nation progress?

Answer:

There are several factors for Islam being able to do this which can be
summarized in the following basic principles:

1. The simplicity of the government apparatus.
2. Encouragement.
3. Mutual cooperation.

Concerning the apparatus of government in Islam, I have already pointed
out some of its aspects. Historians have mentioned that the number of
top officials sufficient to rule an Islamic state need not exceed 50 for
every million or so inhabitants. Islam does not see the necessity for
the existence of many of the departments considered as being essential
by the governments of the nations of today, because it prefers to have
things done in an uncomplicated fashion.

Thus an Islamic state does not unduly make issues intricate nor
protract them so that it has to have numerous officials and similarly it
delegates many tasks to the people themselves. These tasks therefore are
not monopolized by the government causing it, in turn, to create more
departments which would not only be a considerable burden upon it but
would also mean having to take people away from the private sector.

As for encouragement, Islam encourages knowledge and work to an extent
not found in any other religion or legal system. It makes “seeking
knowledge an obligation for every Muslim” and both for the scholar and
the manual worker it promises an astonishing amount of merit in the
hereafter.

So those who are religious possess two forces that will lead to the
advance of human affairs: a worldly potential which is also present in
non-Muslim societies and a religious, spiritual power which others do
not possess and this truth is indicated in the words of the Almighty,
“And you hope from God what they do not hope”[4: 104].

Thirdly, concerning mutual cooperation: an Islamic government
cooperates with the people in order to bring about a thriving society
and a more prosperous nation just as Imam Amir al- Mu’minin (peace be
upon him) directed Malik al-Ashtar when he appointed him his governor
over Egypt [ca. 37/658] during his glorious period of rule, and there
are many other examples.

Since an Islamic government is sure to pursue the policies outlined
above, the state cannot help but achieve a remarkable degree of
advancement. We have thus summed up what we mean by politics seen from
an Islamic perspective. A detailed survey is not possible here but we
have allocated a special work to this topic.


**Society in Islam**

**12-SOCIETY IN ISLAM**

Question:

Does Islamic society have a specific structure?

Answer:

The various units of society adapt themselves to each other according
to how a particular society is governed. Sometimes those governing
society make allowances for the basic instincts of man and at other
times they ignore them.

Since Islam is the religion which responds to the innate nature of man,
it takes into account this inherent disposition in all its laws and so
promotes what is good and forbids what is bad. If we look at society at
the present time, we notice the following elements and phenomena:

1. The family.
2. People who work in trade or business.
3. The school and education.
4. Worship.
5. Religious festivals.
6. Government employment.
7. Social gatherings like the meeting together of friends, weddings,
travelling together, funeral gatherings and so on.
8. The army.
9. Relations between the government and the people.
10. Temporary sharecropping.

1-The family:

Each member of a family has his or her particular responsibilities, so
a husband has his responsibilities and a wife hers and both of them have
responsibilities towards the children, just as the children have towards
their parents. Taking the word family to comprise also relatives, then
they all have responsibilities and duties towards one another which are
not confined to particular circumstances or occasions but are general in
application.

Some matters regarding the family (according to the five principles
into which human actions fall) are obligatory, some recommended, some
forbidden and some are disapproved of and some permitted.

For example Islam has set out rules regarding getting married: the
obligation on the husband to provide for his family, the duty of the
wife to obey her husband, correct behaviour within the house, the way to
bring up children, what names to give them and other matters concerning
them.

2- Business and trade:

Islam has clarified the conditions and rules relating to running a
business whether it is a matter concerning the customer, or between two
parties regarding a purchase, mortgage, making out a contract for
renting and so on.

3-Education:

Islam has a particular view regarding education, culture, the
conditions for becoming a teacher, how a student should behave, the
characteristics of an Islamic education and what should be its aims.
Evidence for Islam’s concern for education is that the “Second Martyr”1
(al-Shahid al-Thani), may God be pleased with him, wrote a book on this
subject entitled, “Munyat al-murid fi adab al-mufid wa-’l-mustafid” 2.

4-Worship:

Islam has set out specific laws regarding worship, has clarified how
prayers in congregation are to be carried out and what kind of place is
suitable for such prayers. It has also detailed the characteristics of a
mosque and the conditions for being an imam and has stressed the
obligation of the believers to interrelate affectionately with one
another and with the imam, and so on.

1 The author is referring to Shaykh Zayn al-Din b. Nur al-Din al-‘Amili
who was murdered in 966/1559 while travelling to Istanbul. About 80
works are attributed to him.

2 “What an aspirant desires concerning the conduct of a teacher and
that of his pupil.”

5-Religious festivals:

Joyful festivals and occasions for grief, the Hajj, visits to the
shrines of the Holy Prophet and the impeccable Imams: all have a special
place in Islam and each occasion has its particular character, rites and
special spiritual benefits for which scholars have compiled numerous
works as, for instance, the Hajj of the Jawahir1, Kamil al-ziyarat2 and
the Mazar of the Bihar3.

6-Employment in government service:

I am referring here to the social aspects of such employment, that is
to say what is entailed in holding a post close to the government and
also the qualities that a judge should possess and those who work under
him as well as any specific employment that directly affects the
well-being of society.

7-Social gatherings:

Islam gives great importance to these from the point of view of correct
procedure: how best these should be conducted and everything
appertaining to them. One of the scholars has even written a specific
treatise about this called, “The book of social relations” (Kitab
al-‘Ishra)4.

8-Army:

From the social aspects, both when in camp and on the move: how the
army should conduct itself, what is involved in the army’s obeying its
commander-in chief and how such a commander must treat his men. Islam
deals with all these points and a special section in jurisprudence has
been allocated to them called “The Book of Jihad”5.

1 A reference to pp. 80-110 of vol.20 of Jawahir al-kalam fi sharh
shara’i‘ al-Islam by Muhammad Hasan al-Najafi (d. 1266/1850), Beirut,
1981, (43 volumes).

2 By Ja‘far ibn Quluye al-Qummi (d. 369/979), Najaf, 1356/1937-8.

3 The Kitab al-mazar of Bihar al-anwar by ‘Allama al-Majlisi, which
embraces vol. 97 (pp. 101 to end) and vols. 98 and 99.

4 Vols. 109 and 110 of the author’s “Encyclopaedia of Jurisprudence”
(Mawsu‘a al-fiqh) are entitled Kitab al-ijtima‘.

5 Vols. 47 and 48 of the author’s mawsu‘a are devoted to this topic.

9-Temporary sharecropping:

This has its own procedures, conditions and characteristics such as how
contracts between the sharecroppers are retained, the forms of the
sharecropping contract, the share of the cultivator in the farm produce,
how he is employed, his rights and the rights of the owner of the farm,
and so on.

10-Finally, Islam has clarified the rights of the ruler with regard to
the people, the rights of the people with regard to the ruler and the
relationship which should exist between both of them. In short, what is
called today “Sociology” has already received exhaustive treatment in
Islam. Society according to Islam should be characterized by the
following features:-

1. The promotion of a healthy state of affairs in every aspect of
life.

2. Total mutual trust throughout society.

3. The greatest degree of tranquillity and calm.

This is thanks to the vitality and reasonableness of the programme
which Islam has drawn up in detail for human society and which has to be
put into practice if what is desired is a life of well-being and
happiness.


**Islamic rulings**

**13-ISLAMIC RULINGS**

Question:

Has Islam designed special laws for the people with regard to the
diverse aspects of their lives?

Answer:

Yes, for every situation Islam has designed a law which is precise,
succinct and appropriate to the highest degree. So Islam abounds in laws
which have a direct bearing on the various stages of a person’s life. To
prove this you only have to peruse the Jawahir al-kalam in
jurisprudence1 which contains almost 60,000 edicts, all accompanied by
the evidence that they have been extracted from the following sources:
the Holy Qur’an, the sunna, the consensus of the religious scholars and
man’s reason.

Question:

Please give examples of some of the principle sections under which
Islamic laws are classified with regard to different aspects of life.

Answer:

They are numerous, for example laws relating to:

1. Transactions between people such as selling, buying, giving a
security, renting out and letting.

2. Farming matters relating to the land itself, agriculture and
irrigation channels.

3. Legal matters such as those concerning judges, witnesses, advocacy,
reconciliation and an individual’s rights.

4. Personal affairs like marriage, divorce, separation, inheritance and
making a will.

5. Criminal offences like punishment, the death penalty (judicial
retaliation) and the payment of blood money. 1 See fn. 1, p. 101.

6. Surety, getting a loan, deposits, bank drafts and so on.

7. Peace and war, treaties and all that concerns the affairs of the
state.

8. Several categories not mentioned above but which have a direct
bearing on the life of an individual.

Question:

How is it possible that these laws which were formulated more than
fourteen centuries ago meet the needs and problems of today?

Answer:

We have already said that Islam is the religion that the God of the
Universe has sent down so that it may be for all time the religion of
mankind and the way man should live his life. God is omniscient and if
man-made legal systems take into account the development of the human
race, its progress and possible requirements in the future, then is it
not more fitting for God to do the same with regard to His laws?

In addition to what has already been said, laws are of two kinds: laws
of a specific nature and which are never ever subject to change, such as
“alcoholic drink is forbidden”; laws which set out a general principle
which can be applied at any time or in any place such as the law that
“anything which is capable of producing intoxication is forbidden”.

Any development or problem we encounter in today’s world, if not
covered by a specific law, undoubtedly will fall within the scope of a
law which enunciates a general principle, which is then applied to the
issue in question either sanctioning it or disallowing it.

Question:

Can you give proof of what you have just said with regard to banks,
insurance and arming a country with nuclear weapons?

Answer:

Anyone who has a thorough grounding in the bases of Islamic
jurisprudence (usul al-fiqh) could answer this question.

1. A bank is tantamount to a place where a number of separate
activities take place concerning which, Islam has clarified its own
position and for each of which it has set out a specific law. Such
activities include bank drafts, loans, business transactions, deposits
and usury.

2. Insurance is covered by God’s words in the Holy Qur’an, “O you who
believe, fulfill [your] contracts”[5: 1] and because insurance does not
have any forbidden element, it will be covered accordingly by this
principle.

3. An Islamic state arming itself with nuclear weapons, on condition
that they are for defence, is covered by God’s words, “And make ready
against them what force you can [muster]”[8: 60].

Numerous other examples can be given where Islamic jurisprudence can be
applied to modern developments and phenomena.


**A life of happiness**

**14-A LIFE OF HAPPINESS UNDER THE BANNER OF ISLAM**

Question:

How can a happy life be found best within Islam?

Answer:

This is clear from the previous chapters of this book but suffice it
here to summarize what Islam can provide if Islam is actually applied:

1. A faith devoid of superstition, humbug, exaggeration and aberration
and which is consistent with man’s innate disposition and capable of
clear demonstration.

2. A spirit which is free from malice, spite, enmity and other
unpleasant traits and which possesses the qualities of equilibrium,
serenity, inner composure and justice.

3. A society which benefits from the world’s resources whether they be
in the earth, the sea or the air and where such resources are
distributed fairly without prejudice, without enriching one race at the
expense of another.

4. Knowledge and good health, material well-being, work, civilized
development and the promotion of virtue, as a result of which ignorance,
illness, poverty, vice, crime, unemployment and decadence will cease to
exist.

5. Abundant freedom and giving mankind a sense of dignity and in this
context we mention the words of the Almighty in the Holy Qur’an: “And
indeed We have honoured the children of Adam, and We have carried them
on land and sea, and have nourished them with [all] good things and have
preferred them over much We have created, with a marked preference”[17:
70].

And in numerous verses in the Holy Qur’an we read that God has made the
universe subservient to mankind. As regards the value of man from the
Islamic perspective, suffice it to mention here the Qur’anic verse: “If
anyone kills a person not in retaliation for murder or for spreading
turmoil in the land it is as if he has killed all mankind”[5: 32].

6. Peace throughout the world and security for all people.

7. Progress for mankind in all the vital fields of human activity.

8. Social justice, whether it be in the affairs of state or among the
populace.

9. The faithful discharge by each individual of his duties and the
giving to each person what is his due in a straightforward,
uncomplicated and honourable fashion.

10. The solution to every kind of problem.

This is a summary of the basic things to which Islam aspires for the
fulfilment of a happy life, the likes of which cannot be conceived as
existing outside Islam. In addition to this, that which is the source of
joy to a person in this life is the good news of a glorious future which
will thus make any disaster that may now befall him or her easy to
bear.

Consequently, we do not find even among those people who are the most
fervent nationalists and patriots, but who do not believe in the
hereafter, half the vitality, courage, intrepidity, happiness and
equanimity that we find among those who believe in God and the
resurrection, and history is the best witness to this.

Finally, we ask God to guide us all so that we may please Him and to
Him alone do we turn for help.

**1. Fundamentals of Islam**

In this book the author outlines the five fundamental principles of
Islam, namely Tawheed (the Indivisible Oneness of God), Adl (Divine
Justice), Nubowwah (Prophethood), Imamah (Leadership of mankind), and
Me’ad (Resurrection). For each principle, the author presents a brief,
and to the point, discussion on the significance of the issue concerned.
The book could serve as a good introduction to Islamic beliefs.

**2. The Family**

In this book the author highlights the problems he sees both in Islamic
societies and in west societies today that arise from the phenomenon of
unmarried young men and women, through to birth control and
contraception. He surveys the idea of marriage in various religions and
schools of thought, and discusses polygamy from the Islamic
perspective.

As well as being a call to the Muslim world to revert to the true
teachings of Islam, this book can also be of use as an introduction to
others who seek some answers to the social problems of today. This is
because Islam provides detailed teachings that promise success in every
area of human life on individual and societal levels, and furthermore
the practicality and success of those teachings have been proven in the
course of history.

3. The Qur’an: When was it compiled?

In this book the author addresses the issues of when the Holy Qur’an
was compiled, on what and whose instructions was this task carried out,
and who accomplished its compilation in the form that it is available
today. In this work the author presents undisputable evidence as to
address these crucial questions. Through historical, methodical and
logical analyses, the author establishes how and when the compilation of
the Holy Qur’an was achieved. In the latter half of the book the author
cites many Prophetic traditions (hadith) on the significance of the
learning and recitation of Holy Qur’an. It is a must read for every
Muslim, and any non-Muslim who follows Islamic issues.

**4. The Bible and Christianity: an Islamic view**

In this work the author carries out a brief investigation into the
Bible and presents his findings. They show that some of the most noble
men, i.e. the Prophets, who have been chosen by God Almighty as His
messengers to mankind, are accused in the Bible to have committed some
of the most vile and immoral conducts known to man. Prophets are accused
of deception, lying, fornication, rape, incest, murder, and the list
goes on. Even God does not escape unscathed in the Bible . . . false
characteristics are attributed to Him, or He is accused of making His
messengers to commit foul and disgusting acts.

In the second part of this work the author presents some of the debates
he had with the Christians who visited him in his residence in Karbala,
Iraq. The debates concerned their impression of Islam and its doctrine
as well as their own religious beliefs. In this presentation the author
shows how he invited non-Muslims to Islam through calm but rational and
intellectual debates with them. The book makes an interesting read,
especially when the reader can see the simple arguments put forward in
these debates.

**5. If Islam were to be established**

This book can serve as the Muslim's guide to the Islamic government. If
an Islamist opposition group has a plan for an Islamic government, this
book would help to check various aspects of the plan. In the absence of
such a plan, this book would present one. To the non-Muslims, the book
presents a glimpse of a typical Islamic system of government. The book
would also serve as a yardstick for anyone to check the practices of any
government that claims to have implemented an Islamic system of
government.

**6. War, Peace and Non-violence: An Islamic Perspective**

In this work the author addresses three controversial issues, which
have come to be associated with Islam. Through his extensive knowledge
of the teachings of Islam, the author presents the Islamic stand on war,
peace and non-violence, as found in the traditions and teachings of the
Prophet of Islam, which could serve as exemplary models for the
Mankind.

Detailed accounts of the traditions of Prophet in his dealings with his
foes during war or peace times are presented in this book, which gives
the reader a clear insight into the way and the basis upon which the
Prophet of Islam used to conduct his affairs in this respect.

**7. The Islamic System of Government**

In this introductory book the author outlines the basic principles of a
government based on the teachings of Islam. The author begins with the
aim and objectives of the government according to Islam and the extent
of its authority in that framework. He then addresses, from the Islamic
viewpoint, the significance and fundamental nature of such issues as
consultative system of government, judicial system, freedoms, party
political pluralism, social justice, human rights, foreign policy,
etc.

The author also outlines the policies of a government on issues such as
education, welfare, health, crime, services, etc. as well as such
matters as the government's income, and authority.

**8. Islamic Beliefs for All**

In this book the author discusses the five fundamental principles of
Islam. These principles are Tawheed or the Indivisible Oneness of God,
Adl or Divine Justice, Prophethood, Imamah or the Leadership of mankind
after the prophet, and Resurrection.

What distinguish this book are the author's subtle approach in
addressing the issues concerned and the simple examples given to
illustrate the discussion. This authoritative work is not only important
to Muslims, but it would also be of interest to those non- Muslims who
seek to explore Islam and its doctrine. This easy to read book would be
a valuable reference for Religious Education.

**9. Husayn - The Sacrifice for Mankind**

This is a collection of articles about a totally unique individual who,
through his remarkable sacrifices, managed to change the course of
history and the direction that mankind was heading for. He is none other
than Husayn, the grandson of the Prophet of Islam, Muhammad, and the
second son of Fatima and Ali, peace be upon them. Imam Husayn peace be
upon him stood up to tyranny and oppression and gave everything he had,
including his life and the lives of his most beloved sons and brothers
as well as those of his closest allies, in order to awaken the masses,
reform society and rectify the distortion that has been inflicted on
Islam.

The articles in this work cover some aspects of the aims and objectives
of Imam Husayn’s movement, the difference between his strategy and that
of his brother Imam Hasan in facing tyranny and despotism, the examples
he set, and the lessons that are learnt from the events that lead up to
Karbala fourteen centuries ago.

Besides the benefits of his movement, the personality of Imam Husayn
peace be upon him as reflected by the many hadith and teachings of
Prophet Muhammad is also discussed. Also included in this work are a
number of questions and answers about the commemoration ceremonies
observed by the Muslims around the world on the occasion of Ashura.

10. The rights of prisoners according to Islamic teachings In general,
Islam considers imprisonment as a case of last resort in many
circumstances, however, according to Islamic teachings there are only a
few offences that would lead to imprisonment. Under non-Islamic system,
of course the offender should be reprimanded, but any chastisement
prescribed by Islamic teachings may only be implemented if all the
relevant criteria and the preconditions prescribed are also met. If the
criteria are not met, then the prescribed punishment may not be
executed.

In this book the author addresses such issues as the fundamental nature
of freedom, the rights of prisoner, and the harmful effects of
imprisonment on the individual concerned as well as on society, and the
kind of offences that would lead to imprisonment under an Islamic
system. The author also cites a few cases to demonstrate the attitude
the Islamic ruler should take towards offence; to try to find reasons to
waive the punishments in any particular case.

The author also addresses the issue of torture in general, and mental
and physical ill treatment that is carried out under the guise of
interrogation and extracting confession from a detainee or a suspect.
11. Aspects of the political theory of Imam Shirazi Muhammad G. Ayub is
a well-known Islamist political activist within the Iraqi circle who has
established a long history of political struggle over the past three
decades. He was attracted by the views of the Imam Muhammad Shirazi in
the fields of social and political sciences.

This prompted the author to write this book to introduce the reader to
these views that have remained relatively unknown amongst Muslim
activists and reformists. It covers such aspects on politics as freedom
of expression, party-political pluralism and organisation, social
justice, peace and non-violence, human rights, consultation system of
government, etc.


