Moral Qualities, Ethics and Ideals
==================================

**3-ISLAMIC MORAL QUALITIES, ETHICS AND IDEALS**

Question:

What are moral qualities or traits?

Answer:

They are of two kinds: those relating to the heart; those relating to
parts of the body and the limbs.

Question:

Please provide examples for each kind.

Answer:

Moral traits relating to the heart are, for instance, tenderness of
heart or, conversely, jealousy, and examples of traits relating to parts
of the body are truthfulness or lying.

Question:

Moral qualities, as a whole, may be divided into how many kinds?

Answer:

They can be divided, on the whole, into two kinds:

1. Good moral traits, or virtues, whose presence in man is
commendable.

2. Bad moral traits, or vices, whose presence in man is found
repulsive.

Question:

What is man’s responsibility as regards moral principles?

Answer:

Man is charged with adorning himself with “virtues” and avoiding vices,
for virtues are perfection and vices are a deficiency. Man by nature
seeks perfection and distances himself from defects.

Question:

Is it possible for man to adorn himself with virtues and keep away from
vices?

Answer:

Yes, this is possible, for man’s soul is like a white sheet of paper
which is receptable to any colour. The only thing is that it is
difficult to be in command of one's soul which needs to be made
tractable and, particularly with regard to acquiring virtues, it
requires continuous vigilance until the praiseworthy quality becomes
inherent in one’s nature.

When such a quality becomes fixed within a person’s soul, he or she
cannot help but do good and does so without any hardship The soul, when
it comes to ethics, is similar to man when he wants to learn or make
things. A man needs to learn and apply continually his knowledge in
order to become an artisan who almost automatically and without
difficulty can perform his job. In the same way man can acquire
virtues.

Question:

Give an example of this.

Answer:

If someone wants to be truthful he should tirelessly make an effort to
speak nothing but the truth, and should do this time and time again
until truthfulness becomes a part of his nature. The same applies to
other qualities especially the most commendable which are more of a
trial for the soul of man.

Question:

How does Islam regard having moral principles?

Answer:

Islam incessantly orders people to acquire virtues and forbids them
from doing base deeds.

Question:

What is to be gained from tiring oneself to acquire virtues and of
keeping away from bad things?

Answer:

Virtues and good deeds benefit both the individual and society, as
opposed to base things which harm equally the individual and society.
For example, activity, which is in itself a virtue, makes man progress
and strive harder and at the same time encourages society to develop
more, whereas stagnation and laziness harm both man and society. Such is
the case with all the virtues and vices.

Question:

Some say that ethical principles reflect a society divided by class. Is
this true?

Answer:

Not at all. Let us ask this group whether justice in the application of
the law is a mere reflection of a particular society and so if the
attitudes of that society were to change, injustice would become an
admired quality? And is treason against the state such that if a
different kind of society came about, treason would be counted lawful? A
similar argument can be applied to all the other virtues.

Virtue will always be virtue and baseness will always be baseness and
this is irrespective of how society is at a particular time or how it
changes.

Question:

What are good moral traits?

Answer:

There are many good moral traits. We will here mention some of them:

1-Honesty in Word and Deed:

Man should be truthful in what he says and should be honest in what he
does, in that his actions do not contradict what he really believes as
in the case of a person who, out of outward show or flattery, is
respectful to another although in his heart he thinks otherwise.

Man should also be sincere in his actions. This means that he should
not give the impression that he is intent on doing a particular thing
whereas he really wants to do something else. He should also keep his
promises and never break his word. He should avoid pretence and not make
himself out to be something that he is not, like someone, for instance,
who wears tattered clothes so that people will think that he is poor
whereas in reality he is well-off.

2-Trustworthiness in Speech and Character:

Man should be sincere with his Lord and should not offend Him on any
account. He should be honest in his dealings with others and not cheat
anyone and should be trustworthy with regard to things that belong to
other people and never betray their trust. He should act honourably
concerning the reputation of another and never do anything God has
forbidden behind his back.

The importance of these two virtues, truthfulness and trustworthiness
have been emphasized in hadith transmitted from the Holy Prophet and his
pure progeny to the extent that one of the traditions relates that,
“Every prophet sent by God was truthful in what he said and trustworthy
in his dealings".1 Indeed an honest and trustworthy man is loved by
others and by God and is successful in what he does, in contrast to a
liar and one who cannot be trusted who wrecks his future even though he
may benefit from some brief gain in the short term.

3-Courage:

Man should be courageous and intrepid, and in his affairs should not
let fear near him, for the coward is always at the end of the line.
Every prophet and reformer possessed this quality and this is enough to
show how desirable it is. They could otherwise never have been able to
change society from being a corrupt one to being righteous and lead it
from decadence onto the path of upward development, since to confront
people with what they do not want to hear even 1 See Usul al-Kafi,
Muhammad b. Ya‘qub al-Kulayni (d. 329/940), Beirut, 1995, p.111, with
the addition, “ ……with a pious man and an unrighteous one [alike]”.

though it is for their own good requires the strongest kind of
courage.

4-Generosity:

In society there are always poor and needy people, and there are always
schemes which need help. [Those who give generously] are the mainstays
of society upon whom the disadvantaged pin their hopes. Therefore man
should be generous and give liberally. If the generous person is rich,
his generosity will not be a cause of loss for him, and if he should be
of average means his smaller contribution will also be accepted.

According to the popular saying, “The best generosity is to give
whatever you can”. The poet says: If the world has favoured you dispense
of its bounty to others before it slips from your grasp, If this bounty
is coming your way generosity will not destroy it and if this bounty is
leaving you, miserliness will not hold it back.

5-A Sense of Honour:

Honour is a condition in man by means of which he protects those things
which should be protected and guarded like religion, country, reputation
and so on and is one of the virtues. If an individual or community cease
to have honour their very nature comes under threat.

Of course teachers of ethics have talked in detail about those things
which are a matter of honour, as well as those things in which it would
be harmful if a sense of honour were applied but that is outside the
scope of this book.

6-Cooperation in Good Works:

Life is not shaped by the individual but, on the contrary, by
individuals cooperating together. The greater this cooperation and
mutual assistance, the more life will get better and the more society
will progress. Cooperation is of various kinds: through intellectual
endeavour, through money, work, and the various ways of cooperating as a
community.

7-Effort and Joy:

Man loves pleasures and comfort which are the enemies of progress and
advancement and cause laziness, indolence, backwardness and decline.
Therefore effort and activity have become indispensable for mankind.
Activity is incumbent upon mankind since it is a quality which moves him
forward in all aspects of life. Anyone who is not active and does not
make an effort will undoubtedly remain backward. Similarly, any nation
which does not possess this quality is on the road to decline.

8-Organization:

Imam Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him) says “By God I exhort you to
organize your affairs". 1 Man’s time is very scarce and the duties and
responsibilities that he has in relation to himself, society, his future
in this world and the afterlife are numerous. Therefore he should
organize his tasks carefully and meticulously.

In this respect he should take an example from the phenomena of the
universe. Everything has a special system otherwise the universe would
be chaotic. Similarly if a government or administration does not have a
system or division of work responsibilities, society will fall into
disarray.

9-Reform:

The world whether it likes it or not tends towards disorder. Time makes
every new thing obsolete and destroys eventually anything that has been
built. Tyrants corrupt nations and treat the people like slaves.
Therefore, man must rise like a reformer and, according to his ability,
make the world a better place to live in, make people more civilized,
improve society by introducing into it ways by which it can progress and
go forward, and reform conditions which have got out of order or been
corrupted by the oppressors.

1 See Nahj al-Balagha, ed. ‘Aziz-Allah al-‘Utaradi, Iran, 2nd. Print.
1995, p. 362: “I exhort you and all my offspring and my family and those
who hear these words to fear God and organize your affairs” - from
‘Ali’s last testament (no. 47).

10-Cleanliness:

The Holy Prophet (God’s blessings and peace be upon him and his
progeny) says, "cleanliness is a part of faith".

• Cleanliness is of four kinds:

• Cleanliness in speech, which means that man’s speech should be free
of idle talk, meaningless utterances, gossip, lies, poking fun at people
and so forth.

• Cleanliness in character, that is not doing bad and nasty things.

• Cleanliness in every part of the body, which is fulfilled by washing
thoroughly, removing dirt and grime, and by using perfumes.

• Cleanliness in one's clothes and in one's food and drink and so on.

11- Moderation:

Man should be moderate in all his affairs. For excess and
over-indulgence cause fatigue and, consequently, destruction. Wastage
creates backwardness and decadence. God, in the Qur’an, states:

“Thus we have made you a moderate nation”[2: 143]. For example, if the
safest speed for a a car is 100 kms per hour, then the speed of 150 kms
per hour is excessive and the speed of 50 kms per hour is too little.

12-Justice:

In all his dealings man must be just whether they are personal, family
or social, whether he is a judge or ruling a country or anything else.
In the heart of every man, God Almighty has placed a yardstick by which
he can distinguish justice from injustice. Justice is one of the
greatest virtues and personal qualities by means of which man can reach
the highest levels of spirituality.

13-Prudence:

By this quality man can organize affairs according to wisdom and
correctness, paying careful attention to matters that concern him
personally: giving and receiving, bringing up his children, getting on
with people, and, if he is the manager of a business or the like, how
best to run it; similarly in all his affairs, whether they be personal
or affect society as a whole, whether they be religious or worldly and
so on. 14-Affability and Amiable Conduct:

This means he speaks to others kindly and maintains a pleasant
countenance whether they be his family or relatives, neighbours, his
colleagues at work or anyone else. He should try to acquire the
friendship of others through the interchange of visits and gifts, by
participating in the happiness and sorrows of other people, by forgiving
anyone who does him a wrong and by apologizing to anyone he may have
offended.

15-Piety:

Man should fear God in all circumstances and in everything he does. He
should not do anything which displeases God Almighty for he will not
remain forever in this world. He will die and afterwards if he has done
good he will receive a good reward but if has done bad he will be duly
punished In addition to this, piety is one of the best ways by which
both the individual and society will prosper in this world.
16-Knowledge:

Not, however, just a little knowledge: on the contrary, just as the
Holy Prophet of Islam has stated, “Seek knowledge from the cradle to the
grave”. It is through knowledge that God Almighty raises the status of a
human being in His sight for as He himself states in the Qur’an: “Allah
will exalt those of you who believe, and those who are given knowledge,
in high degrees”[58: 11].

Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali (peace be upon him) also says: “The worth of a
person is what he knows”1.

17-Fondness and Friendship:

Man has been created a social being and so the more his friendship with
his fellow creatures increases, the more his own hidden merits and those
of the community where he lives become apparent, and this is always
perceived whenever a man loves other human beings and when people get on
with each other in a spirit of friendship.

Therefore we read in the hadith: “A believer is someone who is fond of
others and so others become fond of him, and there is nothing
praiseworthy to say about a person who is not affectionate towards
others and so he himself is not the recipient of affection". 2

18-High-mindedness:

It has always been high-aiming aspirations, which have raised man to
the ranks of the great ones. The poet in praise of the Prophet (God’s
blessings and peace be upon him and his progeny) says:

He has aspirations the greatest of which there is no limit to it, and
whose smallest one is more sublime than time itself.

19-Perseverance:

Man is perpetually confronted with problems, particularly if he strives
for progress desiring advancement for society and wishing to work for
the common good. So if he defies misfortune and continues in his work he
will succeed but if he does not, he will be counted among the losers. As
God states: “Verily, those who say, ‘Our Lord is Allah’, and then they
stand fast, on them the angels will descend [saying], ‘Fear not, nor
grieve’……..”[41: 30].

1 Nahj al-balagha, hikma no 78, page 419.

2 See Kanz al-‘ummal, vol. I, p. 141, hadith 678; p. 142, hadith 679
for similar versions; the latter has the addition, “ …. and the best
people are those who do the most for others”. 20-Adherence to the
Highest Standards in the Treatment of Others:

Such as, possessing humility, which is not being proud; having no
arrogance; possessing forbearance and not flying into a rage. Also
having patience and not being easily irritated; doing good for other
people and not hesitating from being a service to others, and so on.

There are many other virtues that scholars of ethics have mentioned in
more detail in their books and which contain a greater number of verses
from the Qur’an and hadith of the Holy Prophet and the pure Imams.


