Aspects of the Shari’a
======================

**7- SOME ASPECTS OF THE SHARI‘A**

In this section we shall briefly examine some of the lustrous features
of the Shari‘a of Islam namely, making oneself pure for worship, the
noble sanctuaries, non-ritual prayers, congregational prayers, enjoining
what is right and forbidding what is reprehensible, i‘tikaf, calling to
what is good, recalling memorable past events, the utter allegiance to
the Ahl al-Bayt and disassociation from their enemies.

**PURIFICATION IN ISLAM:**

Question:

What is meant by making oneself pure?

Answer:

Purification in Islam is of four kinds:

1. Purifying the soul from bad tendencies, such as jealousy,
miserliness, anger, cowardliness and other base qualities.

2. Purifying bodily parts from things which are incompatible with
Islam, as for instance, purifying the eye from treacherous glances,
purifying the tongue from idle talk and so on.

3. Purifying the body and its various parts from things which are
dirty, because Islam makes it obligatory to clean oneself thoroughly
from urine, blood, stools and other impurities. Also Islam commends
purifying and cleansing anything which has become dirty or filthy and
this does not only apply to the body but to everything with which the
Muslim comes into contact in the way of clothes, tableware and cooking
utensils, carpets and so on.

4. Cleaning both the body and the soul together in one of the following
three circumstances:-

A. Performing ablutions after each hadath.

**ABLUTIONS (WUDU’)**

Question:

What is a hadath?

Answer:

A hadath applies to urinating, making stools, flatulence, sleep, (for a
woman) a minor discharge of blood - istihada qalila, and it applies to
anything which causes mental confusion such as imbibing alcoholic
drinks, fainting and the like.

Question:

How should ablutions be performed?

Answer:

The manner of performing ablutions is as follows:

1. Washing the face from the hairline to the chin.

2. Washing of the right hand from the elbow to the tip of the
fingers.

3. Washing of the left hand from the elbow to the tip of the fingers.

4. Wiping the front part of the head with the moisture from the
underside of the right hand.

5. Wiping the top surface of the two feet with the moisture from the
palms of both hands, respectively.

**COMPLETE WASH (GHUSL)**

B. A wash of the entire body, which is of two kinds:

1. Obligatory complete wash.
2. Recommended complete wash.

Question:

When is a complete wash obligatory?

Answer:

A complete wash must be taken in the following six instances:

1. Janaba: that is after the ejaculation of semen or penetration.

2. Menstruation: this is blood which a women usually sees being
discharged once a month.

3. The discharge of blood etc (lochia) after childbirth.

4. (For a woman), discharge of blood, other than the monthly
menstruation and a minor menstruation - for a full explanation reference
should be made to a more detailed volume.

5. Touching a corpse: a complete wash becomes obligatory if one touches
the dead body of a human being after it has grown cold and before it has
been washed.

6. A dead person: it is obligatory that he or she be given a complete
wash.

Question:

What are the recommended complete washes?

Answer:

There are many such as, for instance, the wash on Fridays, Festival
Days1 and on the nights of the month of Ramadan.

Question:

What is the mode of taking a complete wash?

Answer:

It can be taken in one of two ways:

1. Submersing oneself: plunging oneself once into pure water, which it
is legally permissible to use (halal), in such a way that the water
covers the whole body.

2. Washing in a certain order: firstly washing the head and neck, then
the right side of the body and, after that, the left side of the body.

1 The a‘yad (pl. of ‘id).

However, one who cannot perform ablutions or take a complete wash is
required by Islam to do tayammum.

**TAYAMMUM**

Question:

What is that?

Answer:

Tayammum consists of:

1. Striking the palms of the two hands on clean and legally permissible
earth, then shaking them and after that wiping the forehead with the two
palms, from the beginning of the hairline up to the top part of the
nose. 2. Wiping the upper part of the hands with the palms by first
wiping the upper part of the right hand with the palm of the left hand
and vice-versa.

3. Again striking the palms of the two hands on the earth and wiping
the upper part of the hands with them in the way just described.

Clearly these rites of purification have to be done with the intention
of seeking nearness to God and consequently they not only purify a
person externally but also cleanse him or her inwardly, since seeking to
draw close to God necessitates also the cleansing of the soul.

**PLACES for WORSHIP**

Question:

What do you mean by places for worship?

Answer:

The Prophet of Islam, Muhammad (God’s blessings and peace be upon him
and his progeny) says: “The ground has been made for me a place of
prostration (masjid) and its earth [made] pure for me”1.

Therefore, in the view of Islam the ground everywhere is suitable for
worship, and thus worship has no particular place. Moreover, in Islam,
there is no place assigned for the worship of one group of people, and
another set up for another group. God Almighty states:

“And turn your faces [to Him] in every place of prostration
(masjid)”[7: 29].

However Islam has established certain places specifically for worship
called mosques (masajid, sing. masjid) and encourages worship and the
gathering of people in them and has promised a great reward for building
them, lighting them and looking after their affairs. Praying in a mosque
is preferable to praying elsewhere.

Places for worship are divided into:-

1. Places which are in the highest category of importance such as the
al-Haram Mosque at Makka, the Mosque of the Prophet (God’s blessings and
peace be upon him and his progeny) at al-Madina, the Mosque of Kufa,
(near the city of Najaf), the Mosque of Basra in the city of Basra, and
the Sakhr al-Sharif (the Dome of the Rock) at Jerusalem in Palestine.

2. Places that are in the second category of importance such as the
Sahla mosque near Najaf and the Baratha mosque2 between Kadhimayn and
Baghdad.

3. Places at the third level of importance which are all the other
mosques which Muslims have built throughout the world. They vary one
from another in status as has been explained in Islamic jurisprudence.

1 See ‘Awali al-la’ali al-‘aziziyya fi’l-ahadith al-diniyya, Ibn Abi
Jumhur Ahsa’i (born 840/1436-7), Sayyid al-Shuhada’ Publishing House,
Qum, 4 vols. 1405/1984-5, vol. 2, p. 208, with the addition, “wherever I
happen to be and it is time for prayer, I make tayammum and pray”.

2 Amir al-Mu’minin ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) passed by
Baratha (in the vicinity of Karkh, on the western side of old Baghdad,)
and prayed on the site of the present mosque.

Question:

Are there special injunctions relating to mosques?

Answer:

Indeed there are. For instance, it is forbidden to defile them and
arbitrarily to demolish them. It is also forbidden for a person in a
state of janaba or a woman in menstruation or who is in a state of
lochial discharge after childbirth to sit in a mosque, and it is
forbidden for those in a state of janaba even to pass through the
al-Haram Mosque at Makka and the Mosque of the Prophet (God’s blessings
and peace be upon him and his progeny) in al- Madina.

**HOLY SHRINES**

Question:

Which are the illustrious shrines?

Answer:

These are places where the Prophet and the impeccable Imams have been
buried namely:

1. The Hujra of the Prophet (God’s blessings and peace be upon him and
his Progeny ) at al-Madina in the Hejaz.

2. Al-Baqi‘ cemetery at al-Madina which contains the graves of Imam
al-Hasan al-Mujtaba, Imam Zayn al- ‘Abidin, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir and
Imam Ja‘far al- Sadiq (peace be upon them all). The final resting-place
of Fatima al-Zahra’ (peace be upon her), the best of all women, is also
probably in al-Baqi‘.

3. The shrine of Imam Amir al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him) in al-Najaf
al-Ashraf in Iraq.

4. The shrine of Imam al-Husayn (peace be upon him) in Karbala’,
Iraq.

5. The shrines of Imam Musa al-Kadhim and Imam Muhammad Jawad (peace be
upon both of them) in al- Kadhimiyya, Iraq.

6. The shrine of Imam ‘Ali al-Rida (peace be upon him) in Mashhad in
Khurasan, Iran.

7. The shrines of Imam ‘Ali al-Hadi and Imam al-Hasan al- ‘Askari, and
the underground vault of Imam al-Mahdi (peace be upon them) in Samara’
in Iraq.

8. Other shrines approach to some degree the unique status of the above
as, for instance, the shrine of al-‘Abbas (peace be upon him) in
Karbala’, the shrine of Sayyida Zaynab (peace be upon her) at Damascus,
and the shrines of other Prophets like the shrine of Dhu Kifl (peace be
upon him), and the shrine of Musa ( Kalim- Allah - peace be upon him).

Question:

Do these shrines enjoy a special superiority?

Answer:

Yes, for the reason that the Prophets of God and His deputies
(awsiya’uhu) and those who are near and close to God are buried there.

Question:

Please explain some aspects of this superior status.

Answer:

The special injunctions which apply to mosques (as set out above) also
apply to these holy shrines with the addition that supplications are
particularly recommended in the mausoleum of Imam al-Husayn (peace be
upon him). The latter is characterized by other privileges as are the
rest of the shrines.

Question:

Does merely being present at these shrines also carry reward and
recompense?

Answer:

Yes, for Islam has highly recommended that the Muslims visit the graves
of the Prophet, his Daughter and the impeccable Imams (peace be upon
them all) since such visits will receive an abundant reward in the
hereafter. Moreover Islam has specified particular occasions which are
preferable to other times for such visits.

If in today’s world we see that the tomb of the Unknown Soldier has
become a spot to visit, thus encouraging people to defend their homeland
and as a mark of esteem for the soldiers who are killed on the
battlefield, so in Islam there are well-known leaders and if people only
were to follow them they would acquire blessings in this world and
happiness in the world to come. Therefore we see that the shrines of the
Prophet and the impeccable Imams are as a torch for Islam and the source
of abundant happiness.

In particular the prayers for visiting the Prophet and the Imams are in
themselves lessons and a method for right belief. For example, in one of
the prayers written for the visit to the shrine of Imam Amir al-Mu’minin
(peace be upon him), ‘Ali is extolled as the one who is,

“Just with the people parcelling out justice with impartiality”.1 From
this sentence we glean the principle of justice and the need to be
impartial when dealing with the rights of others. In one of the prayers
written for the visit to the sanctuary of Imam al-Husayn we read:

“I bear witness that you are purity, pure and made pure and that you
are from the offspring of purity, the pure and those who have been made
pure. You yourself are pure and so through you the land was purified,
the earth in which you lie is pure because of you, and your sanctuary is
pure.”2

We learn from this that it is incumbent upon man to make his heart,
body and everything with which he comes into contact pure 1 See, for
instance, Mafatih al-jinan by ‘Abbas al-Qummi, Dar al-Zahra’ Beirut,
first print. 1998, p.443, ziyarat Amir al-Mu’minin (‘alayhi ’l-salam) on
the Day of Ghadir: “You parcel out justice with impartiality, you are
just with the people and you are more knowledgeable about God’s law than
the rest of mankind” [after the Holy Prophet Muhammad - peace be upon
him and his progeny].

2 Mafatih al-jinan, p. 515, fi ziyarat al-Imam al-Husayn (‘alayhi
’l-salam) al-makhsusa alula. and to make pure the land in which he
dwells. Should not the pilgrim follow the example of Imam al-Husayn
(peace be upon him) through whom the land was purified?

Question:

Are there other advantages for visiting the shrines on special
occasions?

Answer:

Yes, the same benefits that were mentioned for the Hajj, since during
the special occasions for visiting the shrines of the impeccable Imams,
people come together from every place and so the benefits that are
obtained from the Hajj (already listed above) are obtained from these
visits too.

**SUPPLICATION**

Question:

What are meant by supplications1 and why should we make them?

Answer:

Supplication is tantamount to the words man utters to his Creator in
which he asks God for a need, expresses a grievance, praises his Lord,
enumerates the blessings and benefits bestowed upon him or seeks His
guidance concerning something which either he is inclined to do or has
an aversion from doing.

The benefits of supplication consist in:

1. Man linking himself with the Creator of the universe.

2. Strengthening the soul since if man realizes that he is bound to God
the Mighty, his soul gains strength and the strength of the soul is the
source of courage and fearlessness.

3. Bringing about serenity and inner peace, for serenity diffuses
happiness.

1 Du‘a’ (non-ritual prayers) as distinct from salat (the five
obligatory daily prayers and so on) as described above.

4. Instilling what is good in the soul and keeping the believer from
bad things due to the inspiration which is got from making
supplications.

5. Leading the supplicant to a recognition of what is good and what is
evil since prayers elucidate this. Identification of good and evil, for
invocations always contain this.

6. Moreover, God Almighty replies to supplication, just as He says in
the Holy Qur’an:

“And your Lord said: Pray to me and I will answer you ”[40: 60] and so
the needs of a believer for this world and the hereafter are
fulfilled.

In short, Islamic supplications are a perpetual source of learning the
like of which is not found in any other faith or religion, and from
which man benefits, beginning from his earliest days until the last
moments of his life.

Question:

Please give an example of a supplication.

Answer:

We will mention here, as an example, parts of the supplication of Imam
al-Sajjad1 (peace be upon him) from his prayer to acquire “The most
beautiful virtues”2:

“O God extend your sustenance upon me and do not try me by my looking
at [what other people have got]; give me strength and do not afflict me
with arrogance; make me Your slave and do not spoil my worship by my
becoming absorbed with myself; cause me to be a means of doing good for
others; do not blot out my good deeds because of my making others feel
that they are indebted to me; grant that I treat others in the noblest
way and protect me from self-congratulation”

1 Imam ‘Ali Zayn al-‘Abidin, the fourth imam of the Ahl al-Bayt. 2 See
al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya al-kamila, (wa-kana min du‘a’ihi ‘alayhi
al-salam fi makarim al-akhlaq wa-mardi ’l-af‘al), 2nd print., Beirut
(al-Mu’assisa al-Dawliyya), 1999, with commentary by Ghalib ‘Asayli,
prayer no 20, pp. 113, 115-6.

“O God pour out Your blessings upon Muhammad and his Progeny and guide
me that I combat one who has cheated me, with kindness; that I reward
the one who has decided to have nothing to do with me, with munificence;
that I remunerate one who has deprived me, with generosity; that I
requite one who had cut off any association with me, by visiting him;
and oppose one who had spoken behind my back, by speaking well of him;
and may I be grateful for any favour [shown to me] and overlook anything
done against me.”

“O God pour out Your blessings upon Muhammad and his Progeny and I
beseech You that I may not be oppressed, since you have the power to
defend me; that I do not oppress [others], since you have the power to
restrain me; that I am not led astray, since you are able to guide me;
that I shall not be in need, since my well-being is in your hands; and
that I do not maltreat [others], since any power I have is from You”.

Anyone who scrutinizes the supplications of the Prophet (God’s
blessings and peace be upon him and his progeny) and the Imams, some of
which have been included in the volumes called al-Qur’an wa-’l-du‘a’ in
Bihar al-anwar1, or in Mafatih al-jinan or al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya will
realize that supplications are indeed a great treasure that can be used
to make man happy both in this life and the hereafter.

**CONGREGATIONAL PRAYER (SALAT AL-JAMA’A)**

Question:

What is meant by jama‘a?

Answer:

This is congregational prayer. Islam encourages Muslims to offer
together their five daily prayers in congregation behind an imam, on
condition that he is just, which means that he must be someone sincere
in his religion. Throughout the Islamic World from the time of the
Prophet, who was the one to establish 1 The encyclopaedic work by the
17th century ‘Allama Muhammad Baqir al-Majlisi, published (110 volumes)
in Beirut, 2nd revised edition, 1983. The specific section referred to
is Kitab al-dhikr wa-’l-du‘a’ found in vol. 90 (pp. 148 to end) and
embraces also vols. 91 and 92.

congregational prayers, until today Muslims have gathered early in the
morning to pray together the dawn prayer, at noon for the noon and
afternoon prayers and at sunset for the sunset and early evening
prayers.

They usually gather in specific places, such as the shrines of the
Imams and in mosques, and prayer behind one of the Muslims whom they
know to lead a good and upright life and they perform their obligatory
prayers doing what he does in the way of standing, sitting, bowing and
prostrating.

Question:

What do we gain from praying together?

Answer:

The benefits of congregational prayer are many and they include:-

1. Unifying the Muslims in a practical way: every day a Muslim with
great responsibilities stands next to a subordinate, a white Muslim next
to a black one, a rich Muslim next to a poor one and so on, all before
the one Lord, no one being distinguishable from another. At these times
all share similar sentiments. Class and other distinctions disappear and
from this can come nothing but good.

2. Cooperation will occur when Muslims meet together, since everyone
will get to know each other individually, friends will then help each
other when help is needed and there will be general concern if someone
is absent or going through difficult times.

3. Inculcating discipline in the hearts of those who are praying, for
congregation is one of the best forms of discipline. If it becomes
ingrained in the character of a Muslim he will be organized in all his
doings.

4. Benefiting from homilies and guidance which are given to the
congregation before the prayers or, as is usually the case, afterwards.
Muslims in these congregations are made aware of the calamities that
beset the Muslims throughout the world so as to get them to participate,
not only with their hearts in the grief of those who have been
afflicted, but also to participate by doing something practically.
Therefore we notice that those who are in the habit of praying together
are highly informed about religion and we also notice that, as a
consequence of the sermons and homilies which are delivered on these
occasions, those who pray congregational prayers are more upright and
scrupulous than others in the various fields of life. The benefits
accruing from praying in congregation continue to this day.

**ENJOINING WHAT IS GOOD and FORBIDDING WHAT IS REPREHENSIBLE**

Question:

What does this mean?

Answer:

Islam enjoins what is good, whether it is to make something obligatory
or to cause something to be recommended. The good which Islam enjoins is
called ma‘ruf.

Similarly, it also forbids what is reprehensible, either by causing
certain things to be absolutely forbidden or by saying that certain
actions are best kept away from. Bad things are called munkar.
Consequently Islam has ordered Muslims to enjoin what is ma‘ruf (good
things) and forbid munkar (bad actions). Thus, with this law the
deviations in any community are set straight, people are guided towards
correct Islamic behaviour and they are saved from evil things and
crimes.

In the Qur’an, God says: “You are the best of peoples ever raised up
for mankind, you enjoin what is good and you forbid what is
reprehensible”[3: 110].

The Prophet Muhammad (God’s blessings and peace be upon him and his
progeny) likened enjoining good and forbidding what is reprehensible to
a person in a boat who, while at sea, starts making a hole in it. If the
other passengers grab hold of him, he and they will be saved but if they
leave him to carry on, both he and they will perish Imam Amir
al-Mu’minin (peace be upon him) said: “See to it that you command what
is good (ma‘ruf) and forbid what is reprehensible (munkar) otherwise the
evil amongst you will surely gain the upper hand, whereupon you will ask
God to help you but your prayers will not be granted”1.

**I‘TIKAF**

Question:

What is i‘tikaf?

Answer:

I‘tikaf consists of staying in the mosque for a period of three days or
more during which the Muslim fasts in the daytime and refrains from
doing many things which would be incompatible with achieving nearness to
God, and also does not leave the mosque except for the performance of
necessities.

Question:

What is the benefit of i‘tikaf?

Answer:

Its benefit is to raise the soul upwards to spiritual things and to
break the individual from those physical attachments which smear clear
thinking. It is a time of recuperation and rest so as to cleanse the
body and purify the soul.

At the present day we see that people, even the heads of governments,
withdraw from their work for a period of recuperation, so that they may
have an opportunity for relaxing and reflecting. They go to a house in
the country or to the seaside and elsewhere in order to regain their
energy and think about their problems away from the hubbub of life.
I‘tikaf is better than doing this because:

1. While doing i‘tikaf you are fasting, some of the benefits of which
have already been mentioned.

1 A similar exhortation is in Nahj al-balagha p. 362, but with a slight
difference at the beginning viz. “Do not abandon the commanding of what
is good and the forbidding of what is reprehensible …………..”.

2. I‘tikaf involves focusing oneself on God who is the source of every
good and the inspiration of every serenity and inner peace.

3. I‘tikaf is carried out in a mosque which is in itself a place of
obedience, worship, truthfulness and purity, free from transgressions
and evil acts.

It has been scientifically demonstrated that place influences the human
spirit and can, according to what sort of place it is, be a positive
influence for good or for evil.

**PROPAGATING GOOD**

Question:

What is meant by propagating good?

Answer:

Islam has named every noble action “good” (khayr) and has enjoined
people to invite others towards goodness. God Almighty says, “Let there
arise out of you a group of people inviting to all that is good”[3:
104], just as He enjoined people to do good things themselves.

Indeed in Islam, in addition to this, there is a reward for someone who
guides to what is good exactly as there is for one who actually performs
that act himself for as the Prophet (God’s blessings and peace be upon
him and his progeny) says, “He who points the way to something that is
good is as if he performs [the good action himself]”1.

Good action are divided into two categories:

1. Good deeds that Islam has specifically designated such as prayers,
coming to the aid of the needy and feeding the hungry.

2. Good works which are covered by the general principles laid out by
Islam, even if Islam has not made a specific stipulation for them, such
as building schools and hospitals, establishing charities for providing
clothes and 1 See Kanz al-‘ummal, vol. 16, p. 359, hadith 16052 and
Bihar al-anwar, vol. 71, p. 409. food for the needy, facilitating
marriage contracts and so on.

Therefore in the view of Islam, a Muslim is a person who does good and
at the same enjoins good to the extent that the Prophet (God’s blessings
and peace be upon him and his progeny) says: “Removing something from
the road that might cause injury is a good deed”1.

Surely if human beings would act upon the directions of Islam in doing
good and propagating what is good, no one would be in need and the world
would be changed into a paradise of wellbeing where goodness, prosperity
and friendship would prevail throughout the earth.

**COMMEMORATIONS**

Question:

What is meant by commemorations?

Answer:

Islam has made the holding of celebrations and commemorations in memory
of the Prophet and the impeccable Imams, whether it is for happy events,
like their birthdays, or for sad ones, like the days on which they died,
something that is recommended and highly desirable. In a hadith it is
related that, “Our followers are from us, they are joyful in our joy and
are grieved in our grief”2 Question:

What benefit do these commemorations have?

Answer:

The many benefits they have include:

1 See Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 72, p. 50.

2 See Ghurur al-hikam wa-durar al-kalim, ‘Abd al-Wahid al-Amidi (fl.
5/11th century), 1st print., Beirut, 1987, part 1, p. 227, hadith no
178: “ Almighty God looked upon the Earth and chose us and selected for
us followers (shi’a) who will come to our aid and will be joyful when we
are joyful, will grieve when we are grieved and will expend of
themselves and their possessions for our sake. Those [people] are from
us and will return to us and they will be with us in Paradise”.

1. Encouraging the good. If people see that the good and upright are
the object of respect then their souls are inclined towards good, so
that they in turn may also generate respect. Just as these
commemorations are an encouragement towards good and laudable deeds so
they also arouse an aversion to what is bad and reprehensible.

2. Creating role models. If man has a personal esteem for someone, he
will take him as a role model and will try to make his own life conform
to the qualities of whom he is in awe. This is because in man’s
character there is a tendency towards spiritual advancement and the
raising of oneself towards the ranks of those who are at the peaks of
humanity and at the highest level of nobility and virtue.

3. Appreciating those who are concerned with the betterment of society.
Such people are by right the object of respect, be it during their
lifetime or after their demise.

4. In addition, these commemorations usually involve people gathering
together and the holding of seminars and lectures and so there accrue
from them benefits for the community, some of which we have already
mentioned with regard to the Pilgrimage to Makka and praying in
congregation. Moreover these gatherings are usually not simply
commemorations but also contain aspects of guidance and admonition so
that the benefit is two-fold: the benefit from the actual event and the
benefit obtained from spiritual instruction.

5. If such a gathering is accompanied by colourful decorations when
celebrating a joyful occasion and by black ones for sorrowful
commemorations, this will have a greater impact because then the eye
participates with the ear in the quest for understanding and inspiration
and so the response to what is good and the aversion to what is bad will
be stronger.

Question:

Can you give some examples of commemorations?

Answer:

For instance:

1. The Birthday of the Holy Prophet, of Fatima al-Zahra’ and the 12
Imams (peace and blessings be upon them all).

2. The Festival (‘Id) of al-Mab‘ath1 when the Prophet (God’s blessings
and peace be upon him and his progeny) was told by God to commence his
Prophetic Mission to the people - on 27th Rajab2.

3. The demise of the Prophet, Fatima al-Zahra’, and 11 of the
impeccable Imams (peace and blessings be upon them all).

4. The Festival of Ghadir (‘Id al-Ghadir) when at a place called Ghadir
Khumm the Prophet (God’s blessings and peace be upon him and his
progeny) appointed ‘Ali ibn Abi Talib as his khalifa (successor) over
the Muslims - on 18th Dhu ’l-Hijja3.

5. The Islamic festivals of ‘Id al-Fitr (breaking of the fast) on 1st
Shawwal4 and ‘Id al-Adha (the festival of Sacrifice) on 10th Dhu
’l-Hijja.

6. One of the days of grief is the Arba‘in, the fortieth day of
mourning for Imam al-Husayn, on the 20th Safar5.

1 13 years before the Hijra (when the Prophet Muhammad moved from Makka
to al-Madina).
2 This was in Makka.
3 Ghadir Khumm is the name of a pool between Makka and al-Madina. The
event took place in the year 10/632 when the Holy Prophet was on his way
back to al-Madina, having performed his Farewell Hajj.

4 The day after the fasting month of Ramadan.

5 The fortieth day after the martyrdom of Imam al-Husayn at Karbala’ on
10th Muharram 61/680, the 1st month of the Muslim calendar, (Safar is
the 2nd).

**TAWALLI and TABARRI**

Question:

What is the meaning of tawalli and tabarri.

Answer:

If a person loves someone he will become close to him, and when he
becomes close to someone then he will follow his example in his deeds
and words. Similarly if he hates someone he will keep away from him and
when he shuns him he will also oppose and be different from him in what
he does and says. Thus love and taking someone as an example to be
followed are called tawalli (amity), and dislike and keeping distant
from someone are called tabarri (hostility).

Question:

To whom should we display real friendship and to whom should we display
hostility?

Answer:

We ought to show amity towards God, His Prophets, the Imams and the
God-fearing, and hostility towards the enemies of God, of His Prophets,
the Imams and those closest to Him. We should do this because one who
truly loves God will become nearer in his heart and in his actions to
the pious, will obey them, and in so doing will gain well-being in this
world and success in the hereafter.

Similarly, if one displays hostility towards the enemies of the
God-fearing he will also keep himself away from them, have nothing to do
with them and contradict them in his actions and in all his doings.
Consequently he will not be made wretched like those people. Moreover,
man must satisfy inevitably his inner instincts which include love and
aversion, for there are three categories of people:

1. Those among God’s servants who truly fear Him.
2. The enemies of God and the enemies of the God-fearing.
3. Those who are neither with God or with His enemies, like the
ignorant who are incapable of distinguishing truth or some of those who
live in remote villages or desert places.

If man wants to fulfil his instinct for love he should channel it
towards someone who is of beautiful character, whose friendship is
beneficial, and if he wants to fulfil his instinct for enmity he should
direct that towards someone who is of ugly nature with whom to make
friendship would be dangerous and harmful.

Therefore, as we have outlined, adopting amity and hostility is,
firstly, the way to satisfy these instincts which have to be expressed
and, secondly, one will obtain benefit from such a stance in this world
and in the hereafter.

Question:

Can instincts be fulfilled?

Answer:

Any instinct be it love, hate, grief, joy, courage and so on has, like
the stomach, to be satisfied. Islam has made clear what is the best
nourishment for these instincts so that man will be aware of what makes
him happy and what causes him distress and thus he will follow what is
beneficial and discard what is harmful.


