Islamic Economics
=================

**9- ISLAMIC ECONOMICS**

Question:

Has Islam a special economic system?

Answer:

A healthy and free economic system exists only in Islam whereas the
economic systems dominant in today’s world are not healthy due to one of
these factors:

1. Either the system is corrupt in that it enables some to acquire
millions beyond imagination, while others are dragged down to the lowest
level of poverty and die in their thousands every day from hunger and
nakedness.

2. Or the system is stifling and repressive since it does away with
private ownership with the result that an individual lives in dire
poverty.

Question:

What is an Islamic economic system like?

Answer:

The description of an Islamic economy requires several large volumes,
so we will simply outline here the general basic principles that Islam
has set out for dispelling poverty and need from society and raising the
standard of living, which are as follows:

1-The broadening of freedom in all aspects of life:

Since people enjoyed freedom under an Islamic government, as was
pointed out in the previous chapter, they would work hard and with
sincerity and the road to prosperity was open to them. So they would
enrich themselves and rarely would there be found among them anyone in
need.

This is because, as is well-known, the basic methods of acquiring
wealth were permitted in every respect and no taxes or tolls were
imposed upon them, nor restrictions or conditions.

So everyone would be busy and be working and his work would be his
means of sustenance and his income would exceed what he needed. However
under secular legal-systems:

1. The sources of wealth are restricted and profiting from them is not
open to all.

2. What is allowed to be profited from is subject to taxes and other
dues.

3. The mere making of a profit is bound up with restrictions and
conditions. Rarely, therefore, is one able to benefit from the basic
sources of wealth and even if one can, conditions and taxes are imposed
upon any gain one might make. Indeed if we say that these restrictions
have reduced the level of the creation of wealth to 20% of what it
should be, we have not exaggerated.

Take the example of Iraq. Under Islamic governments it was flourishing
with agriculture and development projects but now under non-Islamic rule
only a small part of Iraq is prosperous and the rest of it is in ruin.
Whereas under Islamic governments 40 million people were living off its
resources, its population today barely reaches 8 million1.

2-The Structural Simplicity of Islamic Government: A fine example of
this simplicity can be seen at the time Iraq came under Islamic rule
when only three people went there from Medina to govern the country.

The secret of this simplicity is that the apparatus of government is
there in the first instance to ensure that there is justice among the
people, secondly to protect the country from its enemies and thirdly to
bring about greater prosperity throughout the land.

Moreover, Islamic government is :

1. Popular government to the highest degree.

1 This is, of course, an out of date statistic (the book was compiled
in the mid-1960s) and the present population of Iraq is estimated to be
around 22 million.

2. Does not recognize the restrictions which only lead to a plethora of
departments.

3. Opposes bureaucracy and strives to solve problems speedily.

4. Creates a climate of trust among the people by demonstrating what
having faith and a conscience should entail.

In this manner, Islamic government does not need numerous departments
and so its employees are few in number which means that the wealth at
its disposal is considerable. This in turn brings about a growth in the
economy for two reasons:

1. The government employee generally does not generate his own income
but instead is dependent in the long run on the labour of others.
Therefore if the number of employees is reduced the money that otherwise
would have to be spent on paying salaries can be saved, and the
government will consequently have more money at its disposal and can
direct its attention to other vital projects.

2. Those who are not employed by the state work for themselves and
generate wealth, whereas if they were employed by the state they become,
in effect, consumers.

For example: If there are 10 people in a house and each one earns 1
dinar and then the government employs 5 of them, the money being
generated will be 5 dinars to be shared among 10 people, whereas if
there were only 1 employed among them, the income generated would be 9
dinars to be shared among 10 people.

3- The Treasury:

Khums, zakat, jizya and kharaj were collected for the treasury, the
first three categories having already been explained. Kharaj is the
yield from those lands which are in the possession of the state or which
have been acquired by the Muslims by virtue of war and so forth.

The duty of the treasury is twofold:

1. To meet all the needs of the people.

2. To look after every aspect of the welfare of the people.

For example, the treasury gives money to a poor man so that he can be
free of want; to a traveller in need so that he can return home; to an
unmarried man so that he can get married; to someone who is sick who
cannot afford treatment so that he can get well; to someone who does not
have any capital to start a project so that he can make a living; to
someone who needs a house to live in, in order that he might build one;
to someone who wants to embark upon a course of study but has not got
enough money so that he is able to do so - and so on and so on.

In short, every person in need approaches the treasury which is then
obliged to help him out of duty and so this help is not like a donation
or act of piety. From another aspect, it is incumbent upon the treasury
to look after the welfare of the Muslim community as a whole by, for
example, building roads and illuminating them efficiently, establishing
hospitals, opening schools and building mosques.

As a result no one will remain in need nor will there be any aspect of
the public good inadequately funded.

With these three things to which we have alluded: the extension of
freedom, the simplicity of the machinery of government and the
institution of the treasury, Islam is able to make society more
prosperous and so the Islamic economic system is the best system and
differs from capitalism, wherein the distribution of wealth is
unbalanced, and from a communist economy which does not attend to the
priorities and real needs of the people.

**Peace in Islam**

**10-PEACE IN ISLAM**

Question:

Is Islam a religion of peace or a religion of war?

Answer:

Islam is a religion of peace and not of war and the proof of this are
God’s words in the Qur’an: “O you who believe, enter all of you into
peace”[2: 208], also “And if they are disposed towards peace, you, also,
be so disposed”[8: 61].

Question:

So does Islam say you must submit when confronted with an oppressor or
aggressor?

Answer:

Certainly not, for Islam is a religion of reason and justice and
therefore submission and capitulation are not permissible and thus God
says: “... whoever then acts aggressively against you, inflict
aggression upon him in the same way that he had inflicted it upon
you”[2: 194]; and says:

“Permission [to retaliate] is given to those upon whom war is made
because they are oppressed, and most surely God is able to grant them
victory”[22: 39]; God also says:

“And if you retaliate, then do so in the same way that you were
treated”[16: 126].

Question:

If Islam is the religion of peace, then why did it consider fighting
non-Muslims to be permissible and why did the Prophet of Islam fight
them?

Answer:

All the battles of the Prophet (God’s blessings and peace be upon him
and his progeny) are characterized by their having been defensive
battles and not battles of aggression. He did not fight What is Islam?

because he loved power for its own sake or because he wanted to acquire
territory and colonize it.

Question:

Does Islam ever consider starting fighting to be lawful?

Answer:

Yes, but only under two conditions:

1. If the fighting is for the sake of God in order to deliver people
from harmful beliefs and defiled social and moral practices.

2. If it is for the sake of the downtrodden: to deliver people who are
suffering from suppression and tyranny at the hands of tyrants and
oppressors.

These two principles have been enunciated in the Holy Qur’an thus:

“And what prevents you from fighting for the sake of God and for the
oppressed men, women, and children?”[4: 75]. Question:

In brief, what are the differences between an Islamic war and a non-
Islamic one?

Answer:

They can be summed up as follows:

1-Islam fights only for the deliverance of human beings:

a) Delivering men from superstitious, dangerous beliefs, corrupt
behaviour and saving the oppressed from those who exploit them

b) To ward off attack, be it from abroad or from a rebellion against
Islam from within.

2-Islam, if it engages in conflict observes the strictest ethical
conduct:

a) It does not harm women, children, those who are not involved in the
conflict, old men, and similar categories of non-combatants.

b) It does not cut off the supply of water or poison it, cut down
trees, and so on.

c) As far as possible, it refrains from killing.

d) After gaining the upper-hand it grants a general amnesty, just as
the Holy Prophet (God’s blessings and peace be upon him and his progeny)
did in the case of the people of Makka and ‘Ali (peace be upon him) did
with the inhabitants of Basra.

3-Exemplary behaviour after victory:

a) Applying justice everywhere scrupulously.

b) Islam does not exploit the country but enables the inhabitants to
benefit from its resources.

c) Does not impose from outside a ruler over the people but instead
enables someone from the indigenous populace to rule the country if he
possesses the necessary qualities.

d) Gives complete freedom and equality to the people, as has already
been indicated.

As for non-Islamic conflicts, they are not waged to save people from
their plight but rather to gain control over them. The victors after
gaining power are set on a policy of killing, exploitation and
oppression.

What we have said regarding wars waged in the name of Islam and
non-Islamic conflicts is not mere propaganda but is substantiated by
history. We should add that those wars and battles carried out in the
name of Islam but which, however, do not conform to the Islamic
principles outlined above, are to be considered aberrations.


