Foreword
========

The human society is comprised of families. Islam attaches great
importance to real pleasure and prosperity of human beings through
Islamically balanced, highly ethical, well-educated and well-behaved
families and happy homes. Like in all the fields of human activity,
Islam has laid down clearly and in detail the rights and duties of men
and women, husbands and wives and also parents and children. The happy
homes having pleasant environment, in which husband, wife, children and
other relatives live together merrily with good mutual understanding,
tolerance and respect as well as fulfilling their respective duties
towards each other, is indeed an index of the highest status the
Almighty Allah has blessed, among the creatures, to all human beings.

Unfortunately, the lack of appreciation about these aspects,
particularly by husbands and wives, leads to many problems for
themselves as well as for the children-the future generations. In
advanced and western countries, with more and more progress, greater
technological and scientific achievements and very fast and ultramodern
way of life, the rate of divorces and separations is alarming.

Considering the importance of the subject, the I.P.O. is taking the
privilege of publishing this book (originally in Persian language)
written by an eminent Islamic scholar, a noted author and a senior
professor of Islamic Jurisprudence at, *Hawzah Ilmiyyah* (Islamic
Theological Centre), Qum, Iran, Hujjatul-Islam Ibrahim Amini.

The author has taken great pains in conducting research and deep study
on the subject of family ethics and husband-wife relationship. The first
part deals with duties of women and the second part contains duties of
men. Along with the duties, rights of husbands on wives and those of
wives on husbands have also been described quoting relevant verses of
the Holy Qur'an and *Ahadith* (traditions).

It is hoped that the book would be found very useful for all and every
home would treasure this to derive the maximum benefit for creating and
maintaining the serene and pleasant environment, full of Allah's
blessings.

*International Relations Department*  
*Islamic Propagation Organization*


