Preface
=======

The greatest desire of all young men and women who reach the age of
puberty is to marry. Through the establishment of a joint marital life,
they would earn more independence, as well as have a kind and
trustworthy partner. They regard marriage as the beginning of their
lives of prosperity.

Man has been created for woman and *vice versa*.

They are attracted to each other like magnets. Marriage and establishing
a joint life is a natural desire of human beings responding to their
instincts. It is considered one of the greatest Divine blessings. In
fact, where else could one find a better shelter for the youth than a
sincere family unit?

It is the desire of raising a family which preserves the youth from
pursuing irrational dreams and internal anxieties. The marital union
enables them to find a kind and faithful partner who could share the
hard and difficult times. The sacred marital covenant is a Divine rope
which links the hearts, calms them when they become unsettled, and
focuses irrational dreams on one ideal goal. The house is the centre of
love, kindness, and friendship, whereby it is the best place to relax
and live comfortably.

The Almighty Allah mentions this blessing in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
لِتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُمْ مَوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً ۚ
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And one of His signs is that He created mates for you from
yourselves that you may find rest in them and He put between you love
and compassion; most surely there are signs in this for a people who
reflect" (30:21).***

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: 'A man who is not married, even though
he may be wealthy is surely poor and needy: and the same is true for a
woman."[^1]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) asked a man: 'Are you married?" The man replied
"no". The Imam stated: 'I would not like to stay unmarried even for one
night, even if I were to own the whole world'."[^2]

"The Holy Prophet (S) stated: 'There has not been created any
institution in Islam which is more favored and dearer to Allah than
marriage'."[^3]

Even though the Compassionate Allah has endowed human beings with such a
precious blessing, they do not appreciate it and sometimes due to
ignorance and selfishness, convert this warm and blessed union, into a
dark prison or even a burning Hell! It is due to man's own ignorance
that the members of the family have to live in this dark prison or that
the sacred marital covenant has to be destroyed.

If a couple is aware of their duties and acts accordingly, then a house
would be a place of friendship and would resemble heaven. But, if there
are family differences and arguments, the family home, could truly
change into a prison. Family differences are due to various reasons,
such as economic factors, family background of the man and woman, living
environment, unwanted interference by fathers, mothers and relatives,
and tens of other reasons.

But according to the author, the most important factor is the ignorance
of husband and wife regarding their duties and lack of preparation for
their marital life. Generally, in order to accomplish a task, expertise
and readiness are necessary requirements. If one lacks the necessary
knowledge and readiness, then one cannot successfully achieve his
desired goal. Thus, training classes are formed to educate people for
different tasks.

Expertise, readiness, and knowledge are also needed in marriage. A young
man must possess enough information about his wife's principles of
values and internal desires. He must also be aware of marital problems
and ways of solving them. He should not regard marriage as merely buying
goods, or hiring a maid, but to acknowledge it as a treaty of
friendship, honesty, kindness, partnership, and cooperation in a joint
family life.

A young woman should also be aware of her husband's philosophy of life
and wishes. She should not consider that marriage is like engaging a
servant for fulfilling needs without any terms and conditions; but as a
pledge for partnership and cooperation in making efforts for conducting
the life. In order to obtain a successful partnership, there is a need
for understanding, cooperation, and devotion.

Although the future of young men and women largely depends on a marriage
which requires awareness of the importance of the concepts of marriage
and preparation for undertaking such a task, our society unfortunately
neglects the importance of these conditions.

The parents pay a great deal of attention to such points as dowry,
beauty, and personality. However, they disregard the readiness for
establishing a marital life as a necessary condition. They marry their
sons and daughters off without providing adequate information about
family life.

Consequently two young and inexperienced people step into a new life and
confront many problems. Differences, arguments, and fights begin to
develop. Their parents then interfere to help resolve the differences.
But, since their interferences are mostly biased, the differences are
exaggerated and the situation becomes worse.

The initial years of family life are eventful and critical. This is the
period where many families can be torn between divorce and
disintegration. Some of them continue their marriage and prefer this
self-made prison to divorce and others learn more about each other and
form a relatively comfortable life.

What a nice thing it could be had there been some means of educating and
informing young men and women about the foundations and the
establishment of marriage in the form of classes entitled "marriage
preparation" which would prepare them for establishing their own
families. I am hopeful of the day that such program is established.

The present book is written on the basis of this necessity. In resolving
the issues of this book, I have relied upon the Holy Qur'an, the
traditions of the Holy Prophet (S) and the Infallible Imams (a.s.), as
well as some general statistics, and my personal experience.

Although certain guidelines for a better marriage have been presented, I
do not claim that all family problems can be solved by reading this
book. It is hoped that the book will provide better insight and
awareness for those experiencing marital and family problems. It is
highly expected of those responsible' persons who realize the importance
of this matter, to take serious steps in order to help those who suffer
from the agonies and sufferings of family deterioration and conflict.
(Insha’Allah)

This book has been divided in two parts. The first part concerns the
duties of women to their husbands and the second part covers the duties
of men to their wives. But men and women are recommended to read both
parts in order to get a better insight into the matter. By reading only
one part of the book, the reader might feel a bias towards one side or
the other; but by reading both the parts, one would admit that this is
not the case.

*Ibrahim Amini*  
*Qum*  
*July 1975*

[^1]: Wasa 'il al Shiah, vol. 14, p 3.

[^2]: Ibid.

[^3]: Ibid, p 23


