Part 1: The Duties of Women
===========================

The Purpose of Marriage
-----------------------

Marriage is a natural necessity for every human being. It bears many
good outcomes of which the most important ones are:

(1) The formation of a family through which one can find security and
peace of mind. A person who is not married resembles a bird without a
nest. Marriage serves as a shelter for anyone who feels lost in the
wilderness of life; one can find a partner in life who would share one's
joy and sorrow.

(2) The natural sexual desire is both strong and significant. Everyone
should have a partner for satisfying their sexual needs in a secure and
serene environment. Everyone should enjoy sexual satisfaction in a
correct and proper manner. Those who abstain from marriage often suffer
from both physical and psychological disorders. Such disorders and
certain social problems are a direct consequence of the abstinence of
youth from marriage.

(3) Reproduction: Through marriage the procreation of mankind is
continued. Children are the result of marriage and are important factors
in stabilizing the family foundations as well as a source of real joy to
their parents.

A great deal of emphasis has been given in the Holy Qur'an and the
Traditions to both marriage and having children. The Almighty Allah
states in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا …
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And among His signs is this, that He created for you mates from
among yourselves..."*** ***(30:21).***

"The Prophet (S) stated: 'There is no better structure founded in Islam
other than marriage'."[^1]

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'Engage in marriage; because this is the
tradition of the Prophet (S) of Allah'."[^2]

"The Prophet of Allah (swt) stated: 'Whoever chooses to follow my
tradition must get married and produce offspring through marriage (and
increase the population of Muslims) so that on the day of resurrection I
shall confront other Ummah (nations) with the (great) numbers of my
Ummah'.'"[^3]

"Imam Rida (a.s) stated: 'The greatest gain for a man is a faithful
woman who, when she sees him, becomes happy and protects his property
and her own honor in his absence'."[^4]

What has been dealt with so far in this chapter has been only the
worldly and animalistic side of marriage which the animals also share:
the Benefits of companionship and reproduction. As such the true purpose
of marriage for the human race is of a different kind. Mankind is not
meant to have entered this world solely in order to eat, drink, sleep,
seek pleasure or act lustfully, and then to die and be destroyed.

The status of man is higher than such deeds. Human beings are meant to
train themselves and their souls by gaining knowledge, committing good
deeds, and behaving with good manners. Man is meant to take steps along
the straight path to achieve nearness to Almighty Allah. Mankind is a
creation that is able to cleanse his soul and by avoiding evil deeds and
exercising good behavior reach a level of such high status that even the
angels are not able to attain. Man is a creature that is eternal. He has
come to this world so that by the guidance of the prophets and the
implementation of the programs set by the religion (of Islam), to secure
his happiness in this world and the Hereafter; so that he could live a
peaceful life in the next world eternally.

Therefore, the purpose of marriage should be searched for in this
spiritual context. The aim of marriage for a religious person should be
a means of avoiding evil deeds and purging one's soul of sins. It should
be a means of acquiring nearness to the Almighty Allah. It is in this
context that a suitable and good partner assumes an important role. When
two believers, through marriage, form a family, their sexual
relationship would benefit them in strengthening their mutual love and
kindness, for such a couple, there would not exist any dangerous threats
of sexual perversion, dangerous addictions or unlawful deeds. The
Prophet (S) of Islam and all of the Imams (a.s) have laid great emphasis
on the institution of marriage.

"The Prophet (S) stated: 'Whoever gets married, has safeguarded half of
his religion'."[^5]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) stated: 'Two Rak'ats (units) of a married person's
Salat (prayer) are better than seventy Rak'ats offered by a
bachelor'."[^6]

A faithful, pious, and harmonious partner plays a crucial role in having
a respectable and honest life. Indeed having such a partner is an
important factor when wanting to avoid evil deeds and enables the
commitment of oneself in performing the obligatory acts of worship. A
pious couple, not only would not meet with any obstacle in achieving
religious goals, but would be a source of encouragement to each other.

Is it really possible for a faithful man of Allah to gloriously fight in
His way, without the approval of his wife? Is it possible for any pious
person to earn his living lawfully, observing all religious aspects,
paying statutory religious alms to avoid extravagance, and to spend on
charitable deeds without the consent of his wife?

A pious person would always invite his partner to goodness, just as a
corrupt person would tempt his partner towards corruption. It is then
reasonable that, in Islam men and women, who want to get married, are
advised to regard the piety and good manners of their future partners,
as essential conditions.

"The Prophet (S) stated: 'If I were to bestow all the good of both
worlds upon a Muslim person, I would endow him with a humble heart, a
tongue which continuously utters his praises, a body patient enough to
withstand all calamities; and I would give him a pious spouse who, when
she sees him, becomes happy, and protects his property and her own honor
in his absence'."[^7]

"One person went to the Prophet (S) and said: 'I have a wife who always
welcomes me when I come home, and escorts me to the door when I leave.
When she finds me sad and unhappy, she then, by consoling me says: 'If
you are thinking of sustenance, then do not despair, because Allah
provides sustenance; and if you are thinking about the next life, then
may Allah increase your intellect and efforts. Then the Prophet (S)
stated: ' Allah surely has functionaries and agents in this world and
your wife is one of those. Such a woman would be rewarded half as much
as a martyr'."[^8]

"Imam Ali (a.s) was thinking the same when he spoke of Hadrat Zahra
(a.s). He stated that she was the best help for worshipping the Almighty
Allah. History tells us that the Prophet (S), one day after the wedding
of Imam Ali (a.s) and Hadrat Zahra (a.s), went to congratulate them in
their house and know about their welfare. He asked Imam Ali (a.s): 'How
do you find your spouse?' The Imam replied: 'I found Zahra as the best
help in worshipping the Almighty Allah.' The Prophet (S) then asked the
same of Zahra (a.s), and she replied: 'He is the best husband'."[^9]

Imam Ali (a.s), in one sentence, introduced the best woman in Islam and
expressed the main purpose of marriage. Imam Ali (a.s), in one sentence,
introduced the best woman in Islam and expressed the main purpose of
marriage. Imam Ali (a.s), in one sentence, introduced the best woman in
Islam and expressed the main purpose of marriage. Imam Ali (a.s), in one
sentence, introduced the best woman in Islam and expressed the main
purpose of marriage. Imam Ali (a.s), in one sentence, introduced the
best woman in Islam and expressed the main purpose of marriage. Imam Ali
(a.s), in one sentence, introduced the best woman in Islam and expressed
the main purpose of marriage. Imam Ali (a.s), in one sentence,
introduced the best woman in Islam and expressed the main purpose of
marriage.

Living with Husband
-------------------

The task of a wife is to maintain and take care of a husband. It is not
an easy undertaking. Those women, who are unaware of this feature of
their role, may find difficulty in fulfilling the task. It is a job for
the woman who is aware that the job requires a degree of sagacity,
style, and ingenuity. For a woman to be a successful wife, she should
win over her husband's heart and be a source of comfort to him.

She should encourage him to do good deeds while dissuading him from bad
ones. She should also provide adequate measures to maintain his health
and well-being. The results of her efforts are directed towards making
the man into a kind and respected husband who would be a proper guardian
for his family, and a good father from whom the children would seek
guidance and respect. Allah, the All-Knowing has endowed woman with
extraordinary power. The prosperity and happiness as well as the misery
of the family are in her hands.

A woman can turn the home into a lofty paradise or a burning hell. She
can lead her husband to the peak of success or the dregs of misfortune.
The woman with the qualities bestowed on her by Allah, who is aware of
her role as a spouse, can elevate her husband to a respected man even if
he had been the lowest of all men.

"One learned scholar wrote: 'Women possess a strange power in that they
are able to acquire whatever they desire'."[^10]

In Islam, taking care of one's husband has an important position. It has
been equated to the role of Jihad (holy war in the path of Allah). "Imam
Ali (a.s) stated: 'The *Jihad* of a woman is to take care of her husband
well'."[^11]

Considering that *Jihad* is the struggle and holy war in the path of
Allah including the struggle for advancement and honor of Islam,
defending the Islamic territories and execution of social justice, it is
one of the highest acts of worship. The value of fulfilling the duties
of a proper spouse is also reflected upon when considering *Jihad.*

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: ' Any woman who dies while her husband
is pleased with her, enters Paradise'."[^12]

The Holy Prophet also stated: "If a woman does not perform her duty as a
spouse, she has not done her duty to Allah'."[^13]

Kindness
--------

Everyone is thirsty for friendship and kindness; They all like to be
loved by others. The heart of a human being thrives on it. A person who
is not loved by anyone regards himself as alone and deserted. Dear lady!
Your husband is not any different. He is also in need of love and
affection. Before his marriage the love and affection of his parents
fulfilled this need, but now, he expects you to fulfill it.

The man looks towards his spouse to find friendship and love, which is a
requirement of all human beings. He struggles hard to earn a living and
to comfort you. He shares with you all the hardships of life and as your
true partner cares for your happiness even more than your parents.
Therefore, express your appreciation to him and love him, he will love
you. Love is a two-way relationship which unites the hearts.

A twenty-year old boy who had come to Tehran to study at the university
fell in love with a 39-year old widow who was his landlady. This was
because the woman had fulfilled the empty place of his mother in his
heart through her kindness.[^14]

If love is mutual, the marital foundation becomes strong and the dangers
of separation are averted. Do not proudly think that your husband fell
in love with you at first sight, because such love is not lasting. A
lasting love is through kindness and permanent affection in the form of
a very close friendship.  
 If you love your husband and have a good friendship he will be happy
and willing to strive and sacrifice himself for your well-being. A man
who enjoys the love of his wife, rarely suffers from poor health or has
emotional problems. If a man is deprived of a warm and friendly
relationship with his spouse, he may become disheartened and may avoid
his home. He may end up spending a great deal of time out of his home in
search of friends and attention. He may say to himself: "Why should I
work and support the people who do not like me. I might as well enjoy
myself and try to find genuine friends."

A woman may sincerely love her husband, but does not show it or express
it very often. It is not enough to establish the ties of friendship and
take it for granted. Occasional expressions of statements such a "I love
you," "I missed you," "I am happy to see you," help enormously in
promoting a good relationship. When the husband is on a trip, the woman
should write letters expressing that she missed him. If there is a
telephone at the man's office, the wife should phone him occasionally,
but not in excess. She should praise him among friends and relatives
when he is absent, and defend him if anyone is talking against him.

The Almighty Allah refers to this bond of love and affection of a
husband and wife in the Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
لِتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُمْ مَوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً إِنَّ
فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And one of His signs is that He created mates for you from
yourselves that you may find rest in them, and He put between you love
and compassion; most surely there are signs in this for a people who
reflect (30:21)."***

"Imam Rida (a.s) stated: 'Some women are blessings for their husbands
who express their love and affection'."[^15]

"The Holy Prophet (S) stated: 'The best of you among women are those who
possess love and affection'."[^16]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) stated: 'When you love someone, let the person
know'."[^17]

The Husband's Respect
---------------------

The desire for respect is an inherent one, but not everyone is willing
to give it readily. Your husband is in contact with many people during
the day while away from home. Some may be impolite and insulting him
which eventually can upset the person. As his wife, he expects you to
show respect and encouragement at home and thereby boost his trampled
ego.

To honor and respect your husband does not belittle you, but it provides
energy and inclination to struggle to make a better life. You should
always greet him, and with your greeting, give him a feeling of
veneration. Do not interrupt him when he is talking. Be courteous and
polite when you are talking to him and do not shout at him. Let him
enter first when both of you are going to a meeting.

Praise him in front of others. Ask your children to respect him and
reprimand them if they are discourteous towards him. Be respectful of
him in front of guests and be attentive to his needs, as well as the
guests. When he is knocking at the door you should try to open the door
with a smile and a happy expression. This small act of happiness has
such an effect that it refreshes the man's tired spirits. Some women may
think that such behaviour is strange. Imagine greeting your husband as
if he was a guest. This is not the correct attitude because the man has
been struggling all the day for the well-being of his family and he
deserves some consideration and respect when he returns home. That first
greeting makes a big impression and what's good for a guest is good for
the family members.

"The Holy Prophet (S) stated: 'The duty of a woman is to answer the call
at the door and welcome her husband'."'[^18]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) stated: 'A woman who respects her husband and does
not harass him, will be fortunate and prosperous'."[^19]

"The Holy Prophet (S) stated: 'A wife is duty-bound to arrange for a
basin and towel to wash her husband's hands'."[^20]

Be careful not to humiliate him, do not talk to him harshly, do not
abuse him, do not be inattentive to him, and do not call him by any
obscene titles. If you offend him, he, in turn, will insult you.
Eventually, the spirit of love and trust will erode. Consequently, you
will have constant quarrels and arguments which may lead to a divorce.
Even if you continue to live together, your lives will surely be filled
with many turbulent moments. Feelings of antagonism and psychological
disturbances may build up to the point that it becomes hazardous to the
couple's life in that it may lead to crime. The following stories,
illustrate some of these points:

"A twenty-two year old man, stabbed his 19-year old wife to death after
he was abused by her. In the court he said: 'I was married to this woman
a year ago. At the beginning my wife loved me very much. But it was not
long before she changed and started to humiliate me. She would use
abusive language with me on every possible occasion and over the
smallest issue, would make fun of me. Due to a squint in my left eye,
she used to call me a "blind ass". One day she called me a "blind ass"
and I became so furious that I stabbed her fifteen times with a
knife'."[^21]

"A seventy-one year old man who had killed his wife, explained:
'Suddenly her manners towards me changed and she started to ignore me.
Once she called me "an intolerable man". I realized that she did not
love me any more; I became suspicious of her and killed her with two
blows of an axe'."[^22]

Complaints and Grievances
-------------------------

There is not anyone who does not have problems and grievances with
regard to daily life. Everyone likes to have a sympathetic person with
whom he can confide and who will listen to his problems. But the point
to remember is that "there is a time and place for everything". One
should realize the proper time and occasion to complain. Some ignorant
and selfish women do not realize that their husbands are very tired and
nervous after a long day's work. Instead of waiting an hour or two for
him to regain his spirits, they start attacking him with a barrage of
complaints. For instance the wife may say:

"You have left me with these damned kids and rushed off. Ahmad has
broken the glass in the door of the front room. Our daughters have been
fighting. I am going crazy with the noise of the kids outside. Hasan
does not study at all and he has secured poor marks. I have been working
so hard today and I am exhausted. Nobody listens to my cries!

These kids don't help at all in the house-work. I wish I didn't have any
children at all! By the way your sister was here today. I don't know
what was wrong with her; she acted as if I had swallowed her father's
inheritance. May God save me from your mother! She has been talking ill
about me behind my back. I am fed up with all of them. Also, I cut my
finger badly with a knife today.

I wish I'd not gone to Muhammad's wedding yesterday. You should have
seen Rashid's wife! What an outfit! Allah should give me the same luck!
Some men really love their wives and buy them beautiful things. They are
real husbands. When Rashid entered, everybody respected him. It's true
that people are only interested in what you're wearing. What has she got
that I haven't? Why should she show off in front of me?! Oh yes, she is
fortunate to have a husband who loves her, he isn't like you!

I can't stand this damned house any longer, looking after your and your
children. So do what you like!"

This sort of attitude is incorrect. Women of this sort think that their
husbands are going on a picnic or pleasure-ride every morning. Men
confront hundreds of problems everyday. Dear lady! you do not know what
your husband has gone through when he is at work. You do not know what
rude and obnoxious people he has had to deal with all the day. So, when
he comes home, you should not present all of your complaints at the same
time. He should not feel guilty of being a man. Be fair and be
considerate to him. If you, by grumbling and nagging, add to his worries
and anguish, then he may either start a row or just leave the house and
go to a cafe, cinema, or even walk around the streets.

Therefore, dear lady! For the sake of Allah, give up this habit of
complaining at inopportune moments. Find a suitable time and then
present him with your genuine problems, not by complaining, but in a
consultative type of way. In this way, you do not create antagonistic
feelings in him and the family bonds remain secure

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: 'The prayers of a woman who teases her
husband with her tongue, are not accepted (by Allah) even though she
fasts everyday, gets up for the acts of worship every night, sets free a
few slaves and donates her wealth in the way of Allah. A bad-tongue
woman who hurts her husband in this way, is the first person who enters
hell'."[^23]

"The Holy Prophet (S) also stated: 'The women of Paradise say to those
women who abuse their husbands in this way: 'May Allah kill you. Do not
misbehave with your husband. This man (the husband) is not yours, and
you do not deserve him. Soon he will leave you and come towards us'."
[^24]

I do not know what such women want to achieve by their grumbling. If
they want to attract their husband's attention or to show off, then
surely they achieve the exact opposite and exasperate him. If they
intend to distress him, to create for him psychological problems and to
lead him towards fatal artificial addictions, then they are on the right
track.

Dear lady! if you care about your husband and your family, then you
should give up this improper and illogical attitude. Have you ever
thought that your misconduct may lead towards breaking up your family
life?

"One doctor testified in court: 'I have not yet seen my wife act like a
proper housewife during all my married life. Our house is always in a
mess. She is always shouting and abusing. I am fed up with her'. After
paying her a lump sum money, he received divorce. He said joyfully: 'If
she had wanted and had asked for all my wealth and even my medical
degree, I would have given it to get rid of her sooner',"[^25]

Pleasant Dispositions
---------------------

Anyone who is good-natured with a pleasant disposition would also face
the hardships and problems of life in the same manner. These are the
kinds of personality that people are attracted to and continually seek.
The pleasant disposition and attitude of a person would be immune to
psychological disorders since their outlook to life is to overcome their
hardships in the best feasible manner.

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'No life is more agreeable than the one
which is of a pleasant nature'."[^26]

But an ill-natured person would likewise find life unpleasant since the
relationship of such people promote anxiety and tension. Such a person
enjoys complaining and voicing one's dissonance with life. This type of
attitude is avoided by most people whereby the person ends up with very
few friends, these are then the conditions which are susceptible to
various psychological problems, and other illnesses due to the anxiety
and emptiness with which the person with a bad attitude views life.

"The Holy Prophet (S) stated: 'A person with a bad disposition and
attitude would be in permanent agony and suffering'.”[^27]

A good and pleasant attitude is essential between all people in general
and between couples in particular since the couple must be together to
form a joint life.

Dear lady! If you want to enjoy a pleasant life with your husband and
children, make your attitude and disposition pleasant and agreeable. Be
good-natured and not quarrelsome. You have the ability to turn your
house into a lofty paradise or a burning hell. You can be an angel of
mercy whereby your husband and children can find peace through you. Do
you know what a beautiful impression you would leave on their souls with
your smiling attitude and good language? The pleasant impression is
fresh in their minds as they start off to school or work and helps them
to make a good start of the day.

Therefore, if you care about the quality of your life and the
relationship you have with your husband; do not be negative in nature.
Be positive in your attitude and disposition since the best supportive
pillar of security to marriage is a good set of ethics leading to a
pleasant disposition.

Most instances of divorce are due to the incompatible nature of man and
wife. The statistics on divorce conclusively indicate that the
compatible attitude, moral values and disposition was non-existent in
the couples. The main source of family rows and discord is due to the
incompatible character of the couple's ethical principles and values.
The following set of data is of interest:

"In the year 1968, 12,760 cases out of a total of 16,039 cases of
marital complaints brought to court were based on incompatible moral
foundations. In 1969, 11,246 cases out of a total of 16,058 cases, were
based on the same reason. It is therefore evident that more than seventy
per cent of family rows were due to this factor'."[^28]

"A woman complained to the Council that her husband always ate his lunch
and dinner outside. The husband then explained that the reason he ate
outside was because his wife had absolutely no constructiveness in her
and she was the worst of all the ill-disposed women in the world. The
wife suddenly got up and started beating her husband in front of the
judges'." [^29]

This foolish woman thought that by complaining, abusing and beating, she
could bring him back home. But she did not use the simple and
intelligent method which was to be more considerate and to observe
appropriate conduct.

"Another woman reported to the court that her husband has not been
talking to her for 15 months and that he was paying for living expenses
through his mother. The husband replied that he had enough of his wife's
ill-disposed attitude which made him decide not to talk to her for 15
months'."[^30]

Most of the family conflicts may be resolved with kindness, compassion
and a pleasant disposition. If your husband is unkind, if he goes out
for dinners alone, if he is abusive, wastes away all his wealth, speaks
of divorce and separation or a number of reasons for family conflict,
there is only one way to resolve them. The way is by being kind and
good-natured. The results of exercising such behavior are miraculous.

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'Allah Almighty will grant a well-disposed
person a reward equivalent to the blessings of Jihad. He will endow many
blessings onto him day and night'."[^31]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) stated: 'Any woman who bothers her husband and
distresses him is distant from the blessings of Allah and any woman who
respects her husband, is obedient and does not cause him sorrow, is
blessed and prosperous'."[^32]

"There is a tradition reported that the Holy Prophet (S) was informed of
a good woman who fasted everyday and worshipped Allah every night, but
she had an ill-disposed character and would hurt her neighbours with her
sharp tongue. 'The Holy Prophet (S) stated: 'There is no good in her and
she is an inhabitant of hell'."[^33]

Wrong Expectations
------------------

Dear lady! You are the mistress of your household. Be wise and
understanding. Keep an account of your expenses. Budget your
expenditures in a way that it is not detrimental to your wealth and
honor. Do not compete with others and be envious of them. If you see a
nice dress on a woman, or if you become interested in some furnishings
that you have seen at a friend's or relative's house, do not compel your
husband to purchase them which is beyond his financial means and would
force him to borrow. Isn't it better to wait until your budget is higher
or there is some extra saving to make non-essential purchases?

It is mostly the ignorant and selfish women who succumb to extravagance
and rivalry. These women force their husbands to be under debt and they
become exhausted and disgusted in trying to satisfy the unsuitable
demands of their wives. Sometimes, the only solution to these problems
for the men is to go for a divorce or even commit suicide.

The women who have not perceived the true purpose and meaning of
marriage and instead they regard it in terms of bondage where the
husband is acquired to fulfill their childish desires and material
needs. They want a husband who will serve them like a slave and will not
object to their way of spending. These women sometimes even go further.
They make their husbands spend more than their means which may entail
bankruptcy, murder, and other disastrous consequences.

Such women are a disgrace to other women. If her high expectations lead
to divorce, the woman will be deprived of the love of her children, and
will have to live a life of loneliness. For these women remarriage will
not happen easily. Even if it does happen, it is not certain that the
marriage will work out since most human beings do not like to be kept in
unreasonable bondage and the new husband may not be able to meet their
demands any better than the previous one.

Dear lady! Instead of being covetous, try to be reasonable. Spend more
time and effort for the well-being of your family and husband rather
than trying to imitate everyone. If your husband spends lavishly, then
stop him and curb his unnecessary expenses. Instead of buying
non-essential commodities, it is better to save some money for a rainy
day.

"In a tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) stated: 'Any woman who is not
compatible with her husband and persuades him to act beyond his
capacity, then her deeds would not be accepted by Allah. She would taste
the wrath of Allah on the Day of Resurrection'."[^34]

In another Tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) stated:

"Any woman who is not compatible with her husband, is not content with
what Allah has blessed them with, and treats her husband harshly by
demanding him to give more than he is able, then her acts (or worship)
are not acceptable by Allah and He will be angry with her'."[^35]

"In other tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) stated: After having faith in
Allah, there is not any greater blessing than to have a compatible
spouse'."[^36]

Be a Comfort for Your Husband
-----------------------------

The burdens of life weigh heavily upon the shoulders of men since they
are responsible for maintaining and supporting their families. In
fulfilling this responsibility, the man of the household must confront
many problems and obstacles outside of the home. Some of these problems
may be the pressures of work, the hassles of traffic and commuting from
the office to home, concerns over economical and political issues of the
day, empathy and concern for friends and colleagues, and the pressures
of trying to improve the living conditions of his family. The amount of
preoccupations and pressures upon a responsible man is enormous and
multifaceted. It is no wonder that the average lifespan of a man is less
than the woman.

In order for the human being to be able to cope with the burdens of life
it is necessary to have someone to listen to and sympathize with him.
Your husband is no exception. He may feel alone and in need of finding
refuge and comfort amidst these pressures. It is natural that the man
looks towards his wife and family as a source of comfort and relief.
Therefore, anticipate his expectations and needs. Be cordial and warm
when he first returns home after working and have refreshments or let
him feel that you are at his disposal to care for his needs. Try not to
overwhelm him with criticizing him the minute you see him. Let him rest
and recover his strength before putting up the demands of the family's
personal issues.

When your husband comes home, try to have a smile and a warm greeting
for him. Attend to his physical needs of fatigue, hunger, and thirst.
Then ask him about his problems. If he is not willing to talk, be a good
listener and sympathize with him. Try to express your genuine concern
and then help him realize that the problems are not as impossible and
huge as he had thought. Give him encouragements of support to help him
cope with the issues. You can say something like this: These problems
are being faced by many people. With a strong will-power and patience,
it is possible to overcome the difficulties as long as one does not let
the problems get the better of you. These problems, as a matter of fact,
are tests as well as builders of the true character of a person. Do not
despair. You can solve them through determination and perseverance.

If you have some ideas on handling the problems, share them with your
husband. If not, may be you can suggest a good friend who is more
qualified.

Dear lady! at times of difficulty, your husband is in need of your
attention and love. You should come to his aid and nurse him like a
sympathetic psychiatrist and wife. What a psychiatrist could give the
amount of care that you would give? Do not underestimate your ability to
soothe and strengthen him. There is no one more devoted and concerned
over your husband's well-being other than yourself. He would be able to
draw strength from your devotions to him and cope with his problems
which will relieve his emotional and mental pressures. Consequently, the
mutual bond of respect and love would also be greater which can only
lead towards strengthening your marital relationship.  
 "In a tradition, Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'There is nothing better
in the world than a good wife. And a good wife is the one whose husband,
becomes glad upon seeing her'."[^37]

"In a tradition, Imam Rida (a.s) stated: 'There are a group of women who
raise many children. They are kind and sympathetic. They support their
husbands in times of difficulty and in the affairs of this world and the
next. These women do not commit any acts which would incur a loss upon
their husbands nor multiply their difficulties'."[^38]

Be Appreciative
---------------

If a person is generous and charitable with the wealth that he has
acquired from hard work, the appreciation and notice given in response
to such acts will warm that person's inner feelings and give him a
feeling of accomplishment. Acts of goodwill may then become second
nature to the person whereby it becomes a habit to spend and share one's
wealth for those in need. However, if the acts of goodwill are taken for
granted and unappreciated, the person may lose the desire and drive to
do good. It would be natural for a person to conclude that it was a
waste to give away his hard earned money when it was unappreciated.

Gratitude and appreciation are admirable characteristics in a person and
it is the secret by which one may attract charitable acts. Even Allah
has mentioned that gratitude for His blessings are conditional on the
continual perpetuation of his grace upon mankind:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ تَأَذَّنَ رَبُّكُمْ لَئِنْ شَكَرْتُمْ لَأَزِيدَنَّكُمْ وَلَئِنْ
كَفَرْتُمْ إِنَّ عَذَابِي لَشَدِيدٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And when your Lord made it known: If you are grateful would
certainly give to you more, and if you are ungrateful, My chastisement
is fully severe"(14:7)***

Dear Madam! Your husband is also human. Like everyone else, he enjoys
being appreciated. He is willing to support his family and regards it as
a moral and lawful obligation. When he is thanked and appreciated for
doing his duty, those duties no longer seem to be a burden.

Whenever he buys home appliances or something like clothes and shoes for
you and the children, be happy and thank him. Show your gratitude for
the trivial things he does such as buying groceries, taking the family
on trips and gives you your allowance. By showing your appreciation, you
will make your husband feel good and rewarded for the trouble he has
taken. Be careful that you do not take his duties for granted and become
indifferent towards his contributions to the family. He may become
disheartened about the welfare of the family. He may prefer to spend his
money elsewhere or on himself.

If a friend or relative presented you with a pair of stockings or a
bunch of flowers, you would thank them repeatedly. So it is only natural
and fair to show appreciation to your husband for his consideration and
thoughtfulness. Do not think that you would be belittling yourself by
demonstrating your appreciation. On the contrary, you would be loved and
cared for more because you appreciate the efforts of your husband
whereas snobbism and selfishness can only lead towards great
misfortunes.

The following are some Traditions referring to the characteristics of
gratitude:

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'The best women among your women are those
who show appreciation when their husbands bring home something and are
not discontented if nothing is brought home'."[^39]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) also stated: ' Any woman who says to her husband
that she has not seen any good things from him then she has fallen in
her credibility and has voided her acts of worship'."[^40]

"The Messenger (SA) of Allah stated: 'Whoever does not thank the people
who help him is, in fact, not showing his gratitude to Allah for His
Blessings'."[^41]

Do not Look for Shortcomings
----------------------------

Nobody is perfect. Some are too tail or too short, or too fat or too
skinny, have a big nose or a small one, talk too much or are too silent,
are bad-tempered or too easy-going, have a very dark complexion or a
very fair complexion, or eat too much, or too less, and the list can
continue. Most men and women have some of these shortcomings. It is the
hope of every man and woman to find a spouse who is perfect but such
hopes are unrealistic. It is unlikely to find a woman who regards her
husband as perfect.

Those women who are in search of faults in their husbands will
undoubtedly find them. They would find a trivial shortcoming and
exaggerate it by dealing on the matter to the point that it becomes an
unbearable impediment. This defect then replaces all the merits of the
husband. They always compare their husbands with other men. They have
established a so-called ideal man in their imaginations whose standards
do not fit in their husbands. Therefore, they are always complaining
about the shortcomings in their marriage. The women regard themselves as
unfortunates and failures which gradually turn them into spiteful women.

What does such behaviour in a woman do to her husband? He may be a very
patient person who can tolerate his rudeness but most likely he will
become insulted and develop a grudge against her. This would likely lead
towards mutual arguments and elaborations of the shortcomings in each
other. They will both become contemptuous of each other and their life
wit! turn into a series of rows and arguments. Thus, they will either
live in misery together or go for a divorce. In either case, both will
lose, especially when there is no guarantee that another marriage may
prove otherwise.

It is a pity that some women are ignorant and obstinate in their
ignorance. It is possible that they may shatter their family life over a
trivial matter. The following are some illustrative cases of such women:

"A woman left her husband and went to her father's house because her
husband had bad breath. She was not prepared to go back home until he
corrected his problem. On the basis of the husband's complaint, the
court reconciled the couple and the wife returned to him. When the
couple went home, the wife could still smell his bad breath so she went
into another room. The husband went crazy and killed her'."[^42]

A female dentist divorced her husband because he was not on the same
level as her; he had graduated three years after her'."[^43]

A woman applied for a divorce because her husband used to sit on the
floor and eat with his fingers, did not shave everyday and did not know
how to socialize with others'."[^44]

Of course all women are not like this. There are those who are
intelligent, realistic, and aware enough that they do not foolishly
jeopardize their marriage and happiness by exaggerating the shortcomings
of their husbands.

Dear Madam! Your husband is a human being like you. He is not perfect,
but he may have many merits. If you are interested in your marriage and
your family then do not set out to find his weaknesses. Do not regard
his small defects as important. Do not compare him with an ideal man
whom you have established in your mind. There may be some faults with
your husband which are not present in others. But you should remember
that other men may have other defects which are non-existent in yours.
Be satisfied with his merits. You will consequently see that his merits
outweigh his faults. Besides why should you expect a perfect husband
when you are imperfect yourself. If you are proud enough to think you
are perfect, then ask others.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'There is nothing worse for human
beings than to seek the faults of others, while ignoring their own
flaws'."[^45]

Why should you exaggerate a trivial fault? Why should you shatter your
life for the sake of something unimportant?

Be wise? Stop being frivolous! Ignore the faults and do not mention them
in front of or behind your husband. Try to create a warm atmosphere in
your family and enjoy the blessings of Allah. However, there may be
flaws in your husband's character which you may be able to correct. If
so, then you can succeed only by behaving considerately and with
patience. You must not criticize him or start a row, but approach him in
a friendly manner.

Don't Look at Anyone Other Than Your Husband
--------------------------------------------

Dear lady! Before your marriage you may have had other offers of
matrimony. These offers may be from rich, educated, handsome men, etc
whom you may have wished to marry. Such expectations were natural before
your marriage. But now that you have chosen your partner and signed a
sacred covenant with him to be together for the rest of your life, then
forget the past altogether. You must put aside your past wishes and
forget those past offers. Do not think of any men except your husband
and find peace with him. If you do otherwise you will place yourself in
a strained condition.

Now that you have agreed to live with your husband, why should you be
constantly noticing other man? Why should you compare him with others?
What do you achieve by looking at other men except putting yourself in a
permanently miserable state and cause mental anguish for yourself?

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'Whoever leaves his eyes at liberty, will always
suffer through his nerves, and will be trapped in a permanent state of
envy'."[^46]49

By looking at other men and comparing your husband with them, you will
find a man who does not have your husband's faults. You might then think
that man is perfect, because you are not aware of the deficiencies of
such a man. You regard your marriage as a failure and this thought might
lead to disastrous ends.

"Mrs..., an 18-year old woman who had run away from home was arrested by
the police last night. In the police station the woman said that, after
three years of marriage, she gradually felt that she did not love her
husband. She said: 'I m used to compare my husband's face with other men
and I regretted my marriage with him'." [^47]

Dear Madam! If you are interested in an everlasting marriage; if you do
not want mental distress; and if you want to conduct a normal life, then
stop being selfish and forget your vain hopes. Do not make compliments
for other men. Do not think of any man other than your husband. Do not
think to yourself:

"I wish I had married so and so;"

"I wish my husband looked like...;"

"I wish my husband's job was...;"

"I wish...," "I wish..." "I wish..."

Why should you imprison yourself with these thoughts? Why should you
upset the foundations of your marriage? If any of those wishes had come
true, how would you know that you would have been more satisfied? Are
you sure that the wives of those so-called "faultless" men are satisfied
with them?

Dear Madam! If your husband suspects that you show interest in other
men, he would be disheartened and would lose interest in you. You must
not cut jokes with other men or keep company with them. Men are so
sensitive that they cannot even tolerate their wives to show an interest
in a picture of another man.

"The Holy Prophet (S) stated: 'Any married woman, who looks at other
men, would be subject to the vehement wrath of Allah'."[^48]

Islamic Hijab
-------------

Men and women, although having many aspects in common, also possess
unique characteristics. One such characteristic is that women are
delicate, beautiful, and likable beings. They are charming, attractive,
and lovable; whereas men are charmed, attracted by and love women's
qualities.

When a man marries a woman, he wishes all his wife's beauty and
affection to be reserved for him. He wishes to be the only one who
benefits from her charm, affection, coquettishness, beauty, sense of
humour, etc and to strictly avoid men. Man is, by nature, very ardent
and intolerant of another man either looking at his wife or having any
kind of relationship with her. He would regard a close relationship
between his wife and other men to be a violation of his lawful right. He
expects his wife to observe Islamic Hijab (statutory Islamic dress for
women) and by adapting herself to Islamic behaviour and ethics she
cooperates in maintaining his lawful rights.

Any faithful and fervent man would have such a wish. A woman's social
behaviour, which is based on Islamic ethics, would set her husband's
mind at rest; he would then work enthusiastically to provide for his
family and his affection for his wife would increase. Such a man would
not be attracted to other women. On the contrary, a man whose wife is
not concerned m with Islamic Hijab and displays her beauty to other men
or socializes with them, would seriously become upset. He would regard
his wife as responsible for trampling over his rights. Such a husband
would always suffer from distress and pessimism and his love for his
family may gradually fade away.

It is therefore in the interest of society and women that they should be
dressed modestly and behave humbly; they should appear in public without
any make-up and should abstain from showing off their beauty to others.
Observing Hijab is an Islamic duty. The Almighty Allah says in the Holy
Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقُلْ لِلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ يَغْضُضْنَ مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِنَّ وَيَحْفَظْنَ
فُرُوجَهُنَّ وَلَا يُبْدِينَ زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلَّا مَا ظَهَرَ مِنْهَا ۖ
وَلْيَضْرِبْنَ بِخُمُرِهِنَّ عَلَىٰ جُيُوبِهِنَّ ۖ وَلَا يُبْدِينَ
زِينَتَهُنَّ إِلَّا لِبُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ آبَائِهِنَّ أَوْ آبَاءِ
بُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَائِهِنَّ أَوْ أَبْنَاءِ بُعُولَتِهِنَّ أَوْ
إِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِي إِخْوَانِهِنَّ أَوْ بَنِي أَخَوَاتِهِنَّ
أَوْ نِسَائِهِنَّ أَوْ مَا مَلَكَتْ أَيْمَانُهُنَّ أَوِ التَّابِعِينَ
غَيْرِ أُولِي الْإِرْبَةِ مِنَ الرِّجَالِ أَوِ الطِّفْلِ الَّذِينَ
لَمْ يَظْهَرُوا عَلَىٰ عَوْرَاتِ النِّسَاءِ ۖ وَلَا يَضْرِبْنَ
بِأَرْجُلِهِنَّ لِيُعْلَمَ مَا يُخْفِينَ مِنْ زِينَتِهِنَّ ۚ وَتُوبُوا
إِلَى اللَّهِ جَمِيعًا أَيُّهَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لَعَلَّكُمْ تُفْلِحُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"*****And say to the believing women that they should cast down their
looks and guard their private parts, and not display their ornaments
except what appears thereof, and let them wear their head coverings and
not display their ornaments except to their husbands or their fathers.
or the father of their husbands, their sons. or the sons of their
husbands or their brothers or their brother's sons or their sisters'
sons, or their women, or those whom their right hands possess, or male
servants not having need (of women), or the children who have not
attained knowledge of what is hidden of women; and let them not strike
their feet so that what they hide of their ornaments may be known; and
turn to Allah all of you, so that you may be successful*** **(24:31)."**

Islamic Hijab and its observance in society is beneficial to women in
many aspects:

(1) They can protect both their social worth and inner values much
better, and guard themselves against just being an object on display.

(2) They can prove both their faith and love for their husbands more
effectively and thus help create and maintain a warm family atmosphere
while preventing ill-feelings and family rows. In short, they can win
their husband's hearts and establish themselves in their families.

(3) By observing Islamic Hijab, unlawful flirtation looks by such people
as ogles would cease and help in lessening the amount of rows,
strengthening the family roots, and as a result create an atmosphere of
tranquility within its circle.

(4) Islamic Hijab of women would also help prevent young unmarried men,
from deviating from the right path. Thus forestalling harm to the young
men, which would also benefit the women of the society.

(5) If all women observed the regulation of Islamic Hijab, then all
women could rest assured that their husbands, when not at home would not
encounter a lewd woman who might draw his attention away from the
family.

Islam is aware of woman's specific nature of creation and regards her as
a very important base of society with responsibilities towards it. It
demands her to make sacrifices to carry out her responsibility by
observing Islamic Hijab, which in turn would forestall social corruption
and deviation and go a long way in creating stability, security and
glorifying her nation. But definitely the greatest reward is with the
Almighty Allah for performing her divine duty.

Dear lady! if you are interested in the stability and peace of your
family and your husband's continual trust in you; if you are concerned
about the social rights of women; if you are interested in the youth's
mental health and are worried about their deviation from moral values,
if you want to take positive steps towards bringing to a halt the
seduction of women by corrupt men; and if you are seeking Allah's
satisfaction by being a faithful and sacrificing Muslim; then you should
observe Islamic Hijab.

You should not display your beauty and adornments to strangers, be it in
the house with your close relations or at other social gatherings
outside your own home. You must cover yourself before your
brothers-in-law and their sons, sister-in-law's husbands, aunts'
husbands, and cousins. Being not dressed as per Islamic Hijab before
these people is a sin and may also cause great distress to your husband,
even though he may never mention it.

A woman is not restricted to covering herself to the same extent before
her father-in-law, her own brother, and her nephews, although it is
better to observe a certain degree of Islamic Hijab before these people
too. In other words women should not appear before these relatives of
hers in the same way as she would make herself attractive for her
husband. This is because most men dislike their wives to appear
attractive by wearing attractive clothes and make up before other men;
and of course it should not be forgotten that the tranquility of mind
and the trust of a man in his wife is crucial to the survival and
security of the whole family.

Forgive Your Husband's Mistakes
-------------------------------

Everyone, except those that Allah has declared as "Infallible" makes
mistakes. When two people, who love together, and cooperate with each
other, make mistakes, they must be forgiving, if they do not forgive
each other, then their marriage will come to an end. Two business
partners, two neighbours, two colleagues, two friends, and specifically,
a husband and a wife need to be able to forgive each other. If the
members of a family are unforgiving and pursue each other's mistakes,
then either the family will separate or they will experience an
unbearable life.

Dear Madam! Your husband probably makes mistakes. He may insult you,
abuse you, tell lies, he might even hit you. Such acts might be
committed by any man. If your husband, after making a mistake, regrets
it or you feel he is regretful himself for his misconduct, then forgive
him and do not pursue the matter. If he is regretful but not prepared to
express his apologies, then do not try to prove his mistake. Otherwise,
he might feel humiliated and he may retaliate by picking out your
mistakes and consequently start a major row. So it is better for you to
remain silent until he condemns himself from his conscience and starts
to feel remorse about it. He would then regard you as wise and devoted
wife who is interested in her husband and family.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'A bad woman does not forgive her
husband's mistake and does not accept his apology'."[^49]

Is it not pitiful that a sacred marital covenant should be broken
because a woman is not prepared to forgive some mistakes of her husband?

Coping with Your Husband's Relatives
------------------------------------

One of the problems of family life is the one cause between the wife and
her husband's relatives. Some women do not have a good relationship with
their husband's mother, sisters, or brothers. On the one hand the wife
may try to dominate her husband so that he would not be able to pay any
attention even to his mother, or any other relatives and she may try to
sow discord between them.

On the other hand, her mother-in-law regards herself as the owner of her
son and daughter-in-law. The mother tries hard to hold on to her son and
is watchful that the new woman does not try to possess him fully. She
may fabricate lies about her daughter-in-law or find fault in her. Such
an attitude might be followed by many arguments and even occasional
hostilities. The situation becomes even worse if they all live in the
same house. Even though a row may occur between two women, the real
anguish and distress remains with the man in the middle.

The husband is trapped in an argument where he cannot take sides. On the
one hand is his wife who would like to have an independent life without
any interference from outsiders. He naturally feels that he must support
her and make her happy. But on the other hand, he thinks of his parents
who have helped him with his life, education, and have spent their own
lives in bringing him up. He feels that his parents expect him to help
them in their times of need and that it would not be fair to abandon
them.

Besides, if he himself was in need of something, who else, other than
his parents, would help him and his family. As a result, he realizes
that his best and most trustworthy friends are his parents and
relatives. So, the dilemma for a sensible man is either to choose the
wife and abandon the parents or vice versa; but neither of these is
possible.

Consequently, he has to cope with both sides and keep them satisfied
which, itself, is a difficult task. The only possible way to ease the
situation is that the woman should be loyal and wise. A man in this
situation expects his wife to help solve the problem. If the wife
respects her mother-in-law, seeks advice from her, and becomes obedient
and friendly with her, then the mother-in-law will be her greatest
supporter.

Is it not sad that one, who can attract many people through kindness and
good manners, should repulse them through stubbornness and selfishness?
Do you not realize that in the ups and downs of life, one might need the
help of others, and especially of relatives who would support you when
everyone else deserts you? Is it not better to enjoy a good relationship
with one's relatives through consideration and good behaviour? Is it
really wise and fair to become friends with strangers while breaking
away from your own relations?

Experience shows that when one needs the help of others, friends leave
but the abandoned relatives come to help. This is because the family
ties are natural and cannot be broken easily. There is a general proverb
which says: "Even if one's flesh is eaten by relations, they would not
throw away the bones!"

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'One is never able to do without his relatives,
even though he may possess wealth and children'."[^50]

One would need the respect and kindness of one's relatives. It is they
who would support one physically and mentally. Relatives always come to
the rescue. In times of need they could come to one's assistance faster
than others. Whoever disowns his relatives will lose many helping hands.

Dear Madam! For the sake of your husband and for the sake of your own
comfort as well as to find many good friends and supporters, put up with
your husband's relatives. Do not be selfish and ignorant; be wise and do
not cause your husband any distress. Be a good and devoted wife in order
to be accepted by both Allah and the people.

Coping With Your Husband's Job
------------------------------

Everyone has a job and jobs are different. For example, a driver who is
mostly on the road and is unable to come home every night; a policeman
who may have to stay out some nights; a medical doctor who has little
time to spend with his family; a lecturer or a scientist who reads a
great deal at nights; a mechanic whose clothes are dirty and have smell
of oil; a factory worker who works at night. Therefore, there are rarely
jobs which are entirely convenient and do not entail any discomfort of
the family. There is not any other way of earning an honest living than
working. It is necessary for the men to put up with the difficulties of
their jobs. However, there is another problem which is the complaints of
the family.

Women usually like their men to be nearby and prefer them to be home
when it becomes dark. Women want their husbands to have a decent job
with a high salary. They like to have enough time to go out in the
evenings. But unfortunately, the jobs of most men do not live up to
their wives' expectations, and this, for some families, is a source of
rows and arguments.

A driver who has been on the road for a few nights, who has not had a
decent sleep and has not been eating regularly, enters his house to rest
and find peace and comfort with his family. Then his wife, without
sparing a moment, starts to moan and groan: "What is this life? Why do
you leave me with these kids and where have you been? I have to do all
the work myself because you are not here to help. I am fed up with these
naughty children. As a matter off act driving is not a good job. You
should either change your job or settle with me. I can't live like this
any longer!"

A poor driver who has such a wife cannot be expected to perform well on
his job and may endanger his life; and the lives of those whom he
transports. A doctor who, from morning to night, visits tens of patients
cannot cope with the grumbling of his wife. Then how could he continue
to practise medicine? A worker who works during the night shifts cannot
enthusiastically pursue his job if his wife is a shrewish woman. How can
a scientist be successful in his field of research if his wife is
constantly nagging him? These are the tests which distinguish the wise
women from the ignorant ones.

Dear Madam! We cannot make the world according to our wishes, but we can
adapt ourselves to the existing situation. Your husband needs to have a
job to earn his family's living. His job has certain conditions which
you must adapt to. You must program your family life according to his
job. Why do you grumble and find fault with his job? Welcome him home
with a happy face and be kind to him. Be wise and cope with his job.

If your husband is a driver who is mostly on the road, then realize that
he is trying to bring money home for your sake and the children's. There
is nothing wrong with his job. He is a part of society and is serving it
the best way he can. Would it have been better if he was a lazy person
or if he was engaged in an irreligious job? So, there is nothing wrong
with him. The fault lies with you, expecting him to be at home every
night and not being able or not wanting to adapt yourself to the present
conditions.

Is it not wise to get used to the existing situation and live more
comfortably? Would you not rather welcome him with a smiling face and
persuade him to carry on in his job with a warm "Good-bye" when he
leaves home for work? If you act kindly, his interest in his family
would increase and he could work harder. He would not isolate himself
from you; he would come home as early as possible; he would not have
accidents and he would remain healthy in his morals.

If your husband is a night-shift worker, he is missing his night's good
sleep in order to meet the expenses of his family. Try to get used to it
and do not express your dissatisfaction. If you get bored, then you can
do some of the housework, sewing and reading at night. In the morning
prepare the breakfast when your husband comes back from work, and then
prepare his bed in a quiet place. Keep the children quiet and teach them
not to disturb their father when he is resting. You can even sleep less
at night and take a rest with your husband during the day. But, do not
forget that he has been awake all the night and the sleep during the day
to him is the same as the night sleep for you. Women in this situation
have to have two programs, one for themselves and one for their
husbands.

If your husband is a driver, a doctor, a worker, or a scientist etc,
then you must be proud of him. Your husband is not an idle loafer or
engaged in an irreligious occupation. So appreciate him and show your
gratitude.

Do not expect him or ask him to leave his job, but try to adapt to his
existing one. If he is reading or researching on a particular field,
then do not disturb him. You can do the housework, read a book or, with
his permission, go and visit your friends or relatives. But when he is
resting, try to be at home. Prepare his food and other requirements.
Receive your husband with a smiling face and good manners. By showing
your kindness and by pleasing him you can make him forget his tiredness.
If you are a good wife, then not only you can expedite his promotion,
but also you are contributing to his services towards society.

Not all women deserve such hardworking men. So by being well-mannered
and sacrificing, prove that you are worthy of him.

If your husband's job requires him to wear special clothes which become
dirty, then wash them frequently. Do not grumble and do not tell him bad
because of his job. Do not ask him to change his job. It is not easy to
change jobs. What is wrong with being a mechanic? In any case, this is
not an important matter and families should not be broken because of it.

"A woman told the judge in a court that her husband's job was selling
kerosene and that he always smelled bad and hence she was fed up with
the situation'."[^51]

If You Have to Live Away From Your Hometown
-------------------------------------------

One may have to live away from one's hometown. Your husband may be
working for the private or the public sector and sent on duty to another
city or town also. Some people live in this way either temporarily or
permanently. Men are forced to cope with this situation but some women
prefer to be near their parents and relatives. These women are
accustomed to the streets, walls, and the environment of their place of
birth. After moving away they blame their husbands and complain: "Why
should I live away from my home? How long am I going to be away from my
home and my parents? I have no one in this place. What is this place you
have brought me? I cannot stay here; so think of a way out!"

These women should not upset their husbands in this way. They are so
feeble-minded that they think their birth places are the best locations
to live. They think that they cannot enjoy life anywhere else. Mankind
is not satisfied even with its own planet, so it has stepped onto other
planets. But one looks and finds a woman who is so improvident that she
is not prepared to live a few miles away from her hometown. She thinks
to herself: "Why should I leave all my friends and relatives to get to a
strange place?’It is as if this lady is not self-confident enough to be
able to find new friends in another place away from her home.

Dear Madam! Be wise and sacrificing. Do not be selfish. Now that your
husband's job has taken you away from your hometown, do not cause him
any distress. If he is a civil servant, he has orders to travel on duty
and if he has a private business, then surely it is to his advantage to
live in another location. If your husband informs you that he has to
live in another place, then you should agree at once. You should then
help pack up and move to new places where you must try to feel at home.
Plan your life in this new home and adapt yourself to it. Since you are
new in the area and probably not familiar with the characteristics of
the inhabitants, be cautious with them. After a while, with the help and
supervision of your husband, try to make friends from among the chaste
and trustworthy women.

Every place has its own merits. You can relax by sightseeing and
visiting ancient buildings. You must keep the family together and
encourage your husband in his work. After a while you get used to your
new home and you might even like it more than your previous one. You
might find that your new friends are better than your old ones.

If the new place lacks the luxury of your previous town, then get used
to the new life and find its merits. If you are no longer enjoying such
privileges as electricity, then your environment may have a better
climate and you may be able to get fresher and better quality food. If
there are not any proper roads, then you will not be inhaling toxic
exhaust fumes and you will be away from all the noise of people and
cars.

Think a little about your country men and women who are living happily
in mud and brick houses and would not give any heed to the luxuries of
city life and their beautiful castle-like houses. Think of their needs
and deprivations. If you can help them, then do not hesitate and
encourage your husband to be helpful to them. If you are wise and
perform your duty, then you can live comfortably in the new place. You
can be helpful towards your husband's progress. This way you would be
known as a respected and devoted wife. You will be loved by your husband
and would earn popularity amongst the people. Moreover Allah will be
satisfied with you.

If Your Husband Works at Home
-----------------------------

Those women whose husbands work outside have freedom at home. But some
men work at home, like poets, writers, painters, or scientists who need
to read a great deal. The wives of such men have less freedom at home
and, therefore their lives are different. The above-mentioned jobs
require concentration, talent, and intellect. Therefore, there will be a
need for privacy and silence. One hour of work in peace is equivalent to
a few hours of work in a busy and noisy surrounding. The problem is
clear. On the one hand, the man needs a quiet place to work in and on
the other hand, the wife wants to move around the house freely.

If a woman plans the affairs of such a house in such a way that her
husband can get on with his job, surely she has accomplished a valuable
task. Such an achievement is certainly not easy, especially when there
are children around. But nevertheless the problem must be solved,
because the progress of the husband in his job would be based on this.

If a woman cooperates with her husband, she can turn him into a
respected man who can be a credit to her and the society.

A woman, whose husband works at home, should not expect him to baby sit,
to open the door to callers, to go to the kitchen, to help with the
housework, to shout at the children...; but she should imagine that he
is not in the house while he is working.

Dear Madam! When your husband wants to go to his study room, prepare his
pen, paper, cigarettes, ash-tray, matches, books, and other items he
requires.

Once you have prepared the room and his requirements, leave him. Do not
talk loudly and do not allow the children to make a noise. Teach your
children not to play noisily while their father is working. Do not talk
to him about daily matters. Answer the door and the telephone when it
rings. If anybody wants to see him or talk to him, tell them he is busy.
Entertain your guests during his break times. Tell your friends and
relatives to visit you when your husband is not busy. Your true friends
would not be upset by your demand. While you are doing your housework,
provide him with his needs. Do not interrupt him.

Perhaps some women think this way of life is impossible. They might say:
"Is it possible for a woman to do the difficult housework, and at the
same time, take care of her husband and not to let anything interrupt
him?"

It is true that this way of life is unusual and seems difficult, but if
the women in question ponder over the importance of their husbands'
jobs, they can decide to overcome the problem through good planning,
devotion, and wisdom. The exceptionality of some women becomes apparent
in these situations. Otherwise, running an ordinary family life is not
an extraordinary task.

Dear lady! Writing a book, a good scientific article or a useful essay,
writing an excellent poem, creating a precious painting, or solving
scientific problems are not easy tasks. But, with your devotion and
co-operation it becomes possible. Are you not prepared to sacrifice your
desires and with a slight alteration in your life, help your husband in
his job? Through your help, he would become prestigious and you would
share his social status.

Help Your Husband to Make Progress
----------------------------------

Human beings are by nature potentially able to make progress. The love
for attaining perfection exists in all of us; and we have been created
for achieving perfection. Everyone, in any job at any age and in any
condition is able to progress and mature. One should never be content
with mere existence, and should not forget the purpose of creation. One
must try to acquire perfection in one's own lifetime.

Even though everyone is pursuing for progress, not all are successful.
Making progress needs high aspirations and a great deal of hard work.
One must prepare the ground and remove the obstacles after which one
must take the necessary steps in the path of progress. The personality
of a man is largely dependent on his wife's desires. A woman can be
helpful in her husband's progress as much as she could be detrimental to
it.

Dear lady! While considering the possibilities, consider a higher status
for your husband and encourage him to achieve it. If he is interested in
continuing his studies or if he wants to increase his knowledge through
reading and research, then do not stop him. Encourage him to achieve his
desires. Plan your life in a way that is not a hindrance in his
progress. Try to assist him to make progress through creating a relaxed
and comfortable atmosphere at home. If he is illiterate, encourage him
and humbly ask him to start his studies at night classes. If he is
educated, encourage him to increase his knowledge by further reading. If
he is a medical doctor, make him read the medical journals and other
related articles. If he is a teacher, engineer or a judge, then ask him
to read the books and articles which are related to his specialization.
You should remember whatever position your husband holds, there is an
opportunity for him to make progress.

Do not let him deviate from the path which has been paved by the order
to creation. Encourage him to read books. Do not let his personality
cease to grow.

If he is short of time to buy or obtain books, then with his or a
friend's supervision obtain the books of his interest. Give the books to
him and encourage him to read them. You should read books and useful
magazines too. If through reading, you come across an article which is
useful for your husband, then inform him of it. This act has several
benefits:

(a) Through the repetition of this act, your husband will become a
learned person who would be a credit to you and himself. Moreover, he
would become a brilliant specialist whose services would be beneficial
to him as well as his society.

(b) Since, through his studies and research, he has conformed with the
laws of creation, he would be less prone to mental and nervous
disorders.

(c) Since he is on the path to progress and shows interest in reading,
then he becomes more attached to you and the children; he would not be
drawn towards corrupt activities and would not fall into the trap of
fatal addictions.

Be Careful That He is Not Misled
--------------------------------

Men should have freedom in their business and associations in order to
be able to work and progress in a way suitable to them. If men are
restricted in their activities, then they will not be comfortable. A
wise woman would not interfere with the affairs of her husband. She
should not monitor his movements; because she should know that by
denying him the freedom he needs and by trying to control his
activities, he may react severely.

Wise and experienced men do not need to be controlled. Such men always
act wisely; they cannot be deceived; they know both their friends and
their foes. However, there are men who are simple; they can easily be
deceived and would easily be influenced by others.

There are people who are impostors and are lying in wait for simple men.
The impostor, though pretending to be a good-doer, traps the man and
draws him towards corruption. The corrupt society and the unyielding
nature of humans does not help the situation. The simple man may not
realize his situation for a while, but one day he wakes up and finds
himself deep in a trap from which there is not any escape.

If you look around yourself, you see tens of such unfortunate people.
Perhaps none of them intended to fall in the trap or become corrupt, but
through their own simplicity, ignorance, and unthoughtfulness, they are
now preyed upon by the corrupt in society.

On this account, the simple men need to be taken care of. By monitoring
their activities, the wise and well-wishing people would be doing them a
great service.

The best people for this task, however, are the wives of these men. A
wise and clever wife is able, through a benevolent and wise attitude, to
achieve the greatest of the tasks regarding her husband. Such women,
however, should remember not to directly interfere with the affairs of
their husband, or to tell them the "do's" and the "don'ts". The reason
for this is because men mostly do not like to be treated as tool in the
hands of others; otherwise they may react sharply. But a wise woman
would monitor her husband's activities and watch his associates
indirectly without his knowledge.

It also happens that some men, some times, come back home later than
usual. If this is the case and the number of the late arrivals to home
are within an acceptable limit, then there is no need to worry, because
men are sometimes engaged in certain unexpected events which they try to
pursue after their work. However, if the number of late arrivals exceeds
the accepted limit, then his wife should make an effort to investigate.
But investigation is not easy; it requires patience and wisdom; one must
avoid anger or protest.

The wife should first of all talk to him softly and kindly. She should
ask him why he came home later than the day before and where he had
been. She should pursue the matter wisely and patiently at different
times and on different occasions. If she finds out that he comes back
home late because of his work or attends scientific, religious, and
moral meetings, then she should leave him alone. If she feels that he
has found a new friend, she should find out who he is. If his new friend
is a well-mannered person with a clean record, then she should not
worry. It is even recommended that she encourages him in his new
friendship, because a good friend is a great blessing.

If you feel that your husband is going astray or that he associated with
corrupt and unworthy people, then you should stop him immediately. A
woman in this situation has a great responsibility. The slightest
mishandling of the situation, through carelessness. May shatter their
family life. This is a situation where the wisdom and cleverness of some
women can become useful and apparent. One should remember that rows or
arguments are not the solution and they may result in the exact
opposite. A woman, who experiences this event, has two tasks to achieve:

(a) First she should assess the situation at home; and should examine
herself and her attitude. She must find out the reason for her husband's
behavior. She should fairly judge why he has grown cold towards his
family and gone astray. She may find that her own attitude had been the
cause; or perhaps she had been the cause; or perhaps she had been
indifferent to his desires for food, her looks or the affairs of the
house. Such matters draw men away from home. They may then pursue
outside deviant activities in order to forget their problems.

The wife can ask her husband about his problems and try to help solve
them. If a woman corrected herself and changed the house according to
his desires, then she could be hopeful that her husband could be drawn
back to his family and that he would avoid corrupt places.

(b) Secondly, she should show him as much kindness as possible. She
should advise him and remind him of the grim consequences of his deeds.
She should even cry and beg him to give up his bad companions. She must
say to him:

"I love you from the bottom of my heart. I am proud of you. I prefer you
to all things and I am ready to devote myself to you. But I am saddened
by one thing; why should a man, like you, have these kinds of friends;
or attend that kind of a party? Such deeds are not suitable for you.
Please give them up"

The wife must continue this attitude until she conquers the heart of her
husband.

It is possible that the husband is used to unworthy habits and that he
would not be influenced easily, but the wife should not become
disappointed. She should pursue her goal with greater strength and
patience.

Women have great power and influence over men. She is able to do
whatever she wills if she puts her mind to it. If a woman decides to
save her husband from the filth of corruption, she can do it. There is
an eighty per cent chance of success, provided she acts wisely. Anyway,
she must not use violence or a harsh attitude, unless she sees that
there is not any result from being kind and gentle to him. Even then she
must quarrel, leave home or use any other way in as kind a way as
possible and not revengefully.

Yes, looking after one's husband is the duty of every wife. It is a
difficult duty and that is why the Prophet (S) of Islam stated: "The
Jihad of a woman is to take care of her husband well."[^52]

Suspicious Women
----------------

It is not wrong if a woman is watchful of her husband, but only if it
does not exceed to a state of suspicion and mistrust. Suspicion is a
destructive and incurable illness. Unfortunately some women are affected
by this disease.

A woman of suspicion imagines that her husband is, lawfully or
unlawfully, disloyal to her. She imagines that he is married to another
woman or that he is going to marry her. She suspects him of having an
affair with his secretary or another woman. She loses trust in him
because he comes home late or he was seen talking to a woman. If he
helps a widow and her children, the wife may think that he has an
interest in her, other than a charitable one. If any woman gives her
husband a compliment, saying that he is handsome or well-mannered, she
concludes that he is interested in that woman. Upon finding a strand of
hair in his car, she thinks there is another woman in his life.

Such women with these thoughts and inconclusive proof gradually assume
certainty regarding their husbands' unfaithfulness.

They think about it every day and night. They also tell others, friends
and foes about it, who, in the name of sympathy, reinforce the
allegations and in turn tell the concerned women about other unfaithful
men.

Arguments and rows start to take shape. The woman begins to ignore the
affairs of the house and the children and might even go to her parents.
She would monitor him and search his pockets. She would read his letters
and would explain any trivial matter as due to his unfaithfulness.

With this attitude, she would make the family's life hard and turn the
house into a burning hell in which she would also suffer. If her husband
brought proof of his innocence, or swore that he had not been committing
any thing wrong, or cried, she would not be satisfied.

The reader has certainly come across such women, but it is useful to
know of the following cases:

"A woman said in the family court: 'Do not be surprised as to why, after
twelve years of married life and three small children, I have decided
upon a separation from my husband. I am now certain that my husband is
unfaithful to me. A few days ago, I saw him with an attractive woman
walking in the street. I read a weekly magazine which has a proper
section on fortune telling. Every week, in my husband's horoscope, it
mentions that he would have good times with the people who are born in
the month of June. I was born in February; so I am not one of those
people mentioned in the horoscope. Besides I feel my husband is not as
loving towards me as he used to be'.

The husband of this woman said: "Please tell me what I can do I wish
these magazines would consider the readers like my wife, and would not
tell so many lies. Believe me these horoscopes have turned the lives of
mine and my children into ruins. If one of these horoscopes says that
this week a large lump sum of money is coming my way, then she comes to
me and asks me what I have done with that money? Or, if it says that I
would be receiving a letter, then Allah save me! I think it is probably
better for both of us to separate, because she does not confront
reason'."[^53]

"A man said in the court: 'It was a month ago, when I was coming back
from a party, that of my colleagues asked me to give him and his wife a
lift back home. The day after my wife asked me to take her to her
parents'. On the way, she looked back and found a strand of hair on the
back seat of the car. She asked who this strand of hair belonged to. I
was in a panic and could not give her a proper explanation. I dropped
her at her parents' house and went to work. When I went to pick her up
that night she refused to come with me. I asked, why? She said to me
that I should better live with the owner of the strand of hair'."[^54]

"A young woman complained to the court and said: 'My husband is coming
home late every night on account of overtime at his work. I have been
worried about this and my suspicion has increased due to what our
neighbours are saying. They say that my husband is lying and he is not
working at night and that he goes after his pleasure. As a result I am
not prepared to live with a liar'.

At his point the husband took out a few letters from his pocket and
placed them on a counter before the judge and asked him to read them
aloud in order to prove his innocence and to stop his wife's improper
attitude.

The judge started to read the letters aloud. One of the letters was
indicative of his overtime working from 4 to 8 O'clock at night. Other
letters were also related to his work where he was asked to attend
certain seminars. The wife came forward and after seeing the letters
said: 'I used to search his pockets every night but I did not see any of
these letters'..

The judge said: 'He might have left them at his work'.

The young man said: 'My wife's suspiciousness towards me has grown so
much that I have become suspicious of her. Every night I have
nightmares. I imagine that she is in love with a man and wants to
separate from me in order to marry him'.

At this point the young wife rushed towards her husband and while crying
for joy, apologized to him and they both left the court'."[^55]

"A dentist complained to the court and said: 'My wife is exceedingly
jealous. I am a dentist and there are women patients who come to my
office for treatment. This has aroused my wife's jealousy and everyday
we argue about it. She believes that I should not accept women patients.
But I cannot lose my regular patients. I love my wife and she loves me,
but this improper expectation of hers is ruining our lives. A few days
ago she came to my dental surgery and forced me to leave. We went home
and quarreled. She said to me: 'I went to your surgery and sat beside a
young girl in the waiting room. We talked about you and she, without
knowing that I was your wife, said: 'The dentist is a handsome and well-
mannered man' . "The dentist went on saying: 'On account of a girl's
opinion, my wife dragged me out of the surgery in a degrading
manner'."[^56]

"A woman, complaining to the court, said: 'One of my friends told me
that my husband goes to a stranger woman's house. I followed him one day
and realized that it was true. Now I am asking the court to punish him'.
The husband, while acknowledging what his wife was saying, told the
court: 'One day I went to a pharmacy to buy some medicine. I saw a woman
in the pharmacy who was buying powdered milk. She did not have enough
money to pay for the milk, so I offered to help. Later, I found out that
she was a widow who was poor. So I decided to continue my help'." The
judges, after investigating the matter, realized the truth of his claims
and reconciled the couple'."[^57]

Such events happen in many families. The family atmosphere changes into
an environment of pessimism, suspicion, and enmity. The children would
suffer and the mental effects are grave.

If a couple continues to live in this situation, then they would both
suffer, and if they show stubbornness towards each other, they would
surely lead to a divorce. In the case of a divorce taking place, both
man and wife would be losers, because on the one hand the man would not
be able to find another wife who is any better than the previous one. On
the other hand, the children would suffer and would not be able to enjoy
a healthy life. The children might even confront new problems due to a
step-father or step-mother.

The man may think that by divorcing his wife, he can marry a 'perfect'
woman, with whom he can live in peace. But this is nothing more than a
dream and the realization of it is very remote. By divorcing his wife,
he may encounter new problems with the new one.

Divorce is also not a path to comfort and happiness for the woman.
Although she might feel satisfied that she has had her revenge,
remarrying would not be easy for her. She may have to live alone for the
rest of her life and would probably not even enjoy the presence of her
children. Even if she gets married again, it is not certain that her new
husband would comply with her expectations. She may even have to bring
up the children of a man whose wife is dead. Therefore, neither divorce
nor arguments and rows can save the couple. But there is a way to
salvation.

The best attitude is that both man and wife give up arguing and try to
be logical. Men have a greater responsibility in this matter, and in
fact the key to the solution is in their hands. Men can, through
patience and forgiveness, save themselves from trouble and also help
eliminate the element of suspicion in their wives.

Now a few words to the men:

Firstly, dear sir! You should remember that your wife, even though
suspicious of you, loves you. She is interested in your children and the
family home. She is afraid of separation. She would definitely suffer
from your deplorable life situation. If she did not love you, she would
not have been jealous. So she does not like the present situation, but
what can she do if she is ill? Some patients have rheumatism and some
have cancer. Your wife suffers from a mental disorder and if you do not
believe it, then take her to a psychiatrist. You should treat her
sympathetically and compassionately. You should not be angry with her or
have arguments. No one could quarrel with an ill person. Do not react
harshly to her impoliteness or allegations. Do not end up fighting with
her. Do not go to any courts. Do not ignore her. Do not talk about
divorce and separation. None of these acts can cure her illness; in fact
it might become worse. Your unkindness would serve as a source of her
suspicion.

You must be as kind to her as possible. You might resent your wife
deeply because of her attitude, but there is not any other way. You must
treat her in a manner so that she becomes certain of your innocence.

Secondly, you should try to create an understanding between yourselves.
Do not hide any thing from her. Let her read your letters even before
you do. Leave the keys to your private desk, drawers or safe within her
reach. Let her look into your bags and pockets. Allow her to monitor
you. You should not express displeasure with any of the above- mentioned
points, but regard them as normal procedures in a healthy and friendly
family life.

After work, if you do not have any other business, return home as soon
as possible. If an urgent matter arises that you should attend to, then
inform your wife and tell her where you are going and at what time she
should expect you back home. Then try to be on time. If you are late in
coming home, then immediately tell your wife the reason. Be careful not
to lie, otherwise she will become suspicious. Consult her in your
affairs. Do not hide anything from her. Talk to her about your day. Keep
her trust in you. Ask her to question you on any vague subject which may
be bothering her.

Thirdly, you may be innocent of the subject of her suspicion, but the
suspicions of women are mostly not baseless either. Perhaps, through
carelessness you have done something which has affected her mentally and
made her suspicious of you. You should ponder over your previous acts
carefully. You might then find the cause of her suspicion. In this way
you can solve the problem better. For instance, if you joke a lot with
other women, try not to do it any more.

What is the point of being called handsome or well-mannered at the
expense of your wife's suspicion and her distrust towards you? Why
should you trigger her suspicion by joking with your secretary or a
woman colleague? Why should you employ a woman to work for you? Do not
joke with other women in parties. If you want to help a poor widow, why
should you not inform your wife? You can even help the widow through
your wife. Do not think that you are a slave, or a person in chains. You
should not be a slave, but a wise man who, upon an agreement with your
wife, is taking care of her. You should help her overcome this problem.

Through patience and wisdom, you should remove the dangers which are
threatening the foundation of your sacred family life. You would then
cure your wife's illness as well as save your children from unhappiness.
You would do a great deal of service to yourself both mentally and
materialistically. Moreover, Allah rewards men who are willing to
sacrifice at vital moments such as this.

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: ' Act moderately with the women in every
instance. Speak to them nicely in order that their deeds become
good'."[^58]

"Imam Sajjad (a.s) stated: 'One of the rights of a woman upon her
husband is that he should forgive her ignorance and foolishness'."[^59]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: ' Any man who copes with his
incompetent wife, the Almighty Allah, upon his patience (towards his
wife) on every occasion, would grant him the reward of patience of
Hadrat Ayyub (a.s)'."[^60]

Now the women are reminded of few points:

First:  
 Dear Madam! The subject of your husband's unfaithfulness, like every
other subject, needs proof. As long as his guilt is not proved you do
not have any right to convict him. Neither law nor one's conscience
allows one to accuse someone on the account of probability of a crime
having taken place. Would you not be hurt if someone accused you of
something without any proof? Is it possible to consider your foolish and
baseless theories as proof of an important crime such as adultery?

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اجْتَنِبُوا كَثِيرًا مِنَ الظَّنِّ
إِنَّ بَعْضَ الظَّنِّ إِثْمٌ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O you who believe! avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin...*****(49:12)*****."***

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) stated: '(The weight of) accusing an innocent
person falsely is heavier than the high mountains'."[^61]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: " Anyone who makes false accusations
upon a believer, Allah, on the Day of Resurrection, will place him upon
a heap of fire in order that he receives the punishment he
deserves'."[^62]

Dear Madam! Do not be foolish and do not jump to conclusions. When you
have time, sit down and write down all the proof and grounds regarding
your husband's unfaithfulness. Then in front of each point, write down
the other aspects to the problem and the probability of their
occurrence. Next, place yourself as a fair judge and think deeply about
the written points. If they do not convince you that he is guilty, then
you can either forget the matter or make further investigations.

For instance, the presence of a strand of hair in your husband's car may
be easily explained by one of the following:

(a) It may belong to one your husband's relatives such as his sister,
mother, aunt, or their children.

(b) It may be one of your own.

(c) He might have given a lift to his friend or relative accompanying
his wife and the strand of hair might be hers.

(d) He might have given a lift to a helpless woman.

(e) Perhaps one of his enemies has dropped the strand of hair in his car
deliberately in order to make you suspicious of him.

(f) One of his women colleagues might have been given a lift in his car.

(g) There is also a probability that he had been out with his beloved.
But this case is far more remote than the previous ones and therefore
should not be taken very seriously. At least one should not regard it as
firm evidence of guilt while forgetting about the other possibilities.

If your husband comes back home late, he might have been doing extra
work; or might have been at his friend's house; or might have attended a
seminar or a religious meeting; or he might even have walked back home.

If a woman thinks of him as a handsome man, it is not his fault. Being
well-behaved is not a proof of being guilty! Would you prefer him to be
a bad-tempered man from whom everyone would be repulsed?

If your husband attends to the needs of a widow and her children, regard
him as a charitable person who is doing this for the sake of Allah.

If your husband has a private desk or a safe; and if he does not let you
read his letters, do not think of him as having a mistress. Men
generally have a sense of secrecy and modesty. They do not like others
to be informed of their affairs, perhaps they possess secret materials
which are related to their work. Perhaps he does not regard you as a
person who could keep a secret. Any way, a possibility is just that, and
it should not be considered as a firm proof.

Second:  
 Whenever you suspect anything, you should discuss it with your husband
in such a manner as to find the truth of the matter out and not in a way
of protest. Be frank with him and ask him to explain the subject of your
suspicion in order to clear your mind and set it at peace. Then listen
to him carefully. Think about his explanation. If you are satisfied with
it then the matter is over. But if you are still suspicious, then
investigate the matter yourself until the truth is revealed.

If, while investigating, you come across a point that your husband had
lied about, then do not regard it as a proof of his guilt. This is
because despite his innocence, he might have deliberately not been
telling the whole truth lest you become more suspicious. Again it is
better to go to him and ask why he did not tell the whole truth. Of
course, it is not good for one to lie, but if your husband made this
mistake, then you should not, in turn, act foolishly.

Ask him firmly to tell you the truth. His inability in explaining the
subject of your suspicion is not indicative of his guilt. It is possible
that he may really forget something or he may be in a panic. At this
point, do not pursue the matter further and leave it for a more
appropriate occasion. If he says to you that he has forgotten something,
accept it. However, if you are still in doubt, investigate through other
channels.

Third:  
 Do not voice your suspicion with anyone you see, since they may be your
foes. Enemies always endorse your claims and might even add a few lies
to it in order to shatter your life. They may not be foes, but a bunch
of foolish, simple, and inexperienced people who reinforce your claims
sympathetically. They may be you r close relatives or close friends.
Consultation is only useful with wise, clever, and genuine sympathizers.
If you need to consult someone, then find the right people and discuss
it with them.

Fourth:  
 If the proof of your husband's guilt is not a firm proof towards your
husband's guilt, if your friends and relatives think that the evidence
is not enough, if your husband regards himself as not guilty, and
finally if you are still suspicious of him, then you can be sure that
you are ill. You are suffering from a mental disorder in which the
element of suspicion has grown beyond your control. It is vital for you
to turn to a psychiatrist who could treat you accordingly.

Fifth:  
 Therefore, it is not wise for you to argue with you r husband or make
complaints to the court. Do not talk about divorce and do not degrade
him. Such an attitude will only lead to more anger and rows which may
result in divorce. Be careful not to act foolishly, or decide to commit
suicide. By killing yourself not only would you lose this life, but you
would also be tormented in the next world. Is it not sad to lose your
life for the sake of a baseless thought? Is it not better to solve your
problems through patience and wisdom?

Sixth:  
 If you are still suspicious of your husband or you reach the conclusion
that he is certainly having an affair, then again you are to be blamed,
because you have not tried enough to win his heart. You have placed a
gap in his life in which other woman can find a place. But do not
despair; there is still time. Review your attitude and act in a manner
that would attract your husband towards you.

Do Not Pay Attention to Slanderous Talks
----------------------------------------

One of the negative characteristics of some people is their speaking ill
of each other. This characteristic is not only unpleasant by nature, but
it is also a cause of much mischief. It causes suspicion, pessimism,
disharmony, and strife among the people. It destroys friendly
atmospheres and sows the seed of discord among families. It separates
men from their wives and it could lead to homicide.

Unfortunately, this characteristic is so widespread among the people
that it does not even seem bad any more. In a gathering it is rare not
to hear gossiping and backbiting. Specially, in a women's gathering, the
element of gossip is dominant. When two women meet, they start
gossiping. They talk slanderously of others as if it is a competition.
They sometimes talk about their husbands. For instance, they discuss
their looks or jobs, and find fault with the other woman's husband. One
woman would blame the other one for being married to; say a mechanic or
a shoemaker.

If the husband is a driver she would say: "Your husband is always
traveling, how can you cope with this?" If he is a butcher, she would
say: "Your husband always smells of fat." If he is not earning much, she
would say: "How do you live with such little money? Why did you marry
him? Is it not a pity that you, with such a beauty, have married such a
short and puny man? How did your parents allow you to do this? Were they
fed up with you? You could have married any man you wished. Why did you
choose this man? He does not take you anywhere, not the cinema, not the
theatre, nowhere.

By the way, your husband is such a grim faced man. How can you live with
him? How could you, with all your education, marry a peasant?"

Talks of this kind can be heard among a fairly large percentage of the
female population of any society. Women who are used to this manner of
speaking, as a matter of fact, do not think of the grave consequences
which might follow. They do not think that their gossiping or picking up
faults could lead to divorce or even murder.

Such women are truly demons in a human form. They are the enemies of
families. They create strife among the families and turn their houses
into dark and horrible dungeons. What should one do? This is a component
of our societies. Even though Islam has firmly prohibited us from such
deeds we are not prepared to give them up.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Oh! Those of you who claim to be
Muslims, but failed to let faith enter into your hearts, do not speak
ill of Muslims and do not find faults with them. Whoever find faults
with people, then Almighty Allah will be doing just the same while
looking into their faults; and in that case they would be disgraced
among the people, even though they may remain in their own
houses'."[^63]

These evil-character women may pursue one or many goals. They gossip for
the sake of revenge in order to break up a family. They may do it
because of jealousy or self- glorification. They might want to cover
their own deficiencies or deceive the simple women. They may want to
pretend that they are sympathetic. They sometimes gossip for amusement
and do not pursue any goal other than satisfying their distasteful
desires. But what one can be sure of is that deeds of this kind are not
committed in order to help others and that such acts could have
disastrous effects.

The readers have surely come across certain events which have occurred
as the result of gossip. The following is such a case:

"A woman said in the court: 'Mr... used to talk behind my husband- in
order to cause a clash between me and my husband. He used to tell me
that my husband was not good enough for me and that he did not
understand me or have any emotions. He always wanted me to get a divorce
and marry him... As a result of his deluding suggestions I was misled
and one day we, both together, killed my husband'." [^64]

Dear madam! Now that you have realized the evil intentions behind gossip
and if you are interested in your husband and children, then do not be
influenced by the tongues of the human-shaped devils. Do not give in to
their false friendship. Be sure they are not your friends, but your foes
who want to see you breaking away from your family. Do not be simple and
do not believe them. Try to find their evil intentions through sagacity.
Stop them immediately when they set out to criticize your husband. Do
not be shy to tell them: "If you want us to remain friends, then stop
talking about my husband. You do not have any right t to criticize him.
I love him and there is nothing wrong with him."

Once they detect your love towards your husband and children, through
the firmness of your tongue, then they may become disappointed with
misleading you and you will not be disturbed again. Do not think that
they would become upset, or that you would lose your friends. If they
are your true friends, then they should not be hurt and should even
thank you. If they are your enemies, then what is better than avoiding
them. If you encounter those who are persistent in their evil act, then
cut off your relationship with them.

The Satisfaction of Your Husband and Not Your Mother
----------------------------------------------------

A girl, while in her parents' house, is duty-bound to satisfy them.
However, once she is married, her role changes.

In her husband's house, a woman should give priority to her husband's
needs. Even when there are conflicting desires of her husband and her
parents, she should obey her husband, even at the expense of the
parents' dissatisfaction. Disobedience to one's husband may harm one's
marital relationship and vice-versa. Moreover, many mothers do not enjoy
a proper education and wisdom.

Some mothers have not yet realized that they should leave their
daughters to reach an understanding with their husbands of their own.
The married couple must be left to plan their own affairs and if they
encounter any difficulty, they should overcome it through their own
initiative.

Since the wives' mothers are unaware of this point, then, in their own
minds, they try to make their son-in-law act according to their desires.
They try, directly and indirectly, to interfere in their family affairs.
They use their young daughters, who are inexperienced and not quite
aware of their situations, in order to influence the sons-in-law. The
mothers constantly tell their daughters how to act, what to do, what to
say, and what not to say. The poor daughter, who regards her mother as
sympathetic and experienced, obeys her and commits herself to the
mother's desires too.

There would not be any problems if the son-in-law submits to the
mother-in-law's desires: However, if he shows resistance, then rows
begin to take shape. In the latter case the ignorant mother may become
so stubborn that it may lead to the destruction of her daughter's family
life. The ignorant mother, instead of encouraging her daughter to devote
herself to her husband, makes her oppose her husband. The mother may
tell her daughter:

"You have ruined your life. What an awful husband! What good men were
prepared to marry you! What a good life your cousin has! How lucky your
sister is! What have they got that you haven't? Why should you live like
this? My poor daughter!"

The mother, whose words are regarded as sympathetic, causes family rows
and arguments between the daughter and her husband. The daughter is
placed in a situation to pick up rows with her husband. The parents
would also take sides with her and finally in order to win the fight,
they show willingness towards their daughter getting a divorce.

"A thirty-year old woman attacked her fifty-year old mother for she had
caused her divorce. This woman said: 'My mother talked behind my husband
so much that it caused many arguments between me and him. Finally, I got
divorced but soon regretted it. But it was too late, because six hours
after our divorce, my former husband was engaged to my cousin. I was so
frustrated that I decided to beat up my mother'." [^65]

"A thirty-nine year old man ran away from his wife and mother-in-law and
left a letter saying: 'Because of my wife's attitude and because she was
not prepared to go to Abadan with me, I decided to leave this world. My
wife and her mother are responsible for my death'. Thus a man, who was
fed up with his mother-in-law's interference, committed suicide'." [^66]

"A man, who was fed up with his mother-in-law's interference, threw her
out of a taxi'." [^67]

Undoubtedly, daughters who obey mothers of this kind and submit to their
wills, would inflict an irreversible blow on themselves.

Therefore, any woman who cares for her family, should not be influenced
by her mother's will and should not regard them as one hundred percent
correct.

A wise and clever woman would always examine the suggestions and sayings
of her mother before implementing them in her family life. She should
implement them if they did not contradict or endanger her family bonds.
In this case, the daughter should submit to the will of her mother.
Otherwise, if the daughter reaches the conclusion that her mother is
ignorant and her suggestions lead to rows and arguments, then she can
reject her.

Anyway, there are two choices for the daughter:  
 (a) To go along with the desires of her mother in which case, family
arguments would follow; or  
 (b) To ignore her mother, and comply with her husband's desires.

Obviously, one would not choose the former because if one did, then she
would either have to live in a misery with her husband or divorce him.
If she continues to live with her husband, then she, along with her
husband, and the children, would suffer .In the case of divorce she
would probably have to go to live with her parents. In this case they
would not accept her as a member of the family and would try to get rid
of her. She would be degraded and humiliated before all the other
members of the family .It is also not easy to live alone. It will also
not be easy to marry again. How can one be sure that the next round will
be any better What about the children? What about the children of the
next man? She might end up so frustrated that she might kill herself.
She may become so difficult to live with that the next man she marries,
may run away from her, or even kill himself.

Once a woman ponders over the consequences of acting upon the selfish
and foolish desires of her mother or others, then she should firmly
decide to ignore all the talk as not to endanger her relationship with
her husband.

She could tell her mother:  
 "Now that I am married, it is better for me to try to protect my
marriage, and keep my husband satisfied. I would rather treat him
kindly, because he is my partner. He can make me happy and is able to
help me. He shares ail the ups and downs of life with me. He is my
choice and, if we have any difficulties, we will try to solve them
ourselves. We can plan our lives. Your interference may make a bad
situation worse. If you want us to have a good relationship with you,
then do not interfere in our lives, do not talk behind my husband,
otherwise I will have to cut off my relationship with you."

If your mother, as a result of your suggestion, stops interfering, then
you will not be disturbed. However, if she is not prepared to take any
notice of you r desires, it would be better for you to stop seeing her.
In this way you will be saved and you can live comfortably.

While, as a result of breaking away from you r parents, you may lose
some of your respect among you r family, you will have earned many times
over more respect from your husband.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The best of your women is one who
gives birth to many children, is loving and chaste, who does not submit
to the will of her relatives but is obedient towards her husband, adorns
herself only for her husband and protects herself from strangers,
listens to her husband and obeys him, accedes to his wishes in privacy
and does not lose her modesty in any case."

"The Prophet (S) then added: 'The worst of your women is she who obeys
her relatives but does not submit to the wishes of her husband, is
barren and vindictive, is not afraid of committing bad deeds, adorns
herself in the absence of her husband, would not accede to the wishes of
her husband in privacy, would not accept his excuses and would not
forgive his mistakes',"[^68]

Be Clean and Beautiful at Home Also
-----------------------------------

It is customary with most women that whenever they go to a party or a
gathering, they wear their best dresses and adorn themselves with the
best. However, upon returning home, they take their dresses off and put
on an old and shabby dress. These women are not particular about
cleanliness at home and do not beautify themselves. They walk around the
house with disheveled hair, stained clothes, and torn socks. In fact,
the situation must almost be reverse, that is, a woman should adorn
herself at home and charm her husband in order to conquer his heart and
in order not to leave any gap for other women to fill. Why should she
look beautiful for others? Is it proper for a woman to expose her beauty
before the eyes of other men and to create problems for the youth?

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: ' Any woman, who perfumes herself and
leaves the house, is deprived from the blessings of the Almighty Allah
until she returns home'."[^69]

"The Prophet (S) also stated: 'The best of your women is one who is
obedient towards her husband, adorns herself for her husband but does
not reveal her adornment to strangers; and the worst of your women is
one who adorns herself in the absence of her husband'." [^70]

Dear Madam! Winning the heart of a man, especially for a long time, is
not easy. Do not think: "He loves me. I don't need to look beautiful for
him or try to win his heart or entice him." You must always maintain his
love towards yourself. Be sure that your husband would enjoy having a
tidy beautiful and clean wife, even though he may not express it. If you
do not satisfy his inner desires and do not dress attractively at home,
he may see beautiful and attractive women out of the house. He may then
become disheartened in you and might deviate from the right path. When
he sees attractive women, he compares you with them. If you are an
untidy, careless, and disheveled woman, he would think that other women
are angels who have descended from the heavens. So try to look
attractive at home and be sure that he will not lose interest in you.

Read the following letter written by a husband:

One cannot distinguish my wife from my servant in the house. I swear by
Allah that I sometimes think: I wish she would wear one of these dresses
made for parties, at home. I wish she would throwaway those torn and
worn out clothes. I have told her a few times: 'darling! at least wear
those nice dresses at home on holidays.' She told me sourly: 'I don't
need to be particular when I am at home; but if one day I look untidy in
the presence of my colleagues, then it would be embarrassing for me'."

The reader might believe that while house keeping and cooking, a woman
cannot dress up or look beautiful. This may be true but a housewife can
have different clothes for doing the housework; and she can change her
working clothes to proper ones while she is in the presence of her
husband or for when he returns home. You can always comb your hair and
keep yourself clean after the housework.

"Imam Baqir (a.s.) stated: 'It is incumbent upon a woman to perfume
herself, to wear her best clothes, to adorn herself in the best way, and
to meet her husband in this state day and night'."[^71]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) stated: 'Women should not give up adornment, be it
only with a necklace. She should not have untinged hands, be it with a
little henna. Even old women should not give up adornment'." [^72]

Be a Mother to Him
------------------

At the time of preoccupation and illness, one needs to be nursed by
others. A nurse can assist the recovery of an ill person tremendously
through kindness and loving care. Men are small children who have grown
up. They still need motherly care. When a man gets married to a woman,
he expects her to be a mother to him at times of illness and difficulty.

Dear Madam! If your husband becomes ill, take care of him more than
usual. Express your sympathy and pretend that you are extremely upset
with this sickness. Console him, prepare all his requirements and keep
the children quiet in order to keep him relaxed. If he needs a doctor or
medicine, then act accordingly.

Cook the food he likes, and which is good for him. Ask about his health
frequently. Try to stay by his bedside, as much as possible. If he is in
so much pain that he cannot sleep, stay up with him, as much as
possible. Once you wake up, go to him. Ask how is he. If he had not
slept that night, then express your sorrow. Keep his room silent in the
daytime. Your care for him would help him recover faster. He would
appreciate your efforts and would love you more. Besides he would do the
same for you if you ever became ill.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The Jihad of a woman is to care for
her husband well'."[^73]

Keep the Secrets
----------------

Women usually like to know about their husbands' secrets, their
earnings, their decisions about the future, and their work. They expect
men not to hide anything from them.

On the contrary men are not willing to tell their wives everything. As a
result, some husbands and wives constantly argue over this matter.

Some women say that their husbands do not trust them; do not let them
read their letters; do not tell them the amount of their earnings; are
not straight with them; do not answer their questions properly; and
sometimes lie.

Incidentally, men do not mind telling their secrets to their wives. But
they believe that their wives do not keep secrets; that they relate to
others everything they know, and might even cause trouble for their
husbands.

If one intends to find out the secrets of others, it suffices for one to
call on their wives. Some wives, by knowing their husbands' secrets,
blackmail them, and thus misuse their husbands' trust in them.

Obviously men, up to a certain extent, have a point. Women, in
comparison with men, are more under the influence of their emotions.
When women become angry, it would be difficult for them to control
themselves, and by knowing their husbands' secrets, they could put their
men in trouble.

Therefore, if a woman is interested in knowing her husband's secrets,
she must be very careful not to speak of them anywhere without his
permission. She must not even tell her best friends or relatives. It is
not keeping a secret if you tell someone about it, and ask him not to
repeat it to anybody, otherwise everyone will find out about it.

Therefore a wise person is one who does not tell his secret to anyone.

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'The chest of a wise man is the safe for his
secrets'." [^74]

"Imam ' Ali (a.s) also stated: 'The benevolence of this world and the
next is in two things: keeping secrets, and friendship with the good
people; and all the evils are in two things: revealing secrets, and
keeping bad company'."[^75]

Accept His Management
---------------------

Every institution, factory, and organization needs a responsible
manager. In any sociological unit and organization, cooperation between
the staff is important. However, running the affairs of such a unit
needs a manager who can coordinate the duties.

One of the very important social units is the 'family'. Running the
affairs of this unit is very vital and difficult.

Undoubtedly, there must be a deep understanding, and cooperation among
the members of a family, but there must also be a manager who can act
responsibly with regard to the family matters. Needless to say, if a
family does not enjoy a person who can organize others it would suffer
from disorder and chaos. Thus, either the husband must act as the
director and the wife follows, or vice versa.

However, since the logical aspect of men is dominant over their
emotional aspect, they can be better managers.

The Almighty Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرِّجَالُ قَوَّامُونَ عَلَى النِّسَاءِ بِمَا فَضَّلَ اللَّهُ
بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ وَبِمَا أَنْفَقُوا مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ ۚ
فَالصَّالِحَاتُ قَانِتَاتٌ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

**"*****Men are the maintainers of women because Allah has made some of
them to excel others and because they spend out of their money; the good
women are therefore obedient...*** **(4:34)."**

Thus it is in the interest of the members of a family to regard the man
as their guardian and the one in charge, and to seek his supervision in
their deeds.

However, one should not conclude that the status of a woman in the house
is belittled, but it is a fact that maintaining the order and discipline
in the house requires the management of the husband. Women, who can
think without being biased, would confirm this act.

"A woman said: 'We had a good tradition in Iran which has unfortunately
faded away gradually. In this tradition the man used to be in charge of
the family affairs. He used to be the boss. Nowadays, however, the
situation is changed, and families cannot make their minds up as to who
should be in charge. I believe that the woman of today, who more or less
have the same social status as men, should accept her husband as the
chief of the house... This old tradition has to be recommended to
today's young woman, who intends to marry. She should enter her
husband's house wearing a wedding dress and come out of it wearing a
shroud'." [^76]

It is true that the everyday preoccupations of life do not allow man to
participate in all the family affairs and that in practice the wife runs
the house according to her desires, but nevertheless, the right of
directorship remains with the man, and as such he should be respected.

Therefore, should a man express his opinion about any point in the
household matters or suggest any thing, the wife should not oppose him
or deny him his right of directorship in any way. Otherwise, the man
would regard himself as powerless and look upon his wife as an impolite
and ungrateful woman. He might hold a grudge against her and, at a later
stage, even resist his wife's lawful wishes.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: ' A good man would pay heed to her
husband's wishes and would act according to his desires'." [^77]

"A woman asked the Prophet (S) of Allah: 'What is the duty of a woman
with regard to her husband?' The Prophet (S) stated: 'She must obey him
and must not violate his orders'." [^78]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: 'The worst of women is one who is
stubborn and obstinate'." [^79]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: 'The worst of women is one who is
barren, dirty, obstinate and disobedient'." [^80]

Dear Madam! Accept the authority of your husband. Seek his supervision
in your household affairs. Do not violate his orders. Do not resist or
oppose his participation in the household and family matters. Do not
reject his participation even in those matters that you have more
expertise. Do not practically make him powerless. Let him participate in
your work occasionally. Teach your children to respect his authority,
and ask them to get permission from their father in their affairs. Your
children must learn not to violate his orders from an early age. This
way your children will be brought up as obedient to their parents.

Be Resourceful when Times are Hard
----------------------------------

Life is full of ups and downs. The wheels of fortune do not always
rotate according to our desires. One goes through many difficult times.
Everyone becomes ill. Many lose their jobs, and some may lose all their
wealth. Many unpleasant incidents happen in the lives of everyone.

A man and a woman, who have sworn allegiance to each others and signed a
covenant of marriage, should walk along the path of life hand in hand.
The covenant should be so firm that it could hold them together in
sickness and in health, in richer and poorer, and in good as well as bad
times.

Dear Madam! If your husband becomes poor, must you add to his problems
by having disagreeable behaviour. If he becomes ill, and bed-ridden,
either at home or in the hospital, it is fair for you to increase your
kindness towards him. You must nurse him, attend to his needs, and spend
money for him. If you have money of your own you must pay for his
treatment. Remember if you were ill, he would have paid for your health.
Must you withhold your wealth in preference to your husband's health? If
you fail to satisfy him at sensitive times like this, then he will be
disappointed with you, and may even prefer to divorce you.

Here is a case to read about:  
 "A person came to the court to divorce his wife. He said: 'I became ill
a few days ago and my doctor told me that had to have an operation. I
asked my wife to lend me the money that she had saved. She disagreed and
left my house. As a result, I had my operation in a state hospital. Now
that I have my health back I am not prepared to live with a woman who
prefers her money to her husband. How can one call this woman a 'wife'?"
[^81]

Every conscientious person would acknowledge that, in the
above-mentioned case, it was the man who was right. Such a woman, who is
not prepared to spend her money for the treatment of her husband, does
not deserve the respected position of 'wifehood'.

Dear Madam! Be careful not to act mercilessly at a time when your
husband suffers from a permanent illness; must you leave him and your
children? How can you desert a man with whom you have had many joyful
days and nights? How do you know that a similar fate is not awaiting
you? How can you be sure that another man will be any better? Do not be
stubborn and selfish. Be sacrificial and devote yourself or the sake of
Allah as well as your honour and children. Be patient and teach your
children a lesson of devotion, love, and patience. You can be sure that,
in this world and the next, you will be rewarded handsomely. Your
devotion is the best way of showing your care for your husband which is
placed at the same level as Jihad.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: ' Jihad of a woman is in taking care
of her husband'."[^82]

Do not Refuse to Talk and do not Sulk
-------------------------------------

It is customary with some women that, when upset with their husbands,
they sulk, refuse to talk, do not attend to household work, do not eat,
hit the children, or grumble. They believe that, not speaking, or
quarrelling are the best possible ways of revenging their husbands. This
attitude, not only fails to punish the man, but may result in his
retaliation. Life then becomes difficult turning into a series of
quarrels. The woman moans, then the man does. The woman refuses to talk
and the man retaliates. The woman does something else, and the man does
the same until they become tired and, through the mediation of relatives
or friends, reconcile. But this is not the only time they had a row.
There will be other occasions and there will be a few more days of
bitterness.

Therefore, spending a lifetime of family rows will not be pleasant for
either the parents or the children. Most of the runaway youth come from
these kinds of families who then turn to crime and corruption.

"A youth, who was arrested on charges of theft, blamed his parents for
his crime and said: 'My parents used to argue everyday after which they
used to go to their relatives and I used to go into the streets and
wander about. I was then deceived by others and later committed theft'."
[^83]

"A ten-year old girl told the social workers: 'I remember vaguely that
one night my parents argued over something. The following day, my mother
left and a few days later, my father took me to my aunt. After a while
an old woman took me from my aunt's house and brought me to Tehran. It
is a few years now, that I have been living with her and I suffered so
much that I do not want to go back to her'."

"The teacher of a girl said: 'She is one of my students. She has not
been performing well in her studies and looks to be suffering from
something. She is always thinking. She has even been sitting in the
courtyard of the school unprepared to go back home.' Two days ago I
asked her: 'Why she was not going home?' She replied that she was living
with an old woman who was nasty to her, and that she did not want her to
returned home. I asked about her parents and she said they were
separated'."[^84]

Dear madam! You should remember that if your husband reacts harshly
towards you for not speaking with him, then he might even resort to
severe measures such as hitting you. You would probably leave you r
house to go to your parents' as the result of his harsh reaction. Next
your parents would interfere and the row s between your husband and you
would widen. You might end up getting a divorce in which case you would
lose more than your husband. You might have to live on your own for the
rest of your life. You will certainly regret a divorce.

"A woman said: 'I got married some time ago. I did not know much about
caring for my husband and he did not know much about looking after me.
We used to have row everyday. One week I wasn't talking and the week
after he was refusing to speak to me.

Only on Fridays, through the mediation of friends and relatives, we used
to be on good terms. Gradually, my husband became disappointed with me
and thought of divorcing me and remarrying. Since I was young I was not
prepared to change and did not object to a divorce. We got divorced and
I rented a flat. Soon I realized the dangers. Most of the people, whom I
met, were out to deceive me. I decided to reconcile with my former
husband and called at his house. There I met a lady who introduced
herself as his wife. I cried all the way back to my house. I regretted
my divorce, but it was too late'." [^85]

"A twenty-two year old woman who, after getting divorced, had taken her
child to her parents, tried to commit suicide on the night of her
sister's wedding'." [^86]

Dear Madam! You should seriously avoid sulking and not talking to your
husband. If you are upset with him, be patient. Once you are calm and
collected, talk .to him gently about your annoyance with him. You can
tell him, for instance, "You insulted me yesterday, or you rejected my
demand... Is it fair that you should treat me in this way?"

Such an approach, not only relaxes you within, but also would admonish
him. He would then try to make up for his wrongdoing, and would respect
you for you r good manners. As a result, he would review his behaviour,
and would try to discipline himself.

The Prophet of Allah (S) stated:  
 "At a time when two Muslims refuse to talk to each other and do not
reconcile within three days, both will be out of Islam, and there will
not remain any friendship between them. Then anyone of them who takes
the initiative to reconcile with the other, would enter Paradise faster
(than the other) on the Day of Judgment'."[^87]

Remain Silent when he is Angry
------------------------------

A man meets many people while at work and he comes across many problems.
Once he returns home from work, he is tired and upon confronting the
smallest unpleasant incident becomes angry and may insult his family.

A wise lady would remain silent towards her husband's ranting and
insults. The man would then calm down and would regret his insults. If
he sees that there is not any reaction to his anger, he would even
apologize. With this approach the family gets back to a normal situation
after only an hour or two.

However, if the woman of the house did not understand her husband's
sensitive position, then she would shout, swear, curse, and react
sharply.

With this approach, the husband and wife might end up fighting and
eventually resort to a divorce. Many families are broken up as the
result of such little incidents. There are even cases where men become
so angry that they erupt like a volcano and commit murder.

"A man shot himself, his wife and step-mother to death. The couple were
believed to have had many rows and arguments right from the start of
their marriage. On the night of the incident the husband had returned
home from work when the couple started yet another argument. The husband
hit his wife, and she decided to go to the police. Suddenly, the man
took his gun, killed his wife, his step-mother, and then ended his own
life with a bullet'." [^88]

Would it not have been better for the woman to have remained silent at
the husband's anger? Would three lives have been ended if the woman had
been patient and had not reacted? Which one would you prefer? A few
moments of silence or all the grave consequences of getting back at your
husband?

Do not imagine for a second that the position of the man is being
defended here and that he is not guilty. Not at all. Of course he is
guilty. He should not vent his anger out on his family. In the next
chapter, this point will be discussed in more detail but here we are
saying that a woman should be wise and not react towards her husband's
anger, be it right or not. In this situation, the man may not be able to
control himself, so it is important that the wife, in order to save her
family, remains silent.

Women usually think that remaining silent, when coming face to face with
their husband's anger, would belittle them, and that they would lose
their respect. However, the situation is quite the reverse. A man who
sees no reaction when insulting his wife. Would certainly become
remorseful. He would regard his wife as a loving woman, who despite her
ability to retaliate, preferred to forgive him. His love for his wife
would increase many fold. He would apologize and thus his wife would
earn more respect.

The Prophet (a.s) of Allah stated: ' Any woman who tolerates her
husband's bad temper, will be rewarded by Allah in the same way that He
rewarded Asiyah[^89], daughter of Muzahim, " [^90]

'The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The best of your women is one who,
upon seeing her husband's anger, tells him: 'I submit to your will.
Sleep will not pass over my eyes unless you become content with me'."
[^91]

'The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Forgiveness and tolerance would
increase the honour and respect of their owners. Be forgiving so that
Allah will cherish you'."[^92]

Men's Hobbies
-------------

Some men like to have certain hobbies at home. They are interested in,
say, collecting stamps or books, gardening or photography in their spare
time at home.

Such hobbies are classified as the best and healthiest pastime
activities. They are very useful in that they attract men towards their
homes as well as causing their relaxation. One can become depressed and
frustrated from being idle. It is a fact that one of the ways of
treating people with mental disorders is to keep them busy with certain
jobs. Those of us who work more than others are generally less affected
by mental disorders, and are less attracted towards dangerous
occupation.

Therefore, woman should respect the healthy hobbies of their husbands
and should not regard their pastime activities as foolish, cheap, and
useless. Women must encourage their men in these activities and
cooperate with them if necessary.

Housekeeping
------------

A house, although a little place, is a precious blessing. It is a
shelter for the man who takes refuge in it after the work. It is a place
for seeking comfort in even after being on a holiday; one finds rest in
one's home. No where is like home and nowhere can one find peace as one
would in one's home. It is a place of friendship, love, sincerity,
comfort, rest, and a place where men and women of good virtue are
educated and trained. It is a workshop to train mankind and a place to
educate and bring up children. It is a little society from which greater
societies are formed.

It is responsible for the advancement as well as the decline of the
larger society. The small family environment. Although a part of a
greater society, enjoys an internal independence, and that is why
correcting a nation must start by improving the family. The
responsibilities of education, training, and running of this sensitive
social base lies with the women. Therefore women, through their deeds
and behaviour towards their family, can determine the deterioration or
progress of a nation. Thus, the job of a housewife is sensitive,
respectable and revered.

Those who underestimate the family unit and are ashamed with this job,
are in fact ignorant of its values.

A housewife should be proud of her position. She is holding a position
of honour and sacrifice for the good of society.

The educated women have a greater responsibility in this job, and thus
should be models to others. They should practically prove that being
educated does not contradict the position of being a housewife, but that
it also helps in being a better housewife.

The educated woman should manage the family life in the best possible
manner. She should be proud of housekeeping and should prove that an
educated housewife is much better than an uneducated one.

It is not proper for her to abandon housework on the pretext of being
educated. Education is not meant to shirk one's responsibilities, but it
should help one perform his responsibilities better.

"A man, married to a high-school passed girl, said in the court: 'My
wife refuses to do any housework. Every time I protested she said that
housekeeping was not meant for an educated woman. She is not prepared to
change and even asks me to divorce her, and marry a maid instead! Two
nights ago I invited my wife's relatives and friends for dinner. At
dinner time I spread the table cloth and placed my wife's framed
certificate of high school in the middle. I then told everyone to
observe the dinner that my wife prepares for me every night'."[^93]

Now let us read the opinion of a few educated women about being a
housewife:

"Mrs. F. N. Shamirani, a graduate, said: 'A housewife should be an
expert in dealing with the household affairs, a good companion for her
husband, a good mother to her children and a good hostess to the
guests'."

"Dr Mrs Fasihi, pediatrician, said: 'I believe that a genuine housewife
is one who is not engaged in office work, because office jobs in our
country lack the necessary facilities regarding nutritional needs and
nurseries. A woman in an office is always worried about her children or
her husband's food'."

"Mrs. S. Yakita, Technical Superintendent of the Faculty of Medicine,
said: 'A housewife should be able to create a clean and attractive house
with the least possible budget. She should share the happy and sad time
with her husband. She must not ignore her husband's mental and social
status'."

"Mrs. I. Naimi said: ' A housewife is one who minimizes her unnecessary
recreations and who would try to improve the affairs of the house. She
must also be able to regulate the income with spending'."[^94]

Cleanliness
-----------

One of the important duties of a housewife is maintaining cleanliness in
the house. Cleanliness is the key to hygiene and health. It prevents
many illnesses and attracts the family members to the house. It is a
source of respect for the family.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The religion of Islam is based upon
cleanliness'." [^95]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: 'Islam is immaculate, so you
should make efforts for cleanliness because only the clean ones would
enter Paradise'."[^96]

Always keep your house clean and tidy. Dust it off once a day and remove
all stains and dirt from the walls, doors, windows, furniture, and other
items. Keep the garbage in a covered dustbin; keep it away from the
other rooms, and kitchen. Empty the dustbin regularly. Do not keep the
garbage in front of your house. Do not let your children urinate in the
garden or the yard, and if they did, wash the place immediately. Dirt is
a center for dangerous microbes. Do not pile up dirty dishes. Wash them
as soon as possible. Do not forget that deadly germs grow on dirt and
can become fatal to you and your family. Wash the dishes with clean
water, and afterwards keep them in a clean place. Remove all dirty
clothes, especially babies' nappies, from the vicinity of all rooms and
kitchen and wash them as soon as possible.

Keep all the family clothes, especially the underwear, clean and tidy.
Wash the meat, vegetables and all your food ingredients before cooking.
Wash all fruits before eating them because some fruits are sprayed with
poisonous substances.

Wash your hands before eating and teach your children to do the same.
After food, one should wash one's hands and mouth. If possible one
should brush one's teeth after every meal. Brushing one's teeth is
essential, at least, once a day, preferably before sleeping at night.

Cut your nails once a week. Long nails are not hygienic, because germs
can live under long nails.

Take a bath, at least, once a week, or if possible every other day.

One must remove all hair from under one's armpit as well as other places
by shaving or other means. Hidden hair on the body is a suitable place
for the growing germs. Do not leave food exposed to flies, because flies
are carriers of many dangerous microbes.

The holy religion of Islam strongly recommends people to observe
cleanliness.  
 "Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'Almighty Allah likes adornment, being
beautiful, and finds the pretention of being poor as distasteful. He
likes to see the effects of his blessings upon his worshipper, that is
to see him clean, tidy and using scent, to decorate his house, to dust
off his house environment, to turn the lights on before sunset -because
this deed takes away the poverty from home and increases sustenance.'"
[^97]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: ' A dirty person is a bad servant (to
Allah)'."[^98]

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'Keep your house clean of spider's webs, because
a spider's web is a cause of poverty'."[^99]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Do not leave the rubbish inside the
house at night, because Shaytan (Satan), i.e. pollution and
uncleanliness takes its abode there'." [^100]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: 'One's clothes must always be
clean'." [^101]

"In addition, the Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Do not leave an oily
cloth in the house, because Satan takes its abode there',"[^102]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'Washing dishes and cleaning around the
house increases the sustenance'," [^103]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) also stated: 'Do not leave the dishes without a
cover, otherwise Satan spits at them and uses them'," [^104]

"In addition, Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'Fruits are sprayed with
poisonous substances, so wash them before eating'," [^105]

"Imam al-Kadhim (a.s) stated: 'Taking a bath every other day would
fatten one'," [^106]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Do not leave the rubbish behind the
front door of the house because Satan takes its abode there'," [^107]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: 'If it had not been something
inconvenient for my followers, I would have ordered them to brush their
teeth with every wudu (ablution) for prayer (i.e., five times a day)',"
[^108]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'Cutting one's nails on Fridays would
prevent one from being affected by leprosy, insanity, alopecia and
blindness'," [^109]

"It has been related that: 'Satan takes his sleep underneath the (long)
nails'." [^110]

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'Washing one's hands, before having meals, would
prolong life, prevent one's clothes from becoming dirty and would
enlighten one's eyes',"  
[^111]

A Tidy House
------------

A tidy house is preferred to an untidy one in many ways.

Firstly, the tidiness helps the house look clean, attractive and
beautiful, An arranged house, does not bore one, but would be a source
of joy and happiness.

Secondly, the job of house-keeping would be easier in a well-ordered
house, and the housewife, by knowing the exact location of the household
contents, would not waste time to look for them. As a result the woman
would not become tired with her job.

Thirdly, it attracts the man to his house and his wife. A well-ordered
house is representative of the woman’s quality.

Fourthly, a tidy house is a source of pride for the whole family.
Whoever visits it, appreciates it, and admire the woman's talent and
good taste.

Having many luxurious items would not beautify a house, but the manner
in which the household contents are arranged, would make it attractive.
You must have seen wealthy people whose house, despite containing many
luxurious items, is boring, and there are poor people whose houses,
because of being orderly, are enjoyable to look at.

Therefore, arranging a house is one of the duties of housewives.
Talented ladies with good taste know how to put their houses in order,
but mentioning a few points here may prove useful.

Classifying your dishes: Do not pile them all on top of each other.
Leave all the cutlery in one place and place the dishes somewhere else.
Put all the dishes for guests separate from the dishes you use everyday.
Do the same for every thing else. Every thing must be put in its proper
place so that all the family members are able to find them, even in the
dark.

Some ladies may believe that such a program suits the rich and the
wealthy .But this is not correct, even poor people should arrange their
belongings, including their dishes, beds, and clothes. For instance, the
wife should keep her own clothes separate from her husband's and her
children's. The winter clothes must be separate from summer ones. Dirty
clothes must have their own place. The ornaments must be put in their
proper locations. Teach your children to be tidy with their clothes,
books, toys, etc. You can be certain that by being tidy, your children
would learn and would follow you.

Untidy women blame their children for the house being in a state of
mess, whereas it is the children who learn from their parents. If the
parents are tidy, then the children would learn and children, by nature,
are willing to be disciplined.

Keep all your money, important papers, documents, jewelry and
certificates in a safe or a place out of the reach of children. It is
not correct to punish a child for touching, destroying or losing any of
the precious items that you have left within their reach. The parents
are the guilty ones and they should know better.

"A man left some money with his wife and asked her to leave it in a safe
place..., and then put it on the mantle piece and left the house. After
a short while the man returned home and did not find the money he had
left. He looked around the house anxiously, and saw his five-year old
boy burning something in the garden. The mother of the boy angrily went
up to him, lifted him up, and then threw him on the ground so hard that
it killed the boy outright. She was quite scared while looking at her
son's corpse when the man came out into the garden. He started hitting
her, and then decided to go to the police. He got on his motorcycle, but
on the way to the police station, he had an accident. He is now in the
Intensive Care Unit'." [^112]

Who do you think, is guilty party in this incident? You can judge for
yourself. Perhaps your know of a similar occurrence.

Medicines, paraffin, petrol, and poisonous substances should always be
kept out of the reach of children. Children drink and eat anything which
looks like water and food. Do not endanger their lives by being
careless. There are many children who die as the result of their
parents' carelessness.

"Two children, a brother and a sister, aged 6 and 4 years drank a
solution of DDT. The four-year old girl died, and her brother survived.
The children were on their own in their house. They drank the solution
in order to quench their thirst. 'Their mother said in the hospital that
the solution was made to kill the mice in her house '. "[^113]

"Two children drank kerosene, mistakenly thinking that it was water."

"Another child swallowed ten of her mother's tablets."

"All these children were taken to hospital for treatment." [^114]

Finally, you are reminded that discipline is only useful up to a certain
extent in that it should not deprive you from comfort. You should not be
obsessed with tidiness, because obsession itself can cause problems:

"A man said: 'I am fed up with my wife's obsession with cleanliness and
tidiness. Everyday when I return home at 4-30 pm, my wife makes me wash
my hands and feet a few times. She wants me to put my clothes in their
proper place. She doesn't even let me smoke in all the rooms. I have
always lived freely, but during the four years of my marriage, I have
been living in a prison. Why should one care for cleanliness and
tidiness so much. This is an obsession and I hate obsession'." [^115]

A moderate behaviour is the best in all aspects of one's life. One
should not be so chaotic that it becomes impossible to live a normal
life, and also one should not overindulge in cleanliness to the extent
that it becomes an obsession.

Preparing Food
--------------

Another very important responsibility of a housewife is preparing food
for her family. A good housewife is also a good cook who can prepare
delicious food with little money, while a bad housewife cooks bad food
with expensive ingredients. Delicious food is a means of attracting her
husband towards her. A man whose wife cooks well, does not particularly
enjoy eating out.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The best of your women is one who
perfumes herself, prepares food skillfully and would not overindulge in
spending. Such a woman is one of the workforce of Allah and a person who
works for Allah would never have to face either regret or defeat'."
[^116]

It is not possible for me to write down recipes, but there are many good
books on the subject which can be obtained and used to cook delicious
foods.

But just a few points to remember:

The purpose of eating is not to fill one's stomach but that it also
supplies the body with all the nourishment it needs to continue its
function. The necessary nourishment for the body is contained in meat,
fruits, vegetables and cereals and can be classified into six groups:

(a) Water,

(b) Minerals, such as calcium, phosphorus, iron, copper, etc,

(c) Starchy substances (carbohydrates),

(d) Fats,

(e) Proteins, and

(f) Vitamins like, A, B, C, D, K.

The majority of one's weight is water. Water dissolves the solid food in
order to prepare it for absorption by the intestines. Water also
regulates the body's temperature.

The minerals are necessary for the growth of bones, teeth, and the
regulation of muscle functions.

Carbohydrates create energy and heat.

Protein helps in the replacing of old or dead cells causing the growth
of the body.

Vitamins are also important for the growth, strengthening the bones,
regulating the chemical reactions in the body, and are vital in
maintaining a healthy nervous system.

Each of the above substances is vital for the body. Malnutrition causes
many illnesses and can be fatal. The quality of the food is important
and has a proportional relationship with one's life span, happiness or
sadness, beauty or ugliness and healthy nerves or mental disorders.

We are what we eat. If one monitors his food and cares for his eating
habits, he would become ill less frequently. It is not wise to eat just
delicious food without pondering over its quality. Once one's health is
impaired as a result of bad food, one would have to seek medical
treatment by a doctor, but unfortunately the human body would never be
restored to its original health.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The stomach is the centre of all
illnesses'."[^117]

Since the choice of food is with the women, therefore, they are very
much responsible for the family health. The smallest carelessness on her
part, would expose the health of all the family members to many
illnesses.

Therefore a housewife, besides being a good cook, should be able to
identify the quality of the food.

Firstly: She should make a food which has all the nourishment necessary
for a human body to function properly.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The duty of a woman towards her
husband is to turn the lights on in the house and to prepare good and
suitable food'." [^118]

"A woman asked the Prophet (S) of Allah: 'What good (reward) is awaiting
a woman who performs her duties in her husband's house?' The Prophet (S)
stated: 'For every activity that she does concerning the household
matters, Allah looks on her kindly, and whoever enjoys the grace of
Allah would not be tormented'." [^119]

Secondly: The dietary needs of people are not the same. Age, size of the
body and other possible factors determine the level of our nutritional
requirements. For instance, a child, who is growing, need more calcium
in comparison with a middle-aged person. The youth need more energy
providing food because they have more activities.

One's job is also a factor in determining the type of food one should
eat. For instance, a worker needs more fatty, sugary, and starchy food,
because he is very active. . The weather is another factor. Our
nutritional requirements differ from each other in the seasons of
summer, and winter. Also an ill person would eat differently from a
healthy one. A good cook should remember all these points.

Thirdly: It is a fact that when one reaches the age of forty and over,
he is likely to get fat. Perhaps some people regard obesity as the sign
of health, but they are mistaken. Obesity is an illness which could have
very bad effects on the heart, blood pressure, kidneys, gall-bladder,
liver, and may cause angina and diabetes.

Statistics coming from medical sources and insurance companies suggest
firstly that thin people live longer than fat ones.

Beyond the age of forty, one becomes less active and thus needs less
fat, sugar, and starch. The calories are not turned into energy as much
as before and therefore contribute towards the fattening of the body. It
is therefore better to reduce your consumption of these substances.

A woman who cares for her husband's health should put him on a special
diet to stop him from getting fat. He should eat less sweets, fat, and
cream, but more eggs, liver, poultry, red meat, fish and cheese. Dairy
products are also useful. If permitted by the doctor, the overweight
person should consume plenty of fruit, and vegetables.

If you are fed up with your husband, if you prefer to be a widow, or if
you want to murder your husband without the risks of being prosecuted by
the police -then you will not have to do much. Just put plenty of
delicious and fattening foods before him. Encourage him to eat as much
bread, rice and cakes as possible. Consequently you will get rid of him
and not only will you become a widow but he would also thank you for
feeding him with all these delicious foods.

You may suggest that such a program is possible for the wealthy people
who can afford to buy any type of food they wish. You may think it
impossible for those who are not so well off.

But one should not forget that all the nutritional values are hidden in
the simple and natural foods. A woman who has learned about cooking
would tell you that one could get all the nutritional requirements for
the body from simple foodstuff such as fruits, cereals. Vegetables. and
dairy products. One can cook a meal with these ingredients which is both
hygienic, healthy, and cheap.

Receiving Guests
----------------

One of the inevitable tasks of every family is to entertain guests at
one time or another. This is an enjoyable tradition as a result of which
friendships become closer and people can forget their problems
temporarily. Keeping company with friends and relatives is one of the
healthiest pastimes.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The sustenance of a guest is
descended from the heavens. and upon eating it, the sins of the host are
forgiven'." [^120]

"Imam Reza (a.s) stated: ' A generous person eats the food offered to
him by others so that they eat his. But a miser would not eat the
offered food by others lest they eat his'." [^121]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Associating with friends causes
kindness (amongst them)'." [^122]

"Imam Muhammad Taqi (a.s) stated: ' Associating with friends matures
one's mind and enlivens one's heart, be it even only slightly'." [^123]

In the turbulent sea of life, one's soul needs tranquility, and this
peace of mind can be found when keeping company with one's friends.

People would forget their problems while present in a friendly
gathering. Not only can friendships become stronger, but it would serve
to boost one's morale.

Entertaining guests is a good custom and rarely one would deny its
merits, but there are two difficulties with it that make some families
reluctant to take part in this age-old tradition.

First: Luxury goods and vying with one another has made life difficult
for many of us. Household goods which are meant to serve our comfort
have turned into a means of showing off and ostentation. Thus people are
tending to associate less frequently with each other. Although many who
are willing to socialize, refuse to do so, because they have the wrong
idea that they do not possess many luxurious items in their homes that
it would be better to keep away from others and save themselves the
embarrassment. This reflection destroys one's situation in the life
after death as well as placing him in a difficult situation in this
world.

Dear Madam! Do your friends come to your house in order to watch your
luxury goods? If so, advise them to go to the stores and museums instead
of coming to visit you. Associating with others is meant to increase
one's friendship with them as well as having a pleasant time. It is not
meant for showing off or filling one's stomach. Everyone is annoyed with
'luxurism' and rivalry of this kind. But they dare not dispose of this
mistaken tradition.

If you were prepared to entertain your guests in a simple manner, you
would see that they would follow you. This way you can associate with
your friends simply and without going to too much trouble. Thus, the
solution to this problem is easy .Instead of trying to match your
belongings to those of others’; you should concentrate on strengthening
the bonds of friendship with them through kindness.

Second: Another difficulty is about the hosting of one's guests. A
housewife goes through the trouble of making food for a few guests over
a period of a few hours. Sometimes a woman cannot prepare a delicious
meal, after which the husband may become upset. Her husband may also
show his displeasure towards her cooking. Therefore, some parties are
accompanied with the anxiety of the host couple as a result of which
people tend to avoid having a party.

Of course it is true that holding a party is not easy, but the main
difficulty arises when the housewife does not have sufficient knowledge
about how to look after her guests.

Hosting one's guests becomes easy if one is prepared to learn the
necessary skills. Here two case studies are presented. You may follow
whichever you prefer while entertaining your guests:

Case (a): The man informs his wife that on Friday night, ten of his
friends are coming for dinner His wife who has had bitter experience
with previous parties, suddenly becomes enraged and protests to her
husband. After a detailed discussion and the husband's pleading, the
reluctant wife agrees to arrange the dinner for his guests. They spend
their days and nights in a certain air of restlessness, and excitement
until Friday.

On Friday morning one of them goes for shopping. He remembers the
necessary items to buy and after purchasing a few items, returns home.

The housewife starts her job after lunch. She suddenly confronts many
problems. She has to do the cooking, washing, sweeping, dusting,
arranging the guestroom, and so on. Also, she has to do all this and
more on her own or at the most with only one person helping her. She
begins to work with a great deal of worry. She looks for the knife to
cut the onions, searches the house for salt, etc. She realizes that
there is not any tomato in the house, so she sends somebody to buy it.
She must then fry the chickens, cut the meat, soak the rice in water,
clean the vegetables... etc.

She becomes touchy and nervous, and then shouts at the servant, curses
her daughter, hits her son and then runs out of gas or kerosene. "Oh
God! What shall I do?” she screams.

All of a sudden the door bell rings. The guests have arrived! They come
in one after another. The poor husband, who is aware of wife's anxiety,
welcomes the guests into the house and leads them to the sitting room.
He then intends to serve them with tea, but he finds out that tea is not
ready. He shouts at his daughter or son for not putting the kettle on
the samovar.

Once the tea is made, he finds out that they do not have enough sugar.
After having to buy some more sugar, he takes a few cups of tea to the
guests. He looks at them but his mind is in the kitchen. He knows what
is going on in that quarter. He cannot sit comfortably or talk to the
guests peacefully. He is worried about the dinner. It is even worse if
there are women among the guests in which case they keep asking where
the woman of the house is. The man must answer that his wife is busy
cooking and she will be with them soon.

The wife, occasionally goes to the guests but cannot stay and sit with
them. She, while apologizing to them once again returns to her kitchen.
It is not possible for her to prepare a really delicious meal under
these conditions.

Once the meal is ready, she has to look for the dishes, make a drink,
get the glasses, fill the salt and pepper shakers, etc.

The guests after eating their meal finally say 'good-bye' to their hosts
and leave.

Conclusion: The meal was either too salty or salt less, burnt or less-
cooked. Also some of the items may have been forgotten by the hostess,
and therefore not placed before her guests.

It is now midnight and the wife is exhausted. She has not had a moment
of rest since noon. Also she was unable to attend to the guests
properly.

The husband has gone through a great deal of worry. He has spent a lot
of money for the party, but the evening was not enjoyable and he may
even blame his wife.

The couple, not only have not enjoyed the party, but may also have an
argument over it, and may even decide not to hold any more parties.

The guests did not enjoy the party either, because they felt that they
had caused a lot of trouble for their hosts and they probably wished
that they had not come at all.

Undoubtedly, the readers would not enjoy such a situation and would not
be prepared or willing to have this kind of experience.

Do you know what the source of this problem is? Well, the only real
cause is the lack of experience and know-how of the housewife about how
to entertain her guests. Otherwise, holding a party is not such a
difficult task.

Now the second option:

Case (b): The man informs his wife that ten of their friends will be
coming for dinner on Friday night. The wife responds by saying "Very
well, what should we prepare for dinner that night?" The couple decides
on this matter together and then writes down all the necessary items
needed for the party. They recheck their needs again and by crossing out
those items that they already have in their house, re-write the items
that they would have to purchase. Then in good time they do their
shopping.

On Thursday, a day before the party, they finish some of the work such
as cutting onions, washing the potatoes, filling the salt and pepper
shakers, preparing the table wares and so on.

The following morning, the woman of the house after eating breakfast,
carries out some of her tasks like washing, cutting and frying the meat,
chicken, and potatoes. After lunch she can take a rest after which she
can finish the remainder of her work.

So she can finish all her cooking, tidying up and arranging the house
without any rush or worries. There would be no need for arguments or any
cause for confusion. She would have enough time to get herself ready and
prepare a cup of tea when their guests arrive. She can then welcome the
guests alongside her husband and sit and talk to them. She would just
need to go to the kitchen to make sure everything was going smoothly.

She can ask her husband and the children to help her in setting the food
in front of the guests. Therefore, everyone would be able to comfortably
enjoy their delicious meal.

Conclusion: The guests have enjoyed the company of their hosts. They
have talked and their friendship had become stronger. They have enjoyed
the meal and have admired the housewife for her ability to entertain
them. Finally, they have enjoyed an evening which they would remember
for a long time to come.

The husband has been able to associate with the guests. He has had a
good time with his friends and is happy with his wife for not letting
him down. They become encouraged to invite their friends over and over
again.

Finally, the woman who, through patience and know- how, has been able to
entertain the guests normally and without any problem, is satisfied with
herself. She feels happy with her husband and has proved herself to be a
good hostess.

Now you can choose to follow either of the two examples.

The Trustee of the House
------------------------

Men are usually the supporters of the family. They work hard and spend
their earnings on their wives and children. They regard this as their
duty and do not ever show their displeasure in their hardship.

But men also expect their wives to economize and not to spend their
money extravagantly. The women are expected to classify the necessities
and spend on the priorities such as food, clothes, medicine, rent,
electricity, telephone, gas and water bills. Placing such items as
luxury goods on the list of one's priorities is regarded as squandering
and wasteful. Men do not like their wives to misuse their money in
buying unnecessary goods or lavishly spending.

If a man finds his wife trustworthy of caring for his money, if he is
sure that his wife does not spend lavishly and if he is certain that his
hard earned money is not wasted away he would then work harder and would
not waste his money.

On the other hand, if the woman spends the money on her clothes and
adornment, or if she spends on unnecessary items and they would have to
borrow in order to live, or if the family, like an infidel enemy,
plunders his wealth, then the man will become disheartened. He would
lose interest in working and supporting his family. He would think it
illogical to work and support the people who do not appreciate his
efforts. He may even go astray and follow a corrupt path. It might
shatter the foundations of the family.

Dear Madam! Although your husband's money and wealth is at your
disposal, do not regard it as your own. The wealth is lawfully his and
you are the trusted one. Therefore, taking any item into your
possession, giving anything away, presenting or selling any of his
belongings needs his permission. You are responsible for his wealth and
as such you must protect it. If you shirk your responsibility, you would
be questioned in the world Hereafter.

"The Prophet (a.s) of Allah stated: 'A woman is the protector and
trustee of her husband's wealth and as such is responsible'." [^124]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: 'The best of your women is one
who perfumes herself, prepares delicious food and would not overindulge
in spending. Such a woman is a representative of and one of the
workforce of Allah, and a person who works for Allah would never be
faced with regret or defeat'."[^125]128

"A woman asked the Prophet (S) of Allah: 'What are the rights of a
husband over his wife?' The Prophet (S) stated: 'She must be obedient
towards him, must not violate his orders and should not give away
anything without his permission'." [^126]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: 'The best of your women is one
who spends less' [^127]

Careers of women
----------------

It is right that earning a family's living is an obligatory deed of the
man, and that women are not Islamically (as per Islamic laws)
responsible for this act. Women, however, should also have a job. In
Islam, idleness is discredited and reproached.

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) stated: 'The Almighty Allah hates too much sleep
and too much rest'." [^128]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) also stated: 'Too much sleep wastes and ruins both
one's worldly life and the religion (the life in the world
Hereafter)'."[^129]

"Hadrat Zahra (a.s) also used to work at home."[^130]

Anyone, in need or not, should have a job. He should not waste his life
by not doing anything, but he should work and offer his share in
building a better world.

If necessary, one should spend his earnings for his family and himself,
but if not needed then he should donate his earnings from work to those
who need his help. Idleness is tedious and, more often than not, causes
mental and psychological disorders, as well as moral corruption.

The best job for married women is to take care of the house.
Housekeeping, childcare, etc are the best and the easiest jobs that
women can do.

A talented and hardworking housewife can turn her house into a heavenly
place for her children and husband; and this is a valuable and
worthwhile job.

"The Prophet (S) stated: 'A woman's Jihad is when she attends to her
husband (and takes care of him well)'." [^131]

"Umm-e-Salamah asked the Prophet (S): 'How much reward is there for a
woman's housework?' The Prophet (S) replied: 'Any woman who, in the way
of improving the order of the house, takes something from somewhere and
places it somewhere else, would enjoy the grace of Allah, and whoever
attracts the blessings of Allah, would not be tormented by Allah's
anger'.

Umm-e-Salamah said: 'O Rasul-Allah (Messenger (SA) of Allah)! May my
parents be sacrificed for you, please state other rewards for women'.
The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'When a woman becomes pregnant, Allah
rewards her as much as He would to someone who goes for Jihad (holy war)
with all his wealth and life. Then when she delivers her baby, a call
would reach her stating 'all your sins are forgiven; start a new life
again.' Each time she feeds her baby with her milk, Allah gives her
reward equal to that of freeing a slave for each feeding'."[^132]

Housewives, even not busy with their housework, should find something to
do. They can read books, conduct research on something useful, and add
to their knowledge and skills. They can write articles, and even books.
They can engage in drawing, painting, tailoring, knitting, sewing, and
so forth. As a result they can help their families economically as well
as contributing to their society by making their achievements available
to the public. Working prevents the development of many mental
disorders.

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: ' Allah likes a pious person who is honestly
engaged in doing a job'." [^133]

While some women work at home, there are others who prefer an outside
job. This preference may be either for economical or other reasons. In
this case, the best jobs are cultural occupations or nursing. Nurseries,
primary and high schools are suitable places for women to train and
teach female students. Hospitals are also suitable places where women
can serve as nurses and doctors. Such jobs are agreeable to the female
nature; and also, there would rarely, if at all, be the need for them to
mix with or come across the men who are not mahram (near relatives with
whom marriage is prohibited).

The following are recommendations to those ladies who intend to or who
are working outside their homes.

Consult your husband before taking up a job. It is your husband's right
to grant or refuse you permission to work. Starting to work without your
husband's permission will be detrimental to the serenity and loving
atmosphere of your family.

Men are also advised not to be adamantly negative with regard to their
wives' working outside the house, unless the job concerned is considered
unsuitable for them.

(b) Ladies should observe proper Islamic Hijab (veil) when not at home.
They should go to work without any make up, and with plain clothes. They
must avoid mixing with men who are not mahram as much as possible.

An office is a place to work in and is not for the purpose of showing
off, or for rivalry. Prestige and dignity does not come with what you
wear, but what you do, and how well you do it. Be and act as a dignified
Muslim woman. Maintain your self-respect, and do not hurt your husband's
feelings; save your adornments and your beautiful dresses for him at
home.

(c) Ladies should be aware that although they are working outside the
house, they are still expected by their husbands and children to attend
to such activities as housekeeping, cooking, washing, and so forth. This
can be done by cooperation within the family. An outside job should not
pave the way for upsetting the whole family. Men are also advised to
help their wives with regard to housekeeping. Husbands should not expect
their wives to work both outside and inside the house on their own. Such
an expectation is neither lawful nor fair. Men and women should share
the housework.

(d) If a woman, who working outside has a child, then she should leave
the child in a nursery or with someone trusted and kind. It is neither
right nor wise to leave children at home on their own, since many
children become fearful or helpless when they have to confront dangerous
situations.

(e) If a woman feels that, in addition to the above works and
responsibilities, she should under take another job, then she should
definitely come to an understanding with her husband and take up a job
with his permission and under his advice. If the husband does not agree,
she should forget about this job. If the husband agrees for the wife's
undertaking a job, she must try to select a job in which she comes in
contact with minimum number of strange men. This is in the interest of
both herself and the society. In any case, while outside her home, she
must certainly observe Islamic Hijab and see that she remains simple and
without any make-up.

Do not Waste your Spare Time
----------------------------

The housework comprises of a great deal of work. If a housewife intends
to carry out her job perfectly, she would not have enough time to do
anything else. This is especially true if she has to take care of a few
children as well. But most housewives do find some spare time.

Everyone spends his spare time in one way or another. Some women waste
their time. They might just walk in the streets or find another woman to
talk to. Most of the time their few hours of talking are not worth a
penny. They would listen to repeated words which only prove to be time
wasting and nerve breaking. Such idle chatting always results in one's
moral degradation. The women who go through life in this way, are surely
losers in this world and the next. How surprising it is that if anyone
should lose some money, he would become very upset, but people do not
give a thought about losing their precious moments of life.

A wise person would make the most out of his precious hours of life.
What valuable achievements one can have!

Idleness is very harmful and is a cause of many mental disorders and
anxieties. An idle person keeps thinking and finds ways of feeling sad.
He would experience many types of worries after which his mind would
become confused. A happy person is one who is busy doing something. An
unlucky person is one who has excess idle time enough to think of the
ups and downs of his life. Being busy is enjoyable, and idleness is a
source of depression.

Is it not a pity that one should waste his precious life or spend some
of its moments without getting anything in return?

Dear Madam! You can make the most out of your spare minutes or hours.
You can do scientific tasks. You can buy the related books and with the
help of your husband, increase your knowledge. Any course is possible;
physics, chemistry, Qur'an, philosophy, history, geography, literature,
psychology, etc. You would enjoy it and perhaps you could one day
contribute to your society through your knowledge. You can write
articles or even books after which your name will remain. You can earn
money too.

Do not think that this is too ambitious for a housewife. Do not imagine
that all the great women of history have been sitting idle. They, too,
were housewives but the ones who did not waste their spare time.

Mrs. Dorothy Carnegie was a housewife who wrote a good book. She used to
do the housework and also helped her husband (Dale Carnegie) in writing
his famous book "How to Make Friends and Influence People". She writes
in her book concerning principles of looking after the husband: "I have
written this book during my child's two-hour sleep. I did a lot of my
reading during the time my hair were getting dried in the hairdressing
saloon."

There are many women who have been writing great books or have had many
achievements in scientific fields.

If you are an enthusiastic person, you could be one of them.

If your husband is a researcher, then help him in his field. Is it not a
pity for an educated woman to give up all her knowledge?

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'There is not any better treasure other than
knowledge'." [^134]

"Imam Baqir (a.s) stated: 'Whoever spends his day and night in seeking
knowledge, would surely be enjoined by the blessings of Allah’''[^135]

If you are not interested in reading or research then keep yourself busy
with handicraft or artistic hobbies such as dress making, painting,
knitting, flower decorations, etc.

You can learn such arts and practice them. These skills may help you
mentally and financially. Islam has also proposed handicraft to women in
their spare time. The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: "Spinning (and
weaving) is a good pastime for women." [^136]

Motherhood (Caring for Children)
--------------------------------

One of the important duties of women is caring for their children. This
is not an easy task but one which is very sensitive and vital. It is the
most sacred and most valuable responsibility which has been bestowed
upon women by the order of creation. There are a few points which are
briefly mentioned here with regard to this matter:

(1) Fruit of Marriage

Although a man and a woman get married for a few reasons such as sexual
motive, love, etc, having a child is not one of the main reasons for
marriage.

But it is not long before the true motive of natural creation becomes
apparent itself and the love for having a child grows in their hearts.
The existence of a child is the fruit of the marital tree and a natural
desire of men and women. A marriage without a child is like a fruitless
tree. A child would strengthen the bonds of love between a couple. It
serves as a drive to the man's working life and encourages the parents
to care for their family.

Marriage is sometimes initially founded on the basis of lust, love
making and instantaneous sexual interests. Such a foundation is false
and not lasting and is always prone to destruction. The factor with
which this foundation becomes strong, is haying a child.

Lust and sexual drive soon subside. The only memory from days and nights
of sexual desire would be the children, whose existence would be heart
warming to the parents.

"Imam Sajjad (a.s) stated: 'One's happiness is in haying pious children
from whom one can seek help'.'' [^137]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'A pious child is a sweet-smelling
plant from among the plants of Paradise'.'' [^138]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: ' Add to the numbers of your
children, because I, on the Day of Judgment, will feel honored about the
greatness of your numbers over the other Ummahs'.'' [^139]

How ignorant are those who, with various excuses, refuse to have
children, and thus fight the principle of creation!

(2) Educating a Child

The most sensitive responsibility of a mother is her duty to educate and
train her children. Although both the parents should share this
responsibility, it weighs more heavily on the shoulders of mothers.

This is because a mother is able to constantly protect and monitor her
child. If mothers, through a correct program try to bring up their
children, then a whole nation and even the world would undergo
revolutionary changes.

Thus the progress or deterioration of a society is in the hands of
women.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The Paradise is under the feet of
mothers'." [^140]

Small children of today are the men and women of tomorrow. Whatever
lessons they learn now, they will practice in future societies. If
families improve, the society will progress, because societies are no
more than a collection of families. Tomorrow's world will suffer with
today's bad- tempered, stubborn, ignorant, cowardly, materialistic,
nasty, careless, selfish and cruel children.

On the contrary, tomorrow's world will benefit from today's children who
are honest, well mannered, generous, brave, just, trustworthy, etc.

Therefore, parents in general and mothers in particular are responsible
towards their societies. They can serve their society by bringing up
pious children. On the other hand, carelessness about their
responsibility will be questioned on the Day of Judgment.

"Imam Sajjad (a.s) stated: 'The right of your child is that you should
know he is from you. Be it good or bad he is related to you. You are
responsible for his upbringing, education and showing him the path to
Allah and helping him to be obedient. You should treat him in such a way
that if you behave well towards him, you will be sure of being rewarded
and if you behave badly towards him, you will be sure of receiving
punishment'.'' [^141]

Of course not all mothers are aware of the necessary skills of training
a child and that is why they should set about learning them.

It is not within the scope of this book to present you with a detailed
discussion on caring for one's child. Fortunately, there are many books,
which have been written on this subject by learned writers and scholars.
Women can buy these books and with the help of their own experience,
they can educate their children and even become specialists in the field
of child-rearing. She can then become helpful to other mothers for their
duties regarding their children.

Here one point should be mentioned. Many people make mistake about the
two phrases of 'education' and 'training', or think of them as having
the same meaning. But one should know that teaching a child different
subjects such as appropriate stories, poems, Qur'an, traditions of the
Prophet (S), and the Imams (a.s) does not educate them. Such subjects
are useful but a child should not only learn about honest persons, but
he should be honest himself.

Thus, we must create such an atmosphere and living environment that the
child would naturally become an honest and pious person. If a child
grows up in an environment of honesty, truthfulness, bravery,
discipline, cleanliness, kindness, love, freedom, justice, patience,
trustworthiness, faithfulness, and sacrifice, then he learns all of
that.

On the other hand, a child who grows up in a place of corruption,
deception, anger, hate, hypocrisy, filth, and disloyalty, would
inevitably be affected by them. Such a child may learn many stories
about good and pious people, but to no avail. Dishonest parents cannot,
by teaching Qur'an and Hadith, bring up honest children. Dirty mother
and father actually teach their child to be dirty. A child pays more
attention to his parent's deeds and not so much to their words.

Therefore, those of us who are seriously thinking of bringing up honest
and good children should correct their own behaviour first. This is the
only way to educate a child to be useful to himself and his society.

Nutrition and Hygiene
---------------------

Another important duty of a housewife is feeding her children. Health or
illness, beauty or ugliness, even good or bad temperedness, and
cleverness of children are all related to the way they are fed.

Children have a different feeding pattern as compared with that of
adults. They have different requirements at different ages and therefore
mothers have to take this point into consideration when feeding their
children.

"The best and the most nourishing food is milk. Milk contains all that
is required for a healthy body. Thus for a baby there is nothing more
suitable than the mother's milk. Since milk contains ingredients which
are suitable for the baby's digestive system, therefore, there are not
any problems in feeding a baby with mother's milk. Besides one does not
need to boil it, pasteurize it, or sterilize it. One also need not to
worry about its genuineness.

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'There is no better and more copious food than
mother's milk for a baby'." [^142]

"Dr A. H. Taba, the former Head of the Eastern Mediterranean Region of
the World Health Organization said: 'One of the important factors, which
makes a child susceptible to many illnesses is by depriving him or her
of mother's milk which is the only life insurance of any person.''
[^143]

Thus, mothers who feed their babies with their own milk must remember
that all the necessary nutrition for their babies are contained within
that milk.

But a nutritive milk is only possible if the mother is fed well, that
is, the quality of her milk is related to the quality and quantity of
her own food. The better her food, the better her milk would be. Mothers
who feed their babies with their own milk can, through carelessness
about their food, damage their own health as well as of their babies.

The fathers of small babies are also responsible to supply their wives
with sufficient good quality food. Malnutrition is a serious problem for
many people and one should not overlook it or else she must be prepared
to pay for the treatment of illnesses caused by it.

You can obtain enough information on this subject from your doctor or
related books. But as a general rule a nursing mother should consume all
types of food from meat, fruit, dairy products to vegetables.

The important fact is that the mother's milk affects the baby's
character and that is why "Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'Do not choose foolish
women to feed (your children) with their milk, because the milk makes
their base qualities penetrated into the child'." [^144]

"Imam Baqir (a.s) stated: 'Choose noble women to feed (your children)
with their milk, because the base qualities of milk are passed from the
feeding woman to the child'." [^145]

You must feed your baby at definite intervals. Your child gets used to
this regularity and helps him in being patient. It also helps him with
regard to a healthy digestive system and stomach. On the other hand, if
you feed the baby whenever he cries, then he will not learn to be
disciplined. If he gets what he wants through crying, then he will pick
up this attitude and use it even when he becomes an adult. He will not
have the necessary patience when confronting hardships. He will either
use force to achieve his own wishes or he will break down under
difficulties.

Do not think that to discipline a child is an impossible task. You must
just be patient and have a suitable program for training him according
to your standards. The child nutritive experts say that a baby must be
fed with milk once every three to four hours.

Hold your child in your arms while feeding. By embracing the child feels
your love and it would even affect his/her future personality. Do not
feed the baby while lying down, because it has been seen that some
mothers have fallen asleep while feeding their babies and as a result
some babies have suffocated because their mother's breasts prevented
them breathing.

If you do not have any milk yourself, you can use cow's milk. But since
cow's milk is much denser than mother's milk, you must add some water to
it. You can also use pasteurized milk, which you should boil for twenty
minutes or until it becomes safe for babies' consumption.

Do not feed the baby with hot or cold milk, but at the same temperature
as the mother's milk.

After every feeding, you should boil the bottle and its nipple, and
extra car must be taken during the hot seasons. Be careful not to use
leftover or sour milk. It is better to measure the amount of milk for
every feeding in order to make sure that your child is not getting too
much or too little. In using powdered milk, you should consult a
pediatrician. You must always use fresh powdered milk.

After the fourth month of the baby's birth you can start to feed him
with fruit juice. From the age of six months, you can also start to feed
him with solid foods and soups. You can feed him biscuits or sweet
bread. Yogurt and cheese are also useful. You can gradually feed him
with slight amounts of your own food.

Remember that your baby feels thirsty just as often as you do.
Therefore, feed him with water as well, but do not try to make him drink
tea or coffee. Fruits, vegetables, and soups are especially useful for
growing infants.

Do not forget to be hygienic with regard to your baby's bedding,
clothing, and nappies. Wash his face and hands often. Bathe him
regularly, because infants are very susceptible towards dirt and germs
and become ill easily.

You must vaccinate your children against such diseases as smallpox,
chickenpox, whooping cough, infantile paralysis, scarlet fever, measles,
and diphtheria. Vaccines are fortunately readily available in medical
and health centers.

You can have healthy children by observing these codes of hygiene and
cleanliness.

[^1]: Wasa 'il al Shiah, vol 14, p 3.

[^2]: Ibid

[^3]: Ibid

[^4]: Ibid, p 23

[^5]: Ibid, p 5

[^6]: Ibid, p 6

[^7]: Ibid, p 23

[^8]: Ibid, p 17

[^9]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 43, p 117

[^10]: Dar Aghushe Khushakhfi, p 142

[^11]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 254

[^12]: Mahajjat al-Bayda, vol 2, p 70

[^13]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 552

[^14]: Ittela'at, 20th Esfand, 1348 Solar Hijri\*, no. 13140. \*By Solar
Hijri is meant Solar Calendar based on Hijrah of Prophet Muhammad (SA).
Difference between the Gregorian calendar and Solar Hijri is 621 years.

[^15]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 532

[^16]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 235

[^17]: Ibid, vol 74, p 181

[^18]: Mustadrak, vol 3, p 551

[^19]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 253

[^20]: Mustadrak, vol 3, p 551

[^21]: Ittela'at, 14th Urdibahisht, 1351 Solar Hijri, no 13787

[^22]: Ibid, 1st Azar, 1350 Solar Hijri, no 13652

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 76, p 363

[^24]: Mahajjat al-Bayda, vol 2, p 72

[^25]: Ittela'at, 13th Dey, 1350 Solar Hijri, no 13689

[^26]: Bihar al-Anwar vol 71, p 389

[^27]: Ibid, vol 73, p 298

[^28]: Ittela'at, 15th Azar, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^29]: Ibid, 3rd Bahman, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^30]: Ibid, 3rd Shahriwar, l349 Solar Hijri

[^31]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 71, p 377

[^32]: Ibid, vol 103, p 253

[^33]: Ibid, vol 103, p 253

[^34]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 71, p 244

[^35]: Ibid, vol 76. p 367

[^36]: Mustadrak, vol 3, p 532

[^37]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 217

[^38]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 534

[^39]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 239

[^40]: Shafi, vol 2, p 139

[^41]: Wasa'il al Shiah, vol 11, p 542

[^42]: Ittela'at, 7th Azar, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^43]: Ibid,17th Bahman, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^44]: Ibid, 8th Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^45]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 73, p 385

[^46]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 104, p 38

[^47]: Ittela'at, 3rd Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^48]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 104, p 39

[^49]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 235.

[^50]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 74, p 101

[^51]: Ittela'at, 13 Murdad, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^52]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 247

[^53]: Ittela'at, 4th Dey, 1350 Solar Hijri.

[^54]: Ibid, 7th Dey, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^55]: Ibid, 29th Dey, 1348 Solar Hijri

[^56]: Ibid, 17th Tir, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^57]: Ibid, 25th Tir, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^58]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 123

[^59]: Ibid, vol 74, p 5

[^60]: Ibid, vol 76, p 367

[^61]: Ibid, vol 75, p 194

[^62]: Ibid

[^63]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 57, p 218

[^64]: Ittela'at, 27th Aban, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^65]: Ittela'at, 9th Azar, 1348 Solar Hijri.

[^66]: Ibid, 12th Urdibahisht, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^67]: Ibid, 13th Urdibahisht, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^68]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 235

[^69]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 247

[^70]: Ibid, p 235

[^71]: Shafi, vol 2, p 138

[^72]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 228

[^73]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 247

[^74]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 75, p 71

[^75]: Ibid, vol 74, p 178

[^76]: Ittela'at, 17th Murdad, 1351 Solar Hijri.

[^77]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 235

[^78]: Ibid, p 248

[^79]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 532

[^80]: Shafi, vol 2, p 129

[^81]: Ittela'at, 25th Azar, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^82]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103. p 247

[^83]: Ittela'at, 4th Azar, 1348 Solar Hijri

[^84]: Ibid, 28th Mehr, 1348 Solar Hijri.

[^85]: Ibid, 8th Azar, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^86]: Ibid, 17th Esfand, 1348 Solar Hijri

[^87]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 75, p 186

[^88]: Ittela'at, 17th Tir, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^89]: Asiyah was the wife of Pharaoh.

[^90]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 103, p 247

[^91]: Ibid, p 239.

[^92]: Ibid, vol 71, p 419

[^93]: Ittela'at, 3rd Azar, 1350 Solar Hijri.

[^94]: Ittela'at, 28th Farwardin, 1351 Solar Hijri

[^95]: Mahajjat al-Bayda, vol 1, p 166

[^96]: Majma' al-Zawaid, vol 5, p 132

[^97]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 79, p 300

[^98]: Shafi, vol 1, p 208

[^99]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 76, p 175

[^100]: Ibid

[^101]: Shafi, vol p 208

[^102]: Ibid, p 215

[^103]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 76, p 176

[^104]: Ibid

[^105]: Shafi, vol 2, p 124

[^106]: Ibid, vol 1, p 209

[^107]: Ibid, p 210

[^108]: Ibid, p 211

[^109]: Ibid

[^110]: Ibid

[^111]: Ibid, vol 2, p 123

[^112]: Ittela'at, 23rd Bahman, 1348 Solar Hijri

[^113]: Ibid, 26th Tir, 1351 Solar Hijri.

[^114]: Ibid,11th Esfand, 1348 Solar Hijri.

[^115]: Ibid, 3rd Bahman, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^116]: Wasa'il al-Shiah, vol 14, p 15

[^117]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 62, p 290

[^118]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 551.

[^119]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 251

[^120]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol 16, p 557

[^121]: Ibid, p 520

[^122]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 74, p 355

[^123]: Ibid, p 353

[^124]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 550

[^125]: Wasa.il al-Shiah, vol 14, p 15

[^126]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 248

[^127]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 532

[^128]: Usul al-Kafi, vol 5, p 84

[^129]: Ibid

[^130]: Ibid, p 86

[^131]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 247

[^132]: Ibid, p 251

[^133]: Usul al-Kafi, vol 5, p 113

[^134]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 1 p 165

[^135]: Ibid, p 174.

[^136]: Ibid, vol 103, p 258.

[^137]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol 15, p 96

[^138]: Ibid, p 97

[^139]: Ibid, p 96

[^140]: Majm'a al-Zawa'id, vol 8, p 138

[^141]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 74, p 6.

[^142]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol 15, p 175

[^143]: Ittela'at, 15th Farvardin, 1353 Solar Hijri

[^144]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol 15, p 188

[^145]: Ibid, p 189.


