Part 2: The Duties of Men
=========================

The Guardian of the Family
--------------------------

Man and woman are the two basic pillars of a family, but since men are
endowed with special qualities by the order of creation, and because
their power of logic is stronger than women's, they are regarded as the
guardians of their families.

The Almighty Allah regards men as the guardians of their families and
states in the Holy Qur'an that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرِّجَالُ قَوَّامُونَ عَلَى النِّسَاءِ بِمَا فَضَّلَ اللَّهُ
بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***  
 "Men are the maintainers of women, because Allah has made some of them
to excel others...”*** ***(4:34).***

Therefore, men have a greater and more difficult responsibility in
supporting their families.

It is the man who can, through his wisdom, support his family and
prepare the grounds for their happiness and it is he who can turn the
house into a paradise and his wife to act as an angel.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Man is the guardian of his family and
every guardian has responsibilities towards those under his
guardianship'."[^1]

A man, who is supporting his family, should know that a woman is also a
human being like a man. She also has desires and the rights of freedom
and life. Marrying a woman is not hiring a servant, but it is a
selection of a partner and a friend who would be able to live with for
the rest of one's life. Man has to care for her and her desires. Man is
not the owner of his wife and in fact a woman has certain rights upon
her husband.

Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

**  
**

وَلَهُنَّ مِثْلُ الَّذِي عَلَيْهِنَّ بِالْمَعْرُوفِ ۚ وَلِلرِّجَالِ
عَلَيْهِنَّ دَرَجَةٌ ۗ

***"...*** ***And women have rights similar to the rights of men in a
just manner, and the men have a degree (of advantage) over them..."
(2:228).***

Taking Care of your Wife
------------------------

The secret to a family's prosperity is the way in which one takes care
of one's wife, and this is, like the duty of a woman towards her husband
which is regarded to be at the same level as Jihad, is also regarded as
a man's best and most valuable act. But a married man must learn how to
treat his wife in a way that she turns into an angel-like character.

For this, a man must find out about his wife's behaviour and her
desires. He must program his life according to her wishes and righteous
requests. He can, through his own manners and attitude, influence her in
a way that interests her in both him and his house.

This is a subject which needs more explanation and detailed discussion
will be presented later in this book.

Be Loving towards Her
---------------------

A woman is a center of kindness and a being who is completely emotional.
Her existence depends on compassion and affection. She longs to be loved
by others and the more the better. She sacrifices herself a great deal
in order to seek popularity. This character is so strong in her that if
she realizes nobody loves her, then she regards herself as a failure.
She becomes disappointed in herself and feels dejected. Therefore,
certainly one can claim that the secret of a successful man in a happy
marital life is his expression of love towards his wife.

Dear Sir! Your wife before marrying you was enjoying her parents' love
and kindness. Now that she has entered into marriage agreement with you
and now that she has chosen to live with you for the rest of her life,
she expects you to fulfill her desires for love and affection. She
expects you to show more love to her than she received from her parents
and friends. She has trusted you extremely and that is why she has
entrusted you with her existence.

The secret to a happy marriage is the expression of your affection to
your wife.

If you want to conquer her heart, if you want to make her obedient with
regard to your demands, if you want to strengthen your marriage, make
her love you and remain faithful to you, or..., then you must always
show your affection to her and express your love.

If you deprive your wife of kindness, then she would lose interest in
her house, children and, above all, in you. Your house would always be
in a messy condition. She would not be prepared to make efforts for a
person who does not love her.

A house, in which there is no affection, resembles a burning hell, even
though it may be very tidy and full of luxurious goods.

Your wife may become ill or have a nervous breakdown. She may seek
popularity with others if she is not satisfied with you. She may grow so
cold towards you and the house that she may even seek for a divorce.

You are responsible for all this because you have failed to keep her
content. It is certainly true that some divorce procedures take place as
a result of unkindliness.

Your attention is drawn to the following statistics. The psychological
requirement of affection, the carelessness of husbands with regard to
their wives' wishes and the overlooking of the importance of the mental
status of women, have been responsible for many divorce cases.

"In the year 1969, out of a total of 10372 separations, 1203 women
expressed the reason for their divorce as losing heart in life, feeling
worthless, and the lack of care of their husband with regard to their
wives' desires and emotional feelings." [^2]

"A woman said in court that 'She was prepared to abandon her dowry and
even pay her husband a sum of money to make him agree to a divorce. She
said her husband was more interested in his parrots and that was why she
did not want to live with him any longer."[^3]

Family love and friendship is more precious than anything else and that
is why Allah has regarded it as one of the signs of power and a great
blessing which mankind has been endowed with, Holy Qur'an says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنْ آيَاتِهِ أَنْ خَلَقَ لَكُمْ مِنْ أَنْفُسِكُمْ أَزْوَاجًا
لِتَسْكُنُوا إِلَيْهَا وَجَعَلَ بَيْنَكُمْ مَوَدَّةً وَرَحْمَةً ۚ
إِنَّ فِي ذَٰلِكَ لَآيَاتٍ لِقَوْمٍ يَتَفَكَّرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"..And one of His signs is that He created mates for you from
yourselves that you may find rest in them and He put between you love
and compassion; most surely there are signs in this for a people who
reflect."*** ***(30:21)***

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'Whoever is our friend, expresses his
kindness to his spouse more'." [^4]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The more one becomes faithful the
more one expresses kindness to his spouse'." [^5]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'One of the characteristics of the prophets
of Allah is that they are all kind towards their wives'," [^6]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The words of a man who tells his
wife, 'I love you truly', should never leave her heart'." [^7]

Love and affection must of course be genuine to appeal to another's
heart, but even so loving for someone is not enough, as it is vital to
express one's affection. By showing your feelings through your words and
actions, the love you have shown will be returned to you and your hearts
will strengthen their bonds of love.

Be frank and do not be discrete in expressing your love towards your
wife. In her absence or presence, you should make compliments for her.
Write to her while traveling and inform her that you miss her.
Occasionally buy something for her. Phone her when you are at work and
ask how she is.

One of the important things on a woman's mind is these kinds of
expressions of love.

"Mrs... while shedding tears of grief said: 'I married my husband on an
autumn night. We lived together in peace for a while. I regarded myself
as the luckiest woman in this world. I lived in his little house for six
years. I felt a hundred times happier when I found out that I was
pregnant. When I informed my husband he wept tears of joy while
embracing me in his arms. He cried so much that he nearly lost control
over himself. He then went out and bought me a diamond necklace with his
savings. He gave the necklace and said: 'I am giving this to the best
woman that I have ever seen in the world'. But it was not long before he
was killed in a driving accident'." [^8]

Respect Your Wife
-----------------

A woman is proud of herself just the same as a man would be. She likes
to be respected by others. She would get hurt if she were to be insulted
or belittled. She feels good when respected and would hate those who try
to degrade her.

Dear Sir! your wife surely expects you to respect her more than others.
She has every right to expect her life partner and best friend to care
for her.

She works for you and your children's comfort and thus expects you to
value her efforts and to respect her. Honouring her would not belittle
you but it would indeed go to prove your love and affection towards her.
Therefore, respect her more than others and talk to her politely. Do not
interrupt her or shout at her. Call her by respectful and virtuous
names. Show your respect when she wants to sit down. When you enter the
house, if she forgets to say 'Salam' (greetings), then you should say
'Salam' to her.

Say 'Good-bye' when leaving your house. Do not lose contact with her
when travelling or away from home. Write to her.

Show your respect for her when in gatherings. Seriously avoid all
insults and humiliation. Do not abuse or even jokingly tease her. Do not
think that because you are close to her she would not mind you making
fun of her. On the contrary she will dislike such an attitude but may
not express it.

"A dignified woman, around 35 years of age, says about her divorce
request: 'It is twelve years that I have been married. My husband is a
good man and there are many characteristics of a good and amiable person
in him. But he has never wanted to realize that I am his wife and the
mother of both his children. He thinks he is a fitting person for get
togethers, but he performs his show by teasing and humiliating me. You
cannot believe how much I have been hurt. My nerves have been affected
so much that I have to go to a psychiatrist for treatment. I have talked
to my husband about it many times. I have begged him not to treat me in
this way. I have reminded him of my position as 'his wife' and my age
and that it is not proper for him to joke with me in front of others so
that they have a laugh or a good time. I feel embarrassed in front of
everybody and because I have not ever been a witty person, I cannot
compete with him. Since my demands are not being met by my husband, I
prefer to separate from him. I know I will not be happy on my own, but I
cannot live with a man who constantly degrades me'." [^9]

All women expect their husbands to respect them and all of them hate
insults If some women keep silent before their husbands' humiliations,
it is not the proof of their satisfaction.

If you respect your wife, she will do the same to you and thus your
relationship will grow stronger. You would also earn more respect from
others. If you maltreat her and she retaliates, it is again your fault
and not hers.

Dear Sir! Marrying is not equal to getting a slave. You cannot treat a
free person as a slave. Your wife has married you in order to live with
you and to share her life with a man whom she loves. She expects the
same things from you as you do from her. Therefore treat her in a manner
in which you would like to be treated.

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s), quoting his father, stated: 'Whoever marries, must
respect his wife'." [^10]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Whoever respects a Muslim, Allah
would pay him his own respect'." [^11]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: 'None would respect women except
the magnanimous ones, and none would insult them except the ignoble
ones.' In addition, the Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Whoever insults
his family, would lose happiness in his life'." [^12]

Be Well-mannered
----------------

The world takes its path according to a regular pattern. Events happen
and show themselves one after another. Our small existence in this vast
universe is like a small particle which moves and impinges on other
particles at every instant of time. The running of this world is not in
our hands and the events of this world do not occur according to our
will. From the moment that one sets foot outside his house in the
morning until the time he returns home in the evening, one may be
confronted with hundreds of unpleasant circumstances.

One comes across a great many difficulties in the arena of life. You
might be insulted by someone, have an unfriendly colleague, have to wait
for the bus too long, have been accused of something at work, have lost
some money, have been robbed, or have come across anyone of a number of
similar events that could happen to anybody anywhere.

You might be so frustrated with the usual everyday events of your life
that you resemble a time bomb which could explode any time.

Well you may think that you cannot blame other people or the world for
your mishaps, so when you come home, you try to vent your anger out on
your wife and children. You enter your house and it is as if 'Izrail
(the angel of death) has arrived. The children disperse like little mice
in front of you. God forbid that you should find something to pick up
fault. With! The food may be salty or salt less, your cup of tea may not
be ready, the house may be untidy, or the children make a noise. And it
gives you a good excuse to blow your top in your own house.

You then become furious and shout at every body, abuse them, hit the
children, and so on. You will have then turned a house of affection and
friendship into a burning hell in which you and the rest of your family
would have to suffer.

If the children are able to run away from home into the streets, they
would do so, and if they cannot do that, then they count the seconds
until you leave the house.

It is patently obvious what an apathetic and horrific atmosphere is
dominant in families of this kind. There are always rows and arguments.
Their house is always in a mess. The wife hates to see her husband's
face.

How can a woman live happily with a grim and bad- tempered man?

Worse than all is the fate of children who are to grow up in such an
environment. The parents' quarrels would certainly leave a scar on their
sensitive souls and hearts. Children, who experience this kind of
hardship, tend to become furious, aggressive, depressed, and pessimistic
type of people in their adulthood. They become disheartened in their
family and go astray. They might fall into the traps of corrupt people
and turn to crimes of different kinds. They might even become so
complexed and mentally disturbed that they might even endanger other
lives and commit murder or even suicide.

The reader is recommended to conduct research into the backgrounds of
criminals. Statistics and the daily news of criminal events all reflect
this fact.

Responsibilities of all these lie with the guardian of the family who
has not been able to control his temper and who has mistreated his
family. Such a person can never find peace in this world and would be
punished in the next.

Dear Sir! We are not in a position and cannot control the affairs of
this world. Mishaps, hardships, and sorrowful events are all inseparable
parts of this life. Everybody experiences difficulties at different
times. As a matter of fact, one can reach maturity through hardship. One
must confront them with strength and must try to find solutions to them.

Human beings have the ability to meet with hundreds of small and large
difficulties and not to give in under the strain of misfortune.

Worldly events are not the only reason for our being upset, but rather
it is our nervous system which becomes affected by such events and
causes us to experience discomfort. Therefore, if one could control
himself when faced with the unhappy events of life, one would not become
annoyed or angry.

Suppose that you have experienced an unpleasant event. This event is
either an inseparable part of daily events with which we cannot
interfere or that we cannot help. Or it might be an event in which we
can thrust our own decision.

It is obvious that in the former case, our annoyance would not help in
anyway. We would be wrong to become angry or bad-tempered. We must
remember that we were not responsible for its occurrence and even try to
welcome it with a smiling face. But if our bad experience is of the
latter type, then we can seek a suitable solution for it.

If we do not lose heart when faced with hardships and try to control
ourselves, we can, through prudence, overcome our difficulties. In this
way we would not resort to anger which may itself add to our problems.
Therefore, a wise person is the one who is not affected by hardships.

We have the ability to overcome all difficulties through patience and
wisdom. Is it not a pity that we lose control over matters resulting
from inevitable events of life?

Moreover, why should you blame your wife and children for your
misfortunes?

Your wife is performing her share of duty. She has to take care of the
house and the children. She has to do the washing, cooking, ironing,
cleaning, etc. You should encourage her in the way you treat her.

Your children are also doing their own work. They too wait for their
father to make themselves happy. Teach them the right things and
encourage them in their studies.

Is it fair that you confront your family with a grim and angry face?

They expect you to fulfill their righteous desires. They expect kindness
from you and want you to talk to them gently and behave pleasantly.

They would hate you for ignoring their feelings and for turning the
house into a dark place in which there is not a glimpse of happiness.

Do you know how much they could suffer from your unpleasant and harsh
manners?

Even if you do not take your family very seriously, at least have mercy
upon yourself. You can be sure that you would damage your own health by
being bad-tempered.

How can you continue to work and how can you achieve anything
successfully? Why should you turn your house into a hell?

Is it not better for you to always be happy and confront your problems
with prudence and not anger?

Would you not prefer to believe that anger would not solve your
problems, but rather it would add to them? Would you not agree that,
while being at home, you should rest and regain your strength in order
to find a suitable solution to your problem with a clear mind? You
should meet your family with a smile on your face. You should joke with
them in a nice manner and try to create a happy atmosphere at home. You
should eat and drink with them and take rest. In this way you and your
family would enjoy life and you would overcome your problems easily.

That is why the holy religion of Islam regards good behaviour as a part
of religion and a sign of the utmost level of faith.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Whoever is more well-behaved is more
complete in his faith. The best among you (the people) is one who does
good to his family'."' [^13]

"The Prophet (S) also stated: 'There is no deed better than good
behaviour'."[^14]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'Doing good to the people and behaving
properly with them makes the cities populous and increases the age (of
the citizens)'."[^15]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) also stated: ' An immoral person remains involved
in torture and anguish'." [^16]

"Wise Luqman stated: ' A sagacious man must act like a child when with
his family, and leave his manly behaviour for when out of his house'."
[^17]

The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'There is no joy better than good
behaviour'." [^18]

"The Prophet (S) also stated: 'Good behaviour is half the religion (of
Islam)'." [^19]

"It has been reported that when Sa'ad ibn Ma'adh, one of the great
companions of the Holy Prophet (S) died, the Holy Prophet (S) took part
in his funeral with bare feet, as if he had lost someone from among his
own family.

The Prophet (S) placed the dead body in the grave with his pious hands
and then covered it. The mother of Sa'ad who was observing the Holy
Prophet's (SA) respect for her son, addressed Sa'ad and said: 'O Sa'ad!
enjoy Paradise.' The Prophet of Allah (S) told her: 'O mother of Sa'ad,
do not say that, because Sa'ad has just experienced Daghtat al-Qabr[^20]
(torment by way of compression in the grave etc). Later, when the
Prophet (S) was asked about the reason for Sa'ad's Daghat al-Qabr, the
Prophet (S) replied: 'it was because he (Sa'ad) was maltreating his
family'.[^21]

Complaining Unnecessarily
-------------------------

The problems of life are many. There is not anyone who is completely
happy with his situation. But some people are more patient with their
hardships than others, they try to record them in their memories and do
not mention them except when there is reason or revealing them.

On the other hand, there are people who are so weak that they cannot
keep any problem to themselves.

They are so used to making complaints that upon meeting others, they
start complaining. Wherever they, go and whenever they are in a
gathering, they moan about the everyday events which have effected their
lives it is as if they haven sent on a mission by Satan himself, to
spoil the happiness of others. That is why most friends and relatives do
not want to be bothered with these and try to keep away from them as
much as possible.

But one must feel sorry for their wives and children who have to cope
with them. Because no one else is prepared to listen to their moaning,
these men vent their problems before their families.

They sometimes complain about their expenses, the taxis, their friends,
and sometimes they moan about their colleagues, their businesses,
diseases, doctors, and so on.

These men are very pessimistic and, do not see any good in this world.
They suffer themselves as well as make and especially their families,
suffer too.

Dear Sir! What is the point of making complaints all the time? What do
you achieve by moaning? Why should your family suffer if you are angry
with the taxi driver? Why do you blame your wife if your business is not
brisk?

Do not forget that your attitude would repel your family from you. They
will become disappointed in you and disheartened with the house. They
might even run away from home and might fall into the trap of corruption
and crime. The least is that it leaves a mental scar on them.

Is it not better not to spoil your family's happiness?

When returning home, try to forget your problems. Be happy with your
family. Eat with them. Have a laugh and enjoy their company.

Islam has also regarded patience and refusing to make complaints as good
behaviour and has even allocated a reward for it.

"Imam Ali (a.s.) stated: 'When hardship falls upon a Muslim, he should
not make complaints about Allah to other people, but that he should take
the problems to Allah who possesses the key to all problems'."[^22]

"Imam Ali (a.s) also stated: 'It is written in the Tawrah: whoever makes
a complaint about a hardship which has befallen him, is in fact
complaining about Allah'." [^23]

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: 'Whoever experiences hardship with his
health and does not make complaints (about it) to people, then it is
incumbent on Allah to forgive all his sins’." [^24]

Picking up Quarrels
-------------------

Some men are constantly seeking excuses to pick up fault with
everything. They moan at every trivial matter: "Why is this table dirty?
Why is the lunch not ready? Why is that vase here? Have I not said
before that ashtrays should not be on the floor?" etc...

Some men take this attitude so far that it causes rows and quarrels
within their family, and sometimes a family break- down as a result of
their behaviour.

Of course we are not saying that men do not have the right to tell their
wives what to do and what not to do. In the first part of this book,
women were recommended to acknowledge this right. There we stated that
women should not show stubbornness towards their husbands' suggestions
regarding household affairs. However, men should keep their logic and
wisdom. They are their families' guardians and as such they should act
properly.

If a man wants to successfully participate in the affairs of the house
then he should do so in a calculated manner.

As a matter of fact, since a man does not have enough time to
participate in all the matters regarding his house and because he lacks
the necessary expertise in this connection, then it is to his advantage
to leave the housework to his wife. A man should leave his wife at
liberty with regard to running the house.

Men can, however, under the pretext of consultation, not forcefully,
remind their wives about certain points. Once a wise woman finds out her
husband's wishes about any matter, she would try to conform with them.
Therefore, a man and a woman who care for each other and their family,
can through talking together in a kind manner, reach many agreements on
all matters. In this way, most women are prepared to conform with their
husbands' occasional demands.

But if his participation takes the form of picking up fault and constant
moaning, then the housewife gets used to them and consequently this
attitude becomes a usual affair from which nothing useful would result.

A woman with a moaning husband would not take him seriously. She may
even ignore his proper and important points of concern. She would reason
for herself "Why should I waste my energy, if my husband is not ever
satisfied with my work?"

Not only would she ignore her husband's criticism, but might even take
retaliatory measures.

This is when their house turns into a battlefield. Constant criticism of
each other would then prepare the ground for separation and thus a
family unit breaks down. In this scenario the woman is not to be blamed
because even a wise and patient wife would run out of patience as a
result of continuously humiliating attitude of her husband.

"A man called the police station and claimed that his wife had left his
house two months ago and that she was living with her parents. After
further enquiries, this man's wife said:

'My husband does not like my style of housekeeping. He constantly
criticizes me on my cooking and running the affairs of house. Therefore,
I have left him to find peace somewhere else'."[^25]

Men should remember that housework is an area for their wives to perform
their duties. It is wrong to deprive them of their rights or to turn
them into puppets. It is wiser to leave them to run the house the way
they like.

As a result, your wife does her job enthusiastically, you would remain
happy and your house would be a home for a happy family.

Appease Her and Sympathize with Her
-----------------------------------

A woman also, similar to a man, undergoes emotional changes. She
experiences happiness, anger, sorrow, etc. She becomes tired from
housework and may become annoyed with the children. Others may upset her
by their criticisms. She might become involved in competing with others.
In short, a woman confronts many problems of which some may affect her
so much so that she might become desperate to such an extent so as to
react unkindly towards trivial matters.

This is especially the case for women, because they are very sensitive
and would react more critically towards unpleasant events as compared to
men.

Women, who experience hardship, need appeasing. Men must comfort them
because they are their partners and the ones who are trusted by their
wives.

Dear Sir! When you find your wife in a state of distress and anger, then
try to understand her situation. If you enter your house and she does
not salute you, you say 'salam' to her. This would not belittle you.
Talk to her with a smiling face. Avoid-grimness. Help her in the
housework. Be careful not to offend her in any way. Do not tease her. If
she is not in a mood to talk, then leave her alone. Do not say: 'What is
wrong with you?'

If she feels like talking, listen to her and sympathize with her.
Pretend you are more concerned with her problem than herself. Let her
reveal her grievances for you. Then like a kind father or a sympathetic
husband try to help her find a solution to her problem. Encourage her to
be patient. Through wisdom and logic make her regard her problems as
trivial. Strengthen her character and assist her in overcoming the cause
of her annoyance.

Be patient and treat her according to your logic. She would certainly
find your help useful and life will soon get back to normal for both of
you.

On the contrary, your wrong approach would cause more distress for her.
You would also suffer and it might even turn into a major row from
which, both of you would suffer.

Do not pick up Faults
---------------------

There is no one in this world who has all the qualities and free from
all the faults. Some people may be too fat or too thin. Their mouth may
be too big, have large noses or big teeth. Others may be dirty,
impolite, shy, cheeky, depressed, bad-tempered, jealous, lazy or
selfish. Some women may not be good cooks or talented hostesses. Some
people may eat too much or spend lavishly. In brief, everyone is
imperfect and no one in this world can be regarded as a perfect being.

Men usually, before marriage, imagine their ideal woman to be devoid of
all faults. They ignore this fact that there is no angel-like figure in
our universe. These men, once married, find their ideal wives not to be
perfect and thus start to point out their faults. They might even regard
their marriages as failures and call themselves 'unlucky'.

These men are always moaning and do not even spare the trivial faults of
their wives.

Some men exaggerate the faults so much that they always appear before
them like high mountains. They occasionally mention these faults to
their wives and humiliate them. They might even mention them before
friends and relatives.

As a result, the foundation of their marital life starts trembling. The
woman becomes depressed and loses interest in her husband and family.
She would think it illogical to work in the house of someone who
criticizes her. She might even take retaliatory measures.

The man says to his wife: "What a big and ugly nose you have!?" And the
woman replies: "It is not as bad as your ugly face and deformed figure!"
The man would then say: "Your feet smell foul!" And the woman replies:
"Shut up your big mouth!" etc.

A continuation of this conversation opens the door for criticisms and
turns the house into a battlefield in which the couple insults and
degrades each other.

If they live like this, they would not enjoy their lives ever again,
because a house devoid of family love and sincerity, is not a place of
comfort.

Moreover, a man who regards himself as unlucky and his marriage as a
failure, and a woman who is constantly being humiliated, are both prone
to mental disorders and other illnesses.

If the magnitude of their row becomes larger then there is always the
danger of divorce and separation. A divorce is not very helpful to
either party especially if there are children in the family.

Society does not have much respect for a divorcee. Moreover, a divorce
would inflict economic losses on a man, which are not easily repairable.
This is especially true if he wants to re-marry, since he would also
have to spend money on his second marriage. Furthermore, it is not at
all clear that a divorcee is able to find another woman who would live
up to his expectations.

Re-marriage would not be easy for him because of his past record. Even
if he finds another woman, she would definitely possess certain faults
also. She may even turn out to be worse than his first wife. He would
then have to cope with her. This is because some men are too proud to
confess their shortcomings. It is rare to find a man who is fully
satisfied with his second marriage. It has even been seen that some men
return to their first wives.

Dear Sir! Why should you look at your wife with a view of finding her
faults and why do you place so much importance on her trivial defects?
Why do you magnify her deficiencies so much so that it causes suffering
for you and your family? Have you ever seen a perfect woman? Are you
perfect yourself? What are trivial deficiencies worth that you endanger
your marriage for their sake?

Be certain that if you look at your wife with a logical and fair view,
you would see many good points about her. You look and see that her
merits would outweigh her deficiencies.

Islam regards this attitude as harmful and distasteful and thus forbids
all from finding other people's faults.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'O you who express to be Muslims by
tongue only but faith has not entered your hearts! Do not speak ill of
Muslims and do not set out to find their faults (because) whoever picks
up fault with others, would be criticized by Allah and even if such a
person is at his house, he would be disgraced'."[^26]

Do not Pay Attention to Slanderous Talk of the Critics
------------------------------------------------------

Some people are in the habit of uttering slander about others. This
distasteful behaviour creates enmity among friends and relatives and can
break families. It has even been responsible for murder. There are
various reasons for such behaviour, like jealousy, anger, vengeance and
hostility.

Some people resort to defamatory words in order to satisfy their own
ego, to attract others' attention towards themselves, or to pretend to
be sympathetic with someone else. But it is rarely a case that
slanderous statements are based on good intentions.

Therefore, a wise and clever man should ignore such statements. He must
always analyze the statements of the speaker in order not to be deceived
or influenced by his evil insinuations.

One of the points for men to remember is that generally their mothers,
sisters and brothers, despite their apparent friendship, do not enjoy a
good relationship with their wives.

The reason is that a man, before marriage, spends years with his parents
where he does not have much independence. His parents, who have worked
hard to bring him up, expect him to be helpful to them in their old age.

Even after they marry their son off and apparently give him
independence, they expect him to conform to their own will and wishes.
They like their son to pay more attention to them than to his wife. But
the reality is that when a man starts a marital life, he makes a great
deal of effort for his new family, wife, and independence. He directs
his love towards his wife and works hard in this connection. The more he
steps in this direction, the farther he goes away from his parents.

Thus his mother and sister(s) specifically feel offended. They regard
their new bride as a threat who would be taking their young boy away
from them. They might even blame their bride for separating their boy
from his family.

Mothers may sometimes think that the best way of confronting this danger
is by implementing ways of lessening their sons' affection towards their
wives. A mother of this kind would then start to point out her
daughter-in-law's deficiencies, spread lies about her, speak defamatory
words about her, conspire against her, etc.

If a man is simple or naive, he might even be influenced by his mother's
defamatory statements. He would then become a tool in the hands of his
family after which he would lose interest in his wife. Under his
parents' influence, the man would start to moan and pick up faults with
his wife. He would criticize her on any possible occasion.

As a result, the family house could turn into a cold and dull place.

Instigations of men by their mothers and sisters could lead to rows and
even fights between a man and his wife. A wife in this condition might
resort to drastic measures such as committing suicide.

"A newly married woman swallowed pins at the end of her first week of
marriage. After an operation on her to remove the pins from her stomach,
she said in the hospital: 'About a week ago, I was married. The day I
entered the house of my husband, I felt as lucky as other married women.
But after only a few days, my husband and his sister started criticizing
me. Their attitude made life very difficult for me. Finally I decided to
kill myself and swallowed a few pins'." [^27]

"A woman who was frustrated with the criticisms of her husband's
brothers, set fire on herself and died of severe burns." [^28]

"A newly married woman became so frustrated with the bad attitude of her
mother-in-law that she burnt herself to death." [^29]

Therefore, criticisms, bad attitudes, and defamatory words of mothers,
sisters and brothers-in-law can be very harmful and thus a man must be
aware of their nuisance. Of course it is not possible to stop people
from talking but it is possible to neutralize their talks.

A man must be aware that criticisms about his wife by his mother,
sister, etc are not meant to be sympathetic and out of good intentions,
but the main reasons are jealousy, enmity, selfishness, etc.

He must remember that because his wife draws much of his attention
towards herself, his family envies her and regards her as a usurper of
their young man. Therefore, they resort to ways of preventing their love
to grow.

Dear Sirs! In brief, mothers, sisters, and brothers of this kind are not
bothered with your happiness, but rather they are concerned with their
own interests. If they were concerned with your happiness, they would
have done something different.

It is very strange that parents make a great deal of compliments of a
woman who wants to marry their son, but once their son marries that
woman, the parents turn completely the opposite way.

Dear Sir! Do not be deceived. Those deficiencies that your family set
forth for your wife are not relevant; and even if they are not trivial,
then remember that nobody is perfect.

Anyway, are your sister, mother or others who criticize your wife,
themselves perfect beings?

Paying attention to their slanderous statements would only adversely
affect your family life. You might even end up with a divorce as a
result of which you would suffer mentally and economically.

A re-marriage would not be easy. Even if you find another woman to
marry, it is not at all obvious that she is any better than your former
wife. How do you make sure that your family would not treat her as badly
as they did with your former wife?

So it is better for you to tell your mother, sister and others right now
that your wife suits you and that you love her. You must declare to them
that they should stop criticizing your wife or else your wife or else
you would cut off your relationship with them. Once they feel your firm
attitude, they would stop their instigative attitude and you may find
peace with your wife.

But unfortunately, some mothers and sisters do not give up easily and
resort to malicious accusations such as adultery. The problem becomes so
serious that a man might, based on his mother's statements, divorce his
wife or even kill her.

"A young couple took their divorce application to a court in Tabriz. The
man said in the court: 'My wife writes love-letters to my brother who
lives in Isfahan. I found a few of her letters last night'. His wife
while crying, said: 'My mother and sister-in-law do not like me and
constantly disturb me. But now that their mischievous deeds have not
affected my husband, they have forged some love-letters and have placed
them in my wardrobe in order to instigate him to divorce me'. The court
reconciled the couple with each other and advised the man to tell his
mother and sister to stop their malicious acts towards their bride."
[^30]

"A thirty-four year old woman emptied a can of kerosene on herself and
set herself on fire. Neighbours soon put the fire out and took her to
the hospital. She said in the hospital: 'I live with my husband and his
mother. She constantly picks up fault with me. She raises excuses and is
very furious in nature. She does not miss an opportunity to create a row
between me and my husband. Yesterday I went for shopping and
accidentally met one of my old school friends. We talked a while and
then I returned home. My mother-in-law started questioning me as to why
I was late? I explained but she was not satisfied. She said that I was
lying and that I was having an affair with the butcher in our street. I
got furious and felt so frustrated that I decided to kill myself."[^31]

Therefore, a man should always be aware of such allegations which could
have disastrous ends. He should make enquiries about them patiently and
not jump to conclusions blindly.

Of course one's parents work hard and suffer a great deal in bringing up
their children and thus make them become the centre of all their hopes.
They expect him to be a helping hand for them in their old age and their
expectations are just that. So it is not fair that when one gains
independency, he should forget about his duties towards his parents. He
should attend to their rightful wishes even after he is married. He must
maintain their respect and be humble before them. He is duty-bound to
help them money wise if they ever needed it. He should not cut off his
relationship with them and must invite them to his house. He must demand
his wife and children to show their respect for them. He must make his
wife understand that if she would respect his parents, they would not
feel the necessity of annoying her and would even be proud of her and
support her.

Finally women are reminded that they have no right to expect their
husbands to abandon their parents. This expectation is neither possible
nor fair. A wise woman can treat her in-laws in such a way that they
would regard her as an important member of their own family. This is
only possible if she respects them, seeks advice from them, helps them,
etc.

This discussion was presented in detail in the first part to which you
can refer to for more information.

Overlook Her Mistakes
---------------------

Other than the Infallible ones (whom Allah has vowed to keep away from
sins), no human being is perfect and all of us make many mistakes. Of
course this is true for both men and women.

In the case of women, she may make mistakes by being impolite to her
husband, do something against his wish, be harsh to him, or inflict an
economic loss on him by being careless, etc.

Of course it is true that a couple should keep each other satisfied and
should seriously avoid annoying each other; however, it rarely happens
that one or both parties do not deviate from this line.

Some men think that they should be strict about their wives' mistakes as
they believe this to be the way to prevent the repetition of the same
mistake again.

However, experience often shows exactly the reverse to be the case. A
woman, whose husband is strict with her, may be able to cope with his
strictness for a while, but would eventually decide to react against it
as a result of frustration. She gradually gets used to his attitude
until she becomes indifferent towards it.

A husband who would not practice forgiveness with regard to his wife's
mistakes, is practically encouraging her to become impudent and
disobedient. He might wish to continue this attitude where he will
surely have many rows with his wife. They both would have to live in a
state of bitterness for the rest of their lives.

Or he might choose to leave his wife alone and not concern himself with
her as much. In this case his wife, who feels she has won a fight,
becomes indifferent to her husband's will and wishes. It might reach a
point that even when she commits major mistakes deliberately, he keeps
silent. Their marriage then loses its warmth and they might resort to
divorce.

Remember that a divorce is harmful to both parties because starting a
new life is not so easy. Happiness cannot be guaranteed after divorce.
Therefore, strictness is not always useful and often results in
undesired events which one can read about in the media. The best way is
to remain moderate and to act logically. Forgive all the trivial and
non-deliberate mistakes of your wife. There is no need to shout at
someone for a mistake which has happened erroneously. Of course, one can
always advise others in order to help them not to repeat their mistakes.

People make many mistakes out of ignorance, so it is better to advise
them patiently to correct their incorrect deeds or opinions.

Therefore, your wife cannot be forced into correcting her mistakes, but
instead you should explain her mistake and its harmful effects logically
so that she could choose herself not to repeat that action again. Thus
not only your mutual respect remains as before, but it would also
prevent the repetition of the same mistakes.

It is wise for a man to logically stop his wife from making mistakes,
but if she persistently makes errors, then again he should forgive and
overlook them. It is wrong for him to set about punishing her or trying
to prove her guilt in order to make her apologetic. This is because
women are stubborn by nature, and improper strictness makes them react
more severely than before. This might be followed by unpleasant or even
horrific events, such as divorce or murder.

Islam has recognized this sensitive point where men have been made
responsible for their women.

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'Cope with women under all circumstances and
speak to them well; (and by doing so) it may make their actions
correct'." [^32]

"Imam Sajjad (a.s) stated: 'It is a right of (your) wife that you treat
her kindly, because she is under your surety, and you should feed and
dress her, and forgive her ignorant deeds'."[^33]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) was asked: 'What rights a woman has on her husband,
for which, if he acted accordingly, would be regarded as a good-doer?'
The Imam replied: 'He must provide her with food and clothes and he
should forgive her mistakes committed unknowingly'."[^34]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) also stated: 'Whoever punishes those who are
subordinate to him, should not expect to be honoured or to attain high
ranks'."[^35]  
 One of the causes of rows among men and women is because men
mothers-in-law butt into their family affairs.

A mother, before marrying her daughter off to a man, imagines her
son-in-law to be perfect and approves for her daughter one who could
make her happy. She would respect him and would treat him kindly in the
hope of being able to correct his trivial faults at a later stage.

Sometimes she finds her son-in-law conforms to her expectation, and
sometimes he does not. In the latter case, she intends to shape him
until he can be accepted by her and for this she uses every possible
means such as her own and others' experiences, and starts to plan her
approach.

She sometimes pretends to be sympathetic and sometimes strict. She might
act as a guide and a supervisor, or might complain. However, the best
option is to achieve her goal by influencing her daughter by making her
not conform to her husband.

She uses her daughter and thus orders her to act differently at various
times. Consequently, the man finds his wife to be critical of him one
day and begging him to do something the next day.

An inexperienced woman would think that her mother would be sympathetic
to her marriage and would conform to her advice!

Thus if her husband still does not conform to his mother- in-law's ideal
man, rows may break out between the couple which could result in divorce
and even murder. That is why most men are not on good terms with their
mothers-in-law. They blame them for their wives' disobedience and
believe that their mothers put words in their daughters' mouths.

It would not be a bad idea if one learns about complaints of a few
sons-in-law.

"Mr. M. Javad writes: 'My mother-in-law is a demon, a dragon, a
two-headed serpent. May God save the wolves from her. She has made my
life so bitter that I am going crazy and feel like running away to the
mountains and deserts... It is not only me who is fed up with this
situation. This is a general case and I think ninety-five percent of men
are affected by them and the other five percent probably do not have a
mother-in-law'.

Mr. F. Muhammad writes: 'My mother-in-law is always butting into my
life. She causes our annoyance for no good reason. She is always
speaking defamatory words about my family. Whenever I buy anything for
my wife, she (the mother-in-law) starts picking up fault with it. She
criticizes its colour, or model and tries to prove it worthless to my
wife.'Mr. K Parviz writes: 'My mother-in-law has treated me in such a
way that I have almost divorced my wife three times. She stings like a
scorpion. She teaches my wife to be rude to me, to leave the housework,
or to expect the impossible from me. Whenever she comes to us, our house
turns into hell. I truly hate the sight of her'."[^36]

Most men try to counter their mothers-in-law's influences on their wives
by restricting their relationship with them. They stop their wives from
going to their parents' houses. In brief, men do not get along with
their mothers-in- law and show their dislike for them by all possible
means.

However, this approach, although usual, is not logical and wise. This is
because a mother daughter relationship is very strong and is a natural
bond which cannot be broken easily.

How can a man expect his wife to abandon her parents who have spent
years trying to bring her up?

This expectation is not practical and even if it happens, it would not
be permanent, as any unnatural act is temporary.

Besides if a woman feels that her husband is against her parents, she
might take up a similar stance with regard to his family. She may become
disobedient, disrespectful, etc.

Moreover, this attitude of the man gives an excuse to his mother-in-law
to interfere more severely in their marriage. In brief this approach
could have a negative result and might lead to divorce.

Anyway why should a man, who can benefit from associating with his
in-laws, resort to such measures which could harm him and his family?

"Indian police authorities reported that in the year 1971, the main
reason for a total of 146 cases of suicide in New Delhi was due to an
unfavorable relationship between men and their mothers-in-law."[^37]

"A man, who was frustrated with his mother-in-law because of her
obtrusions, threw her out of a taxi." [^38]

"A man broke his mother-in-law's skull with a hammer. His brother-in-law
then became furious with him and after wounding him with a knife,
escaped." [^39]

"Mr..., who was angry with his mother-in-law, poured the contents of a
hot stew over her head. She screamed and fainted on the floor. She was
taken to hospital and after recovery said her daughter had informed her
husband that she wanted a divorce and could not live with him any
longer." [^40]

"A man who was fed up with his mother-in-law committed suicide."[^41]

Here it is perhaps worth mentioning two points:

(a) Obviously a mother-in-law, not only is not an enemy to her
son-in-law, but it is natural for her to like him as is evident at the
beginning of a marriage. Besides she finds herself close to him because
of the interest that she has in her daughter's happiness. Therefore,
when a mother-in-law interferes in her daughter's life, it cannot be
meant to be anything but with good intentions.

She means to be sympathetic, but sometimes out of ignorance, she takes
the wrong steps or makes harmful suggestions. Thus one should not be too
critical of such women.

(b) A mother and child relationship is a natural bond which cannot be
easily broken, and whoever makes efforts in this direction. Would surely
fail. Such effort is contrary to the laws of nature and cannot be
justified in any way.

Just as a man is interested in his parents, so is a woman. Consequently
it is best to have a kind of relationship with one's in-laws that is
beneficial to both parties. This is only possible if one exercises
respect and kindness. A man can, through wisdom, respect, obedience, etc
have a good relationship with his mother-and father-in-law.

He should show his love for their daughter. He should not criticize her
in front of them. He should seek advice and spiritual help from them. In
the event of their suggesting or doing something wrong. He should kindly
and logically point out to them that they are not right. He should not
speak harshly to them.

A married man should regard a good relationship with his in-laws, as his
duty and a secret to a successful marriage. As a result many family
problems are prevented while many more can be resolved.

In brief, it is not always the mother-in-law who is guilty but men
should be wise enough to be friend them.

There are many men who enjoy a good relationship with their
mothers-in-law.

"Mr. Manuchehr writes: 'My mother-in-law is an angel or even better. I
love her more than my own mother, because she is kind and understanding.
She always helps us with our problems. Her existence is a guarantee of
my family's happiness and prosperity'."[^42]

Even if a man has a mother-in-law who is stubborn, ignorant and
impossible to reconcile with, he should not treat her harshly. This kind
of women may make one's life difficult, but it is always better to react
softly towards their improper behaviour. This is because, by treating
them kindly, one could minimize the danger to one's marriage.

Meanwhile, the man should get closer to his wife and should make her
trust him. He must discuss her mother's wrong deeds with her, and
logically prove to her, their undesirable consequences.

If a man is able to create a deep understanding with his wife, then many
problems, including the one with his mother- in-law would be solved.

So do not forget good manners, be wise and treat your family kindly in
order to have a successful marriage.

"Imam Ali (a.s) stated: 'Developing friendship is half of
wisdom'.''[^43]

"Imam 'Ali (a.s) also stated: 'Associating with people and treating them
with good manners would prevent one from committing bad deeds and
mischievous acts'."[^44]

"Imam Ali (a.s.) stated: 'Associate with each other and do good. Keep
away from sulking and separation'."[^45]

Be Attentive
------------

Woman is an emotional being whose emotions are dominant over her logic.
She is more naive and sensitive than a man. She can be deceived more
easily and has less control over her emotional desires. She cannot
decide wisely once she is upset. She can be amused or made upset with
little effort. Thus if the man has supervision over the behaviour and
actions of his wife, most of the possible risks would be averted.

This is why the holy religion of Islam appoints men to act as guardians
of their families and makes them responsible for their family affairs.
Allah states in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الرِّجَالُ قَوَّامُونَ عَلَى النِّسَاءِ بِمَا فَضَّلَ اللَّهُ
بَعْضَهُمْ عَلَىٰ بَعْضٍ وَبِمَا أَنْفَقُوا مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ ۚ
فَالصَّالِحَاتُ قَانِتَاتٌ حَافِظَاتٌ لِلْغَيْبِ بِمَا حَفِظَ اللَّهُ
ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Men are the maintainers of women because Allah has made some of them
to excel others and because they spend out of their property; the good
women are therefore obedient, guarding the unseen as Allah has
guarded."*** **(4:34)**

Therefore a man, who is regarded as the protector of his family, should
not practise carelessness with regard to his wife's deeds, He must
always supervise her affairs and monitor her actions, He must see to it
that she does not deviate or associate with the wrong kind of people. He
must logically explain to her the harms of keeping bad company. He must
not allow her to leave the house with indecent clothing or which arouse
sexual feelings, He must not permit her to participate in corrupt
activities or to attend unworthy gatherings,

It is a fact that if a woman is left alone in her deeds and
associations, she would possibly fall into the traps of evil- minded
people who live in a corrupt life.

Men are recommended to take a look at the number of women who, as a
result of their husbands' negligence, have fallen prey to corruption;
there are many women who have been deceived at night parties. Many
families have broken down and many children have lost their families as
a result of such get-togethers.

A man who allows his wife to leave the house with indecent clothes,
permits her to befriend all kinds of people, and does not stop her from
attending corrupt gatherings, is in fact committing the greatest
perfidious act to himself, his wife, and children.

This attitude would lead his wife towards hundreds of danger zones from
which she cannot easily escape. Petrol is inflammable and fire can burn
it, thus it is foolish to think that leaving petrol next to fire would
not set it ablaze.

How ignorant and simple minded are those men who allow their wives or
daughters, by being indecently dressed, to expose themselves in the
streets, while at the same time disliking the attention or notice given
to them by the youth.

Wrong freedoms of this kind have grave consequences. If a woman is
successful in taming her husband with regard to her unlawful desires,
she would then increase the extension of her wishes up to a level where
she would act independently of her husband altogether. This will result
in mischievous events in the family.

"That is why the Prophet (S) of Islam stated: 'A man is the guardian of
his family and any guardian is responsible to his subordinates to take
care of their needs '."[^46]

"The Prophet (S) also stated: 'Order women to do good deeds before they
make you commit wrong ones'." [^47]

"In addition the Prophet (S) stated: 'Whoever obeys his wife, Allah
would cast him into the fire on his face'."

"The Prophet (S) was asked: 'What sort of obedience is meant here'? The
Prophet of Allah (S) replied: 'It is when the husband permits a woman
who asks her husband to allow her to go to the public bath, weddings,
celebrations, and condolence gatherings while wearing delicate and thin
clothes'."[^48]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'The bliss of a man is that he becomes
supervisor and guardian of his family'." [^49]

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: ' Any man who permits his wife, who
has adorned herself, to leave the house, is a mean-spirited person, and
whoever calls him as such, would not have committed any sin. And any
woman whose husband permits her to leave the house adorned and perfumed,
with each step that she takes, Allah would build a house for her husband
in hell'.'' [^50]

Finally, I remind you of two points:

(a) It is correct that a man should be watchful of his wife but this
should be done carefully and wisely. He must not resort to anger or
violence. He must not make his wife feel that she is being ordered about
or else she would react unpleasantly.

The best way is, for the man, to be kind and understanding. He must act
like a sympathetic partner and explain to his wife about the harms of
wrong deeds. She must be made to choose the right path herself with
enthusiasm and eagerness.

(b) A man should be moderate, that is, he should neither be too strict
and fussy, nor should be care-free.

A woman, like a man, needs freedom and should be at liberty in her
rightful associations. She must be free to communicate with her parents,
brothers, and sisters and must be allowed to keep the appropriate type
of company.

In brief, there are exceptional cases where a woman should be deprived
of her desires. But even in such cases one should not step beyond the
limits and become too strict. Too much strictness is harmful. It
destroys a friendly atmosphere and causes annoyance. A woman might react
severely as a result of her husband's strictness. She might even ask for
a divorce.

"A young woman, Mrs... said to the reporter in the court: 'I got married
with Mr ...five years ago. We have a son and a daughter now. At times my
husband has been treating everybody in a cynical manner. He does not
allow me to associate with anybody. He even locks the doors for us when
he leaves the house. We are prisoners in his house. I can't even go to
my parents any more. My family-members do not come to us either, because
of him. I do not know what to do! On the one hand I cannot live with
him, and on the other, I am worried about my children's future. So, I
decided to take my case to this court; perhaps they can pass some
judgment'."[^51]

Men such as this woman's husband are, unfortunately, so strict and
abnormal that their wives, despite their wish to live together, apply
for divorce. Their wives become so annoyed with them that, despite
having children, they are prepared to separate from them.

Why should a man forbid his wife from associating with her
near-relatives? Does he not know that too much strictness prepares the
grounds for some women to deviate from modesty? Has he not heard of or
seen any shattered families as a result of such behaviour?

Even if one's wife copes with one's strictness, there would be a lack of
warm family atmosphere in the house. How can one expect an imprisoned
housewife to be kind to her husband and children or to eagerly pursue
the housework?

The Disciplinary Rights of the Husband
--------------------------------------

Although a husband and wife, who form a joint family life, share and
cooperate in running the affairs of their house, they may have different
opinions over certain matters. A man might feel that it should be he who
should decide about family affairs, with his wife's indisputable
agreement. At the same time his wife may object to her role as the
obedient party.

Arguments and rows may then start because both parties attempt to
establish their authority over the other. The best solution to such a
problem is that both should try to refrain from acting as superior to
the other, and try to resolve their problems through dialogue and deep
understanding. This would only be feasible if both of them stop being
stubborn.

Some men order their wives to do many things and if are confronted with
resistance, they think it right to become annoyed, to punish or even to
physically hurt their wives. This approach is not correct at all. The
men of the 'Age of Ignorance', who lacked humanity, used to hurt and
beat their wives.

"The revered Prophet (S) banned the beating of women, unless in special
circumstances when punishment becomes wajib (obligatory)'."[^52]

"The Prophet (S) also stated: 'I am astonished at a man who beats his
wife, whereas it is he himself, more than his wife, who deserves a
beating. O people, do not beat your women with sticks because such an
act has Qisas (reprisal)'."[^53]

Oppressing a woman who has wishfully married her husband, who seeks
comfort and tranquility with him, and who expects her husband to share
with her problems, is not right. In fact Allah entrusts a woman to her
husband through marriage and a man's mistreatment with his wife would be
unfaithfulness towards Allah's trust in him.

"Imam Ali (a.s.) stated: 'Women are entrusted to men, and as such are
not owners of their fortunes and misfortunes. They are with you like a
trust of Allah; so do not hurt them and do not make (the life) difficult
for them'."[^54]

A man who hits his wife, inflicts such damage on her soul that she might
suffer from a complex; and the family love and warmth would almost
definitely fade away. How can a man maintain a sound marital
relationship with his battered and degraded wife? This is really
shameful.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'O you (men)! How can any of you beat
his wife and there- after embrace her'?"[^55]

A man, unless having a particular right over his wife, similar to those
to be mentioned in this chapter is not lawfully permitted to force his
wife into doing anything or to resort to physical punishment upon her
disobedience. For instance a woman, lawfully is not duty-bound to carry
out housework such as cleaning, cooking, washing up, childcare,
knitting, sewing, etc.

Although the majority of women do carry out these works of a housewife
on their own, these are not mandatory. Men should be grateful to their
wives for their work in the house. Therefore, no man has the right to
question or punish his wife when faced with her refusal to carry out the
house- keeping chores.

Islam recommends physical punishment of one's wife only in two cases
where his rights are violated:

Case 1: A man is Islamically and lawfully allowed to seek sexual
satisfaction and pleasure from his wife and to derive all sorts of
enjoyment from this relationship. His wife is lawfully duty-bound to
yield to her husband's sexual desires. If a woman refuses to satisfy her
husband, the husband should initially persuade her in an orderly manner.
However, if a man feels that his wife is trying to be malicious to him,
and if he cannot tolerate the situation, then by observing the
prescribed stages can punish her.

Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاللَّاتِي تَخَافُونَ نُشُوزَهُنَّ فَعِظُوهُنَّ وَاهْجُرُوهُنَّ فِي
الْمَضَاجِعِ وَاضْرِبُوهُنَّ ۖ فَإِنْ أَطَعْنَكُمْ فَلَا تَبْغُوا
عَلَيْهِنَّ سَبِيلًا ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلِيًّا كَبِيرًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"...And (as to} those on whose part you fear desertion admonish them.
and leave them alone in the sleeping places and beat them; then if they
obey you do not seek a way against them; surely Allah is High Great***
***(4:34)."***

Therefore, the Qur’an allows beating one's wife as the final stage of
punishment, in the event of unreasonable behaviour of a woman with
regard to the sexual desires of her husband.

The first stage is giving advice. Secondly, the man should avoid sharing
her bed or turn his back towards her, and in this way he should show his
anger. If nothing positive happens at the end of the second stage and
still the woman continues to refuse her husband, he is permitted to beat
her (lightly).

A man, however, is not permitted to surpass the prescribed limit and
resort to oppression. Men are reminded of the following:

(a) The aim of physical punishment of one's wife should be a way of
education and not that of taking revenge.

(b) Hitting should be done by hand or by using a thin and light wooden
stick.

(c) Hitting to the extent that results in changing the color of the skin
(to blue or red) is not permitted and is punishable by the payment of a
Diyah (fine).

(d) Hitting of sensitive parts of the body such as the eyes, head,
stomach, etc is not permitted.

(e) Physical punishment should not be so hard as to create hatred and
ill-feeling between the couple, or to drive the wife towards more
disobedience.

(f) A man (who intends to punish his wife in this manner) should
remember that he is to live with his wife and that the family love
should not be destroyed.

(g) A man is not allowed to hit his wife if there are legitimate reasons
for her non-compliance with his wishes. For instance, if she is in the
state of menstruation, fasting in the month of *Ramadan* being in
*ihram* (garb for Hajj pilgrimage), or if she is sick. These are
acceptable reasons and a man cannot punish his wife for not complying
with his wishes on these occasions.

Case 2: A woman can go out of the house only after obtaining her
husband's permission. Going out without permission is lawfully not
allowed and committing it is a sin.

A tradition has been reported that the Prophet (S) did not allow any
woman to go out of her house without her husband's permission. "He
stated: 'Any woman who goes out of her house without her husband's
permission, would be subjected to the curse of all the angels in the
heavens and all those who see her, be they jinn or human, until the time
she returns (to her home)'."[^56]

This is the right of any husband which must be observed by their wives.

But men should not be too strict with their wives on this account. It is
better for them to allow their wives to go out whenever possible.

This right of men is not meant to be a show of strength or an attempt at
putting pressure on their wives, but a means of preventing women from
going to undesirable and unsuitable places.

Being too strict, not only is not useful, but may affect the family
relationship, or even drive a woman towards disobedience and corruption.

A man must stop his wife from going to corrupt and unsuitable places and
gatherings. It is a religious obligation for women to obey their
husbands. A disobedient woman can be punished by her husband. Here again
the punishment should be carried out in stages.

A woman, however, can go out of the house on specific occasions without
her husband's permission and men are not permitted to hurt their wives
in such cases:

(a) Going out of the house for learning the necessary commandments of
religion.

(b) Going out of the house for Hajj when she possesses the necessary
financial means and ability to perform Hajj.

(c) Going out of the house to repay a debt provided it is not possible
to repay without going out of the house.

Suspicious Men
--------------

It is rightful for men to be watchful of their wives but not to an
extent of suspicion and distrust. Some men are suspicious and doubt
their wives' faithfulness. This is dangerous and makes life very
difficult for all the family.

A man who is suffering, from this behavior, constantly picks up fault
with his wife. He monitors her closely and follows her everywhere. He
finds supporting evidence for his cause of suspicion from every thing.
If he sees his wife talking to a man, or finds a photograph of a man
among her belongings, or finds a letter written to her by a man, or
finds a man looking at her, he would reach certainty with respect to her
unfaithfulness. If his wife hides a letter from him, he would think that
it is a love letter. If she expresses her love less than before, he
would doubt her sincerity.

He might even think that since his daughter does not look like him, his
wife must have committed adultery.

All such examples can be regarded as a firm proof of a woman's
infidelity by the suspicious husband. The situation becomes worse if a
relative or friend agrees with his suspicion.

Families, who are affected by this illness, suffer a great deal. The man
would act like a detective around the house, and his wife would feel as
if she was being kept in custody. They would both suffer mentally and
their marriage would become endangered. They might even resort to
divorce or murder.

There are many cases of homicide and suicide which have occurred as a
result of suspicion.

Under these conditions a man and his wife should be aware of the
possible grave consequences and, through wisdom and understanding, repel
any danger which could threaten their marriage or even their lives. They
only need to be a ware of the potential danger and be able to think
clearly in order to overcome their problems.

A man should give up his fanaticism and extreme jealousy. He must act
logically. He must be aware that convicting his wife of adultery is not
a trivial matter, and that such an allegation needs definite proof.

Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اجْتَنِبُوا كَثِيرًا مِنَ الظَّنِّ
إِنَّ بَعْضَ الظَّنِّ إِثْمٌ ۖ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"*** ***O you who believe! avoid most of suspicion, for surely
suspicion in some cases is a sin..."*** ***(49:12)***

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Whoever, falsely, accuses his wife of
committing adultery would lose all the benefits from his good deeds just
as a snake sheds its skin. And for each hair on his body, one thousand
sins would be written down in his record (for the Day of
Judgment)'."[^57]

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: 'Whoever falsely accuses a
faithful man or woman, Allah would, on the Day of Judgment, hold him on
a heap of fire so that he receives the punishment for his sin'."[^58]

As long as a woman's unfaithfulness is not proved through firm evidence,
a man does not have any right to accuse her, otherwise he would be
committing a sin for which, as per Islam, he is to be punished with
eighty lashes.

Evidence based on purely imaginative grounds are not indicative of any
thing. Old letters, pictures, etc do not prove any thing.

Keeping such things is not right, but this is a mistake that most young
people commit and it is not a thing to be seriously concerned with.

If a woman is seen conversing with a stranger, although she is not right
in doing so, this isolated event cannot be held against her as a proof
of her unfaithfulness. This is because she might have thought it rude
not to pay heed to that man, or he might have not been a stranger but a
friend of her father or brother.

If a woman makes a compliment to a man, although she should not, it may
be out of simplicity and therefore cannot be indicative of her
unfaithfulness.

If a woman tells a lie about a relationship, or hides her letters, it
may be that there is a good reason for it or she may fear her husband's
groundless accusations.

If a woman has grown cold towards her husband, it may be that she is
upset with him, that she may be ill, or may have other problems.

In brief, for all situations which may indicate symptoms of
unfaithfulness, one can find tens of good reasons which render the
possibility of any wrong doing as void.

Dear Sir! For the sake of Allah stop being suspicious. Consider yourself
a fair judge and view the problem with logic. Measure the degree of the
possibility of your wife's unfaithfulness and find out whether it is
definite, just a suspicion, or even feasible?

I am not saying that you should be indifferent or careless but that you
should act upon the amount of evidence you possess and not more. Why
should you exaggerate the problem with baseless suspicion and make life
difficult for yourself and your family? How would you feel if anybody
accused you in a similar manner? Why do you think in an unfair manner?
Why should you disgrace yourself and your wife? Why can you not have
mercy upon your wife? Have you ever thought that she might eventually
deviate from the right path through your mistrust and false accusations?

"Imam Ali (a.s.) stated to his son, Imam Hasan (a.s.): 'Be careful not
to act possessively when you should not. Because this would incline the
right people towards corruption and the chaste people towards committing
sin'."[^59]

If you are suspicious of your wife, do not discuss it with just anyone
whom you see, because they might approve of your suspicion out of
enmity, simplicity or carelessness. They might approve of your suspicion
out of enmity, simplicity or carelessness. They might even strengthen
your suspicion and cause you unhappiness in this world and the life
after. You should not, specifically inform your mother or sister because
they would naturally be in agreement with you and thus increase your
suspicion. You must seek advice from wise and experienced friends or
relatives.

The best approach, however, is for you to talk to your wife and ask her
for an explanation. But you should not seek to prove her guilt. Listen
to what she has to tell you and decide like a fair judge who is free
from any prejudice.

At least try to believe her and imagine your brother-in-law is
presenting you with evidence of your sister's unfaithfulness. Why should
you act mercilessly and regard her as a proven criminal'?

Be wise and patient, lest you divorce her on baseless grounds. Suppose
you endure the sufferings of a divorce, but how certain are you about
the next wife? You would still be suspicious. What is their fault if it
is you that is suffering with this illness? Be wise and try to
understand your own problem.

Be careful not to resort to commit suicide or murder your wife. Because
you would destroy your life here in this world and the Almighty Allah
would punish you in the life Hereafter.

You must know that spilling blood would one day be revealed and then you
would either be executed or would spend your life in prison.

If you do not agree with this point, then just take a look at the
statistics of convicts.

Wives of suspicious men also have a great responsibility with respect to
their families. These women must sacrifice and prove their ability in
such difficult situations.

Dear Madam! First of all your husband is infected with a dangerous
illness where he, unwillingly, takes the wrong steps which would
endanger your family.

You must express your love for him as much as possible. He must be
certain that he is the only man in your life. Be patient with him, do
not shout at him, do not refuse to talk to him and do not be stubborn
with him.

If you feel that he is monitoring your letters or controlling your
comings and goings, do not protest. Tell him every thing, tell the
truth. A void lies or denials of the events which have happened. If he
ever finds out that you have been lying about anything, he would regard
it as a proof of your infidelity, the damage of which cannot easily be
repaired.

If your suspicious husband ever asks you not to associate with a certain
person or wants you to do a certain task, then accept his word,
otherwise the cause of his doubt in you would strengthen. In brief,
avoid all deeds which could make him suspicious of you.

"Imam Ali (a.s.) stated: 'Whoever exposes himself to accusation, must
not blame those who become suspicious of him'."[^60]

If your husband shows animosity towards any one, then you should break
your contact with that person altogether.

Dear Madam! It is better for you to keep your family together than
keeping your friendship with others. Do not think that you are a slave
in the chains of your husband, but realize that you are an ill man's
wife.

Remember when you made a marital covenant with your husband; you
undertook to share all the happy and the sad occasions of life. Is it
now fair for you to mistreat your husband who is suffering from an
illness? Put away immature thoughts and be provident. By Allah, however
much your sacrifice for your family, it is worth it. A good woman is one
who can cope with in difficult situations.

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'Jihad of woman is in her patience towards
her husband's malicious acts and fervour'."[^61]

Do not do anything which would make your husband suspicious. Do not look
at other men.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: ' Allah would be greatly angry with a
married woman who fills her eyes with the looks of strangers'."[^62]

Do not associate with strange men. Do not leave the house without your
husband's permission. Do not get in strangers' cars. Only your chastity
is not enough: but you should seriously avoid anything which would
arouse your husband's suspicion. He might become suspicious of the most
trivial points of your behaviour.

"A 27-year old woman said in the court: 'It was the winter of 1963, when
on a snowy day, I got in a car which belonged to my friend's uncle. She
offered that her uncle would give me a lift home. I accepted and got in
his car.

When we reached home, my husband was standing by the door of the house
and since I did not want him to see me in another man's car, I asked my
friend's uncle to drive on, which he did. Later, my husband who had seen
me in that car, asked about it, but I denied everything. He became more
suspicious and it reached a stage where he did not even believe my
friend's witness. Now it is eight years that he has neither lived with
me nor divorced me. I do not know what to do'."[^63]

Who do you think is to blame in this story?

I would say that the woman is more guilty than her husband. It is she
who, out of carelessness and simplicity, had placed herself and her
husband in this situation.

First of all she should not have accepted a lift from a stranger as this
is not a correct thing to do for any woman. It is not proper and it may
be dangerous.

Secondly, she should not have acted the way she did when she saw her
husband. She should have stopped the car and should have explained to
her husband.

Thirdly, one of her mistakes was to tell the driver to drive on.

Fourthly, she should not have denied it later. She could have explained
every thing even at this late stage and it could have helped to solve
the problem.

Of course the man is not right either. He must not regard this event as
a conclusive evidence of his wife's guilt. He must consider the
possibility that his wife might have carelessly got in a stranger's car
and then she might have, fearfully, asked the driver not to stop and
naturally denied the whole affair.

He must investigate the matter and once he is certain that she is not
guilty, he must be forgiving.

The Unfaithful Woman
--------------------

Once a woman, through firm proof, is convicted of adultery, her husband
would be placed in a very difficult situation. On the one hand, his
honor is endangered and on the other, enduring such a disgrace is not
easy. He feels trapped in a state of deadlock from which an easy escape
is not possible. A man in this situation can choose one of the
following:

(a) He can keep silent about the affair in order to save his honor and
for the sake of his family. But he must live with this event for the
rest of his life. Of course this choice cannot be acceptable by any
honorable man, since it would not be possible for him to cope with his
adulterous wife and a possible illegitimate child.

Passion is an admirable quality of men, so much so that a man without it
would not enjoy the grace of the Almighty Allah as well as being
dishonored by the people who know him.

What a disgraceful and shameful life those men have who are indifferent
with regard to their wives' disloyalties.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The fragrance of Paradise can be
smelt at a distance of five hundred years journey, but two groups of
people are deprived from it; those which are disowned by their parents
and the cuckold ones'. It was asked: 'O Prophet (S) of Allah: 'Who is a
cuckold'? The Prophet (S) replied: 'A man who knows his wife is an
adulterer (and remains silent about it)'." [^64]

(b) He could kill either or both his wife and the man she committed
adultery with. He can take his revenge and find peace. But this is a
dangerous act and would not have a good end, because a murder would
rarely be concealed for ever. A murderer would finally be found and be
punished. He cannot easily prove his wife's disloyalty in the court
either; and thus the possibility of his release from imprisonment would
be very remote. He might even receive capital punishment. Thus he would
lose his life and his children would go astray. Therefore, it is not
wise for a man to endanger his life just for the sake of seeking
revenge.

He should be wise and prudent and be able to control his temper until he
can find a suitable solution to his problem.

(c) He can commit suicide in order to get rid of himself from his wife's
disloyalty and leave a disgraceful life. This is not a wise act either,
because on the one hand he has murdered himself, which itself is a major
sin in Islam and the murderer would be punished by Allah on the Day of
Judgment. On the other hand, he would have deprived himself from life.
What kind of logic is it that would suggest self-killing as a revenge
for someone else's guilt. He would suffer in the next life as well as
give more freedom to his wife to commit more adulterous acts.

(d) He could divorce her. This is the wisest thing to do. It is right
that a divorce would destroy his family life and would inflict much harm
upon him and his children, but there is not any other way. It is better
for him to divorce her and take the children, because it is not right to
leave them with a corrupt woman to bring up.

Of course bringing up children is not an easy job for a man, but he must
be sure that Allah would help him. He could help him lead an honorable
life.

Do not Go After Other Women
---------------------------

A man must do his utmost to choose a woman that is suitable for him. He
is in a position where he can exercise care and caution in finding a
partner whom he is going to live with for the rest of his life. He,
however, after marriage, should not go after other women. He must not
think of any woman except his wife.

He must realize that a girl has left her family to live with him and it
is not right for him to pursue childish desires. He must make efforts in
bringing his new family together and must try to create a friendly
atmosphere at home.

A man who is interested in his own happiness, must, after marriage, give
up naive thoughts and must adapt himself to a new life.

It is senseless for a married man to joke with other women or express
his affection for them. A man would also not like his wife to joke with
men, A woman would not like this type of attitude of her husband towards
other women.

A woman who sees her husband close to other women would feel jealous and
would be disheartened. She would lose interest in her house and family.
She might retaliate with a similar action or seek divorce.

"A woman complained about her husband to the court. She had been married
for thirty-three years and said that her husband had always been in the
habit of jesting with other women."[^65]

"A woman complained to the court that her husband was always expressing
interest in her friends. She said that she could not invite her friends
to the house because they thought her husband was having an interest in
them and that she was embarrassed because of him."[^66]

It is not proper for a married man to have an eye on other women. Ogling
and having eyes at other women results in internal anxiety, nervousness
and indifference towards one's family.

Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَغُضُّوا مِنْ أَبْصَارِهِمْ وَيَحْفَظُوا
فُرُوجَهُمْ ۚ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"Say to the believing men that they cast down their looks and guard
their private parts..."*** ***(24:30).***

Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'A lewd look is a poisonous arrow thrown by
Satan. It is likely that such a glance would be the cause of sorrow and
grief for some time'."[^67]

Flirting is regarded as an illness by psychiatrists. An eye which has
become used to this habit, would never be satisfied. Looking in this
manner becomes a cause of many corruptions, where the youth can deviate
from the right path. What the eyes do not see the heart would not
desire.

One might initially resist the grave consequences of forbidden glances,
but finally he may break down, and become influenced by what he has
seen.

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) stated: 'Frequent (forbidden) looks create lust in
one's heart, and this is sufficient for deviating the looker'." [^68]

Islam, knowing the harm of such lewd looks, has forbidden it altogether.

A man who suddenly sees a woman in the streets or elsewhere, should at
once direct his look somewhere else or close his eyes. He should not
persist in staring at women. This may be difficult at first, but with a
little practice he can do it.

Wise people know that preventing oneself from forbidden looks would
remove many potential dangers such as murder, crime, suicide, divorce,
nervous breakdown, mental disorders, weakness or heart, anxiety, family
rows, etc.

I am aware of the difficulties that the youth are confronted with at
this age, and I know that closing one's eyes to obscene scenes in the
streets and elsewhere is not easy, but there is not any way other than
to ignore them.

A man who can close his eyes to other women, would be protected from
many corruptions. Instead he would enjoy his family and peace of mind.

Dear Sir! If you are after happiness, once married, do not take notice
of other women. Do not make compliments to other women in front of your
wife. Do not say: "I wish I had married Miss...; missed many good
opportunities..."

Such statements would hurt your wife and she would grow cold towards you
and life. She might even try to do the same and talk similarly.

As a result your life would lack happiness. Pitiful are those men, who
for a few moments of lust, chase after corrupt women and leave their own
chaste wives, as if they have never known family love and sincerity.
Such men are like animals who have only concentrated on eating,
sleeping, and lust. They seem to be strangers to humanity and affection.

Be Grateful
-----------

Housework may possibly seem an easy job to some men, but it is only fair
to acknowledge it as a hard and tedious job.

A housewife, even if she works all day and night, would not be able to
finish all her work. Cooking, cleaning, washing the clothes and ironing,
washing the dishes and arranging them, making the beds, and arranging
the furniture and above all taking care of children, not one day, but
everyday is very difficult.

A man might think that his wife is just cooking food three times a day
and forgets about the rest of her work.

Only a man who is prepared to stay in the house for a month and do the
housework would know the pressures involved. He would then appreciate
his wife's efforts.

A housewife does all this work happily but she expects her husband to
appreciate her and to show his gratitude.

Dear Sir! What is wrong with thanking your wife for her housekeeping?
Why should you not express your fondness for the food she cooks? What is
wrong with thanking her with regard to her efforts in taking care of
your children? Are you not aware that your appreciation for her would
encourage and refresh her?

If you remain indifferent to her efforts, or do not show your gratitude,
she would lose interest in the housework and then you would complain
about her. You should know that you could be the cause of your wife's
indolence.

If a stranger does you a small favour, you would thank him many times,
but upon your wife's many favours you are not even thanking her once!
You are not prepared to even make her happy by showing your appreciation
for all her efforts.

"A twenty-nine year old housewife wrote from Tehran: 'I am married to an
ungrateful and an inappreciative man who ignores my housework
altogether. I wash, clean, cook, decorate the house, knit jumpers for
the family, polish his shoes, iron his clothes, etc and he has not even
once thanked me. Whenever I talk to him about the work in the house, he
interrupts me and says that I should not praise it before him. He
belittles my efforts, whereas his success is mostly due to my hard
work'."[^69]

Some men regard it as a manly act to ignore their wives' housework. They
think if they make compliments to their wives for their work, the women
would be spoiled. They might even believe that a man and wife do not
need to thank each other.

This belief is not right, because any good-doer from a psychological
point of view, needs appreciation and gratitude. Appreciation encourages
one to do good, and this is especially true for a housewife who is doing
a tedious job everyday over and over again.

Thus Islam regards being thankful as a good quality in one's behaviour.

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'Whoever praises a Muslim, Allah would
write many praises for him until the Day of .Judgment'." [^70]

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: 'Whoever respects a Muslim, and speaks
affably to him, and removes his sorrow, would always be under the
blessings of Allah'."[^71]

Be Clean at Home Also
---------------------

Observing cleanliness is necessary for everyone everywhere. One must
always keep his body and clothes clean. He must bathe himself at least
once a week and must wash his face and hands with soap and water every
morning. He must brush his teeth, comb his hair, trim his hair, wash his
feet wear clean socks everyday and must also wear pure clothes. The holy
religion of Islam emphasizes greatly about cleanliness and being
well-dressed.

The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'Cleanliness is a part of the faith (of
Islam)'."[^72]

"The Holy Prophet (S) saw a man who was dirty, had messy hair and looked
unattractive. The Prophet (S) stated: 'Using the blessings of Allah is a
part of the faith (of Islam)'." [^73]

"The Prophet (S) of Islam also stated: 'A dirty person would be a bad
worshipper of Allah'." [^74]

"In addition, the Holy Prophet (S) stated: '*Jibra'il* (Gabriel) laid so
much stress on brushing the teeth that I feared for them'." [^75]

"Imam Ali (a.s.) stated: 'Allah is beautiful and he likes beauty. And he
also likes to see the effect of his blessings on his servants'."[^76]

Cleanliness and beauty is not only for women, but men should, also be
clean and well-dressed. Some men are not bothered about their
cleanliness and take a bath only once in a while. They do not care for
the state of their clothes and do not bother about trimming their
beards. They smell badly and thus make others keep away from them.

Those men who are careful about cleanliness and do lay importance on
their clothing, mostly do so outside their own houses. That is they look
clean and well-dressed outside the house for the people, not inside
their homes for their families. They appear very smart in the streets,
gatherings, etc but as soon as they return home, they change into worn
out clothes. They rarely attend to the state of their hair and faces at
home for the sake of their families.

They might not even bother to wash their faces before eating breakfast.
Men of this kind make their families not bother to look at them.

Dear Sir! if you cannot tolerate a dirty and shabby dressed wife, and
you expect her to look clean and beautiful at home, then be sure that
she expects the same from you. She, too, hates the sight of a dirty,
smelly and untidy husband. She also likes to see you clean and smart.

If you do not satisfy her expectations with regard to smartness, then
she would notice other men who are clean and smart and she might even
think they are from another world. She compares you with them and might
lose interest in you. Therefore, try to look good at home as well as
outside.

Your wife would not notice other men if you were successful in drawing
her attention toward yourself. Why should you look good for strangers in
the streets but look messy before your wife and children?

Therefore, the holy religion of Islam orders men to adorn themselves for
their wives.

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: 'It is obligatory for a man to provide
his wife with food and clothing, and not to appear before her with an
unpleasant appearance. If he did (the above mentioned), then he would
take care of her rights'."[^77]225

"The Prophet of Allah (S) also stated: 'You (men) must make yourselves
tidy and be prepared for your wives, as you would like them (your women)
to be prepared for you'." [^78]

"Hasan ibn Jiham says: 'I saw Hadrat Abu al-Hasan (a.s.) who had dyed
his hair. I asked if indeed he had dyed his hair'. He stated: 'Yes,
adornment of man (for the sake of his wife) helps her keep her chastity.
Women who deviate from the path of chastity do so due to the
carelessness and faults of their husbands.' Hadrat Abu al-Hasan then
stated: 'Do you like to see your wife untidy?' I replied: '.No.' He then
added: 'She thinks just as you do'." [^79]

"Imam Rida (a.s.) stated: 'Women of the Bani Israel deviated from the
path of chastity because their men were not bothered about cleanliness
and their good looks.' The Imam then added: 'What you expect of your
wife, she expects the same from you'."[^80]

Nurse Your Wife
---------------

The husband and wife always need each other's cooperation and expression
of love. However, this need becomes more intense at times of illness and
on other similar occasions. An ill person, just as he needs a doctor and
medicine, requires nursing and loving care. A good nurse would be able
to help a patient recover better and faster.

A woman also expects her husband to nurse her when she is bed-ridden.
She expects him to care for her more than her parents.

A woman who works at home like a maid, deserves such loving care from
her husband. She rightly expects her husband to take care of her.

Paying for treatment and medicine is one of the usual expenditures of
life and a man is duty-bound to provide her with the necessary money. A
woman who is working at home without any wages, certainly has a right to
expect her husband to pay for her treatment.

There are men who are shamelessly unfair. They use their wives when they
are healthy and able, but refuse to pay money when they are ill. Any
little money men spend for their wives' treatment is accompanied by many
complaints. Some men, if they feel the cost of treatment is high, might
even lose their wives. Is this behaviour really fair?

"A woman was complaining about her husband. She said: 'I was working
hard at home and went through many happy and harsh times with my
husband. However, now that I have become ill my husband wants to leave
me'." [^81]

Dear Sir! if you are interested in your happiness and your family's
prosperity, you must take your wife to a doctor when she becomes ill.
You must pay for her treatment. Moreover, you must nurse her kindly. Now
that she has left her parents to live with you, she expects you to be
more loving to her than her parents. She is your partner and the mother
of your children. Sympathize with her and make her hopeful of a speedy
recovery. Cook for her. Prepare suitable food and buy the prescribed
items. Feed her. All this will make her happy.

Keep the children quiet. Be watchful of her at night. Whenever she is
awake ask how she is. If she cannot sleep because of pain, then stay up
with her. You can even ask your children to help you look after their
mother. Do not ever leave your wife unattended, especially when she is
in pain.

At such times, your wife would notice your love and would in turn love
you more. She would be proud of you and would attend to you and the
children more, once she is healthy again.

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: 'The best of you is the one who is
better towards his family, and I am to my family the best among all'."
[^82]

"The Prophet (S) of Islam also stated: 'Whoever makes efforts to realize
a wish of an ill person, would be purified from his sins, just as the
day he was born'. One of the Ansars (helpers who helped the Prophet (S)
settle in Madinah) asked: 'O Prophet (S) of Allah! May my parents be
sacrificed for you, what if the ill person is from amongst your family
(Ahl al-Bayt)? Is there not more reward in this case?' The Prophet of
Allah (S) replied: 'Yes'."[^83]

Family Economy
--------------

To arrange for alimony of wife is wajib (obligatory) for husband. That
is a man is duty-bound to pay for the expenses of his wife such as food,
clothes, house, doctor, and medicine. He would be wrong not to maintain
his wife and could be prosecuted by law.

One cannot expect a family to live without any expense. They all need
food, medicine, clothes, and a place to live in. However, they might ask
for unnecessary items in which case one can disobey them and not conform
with their various desires.

A wise man would spend according to his earnings. He must classify the
necessary commodities and purchase them in the order of priority
whenever he can. He must also save some money for a rainy day. Some
money must be put away for the house rent or purchasing a new place. He
must not forget the electricity, water, gas, and telephone bills. Taxes
have to be paid and school fees must be kept in mind. He must seriously
avoid overspending and not pay for unimportant items. A calculated
manner of spending would never confront one with bankruptcy or debt.

Allah regards balanced spending as a sign of faith and states in the
Holy Qur'an: "And they who when they spend are neither extravagant nor
parsimonious and (keep) between these the just mean (25:67)."

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'I guarantee a person. Who spends
moderately, would never become poor'." [^84]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) also stated: 'There are four groups of people whose
prayers would not reach the level of acceptance; one group of persons is
that which wastes his wealth and then asks the Almighty Allah, O Allah!
give me my sustenance. Then Allah replies, had I not ordered you to
observe moderation (in your expenditure)'." [^85]

"Abdullah ibn Aban says: 'I asked Musa ibn J'afar (a.s) about
maintaining one's family and he stated: 'Extravagance and niggardliness
are both abominable. One must not lose moderation'."[^86]

A wise man would avoid borrowing money and would not take a loan for
unessential purposes. An economy which is based on loans (with
interests), received from banks and other establishments is Islamically
and logically wrong and is not praiseworthy.

Buying goods on hire-purchase system, although makes your house look
good, but takes away your comfort and peace of mind.

Why should one buy unnecessary goods more expensively and fill the
pockets of bankers by installments? What kind of a life is it when every
thing is acquired at a hire- purchase price? Is it not better for one to
wait and save his money in order to buy goods at cheaper prices?

It is true that earning money is difficult and it affects one's life a
great deal, however, more important is the way in which one spends his
money. There are families with good earnings who are always under debts
of others. There are also many families with low earnings who live
comfortably. The difference between the two is the way they spend their
earnings. Therefore, it is advantageous to a family that the man either
takes control of expenditures or supervises the one who is responsible
for it.

Finally, it is reminded that meanness is just as bad as overspending. If
a man has more earnings he must make his family more comfortable and
provide their essential requirements as much as possible.

Wealth and money are all for spending and providing the necessities of
life, and not for piling up and leaving them behind in this world.

The signs of wealth must be apparent in one's family and house. What is
the use of working hard and not spending?

One must use his wealth with regard to his family and his own comfort.
It is hateful to see someone who is able money wise but his children
long for good food and clothes. Children of a stingy person would wait
for his death to share his wealth.

If the Almighty Allah bestows his blessings onto someone, this blessing
must be apparent in that person's life.

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: 'He is not one of us (followers of
Prophet (S) who possesses money but keeps his family away from his
wealth'." [^87]

"Musa ibn J'afar (a.s) stated: 'A man's family members are his
dependents. Thus whoever is bestowed with the blessings of Allah, should
expand on his dependents' comfort, or else such blessings may be taken
away from him'."[^88]

Imam Rida (a.s) stated: 'It is worthy of a man to grant his
family-members with comfort by his spending, so that they do not await
his death'." [^89]

"Imam Ali (a.s.) stated: 'Arrange fruits for your dependents every
Friday so that they may be pleased with the coming of Friday'."[^90]

Extend Your Help in the Household Works
---------------------------------------

Although housekeeping is a duty of women, it must be realized that
running the affairs of a house is not an easy task

A housewife, however much time she spends on housekeeping, would not be
able to do it all This is especially true when one has to entertain
one's guests or when one becomes ill, etc Housekeeping is tiresome for a
housewife and thus husbands are expected to assist their wives in this
respect

It is not fair that a man sits around the house idly while his wife
remains busy in so much works It is only proper for him to help his wife
as much as possible whenever he can. This help is a sign of affection
which attracts one's wife to her husband and family

It is not at all a manly act that a man should not touch anything around
the house, or orders his wife around A house is not a command
headquarters, but a place of love, kindness, and cooperation

Dear Sir! Do not think that working at home is degrading On the
contrary, through your assistance, your wife would appreciate you more

The Prophet (S) of Islam. Who is the most revered person in history,
used to help in the housework'."[^91]

Ayeshah, the wife of the Prophet (S) said :'Whenever the Prophet (S) was
free from his work, he used to sew his clothes, repair his shoes and
used to work at home like other men'."[^92]

Return Home Soon
----------------

An unmarried man is free to spend his time. But once married, he must
alter his program. He cannot stay out for any length of time that he
desires He should inform his wife of his whereabouts, etc. He must not
forget that his wife stays at home all the day, cleans the house, washes
the dishes, and cooks. She waits for him to return home as soon as his
work is finished, to see him, talk to him, and to enjoy his company. The
children look forward to seeing their father too. It is not fair that a
man should leave his family at home and pursue his enjoyment somewhere
else.

Marriage is not only providing food and clothes for one's family. A
woman is her husband's partner and not a servant. She is not there to
work all the day and get fed in return, but rather she hopes to have a
permanent friend and partner.

Some men are truly unfair, unjust, and foolish. They leave their wives
and children at home and spend their nights somewhere else. The money
that they should spend at home for the family, they waste at other
places. Such men have not yet understood the meaning of love and
affection and regard their cheap and filthy enjoyments as a way of good
living. They overlook the fact that they would degrade themselves
through such deeds. Others would recognize them as silly and impudent.

These men are the causes of the unhappiness of themselves and their
families. Their acts drive their wives to seek a divorce from them.

"A man who had divorced his wife, said in the court: 'At the beginning
of my marriage, I had certain friends that I used to go out with, while
leaving my wife behind..., and I used to return home in the early hours
of the morning, My wife, who was fed up with this situation, obtained a
divorce. We had ten children, whom I was supposed to meet twice a month.
Some time passed like this. But it is quite some time now that my
children are in hiding and I am desperate to see my children',"[^93]

"A woman said: 'I am frustrated with loneliness. My husband does not
care about me at all. Every night for his own enjoyment he is out until
the early hours of the morning '."[^94]

Dear sir! you are now married. You should not act like a bachelor. You
are responsible for your wife and the children. Do not associate with
unworthy friends. Return home as soon as you finish your work. Enjoy a
family life and be a good company for your wife and the children. Even
if your nightly amusements are not wrong they can be nevertheless
harmful to you and your married life.

Be Faithful
-----------

Upon a marital covenant, the individual lives of two persons converge
into a single social joint life. The holy covenant of marriage means
that a man and a woman promise each other to be together for the rest of
their lives, to help each other, to be kind and understanding at all
times, for richer and poorer, in sickness and in health, happiness and
sorrow, etc.

Humanity demands that one should remain faithful to one's promises. A
married couple should not forget their treaty at difficult times.

A young girl, who chooses one man to live with her for the rest of her
life, expects him not to leave her at an age when she is no longer a
young woman any more. It is not fair that a man should seek pleasure
with anyone other than his wife.

A woman who contributes a great deal in building a strong family with
good economical prospects, does not expect her husband to go after
another woman.

A woman who works hard at home, naturally hopes that her husband would
not deprive her of his love and affection at times of sickness and
inability to work. The least she expects of him is not to go after his
pleasure alone.

Some men are truly emotionless. When their wives are young and
good-looking they enjoy their company, but leave them when they lose
their good look.

A man divorced his wife on the basis of her being bad-omen, because
since their marriage his father had died and his uncle had become
bankrupt'." [^95]

"A man who had married a young woman out of love, divorced her later on
the grounds that he did not love her'." [^96]

"A woman Mrs... complained to the court: 'For years I have lived with my
husband, but now that I have become ill, he says that he does not want a
sick wife'." [^97]

Dear Sir! You are not an animal whose life is all about eating and lust.
You are a human being with emotion, conscience and sacrificial
characteristics. Is it really fair that you pursue your enjoyment away
from your wife? If yes, then you are an oppressor and as such you would
be punished in this very world. If you spend your time with another
woman, then for the sake of a few minutes of enjoyment, you may indeed
lose your peace of mind and would be affected by nervousness. Besides
you would be disgraced before people. Your children would not accept you
either and would react by being malicious to you.

If your wife ever becomes ill, take the necessary steps to cure her, and
if she has an incurable illness, then stay with her, sacrifice yourself
and do not remarry while she is still alive.

Do not disappoint her during the difficult times. What would you expect
if you were in her situation? It is only fair that she would expect the
same from you.

Is it right that your wife, when you are ill, should seek a divorce?
Would she not be disgraced in the eyes of your friends and relatives? So
if you agree that faithfulness and sincerity are good, then try to be
faithful.

Education and Training
----------------------

A young newly married woman has the responsibility of running the
affairs of her husband and as such she would need knowledge of cooking,
cleaning, ironing, sewing, arranging the furniture, entertaining her
guests, socializing with others, taking care of her child, etc.

Her husband would expect her to know all of this. However, his
expectations may not be realized most of the time because his young
wife's knowledge about housekeeping is either non-existent or very
little indeed.

What can one do? This is a problem in our societies. Neither the parents
are bothered, nor the educational system contains enough programs to
meet this need. Nevertheless one should find a solution to this problem.

A man, since intending to live with his wife for the rest of his life,
must help educate her, because usually men are older than their wives
and thus more experienced.

A man, through patience, can educate his wife and teach her things that
he knows. He can even ask his mother, sister or aunts about things that
he does not know or can even buy books on the related subjects like
cooking, tailoring, housekeeping, etc.

A man must also encourage his wife to read the books which may prove to
be morally helpful. He must correct her moral shortcomings with good
manners and not by protesting, or else she would react against him.

A man, through patience, can educate his wife according to his own way
of living within the first two years of their marriage. He may not be
successful one hundred percent but undoubtedly would be near
satisfaction.

Such education needs patience, time, and wisdom, but a man should try to
achieve it. This is because a good partner and a good mother for his
children is a blessing for a man.

One of the important points that a Muslim married man should remember is
the fact that his wife is also a Muslim and may be unaware of the
Islamic code of life and laws. She may not even know about having wuzu
(ablution), praying, etc.

As a matter of fact it is a duty of parents to teach their children all
the necessary Islamic matters and precepts, unfortunately; however,
parents are mostly ignorant of this fact and without teaching their
daughters any thing about Islam, marry them off. Thus their
responsibility falls upon the shoulders of the men they marry.

Dear Sir! It is your responsibility to familiarize your wife with
Islamic precepts and to teach her the dos and don'ts of the religion.
Make her learn about Islamic behaviour. If you cannot do this then seek
help from others or arrange for books and articles on Islam and make her
read and practice them. You can even arrange her education and training
through an honest and learned person.

In brief, it is a responsibility of a man to encourage his wife to do
good and to forbid her from committing any wrong. If he conforms with
this responsibility then he would enjoy the company of a well-behaved,
kind, moral, and wise wife.

If he, however, neglects his duty, he would suffer by having an ignorant
wife whose faith is weak and who is not immune from immorality. He would
also be questioned by Allah in the next world regarding his negligence.

Allah states in the Holy Qur’an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا قُوا أَنْفُسَكُمْ وَأَهْلِيكُمْ نَارًا
وَقُودُهَا النَّاسُ وَالْحِجَارَةُ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"O you who believe! Save yourselves and your families from a fire
whose fuel is men and stones..."*** ***(66:6).***

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'When the above Ayah (verse) was revealed,
one of the Muslims was crying and said: 'I am unable to save even myself
from the Hellfire and I am supposed to be responsible to save my family
from Hell as well'! The Prophet (S) stated to this man: 'It would
suffice you only to order them to do those things that you have to do
yourself and to forbid them from those deeds that you yourself should
abstain from'." [^98]

"The Holy Prophet (S) stated: 'Men have been made guardians and
responsible for their families and as such they are responsible for
their dependents'."[^99]

"The Holy Prophet (S) has also reminded women: 'Invite your husbands to
do good before they persuade you to commit wrong deeds'."[^100]

Having A Child
--------------

One of the possible sore points for a couple is having a child. That is
a woman may want to have a child but her husband disagrees or vice
versa. This problem sometimes becomes very serious as a result of which
a couple may resort to divorce.

"Mrs... made a complaint to the court and said: 'I married at the age of
twenty-seven years when my husband had just graduated from the
university. He was a lecturer in one of the universities and I felt that
I was a lucky woman. However, my husband disagrees with having a child.
I do not understand him because we are both healthy and have enough
money to at least bring up two children.

He does not dislike children and treats his nieces and nephews well. I
am thirty years old and naturally I wish I were a mother. He understands
my feelings but says that a child would be a cause of inconvenience in
our lives, and so on'. This woman, while stopping herself from crying,
is confronted with a problem which is so serious that the couple has
decided for a divorce, so that she would remarry while he would have
enough time for his scientific research." [^101]

Love for children and reproduction is a natural desire of human beings
and even of animals. Children are the fruit of life and the best legacy
of mankind.

The life of one who has children would not be ended by his death but
rather would be continued as if with an extended life. A person without
a child or children would feel lonely and forlorn and would feel even
worse in old age.

A house without children is a place of boredom, and would lack warmth
and love. A marriage would always be in danger of breaking down if there
were no children. Thus children are the source of family warmth and
survival.

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s.) stated: 'One's happiness is in having children'."
[^102]

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: 'Give birth to many children because
on the Day of Judgment I will take pride in your numbers over the other
Ummahs (nations)'."[^103]

Love for a child is a natural desire, but some people are deviated from
their natural 'self' and are affected by an illness where they bring up
different excuses, such as the lack of money, for not having children.
However, Allah guarantees that He would give sustenance to all His
creatures.

"Bakr ibn Saleh said: 'I wrote a letter to Hadrat Abu al- Hasan (a.s.)
saying that I had been taking preventive measures against having a child
for five years, because my wife had been reluctant to have one, and that
she was saying, lack of money would make it difficult for us to bring up
a child.' I asked Hadrat Abu al-Hasan his opinion on this matter. He
replied: 'Do not prevent having a child, because the Almighty Allah
would provide him sustenance'." [^104]

Allah would even increase a family's sustenance due to the blessings of
children. There are many people who were in difficulty before having
their children, but found a comfortable life afterwards.

Some people regard children as inconvenient. This is not true and as a
matter of fact children are the best source of enjoyment and amusement
for the parents.

Of course taking care of children is not without difficulty and trouble,
but since it conforms with the law of nature, one can cope with all the
difficulties and as such it is worth taking the trouble involved.

How narrow-minded are those men and women who for the sake of not having
children resort to divorce!

Is it not really surprising that a man, and that too an educated one for
that matter, should disagree with the laws of nature so persistently
that he would even be prepared to divorce his wife?

Some couples do not disagree on having a child but argue over the time
of having one. A woman or a man of this kind would say: "One must be
free at a young age as a child would deprive one from being at liberty
to enjoy oneself. It is better to wait until later to have one or two
children". If both husband and wife are not of the same opinion, then
arguments would start which may end in a divorce.

Let us remember that if one wants children, then this should be achieved
at the earliest possible age. This is because children born from young
parents are in some respects better off than those born from older
parents. Firstly, these children are healthier and stronger. Secondly,
since they are from younger parents, they can live for more time with
their parents.

They can be better educated and brought up. But children from older
parents might become deprived of their parents' guidance and teachings
due to their death or disability. Thirdly, children of younger parents
would reach an age of forming their own family and taking up jobs, while
their parents are still alive. Thus they can be a great deal of help to
their parents when they are old.

In brief, having children at a young age is better than at an older age.
But this is not so important that it should cause rows or divorce. It is
better for the husband or wife to agree mutually and not let it create a
rift in their marriage. Some couples disagree on the number of children
they would like.

"A woman, while holding a baby in her arms, said:, After four years of
marriage I had two daughters with my husband, but since he wanted a son
I became pregnant once more and again gave birth to a girl. I now have
three daughters. My husband works in a bank and his salary does not
suffice our family. He has recently been insisting that I should become
pregnant many times until I give birth to a son.  
 But I am not prepared for this because his earnings are not enough for
us to educate our children the way we want. I have told him many times
that boys and girls are both good. I fear that if I become pregnant
again I shall give birth to another girl. I am sure that he would again
insist on having another child. We cannot agree on this matter and thus
have taken our case to the court'."[^105]

It is right that providing for education and training of many children
is difficult and this is especially true in the case of those whose
earnings are not high.

Therefore, it is better that couples decide on the number of children
according to their moral and financial abilities. They must have
understanding and be able to solve their problems through wisdom and
kindness. It is not correct for either of them to insist on something
illogical.

This problem is not so serious and should not lead a couple to have
quarrels or resort to a divorce. There are many families who either have
many children or are satisfied with only one or two.

Some couples have differences about the sex of their proposed children.
Some couples, men and women prefer having a son and do not take too
kindly to having girls. The birth of a daughter would make a woman feel
guilty and therefore she would keep silence because she was the one who
has given birth. But the man might express his dissatisfaction.

Men are different. Some do not express their dissatisfaction openly and
just show a grim face. They do not particularly attend to their wives
during the post-natal days. They look sad. Some men, however, react
severely to the news of having a daughter. They become angry with their
wives and pick up fault with them. They protest and create a row. Some
men go further and might even beat them up or even divorce them.

"A woman said in the court: 'I got married fifteen months ago and became
pregnant six months later. Recently, when the time for delivery was
near, my husband said to me that I had to give birth to a son. But I
felt that I might have twins or even triplets. A few days ago I gave
birth to twin girls. I was very happy about it. When my husband came to
know about the birth, he was upset and left the room. Later, when I
asked him to take the girls home he shouted at me and blamed me for
delivering twin girls. He asked me to leave him. so I went to my parents
and now I am applying for divorce." [^106]

"Mrs... said to a reporter in the court: 'After twenty-one years of
marriage and having five children. I have to leave a life to which I
have contributed so much to for another woman a woman who is able to
give birth to a boy. I have five beautiful and talented daughters who
are no problem to their father at all. What is my guilt if I cannot give
birth to a boy? My husband is blaming me for it and wants me to allow
him to remarry with another woman'.[^107]

Unfortunately, this quality has remained with some people from the time
of *Jahiliyyah* (age of ignorance) that they doubt the human nature of
the female sex. They arc ashamed of having daughters and feel belittled.
In the age of ignorance, people used to bury their baby daughters alive.
The Holy Qur'an mentions their deeds and states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا بُشِّرَ أَحَدُهُمْ بِالْأُنْثَىٰ ظَلَّ وَجْهُهُ مُسْوَدًّا
وَهُوَ كَظِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***  
 "And when a daughter is announced to one of them, his face becomes
black and he is full of wrath."*** ***( 16:58).***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَتَوَارَىٰ مِنَ الْقَوْمِ مِنْ سُوءِ مَا بُشِّرَ بِهِ ۚ أَيُمْسِكُهُ
عَلَىٰ هُونٍ أَمْ يَدُسُّهُ فِي التُّرَابِ ۗ أَلَا سَاءَ مَا
يَحْكُمُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"He hides himself from the people because of the evil of that which
is announced to him. Shall he keep it with disgrace or bury it (alive)
in the dust? Now surely evil is what they judge"*** ***(16:59).***

But Islam denounces this wrong idea and regards men and women as equal.

"The Prophet (S) of Islam stated: 'The best of your children are your
daughters'."[^108]

"The Prophet (S) of Islam also stated: 'The sign of a lucky woman is
that her first child is a girl'."[^109]

"In addition, the Holy Prophet (S) stated: 'Whoever looks after three
daughters or three sisters, Paradise would become incumbent upon
him'."[^110]

If a girl was inferior, Allah would not have made his (Prophet's (SA))
descendents line continue through Hadrat Zahra (a.s).

Dear Sir: you are claiming to be a civilized and modern human being, so
abstain from having such evil thoughts. What difference does it make if
you have a girl or a boy? They are both your offspring and both can
advance towards perfection. A girl also can become a prominent
personality through your correct care and education.

A girl is in some respects better than a boy.

Firstly, a girl is more sympathetic to their parents. Boys usually do
not benefit their parents when they grow up and become independent.
Girls, if parents do not place any preference on their sons, would be
more loving towards them.

Secondly, a girl requires less expense as compared to a boy, because she
generally spends less time in her parents' house since she gets married
at an earlier age and leaves her parents with only a few items for her
new life. But boys become young men who may stay with their parents for
a long time. The parents would have to pay for his education, find him a
job, may have to pay his expenses during his two years of military
service, wherever necessary, and then marry him off to a young woman,
after which he would need to be provided with a house, carpets,
furniture, and so on. He would even seek financial help from his parents
after his marriage.

Thirdly, if parents do not discriminate between their son and daughter,
and if they treat their son-in-law kindly, the son-in-law would often be
more helpful to them at times of difficulties and is usually more
faithful to them in comparison to their own son.

Anyway, is it a woman's fault if she gives birth to a girl? The man and
wife are both involved in the action of procreation and a man has no
right to blame his wife for this matter. Otherwise it is just as
reasonable for a woman to blame her husband in this regard. However,
neither are to be blamed, as it is only the will of Allah to determine
the sex of a baby.

There are some experts who believe that the sex of a child can be
determined from the fact as to how the mother is fed during the first
two months of pregnancy. So if there are people who prefer a particular
sex of a baby, they should get in contact with the experts and thus
prevent a situation of blaming their wives.

An intellectual man, not only should not upset at having a baby
daughter, but must be very happy too. He should show his happiness,
should express his affection towards his wife and should even give her a
present.

He could celebrate the new birth and even take logical steps in
convincing his wife that a baby daughter is just as good as a baby boy,
should she be upset with having a daughter.

A wise father would not discriminate between his son and daughter, would
not condemn any body for having a daughter, and thus would fight the
ignorant concepts of the 'Age of Ignorance'.

"A man heard the news of having a newly born baby daughter, while he was
in the presence of the Holy Prophet (S) of Islam. He became upset. The
Prophet (S) stated:

'Why are you upset?' He said: 'When I was coming out of my house, my
wife was having labour pain, and now they have brought the news to me
that I have had a daughter'. The Prophet (S) stated: 'The earth has
enough room for her, and the sky provides her with shelter, and Allah
will provide her with sustenance. She is a sweet smelling flower from
which you will get much enjoyment'."[^111]

Pregnancy and Childbirth
------------------------

The duration of pregnancy is a very sensitive and fateful period in a
baby's life. The mother's nutritional habits together with her physical
movements and psychological behavior are vital both to herself and the
life of the baby in her womb.

The baby's health or illness, strength or weakness, ugliness and beauty,
and its good or bad behavior and a part of intellect and prudence, are
established in the mother's womb. One of the experts writes: "The baby's
parents are able to either grow in a fortress of health or in the ruins
of sickness. It is obvious that the latter is not a suitable place in
which the eternal soul or a human being should live. This is the reason
that-parents are believed to shoulder the greatest responsibility
compared to the whole of creation'."[^112]

Therefore, the period of pregnancy cannot be regarded or be treated as
an ordinary one. Once the pregnancy starts, the parents are given a
great responsibility.

Parents may unwittingly create a variety of difficulties, many of which
may be extremely difficult to remedy, because of slight carelessness
when performing their duties.

Below are a few points that should be noted:

(a) Food: A foetus in its mother's womb feeds and grows on the
nourishment in her blood. Therefore, the mother's food should be
nutritive enough to provide the elements needed by the baby as well as
for the welfare of the mother. Therefore any lack of vitamins, proteins,
fat, sugar or carbohydrates in the mother's intake of food would inflict
harm on the baby's health.

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'The food of a foetus, is provided by the
nourishment that the mother receives'." [^113]

A major problem which confronts most of the pregnant women is that
during either the whole or the majority of the pregnancy period, they
lack a well-balanced appetite for food, as they develop craving for
certain foods while being repulsed by others. Because they generally eat
less, during this period, they should make sure that their food is not
stodgy and at the same time nutritious enough to provide the essentials
for the baby.

Following up a food program in this phase of pregnancy is extremely
difficult, particularly for those of low income and those who are
unaware of the nutritional values of different foods.

A great responsibility rests with the father who should do his utmost to
provide essential foods for his wife. Carelessness on the part of the
father would be harmful to the growing baby, for which he would be held
responsible in both this world and in the world Hereafter.

(b) Mental State: A mother, in her pregnancy, needs serenity and should
experience a sense of love towards life. This is beneficial to both the
mother and her baby. The father, being responsible for providing his
wife with a peaceful and lively atmosphere, should try even harder
during the period of her pregnancy. The husband, through kindness and
love, should behave in such a manner that his wife can feel proud and
happy about being pregnant; she should feel proud that another life
depends on her and that she is responsible for its welfare.

(c) Refrain from Jerky Movements: A pregnant woman should avoid
strenuous activities and should rest a great deal. The lifting of heavy
objects or fast body movements could result in irreparable harm to her,
the baby or both. Pregnant women should refrain from doing any heavy
work, and their husbands should volunteer to carry out such activities.

(d) The Fear of Labour: Delivering a baby is not always an easy event.
Labour pains can sometimes be severe. Pregnant women often worry about
the pain involved and the possible risks associated with child birth,
followed by the period of convalescence after giving birth. Although
women should be able to cope with pregnancy, labour and feeding their
babies, men should also share in the responsibility of bringing up their
children.

Although an embryo is conceived in women's womb, there is also the
father of the baby who has played an important role in its conception.
So men should make certain for their wives' comfort during child birth
and be handy if anything should be urgently required.

It is both an Islamic and a human duty of husbands to do their utmost
for their pregnant wives to provide medical care and facilities for an
easy delivery. A man should try to be with his wife after the birth of
their child; but if unable to do so, he should phone her or send a
relative to stay with her. He should try to bring her back home himself
and help her with the housework so that she can get sufficient rest to
regain her lost energy. A man, who treats his wife well, will be
rewarded by Allah.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: 'The best of men is one who treats his
wife well and I, amongst you, am the best man with regard to the good
treatment of my wife'." [^114]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'May Allah bless a man who creates a good
relationship with his wife, because Allah has appointed man to be the
guardian of his wife'." [^115]

A man, who treats his wife well, will make the atmosphere of his family
life warmer and will strengthen its foundations.

His wife, in turn, would never forget her husband's love and affection.
As a result the bonds of matrimony become stronger.

Assistance in Bringing up Children
----------------------------------

A child is the fruit of a marriage. Both man and woman have played a
part in his creation and must share in all the difficulties and
happiness involved. Bringing up a child is a duty for both parents and
not only the mother. Although mothers most often take care of their
children and attend to their feeding, cleanliness, etc, the fathers
should not take their efforts granted. It is not proper for a man to
assume that looking after children is a duty for women only and that men
have no responsibilities in this matter. It is not fair that a father
should leave his wife with their crying baby and go to rest in a
separate room.

Dear brother! Your child is your responsibility too. Do you think it is
fair to leave your wife with a crying baby while you rest in a separate
room? Is this the proper way of doing things in your house? Just as you
work hard outside the house, your wife works hard inside it, and she
needs her sleep just as much as you do yours. She, too, does not enjoy
from a screaming baby but she perseveres.

My brother! Humanity as well as Islam demands you to help your wife in
bringing up your child. You should either help each other simultaneously
or take it in turns.

If your wife experiences a sleepless night and falls asleep after the
morning prayer, then you should not expect her to prepare your breakfast
like on other days. In fact you should prepare your own and even leave
hers ready and waiting for her when she wakes up.

Your wife is not duty-bound to look after your child all the time that
you are out of the house or on a trip. In brief, you should assist your
wife and share in looking after the child. In this way your family life
would be strengthened.

Finally women should also remember that their husbands work hard to earn
their living and should not expect them to offer assistance beyond their
capacity. Women should not expect their tired, work-weary husbands to
begin looking after the children as soon as they return home from work.

The Major Obstacle in Settling down Disagreements
-------------------------------------------------

The biggest obstacle in solving family rows are self- centeredness and
self-conceit. Unfortunately, many people are affected by these
characteristics. Such people lack a certain intelligence whereby they
only acknowledge their own virtues while dismissing those of others and
never own their failures. It is especially disastrous when this disorder
of character is accomplished by another. namely picking up faults with
others. Sometimes both husband and wife suffer with the latter in which
case they may have a row day and night. Each criticizes the other while
tracing themselves totally from all faults.

Sometimes if only one side suffers from this defect of fault-finding,
they would pick up fault with the other and by so doing liberate
themselves completely from all criticisms.

Where both husband and wife suffer with this disorder, it is
particularly difficult to reconcile them, because they would not he
prepared to take anyone's advice. When each no listens to the radio or
watches a program on television pertaining to family affairs, they would
notice a particular flow of character which existed in their partner and
would throw it in their faces. But any talked about fault pertaining to
themselves would evade their attention. They would buy a book on family
morals and hand it over to their partner, without feeling any need for
themselves to read it.

Selfishness can become so sever that the affected person may not even be
aware of it. In such a situation, the relationship between the couple
becomes strained and even impossible to continue. Consequently, either
life would go on in the form of rows, distress and unhappiness, or may
even lead to a divorce.

It is, therefore, recommended to all couples to abstain from selfishness
and self-conceit. A couple, who are troubled with this situation, should
find time to sit together and like two honest judges talk about their
problem(s). They should listen to each other without prejudice. Each one
should take a note of his own shortcomings without overlooking even the
smallest issue, and with the intention of correcting them. Then they
should both decide to correct themselves; but only if they feel the
necessity for deep understanding and where they both long to revive
their love and tranquility which once existed between them.

However, in the case of an inability to achieve reconciliation, they
should refer their problem(s) to an experienced, faithful, aware,
trustworthy, and benevolent person. If such a person is a friend or a
relative, it may be to their advantage because they can tell them
everything and await their verdict. They should listen to him and take
note of his advice given and intend to put it into practice.

Of course being faithful to the recommendations of a judge is not easy,
but a person, who is concerned about his family and its stability,
peace, and survival, should persevere and later enjoy its valuable
results.

Parents of such couples, if aware of their children's family problem(s),
should advise them to call on an experienced, faithful, and good
intentioned judge. Parents should not take sides with either husband or
wife. In this way, with the help of Allah their problems would be
resolved.

Allah states in the Holy Qur'an:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِنْ خِفْتُمْ شِقَاقَ بَيْنِهِمَا فَابْعَثُوا حَكَمًا مِنْ أَهْلِهِ
وَحَكَمًا مِنْ أَهْلِهَا إِنْ يُرِيدَا إِصْلَاحًا يُوَفِّقِ اللَّهُ
بَيْنَهُمَا ۗ إِنَّ اللَّهَ كَانَ عَلِيمًا خَبِيرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***"And if you fear a breach between the two, then appoint a judge from
his people and a judge from her people; if they both desire agreement,
Allah will effect harmony between them; surely Allah is Knowing,
Aware."*** ***(4:35)***

Divorce
-------

Although divorce is a lawful act, it is the most detested and worst of
all deeds.

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) stated: 'Get married but do not divorce, because a
divorce would tremble the Arsh (empyrean) of Allah'." [^116]

"Imam as-Sadiq (a.s) also stated: 'Allah likes the house which is
inhabited in the wake of marriage and dislikes the house which is
abandoned in the wake of divorce. There is nothing more detestable to
Allah than a divorce'." [^117]

Marriage is not like buying a pair of shoes and socks that whenever not
liked one disposes the shoes and buys another pair of shoes. Marriage is
a spiritual covenant that two people make in order to stay together like
friends, sympathizers and lovers till their death. It is based on these
great hopes that a young girl leaves her parents and joins her husband.

A man makes efforts and works hard on the basis of such a divine
covenant. He pays for his wedding and buys the necessary goods for his
new life and works for his family comfort.

Marriage is not a lustful affair and a couple cannot destroy it for
trivial excuses. Although divorce is lawful, it is seriously detested
and people are recommended to avoid it as much as possible.

Unfortunately, this very detestable act has become so common in Islamic
countries and the foundations of family units have become so shaky that
there is generally little faith in marriage any more.

Divorce is permitted but only in very exceptional and compelling
circumstances.

"The Prophet of Allah (S) stated: *Jibrail*(Gabriel) advised me about
women so much that I thought one should not divorce them except if they
commit adultery'."[^118]

Most cases of divorce are not based upon good reasons, but are on
immature excuses. That is. the reasons for most cases of divorce are
trivial and are not worth effecting the separation of a couple. The
husband or wife, because of selfishness, may exaggerate a trivial
problem and decide that their married life must be ended.

"Mrs..., twenty-four years old, asked her husband to invite her parents
to an expensive dinner. Since he did not accept her demand, she applied
for a divorce'." [^119]

"A man divorced his wife on the grounds that she was only giving birth
to girls. The couple had five daughters." [^120]

"A woman applied for a divorce, because her husband believes in
mysticism and did not show much interest in life." [^121]

"A man applied for a divorce because he wanted to get married to a
wealthy woman." [^122]

"A woman applied for a divorce because her husband used to hide his
money in his sleeves."[^123]  
 "A man has divorced his wife because he claims that she is a bad-omen.
Since their marriage his father had died and his uncle had become
bankrupt."[^124]

A couple who is not wise and prudent, might fall into the traps of such
petty matters and apply for a divorce.

A couple, who seeks separations, must not rush for it. They are
recommended to consider carefully about the after-effects and their
future in detail and then decide. They must specifically ponder over two
points:

First Point: A couple, who seeks divorce, generally would like to
re-marry. But they should remember that after the divorce, the persons
known as divorcees would not have a good record with regard to marriage.
People think of them as selfish and unfaithful.

Upon finding out a man's previous marriage and divorce, a woman might
doubt his faithfulness or his character.

A divorced woman rarely gets a chance to re-marry. Because men generally
do not show much interest in marrying a divorced woman and doubt about
her faithfulness. Therefore a divorcee would possibly have to stay alone
for the rest of his or her life and may have to suffer from loneliness
too.

Being lonely is a very difficult situation, and some lonely people
prefer death rather than such an unbearable life.

"A twenty-two year old woman who was divorced, attempted to commit
suicide on the night of her sister's wedding. She had one child." [^125]

Even if a man is successful in re-marrying, it is not at all obvious
that his new life would be any better than his first wife. She may even
be worse. Such men usually prefer to divorce their second wife and
re-marry the initial one. But usually it is too late for such a move.

"An eighty-year old man said in the court: 'I had a good life when I
married my first wife about sixty years ago. But after a while she
started mistreating, so I divorced her. I married a few women after
that, but felt that my first wife was the most faithful among them. I
found her and asked her to re-marry me. She, who was also tired of
loneliness, agreed, and we now want to marry again'."[^126]

"A man divorced his second wife because she could not take care of the
two children that he had from his first marriage. He than remarried his
first wife whom he had divorced five years ago." [^127]

Second Point: A couple, which seeks separation. Must also think of their
children. Children's comfort lies in a family where their both the
parents live together and take care of them jointly.

Upon the breaking down of the family life. Children become extremely
upset. If only their father looks after them, they would be deprived of
motherly love. They would not enjoy life with step-mother either.
Step-mothers, not only are unable to act as their genuine mothers but
may regard their step-children as a burden. Some step-mothers maltreat
their step-children and make them upset deliberately and their fathers
may have to remain silent.

"A fourteen-year old bride who had attempted to commit suicide said in
the hospital. 'My parents separated when I was one-year old. My father
remarried after one and half years and we are now living together. My
step-mother used to beat me up and even burnt me with a hot metal rod on
a few occasions. My father, even though a well-off man, prevented me
from studying and deprived me from learning. About a month ago my father
forced me to marry a forty-five year old man'." [^128]

"A thirteen-year old girl hung herself. This girl lived with her two
brothers. One of the brothers said: 'My parents separated about three
years ago. My mother re-married another man, and my father died two
months ago. It was 6:30 pm yesterday that I came home and found my
sister who had hung herself."[^129]

Also, if the mother assumes the responsibility of her children, then
they would be deprived of having a real father who would care for them.
A step-father is often the cause of much unhappiness to his
step-children.

"A woman helped her second husband to tie his eight- year old step-son
to a bed. They then closed the door and went out for a walk. When they
returned home, they found their child had been burnt to death as a
result of the fire in the house."[^130]

Divorce destroys a family unit and leaves the children wandering and
shelter less. Children often suffer as the result of their parent's
selfishness.

"Four children aged twelve, nine, six and four years went to a police
station. The eldest son said: 'Our parents separated from each other a
while ago. They had constant arguments and used to have a row everyday
and night. Now that they are divorced, neither are prepared to take the
responsibility of caring for us'."[^131]

Children, who are deprived of having a suitable guardian and a family
atmosphere, often go astray. The lack of proper education and a
sympathetic person in their lives, makes them suffer from complexes of
interiority. They may even commit crimes of various degrees, during
their childhood or adulthood.

One can realize this fact by just reading the events in the daily
newspapers.

"In a research made at the Center for Youth Rehabilitation, it is
evident that out of one hundred and sixteen criminal youths of this
center, eighty people asserted that their step-mothers' treatment with
them was the cause of their crimes'."[^132]

Dear madam/sir! For the sake of Allah and for the sake of your innocent
children, be forgiving towards each other. Do not exaggerate trivial
problems and do not persist in your arguments. Do not pick up faults
with each other. Think of your future as well as that of your children.

Remember! Your children rely on you and look up to you for their
happiness. Have mercy upon them and do not destroy their lives.

If you ignore their internal desires and if you break their little
hearts, you would not be able to escape the effects of their
unhappiness. You would, therefore, be unable to have a comfortable life
together.

[^1]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 550.

[^2]: Ittela'at, 15th Azar, 1350 Solar Hijri.

[^3]: Ibid, 6th Bahman, 1350 Solar Hijri.

[^4]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 227.

[^5]: Ibid, p 228.

[^6]: Ibid, p 236

[^7]: Shafi, vol 2, p 138.

[^8]: Ittela'at, 6th Bahman, 1348 Solar Hijri

[^9]: Ibid, 8th Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^10]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 224.

[^11]: Ibid, vol 74, p 303.

[^12]: Mawa iz al-Adadiyyah, p 151

[^13]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 226.

[^14]: Shafi, vol 1, p 166.

[^15]: Ibid

[^16]: Ibid, p 176.

[^17]: Mahajjat al-Bayda, vol 2, p 54

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 71, p 389.

[^19]: Ibid, p 385.

[^20]: Daghtat al-Qabr: 'Compression in the grave' which is a kind of
torment for the deceased person against his sins.

[^21]: Ibid, vol 73, p 298

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 72, p 326

[^23]: Ibid, p196.

[^24]: Majm'a al-Zawaid, vol 3, p 331.

[^25]: Ittela'at, 16th Urdibahisht, 1351 Solar Hijri

[^26]: Shafi, vol 1, p 206

[^27]: Ittela'at, 25th Aban, 1348 Solar Hijri

[^28]: Ibid, 14th Murdad, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^29]: Ibid, 13th Urdibahisht, 1349 Solar Hijri.

[^30]: Ibid, 3rd Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri.

[^31]: Kayhan, 25th Farvardin, 1352 Solar Hijri.

[^32]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 223.

[^33]: Ibid, vol 74, p 5.

[^34]: Shafi, vol 2. p 139

[^35]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 75, p 272

[^36]: Ittela'at, Weekly. no 1646

[^37]: Kayhan, 15th Farvardin, 1352 Solar Hijri.

[^38]: Ittela'at, 13th Urdibahisht, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^39]: Kayhan, 4th Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^40]: Ittela'at, 14th Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri.

[^41]: Ibid, 12th Urdibahisht, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^42]: Ibid, Weekly, no 1646.

[^43]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 74, p 168.

[^44]: Ibid.

[^45]: Ibid, p 400

[^46]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 550

[^47]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 227

[^48]: Ibid, p 228.

[^49]: Wasa.il al-Shi'ah, vol 15, p 251

[^50]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 249.

[^51]: Ittela'at, 14th Farvardin, 1351 Solar Hijri

[^52]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 550.

[^53]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 249

[^54]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 551.

[^55]: Wasa.il al-Shi'ah, vol 14, p 119.

[^56]: Ibid, p 154

[^57]: Bihar al-Anw'ar, vol 103, p 248.

[^58]: Ibid, vol 75, p 194.

[^59]: Ibid, vol 103, p 252.

[^60]: Ibid, vol 74, p 187.

[^61]: Wasa'il al-Shiah, vol 14, p III

[^62]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 104, p 39

[^63]: Ittela'at, 23rd Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri.

[^64]: Wasa'il al-Shiah, vo114, p 109

[^65]: Ittela'at, 26th Bahman, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^66]: Ibid, 27th Bahman, 1348 Solar Hijri

[^67]: Wasa'il al-Shiah, vol 14, p 138

[^68]: . Ibid, p 139

[^69]: "Wa Nami Danand Chara.. ("And They Do Not Know, Why?"). p 140.

[^70]: Shafi, vol 1 p 197.

[^71]: Ibid

[^72]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 62, p 129

[^73]: Shafi, vol l, p 208

[^74]: Ibid

[^75]: Ibid, p 210.

[^76]: Ibid, p 212

[^77]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 254

[^78]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 559

[^79]: Wasa'il al-Shiah, vol 14, p 183

[^80]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 76, p 102.

[^81]: Ittela'at, 18th Urdibahisht, 1351 Solar Hijri.

[^82]: Wasa'il al-Shiah, vol 14. p 122

[^83]: Ibid, vol 2, p 643

[^84]: Wasa'il al-Shiah, vol 15, p 258.

[^85]: Ibid, p 261.

[^86]: Ibid

[^87]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 643

[^88]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol l04, p 69

[^89]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol 15, p 249

[^90]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 14, p 73.

[^91]: Bihar al-Anwar, vo116, p 227.

[^92]: Ibid, p 230.

[^93]: Ittela'at, 11th Tir, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^94]: "Wa Nami Danand Chara" (..And They Do Not Know, Why?") p, 138

[^95]: Ittela'at, 25th Dey, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^96]: Ibid, 26th Shahrivar, 1348 Solar Hijri

[^97]: Ibid, 18th Urdibahisht, 1351 Solar Hijri

[^98]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol 11, p 417

[^99]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 550.

[^100]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 103, p 227

[^101]: Ittela'at, 28th Bahman, 1350 Solar Hijri.

[^102]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol 15, p 97.

[^103]: Ibid, p 96.

[^104]: Ibid, p 99.

[^105]: Ittela'at, 2nd Murdad, 1351 Solar Hijri.

[^106]: Ibid, 14th Tir, 1349 Solar Hijri.

[^107]: Ibid, 16th Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri.

[^108]: Mustadrak, vol 2, p 615

[^109]: Ibid, p 614.

[^110]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol 15, p l00

[^111]: Ibid, p 101

[^112]: Raz-e-Afrinish, p 108

[^113]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol 60, p 342

[^114]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vo114, p 122

[^115]: Ibid

[^116]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p 225

[^117]: Wasa'il al-Shi'ah, vol 15, p 267

[^118]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p 248.

[^119]: Ittela'at, 12th Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri.

[^120]: Ibid, 16th Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^121]: Ibid

[^122]: Ibid, 8th Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^123]: Ibid, 16th Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^124]: Ibid, 25th Dey, 1350 Solar Hijri

[^125]: Ibid, 17th Esfand, 1348. Solar Hijri.

[^126]: Ibid, 21st Bahman, 1348 Solar Hijri.

[^127]: Ibid, 8th Dey, 1348, Solar Hijri

[^128]: Kayhan, 29th Aban, 1348 Solar Hijri

[^129]: Ittela'at, 4th Bahman, 1351 Solar Hijri

[^130]: Ibid, 18th Bahman, 1348 Solar Hijri.

[^131]: Ibid, 7th Khurdad, 1349 Solar Hijri

[^132]: Ibid, 22nd Esfand, 1350 Solar Hijri


