15 Avoiding a Hasty Action
==========================

The traditions differentiate between hastening (Isti'jal) and praying
to Allah to hasten the universal government. The former is prohibited
while the latter is commanded. In addition, in a number of verses in the
Quran, Allah, the glorious, advices against al-Isti'jal. For instance:

Man is a creature of haste. I shall soon show you My signs. So hasten
not! (21:37)

In the following tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) quotes anther verse of
the Quran in this regard. Abd al-Rahman Ibn Kathir narrated:

On the commentary of verse, "The command of Allah came. Therefore, do
not hasten it," (16:1) Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) said, "It is our
command/kingdom (that shall arrive).

Allah has commanded that you do not hasten it until Allah supports him
(i.e., al-Qa'im (PBUH)) by three: The groups of angles, the believers,
and fright. His emergence shall be like the emergence of the Apostle of
Allah (PBUH&HF), and this is in His saying, the Glorious, 'Just as your
Lord ordered you out of your house in truth.' (8:5)"[^1]

Moreover, Abdurrahman Ibn Kathir narrated:

I was with Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) when Mihzam al-Asadi came to him and
asked him, "May I be sacrificed for you! When will be the time of this
kingdom for which you wait? It has become too long."

He (PBUH) said, "O Mihzam! Verily those who appoint time are liars,
those who hasten (al-Musta'jilun) shall perish, and those who are
submissive (to Allah's orders and decrees) shall be saved."[^2]

[^1] al-Ghaiba, al-Nu'mani, p. 198, Hadith 9, Ta'wil al-Ayat al-Dhahira,
p. 256 from al-Mufid; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 139, Hadith 46.

[^2]al-Ghaiba, al-Tusi, p. 426, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 103, Hadith
7; al-Ghaiba, al-Nu'mani, p. 294, Hadith 11 (similar narration);
al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 368, Hadith 2.

Ibrahim Ibn Mihzam narrated from his father who said:

We mentioned such and such kings in the presence of Imam al-Sadiq
(PBUH). He (PBUH) said, "Indeed, people have perished due to their haste
(Isti'jal) for this kingdom. Verily, Allah does not hasten in reaction
to the hasty action of the servants. For this kingdom there is a final
end that will reach it."[^1]

In another sermon in Nahj al-Balagha, Imam Ali (PBUH) said:

"Be steady on earth, be patient in afflictions, do not move your hands
and swords after the liking of your tongues, and do not make haste
(Isti'jal) in what Allah has not expedited for you.

Thus, any one of you who dies in his bed while he recognizes the rights
of Allah and the rights of His Apostle (PBUH&HF) and his Ahl al-Bait
(PBUT) has died a martyr.

His reward is on Allah, and he deserves the reward of what good acts he
has intended to do, since his intention has taken the place of drawing
his sword. Certainly, for everything there is a period and an appointed
time."[^2]

Without any doubt, hurrying a matter that pertains to Allah at a time
that Allah did not consider proper will not achieve the divinely
intended goals. Hurrying requires the violation of Allah's commandments,
and a person who hurries has to commit and justify many unlawful acts to
reach his aims at an improper time.

Moreover, the achievement of a hasty action lacks stability and does
not last long, though it may result in many long-term negative side
effects that delay the relief.

Any seeming achievement and temporal success in a hasty process would
only serve to misguide people from the divine goals and would misdirect
people toward other alternatives. On the other hand, any apparent
failure in a hasty plan may bring despair, may destroy the state of
waiting and expectation as well as hope for relief, all of which are
against Allah's command. Reflecting on the fate [^1] al-Kafi, vol. 1, p.
369, Hadith 7; al-Ghaiba, al-Nu'mani, p. 296, Hadith 15; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 118, Hadith 46.

[^2]Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon 189/190.

of those who hastened throughout the history, and contemplating the
reverse outcomes of their deeds are, indeed, good lessons for the
believers. In a very famous and recommended supplication, which has been
narrated from the first special deputy of Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH), both
types of action (hastening vs. praying that Allah may hasten) has been
mentioned with clear distinction:

... O Allah! Make me firm on the obedience of the master of Your
command whom You have concealed from Your creation and waits for Your
command.

You know-without being taught-the time that is right for the kingdom of
Your master and for giving him permission to manifest his command and to
disclose his secret.

Thus, grant me patience on it so that I do not like to hasten what You
have postponed, nor to delay what You have hastened, nor to disclose
what You have concealed, nor to discuss what You have kept secret, nor
to argue with You in Your planning, and (so that) I do not say why the
master of the affairs does not appear while the earth has been filled
out with tyranny, and until I relinquish all my affairs to You.

O Allah! I ask You to show me the master of the affairs while has
appeared and manifested his command... O Allah!

Hasten his relief..."[^1]...

[^1]Mafatih al-Jinan, about the end of the book, under Du'aa in the
absence of the Imam (PBUH); Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 187, Hadith
18.

Although a believer longs for the kingdom of justice of Imam al-Mahdi
(PBUH) and earnestly beseeches Allah to hasten the relief of the Imam
(PBUH), he is satisfied with Allah's decree if He decides to postpone
the time of reappearance.

While his request is in conformity with what Allah instructed him to
ask, he submits to what Allah chooses for him according to His wisdom,
relinquishes all the affairs to Him, and does not become disappointed
from Allah's mercy if the period of the occultation is prolonged.


