4 Continual Expectation Due To the Unpredictability of the Time of Reappearance
===============================================================================

The Shia traditionists narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) said to his companions, "Be more hopeful on the
things that you consider far-fetched than that which you presume very
likely. Verily, Musa Ibn Imran (PBUH) went to bring fire (to provide
heat and light) for his family and when he came back to them he was an
apostle, and this way, Allah rectified the matter of His servant and His
Prophet, Musa (PBUH), within a night.

In the same way, Allah shall treat al-Qa'im, the twelfth of the Imams
(PBUT). He shall rectify his matter in one night and shall take him from
complication and concealment to the light of relief and
reappearance."[^1]

There are many other Shi'i transmitted traditions, which convey the
similarity of the sudden advents of some ancient prophets (PBUT) with
that of Imam al- Mahdi (PBUH).[^2]

The following tradition also shows that we should expect the
reappearance of al-Qa'im at every moment and make ourselves ready for
his arrival because his coming is very unpredictable. It is narrated:

Imam Ja'far Ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (PBUH) said, "Anticipate the rule of
your master in every day and night of your (lifetime), for indeed Allah
(says about Himself) 'Every day He brings in a (new) situation.'
(55:29)"[^3]

The notion of continual awaiting and hoping to see the golden days of
the universe at any moment has many positive benefits in our lives. It
constantly reminds us the absolute power of Allah. The faithful
servants, who believe Allah has power to do all things, should not
consider any goodness far-fetched from Him. Moreover, so long as we
expect the Imam (PBUH), we are hopeful [^1]Kamal al-Din, p. 151; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 13, p. 42.
[^2]See for instance:; Kamal al-Din, p. 316, Hadith 1; p. 329, Hadith
12; p. 377, Hadith 1; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 132, Hadith 2; p. 156,
Hadith 1; p. 218, Hadith 8.

[^3]Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 95, p. 159, Hadith 4.

for a better future and will not be disappointed by the difficulties
and the problems of our present life no matter how severe they are. In
addition, when we realize that Allah may advance the advent of al-Qa'im
(PBUH) to a very near future, we do our best to prepare our spiritual
state to receive him. In Part II of this work, some divine prescriptions
that make us prepared for receiving al-Qa'im (PBUH) will be presented.

As we have seen, the existence of al-Badaa plays a central role in our
way of expectation of al-Qa'im (PBUH). Due to the possibility of Badaa,
the signs foretold are subject to change. According to the traditions,
waiting for the Imam (PBUH) at any moment is the best deed and the most
significant act.

If the signs were unchangeable or could not be advanced, there would be
no point to wait all the time and in every moment. Having faith in
alteration of the characteristics and the time of the events by Allah,
everyone would keep himself ready every morning, every evening, and all
the time in between to receive the Imam (PBUH).

A person who has no faith in the alteration of signs and thinks of the
reappearance of the Imam (PBUH) in terms of the sighting of all the
signs is actually waiting primarily for those signs and then for the
Imam (PBUH).

Such an individual may deny Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) if he were to reappear
without some of the signs being fulfilled. In contrast, the traditions
give prime importance to the promise of the reappearance of the Imam
(PBUH) and consider the appearance of the signs as a less important
issue. Abu Ubaida al- Hadhaa narrated:

I asked Imam al-Baqir (PBUH) about this matter (i.e., the reappearance
of al-Mahdi (PBUH)). He (PBUH) replied, "Because you expect that it
comes to you in a (certain) way, do not deny it (if it happens in
another way)."[^1]

It is now clear that we should wait for the reappearance of Imam (PBUH)
and not for the signs, and further, should not consider the Imam's
reappearance before witnessing all the foretold signs impossible. It is
only in this situation that imploring Allah to hasten the reappearance
of Imam (PBUH) is meaningful. Allah is free to shower His blessings any
time He wants.

He has created a leader for this task long ago and has kept him on call
in concealment. He can order the reappearance of the Imam (PBUH) even
before the sighting of the signs, can change, or miraculously expedite
the occurrence of the signs for his early reappearance. Indeed, much
more than any of His followers, the Imam (PBUH) himself is eagerly
waiting for receiving Allah's permission at any moment.

[^1]Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 268, Hadith 157.


**5 The significance and the purpose of specifying the signs**

Specifying the signs before the time of reappearance has its own
advantages and benefits both before and after the occurrence of the
signs. As we mentioned, some of the foretold events are related to the
hardship of people before the reappearance of the Imam (PBUH) and warn
people about the situations that they may face if disappearance is
prolonged.

These prophecies urge the believers to turn to Allah and supplicate to
Him with the hope that He may alleviate or cancel such hard situations
and accommodate an easy and early relief. Thus, such warnings are, by
themselves, constructive if people react to them by turning to Allah
before the actual manifestation of the signs.

On the other hand, if a sign does finally occur, it strengthens one's
faith in the reappearance of Imam (PBUH) and increases his anticipation.
Once a sign occurs, a believer realizes that it was among the signs
foretold, and thus, his faith and confidence will increase, and he
trusts that the time of reappearance is closer than ever.

Thus, the foretold events should not be ignored or considered as
insignificant before and after their occurrence.

Nevertheless, the signs were not given for the purpose of predicting
the time of reappearance or for urging people to search the scientific
data to estimate the time of the occurrence of the sign itself. Rather,
they serve as reminders for people only after they occur miraculously.
The signs were described in order to keep us alert, aware, and mindful
of Allah, but not to enable us to make any kind of prediction.

Keeping in mind the issue of al-Badaa, all the mentioned signs before
his arrival, even if they finally occur, they may happen miraculously in
an unpredictable manner.

As we have seen in a tradition quoted earlier, some of the signs such
as an eclipse of the moon at the end of the month can only happen
miraculously. Even for some other signs that can occur naturally and can
be predicted by the available physical information; they may still occur
supernaturally and thus their predicted schedules may be proven wrong.

The most interesting observation is that, one of the mentioned signs at
the end of the time is the rising of the sun from the west [^1], which
shows that Allah will miraculously change the direction of the heavenly
bodies, and thus, all astronomical data will change according to the new
movements.

This means that all timely predictions based on the available
astronomical data may be proven false due to this single miracle of
Allah. Moreover, this makes possible many other events that are
considered physical impossibility including the double eclipse mentioned
earlier. Similar to the advent of the Imam (PBUH), the signs before his
advent are Allah's miracles, all of which remind us the

[^1]See for instance, Tafsir, al-Ayyashi, under commentary of chapter
six, verse 158; Tafsir, Ali Ibn Ibrahim al- Qummi, vol. 1, p. 198, under
commentary of chapter six, verse 37; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 6, p. 312,
Hadith 13 & 16, vol. 9, p. 204, Hadith 66.

power of Allah and His sovereignty. Their miraculous nature assures
that they are signs from Allah, not from people.

Hence, instead of worrying about the time of the occurrence of the
unpredictable signs before the reappearance of Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH), one
should care about keeping faith in the Imam (PBUH) and following his
customs. Only in that way, will one be safe from the afflictions of the
end of time no matter how the signs finally appear.

If some signs appear he will gain more hope and energy that the
appointed time is fast approaching, and if he did not observe the signs,
he will still remain hopeful to receive the Imam (PBUH) because he
believes that Allah is never restricted by His creation including His
previous will and has power to do all things at any moment.


