6 Will There Be Any Confusion in Identifying Al-qa'im (pbuh)?
=============================================================

The occurrence of the signs indicates that the reappearance of al-Qa'im
is about to take place. However, if Allah wants to respond to people's
supplication for an early relief,

He may expedite, change or cancel some of the decreed events. The
question that may arise here is that, will there be any confusion among
people in recognizing Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH)-once he starts his
mission-due to the changes in some of the signs? Moreover, if there
would be no confusion that he is the promised Mahdi (PBUH), why would
then some people oppose him?

According to the traditions, once Allah calls Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) to
reappear, all people around the world, believers and disbelievers
likewise, will become aware of him immediately and without any shadow of
doubt.

In the following tradition, it is mentioned that his reappearance will
be as clear as sunshine and will be identified by all people. Narrated
Jabir Ibn Yazid:

Imam al-Baqir (PBUH) said, "Be calm so long as the heavens and the
earth are calm... Verily your matter (i.e., the movement of the Imam
(PBUH)) shall not take place secretly as it shall be a sign from Allah,
not from people.

Be hold! It shall be brighter than sunshine so much so that it shall
not remain hidden from the righteous and the evildoer (likewise). Do you
know morning/dawn? It shall be like the dawn without anything hidden in
it."[^1]

According to another tradition, Imam al-Ridha (PBUH) explained the
sentence, 'Be calm so long as the heaven and the earth are calm' as 'Be
calm so long as the

[^1]al-Ghaiba, al-Nu'mani, p. 200, Hadith 17; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52,
p. 139, Hadith 49.

heaven is calm from the call (of Gabriel) and the earth is calm from
sinking the army (of al-Sufyani).'[^1] These two signs are among the five
definite signs that we discussed earlier.

We do not know of anything brighter than sunshine, which could be
sensed by our faculties. The reappearance Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) will be
clearer than that. The above tradition proves that Allah has guaranteed
He will not let anyone remain ignorant of the reappearance of Imam
al-Mahdi (PBUH).

It also warns the believers against joining the hidden agenda of those
who pretend to be the Mahdi, by stating that Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) will
starts his mission openly, and will be immediately identified by all
people.

However, according to the next tradition, once the Imam (PBUH)
reappears, no one would be able to believe in him if he denied him,
disbelieved his existence, his rights, or his Sunna before the time of
his reappearance; or, it is better say, believing in him at that time
will be of no use for a disbeliever.

It is just like believing in Allah on the Day of Judgment, which will
be of no benefit for the disbelievers. Those who entertain doubt about
his existence during the time of occultation (after truth has reached
them through the traditions) will have no way to escape from his sword
once they meet him (PBUH). Allah states in the Quran:

... On the day that certain signs of your Lord do come, no one would
benefit from believing in (that sign) if he did not believe (in that)
before, or such belief is no good for him. Say, "Wait! We too are
waiting." (6:158)

Ibn Ri'aab narrated that, on the commentary of the above verse, Imam
Ja'far al- Sadiq (PBUH) said:

"The 'Signs' are the Imams (PBUT), and the 'expected sign' is al-Qa'im
(PBUH). On that day, no one would benefit from believing in (that sign)
if he did not believe in him before his rising by sword even if such a
person believed in (the Imamate of) his ancestors, peace be upon
them."[^2]

In some other traditions, rising of the sun from the west has been
mentioned as a sign after which having faith will not be helpful for the
disbelievers.[^3] [^1]al-Amali, al-Tusi, p. 412, Hadith 926; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 189, Hadith 17.

[^2] Kamal al-Din, p. 336, Hadith 8; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 51,
Hadith 25; vol. 52, p. 149, Hadith 76 (a similar narration from Abu
Basir).

[^3]Tafsir, al-Ayyashi, vol. 1, p. 384; Tafsir, Ali Ibn Ibrahim
al-Qummi, vol. 1, p. 221; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 6, p. 34, Hadith 46.

As we have shown, there is nothing to worry about identifying Imam
al-Mahdi (PBUH) once he emerges. We should only worry about our belief
before his reappearance since believing in him after his reappearance
will be of no benefit at all. Those who will oppose Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH)
when he does appear will not doubt that he is the Imam (PBUH).

They will oppose him because they did not believe in the sayings and
practices of him and those of his fathers, as they do not match with
their innovations and the innovations of their fathers.

The terrifying news amongst the foretold events is that most of those
who believe in Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) will doubt his existence over time
due to the length of the time of occultation and because of various
trials and afflictions that befall people during this period. Therefore,
when the Imam (PBUH) starts his mission, the believers will be very few
in number. Saqr Ibn Dilf narrated:

I asked Imam al-Jawad (PBUH) why Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) is called al-
Qa'im. He (PBUH) replied, "Because he will rise after his remembrance is
dead (in the society) and when most of the believers in his Imamate have
turned back (from their belief)."

I asked why he is called al-Muntadhar (the awaited). He (PBUH) replied,
"Because there shall be an occultation for him whose period shall be
prolonged. The sincere ones shall wait for him, the doubtful ones shall
deny him, those who reject him shall ridicule his remembrance,

and those who propose a time (for his reappearance) shall increase.
During that period, those who hasten in movement (al- Musta'jilun) shall
perish, and those who submit (to Allah's commands and decrees) shall be
saved."[^1]

Another tradition is narrated by Mufadhdhal Ibn Umar, who said:

[^1]Kamal al-Din, p. 378, Hadith 3; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 30,
Hadith 4.

I heard Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) saying, "Be hold! By Allah, your Imam
shall disappear for a number of years in your lifetime and you will be
afflicted with hardship until some people say he (PBUH) has died or has
been killed, which valley is he in?

Verily the eyes of the believers shall remain full of tears for him,
and you will be overturned as the ships are overturned in the waves of
the sea. None would survive but those from whom Allah has taken oath, in
whose heart He has written faith, and has helped them by a spirit from
Him. And there shall appear twelve

confusing banners that will not be recognized from one another." I
cried and said, "What could we do at that time?" He (PBUH) looked
towards the beam of sunshine that was in the room and said, "O the
servant of Allah! Do you see this sunlight?" I said, "Yes." He (PBUH)
continued, "By Allah! Our matter (i.e., the movement of al-Mahdi (PBUH)
once it starts) shall be more evident than this sun."[^1]

Musa al-Baghdadi narrated:

I heard Imam Hasan al-Askari (PBUH) saying, "I see that you will differ
(with one another) after me concerning my successor. Whoever accepts the
Imams after the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) but denies my son is like a
person who accepted all the prophets and the apostles but denied the
prophet hood of Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF).

And whoever denies the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) is like one who has
denied all the prophets.

This is because obeying the last of us is like obeying the first of us
and denying the last of us is like denying the first of us. Beware!
Verily, for my son there shall be an occultation during which all people
shall fall into doubt except those whom Allah protects."[^2]

According to the traditions (some of which will be quoted in Part II),
denying the transmitted teachings of Ahl al-Bait (PBUT) is equivalent to
denying the Ahl al-Bait (PBUT). Thus, some of those who claim to believe
in Imam al- Mahdi (PBUH) as the twelfth Imam during the time of
occultation will oppose [^1]al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 336, Hadith 3; p. 338,
Hadith 11; Kamal al-Din, p. 347, Hadith 35; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p.
281, Hadith 9.

[^2]Kamal al-Din, p. 409, Hadith 8; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 160,
Hadith 6

him after his reappearance because they used to oppose their teachings
and follow their own inventions. Fudhail Ibn Yasar narrated:

I heard Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) saying, "When our Qa'im (PBUH) rises he
will face the ignorance of people more severe than what the Apostle of
Allah (PBUH&HF) faced during the days of al-Jahiliyya." I asked, "Why
should it be so?" The Imam replied, "The Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) came
to people who were worshipping the stones and the carved wood.

However, our Qa'im (PBUH) shall come to people all of whom will
interpret the Book of Allah against his interpretation, and will argue
with him by means of that. By Allah, al-Qa'im shall cause his justice to
enter within their houses, just as the heat and the cold enter
them."[^1]

During the period of occultation, people gradually leave the traditions
of Ahl al- Bait (PBUT), interpret the Quran according to their own
opinion, and prefer the words of fallibles to the words of infallibles.
Consequently, many religious instructions will be forgotten as if they
had never been a part of the religion.

On the other hand, they will consider many man-made ideas as if they
really have been a part of the religion. When Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH)
comes, he will fight all the innovations and will restore the true
religion. For this reason, at the beginning of his mission, many people
will think he has brought a new religion. Muhammad Ibn Ijlan narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) said, "When our Qa'im rises he shall call people
anew to Islam and shall guide them to the things that were eliminated
and from which people had turned away.

He is called Mahdi because he will guide people to the thing from which
they have been separated. He is called al-Qa'im because of his rise for
(establishing) the truth."[^2] Thus, the opposition to Imam al-Mahdi
(PBUH) will not be due to people's failure in identifying him, but
rather due to their disbelief in the original laws of [^1]al-Ghaiba,
al-Nu'mani, p. 296, Hadith 1.
[^2]al-Irshad, vol. 2, p. 383; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 30, Hadith
7.


the religion, their overlooking of the transmitted traditions, and
their following man-made ideas and opinions in the domain of religion.


