7 Is Lack of the Occurrence of Signs a Reason For the Delay in Relief?
======================================================================

The manifestation of the signs depends on when Allah decides to make
the Imam (PBUH) reappear. When Allah chooses to postpone or advance the
mission of the Imam (PBUH), He may also change time of the appearance
signs as a by-product of this decision. Therefore, if Imam al-Mahdi
(PBUH) has not appeared yet, it is not because certain signs have not
taken place.

According to the traditions, the reason for prolongation of the
occultation is that people are yet not ready to sincerely follow the
commandments and the instructions of Ahl al-Bait (PBUT). In a Tawqi'[^1]
from Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH), it is written that:

"If our followers-may Allah grant them success for His obedience-all
had truly kept their covenant (with us) the blessing to meet us would
not have been postponed and they would have seen us with true
recognition.

Nothing holds us back from them except that which reaches us (of their
actions) that we dislike and that which we do not consider proper for
them."[^2]

Moreover, Muhammad Ibn al-Faraj narrated:

Imam Baqir (PBUH) wrote to me, "When Allah, the Glorious, becomes angry
at His creatures, He keeps us away from their company."[^3] Similarly,

Imam al-Baqir (PBUH) wrote, "When Allah dislikes too see us nearby a
group of people, He removes us from among them."[^4]

[^1] Tawqi' is a signed written statement by Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) that
has been obtained through four special deputies during the minor
occultation (260~329 AH).

[^2]al-Ihtijaj, vol. 2, p. 499; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 177, Hadith
8.

[^3]al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 343, Hadith 31.

[^4]Ilal al-Sharaye', part 1, p. 244, Hadith 2; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52,
Hadith 90.

Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) wrote the following to one of his special
deputies, namely Muhammad Ibn Uthman (RA), in response to people's
questions about the cause of occultation:

Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) said, "… As for the reason for the occurrence of
occultation, Allah, the Mighty and the Majestic, states, 'O you who
believe! Ask not questions about things which, if made plain to you, may
cause your dislike.' (5:101)

There was no one among my fathers except that an oath (Bai'a) of a
tyrant of his time was (forcibly) placed on his neck. But I will emerge
while I do not have any oath on my neck to any of the tyrants. As for my
benefit during my occultation, it is like the benefit of the sun when
the clouds make it absent from the eyes.

Certainly, I am amnesty for the inhabitants of the earth just as the
stars are amnesty for the inhabitants of the heaven. Thus, close the
doors of question over what is not related to you and do not charge
yourself with what you have been discharged to know. (Instead) increase
your supplications (Du'aa) to hasten the relief (al-Faraj), for this is
indeed your relief..."[^1]

Referring to verse 5:101 in the above Hadith as a response to people's
query for the reason behind occultation implies that the disobedience of
his followers has been one of the major reasons for occultation.

Other reasons mentioned in the traditions as the philosophy of
occultation include: protecting the Imam from being slain[^2], and
avoiding oath of allegiance to a tyrant[^3]. However, it is clear that
both of these reasons were the result of lack of enough faithful
followers.

By occultation, Allah intended to save the life of the Imam (PBUH)
until he would have enough sincere followers to start his mission. The
bitter fact is that out of many people who have claimed to be his
partisans in each era, the Imam (PBUH) did not have 313 true followers
to start his mission. Abdullah Ibn Hammad al-Ansari narrated:

[^1] Kamal al-Din, part 2, p. 483, Hadith 4; al-Ghaiba, al-Tusi, p. 290;
al-Ihtijaj, vol. 2, p. 469; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, p. 180, Hadith
10.

[^2]See Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp. 90-97, Hadith 1, 5, 16, 18, 20.

[^3]See Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, pp. 95-96, Hadith 11-15.

A companion of Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) came to him saying, "How numerous
your followers are!" The Imam (PBUH) said, "Did you count them?" He
replied, "They are more than that."

Thereupon, the Imam (PBUH) said, "Certainly, if the specified number
that is three hundred ten and few more had been completed, what you wish
for would have taken place"… The man said, "Then what about these
different groups who claim that they are Shia?" He (PBUH) replied, "They
will be distinguished, filtered, purified, and transformed. Ages come to
them that will perish them, a sword that will kill them, and
disagreement that will scatter them."[^1]

The following tradition also proves that once 313 sincere followers
exist the Imam (PBUH) will reappear. Abd al-Adhim al-Hasani narrated:

I said to Imam al-Jawad (PBUH), "I wish you were al-Qa'im of the family
of Muhammad (PBUH&HF) who fills the earth with peace and justice just as
it was filled with injustice and tyranny." He (PBUH) replied, "O Abu
al-Qasim! Any one of us (Ahl al-Bait (PBUT)) is standing (Qa'im) to
[^1]

al-Ghaiba, al-Nu'mani, p. 204, Hadith 4; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 65, p.
165, Hadith 16.

maintain the command of Allah, the mighty and the majestic, and is a
guide to His religion. However, the Qa'im by whom Allah will cleanse the
earth from people of disbelief and rejection and will fill it with
justice and peace is he whom Allah will conceal his birth from people,
will hide him from them, and will prohibit calling him by his name.

He will be named after the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) and will have his
nickname (Abu al-Qasim), to whom the earth will yield and for whom any
difficult thing will become simple.

The number of his companions will be equal to that of warriors of Badr,
313 men who will gather around him (at once) from far parts of the
earth, and this is the saying of Allah, "Wherever you are, Allah shall
bring you together.

Certainly Allah has power over all things." (2:148) Once this number of
sincere individuals gather for him, he will manifest his affair and when
pledge to him was completed by 10,000 men[^1] by leave of Allah, he will
rise and will not seize fighting the enemies of Allah until Allah, the
mighty and the majestic, is satisfied." I asked him, "O My master! How
will he know that Allah has been satisfied?" The Imam (PBUH) replied,
"Allah shall cast mercy into his heart."[^2]

Occultation has been the result of forsaking the Imam (PBUH) and will
continue as long as he is without enough sincere followers. The very
fact that Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) is without helper and is deserted by
people during the time of occultation has been testified in the
following tradition. Asbagh Ibn Nabata has narrated:

The Leader of the Faithful (PBUH) said, "The master of this kingdom is
the forsaken, the deserted, and the lonely one."[^3]

Certainly, the Imam (PBUH) has not been afraid of the tyrants for Allah
has created him to take revenge against all the tyrants and to eradicate
their power. In reality, he has kept himself away from those who claim
to be his lovers, because he is afraid of their disobedience and
betrayal.

Allah has concealed him due to their misconducts and because they have
not made themselves worthy of receiving him and enjoying his company.
Once they truly turn to him, he (PBUH) will return to them by leave of
Allah. If they do what is expected from them as followers and fulfill
their duties, the Imam (PBUH) will certainly do what is expected from
him as their leader, by the permission of Allah.

[^1] The ten thousand helpers may include the first group of the dead
among those who were the true expectant of al-Qa'im during their time,
who will return to this world in the phenomena of al-Raj'a by will of
Allah.

[^2]Kamal al-Din, p. 377, Hadith 2; al-Ihtijaj, vol. 2, p. 449; Bihar
al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 383, Hadith 10.

[^3]Kamal al-Din, p. 303, Hadith13; al-Ghaiba, al-Nu'mani, p. 179,
Hadith 24; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 120, Hadith 21; p. 37, Hadith
10.

Finally, another important outcome of occultation that has been stated
in the traditions is test of those who claim to be the followers of Ahl
al-Bait (PBUT). The trials and afflictions during this period are so
intense that people who have any insincerity in their heart will finally
abandon their faith and the sincere faithful will be distinguished. Ali
Ibn Ja'far narrated:

Imam al-Kadhim (PBUH) said, "When the fifth (offspring) from the
seventh of the Imams disappears, then, I adjure you by Allah to watch
for your religion so that no one would take it away from you.

Without doubt, there shall be an occultation for the holder of this
matter until such time that (most) people who believe in his Imamat will
turn away from their belief. Verily this (occultation) is but a test by
Allah, the Glorious, for his creation."[^1]

Ibrahim Ibn Hilal has narrated:

I said to Imam Ridha (PBUH), "May I be sacrificed for you! My father
died while still believing in this matter (the rising of al-Qa'im) and
you see how old I have become but still you do not inform me of any news
(about this advent)?" He (PBUH) replied, "O Abu Is'haq! Do you hasten?"
I replied, "Yes, by Allah, I hasten. Why should I not hasten when I have
become so old as you see?"

He (PBUH) said, "O Abu Is'haq! By Allah! That (advent) will not occur
until you are distinguished, tried, and clarified so much so that none
of you remains save the least."[^2]

The above traditions all show that of the reasons for the prolongation
of this period of trial is insincerity among the people who still claim
to be the followers of Ahl al-Bait (PBUT).

The afflictions during this period will continue until such time that
those who continue to keep any insincerity in their heart separate their
route (in terms of beliefs and actions) in a recognizable manner from
the true followers of Ahl al-Bait (PBUT). Moreover, the Imam (PBUH) will
not start his mission until after the number of the remaining sincere
and faithful [^1]al-Ghaiba, al-Tusi, p. 337; al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 336,
Hadith 2; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 113, Hadith 26.

[^2]al-Ghaiba, al-Nu'mani, p. 208, Hadith 14; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52,
p. 113, Hadith 29.

Naba Cultural Organization individuals who are resolute in their
expectation of al-Qa'im (PBUH) reaches the minimum specified number.


