Part Ii : How Can We Become a Person Expecting Al-qa'im (pbuh)?
===============================================================

By the presented discussions in the previous part, it is now clear that
of the major reasons for the occultation have been insincerity in our
claims and our refusal to submit to the sayings of Ahl al-Bait (PBUT).
Allah, the most merciful, has assigned for us a leader who is ready to
relieve us, but we have turned away from his commands and the commands
of his ancestors.

This has caused the wrath of Allah in the form of occultation. Our only
chance for an early relief is to try to seek the pleasure of Allah and
His Hujja (PBUH) so that Allah may waive the remaining time of
occultation. But how can we achieve this end?

Certainly, we cannot seek the pleasure of Allah by inventing some
duties during the time of occultation passed on our opinion. The Ahl
al-Bait (PBUT) have already enumerated the specific duties that we have
during the time of occultation, and we cannot change them.

For instance, wasting our time on searching the astronomical data and
proposing time for the Imam's reappearance will only displease Allah.

It will also serve the impostors who try to take the advantage of
astronomical events for their aims, as well as those who want to weaken
our faith in Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) by claiming that these events did not
accompany Imam's reappearance, and consequently, making us doubtful
about his existence.

In what follows, we present some of the divine commandments through the
words of Ahl al-Bait (PBUT) that we need to undertake during this time
of occultation.

Acting upon these instructions, among others, saves us from the
afflictions of this period, prepares us and makes us worthy of receiving
Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH), and pave the way for an early implementation of
the kingdom of justice over the earth, by leave of Allah.


**8 True recognition of the Imam (PBUH)
**
As the first step, we should strive to have a true recognition
(Ma'rifat) of the Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) with all his exclusive rights.
This is one of the most important conditions for those expecting him,
and is their prime duty. True recognition of the Imam (PBUH) is not just
to know his name and his lineage.

At the most primary level, recognition means acknowledgement of his
rights and authorities, while at an advanced level it is acknowledgement
of his light (Nur). Fudhail Ibn Yasar narrated:

I asked Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) about Allah's saying, "On the day that We
shall call every group with their (respective) Imam." (17:71) The Imam
(PBUH) replied, "O Fudhail! Know your Imam, for if you have real
understanding of your Imam, postponement or advancement of this matter
(al-Faraj) shall not hurt you.

He who recognizes his Imam and dies before the rising of the holder of
this matter, he is like the one who is sitting in his army. Nay, he is
like the one who is sitting under his banner."[^1]

It is noteworthy that the above tradition also points to the issue of
al-Raj'a (earthly return). The one truly cognizant of the Imam and
committed to him is of the Imam's soldiers and will return to this world
by Allah's permission to help the establishment of the kingdom of
justice once the Imam (PBUH) reappears. In another tradition, it is
narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) said, "The lowest limit of the recognition of Imam
is that He is the peer of the Prophet (PBUH&HF) without the degree of
prophet hood and is his inheritor, and that obedience to him is
obedience to Allah and obedience to His Apostle, and submitting to him
in all matters and returning every (religious) issue to him and taking
his words."[^2]

Furthermore, it has been narrated:

[^1] al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 371, Hadith 2; al-Ghaiba, al-Nu'mani, p. 329,
Hadith 2; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 52, p. 141, Hadith 53.

[^2]Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 36, p. 407, Hadith 16.

Imam Baqir (PBUH) said, "Certainly, people are charged with three
obligations: Recognition (Ma'rifa) of the Imams (PBUT), submission to
them in what reaches them (of their instructions), and referring to them
in any disagreement (in religious matters)."[^1]

Moreover, Ibrahim al-Ziyad narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) said, "He who claims to recognize us but adheres
to other handholds is a liar."[^2]

In one of his Tawqi', Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) wrote:

"Seeking the knowledge of religion (al-Ma'arif) from other than us (Ahl
al-Bait) is equivalent to denying us."[^3]

The traditions are quite clear that a person who does not refer to Ahl
al-Bait (PBUT) in every religious issue has not recognized Ahl al-Bait
(PBUT) as the guiding Imams.

The religion belongs to Allah and any one who has really acknowledged
this fact, seeks the knowledge of religion only through His vice-
regents. Seeking guidance and religious knowledge from other than Ahl
al-Bait (PBUT) is equivalent to denying them as His vice-regents.


