9 Learning and Acting Upon the Words of the Imam (pbuh)
=======================================================

Those living in expectation should learn and submit to the instructions
of Ahl al-Bait (PBUT) and act upon their commands, which are available
to us in the form of Hadith. This can only be achieved if we study the
traditions of Ahl al- Bait (PBUT) on a regular basis and submit to their
words. Abu Hamza al- Thumali narrated:

[^1]al-Kafi, vol. 1, p. 390, Hadith 1; Wasa'il al-Shia, vol. 27, p. 67,
Hadith 33216; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 202, Hadith 74.

[^2]Ma'ani al-Akhbar, p. 399, Hadith 57; Wasa'il al-Shia, vol. 27, p.
129, Hadith 33397; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 83, Hadith 7.

[^3]Mustadrak Safinat al-Bihar, Shaikh Ali al-Namazi, vol. 1, p. 10.

Imam al-Sajjad (PBUH) said, "Surely, the religion of Allah shall not be
intercepted by the deficient intellects, false opinions, and corrupt
criteria. It shall not be grasped except by submission. He who submits
to us shall be safe.

He who accepts our guidance shall be guided. He who acts upon analogy
(Qiyas) and opinion (Ra'y) shall perish. And he, who feels difficulty in
his heart in accepting our sayings or our verdicts, has disbelieved in
the One who sent Quran, the Great, while he does not know."[^1]

Imam Ali (PBUH) said the following in one of his sermons preserved in
Nahj al-Balagha:

"Look at the people of the Prophet's family. Adhere to their direction.
Follow their footsteps because they shall never let you out of guidance
and shall never throw you into destruction.

If they sit down, you sit down, and if they rise up you rise up. Do not
go ahead of them for you will go astray, and do not fall behind them for
you will perish."[^2] Yazid Ibn Abd al-Malik narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH) said, "Visit each other since this would revive
your hearts and would cause reminding of our traditions. Our traditions
cause affection among you. If you follow them, you will be guided and
saved, and if you abandon them, you will be misguided and perished.
Thus act upon them and I guarantee your salvation."[^3]

The Ahl al-Bait (PBUT) have emphasized that the only way to
successfully pass the trial of occultation with firm belief in the Imam
(PBUH) is to hold fast to religious instructions and guard against the
Satanic views and the intruders in the domain of religion. Abu Salt
al-Hirawi narrated:

[^1] Kamal al-Din, sec. 31, p. 324, Hadith 9; Mustadrak al-Wasa'il, vol.
17, p. 262, Hadith 21289; Bihar al- Anwar, vol. 2, p. 303, Hadith 40.

[^2]Nahj al-Balagha, Sermon 97.

[^3]al-Kafi, p. 186, Hadith 2; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 71, p. 258, Hadith
56.

Imam al-Ridha (PBUH) said that the Prophet (PBUH&HF) said, "By Him Who
sent me in truth as a bearer of glad tidings! Most certainly, al-Qa'im
from my offspring shall disappear according to the covenant that has
been taken from me until such time that most people will say, 'Allah
does not have any wish for (implementing a government for) the family of
Muhammad,' and some others become doubtful about his birth (i.e., his
existence).

Thus, whoever meets such time should hold fast to his religion and
should not leave out a way for Satan towards himself, or Satan will
remove him from my nation and will drive him out of my religion…
Certainly, Allah, the mighty and the majestic, has made 'Satans
guardians for those who do not to believe.' (7:27)"[^1]

The period of occultation is the most sensitive and the most difficult
period of the trial for people, and those who succeed to maintain their
faith during this period have the greatest faith in comparison with the
people of other era. In a very interesting Hadith, Imam al-Sadiq (PBUH)
narrated from his fathers from the Leader of the Faithful (PBUH) who
said:

The Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) said, "O Ali! The most astonishing
people in faith and the greatest among them in certainty (Yaqin) are the
people who shall be in the end of time who shall not meet the Prophet
(PBUH&HF), and the Proof (of Allah) shall be concealed from them, but
they shall believe by means of black (letters) over white (sheets)
[i.e., by the written traditions that have reached them]."[^2]

In a Tawqi', Imam al-Mahdi (PBUH) mentioned:

[^1] Kamal al-Din, p. 51, Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 68, Hadith 10.
Similar traditions have been narrated from Imam Ali (PBUH), Imam
al-Sadiq (PBUH). See Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 51, p. 119 & p. 145.
[^2]Man La Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, vol. 4, p. 366; Kamal al-Din, p. 288,
Hadith 8; Wasa'il al-Shia, vol. 27, p. 92, Hadith 33296; Bihar al-Anwar,
vol. 52, p. 125, Hadith 12.

"We are not negligent of caring you and are not forgetful of your
remembrance. Had it been so, then terrible calamities would have
befallen you and your enemies would have destroyed you. Be Mindful of
Allah and assist us (by obedience) to rescue you from the tribulations
that have afflicted you… Thus, each one of you should act upon what
draws him nearer to our love and refrain from whatever brings him to our
dislike and our anger.

Certainly, our advent shall come very suddenly and unexpectedly at the
time that no repentance would benefit and no regret from sin would save
one from the punishment by us. May Allah inspire in you consciousness
and be kind to you in making you successful by His mercy."[^1]

The above tradition implies that our strict adherence to the commands
of Ahl al- Bait (PBUT) and trying to please them by our deeds, may
contribute to our early relief by leave of Allah.


**10 Educating others about the religion**

As persons living in constant expectation, we should also teach what we
know from Ahl al-Bait (PBUT) to other qualified individuals, narrate
their traditions to people who are willing to hear us, and transfer what
has been conveyed to us from their knowledge:

Imam al-Ridha (PBUH) said, "May Allah bless he who revives our
matter/kingdom." He was asked, "How is your matter revived?" The Imam
(PBUH) replied, "To learn our knowledge and to teach them to the people.
Verily, if people know the beauty of our sayings, they will follow
us."[^2]

[^1]al-Ihtijaj, vol. 2, pp. 497-498; Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 53, pp.
175-176.
[^2]Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 2, p. 30, Hadith 13.

Those who wish to see the kingdom of al-Qa'im (PBUH) in a near future,
should learn and act upon the instructions of Ahl al-Bait (PBUT) first,
and then teach them to those who are willing to know.

There is a series of enlightening traditions from the Prophet (PBUH&HF)
and the Imams (PBUT)-one from each in consecutive order-narrated by Imam
Hasan al-Askari (PBUH) in his Tafsir, which are known as the traditions
of "The Orphans of Family of Muhammad (PBUH&HF)". Below is the first
one, which belongs to the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF):

The Imam al-Askari (PBUH) said, "As for Allah's saying 'and the
orphans,' (4:36) indeed the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) said, "Allah, the
Glorious, has urged (people) to be kind towards the orphans, due to the
severance of their links with their fathers.

Therefore, he who protects and shields them, Allah shall protect him.
He who honors them, Allah shall honor him.

He who touches his hand over the head of an orphan- out of kindness
toward him-Allah places for him in Paradise for every strand of hair
that passed under his hand, a castle more expansive than what the
universe encompasses, and within which is whatsoever the souls desire
and the eyes cherish and therein shall they remain forever. (Referring
to chapter 43, verse 71 of the Quran).'"

Then the Imam (PBUH) continued, "More severe than the orphancy of this
orphan is that of the one who has been orphaned from his Imam, (whose
link with his Imam has been severed,) who is unable to reach him and
does not know his commandments on those of religious laws that he is in
need of them. Behold!

For any of our followers who possess knowledge of our sciences, this
(other) person-the one ignorant of our path, who is severed from seeing
us-is thus an orphan under his guardianship.

Then, behold! Whosoever (of our followers) guides and instructs him,
and teaches him our path, he shall be with us in the loftiest
companionship (a special degree in Paradise where the prophets and the
Imams reside). My father reported this to me, from his forefathers, from
the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF)."[^1]


