Introduction
============

Imam ‘Ali, the fourth Caliph of Islam and the first Imam of the Ahlul
Bayt, is well known for his abiding contribution to spiritual thought.
In the Arabic world he’s just as famous for being a great jurist and man
of letters.

The historian Masudi (Murooj-uz-Zahab Masudi Vol. II, p. 33. Egypt),
recognised Imam ‘Ali as being the source of no less than 480 treaties,
lectures and epistles on a variety of subjects dealing with philosophy,
religion, law and politics, as collected by Zaid Ibn Wahab in the Imam’s
own life time. These contributions are held in such high regard, both
for their contents as well as intrinsic literary worth, that some of his
masterpieces stimulated into being many subjects of study in Muslim
colleges and universities.

Imam ‘Ali’s reputation was such, that it seems to have even reached to
Europe by the time of the Renaissance, as we find that Edward Powcock
(1604-1691) a professor at the University of Oxford, in 1639 delivered a
series of lectures on his “Rhetoric”, and was responsible for publishing
the first translation of his “Sayings” into English.

Here we present Imam ‘Ali’s famous letter of advice while Caliph, to the
Governor of Egypt, Malik al-Ashtar, which is based on the translation by
Rasheed Turabi. The letter, according to Fehrist at-Tusi (p.33) was
first copied during the time of Imam ‘Ali himself by Asbagh bin Nabata
and then later on reproduced or referred to in their writings by various
Muslim scholars, chief of them being Nasr ibn Mazahim (148 A.H.), Jahiz
Basari (255 A.H.) Syed Razi (404 A.H.) Ibn Abil Hidaid and Allama
Mustafa Bek Najib, the great living scholar of Egypt. The latter
scholar, regarded this letter “as a basic guide in Islamic
administration.”


