Revenue Administration
======================

Great care is to be exercised in revenue administration, to ensure the
prosperity of those who pay the revenue to the state, for on their
prosperity depends the prosperity of others, particularly of the masses.
Indeed, the state exists on its revenue.

You should regard the proper upkeep of the land in cultivation as of
greater importance than the collection of revenue, for revenue cannot be
derived except by making the land productive. He who demands revenue
without helping the cultivator to improve his land, inflicts unmerited
hardship on the cultivator and ruins the state.

The rule of such a person does not last long. If the cultivators ask for
a reduction in their land tax for having suffered from epidemics,
drought, excessive rainfall, soil infertility, floods impairing the
fertility of the land or the cause of crop damage, then reduce the tax
accordingly, so that their condition may improve.

Do not mind the loss of revenue on that account, for that will return to
you one day manifold in the hour of greater prosperity of the land and
enable you to improve the condition of your towns and to raise the
prestige of your state. You will be the object of universal praise. The
people will believe in your sense of justice. The confidence which they
will place in you in consequence will prove your strength, as they will
be found ready to share your burdens.

You may settle down on the land any number of people, but discontent
will overtake them if the land is not improved. The cause of the
cultivatorâ€™s ruin is the rulers who are bent feverishly on accumulating
wealth at all costs, out of the fear that their rule might not last
long. Such are the people who do not learn from examples or precedents.


