Clerical Establishment
======================

Keep an eye on your establishment and on your scribes, select the best
among them for your confidential correspondence such among these, as
possess high character and deserve your full confidence, men who may not
exploit their privileged position to go against you, who may not grow
neglectful of their duties, who in the drafting of treaties may not
succumb to external temptation and harm your interests, or fail to
render you proper assistance and to save you from trouble, who in
carrying out their duties can realize their serious responsibilities,
for he who does not realise his own responsibilities can hardly appraise
the responsibilities of others.

Do not select men for such work merely on the strength of your first
impressions of your affection or good faith, for as a matter of fact,
the pretensions of a good many who are really devoid of honesty and good
breeding, may cheat even the intelligence of rulers. Selection should be
made after due probation, which should be the test of righteousness.

In making direct appointments from people, see to it that those selected
possess influence with the people and who enjoy the reputation of being
honest, for such selection is agreeable to God and the ruler. For every
department of administration, let there be a head, whom no trying task
might cause worry and no pressure of work annoy.

Remember, every weakness of any one among your establishment and
scribes, which you may overlook, will be written down against you in
your scroll of deeds.


