The Poor
========

Beware! Fear God when dealing with the problem of the poor who have none
to patronise them, who are forlorn, indigent, helpless and are greatly
torn in mind – victims of the vicissitudes of time. Among them are some
who do not question their lot in life and who, notwithstanding their
misery, do not go about seeing alms.

For God’s sake, safeguard their rights, for on you rests the
responsibility of protecting their interests.

Assign for their uplift a portion of the state exchequer (Bayt al-Mal),
wherever they may be, whether close at hand or far away from you. The
rights of the two should be equal in your eye. Do not let any
preoccupation slip them from your mind, for no excuse whatsoever for the
disregard of their rights will be acceptable to God.

Do not treat their interests as of less importance than your own, and
never keep them outside the purview of your important considerations,
and mark the persons who look down upon them and of whose conditions
they keep you in ignorance.

Select from among your officers such men as are meek and God fearing who
can keep you properly informed of the condition of the poor. Make such
provision for these poor people as shall not oblige you to offer an
excuse before God on the Day of Judgement for, it is this section of the
people which, more than any other, deserves benevolent treatment.

Seek your reward from God by giving to each of them what is due to him
and enjoin on yourself as a sacred duty the task of meeting the needs of
such aged among them as have no independent means of livelihood and are
averse to seek alms. The discharge of this duty is what usually proves
very trying to rulers, but is very welcome to societies which are gifted
with foresight. It is only such societies or nations who truly carry out
with equanimity their covenant with God to discharge their duty to the
poor.


