Peace And Treaties
==================

Bear in mind that you do not throw away the offer of peace which your
enemy may himself make. Accept it, for that will please God. Peace is a
source of comfort to the army, it reduces your worries and promotes
order in the state.

But Beware! Be on your guard when the peace is signed for, certain types
of enemies propose terms of peace just to lull you into a sense of
security only to attack you again when you are off your guard. So you
should exercise the utmost vigilance on your part, and place no undue
faith in their protestations.

But, if under the peace treaty you have accepted any obligations,
discharge those obligations scrupulously. It is a trust and must be
faithfully upheld and whenever you have promised anything, keep it with
all the strength that you command, for whatever differences of opinion
might exist on other matters, there is nothing so noble as the
fulfilment of a promise.

This is recognized even among non-Muslims, for they know the dire
consequences which follow from the breaking of covenants. So never make
excuses in discharging your responsibilities and never break a promise,
nor cheat your enemy. For breach of promise is an act against God, and
none except the positively wicked acts against God.

Indeed Divine promises are a blessing spread over all mankind. The
promise of God is a refuge sought after, even by the most powerful on
earth, for there is no risk of being cheated. So, do not make any
promise from which you may afterwards offer excuses to retract, nor go
back upon what you have confirmed to abide by, nor break it, however
galling it may at first prove to be. For it is far better to wait in
patience for wholesome results to follow, than to break it out of any
apprehensions.

Beware! Abstain from shedding blood without a valid cause. There is
nothing more harmful than this which brings about oneâ€™s ruin. The blood
that is wilfully shed shortens the life of a state. On the Day of
Judgement it is this crime for which one will have to answer first. So,
beware! Do not wish to build the strength of your state on blood for, it
is this blood which ultimately weakens the state and passes it into
other hands. Before me and my God no excuse for wilful killing can be
entertained.

Murder is a crime which is punishable by death. If on any account the
corporal punishment dealt by the state for any lesser crime results in
the death of the guilty, let not the prestige of the state stand in any
way of the deceased relations claiming compensation.


