Last Instructions
=================

Do not make haste to do a thing before its time, nor put it off when the
right moment arrives. Do not insist on doing a wrong thing, nor show
slackness in rectifying a wrong thing. Perform everything in its proper
time, and let everything occupy its proper place.

When the people as a whole agree upon a thing, do not impose your own
will on them and do not neglect to discharge the responsibility that
rests on you in consequence. For, the eyes of the people will be on you
and you are answerable for whatever you do to them. The slightest
dereliction of duty will bring its own retribution.

Keep your anger under control and keep your hands and tongue in check.
Whenever you fall into anger, try to restrain yourself or else you will
simply increase your worries.

It is imperative on you to study carefully the principles which have
inspired just and good rulers who have gone before you. Give close
thought to the example of our prophet, his traditions, and the
commandments of the Holy Qurâ€™an and whatever you might have assimilated
from my own way of dealing with things.

Endeavour to the best of your ability to carry out the instructions
which I have given you here and which you have solemnly undertaken to
follow. By means of this order, I enjoin on you not to succumb to the
prompting of your own heart or to turn away from the discharge of duties
entrusted to you.

I seek the refuge of the might of the Almighty and of His limitless
sphere of blessings, and invite you to pray with me that He may give us
together the grace willingly to surrender our will to His will, and to
enable us to acquit ourselves before Him and His creation, so that
mankind might cherish our memory and our work survive.

I seek of God the culmination of his blessings and pray that He may
grant you and me His grace and the honour of martyrdom in His cause.
Verily, we have to return to Him. I invoke His blessings on the Prophet
of God and his pure progeny.


