The Common Man
==============

Maintain justice in administration and impose it on your own self and
seek the consent of the people, for, the discontent of the masses
sterilises the contentment of the privileged few and the discontent of
the few loses itself in the contentment of the many. Remember the
privileged few will not rally round you in moments of difficulty: they
will try to side-track justice, they will ask for more than what they
deserve and will show no gratitude for favours done to them.

They will feel restive in the face of trials and will offer no regret
for their shortcomings. It is the common man who is the strength of the
State and Religion. It is he who fights the enemy. So live in close
contact with the masses and be mindful of their welfare.

Keep at a distance one who peers into the weaknesses of others. After
all, the masses are not free from weaknesses. It is the duty of the
ruler to shield them. Do not bring to light that which is hidden, but
try to remove those weaknesses which have been brought to light. God is
watchful of everything that is hidden from you, and He alone will deal
with it. To the best of your ability cover the weaknesses of the public,
and God will cover the weaknesses in you which you are anxious to keep
away from their eye.

Unloose the tangle of mutual hatred between the public and the
administration and remove all those causes which may give rise to
strained relations between them. Protect yourself from every such act as
may not be quite correct for you. Do not make haste in seeking
confirmation of tale-telling, for the tale-teller is a deceitful person
appearing in the garb of a friend.


