The Counsellors
===============

Never take counsel of a miser, for he will vitiate your magnanimity and
frighten you of poverty. Do not take the advice of a coward either, for
he will weaken your resolve. Do not take counsel of the greedy: for he
will instill greed in you and turn you into a tyrant. Miserliness,
cowardice and greed deprive man of his trust in God.

The worst of counsellors is he who has served as a counsellor to unjust
rulers and shared in their crimes. So, never let men who have been
companions of tyrants or shared their crimes be your counsellors. You
can get better men than these, men gifted with intelligence and
foresight, but unpolluted by sin, men who have never aided a tyrant in
his tyranny or a criminal in his crime. Such men will never be a burden
on you. On the other hand, they will be a source of help and strength to
you at all times. They will be friends to you and strangers to your
enemies.

Choose such men alone for companionship both in privacy and in the
public. Even among these, show preference to them who have a habitual
regard for truth, however trying to you at times their truth may prove
to be, and who offer you no encouragement in the display of tendencies
which God does not like His friends to develop.

Keep close to you the upright, and the God fearing, and make clear to
them that they are never to flatter you and never to give you credit for
any good that you may not have done: for, the tolerance of flattery and
unhealthy praise stimulates pride in man and makes him arrogant.

Do not treat the good and the bad alike. That will deter the good from
doing good, and encourage the bad in their bad pursuits. Recompense
everyone according to their deserts. Remember that mutual trust and
goodwill between the ruler and the ruled are bred only through
benevolence, justice and service. So, cultivate goodwill among the
people; for their goodwill alone will save you from troubles. Your
benevolence to them will be repaid by their trust in you, and your
ill-treatment by their ill-will.

Do not disregard the noble traditions established by our forbears, which
have promoted harmony and progress among the people; and do not initiate
anything which might minimize their usefulness. The men who had
established these noble traditions have had their reward; but
responsibility will be yours if they are disturbed. Try always to learn
something from the experience of the learned and wise, and frequently
consult them in state matters so that you might maintain the peace and
goodwill which your predecessors had established in the land.


