The Different Classes of People
===============================

Remember that the people are composed of different classes. The progress
of one is dependent on the progress of every other, and none can afford
to be independent of the other. We have the Army formed of the soldiers
of God. We have our civil officers and their establishments, our
judiciary, our revenue collectors and our public relations officers.

The general public itself consists of Muslims and other subjects and
among them of merchants and craftsmen, the unemployed and the indigent.
God has prescribed for them their rights, duties and obligations. They
are all defined and preserved in the Holy Quran and in the traditions of
his Prophet.

The army, by the grace of God, is like a fortress to the people and
lends dignity to the state. It upholds the prestige of the faith and
maintains the peace of the country. Without it the state cannot stand.
In its turn, it cannot stand without the support of the state. Our
soldiers have proved strong before the enemy because of the privilege
God has given them to fight for Him; but they have their material needs
to fulfil and have therefore to depend upon the income provided for them
from the state revenue.

The military and civil population who pay revenue, both need the
co-operation of others – the judiciary, civil officers and their
establishment. The judge administers civil and criminal law; the civil
officers collect revenue and attend to civil administration with the
assistance of their establishment. And then there are the tradesmen and
the merchants who add to the revenue of the state. It is they who run
the markets and are in a better position than others to discharge social
obligations.

Then there is the class of the poor and the needy, whose maintenance is
an obligation on the other classes. God has given appropriate
opportunity of service to one and all; then there are the rights of all
these classes over the administration which the administrator has to
meet with an eye on the good of the entire population – a duty which he
cannot fulfill properly unless he takes personal interest in its
execution and seeks help from God. Indeed, it is obligatory on him to
impose this duty on himself and to bear with patience the inconveniences
and difficulties incidental to his task.


