Imam Ali An-naqi (a)
====================

Once in the time of our 10th Imam, Imam Ali an-Naqi (A), a lady came to
the Khalifa, Mutawakkil and said that she was Zainab (A), the daughter
of Fatimah (A), the daughter of the Prophet (S).

Mutawakkil told her that this could not be true because many years had
passed since the time when Zainab (A) was alive, and the lady looked
very young.

The lady answered that she was Zainab (A) and that she looked young
because the Prophet (S) had passed his hand over her head and prayed for
her to remain young for ever.

Mutawakkil did not know what to do so he called all the wise men and
asked them. All of them said that the ladywas lying, but how were they
to prove this.

No-one could think of anyway to prove that the lady was lying, so then
Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) was called.

Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) told Mutawakkil to put the lady into a cage of
lions and if what she said was true, then the lions would not harm her,
because the wild animals do not hurt the children of Fatimah (A).

The lady said that Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) wanted to kill her and that if
what he said was true then let him go into the cage first.

Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) agreed and went into a cage of lions. The lions
did not harm Imam (A) instead they caressed him. Imam Ali an-Naqi (A)
then came out and told the lady that now it was her turn.

The lady began to cry and said that she was sorry and that she did not
mean to lie, it was only a joke.

**Moral:**

You should never lie (even as a joke) as you will get caught. If you do
get away with it and no-one finds out remember that Allah knows and He
is the one you have to go back to for your reward or punishment.

Our 10th Imam, Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) became an Imam at the age of only 8
years old.

Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) when young, was forced to go to a famous old poet
named Junaydi to be tutored.

Junaydi was a very clever man but hated the Ahlul-bayt.

The king at the time forced Imam (A) to go to Junaydi so that anything
that the Imam (A) said or did in his life would be according to the
teachings that he had received from Junaydi. Even if they were not
people would think that they were because he had been taught by him.

After some time had passed the king asked Junaydi how the Imam (A) was
doing.

To which Junaydi answered that he was no longer the teacher (Imam (A)
was), but a student, and that he now understood what knowledge really
was.

**Moral:**

1. Imams (A) have a supreme knowledge so that they are able to answer
whatever question is put to them. 2. What age you are does not matter
but how much youknow matters. People will treat you like a child
unlessyou can show them otherwise - through your knowledgeand your
Akhlaq.

In the time of our 10th Imam, Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) the king was a bad
man called Mutawakkil.

One day Mutawakkil fell very ill. The doctors could notmake him
better.

Mutawakkil's mother was very sad and asked Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) to help
him.

Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) told her what medicine to use to make Mutawakkil
better and when she used what Imam (A) had told her to use, Mutawakkil
became well again.

All the doctors were very surprised.

Although Mutawakkil was a bad man, Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) still helped
him, because the mother had come to him for help.

**Moral:**

If anyone ever asks you for help you should help themeven if they are
not very nice.

Once in the time of our 10th Imam, Imam Ali an-Naqi (A), a man came to
Imam (A) and told him that if Imam (A) did not help him, he would be
killed.

Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) asked the man to explain. The man explained that
he had been given an expensive stone by the King and told to write
something on it.

The man continued that when he went to write on it, the stone broke in
half and when the king would find out, he would kill the man.

Imam Ali an-Naqi (A) prayed for the man, then told the man not to
worry, and that Allah would look after him.

The next day when the king came to pick up his stone, the man was
shaking because he was so scared.

The king told the man that he had changed his mind and now wanted the
stone broken in half, one piece for each one of his two daughters, with
the writing on each half of the stone.

**Moral:**

No matter what trouble you are faced with always trust in Allah and ask
for His help as He can make anything happen.


