Imam Hasan (a)
==============

Once a maid of our 2nd Imam, Imam Hasan (A) dropped ahot bowl of soup
on Imam (A).

She was very scared because she thought the Imam (A) would be angry and
punish her.

She immediately recited the Ayah:"..Those who control (their)
anger.."

Imam Hasan (A) smiled and said he was not angry.

Then she recited the next part of the Ayah:"..And are forgiving towards
people.."

Imam Hasan (A) said he had forgiven her.

She then finished the Ayah :"..Allah loves those who do good.."

Imam Hasan (A) told her she was free.

The above Ayah is from the Holy Qur'an:Surah Aali Imraan (3), verse
134.

**Moral:**

The Holy Qur'an is not just there to read but to learn from and act
upon. It is the word of Allah and teaches us everything we need to know
if only we understood it.

Once a follower of Mu'awiyah came to Madina. When he saw our 2nd Imam,
Imam Hasan (A) he started to shout names and use foul language at the
Imam (A), because Mu'awiyah had told him horrible things about Imam
(A).

The followers of Imam Hasan (A) wanted to punish the man for what he
had said but Imam (A) told them to leave him alone.

Imam Hasan (A) then turned to the man and greeted him with "Salaam"
after which Imam asked the man if he would like to come to his house for
food and a rest as he had just come from a long trip.

When the man saw the Akhlaq of Imam (A), he realised that what
Mu'awiyah had told him about the Imam (A) was untrue and he felt very
ashamed of how he had spoken.

The man asked Imam (A) for forgiveness. Thereafter, whenever he heard
anyone saying anything against Imam Hasan (A) he would correct them.

**Moral:**

1. Never get angry at someone when they are angry - It takes two people
to start a fight.
2. No matter how other people act you should always have perfect
akhlaq.
3. Never believe bad things about other people that you have heard.

One day our 2nd Imam, Imam Hasan (A) was eating when a dog came and
stood in front of him, looking at him hungrily.

Imam Hasan (A) gave some of his food to the dog, who ate it up and
again looked up at him, so Imam (A) threw another little bit of food to
the dog.

A man who was passing by came forward to shoo the dog away, so that
Imam (A) could eat in peace.

Imam Hasan (A) told the man to leave the dog alone as Allah had made
the dog just as He has made all of us and loves the animals just as He
loves us all.

**Moral:**

Be kind to animals as they also have been made by Allah and are loved
by Allah just as we all are.

Our 2nd Imam, Imam Hasan (A) was always very kind to the poor.

One day, Imam Hasan (A) was walking down the road when he came across
some poor people sitting on the ground eating their food, which was dry
bread.

When the poor people saw Imam Hasan (A), they asked him to join them.
Imam (A) sat down on the ground and ate the dry bread with them.

When they had finished Imam (A) got up to leave but before he went he
thanked the poor people for sharing their food with him and asked them
all to come to his house for food They accepted. When the poor people
arrived at Imam Hasan's (A) house they were given the finest food and
the greatest respect by Imam (A).

**Moral:**

1. If someone gives you something, take it saying thank you even if you
do not really want it.
2. Always try to give people more than they give you.


