Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (a)
===========================

Once a man who claimed to be a friend of our 4th Imam, Imam Ali Zainul
Abideen (A) came to him and told him that so and so had been saying
horrible things about him.

Imam (A) replied that he had not heard anything and would not have if
the man had not told him. Imam (A) then continued that the person who
had said the horrible things was as if he had shot an arrow and missed
the target but the man who had told him was as if he had picked up the
fallen arrow and hit the target (Imam (A)) with it.

Allah does not like the habit of spreading scandal and gossip even if
it be true.

In the time of Prophet Musa (A), once there was a severe drought. For
months there had been no rain.

The people prayed and prayed but no rain came. When Prophet Musa (A)
went to mount Sinai to pray, Allah revealed to him that amongst his
people there was someone who spreading scandal and because of this
person Allah had not let it rain. Prophet Musa (A) asked Allah who this
person was so that he could tell him off for what he had done.

Allah replied that did Prophet Musa (A) want Him to do what He had
forbidden for others. (i.e. talk about others).

**Moral:**

Do not talk about other people when they are not there even if what you
say is true.

At the time of our 4th Imam, Imam Zainul Abideen (A) it was very
difficult for Imam (A) to teach Islam to the people. This was because
Yazid's men used to keep a close watch on Imam's (A) movements.

Imam Zainul Abideen (A) had seen his father, Imam Husain (A), and other
loyal friends and family die for the sake of Islam.

Imam Zainul Abideen (A) decide that the best way to teach people about
Islam, was by prayers (Du'a). As a result, we have today a beautiful
collection of his Du'a in a book called: "Al-Sahifat al-kamilat
al-Sajjadiyya" - The complete book of Al-Sajjad, (Imam Zainul Abadeen
(A) was also known as al-Sajjad).

An extract from a du'a for Sunday (the 1st verse) from AL- Sahifat
al-kamilat al-Sajjadiyya:

In the name of Allah, the most Kind and the most Merciful.In the name
of Allah from whom I hope for nothing but bounty, and from whom I fear
nothing but justice!I rely only upon His word, and I cling only to His
cord!

Just in these few lines Imam (A) is teaching us so much:He is teaching
us that only Allah is the provider.He is teaching us that we should not
fear Allah as He is the most forgiving and the most Merciful but at the
same time He is also the Most Just and it is this justice that we should
fear.There was once a man who was a very religious man and because he
was so sure of himself he always used to pray to Allah to judge him on
Justice, (we are told always to pray to Allah to judge us with His
mercy).

When this man died he saw a scale which was being weighted down with
all his good actions. The angels then brought an apple which they put on
the other side of the scale and the scale came down on the side of the
apple.

The man did not understand how a single apple could outdo all his good
actions. He was then told that, that apple was one that he had tasted in
the market without the permission of the shop owner. Because the man had
insisted that Allah judge him on justice, Allah did not intervene with
His mercy.

Imam Zainul Abideen (A) then finished the 1st verse with the lesson
that we should only rely on Allah and attach ourselves to Him alone.

**Moral:**

1. We should always ask Allah to judge us with His mercy.
2. We should try to read the du'as from Al-Sahifat al-Kamilat
al-Sajjadiyya, as there is so much to learn from them.

Our 4th Imam, Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (A), was a very kind and patient
person. He usually never got angry and he always had a smile on his
face.

One day when Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (A) was walking down the street
with a few of his friends, he saw an old man carrying a heavy load while
his son walked next to him.

Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (A) lost his smile and became red with anger.
All his friends were very surprised to see Imam (A) in this way, as they
had never seen him angry.

They asked Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (A) what had happened to make him so
angry. Imam (A) replied that he was angry to see a son walk with his
father letting him carry a heavy load and not helping.

**Moral:**

You should always help your parents, even when they do not ask you to.
For example, you can tidy up your toys after you have finished playing
with them.

Our 4th Imam, Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (A) always remembered the saying
of the Holy Prophet (S): that if a Muslim did not think of the needs of
his Muslim brothers then he was not a Muslim.

This is why when it was dark in the night and all the people were
sleeping, Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (A) would get up, put some food in a
sack and carry it on his shoulders to the houses of the poor people.

When Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (A) went out at night it was dark and
everyone was be sleeping but Imam (A) would cover his face just in case
anyone was up, so that no one could recognise him.

Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (A) looked after about 100 families like this
without them even knowing who it was that was helping them.

It was only when Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (A) died and the people no
longer received the food that they found out it must have been Imam Ali
Zainul Abideen (A) who had helped them all that time.

**Moral:**

When you do something good you should not tell everyone because Allah
can see and He is the one who will give you Thawaab for what you have
done. In fact Allah says that He will give you more Thawaab if you do
good and do not tell everyone.


