Imam Muhammad Al-baqir (a)
==========================

Once a Christian asked our 5th Imam, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) how it
could possibly be true what the Imam (A) had said about the fruits of
Heaven not reducing when they were eaten.

Imam (A) told him not only was it true but he could give him an example
of something being used and not reducing, which was present in this
world.

Imam (A) then continued that when a candle is used to light other
candles, even as many as a hundred thousand other candles, the light of
the original candle will not get any less.

**Moral:**

Just because you do not understand something in Islam does not mean it
is wrong. Allah gave us Islam and our knowledge can not compare with
His.

In the time of our 5th Imam, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) there lived a
man called Jabir bin Abdullah.

Jabir was a pious man who was alive at the time of the Holy Prophet
(S).

One day the Holy Prophet (S) told Jabir that he would be alive to see
the Prophet's great great grandson Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A). The Holy
Prophet (S) asked Jabir to give Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) salaams from
his great great grandfather, the Holy Prophet(S).

The Holy Prophet (S) passed away and Jabir remained alive for a long
time just as the Prophet (S) had told him.

One day Jabir who was now a very old man, was visiting the house of
Imam Ali Zainul Abideen (A) when he came across a small child.

Jabir asked Imam Zainul Abideen (A) who the child was. When Imam (A)
replied that the child was his son Muhammad al-Baqir who was to be the
next Imam, Jabir was so happy that he began to cry.

At last Jabir could give the message that he had been carrying with him
for so many years.

Jabir turned to face Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) and told him that his
great great grandfather had asked him to pass his salaams to Imam (A).

**Moral:**

If you are given something to look after or pass to someone else (no
matter how small) then look after it well as you are accountable for
it.

In the time of our 5th Imam, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) the Muslims
were using Roman coins for money. The King of Rome decided that he was
going to make new Roman coins which would have written on them things
that were against Islam.

The Muslim king Waleed did not know what to do because they needed to
use the coins for money but at the same time they did not want to use
coins which had things against Islam written on them.

Waleed decide to ask our 5th Imam, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) what he
should do. Imam (A) told him that he should also make new coins which
the Muslims could use from then on.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir told him that the coins should have on one side
"La ilaha illallah" and on the other side "Muhammadur rasulullah".

Waleed agreed that this was an excellent idea and the coins were
made.

**Moral:**

We should learn what our Imams (A) have taught us. They always know
what to do.

It was a very hot day and our 5th Imam, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) was
working hard on his farm.

A man was walking past and when he saw Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A)
looking so hot and tired from all the hard work he had done, he told the
Imam that he should not work so hard and rest instead.

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (A) answered that he was working so hard, so
that he can look after his family, and not have to ask anyone for
help.

Allah likes for us to work hard and do things for ourselves.

**Moral:**

You should always try hard to do something by yourself and only when
you have tried and can not do it you should ask for help.


