Publishers’ Note
================

There is no doubt that one of the most fundamental goals of the research
institutes and centers is to enhance the scientific potentials of the
universities and higher education centers, which bring together the
talented elite.

Dealing with this specialized stratum and producing research material
for the students to use is the most worthwhile endeavor of these
scientific institutions. Similarly, in order to compensate the
scientific deficiencies existing in various centers, the universities
are to provide these institutes with their new findings so that by
developing a viable mutual bond, a productive transaction may ensue and
thus, the theoretical aspects and the fruitful applied results of
sciences may emerge.

One of the blessed evidences of this research transaction in the field
of humanities is the cooperation between the Islamic Research Foundation
of Astan Quds Razavi and the Organization for Researching and Composing
University Textbooks in the Humanities (SAMT), the Center for Humanities
Research and Development. The two institutes have presented their
fifteenth joint endeavor to the country’s scientific community by the
publication of the Persian edition of **Animals: Protective Laws and
Exploitation Limits in Islam**, which is now translated into English.

Holding a PhD in philosophy and besides being familiar with Islamic
jurisprudence, philosophy, and mysticism, the writer has for years been
dealing with jurisprudential issues and is at present among those making
research on bioethics and medical jurisprudence.

The author’s works published by The Islamic Research Foundation of Astan
Quds Razavi are:

1. *Al-Tarqi‘ wa Zar‘ al-A‘dha’ fi Fiqh al-Islami* (Arabic) [Organ
Transplantation in Islamic Jurisprudence] (1380/2001)

2. *Payvand A‘dha’ dar Fiqh-i Islami* (Persian) [Organ Transplantation
in Islamic Jurisprudence] (1381/2002)

3. *Hidhanat-i Kudakan dar Fiqh-i Islami* (Persian) [Child Custody in
Islamic Jurisprudence] (1386/2007)

4. *Hadithi Wilayat, Nigarishi Naw dar Ma‘na Shinasi* (Persian)
[*Hadith* of Guardianship, a New Approach to Semantics] (1387/2008)

5. *Guzargah-ha dar Fiqh-i Islami* (Persian) [Passageways in Islamic
Jurisprudence] (1388/2009)

6. *Hayvanat, Qavanin Himayati wa Hudud- Bahravari dar Islam* (Persian)
[Animals; Protective Rules and Exploitation Limits in Islam] (Islamic
Research Foundation & SAMT Publication – 1388/2009)

*Nazariyya Padayish-i Jahan dar Hikmat-i Yamani wa Hikmat-i Muti‘aliya*
(Persian) [Origins of the Universe in Transcendent Philosophy and the
Yamani Wisdom] (1389/2010)

This book is originally written as an auxiliary textbook for the
students of Jurisprudence and Fundamentals of Islamic Law. It is hoped
that, besides the academic community, other researchers and those
interested in the topic will benefit from it, as well.

**The Islamic Research Foundation of Astan Quds Razavi**


