Preface
=======

Need for health is among the basic needs in human life. Man’s physical
and mental health is secured by two methods of prevention and treatment.
In the first method, the pathogenic factors are diagnosed and rendered
inactive, or minimized to the lowest possible level, so that one may go
on living with a healthy body and soul. In the second method, however,
it is attempted to bring the pathogenic factors under control and, in
the best of conditions, destroy it so that one may regain one’s health.

Although apparently seem two different ways, hygiene and treatment are
supplementary to each other and in any case, the diagnosis of diseases
is necessary.

Diagnosing the factors of diseases and the way they function in the
body, on the one hand, and the way to neutralize them, on the other, is
the main duty of medical science. In order to carry out this essential
duty, medicine requires an environment enabling it to recognize the
emerging process of the factors of diseases, the way they function, and
finally the body’s reaction against them; and then, by arranging the
hygienic principles and regulations, to eliminate the grounds for their
emergence, and in case of emerging, eradicate them.

Naturally, the environment for such discovering cannot be the very body
of a human being; because, regardless of its contradiction with the
objectives of medicine, which include protecting and taking care of
man’s health, it is incompatible with the status and self-esteem of
human beings, as well. Thus, the need for vivisection of animals for
research purposes is increasingly felt in the medical community.

Although the need for laboratory animals is understandable from the very
early days that medicine turned from description of disease towards
diagnosis of disease; with the passage of time, however, the question
was raised, first in the minds of the physicians and then in the minds
of the jurists, as to whether man is permitted to jeopardize animals’
health in order to maintain their own health condition in the two areas
of health and treatment.

It was then that, with the entrance of ethico-judicial thinking into the
realm of medical studies and research, the ground was paved for the
appearance of a new interdisciplinary science called bio-ethics. The
bio-ethics researchers believe that although man’s distinguished status
among the other creatures allows him to exploit animals for the benefits
of advancing medical research but since the animals as creatures of the
same system [of creation] also have the right to live, and of course
living a healthy life, it is not so obvious that they can be utilized to
our own benefits without any limitations.

Such an attitude towards animals led the researchers of bio-ethics to
study the utilization of animals in the two legal and ethical fields,
and, while reminding the qualifications and ethical principles of using
the animals, design rules and regulations for keeping animals and
working on them in laboratory environments.

Accordingly, the most important bio-ethical duty is the researchers’
willingness to accept responsibility for supervising the work on
animals. This responsiveness causes medical sciences researchers to be
sensitive to the place and conditions, feeding, and hygiene of keeping
animals and seriously prevent painful methods in dealing with them
except in specific instances.

Now, there is a question before us, albeit in several forms: How is our
work with the animals in a laboratory environment assessed from the
viewpoint of Islam as one of the great Revealed religions, which has
many rules and regulations in different human and animal fields?

To find an answer, it is inevitable that we first review the Islamic
sources including both the Holy Qur’an and the *Sunna*, and then
consider the viewpoints of different researchers of Islamic sciences.

Animals are among the wonders of the world of creation that the Exalted
God calls humankind to deliberate on their creation so that, on the one
hand, they may find out subtlety of their existence, and on the other,
acknowledge the greatness of their Creator:

***﴾Do they not observe the camel, [to see] how she has been
created?***[^1]***﴿***

As we will explain in detail later on, the Holy Qur’an has approved the
love for animals and being delighted in relation with them as a
principle, and states the Prophet Solomon’s viewpoint in this respect as
follows:

***﴾When one evening there were displayed before him prancing steeds, he
said, “Indeed I have preferred the love of [worldly] niceties to the
remembrance of my Lord until [the sun] disappeared behind the [night's]
veil. “Bring it back for me!” Then he [and others] began to stroke
[their] legs and necks.***[^2]***﴿***

The Holy Qur’an also describes the sense of beauty and splendor that
humankind feels of seeing animals as follows:

***﴾There is in them a beauty for you when you bring them home for rest
and when you drive them forth to pasture.***[^3]***﴿***

This pleasant and beautiful feeling of human co-existence with the
animals has made the Infallible Imams (A.S.) to regard some animals as
household residents.

It is related from Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) about cats: “A cat is among the
residents of the household.”[^4]

Therefore, the animals, like human beings, enjoy a kind of status and
place to the extent that, on the one hand, God accepts their request and
prayer[^5] and withholds the punishment of the human beings for their
indecent behaviors for animals’ sake,[^6] and on the other hand, human
beings are obliged to respect them, as the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has
also viewed the animals as deserving to be greeted (*salam*).

A man went to the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and greeted him. The Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.) said, “Greetings to you (two).” The man said, “O
Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.), I am alone.” The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said,
“Greetings to you and to your horse.”[^7]

So also, Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.), not forgetting the animals, raises his
hands to the Divine Threshold to pray:

*I pray in the Divine Presence for you and your beast.*[^8]

Similarly, Imam al-Kazim (A.S.) and Imam al-Baqir (A.S.) would raise
their hands to pray for solving the problems of some animals, whether
that animal was a devouring lion or a little bird like a ringdove or a
pigeon.[^9]

It is in such circumstances that the animals like other members of a
intimate family enjoy certain rights that the head of the family is
obliged to fulfill, while being emotionally protected by him/her.[^10]
That is why in Islamic texts there is mention about the rights of
animals over their owners.

Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) has enumerated six rights for the animals that the
owner is obliged to observe: not to overload them; not to make their
back a place for engaging in conversations; to feed them after using
them; to let them have access to water; not to brand them on the face;
not to whip their faces.[^11]

The Commander of the Faithful (A.S.) enjoined his administrators, who
were in charge of collecting *zakat* (obligatory alms), of upholding
moral principles in treating animals:

*Do not entrust the animals (for shepherding) to anyone except someone
who is a well-wisher, God-wary, trustworthy, and watchful; and who is
not harsh (on them), nor makes them run too much, nor tires them, nor
belabors them… When the trustee takes over the animals, tell him not to
separate the she-camel from its young and not to milk all its milk
because that would affect its young.*

*Also, tell him not to exert it in riding. In this matter, he should
behave justly towards camels, especially when riding the ones that are
tired or wounded. He should allow camels (who are tired) to rest, and
drive with ease those whose hoofs have been rubbed off. When you pass a
water spring, stop the camels there for drinking and do not take them
away from grasslands to barren paths. When he reaches grasslands, he
should allow them to rest and then and give them time to drink water and
eat grass.*[^12]

Not only the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and the Infallible Imams (A.S.) have
advised on animals and their rights, but also Islam is the only Divine
religion that since its advent, has undertaken to protect animals and
declared the sacred territory of Makkah as a safe sanctuary for animals,
a place where not only maltreatment of animals is not allowed, but also
their hunting, evicting, and startling is declared as *haram*
(unlawful).[^13]

Since the very beginning of Islam, Muslims have always respected the
animals and their rights in their day-to-day life and viewed their
protection as among their obligatory duties.

For instance, after the Muslims conquered Egypt in 19/640, they set out
for Alexandria to conquer Rome. The commander of the Muslim Army (‘Amr
b. ‘As) before leaving Egypt ordered to pick up the commander’s tent,
but he was informed that a ringdove had nested there. The commander
backed off from his order and allowed the tent remain intact. The
existence of this tent caused people to gather there and built a city at
that location which is still famous by the name Fustat (tent) and known
to be the first city built by Muslims in old Cairo.[^14]

In addition, one of the functions of good practice of endowment,[^15]
which has since long ago been confirmed by Islam and implemented by
Muslims, is pious endowment for supplying food for animals. Some
examples of such pious practice can be found in the endowment deeds
preserved in the Astan Quds Razavi Documents Archive.

Some well-wishing pious people have endowed part of their immovable
properties to provide food for birds and stray dogs in winter out of
their fixed assets.

However, although the present research is not the first with an Islamic
approach,[^16] it is attempted to study the animals in three fields of
theology, law, and ethics. The writer hopes that the results achieved
from all these three fields may somehow clarify the viewpoints of Islam
and the Muslim scholars concerning the animals, their rights, as well as
the proper behavior of human beings towards them.

Undoubtedly, the path we are treading today will in future resolve the
ethico-legal ambiguities of working with animals in a much brighter way
through comprehensive researches done by the eminent scholars and
researchers.

In conclusion, I draw the respected readers’ attention to two issues:

First: there are different topics in *hadith* collections concerning
animals, which we have avoided to talk about for the sake of brevity.
Some of those topics are as follows: desirability of keeping animals;
manners of keeping animals; manners and value of keeping different types
of horses, donkeys and mules, camels, sheep, dogs, cats, doves, hens,
roosters and the necessity of respecting them; manners of training
animals, the way to fasten the saddles and bridles, manners of riding
animals, variety of the colors of animals and their differences, eating
before a dog, impermissibility of killing cats and quadrupeds, etc.[^17]

Second: in this research, the traditions of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.)
and the Infallible Imams (A.S.) existing in the Sunni and Shi‘i sources
are widely applied. Although in legal researches, it is necessary to
examine the traditions before considering their content in terms of
their chains of transmission (*sanad*) in order to come up with a
ruling, we did not do this because we trust their authenticity, as most
of these traditions, are reliable despite the school of thought of their
transmitters, as they stand to reason and match the generalities
existing in the Book and *Sunna*.[^18]

**Saeid Nazari Tavakkoli**

Mashhad, Iran,

May 21, 2007

[^1]: The Qur’an, with an English Paraphrase, tr. Sayyid ‘Ali Quli
Qara’i, the Center for Translation of the Holy Qur’an, Qum, 2003, 88:17.

[^2]: Q. 38:31-33. There are other possibilities set forth on the
meaning of these verses; see: Saduq, Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Man la Yahdhuruhu
al-Faqih, ed. ‘Ali Akbar Ghaffari, 4 vols. 2nd edition, Jami‘a-yi
Mudarrisin, Qum, 1404/1984, 1/202, No. 606-607.

[^3]: Q. 16:6.

[^4]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Tahdhib al-Ahkam fi Sharh al-Muqniʿa, ed.
Akhundi, 10 vols. 4th edition, Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyya, Tehran,
1406/1968. 1/226, No. 256.

[^5]: Kulayni, Muhammad b. Yaʿqub, Al-Kafi, ed. ʿAli Akbar Ghaffari, 8
vols. 3rd edition, Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyya, Tehran, 1388/1968, 8/246,
No. 344.

[^6]: Al-Kafi, 2/276, No. 31.

[^7]: Rawandi, Fadhlullah, al-Nawadir, ed. Saʿid Ridha ʿAli ʿAskari, Dar
al-Hadith, 1407/1987, p. 196.

[^8]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Ikhtiyar Ma‘rifat al-Rijal, ed. Mahdi
Raja’i, Al al-Bayt Institute, Qum, 1404/1983, 2/687, No. 730.

[^9]: Rawandi, Sa‘id b. Habbat Allah, Al-Khara’ij wa al-Jara’ih, Imam
Mahdi Institute, Qum, n.d, 2/649-650 No. 1; Tusi, Ibn Hamza, Al-Thaqib
fi al-Manaqib, ed. Nabil Ridha ‘Alwan, 2nd edition, Ansariyan Institute,
Qum, 1412/1991, p. 390, No. 320; Saffar, Muhammad b. Hasan, Basa’ir
al-Darajat al-Kubra, ed. Muhsin Kuchibaghi, A‘lami Institute, Tehran,
1404/1983, p. 364, No. 16.

[^10]: Accordingly, in Islamic traditions, there is talk about stroking
the animals: The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) said, “Maintain relations
with animals and stroke them on the forehead and back.” Abi Dawud
Sajistani, Sulayman b. Ashʿath, Sunan Abi Dawud, ed. Saʿid Muhammad
al-Laham, 2 vols. Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, 1410/1990, 1/576, No 2553.

[^11]: Al-Mahasin, 2/627, No. 963; also see: Rayshahri, Muhammad, Mizan
al-Hikma, 4 vols. Dar al-Hadith, Qum, 1416/1995, 1/712, No. 981

[^12]: Nahj al-Balagha, ed. Muhammad ‘Abdu, 4 vols. Dar al-Ma‘rifa,
Beirut, p. 380, letter No. 25.

[^13]: Ibn Idris Hilli, Muhammad b. Mansur, Al-Sara’ir al-Hawi li Tahrir
al-Fatawi, 3 vols. 2nd edition, Muʿassisa-yi Nashr-i Islami Qum,
1410/1990, 1/566; Hilli, Ja‘far b. Hasan, Shara’i‘ al-Islam fi Masa’il
al-Halal wa al-Haram, 4 vols. 2nd edition, Istiqlal Institute, Tehran,
1409/1988, 1/222.

[^14]: Mas‘udi, ‘Ali b. al-Husayn, Al-Tanbih wa al-Ishraf, Dar al-Sawi,
Cairo, p. 310.

[^15]: What is ment by endowment is that a person leave to others some
of his property to be spent on charity.

[^16]: The animals’ rights from the Islamic point of view has already
been studied in Persian language in several works (articles and books)
and it behoves me to express my gratitude and appreciation to them. Some
of these works include: Fariduni, Husayn, Barrasi-yi Huquq-i Hayvanat
dar Islam wa Qawanin-i Ruz (Ph.D. Dissertation), Tehran University,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Academic year 1344/1965-1345/1966, No.
797. Ja‘fari, Muhammad Taqi, Rasa’il-i Fiqhi (Huquq-i Haywanat dar
Fiqh-i Islami), Nashr-i Kiramat Institute, 1377 sh/1998. Na’ini, Dr.
‘Aliridha – Rabbani, Dr. Muhammad, Huquq Haywanat az Didgah Qur’an wa
Hadith, Majalla-yi Danishvar, VII, No. 26, Winter 1378 sh/1999. Naji
Jazayiri, Sayyid Hashim, Himayat az Haywanat dar Islam, 1st edition, Dar
al-Thaqalayn, Qum, 1379 sh/2000. Rashidi, Fariburz, Huquq-i Haywanat,
Majalla-yi Dampizishk, V, No. 1, Fall, 1380/2001 and IV, No. 3, Spring,
1380 sh/2001. Purmuhammadi, Shima, “Gostara-yi Huquq-i Haywanat dar
Islam va Gharb”, Majalla-yi Nida-yi Sadiq, X, No. 39 and 40, Winter 1384
sh/2005. Ahmadikhah, ‘Ali, “Huquq-i Hayvanhat dar Sira va Sukhan-i
Payambar-i A‘zam”, Majalla-yi Tarikh dar A’inay-yi Pazhuhish, III, No.
11, Fall, 1385 sh/2006. Muqimi Haji, Abu al-Qasim, “Huquq-i Haywanat dar
Fiqh-i Islami”, Faslnama-yi Fiqh-i Ahl-i Bayt, XII, No. 48, Winter 1385
sh/2006. Kalantari Arsanjani, ‘Ali Akbar, “Fiqh-i Shi‘a wa Huquq-i
Haywanat”, Majalla-yi Fiqh, IX, No. 33-43.

[^17]: For more information, see: Hurr ʿAmili. Muhammad Hasan, Wasa’il
al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, ed. Rabbani, 20 vols. Dar Ihya’
al-Turath al-ʿArabi, Beirut, n.d, 8/339-362.

[^18]: See: Majlisi, Muhammad Baqir, Bihar al-Anwar al-Jami‘a li Durar
Akhbar al-A’immat al Athar, 110 vols. 2nd edition, Mu’assisat al-Wafa,
Beirut, 1403/1982, 62/316.


