Discourse One: Theological Studies
==================================

Animals’ Hereafter Life
-----------------------

The life after death and the life Hereafter (*hashr*) of creatures is
among the tenets of all Muslims. The question is set forth by the
theologians as to whether animals’ life will end by worldly death, or
like humans, they will transfer to the other world and enjoy an
immaterial life, too.

This is among the most important epistemic (religio-philosophical)
questions, because human beings have been wondering since long ago if
they can compare themselves with other creatures, especially with
animals, and despite the structural disparity that they have with them,
if they will find a way to prove an essential similarity between
themselves and animals.

Bringing up the issue of animal’s Resurrection in the religious texts
provided a suitable ground for rational endeavors, which are discussed
in the best way possible by Muslim exegetes and theologians in
exegetical and theo-philosophical sources.

### 1. Exegetical Studies

In *aya* 38 of *Surat al-An‘am*, the Holy Qur’an first brings up the
similarity between humans and animals, and then draws the conclusion
that the animals also have Resurrection:

***﴾There is no animal on land, nor a bird that flies with its wings,
but they are communities like yourselves. We have not omitted anything
from the Book. Then they will be mustered toward their Lord.﴿***[^1]

Therefore, we can easily find out why the Holy Qur’an explicitly
declares that animal’s *hashr* is among the definite signs of
Resurrection:[^2]

***﴾when the wild beasts are mustered﴿.***[^3]

Before any talk about the resurrection (*hashr*) of the animals, it is
necessary to clarify the meaning of the word *hashr,* then clarify what
is meant by the similarity of man and animal (*umammun amthalakum* =
communities like yourselves).

**1.1. Semantics of** ***Hashr***

**1.1.1.** **Lexical**: The word *hashr* means gathering (mustering) in
Arabic[^4] and thus the gathering place of people is called
*mahshar*.[^5] Since gathering of people together requires their
intermingling, the word *hashr* can be translated as *ikhtilat*
(mixture), too, which is the concomitant of the lexical meaning.[^6]

However, it is to be noted that in Arabic the word *hashr* is used to
imply the meaning of gathering when this action is carried out with a
kind of forcing and driving (*al-jam‘ ma‘ al-sawq* = gathering by means
of driving);[^7] thus, this word is also used to describe the forced
migration of people from their inhabiting place.[^8]

Perhaps it is with such consideration that Allah Almighty has used the
two words *baththa* (scattered) and *jam‘* (to gather) in the meaning of
scattering and gathering in *Surat al-Shura* in order to show the
presence of the animals in the Hereafter, and takes upon Himself the
gathering of animals and to actualize it He uses the word *Ghadir*
(Able, All-Powerful).[^9]

***﴾Among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and
whatever creatures He has scattered in them, and He is Able to gather
them whenever He wishes.﴿***[^10]

Therefore, translating the word *hashr* into *mawt* (death), as presumed
in some exegetical texts,[^11] cannot be correct, because in this case
it may no longer mean *hashr* towards God.[^12]

**2.1.1.** **Connotative**: What is meant by *hashr* in religious texts
is “to bring out the dead from the graves and to drive them toward the
place of reckoning (judgment).”[^13] Some theologians, however, have
applied this word to the first stage of the Resurrection Day, i.e.
bringing the dead to life.[^14]

**2.1. Communal Life of Animals**: The statement ﴾There is no animal on
land, or a bird that flies with its wings, but they are communities like
yourselves﴿[^15] denotes that from the viewpoint of the Holy Qur’an
animals, like human beings, are communities (*umam*).

In Qur’anic terminology, *umma* is group of people that a single cause,
such as religion, path, time, or place has gathered together;[^16] thus,
the people who believe in a prophet are regarded as that prophet’s
*umma*.[^17]

From the viewpoint of the Holy Qur’an, all people were a single united
community, who separated from each other due to the differences arising
among them, a difference that can be resolved through obeying divine
prophets.[^18]

Since the Holy Qur’an has regarded animals as *umma*, we are to accept
that there has been a kind of identity and unity among the animals in
understanding the world of being, reaction to the Creator of being, the
quality of life, and the finality and the purpose of life, and this has
prompted the application of *umma* to them.[^19]

**3.1. Similarity of Animals and Humankind**: It is implied from the
phrase *umamun amthalukum* (communities like yourself) that the *hashr*
of animals is the corollary of their similarity with human beings.
Therefore, the question remains to be asked as to what the animals and
human beings are identical in that they should be resurrected like human
beings.

Although the term *amthalukum* suggests similarity of animals to humans,
it is to be noted that this similarity is not in all aspects (states and
affairs), for, it is not possible to ignore the structural and
behavioral differences of animals and humans.[^20] Therefore, we are to
be looking for a kind of likeness between them.

In explanation of the likeness between animals and humankind, some
probabilities are set forth:

1. Being divine creatures and denoting their Creator[^21]

2. Needing someone to manage them in different aspects of their
life[^22]

3. Enjoying the capability of recognizing God, accepting the Oneness and
worshipping of God[^23]

4. Capability of grouping and having intra-group likeness and
communication[^24]

5. Stating different aspects of their lives in the Divine Scripture[^25]

6. Resurrection on the Day of Judgment and gaining one’s rights[^26]

7. God’s dispensing justice to them[^27]

8. Tendency to accept inter-group training[^28]

9. Existence of some ethical similarities between a group of human
beings and animals.[^29]

Although each one of these probabilities *per se* can be true in
explaining likeness of animals to human beings, it does not seem
necessary to translate this likeness as a specific behavior or feature
common among them; rather, we have to accept that this similarity can be
in any area that can be realized in the real world.[^30]

**1.4. Summing Up**: Using the word *umma* about animals as well as
*amthal* to explain the relation between man and animal signifies two
points:

Firstly, the animals may be called *umma* only when a common goal in
life can be found for them, whether they themselves have chosen this
goal (optional) or the laws of nature have imposed it on them
(compulsive). Thus, simply having a proper name and being classified on
that basis – as some have claimed[^31] – is not sufficient for regarding
animals as *umma*.

Secondly, the likeness of animals and humans is to be viewed at from the
perspective that the animals enjoy the same circumstances that lead to
human resurrection.

For this reason, the similarities of animals and humans cannot be
summarized in their common biological characteristics; rather, we have
to step beyond this and claim that the same criterion for human
resurrection, namely, a kind of consciousness and rational-inner
perception that brings about felicity and wretchedness, is also found in
animals. Thus, due to their availing of this blessing, their life would
not end with death and upon departing from the material world, they
would enter an immaterial world called Hereafter.[^32]

This is the amazing aspect of animals’ life that the Holy Qur’an enjoins
us to comprehend:

***﴾And in your creation [too], and whatever animals that He scatters
abroad, there are signs for a people who have certainty.﴿***[^33]

### 2. Theo-Philosophical Studies

As we noticed, according to religious doctrines, animals have
resurrection (*hashr*), that is, their life would not end with death
and, like humans, they would begin a new life in the world to come (the
immaterial world after death). It is to be figured out whether we can
prove it as true on the grounds of theo-philosophical fundamentals.

**1.2. Rational Potential of Animal Resurrection**: In the process of
death – as we feel it – the physical life of a living being stops. That
is to say, as soon as its body activities come to a halt, it would give
no response to any of the external stimuli. But according to the
religious doctrines, death is a gradual process, which is associated
with the acceptance of an immaterial dimension (soul). For this reason,
death means the disconnection of the soul from the body, which is either
the result of the ceasing of physical activities or the cause of it.

As life is defined by the connection of the soul to the body, so also
death is defined by the final and permanent disconnection of the spirit
from the body. Fakhr al-Rizi wrote in this respect:

***Human soul is comprised of a luminous spiritual essence that if
connected to the body, its luminosity permeates all organs of the body,
and that is [called] life. Then, we say, at the death time its relation
would indeed be cut from the outer and inner aspect of the body, and
this is [called] death.***[^34]

According to the theo-philosophical doctrines, separation of body from
soul would take place in two conditions: 1. Perfection (actualization)
of the soul, 2. Decay (ruined condition) of the body.

When entered the physical world, human soul is purely potential; it
actualizes its hidden excellences during the worldly life through the
body and by acquiring knowledge and practicing. Naturally, by
actualization of the inner human faculties, the soul no longer needs the
body, separates from it, and the person dies. On the other hand, when
the body loses its capability to hold the soul as a result of ruined
condition, the soul departs from the body and the person dies, although
the soul has not achieved its full actualization yet.

Sadr al-Din Shirazi describes the first type of death as follows:

***The basis of this (natural death) is the soul’s getting independence
due to its essential life and gradually giving up using bodily
apparatuses until it is fully separated and totally leave the body so as
to turn into an actual entity.***[^35]

Similarly, Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) states in response to Hisham b. Hakam
concerning the second type of death:

***Blood causes freshness of the body, radiance of the skin, fineness of
the voice, and increase of laughter. When the blood circulation stops,
the soul will leave the body.***[^36]

Such a belief about death is ascertained through the Qur’anic teachings.
In describing death, the Holy Qur’an frequently uses the word *wafaya*
and its derivatives, which includes such meanings as full grip (taking
full hold of something) and a kind of separation (complete disunion), a
separation that sometimes God directly ascribes to Himself and sometimes
to the angel of death (*malik al-mawt*):

﴾Allah takes the souls at the time of their death, and those who have
not died in their sleep. Then He retains those for whom He has ordained
death and releases the others until a specified time. There are indeed
signs in that for a people who reflect[^37]﴿.

﴾Say, "You will be taken away by the angel of death, who has been
charged with you. Then you will be brought back to your Lord."﴿[^38]

According to the religious doctrines, when death happens and the worldly
life ends, the eternal life of man starts in two stages of purgatory and
Resurrection.

Purgatory or *barzakh*, which lexically means the buffer between two
things, applies to a stage in the otherworldly eternal life lying
between the present world and the Resurrection. When gradual physical
death occurs, human beings keep living in the world without their
physical body but influenced by the physical world until the last of
human beings dies and departs from this world. With the termination of
human life on earth, the physical world is shattered and the human
beings make themselves present to God for reckoning; this stage is
Resurrection.

Despite the viewpoints of some Sunni theologians, two views are set
forth about the circumstances of Resurrection:

1. Resurrection of the soul: the advocates of this view believe that
only the non-physical and spiritual aspect of human beings will be
present in the Hereafter life.

2. Resurrection of the body: the Resurrection of the body or physical
Resurrection, by its widely known definition, is that man’s physical
body, which is decomposed due to death and passage of time, is revived
again and stand [before Allah] for reckoning.

However, from the viewpoint of Sadr al-Din Shirazi, what is meant by
physical Resurrection is the presence of the soul with a non-physical
and ethereal body in the Hereafter life.[^39]

Anyway, if we accept that what the Holy Qur’an means by the Resurrection
of animals and their equality with human beings in this respect is their
presence in the Hereafter, we should be able to prove that the animals
do have souls (*nafs*)[^40], a soul that after death and its departure
from the physical world, starts its journey toward the Hereafter.
Nevertheless, do animals have souls?

Two different answers are given to this question in theo-philosophical
texts:

First, no creature except man has immaterial soul.[^41] The proponents
of this idea believe that although animals possess physical powers
(faculties) like those of human beings, they do not have immaterial
souls, because for them accepting such a dimension requires accepting
the equality of man and animal in an immaterial reality (nature). This,
in itself, is followed by equality in behavior, moral characteristics,
and acquisition of knowledge, which is definitely not acceptable.[^42]

Criticism: Although immateriality (*tajarrud*) is a negative concept and
common between man and animal, it does not mean their equality in all
essence (nature),[^43] since it can be assumed as a hierarchical concept
in which human beings and animals have been placed in two different
ranks.

Second, like human beings, animals also possess immaterial souls. The
proponents of this theory have relied on rational reasons as well as
some Qur’anic verses and sayings of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and the
Infallible Imams (A.S.) to prove the existence of immaterial soul in
animals:

1. Out-religious (rational) reasons: Discovery of animal behavior
indicates the dominance of a kind of rationality in them, as the animals
cannot carry out certain well thought-out and calculated tasks without
availing rational perception. Animals’ availing such a level of rational
perception indicates that they possess an immaterial soul (rational
soul) which controls (manages) their various material dimensions (body).

2. In-religious (narrated) reasons: Similarly, the religious texts also
emphasize the animals’ ability to establish verbal communication as well
as their understanding and ability to reason and draw inferences.

Although the animals’ degree of understanding and the ability to
perceive is not comparable to that of the human beings, it does not mean
that animals’ understanding in all cases is lower than that of humans.
Scientific evidences indicate the reality that the difference between
the physical structure of human beings and animals sometimes provides
the ground for the animals to be more perceptive than humans. This
scientific reality has not been neglected in religious texts, either.
For instance, barking of dogs and braying of donkeys at night shows
their awareness of some incidents that are going to take place. These
texts warn against being heedless of them and emphasize that these
reactions are the result of their perceiving something that the humans
are not able to perceive.[^44]

The existence of such an understanding in animals represents their
possession of an immaterial soul. The Holy Qur’an points out this
understanding in various instances.

- Glorification (of Allah Almighty) by the wise earthly and heavenly
creatures:

***﴾Have you not regarded that Allah is glorified by everyone in the
heavens and the earth, and the birds spreading their wings? Each knows
his prayer and glorification, and Allah knows best what they
do.﴿***[^45]

There are two possibilities regarding what the glorification (of Allah
Almighty) by animals is meant to be:

1. Non-verbal glorification: According to this hypothesis, every living
creature praises the Lord and describes His characteristics in its own
language based on its existential structure;

2. Verbal glorification: in this view, animals glorify their Lord using
their power of understanding and faculty of perception with the use of
speech and sounds.[^46]

- Possibility of understanding the birds’ speech:

***﴾… and he [Solomon] said," O people! We have been taught the speech
of the birds, and we have been given out of everything. Indeed this is a
manifest advantage.﴿***[^47]

Although, in the Holy Qur’an, understanding the speech of the birds is
taught to some Divine Messengers, such as David and Solomon, according
to what is related in some tradition texts, the Infallible Imams (A.S.)
also possessed this understanding.

***It is related that a perplexed and frightened sparrow came twittering
near Imam al-Ridha (A.S.). The Imam (A.S.) said, “Do you know what it is
saying?” “No”, they said. He said, “It is telling me that a snake is
about to eat its offspring in the house. Stand up and take this rod,***
***go to the house and kill the snake.” I [the narrator of the hadith]
stood up, took the rod, and entered the house. I saw a snake moving
around in the house and killed it.***

The birds chiming in with David:

***﴾Certainly We gave David a grace from Us: “O mountains and birds,
chime in with him!”﴿***[^48]

Deep understanding of the birds:

***﴾[One day] he [Solomon] reviewed the birds, and said, “Why do I not
see the hoopoe? Or is he absent?” “I will surely punish him with a
severe punishment, or I will surely behead him, unless he brings a
clear-cut excuse.” He did not stay for long [before he turned up] and
said, “I have alighted on something which you have not alighted on, and
I have brought you from Sheba a definite report.﴿***[^49]

Perception of the birds:

***﴾When they came to the Valley of Ants, an ant said, “O ants! Enter
your dwellings, lest Solomon and his hosts should trample on you while
they are unaware.”﴿***[^50]

Innate intelligence in the honeybee:

***﴾And your Lord inspired the bee [saying]: “Make your home in the
mountains, and on the trees and the trellises that they erect.”﴿***[^51]

The meaning of the sparrow’s song:

Abu Hamza al-Thumali said:

***One day I was sitting with Imam ‘Ali b. al-Husayn (A.S.) when a flock
of sparrows were flying overhead and making noise. Then he said to me,
“O Aba Hamza! Do you know what these sparrows are saying?” I said, “No.”
He said, “They are glorifying their Lord and pleading Him for their
daily sustenance.”***[^52]

The existence of various types of cognizance in animals:

***Whatever God has kept hidden from animals, there are four features
that He has not kept hidden from them: knowing that they have a Creator,
knowing how to look for livelihood, knowing the gender, and fear of
death.***[^53]

**2.2. The Objective of Resurrection of the Animals**: Given the
acceptance of the soul and resurrection od the animals, the question
remains to be answered as to what objective God is pursuing for the
presence of animals in the Hereafter and their resurrection.

The easiest answer is that either like Ibn Hazm we say, “I do not
know”[^54], or like Qadhi ‘Adhud Iji we say, “God has no purpose for
this.”[^55] However, if we seek to find a clear and convincing answer,
we should notice that according to the principle of the similarity
between man and animal regarding resurrection, the same reason or
reasons that ascertain man’s resurrection would prove animal
resurrection in the Hereafter, too.

Although taking this issue into consideration would pave the way to find
the answer, it would create a new difficulty, too; because, according to
the Qur’anic teachings, the human resurrection is aimed at receiving
reward (*thawab*) and punishment (*‘iqab*) for the way they have acted
in the world.

Although the world can be a place for rewarding or punishing human
beings for their deeds, the material characteristics of the world create
a kind of restriction that rules out the possibility to establish a
perennial proportion between human function and the kind and degree of
reward or punishment they receive. Therefore, the Hereafter, because of
its infinite time and space, is a proper place for judging human
actions.

***﴾Indeed the Hour is bound to come: I will have it hidden, so that
every soul may be rewarded for what it strives for.***[^56]***﴿***

The otherworldly reward or punishment in the world Hereafter is
imaginable only if the person is obliged to follow or to abandon
something (a duty) and enjoy a kind of legal responsibility with respect
to his conduct. Obviously, this is exclusive to humankind and animals do
not have this responsibility. Thus, it is no longer possible to seek a
justification for the necessity of animal resurrection through principle
of the similarity between man and animal.[^57]

Anyway, given the propounding of animal resurrection in religious texts,
nevertheless, the Muslim theologians by expressing various views have
attempted to study its existence and the way it exists:

**1.2.2. A Symbolic Move**: Some theologians, such as Abu al-Hasan
Ash‘ari perceive that the presence of animals in the world to come
(Resurrection) is simply a symbolic move which is aimed at reminding
humankind of the extreme accuracy in reckoning and fulfillment of
justice.[^58]

Naturally, in such a state, the animals no longer need to receive any
reward or punishment for their deeds because they do not have any
obligations.[^59]

To prove this notion of resurrection of the animals, perhaps we can
refer to this saying of the Noble Prophet (S.A.W.):

***On the Judgment Day, all the rightful people will receive their
rights, inasmuch as the horned sheep will be retaliated in qisas for
butting the hornless sheep.***[^60]

It can be assumed that the hornless sheep is a symbol of being oppressed
since it cannot fend off oppression; and the horned sheep is a symbol of
being an oppressor as it has various means, including physical power,
for harming others.[^61]

**2.2.2. Receiving Recompense**: What is meant by recompense (damage) is
the valuable benefit that if the animal had possessed understanding and
had known that it had no way to obtain that benefit except through
undergoing some maltreatments, it would have agreed to undergo it.[^62]

Most of the theologians (Mu‘tazilites and Shi‘as) and exegetes believe,
on the basis of the rational rule of “*i‘adatu man lahu ‘iwadhun aw
‘alayhi ‘iwadhun*” (returning of the one who claims a recompense or upon
whom is a recompense)[^63], that animal resurrection is for the purpose
of receiving the recompense and damage for the hardships and sufferings
that they undergo in the world.[^64]

Projecting this concept concerning the animal resurrection is dependent
on accepting two issues:

First, maltreating animals (*isal alam* = causing pains) without having
committed any wrong is evil.

Second, it is necessary for (incumbent upon) God to recompense animals
for maltreatment and suffering they undergo in the world.[^65]

It is clearly understood that this argument can be used concerning the
necessity of animal resurrection when the animal has not received the
recompense for the pains and sufferings that it has undergone in the
world, otherwise, intellectually there is no need for their
resurrection.[^66]

Similarly, if we assume that an animal has not undergone any pain and
suffering for availing a desirable living condition, there remains no
need for its resurrection, since it has not been entitled to receiving
recompense.[^67]

Finally, it is obligatory upon God to recompense an animal only when He
has a role in the maltreatment process of the animal, like when He
permits to kill (slaughter) an animal to use its meat, or to kill
(murder) it for hurting human beings as in case of the predators and
harmful insects, or when he permits to use them in toilsome tasks such
as transporting heavy loads. But, if man inflicts torment on an animal
(tyrannizes it) without having rational or canonical (textual) permit,
he is naturally responsible to recompense that animal in the
Hereafter.[^68]

Justification of the necessity of resurrection of the animals for
receiving recompense, which is advocated by most of the Mu‘tazilite and
Shi‘a theologians, is strongly opposed by the Ash‘arite theologians.
Although not denying the resurrection of the animals, the Ash‘arites
maintain that their resurrection can take place only by God’s will
(dispensation) without its being necessary (incumbent) for God.

In other words, as religious texts emphasize the resurrection of the
animals and there is no religious (canonical) or rational evidence for
being wrong, it is to be believed; however, it should be noted that this
resurrection does not need to be solely for the purpose of retribution
(punishment) or receiving reward (recompense).[^69]

They have relied on two issues to prove the necessity (incumbency) of
paying recompense (damage) to the animals as false.

1. If something is incumbent upon a person, he or she has to be
reproached for not fulfilling it, whereas God cannot be reproached if
the animals are not resurrected.

2. If hurting others is permitted for the recompense that they would
receive later on, then it should be permissible to harm others without
their wishing it and undertake to compensate. But, this act is not
permissible and fair (good).[^70]

**2.2.3. Animals’ Demanding Justice against Animals**: The possibility
is set forth in some exegetical texts that the resurrection of the
animals takes place for the sake of judging animals’ reciprocal conducts
so that by means of retaliation (*qisas*)[^71] the oppressed animals can
take revenge on the oppressive animals (*intisaf* = demanding
justice).[^72]

This impression is evidenced by an event that Abu Dhar al-Ghaffari, the
famous companion of the Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.), recounts:

When I was with the Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.), two nanny goats were
butting at each other with their horns. The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said,
“Do you know why they are butting at each other?” I said I did not. The
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said, “But Allah knows and will soon judge between
them.” [^73]

Accordingly, the similarity of animals and human beings is in two
things. One: resurrection, i.e., as a human being is resurrected, so
also is an animal; second: *qisas* (retaliated punishment), i.e., as a
human being will pay their penalties in the Hereafter, so also will an
animal be responsible to its tyrannical conducts.[^74]

With this explanation, it is clear that what is meant by *qisas* of the
tyrannical animals is a kind of retaliation and requiting in kind,
rather than a punishment for disobeying Divine commands, which is
incompatible with the animals’ non-obligation principle.[^75]

Also, there is no room for saying that if the oppressive animal deserves
receiving a recompense from God, God would transfer it to the animal
oppressed by that animal; otherwise, God would directly award this
recompense to the oppressed animal.[^76] Because, with the reciprocal
treatment, the injustice of the oppressive animal to the oppressed
animal would be compensated for and there would remain no need for
reparation (recompense).

Accepting the intra-group pleading for justice for animals is imaginable
only when their conducts are based on a kind of common sense and
understanding;[^77] because, so far as it is not possible to imagine a
conscious behavior and criminal intention for the animal, it would not
be possible to accept pleading for justice for one side and
incrimination for the other, and judge for the necessity of
(compensation) recompense.

**2.2.4. Animal’s Appealing for Justice against Man**: Although in
theo-exegetical texts its probability is not taken seriously, but the
result of the resurrection of animals may be viewed as their pleading
for justice against cruel treatment of human beings and this pleading
for justice may not need to be just for receiving recompense. Rather, it
can be assumed that a sort of requitement or punishment will take place
between man and animal; and this way, man will pay for their
maltreatment of animals.

This requitement can be implied from the application of the word *qisas*
in the following saying of Imam al-Sajjad (A.S.):

***I was going on the Hajj pilgrimage along with Imam al-Sajjad (A.S.).
His camel was moving along slowly. He aimed his stick at it, but
[without hitting it] said, “If only there were no qisas [in the
Hereafter, I would hit it]” and let down his hand.***[^78]

On this basis, stating the equality of man and animals concerning the
Resurrection, the Almighty God intends to say that human beings are not
permitted to treat animals cruelly, because God is their creator and on
the Resurrection Day will protect them by dispensing justice.[^79]

There are also evidences in religious texts confirming such an
impression of the objective for the resurrection of animals. These
evidences are divided into two groups in terms of content:

The first group, without referring to the punishment in the world of
Hereafter for maltreating the animals, just points out the animals’
pleading for justice in the Hereafter.

The second group, without mentioning the pleading for justice, just
refers to the punishment for maltreating the animals.

In a tradition, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) is quoted as describing the
complaint of a sparrow as follows:

***“Anyone who kills a sparrow in vain, it will cry for help from God on
the Resurrection day, saying, ‘O Lord! This person killed me in vain
without gaining any benefit from it and denied me of eating insects and
reptiles of the earth’.”***[^80]

Similarly, he threatens the unjust camel-driver this way:

***The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) saw a camel whose feet were fastened while
its load was still on its back. He said, “Where is its owner? He has no
humanity; tomorrow [on the Day of Resurrection] he should be ready to
face justice.”***[^81]

On his heavenly journey (*mi‘raj*)[^82], the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.)
describes the condition of a woman who is being tormented in the Hell
for her maltreatment of a cat:

***On the night of mi‘raj, I saw a woman in the fire; I asked the reason
for it, it was said, She had fastened a cat without giving it food and
water and would not release it to eat vermin of the earth until it died.
Therefore, Allah is punishing her because of that.***[^83]

In another description of the same story, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said
that that woman would be punished in the Hell by the same cat:

***I saw in the Fire an owner of a cat whose cat was biting her on her
front and back. She was a woman who had fastened her cat, neither
allowing it to feed nor releasing it to eat from the vermin of the
earth.***[^84]

It is to be reminded that in contrast to animal’s pleading for justice
against man, man’s pleading for justice against animal is also
imaginable; that is, the animal that has done an injustice to man in the
world would come back to life in the Hereafter to pay for its injustice
to man. However, we did not examine this hypothesis, as assumption of
animal’s injustice to man is examinable only when it can be proved that
animals enjoy judicious behavior resulting from a conscious choice, as
well as comprehension and recognition of institutionalized affairs in
them (instincts).

**3.2. The Degree of Animals’ Presence in the Hereafter**: Let us
suppose that the resurrection of the animals is for the animals to
receive recompense for the injustice they suffered in the world. If so,
the question comes up as to whether their life will terminate (*inqita‘*
= cease to continue) in the Hereafter once they receive their recompense
or they would live on (perpetuate) there to enjoy the Divine blessings
as human beings do.

Three different answers are given to this question in theological texts:

**1.3.2. Termination (*****Inqita‘*****)**: Some theologians believe
that the necessity for the resurrection of the4 animals would terminate
by receiving of recompense; and as there is no reason for them to be
eternal, there remains no reason for the animals to continue to survive
in the Hereafter.[^85]

To prove the transitory presence of animals in the Hereafter, we can
quote the following saying of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.):

***Allah will resurrect all His creatures (beasts, animals, birds, and
any other creatures) on the Resurrection Day, then His Judgment will go
as far as to restore the rights of the unhorned sheep from the horned
one, and then tells them to turn to earth.***[^86]

**2.3.2. Permanence (Durability)**: Abu al-Qasim al-Balkhi and his
followers believe that since taking blessings back will hurt the animal
again, Divine favor (*tafadhdhul*) will be bestowed on the animals to
keep on living in the world Hereafter. Besides, with the recompense
being compensated, death has to occur, and causing the animal to die
again would in turn hurt it; this way we will encounter a chain of
endless recompenses.[^87]

**3.3.2. Being Unclear**: A third group of theologians also believe that
making decision about the continuation or cessation of blessings in the
world Hereafter is subject to God’s will; if He deems it fair, He would
do it, otherwise, He would prepare the way for their extinction.[^88]

Since the only source for examining this issue is the religious
teachings and as there is no explicit explanation in the revealed verses
and the sayings of the Infallible Household (A.S.) in this respect, we
will put off judging about animal life in the Hereafter until some later
time.

If we accept the similarity of man and animal in the Hereafter life and
claim that the statement ﴾communities like yourselves﴿ concerns this
similarity in all aspects, then we will be able to proclaim with
certainty that the life of animals in the world Hereafter is also
eternal like that of the humankind. However, if we do not accept the
overall similarity of man and animal and claim that this similarity only
concerns the principle of the existence of resurrection for animals,
then there is no way for us to talk about the permanence (durability)
and transience (cessation) of enjoying the Hereafter blessings.[^89]

Nevertheless, it is implied from the sayings of the religious
dignitaries and the Infallible Imams (A.S.) that at least some animals
would enjoy kind of eternal otherworldly life:

There is no camel having stayed seven times in *‘Arafa* during Hajj
pilgrimage except that Allah has rated it among the animals of the
Paradise and blessed its progeny.[^90]

Any camel with which people go on Hajj pilgrimage three (seven) times,
is rated as among the animals of Paradise.[^91]

Choose healthy and strong animals for sacrificing, as they will be your
riding mount on the *Sirat* (the bridge over Hell leading to
Paradise).[^92]

The horses of the soldiers in the world are considered as their horses
in the paradise.[^93]

**4.2. The Type of Animals that will be Resurrected**: One of the
important issues discussed about animal resurrection is to determine
which types of animals will enjoy otherworldly life. Will all the living
creatures have the chance to be present on the Resurrection Day or just
a group of them will enjoy this blessing?

To find an answer to this question, we have to refer to the Holy Qur’an.
According to the statement ﴾There is no animal on land, nor a bird that
flies with its wings, but they are communities like yourselves.﴿, the
Holy Qur’an has mentioned two types of animals as *dabba* (beast) and
*ta’ir* (bird) and regarded them communities (*umam*) like human beings.

Conceptologically, *ta’ir* has no ambiguity because it includes all
living creatures that we call “birds” of the sky.

However, what type of animals is called *dabba*?[^94] It is a beast that
moves on land.[^95] According to the division that the Holy Qur’an has
made in *Surat al-Nur*, these animals are divided into three general
groups:

***﴾Allah created every animal from water. Among them are some that
creep upon their bellies, and among them are some that walk on two feet,
and among them are some that walk on four. Allah creates whatever He
wishes. Indeed Allah has power over all things.﴿***[^96]

Therefore, we can conclude that all the birds of the sky and land
animals have resurrection.[^97] However, no mention has been made of the
aquatic creatures and the insects.

The silence of the Hply Qur’an about the resurrection of the aquatic
creatures, despite their communal life, is perhaps because the Holy
Qur’an has on three occasions viewed the merging of the seas and their
being set afire and drying up as signs of resurrection:

***﴾when the seas are set afire.***[^98]***﴿, ﴾when the seas are
merged﴿***[^99]***, ﴾by the surging sea.﴿***[^100]

It is worth mentioning that there are different possibilities set forth
in the exegetical texts concerning the meaning of the above verses: 1.
Merging of the fresh and salty waters, 2. Joining of the seas, 3. The
seas being set afire, 4. The water of the seas drying up, 5. The seas
filling up with fire, 6. Overflow of the seas and spreading over the
land mass, 7. The water of the seas vaporizing with the fire entering
them.[^101]

With the extinction of the seas, no chance is left for the aquatic
creatures to survive; thus, talking about their resurrection will lead
nowhere. That is why the phrase “There is no animal on land…” is
interpreted as “There moves no animal over the face of Earth…”;[^102]
although the contrast between the sky and the earth and using *fi* (in,
on) instead of *‘ala* (over) in verse 38 of *Surat al-An‘am* could in
itself indicate the presence of the aquatic creatures, as well.

However, we cannot deny that the justice-orientedness of the Hereafter
necessitates that man should be called to account for doing injustice to
the aquatic creatures.

The resurrection of the insects, however, has not received much
attention from the interpreters, although Qatada and Ibn ‘Abbas have
related it simply as a possibility,[^103] and we have no evidence for
the inclusiveness of the resurrection of the creatures, even insects.

Following in the footsteps of Plotinus, Sadr al-Din Shirazi (Mulla
Sadra) has divided the animals into two groups: ones that enjoy only
sensual perception and the other that besides sensual perception enjoy
faculty of imagination and the ability to remember images. He believes
that only the second group of animals will be resurrected and have the
possibility to be present in the lower levels of the *Barzakh*
(purgatory) after their death and the destruction of their bodies while
retaining their individual distinction. Losing their idiosyncratic
advantage, however, the first group will transform into a single
creature and return to their lord of species (*rabb al-naw‘*) and the
rational sagacious.[^104]

What is meant by “lord of species” in this theory is what has been set
forth in philosophy by Plato onwards as the theory of exemplary ideas
(*muthul*).

Stemmed from the root *ma tha la*, the word *muthul* means similar and
parallel and in Plato’s terminology it applies to the creatures similar
to the material creatures. To Plato, everything has two existences:
material and immaterial, because, according to the principle of
inconsistency of matter, the little material creatures are exposed to
change, transformation, decadence, and destruction; despite this,
however, the typical nature of every species would sustain to survive.

The survival of any creature is dependent upon that which protects its
species and may not undergo any change and transformation. Therefore,
any material object has an immaterial existence, which manages the
individuals of that species and our cognition belongs to it.[^105]

Although the theory of exemplary ideas (*muthul*) was severely
criticized by Aristotle and his Muslim followers such as Avicenna,
philosophers of illumination like Suhrawardi and sages such as Mirdamad,
Mirfindiriski, and Sadr al-Din Shirazi made great attempts to prove this
theory with justifications.[^106] Mirfindiriski portrays his viewpoint
about *muthul* as follows:

*With its stars, the global sphere is elegant and beautiful*

*That which is above is the same as that which is below*

*Below form, if soars up through ladder of knowledge*

*Will truly join with the above, with its origin*

*No one with surface knowledge will grasp this saying*

*Be it Abu Nasr al-Farabi or Bu ‘Ali Sina (Avicenna)*.[^107]

Such a comment on the resurrection of animals results from the idea that
in his view, the world Hereafter is an immaterial world whose pleasures
and torments are the outcome of the perceiving and imagining the
pleasant and unpleasant forms that are created in man due to his worldly
acts.

It is with this consideration that in philosophical texts perception is
regarded as involved in creating pleasure and pain and is defined as
follows:

***Pleasure is the perception of the desirable because it is desirable
and pain is the perception of undesirable because it is
undesirable.***[^108]

Normally, according to this type of approach to the Hereafter, so long
as an animal does not enjoy the faculty of imagination, it cannot enjoy
its presence in the world Hereafter.[^109]

Faculty of imagination is one of the inherent faculties of humankind,
which is also referred to as *musawwira* (representative faculty). This
faculty protects images existing in man’s interior being, which, in
philosophical and mystical texts, is divided into two sections:
conjoined imagination and separate imagination (restricted and
absolute).

Giving a definition of this faculty of man’s inherent faculties,
al-Farabi says:

***It is a force that retains the descriptive definitions of the
sensible objects after being concealed from the domain of the sense;
and, both in sleeping and waking states, it proceeds to combine a part
of those descriptive definitions of the sensible objects with another
part or to separate some from other.***[^110]

The Good and Evil of Maltreating Animals
----------------------------------------

Among debated issues in theology (science of *kalam*) is the rationality
or religiousness of the recognition of the value of human deeds and
conducts, which is referred to as rational or legal good and evil.
Theologians have set forth the question as to whether maltreatment of
animals is something regarded by intellect as indecent and evil or the
recognition of such an issue is subject to examining the divine (the
lawmaker’s) commands, in which case an action can be permissible or
impermissible when different laws are passed on it.

Violating animals’ rights and maltreating them is among the issues that
few people doubt about its indecency and ugliness. Even those considered
as pioneers of violating animals’ domains and those treating them
cruelly, on most occasions do not deny this reality, and view their
profiteering or pleasure seeking as the reason for perpetrating such
behavior.

Accordingly, the Muslim thinkers are facing the question as to what is
the origin of such judgment? Why is cruel treatment of animals
considered as undesirable and indecent to people?

In theological explorations, we find three different answers to this
question:

### 1. Intellectual Discernment

On the basis of their intellectual approach to the theological issues,
the Mu‘tazilite and Shi‘i theologians claim that the objects and actions
have real expedience and evil or benefit and loss (inherent good and
evil) despite any external matter, and that human intellect has the
ability to perceive it (rational good and evil) without needing any
factor for help.

What is meant by inherent good and evil is that the act of any learned
and able creature that freely chooses its work is either essentially
beautiful or essentially ugly; i.e., the intellect would discern its
beauty or ugliness without getting help from other sources
(*al-mustaqillat al-‘aqliyya* = rational independents).[^111]

Such an approach paved the way for setting forth the thought among the
Mu‘tazilites and the Shi‘as that the impermissibility of maltreating
animals results from the independent perception of the intellect of its
evil. This judgment of the intellect is so transparent and decisive that
some have regarded it as among the intellect’s inherent judgments,[^112]
and regarded its denial the same as denial of the intellect’s essential
judgment.[^113]

As a result of accepting this rational judgment, any act leading to the
maltreatment of animals is permissible when we have a specific reason –
rational or legal – for its permissibility.[^114]

In response to the question as to why God has on some instances
permitted man to maltreat animals in order to utilize them despite the
explicit judgment of intellect on the impermissibility of maltreating
them, the Mu‘tazilite and Shi‘i theologians have pointed out three
justifications:

**1.1. Expenses Rendered by Human Being**: There is no doubt that
keeping animals would cost much for a person, because by agreeing to
take care of an animal – as it will be explained later – that person
undertakes to provide food, water, sanitation, treatment, and a place
for keeping it.

Since man has no essential obligation to animals for providing these
expenses and services, he is normally entitled to use the animal for his
own benefit in return; however, the amount of services that man provides
to the animals is much more than the benefits he gains from utilizing
them. Thus, by recognizing this human entitlement, common sense gives
man permission to utilize the animals, even though this utilization
would lead to their maltreatment.[^115]

**1.2. Hereafter Reward**: According to theological doctrines, God
grants benefits to His creatures through one of the following three
states: granting benefits without (the creature’s) doing good (*tafdhil*
= favoring); granting benefits for the unpleasant events (recompense);
and granting benefits for obeying the commands (reward).[^116]

As per the theory of “recompense in the Hereafter”, which is the most
prevalent theory in Islamic theological texts, God will reward
(recompense) animals in the Hereafter for the maltreatment they suffer
from being utilized by human beings. Thus, God would recompense in the
Hereafter the injustice, which He prepared the ground for in this world
by creating the creatures.[^117]

**1.3. Evaluative Comparison**: According to a group of theologians, to
determine the evil of maltreating the animals, the amount of the profit
that this maltreatment would entail for man or for the animal itself has
to be taken into account. Then judgment is to be made about the good or
the evil of the action through an evaluative comparison between the
profit and the maltreatment.

On this basis, if the amount of the profit that a person gains from
using an animal exceeds the amount of the damage or maltreatment that
the animal suffers for it, or if the amount of the benefit that the
animal gains from human treatment or it is more than the amount of the
maltreatment that the animal suffers from that same treatment, then this
type of use or treatment is rationally sound and permissible[^118] and
the religion approves it.

***One day, in my presence, a man asked Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) about
cutting off a sheep’s testicles. The Imam answered: “There is no
prohibition against cutting them if you may improve your belonging
thereby.”***[^119]

**1.4. Imagining the Ultimate End**: According to this theory, for the
maltreatment of animals and the judgment on its rational permissibility,
we have to look for the goal and ultimate result of such an action.

If one follows a rational purpose in maltreating animals, the intellect
regards such a maltreatment as proper and permissible; but if one
maltreats animals aimlessly (in vain) or for an irrational purpose
(playfully), the intellect would similarly assert its judgment as to the
impermissibility and indecency of such an action.[^120]

This kind of imagining the ultimate end can be found in the sayings of
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.), too; because he regards the killing
(slaughtering) of a pregnant or nursing animal as abhorring only if it
is with no reason.[^121]

Ibn Idris Hilli, Sarakhsi, and Ibn al-Munir have proved the rational
legitimacy of castrating,[^122] slaughtering,[^123] and forcing animals
to do hard tasks.[^124]

Similarly, in rejecting the saying of Abu Hanifa who regarded the
*ish‘ar*[^125] of a camel as a kind of torture and hence
impermissible,[^126] ‘Allama Hilli and Ibn Qudama argue that although
this action would hurt the camel, it is proper and permissible because
it is motivated by a proper purpose (hurting for a true
intention).[^127]

Although *ish‘ar* in the laws of Hajj rituals and its relation to
maltreatment of animals is a legal rather than theological issue, some
points need to be taken into consideration. Firstly, *ish‘ar* is
applicable only to camels and not to cattle or sheep;[^128] secondly,
the *ish‘ar* of camel is permissible only when it has a hump, that is to
say it has fat tissues which lack pain sensors, so a camel that does not
have a hump may not be marked through *ish‘ar*.[^129] Thirdly, doing
*ish‘ar* on the cows lacking humps is debated among the
jurisprudents.[^130]

With this explanation, both Abu Hanifa’s statement and the responses by
‘Allama Hilli and Ibn Qudama do not sound right, because in both cases
the issue of maltreating a camel by practicing *ish‘ar* is taken for
granted; whereas the fat tissues of the camel’s hump lack pain sensors
and the camel does not feel any pain by receiving *ish‘ar* so discussion
about the maltreatment of animals and having a proper intention for it
do not rise.

In some theological texts, this kind of imagining the ultimate end in
the permissibility of maltreatment of animals is referred to as *lutf*
(favor). The rule of *lutf*, as one of the significant theological
rules, is based on the indecency of [presuming] violation of intention
by the All-wise Allah. Accordingly, since maltreatment of animals
without recompense is injustice and maltreating them in return for
recompense but without any goal is pointless and none of which is
permissible to God, maltreatment of animals in the context of human
beings profiting from them would be permissible according to the
dictates of intellect.[^131]

When comparing these two theories, we should note that according to the
third theory the sum total of the benefit and loss of the action,
regardless of the impact of the agent’s motivation, is the criteria for
the correctness and incorrectness of hurting the animal. In the fourth
theory, however, the agent’s motivation, irrespective of the degree of
the benefit or loss, delineates the correctness and incorrectness of the
torture of the animal.

Anyway, the reconciliation of the last two theories can bring us to the
conclusion that the maltreatment of animals is impermissible in two
cases. First, when it is injustice, i.e., when there is neither benefit,
nor it may prevent from further loss. Second: when it is pointless,
i.e., when it is lacking a recompense of equal weight to it or more
beneficial, it does not fend off any loss, causes depravity (i.e., it
brings along evil and distracts from good). In contrast, hurting of
animals is regarded as a permissible act only when it is beneficial or
prevents from a greater loss.[^132]

### 2. Religious Laws

In contrast to the Mu‘tazilites and Shi‘as, the Ash‘arite theologians,
denying the existence of the intellect’s innate perceptions (inherent
good and evil), believe that human wisdom is too weak to judge on the
good and evil of actions; rather, it is the religious teachings that we
should turn to for perceiving it.[^133] (Good is what the lawmaker
regards good and evil is what the lawmaker considers evil).[^134]

Accordingly, the Ash‘arites have discussed about the maltreatment of
animals, maintaining that hurting the animals is not rationally
indecent. They argue that if a conduct is impermissible according to the
dictates of intellect, it should be so everywhere and for everybody as
the inherent does not change; whereas, God has allowed human beings in
some cases to treat animals in such a way that may hurt them.[^135]

In view of the Ash‘arites the best reason for the maltreatment of
animals not to be rationally impermissible is the differences among the
intellectuals in this respect, for this disagreement results from the
lack of rational necessity in the evil of such an act.[^136] Supposing
we accept that the intellect considers maltreatment of animals as evil,
but since God has given man permission for such behavior, the intellect
has to give in by accepting God’s Omniscience and consider animal
maltreatment as permissible, as well.[^137] Therefore, maltreatment of
animals is rationally evil so long as God has not permitted man for it,
but after that, it is no longer evil.[^138]

Some Ash‘arite theologians have gone beyond this and claimed that even
where the intellect – presumably – deems animal maltreatment as
impermissible, it is because God has in those instances prohibited us
from performing it; otherwise, the intellect has no capability to
understand its evil.[^139]

Conclusion: According to the Ash‘arites, God can persecute the animals
with no crime and may not give them reward in the world and in the
Hereafter without its being called “injustice”; for, God is the absolute
master and possessor of the world of being and its creatures and
injustice is imaginable only when a person takes possession of another
person’s property without permission.[^140] However, the wisdom and the
true reason of such treatment by God is not clear for us and we do not
know He has created the world of being in such a way that a group of
creatures would suffer so much torment and persecution in their
life.[^141]

Now that such treatment by God in maltreatment of animals is not unjust,
He can also give permission to mankind to maltreat animals in the best
of their interest without such treatments being considered as indecent
or injustice.[^142]

### 3. Sensual Affections

In contrast to the two rationalistic Mu‘tazilite-Shi’ite and
irrationalistic Ash‘arite theological trends, there are certain renowned
philosophers such as Ibn Sina, Khawja Nasir al-Din Tusi, Qutb al-Din
Razi, ‘Umar b. Sahlan al-Sawi, and Muhaqqiq Isfahani (Kompani) who
maintain that the difference of the theologians in the perception and
imperception of good and evil is based on accepting the principle that
judgment about the good or evil is among the judgments of the
theoretical reason; whereas, [the judgment concerning] the good and evil
of the objects and actions includes in judgments of the practical
reason. Thereupon, such propositions as “justice is good” or “injustice
is evil” are beyond certainty and regarded as among the generally
accepted (*mashhur*) uncertain propositions.[^143]

The corollary of such a thought is that judging on the evil of
maltreatment of animals is not a judgment based on intellectual
perception but it results from certain human tendencies and inner
qualities such as kindness and compassion.

**A Critical Review**: Although critically reviewing the reasons of the
Mu‘tazilites and Ash‘arites for accepting and denying the intrinsic good
and evil of actions, particularly the maltreatment of animals as an
example of that general precept, demands another chance to deal with, it
is to be noted that *ilam* (inflicting pain) is not evil simply for
being *ilam*; because nothing would be characterized as evil (*qubh*)
because of its own essence (*genus*).[^144] Therefore, maltreatment of
animals can be evil (*qabih*) only when it is characterized by
“injustice”, just as it can be good (*hasan*) if characterized by
“justice”.[^145]

Parity of good and evil with justice and injustice, hence, the
lawfulness and unlawfulness are among the issues that the Holy Qur’an
has emphasized in its various verses.

﴾Say, “My Lord has only forbidden indecencies, the outward among them
and the inward ones.”﴿[^146]

﴾Indeed Allah enjoins justice and kindness and generosity towards
relatives, and He forbids indecency, wrong, and aggression.[^147]﴿

﴾…who bids them to do what is right and forbids them from what is wrong,
makes lawful to them all the good things and forbids them from all
vicious things.﴿[^148]

﴾When they commit an indecency, they say,” We found our fathers
practicing it, and Allah has enjoined it upon us.” Say, “Indeed Allah
does not enjoin indecencies.”﴿[^149]

Consequently, if an animal is utilized in accordance to its creation, no
injustice is perpetrated rationally so that the judgment of religion for
the permissibility of using that animal in that respect be a breach of
the judgment of intellect as to the evil of maltreatment of animals. In
other words, the exclusions in the intellectual judgments is an unreal
presumption, as the lawmaker, by virtue of intellect and his behavior
based on intellect, would never make a judgment contrary to reason
(whatever reason judges, the canonical law – *shar‘ –* would judge,
too). As a result, we would not encounter any law in the Islamic rules
and ordinances that, contrary to the intellectual judgment of the
impermissibility of maltreating animals (*ilam* and *ta‘dhib*), would
permit man a conduct that would cause the maltreatment of animals.[^150]

Notice the context of the following verse:

***﴾He created the cattle, in which there is warmth for you and [other]
uses and some of them you eat…. And they bear your burdens to towns
which you could not reach except by straining yourselves. Indeed your
Lord is most kind and merciful. And horses, mules and asses, for you to
ride them.﴿***[^151]

In this verse, God has pointed out some ways man can use animals: 1.
Using their hide and wool for clothing, 2. Using their meat for food, 3.
Carrying loads, and 4. Riding.

Thus, killing (slaughtering) animals for their hide or meat as well as
transporting goods or people by them is not injustice; rather, it is
using them in line with their creation. So, the judgment by religion as
to the permissibility of slaughtering the animals or the like cannot be
regarded as a judgment contrary to the judgment of intellect or an
exception to it.

For this reason, the Muslim jurists have asserted that drying silkworm
cocoons by sun’s heat is permissible, as without which the intended
purpose for the creation of silkworm will not be fulfilled, even though
the worm may thus be killed.[^152]

Normally, if this utilization is in line with the animals’ creation,
maltreatment no longer applies to it; however, it does not mean that the
animal never gets hurt and pain through human utilization.

Therefore, some theologians’ claim that the denial of pain in animals is
pointless[^153] or denial of God’s intervention in maltreating animals
is a denial of an evident matter[^154], cannot be true, because God has
made the animals’ bodies in such a way that human beings can use them to
their benefit and if they perform it in the right way, the animal would
not undergo any pain. For this reason, some believe that the method
proposed by Islam for slaughtering animals would not entail any pain for
the animal, because by the abrupt cutting of the [four] arteries and the
sudden outflow of the blood from its body the animal’s nervous system
stops working and no pain is felt thereafter.[^155]

This issue, to be discussed later on in our legal deliberations, has
unfortunately been neglected in both Mu‘tazilite and Ash‘arite
theological trends. They have, in their negligence, attempted by raising
various theories to either justify animal maltreatment in line with
Divine justice like the Mu‘tazilites, or bring up the issue of
precedence of faith over reason and deny the reason’s perception in the
good and evil of the matters like Ash‘arites.

[^1]: Q. 6:38.

[^2]: It is worth mentioning that in some philosophical texts, animals’
Resurrection has been translated as the Resurrection of human beings in
the form of certain animals according to the type of bestial life that
they have had in their worldly life; which is, therefore, off the
subject; see: Shirazi, Sadr al-Din Muhammad, Mafatih al-Ghayb, ed.
Muhammad Khawjawi, Cultural Studies and Research Institute, Tehran, 1363
sh/1984, p. 640-641.

[^3]: Q. 81:5.

[^4]: Ibn Manzur, Lisan al-ʿArab, 15 vols. Adab al-Hawza, Qum,
1405/1985, 4/190; also, see: Tabari, Muhammad b. Jarir, Jamiʿ al-Bayan
ʿan Ta’wil Aya al-Qur'an, ed. Sidqi Jamil al-ʿAttar, 30 vols. Dar
al-Fikr, Beirut, 1415/1995, 30/84; Ibn Jawzi, ʿAbd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali,
Zad al-Masir fi ʿIlm al-Tafsir, 8 vols. Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, 1407/1986,
3/26; Ibn Kathir Qurashi, Ismaʿil, Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAzim, 4 vols.
Dar al-Maʿrifa, Beirut. 1412/1992, 4/508.

[^5]: Harbi, Ibrahim b. Ishaq, Gharib al-Hadith, ed. Sulayman Ibrahim
Muhammad al-‘Ayir, 3 vols. Dar al-Ma‘rifa, Jaddeh, 1405/1987, 1/283;
Al-‘Ayn, 3/92; Lisan al-‘Arab, 4/190.

[^6]: Jamiʿ al-Bayan ʿan Ta’wil Aya al-Qur'an, 30/84; Tafsir al-Qur'an
al-ʿAzim, 4/508.

[^7]: ʿAskari, Abi al-Hilal, Muʿjam al-Furuq al-Lughawiyya, Mu’assisat
al-Nashr al-Islamiyya, Qum, 1412/1991, p. 188, No. 751; Turayhi, Fakhr
al-Din, Majma‘ al-Bahrayn, ed. Sayyid Ahmad Husayni, 4 vols. 2nd
edition, Maktab al-Nashr al-Thiqafat al-Islamiyya, 1408/1988, 1/516;
Zubaydi, Muhammad Murtaza, Taj al-ʿArus min Jawahir al-Qamus, 10 vols,
Maktibat al-Ihya, Beirut, n.d, 3/141; Faydh al-Qadir Sharh Jami‘
al-Saghir min Ahadith al-Bashir al-Nadhir, 1/57 (al-hashr: akhiru man
yusaqu ila al-madina).

[^8]: Ibn Athir, Al-Mubarak b. Muhammad, Al-Nihaya fi Gharib al-Hadith,
ed. Tahir Hamd al-Zawi, 5 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut,
1418/1997, 1/374; Lisan al-‘Arab, 4/190; Taj al-‘Arus min Jawahir
al-Qamus, 3/141.

[^9]: Tabataba’i, Sayyid Muhammad Husayn, Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an,
Ismaʿiliyan Institute, Qum, 1393/1973, 18/58.

[^10]: Q. 42:29.

[^11]: Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAzim, 2/136 and 4/508; Al-Hakim
al-Naysaburi, Al-Mustadrak ala al-Sahihayn, ed. Dr. Yusif al-Mar‘ashli,
4 vols. Dar al-Ma‘rifa, Beirut, 1406/1985, 2/515; Manawi, ‘Abd al-Ra’uf,
Faydh al-Qadir Sharh Jami‘ al-Saghir min Ahadith al-Bashir al-Nadhir ed.
Ahmad ‘Abd al-Salam, 6 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut,
1415/1994, 1/57; Jamiʿ al-Bayan ʿan Ta’wil Aya al-Qur'an, 7/249; Zad
al-Masir fi ʿIlm al-Tafsir, 3/26; Qurtubi, Muhammad b. Ahmad, Al-Jamiʿ
li Ahkam al-Qur'an, 20 vols. 2nd edition, Mu’assisat al-Ta’rikh
al-ʿArabi, Beirut, 1405/1985, 19/229; Shawkani, Muhammad b. ʿAli, Fath
al-Qadir al-Jamiʿ bayn Fanni al-Riwaya wa al-Diraya min ʿIlm al-Tafsir,
5 vols. ʿAlam al-Kutub, Beirut, n.d., 5/388.

[^12]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, ed. Ahmad
Habib Qaysar ʿAmili, 10 vol. Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-ʿArabi, Beirut,
1409/1989, 4/130; Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 7/83.

[^13]: Muʿjam al-Furuq al-Lughawiyya, p. 189, No. 752. Muhaqqiq Lahiji
has translated hashr as follows: “Hashr means to revive the dead and
gather them in that station.” Fayyadh Lahiji, ‘Abd al-Razzaq, Gawhar
Murad, ed. Zayn al-‘Abidin Qurbani, Ministry of Culture’s Printing and
Publishing Organization, Tehran, 1372 sh/1993, p. 655.

[^14]: “I‘adat al-khalq ba‘d al-‘adam wa nash‘atuhum ba‘d al-Ramam.”,
“An tajtama‘ al-ajza’ al-asliyyatu ba‘da tafaruqiha, fatariddu ilayha
al-nufus.”; Amidi, ‘Ali b. Muhammad, Ghayat al-Maram fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam,
Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1413/1992, p. 260; Takhti Sanandaji,
‘Abd al-Qadir b. Muhammad, Taqrib al-Maram fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam, with
additional notes by Faraj Allah Kurdistani, lithography, Egypt,
1304/1886, 2/87.

[^15]: Q. 6:38.

[^16]: Majma‘ al-Bahrayn, 1/108; Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 7/72.

[^17]: Farahidi, Khalil b. Ahmad, Al-‘Ayn, ed. Mahdi al-Makhzumi, 8
vols. 2nd edition, Dar al-Hijra, Qum, 1409/1989, 8/428.

[^18]: Q. 10:19, 2:213.

[^19]: Al-‘Ayn, 8/428, Majma‘ al-Bahrayn, 1/108; Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir
al-Qur'an, 4/129.

[^20]: Razi, Fakhr al-Din Muhammad b. ‘Umar, Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 31
vols. 3rd edition, Dar Ihya al-Thurath al-‘Arabi, Beirut, n.d, 12/213.

[^21]: Bihar al-Anwar, 7/255; Tabarsi, Fadhl b. Husayn, Majmaʿ al-Bayan
fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, 10 vols. Dar Ihya al-Turath al-ʿArabi, 1379/1960,
4/129.

[^22]: Bihar al-Anwar, 7/255-256; Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an,
4/48-49.

[^23]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 12/213. To verify this impression, we may
refer to the verses in the Holy Qur’an that sets forth the issue of all
creatures’ glorification, such as verse 44 of Surat al-Isra and verse 41
of Surat al-Nur, ﴾The seven heavens glorify Him, and the earth] too [,
and whoever is in them. There is not a thing but celebrates His praise,
but you do not understand their glorification.﴿, ﴾Have you not regarded
that Allah is glorified by everyone in the heavens and the earth, and
the birds spreading their wings. Each knows his prayer and
glorification﴿;

[^24]: Ibid, 12/213-214.

[^25]: Ibid, 12/214.

[^26]: Ibid.

[^27]: Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 4//127.

[^28]: Zad al-Masir fi ʿIlm al-Tafsir, 3/26.

[^29]: Al-Jamiʿ li Ahkam al-Qur'an, 6/420.

[^30]: Fath al-Ghadir, 2/114.

[^31]: Bihar al-Anwar, 7/255; Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAzim, 2/135; Suyuti,
Jalal al-Din, Al-Durr al-Manthur fi Tafsir bi al-Ma’thur, 6 vols. Dar
al-Fikr, Beirut, 1403, 3/10.

[^32]: See: Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 7/73-74.

[^33]: Q. 4:45.

[^34]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 26/284.

[^35]: Shirazi, Sadr al-Din Muhammad, Al-Shawahid al-Rububiyya fi
al-Manahij al-Sulukiyya, ed. Sayyid Jalal al-Din Ashtiyani, 3rd edition,
Bustan-i Kitab Institute, Qum, 1382 sh/2003, p. 105.

[^36]: Tabarsi, Ahmad b. ‘Ali, al-Ihtijaj, ed. Sayyid Muhammad Baqir
Khursan, 2 vols. Dar al-Nu‘man, Najaf, 1386/1966, 2/97.

[^37]: Q. 39:42.

[^38]: Q. 32:11.

[^39]: For more information, see: Gawhar Murad, p. 631; Ibn Sina, Husayn
‘Abd Allah, Al-Shifa, Ilahiyyat, ed. Ibrahim Madkur, Al-Hay’at al-‘Ammat
li Shu’un al-Matabi‘ al-Amiriyya, Cairo, 1380-1960, p. 423; Shirazi,
Sadr al-Din Muhammad, Al-Hikmat al-Muti‘aliyya fi Asfar al-‘Arba‘at
al-‘Aqliyya, 10 vols. Mashurat Mustafawi, Qum, 1378, 9/165; Bihar
al-Anwar, 7/47; Dawani, Muhammad b. Hasan, Sharh al-‘Aqa’id
al-‘Adhudiyya, 2 vols. Matba‘atu ‘Uthmaniyya, Istanbul, 1316/1898,
2/247.

[^40]: Soul or the non-physical aspect of man has various names such as
qalb, ‘aql, and nafs. Human soul is called qalb because it is
transformed when encountered with different accidents. Soul is called
aql because its duty is thinking (ta‘aqqul) and the brain is the only
tool for thinking, that is why although after death the brain is not
able to function with the failure of the body, the soul keeps on
enjoying perception in the intermediate (purgatory) world (isthmus).
Finally, the soul is called nafs when it is related to the material
body, because man per se is nothing but a souled body or a body
possessing soul.

[^41]: Lexically, mujarrad means bare, which in philosophical discourses
is taken to mean immaterial, as any object enjoys time and space and
therefore if the object is not devoid of time and space, it will not be
material.

[^42]: Taftazani, Mas‘ud b. ‘Umar, Sharh al-Maqasid, ed. ‘Abd al-Rahman
‘Umayra, 5 vols. Manshurat al-Sharif al-Radhi, Qum, 1409/1989, 3/252.

[^43]: Ibid.

[^44]: See: Bukhari, Muhammad b. Ismaʿil, Al-Adab al-Mufrad, ed.
Muhammad Fu’ad ‘Abd al-Baqi, 2nd edition, Al-Kutub al-Thiqafiya
Institute, 1401/1981, pp. 263-264, No. 1233-1235.

[^45]: Q. 24:41.

[^46]: See: Shaykh Baha’i, Muhammad b. Husayn, Miftah al-Falah fi ‘Amal
al-Yawm wa al-Layla min al-Wajibat wa al-Mustahabbat wa al-Adab,
Mu‘assisat al-A‘lami, Beirut, p. 101.

[^47]: Q. 27:16.

[^48]: Q. 32:10.

[^49]: Q. 27:20-22.

[^50]: Q. 27:17.

[^51]: Q. 16:68.

[^52]: Irbali, ‘Ali b. ‘Isa, Kashf al-Ghumma fi Ma‘rifat al-A’imma, 3
vols. 2nd ed. Dar al-Adhwa’, 1405/1985, 2/77.

[^53]: Kafi, 6/539, No. 11.

[^54]: Ibn Hazm al-Tahiri, ‘Ali b. Ahmad, Al-Fasl fi al-Milal wa
al-Ahwa’ wa Nihal, 5 vols., Maktibat al-Khanji, Cairo, 1/74 and 3/74.

[^55]: Jurjani, ‘Ali b. Muhammad, Sharh al-Mawaqif, 8 vols. Matba‘atu
Sa‘ada, Egypt, 1325/1907, 8/296.

[^56]: Q. 20:15.

[^57]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Rasa’il al-‘Ashr, ed. Muhammad Va’iz
Zada, Jami‘a-yi Mudarrisin, Qum, 1404/1984, p. 313.

[^58]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 31/67-68; Majma‘ al-Bahrayn, 1/517.

[^59]: Mazandarani, Mowla Muhammad Salih, Sharh-i Usul al-Kafi, with
additional notes by Mirza Abulhasan Shaʿrani, 12 vols. n.d, 10/186;
Al-Jamiʿ li Ahkam al-Qur'an, 6/421.

[^60]: Tabarani, Sulayman b. Ahmad, Musnad al-Shamiyin, ed. Hamdi
al-Salafi, 2nd edition, Mu‘assisatu al-Risala, Beirut, 1417/1996, 2/301.

[^61]: Bahrani, Maytham b. ‘Ali, Qawa‘id al-Maram fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam, ed.
Sayyid Ahmad Husayni, 2nd edition, Ayatollah Marʿashi Library, Qum,
1406/1985, p. 120.

[^62]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 12/219.

[^63]: Mufid, Muhammad b. Nu‘man, Al-Nukat al-I‘tiqadiyya, Jamiʿa-yi
Mudarrisin, Qum, n.d, p. 46.

[^64]: Bihar al-Anwar, 7/92, 256, and 276; Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 12/218;
Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 4/129 and 10/281; Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi
Tafsir al-Qur’an, 4/49 and 10/277; Tabarsi, Fadhl b. Hasan, Jawami‘
al-Jami‘, 3 vols. Muʿassisa-yi Nashr-i Islami, Qum, 1418/1997, 1/568.

[^65]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 12/219.

[^66]: Ibid, 12/219.

[^67]: Ibid.

[^68]: Ibid; Mar‘ashi Najafi, Sayyid Shahab al-Din, Sharh Ihqaq al-Haqq
wa Izhaq al-Batil, 33 vols. Ayatollah Mar‘ashi Library, Qum, 16/186.

[^69]: Nawawi, Yahya b. Sharaf, Sahih Muslim bi Sharh al-Nawawi (Sharh-i
Muslim), 18 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyya, Beirut, 1407/1987, 16/136.

[^70]: Ghazali, Abu Hamid Muhammad b. Muhammad, Qawa‘id al-‘Aqa’id, ed.
Musa b. Nasr, 2nd edition, ‘Alam al-Kitab, Beirut, 1985, 1/205; Bihar
al-Anwar, 61/7 (Al-Matalib al-‘Aliyya).

[^71]: Etymologically, qisas means retribution and in terms of
jurisprudence, it means penalty which God (the Lawmaker) has set for
specific crimes; see: Fathullah, Ahmad, Muʿjamu Alfadh al-Fiqh
al-Jaʿfari, Mtabiʿ al-Madukhal, 1415/1995, p. 153.

[^72]: Suyuti, Jalal al-Din, Tafsir al-Jalalayn, ed. Marwan Suwar, Dar
al-Ma‘rifa Beirut, p. 793; Fath al-Qadir, 5/388; Al-Jamiʿ li Ahkam
al-Qur'an, 19/229; Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, 10/277;
Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 10/281.

[^73]: ‘Arusi Huwayzi, ‘Abd ‘Ali b. Jum‘a, Nur al-Thaqalayn, ed. Sayyid
Hashim Rasuli, 5 vols. 4th edition, Isma‘iliyan Institute, 1412/1991,
1/715; also see: Hakami, Hafz b. Ahmad, Ma‘arij al-Qabul bi Sharh Sullam
al-Wusul ila ‘Ilm al-Usul, ed. ‘Umar b. Mahmud Abu ‘Umar, 3 vols. Dar b.
al-Qayyim, Al-Dammam, 1391/1971, 2/831.

[^74]: Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, 16/.

[^75]: Sahih Muslim bi Sharh al-Nawawi, 16/137.

[^76]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 12/220.

[^77]: Majma‘ al-Bahrayn, 1/517.

[^78]: Mufid, Muhammad b. Nuʿman, Al-Irshad fi Maʿrifat-i Hujaj Allah
ʿala al-ʿIbad, 2 vols. Al al-Bayt (ed.), Dar al-Mufid, Qum, 1413/1992,
2/144.

[^79]: Biahr al-Anwar, 7/256; Tabarsi, Fadhl b. Husayn, Majmaʿ al-Bayan
fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, 10 vols. Dar Ihya al-Turath al-ʿArabi, 1379/1960.,
4/49.

[^80]: Nuri Tabarsi, Mirza Husayn, Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat
al-Masa’il, 18 vols. Al al-Bayt Institute, Qum, 1408/1987, 8/304, No.
9507.

[^81]: Bihar al-Anwar, 7/276; Nur al-Thaqalayn, 1/715.

[^82]: Literally, mi‘raj means ladder; what it means in
religio-philosophical terminology is the Holy Prophet’s (S.A.W.) journey
from Masjid al-Aqsa in Jerusalem to the Heaven (the unseen world). In
the first verse of Surat al-Isra, the Holy Qur’an describes it as
follows, ﴾Immaculate is He who carried His servant on a journey by night
from the Sacred Mosque (Masjid al-Haram) to the Farthest Mosque (Masjid
al-Aqsa) whose environs We have blessed, that We might show him some of
Our signs. Indeed He is the All-hearing, the All-seeing.﴿; for more
information, see: Ibn Sina, Al-Shifa, Husayn ‘Abd Allah, Mi‘rajnama, ed.
Najib Mayil Hiravi, 2nd edition, Islamic Research Foundation of Astan
Quds Razavi, 1366 sh/1987.

[^83]: Nawawi, Yahya b. Sharaf, Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 20
vols. Dar al-Fikr, n.p., n.d, 18/319.

[^84]: Tamimi, Nuʿman b. Muhammad, Da’a’im al-Islam wa Dhikr al-Halal wa
al-Haram wa al-Qadhaya wa al-Ahkam ‘an Ahl-i Bayt-i Rasul Allah ‘Alayhi
wa ‘Alayhim Afdhal al-Salam, ed. Asif b. ‘Ali Asghar Faydhi, 2 vols. Dar
al-Ma‘arif, Egypt, 1383/1963, 2/468, No. 1666.

[^85]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 12/219; Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an,
10/281.

[^86]: Bihar al-Anwar, 7/256; also see: Tafsir al-Jalalayn, p. 167.

[^87]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 12/219; Bihar al-Anwar, 7/92 and 61/9;
Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 4/130; Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi Tafsir
al-Qur’an, 10/277.

[^88]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 31/67.

[^89]: Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 20/214.

[^90]: Barqi, Ahmad b. Muhammad, Al-Mahasin, ed. Sayyid Jalal al-Din
Husayni, 2 vols. Dar al-Kutub Islamiyya, 2/635-636, No. 133.

[^91]: Saduq, Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, ed. ‘Ali
Akbar Ghaffari, 4 vols. 2nd edition, Jami‘a-yi Mudarrisin, Qum,
1404/1984, 2/216, No. 2207.

[^92]: Saduq, Muhammad b. ‘Ali, ‘Ilal al-Shara’i‘, 2 vols. Maktibatu
Haydariyya, Najaf, 1386/1966, 2/438, chap. 179.

[^93]: Al-Kafi, 5/3, No. 3.

[^94]: Lexically, dabb is an beast that moves slowly with steps close
together; see: Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 7/72; Fath al-Qadir, 2/113.

[^95]: Bihar al-Anwar, 7/255; Faydh Kashani, Mawla Muhsin, Al-Safi fi
Tafsir Kalam Allah, 5 vols. Dar al-Murtadha li al-Nashr, n.d, 2/118.

[^96]: Q. 24:45.

[^97]: Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 7/72; Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir
al-Qur'an, 4/127; Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, 4/48.

[^98]: Q. 81:6.

[^99]: Q. 82:3.

[^100]: Q. 52:6.

[^101]: For more details, see: Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 10/282;
Al-Durr al-Manthur fi al-Tafsir bi al-Ma’thur, 6/318-319; Raghib
Isfahani, Husayn b. Muhammad, Al-Mufradat fi Gharib al-Qur'an, Daftar-i
Nashr-i Al-Kitab, 1404/1984, p. 224; Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAzim, 4/257
and 508; Tafsir al-Jalalayn, p. 793; Thaʿalibi, ʿAbd al-Rahman,
Al-Jawahir al-Hisan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, ed. ʿAbd al-Fattah Abu Sunna,
Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-ʿArabi, Beirut, 1418/1994, 5/555; Al-Jamiʿ li
Ahkam al-Qur'an, 19/230 and 17/61-62; Jamiʿ al-Bayan ʿan Ta’wil Aya
al-Qur'an, 30/85 and 27/25; Zad al-Masir fi ʿIlm al-Tafsir, 8/189; Fath
al-Qadir, 5/94 and 388; Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, 10/277;
Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 19/7.

[^102]: Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, 4/48.

[^103]: Al-Tafsir al-Kabir, 31./67; Tafsir al-Qur'an al-ʿAzim, 4/508.

[^104]: Al-Shawahid al-Rububiyya fi al-Manahij al-Sulukiyya, p. 400;
Al-Hikmat al-Muti‘aliya fi al-Asfar al-Arba‘at al-‘Aqliyya, 9/248-50.

[^105]: See: Aflatun, Jumhuri, W.K.C. Guthrie, trans. Hasan Fathi,
Fikr-i Ruz Publication, book six.

[^106]: See: Al-Shifa, Al-Ilahiyyat, pp. 310-324; Suhrawardi, Shahab
al-Din, Hikmat al-Ishraq, ed. and introduction by Henry Corbin,
Humanities and Cultural Studies Resesarch Center, 3rd, Tehran, 1380
sh/2001, pp. 92-93; Al-Shawahid al-Rububiyya fi al-Manahij al-Sulukiyya,
pp. 256-263; Al-Hikmat al-Muti‘aliya fi Asfar al-‘Arba‘at al-‘Aqliyya,
5/214, 2/77, and 3/504-505.

[^107]: Bigdili, Lutf‘ali Baig, Atashkada-yi Adhar, edited and
researched by Hasan Sadat Nasiri, Amir Kabir Publication, Tehran, 1338
sh/1959, 2/794-795.

[^108]: See: Sharh al-Maqasid, 2/364.

[^109]: Al-Hikmat al-Muta’aliya fi Asfar al-‘Arba‘at al-‘Aqliyya, 9/175;
Shirazi, Sadr al-Din Muhammad, Al-Mabda‘ wa al-Ma‘ad, ed. Sayyid Jalal
al-Din Ashtiyani, 3rd edition, Islamic Propagation Office, Qum,
1422/2001, pp. 524-526.

[^110]: Siyasat-i Madaniyya, p. 76.

[^111]: For further information, see: Rabbani Gulpaygani, ‘Ali, Husn wa
Qubh-i ‘Aqli, Cultural Studies and Research Institute, Tehran, 1368
sh/1989, pp. 11-12.

[^112]: In logic, inherent (fitri) is applied to the propositions that
once the object of desire crosses the mind, the latter may confirm it
without need for deliberation; see: Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha, Al-Mantiq,
2 vols. 3rd edition, Matba‘atu Nu‘man, Najaf, 1388/1968, 2/322.

[^113]: Hilli, Hasan b. Yusuf, Al-Rasai’l al-Sa‘diyya, ed. ‘Abd
al-Husayn Muhammad ‘Ali Baqqal, Nashr-i Islami Institute, Qum,
1410/1990. Ayatollah Marʿashi Library, Qum, 1410/1989, p. 54.

[^114]: Al-Sara’ir al-Hawi li Tahrir al-Fatawi, 3/490, 458; Al-Sharif
al-Murtadha, Rasa’il Al-Sharif al-Murtadha, ed. Sayyid Mahdi Raja’i, 4
vols. Dar al-Qur’an, Qum, 1405/1984 2/372; Ahmad al-Murtadha, Sharh
al-Azhar, 4 vols. Ghadhan San’a, 1400/1979, 1/26.

[^115]: Rasa’il al-Sharif al-Murtadha, 2/373.

[^116]: See: Sharh al-Mustalahat al-Kalamiyya, Majma‘ al-Buhuth
al-Islamiyya, Mashhad, 1415/1994, p. 242.

[^117]: Rasa’il al-Sharif al-Murtadha, 1/429 and 2/373.

[^118]: For further details, see: Rasa’il al-Sharif al-Murtadha,
2/372-373; Shifa’ al-‘Alil, pp. 216-217.

[^119]: Al-Kafi, 6/155-254.

[^120]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/299.

[^121]: Da’a’im al-Islam, 2/177, No. 638.

[^122]: Hilli, Hasan b. Yusuf, Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 9 vols. Muʿassisa-yi
Nashr-i Islami, Qum, 1412/1992, 5/12.

[^123]: Sarakhsi, Shams al-Din, Al-Mabsut, 30 vols. Dar al-Ma‘rifa,
Beirut, 1406/1985, 11/220-221.

[^124]: ‘Asqalani, Ibn Hajar, Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, 13
vols. 2nd edition, n.d, 9/504.

[^125]: It means creating a fissure on the right part of a camel’s hump
and spreading the blood over its hump during the Hajj pilgrimage in
order to specify that the camel is being taken to the Hajj ritualsfor
sacrifice. See: Muʿjamu Alfadh al-Fiqh al-Jaʿfari, p. 54; ʿAllama Hilli,
Hasan b. Yusuf, Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2 vols. Lithography, Al al-Bayt
Institute, Mashhad, n.d, 1/107.

[^126]: Kashani, Abu Bakr b. Masʿud, Bada’i‘ al-Sana’i‘ fi Tartib
al-Shara’i‘, 7 vols. Al-Maktibat al-Habibiyya, Pakistan, 1409/1989,
2/162; Ibn Qudama, ʿAbd al-Rahman, Al-Sharh al-Kabir, 12 vols. Dar
al-Kutub al-ʿArabi, n.d, 3/577.

[^127]: Hilli, Al-Hasan b. Yusuf, Muntaha al-Matlab, 2 vols. Haj Ahmad
Publication, Tabriz, 1333 sh/1954, 2/753; Hilli, Hasan b. Yusuf,
Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2 vols. Makyabat al-Radhawiyya li Ihya’ al-Athar
al-Jaʿfariyya, n.d, 1/386; Ibn Qudama, ʿAbd Allah b. Ahmad, Al-Mughni,
12 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-ʿArabi, Beirut, n.d, 3/574.

[^128]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Mabsut fi fiqh al-Imamiyya, ed.
Muhammad Tqi Kashfi, 8 vols, Al-Maktabat al-Murtadhawiyya, Tehran,
1387/1967, 1/316; Shara’i‘ al-Islam fi Masa’il al-Halal wa al-Haram,
1/176; ‘Amili, Zayn al-Din b. ‘Ali, Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘
al-Islam, 15 vols. Mu‘assisat al-Ma‘arif al-Islamiyya, 1413/1992, 7/196.

[^129]: Malik b. Anas, Al-Mudwwanat al-Kubra, 6 vols., Alsa‘ada, Egypt,
1/451; Al-Hattab al-Ru‘ayni, Muhammad b. Muhammad, Mawahib al-Jalil bi
Sharh Mukhtasar Khalil, ed. Zakaria ‘Umayrat, 8 vols. Dar al-Kutub
al-‘Ilmiyya, 1416/1995, 4/280.

[^130]: Al-Dasuqi, Muhammad ‘Arafa, Sashiya al-Dasuqi ‘ala SharH
al-Kabir, ed. Muhammad ‘Alish, 4 vols. 2/89, Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, nd.;
Tahrir al-Ahkam, 1/107; Ibn Hazm Andulusi, Al-Muhalla, ed. Ahmad
Muhammad Shakir, 11 vols. Beirut, Dar al-Fikr, 6/4, 7/99, and 7/112.

[^131]: Halabi, Abu al-Salah Taqi b. Najm, Taqrib al-Ma‘arif, ed. Faris
Tabriziyan, Maktaba Amir al-Mu’minin, Isfahan, 1417/1996, p. 135;
Qawa‘id al-Maram fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam, p. 119.

[^132]: Taqrib al-Ma‘arif, p. 135; Qawa‘id al-Maram fi ‘Ilm al-Kalam, p.
119.

[^133]: Ibn al-Jawzi, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali, Al-Thubat ‘ind al-Mamamat,
ed. ‘Abd Alla al-Laythi al-Ansari, Mu’assisat al-Kutub al-Thiqafiyya,
1406/1985, p. 60.

[^134]: In various works of the Ash‘arites, different issues have been
referred to for denying the rationality of the inherent good and evil
and proving their legality. For further information about the
Ash‘arites’ resaons as well as their critique, see: Husn wa Qubh-i
‘Aqli, pp. 81-110.

[^135]: Ghayat al-Maram, p.322.

[^136]: Amidi, ‘Ali b. Muhammad, Al-Ahkam fi Usul al-Ahkam, 4 vols. 2nd
edition, Al-Maktab al-Islami, Damascus, 1402/1981, 1/85-86; Ghayat
al-Maram, p. 238; Ghazali, Muhammad b. Muhammad, Al-Mustasfa fi ‘Ilm
al-Usul, Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya Beirut, 1417/1996, p. 46.

[^137]: Abu al-Faraj, ‘Abd al-Rahman b. ‘Ali, Talbis Iblis, ed. Dr.
Al-Sayyid al-Jamili, Beirut, Dar al-Kutub al-‘Arabi, Beirut, 1405/1985,
p. 84.

[^138]: Al-Baqalani, Abu Bakr Muhammad b. al-Tayyib, Tamhid al-Awa’il wa
Talkhis al-Dala’il, ed. ‘Imad al-Din Ahmad Haydar, Al-Kutub al-Thiqafiya
Institute, Beirut, 1981, pp. 141-142.

[^139]: Tamhid al-Awa’il wa Talkhis al-Dala’il, pp. 384-385; al-Mustasfa
fi ‘Ilm al-Usul, p. 46-47.

[^140]: Qawa‘id al-‘Aqa’id, pp 204-205; Tamhid al-Awa’il wa Talkhis
al-Dala’il, pp. 382-383 and 138; Ghayat al-Maram, p. 244.

[^141]: Karami, Mar‘i b. Yusuf b. Abi Bakr, Raf‘ al-Shubha wa Gharar
‘amman Yahtajju ‘ala Fi‘l al-Ma‘asi bi al-Qadar, ed. As‘ad Muhammad
al-Maghribi, Dar Harra’, Makkat al-Mukarrama, 1410/1989, p. 57.

[^142]: Ibn Taymiya al-Harrani, Ahmad b. ʿAbd al-Halim, Kutub wa Rasa’il
wa Fatawa-yi Ibn Taymiya fi ‘Aqida, ed. ‘Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Qasim
al-Najdi, 7 vols. Maktiba Ibn Taymiya, 6/127; ‘Abd al-Rahman b.
Muhammad, Abu Sa‘id, Al-Ghunyatu fi Usul al-Din, ed. ‘Imad al-Din Ahmad
Haydar, Mu‘assisat al-Khadamat wa al-Abhath al-Thiqafiyya, 1987, p. 149;
Al-Fasl fi al-Milal wa al-Ahwa’ wa al-Nihal, 3/64.

[^143]: Muzaffar, Muhammad Ridha, Usul al-Fiqh, 2 vols. 4th edition,
Islamic Propagation Office, Qum, 1370 sh/1991, 1/208; it seems we can
regard these types of propositions as among the “self evident”
propositions which are evident; hence, no need to return them to the
sensual affections; for more information, see: Husn wa Qubh-i ‘Aqli, pp.
49-66.

[^144]: Taqrib al-Ma‘arif, p. 134

[^145]: This claim is apt to come up with since moral good and evil
refer to “justice” and “injustice”. See: Isfahani, Muhammad Husayn,
Nihayat al-Diraya fi Sharh al-Kifaya, Lithography, Mahdavi Publications,
Isfahan, 1418/1997, 2/128.

[^146]: Q. 7:33.

[^147]: Q. 16:90.

[^148]: Q. 7:157.

[^149]: Q. 7:28.

[^150]: Al-Sara’ir al-Hawi li Tahrir al-Fatawi, 3/464.

[^151]: Q. 16:5-8.

[^152]: Bahrani, Yusuf, Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhira fi Ahkam al-ʿItrat
al-Tahira, ed. Muhammad Taqi Iravani, 20 vols. Nanshr-i Islami
Publication, Qum, 14014/1984, 25/143; Nawawi, Yahya b. Sharaf, Rawdhat
al-Talibin, ed. ʿAdil Ahmad ʿAbd al-Mawjud, 8 vols. Dar al-Kutub
al-ʿIlmiyya, Beirut, n.d, 6/524; Najafi, Muhammad Hasan, Jawahir
al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, ed. Shaykh ʿAbbas Quchani, 43 vols.
3rd edition, Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyya, 1409/1988, 31/397; ʿAmili,
Muhammad, Nihayat al-Maram fi Sharh-i Mukhtasar Shara’iʿ al-Islam, ed.
Mujtaba ʿIraqi, 2 vols. Muʿassisa-yi Nashr-i Islami, Qum, 1413/1992,
1/491; Bahuti, Mansur b. Yunus, Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 6 vols. Dar al-Kutub
al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1418/1997, 5/852.

[^153]: Raf‘ al-Shubha wa Gharar ‘amman Yahtajju ‘ala Fi‘l al-Ma‘asi bi
al-Qadar, 57.

[^154]: Ghayat al-Maram, p 245.

[^155]: Al-Ghazali, Muhammad b. Muhammad, Al-Maqsad al-Asna fi Sharh
Ma‘ani Asma Allah al-Husna, ed. Bassam ‘Abd al-Wahab al-Jabi, Al-Jaffan
wa al-Jabi, Cypress, 1407/1987, p. 85.


