Discourse Two: Legal Studies
============================

Legal Presuppositions
---------------------

Exploitation is the first and the most important issue that man has
dealt with in his encounter with the nature – irrespective of its being
animate or inanimate – since the beginning of his life on earth. This
issue holds such a sublime status in human mind, hence in his behavior,
that the Holy Qur’an has accepted it on both macro and micro levels. In
a general statement, first the Holy Qur’an brings up man’s utilization
of the nature as follows:

***﴾It is He who created for you all that is in the earth.***[^1]***﴿***

Then, it goes on to specify in detail the relation between man and
animals:

***﴾... and He created the cattle for you.﴿***[^2]

Although these two principles denote the purposeful creation of the
world of being and its creatures for humankind, the Muslim jurists are
facing several important and fundamental issues in explaining the
relation between man and animal and its legal status.

### 1. Creation of Creatures for Man

Understanding the creation of creatures for man is based on clarifying
in what sense the word *lakum* (for you) in verse 29 of *Surat
al-Baqara* is employed.

Two possibilities are proposed in the meaning of the word *lakum*, which
is discussed in various Islamic sources (of exegesis, principles of
jurisprudence, etc.):[^3]

**1.1. Utilization (*****Intifa‘*****)**: The intention in creating
other creatures, especially animals, is for humankind to benefit from
them.[^4]

**2.1. Taking Heed (*****I‘tibar*****)**: Creation of other creatures
for humankind is for human beings to take heed from them so as thereby
to achieve a better and higher understanding of the Exalted God.[^5]

The basis for setting forth this possibility is a saying related from
the Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) commenting on the
above-mentioned verse:

***﴾It is He who created for you all that is in the earth﴿… so that you
think and take heed and attain God’s pleasure in His Paradise and guard
yourselves against His Fire… and because of His knowledge over all
things, He knows what is good for you. Then, O children of Adam! He
created for you all that is in the earth for your interest.***[^6]

Although these two possibilities apparently seem incompatible, it will
be clarified with a little scrutiny that the relation between them is
that of generic and specific, since “utilization” is a generic concept
that encompasses both religious (ideological) and worldly fields.[^7]
Therefore, it can be concluded that God’s intention in creating
creatures, especially the animals, for mankind is for man’s use of them,
by which indeed the taking heed is also actualized.

The Holy Qur‘an has asserted man’s utilization of animals in various
verses:

﴾Have they not seen that We have created for them – of what Our hands
have worked – cattle, so they have become their masters? And We made
them tractable for them, so some of them make their mounts and some of
them they eat.]eat.﴿[^8]

﴾And most surely there is a lesson for you in the cattle: We give you to
drink of what is in their bellies from between [intestinal] waste and
the blood pure milk, easy and agreeable to swallow for those who
drink.[^9]﴿

﴾And most surely there is a lesson for you in the cattle. We make you to
drink of what is in their bellies, and you have in them many advantages
and of them you eat.[^10]﴿

﴾And Allah has given you a place to abide in your houses, and He has
given you tents of the skins of cattle which you find light to carry on
the day of your march and on the day of your halting and of their wool
and their fur and their hair (He has given you) household stuff and a
provision for a time.﴿[^11]

Similarly, the content of some traditions asserts this issue:

Choose cattle for yourselves, as they are ornaments for you, by them you
fulfill your needs, and the provision for their sustenance is upon
Allah.[^12]

Among the signs of man’s happiness is their having an animal to mount on
to satisfy their needs and to fulfill the rights of their brothers.[^13]

Whoever buys an animal is entitled to use it as a mount and its
sustenance is upon Allah.[^14]

### 2. Creatures that Humankind Would Benefit from

Having accepted the principle of utilization of other creatures by
humankind, the question rises as to whether this right is restricted
only to a group of creatures or human beings are entitled to use all
creatures to their own benefit.

Given the application of the two words *ma*[^15] and *jami‘an* in the
verse, ﴾*khalaqa lakum ma fi al-ardhi jami‘an* = [He] created for you
all that is in the earth.﴿, it is understood that man is permitted to
make use of all that is in the earth. That is because, according to the
Holy Qur’an, all that is in the heaven and earth is made subject to and
disposed for man; therefore, human right for utilization is not
restricted to a specific species or type of creatures.

﴾Do you not see that Allah has disposed for you whatever there is in the
heavens and whatever there is in the earth and He has showered upon you
His blessings, the outward and the inward?﴿[^16]

﴾And He has disposed for you [benefit] whatever is in the heavens and
whatever is on the earth; all is from Him. There are indeed signs in
that for a people who reflect.﴿[^17]

### 3. The Type of Utilization of the Creatures

After accepting the permission for utilization and its non-restriction
to a specific type of creature, the most important issue is determining
the extent of this utilization.

There are two views in Islamic sources concerning determining the extent
of man’s utilization of creatures:

**1.3. Non-Restriction**: Some believe that the result of accepting “the
creation of creatures for man” is the license for man’s unrestricted use
of them (principle of permissibility = *ibaha*), because making benefit
from some creatures is something that man’s intellect is capable of
comprehending without needing this legal precept.[^18] Consequently, by
virtue of intellect and religion (texts), man is entitled to use the
natures’ inanimate as well as the animate creatures in whatever way that
they desire, except when we find a specific reason for the
impermissibility of a specific type of exploitation.[^19]

**2.3. Restriction**: In contrast, yet some others believe that the
creation of creatures for man only suggests the existence of an
formative relationship between man and other creatures, according to
which the goal for creating the creatures is for man to make use of,
without specifying what kind of utilization is legally or morally
permissible.[^20]

It seems that the statement, ﴾It is He who created for you all that is
in the earth.﴿, although applying to individuals, i.e., suggesting the
creation of all creatures for humankind, it does not apply to states,
i.e., there is no mention of how to use the creatures. So, it cannot be
claimed that human beings has the right to use the creatures in whatever
way they wish; rather, we should seek for a specific reason for being
permitted as well as in what way to utilize any creature.[^21]

### 4. Principles of Utilization

As our findings indicate, man’s utilization of animals is based on two
fundamental principles:

**1.4. Coordination with Existential Structure**: The shape and type of
the body of any animal is designed to fulfill a specific goal; thus,
human beings have to coordinate their utilization of the animals with
that goal.[^22]

This essential point can be epitomized in the phrase “escaping from
injustice and welcoming justice”; for, what is meant by “justice” is to
put everything in their right place, and in contrast, injustice is not
to put everything in their right place. Therefore, if man’s use of the
animals is proportionate to the goal for their creation, it is
permissible as it is justice; and on the contrary, if the utilization is
not proportionate to that goal, since it is injustice it is regarded as
indecent and illegitimate in the Islamic law.

The observance of utilization and its coordination with the existential
structure of animals can be well understood from the following saying of
the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.):

***Beware of using the animals’ backs as pulpits, as the Almighty and
Glorious Allah has subjected them to you so that you can reach towns to
which you would not reach unless with hardship.***[^23]

Therefore, we can neither stop using the animals’ meat by turning to
vegetarianism on the pretext of avoiding hurting them,[^24]because in
this case the goal for creation is not fulfilled and it will remain in
vain,[^25] nor can we exploit them beyond their existential structure on
the pretext of the existence of a possessive relationship between man
and animals – as some have claimed[^26] – because all that possession
proves is the right to use them, but it fails to indicate the method and
the type of utilization.

**2.4. Consistency with Divine Prohibition**:[^27] From the Islamic
point of view, animals, like human beings, have a non-material soul, by
which they enjoy a lasting coexistence with humankind, a coexistence
that starts in the world and continues until the Day of Resurrection
(resurrection of the animals).

Accepting a non-material and celestial dimension for animals in the
Islamic cognition system would entail a value and status for them which
is referred to as “reverence of the soul” or “divine right”,[^28] a
status that is undoubtedly influential in the way man utilizes the
animals.

The existence of this intangible value status for the animals (in Islam)
is considered as a basis for expressing various legal opinions about
them:

Protection of lost animals and saving them from death;[^29]

Dropping goods off the ship in order to save animals from drowning [in
the storm];[^30]

Non-permission to separate the occupied parts of the ship in case it
will cause the drowning of the animals being carried in it;[^31]

Non-permission to pull out the suture thread from the (injured) animal’s
body in case it leads to the animal’s death or (further) injury;[^32]

Necessity to release the animal from a (occupied) container or place in
which it has been trapped, even though it leads to their
dismantling;[^33]

Necessity of providing fodder, water, and other requirements of the
animal that is in someone else’s disposal (held in trust), even though
the owner disagrees with this;[^34]

Necessity of dressing the wounds of the animal even though the stuff
used for dressing belongs to someone else (usurped).[^35]

It is by the acceptance of such divine status that the issue of blood
money for committing crime against the animals is set forth in the
sources of Islamic law. As inadvertent killing of people, amputating
them, and injuring their body causes the perpetrator to pay blood money
to the victim, so also such treatment of the animal necessitates payment
of blood money, which indicates the significance of the life and
security of the animal’s body and impermissibility of hostility towards
them in Islam.[^36]

Whoever blinds an animal, must pay off one fourth of its price as blood
money.[^37]

In regard to the horse that was killed in a collision with another
horse, the Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) said, “the owner
of the living horse is responsible to pay for the blood money of the
horse killed.”[^38]

It is worth mentioning that this Islamic ruling includes the animal’s
fetus as well and if someone hurts a female animal aborting its fetus,
they have to pay one tenth of the price of the female animal as blood
money. [^39]

Similarly, although fogs are regarded as impure by Islamic law and it is
indecent for the Muslims to mingle with them, they are not an exception
to this rule and harming them would entail paying blood money.[^40]

Indicators for Utilizing Animals
--------------------------------

As far as our studies show, five significant indicators are set forth in
Islamic sources for utilizing the animals, which include protection of
animals’ lives, protection of animals’ bodily health, protection of
animals’ sexual need, abstaining from harming and maltreating of
animals, and abstaining from punishing animals.

However, with a little attention, it will be cleared that the pivot of
these indicators is the magnanimity in using the animals, that if the
human society keeps it in mind, the above five principles would
automatically be taken care of, as well.

The principle of magnanimity is finely illustrated in three anecdotes
related from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.).

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) of Islam regards as against magnanimity
keeping loads on the back of a camel while its feet are tethered.

***The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) saw a camel whose feet were tied while
holding its load on its back. He asked: “Where is its owner? He is not
manly [magnanimous]. Let him be ready for judgment on the Day of
Resurrection.”***[^41]

Similarly, he does not regard as permissible taking a piece of bread
from the sheep’s mouth by forcing its neck.

Umm Salama said, “I was with the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) when suddenly the
neighbor’s sheep entered the house and picked a piece of bread that was
lying before us. I rushed toward it and took the bread off its mouth.
The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said, ‘It was not proper to press the animal’s
neck’.”[^42]

And finally, when one of the Muslim women escaped from the Quraysh
pagans and made a vow to sacrifice upon her return the camel by which
she had escaped upon her return, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) points out to
her what an awful reward she had promised to this camel that saved her
from the enemy, and she was going to kill it. Such a vow is not
valid.[^43]

### 1. Protection of Animals’ Lives

Protecting the lives of animals – despite the expenses it entails – like
protection of human life is a principle in Islamic law[^44], which is
incumbent upon all Muslims to do their best to achieve.

The Holy Qur’an considers the value of the soul of a single person as
equal to that of all other human beings and regards granting life to a
single person as granting life to all the human beings.

***﴾… anyone who kills any person without another soul being involved or
for causing mischief in the land, acts as if he had killed all mankind.
Anyone who spares life acts as if he had granted life to all
mankind.﴿***[^45]

There are similar notions in *hadith* sources concerning animals, too.
The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) has referred to
undertaking the custody of an animal whose owner has abandoned it due to
financial disability to provide for its expenses as “giving new life”
(*ihya*).[^46]

This principle enjoys such a status in Islamic thought that the life of
the insects and tiny creatures are not neglected, as the Muslims are
obliged to protect their lives lest they are unintentionally hurt.

To this end, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) advises the Muslims to avoid
unnecessary nighttime walks on the passageways so that the tiny
creatures that show up during the night to procure food would not be
trampled.[^47]

Paying attention to such a principle concerning the animals has become
the ground for deducing various rulings in Islamic law:

**1.1. Ablution (*****wudhu*****) and Protecting the Lives of Animals**:
Any Muslim is obliged to perform ablution with some water for their
daily prayers. If the water available is limited and there is an animal
around that is thirsty and in need of the water (for ablution), it is
incumbent (*wajib*) upon the Muslim[^48] to give the water to the
thirsty animal and perform dry ablution (*tayammum*) for their prayer.

The importance of such a ruling becomes clear when we find out that it
is not necessary for the animal to be so thirsty that if the water is
not given to it, it would die of thirst. Rather, even the possibility of
its risk of dying in the future due to the likelihood of unavailability
of water is sufficient for this purpose. It is for this reason that the
Muslim jurists emphasize the use of *khawf* (fear = i.e. fear of
inaccessibility of water in the future), as there is no difference
between the animal belonging to oneself and the one belonging to another
person.[^49]

**2.1. Prayer (*****Salat*****) and Protection of Animals’ Life**:
Performing prayers is among the religious obligations. The Muslims are
not permitted (it is unlawful for them) to give up (interrupt) their
prayer before it is over. However, if the life of an animal is in
danger, it is obligatory for the Muslim to give up their prayer and try
to protect or save the life of that animal.[^50]

**3.1. Fasting and the Protection of Animals’ Life**: Similarly, if
saving the life of an animal is subject to breaking one’s obligatory
fast, such as when an animal is drowning, and saving it requires the
person to dip their head completely under water or breathe some gas
(dense smoke), it is incumbent upon the Muslim to proceed to save the
life of the animal.[^51]

**4.1. Inviolability of other Peoples’ Properties and Animals’ Life**:
If a person who is taking care of an animal is not capable of providing
fodder for their animal at a certain time and in case no one else would
be ready to help them thereupon and the animal’s life is in serious
danger, they can use (usurp) the fodder belonging to another person in
any possible way, without the owner’s permission, and pay back the price
of the fodder to its owner after their financial status is
normalized.[^52]

It is noteworthy that protection of Animals’ life and health is among
the issues that is not merely restricted to the animal’s owner; rather,
it is obligatory (a collective obligation) upon other people, who
witness an animal’s being killed or injured, not to withhold their
protection as a social duty (a benevolent action) from the animals.

With this explanation, the significance of the following saying of the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) regarding the value of saving the life of the
animals can be understood:

***The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) said, “A prostitute encountered a dog
near a well that was about to die of thirst; she took off her shoe, tied
it to her scarf, and drew some water from the well for the dog. This
caused the forgiveness of her sins.”***[^53]

It is worth mentioning that in some *hadith* sources, this narration has
been quoted in another way, in which the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) in the
end of his saying has referred to the rule, “*fi kulli dhati kabidin
ratbatin ajrun*” (lit. translation: in every wet liver, there is reward,
meaning quenching every thirsty liver is rewarded.).[^54]

In the desert one found a thirsty dog,

With naught of his life but last gasp left;

That man of seemly ritual made his hat a bucket,

Binding his turban thereto as a rope;

His loins he girt in service and opened up his arms,

And gave the helpless dog a fraught of water –

At all of which the Messenger (S.A.W.) proclaimed that man’s condition

***As pardoned by the Arbiter of Sins!***[^55]

**5.1. Killing and Hunting Animals**: Despite such an attitude towards
animals’ life, there is no wonder to know that killing animals except
for using their meat in cases that their meat is consumable (*ma’kul
al-lahm*) and man is in need of it, is not permissible.[^56] That is why
the Holy Qur’an regards the aimless killing of animals, which results in
the extinction of their species, as indication of vicious (corrupt)
human beings.[^57]

***﴾And if he were to wield authority, he would try to cause corruption
in the land, and to ruin the crop and the stock [humans and animals],
and Allah does not like corruption.﴿***[^58]

Accordingly, with the advent of Islam, the paganist tradition of
*muaqara* (contending), in which the contenders practiced killing a
great number of camels in a kind of contest to show off their financial
authority, was declared as forbidden.[^59]

When the Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) found out a number
of camels were killed as per the above (paganist) practice, he did not
allow people to eat the meat and ordered it to be transferred to the
city’s garbage dump so that only the carnivorous animals could eat it,
because those camels were not killed for the purpose of human
consumption.[^60]

Perhaps it is for this consideration that God does not consider the
slaughter of an animal as permissible without mentioning the name of God
so as to draw human beings’ attention to the fact that using animals’
meat is permissible only when the animals are slaughtered according to
Divine rules.[^61]

﴾He has only forbidden you what has died by itself, blood and pork, and
anything that has been consecrated to something besides God.﴿[^62]

The prohibition of killing animals except for using their meat
(*akl*)[^63] and the prohibition of killing them without a purpose (in
vain)[^64] is among the principles that have various applications in
Islamic jurisprudence.

For instance, “If an animal gets its head stuck in a container belonging
to someone else, the animal cannot be killed under the pretext of
preserving the container, however valuable it may be.”[^65] “If an
animal is in danger because of thirst, that animal cannot be slaughtered
[without giving it water] and use the available water for performing
ablution, because such an act is against Divine grace and
kindness.”[^66]

Among the most important legal consequences of this principle is the
prohibition of travel for hunting animals. All Muslim jurists – except
for Abu Hanifa[^67] – regard as forbidden all the recreational trips
intended for hunting animals (idle hunting), which is not permissible
for a Muslim person[^68]; and if they do it, they are obliged, contrary
to other travelers, to perform their prayers in the full format
(*tamam*) and observe the fast during the month of Ramadan, as well.

As we know, according to the Islamic law, if a Muslim gets as far as 24
kilometers away from their residence, they have to perform the
four-*rak‘a* prayers of noon (*zuhr*), afternoon (*asr*), and late
evening (*‘isha’*) in shortened (two-*rak‘a*) format (*qasr*).
Similarly, it is not permissible to observe fast if this journey falls
within the month of Ramadan. However, these two rulings do not apply to
the one who goes on a trip for hunting and does not intend to procure
food or earn livelihood for himself and his family. It is only Abu
Hanifa, from among the Muslim jurists, who maintains that when
travelling with the intention of hunting, the shortened prayers (*qasr*)
and breaking one’s fast (*iftar*) would be necessary.[^69]

Condemning such a travel, the Infallible Imams (A.S.) have referred to
it with phrases like travel of vanity (*kharaja fi lahw*);[^70] false
way;[^71] unjust way (*laytha bi masir-i haq*);[^72] acquisitiveness
(*kharaja li talab al-fudhul*).[^73] They have stressed that the
Almighty Allah regards as lawful the hunting of animals only when human
beings are in dire need of it and have no other ways for procuring their
food (*mudhtar*, i.e. being in desperate plight).[^74] It is with this
consideration that Imam al-Baqir (A.S.) and Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.), in
interpreting the statement, ﴾But should someone be compelled, without
being rebellious or aggressive…﴿, which is repeated in verses173 of
*Surat al-Baghara*, 145 of *Surat al-An‘am*, and 115 of *Surat al-Nahl*,
have clearly stated that the one who hunts animals with the intention of
entertainment (play and pastime) is oppressive and acquisitive
(rebellious), and the rules of being *mudhtar* do not apply to him.[^75]

According to Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.), killing animals (with intention of
play and pastime) is among the most disgusting sins:

***The most disgusting sins are three: to kill animals; not to give
women their dowries; and to avoid paying the workers their
wages.***[^76]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) considers the one who
kills an animal intentionally and in vain as deserving punishment:

***The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) passed a decree for
the one who kills an animal without a purpose, cuts down a tree, ruins
the crop, destroys a house, or drains a spring or river to pay off the
cost of what they have destroyed or ruined and to receive a number of
lashes. If they do it by mistake or unintentionally, then they should
only pay for the damage and not to be punished.***[^77]

In the Holy Prophet’s (S.A.W.) view, anyone who kills an animal
unreasonably (unrightfully), that animal will bring them to trial in the
Divine Presence on the Resurrection Day:

There is no animal – birds, etc. – that is killed unrightfully, except
that it will call its killer to trial on the Resurrection Day.[^78]

No one would kill a sparrow or bigger than that unrightfully except that
the Almighty and Glorious Allah would call them to account. The Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.) was asked, “What is the animal’s right?” He answered,
“To slaughter it (for procuring their food) and eat it, rather than cut
off its head and throw it away.”[^79]

Accordingly, the life of small birds, such as swallows, hoopoes, and
sparrows are to be respected[^80] and the believing person is not
permissible to deprive them of the right to live without reason.[^81]

Whoever kills a sparrow without reason, that sparrow will complain of
them to Allah on the Resurrection Day and say, “O Lord! Such and such a
person killed me aimlessly and for no benefit.”[^82]

No one would kill a sparrow except that it will complain on the
Resurrection Day and say, “O Lord! This man killed me with no reason,
neither benefitting from my killing nor leaving me to live on in Your
earth.”[^83]

Whoever kills a sparrow unrightfully, Allah will call them to account on
the Resurrection Day. People said, “What is its right [the right thing
to do]?” He replied, “To slaughter it, rather than holding its neck and
cutting it off.”[^84]

This ruling is not merely limited to the animals whose meat is eatable
(*ma’kul al-lahm*); rather, from the viewpoint of the Muslim jurists,
man is not permitted to kill animals that do not do any harm to him
without any reason and in normal conditions.[^85] Even in the wartime,
the animals that are scattered in the war-ravaged territories should not
be killed on the pretext of the war condition or taking revenge the
enemy.[^86]

Although killing animals that can endanger human life and inflict harm
upon him, like different kinds of reptiles (wild animals), is
permissible in view of Muslim jurists,[^87] it is not clear that one is
permitted to commit such an act without feeling threatened by them,[^88]
because the religious permission for killing such animals is subject to
their potential threat against human beings; otherwise labeling them as
harmful (*mudhi*) is not right even though they are potentially
harmful.[^89] That is why the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has permitted
killing an animate creature only when it is harmful and hurting to human
beings.

***The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) prohibited [people] from killing any
animate creature, unless when it threatens to harm.***[^90]

By virtue of the restricting concept of *illa* (unless) and the
permissibility of using the derivative of *yudhi* in respect to the
person who would in future appeal to the origin of the verb
(*al-talabbus bi al-mabda‘*), and the necessity of implying truth from
speech, it can be concluded that so long as an animal is not actually
threatening human safety, it may not be killed.

***I asked Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) concerning the killing or hurting
swallows in the Holy Mosque (Masjif al-Haram). He said: “They must not
be killed, because I was in the company of Imam al-Sajjad (A.S.),
pestering a swallow. The Imam told me: O my son! Do not kill these birds
and do not hurt them, since they do not harm anybody.”***[^91]

It is worth mentioning that although in this *hadith* the narrator’s
question concerns killing and hurting the swallow in the Holy Mosque,
the Imam’s answer and the reason he mentioned would also apply to
killing birds in places other than the Holy Mosque as well as killing
any harmless creature.[^92]

Such an attitude towards the status of animate creatures has lead to the
impermissibility of small aquatic creatures such as frogs, even with the
pretext of medical use[^93] and such insects as honeybees[^94]; and also
killing ants is not permissible except when they hurt human beings.[^95]

Therefore, man’s entrance into the wild life and the killing of the
animals for whatever motivation, is not permissible as long as human
safety is not threatened by them.[^96] Thus, claiming that all animals
are created for man’s exploitation and the man has the right to take
their life (*ihlak*) is an incorrect claim.[^97]

### 2. Protection of Animals’ Physical Health

Because of his need for animals, man has tried throughout history to
keep animals alive to attain his own benefit; but the superiority of man
over animals has caused him to endanger their lives whenever he wishes.

These behaviors include defiling animals’ organs and cutting off,
slitting, damaging, and breaking them; as in most instances, having a
proprietary relationship with them would be the lame excuse for such
mistreatments.

Allah considers such treatments of animals an outcome of the Satan’s
interference and explains it in its language as follows:

***﴾And I will lead them astray and give them [false] hopes, and prompt
them to slit the ears of cattle﴿.***[^98]

As this verse implicates, the best incentive for such behaviors is the
existence of superstitious beliefs in ancient communities. For instance,
in the community in which Islam emerged, as in many other communities,
when the number of someone’s camels exceeded one hundred, they would
blind one eye of a male camel and if they exceeded one thousand they
would blind the two eyes of a camel, in order to avert evil eye.[^99]

Irrespective of the interference of superstition, which Islam has
strongly opposed, other motivations such as revenge, pleasure seeking,
entertainment, and the like have also been involved in such treatments
of animals.

According to Islamic teachings, any deforming of the face and body of
the animals, which is referred to as *muthla* (mutilation), is
prohibited.

Literally, *muthla* is derived from the root *mathala*, meaning “to make
an example of” and “to mark”. Making [someone or something] notorious
takes place with various motivations such as frightening others and
making an example of them, punishing severely, mutilating, venting one’s
anger, entertaining and amusement. Having usually been performed by
cutting off body parts such as nose, ear, hand, etc., this action was
done to both human beings and living and dead animals.[^100]

Warning people against such an act, the Holy Prophet said:

Whoever mutilates an animal, may the curse of Allah, the angels, and all
people be upon him.[^101]

Whoever mutilates a living animal and does not repent for that Allah
will mutilate him on the Day of Resurrection.[^102]

Cutting off the animals’ organs is unjust and impermissible to the
extent that the religious authorities do not permit it even towards the
stray and rabid dogs, either.[^103]

Such treatment of animals is not only an offence to them, but it also
scars the beauty of their face and ruins the conformity of their body
parts. It is for this reason that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has
considered it impermissible to shorten a horse’s forelock and mane, and
to cut its tail, explaining it as follows:

Do not cut the forelock, mane, and tail of a horse, because there is
goodness in its forelock; the mane would make it warm; and the tail
disperses the insects from it.[^104]

You mutilated it! You mutilated it! Goodness is written on the forelock
of the horse until the Resurrection Day and its owners would get
assistance for it. The horse’s mane is [represents] its dignity, its
forelock is its beauty, and its tail is its strength.[^105]

With these explanations, there remains no doubt that cutting off the
tusks of an elephant, the antlers of an elk and a wild goat, the tusks
of a walrus, and the feathers of a peacock, and similar mistreatments
would not be permissible.

### 3. Protection of Animals’ Sexual Health

The animals’ sexual functions, like their other functions, are of
concern to Islam, which, has devised protective rules and commanded
people to observe them.

**1.3. Castration (*****Ikhsa’*****)**: Castration is among the most
common treatments that man has practiced on animals throughout history.
Despite the underlying motivation, this action is legally examinable
from two perspectives: the torments and pain that the animal suffers
during this action and its deprivation of the right to procreate in its
lifetime.

Appealing to the principle of proprietorship, some jurists claim that
since human beings are the proprietors of animals and the proprietors
can exploit their property in whatever way they wish (the proprietor has
authority over his/her property), they can castrate animals to suppress
their sexual excitement or to fatten them (intending to make
profit).[^106]

In contrast, jurists like Abu al-Salah al-Halabi, Ibn Barraj, and
Shawkani consider such an action as unlawful, because the usefulness of
an action would become a permit for performing it when a legal barrier
would not prohibit us from such an action. However, in our premise, in
addition to the prohibition of maltreating animals, the sayings of the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and the infallible Imams (A.S.) concerning the
impermissibility of this action would suffice in proving its
prohibition.[^107]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) prohibited us from castrating the
animals[^108], saying, “Castration is not permitted in Islam.”[^109]
Similarly, he deemed castration of animals as evil (detestable),
believing that we should not destroy the power of God’s creatures,[^110]
as the growth and development is in procreation.[^111] He told a man who
had castrated his horse at the pretext of being stubborn, “Woe on you!
You have mutilated the animal’s body; goodness is hanging on the
forehead of horses until the Resurrection Day.[^112]

Similarly, Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) has regarded as detestable (*makruh*)
the castration and pitting animals against each other (*tahrish*).[^113]

However, if we cannot prove the prohibition of castigating animals from
these traditions and conceive the word “aversion” by its literal
concept, which is used in some traditions whether in its technical sense
of prohibition or aversion, at least we have to accept that castration
of animals is a detestable and aversive act and thus the Muslims had
better avoid it.[^114]

**2.3.** **Interbreeding Animals**: Interbreeding animals is among the
controversial issues in animals’ law. Is man justified to provide for
the interbreeding of animals of different species and thus produce
animals of middle race?

The research conducted indicates that interbreeding animals of different
species (an animal born of two different animals) has been discussed by
Muslim jurists in terms of purity and impurity (*taharat* and *najasat*)
and using their meat and other products (*akl* and *shurb*).

Some traditions related from the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) concerning the
interbreeding of a donkey and a horse indicate that His Holiness has
regarded this practice as inadvisable and warned the Muslims against it,
viewing such treatment as a result of human ignorance.

We are a household to whom (giving) charity (alms) is unlawful, and are
commanded not to wipe the moist of our ablution (*wudhu*) and not to
interbreed a donkey with a horse.[^115]

The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) was an obedient servant; he did not enjoin
us (his household) but against three things: not to wipe the moist of
ablution; not to accept charity; and not to interbreed a donkey with a
horse.[^116]

The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) warned against interbreeding a donkey and
a horse.[^117]

[He was asked:] “O Apostle of Allah! Shall we interbreed a donkey with a
horse?” He answered, “Those who do this do not know.”[^118]

A mule was presented to the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) as a gift. We said, “O
Apostle of Allah! Shall we interbreed our donkeys with our horses so as
they produce mules like this for us?” He replied, “Those who do this do
not know.”[^119]

The impression of Muslim jurists about all these traditions is that the
heterogeneous interbreeding of donkeys and horses, although indecent and
inadvisable, is not regarded an unlawful (*haram*) act, because the
purpose of such a ruling is to prevent the reduction of horse stock and
to encourage its procreation. This practice has been prevalent in the
time of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and His Holiness (S.A.W.) has not
expressed any strong opposition against it.[^120] In some *ahadith*,
this has been regarded as permissible[^121] and in case of doubt in its
permissibility and impermissibility, the practical principle of
exemption (*bara’a*) denotes its permissibility.[^122]

Despite the unlawfulness or repugnance of heterogeneous interbreeding,
the subject matter of the above traditions merely concern donkeys and
horses; however, the question remains to be answered whether we can go
beyond these traditions and seek to examine the issue of genetic
engineering in Islamic law. Can the undesirability of interbreeding
donkeys and horses be an indication that from the Islamic point of view
any manipulation in the genetic structure of animals leading to the
appearance of middle animals cloned is not appropriate?

### 4. Preventing Cruelty and Maltreatment to Animals

Transgressing animals’ rights is among the acts, which all revealed
religions have been unanimous on its prohibition.[^123] However,
sometimes we encounter in every community unjust traditional practices
in which the major pivot is cruelty and maltreatment of animals. Among
such practices, which can also be traced in different forms in other
communities, are the two superstitions of *habs al-balaya* (confinement
of misfortunes) and *dharb al-thawr* (beating the bull), prevalent all
over Arabian Peninsula (before the advent of Islam).

When a person died (during the *Jahiliyya* period), they would keep his
camel in a ditch dug near his grave without giving it any water and
fodder until it would die. This camel was called *baliyya* (misfortune)
and this practice was called *habs al-balaya*, the purpose of which was
that the dead person might not become pedestrian on the Resurrection
Day![^124]

It was also customary (during the *Jahiliyya* period) that when the
cattle are moving toward a water pond to drink, first the bulls and then
the cows drink water. Now, when the cow would not drink water, it was
believed that the demons living in between the bull’s horns is
preventing the cow from drinking; thus, they would beat the bull to the
extent that the cow would start drinking.[^125]

One of the earliest measures taken by Islam was to fight against such
superstitions, which were partially or widely prevalent in Arabian
Peninsula (during that period). The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) frequently
prohibited his companions from such superstitious acts.

Do not oppress (torment) the creatures of God.[^126]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) prohibited from oppressing (tormenting) the
creatures of God.[^127]

From the point of view of religious authorities, a Muslim is not
permitted to maltreat animals even if this should be done by snatching a
leaf from an ant’s mouth:

***The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) prohibited snatching and eating what an
ant is holding in its mouth.***[^128]

Similarly, the Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) clearly
declared that if he were offered the whole universe to grab a barley
husk from an ant’s mouth in return, he would not do it.

***By Allah, if they grant me all the heavens and the whole world and
ask me in return to disobey God by grabbing a barley husk from an ant’s
mouth, I would not do that.***[^129]

Commenting on the *aya*, ﴾Allah will inflict retribution on him[^130]﴿,
Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) pointed out a man who terrified a fox by bringing a
fire close to its face so much as the fox wetted itself out of panic,
and the Almighty God sent a snake to him at night so as he got himself
wet in an intense panic.[^131] Similarly, His Holiness (A.S.) tells the
story of a man who because of throwing stones at pigeons was hit by a
thunderbolt.[^132]

Accordingly, not only maltreating and oppressing animals is regarded as
impermissible, but also keeping silent before indecent and pervasive
treatment of animals is not permissible either and one should prevent
others from it; because, otherwise, one’s acts of devotion would be
devoid of any value and will ensue Divine punishment.

***There was an old pious person among the Children of Israel. One day,
while performing prayer, he noticed two little boys who were holding a
rooster and plucking its feathers. The old man kept on performing his
prayer, not preventing the children from that. God ordered the earth to
swallow this servant of His and the earth swallowed him.***[^133]

The issue of maltreating and abusing animals in Islamic jurisprudence
has been studied by Muslim legal experts who have in different cases,
which will be explained later on, regarded such treatments of animals as
unlawful (*haram*).[^134]

**Semantics**: Before legal examination of this issue, it is to be noted
that in legal sources different terms such as *ilam*, *ta‘dhib*, and
*idhrar* have been used to describe man’s indecent treatment of animals.

Structurally, *ilam* is infinitive and from the root word *alama*, which
is used in Arabic as meaning severe pain (*waj‘*).[^135] Similarly,
*Ta‘dhib* is structurally an infinitive and from the root word
*‘adhaba*.

There are three possibilities in the meaning of this root word (i.e.
*alama*): 1. prohibition, 2. continuity, 3. beating (*dharb*).[^136] So
also for *‘adhab* different definitions are proposed: pain (*alam*),
loss (*madharr*),[^137] pain along with hardship,[^138] pain along with
degradation,[^139] continuous and unremitting pain (*istimrar
al-alam*).[^140]

A careful examination of these definitions would imply that pain
(*alam*) has varying degrees (is gradational), which, depending on its
intensity, continuity, or discontinuity, can be named *‘adhab*
(chastisement).[^141] Therefore, it can be concluded that every *‘adhab*
includes pain (*alam*), but every pain is not always *‘adhab*.[^142]

On this basis, we can regard *ilam* as equivalent to maltreatment and
*ta‘dhib* as torture. However, since *ilam* is conceptually more
widespread than *ta‘dhib*, as it encompass both torture and suffering
extra pain and undergoing tension and pressure in life, instead of using
any of the words here we use the word maltreatment (*azar wa aziyat*) so
that it may designate both concepts. However, in some cases we would
mention the Arabic equivalent in parentheses for accuracy in phrasing.

**1.4. Branding Animals**: Among what has been much practiced by human
beings for a long time is branding animals (*wasm* or *kayy*).

Branding animals has been normally practiced for two purposes:

First, treatment referred to as *kayy*, on the basis of which certain
superstitions have also crept in. For instance, whenever a camel
developed a disease called *‘urr* (mange), namely, its lips or inside
its mouth would blister, they would brand a healthy camel to cure it
[the diseased one].[^143]

**1.1.4. Branding the Face**: The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has frequently
prohibited Muslims from such acts[^144] and when he saw a donkey whose
face was branded, he cursed (damned) the perpetrator[^145] and warned
one of his companions that the perpetrator of such an act will be
punished in the same way on the Resurrection Day.[^146]

Despite causing maltreatment of the animal, branding the face would
sustain serious damage to the face and ruin its beauty. Thus, in a
general command, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has bewared Muslims of doing
anything that may damage the animals’ beauty (*la taqbahu
al-wujuh*).[^147]

Given the prohibition and cursing by the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) as well
as the consensus (*ijma‘*) of Muslim jurisprudents, branding the face of
animals is an unlawful act, because it causes cruelty (*ta‘dhib*) to
animals and ruins their beauty.[^148]

**2.1.2. Branding other Parts of Animals’ Body**: The Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.) and the infallible Imams (A.S.) have asserted that except for
the face, other parts of the animals’ body can be branded;[^149] among
which, the ears and buttocks are considered as the most suitable for
this purpose.[^150]

Except Abu Hanifa, all other Muslim jurists consider branding other
parts of animal’s body for the purpose of their recognition and
separation as permissible and, in some cases, even as recommended
(*mustahab*), with respect to the sayings of the religious authorities.

Abu Hanifa believes that since branding animals causes their
maltreatment and our Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has bewared us of any
maltreatment and abusing of animals, it is an indecent (detested =
*makruh*) act. In contrast, other legal experts maintain that since this
is performed for a rational purpose and the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has
approved it toward animals, it can be considered as an exception to the
prohibition of maltreating and abusing animals and judge it as
permissible.[^151]

**2.4. Hamstringing Animals (*****‘Aqr*****)**[^152]: According to our
findings, hamstringing animals has been practiced for two different
purposes in pre-Islamic Arabia:

**1.2.4. In the Battlefield**: In the past, when some animals such as
horses were frequently used in battles, the belligerent party would cut
off the four legs of their own horses or those of their enemy’s (*‘aqr*)
so that the enemy would not be able to use them to their own benefit or
by which the soldiers could not flee the battle scene; and also, in
order to cripple the enemy forces.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) allowed his troops to kill (slaughter) their
quadrupeds whenever they become defiant in the enemy’s land and stop
from moving on, but they are not permitted to cut off their legs.

***Whenever a beast of yours becomes defiant– that is, it desists from
moving in battlefield in the way of Allah – slaughter it but do not
hamstring it.”***[^153]

Muslim jurists maintain that the Holy Prophet’s (S.A.W.) statement
concerns the time when such an action is possible; but if the battle is
so fierce that it would be impossible to kill the animal in a legal way
(i.e., to slaughter it) and there is fear of the enemy’s opportunistic
exploitation of this event, then one can hamstring his animal.

Therefore, although in normal conditions maltreatment and abusing of
animals is not permissible, special circumstances of war allows man to
do so;[^154] just as when Ja‘far b. Abu Talib, the commander of the
Muslim army in battle of Mu‘ta (against the Byzantine) did so.[^155]

**2.2.4. On the Tomb of a Deceased Person**: The *sunna* of *‘aqr*
(hamstringing) is among the superstitious practices of pre-Islamic
Arabs. According to this *sunna*, when a person passed away, a camel
(sheep or cow[^156]) would have been hamstringed at his or her grave,
its blood sprinkled over the grave, and its carcass was left around to
be eaten by carnivorous animals.

Different motivations have been mentioned for this superstictious
practice, such as compensating the hospitality during his/her
lifetime,[^157] showing the deep grief of the bereavement, and
sacrificing one’s best properties for that.[^158]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) forthrightly outlawed this practice by
stating, *la ‘aqra fi al-Islam* (there is no hamstringing in Islam), and
said hamstringing is outlawed in Islam.

**3.4. Using Animals as Targets (*****Sabr*****)**: Archery is among the
athletics, learning and competition matches of which is highly
recommended in Islam; however, if this sport brings about maltreatment
and abusing of animals, it is not only undesirable but unlawful, as
well.

Among the practices opposed to by Islam is *sabr al-baha’im* (taking aim
at animals). What is meant by this is to tie up an animal’s legs and let
it die gradually and painfully by taking aim and shooting at it.[^159]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has prohibited Muslims from such a way of
killing animals and cursed its perpetrator. Having taken for granted the
existence of soul for the animals, it is stressed in some traditions
that the animal possessing soul should not be killed this way.

***The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) prohibited targeting beasts; he
prohibited killing any animal by way of aiming at it while its legs are
tied up. The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) prohibited al-mujaththama
(killing an animal lying in a squatted position), which Abu Muhammad
further explained as: al-mujaththamata al-masbura (squatted while its
legs are tied up). Do not take the life of any animal with spirit by
taking aim at it; the Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) prohibited*** ***taking
the soul of an animal by taking aim at it. He cursed the one who takes
the soul of a tied up animal by taking aim at.***[^160]

The Holy Prophet’s prohibiting and cursing the perpetrator of such an
act indicates the unlawfulness of this act in Islam; it is besides the
principle that regards the maltreatment and hurting (*ta‘dhib*) of
animals as unlawful.[^161]

**4.4. Confining Animals**: As it will be explained in the following
lines, man has different duties towards animals, the most important of
which is to try to preserve their life, and it may best be achieved
simply by supplying their water and food.

Confining animals is among the indecent conducts towards animals. In
this procedure, the animal is detained in a place without water and food
so that it may die gradually out of hunger and thirst. According to the
Muslim jurists, such a treatment of animals is impermissible and
unlawful (*haram*).[^162]

In his spiritual ascension to the Unseen (*mi‘raj*), the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.) talks about his meeting with a woman, who, due to her
mistreatment and abusing of a cat, had been punished in the Hell.

***The night I ascended to the mi‘raj, I saw a woman in fire. I asked
for the reason, it was said, “she had tied up a cat without giving it
water and food and would not let it go to eat insects of land until it
died. That was why God punished her.”***[^163]

**5.4. Crucifying Animals (*****Salb*****)**: Some jurists believe that
crucifying animals before killing them is not permissible, because it
would torment them and is incompatible with the Islamic creed enjoining
tolerance with animals (practicing benevolence towards animals when
slaughtering them).[^164]

**6.4. Burning Animals (*****Ihtiraq*****)**: According to the Islamic
law, burning animals even though they cause harm to human beings is
impermissible and unlawful (*haram*).[^165]

Once on a journey, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) found out that some of his
companions had set an ant hole on fire, he reproached them and said,
“Punishing with fire does behoove no one except the Creator of
fire.”[^166] “It does not behoove man to punish a creature like God
does.”[^167]

Accordingly, a question is raised in legal sources as to whether the
living small fish can be put in boiling oil or fire to cook them for
eating.

This question is examined in two aspects: 1. maltreatment of the
animals, 2. eating these animals without observing the hunting
conditions.

Apart from the second aspect, which concerns the eating and drinking
issue (*at‘ima wa ashriba*), the first aspect has drawn the attention of
the jurists, some of whom regard such treatment as unlawful and
impermissible as it inflicts torment on the fish.[^168] Some jurists,
however, have only discussed the issue in respect to the second aspect
and do not view eating such fish as permissible[^169] according to the
tradition narrated by ‘Ammar Sabati.[^170]

Nevertheless, the Muslim jurists have only in one case given *fatwa* as
to the legal obligation of burning animal’s body, and it is when an
animal whose flesh is lawful to eat is sexually exploited by a human
being. In this case, the animal is first killed (slaughtered) as per the
instructions given in Islamic sources, and then the flesh is burned and
buried.[^171]

It is necessary to keep in mind two points in this judgment:

First: Burning the body of the animal after killing is not for
punishment of the animal because it has not had any role in its being
sexually abused; rather, it is to show the indecency of the act, while
suppressing the desire for such ignominious act and preventing human
health from hazardous problems.[^172]

Second: this judgment is only applicable to the animals whose meat is
for human consumption; as for other animals, just their place of living
is to be changed and then sold so that the owner of the animal is not
reproached for that.[^173]

**7.4. Full Shearing of Animals Wool (Hair)**: As it is explicitly
pointed out in the Holy Qur’an, some animals’ wool (hair) has many uses
in human clothing, which in turn can pave the way for profiteering. For
this reason, the Muslim jurists have commented in this regard using the
general rule concerning “the unlawfulness of maltreatment and abusing of
animals.”

From the viewpoint of the Muslim legal experts, the owners of animals
such as sheep are not permissible to shear off the wool close to the
skin, because such an act would hurt (*ta‘dhib*) the animal.[^174]
Accordingly, some jurists do not deem as permissible the sale of the
sheep’s wool before it is sheared, because such a transaction is
apparently the sale of the whole wool of the sheep and access to such a
thing is not possible except through shearing the wool close to the
skin, which would hurt the animal.[^175]

**8.4. Slaughtering the Animal, Avoiding Maltreatment**: Although
consuming the animal’s meat is not possible except by killing
(slaughtering) it, one should not torment the animal under the pretext
of obtaining meat and ignore the Holy Prophet’s (S.A.W.) command in
doing benevolence while slaughtering them.[^176] That is because there
is no conflict between the necessity of slaughtering animals and doing
benevolence to them in doing so. Thus, one should avoid any action that
increases persecution and maltreatment of the animal.[^177]

***Verily, Allah has ordained you to do benevolence to everything; so,
when you slaughter and kill animals, do it with benevolence.***[^178]

In a letter to one of his judges and pointing out the necessity of
instructing the butchers on how to slaughter animals properly, the
Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) emphasizes that the butchers
who slaughter the animals in an improper way should be
reprimanded.[^179]

It is in respect to such an attitude that the Holy Qur’an, while
explaining different methods of killing animals, deems only one method
as permissible and does not permit Muslims to consume the meat of the
animals that are killed in such ways as described in the following
verse:

***﴾You are prohibited carrion, blood, the flesh of swine, and what has
been offered to other than Allah, and the animal strangled or beaten to
death, and that which dies by falling or is gored to death, and that
which is mangled by a beast of prey barring that which you may***
***purify and what is sacrificed on stone altars [to idols], and that
you should divide by raffling with arrows. All that is
transgression.﴿***[^180]

Benevolence in slaughtering animals cannot be restricted to specific
instances, because what is meant by benevolence is to avoid
maltreatment; so, whatever that may bring us a step closer to that goal
is regarded as benevolence.[^181] We study benevolence in two stages:

**1.8.4. While Slaughtering**: In Islamic sources, the following
instructions are given to reduce tormenting of animals when being
slaughtered.

**1.1.8.4. The Sharpness of the Slaughtering Tool**: It is befitting to
slaughter animals with a tool of iron (metal) and sharp like a
knife[^182] so that its bluntness would not torment the animal.[^183]

When you want to slaughter an animal, do not torment it; sharpen your
knife, lay the animal down facing the *qibla*, and do not cut off its
spinal cord before it dies.[^184]

When you slaughter an animal, do it well; each one of you should sharpen
your knife and relieve the animal.[^185]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) commanded that the Muslims sharpen their
knives when slaughtering animals.[^186]

The sharpness of the slaughtering tool is a necessary rather than
sufficient condition for the reduction of animal’s pain; because, if a
tool, however sharp it is, still causes pain to the animal, should not
be used. For this reason, some jurists believe that using tools such as
a jagged scythe for slaughtering is not permissible, because its being
jagged would add to the animal’s pain (*ta‘dhib*).[^187]

**2.1.8.4. Swift and Powerful**: Tardiness in action also increases the
process of slaughtering, causing further pain to the animal. Therefore,
as the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) ordered, the animal is so that it can be
slaughtered as swiftly and powerfully as possible to tolerate it more
easily.[^188]

***When one of you slaughters an animal, you should act
swiftly.***[^189]

**3.1.8.4. Avoid Cutting Lengthwise**: To slaughter an animal, its four
main arteries are to be cut off so that blood can gush out quickly;
emptying its blood vessels and end its worldly life in the shortest time
possible. To this end, it is not permissible to use any other method
that would cause the gradual and painful death of the animal.

Among such methods is the upward cutting of the animal’s throat (*qalb
al-sikkin*). In this method, the knife is inserted in the animal’s
throat and moved upward while rotating it, causing the animal to die
slowly.[^190]

In response to the question as to how the animals should be slaughtered,
Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) warned the Muslims against the above way of
slaughtering.[^191] Having regarded the *sanad* of this *hadith* as
valid, some Muslim jurists have considered such an act as unlawful and
eating the flesh of the animal slaughtered this way as
impermissible.[^192] In contrast, another group has regarded such an act
as detestable (*makruh*) and enjoined the Muslims to avoid it, while
throwing doubt on the validity of the *sanad* of the *hadith* due to the
unclearness of the identity of Qasim b. Muhammad (its narrator).[^193]

**2.8.4. The Interval between Slaughtering and Final Death**: With the
acceptance of the animals’ enjoyment of an immaterial (pure) soul and
the existence of a relationship between death and separation of the soul
from the body (disjunction) and since this process is gradual, we should
avoid doing anything that may inflict more pain to the animal until the
soul is fully separated from the body.

**1.2.8.4. Skinning**: Among the legal considerations, whose basis is
the avoidance of tormenting animals, is the unlawfulness of skinning the
animal (*salkh*) before its body is cold enough after being slaughtered;
i.e. before the total separation of the soul from the body.

It seems – as some Shi‘i and Sunni legal experts have asserted – that
the coldness of the animal’s body that is accompanied by the ceasing of
its throbbing motions can be regarded as a sign of the total separation
of its soul from the body. Thus, the difference between *qabl al-mawt*
(before death) and *qabl al-bard* (before getting cold), as stated in
some legal books is not correct; “until it gets cold, i.e., until its
soul departs from the body”, “before it gets cold... before the soul
exits the body”, “unless there exists a correlation between dying and
getting cold”.[^194]

Some jurists believe that since the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and the
Infallible Imams (A.S.) have regarded as unlawful eating the meat of the
animal that is skinned before its body gets cold,[^195] there is a
correlation between the unlawfulness of eating the meat of such an
animal (*akl*) and the unlawfulness of doing such an act (*al-salkh qabl
al-bard* = skinning before the animal’s body gets cold).[^196] So
skinning the animal before the completion of its dying process is
indecent, unlawful (*haram*), or detestable (*makruh*).

Although according to the extant documents, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.)
has never in his life skinned a sheep before its body getting
cold,[^197] it seems for proving the unlawfulness of such an act we need
no specific reasons except the judgment of intellect, the
impermissibility of tormenting animals, and the words of the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.) concerning the unlawfulness of torturing (*ta‘dhib*)
animals,[^198] provided that we accept that the animal preserves its
ability to perceive and feels the tormenting of its body till the end of
the process of the soul leaving the body (coldness of the body).[^199]

**2.2.8.4. Cutting off the Spinal Cord (Paralyzing)**: According to the
religious teachings, the killer of the animal (*zabih* = slaughterer) is
not allowed to cut off the animal’s spinal cord (*nakh‘*) by cutting off
its head or breaking off its backbone[^200] before its ultimate death
(before the body becomes cold).[^201]

Irrespective of the disagreement among the jurists on the unlawfulness
or repugnance of cutting off an animal’s spinal cord before its body
gets cold as well as eating its meat,[^202] we should look for the
reason for this ruling.[^203]

Since the spinal cord lies in the spinal column, breaking it off is not
possible without breaking its neck; for this reason, the traditions in
which cutting off the animal’s spinal cord is discussed are interpreted
as referring to the issue of breaking the neck (*raqaba*) as well.

So long as the animal’s body does not get cold (enough), its spinal cord
should not be cut off and its neck should not be broken.[^204]

After slaughtering, the spinal cord is not cut off and the neck bone is
not broken.[^205]

He was asked about the person who cuts off the neck of an animal before
it dies, and he replied, “Although it is an evil act, its meat can be
eaten.”[^206]

Cutting off the spinal cord and breaking the neck of an animal in the
early stages of its killing (*dhibh*) denotes two points:

1. The Slaughterer’s Haste;

***O butchers! Do not break the animal’s neck bone and do not hasten its
dying [process] until the soul leaves the body by itself.***[^207]

2. The Slaughterer’s Violence.[^208]

There is no doubt that this hastening and violence would torment the
animal, because by the time the dying process is over, the animal’s
overall nervous system is active and it feels all the injuries and pains
inflicted upon its body. For this reason, by cutting off the four main
arteries of the animal’s neck, the blood should be allowed to be
completely drained from its body and only after the body’s activity is
totally stopped the neck and the spinal cord can be cut off.

It is in respect to this issue that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and the
Infallible Imams (A.S.) have regarded cutting off the spinal cord in the
interval between slaughtering and death of the animal as impermissible;
however, they have permitted it after its death, i.e. after the complete
separation of the soul from the body (*idhhaq-i nafs*).

The animal’s spinal cord is not to be cut off until it dies; so, when it
dies, then cut off its spinal cord.[^209]

Do not cut off its spinal cord until it is quite death.[^210]

Do not cut off its spinal cord, nor cut off its head, nor tear apart its
meat until its soul is separated from the body.[^211]

Therefore, cutting off the animal’s spinal cord and breaking its neck
intentionally before its death process is over is an indecent act since
it causes unreasonable intensification of its pain.[^212]

***The Exalted Allah has obliged you to do good to all things; then,
when you slaughter, do it with benevolence.***[^213]

**3.2.8.4. Cutting the Body (Flesh) into Pieces**: If we accept that
there is an interval between slaughtering the animal and its final death
– which is referred to as the complete departure of the soul from the
body – and if we regard its getting cold as a sign of dying, then we are
not permitted to cut the animal’s flesh into pieces before its final
death.[^214]

**Animals Vexing Humans**: So far, we have pointed out some instances in
which Islam did not allow human beings to hurt and abuse animals in
different ways and under any pretext; however, the question remains to
be answered as to if animals prevent humans from utilizing them by
vexing them, what can humans do?

Obviously, when we talk about rights it concerns a mutual relation.
Therefore, as much as man is obliged to observe the animals’ rights, his
own rights in utilizing them are also to be observed, as we talked about
it before. Thus, in order to secure his rights, man is permitted to seek
procedures for protecting himself against the animals’ harm, but these
procedures should not cause their physical or psychological damage.

For instance, man has the right to use the honey produced by the
honeybee, but he is threatened by the bees when he approaches their
hives. To solve this problem, some legal sources have suggested
producing smoke (*tadkhin*) to keep safe from the bee stings.[^215]

### 5. Avoiding Punishment of Animals

Among the simplest and at the same time most widespread treatments of
animals by man is beating them for various motives such as training,
spurring (making it do something, e.g. go faster), and sometimes –
unfortunately – taking revenge. Such treatments by man, despite its
motivation, is based on accepting a kind of privilege for him; but is he
really entitled to such treatment of animals?

Before legal examination of this issue, it is to be noticed that from
the viewpoint of religious authorities, such treatment of animals has
not been agreeable and their practical life story (*sira*) has suggested
avoiding such acts.

For example, Imam al-Sajjad (A.S.) went on Hajj pilgrimage with a camel
forty times without whipping his camel for even once.[^216]

In response to the question as to when one can beat the animal one
rides, Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) said, “When the animal is not moving like
when it is returning to its manger.”[^217] Deliberating on this question
and answer, it is well understood that beating an animal is permissible
only when it refuses to do its duty, for which it is created.

As we explained previously, according to the Holy Qur’an’s delineation,
the creation of the cattle is intended for the fulfillment of some human
needs, including transportation.

﴾Of the cattle [some] are for burden and [some] for slaughter. Eat of
what Allah has provided you and do not follow in Satan's footsteps; he
is indeed your manifest enemy.[^218]﴿

﴾and you are carried on them and on ships.﴿[^219]

﴾It is Allah who created the cattle for you that you may ride some of
them, and some of them you eat…﴿[^220]

﴾And who created all the kinds and made for you the ships and the cattle
such as you ride.﴿[^221]

Now, if an animal refuses to do this inherent duty, which can be
signified by sluggish motion and lack of liveliness (not moving as when
returning toward its manger), it should be notified; but since it is not
possible for man and animal to verbally communicate for this purpose, it
can be done by showing a specific conduct.[^222]

This issue can be implied from the difference between *‘ithar* and
*nifar* in beating the animals and the reason stated for it:[^223]

***Beat it for its rebellion (‘ithar), but do not beat it for its
ill-temperedness (nifar), since the animal sees things you do not
see.***[^224]

Although in such cases, it is permissible to beat the animal to make it
carry out its duty, it should be known, however, that the beating is
permissible when it would not be possible in no other to notify the
animal of its duty. For this reason, when one of the Holy Prophet’s
(S.A.W.) companions begins to beat a camel to have it stand up, the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.) tells him not to beat it and to make a sound, instead,
to make the animal stand up.[^225]

Similarly, to the man who was beating his sheep to make them move, the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) teaches that person how to make them move instead
of beating them.

***The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) saw an Arab who was beating his sheep. He
told his companions “Bring that man to me without frightening him.” When
they brought him to the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.), he said, “O Arab! Say
giddyup! Instead of beating them.”***[^226]

However, the religious authorities do not approve beating animals.

***I was going on a Hajj pilgrimage with Imam al-Sajjad (A.S.), his
camel was moving very slowly. He pointed his stick toward it, but said,
“Ah! If there were no retaliation (qisas) in the world Hereafter, I
would beat it,” and then moved his hand back.***[^227]

Naturally, if beating is just for drawing the animal’s attention, then
we are not permitted to use the means that may inflict serious harm on
it, whether it is used for training or utilization.[^228]

***Beware of beating [an animal] with a wooden stick, because the Satan
will accompany you and the angels will run away from you. Whoever is so
harsh on his animal that it may die, he will be cast in Hell.***[^229]

Therefore, beating the animals for what they are not naturally
committed, like beating them in circus shows, and beating them for doing
what they are not capable of doing, like beating them for carrying heavy
loads or gaining unusual speed in races, is not permissible.

If we look at beating animals from this perspective, we will well
understand why the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and the Infallible Imams (A.S.)
have warned the Muslims against damaging the face of the animal[^230]
and explained the reason as follows:

Everything has sanctity, and the animals’ sanctity is in their
faces.[^231]

Do not beat the face of animals or any spirited being, as they praise
Allah.[^232]

Accordingly, the Muslim jurists have regarded damaging the face of the
animals and beating it as unlawful or at least as aversive (*makruh*),
because the face is more delicate than other parts of the body, the
animals feel more pain thereby, and the scar left on the face may ruin
its beauty.[^233]

Human Duties in Utilizing Animals
---------------------------------

As it was stated before, the relation between man and animal is a
bilateral one; i.e. if man is granted the right – albeit limited – to
utilize animals, the animal – in turn – has rights that man is obliged
to observe (as his responsibility) that in case he does not, he will
lose his right of utilization.

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) says in this respect:

***Be wary of Allah concerning His servants and His lands, because you
are responsible even for the places and beasts.***[^234]

The duty and responsibility of man towards animals can be summarized in
the following proposition: It is incumbent upon the owner of the living
creatures to do whatever is in their interest.[^235]

The necessity of acting in the interest of the animals can be well
understood from the following words of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.):

***‘A’isha is quoted as saying, “I went out of the house and saw the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) was wiping his horse’s back with his clothes, I
said, ‘May my father and mother be your ransom! Are you cleaning the
back of the horse with your clothes? He said, ‘Yes O ‘A’isha! You do not
know. Maybe My Lord has commanded this to me. Besides, I am near and the
angels call me to account for keeping the horse and cleaning it.’ I
said, ‘O Apostle of Allah! Assign me to this; let me be the one who
takes care of it.’ He said, ‘I will not do so. My friend, Gabriel,
informed me that the Exalted Allah will reward me for every single grain
that I give it and erases a sin from me for every single grain that I
give it. There is no Muslim taking care of a horse in the way of Allah
except that he will receive reward and his sins will be erased for every
grain that he gives it.***[^236]

In Islamic jurisprudence, provision for the needs of the living
creatures is referred to as *nafaqa* (maintenance). Paying maintenance
becomes obligatory for man for three reasons: marriage, kinship, and
ownership. Accordingly, in case a human being owns an animal, he is
obliged to provide for various needs of his animal such as food,
clothing, dwelling, medicine, and medical treatment.[^237]

### 1. Providing Foodstuffs

The All-knowing and Almighty Allah has created the nature in such a way
that it readily provides for the needs of all creatures for foodstuffs.
Thus, viewing man and animal as equal [in their physiological needs],
the Holy Qur’an stresses that Almighty Allah undertakes to provide for
their food.

***﴾ How many an animal there is that does not carry its own provision.
Allah provides for it, and for you, and He is the All-hearing, the
All-knowing.﴿***[^238]

Therefore, the first and the foremost duty of man as the God’s
vicegerent on earth is to provide food and water for the animals that he
is taking care of without there being any difference between various
animal species in this rule.[^239] However, once he is not capable of
this undertaking, he should not take on the responsibility of keeping
animals.

This responsibility is of such importance in the Islamic legal system
that the jurists consider fulfilling it as necessary even if the animal
is not able to use the food and water[^240] due to old age or is passing
its last moments of life and thus giving it food and water does not make
any difference in sustaining its life.[^241]

As it is implied from the religious sources, fulfilling this
responsibility is associated with the spiritual status and divine
veneration of the animal.[^242]

Concerning this association, Shaykh al-Tusi wrote:

***Whenever you own an animal, it is incumbent upon you to provide for
its food, whether its meat is eatable or not; there is also no
difference between birds and non-birds, because animals are
revered.***[^243]

The existence of such a relation between divine veneration of animals
and the necessity of providing for their food has led to the fact that
providing for the animals’ food needs is regarded as benevolent from the
Islamic point of view that if it is for gaining divine pleasure, it will
bring reward in the world Hereafter, as well.[^244]

Whoever provides for the horse’s expenses for the sake of Allah is like
a person who has always been open-handed for giving alms.[^245]

Whoever takes care of a horse for the sake of Allah, the feeding and
giving water to it and cleaning its place will all be counted as his
good deeds on the Resurrection Day.[^246]

The benevolence of providing food for the animals will have two
consequences:

First: the Muslims by endowing all or part of their properties can
provide for food expenses for a special kind of animals or any animal
needing food as it desires.[^247]

Second: fulfilling the food needs of animals was considered a moral
issue, without needing there to be an ownership relation between man and
the animal so that he has to fulfill its food needs; rather, man can
give food and water to the animals that he is not an owner of, too.

While passing by the sea, Jesus son of Mary threw a piece of bread that
was his own meal into water. Some of his companions told him, “O Spirit
of God! Why did you do so? That piece of bread was your meal.” Jesus
(A.S.) answered, “I did so for one of the aquatic creatures to eat it;
such an act has a great reward with God.”[^248]

Imam al-Sajjad (A.S.) would constantly say, “I do not cultivate to
benefit; rather, I cultivate so that the poor or a bird, especially a
lark, may eat from it.”[^249]

The sacredness of this act would become more manifested when we know
that according to the Islamic teachings man first has to provide food
for the animals then proceed to supply food for himself.[^250]

Although fulfilling animals’ food needs includes giving water to them
too, in Islamic sources special emphasis has been placed on giving water
to the living creatures and quenching their thirst, including the
animals.

In this respect, Imam al-Baqir (A.S.) said:

***Allah, the Blessed and the Exalted, likes the quenching of a thirsty
liver. Whoever quenches a thirsty one – whether an animal or non-animal
– God will place him/her in the shade of His mercy on the Day of
Resurrection.***[^251]

Irrespective of the moral aspect of this act, whoever owns an animal is
obliged to provide sufficient food and water for it. This duty can be
performed in the following two direct and indirect ways:

In the first way, the owner or the caretaker of the animal provides the
food and water for the animal and gives it to it; in the second way,
however, he provides a chance for the animal so that it can get its food
and water directly from the nature.[^252]

The above can be implied from the advice that the Commander of the
Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) gave her daughter, Umm Kulthum, in the last
night of his life:

***... then he entered the house, and there were some geese in the house
that my brother Husayn (A.S.) had given to me as a gift. When he sat
down, the geese gathered around him, flapping their wings and making
noise in front of him, which they had not done before... Then he said,
“My daughter! By the right I have upon you, release them, because you
are keeping what*** ***neither have tongue nor are able to talk when
they are hungry and thirsty. Give them food and water, otherwise set
them free to eat from the plants on the ground.”***[^253]

Obviously, using the indirect method, like taking the animals to the
pasture, may release man from duty (lapse of duty) only when, on the one
hand, there is enough water and food in nature for the animal to use,
and on the other hand, the animal’s health and safety would not be at
risk. Otherwise, the owner or the caretaker has to provide for the
animals’ provision directly.[^254]

***Every quadruped has six rights upon its owner: ...when he dismounts
it, he should first give it fodder... Whenever he passes by water, he
should let it drink water.***[^255]

Such a duty for man when taking care of and utilizing animals has
prompted Muslim legal experts to generalize this notion to insects and
proclaim that the beekeepers are also required not to collect all the
honey in the hives and leave out some honey for the bees to use.
Similarly, the silkworm owners are obliged to prepare and provide enough
mulberry leaves for the worms to eat.[^256]

Accordingly, if the owner is unable to normally fulfill his duty, he is
permitted to use other methods to carry out this task. For this reason,
if the owner or the caretaker cannot provide fodder for his animal by
means of paying or without paying for it, he will be permitted – in
order to support the animal’s life and health – to supply food for his
animal from the fodder that is at someone else’s disposal without asking
permission from the owner (usurpation); and then compensate for the loss
when the situation is normalized.[^257]

On the other hand, in case the owner refuses to provide fodder for his
animal while he can afford it, the government or a supporting
organization would force him to carry out his duty. However, if he is
not financially able to pay for it or forcing him to do so does not work
out, depending on the circumstances, the expenses can be paid for from
the state’s public budget or the ownership of the animal transferred to
a qualified person to protect its life and safety.[^258]

It is worth mentioning that in the legal sources three issues have been
referred to for proving the necessity of providing the animal’s fodder
by its owner as well as for putting him under pressure in case of
refusal: 1. the status of the animal’s soul 2. avoidance of abusing the
animal, and 3. punishment in the world Hereafter in case of not avoiding
it.[^259]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said, “The night I ascended to the *mi‘raj*, I
saw a woman in fire. I asked for the reason, it was said, ‘she had tied
up a cat without giving it water and food and would not let it go so
that it would eat insects of land until it died. That was why God
punished her’.”[^260]

While the Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) was performing ablution, a cat
entered his house. He noticed that the cat was thirsty, he set the water
container for it to drink, and then he performed his ablution with the
remainder of the water.[^261]

The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) passed by a camel whose belly was stuck to
his backbone due to excessive thirst. He said, “Be wary of God in
respect to these beasts, ride them decently, and use their meat
decently.”[^262]

Why are you not wary of God concerning the right of the animal whose
ownership He has given to you? It complained to me that you have left it
hungry and made it used to it.[^263]

Where is the owner of this animal? Why do you not wary God concerning
its right? Either give it fodder, or let it go find food by
itself.[^264]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said, “There is no beast except that every
morning it prays to God as follows: Grant me a good owner who relieves
my hunger and thirst by food and water, one who does not burden beyond
my endurance.[^265]

With such an attitude, provision of the animal’s food and water is not
merely restricted to a time when there is possibility of utilizing it;
rather, this duty is still to be done even when the animal is
disabled.[^266]

***One day I was sitting with the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.), suddenly a
camel slowly came over and sat down before us, starting to cry. He told
me, “Woe on you! See who the owner of the camel is? It has some
problem.” I left the house, looking for the owner of the camel, until I
found out it belonged to a man from among the Ansar. I called him to the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.). He told the man, “What is the problem with your
camel?” The man asked, “What problem? By God, I do not know what its
problem is. I used to carry loads and do irrigation with it. When it got
disabled to irrigate, I decided yesterday to kill it and distribute the
meat.” The Prophet said, “Do not do that. Give it or sell it to me.” The
man said, “O Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.)! It is yours.” The Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.) marked it as charity and set it free.***[^267]

**1.1. The Quality of the Provisions**: In providing the animal with
food and water, care must be taken of the animal’s physical well-being
and spiritual status, as well. Accordingly, it is not upright (it is
aversive) to give animals wine or any intoxicating (alcoholic) drinks or
feed it with foods that are not permissible (lawful) for man to
eat.[^268]

The most important reason the Shi‘a jurisprudents present for proving
the aversion (*kirahat*) and not unlawfulness (*hurmat*) of this action
is the content of two traditions narrated by Abu Basir and Ghiyath b.
Ibrahim[^269] as well as the fact that animals are not religiously
accountable.[^270] However, like Qadhi b. Barraj and Ibn Najim Misri, we
too can claim that such an action is unlawful (*haram*) and not
permissible.[^271] Because, although animals are not religiously
accountable (*mukallaf*), if we accept that using alcoholic drinks and
unhealthy foods is as harmful to animals as they are to human beings,
then man does not have the right to knowingly inflict physical damage to
animals just as he does not have the right to do so to a child who is
not legally accountable.[^272]

It is in this respect that for proving this theory we can rely on
traditions, the content of which concerns the impermissibility of using
alcoholic drinks for treatment of all people, including children and
animals.[^273]

Therefore, it is not unlikely to be able to interpret the term *kirahat*
(aversion) used in the two traditions of Ghiyath and Abu Basir by its
literal meaning and not its technical sense and imply unlawfulness of
the action from the context of those traditions.[^274]

**1.2. The Provision Rate**: Although in legal sources no specific rate
and amount is determined for man in providing the animal’s provision,
two issues need to be taken into consideration:

First: the provision supplied for the animal has to (sufficiently)
fulfill its food needs, so the least amount cannot be deemed as
sufficient and feed it just enough to keep it alive.[^275] Second: the
amount of food the animal needs is varied depending on various
conditions of time and place; so, a certain quantity of food cannot be
content with at various times such as sickness, pregnancy,
breastfeeding, reproduction, etc. so that moving animals from one
climatic location to another would in itself cause changes in the
dietary type and amount of food they consume.

It was in consideration of these two aspects that the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.) protested to the people who had overloaded a camel and reduced
the amount of its food; taking this to be the reason for its
disobedience.[^276]

Therefore, the animal’s owner is obliged in respect to the two aspects
of time and place to provide for his animal’s food needs.

There is no fixed amount for their provision; rather, it is obligatory
to provide for whatever the animal requires: food, water, shelter and
the similar things that change over different times and places.[^277]

### 2. Providing Sanitation

The glorious religion of Islam has given great importance to the
sanitation of animals. Hygiene recommendations of Islam concerning
animals can be divided into three general categories:

**1.2. Hygiene of the Body and Environment**: Muslims should not only
undertake to clean of the animals they are taking care of but also to
keep their living place (stockyard) clean so that a Muslim may be able
to perform their most important devotional act, i.e. prayer, there.

The Noble Prophet (S.A.W.) says in this respect:

Clean up the keeping place of sheep and sweep the dust off the place,
because the sheep is an animal from Paradise.[^278]

Clean the dust off the sheep and you can say prayers in their sleeping
place, because sheep are animals from Paradise.[^279]

It is implied from examining the Islamic sources that man’s duty in
providing hygiene for the animals is not restricted to their individual
and environmental hygiene; rather, it includes their food hygiene, as
well.

**2.2. Food Hygiene**: Although to some people the animals’ food hygiene
does not seem to be of serious importance, Islam has taken an interest
in this issue since the very beginning.

In this respect, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) says:

Whoever feeds his horse with cleaned barley, God will record every grain
of barley as a good deed (*hasana*) for him.[^280]

**2.3. Water Hygiene**: When water is exposed to sunshine, it absorbs
sunrays and retains them in itself; thus using such water is not
advisable and performing ablution (*wudhu*) with it is aversive due to
the damage it can inflict to the body.

In some legal texts, it is asserted that if the criterion for such an
ordinance is its likelihood of damage to the human beings and it is
assumed that this damage is the same among both man and animals, it can
be decreed that quenching the thirst of the animal with such water is
inadvisable and aversive (*makruh*).[^281]

### 3. Providing Medication

The one who undertakes to take care of an animal is obliged to proceed
to treat the animal when sick and fulfill for its veterinary needs.
According to Muslim jurists, medication expenses of animal are among the
expenses that the animal’s owners are obliged to pay for (obligatory
maintenance).[^282]

### 4. Providing Dwelling

Our observations of the wildlife reveal the fact that any living
creature, whether aquatic or aerobic, begins to look for a suitable
place for sustaining its life as soon as it attains an independent power
to live, a place that may provide for its physical and spiritual health
and fulfill its various needs.

Although animals in most cases are able to prepare such a desirable
place for themselves, when human beings directly undertake their care,
they have to positively respond to these animals’ needs and provide a
suitable and befitting place;[^283] otherwise, they have been negligent
and disobeying the Almighty Allah and have committed sin.[^284]

The suitability and fittingness of this place has three features in
Islamic law as follows:

First, proportionate to the status of the animal: it does not suffice to
be merely a shelter and the animals cannot be kept in unsuitable and
filthy places on the pretext that they do not understand and are
undiscerning.[^285]

Second, proportionate to the physical needs of the animal: since the
animals are to be kept in conditions in which their health is not
endangered, it is essential that their keeping place be such that they
are secure from heat and cold.[^286]

Third, not jeopardizing human health: although this feature is not much
talked about, it is to be noted that the differences in the body
structure of man and animal entail various health consequences that not
taking care in choosing proper living places for them would lead to
pollution of human environment and sometimes illness for human beings.
Therefore, it is necessary to choose a living place for the animals that
may not jeopardize human physical and psychological health.[^287]

As much as the Muslims are obliged to provide suitable dwelling for the
animals they take care of, they are also obliged to respect their
natural dwelling, as well. That is because, as any kind of human privacy
is to be respected and nobody has the right to violate it, the animals’
privacy is also respectful and no living creature, neither man nor
animal, has the right to violate it

Thus, a Muslim has to have a measured behavior towards the animals’
environment, not to prepare the way for its pollution or destruction.

**1.4. Destroying the Animals’ Environment**: the issue of destroying
animals’ environment has been discussed in Islamic sources. Besides the
traditions that have warned people against destruction of the animals’
environment, the jurists have legally examined this issue, too.[^288]

**2.4. Polluting the Animals’ Environment**: disposing human waste in
the animals’ environment is among the indecent behaviors. The Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.) has warned against urinating in the holes (*juhr*)
where the animals live,[^289] following that, the jurists have also
deemed it as indecent (aversive = *makruh*).[^290]

Such an ordinance may have resulted from two reasons: this act, on one
hand, can put animals’ life in danger, and on the other, some animals
may endanger human health.[^291]

Although the term *juhr* in the Holy Prophet’s (S.A.W.) saying and
*thaqb* (burrow) in the words of the jurists concern the homes of
animals that live in holes and burrows or in the crags of mountains, it
seems the indecency of this act is not limited to a particular group of
animals and encompasses all animals.

The evidence for this claim are the traditions in which the Infallible
Imams (A.S.) have prohibited people from urinating in the running and
stagnant water. To explain this, they have pointed out that there are
[tiny] creatures in water that would be harmed by this; yet it may also
have some harm to human beings too.

No one of you should urinate in stagnant water.[^292]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) prohibited anyone from urinating in running
water except in dire need and said, “Water has inhabitants.”[^293]

Man should not splash his urine in the air or in running water; whoever
does this and face a problem, should not blame anyone except himself,
because some creatures live in the air and water.[^294]

Do not urinate in stagnant water; whoever does this and face a problem,
should not blame anyone except himself.[^295]

Despite the disagreement in legal sources concerning the difference
between running and stagnant water, most of the jurists believe that
urinating in water is aversive and in stagnant water even more
aversive.[^296]

Furthermore, although in these traditions the issue brought up concerns
urinating in animals’ dwellings, it is to be accepted that with respect
to the reason for this ruling, i.e. harming the animals, discharging
human excreta in the dwellings of animals is not permissible.[^297]

This issue can be well understood from the following saying of the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.) concerning the dwelling of the aquatic creatures:

***Water has its inhabitants; do not abuse them by urinating or
defecating.***[^298]

If we accept that polluting the animals’ environment with human waste is
an indecent act as it would abuse the animals, the question remains to
be answered as to whether by implication from the traditions and
trusting the reasons provided in them, we can make the judgment that
polluting the animals’ environment using any type of pollutant is
aversive, in case it abuses them.

### 5. Respecting Animals’ Status

Being committed to respecting animals is regarded as a principle in
adjusting the relationship between human and animal. For this reason,
people are not permitted to prepare the ground for offending the animals
by mistreating or misusing them.

Although concealing one’s private parts from animals is not
obligatory,[^299] we should remember to observe courtesy before them in
this respect. It is probably for this reason that the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.) dismissed the shepherd of his sheep because he was sitting
naked in front of them and said, “We do not hire a person who is not
ashamed of God in their private parts.

One day the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) went to check on his sheep. The
shepherd was sitting naked while cleaning his clothes. When he noticed
that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) was coming, he put on his clothes. The
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) told him, “Go away! We do not need your
shepherding.” The shepherd asked, “Why?” the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said,
“Our family does not employ those who do not observe courtesy in the
presence of God and are not ashamed of Him in their private
parts.”[^300]

Paying attention to such a law in utilizing animals has prompted some
Muslim jurists not to permit people to clean off themselves (*istinja’*)
with living animals’ parts such as tail, ear, and wool after releasing
faeces, because this action would discredit the status of the
animal.[^301]

In contrast, a number of jurists – instead of this issue – have only
pointed out the general rule that after releasing faeces one cannot
clean off with respectful objects,[^302] as by accepting the
respectfulness of animals, it can be decreed that using living animals’
parts for this purpose is not permissible.

With this explanation, there remains no room for the claim that only
abusing animals and not degrading them is unlawful (*haram*),[^303] just
as disrespect for the animals’ parts is not permissible, either.[^304]

Paying attention to such a status for animals in the Islamic legal
system has led to the ruling that when some animals, due to lack of
understanding their own situation, perpetrate something that may degrade
their status and respect, people are obliged to stop its fulfillment or
continuation.

***The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) was passing by a male
and female animal engaged in copulating on the way. He turned his face
away from them. He was asked, “Why did you do so?” He answered, “It does
not behoove them to do such a repulsive act in public; one should hide
them in a way that no human being may see that.”***[^305]

The principle of respectfulness in human-animal relationship is not
restricted just to the animals’ living period; it applies to their
afterlife, too.

Imam al-Sajjad (A.S.) advised his son to bury in the ground the body of
the camel, by which he had several times performed his Hajj pilgrimage,
after it dies so that it may not be prey to predators.[^306]

For this reason, any kind of offense to the animals’ corpses is not
permissible and the Muslims are not permitted to cut off the animals’
parts of body such as their ears, lips, nose, etc. or damage their faces
(mutilate) for the purpose of revenge or the like.[^307]

[^1]: Q. 2:29.

[^2]: Q. 16:5.

[^3]: Fakhr al-Din Razi has discussed in detail about the conceptology
of this verse of the Holy Qur’an. For more information, see: Razi,
Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Al-Mahsul fi ‘Ilm Usul al-Fiqh, ed. Dr. Taha Jabir
Fayyadh alo-‘Alwani, 6 vols. 2nd edition, Al-Risala Institute, Beirut,
1412/1992, 9/97-102.

[^4]: Muqaddas Ardabili, Ahmad b. Muhammad, Zubdat al-Bayan fi Ahkam
al-Qur'an, ed. Muhammad Baqir, Bihbudi, Al-Maktibat al-Murtazawiyya,
Tehran, n.d, p. 73; Muhammad Isma‘il, Ibrahim, Al-Qur’an wa I‘jaz
al-‘Ilmi, Dar al-Fikr al-‘Arabi, p. 68-69.

[^5]: Al-Jamiʿ li Ahkam al-Qur'an, 1/252.

[^6]: Saduq, Muhammad b. ‘Ali, ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha (A.S.), 2 vols.
Mu‘assisat al-A‘lami li al-Matbu‘at, Beirut, 1404/1984, 2/12-13, No. 29.

[^7]: Zad al-Masir fi ʿIlm al-Tafsir, 1/45; Bihar al-Anwar, 54/4;
Ruhani, Sayyid Muhammad Sadiq, Fiqh al-Sadiq fi Sharh al-Tabsira, 26
vols. 3rd edition, Mu’assisa-yi Dar al-Kitab, Qum, 1412/1991, 24/95.

[^8]: Q. 36:71-72.

[^9]: Q. 16:66.

[^10]: Q. 23:21.

[^11]: Q. 16:80.

[^12]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/339, No. 1.

[^13]: Al-Mahasin, 2/626, No, 88.

[^14]: Al-Kafi, 9/536, No. 5.

[^15]: In Arabic literature, the word ma is regarded as a relative noun,
which in most cases is used for creatures devoid of rational thinking,
contrary to the word man, which in most cases is used for creatures
endowed with rational thinking. For this reason, ma is more inclusive
than man; see: ‘Aqili Hamadani, ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Aqil, Sharh Ibn ‘Aqil,
5th edition, Nasir Khuwsraw, Tehran, 1409/1988, 1/147-148.

[^16]: Q. 31:20.

[^17]: Q. 45:13.

[^18]: Fadhil Tuni (Al-Bushrawi al-Khurasani), Al-Mawla ‘Abd Allah b.
Muhammad, Al-Wadiia fi Usul al-Fiqh, ed. Al-Sayyid Muhammad Husayn
al-Radhawi al-Kishmiri, Majma‘ al-Fikr al-Islami, Qum, 1412/1991, p.
125.

[^19]: Zubdat al-Bayan fi Ahkam al-Qur'an, p. 73.

[^20]: Tawhidi Tabrizi, Muhammad ʿAli, Misbah al-Fiqaha, 7 vols. 3rd
edition, Qum, Matbaʿatu Sayyid al-Shuhada, 1412/1992, 1/211-212;
Khomeini, Sayyid Mustafa, Tafsir al-Qur’an al-Karim, The Institute for
Compilation and Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works, 5 vols. 1418/1997,
5/154.

[^21]: Khomeini, Sayyid Mustafa, Tahrirat fi al-Usul, 8 vols. The
Institute for Compilation and Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works,
1418/1997, 7/199-200.

[^22]: Sharh al-Azhar, 3/256.

[^23]: Sunan Abi Dawud, 1/578, No. 2567; Bayhaqi, Ahmad b. Husayn,
Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 10 vols. Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, n.d, 5/255.

[^24]: Tabarsi, Al-Hasan b. al-Fadhl, Makarim al-Akhlaq, 6th edition,
Manshurat al-Sharif al-Radhi, 1392/1972, p. 30.

[^25]: Faydh al-Qadir Sharh Jami‘ al-Saghir, 2/66-67, No. 1303;
Al-Maqsad al-Asna fi Sharh Ma‘ani Asma Allah al-Husna, 5/582.

[^26]: Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/582.

[^27]: It is to be noted that apart from Divine prohibition and
spirtitual prohibition, the term “respected animal” is also used in
legal texts, which refers to the animals that are impermissible to kill
or cannot be killed without observing the religious rules (slaughter);
see: Karaki, ʿAli b. Husayn, Jamiʿ al-Maqasid fi Sharh al-Qawaʿid, 13
vols. Al al-Bayt Institute, Qum, 1408/1987, 6/304.

[^28]: Ardabili, Mulla Ahmad, Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida wa al-Burhan fi Sharh-i
Irshad al-Adhhan, ed. Ishtahardi, 14 vols. Jamiʿa-yi Mudarrisin, Qum,
1403/1983, 10/318; Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 27/111.

[^29]: Al-Mughni, 6/371; Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/269.

[^30]: Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 3/445, 4/161-162.

[^31]: Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 37/77; Masalik
al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 12/176; Hilli, Muhammad b. Hasan,
Idhah al-Fawa’id fi Sharh Ishkalat al-Qawaʿid, 4 vols. ʿIlmiyya
Publications, Qum, 1387/1967, 2/187; Ibn Barraj Tarablusi, Qadhi ʿAbd
al-ʿAziz, Al-Muhadhdhab, 2 vols. ed. Jaʿfar Subhani, Jamiʿa-yi
Mudarrisin, Qum, 1406/1986, 1/447; Al-Mabsut fi Fiqh al-Imamiyya, 3/86;
Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 4/161-162.

[^32]: Al-Mughni, 5/424; Kashaf al-Qina‘, 4/106; al-Mabsut, 11/93;
Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 14/267; Fath al-‘Aziz fi Sharh
al-Wajiz, 11/327; Al-Mabsut fi Fiqh al-Imamiyya, 3/87; Jawahir al-Kalam
fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 37/80; Jami‘ al-Maqasid fi Sharh al-Qawa’id,
6/305.

[^33]: Al-Sharh al-Kabir, 5/382; Al-Mughni, 5/427-428; Masalik al-Afham
ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 12/242; Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/392.

[^34]: Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/203; Al-Khilaf, 4/175, issue 9.

[^35]: Fadhil Hindi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Kashf al-Litham, 2 vols.
Ayatollah Marʿashi Library, Qum, 1405/1984, 2/118.

[^36]: For more information see: Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, 43/390-400.

[^37]: Al-Kafi, 7/368, No. 3; also, see: p. 367, No. 1, 2.

[^38]: Al-Kafi, 7/368, No. 9.

[^39]: Al-Kafi, 7/368, No. 8.

[^40]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 19/167-168;
Al-Kafi, 7/368.

[^41]: Bihar al-Anwar, 7/276; Nur al-Thaqalayn, 1/715.

[^42]: Zamakhshari, Mahmud b. ‘Umar, Al-Fa’iq fi Qarib al-Hadith, Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1417/1996, 2/405; Al-Nihaya fi Gharib
al-Hadith, 3/211.

[^43]: Shafi‘i, Abu ‘Abd Alla Muhammad b. Idris, Al-Musnad, Dar al-Kurub
al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1400/1979, 318-319; Ahmad, Musnad; 4/430; Bayhaqqi,
Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 10/75.

[^44]: The late Shahid al-Thani states the similarity of man and animal
in protecting their lives as follow: “As it is obligatory to spend
property to protect mankind, so also it is obligatory to spend it to
protect the respected animal, although it belongs to someone else.”
Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 12/120.

[^45]: Q. 5:32.

[^46]: Al-Kafi, 5/141, No. 16.

[^47]: Al-Adab al-Mufrad, pp. 263-264, No. 1233; San‘ani, ‘Abd
al-Razzaq, Al-Musannaf, ed. Habib al-Rahman al-A‘zami, 11 vols. Majlis
al-‘Ilmi, n.d, 11/46, No. 19872; Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 6/233, No. 10778;
Bihar al-Anwar, 73/264.

[^48]: It is noteworthy that some of the jurists, by dividing the
animals into respected and unrespected such as dogs and pigs, regard
using the water for preserving the life of the animal as permissible not
obligatory (wajib).

[^49]: Muntaha al-Matlab, 1/153; Hilli, Al-Hasan b. Yusuf, Nihayat
al-Ahkam fi Ma‘rifat al-Ahkam, ed. Sayyid Mahdi Raja’i, 2 vols. 2nd
edition, Al al-Bayt Institute, Beirut, 1410/1989, 1/189; Sabziwari,
Muhammad Baqir, Dhakhirat al-Ma‘ad fi Sharh al-Irshad, 3 vols.
Lithography, Al al-Bayt Institute, 1/95; Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih
Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 12/498; Tabataba’i, Sayyid ʿAli, Riyadh al-Masa’il fi
Bayan al-Ahkam bi al-Dala’il, 2 vols. Lithography, Al al-Bayt Institute,
Qum, 1404/1983, 1/74; Qummi, Mirza Abu al-Qasim, Ghana’im al-Ayyam fi
Masa’il al-Halal wa al-Haram, ed. ‘Abbas Tabriziyan, 5 vols. Maktab
al-A‘lam al-Islami, 1417/1996, 1/330; Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, 5-114-116; Tabrizi Gharawi, Mirza ‘Ali, Al-Tanqih fi Sharh
al-‘Urwat al-Wuthqa (Kitab al-Tahara), 10 vols. 3rd edition, Dar
al-Huda, Qum, 1410/1989, 9/447; Hakim, Hakim, Sayyid Muhammad Sa‘id,
Hawariyat al-Fiqhiyya, 1416/1996, p. 101; Sharh al-Azhar, 1/123; Rafi‘i,
‘Abd al-Karim b. Muhammad, Fath al-‘Aziz fi Sharh al-Wajiz, 12 vols.,
Dar al-Fikr, 2/240; Sharbini, Muhammad, Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat
Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 4 vols. Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-ʿArabi, Beirut,
1377/1958, 3/463; Bihar al-Anwar, 61/218.

[^50]: Hilli, Yahya b. Sa‘id, Nuzhat al-Nazir fi al-Jam‘ bayn al-Ashbah
wa Naza’ir, ed. Ahmad al-Husayni, Al-Adab, Najaf, 1386/1964, p. 43.

[^51]: Al-Iqna‘ fi Hall Alfaz Abi Shuja‘, 1/224; Mughni al-Muhtaj ila
Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 1/441; Hawashi al-Shirwavi, 3/443.

[^52]: Hilli, Hasan b. Yusuf, Qawa’id al-Ahkam fi Ma‘rifat al-Halal wa
al-Haram, 3 vols. Muʿassisa-yi Nashr-i Islami, Qum, 1413/1992, 3/118;
Idhah al-Fawa’id fi Sharh Ishkalat al-Qawaʿid, 3/290; Kashf al-Litham,
2/118; Al-Hada’iq al-Nadhira fi Ahkam al-ʿItrat al-Tahira, 25/143.

[^53]: Ahmad, Musnad, 2/510.

[^54]: See: Sunan Abi Dawud, 1/574-575, No. 2550; Ahmad, Musnad, 2/375;
Bihar al-Anwar, 62/65.

[^55]: English translation adopted from G.M. Wickns, The Bustan of
Sheikh-e Ajal Saadi, chapter 2, p. 77, published by the Iranian National
Commission of UNESCO, 1984.

[^56]: Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 12/179; Fath
al-‘Aziz fi Sharh al-Wajiz, 11/327-328; Al-Muhalla, 11/6.

[^57]: Tafsir al-Imam al-‘Askari, Madrisat al-Imam al-Mahdi, Qum,
1409/1988, p. 619; Al-Safi fi Tafsir Kalam Allah, 1/240.

[^58]: Q. 2:205.

[^59]: See: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat al-Masa’il, 16/160, No.
19466.

[^60]: Al-Madani al-Shirazi al-Husayni, Al-Sayyid ‘Ali Khan, Al-Darajat
al-Rafi‘a fi Tabaqat al-Shi‘a, Maktibatu Basirati, 1397/1976, p. 542;
Hamawi, Yaqut b. ‘Abd Allah, Mu‘jam al-Buldan, Dar Ihya al-Thurath
al-‘Arabi, Beirut, 1399/1978, 3/431-432

[^61]: Akhlaq Islami wa Shikar, “Payam Dustdaran-i Tabi‘at”, 1377, No. 2
& 3, p.7; Nuri, Yahya, Islam wa ‘Aqa’id wa Ara’ Bashari, 2nd edition,
Mu’assis-yi Matbu‘ati Farahani, Tehran, 1346 sh/1967, p. 708-709.

[^62]: Q. 2:173.

[^63]: Sharbini Khatib, Al-Iqna‘ fi Hall al-Alfaz Abi Shuja‘, 2 vols.
Dar al-Ma‘rifa Beirut, 2/142; Al-Shirvani, ‘Abd al-Hamid, Hawashi
al-Shirvani, 10 vols. Dar Ihya’ al-Turath al-‘Arabi, Beirut, 8/372.

[^64]: Sayyid bakri Damyati, I‘anat al-Talibin, 4 vols., Dar al-Fikr,
Beirut, 1418/1997, 2/391.

[^65]: Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 4/107, 5/582.

[^66]: Ghana’im al-Ayyam fi Masa’il al-Halal wa al-Haram, 1/330.

[^67]: According to Abu Hanifa this trip is objectionable (makruh);
Mawahib al-Jalil bi Sharh Mukhtasar Khalil, 2/487.

[^68]: Tabrizi Gharawi, Mirza ‘Ali, Al-Tanqih fi Sharh al-‘Urwat
al-Wuthqa (Kitab al-Salat), 8 vols. 3rd edition, Dar al-Huda, Qum,
1410/1989, 8/113-114.

[^69]: See: Al-Kafi, 4/129, No. 3; Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Khilaf,
ed. Sayyid ‘Ali al-Khurasani, 6 vols. Muʿassisa-yi Nashr-i Islami Qum,
1407/1987, 1/588; Al-Rasa’il al-‘Ashr, p. 215; Al-Sara’ir al-Hawi li
Tahrir al-Fatawi, 1/328; Ghana’im al-Ayyam fi Masa’il al-Halal wa
al-Haram, 2/125; Tabataba’i, Sayyid Muhammad Kazim, Al-ʿUrwat al-Wuthqa
wa Takmilatuha, 2 vols. 2nd edition, Mu’assisat al-Aʿlami, Beirut,
1409/1988, 2/123/-124, No. 31; Muhammad Amin, Zayn al-Din, Kalimat
al-Taqwa, 7 vols., 3rd edition, 1413/1992; 1/619, No. 1208; Qummi
Sabziwari, ʿAli b. Muhammad, Jamiʿ al-Khilaf wa al-Wifaq Bayn
al-Imamiyya wa bayn al-Aʿimmat al-Hijaz wa al-ʿIraq, ed. Husayn Husayni
Birjandi, Zamina Sazan-i Ẓuhur-i Imam-i ʿAsr (A.S.), Qum, 1421/2001, p.
103.

[^70]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam fi Sharh al-Muqniʿa, 3/218, No. 540.

[^71]: Al-Kafi, 3/437, No. 4.

[^72]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Istibsar fi Makhtalafa min al-Akhbar,
ed. Sayyid Hasan al-Khirsan, 4 vols. 4th edition, Dar al-Kutub
al-Islamiyya, Tehran, 1405/1985, 1/235, No. 8412.

[^73]: Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 1/202, No. 606-607.

[^74]: Bihar al-Anwar, 73/356, No. 22

[^75]: See: Al-Kafi, 3/438, No. 7; Tahdhib al-Ahkam fi Sharh al-Muqniʿa,
9/83-84, No. 354.

[^76]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 237.

[^77]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat al-Masa’il, 18/199, No. 22495.

[^78]: Muttaqi Hindi, ‘Ala al-Din ‘Ali, Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal
wa al-Af‘al, ed. Bakri Hayati, 16 vols. Mu‘assisat al-Risala, Beirut,
1409/1989, 15/37, No. 39968.

[^79]: Sha‘rani, Sayyidi ‘Abd al-Wahhab, Lawaqi‘ al-Anwar al-Qudsiyya fi
Bayan al-‘Uhud al-Muhammadiyya, Mustafa al-Babi al-Halabi wa al-Ulada,
Egypt, 1393/1973, p. 721.

[^80]: Al-Kafi, 6/224, No. 3; Saduq, Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Al-Khisal, ed.
‘Ali Akbar Ghaffari, Jami‘a-yi Mudarrisin, 1403/1982, p. 327.

[^81]: Shawkani, Muhammad b. ʿAli, Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid
al-Akhyar, 9 vols. Dar al-Jil, Beirut, 1393/1973, 15/37/38, No. 39971.

[^82]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 15/37-38, No. 39971.

[^83]: Al-Haythami, ’Ali b. Abi Bakr, Majma‘ al-Zawa’id wa Manba‘
al-Fawa’id, 10 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1408/1988, 4/30.

[^84]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 15/40, No. 39986.

[^85]: Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida wa al-Burhan fi Sharh-i Irshad al-Adhhan,
11/327; Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 37/81; Rasa’il
al-Sharif al-Murtadha, 2/373; Sharh al-Azhar, 4/435.

[^86]: Halabi, Al-Kafi, p. 256; Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 1/413.

[^87]: Rasa’il al-Sharif al-Murtadha, 2/373; Sharh al-Azhar, 4/435.

[^88]: Although the late Sayyid Murtadha believes that one can kill
harmful animals without having been motivated by self-defense, even
though no potential threat is felt from them, Muhaqqi Hilli asserts that
if a person as self-defense inflicts a crime upon an animal that has
been attacking him, he is not accountable, he will be accountable when
there has been no threat fom the animal in case it has an owner. See:
Rasa’il al-Sharif al-Murtadha, 2/373; Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 4/1027; Jawahir
al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 43/130.

[^89]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/243.

[^90]: Majma‘ al-Zawa’id wa Manba‘ al-Fawa’id, 4/42; Tabarani, Sulayman
b. Ahmad, Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, ed. Hamdi ‘Abd al-Majid al-Salafi, 25
vols. 2nd edition, Maktibatu Ibn Taymiya, Cairo, n.d, 12/91; Suyuti,
Jalal al-Din, Al-Jamiʿ al-Saqir fi Ahadith al-Bashir al-Nadhir, 2 vols.
Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, 1401/1981, 2/702, No. 9502.

[^91]: Al-Kafi, 6/224, No. 3.

[^92]: See: Kalantari Arsanjani, ‘Ali Akbar, “Fiqh-i Shi‘a wa Huquq-i
Hayvanat”, Majalla-yi Fiqh, IX, No. 33-34, p. 256.

[^93]: Nasa’i, Ahmad b. Shu‘ayb, Sunan al-Kubra, ed. Dr. ‘Abd al-Ghaffar
Sulayman al-Bundari, 6 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut,
1411/1991, 3/166: “A physician was talking to the Holy Prophet(S.A.W.)
of medical properties of frogs and the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) prohibited
him of killing it.”

[^94]: Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 4/9.

[^95]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/264, No. 18.

[^96]: Al-Jamiʿ li Ahkam al-Qur'an, 10/261.

[^97]: Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 17/95.

[^98]: Q. 4:119.

[^99]: Ibn Abi al-Hadid, Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, 20 vols. Ayatollah
Marʿashi Library, Qum, 1383sh/2002, 19/387; Islam wa ‘Aqa’id wa Ara’
Bashari, p. 535. Although the existence of evil eye as a principle is
approved by Islam and the Holy Qur’an reports its incidence towards the
Holy Prophet(S.A.W.) and the scientific research proves the existence of
various energies inherent in man, too, the way to confront it is not
superstitious conducts: ﴾Indeed the faithless almost devour you with
their eyes when they hear the Reminder, and they say," He is indeed
crazy.”﴿ (Q. 68:51)

[^100]: For more information see: Nazari Tavakkuli, Sa‘id, Payvand-i
A‘dha dar Fiqh-i Islami, Islamic Research Foundation, Mashhad, 1381
sh/2002, pp. 66-69.

[^101]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 15/38, No. 39975.

[^102]: Lawaqi‘ al-Anwar al-Qudsiyya fi Bayan al-‘Uhud al-Muhammadiyya,
p.721.

[^103]: Kashf al-Ghumma fi Ma‘rifat al-A’imma, 1/432.

[^104]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 174.

[^105]: Al-Nawadir, p. 174.

[^106]: Fiqh al-Sunna, 3/510; Al-Sara’ir al-Hawi li Tahrir al-Fatawi,
2/215; Muntaha al-Matlab, 2/1024.

[^107]: Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 5/14; Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid
al-Akhyar, 8/250.

[^108]: Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid al-Akhyar, 8/249.

[^109]: Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 10/24; Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat
al-Masa’il, 8 287, No. 9463 (Quoted from the Commander of the Faithful
Imam ‘Ali – A.S.).

[^110]: Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 10/24.

[^111]: Ibid.

[^112]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat al-Masa’il, 8 287; Bihar
al-Anwar, 61/224.

[^113]: Al-Mahasin, 2/634.

[^114]: Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/581; Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il
al-Shariʿa, 8/382, No. 2 and 6.

[^115]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat al-Masa’il, 13/186, No. 15053.

[^116]: Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid al-Akhyar, 8/252, No. 3532.

[^117]: Ahmad b. Hanbal, Musnad-i Ahmad, 6 vols. Dar Sadir, Beirut, n.d,
1/234-235.

[^118]: Kufi, Ibn Abi Shayba, Al-Musannaf fi al-Ahadith wa al-Athar, ed.
Saʿid Muhammad al-Liham, 8 vols. Dar al-Fikr, Qum, 1409/1988, 7/735.

[^119]: Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid al-Akhyar, 8/252, No. 3532.

[^120]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 6/178; Ibn Najim al-Misri,
Zayn al-Din b. Ibrahim, Al-Bahr al-Ra’iq Sharh Kanz al-Daqa’iq, ed.
Zakaria Umayrat, 9 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1418/1997,
8/377; ‘Azimabadi, Muhammad Shams al-Haqq, ‘Awn al-Ma‘bud Sharh Sunan
Abi Dawud, 14 vols. 2nd edition, Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1415/1995,
7/167, No 140; Hilli, Yahya b. Saʿid, Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, Sayyid
al-Shuhada Publication, Qum. 1405/1985, p. 295; Sharh al-Azhar, 3/33;
Al-Mubarakfuri, Muhammad ‘Abd al-Rahman, Tuhfat al-Ahudhi bi Sharh Jami‘
al-Tirmidhi, Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1410/1989, 5/298;
Al-Azdi, Ahmad b. Muhammad, Sharh-i Ma‘ani al-Athar, ed. Muhammad
al-Najjar, 4 vols. 3rd edition, Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, 1416/1996,
3/271.

[^121]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam fi Sharh al-Muqniʿa, 6/384, No. 1137.

[^122]: Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha’, 16/11.

[^123]: Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha’, 1/581.

[^124]: Islam wa ‘Aqa’id wa Ara’ Bashari, p. 509; Rasa’il al-Sharif
al-Murtadha, 3/226; Sharh Nahj al-Balagha, 19/388-390; Baghdadi,
Muhammad b. Habib, Al-Muhabbar, manuscript, p. 323-324.

[^125]: Islam wa ‘Aqa’id wa Ara’ Bashari, p. 523; Sharh Nahj al-Balagha,
19/384.

[^126]: Al-Salihi al-Shami, Muhammad b. Yusuf, Subul al-Huda wa
al-Rishad fi Sirat Khayr al-‘Ibad, ed. ‘Adil Ahmad ‘Abd al-Mawjud, 12
vols. Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1414/1993, 6/157.

[^127]: Al-Zila‘i, ‘Abd Allah b. Yusuf b. Muhammad, Nasb al-Rayat
al-Ahadith al-Hidaya, ed. Muhammad ‘Awama, 4 vols. Mu’assisat al-Rayyan
Li al-Taba‘a wa al-Nashr, Beirut, 1418/1997, vol. 3/573.

[^128]: Al-Kafi, 5/307, No. 11.

[^129]: Nahj al-Balagha, 2/218.

[^130]: Q. 5:59.

[^131]: Al-Kafi, 4/379, No. 6.

[^132]: Ilal al-Shara’i‘, 2/462, No, 6.

[^133]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Amali, Dar al-Thiqafa, Qum,
1414/1993, p. 669-670, No. 1407.

[^134]: Faydh al-Qadir Sharh Jami‘ al-Saghir min Ahadith al-Bashir
al-Nadhir, 3/698.

[^135]: Ibid, 3/435.

[^136]: See: Ibid, 1/325; Al-Tibyan, 1/66; Majma‘ al-Bahrayn, 3/141.

[^137]: Al-Rasa’il al-‘Ashr, p. 307; Al-Busti al-Umawi, Abi al-Hasan
‘Ali b. Ahmad, Tanzih al-Anbiya’ ‘Amma Nasaba Ilayhim Hathalat
al-Aghbiya, ed. Dr. Muhammad Ridhwan al-Daya, Dar al-Fikr al-Ma‘asir,
Beirut, 1990, p. 173.

[^138]: Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, 3/496.

[^139]: Faydh al-Qadir Sharh Jami‘ al-Saghir min Ahadith al-Bashir
al-Nadhir, 1/325.

[^140]: Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 1/66, 2/52, 4/435, 5/389-390,
8/306, 9/327; Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi Tafsir al-Qur’an, 5/326; Zad al-Masir
fi ʿIlm al-Tafsir, 1/22.

[^141]: Hawashi al-Shirvani, 4/64.

[^142]: Muʿjam al-Furuq al-Lughawiyya, p.88, No. 350 and 354, No.
1426-1427; Al-Tibyan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 2/52; Majmaʿ al-Bayan fi
Tafsir al-Qur’an, 1/449.

[^143]: Islam wa ‘Aqa’id wa Ara’ Bashari, p. 524; Sharh Nahj al-Balagha,
19/386.

[^144]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/68, No.
24986/24987 and 9/66, No. 24979; Al-Tirmidhi, Muhammad b. ‘Isa, Sunan
al-Tirmidhi, ed. ‘Abd al-Wahhab ‘Abd al-Latif, 4 vols. Dar al-Fikr,
Beirut, 1403/1982, 3/126, No. 1762; Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il
al-Shariʿa, 8/353, No 5.

[^145]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/68, No. 24989;
Nawawi, Yahya b. Sharaf, Riyadh al-Salihin min Hadith Sayyid
al-Mursalin, 2nd edition. Dar al-Fikr, Damascus, 1411/1991, p. 634, No.
1608; Sunan Abi Dawud, 1/577, No. 2564.

[^146]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/68, No. 24988.

[^147]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/353, No. 7.
There are two implications as to the meaning of the statement la taqbahu
al-wujuh: 1. Avoiding anything that would make the face of an animal
ugly. 2. Avoiding abusing an animal; see: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/212.

[^148]: Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid al-Akhyar, 8/249; Sayyid Sabiq,
Fiqh al-Sunna, 3-vols. Dar al-Kutub al-ʿArabiyya, Berut, n.d, 3/510;
Sahih Muslim bi Sharh al-Nawawi, 14/97.

[^149]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/355-356, No. 1
and 4-6.

[^150]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/355, No. 2;
Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid al-Akhyar, 8/249; Riyadh al-Salihin min
Hadith Sayyid al-Mursalin, p. 634, No. 1607; Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan
al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/68, No. 24986.

[^151]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 6/177; Al-Jamiʿ li Ahkam
al-Qur'an, 5/391. Mawahib al-Jalil bi Sharh Mukhtasar Khalil, 8/465;
Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, 3/290; Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/581;
Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid al-Akhyar, 8/251; Fiqh al-Sunna, 3/510;
Sahih Muslim bi Sharh al-Nawawi, 14/97; Tuhfat al-Ahudhi bi Sharh Jami‘
al-Tirmidhi, 5/300.

[^152]: ‘Aqr: hitting the legs of animal with a sword while standing on
its legs. ‘Awn al-Ma‘bud Sharh Sunan Abi Dawud, 4/277.

[^153]: Al-Mahasin, 2/634, No, 126.

[^154]: Jamiʿ al-Maqasid fi Sharh al-Qawaʿid, 3/386-387; Jawahir
al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 21/82-85.

[^155]: Al-Mahasin, 2/634, No. 127.

[^156]: Sunan Abi Dawud, 2/84, No. 3222.

[^157]: Awn al-Ma‘bud Sharh Sunan Abi Dawud, 9/30-31; Faydh al-Qadir
Sharh Jami‘ al-Saghir min Ahadith al-Bashir al-Nadhir, 6/562-563, No.
19909; Al-Nihaya fi Gharib al-Hadith, 3/271.

[^158]: Islam wa ‘Aqa’id wa Ara’ Bashari, p. 510-511.

[^159]: Sunan Abi Dawud, 2/84, No. 3222; al-Jami‘ al Saghir, 2/750, No.
9909.

[^160]: See: Al-Darimi, ‘Abd Allah b. Bahram, Sunan al-Darimi, 2 vols.
Matba‘at al-I‘tidal, n.d., 2/83; Qazvini, Muhammad b. Yazid, Sunan-i Ibn
Majja, ed. Muhammad Fu’ad ʿAbd al-Baqi, 2 vols. Dar al-Fikr, Beirut,
n.d, 2/1063, No. 3186; Bayhaqqi, Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 10/24; Sahih ibn
Habban, 12/423, No. 5607 and 425, No. 5608.

[^161]: Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid al-Akhyar, 8/249-250.

[^162]: Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/582; Sistani, Sayyid ‘Ali, Minhaj
al-Salihin, 3 vols. Maktibat al-Ayatullah al-Sistani, Qum, 1416/1995,
3/136, No. 460.

[^163]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 18/319.

[^164]: Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 4/182.

[^165]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/243-244; ‘Awn al-Ma‘bud Sharh Sunan Abi
Dawud, 14/119; Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, 6/255; Nasa’i,
Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 5/183-184, No. 8615; Sharh al-Azhar, 4/541.

[^166]: Riyadh al-Salihin min Hadith Sayyid al-Mursalin, p. 635, No.
1610.

[^167]: Nasa’i, Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 5/183-184, No. 8614.

[^168]: Al-Mabsut fi Fiqh al-Imamiyya, 6/277; Al-Sharh al-Kabir,
11/45-46; Hashiyat al-Dasuqi, 2/108; Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 6/258.

[^169]: Khu’i, Abu al-Qasim, Minhaj al-Salihin, 2 vols. 29th edition,
Madinat al-‘Ilm, Qum, 1410/1989, 2/334, No. 1630; Rawhani, Rawhani,
Sayyid Muhammad Husayn, Minhaj al-Salihin, 2 vols. 2nd edition, Maktibat
al-Alfayn, Kuwait, 1416/1994, 2/366, No. 1525; Sistani, Minhaj
al-Salihin, 3/275, No. 837; Gulpaygani, Sayyid Muhammad Ridha, Hidayat
al-‘Ibad, 2 vols. Dar al-Qur’an, Qum, 1413/1992, 2/217, No. 746;
Al-Mughni, 11/42.

[^170]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 16/306, No. 5-6.

[^171]: Kashf al-Litham, 2/410.

[^172]: Al-Kafi, 7/204, No. 3.

[^173]: Al-Kafi, 7/204, No. 1.

[^174]: Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 3/463;
Al-Iqna‘ fi Hall Alfaz Abi Shuja‘, 2/142; Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh
al-Muhadhdhab, 1/241 and 2/124.

[^175]: Fath al-‘Aziz fi Sharh al-Wajiz, 8/155.

[^176]: Al-Mizan fi Tafsir al-Qur'an, 5/186.

[^177]: Kashshaf al-Ghina, 2/582; Faydh al-Qadir Sharh Jami‘ al-Saghir
min Ahadith al-Bashir al-Nadhir, 2/227.

[^178]: Nisa’i, Ahmad b. Shu‘ayb, Sunan al-Nisa’i, 6 vols. Dar al-Fikr,
Beirut, 1348/1930, 7/227.

[^179]: Da’a’im al-Islam, 2/176, No. 634.

[^180]: Q. 5:3.

[^181]: Faydh al-Qadir Sharh Jami‘ al-Saghir min Ahadith al-Bashir
al-Nadhir, 2/311.

[^182]: Da’a’im al-Islam, 2/176-177, No. 637; Masalik al-Afham ila
Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 11/491; Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab,
9/80.

[^183]: Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 6/266.

[^184]: Da’a’im al-Islam, 2/176-177, No. 625.

[^185]: Bada’i‘ al-Sana’i‘ fi Tartib al-Shara’i‘, 5/60.

[^186]: Bihar al-Anwar, 62/316.

[^187]: Kalimat al-Taqwa, 6/311.

[^188]: Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 11/491; Kashf
al-Litham, 2/259; Bada’iʿ al-Sana’iʿ fi Tartib al-Shara’iʿ, 5/60.

[^189]: Ahmad, Musnad, 2/108.

[^190]: Ibn Fahd Hilli, Ahmad b. Muhammad, Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bariʿ fi
Sharh al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, ed. Mujtaba ʿIraqi, 5 vols. Muʿassisa-yi
Nashr-i Islami, Qum, 1407/1987, 4/173.

[^191]: Al-Kafi, 6/229, No, 4; Tahdhib al-Ahkam fi Sharh al-Muqniʿa,
9/55, No. 227.

[^192]: Tusi, Muhammad b. Hasan, Al-Nihaya fi Mujarrad al-Fiqh wa
al-Fatawa, Qudsi, Qum, n.d, p. 584; ‘Amili, Muhammad b. Makki, Al-Durus
al-Shar‘iyya fi Fiqh al-Imamiyya, 3 vols. Mu’assisat al-Nashr
al-Islamiyya, Qum, 1412/1991, 2/416.

[^193]: Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 11/490; Kashf
al-Litham, 2/259; Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 36/136;
Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 4/740; Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 8/304; Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida wa
al-Burhan fi Sharh-i Irshad al-Adhhan, 11/131 and 133; Naraqi, Ahmad,
Mustanad al-Shiʿa fi Ahkam al-Shariʿa, 19 vols. Al al-Bayt Institute,
Mashhad, 1415/1995, 15/450; Khwansari, Sayyid Ahmad, Jamiʿ al-Madarik fi
Sharh al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, ed. ʿAli Akbar Ghaffari, 7 vols, 2nd
edition, Tehran, Saduq Publication, 1397/1977, 5/128; Fiqh al-Sadiq fi
Sharh al-Tabsira, 24/43; Hawashi al-Shirwavi, 9/323.

[^194]: See: Al-Sharh al-Kabir, 11/61; Kashf al-Litham, 2/260; Fiqh
al-Sadiq fi Sharh al-Tabsira, 24/43; Al-Durar al-Mukhtar, 6/607;
Al-Samarqandi, ‘Ala al-Din, Tuhfat al-Fuqaha’, 3 vols. 3rd edition, Dar
al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, 1414/1993, 3/69.

[^195]: See: Tahdhib al-Ahkam fi Sharh al-Muqniʿa, 9/56, No. 233;
Da’a’im al-Islam, 2/175, No630.

[^196]: For further information about the legal objections raised
against the correlation between the unlawfulness of eating the animal’s
meat (akl) and the unlawfulness of skinning it before death (salkh qabl
al-mawt) , as well as the correlation between eating the animal’s meat
and the unlawfulness of skinning it before getting cold (salkh qabl
al-bard), see: ‘Amili, Zayn al-Din b. ‘Ali, Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya fi
Sharh al-Lum‘at al-Damishqiyya, 10 vols. 2nd edition, Davari
Publications, 1398/1977, 7/232-233.

[^197]: Al-Mabsut, 11/226.

[^198]: That is why the late Shahid Awwal (Muhammad b. ‘Amili) has
considered as unlawful the skinning of an animal for the torture it
suffers before its body gets cold, although he deems as permissible
using its meat; Masalik al-Afham, 11/483; also, see: Kashf al-Litham,
2/260; Jawahir al-Kalam, 36/123-124.

[^199]: Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida wa al-Burhan fi Sharh-i Irshad al-Adhhan,
11/136.

[^200]: It is to be pointed out that in some tradition sources instead
of “cutting off the spinal cord”, the phrase “breaking the back” is
used; Bayhaqqi, Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 9/280; Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, 12/192;
Al-Jamiʿ al-Saqir fi Ahadith al-Bashir al-Nadhir, 2/689, No. 9389; Kanz
al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 6/266, No. 15632; Ibn al-Ja‘d
al-Jawhari, ‘Ali, Musnad Ibn al-Ja‘d, ed. ‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad
al-Baghawi, Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, p. 492; Al-Mabsut fi Fiqh
al-Imamiyya, 1/389-390.

[^201]: Majma‘ al-Bahrayn, 4/286.

[^202]: Saduq, Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Al-Muqni‘, Mu‘assisa-yi Imam Hadi, Qum,
1415/1994, p. 274; Saduq, Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Al-Hidaya fi al-Usul wa
al-Furu‘, Mu‘assisa-yi Imam Hadi, Qum, 1418/1997, p. 242; Al-Sara’ir
al-Hawi li Tahrir al-Fatawi, 3/107-108; Shara’i‘ al-Islam fi Masa’il
al-Halal wa al-Haram, 4/740; Fadhil Abi, Hasan b. Abitalib, Kashf
al-Rumuz fi Sharh al-Mukhtasar al-Nafi‘, ed. Ishtahardi, 2 vols.
Mu’assisat al-Nashr al-Islamiyya, Qum, 1410/1989, 2/353; Idhah
al-Fawa’id fi Sharh Ishkalat al-Qawaʿid, 2/137; ‘Amili, Muhammad b.
Makki, Al-Lum‘at al-Damishqiyya, Dar al-Fikr, Qum, 1411/1990, p. 215;
Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya fi Sharh al-Lum‘at al-Damishqiyya, 7/230-231;
Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida wa al-Burhan fi Sharh-i Irshad al-Adhhan, 11/129-130;
Mustanad al-Shiʿa fi Ahkam al-Shariʿa, 15/449-450; Jawahir al-Kalam fi
Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 36/135-136; Jamiʿ al-Madarik fi Sharh
al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, 5/128; Fiqh al-Sadiq fi Sharh al-Tabsira, 24/42.

[^203]: It is not unlikely that cutting off the spinal cord in Islamic
sources is to be regarded as equivalent to paralyzing that is used in
some slaughter houses as a method for killing big domestic animals by
means of electric shock; see: “Huquq-i Haywanat dar Fiqh-i Islami”,
Faslnama-yi Fiqh-i Ahl-i Bayt, XII, No. 48, p. 189.

[^204]: Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/333, No. 4188.

[^205]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam fi Sharh al-Muqniʿa, 9/60, No. 252.

[^206]: Da’a’im al-Islam, 2/1475-176, No. 632.

[^207]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat al-Masa’il, 16/134, No. 19382;
also ess: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 9/85.

[^208]: The late Shahid maintains that what is meant by not cutting off
the spinal cord, is to prohibit using violence in killing the animal;
see: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat al-Masa’il, 16/134, No. 19383.

[^209]: Al-Kafi, 6/229, No. 6.

[^210]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat al-Masa’il, 16/134, No. 19381.

[^211]: Al-Mudawwanat al-Kubra, 2/66.

[^212]: Al-Mabsut, 11/226; Bada’iʿ al-Sana’iʿ fi Tartib al-Shara’iʿ,
5/60; Bihar al-Anwar, 62/314.

[^213]: Sunan al-Nisa’i, 7/227.

[^214]: Al-Mabsut fi Fiqh al-Imamiyya, 1/389; Kashf al-Litham, 2/260.

[^215]: Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/852.

[^216]: Al-Mahasin, 2//361, No. 92-93.

[^217]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/356-357.

[^218]: Q. 6:142.

[^219]: Q. 23:22.

[^220]: Q. 40:79.

[^221]: Q. 43:12.

[^222]: Muntaha al-Matlab, 2/996.

[^223]: See: Jaza’iri, Sayyid ʿAbd Allah, Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya fi Sharh
Nukhbat al-Muhsiniyya, manuscript, Astan Quds Razavi Library, p. 343:
Ibn Qutayba, ‘Abd Allah b. Muslim, Ta’wil Mukhtalaf al-Hadith, ed.
Isma‘il al-Is‘irdi, Dar al-Kutub al-Islamiyya, Beirut, p. 51.

[^224]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/357, No. 4. It
is worth mentioning that in the tradition sources related from the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.), there is a statement contrary to this notion as
follows: “Beat it for its ill-temperedness (nifar), but do not beat it
for its rebellion (‘ithar).” Some believe this latter notion is correct,
because the animal’s rebellion may be due to the incorrect fastening of
its rein straps and the roughness of the pathway, in which the animal
has no role; so, we should not beat it. However, the animal’s
ill-temperedness can be calmed down by punishing it. Wasa’il al-Shiʿa
ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/357, No. 2, 3, and 5; Ibn ‘Abidin,
Muhammad Amin, Hashiyatu Radd al-Mukhtar ‘ala al-Durr al-Mukhtar, 6
vols. Dar al-Fikr, 6/721; Bihar al-Anwar, 61/202; Al-Sayr al-Kabir,
1/56.

[^225]: Usd al-Ghaba, 2/31; also, see: Ibn Abi ‘Asim, Al-Ahad wa
al-Mathani, ed. Basim Faysal Ahmad al-Jawabira, 6 vols. Dar al-Diraya li
al-Taba‘a wa al-Nashr wa al-Tawarikh, Riyadh, 1411/1991, 3/105, No,
1422; Majma‘ al-Zawa’id wa Manba‘ al-Fawa’id, 59/11.

[^226]: Usd al-Ghaba, 5/336.

[^227]: Al-Irshad fi Ma‘rifat Allah ‘Ala al-‘Ibad, 2/144.

[^228]: Hawashi al-Shirwavi, 9/329; Ibn Barraj Tarablusi, Qadhi ʿAbd
al-ʿAziz, Jawahir al-Fiqh, ed. Ibrahim Bahaduri. Muʿassisa-yi Nashr-i
Islami, Qum, 1411/1990, p. 133, No 472; Al-Bahr al-Ra’iq Sharh Kanz
al-Daqa’iq, 8/25.

[^229]: Bihar al-Anwar, 100/191, No. 8.

[^230]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 427; Saduq, Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Al-Amali,
Mu‘assisat al-Bi‘tha, Qum, 1417/1996, p. 512; Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila
Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/353, No. 6.

[^231]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/354, No. 12.

[^232]: Ibid, No. 13.

[^233]: Sahih Muslim bi Sharh al-Nawawi, 14/97; Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith
Sayyid al-Akhyar, 8/249; Tuhfat al-Ahudhi bi Sharh Jami‘ al-Tirmidhi,
5/300; Hashiyatu radd al-Muhtar, 6/721; Al-Tuhfat al-Saniyya fi Sharh
Nukhbat al-Muhsiniyya, p. 330.

[^234]: Nahj al-Balagha, 2/8, sermon 167.

[^235]: Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 3/464.

[^236]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 4/456, No. 11360.

[^237]: Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/301 and 394.

[^238]: Q. 29:60.

[^239]: Al-Hada’iq al-Nazira fi Ahkam al-‘Itrat al-Tahira, 25/142;
Nihayat al-Miram fi Sharh Mukhtasar Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 1/491; Al-Sharh
al-Kabir, 9/130-311.

[^240]: Faydh al-Qadir Sharh al-Jami‘ al-Saghir, 1/164.

[^241]: Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya fi Sharh al-Lum‘at al-Damishqiyya, 5/481.

[^242]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/217.

[^243]: Al-Mabsut fi Fiqh al-Imamiyya, 6/47.

[^244]: Bihar al-Anwar, 62/65: The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) was asked:
O Apostle of Allah! Is giving water to an animal rewarding? He answered:
Yes, there is reward in quenching the thirsty liver of any creature.

[^245]: Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 2/283, No. 2459; Makarim al-Akhlaq,
p. 264.

[^246]: Tusi, al-Amali, pp. 383-384. This content has been reported in
various other ways, too: see for example: Da’a’im al-Islam, 1/344;
Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat al-Masa’il, 8/251, No. 9372.

[^247]: Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha, 2/430; Ansari, Zakaria b. Muhammad, Fath
al-Wahhab bi Sharh Manhaj al-Tullab, 2 vols. Dar al-Kutub al-‘Ilmiyya,
Beirut, 1418/1997, 1/441; Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz
al-Minhaj, 2/379.

[^248]: Saduq, Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Thawab al-A‘mal wa ‘Iqab al-A‘mal,
Manshurat-i Radhi, Qum, 1368 sh/1999, p. 144.

[^249]: Al-Kafi, 6/225, No, 2.

[^250]: Al-Mahasin, 2/361, No. 88: When one of you go on a journey,
wherever you stop, first give fodder and water to your animal.

[^251]: Al-Kafi, 4/58, No. 6; also see: Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih,
2/64, No. 1723.

[^252]: Rawdhat al-Talibin, 6/523; Al-Hada’iq al-Nazira fi Ahkam
al-‘Itrat al-Tahira, 25/142.

[^253]: Bihar al-Anwar, 42/278.

[^254]: Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/395-396; Bihar
al-Anwar, 61/218; Fath al-Wahhab bi Sharh Manhaj al-Tullab, 2/218;
Al-Iqna‘ fi Hall Alfaz Abi Shuja‘, 2/142; Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat
Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 3/462.

[^255]: Al-Mahasin, 2/627, No. 96.

[^256]: Qawa’id al-Ahkam fi Ma‘rifat al-Halal wa al-Haram, 3/118; Idhah
al-Fawa’id fi Sharh Ishkalat al-Qawaʿid, 3/290; Kashf al-Litham, 2/118;
Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/397; Al-Hada’iq
al-Nazira fi Ahkam al-‘Itrat al-Tahira, 25/143; Mughni al-Muhtaj ila
Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 3/463; Al-Iqna‘ fi Hall Alfaz Abi
Shuja‘, 2/142; Rawdhat al-Talibin, 6/524.

[^257]: Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 3/463;
Rawdhat al-Talibin, 6/524.

[^258]: Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 4/1027; Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘
al-Islam, 5/89; Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam; 27/111;
Al-Hada’iq al-Nazira fi Ahkam al-‘Itrat al-Tahira, 25/142; Nihayat
al-Maram fi Sharh Mukhtasar Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 1/491; Bihar al-Anwar,
61/218; Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 18/318; Rawdhat al-Talibin,
6/523-524; Fath al-Wahhab bi Sharh Manhaj al-Tullab, 2/218; Al-Iqna‘ fi
Hall Alfaz Abi Shuja‘, 2/144; Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz
al-Minhaj, 3/463; Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/581-582; Al-Sharh al-Kabir,
9/314-318.

[^259]: Fath al-Wahhab bi Sharh Manhaj al-Tullab, 2/218; Al-Iqna‘ fi
Hall Alfaz Abi Shuja‘, 2/142; Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz
al-Minhaj, 3/462; Bada’iʿ al-Sana’iʿ fi Tartib al-Shara’iʿ, 4/40;
Al-Bahr al-Ra’iq Sharh Kanz al-Daqa’iq, 4/371; Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh
al-Muhadhdhab, 18/318; Bihar al-Anwar, 61/217; Tadhkirat al-Fuqaha,
2/203; Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/580-581; Haskafi, ‘Ala al-Din, Al-Durr
al-Mukhtar, 8 vols. Dar al-Fikr, Beirut, 1415/1994, 3/701; I‘anat
al-Tallibin, 4/120.

[^260]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 18/319.

[^261]: Al-Nawadir, 187.

[^262]: Ibn Khuzayma al-Salami, Muhammad b. Ishaq, Sahih ibn Khuzayma,
ed. Dr. Muhammad Mustafa al-A‘zami, Al-Maktab al-Islami, 4 vols. 2nd
edition, 1412/1991, 4/143.

[^263]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/67, No. 24982.

[^264]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/67, No. 24983;
also see: Majma‘ al-Zawa’id wa Manba‘ al-Fawa’id, 8/196-197.

[^265]: Al-Mahasin, 2/626, No. 91.

[^266]: Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid al-Akhyar, 61/61; Mufid,
Muhammad b. Nu‘man, Al-Ikhtisas, ed. ‘Ali Akbar Ghaffari, 2nd edition,
1414/1993, p. 294.

[^267]: Lawaqi‘ al-Anwar al-Qudsiyya fi Bayan al-‘Uhud al-Muhammadiyya,
p. 395-396; also see: Ibid, pp. 396-397; Bihar al-Anwar, 61/111/112.

[^268]: Al-Nihaya fi Mujarrad al-Fiqh wa al-Fatawa, p. 592; Al-Sara’ir
al-Hawi li Tahrir al-Fatawi, 3/132; Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, p. 395;
Al-Mabsut, 24/25; Al-Musannaf fi al-Ahadith wa al-Athar, 5/432, No. 5;
Al-Durr al-Manthur fi al-Tafsir bi al-Ma’thur, 2/325.

[^269]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam fi Sharh al-Muqniʿa, 9/114, No. 497; Al-Kafi,
6/430, No. 7.

[^270]: Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 8/346; Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘
al-Islam, 12/109; Kashf al-Litham, 2/271.

[^271]: Al-Muhadhdhab, 2/433; Al-Bahr al-Ra’iq Sharh Kanz al-Daqa’iq,
8/404.

[^272]: Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 12/109; Majmaʿ
al-Fa’ida wa al-Burhan fi Sharh-i Irshad al-Adhhan, 11/283.

[^273]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbit al-Masa’il, 17/51.

[^274]: On this basis, the claim of ascribing these two terms to their
technical meanings, as calimed by some jurists, does not seem to be
correct. See: Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 36/420.

[^275]: Qawa’id al-Ahkam fi Ma‘rifat al-Halal wa al-Haram, 3/118; Idhah
al-Fawa’id fi Sharh Ishkalat al-Qawaʿid, 3/290.

[^276]: Al-Khara’ij wa al-Jara’ih, 3/523; Basa’ir al-Darajat, p. 368,
No. 3.

[^277]: Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/395.

[^278]: Al-Mahasin, 2/641, No. 157; also see: Al-Kafi, 6/544, No 3.

[^279]: Al-Mahasin, 2/642, No. 160. It is worth mentioning that some
believe what is meant by “cleaning off dust” in these two traditions is
changing the soil of the animals’ living place and they have concluded
from this that besides observing hygiene of the animals’ stockyard, the
soil of the sleeping place of the animals should be changed so that they
would be safe from the moist and cold; see: Huquq-i Haywan, Nazar-i
Islam darbara-yi Raftar ba Haywanat, Ruznama-yi Kar-u Kargar,
25.01.1377/13.04.1998.

[^280]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/177; Ahmad, Musnad, 4/103; Musnad
al-Shammiyin, 1/315.

[^281]: Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 1/19.

[^282]: Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 5/88; Mu’min
Sabzivari, Muhammad Baqir, Kifayat al-Ahkam, Lithography, Madrisa-yi
Sadr-i Nabawi, Isfahan, n.d, p. 132; Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, 27/109; Al-Hada’iq al-Nazira fi Ahkam al-‘Itrat al-Tahira,
21/417; Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya fi Sharh al-Lum‘at al-Damishqiyya, 4/246.

[^283]: Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/395.

[^284]: Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya fi Sharh al-Lum‘at al-Damishqiyya,
5/481-482.

[^285]: Riyadh al-Masa’il fi Bayan al-Ahkam bi al-Dala’il, 2/168.

[^286]: Fiqh al-Sadiq fi Sharh al-Tabsira, 22/384.

[^287]: Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/581.

[^288]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/318.

[^289]: Sunan Abi Dawud, 1/15, No, 29; Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal
wa al-Af‘al, 9/364, No. 26481.

[^290]: Shara’i‘ al-Islam fi Masa’il al-Halal wa al-Haram, 1/15; Hilli,
Hasan b. Yusuf, Irshad al-Adhhan ila Ahkam al-Iman, ed. Shaykh Faris
al-Hassun, 2 vols. Nashr-i Islami Publication, Qum, 1410/1990, 1/222,
Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 1/33; Majmaʿ al-Fa’ida wa
al-Burhan fi Sharh-i Irshad al-Adhhan, 1/94; Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 2;
Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/67; Ansari, Murtadha,
Kitab al-Tahara, 2 vols. Mu’assisa-yi Al-Hadi, Qum, 1415/1994, 1/481;
Hamadani, Ridha, Misbah al-Faqih, 5 vols. Lithography, Maktibat al-Sadr,
1/93; Ibn Hajar ʿAsqalani, Ahmad b. ‘Ali, Al-Talkhis al-Habir fi Takhrij
al-Rafi‘i al-Kabir, 12 vols. Dar al-Fikr, 1/465; Hashiyatu Radd
al-Muhtar, 1/371; Al-Mughni, 1/157.

[^291]: Nihayat al-Ahkam fi Ma‘rifat al-Ahkam, 1/83; Muntaha al-Matlab,
1/41; Al-Musawi, Muhammad b. ‘Ali, Madarik al-Ahkam fi Shara’i‘
al-Islam, 8 vols. Al al-Bayt Institute, Qum, 1410/1989, 1/179; Dhakhirat
al-Mi‘ad fi Sharh al-Irshad, 1/21; Ibn Tawus, ‘Ali b. Musa, Falah
al-Sa’il, n.p., n.d, p. 48; Fiqh al-Sunna, 1/34, No. 7.

[^292]: Al-Istibsar fi Makhtalafa min al-Akhbar, 1/13, No.525.

[^293]: ‘Ibn Abi Jumhur Ahsa’i, Muhammad b. ʿAli, ʿAwali al-Li’ali, ed.
Mujtaba ʿIraqi, 4 vols. Sayyid al-Shuhada Publication, 1403/1983, 2/187,
No. 66.

[^294]: Al-Khisal, p. 613.

[^295]: Ilal al-Shara’i‘, 1/283, No. 1.

[^296]: Al-‘Amili, Zayn al-Din, Rawdh al-Janan fi Sharh Irshad
al-Adhhan, lithography, Al al-Bayt Institute, 1404/1983, p. 26; Majmaʿ
al-Fa’ida wa al-Burhan fi Sharh-i Irshad al-Adhhan, 1/95; Madarik
al-Ahkam fi Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 1/180; Dhakhirat al-Mi‘ad fi Sharh
al-Irshad, 1/21; Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/68-69;
Ansari, Kitaba l-Tahara, 1-481; Hakim, Sayyid Muhsin, Mustamsik
al-ʿUrwat al-Wuthqa, 14 vols. 4th edition, 14 vols. Dar Ihya’ al-Turath
al-ʿArabi, Beirut, 1391/1971, 2/244-245, Ibn Qudama, Al-Mughni, 1/157.

[^297]: Rawdh al-Janan fi Sharh Irshad al-Adhhan, p. 26; Jawahir
al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 2/68-69; Ansari, Kitaba l-Tahara,
1-481; Misbah al-Faqih, 1/93; Dhakhirat al-Mi‘ad fi Sharh al-Irshad,
1/21; Hakim, Sayyid Muhammad Sa‘id, Misbah al-Minhaj, 4 vols. Maktab
al-Sayyid al-Hakim, 1416/1996; 2/145.

[^298]: Awali al-Li’ali, 2/187, No. 67.

[^299]: Jamiʿ al-Maqasid fi Sharh al-Qawaʿid, 1/99.

[^300]: Daylami, Husayn b. Al-Hasan, Irshad al-Qulub, 2 vols. Sharif
Radhi Publication, 1412/1991, p. 161.

[^301]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 2/121, 2/112; Al-Mughni,
1/149; Fath al-‘Aziz fi Sharh al-Wajiz, 1/497; Rawdhat al-Talibin,
1/180; Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 1/43; Sahih
Muslim bi Sharh al-Nawawi, 3/157; Kashf al-Litham, 1/20.

[^302]: ‘Amili, Muhammad b. Makki, Al-Dhikra, Lithography, p. 21;
Rawhani, Minhaj al-Salihin, 1/27.

[^303]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 2/121 (quoted from Mawardi).

[^304]: ‘Amili, Sayyid Muhammad Jawad, Miftah al-Kirama fi Sharh Qawa‘id
al-‘Allama, ed. Muhammad Baqir al-Khalisi, 5 vols. Mu’assisat al-Nashr
al-Islamiyya, Qum, 1409/1988, 1/212.

[^305]: Al-Mahasin, 2/634, No. 124.

[^306]: Al-Mahasin, 2/635-636, No. 133.

[^307]: Al-Muhalla, 8/399; Sharh al-Azhar, 4/566.


