Discourse Three: Ethical Studies
================================

Observing ethical ocnsiderations towards animals by human beings is of
special importance in the true religion of Islam, to the extent that
they should ask for God’s pardon for their ill-treatment the animals.

If Allah pardons you for what you have done to animals, He has given you
a great pardon.[^1]

Be wary of God concerning what Allah has given to you and the tongueless
among your possessions. Someone asked, “What do you mean by tongueless
among our possessions?” He said, “Sheep, cats, pigeons, etc.”[^2]

Therefore, it would be natural that Islam, through expressing ethical
instructions, mention to man the procedures and manners of utilizing
animals. The ethical considerations and instructions can be divided into
two general sections: physical considerations, psychological
consideration.

Physical Considerations
-----------------------

Examining the ethical instructions of Islam concerning animals’ physical
aspects, we arrive at two general principles:

### 1. Productivity and Power of Animals

In Islamic law, the proportion between the capacity of the one charged
with a duty (*mukallaf*) and the duty (*taklif*) itself is a principle
common to human and animals. The intellect and religion deem it as
unjust that the Almighty God demands tasks from His servants that are
beyond their capacity:

***﴾Allah does not task any soul beyond its capacity.***[^3]***﴿***

In addition, in their relationships between one another, people are not
allowed to demand each other to perform tasks that are beyond their
capacity (impracticable). This principle is also true for the relation
between man and animal; that is why man is not permitted to use the
animal beyond its capacity or create a situation that it cannot
tolerate.[^4]

This principle enjoys so highly a status in Islamic thought that if not
upheld, it would yield two critical results:

First, non-acceptance of devotional acts: Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) asserts
that God will not accept the prayers and Hajj of the person who spurs a
mount to force it to move faster beyond its capacity.[^5]

Second, Punishment: The Commander of the Faithful Imam “Ali (A.S.)
reprimanded the caravan leader who had driven his mounts faster for
arriving at destination sooner and deprived him of working in Kufa.[^6]

Notice some functions of this principle concerning animals:

**1.1. Taking Rides**: using quadrupeds for riding is an accepted
practice in Islam, as the Holy Qur‘an has also approved it:

***﴾And horses, mules and asses, for you to ride them.﴿***[^7]

However, from two standpoints, this kind of usage should be
proportionate to the animal’s capacity and not cause it any harm:

First, how to ride it: the one who is using the mount for riding should
watch out the way he sits on the animal that would not cause distress
and pain to it and would fit the animal’s body structure.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has prohibited the Muslims from *tawarruk* on
animals. What is meant by *tawarruk* is a way of sitting on an animal
with both legs hanging on one side or sitting in a cross-legged
position, not dividing the weight of one’s body on the entire animal’s
back.

***Do not pull up your legs on the animal’s back [or hang them on one
side] and do not make its back a place for dialogs with others.***[^8]

Second, the number of riders: if the standard for using the animal is
its capacity, this capacity is definitely limited for bearing the weight
of a human being. For this reason, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) does not
permit several people ride on the back of an animal (*irdaf*) at the
same time and has warned that if they do that, one of them would be
cursed (*mal‘un*).[^9]

Obviously, the permissibility or impermissibility of more than one
person riding on an animal’s back is subject to the capacity and
tolerance of the animal; in case an animal cannot stand the weight of
more than one person (unendurable), this would be impermissible.[^10]
Thus, to give the animal due consideration, people had better use the
animal for riding in turn (*i‘tiqab* = one by one), as it is practiced
by the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) on various occasions.[^11]

**2.1. Carrying Loads**: the animal’s owner is not permitted to load it
with goods heavier than its capacity under the pretext that he owns
it,[^12] because such an act would torment (*ta‘dhib*) and harm
(*idhrar*) the animal.[^13] The Islamic ruler (government) is obliged to
prevent the owner in case of perpetrating this act.[^14]

It is worth mentioning that in some legal sources two conclusions have
been derived from this issue. First, in case of renting one’s animal to
others (lease), the owner is not allowed to agree that the renter can
overload the animal.[^15] Second, the user of the animal is not allowed
to change the type or amount of loads being transported by the animal by
changing the content of the lease contract, causing torment to the
animal.[^16]

Furthermore, the load should be positioned on the back of the animal in
a way that it may not cause any injury to it.

A caravan of camels was passing by Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.). He saw a camel
whose load was tilted; he said, “O young boy! Do justice to this animal,
because Allah loves justice.”[^17]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said, “Place the loads on the rear part of the
animal‘s back, because the two hands [front legs] are suspended (loose)
and the two feet [hind legs] are firm.”[^18]

**3.1. The** **Amount** **and Speed of Movement**: according to the
religious doctrines, two factors have to be taken into consideration in
determining the amount and speed of the movements of animals such as
horses and camels.

**1.3.1. The Quality of the Track on which to Move**: the one who uses
an animal for travelling has to be careful not to cause any harm to the
animal in this way; thus, he is obliged to choose the easiest path for
it to move on.

***Once any one of you rides an animal, take it through smooth
roads.***[^19]

**2.3.1.** **Speed of Movement**: also, the animal’s speed should be
chosen proportionate to the quality of the path (road).[^20]

When you are travelling on a verdant land, give the camel a chance to
graze; and when you are travelling in a dry and arid land, pick up your
speed before the animal becomes restless with the roughness of the path.
And when the night falls, stop moving on, because during the night the
predators and creepers move on the way [and may be harmed as you are
moving on].[^21]

God loves tolerance and helps practicing it. Whenever you ride lean
animals, use them according to their capacity; if the land is dry pick
up their speed and if it is green, leave them to graze.[^22]

If you are moving on a verdant land, be tolerant to the animal to graze,
but if you are travelling on a dry land, pick up your speed.[^23]

For this reason, in some Islamic sources directing animals through the
[right] pathway is regarded as among their rights so that they would not
be harmed out of unfamiliarity with the path (The right thing for the
rider to do is to say to the pedestrian: [move out of] the way!).[^24]

Therefore, only man’s need for fast movement is not enough to force the
animal to move fast; rather, it should be noted that this kind of
movement would not do any harm to the animal.[^25]

### 2. Utilization and Welfare of Animals

According to religious instructions, constant use of animal is not
permissible; the animal should be given intervals to rest.[^26] It was
on this basis that when the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) performed his morning
prayer on journey, he would dismount his camel and let it rest for a
while.[^27] Similarly, in praise of the one who rested his animal after
climbing up steep slopes, he said:

***Anyone who dismounts an animal when riding in mountain passes, is
like the one who frees a slave in the way of God.***[^28]

Some supportive instructions of Islam in this regard are as follows:

**1.2. Avoidance of Sitting on the Back of Animals for a Long Time**:
the user of the animal is not allowed to keep sitting on its back
unnecessarily for a long time[^29] and use its back as a place for
conversation.[^30]

Beware of using the back of animals as a place for conversation, since
God has left them at your disposal to use them to attain places you
normally would attain with difficulty; and He made the earth a
settlement for you, so fulfill your needs by them [and release
them].[^31]

Ride the animals without hurting them and after fulfilling your needs,
leave them unhurt; do not use animals as seats and as places for
conversation on roads and in marketplaces. It is likely that an animal
is better than the person riding it and is more in remembrance of the
Almighty Allah than he is.[^32]

Furthermore, one is not allowed to use the back of the animal as a place
for sleeping and spending his resting time.[^33]

**2.2. Taking Loads off the Animal’s Back**: in view of some jurists,
merely stopping the animal in intervals for resting it is not enough;
rather, the load should be taken off its back so that the animal has a
chance to have enough rest, as keeping loads on its back torments
(*ta‘dhib*) it.[^34]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) saw a camel whose legs were tied while bearing
its saddlebag. He asked, “Where is its owner? He does not have mercy.
Let him be ready for prosecution on Resurrection Day.[^35]

### 3. Utilization and Health of Animals

Despite the two factors of capacity and welfare, there is a third factor
in man’s Utilization of animals, which can be inferred from the
following saying of the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.):

***Be wary of God concerning these animals; eat their meat when they are
fattened and use them for riding when they are healthy.***[^36]

In Muslim jurists’ view, man’s utilizing animals must not directly or
indirectly result in their physical impairment.

To prove this issue, despite some reasons referred to in specific
instances, the general law of *la dharar wa la dhirar fi al-Islam* (no
injury or malicious damage is [allowed] in Islam) can be used here. As,
according to this rule, any action that results in damage to oneself or
others is not permissible and performing it is unlawful (*haram*), no
matter it is done to man or other living creatures – animals and
plants.[^37]

For instance, man is entitled to use the milk of animals such as camel,
cow, and sheep as a perfect food supply; however, this should not cause
damage to the animal. Accordingly, three duties are stated for man in
this regard:

Clipping nails: if one wants to milk an animal directly with their own
hands, they are obliged to clip their nails to avoid hurting or injuring
the animal.[^38]

Giving advice to one of his companions for taking care of the sheep, the
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said:

***Tell your children to clip their nails to avoid scratching or
injuring the animal’s breast.***[^39]

Obviously, if this is done indirectly by automatic milking devices, the
above caution is also to be taken into consideration, even though no
mention is made about it in early legal (Islamic) sources. Actually, the
reason behind such a ruling in Islamic legal system is to prevent
hurting the animal, without its way of doing has anything to do with
that ruling (*tanqih al-manat* = refinement of the root of the ruling).

Not fully draining the milk: it is better (recommended) and sometimes
necessary (obligatory) that the animal’s breast is not totally drained
of milk, because in normal conditions this would torment the animal and
in time of drought and lack of fodder it would cause damage to the
animal.[^40]

Perhaps, it was for this consideration that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.)
said:

***In time of abundance of water, milk your animal so that you can enter
Paradise.***[^41]

Furthermore, if the animal has a suckling baby, the total draining of
the breast would endanger the baby’s health; therefore, it is obligatory
to leave some milk in the animal’s breast to feed its baby, unless
feeding it otherwise.[^42]

It should be mentioned that what Islam intends by not totally draining
the animals’ breast is primarily providing for the health of the animal
and its baby; however, this ruling can also be of benefit to human,
since the little milk remaining in the animal’s breast may cause more
milk production.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) told a man who was striving hard to milk a
camel:

***Leave out some of the milk to produce more milk.***[^43]

Refraining from Milking (*tark al-halb*): acceptance of a bilateral
legal relationship existing between man and animal causes each one of
them to have a mutual right to each other. Given this, if man does not
use his right to utilize the animal and it causes damage to the animal,
this right turns into a duty obliging him to utilization, which he
cannot shun under the pretext of not wanting to.

Therefore, man is not permitted to disregard his right to use the milk
and milking the animal, because accumulation of milk and not draining
the animal’s breast in due time would inflict harm on the animal.[^44]

Attempting to Increase the Animal’s Weight: it is according to this
attitude that some Islamic legal sources have examined the issue of
fattening (*tasmin*) animals. Although increasing the weight of the
animals whose meat is edible would entail economic benefits, it is
necessary to notice that practicing this should not endanger the
animal’s health, especially if this increase is achieved by feeding it
with chemical food supplements.[^45]

Psychological Considerations
----------------------------

If we assume that animals have souls just like human beings do, we
should not neglect their psycho-spiritual considerations in adjusting
our behavior to them. Relying on the sayings of the Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.) and the Infallible Imams (A.S.), the Muslim jurists and legal
experts have stated such considerations in terms of ethical rules:

### 1. Not Using Offensive Words

Using abusive and offensive words is not only remorseful to be used
about human beings, but also a Muslim is not permitted to use them even
about animals. For this reason, Imam Al-Sadiq (A.S.) has regarded not
using foul language against animals as a right that has to be respected
by man towards animals.[^46]

The repugnance of this act is so strong that some Muslim jurists have
not only viewed it as unlawful (*haram*), but also as among the major
sins,[^47] and have considered its perpetration as causing the
obstruction of justice and non-acceptance of testimony by the offender
in judicial issues.[^48]

The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) said, “When the animal that is being
ridden by someone disobeys and its owner says ‘O! miserable’ to it; the
animal will answer back, ‘miserable is the one who is more disobedient
to the Lord’.”[^49]

The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) heard someone cursing his camel. He told
him, “Go back and do not accompany us with the camel that has been
offended.”[^50]

While travelling, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) heard someone’s cursing and
said, “What was that?” they answered, “A woman is cursing her camel.”
The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said, “Leave her, as she herself is
cursed.”[^51]

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) said about animals, “Do
not curse them (animals), because God curses the curser.”[^52]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) warned against cursing the rooster and said,
“It wakes you up for morning prayer.”[^53]

Not only a Muslim is not permitted to use harsh words when talking to
animals, he is also obliged to have a respectful behavior towards them
and address them with beautiful words.

***The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) dismounted his horse and told it,
“Bravo to you! Wait here until I perform my prayers and return to you.”
The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) went into the mosque and the horse was
standing still there; the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said, “Bravo to
you!”***[^54]

### 2. Emotional Support

The spiritual and emotional interdependence of the mother and the child
in human beings as well as in animals has always been of interest to
Islam.

One day, I was travelling with the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) when he left us
for some task. I saw a bird with two fledglings. I took its two
fledglings. The bird turned back and flew behind us for its fledglings.
The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) arrived and then said, “Who made this bird sad
for its babies? Give it back its babies.”[^55]

We were sitting with the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.). A man arrived with
something wrapped in the corner of his robe and said, “O Apostle of
Allah! When I saw you, I came toward you. I was passing by a garden when
I heard the sound of a bird’s fledglings. I went to them, picked them up
and put them in the corner of my robe. When the mother bird saw this, it
began to fly over my head. I opened part of my robe for it and it
dropped on its babies. I wrapped the robe and brought them to you.” The
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said, “…Take them back where you have taken them
and take their mother with them, too”[^56].

This has led to the fact that the issue of their [the mother and the
fledgling] separation is taken into consideration by the Muslim legal
experts in two instances:

**1.2. Selling and Buying**: it is discussed in some legal sources that
when transacting quadrupeds, their babies should not be separated from
their mothers and none of them should be sold without the other,[^57]
because this will torment both the mother and the baby; and the general
law of prohibition of abusing animals applies to this issue, too.[^58]

**2.2. Grazing**: similarly, some jurists have brought up the issue of
not separating the mother and the baby when turning them out to graze
until the baby can stand on its own and their need for each other is
fulfilled so that grazing one without the other would not harm
them.[^59]

### 3. Strengthening the Feeling of Safety

Feeling of safety is among the psycho-spiritual needs common to man and
animal that Islam has formally recognized for them and has approved
non-disturbance of peace as a principle in its ethico-judicial system.

Accordingly, while prohibiting hunting swallows that take shelter in
one’s house, and within the framework of the law, “give shelter to any
animal that take shelter with you”, it stresses that animals and birds
should feel at peace and secure when living with human beings.[^60]

This principle is well represented in the Holy Prophet’s (S.A.W.)
conducts. When the army of Islam was leaving Madinah for Makkah, they
encountered a dog that was breast-feeding its puppy and howling. The
Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) told one of his soldiers to stand in front of the
dog and its puppy lest they be hurt by the marching army.[^61]

The ethical considerations of Islam in the importance of the safety of
animals can be examined in the following two recommendations:

**1.3. Not Encroaching upon the Birds’ Habitats**: most jurists believe
that the birds’ nestlings, as long as they are not enabled to fly, are
in God’s protection and that it is aversive (*makruh*) to hunt them in
their nests.[^62]

Contrary to this generally accepted view, some Shi‘a jurists regard this
act as unlawful (*haram*), just as Ahmad Murtadha, a Suuni jurist, by
generalizing the issue, maintains that hunting the bird inside its nest
is unlawful.[^63]

Judging the above as unlawful or aversive is important from two
perspectives: first, in respect to the father and mother birds, since
they have to be sure their privacy is respected by human beings and no
transgression is made when they leave the nest for procuring food.
Second, in respect to the nestling that is entitled to spend its growth
period assured by Divine protection without feeling in danger by its
greatest hunter, i.e., human being.

The Exalted Allah has secured commitment from man not to take the
mountain bird’s nestlings from their nests until they are not enabled to
fly.[^64]

Do not go after the birds in their nests so long as they have not grown
feather and learned to fly.[^65]

[Someone asked Imam al-Sajjad (A.S.):] A sparrow has laid eggs in the
house; can the nestling be taken from its nest? He answered, “No. The
nestling is in God’s protection so long as it has not begun to
fly.”[^66]

Encroaching upon the birds’ private domain and taking their nestlings is
not only an indecent act, but the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has warned
against it as the perpetrator will face Divine punishment for it.

***There was once a man among the people of the past who would encroach
a bird’s nest and take its nestlings whenever its eggs hatched. The bird
complained to God about this. God inspired to it that if he did this
again, He would cause him to perish.***[^67]

**2.3. Avoiding Hunting in the Night**: According to Islam, time is of
importance; nevertheless, nighttime is of special importance. Among the
most significant features that the Holy Qur’an states in various verses
is the restfulness of night:

﴾He has made the night for rest,﴿ [^68]

﴾It is He who made the night for you, that you may rest in it﴿[^69]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has regarded as impermissible to perturb the
birds’ privacy during the night and disturb their peace, saying:

Do not enter a bird’s sleeping place before morning arrives. A man asked
him, “O Apostle of Allah! What is a bird’s sleeping place?” He answered,
“Night is the sleeping place of a bird. Do not seek to get the birds
before morning falls.”[^70]

The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) prohibited going toward birds at night and
said, “Night is a safe haven for the bird.”[^71]

Do not look for birds in their nests at night, because for them night is
the source of security and that is because of the Mercy that Allah
Almighty has for them.”[^72]

Accordingly, the Muslim jurists have considered hunting birds at night
as impermissible (*makruh*).[^73]

Although abiding by this ethical principle is enjoined only for the
birds, hunting various types of animals can also be regarded as
impermissible by accepting the relaxing quality of night for all animals
with the use of the generalization principle.

Perhaps it is for this same reason that the Muslim jurists have declared
killing animals at night as impermissible (*makruh*)[^74] and maintain
that the negative effects of cruel behavior (killing) are stronger at
night.[^75]

Imam al-Sajjad (A.S.) would always reiterate to his servants to avoid
slaughtering animals until dawn, saying, “God has made the night for
rest for all creatures.”[^76]

### 4. Reduction of Tension and Strengthening Relaxation

If we accept that the animals, like human beings, have immaterial souls
and enjoy a kind of understanding of and consciousness to what goes on
around them, then we are obliged to adjust our behavior towards them in
a way that may reduce their tension and negative emotions and give them
back their lost peacefulness resulting from man’s wrong exploitation of
them.

***The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) entered the house of one of the Helpers
(ansars) in Madinah and there was a camel there. Upon seeing the Holy
Prophet (S.A.W.), the camel’s eyes filled with tears. The Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.) went near it and cleaned its tears with his own hands. The
camel calmed down; then, the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) said, “Who is the
owner of this camel?” A young man from among the Helpers came forward
and said, “O Apostle of Allah! It is mine.” His Holiness (S.A.W.) said,
“Do you not fear God in the matter of this beast, which He has made you
its owner? This camel has complained that you leave it hungry.”***[^77]

Paying attention to this principle is so important in Islam that if the
types of exploitation of the animal by man is (essentially) agitating,
he is obliged to treat it in his utilization in such a way that would
bring the anguish to the lowest level possible.

For instance, among different types of utilization is the man’s use of
some animals’ meat, skin, and other organs, which will not be possible
except by slaughtering them; however, man is not allowed to perform the
slaughtering by adding to the anguish to the animals without ethical
considerations.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) says in this respect:

***God has prescribed for you to do good to everything; so, when you
kill and slaughter (animals) do kill and slaughter in a good
way.***[^78]

Accordingly, by devising laws adopted from the great religious
personalities, Muslim jurists have attempted to demonstrate that from
the Islamic point of view the animals should not be psycho-spiritually
abused even when being killed.[^79]

Imam al-Baqir (A.S.) said in this respect:

***Treat the animal that is supposed to be slaughtered with kindness and
gentleness and not with violence, either before slaughtering it or
afterwards.***[^80]

**4.1. Not Killing (Slaughtering) Animals in Front of Each Other**:
Among the abusive treatments of animals is killing them in front of each
other (*qatl-i sabr*),[^81] which although most Muslim legal experts
regard as aversive (*makruh*),[^82] it seems to be unlawful (*haram*)
since it torments the animals that see the killing.

The Commander of the Faithful Imam ‘Ali (A.S.) would never kill
(slaughter) a sheep in front of another sheep and would say[^83]:

***Do not kill a sheep in front of another sheep and a camel in front of
another camel.***[^84]

The repugnance of this action is so great that it is related that the
reason for Jacob’s (A.S.) separation from his son Joseph (A.S.) was that
one day he killed a lamb in front of its mother that was wailing,
without being moved with compassion.[^85]

**4.2. Not Sharpening the Knife before the Animal’s Eyes**: Muslims are
not permitted (it is *makruh*) to sharpen the knife or the tool that is
to be used for slaughtering the animal before its eyes, it behooves them
to do this away from the animal’s sight (*muwarat*);[^86] this would
unduly torment the animal.[^87]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) was passing by a man who had laid his foot on
the chest of a sheep and was sharpening his knife while the sheep was
gazing at the man. The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) told him, “Do you want to
kill it twice? Why did you not sharpen your knife before you laid the
animal down?”[^88]

**4.3. Not Showing the Knife to the Animal**: Among the Islamic rules of
conducts at the time of slaughtering the animal is not showing it the
knife and the tools used for killing it.[^89]

**4.4. Taking the Animal to the Slaughterhouse with Kindness**: From the
viewpoint of the Muslim jurists, it is not permissible to treat animals
violently even when preparing them for slaughtering because such a
treatment would unduly intensify their torment (*’ilam*).[^90]
Therefore, one is obliged to take the animal to the slaughterhouse
cautiously and kindly.[^91]

The Apostle of Allah (S.A.W.) saw a man who had taken an animal’s ear
and pulling it toward the slaughterhouse. He told him, “Take it kindly
to its death.”[^92]

It seems it can be implied from this religious command that the animals
enjoy a kind of consciousness that enables them to realize what others
intend to do to them, as it is related in traditions.[^93]

**4.5. Laying them down [for Slaughtering] with Kindness**: Among the
religious rules for slaughtering small animals such as sheep is to be
non-violent toward them when preparing them for slaughtering. For this
reason, it is recommended to lay them down cautiously and kindly –
preferably on the left side of their body[^94] – and then slaughter
them.[^95]

Verily, Allah is benevolent and likes benevolence; ... Whenever you
slaughter an animal, slaughter it with benevolence; each one of you has
to sharpen his knife and then lay the animal down.[^96]

Allah has prescribed for you doing benevolence in everything you do...
When you slaughter an animal, do it benevolently... You should lay it
down on the left side of its body.[^97]

Imam al-Baqir was asked about slaughtering the sheep while standing. He
answered, “This is not proper. The religious tradition is to lay the
animal down facing toward the Ka‘ba (*qibla*).[^98]

**4.6. Not Slaughtering the Animal by its** **Breeder**: There is no
doubt coexistence with animals would provide for a reciprocal emotional
relationship between human and the animal. Thus, it is recommended in
religious sources that the one who undertakes to breed animals should
not be the one who slaughters them,[^99] because this would not only
have an unpleasant spiritual impact on the animal, it would make man
cruel-hearted, as well.[^100]

I said to Imam al-Ridha (A.S.), “I had a sheep that I had fattened for
offering as sacrifice. When I took it and laid down, it looked at me and
I felt pity for it. Yet, after a while, I slaughtered it.” Imam al-Ridha
(A.S.) said, “I wish you had not done it; do not slaughter the animal
that you have bred yourself.”[^101]

I said to Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.), “A man gives fodder to a couple of sheep
to slaughter them [later].” He said, “I do not like this.” I said, “A
man buys a camel or sheep and supplies fodder for them from here and
there to fatten them for sacrifice; can he sacrifice them [when the time
for sacrifice comes]?” The Imam (A.S.) said, “When the time [for
sacrifice] comes, he should go to the market and buy a sheep or camel
and sacrifice it.”[^102]

### 5. Spiritual Tortures

Avoidance of psycho-spiritual torment of animals is among the ethical
principles that if not attended to properly would entail physical damage
to the animal, as well.

Two instances of these torments are touched upon in Islamic sources:

**1.5. Entertainment with Animals**: One of the spiritual torments to
animals is to pit animals against each other (*tahrish*), which can be
motivated by such factors as racing and entertainment.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) has prohibited Muslims from such acts and the
Infallible Imams (A.S.) have regarded it as aversive (*makruh*), except
for the dogs.

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) prohibited pitting beasts against each
other.[^103]

The Apostle of God (S.A.W.) prohibited pitting beasts against each
other, except for dogs.[^104]

The Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) considers as aversive the castration of
animals and pitting them against each other.[^105]

I asked about pitting animals against each other, he [the Holy Prophet]
answered, “All of it is aversive except fro the dogs.”[^106]

I asked Imam al-Sadiq (A.S.) about pitting animals against each other.
He said, “I regard it as aversive, except for the dogs.[^107]

Excluding dogs from the undesirability of *tahrish* does not mean that
pitting them against each other is desirable; rather, it indicates the
permission to instigate (*ighra’*) the hunting dogs and encouraging them
to chase prey (*sayd*).[^108]

Pitting animals against each other is presumable in two cases: 1.
pitting same species animals against each other, 2. Pitting different
species animals against each other, which in both cases are prohibited
and despised by the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) and the Infallible Imams
(A.S.) and regarded as unlawful (*haram*). The reason is that,
irrespective of injuring the animals, such an act would unduly inflict
torment on them, as well.[^109]

This religious precept seems to reflect the fact that from the viewpoint
of Islam man is not permitted to misuse animals for his entertainment
and profiteering, even though using such comely phrasings as races and
sports to justify this practice.[^110]

Perhaps it was from this perspective that the Holy Prophet (S.A.W.) did
not regard as permissible the unwise using of animals and exploiting
them in useless and futile affairs and regards their utilization as
permissible only when they are used in the way of God, namely, in the
direction that God has specified in their creation.[^111]

Therefore, we can rightly judge that such contests as cock-fighting,
dog-fighting and bull-fighting are indecent and unlawful practices.

**5.2. Using Birds as Baits**: Man has since long ago used different
methods for hunting animals, among which is using the animals
themselves. In this method, which is used for the flying birds, a bird
is used on the land to lure the flying birds down to a certain place and
catch them with a net.

Some Muslim jurists wonder if the birds can be used as baits, by means
of which other birds can be caught. To reply, some argue that although
using such birds is materially high yielding for man, using them as
baits is impermissible and buying and selling them for this purpose is
not right.[^112]

**5.3. Children’s Play with Animals**: One of the treatments that can
spiritually torment animals is leaving them with children. Although
playing with small animals and certain birds is pleasing for children,
it is not desirable since it tortures them.[^113]

It was on this basis that Imam al-Ridha (A.S.) advises his companions
not to even leave a lark with children to play with.[^114]

Conclusion
----------

Several significant conclusions can be made from all that was said
above:

1. From the Islamic point of view, animals, like human beings, have the
right to live. Therefore, man is not permitted to deprive animals of
this right by way of [abnormal] exploitation.

2. From the Islamic point of view, tormenting animals is an undesirable
practice; thus, man is not permitted to use animals in such way as
resulting in their physical or psychological abuse.

3. From the Islamic point of view, animals enjoy a special spiritual
status because of their non-material soul; therefore, man is not
permitted to use animals in such a way that would violate their dignity.

According to these three main principles, in normal conditions man is
not permitted to bring (premature) death to the animals, endanger their
physical health, cause physical deformity, torture them, and finally,
abuse them by his behavior.

In abnormal (necessary) conditions, when medical research is not
possible without using animals as subjects in laboratories, medical
researchers are required to use procedures that entail the lowest death
rate and abuse to the animals.

In such conditions, using genetic engineering and biotechnological
experiments on animals that may result in their deformities, has to be
carried out in such a way that while minimizing the physical and
psychological torments to the animals to the lowest possible rates, it
should not offend them or degrade their spiritual status.

[^1]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/66, No. 24973.

[^2]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 129.

[^3]: Q. 2:286.

[^4]: Rawdhat al-Talibin, 6/524; Al-Hada’iq al-Nazira fi Ahkam al-‘Itrat
al-Tahira, 25/142; Al-Iqna‘ fi Hall Alfaz Abi Shuja‘, 1/224; Jawahir
al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/397; Mughni al-Muhtaj ila
Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 3/463.

[^5]: Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 2/392-393, No. 2493; Bihar al-Anwar,
61/212, No. 19.

[^6]: Bihar al-Anwar, 96/122, No. 8.

[^7]: Q. 16:8.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/214.

[^9]: See: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/219; Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il
al-Shariʿa, 8/363; Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/66,
No. 24972.

[^10]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 4/391; Bihar al-Anwar, 61/219.

[^11]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 4/392.

[^12]: Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 8/503; Kifayat
al-Ahkam, p. 198; Kashf al-Litham, 2/118; Al-Hada’iq al-Nazira fi Ahkam
al-‘Itrat al-Tahira, 25/141-142; Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ
al-Islam, 31/397.

[^13]: Al-Sharh al-Kabir, 9/312-313; Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/581.

[^14]: Fiqh al-Sunna, 3/509.

[^15]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 4/390-391.

[^16]: Bada’iʿ al-Sana’iʿ fi Tartib al-Shara’iʿ, 4/214; Tuhfat
al-Fughaha, 2/358; Al-Mabsut, 11/138; Al-Madunat al-Kubra, 6/163, 4/472.

[^17]: Al-Mahasin, 2/361, No. 91.

[^18]: Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 2/292, No. 2491.

[^19]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/62, No. 24952

[^20]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 4/392-393, No. 24952.

[^21]: Riyadh al-Salihin min Hadith Sayyid al-Mursalin, p. 435, No. 962;
also see: Sahih ibn Khuzayma, 4/144 and 145.

[^22]: Al-Mahasin, No. 87.

[^23]: Ibid, No. 89.

[^24]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/214-215.

[^25]: Kashif al-Ghita’, Shaykh Ja‘far, Kashf al-Ghita’ ‘an Mubhamat
Shari‘at al-Ghura’, 2 vols. Lithography, Nashr-i Mahdi, Isfahan, 2/433.

[^26]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 4/391.

[^27]: Bayhaqqi, Al-Sunan al-Kubra, 5/255.

[^28]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/69, No. 24992;
also see: Musnad al-Shammiyin, 1/381, No. 662.

[^29]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/219-220.

[^30]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 4/391.

[^31]: Bihar al-Anwar, 61/219-220; Sunan Abi Dawud, 1/578, No 2567.

[^32]: Miza al-Hikma, 1/712; also see: Ibn Habban, ‘Ali b. Balban, Sahih
ibn Habban, ed. Shu‘ayb alArnu’ut, 16 vols.s, 2nd edition, Mu‘assisat
al-Risala, 1416/1993, 12/437, No. 5617; Sahih ibn Khuzayma, 4/142.

[^33]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 4/391.

[^34]: Mawahib al-Jalil bi Sharh Mukhtasar Khalil, 4/169.

[^35]: Bihar al-Anwar, 7/267; Nur al-Thaqalayn, 1/715.

[^36]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/67, No. 24980.

[^37]: Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 4/390-391.

[^38]: Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 3/463;
Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/397; Rawdhat al-Talibin,
6/524; Al-Iqna‘ fi Hall al-Alfaz Abi Shuja‘, 2/142; Kashshaf al-Qina‘,
5/581; I‘anat al-Tallibin, 2/124.

[^39]: Al-Tabaqat al-Kubra, 7/48.

[^40]: Qawa’id al-Ahkam fi Ma‘rifat al-Halal wa al-Haram, 3/118; Idhah
al-Fawa’id fi Sharh Ishkalat al-Qawaʿid, 3/290; Kashf al-Litham, 2/118;
Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/397; Al-Hada’iq
al-Nazira fi Ahkam al-‘Itrat al-Tahira, 25/143; Mughni al-Muhtaj ila
Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 3/463; Al-Iqna‘ fi Hall Alfaz Abi
Shuja‘, 2/142; Rawdhat al-Talibin, 6/524.

[^41]: Kanz al-Ummal fi Sunan al-Aqwal wa al-Af‘al, 9/67, No. 24981.

[^42]: Qawa’id al-Ahkam fi Ma‘rifat al-Halal wa al-Haram, 3/118; Idhah
al-Fawa’id fi Sharh Ishkalat al-Qawaʿid, 3/290; Al-Lum‘at
al-Damishqiyya, p. 178; Al-Rawdhat al-Bihiyya fi Sharh al-Lum‘at
al-Damishqiyya, 5/486; Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam,
8/502; Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 198; Riyadh al-Masa’il fi Bayan al-Ahkam bi
al-Dala’il, 2/168; Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/396;
Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/581; Al-Sharh al-Kabir, 9/313-314; Fiqh al-Sunna,
3/509; Al-Iqna‘ fi Hall Alfaz Abi Shuja‘, 2/142; Fath al-Wahhab bi Sharh
Manhaj al-Tullab, 2/218; Rawdhat al-Talibin, 6/524; Mughni al-Muhtaj ila
Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 3/463.

[^43]: Ma‘ani al-Akhbar, p. 284; also see: Al-Mujazat al-Nabawiyya,
pp.250-251.

[^44]: Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 3/463;
Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 31/397; Al-Muhadhdhab
al-Bari‘ fi Sharh al-Mukhtasar al-Nafi‘, 2/500; Rawdhat al-Talibin,
6/524; Al-Iqna‘ fi Hall Alfaz Abi Shuja‘, 2/142; Fath al-Bari Sharh
Sahih al-Bukhari, 4/303.

[^45]: Mawahib al-Jalil bi Sharh Mukhtasar Khalil, 4/377.

[^46]: Tahdhib al-Ahkam fi Sharh al-Muqniʿa, 6/164, No. 303.

[^47]: For more information concerning great sins (kabair) in Islamic
jurisprudence and different opinions in that respect, see: Muʿjamu
Alfadh al-Fiqh al-Jaʿfari p. 344; Qalʿaji, Muhammad, Muʿjam Lughat
al-Fuqaha, 2nd edition, Dar al-Nafaʿis, Riyadh, 1408/1988, p. 376; Abu
Jayb Saʿdi, Al-Qamus al-Fiqhi, 2nd edition, Dar al-Fikr, Damascus,
1408/1988, p. 314.

[^48]: I‘anat al-Talibin, 4/324; Afandi, Muhammad ‘Ala’ al-Din,
Takmilatu Radd a-Mukhtar ‘ala Durr al-Mukhtar, 2 vols. Dar al-Fikr,
Beirut, 1415/1995, 1/564; Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 5/581.

[^49]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/356, No. 1-2.

[^50]: Mizan al-Hikma, 1/712.

[^51]: Sunan Abi Dawud, 1/577, No, 2561.

[^52]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 8/353, No. 6 and
8.

[^53]: Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 4/5.

[^54]: Al-Nawadir, pp. 195-196.

[^55]: Riyadh al-Salihin min Hadith Sayyid al-Mursalin, p. 635, No.
1610; Sunan Abi Dawud, 1/603, No. 2675; Al-Mustadrak ala al-Sahihayn,
4/239.

[^56]: Sunan Abi Dawud, 2/55, No. 3089.

[^57]: Mawahib al-Jalil bi Sharh Mukhtasar Khalil, 6/238.

[^58]: Mawahib al-Jalil bi Sharh Mukhtasar Khalil, 7/552; Fiqh al-Sunna,
3/62.

[^59]: Hashiyat al-Dasuqi, 4/23; Mawahib al-Jalil bi Sharh Mukhtasar
Khalil, 6/238.

[^60]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 23/238.

[^61]: Subul al-Huda wa al-Rishad fi Sirat Khayr al-‘Ibad, 5/212 and
7/29.

[^62]: Al-Nihaya fi Mujarrad al-Fiqh wa al-Fatawa, p. 579; Jamiʿ
al-Madarik fi Sharh al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ, 5/110-111; Riyadh al-Masa’il
fi Bayan al-Ahkam bi al-Dala’il, 2/269; Mukhtalaf al-Shiʿa, 8/353;
Tahrir al-Ahkam, 2/158; Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bari‘ fi Sharh al-Mukhtasar
al-Nafi‘, 4/158; Nuzhat al-Nazir fi al-Jam‘ bayn al-Ashbah wa
al-Naza’ir, p. 46; Kashf al-Rumuz fi sharh al-Mukhtasar al-Nafi‘, 2/347;
Al-Sara’ir al-Hawi li Tahrir al-Fatawi, 3/91; Hilli, Jaʿfar b. Hasan,
Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafiʿ fi Fiqh al-Imamiyya, 3rd edition, Tehran, Bi‘that
Publication, 1410/1989, p. 241; Ibn Babuwayh, Fiqh al-Ridha,
International Conference on Imam al-Reza (A.S.), Mashhad, 1406/1985, p.
295.

[^63]: See: Al-Mughni‘, p. 422; Al-Hidaya fi al-Usul wa al-Furu‘, p.
312; Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 3/321; Al-Mughni‘a, p. 577; Sharh
al-Azhar, 4/71.

[^64]: Mustadrak al-Wasa’il wa Mustanbat al-Masa’il, 6/117, No. 19326.

[^65]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 16/239, No. 1.

[^66]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 16/241.

[^67]: Kanz al-‘Ummal, 6/372, No. 16116.

[^68]: Q. 6:96.

[^69]: Q. 10:67.

[^70]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 16/239, No. 1.

[^71]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 16/240, No. 2.

[^72]: Makarim al-Akhlaq, p. 129; Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, 3/131, No. 2896.

[^73]: Al-Nihaya, p. 579; Al-Sara’ir, 3/91; Al-Mukhtasar al-Nafi‘, p.
241; Kashf al-Rumuz, 2/347; Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bari‘, 4/158; Jami‘
al-Madarik, 5/110. The reason for viewing it as impermissible and not
unlawful (haram) despite the Holy Prophet’s (S.A.W.) prohibition, is the
weakness of the sanad of the narrated traditions and the inclusiveness
of the reasons suggesting the lawfulness of hunting. See: Riyadh
al-Masa’il, 2/269.

[^74]: Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 11/489; Kashf
al-Litham, 2/1260; Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 36/134.

[^75]: Bada’i‘ al-Sana’i‘ fi Tartib al-Shara’i‘, 5/60.

[^76]: Bada’i‘ al-Sana’i‘ fi Tartib al-Shara’i‘, 5/60.

[^77]: Lawaqi‘ al-Anwar al-Qudsiyya fi Bayan al-‘Uhud al-Muhammadiyya,
p. 395; Ahmad, Musnad, 1/204; Sunan Abi Dawud, 1/574, No 2549;
Al-Mustadrak ala al-Sahihayn, 2/66-100; Subul al-Huda wa al-Rishad fi
Sirat Khayr al-‘Ibad, 9/512; Bihar al-Anwar, 61/111.

[^78]: Sunan al-Nisa’i, 7/227.

[^79]: “The necessity to kill them does not contradict the proper
quality of doing it.” Faydh al-Qadir Sharh Jami‘ al-Saghir min Ahadith
al-Bashir al-Nadhir, 2/311.

[^80]: Bihar al-Anwar, 62/316.

[^81]: Al-Nihaya fi Mujarrad al-Fiqh wa al-Fatawa, p. 584.

[^82]: Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 4/272;
Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam fi Masa’il al-Halal wa
al-Haram, 36/137; Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 11/490;
Qawa’id al-Ahkam fi Ma‘rifat al-Halal wa al-Haram, 3/322; Idhah
al-Fawa’id fi Sharh Ishkalat al-Qawaʿid, 4/138; Al-Durus al-Shar‘iyya fi
Fiqh al-Imamiyya, 2/416; Al-Muhadhdhab al-Bari‘ fi Sharh al-Mukhtasar
al-Nafi‘, 4/174; Kifayat al-Ahkam, p. 247; Kashf al-Litham, 2/260;
Mustanad al-Shiʿa fi Ahkam al-Shariʿa, 15/451.

[^83]: For more information about some objections to proving
unlawfulness of this act and the words of the Commander of the Faithful
Imam ‘Ali (A.S.), see: Fiqh al-Sadiq fi Sharh al-Tabsira, 24/43.

[^84]: Al-Kafi, 6/229-230, No. 7.

[^85]: I‘anat al-Tallibin, 2/393.

[^86]: Mughni al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 4/272;
I‘anat al-Tallibin, 2/392.

[^87]: Al-Mabsut, 11/226; Bada’i‘ al-Sana’i‘ fi Tartib al-Shara’i‘,
5/61.

[^88]: I‘anat al-Tallibin, 2/393; also, see: Mizan al-Hikma, 3/2500;
Al-Musannaf, 4/493, No. 8608

[^89]: Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 11/491.

[^90]: Bada’i‘ al-Sana’i‘ fi Tartib al-Shara’i‘, 5/60.

[^91]: Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 11/491; Mughni
al-Muhtaj ila Maʿrifat Maʿani Alfaz al-Minhaj, 4/272.

[^92]: This matter has been related in other forms as well: “Take its
leg; Allah is merciful to the merciful servants”, “The Holy Prophet
(S.A.W.) saw a man taking the ear of an animal; he ordered to the man,
‘Let go of its ear and take its neck, instead”; see: Almabsut11/227;
Sunan-i Ibn Majja, 2/1059, No. 8609.

[^93]: Al-Mabsut, 11/227: “Animals are negligent of all things except
four: their Creator, their Provider (Razzaq), their death, and their
mating.”

[^94]: Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 6/266.

[^95]: Masalik al-Afham ila Tanqih Shara’i‘ al-Islam, 11/491.

[^96]: Al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir, 7/275.

[^97]: Bada’i‘ al-Sana’i‘ fi Tartib al-Shara’i‘, 5/60.

[^98]: Bihar al-Anwar, 62/316.

[^99]: Basa’ir al-Darajat, p. 368, No. 5.

[^100]: Jawahir al-Kalam fi Sharh Shara’iʿ al-Islam, 36/138.

[^101]: Wasa’il al-Shiʿa ila Tahsil Masa’il al-Shariʿa, 16/308, No. 1.

[^102]: Ibid, No. 2.

[^103]: Sunan al-Tirmidhi, 3/126, No. 1760.

[^104]: Ibid, No. 1761.

[^105]: Man la Yahdhuruhu al-Faqih, 4/60, No. 5096.

[^106]: Al-Kafi, 6/553-554, No. 1.

[^107]: Ibid, p. 554, No. 2.

[^108]: Al-Kafi, 6/554, marginal notes.

[^109]: ʿAli, Nayl al-Awtar min Hadith Sayyid al-Akhyar, 8/249; Tuhfat
al-Ahudhi bi Sharh Jami‘ al-Tirmidhi, 5/299; Awn al-Ma‘bud Sharh Sunan
Abi Dawud, 7/165, No 137; Ibn al-Turkamani, ‘Ala al-Din b. ‘Ali,
Al-Jawhar al-Naqi, 10 vols. Dar al-Fikr, 10/22; Fiqh al-Sunna, 3/511;
Al-Majmuʿ fi Sharh al-Muhadhdhab, 6/177; Al-Jamiʿ li al-Shara’iʿ, p.
397; Al-Sara’ir al-Hawi li Tahrir al-Fatawi, 3/563; Al-Mahasin, 2/628,
marginal notes; Damayri, Muhammad b. Musa, Hayat al-Haywan al-Kubra,
annotation and introduction by Ahmad Hasan Basj, Dar al-Kutub
al-‘Ilmiyya, Beirut, 2/368.

[^110]: Hashiyat al-Dasuqi, 2/209.

[^111]: Al-Khisal, p. 330, No. 28: “Do not stay on their backs except in
the way of Allah.”

[^112]: Al-Mughni, 4/303 and 11/32; Al-Sharh al-Kabir, 4/10 and 11/40;
Kashshaf al-Qina‘, 3/174; Muntaha al-Matlab, 2/1017; Tahrir al-Ahkam,
1/161.

[^113]: Fath al-Bari Sharh Sahih al-Bukhari, 10/484.

[^114]: Al-Kafi, 6/225, No. 1.


