The Narrations of the Prince of the Believers in This Regard
============================================================

1- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Abd al-Adhīm al-Hasani narrates from Abu Ja‘far II
(Imam Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Jawād) (a.s) who narrates through his
forefathers from the Prince of the Believers (a.s), “Our Qā'im will have
an occultation the duration of which is long. As if I see the Shī‘a,
roving about like the cattle that are searching for pasture and are not
finding it. Behold, whoever from them stays firm on his religion and
will not become stone-hearted because of the length of the occultation
of his Imam, he will be with me in my rank on the Day of Judgment.” Then
he said, “When he rises, our Qā'im will not have commitment of
allegiance to anyone on his shoulders. For this reason, his birth will
be concealed and his person will be hidden.”

2- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Husain Ibn Khālid narrates from al-Redhā (a.s), who
narrates on the authority of his holy forefathers from the Prince of the
Believers, that he said to Husain (a.s), “The ninth from your sons, O’
Husain, is the Establisher of the Right (*al-Qā'im bil-Haqq*), the
Manifester of the Religion, and the Deliverer of Justice.”

Husain (a.s) says, “I said, O’ the Prince of the Believers, is that to
happen?”

He said, “Verily so, by the One Who sent Muhammad with Prophethood and
chose him over all of creation! It will happen, however, after an
occultation and a bewilderment in which no one remains on his religion
but the sincere ones who are touched by the spirit of certainty, people
Allah has taken their covenant for our guardianship and *has inscribed
faith in their hearts and has endorsed them with a spirit from
Himself.*”

3- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Abdullah Ibn Abi ‘Afīf, the poet, says, I heard the
Prince of the Believers ‘Ali Ibn Abi Tālib (a.s) say, “It is as if I
see, O’ congregation of Shī‘a, you will be striding like camel herds
searching for a pasture, yet you will not find him.”

*Ikmāl al-Dīn* narrates this tradition again through another chain of
narration.

### ما ورد عن أمير المؤمنين صلوات الله عليه في ذلك {dir="RTL"}

1- إكمال الدين: الشيباني، عن الاسدي، عن سهل، عن عبد العظيم الحسني، عن
أبي جعفر الثاني، عن آبائه، عن أمير المؤمنين (ع) قال: للقائم منا غيبة
أمدها طويل كأني بالشيعة يجولون جولان النعم في غيبته يطلبون المرعى فلا
يجدونه ألا فمن ثبت منهم على دينه لم يقس قلبه لطول أمد غيبة إمامه فهو معي
في درجتي يوم القيامة.

ثم قال (ع): إن القائم منا إذا قام لم يكن لاحد في عنقه بيعة فلذلك تخفى
ولادته ويغيب شخصه.

2- إكمال الدين: الهمداني، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن علي بن معبد، عن الحسين ابن
خالد، عن الرضا (ع) عن آبائه، عن أمير المؤمنين أنه قال للحسين (ع): التاسع
من ولدك يا حسين! هو القائم بالحق المظهر للدين الباسط للعدل، قال الحسين
(ع): فقلت: يا أمير المؤمنين وإن ذلك لكائن؟ فقال (ع): أي والذي بعث محمداً
بالنبوة واصطفاه على جميع البرية ولكن بعد غيبة وحيرة لا تثبت فيها على
دينه إلا المخلصون المباشرون لروح اليقين الذين أخذ الله ميثاقهم بولايتنا
وكتب في قلوبهم الايمان وأيدهم بروح منه.

3- إكمال الدين: أبي، عن علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن سنان، عن زياد المكفوف
عن عبد الله بن أبي عفيف الشاعر قال: سمعت أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب
(ع) يقول: كأني بكم تجولون جولان الابل تبتغون المرعى فلا تجدونه يا معشر
الشيعة.

إكمال الدين: أبي وابن الوليد معا، عن سعد، عن ابن أبي الخطاب، عن محمد بن
سنان عن أبي الجارود، عن عبد الله بن أبي عفيف مثله.

4- *Al-Muqtadhib*: Abu Juhaifa and al-Hārith al-Hamdāni and al-Hārith
Ibn Sharb say that they were all with the Prince of the Believers (a.s).
It was customary that when his son Hasan would come, he would say,
“Blessed be you, O’ son of the Messenger of Allah.” And when his son
Husain would come, he would say, “My father be the ransom of you, O’
father of the son of the best of bondmaids.” He was asked, “O’ Prince of
the Believers, why do you address Hasan this way and Husain that way?
And who is the son of the best of bondmaids?” He said, “He is the lost
one, the fugitive, the abandoned one, M. U. H. A. M. M. A. D. Ibn
al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Musā Ibn Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad
Ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain,” putting his hand on Husain’s head.

5- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* ‘Ibāya al-Asadi says, I heard the Prince
of the Believers (a.s) say, “How would you be like when you are left
without an Imam of guidance or a visible standard, when some of you are
turning away one from the other with disdain!”

6- *Al-Irshād:* Mas‘ada Ibn Sadaqa says, I heard Abu ‘Abdillah Ja‘far
Ibn Muhammad (a.s) say, The Prince of the Believers (a.s) addressed
people in Kufa. He praised and extolled Allah and then said, “I am the
doyen of the aged people. In me is a mark from Ayyūb and Allah will
gather for me my household as He brought together the scattered house of
Jacob. That will happen when the ages pass and you say, *He is lost or
perished*. Behold, before it happens, seek understanding through
fortitude and return to Allah from sins, as you have already thrown your
sanctity away, extinguished your torches, and have pinned your guidance
in people who do not have, neither for themselves nor for you, any
hearing nor any vision. By Allah, weak are the invoker and the invoked.
“If you do not entrust your fate on one another, and do not abandon one
another in the cause of helping the right amongst you, and do not faint
from weakening the falsity, those who will be unlike you will not become
bold against you and those who will overpower you will not become
strong. “Due to your breach of obedience and desisting it from those who
deserve to be obeyed amongst you, you will wander astray like the
Israelites who wandered astray at the time of Moses. Truthfully do I
say, for forsaking and oppressing my progeny, your wandering will be
increased double folds to the wandering of the Israelites. If you feed
and drink and saturate from the lineage that is accursed in the Qur’ān,
verily you will have gathered on the cry of misguidance, received
falsity running headlong towards it, have betrayed the caller of Truth,
have ill-treated the best from the warriors of Badr, and have tended for
the worst from the sons of Abu Sufyān’s father. Behold, if what is in
their hand goes away, purity for the reward and removal of the veil will
be nearer. The promise will be near and the Star will appear to you from
the east and your moon will shine over your like in a full moon in a
full night. When that appears, return to repentance and forsake grief
and sorrow and know that if you obey the riser from the east, he will
walk you on the path of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) so you would avert
deafness and find cure from dumbness and stay away from the labors of
roving and wandering and searching and throw away the loads of burdens
from your necks. Allah does not chase away anyone except the one who
rejects mercy and divorces chastity. *Those who do wrong will know what
to what return they shall be turned to.*

4- كتاب المقتضب لابن العياش قال: حدثني الشيخ الثقة أبو الحسين بن عبد
الصمد بن علي في سنة خمس وثمانين ومأتين عند عبيد بن كثير، عن نوح بن دراج،
عن يحيى، عن الاعمش، عن زيد بن وهب، عن أبي جحيفة والحارث بن عبد الله
الهمداني والحارث بن شرب كل حدثنا أنهم كانوا عند علي بن أبي طالب (ع) فكان
إذا أقبل ابنه الحسن يقول: مرحبا يابن رسول الله وإذا أقبل الحسين يقول:
بأبي أنت يا أبا ابن خيرة الاماء فقيل: يا أمير المؤمنين ما بالك؟ تقول هذا
للحسن وهذا للحسين؟ ومن ابن خيرة الاماء؟ فقال: ذاك الفقيد الطريد الشريد م
ح م د بن الحسن بن علي بن محمد بن علي بن موسى بن جعفر بن محمد بن علي بن
الحسين هذا ووضع يده على رأس الحسين (ع).

5- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: جعفر بن محمد، عن محمد بن الحسين، عن ابن بزيع، عن
الاصم عن ابن سيابة، عن عمران بن ميثم، عن عباية الاسدي قال: سمعت أمير
المؤمنين (ع) يقول: كيف أنتم إذا بقيتم بلا إمام هدى ولا علم يرى يبرأ
بعضكم من بعض.

6- الإرشاد: روى مسعدة بن صدقة قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله جعفر بن محمد (ع)
يقول: خطب الناس أمير المؤمنين (ع) بالكوفة فحمد الله وأثنى عليه ثم قال:
أنا سيد الشيب وفي سنة من أيوب وسيجمع الله لي أهلي كما جمع ليعقوب شمله
وذلك إذا استدار الفلك وقلتم ضل أو هلك ألا فاستشعروا قبلها بالصبر، وبوؤا
إلى الله بالذنب فقد نبذتم قدسكم وأطفأتم مصابيحكم وقلدتم هدايتكم من لا
يملك لنفسه ولا لكم سمعا ولا بصرا ضعف والله الطالب والمطلوب هذا ولو لم
تتواكلوا أمركم ولم تتخاذلوا عن نصرة الحق بينكم، ولم تهنوا عن توهين
الباطل، لم يتشجع عليكم من ليس مثلكم، ولم يقو من قوي عليكم، وعلى هضم
الطاعة وإزوائها عن أهلها فيكم، تهتم كما تاهت بنو إسرائيل على عهد موسى
وبحق أقول ليضعفن عليكم التيه من بعدي باضطهادكم ولدي ضعف ما تاهت بنو
إسرائيل فلو قد استكملتم نهلا وامتلاتم عللا عن سلطان الشجرة الملعونة في
القرآن لقد اجتمعتم على ناعق ضلال ولاجبتم الباطل ركضا ثم لغادرتم داعي
الحق وقطعتم الادنى من أهل بدر ووصلتم الابعد من أبنا الحرب ألا ولو ذاب ما
في أيديهم لقد دنى التمحيص للجزاء وكشف الغطاء وانقضت المدة وأزف الوعد
وبدا لكم النجم من قبل المشرق وأشرق لكم قمركم كملء شهره وكليلة تم فإذا
استبان ذلك فراجعوا التوبة وخالعوا الحوبة واعلموا أنكم إن أطعتم طالع
المشرق سلك بكم منهاج رسول الله(ص) فتداريتم من الصمم واستشفيتم من البكم،
وكفيتم مؤنة التعسف والطلب، ونبذتم الثقل الفادح عن الاعناق، فلا يبعد الله
إلا من أبى الرحمة وفارق العصمة وسيعلم الذين ظلموا أي منقلب ينقلبون.

7- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*mānī:* Abu ‘Abdillah Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad (a.s)
narrates through his forefathers, saying, “Euphrates swelled at the time
of the Prince of the Believers (a.s). At this time, he and his two sons,
al-Hasan and al-Husain (a.s) rode their courses and passed by the tribe
of Thaqīf. They said, ‘Ali is coming. He will made the water recede.’
The Prince of the Believers (a.s) said, ‘By Allah, I and these two sons
of mine will be killed and Allah will send a man from my progeny in the
End Times, who will avenge our blood. He will go into hiding from them
in order to be away from the people of misguidance, so the ignorant
would say, Allah does not have any need to the Household of Muhammad.’”

8- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*mānī:* Al-Mufadhdhal Ibn ‘Omar says, Said Abu
‘Abdillah (a.s), “One tradition, which you comprehend well, is better
than ten you narrate. Verily, every truth has a reality and every
veracity has an illumination.” Then he said, “We, by Allah, do not
consider a man from our Shī‘a to be a *faqīh* unless when he is
addressed through hints and allusions, he understands them. The Prince
of the Believers (a.s) said on the pulpit of Kufa, ‘Dark blind gloomy
mischief are ahead of you. None will be rescued from it but the
*nauma*.’ He was asked, ‘What is *nauma* O’ Prince of the Believers?’ He
said, ‘He is the one who does not know the people and people do not know
him. Behold, the earth does not remain without a Hujja of Allah;
however, Allah will blind His creation from him due to their oppression,
injustice, and their excesses on themselves. If the earth would remain
one hour without a Hujja of Allah, the earth will be injested along with
its dwellers. However, the Hujja will know the people and the people
will not know him, as Yusuf knew the people, *while they knew him not.*’
Then he recited this verse, *Alas for the servants! Not there comes to
them an apostle, but they mock at him.”*

9- *Nahj al-Balāgha:* The Prince of the Believers says in a tradition,
“When it will be like that, the Master of the Religion will journey
along with the trail of his followers. They will gather around him like
the clouds of autumn.”

10- *Nahj al-Balāgha:* The Prince of the Believers (a.s) says in one of
his sermons, “He has appareled himself with the garment of sapience, and
has seized it with all of its protocols by proclivity towards it and
cognition of it and dedication to it. For him, wisdom is his lost
commodity which he seeks, and it is his wish for which he yearns. He
will go faraway at a time when Islam disappears like a feeble camel
leaves while beating the end of its tail and dragging its neck on the
earth. He is the heir of the heirs of His Hujja and a vicegerent from
the vicegerents of His apostles.”

*Explanation:* Says Ibn Abi al-Hadīd, The Imāmiyya believe that this
passage refers to the Awaited Qā'im (a.s). The Sufis maintain that it
refers to the Wali Allah. They maintain that the world does not remain
devoid from al-Abdāl, who are forty, and al-Awtād, who are seven, and
al-Qutb, who is one. Philosophers say this refers to al-*‘*Ārif. The
Sunnis maintain that he is the Mahdi, who will be created. All Muslim
denominations agree that the world and religious laws will not end but
at after the Mahdi (a.s). “He will go faraway” means that he will hide
himself when corruption and mischief manifest and Islam disappears with
the desertion of equity and virtue. This is a proof of the veracity of
the Imāmiyya’s belief.

7- الغيبة للنعمانى: ابن همام، عن جعفر بن محمد بن مالك، عن إسحاق بن سنان،
عن عبيد بن خارجة، عن علي بن عثمان، عن حراب بن أحنف، عن أبي عبد الله جعفر
ابن محمد، عن آبائه (ع) قال: زاد الفرات على عهد أمير المؤمنين فركب هو
وابناه الحسن والحسين(ع) فمر بثقيف فقالوا: قد جاء علي يرد الماء فقال علي
(ع): أما والله لاقتلن أنا وابناي هذان وليبعثن الله رجلاً من ولدي في آخر
الزمان يطالب بدمائنا وليغيبن عنهم تمييزا لاهل الضلالة حتى يقول الجاهل:
مالله في آل محمد من حاجة.

8- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام ومحمد بن الحسن بن (محمد بن) جمهور
جميعا، عن الحسن بن محمد بن جمهور عن أبيه، عن بعض رجاله، عن المفضل بن عمر
قال: قال أبو عبد الله (ع): خبر تدريه خير من عشرة ترويه إن لكل حق حقيقة
ولكل صواب نورا ثم قال: إنا والله لانعد الرجل من شيعتنا فقيها حتى يلحن له
فيعرف اللحن إن أمير المؤمنين (ع) قال على منبر الكوفة: وإن من ورائكم فتنا
مظلمة عميآء منكسفة لاينجو منها إلا النومة؟ قيل: يا أمير المؤمنين وما
النومة؟ قال: الذي يعرف الناس ولا يعرفونه.

واعلموا أن الارض لا تخلو من حجة لله ولكن الله سيعمي خلقه منها بظلمهم
وجورهم وإسرافهم على أنفسهم ولو خلت الارض ساعة واحدة من حجة لله لساخت
بأهلها ولكن الحجة يعرف الناس ولا يعرفونه كما كان يوسف يعرف الناس وهم له
منكرون ثم تلا "يَا حَسْرَةً عَلَى الْعِبَادِ مَا يَأْتِيهِمْ مِنْ
رَسُولٍ إِلَّا كَانُوا بِهِ يَسْتَهْزِئُون."

9- نهج البلاغة: في حديثه (ع): فإذا كان ذلك ضرب يعسوب الدين بذنبه
فيجتمعون إليه كما يجتمع قزع الخريف قال السيد (رضي الله عنه): يعسوب
الدين: السيد العظيم المالك لامور الناس يومئذ. والقزع قطع الغيم التي لا
ماء فيها.

10- نهج البلاغة: قال (ع) في بعض خطبه: قد لبس للحكمة جنتها وأخذها بجميع
أدبها من الاقبال عليها والمعرفة بها والتفرغ لها وهي عند نفسه ضالته التي
يطلبها وحاجته التي يسأل عنها فهو مغترب إذا اغترب الاسلام، وضرب بعسيب
ذنبه وألصق الارض بجرانه، بقية من بقايا حجته، خليفة من خلائف أنبيائه.

11- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*mānī:* ‘Isā Ibn ‘Abdillah al-‘Alawi narrates
from his father, who narrates from his grandfather, who narrates from
‘Ali Ibn Abi Tālib (a.s), “The Patron of this Order is from my
offspring. He is the one about whom it will be said, he has died,
perished, no rather, has threaded to some valley.”

12- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*mānī:* ‘Akrama Ibn Sa‘sa narrates from his
father that the Prince of the Believers (a.s) used to say, “The Shī‘a
will continuously be the like of goats that a grabber does not know
which one of them should he put his hand on. They will neither have any
dignity to be dignified with nor a source of support to refer to.”

13- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*mānī:* Ibn Abi ‘Aqib says, I heard the Prince
of the Believers say, “As if I see you roving about like camel herds
seeking pastures and not finding it, congregation of the Shī‘a.”

14*- Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*mānī:* Sulayman Ibn Hilāl says, Ja‘far Ibn
Muhammad narrated to us from his father, who narrated from his
grandfather, who narrated from Husain Ibn ‘Ali (a.s) saying, A man came
to the Prince of the Believers (a.s) and said, “O’ Prince of the
Believers, inform us about your Mahdi.” The Prince of the Believers
said, “When generations come and perish, and believers become few, and
the followers of righteousness and supporters of the religion go, then
he shall be.”

He said, “O’ Prince of the Believers, peace be unto you, whose son is he
going to be?” The Prince of the Believers said, “From the Children of
Hāshim, from the summit of the Arab mountain. He is an ocean who will
water a world of oases and will not run short, a man abused when he
comes to his folks, and an abode of purity when all will degenerate. He
will not fear when deaths charge, and will not turn away recede when the
faithful surround him, and will not hesitate when warriors struggle. He
will be prepared, far-reaching, a victorious lion, a reaper, an injurer,
a warrior, a sword from the swords of Allah, generous, and adventurous.
His head will be high in dignity, his nobility firmly rooted in the most
distinguished character. No discouraging leader—who will be moving
towards mischief, who if speaks, is the worst speaker and if remains
silent, possesses evil—should mislead you from following him.” Then he
talked about the Mahdi and said, “He is the best refuge, the most
knowledgeable, and the kindest of you all. O’ Allah, make the pledge of
allegiance to him the occasion of exit from affliction, and unite the
dispersion of the Ummah through him. When it is permissible for you, do
it, but do not turn away from him if you find your way to him. Ah,” said
the Prince of the Believers, pointing with his hand to his chest,
expressing his anxiety to see to see the Mahdi.”

*Translator’s Note*: Researchers are encouraged to compare this
tradition with with the version in *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*mānī*.

11- الغيبة للنعماني: علي بن الحسين قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى، قال: حدثنا
محمد بن حسان الرازي، عن محمد بن علي الكوفي قال: حدثنا عيسى بن عبد الله
بن محمد بن عمر بن علي بن أبي طالب، عن أبيه، عن جده، عن أبيه أمير
المؤمنين(ع) أنه قال: صاحبُ هذا الأمر من ولدي هو الذي يقال: مات أو هلك،
لا بل في أيّ وادٍ سلك.

12- الغيبة للنعماني: علي بن الحسين قال: حدثنا محمد بن يحيى العطار، قال:
حدثنا محمد بن حسان الرازي، عن محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن محمد بن سنان، عن
أبي الجارود، عن مزاحم العبدي، عن عكرمة بن صعصعة، عن أبيه قال: كان علي(ع)
يقول: لا تنفكّ هذه الشيعة حتى تكون بمنْزلة المعز لا يدري الخابس على
أيّها يضع يده فليس لهم شرف يشرفونه، ولا سناد يستندون إليه في أمورهم.

13- الغيبة للنعماني: عن أبي الجارود، عن عبد الله الشاعر - يعنى ابن
عقبة - قال: سمعت علياً(ع) يقول: كأني بكم تجولون جولان الإبل تبتغون مرعي،
ولا تجدونها يا معشر الشيعة.

14- الغيبة للنعماني: علي بن أحمد قال: حدثني عبيد الله بن موسى العلوي، عن
أبي محمد موسى بن هارون بن عيسى المعبدي قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن مسلمة بن
قعنب قال حدثنا سليمان بن بلال قال: حدثنا جعفر بن محمد(ع)، عن أبيه، عن
جده عن الحسين بن علي(ع) قال: جاء رجل إلى أمير المؤمنين(ع)، فقال له: يا
أمير المؤمنين نبّئنا بمهديكم هذا؟ فقال: إذا درج الدارجون وقلّ المؤمنين
وذهب المجلبون فهناك هناك.

فقال: يا أمير المؤمنين ممّن الرجل؟ فقال: من بني هاشم، مِن ذروة طود العرب
وبحر مغيضها إذا وردت، ومخفر أهلها إذا اتيت، ومعدن صفوتها إذا اكتدرت، لا
يجبُن إذا المنايا هكعت، ولا يخور إذا المنون اكتنعت، ولا ينكل إذا الكماة
اصطرعت، مشمّر مغلولب ظفر ضرغامة حصد مخدش ذكر، سيفٌ من سيوف الله، رأس،
قثم، نشؤ رأسه في باذخ السؤدد وعارز مجده في أكرم المحتد. فلا يصرفنّك عن
بيعته صارف عارض ينوص إلى الفتنة كل مناص؛ إن قال فشرّ قائل، وإن سكت فذو
دعاير.

ثم رجع إلى صفة المهدى(ع)<span lang="fa"></span>فقال: أوسعُكم كهفاً،
وأكثرُكم علماً، وأوصلُكم رحماً. اللهم فاجعل بعثه خروجاً من الغمة، واجمع
به شمل الأمة. فإنْ خارَ الله لك فاعزم ولا تنثنِ عنه إن وفّقتَ له، ولا
تجوزنّ عنه إنْ هُديتَ إليه، هاه - وأومأ بيده إلى صدره - شوقا إلى رؤيته.

15- *Al-Tarā’if:* Abi Ishāq says, Said the Prince of the Believers (a.s)
as he was looking at his son Husain, “This son of mine is your master,
as the Messenger of Allah (a.s) has named him so. A man will rise from
his progeny with the name of your Apostle, similar to him in his
character, and not so similar to him in his looks. He will fill the
earth with equity.”

16- *Nahj al-Balāgha:* Says the Prince of the Believers (a.s), “They
went right and left, following the pathways of error and leaving the
traditions of guidance. Do not haste to what is going to happen and is
expected. Do not consider slow what is coming to you tomorrow. How many
are a haster about something that should it reach him, he would wish it
had not! How near is today to the beginnings of tomorrow! O’ People,
this is the time of the coming of every promise and the nearing of the
figure whom you do not know. Behold, the one from us who will be then,
he will stride in these hard times with a luminous light and will be
following the examples of the virtuous to free a captive and emancipate
a slave and disperse a misguided nation and unite the followers of
righteousness, while he is in hiding from the people, tracers not seeing
his footprints, even if they search. A nation will be whetted like an
ironsmith whets an arrowhead—their eyes bright with revelation, their
ears saturated with exegesis, and chalices of wisdom are presented to
them day and night.”

17- *Al-Amāli* of Sheikh Tusi: ‘Āsim Ibn Dhamara narrates from the
Prince of the Believers (a.s) that he said, “The earth will become full
of oppression and injustice, so much so that no one will be able to
utter God’s name but secretly. Then Allah will bring a virtuous
congregation, who will fill it with equity and justice, as it will be
full of oppression and injustice.”

18- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ibn Nabāta says, I came to the Prince of the
Believers ‘Ali Ibn Abi Tālib (a.s) and found him thoughtful. He was
making lines on the ground. I said, “O’ Prince of the Believers, why do
I see you thoughtful and you are making lines on the earth? Is it out of
desire for the earth?” He said, “No, by Allah, I have never had desired
in it, nor for what is in the world even for one day. I was thinking
about the son who will be born from my seed—the eleventh from my sons.
He is the Mahdi and he will fill the earth with equity as it will be
full of oppression and injustice. There will be a perplexity and
occultation related to him in which nations will go astray and nations
will be guided.” I said, “O’ Prince of the Believers, is this to
happen?” “Yes,” he said, “as he will be created. How would you know
this, Asbagh! They are the best of this Ummah in the company of the
righteous of this Household.” I said, “What will happen after that?” He
said, “*Allah will do what He desires,* for He has wills and purposes
and outcomes.”

*Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* An identical tradition through another chain
of narration.

*Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*mānī:* An identical tradition through another
chain of narration.

15- الطرائف: في الجمع بين الصحاح الستة، عن أبي إسحاق قال: قال علي (ع)
ونظر إلى ابنه الحسين وقال: إن ابني هذا سيد كما سماه رسول الله(ص) وسيخرج
من صلبه رجل باسم نبيكم يشبهه في الخلق ولا يشبهه في الخلق يملأ الأرض
عدلاً.

16- نهج البلاغة: وأخذوا يميناً وشمالاً طعناً في مسالك الغي وتركا لمذاهب
الرشد فلا تستعجلوا ما هو كائن مرصد ولا تستبطؤا ما يجئ به الغد، فكم من
مستعجل بما إن أدركه ود أنه لم يدركه وما أقرب اليوم من تباشير غد يا قوم
هذا إبان ورود كل موعود ودنو من طلعة مالا تعرفون ألا وإن من أدركها منا
يسري فيها بسراج منير، ويحذوا فيها على مثال الصالحين ليحل فيها ربقا وتعتق
رقا ويصدع شعبا ويشعب صدعا في سترة عن الناس لا يبصر القائف أثره ولو تابع
نظره ثم ليشحذن فيها قوم شحذ القين النصل تجلي بالتنـزيل أبصارهم ويرمي
بالتفسير في مسامعهم ويغبقون كأس الحكمة بعد الصبوح.

17- أمالي الشيخ الطوسي: علي بن أحمد المعروف بابن الحمامي عن محمد بن جعفر
القاري عن محمد بن إسماعيل بن يوسف، عن سعيد بن أبي مريم، عن محمد بن جعفر
بن كثير عن موسى بن عقبة، عن أبي إسحاق، عن عاصم بن ضمرة، عن علي (ع) أنه
قال: لتملان الارض ظلماً وجوراً حتى لا يقول أحد "الله" إلا مستخفياً ثم
يأتي الله بقوم صالحين يملؤونها قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً.

18- إكمال الدين: أبي وابن الوليد معا، عن سعد والحميري ومحمد العطار وأحمد
بن إدريس جميعا، عن ابن أبي الخطاب وابن عيسى والبرقي وابن هاشم جميعا عن
ابن فضال، عن ثعلبة، عن مالك الجهني، وحدثنا ابن الوليد عن الصفار وسعد
معا، عن الطيالسي عن زيد بن محمد بن قابوس، عن النضر بن أبي السري، عن أبي
داود المسترق، عن ثعلبة عن مالك الجهني، عن الحارث بن المغيرة، عن ابن
نباته قال: أتيت أمير المؤمنين علي بن أبي طالب (ع) فوجدته مفكرا ينكت في
الارض فقلت يا أمير المؤمنين مالي أراك مفكرا تنكت في الارض أرغبة فيها؟
قال: لا والله ما رغبت فيها ولا في الدنيا يوما قط ولكني فكرت في مولود
يكون من ظهري الحادي عشر من ولدي هو المهدي يملأها عدلا كما ملئت ظلماً
وجوراً تكون له حيرة وغيبة يضل فيها أقوام ويهتدي فيها آخرون فقلت: يا أمير
المؤمنين وإن هذا لكائن فقال: نعم، كما إنه مخلوق وأنى لك بالعلم بهذا
الامر يا أصبغ اولئك خيار هذه الأمة مع أبرار هذه العترة قلت: وما يكون بعد
ذلك؟ قال ثم يفعل الله ما يشاء فان له إرادات وغايات ونهايات.

19- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ibn Nabāta says that the Prince of the Believers
(a.s) mentioned the Qā'im (a.s) and said, “He will go into hiding, so
the ignorant will say that Allah does not have any need to the House of
Muhammad.”

20- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Yazīd al-Dhakhim says, I heard the Prince of the
Believers (a.s) say, “As if I see you are roving like the cattle that
are searching for the pasture and not are finding it.”

21- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ibn Nabāta says, I heard the Prince of the Believers
(a.s) say, “The Patron of this Order is the runaway, the fugitive, the
loner, and the forlorn.”

22- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Abu Wā’il says, The Prince of the
Believers (a.s) looked at his son Husain (a.s) and said, “This son of
mine is a master as the Messenger of Allah named him a master. Allah
will bring forth from his seed a man with the name of your Apostle—who
will be similar to him in his character as well as his looks—in a time
of oblivion of the people and death of righteousness and manifestation
of injustice. By Allah, if he should not rise, his neck will be struck.
The dwellers and inhabitants of the heavens will rejoice his rise. He
will fill the earth with equity as it will be replete with injustice and
oppression.”

23- *Nahj al-Balāgha:* In one of his sermons, the Prince of the
Believers (a.s) says, “Then you remain after him (meaning himself, peace
be unto him) for so long as Allah wills until Allah raises for you
someone who will unite you and pull you together from your dispersion…”
as it was mentioned in *Kitāb al-Fitan* (*the Book of Trials from Bihār
al-Anwār*). Ibn Maitham (a.s) says that one of his sermons contains a
segment that is a sort of explanation for this promise, where the Prince
of the Believers says, “Be certain that what faces our Qā'im is on the
virtue of your pagan (*jāhiliyya*) order. Because the entire Ummah on
that day will be pagans, except the ones who are shown Divine mercy. Do
not haste so fear hastes to you. Beware that gentleness is fortune and
equanimity is leisure and endurance. The Imam knows better what is right
and what is wrong. He will tear out the evil judges from you, cut away
your dangers, and dismiss your unjust rulers, and will clean the earth
from the dishonest. He will act with equity and will establish amongst
you a fair scale of justice. Your living ones will wish they could
return shortly once more and live again. This is to happen. For the sake
of Allah, you are in your dreams! Safeguard your tongues and be after
your livelihood, for depravity will come to you. And if you wait, you
will be rewarded and you will find out with certainty that he is the
avenger of your victimization and the retriever of your rights. I take a
true oath by Allah that *Allah is verily with the people who are pious
and who do favors.*

The author says, explaining a sermon recorded by al-Seyed al-Radhi in
*Nahj al-Balāgha,* Ibn Abi al-Hadīd says, This sermon mentions the
Umayyads and has been narrated by a number of historians and is
widespread and narrated through inordinate sources. It has many segments
which al-Radhi has not narrated.

19- إكمال الدين: ابن الوليد، عن أحمد بن إدريس، عن جعفر بن محمد الفزاري
عن إسحاق بن محمد الصيرفي، عن أبي هاشم، عن فرات بن أحنف ، عن ابن طريف عن
ابن نباته، عن أمير المؤمنين (ع) أنه ذكر القائم (ع) فقال: أما ليغيبن حتى
يقول الجاهل: ما لله في آل محمد حاجة.

20- إكمال الدين: ابن إدريس، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد بن مالك، عن عباد بن
يعقوب، عن الحسن بن محمد، عن أبي الجارود، عن يزيد الضخم قال: سمعت أمير
المؤمنين صلوات الله عليه يقول: كأني بكم تجولون جولان النعم تطلبون المرعى
فلا تجدونه.

21- إكمال الدين: ابن موسى، عن الاسدي، عن سعد، عن محمد بن عبد الحميد وعبد
الصمد بن محمد معا، عن حنان بن سدير، عن علي بن حزور، عن ابن نباته قال:
سمعت أمير المؤمنين (ع) يقول: صاحب هذا الامر الشريد الطريد الفريد الوحيد.

22- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: جماعة، عن التلعكبري، عن أحمد بن علي، عن أحمد بن
إدريس عن ابن قتيبة، عن الفضل، عن إبراهيم بن الحكم، عن إسماعيل بن عياش،
عن الاعمش، عن أبي وائل قال: نظر أمير المؤمنين (ع) إلى ابنه الحسين فقال:
إن ابني هذا سيد كما سماه (رسول) الله سيدا وسيخرج الله من صلبه رجلا باسم
نبيكم فيشبهه في الخلق والخلق يخرج على حين غفلة من الناس وإماتة من الحق
وإظهار من الجور والله لو لم يخرج لضرب عنقه يفرح لخروجه أهل السماء
وسكانها يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً تمام الخبر.

23- نهج البلاغة: في بعض خطبه (ع): فلبثتم بعده يعني نفسه (ع) ما شاء الله
حتى يطلع الله لكم من يجمعكم، ويضم نشركم. إلى آخر ما مر في كتاب الفتن.
وقال ابن ميثم S: قد جاء في بعض خطبه (ع) ما يجري مجرى الشرح لهذا الوعد
قال (ع): اعلموا علما يقينا أن الذي يستقبل قائمنا من أمر جاهليتكم وذلك أن
الأمة كلها يومئذ جاهلية إلا من رحم الله فلا تعجلوا فيعجل الخوف بكم،
واعلموا أن الرفق بمن والاناة راحة وبقاء، والامام أعلم بما ينكر ويعرف
لينـزعن عنكم قضاة السوء، وليقبضن عنكم المراضين، وليعزلن عنكم امراء الجور
وليطهرن الارض من كل غاش، وليعملن بالعدل، وليقومن فيكم بالقسطاس المستقيم،
وليتمنين أحياؤكم رجعة الكرة عما قليل فتعيشوا إذن، فان ذلك كائن. الله
أنتم بأحلامكم، كفوا ألسنتكم، وكونوا من وراء معايشكم، فان الحرمان سيصل
إليكم، وإن صبرتم واحتسبتم واستيقنتم أنه طالب وتركم ومدرك آثاركم وآخذ
بحقكم، واقسم بالله قسما حقا إن الله مع الذين اتقوا والذينهم محسنون.

أقول: وقال ابن أبي الحديد في شرح خطبة أوردها السيد الرضي في نهج البلاغة
وهي مشتملة على ذكر بني أمية: هذه الخطبة ذكرها جماعة من أصحاب السير وهي
متداولة منقولة مستفيضة وفيها ألفاظ لم يوردها الرضي.

One of such segments asserts, “Look at the Household of your Apostle, if
they remain silent, you remain silent, and if they should ask for your
help, help them. Allah will bring relief through a man from us Ahl
al-Bait. My father be the ransom of the son of the best of the
bondmaids! He will not give them but the sword in anarchy, putting on
his shoulder eight, so much so that the Qureish will say, If he were
from the progeny of Fātimah, he would pity us. Then Allah will incite
him over the Umayyads until he leaves them broken bits and mortal
remains and *accursed* *they are, wherever they are come upon, they will
be seized and massacred in a complete massacre. Such is Allah’s practice
with those who have passed on before; you will never find any change in
Allah’s conduct.”*

Then Ibn Abi al-Hadīd says, If it should be asked who this promised man
is, the answer would be that the Imamiyya believe he is their Twelfth
Imam and son of a bondmaid called Narjis. However, our scholars maintain
he is a man from the progeny of Fātimah who will be born in the future
and does not exist now. If it should be asked who shall be from the
Umayyads in that time that this man will take revenge from, the answer
is that the Imamiyya say it is through *rij*‘*a.* They believe that
certain people from the Umayyads and others will be brought back with
their very physiques when their awaited Imam comes and that he will
amputate hands and feet of many men, gouge out eyes of many, crucify
many more, and will take revenge from the enemies of the House of
Muhammad (a.s), both enemies of the past and enemies who will come in
the future. Our scholars, nonetheless, believe that Allah, the High,
will create in the End Eras a man from the progeny of Fātimah (a.s) who
does not exist now, and He will avenge through him; and he will fill the
earth with equity as it shall be replete with oppression and injustice
of the oppressors; and that he will chastise them in a much severe
manner.

24- *Al-Kāfi:* Mas‘ada Ibn Sadaqa narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s)
saying that the Prince of the Believers (a.s) delivered a sermon. He
praised and extolled Allah and beseeched blessings for the Prophet and
his House and then said, “Allah, the Holy and the High, has not broken
the tyrants of the ages but after giving a respite and leisure. He has
not healed the breakage of a bone of a nation but after severity and
trial. O’ people, there are lessons in the destructions that are
awaiting you and the affairs you have left behind. However, not everyone
who has a heart is sagacious, nor everyone who has an ear listens, nor
everyone who has eyes observes. Servants of Allah, have a good look at
what matters to you and then look at the scenes of the people whom Allah
gave command through His knowledge and they followed the conduct of the
House of the Pharaoh and enjoyed *gardens and springs, and crops and
splendid positions.* Then look at what finality did Allah lead them to
after a period of deferment and gaiety, and command and forbiddance.
Whoever upholds patience, he will end up in the Paradise, by Allah,
forever and ever, *and Allah holds the destiny of things.* How odd! How
do I wonder from the errors of these sects with the disparity of their
proofs in their religion! Neither they follow the footprints of a
prophet, nor do they defer to the actions of a successor.

ثم قال: ومنها فانظروا أهل بيت نبيكم فان لبدوا فالبدوا وإن استنصروكم
فانصروهم ليفرجن الله برجل منا أهل البيت بأبي ابن خيرة الاماء لا يعطيهم
إلا السيف هرجا هرجا موضوعا على عاتقه ثمانية حتى تقول قريش لو كان هذا من
ولد فاطمة لرحمنا فيغريه الله ببني امية حتى يجعلهم حطاما ورفاتا ملعونين
أينما ثقفوا اخذوا وقتلوا تقتيلا سنة الله في الذين خلوا من قبل ولن تجد
لسنة الله تبديلا. ثم قال ابن أبي الحديد: فان قيل من هذا الرجل الموعود؟
قيل أما الامامية فيزعمون أنه إمامهم الثاني عشر وأنه ابن أمة اسمها نرجس
وأما أصحابنا فيزعمون أنه فاطمي يولد في مستقبل الزمان لام ولد وليس بموجود
الآن. فان قيل: فمن يكون من بني امية في ذلك الوقت موجودا حتى يقول (ع) في
أمرهم ما قال من انتقام هذا الرجل منهم؟ قيل أما الامامية فيقولون بالرجعة
ويزعمون أنه سيعاد قوم بأعيانهم من بني امية وغيرهم إذا ظهر إمامهم المنتظر
وأنه يقطع أيدي أقوام وأرجلهم ويسمل عيون بعضهم ويصلب قوما آخرين وينتقم من
أعداء آل محمد(ع) المتقدمين والمتأخرين. وأما أصحابنا فيزعمون أنه سيخلق
الله تعالى في آخر الزمان رجلا من ولد فاطمة عليها السلام ليس موجودا الآن
وينتقم (به) وأنه يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً من الظالمين
وينكل بهم أشد النكال وأنه لام ولد كما قد ورد في هذا الاثر وفي غيره من
الآثار وأن اسمه كاسم رسول الله(ص) وأنه يظهر بعد أن يستولي على كثير من
الاسلام ملك من أعقاب بني امية وهو السفياني الموعود به في الصحيح من ولد
أبي سفيان بن حرب بن امية وأن الامام الفاطمي يقتله وأشياعه من بني امية
وغيرهم وحينئذ ينـزل المسيح (ع) من السماء وتبدو أشراط الساعة وتظهر دابة
الارض ويبطل التكليف ويتحقق قيام الاجساد عند نفخ الصور كما نطق به الكتاب
العزيز.

24- الكافي: أحمد بن محمد الكوفي، عن جعفر بن عبد الله المحمدي، عن أبي روح
فرج بن قرة، عن جعفر بن عبد الله، عن مسعدة بن صدقة، عن أبي عبد الله (ع)
قال: خطب أمير المؤمنين (ع) فحمد الله وأثنى عليه وصلى على النبي وآله ثم
قال: أما بعد فان الله تبارك وتعالى لم يقصم جباري دهر إلا من بعد تمهيل
ورخاء ولم يجبر كسر عظم (من) الامم إلا بعد أزل وبلاء أيها الناس في دون ما
استقبلتم من عطب واستدبرتم من خطب معتبر وما كل ذي قلب بلبيب، ولا كل ذي
سمع بسميع ولا كل ذي ناظر عين ببصير عباد الله أحسنوا فيما يعنيكم النظر
فيه ثم انظروا إلى عرصات من قد أقاده الله بعلمه كانوا على سنة من آل فرعون
أهل جنات وعيون، وزروع ومقام كريم ثم انظروا بما ختم الله لهم بعد النضرة
والسرور والامر والنهي ولمن صبر منكم العاقبة في الجنان والله مخلدون ولله
عاقبة الامور. فيا عجبا ومالي لا أعجب من خطاء هذه الفرق على اختلاف حججها
في دينها لا يقتفون أثر نبي ولا يعتدون بعمل وصي.

Neither they believe in an unseen, nor do they forgive a fault. Virtue
for them is what they themselves consider virtuous and vice is what they
themselves consider vice. Every man of them is his own imam, following
himself without strong proofs and undeniable reasons. They continue
dwelling with injustice and ever increase in errors, never reaching
proximity and ever increasing their distance from Allah, the Exalted.
Their affinity with one another and their endorsement of one another,
all of that is on the virtue of their fear from what the Apostle has
bequeathed and to flee from the message of the Creator of the heavens
and the earth, which the Apostle has brought to them. They are people of
contrition, cavities of doubts, and dwellers of illusion and misguidance
and doubts. A person who is left by Allah, abandoned to himself and his
own opinion, he is only seen secure by someone who does not know him and
is not suspected by someone who does not recognize him. How similar are
these people to the cattle whose shepherd has disappeared from them!
Alas from the deeds of our Shī‘a after their today’s close love! How
they will disgrace one another after me and will kill each other
dispersedly tomorrow—while they are removed from the principal and are
holding on to the inferior hopes of an opening. Each party of them will
hold a certain branch and will lean to whichever direction the branch
will lean to. However, Allah, glory to His name, will gather them for
the worst day of the Umayyads, as autumn collects clouds. Allah will
then bring them together on love and then will gather them in masses
like masses of clouds. Then He will open gateways for them. They will
spring out from their ambushes like the flood of the two gardens [of
Sabā’]—the flood of the mighty dam of Iram, when a rat punched a hole in
it and neither highlands withstood against it, nor did strong mountains
repulse its flow. Allah will then scatter them in the valleys and will
thread them as *springs on earth.* He will take the rights of one nation
through them from another. He will settle a nation through them in the
place of another nation to chase away the Umayyads and that they may not
continue to usurp what they have usurped. Allah will destroy through
them pillars and will destruct through them the mighty structures of
Iram and will inhabit with them the midlands of al-Zaytūn. “I take a
solemn oath by the Soul Who split the seed and created the nations, this
will happen. As if I hear the neighing of their horses. By Allah, all
the treasures in their hands after their rise and might in the lands
will dissolve as fat melts on fire. Whoever of them dies, will die pagan
and to God, the Exalted, will be eventually taken whoever of them
remains. And Allah, the Exalted, will forgive anyone who repents.
Perchance, Allah will bring together my Shī‘a after dispersion for their
worst day. The choice is for none; rather, Allah makes the choice and
determines all destinies. “O’ People, claimants of Imamate who do not
deserve it are many. If you do not abandon the bitter truth and do not
faint from disparaging the wrong, those who are not like you will not be
bold against you and those who are showing strength over you will not
become strong over you in order to end and sideline obedience to God.
However, you went astray as did the Children of Israel in the time of
Moses (a.s). By my life, your perplexity and misguidance will increase
after me manifolds compared to that of the Children of Israel.

ولا يؤمنون بغيب ولا يعفون عن عيب المعروف فيهم ما عرفوا، والمنكر عندهم ما
أنكروا، وكل امرء منهم إمام نفسه آخذ منها فيما يرى بعرى وثيقات وأسباب
محكمات فلا يزالون بجور ولن يزدادوا إلا خطأ لا ينالون تقربا ولن يزدادوا
إلا بعدا من الله(عزوجل) انس بعضهم ببعض وتصديق بعضهم لبعض كل ذلك وحشة مما
ورث النبي (ص) ونفورا مما أدى إليهم من أخبار فاطر السموات والارض. أهل
حسرات، وكهوف شبهات، وأهل عشوات، وضلالة وريبة، من وكله الله إلى نفسه
ورأيه فهو مأمون عند من يجهله غير المتهم عند من لا يعرفه فما أشبه هؤلاء
بأنعام قد غاب عنها رعاؤها.

وواأسفا من فعلات شيعتنا من بعد قرب مودتها اليوم كيف يستذل بعدي بعضها
بعضا وكيف يقتل بعضها بعضا؟ المتشتة غدا عن الاصل النازلة بالفرع، المؤملة
الفتح من غير جهته كل حزب منهم آخذ منه پبغصن أينما مال الغصن مال معه مع
أن الله وله الحمد سيجمع هؤلاء لشر يوم لبني امية كما يجمع قزع الخريف يؤلف
الله بينهم ثم يجعلهم ركاماً كركام السحاب ثم يفتح لهم أبوابا يسيلون من
مستثارهم كسيل الجنتين سيل العرم حيث نقب عليه فارة فلم تثبت عليه أكمة ولم
يرد سننه رص طود، يذعذهم الله في بطون أودية ثم يسلكهم ينابيع في الارض
يأخذ بهم من قوم حقوق قوم ويمكن بهم قوما في ديار قوم تشريدا لبني امية
ولكي لا يغتصبوا ما غصبوا يضعضع الله بهم ركنا وينقض بهم طي الجنادل من إرم
ويملا منهم بطنان الزيتون.

فوالذي فلق الحبة وبرأ النسمة ليكونن ذلك وكأني أسمع صهيل خيلهم وطمطمة
رجالهم وأيم الله ليذوبن ما في أيديهم بعد العلو والتمكين في البلاد كما
تذوب الالية على النار، من مات منهم مات ضالاً وإلى الله(عزوجل) يفضي منهم
من درج ويتوب الله(عزوجل) على من تاب ولعل الله يجمع شيعتي بعد التشتت لشر
يوم لهؤلاء وليس لأحد على الله عز ذكره الخيرة، بل لله الخيرة والامر
جميعاً.

أيها الناس إن المنتحلين للإمامة من غير أهلها كثير ولو لم تتخاذلوا عن مر
الحق، ولم تهنوا عن توهين الباطل، لم يتشجع عليكم من ليس مثلكم ولم يقو من
قوي عليكم، وعلى هضم الطاعة وإزوائها عن أهلها. لكن تهتم كما تاهت بنو
إسرائيل على عهد موسى (ع). ولعمري ليضاعفن عليكم التيه من بعدي أضعاف
ماتاهت بنو إسرائيل.

By my life, if you outlive after me the rule of the Umayyads, you will
then be subjected to the rule of the caller to misguidance and you will
revive the wrong and will leave the right behind your backs. You will
sever your relation with the near relations, the warriors of Badr, and
will look up to the aliens from the progeny of the fighters against the
Messenger of Allah (a.s). By my life, if they lose their scepter, the
purging for the sake of requitals will come near. The promise will be
near and the period will be ending. The bright comet will appear to you
from the direction of the east and that bright moon will shine to you.
When that happens, turn to repentance and beware that if you follow the
Star from the East, he will thread you on the path of the Messenger
(a.s). He will heal your blind, dumb, and deaf. He will save you the
toils of search and misguidance. The great burdens will be removed from
your necks. Allah does not cast away anyone but the one who defies and
oppresses and goes astray and takes what does not belong to him. *And
soon will know those who acted unjustly, which final end they will turn
to.*”

25- *Nahj al-Balāgha:* A sermon of the Prince of the Believers in which
he alludes to Mighty Happenings: “He will direct desires to guidance,
when people have turned to avarice. He will direct views to the Qur’ān,
when they have directed the Qur’ān to their views.” He says, “So much so
until wars are waged at you, which grin at you with their fangs while
their breasts are filled with a milk that tastes sweet but leads to
bitter ends. Beware tomorrow, and tomorrow shall come with what you do
not know. The ruler will call unjust rulers to account for their evil
acts. The earth will bring out the treasures of its heart to him and
submit him their keys. He will show you how is equity of character. He
will revive the dead teachings of the Book and Sunnah.” Ibn Abi al-Hadīd
narrates from his teacher Abu ‘Othmān that he said, Abu ‘Obaidah has
narrated a longer version of this tradition on the authority of Ja‘far
Ibn Muhammad (a.s) through his forefathers, “Behold the righteous men
from my Household and the pure men of my family are the forbearing of
all people in their youths and the most knowledgeable of all people in
their old age. We, the Ahl al-Bait, know through the Divine knowledge,
judge through the Divine commands, and the words of the Truthful we
follow. If you follow our words, you will be guided through our light,
and if you do not do that, Allah will destroy you on our hands. With us
is the standard of truthfulness. Whoever follows it will find salvation
and whoever falls behind from it will be destroyed. Behold, through us
the faults of the believers are undone and through us the dress of
dishonor is removed from your necks. Through is the initiation and
through us, not you, is the finality.” Ibn Abi al-Hadīd says, “’Through
us, not you, is the finality” is an allusion to the Mahdi who will rise
in the End Times. The majority of the writers of traditions believe that
he is from the progeny of Fātimah (a.s). Our Mu‘tazilte scholars do not
reject him and they have mentioned him in their books and their scholars
have acknowledged him. However, we believe that he has not been created
yet and that he will be created, which is also the belief of ahl
al-Hadīth.

ولعمري أن لو قد استكملتم من بعدي مدة سلطان بني امية لقد اجتمعتم على
سلطان الداعي إلى الضلالة وأحييتم الباطل وأخلفتم الحق وراء ظهوركم، وقطعتم
الأدنى من أهل بدر ووصلتم الأبعد من أبناء الحرب لرسول الله(ص) ولعمري أن
لو قد ذاب ما في أيديهم لدنا التمحيص للجزاء وقرب الوعد وانقضت المدة وبدا
لكم النجم ذو الذنب من قبل المشرق ولاح لكم القمر المنير فإذا كان ذلك
فراجعوا التوبة واعلموا أنكم إن اتبعتم طالع المشرق سلك بكم منهاج رسول
الله(ص) فتداويتم من العمى والصمم والبكم وكفيتم مؤنة الطلب والتعسف،
ونبذتم الثقل الفادح عن الأعناق ولا يبعد الله إلا من أبى وظلم واعتسف،
وأخذ ما ليس له "وَسَيَعْلَمُ الَّذِينَ ظَلَمُوا أَيَّ مُنقَلَبٍ
يَنقَلِبُونَ.".

25- نهج البلاغة: من خطبة له صلوات الله عليه (في ذكر الملاحم: يعطف الهوى
على الهدى إذا عطفوا الهدى على الهوى ويعطف الرأي على القرآن إذا عطفوا
القرآن على الرأي. منها: حتى تقوم الحرب بكم على ساق باديا نواجذها مملوءة
أخلافها حلوا رضاعها علقما عاقبتها). ألا وفي غد وسيأتي غد بما لا تعرفون
يأخذ الوالي من غيرها عمالها على مساوي أعمالها وتخرج له الارض أفاليذ
كبدها، وتلقي إليه سلما مقاليدها، فيريكم كيف عدل السيرة ويحيي ميت الكتاب
والسنة.

أيضاح: قال ابن أبي الحديد: "ألا وفي غد" تمامه قوله (ع) "يأخذ الوالي"
وبين الكلام جملة اعتراضية وهي قوله (ع) "وسيأتي غد بما لا تعرفون" والمراد
تعظيم شأن الغد الموعود ومثله كثير في القرآن ثم قال: قد كان تقدم ذكر
طائفة من الناس ذات ملك وإمرة فذكر (ع) أن الوالي يعني القائم (ع) يأخذ
عمال هذه الطائفة على سوء أعمالهم و" على " ههنا متعلقة بيأخذ وهي بمعنى
يؤاخذ وقال: الافاليذ جمع أفلاذ والافلاذ جمع فلذة وهي القطعة من الكبد
كناية عن الكنوز التي تظهر للقائم (ع) وقد فسر قوله تعالى " وأخرجت الارض
أثقالها " بذلك في بعض التفاسير. أقول: وقال ابن أبي الحديد في شرح بعض
خطبه صلوات الله عليه: قال شيخنا أبو عثمان وقال أبو عبيدة: وزاد فيها في
رواية جعفر بن محمد(ع) عن آبائه (ع) ألا إن أبرار عترتي وأطائب ارومتي أحلم
الناس صغارا وأعلم الناس كبارا ألا وإنا أهل بيت من علم الله علمنا وبحكم
الله حكمنا ومن قول صادق سمعنا فان تتبعوا آثارنا تهتدوا ببصائرنا وإن لم
تفعلوا يهلككم الله بأيدينا معنا رأية الحق من تبعها لحق ومن تأخر عنها غرق
ألا وبنا يدرك ترة كل مؤمن، وبنا تخلع ربقة الذل عن أعناقكم، وبنا فتح لا
بكم، وبنا يختم لا بكم. ثم قال ابن أبي الحديد: "وبنا يختم لا بكم" إشارة
إلى المهدي الذي يظهر في آخر الزمان وأكثر المحدثين على أنه من ولد فاطمة
عليها السلام وأصحابنا المعتزلة لا ينكرونه وقد صرحوا بذكره في كتبهم
وأعترف به شيوخهم إلا أنه عندنا لم يخلق بعد وسيخلق وإلى هذا المذهب يذهب
أصحاب الحديث أيضا.

The Chief Justice has narrated on the authority of Ismā‘ī Ibn ‘Ibād
(a.s) from the Prince of the Believers (a.s) that he mentioned the Mahdi
and said, “He is from the progeny of al-Husain (a.s).” He mentioned his
facial features and said, “He is a man of broad forehead, high nose,
thick abdomen, bulky legs, and his front teeth are apart from one
another. There is a mark on his right leg.” ‘Abdullah has also mentioned
this Hadīth in *Gharīb al-Hadīth.*

‘Allamah Majlisi says, The following poem is from the book of poetry
that is attributed to the Prince of the Believers (a.s),

My son, when the Turks make turmoil, then expect

The governance of the Mahdi, who will rise and establish justice

The kings of the earth will be humbled to the children of Hāshim

And they will pledge allegiance to them

A child from the children without insight

Neither he has a high aim nor does he have wisdom

Then will rise your Qā'im of Truth

He will bring you the Truth and act on the Truth

The namesake of the Prophet, my soul be his ransom

My sons, do not abandon him and haste to him

روى قاضي القضاة عن كافي الكفاة إسماعيل بن عباد ره باسناد متصل بعلي (ع)
أنه ذكر المهدي وقال إنه من ولد الحسين (ع) وذكر حليته فقال: رجل أجلى
الجبين أقنى الانف ضخم البطن أزيل الفخذين أبلج الثنايا بفخذه اليمنى شامة
وذكر هذا الحديث بعينه عبد الله بن قتيبة في كتاب غريب الحديث انتهى.

أقول: في ديوان أمير المؤمنين صلوات الله عليه المنسوب إليه:

<table>
<colgroup>
<col width="50%" />
<col width="50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>بني إذا ما جاشت الترك فانتظر</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>ولاية مهدي يقوم فيعدل</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>وذل ملوك الارض من آل هاشم</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>وبويع منهم من يلذ ويهزل</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>صبي من الصبيان لا رأي عنده</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>ولا عنده جد ولا هو يعقل</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td align="left"><p>فثم يقوم القائم الحق منـكم</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>وبالحق يأتيكم وبالحق يعمل</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td align="left"><p>سمي نبي الله نفســي فداؤه</p></td>
<td align="left"><p>فلا تخذلوه يا بني وعجلو</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

 

 

بني إذا ما جاشت الترك فانتظر

ولاية مهدي يقوم فيعدل

وذل ملوك الارض من آل هاشم

وبويع منهم من يلذ ويهزل

صبي من الصبيان لا رأي عنده

ولا عنده جد ولا هو يعقل

فثم يقوم القائم الحق منـكم

وبالحق يأتيكم وبالحق يعمل

سمي نبي الله نفســي فداؤه

فلا تخذلوه يا بني وعجلو
