Narrations From Imam Hasan and Imam Husain About Him
====================================================

1- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Abu Sa‘īd ‘Uqaisā’ says, When Hasan Ibn ‘Ali (a.s)
made peace with Mu‘āwiya Ibn Abi Sufyān, people went to him and some of
them criticized him for his pledge of allegiance. The Imam said, “Woe
unto you! You do not know what I did. By Allah, what I have done is
better for my Shī‘a than all the riches upon which the sun has risen and
sat. Don’t you know that I am your Imam, whose obedience is obligatory
upon you, and one of the two lieges of the people of the Garden on the
virtue of explicit saying of the Messenger of Allah (a.s)?” They said,
“Indeed so.” He said, “Don’t you know that when al-Khidhr tore the boat
and killed the boy and erected the wall, that was very harsh for Musā
Ibn ‘Imrān (a.s), since its wisdom was hidden to him, which was wisdom
and propriety before Allah? Don’t you know there is no one of us except
a pledge of allegiance to the tyrant of his time falls on his neck
except the Qā'im behind whom Rūh-Allah Jesus the son of Mary will pray?
For Allah, the Exalted, will hide his birth and conceal his person, so
there will not be any commitment of allegiance on his neck for anyone
when he rises. He is the ninth from the children of my brother Husain,
the son of the Mistress of bondmaids. Allah will prolong his life in his
occultation. Then he will bring him forth through His power in the
figure of a youth of less than forty years, so it may be known *that
Allah is All-Powerful over everything.”*

*Al-Ehtejāj* narrates the same tradition on the authority of Hannān Ibn
Sudair.

2- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: ‘Abd al-Rahmān Ibn al-Hajjāj narrates from Ja‘far Ibn
Muhammad, who narrates from his father, Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali, who narrates
from his father, ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain, saying, Said al-Husain Ibn ‘Ali,
blessings of Allah be unto them, “In the ninth son of mine there is a
tradition from Joseph and a tradition from Moses the son of ‘Imrān. He
is the Qā'im of us Ahl al-Bait. Allah, the High, will restitute his
affair in a single night.”

3- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Abdullah Ibn Sharīk narrates on the authority of a
man from the tribe of Hamdān, saying, I heard al-Husain Ibn ‘Ali,
Allah’s blessings be unto them both, say, “The Qā'im of this Ummah is
the ninth from my progeny. He is the man of the occultation. And he is
the one whose inheritance is split up while he is alive.”

### ماروى في ذلك عن الحسنين صلوات اللـه عليهم {dir="RTL"}

1- إكمال الدين: المضفر العلوي، عن ابن العياشي، عن أبيه عن جبرئيل بن أحمد
عن موسى بن جعفر البغدادي، عن الحسن بن محمد الصيرفي، عن حنان بن سدير عن
أبيه سدير بن حكيم، عن أبيه، عن أبي سعيد عقيصاء قال: لما صالح الحسن ابن
علي (ع) معاوية بن أبي سفيان دخل عليه الناس فلامه بعضهم على بيعته فقال
(ع): ويحكم ما تدرون ما عملت؟ والله الذي عملت خير لشيعتي مما طلعت عليه
الشمس أو غربت ألا تعلمون أنني إمامكم مفترض الطاعة عليكم وأحد سيدي شباب
أهل الجنة بنص من رسول الله(ص)؟ قالوا: بلى، قال: أما علمتم أن الخضر لما
خرق السفينة وقتل الغلام وأقام الجدار كان ذلك سخطا لموسى بن عمران (ع) إذ
خفي عليه وجه الحكمة فيه وكان ذلك عند الله حكمة وصوابا أما علمتم أنه ما
منا أحد إلا ويقع في عنقه بيعة لطاغية زمانه إلا القائم الذي يصلي روح الله
عيسى بن مريم خلفه فان الله(عزوجل) يخفي ولادته ويغيب شخصه لئلا يكون لاحد
في عنقه بيعة إذا خرج ذاك التاسع من ولد أخي الحسين ابن سيدة الاماء يطيل
الله عمره في غيبته ثم يظهره بقدرته في صورة شاب ابن دون أربعين سنة ذلك
ليعلم أن الله على كل شئ قدير.

2- إكمال الدين: عبد الواحد بن محمد بن عبدوس، عن أبي عمرو الليثي، عن محمد
بن مسعود، عن علي بن محمد بن شجاع، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن
عبد الرحمان بن الحجاج، عن جعفر بن محمد، عن أبيه محمد بن علي، عن أبيه علي
بن الحسين قال: قال الحسين بن علي صلوات الله عليهما: في التاسع من ولدي
سنة من يوسف وسنة من موسى بن عمران وهو قائمنا أهل البيت يصلح الله تبارك
وتعالى أمره في ليلة واحدة.

3- إكمال الدين: المعاذي، عن ابن عقدة، عن أحمد بن موسى بن الفرات، عن عبد
الواحد بن محمد، عن سفيان، عن عبد الله بن الزبير، عن عبد الله بن شريك، عن
رجل من همدان قال: سمعت الحسين بن علي صلوات الله عليهما يقول: قائم هذه
الأمة هو التاسع من ولدي وهو صاحب الغيبة وهو الذي يقسم ميراثه وهو حي.

4- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Abd al-Rahmān Ibn Sulait says, Said al-Husain Ibn
‘Ali, blessings of Allah be unto them both, “There are Twelve Guides
from us; their first is the Prince of the Believers ‘Ali Ibn Abi Tālib
and their last is the ninth from my sons and he is the Imam, the
Establisher of the Truth. Allah will revive the earth after its death.

He will uplift the right religion through him *over all religions,
dislike may the polytheists.* He will have an occultation in which
nations will apostatize and many more will stay firm on the religion.
They will be maltreated and asked, *When is this promise, if you are
truthful?*

Behold, the one who remains steadfast during his occultation despite
maltreatments and falsifications, is in the position of a warrior with
the sword in the way of Allah in the presence of the Messenger of Allah
(a.s).”

5- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Omar says, I heard Husain Ibn ‘Ali
(a.s) say, “Even if there should not remain but a single day from the
world, Allah, the Exalted, will prolong that day so much that a man from
my progeny will rise. He will fill the earth with justice and equity as
it will be replete with injustice and oppression. So I heard the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) say.”

6- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Isā al-Khashshāb says, I said to Husain Ibn ‘Ali
(a.s), “Are you the Awaited Patron of this Enterprise?”

He said, “No, rather, the Patron of this Enterprise is the runaway
fugitive, the son of a non-avenged father, called by the patronym of his
uncle. He will put his sword on his shoulder for eight months.”

7- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* ‘Abdullah Ibn Sharīk says in a narration,
which we have abridged, that Husain (a.s) passed by a group of Children
of Hāshim, who were sitting in the Masjid of the Messenger (a.s).

He said, “Behold, by Allah, the world will not end until Allah sends a
man from my seed, who will kill from you one thousand and with the
thousand another thousand, and with the thousand another thousand.”

I asked, “May I be your ransom. They are the sons of so-and-so and do
not reach this number.”

The Imam said, “Look at you! At that time, a man will have from his
seed” so-and-so many men. “And the chief of our people will be from
themselves.”

4- إكمال الدين: الهمداني، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن عبد السلام الهروي، عن وكيع
ابن الجراح، عن الربيع بن سعد، عن عبد الرحمان بن سليط قال: قال الحسين بن
علي صلوات الله عليهما: منا اثنا عشر مهديا أو لهم أمير المؤمنين علي بن
أبي طالب وآخرهم التاسع من ولدي وهو الامام القائم بالحق يحيي الله به
الارض بعد موتها ويظهر به دين الحق على الدين كله ولو كره المشركون له غيبة
يرتد فيها أقوام ويثبت على الدين فيها آخرون فيودون ويقال لهم: متى هذا
الوعد إن كنتم صادقين، أما إن الصابر في غيبته على الاذى والتكذيب بمنـزلة
المجاهد بالسيف بين يدي رسول الله(ص).

5- إكمال الدين: علي بن محمد بن الحسن القزويني، عن محمد بن عبد الله
الحضرمي عن أحمد بن يحيى الاحول، عن خلاد المقري، عن قيس بن أبي حصين، عن
يحيى بن وثاب، عن عبد الله بن عمر قال: سمعت الحسين بن علي (ع) يقول: لو لم
يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحد لطول الله(عزوجل) ذلك اليوم حتى يخرج رجل من
ولدي يملأها عدلا وقسطا كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً كذلك سمعت رسول الله(ص)
يقول.

6- إكمال الدين: أبي، عن محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن جعفر بن محمد بن مالك، عن
حمدان بن منصور، عن سعد بن محمد، عن عيسى الخشاب قال: قلت للحسين بن علي
(ع): أنت صاحب هذا الامر؟ قال: لا ولكن صاحب هذا الامر الطريد الشريد
الموتور بأبيه المكني بعمه يضع سيفه على عاتقه ثمانية أشهر.

7- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: جماعة، عن التلعكبري، عن أحمد بن علي، عن أحمد بن
إدريس عن ابن قتيبة، عن الفضل، عن عمرو بن عثمان، عن محمد بن عذافر، عن
عقبة بن يونس، عن عبد الله بن شريك في حديث له اختصرناه قال: مر الحسين على
حلقة من بني امية وهم جلوس في مسجد الرسول (ص) فقال: أما والله لا يذهب
الدنيا حتى يبعث الله مني رجلا يقتل منكم ألفا ومع الالف ألفا ومع الالف
ألفا فقلت: جعلت فداك إن هؤلاء أولاد كذا وكذا لا يبلغون هذا فقال: ويحك إن
في ذلك الزمان يكون للرجل من صلبه كذا وكذا رجلا وإن مولى القوم من أنفسهم.
