Narrations From ‘ali Ibn Al-husain
==================================

1- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Ibn Qais al-Thumāli narrates from ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain,
“This verse, Those related by blood are prior to one another in the Book
of Allah, has been revealed about us. And the verse, And He made it a
Word to endure in his progeny, has been revealed about us. Imamate is in
the progeny of Husain Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Abi Tālib (a.s) until the Day of
Judgment. Our Qā'im will have two occultations, one longer than the
other. The first one will be six days and six months and six years. The
second one, its period will last very long so much so that many of the
believers of this creed will turn away from it. No one will stay firm on
it but the one whose certainty is strong, whose cognition is correct and
he does not find impediment in his heart from our judgment and submits
to us Ahl al-Bait.”

*Explanation:* “Six days” perhaps alludes to the different phases of his
life in his occultation. For six days, no one but the extremely
confidential individuals were aware of his birth. After six months,
others were informed. After six years, as his father passed away, he
became well known to many people.

2- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Sa‘īd Ibn Jubair narrates from ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain
(a.s), “The birth of our Qā'im will be hidden from the people, so they
will say that he is not born yet. He will rise at the time of his rise
without any pledge of allegiance to anyone on his shoulders.”

3- Al-Majālis of al-Mufīd: Abu Khālid al-Kābuli says, ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain
(a.s) said to me, “O’ Abu Khālid, mischief shall come like strips of
nightly shadow. No one will be saved but the one Allah has taken his
covenant. They are the lights of guidance and the sources of knowledge.
Allah will save them from every dark mischief. As if I see your Awaited
Patron has risen over your Najaf on the outskirts of the Kufas with
three hundred and ten and some odd men. Gabriel is on his right hand and
Michael is on his left hand. Isrāfīl is in his fore. The standard of the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) is with him, which he has unfolded. He throws
no nation down with it, but Allah, the Exalted, destroys them.”

### ما روي في ذلك عن علي بن الحسين صلوات الله عليه {dir="RTL"}

1- إكمال الدين: ابن عصام، عن الكليني، عن القاسم بن العلا، عن إسماعيل بن
علي (عن علي بن إسماعيل) عن ابن حميد، عن ابن قيس، عن الثمالي، عن علي بن
الحسين (ع) أنه قال: فينا نزلت هذه الآية " واولوا الارحام بعضهم أولى ببعض
في كتاب الله " وفينا نزلت هذه الآية " وجعلها كلمة باقية في عقبه "
والامامة في عقب الحسين بن علي بن أبي طالب (ع) إلى يوم القيامة وإن للقائم
منا غيبتين إحداهما أطول من الاخرى أما الاولى فستة أيام وستة أشهر وست
سنين وأما الاخرى فيطول أمدها حتى يرجع عن هذا الامر أكثر من يقول به فلا
يثبت عليه إلا من قوي يقينه وصحت معرفته ولم يجد في نفسه حرجا مما قضينا
وسلم لنا أهل البيت.

2- إكمال الدين: الدقاق والشيباني معا، عن الاسدي، عن النخعي، عن النوفلي
عن حمزة بن حمران، عن أبيه، عن سعيد بن جبير، عن علي بن الحسين (ع) قال:
القائم منا تخفى ولادته على الناس حتى يقولوا لم يولد بعد ليخرج حين يخرج
وليس لاحد في عنقه بيعة.

3- المجالس للشيخ المفيد: ابن قولويه، عن أبيه، عن سعد، عن ابن عيسى، عن
ابن أبي عمير، عن ابن مسكان، عن بشر الكناسي، عن أبي خالد الكابلي قال: قال
لي علي بن الحسين (ع): يابا خالد لتأتين فتن كقطع الليل المظلم لاينجو إلا
من أخذ الله ميثاقه اولئك مصابيح الهدى وينابيع العلم ينجيهم الله من كل
فتنة مظلمة كأني بصاحبكم قد علا فوق نجفكم بظهر كوفان في ثلاثمائة وبضعة
عشر رجلا، جبرئيل عن يمينه وميكائيل عن شماله وإسرافيل أمامه، معه رأية
رسول الله(ص) قد نشرها لايهوي بها إلى قوم إلا أهلكهم الله(عزوجل).
