Narrations From Imam Al-bāqir
=============================

1- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Abu al-Jārud says, Abu Ja‘far (a.s) said to me “O’
Abu Jārūd, when ages pass and people say the Qā'im has died or perished
or gone to some valley, and the seeker says, *When is this going to
happen while his bones have decayed?* At that time expect him. And when
you hear from him, come to him even if you have to crawl on ice.”

2- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Al-Thumāli says, I heard Abu Ja‘far (a.s) say, “The
nearest of the people to Allah, the Exalted, and their most
knowledgeable and their most compassionate to the populace is Muhammad
and the Imams, bliss of Allah be for them all. Enter where they enter
and separate whoever they separate from. I mean Husain and his progeny
by that. Righteousness is in them and they are the successors and from
them are the Imams. Wherever you see them, follow them. If a time comes
one day that you do not see anyone of them, seek help from Allah and
contemplate on the tradition you are on and follow it, and love whom you
love, and disdain whom you disdain. How soon is the relief coming to
you!”

3- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ma‘rūf Ibn Khurbūdh says, I said to Abu Ja‘far (a.s),
“Tell me about yourselves.” He said, “We are the like of stars. When a
star sets, another star of peace and security, harmony and tranquility,
and leisure and openings rises. So until the Children of ‘Abd
al-Mutallib are equal and no distinction remains amongst them, Allah,
the Exalted, will manifest your Patron. So praise Allah, the Exalted.
And He will give him a choice between the easy and the difficult.” I
asked, “May I be your ransom, which will he choose?” He said, “He will
choose the difficult over the easy.”

*Explanation:* *Al-Sa*‘*b wa al-Dhalūl* (Humble and intractable,
translated above as easy and difficult) are qualities of riding beasts.

4- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Umm Hāni al-Thaqafiyya says, I came in a morning to
my master Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Bāqir (a.s) and said to him, “My master,
a verse from the Book of Allah, the Exalted, has struck my heart and has
troubled me and taken away my nights’ sleep.”

### ما روى عن الباقر صلوات الله عليه في ذلك {dir="RTL"}

1- إكمال الدين: ابن المتوكل، عن علي، عن أبيه، عبد الله بن حماد ومحمد بن
سنان معا، عن أبي الجارود، عن أبي جعفر عليه السقال: قال لي يا أبا الجارود
إذا دار الفلك، وقال الناس: مات القائم أو هلك، بأي واد سلك وقال الطالب:
أنى يكون ذلك وقد بليت عظامه فعند ذلك فارجوه فإذا سمعتم به فائتوه ولو
حبوا على الثلج. نى: أحمد بن هوذه، عن النهاوندي، عن أبي الجارود مثله.

2- إكمال الدين: ابن الوليد، عن الصفار، عن محمد بن عيسى وابن أبي الخطاب
والهيثم النهدي جميعا، عن ابن محبوب، عن ابن رئاب، عن الثمالي، عن أبي جعفر
(ع) قال: سمعته يقول: إن أقرب الناس إلى الله(عزوجل) وأعلمهم وأرأفهم
بالناس محمد والائمة صلوات الله عليهم أجمعين فادخلوا أين دخلوا وفارقوا من
فارقوا أعني بذلك حسينا وولده (ع) فان الحق فيهم وهم الاوصياء ومنهم الائمة
فأين ما رأيتموهم فاتبعوهم فان أصبحتم يوما لاترون منهم أحدا فاستعينوا
بالله وانظروا السنة التي كنتم عليها فاتبعوها وأحبوا من كنتم تحبون
وأبغضوا من كنتم تبغضون فما أسرع ما يأتيكم الفرج.

3- إكمال الدين: عبد الواحد بن محمد، عن أبي عمرو الليثى، عن محمد بن
مسعود، عن جبرئيل بن أحمد، عن موسى بن جعفر بن وهب البغدادي ويعقوب بن
يزيد، عن سليمان بن الحسن، عن سعد بن أبي خلف، عن معروف بن خربوذ قال: قلت
لابي جعفر (ع): أخبرني عنكم قال: نحن بمنـزلة النجوم إذا خفي نجم بدا نجم
مأمن وأمان وسلم وإسلام وفاتح ومفتاح حتى إذا استوى بنو عبد المطلب فلم يدر
أي من أي أظهر الله(عزوجل) صاحبكم فاحمدوا الله(عزوجل) وهو يخير الصعب على
الذلول، فقلت: جعلت فداك فأيهما يختار؟ قال يختار الصعب على الذلول.

4- إكمال الدين: بهذا الاسناد، عن محمد بن مسعود، عن نصر بن الصباح، عن
جعفر بن سهل، عن أبي عبد الله أخي عبد الله الكابلي، عن القابوسي، عن نضر
بن السندي، عن الخليل بن عمرو، عن علي بن الحسين الفزاري، عن إبراهيم بن
عطية، عن ام هانئ الثقفية قال: غدوت على سيدي محمد بن علي الباقر (ع) فقلت
له: يا سيدي آية في كتاب الله(عزوجل) عرضت بقلبي أقلقتني وأسهرتني.

He said, “Ask O’ Umm Hāni.” I said, “The saying of Allah, the Exalted,
No, I swear by the Star that runs its course and hides itself.” He said,
“Yes, the subject you asked me about, O’ Umm Hāni, is someone who will
be born in the End Times and he is the Mahdi and from this House. There
will be a perplexity and occultation about him in which nations will go
astray and nations will remain on guidance. Blessed be you if you see
his time! Blessed be anyone who sees his time!”

5*- Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Abu Ayyūb al-Makhzūmi says, Abu Ja‘far al-Bāqir (a.s)
mentioned the conduct of the Rightly Guided Caliphs and when he reached
their last one he said, “The Twelfth is the one behind whom Jesus the
son of Mary (a.s) will perform prayers. You must uphold his conduct and
the Noble Qur’ān.”

6- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Umm Hāni says, I asked Abu Ja‘far (a.s),
“What is the meaning of Allah’s word, *Nay, I swear by the Star?*” He
said, “O’ Umm Hāni, an Imam who on the year two hundred and sixty hides
himself until his whereabouts is not known to the people. Then he will
appear like a blazing meteor in a dark night. If you should see that
time, your heart will find solace.”

7- *Al-Ghaiba* of al-Ne*‘*māni: Ma‘rūf Ibn Khurbūdh says, Said Abu
Ja‘far (a.s), “Your stars are like the stars of the heavens. Whenever a
star sets, another star rises. So when you point with your fingers and
make gestures with your eyebrows, Allah will hide your stars from you.
The Children of Hāshim will be equal without any distinction amongst
them from one another. Then your star will rise, so praise your Lord.”

8- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Atā’ says, I said to Abu
Ja‘far (a.s), “Your Shī‘a are many in Iraq and there is no one, by
Allah, in your household like you. So why do not you uprise?” He said,
“O’ Abdullah Ibn Atā’, you have began lending your ears to the fools.
No, by Allah, I am not your Awaited Patron.” I asked him, “Then who is
our Awaited Patron?” He said, “Look who does Allah hide his birth from
the people, he is your Awaited Patron. There is no one of us who is
pointed at with fingers or hinted by tongues except that he dies because
of being under wrath or because of other causes.”

*Explanation:* It is possible that the two possibilities for causes of
death mentioned may be expression of doubt of the narrator and it is
possible that death of being under wrath alludes to murder and *hatfa
anfihi* alludes to a death that is not in severe and dire circumstances.

9- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Atta’ says, I said to Abu
Ja‘far (a.s), “Tell me about the Qā'im.” He said, “By Allah, he is
neither me, nor the one towards whom you stretch your necks. His birth
will not be known.” “What is his conduct according to?” I asked. He
said, “He will act according to what the Messenger of Allah (a.s) has
acted, invalidating the past and looking forward.”

قال: فاسئلي يا ام هانئ؟ قالت قلت: قول الله(عزوجل) "فَلَا أُقْسِمُ
بِالْخُنَّسِ الْجَوَارِي الْكُنَّسِ" قال: نعم المسألة سألتني يا ام هانئ
هذا مولود في آخر الزمان هو المهدي من هذه العترة تكون له حيرة وغيبة يضل
فيها أقوام ويهتدي فيها أقوام فيا طوبى لك إن أدركته. ويا طوبى من أدركه.

5- إكمال الدين: المظفر العلوي، عن ابن العياشي، عن أبيه، عن أبي القاسم
قال: كتبت من كتاب أحمد الدهان، عن القاسم بن حمزة، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن
أبي إسماعيل السراج، عن خيثمة الجعفي، عن أبي أيوب المخزومي قال: ذكر أبو
جعفر الباقر (ع) سيرة الخلفاء الراشدين فلما بلغ آخرهم قال: الثاني عشر
الذي يصلي عيسى بن مريم (ع) خلفه عليك بسنته والقرآن الكريم.

6- الغيبة للنعمانى: سلامة بن محمد، عن أحمد بن داود، عن أحمد بن الحسن، عن
عمران بن الحجاج، عن ابن أبي نجران، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن محمد بن إسحاق عن
أسيد بن ثعلبة، عن ام هانئ قال: قلت: لابي جعفر (ع) ما معنى قول الله عز
وجل "فَلَا أُقْسِمُ بِالْخُنَّسِ" قال لي: يا ام هانئ إمام يخنس نفسه حتى
ينقطع عن الناس علمه سنة ستين ومأتين ثم يبدو كالشهاب الواقد في الليلة
الظلماء فان أدركت ذلك الزمان قرت عيناك.

7- الغيبة للنعمانى: الكليني، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن حنان بن سدير، عن معروف
ابن خربوذ، عن أبي جعفر (ع) قال: إنما نجومكم كنجوم السماء كلما غاب نجم
طلع نجم حتى إذا أشرتم بأصابعكم وملتم بحواجبكم غيب الله عنكم نجمكم واستوت
بنو عبد المطلب فلم يعرف أي من أي فإذا طلع نجمكم فاحمدوا ربكم.

8- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام بإسناد له، عن عبد الله بن عطا قال: قلت
لابي جعفر (ع): إن شيعتك بالعراق كثير ووالله ما في بيتك مثلك فكيف لا
تخرج؟ فقال: يا عبد الله بن عطا قد أخذت تفرش اذنيك للنوكى لا والله ما أنا
بصاحبكم قلت: فمن صاحبنا؟ فقال: انظروا من غيب عن الناس ولادته، فذلك
صاحبكم إنه ليس منا أحد يشار إليه بالاصابع ويمضغ بالالس إلا مات غيظا أو
حتف أنفه.

9- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن جعفر بن محمد بن مالك، عن عباد بن
يعقوب عن يحيى بن يعلى، عن أبي مريم الانصاري، عن عبد الله بن عطا قال: قلت
لابي جعفر (ع): أخبرني عن القائم (ع) فقال: والله ما هو أنا ولا الذي تمدون
إليه أعناقكم ولا يعرف ولادته، قلت: بما يسير؟ قال: بما سار به رسول
الله(ص) هدر ما قبله واستقبل.

10- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Abu al-Jārūd says, I heard Abu Ja‘far
(a.s) say, “Times shall come and go until Allah sends for this
enterprise someone you do not know has he been created.”

11- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Abu al-Jārūd says that Abu Ja‘far (a.s)
said, “You will continue to stretch your necks to a man of ours, saying
*He is the one,* and Allah takes him away; until Allah sends a man for
this affair whom you do not know has he been born or not, has he been
created or not.”

12- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Ibn Bukair and al-Hakam narrated from
Abu Ja‘far (a.s), “As if I see you, you climb up and do not find anyone
and return and do not find anyone.”

13- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Abu Hamzah al-Thumāli says, I was with
Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Bāqir (a.s) one day. When everyone had
dispersed, he said to me, “O’ Abu Hamzah, one of the destined events
that must happen is the rise of our Qā'im. Whoever doubts in what I say,
he will meet Allah disbelieving in Him.” Then he said, “My father and
mother be the ransom of the one who is named by my name and bears my
patronym, the seventh after me. My father be the ransom of the one who
will fill the earth with equity and justice, as it will be replete with
oppression and injustice. O’ Abu Hamzah, whoever sees him and submits to
him through the submission for Muhammad and ‘Ali, I give him a solemn
promise of the Paradise. And whoever does not submit, *verily Allah has
made the Paradise forbidden for him and his abode is the Fire and bad a
place it is for the oppressors.*

14- *Al-Kāfi:* Abu Na‘īm says, I came to Abu Ja‘far (a.s) when he was in
Medina. I said to him, “I have taken a vow between the *rukn* and the
*maqām* that when I meet you, I will not to go away from Medina until I
know whether you are the Qā'im of the House of Muhammad or not.” He did
not answer me anything. I stayed for thirty days. Then he met me on a
road and said, “O’ Hakam, and you are still here?” I said, “I told you
about the vow I have taken by Allah and you did not order me to do
anything, nor did you forbid me from anything. And you did not give me
an answer.” He said, “Come to me in the morning at my house.” I went to
him in the morning. He said, “Ask what you need.” I said, “I have vowed
with Allah of alms and fasting and charity between the *Rukn* and the
*Maqām*, that if I meet you I will not exit Medina until I know whether
you are the Qā'im (Establisher) of the House of Muhammad. If you are, I
will stay and be at your guard; and if you are not, I would go in the
lands in search of livelihood.” He said, “O’ Hakam, we are all
Establishers of the Order of Allah.” I said, “Then are you the Mahdi
(the Guide)?” He said, “We all guide to Allah.” “Are you the one with
the sword?” “Each one of us is with the sword and heir of the sword.”
“Then are you the one who will kill the enemies of God, and is it
through you that the bosom friends of Allah will be victorious, and is
it through you the religion of Allah will manifest?” “O’ Hakam,” he
said, “how can I be that and I have reached forty five. The Awaited
Patron of that Enterprise is closer to breastfeeding than me and lighter
on the back of a courser.”

10- الغيبة للنعمانى: علي بن أحمد، عن عبد الله بن موسى، عن ابن أبي
الخطاب، عن محمد ابن سنان، عن أبي الجارود قال: سمعت أبا جعفر (ع) يقول: لا
يزالون ولا تزال حتى يبعث الله لهذا الامر من لا تدرون خلق أم لم يخلق.

11- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام قال: حدثني الفزاري، عن ابن أبي الخطاب
وقد حدثني الحميري، عن ابن عيسى معا، عن محمد بن سنان، عن أبي الجارود، عن
أبي جعفر (ع) أنه قال: لا تزالون تمدون أعناقكم إلى الرجل منا تقولون هو
هذا فيذهب الله به حتى يبعث الله لهذا الامر من لا تدرون ولد أم لم يولد
خلق أم لم يخلق.

12- الغيبة للنعمانى: علي بن الحسين، عن محمد العطار، عن محمد بن الحسن
الرازي عن (محمد بن علي) الكوفي، عن محمد بن سنان، عن يحيى بن المثنى، عن
ابن بكير ورواه الحكم عن أبي جعفر (ع) أنه قال: كأني بكم إذا صعدتم فلم
تجدوا أحدا ورجعتم فلم تجدوا أحدا.

13- الغيبة للنعمانى: علي بن الحسين عن محمد بن يحيى، عن محمد بن الحسن، عن
محمد بن علي، عن إبراهيم بن محمد، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن عبد الرزاق، عن محمد
بن سنان، عن فضيل الرسان، عن أبي حمزة الثمالي قال: كنت عند أبي جعفر محمد
بن علي الباقر (ع) ذات يوم فلما تفرق من كان عنده قال لي: يا أبا حمزة من
المحتوم الذي حتمه الله قيام قائمنا فمن شك فيما أقول لقي الله وهو به
كافر، ثم قال: بأبي وامي المسمى باسمي والمكنى بكنيتي السابع من بعدي بأبي
(من) يملأ الأرض عدلاً (وقسطاً) كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً يا باحمزة من أدركه
فيسلم له ما سلم لمحمد وعلي فقد وجبت له الجنة ومن لم يسلم فقد حرم الله
عليه الجنة وماواه النار وبئس مثوى الظالمين.

14- الكافي: العدة، عن ابن عيسى، عن علي بن الحكم، عن زيد أبي الحسن عن
الحكم بن أبي نعيم قال: أتيت أبا جعفر (ع) وهو بالمدينة فقلت له: علي نذر
بين الركن والمقام إذا أنا لقيتك أن لا أخرج من المدينة حتى أعلم أنك قائم
آل محمد أم لا، فلم يجبني بشئ، فأقمت ثلاثين يوما، ثم استقبلني في طريق
فقال: يا حكم وإنك لههنا بعد؟ فقلت: إني أخبرتك بما جعلت الله علي فلم
تأمرني ولم تنهني عن شئ ولم تجبني بشئ فقال: بكر علي غدوة المنـزل فغدوت
عليه فقال (ع): سل عن حاجتك، فقلت: إني جعلت لله علي نذرا وصياما وصدقة بين
الركن والمقام إن أنا لقيتك أن لا أخرج من المدينة حتى أعلم أنك قائم آل
محمد أم لا؟ فان كنت أنت، رابطتك، وإن لم تكن أنت، سرت في الارض فطلبت
المعاش، فقال: يا حكم كلنا قائم بأمر الله. قلت: فأنت المهدي؟ قال: كلنا
يهدي إلى الله، قلت: فأنت صاحب السيف؟ قال: كلنا صاحب السيف ووارث السيف،
قلت: فأنت الذي تقتل أعداء الله ويعز بك أولياء الله ويظهر بك دين الله؟
فقال: يا حكم كيف أكون أنا وبلغت خمسا وأربعين، وإن صاحب هذا أقرب عهدا
باللبن مني وأخف على ظهر الدابة .
