Narrations From Imam Ja‘far Al-sādiq
====================================

1- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Sudair says I heard Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) say, “There
is a sign from Joseph in the Qā'im.” I said, “It seems as you are
mentioning the perplexity or the occultation.” He said, “What of this
does this nation deny? They are the likes of swine, whereas brothers of
Joseph were heirs and children of apostles, yet they traded and sold
Joseph. They addressed him, being his brothers and he being their
brother, yet did not recognize him; so Joseph said to them, *I am
Joseph.* So what is this accursed nation denying that Allah, the
Exalted, in a certain time from times, may desire to hide his Hujja?
Joseph had the kingdom of Egypt and there was between him and his father
the journey of eighteen days. If Allah, the Exalted, had desired to let
his father know his place, He could have done that. By Allah, Jacob and
his sons journeyed, when they were given the glad tidings, for nine days
from the beginning of their journey until Egypt. What is this Ummah
denying that God would do to His Hujja what He did to Joseph, that he
would walk in their markets and step on their grounds while they do not
recognize him until Allah, the Exalted, identifies him to them, as He
permitted Joseph when he said, *Do you know what did you do to Joseph
and his brother when you were ignorant? They said, Verily, you, you are
Joseph. He said, I am Joseph and this is my brother.*

2- *‘Ilal al-Sharā'e‘:* On the authority of Sudair, who narrates from
his father that Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) said, “Our Qā'im has an occultation
the duration of which is lengthy.” I said, “Why is that so, O’ son of
the Messenger of Allah?” He said, “Allah, the Exalted, disdains to have
the traditions of the occultations of apostles not proceed in him. O’
Sudair, he must complete the duration of their occultations.**[1]**
Allah, the Exalted, says, *You shall surely enter a stage after another
stage.* It means you will thread on the traditions of the nations before
you.”

3- *Al-Amāli of Sadūq:* Ibn Abi ‘Umair narrates from a certain
individual that Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) recited the following rhymes,

*For every nation is a governance which they await*

*Our governance in the End Times will come*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Another possible way to translate this segment would be “O
Sudair, Allah has to fulfill the succors of their occultations.”*

### ما روى في ذلك عن الصادق صلوات اللـه عليه {style="direction: rtl"}

1- إكمال الدين: أبي، عن الحميري، عن أحمد بن هلال، عن ابن أبي نجران، عن
فضالة، عن سدير قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله (ع) يقول: إن في القائم سنة من يوسف
قلت: كأنك تذكر حيرة أو غيبة قال لي: وما تنكر من هذا هذه الأمة أشباه
الخنازير إن إخوة يوسف كانوا أسباطاً أولاد أنبياء تاجروا يوسف وبايعوه
وخاطبوه وهم إخوته وهو أخوهم، فلم يعرفوه حتى قال لهم يوسف (ع): أنا يوسف.
فما تنكر هذه الأمة الملعونة أن يكون الله(عزوجل) في وقت من الأوقات يريد
أن يستر حجته، لقد كان يوسف إليه ملك مصر وكان بينه وبين والده مسيرة
ثمانية عشر يوما فلو أراد الله(عزوجل) أن يعرف مكانه لقدر على ذلك والله
لقد سار يعقوب وولده عند البشارة تسعة أيام من بدوهم إلى مصر، وما تنكر هذه
الأمة أن يكون الله يفعل بحجته ما فعل بيوسف أن يكون يسير في أسواقهم ويطأ
بسطهم وهم لا يعرفونه حتى يأذن الله(عزوجل) أن يعرفهم نفسه كما أذن ليوسف
حين قال: "قَالَ هَلْ عَلِمْتُمْ مَا فَعَلْتُمْ بِيُوسُفَ وَأَخِيهِ إِذْ
أَنْتُمْ جَاهِلُونَ. قَالُوا أَئِنَّكَ لَأَنْتَ يُوسُفُ قَالَ أَنَا
يُوسُفُ وَهذَا أَخِي."

2- علل الشرائع: المظفر العلوي، عن ابن العياشي وحيدر بن محمد السمرقندي
معا عن العياشي، عن جبرئيل بن أحمد، عن موسى بن جعفر البغدادي، عن الحسن بن
محمد الصيرفي، عن حنان بن سدير، عن أبيه، عن أبي عبد الله (ع) قال: إن
للقائم منا غيبة يطول أمدها فقلت له: ولم ذاك يابن رسول الله؟ قال إن
الله(عزوجل) أبى إلا أن يجري فيه سنن الانبياء (ع) في غيباتهم وأنه لابد له
ياسدير من استيفاء مدد غيباتهم قال الله(عزوجل): "لَتَرْكَبُنَّ طَبَقًا
عَنْ طَبَقٍ" أي سنناً على سنن من كان قبلكم.

3- أمالي الشيخ الصدوق: ابن المتوكل، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير،
عمن سمع أبا عبد الله (ع) يقول:

ودولتنا في آخر الدهر تظهر

لكل اناس دولة يرقبونها

4- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Safwān Ibn Mahrān narrates that al-Sādiq Ja‘far Ibn
Muhammad (a.s) said, “Someone who professes faith in all Imams yet
denies the Mahdi is like a person who professes faith in all apostles
yet denies the Prophethood of Muhammad (a.s).” He was asked, “O’ son of
the Messenger of Allah (a.s) which one of your sons will the Mahdi be
from?” He said, “He is the fifth from the sons of the seventh. His
person will be invisible to you and you will be prohibited from
mentioning his name.”

5- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Abu Hayyah narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s), “When
three names, Muhammad, ‘Ali, and Hasan gather in consecution, the fourth
one will be the Qā'im (a.s).”

6- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Abu al-Haitham narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s),
“When three names, Muhammad, ‘Ali, and Hasan come consecutively, their
fourth one will be their Qā'im.”

7- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Al-Mufadhal Ibn ‘Omar says, I entered upon my doyen
Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad (a.s) and said, “O’ my master, I wish that you
confide in us about the heir after you.” He said, “O’ Mufadhal, the Imam
after me is my son Musā and the Awaited Heir is M. U. H. A. M. M. A. D.
Ibn al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Musā.”

8- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ibrāhim al-Karkhi says, I entered upon Abu ‘Abdillah
(a.s). I was sitting there in his courtship when Abu al-Hasan Musā Ibn
Ja‘far (a.s), who was then a boy, entered. I stood before him and kissed
him and sat down. Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) said, “O’ Ibrāhīm, behold, he is
your Patron after me. Behold, a nation will perish in him and the rest
will be blessed. May Allah curse his murderer and increase the
chastisement on his soul. Behold, Allah will bring forth from my seed
the best of the people of the earth in his time, called by the name of
his grandfather, the heir of his knowledge and rules and excellences,
the treasure trove of Imamate, and the summit of wisdom. The tyrant from
the sons of so-and-so will kill him out of jealously after novel
wonders. However, *Allah accomplishes His purpose, even though the
polytheists may disdain so.* Allah will bring forth from his seed the
completion of the twelve guides that Allah has distinguished them by His
dignity and has settled them in the abode of His sanctity. A man
professing faith in the Twelfth of them is the like of a swordsman in
front of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) defending him.” A man from the
allies of the Umayyads entered and the conversation was disrupted. I
went to Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) eleven times hoping that he would complete
the discourse, but it was not to happen. When it was the eve of the next
year, I entered upon him as he was sitting. He said, “O’ Ibrāhīm, the
Reliever of the pains of the Shī‘a will come after severe hardships,
long trials and anxiety and fear. Bliss for the one who will see that
time. This is sufficient for you, O’ Ibrāhīm.” I returned with nothing
more gratifying to my heart and more pleasing to my soul than this.

4- إكمال الدين: ابن إدريس، عن أبيه، عن أيوب بن نوح، عن محمد بن سنان، عن
صفوان بن مهران، عن الصادق جعفر بن محمد (ع) أنه قال: من أقر بجميع الائمة
(ع) وجحد المهدي كان كمن أقر بجميع الانبياء وجحد محمداً (ص) نبوته. فقيل
يابن رسول الله ممن المهدي؟ من ولدك؟ قال: الخامس من ولد السابع يغيب عنكم
شخصه ولا يحل لكم تسميته.

5- إكمال الدين: أبي، وابن الوليد معا، عن سعد، عن الحسن بن علي الزيتوني
ومحمد بن أحمد بن أبي قتادة، عن أحمد بن هلال، عن امية بن علي، عن أبي
الهيثم ابن أبي حية، عن أبي عبد الله (ع) قال: إذا اجتمعت ثلاثة أسماء
متوالية محمد وعلي والحسن فالرابع القائم (ع).

6- إكمال الدين: الطالقاني، عن محمد بن همام، عن أحمد بن مابندار، عن أحمد
ابن هلال، عن امية بن علي القيسي، عن أبي الهيثم التميمي، عن أبي عبد الله
(ع) قال: إذا توالت ثلاثة أسماء محمد وعلي والحسن كان رابعهم قائمهم.

7- إكمال الدين: الدقاق، عن الاسدي، عن النخعي، عن النوفلي، عن المفضل بن
عمر قال: دخلت على سيدي جعفر بن محمد (ع) فقلت: يا سيدي لو عهدت إلينا في
الخلف من بعدك؟ فقال لي: يا مفضل الامام من بعدي ابني موسى والخلف المأمول
المنتظر م ح م د ابن الحسن بن علي بن محمد بن علي بن موسى.

8- إكمال الدين: علي بن عبد الله بن أحمد، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن خلف عن محمد
ابن سنان وأبي علي الزراد معا عن إبراهيم الكرخي قال: دخلت على أبي عبد
الله (ع) فاني لجالس عنده إذ دخل أبو الحسن موسى بن جعفر (ع) وهو غلام فقمت
إليه فقبلته وجلست فقال أبو عبد الله (ع): يا إبراهيم أما إنه صاحبك من
بعدي أما إنه ليهلكن فيه قوم ويسعد آخرون فلعن الله قاتله وضاعف على روحه
العذاب أما ليخرجن الله من صلبه خير أهل الارض في زمانه سمي جده ووارث علمه
وأحكامه وفضائله، معدن الامامة ورأس الحكمة يقتله جبار بني فلان بعد عجائب
طريفة حسدا له ولكن الله بالغ أمره ولو كره المشركون. يخرج الله من صلبه
تمام اثنا عشر مهديا اختصهم الله بكرامته، وأحلهم دار قدسه، المقر بالثاني
عشر منهم كالشاهر سيفه بين يدي رسول الله(ص) يذب عنه قال فدخل رجل من موالي
بني امية فانقطع الكلام فعدت إلى أبي عبد الله (ع) أحد عشر مرة اريد منه أن
يستتم الكلام فما قدرت على ذلك فلما كان قابل السنة الثانية دخلت عليه وهو
جالس فقال: يا إبراهيم المفرج للكرب (عن) شيعته بعد ضنك شديد، وبلاء طويل،
وجزع وخوف، فطوبى لمن أدرك ذلك الزمان حسبك يا إبراهيم. فما رجعت بشئ أسر
من هذا لقلبي ولا أقر لعيني.

9- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* al-Mufadhdhal says, Said al-Sādiq (a.s), “Allah, the
High, created fourteen lights fourteen thousand years before He created
the creation. They are our spirits.” He was asked, “O’ son of the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) who are the fourteen?” He said, “Muhammad,
‘Ali, Fātimah, Hasan, Husain, and the Imams from the progeny of Husain
(a.s). Their last is the Qā'im who will rise after his occultation and
will kill the Dajjāl and will clean the earth from every oppression and
injustice.”

10- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Abu Basīr says, I heard Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) say,
“Ours are the Twelve Guides:. Six have gone and six are remaining. Allah
will place in the Sixth that which He loves.”

11- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ibn Abi Ya‘fūr says, Said Abu ‘Abdillah al-Sādiq
(a.s), “A person who professes faith in the imams, my forefathers and my
sons, yet denies the Mahdi from my sons, he is like a person who
professes faith in all apostles, peace be with them, yet denies Muhammad
(a.s) his apostleship.” I said, “My master, and who is the Mahdi from
your progeny?” He said, “The fifth from the sons of the seventh. His
person will hide from you and it will not be permissible for you to
mention him by his name.”

12- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Safwān al-Jammāl says, Said al-Sādiq (a.s), “Behold,
by Allah, your Mahdi will disappear from you until your ignorant
individuals would say, ‘Allah does not have any need in the House of
Muhammad.’ Then he will come like a blazing meteor. He will fill the
earth with justice and equity as it will be full of injustice and
oppression.”

13- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* In a long narration, al-Seyed Ibn Muhammad
al-Humyari says, I said to al-Sādiq Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad (a.s), “O’ son
of the Messenger of Allah, traditions have been related to us from your
forefathers, peace be unto them, with regard to the occultation and the
confirmation of its occurrence. Please inform me who is it going to
happen to?” He said, “It will happen to the sixth from my sons, the
Twelfth from the Imams of guidance after the Messenger of Allah (a.s),
the first of whom is the Prince of the Believers ‘Ali Ibn Abi Tālib
(a.s) and their last is the Riser with the Truth, the Cherished Redeemer
of Allah on His earth, the Patron of the age and the vicegerent of the
All-Merciful. By Allah, even if he should remain in his occultation as
long as Noah remained in his people, he will not go from the world until
he appears and fills the earth with equity and justice, as it will be
replete with injustice and oppression.”

14- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Hāni al-Tammār says, Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) said to me,
“The Patron of this Affair will have a disappearance. So the servant
should fear Allah and cling on his religion.”

15- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Abu Basīr says, I heard Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) say,
“The customs the apostles went through in terms of their disappearances
will materialize in the Qā'im of us the Ahl al-Bait in the precise and
same manner.”

9- إكمال الدين: ابن إدريس، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن الحسين بن زيد، عن الحسن
بن موسى، عن علي بن سماعة، عن علي بن الحسن بن رباط، عن أبيه، عن المفضل
قال: قال الصادق (ع) إن الله تبارك وتعالى خلق أربعة عشر نورا قبل خلق
الخلق بأربعة عشر ألف عام فهي أرواحنا فقيل له: يابن رسول الله ومن الاربعة
عشر؟ فقال: محمد وعلي وفاطمة والحسن والحسين والائمة من ولد الحسين (ع)
آخرهم القائم الذي يقوم بعد غيبته فيقتل الدجال ويطهر الارض من كل جور
وظلم.

10- إكمال الدين: الهمداني، عن ابن عقدة، عن أبي عبد الله العاصمي، عن
الحسين ابن القاسم بن أيوب، عن الحسن بن محمد بن سماعة، عن ثابت بن الصباح،
عن أبي بصير، عن أبي عبد الله (ع) قال: سمعته يقول: منا اثنا عشر مهديا مضى
ستة وبقي ستة يضع الله في السادس ما أحب.

11- إكمال الدين: الدقاق، عن الاسدي، عن سهل، عن ابن محبوب، عن عبد العزيز
العبدي، عن ابن أبي يعفور قال: قال أبو عبد الله الصادق (ع) من أقر بالائمة
من آبائي وولدي وجحد المهدي من ولدي كان كمن أقر بجميع الانبياء (ع) وجحد
محمدا (ص) نبوته، فقلت: سيدي ومن المهدي؟ من ولدك؟ قال: الخامس من ولد
السابع يغيب عنكم شخصه ولا يحل لكم تسميته.

12- إكمال الدين: العطار، عن أبيه، عن ابن هاشم، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن صفوان
الجمال قال: قال الصادق (ع): أما والله ليغيبن عنكم مهديكم حتى يقول الجاهل
منكم: ما لله في آل محمد حاجة ثم يقبل كالشهاب الثاقب فيملأها عدلا وقسطا
كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً.

13- إكمال الدين: ابن عبدوس، عن ابن قتيبة، عن حمدان بن سليمان، عن ابن
بزيع عن حنان السراج، عن السيد بن محمد الحميري في حديث طويل يقول فيه: قلت
للصادق جعفر بن محمد (ع): يابن رسول الله قد روي لنا أخبار عن آبائك (ع) في
الغيبة وصحة كونها فأخبرني بمن تقع؟ فقال (ع): ستقع بالسادس من ولدي
والثاني عشر من الائمة الهداة بعد رسول الله(ص) أولهم أمير المؤمنين علي بن
أبي طالب (ع) وآخرهم القائم بالحق بقية الله في أرضه صاحب الزمان وخليفة
الرحمان والله لو بقي في غيبته ما بقي نوح في قومه لم يخرج من الدنيا حتى
يظهر فيملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً.

14- إكمال الدين: ابن المتوكل، عن علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن
صالح ابن محمد، عن هانئ التمار قال: قال لي أبو عبد الله (ع): إن لصاحب هذا
الامر غيبة فليتق الله عبد وليتمسك بدينه.

15- إكمال الدين: الدقاق، عن الاسدي، عن النخعي، عن النوفلي، عن ابن
البطائني عن أبيه، عن أبي بصير قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله (ع) يقول: إن سنن
الانبياء (ع) ما وقع عليهم من الغيبات جارية في القائم منا أهل البيت حذو
النعل بالنعل والقذة بالقذة.

Abu Basir says, I said to him, “O’ Son of the Messenger of Allah, and
who is the Qā'im of you Ahl al-Bait?” He said, “O’ Abu Basir, he is the
fifth from the sons of my son Musā. He is the son of the mistress of
bondmaids. He will have a disappearance in which invalidators will
doubt. Then Allah, the Exalted, will manifest him and will conquer on
his hands the easts of the earth and its wests. Ruhallah Jesus the son
of Mary (a.s) will come down and pray behind him. The earth will shine
with the illumination of its Lord. There will be no spot on earth on
which a deity other than Allah, the Exalted, is worshipped, *and the
religion entirely will be for Allah, even if the infidels may dislike
this.*

16- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Abu Basīr says, Said Abu ‘Abdillah
(a.s), “If you hear of a disappearance with regard to your Patron, do
not reject it.”

17- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Yahyā Ibn al-‘Alā’ al-Rāzi says, I heard
Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) say, “Allah will bring forth in this Ummah a man who
belongs to me and I belong to him. Allah will drive the blessings of the
heavens and the earth through him. The heavens will rain down its drops;
and the earth will grow out its seeds; and its beasts and brutes will
live in harmony; and it will be full of equity and justice, as it had
been replete with oppression and injustice. He will put so many on the
sword that the ignorant will say, ‘If he was from the progeny of
Muhammad, he would be merciful.”

18- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Muhammad Ibn Sanān al-Kāhili narrates
that Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) said, “Be nice to each other, do kindness to
one another, and have compassion to one another. I swear by the One Who
split the seed and created the people, a time will come to you when no
one of you will find a place for his dinār and dirham to spend, for the
lack of need of all the people with the blessing of Allah and the
blessing of his *Wali.*” I said, “When will that happen?” He said, “This
will happen when you miss your Imam and you will continue to remain in
that state until he rises over you the way the sun rises. Wherever you
may be, beware doubt and suspicion! Reject doubts from your hearts. You
have been warned so abstain. I beseech Allah for your success and your
guidance.”

19- *Al-Ghaiba* of al-Ne*‘*māni: al-Mufadhdhal Ibn ‘Omar says, I was
sitting with Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) in his sitting room and there were
other people with me as well. He said to us, “Take care not to mention
him by name,” meaning the Qā'im (a.s) and I was seeing he meant to say
this to the others. Then he said to me, “O’ Abu ‘Abdillah, beware not to
mention him by name. By Allah, he will disappear for years. He will be
forgotten until it will be said, *He is dead, perished, gone to some
valley.* The eyes of the believers will shed tears over him and they
will be turned over like a ship is turned over by the waves of the sea
and no one will be saved except the one Allah has taken his covenant and
has inscribed faith in his heart and has endorsed him with a spirit from
Himself. Twelve bewildering standards will be raised not known which is
from whom.” Al-Mufadhdhal Ibn ‘Omar says I cried. He said to me, “Why
are you crying.”

قال أبو بصير: فقلت له: يابن رسول الله! ومن القائم منكم أهل البيت؟ فقال:
يابا بصير هو الخامس من ولد ابني موسى ذلك ابن سيدة الامآء يغيب غيبة يرتاب
فيها المبطلون ثم يظهره الله(عزوجل) فيفتح على يديه مشارق الارض ومغاربها
وينـزل روح الله عيسى بن مريم (ع) فيصلي خلفه وتشرق الارض بنور ربها ولا
تبقى في الارض بقعة عبد فيها غير الله(عزوجل) إلا عبد الله فيها ويكون
الدين كله لله ولو كره المشركون.

16- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: جماعة، عن البزوفري، عن أحمد بن إدريس، عن ابن
قتيبة عن الفضل، عن ابن أبي نجران، عن صفوان، عن أبي أيوب، عن أبي بصير
قال: قال أبو عبد الله (ع) إن بلغكم عن صاحبكم غيبة فلا تنكروها.

17- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: أحمد بن إدريس، عن علي بن الفضل، عن أحمد بن
عثمان عن أحمد بن رزق، عن يحيى بن العلاء الرازي قال: سمعت أبا عبد الله
(ع) يقول: ينتج الله في هذه الأمة رجلا مني وأنا منه يسوق الله به بركات
السموات والارض فتنـزل السماء قطرها ويخرج الارض بذرها وتأمن وحوشها
وسباعها ويملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً ويقتل حتى يقول
الجاهل: لو كان هذا من ذرية محمد لرحم.

18- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن أحمد بن مابنداد، عن محمد بن سنان،
عن الكاهلي عن أبي عبد الله (ع) أنه قال: تواصلوا وتباروا وتراحموا فوالذي
فلق الحبة وبرء النسمة ليأتين عليكم وقت لا يجد أحدكم لديناره ودرهمه موضعا
يعني لا يجد له عند ظهور القائم (ع) موضعا يصرفه فيه لاستغناء الناس جميعا
بفضل الله وفضل وليه فقلت وأنى يكون ذلك فقال: عند فقدكم إمامكم فلا تزالون
كذلك حتى يطلع عليكم كما يطلع الشمس أينما تكونون فاياكم والشك والارتياب
انفوا عن نفوسكم الشكوك وقد حذرتم فاحذروا ومن الله أسأل توفيقكم وإرشادكم.

19- الغيبة للنعمانى: عبد الواحد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن رباح، عن
أحمد ابن علي الحميري، عن الحسين بن أيوب، عن عبد الكريم الخثعمي، عن محمد
بن عصام، عن المفضل بن عمر قال: كنت عند أبي عبد الله (ع) في مجلسه ومعي
غيري فقال لنا: إياكم والتنويه يعني باسم القائم (ع) وكنت أراه يريد غيري
فقال لي: يابا عبد الله إياكم والتنويه والله ليغيبن سنينا من الدهر
وليخملن حتى يقال: مات هلك بأي واد سلك ولتفيضن عليه أعين المؤمنين وليكفأن
كتكفئ السفينة في أمواج البحر حتى لاينجو إلا من أخذ الله ميثاقه وكتب
الايمان في قلبه وأيده بروح منه ولترفعن اثنا عشر رأيه مشتبهة لايعرف أي من
أي قال: فبكيت فقال لي: ما يبكيك؟

“May I be your ransom,” said I, “how would I not cry while you are
saying twelve bewildering standards will raised not known which is one
from whom?” He eyed towards the window in the room from which the sun
was shining into his sitting room. He said, “Is this sun luminous?” I
said, “Yes.” He said, “By Allah, our position will be more luminous than
that.”

20- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Zaid Ibn Qadāma narrates from one of
his persons that Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) said, “When the Qā'im rises, people
will say, *How could this be? Even his bones must have decayed.”*

21- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* al-Mufadhdhal Ibn ‘Omar says, I said to
Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s), “What is the sign of the Qā'im?” He said, “When
times pass much and it is said, *He is dead, perished gone to some
valley.”* I said, “May I be your ransom, “Then what will happen?” He
said, “He will not appear but with the sword.”

22- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Muhammad Ibn Muslim narrates that Abu
‘Abdillah (a.s) said, “When people lose the Imam, they will remain for
ages not knowing one thing from other. Then Allah will manifest their
Patron to them.”

23- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Khallād Ibn Qassār says, Abu ‘Abdillah
(a.s) was asked, “Has the Qā'im been born?” He said, “No. If I lived in
his times, I would serve him for all days of my life.”

24- *Iqbāl al-A*‘*māl:* Abu al-Faraj Abān Ibn Muhammad, known as
al-Sindi says, Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) was in Hajj in the year in which he
stepped under the *Mizāb* (the water-spout at the Ka‘ba). As he was
praying ‘Abdullah Ibn al-Hasan was on his right, Hasan Ibn Hasan on his
left, and Ja‘far Ibn Hasan was behind him. ‘Ibād Ibn Kathīr al-Basri
came and said, “Yā Aba ‘Abdillah.” The Imam remained silent until he had
said it three times. Then he said to the Imam, “Yā Ja‘far.” The Imam
said, “Say what you want to say, O’ Abu Kathir.” “I have found in a book
of mine the knowledge of this structure,” he said. “A man will destroy
it stone by stone.” The Imam said, “Your book has lied, O’ Abu Kathir.
On the contrary, I see, by Allah, the man with yellow steps, injured on
the legs, big in the abdomen, thin in the neck, thick in the head, over
this *rukn,”* and he pointed with his hand to the Yemeni *rukn,*
“prohibiting the people from circumambulating as they are intimidated by
him. Then Allah will send a man from me,” and he pointed to his chest.
“He will kill him like the killing of the ‘Ād and Thamūd and Pharaoh,
the lord of the spikes.” At that point, ‘Abdullah Ibn al-Hasan said, “By
Allah, Abu ‘Abdillah has spoken the truth.” They all endorsed his
veracity then.

It has been narrated from the handwriting of al-Shahīd al-Awwal (a.s) on
the authority of Abu al-Walīd from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) with regard to
the statement *qad qāmat al-salāh,* “The rise of the Qā'im (a.s) has
been purposed by this.”

قلت: جعلت فداك كيف لا أبكي وأنت تقول ترفع اثنا عشر رأية مشتبهة لايعرف أي
من أي قال: فنظر إلى كوة في البيت التي تطلع فيها الشمس في مجلسه فقال (ع):
أهذه الشمس مضيئة؟ قلت: نعم، قال: والله لامرنا أضوء منها.

20- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن حميد بن زياد، عن الحسن بن محمد بن
سماعة عن أحمد بن الحسن الميثمي، عن زيد بن قدامة، عن بعض رجاله، عن أبي
عبد الله (ع) قال: إن القائم إذا قام يقول الناس: أني ذلك وقد بليت عظامه.

21- الغيبة للنعمانى: علي بن الحسين، عن محمد بن يحيى، عن محمد بن الحسن
الرازي عن محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن يونس بن يعقوب، عن المفضل بن عمر قال:
قلت لابي عبد الله (ع) ما علامة القائم؟ قال: إذا استدار الفلك، فقيل مات
أو هلك في أي واد سلك، قلت: جعلت فداك ثم يكون ماذا؟ قال: لا يظهر إلا
بالسيف.

22- الغيبة للنعمانى: ابن عقدة، عن القاسم بن محمد بن الحسين بن حازم، عن
عباس ابن هشام الناشري، عن عبد الله بن جبلة، عن فضيل الصائغ، عن محمد بن
مسلم عن أبي عبد الله (ع) أنه قال: إذا فقد الناس الامام مكثوا سبتا لا
يدرون أيا من أي ثم يظهر الله لهم صاحبهم. توضيح: السبت الدهر.

23- الغيبة للنعمانى: علي بن أحمد، عن عبد الله بن موسى، عن الحسن بن
معاوية عن ابن محبوب، عن خلاد بن قصار قال: سئل أبو عبد الله (ع) هل ولد
القائم؟ قال: لا ولو أدركته لخدمته أيام حياتي.

24- إقبال الأعمال: باسنادنا إلى أبي جعفر الطوسي، عن جماعة، عن التلعكبري
عن ابن همام، عن جميل، عن القاسم بن إسماعيل، عن أحمد بن رباح، عن أبي
الفرج أبان بن محمد المعروف بالسندي نقلناه من أصله قال: كان أبو عبد الله
(ع) في الحج في السنة التي قدم فيها. أبو عبد الله (ع) تحت الميزاب وهو
يدعو وعن يمينه عبد الله بن الحسن، وعن يساره حسن بن حسن وخلفه جعفر بن حسن
قال: فجاءه عباد بن كثير البصري فقال له: يا أبا عبد الله قال: فسكت عنه
حتى قالها ثلاثا قال: ثم قال له: يا جعفر! قال: فقال له: قل ما تشاء يا أبا
كثير قال: إني وجدت في كتاب لي علم هذه البنية رجل ينقضها حجراً حجراً قال:
فقال له: كذب كتابك يا أبا كثير ولكن كأني والله بأصفر القدمين، خمش
الساقين، ضخم البطن، دقيق العنق، ضخم الرأس على هذا الركن وأشار بيده إلى
الركن اليماني يمنع الناس من الطواف حتى يتذعروا منه قال ثم يبعث الله له
رجلا مني وأشار بيده إلى صدره فيقتله قتل عاد وثمود وفرعون ذي الاوتاد قال:
فقال له عند ذلك عبد الله بن الحسن: صدق والله أبو عبد الله (ع) حتى صدقوه
كلهم جميعاً.

25- *Muqtadhab al-Athar fi al-Nass* ‘*alā al-Ithnā* ‘*Ashar:* Wahib Ibn
Munabbah says, Musā (a.s) looked on the night of the Conversation at
every tree and at every stone and plant at the Mount of Tūr. They were
all speaking the remembrance of Muhammad and his Twelve Heirs after him.
Musā said, “My Lord, I do not see anything you have created but it
speaks the names of Muhammad and his Twelve Heirs. What is their
position before you?” “O’ son of ‘Imrān,” came the reply, “I created
them before the creation of the lights and placed them in the treasure
trove of my sanctity, as they nourished in the garden of My will and
breathed form the spirit of My majesty and observed the horizons of My
Kingdom, until I desired my will and implemented my rule and measure. O’
son of ‘Imrān, I have given them a promotion so I will adorn my Gardens
through them. O’ son of ‘Imrān adhere to their remembrance, for they are
the treasures of my knowledge, coffers of my wisdom, and springs of My
illumination.” Husain Ibn ‘Alawān says, I mentioned this to Ja‘far Ibn
Muhammad (a.s). He said, “That is correct. They are the Twelve from the
House of Muhammad: ‘Ali, Hasan, Husain, ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain, Muhammad Ibn
‘Ali and the ones whom Allah desires”. I said, “May I be your ransom, I
beseech you to relate the truth to me.” He said, “I, and this son of
mine,” pointing with his hand to his son Musā, “and the fifth from his
sons, whose person will disappear and mentioning his name will not be
permissible.”

25- كتاب مقتضب الاثر في النص على الاثني عشر، عن محمد بن جعفر الآدمي
وأثنى عليه ابن غالب الحافظ عن أحمد بن عبيد بن ناصح، عن الحسين ابن علوان،
عن همام بن الحارث، عن وهب بن منبه قال: إن موسى (ع) نظر ليلة الخطاب إلى
كل شجرة في الطور، وكل حجر ونبات تنطق بذكر محمد واثني عشر وصيا له من
بعده، فقال موسى: إلهي لا أرى شيئا خلقته إلا وهو ناطق بذكر محمد وأوصيائه
الاثني عشر، فما منـزلة هؤلاء عندك؟ قال: يا ابن عمران! إني خلقتهم قبل خلق
الانوار، وجعلتهم في خزانة قدسي يرتعون في رياض مشيتي ويتنسمون من روح
جبروتي، ويشاهدون أقطار ملكوتي، حتى إذا شئت مشيتي أنفذت قضائي وقدري. يا
ابن عمران! إني سبقت بهم استباقي، حتى ازخرف بهم جناني، يابن عمران! تمسك
بذكرهم فانهم خزنة علمي وعيبة حكمتي، ومعدن نوري، قال حسين بن علوان: فذكرت
ذلك لجعفر بن محمد (ع) فقال: حق ذلك هم اثنا عشر من آل محمد: علي والحسن
والحسين وعلي بن الحسين ومحمد بن علي ومن شاء الله قلت: جعلت فداك إنما
أسألك لتفتيني بالحق، قال: أنا وابني هذا وأومأ إلى ابنه موسى والخامس من
ولده يغيب شخصه ولا يحل ذكره باسمه.
