Narrations From Imam Al-kādhim
==============================

1- *‘Ilal al-Sharā'e‘:* ‘Ali Ibn Ja‘far narrates from his brother Musā
Ibn Ja‘far (a.s), “When the fifth from the sons of the seventh
disappears, then by Allah, by Allah, watch your religiosity. Do not
allow anyone to remove it from you. O’ my dear son, it is necessary for
the Patron of this Enterprise to disappear until many who believe in
this matter turn away from it. It will be a trial from Allah, by which
He will try His creation. If your fathers and grandfathers knew a creed
better than this, they would have followed it.” I said, “My master, who
is the fifth from the sons of the seventh?” He said, “O’ my son, your
intelligence is beneath understanding him and your dreams are narrower
than to carry it. However, if you live, you will see him.”

2- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Muhammad Ibn Ziyād al-Azdi says, I asked my master
Musā Ibn Ja‘far (a.s) about the holy Divine verse, *And He has lavished
His favors on you, explicit and hidden.* He said, “The explicit favor is
the manifest Imam and the hidden one is the hidden Imam.” I asked him,
“Is there someone in the Imams who will disappear?” He said, “Yes. His
person will disappear from the eyes of the people and his remembrance
will not disappear from the hearts of the believers. He is the Twelfth
of us. Allah will facilitate every difficult task for him and will abase
every hardship for him. He will reveal the treasures of the earth for
him, proximate every far for him, destroy every tyrant through him, and
kill the rebellious Satan on his hands. That is the son of the mistress
of the bondmaids, whose birth will be hidden from the people, and
mentioning him by his name will not be permissible for them until Allah
manifests him and fills the earth through him with equity and justice,
as it will be replete with injustice and oppression.” Al-Sadūq (a.s)
says, “I have not heard this narration from anyone except Ahmad Ibn
Ziyād on my return from Hajj. He was a trustworthy, religious, and
knowledgeable man.

3- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* al-‘Abbās Ibn ‘Āmir says, I heard Abu al-Hasan Musā
(a.s) say, “People will say, the Patron of this Order has not been born
yet.”

4- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Dawūd Ibn Kathīr says, I asked Abu al-Hasan Musā
(a.s) about the Patron of this Order. He said, “He is the castaway, the
loner, away from his home, hidden from his family, the son of an
un-avenged father.”

### ما روي عن الكاظم صلوات اللـّه عليه في ذلك {style="direction: rtl"}

1- علل الشرائع: أبي، عن سعد، عن الحسن بن عيسى بن محمد بن علي بن جعفر، عن
جده محمد، عن علي بن جعفر، عن أخيه موسى بن جعفر (ع) قال: إذا فقد الخامس
من ولد السابع فالله الله في أديانكم لا يزيلكم أحد عنها يا بني إنه لا بد
لصاحب هذا الأمر من غيبة حتى يرجع عن هذا الأمر من كان يقول به، إنما هي
محنة من الله(عزوجل) امتحن بها خلقه ولو علم آباؤكم وأجدادكم ديناً أصح من
هذا لاتبعوه. فقلت: يا سيدي من الخامس من ولد السابع؟ قال: يا بني عقولكم
تصغر عن هذا وأحلامكم تضيق عن حمله، ولكن إن تعيشوا فسوف تدركونه.

2- إكمال الدين: الهمداني، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن زياد الازدي قال:
سألت سيدي موسى بن جعفر (ع) عن قول الله(عزوجل) "وَأَسْبَغَ عَلَيْكُمْ
نِعَمَهُ ظَاهِرَةً وَبَاطِنَةً" فقال: النعمة الظاهرة الامام الظاهر
والباطنة الامام الغائب. فقلت له: ويكون في الائمة من يغيب؟ قال: نعم، يغيب
عن أبصار الناس شخصه ولا يغيب عن قلوب المؤمنين ذكره، وهو الثاني عشر منا
يسهل الله له كل عسير ويذلل له كل صعب ويظهر له كنوز الارض ويقرب له كل
بعيد ويبير به كل جبار عنيد، ويهلك على يده كل شيطان مريد ذاك ابن سيدة
الاماء الذي يخفى على الناس ولادته ولا يحل لهم تسميته حتى يظهره (الله) U
فيملا به الارض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً.

3- إكمال الدين: أبي، عن سعد، عن الخشاب، عن العباس بن عامر قال: سمعت أبا
الحسن موسى (ع) يقول صاحب هذا الامر يقول الناس لم يولد بعد.

4- إكمال الدين: الهمداني، عن علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن خالد، عن علي بن
حسان، عن داود بن كثير قال: سألت أبا الحسن موسى (ع) عن صاحب هذا الامر
قال: هو الطريد الوحيد الغريب الغائب عن أهله الموتور بأبيه.

5- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Ali Ibn Ja‘far narrates from his brother Musā Ibn
Ja‘far, saying I asked him, “What is the interpretation of the word of
Allah, the Exalted, *Say, ‘Have you thought? If in the morning your
water should have disappeared into the earth, then who would bring you
running water?”* He said, “When you lose your Imam and do not see him,
what are you going to do?”

6- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Yunūs Ibn ‘Abd al-Rahmān says, I entered upon Musā
Ibn Ja‘far (a.s) and said to him, “O’ son of the Messenger of Allah, are
you the *Qā'im bi al-Haqq* (The Establisher of the Truth/the Riser/the
One Standing with the Truth)?” He said, “I am the Qā'im bi al-Haqq,
however, the Qā'im who will clean the earth from the enemies of Allah
and will fill it with equity, as it will be full of injustice, is the
fifth from my sons.

He will have an occultation the length of which will be much due to his
fear for his life. Many nations will apostatize in that period and the
rest will remain steadfast.” Then he said, “Bliss be for Shī‘a, the
adherers to our love during the occultation of our Qā'im, who will
remain steadfast on our adoration and detestation of our enemies. They
are ours and we are theirs. They are pleased with us as Imams and we are
pleased with them as Shī‘a. Bliss be for them! They are, by Allah, with
us in our rank on the Day of Judgment.”

5- إكمال الدين: أبي، عن سعد، عن ابن عيسى، عن البجلي، عن معاوية بن وهب
وأبي قتادة علي بن محمد، عن علي بن جعفر، عن أخيه موسى بن جعفر (ع) قال:
قلت له: ما تأويل قول الله(عزوجل) "قُلْ أَرَأَيْتُمْ إِنْ أَصْبَحَ
مَاؤُكُمْ غَوْرًا فَمَنْ يَأْتِيكُمْ بِمَاءٍ مَعِينٍ؟" فقال: إذا فقدتم
إمامكم فلم تروه فماذا تصنعون.

6- إكمال الدين: الهمداني، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن صالح بن السندي، عن يونس
ابن عبد الرحمان قال: دخلت على موسى بن جعفر (ع) فقلت له: يابن رسول الله
أنت القائم بالحق؟ فقال: أنا القائم بالحق ولكن القائم الذي يطهر الارض من
أعداء الله ويملأها عدلاً كما ملئت جوراً هو الخامس من ولدي، له غيبة يطول
أمدها خوفا على نفسه يرتد فيها أقوام ويثبت فيها آخرون ثم قال (ع): طوبى
لشيعتنا المتمسكين بحبنا في غيبة قائمنا الثابتين على موالاتنا والبراءة من
أعدائنا اولئك منا ونحن منهم قد رضوا بنا أئمة ورضينا بهم شيعة وطوبى لهم،
هم والله معنا في درجتنا يوم القيامة.
