Narrations From Imam Al-redhā
=============================

1- *‘Ilal al-Sharā'e‘* and ‘*Uyūn Akhbār al-Redhā:* Al-Hasan Ibn
Fadhdhāl narrates from his father, who narrates from al-Redhā (a.s), “As
if I see the Shī‘a when they lose the third form my sons, they will be
searching for the green pasture, but will not be finding it.” I said to
him, “Why so, O’ son of the Messenger of Allah?” He said, “Because their
Imam will disappear from them.” I said, “Why?” He said, “So there will
not be any pledge of allegiance for anyone over his shoulders when rises
with the sword.”

2*- ‘Uyūn Akhbār al-Redhā*: Ibn Mahbūb narrates from Abu al-Hasan
al-Redhā (a.s) saying, The Imam said to me, “Definitely, there will
occur the dumb, catastrophic mischief, in which every secret and close
relation will be dropped. That will happen when the Shī‘a will miss the
third from my sons. The dwellers of the heavens and the earth, and every
worthy and merited man, and every contrite and sorrowful person will cry
for him.” Then he said, “My father and mother be the ransom of the
namesake of my grandfather and my look-alike and the look-alike of Musā
the son of ‘Imrān (a.s). He is appareled in the garments of light,
shining with rays of illumination of sanctity. How abundant worthy men
of faith and how abundant sorrowful men of belief will be perplexed and
grievous at the loss of that crystal spring. As if I see them when in
their utmost despair, they are being called by call that is heard from
faraway as it is heard from the near, a call that is a blessing for the
faithful and a curse for the unbelievers.”

3- *Ikmāl-Din:* Similar narration.

4- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Di‘bil Ibn ‘Ali al-Khuzā‘ī says, I recited my long
poem to my master ‘Ali Ibn Musā al-Redhā, the beginning of which is,

*Schools of verses empty of recitations*

*And the House of Revelation horrendously empty*

When I reached to my verse,

*The rise of an Imam who will definitely rise*

*And stand by the name of Allah and His blessings*

*He will make distinction between all rights and wrongs*

*And will proffer requital for charities and malevolence*

### ما جاء عن الرضا (ع) في ذلك {style="direction: rtl"}

1- علل الشرائع وعيون أخبار الرضا: الطالقاني، عن ابن عقدة، عن علي بن
الحسن بن فضال، عن أبيه، عن الرضا (ع) أنه قال: كأني بالشيعة عند فقدهم
الثالث من ولدي يطلبون المرعى فلا يجدونه قلت له: ولم ذلك يا ابن رسول
الله؟ قال: لان إمامهم يغيب عنهم فقلت: ولم؟ قال لئلا يكون في عنقه لاحد
بيعة إذا قام بالسيف.

2- عيون أخبار الرضا: أبي، عن الحميري، عن أحمد بن هلال، عن ابن محبوب، عن
أبي الحسن الرضا (ع) قال: قال لي: لابد من فتنة صماء صيلم يسقط فيها كل
بطانة ووليجة وذلك عند فقدان الشيعة الثالث من ولدي يبكي عليه أهل السماء
وأهل الارض وكل حرى وحران وكل حزين لهفان ثم قال: بأبي وامي سمي جدي وشبيهي
وشبيه موسى بن عمران (ع) عليه جيوب النور تتوقد بشعاع ضياء القدس كم من حرى
مؤمنة وكم من مؤمن متأسف حيران حزين عند فقدان الماء المعين كأني بهم آيس
ما كانوا، نودوا نداء يسمع من بعد كما يسمع من قرب يكون رحمة على المؤمنين
وعذابا على الكافرين.

3- إكمال الدين: أبي، عن سعد، عن جعفر الفزاري، عن علي بن الحسن بن فضال عن
الريان بن الصلت، عن الرضا (ع) مثله وفيه: تتوقد من شعاع ضياء القدس يحزن
لموته أهل الارض والسماء كم من حرى.

4- إكمال الدين وعيون أخبار الرضا: الهمداني، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن الهروي،
قال سمعت دعبل بن علي الخزاعي يقول أنشدت مولاي علي بن موسى الرضا (ع)
قصيدتي التي أولها:

 ومنـزل وحي مقفر العرصات

مدارس آيات خلت من تلاوة

 

فلما انتهيت إلى قولي:

يقوم على اسم الله والبركات

خروج إمام لا محالة خارج

ويجزي على النعماء والنقمات

يميـز فينا كل حق وباطل

Imam al-Redhā (a.s) cried very profusely and then raised his head and
said to me, “O’ Khizā‘i, the Blessed Spirit has spoken on your tongues
in these two verses. Do you know who this Imam is and when he will
rise?” I said, “No, my master, except I have heard that an Imam of yours
will rise and clean the earth from mischief and will fill the earth with
equity as it will be full of oppression.” He said, “O’ Di‘bil, the Imam
after me is my son Muhammad; after Muhammad his son ‘Ali; after ‘Ali his
son Hasan; and after Hasan his son, al-Hujja al-Qā'im, the Awaited
during his occultation, and the one obeyed in his time of appearance.
Even if not more than one day should remain from the world, Allah will
prolong that day so much that he will rise and fill the world with
equity just as it will be full of injustice. As for when it will happen,
that is to describe its time, and my father has narrated to me through
his forefathers through Prince of the Believers (a.s) that the Apostle
(a.s) was asked, ‘O’ Messenger of Allah, when is the Qā'im from your
progeny going to rise?’ He said, ‘His example is like the example of the
Hour: *None but He shall manifest it at its time*. *It will be momentous
in the heavens and the earth. It will not come on you but asudden.*’”

5- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ayyūb Ibn Nūh says, I said to al-Redhā (a.s), “We
hope that you will be the Patron of this Affair and that may Allah, the
Exalted, confer this to you without the sword. You have been pledged
allegiance to and coins have been minted on your name.” He said, “There
is no one of us that letters come and go to him, is asked questions,
pointed with fingers, and religious dues taken to, but he will be
assassinated or he will die on his bed, until Allah, the Exalted, sends
for this Order a man whose birth and place of growth will be hidden and
he will not be hidden in his lineage.”

6- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ahmad Ibn Zakariyyā says, Al-Redhā (a.s) asked me,
“Where is your house in Baghdad?” I said, “At al-Karkh.” He said, “That
is the safest of places. There has to happen the deaf catastrophic
mischief in which every secret and close relation will be dropped. That
will happen after the Shī‘a will miss the third from my sons.”

7- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Muhammad Ibn Abi Ya‘qūb al-Balkhi says,
I heard Abu al-Hasan al-Redhā (a.s) say, “They will be tested through
something that is severer and greater. They will be tested with a fetus
in the abdomen of his mother and the suckling baby, until it is said
that he has disappeared and that he is dead*.*

They will say, ‘There is no Imam.’ However, even the Messenger of Allah
(a.s) disappeared, and many others and many others disappeared. And here
I am, awaiting a death in the bed.”

8- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Ayyūb Ibn Nūh narrates from Abu al-Hasan
al-Redhā (a.s) that he said, “When your standard is raised from your
behind, then expect the salvation from the beneath of your steps.”

بكى الرضا (ع) بكاء شديداً ثم رفع رأسه إلي فقال لي: يا خزاعي نطق روح
القدس على لسانك بهذين البيتين فهل تدري من هذا الامام؟ ومتى يقوم؟ فقلت:
لا يا مولاي إلا أني سمعت بخروج إمام منكم يطهر الارض من الفساد ويملأها
عدلاً كما ملئت جوراً. فقال: يا دعبل، الامام بعدي محمد ابني وبعد محمد
ابنه علي وبعد علي ابنه الحسن وبعد الحسن ابنه الحجة القائم المنتظر في
غيبته المطاع في ظهوره لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحد لطول الله ذلك
اليوم حتى يخرج فيملأها عدلا كما ملئت جورا وأما متى؟ فاخبار عن الوقت ولقد
حدثني أبي، عن أبيه عن آبائه، عن علي (ع) أن النبي (ص) قيل له: يارسول الله
متى يخرج القائم من ذريتك؟ فقال: مثله مثل الساعة لا يجلبها لوقتها إلا هو
ثقلت في السموات والارض لا يأتيكم إلا بغتة.

5- إكمال الدين: ابن الوليد: عن الصفار، عن ابن يزيد، عن أيوب بن نوح قال:
قلت للرضا (ع): إنا لنرجو أن تكون صاحب هذا الامر وأن يسديه الله(عزوجل)
إليك من غير سيف فقد بويع لك وضربت الدراهم باسمك فقال: ما منا أحد اختلفت
إليه الكتب وسئل عن المسائل وأشارت إليه الاصابع وحملت إليه الاموال إلا
اغتيل أو مات على فراشه حتى يبعث الله(عزوجل) لهذا الامر رجلا خفي المولد
والمنشأ غير خفي في نسبه.

6- إكمال الدين: العطار، عن أبيه، عن الاشعري، عن خمحمد بن حمدان، عن خاله
أحمد بن زكريا قال: قال لي الرضا (ع) أين منـزلك ببغداد؟ قلت: الكرخ قال:
أما إنه أسلم موضع ولابد من فتنة صماء صيلم يسقط فيها كل وليجة وبطانة وذلك
بعد فقدان الشيعة الثالث من ولدي.

7- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن عبد الله بن جعفر، عن اليقطيني، عن
محمد بن أبي يعقوب البلخي قال: سمعت أبا الحسن الرضا (ع) يقول: إنه سيبتلون
بما هو أشد وأكبر يبتلون بالجنين في بطن امه والرضيع حتى يقال غاب ومات
ويقولون لا إمام وقد غاب رسول الله(ص) وغاب وغاب وها أنا ذا أموت حتف أنفي.

8- الغيبة للنعمانى: الكليني، عن علي بن محمد، عن بعض رجاله، عن أيوب بن
نوح عن أبي الحسن الرضا (ع) أنه قال: إذا رفع علمكم من بين أظهركم فتوقعوا
الفرج من تحت أقدامكم.
