Narrations From Imam Al-jawād
=============================

1- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Abd al-‘Adhīm al-Hasani says, I entered upon my
master Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali (a.s) intending to ask him about the Qā'im
whether he is the Mahdi or someone else. However, he initiated the topic
before I brought it up, saying, “O’ Abu al-Qāsim, the Qā'im from us and
he is the Mahdi. It is obligatory to wait for him in his occultation and
to obey him in his appearance. He is the third from my sons. By the One
Who sent Muhammad with Prophethood and distinguished us through Imamate,
even if it does not remain from the world but a single day, Allah will
prolong that day until he rises. He will fill the earth with equity and
justice, as it will be replete with injustice and oppression. Allah, the
Exalted, will rectify his order in one night, as He rectified the order
of His Converser Moses (a.s) who went to fetch some fire for his family
and returned a prophet, an apostle.” Then he said, “The best action of
our Shī‘a is to wait for the salvation.”

2- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* ‘Ali al-Qaisi says, I said to Abu Ja‘far
Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Redhā (a.s), “Who is the heir after you?” He said,
“My son ‘Ali, my son ‘Ali.” Then he lowered his head down briefly in
contemplation and then raised it and said, “There will be a considerable
perplexity.” I said, “When it happens, to whom we should turn to?” He
remained silent. Then he said, “No where,” and repeated it three times.
I asked again. He said, “To the cities.” I asked, “Which city?” He said,
“This city of ours; and is there a Medina other than this?”

3- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* ‘Abd al-‘Adhīm says that he heard Abu
Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Redhā (a.s) say, “When my son ‘Ali dies, the
light after him will come into view and then disappear. Woe is for the
doubter and bliss is for the believer, who will run with his religion
for refuge. Then after that there will be events in which forelocks
would go grey and times will be very severe.”

4- *Kifāya al-Athar:* ‘Abd al-‘Adhīm al-Hasani says, I said to Muhammad
Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Musā, “I hope that you would be the Qā'im from the
Household of Muhammad, who will fill the earth with equity and justice
as it will be replete with injustice and oppression.” He said, “O’ Abu
al-Qāsim, there is no one of us but he is a Qā'im with the order of
Allah and guide to the religion of Allah.

### ما روي في ذلك عن الجواد صلوات اللـّه عليه {style="direction: rtl"}

1- إكمال الدين: الدقاق، عن محمد بن هارون الرؤياني، عن عبد العظيم الحسني
قال: دخلت على سيدي محمد بن علي(ع) وأنا اريد أن أسأله عن القائم أهو
المهدي أو غيره؟ فابتدأني فقال: يا أبا القاسم إن القائم منا هو المهدي
الذي يجب أن ينتظر في غيبته ويطاع في ظهوره وهو الثالث من ولدي والذي بعث
محمدا بالنبوة وخصنا بالامامة إنه لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحد لطول
الله ذلك اليوم حتى يخرج فيملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً
وإن الله تبارك وتعالى يصلح أمره في ليلة أصلح أمر كليمه موسى (ع) ليقتبس
لاهله نارا فرجع وهو رسول نبي ثم قال (ع): أفضل أعمال شيعتنا انتظار الفرج.

2- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن أحمد بن مابنداد، عن أحمد بن هلال،
عن امية بن علي القيسي قال: قلت لابي جعفر محمد بن علي الرضا (ع): من الخلف
بعدك؟ قال: ابني علي ابني علي ثم أطرق مليا ثم رفع رأسه ثم قال: إنها ستكون
حيرة قلت: فإذا كان ذلك فإلى من؟ فسكت ثم قال: لا أين حتى قالها ثلاثا
فأعدت فقال إلى المدينة فقلت: أي المدن فقال: مدينتنا هذه وهل مدينة غيرها.

3- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام. عن أبي عبد الله محمد بن هشام، عن أبي
سعد سهل بن زياد عن عبد العظيم بن عبد الله، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي الرضا
(ع) أنه سمعه يقول: إذا مات ابني علي بدا سراج بعده ثم خفي فويل للمرتاب
وطوبى للعرب الفار بدينه ثم يكون بعد ذلك أحداث تشيب فيها النواصي ويسير
الصم الصلاب.

4- كفاية الأثر: أبو عبد الله الخزاعي، عن الاسدي، عن سهل، عن عبد العظيم
الحسني قال: قلت لمحمد بن علي بن موسى: إني لارجو أن تكون القائم من أهل
بيت محمد الذي يملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً فقال: يا أبا
القاسم مامنا إلا قائم بأمر الله وهاد إلى دين الله.

However, I am not the Qā'im through whom Allah will cleanse the earth
from men of infidelity and rejection, and will fill it with equity and
justice. He is the one whose birth will be hidden from the people and
whose person will disappear from them and it will be unlawful to mention
him by his name. He is the namesake of the Messenger of Allah and will
bear his patronym. He is the one for whom the earth will roll and every
difficult task will be facilitated for him. His companions, equal to the
three hundred and thirteen fighters of Badr, will gather around him from
the distant locations of the earth. To this the word of Allah refers,
*Wherever you be, Allah will bring all of you; verily Allah is all
powerful over all things.* When this number of people of the earth will
unite for him, his command will appear. When the covenant, which is ten
thousand people, fulfills for him, he will rise with the permission of
Allah. He will continue to kill the enemies of Allah until Allah, the
High, will be happy from him.” I asked, “My master, how would he know
Allah is pleased with him?” He said, “Allah will cast compassion in his
heart.”

 5- *Kifāya al-Athar:* Al-Saqar Ibn Abi Dalaf says, I heard Abu Ja‘far
Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Redhā (a.s) say, “The Imam after me is my son ‘Ali.
His command is my command, his word my word, obedience to him is
obedience to me. The Imam after him is his son Hasan. His command is his
father’s command, his word is his father’s word, and obedience to him is
obedience to his father.” Then he became silent. I said, “O’ son of the
Messenger of Allah, who is the Imam after Hasan?” He cried very
profusely and then said, “After Hasan is his son al-Qā'im bi al-Haqq,
the Awaited.”  I said to him, “O’ son of the Messenger of Allah, why is
he called al-Qā'im?” He said, “Because he will rise after the death of
his remembrance and apostasy of the majority of the believers in his
Imamate.”  I said, “Why is he called the Awaited?” He said, “He will
have an occultation the days of which will be many and the duration of
which will be long. The sincere will wait his uprise and the doubters
will reject him and rejecters will mock at him. A person who will assign
a time will lie, a person who will hurry will perish, and the one who
will submit will be saved.”

6- *Kifāya al-Athar:* ‘Ali al-Qaisi says, I said to Abu Ja‘far II (a.s),
“Who is the heir after you?” He said, “My son ‘Ali.” Then he said,
“Behold, there will be a perplexity.” I said, “To where shall we turn
then?” He remained quiet and then said, “To Medina.” I asked, “Which
Medina?” He said, “This Medina of ours, and is there a Medina other than
this?”

7- Ahmad Ibn Hilāl says, Muhammad Ibn Ismā‘il Ibn Bazī‘ narrated to me
that Umayya Ibn ‘Ali came and asked Abu Ja‘far II the same question, to
which he gave the same answer.

8- Through the same chain of narration on the authority of Abu
al-Haitham al-Tamīmi: Said Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s), “When three names,
Muhammad, ‘Ali and Hasan, come consecutively, their fourth one will be
their Qā'im.”

ولست القائم الذي يطهر الله به الارض من أهل الكفر والجحود ويملأها عدلا
وقسطا هو الذي يخفى على الناس ولادته، ويغيب عنهم شخصه ويحرم عليهم تسميته،
وهو سمي رسول الله وكنيه وهو الذي يطوى له الارض ويذل له كل صعب يجتمع إليه
من أصحابه عدد أهل بدر ثلاثمائة وثلاثة عشر رجلا من أقاصي الارض وذلك قول
الله(عزوجل): "أَيْنَ مَا تَكُونُوا يَأْتِ بِكُمْ اللَّهُ جَمِيعًا إِنَّ
اللَّهَ عَلَى كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ." فإذا اجتمعت له هذه العدة من أهل
الارض أظهر أمره فإذا أكمل له العقد وهو عشرة آلاف رجل خرج باذن الله فلا
يزال يقتل أعداء الله حتى يرضى الله تبارك وتعالى قال عبد العظيم: قلت له:
يا سيدي وكيف يعلم أن الله قد رضي؟ قال يلقى في قلبه الرحمة.

5- كفاية الأثر: محمد بن علي، عن ابن عبدوس، عن ابن قتيبة، عن حمدان بن
سليمان، عن الصقر بن أبي دلف قال: سمعت أبا جعفر محمد بن علي الرضا (ع)
يقول: الامام بعدي ابني علي أمره أمري وقوله قولي وطاعته طاعتي والامام
بعده ابنه الحسن أمره أمر أبيه وقوله قول أبيه وطاعته طاعة أبيه ثم سكت
فقلت له: يابن رسول الله فمن الامام بعد الحسن؟ فبكى (ع) بكاء شديدا ثم
قال: إن من بعد الحسن ابنه القائم بالحق المنتظر فقلت له: يابن رسول الله
ولم سمي القائم قال: لانه يقوم بعد موت ذكره وارتداد أكثر القائلين بإمامته
فقلت له: ولم سمي المنتظر قال: إن له غيبة يكثر أيامها ويطول أمدها فينتظر
خروجه المخلصون وينكره المرتابون ويستهزئ به الجاحدون ويكذب فيها الوقاتون
ويهلك فيها المستعجلون وينجو فيها المسلمون.

6- كفاية الأثر: علي بن محمد بن السندي، عن محمد بن الحسن، عن الحميري عن
أحمد بن هلال، عن امية بن علي القيسي قال: قلت لابي جعفر الثاني (ع): من
الخلف من بعدك قال: ابني علي ثم قال أما إنها ستكون حيرة، قال: قلت: إلى
أين؟ فسكت ثم قال إلى المدينة قال: قلت: وإلى أي مدينة قال: مدينتنا هذه
وهل مدينة غيرها.

7- قال أحمد بن هلال: فأخبرني محمد بن إسماعيل بن بزيع أنه حضر امية ابن
علي وهو يسأل أبا جعفر الثاني عن ذلك فأجابه بمثل ذلك الجواب.

8- وبهذا الاسناد عن امية بن علي القيسي، عن أبي الهيثم التميمي قال: قال
أبو عبد الله (ع): إذا توالت ثلاثة أسماء كان رابعهم قائمهم محمد وعلي
والحسن.
