Narrations From Imam Al-hadi and Imam Al-‘askarī
================================================

1- *‘Uyūn Akhbār al-Redhā:* Abu Hāshim al-Ja‘fari says, I heard Abu
al-Hasan of the ‘Askar (a.s) say, “The heir after me is my son Hasan.
How would you be like to the heir after the heir?” “Why, may I be your
ransom?” I asked. He said, “Because you will not see his person and it
will not be permissible for you to mention him by his name.” I asked
him, “So how are we going to mention him?” He said, “Say, al-Hujja from
the House of Muhammad.”

2- *Kifāya al-Athar:* ‘Ali Ibn Mahziyār says, I wrote to Abu al-Hasan
(a.s) asking him about the relief. He wrote, “When your Patron will
disappear from the abode of the oppressors, expect the relief.”

3- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ishāq Ibn Ayyūb says, I heard Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn
Muhammad (a.s) say, “The Patron of this Order is the one about whom
people will say he is not born yet.”

4- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Muhammad Ibn Fāris says, I and Ayyūb Ibn Nūh were on
the way to Mecca. We disembarked at the valley of Zabāla and sat down
talking. We ended up discussing our current situation and the lack of
access to the Imam. Ayyūb Ibn Nūh said, “I wrote this year, mentioning
some of these things. He wrote back to me, ‘When your standard is raised
from your backs, expect the relief from the beneath of your feet.’”

5- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Ali Ibn ‘Abd al-Ghaffār says, When Abu Ja‘far II
(a.s) passed away, the Shī‘a wrote to Abu al-Hasan (a.s) asking him
about the position of Imamate. He wrote to them, “The position is mine
so long as I am alive. When the measures of Allah, the High, catch me,
my heir will come to you. And how would you be like to the heir after
the heir?”

6- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Musā Ibn Ja‘far al-Baghdādi says, I heard Abu
Muhammad al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali (a.s) say, “As if I see you, you have
disputed after me with regard to my heir. Behold, someone who professes
faith in the Imams after the Prophet of Allah yet denies my son, is like
someone who professes faith in all prophets and apostles of Allah and
then rejects the Prophethood of Muhammad the Messenger of Allah (a.s);
and the denier of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) is like the one who
rejects all of the prophets.

### نص العسكريَّين صلوات اللـّه عليهما على القائم (ع) {style="direction: rtl"}

1- عيون أخبار الرضا وإكمال الدين: أبي وابن الوليد، عن سعد، عن محمد بن
أحمد العلوي، عن أبي هاشم الجعفري قال: سمعت أبا الحسن صاحب العسكر (ع)
يقول: الخلف من بعدي ابني الحسن فكيف لكم بالخلف من بعد الخلف؟ فقلت: ولم
جعلني الله فداك؟ فقال: لانكم لاترون شخصه ولا يحل لكم ذكره باسمه، قلت:
فكيف نذكره؟ قال: قولوا الحجة من آل محمد(ص).

2- إكمال الدين: أبي، عن الحميري، عن محمد بن عمر (ان) الكاتب، عن علي بن
محمد الصيمري، عن علي بن مهزيار قال: كتبت إلى أبي الحسن (ع) أسأله (عن)
الفرج فكتب: إذا غاب صاحبكم عن دار الظالمين، فتوقعوا الفرج.

3- إكمال الدين: أبي وابن الوليد معا، عن سعد، عن الخشاب، عن إسحاق بن أيوب
قال: سمعت أبا الحسن علي بن محمد(ع) يقول: صاحب هذا الامر من يقول الناس:
لم يولد بعد. وحدثنا بهذا الحديث محمد بن إبراهيم، عن إسحاق بن أيوب .

4- إكمال الدين: أبي، عن سعد، عن محمد بن عبيد الله بن أبي غانم، عن
إبراهيم بن محمد ابن فارس قال: كنت أنا وأيوب بن نوح في طريق مكة فنـزلنا
على وادي زبالة فجلسنا نتحدث فجرى ذكر ما نحن فيه وبعد الامر علينا فقال
أيوب بن نوح: كتبت في هذه السنة أذكر شيئا من هذا فكتب (إلي): إذا رفع
علمكم من بين أظهركم فتوقعوا الفرج من تحت أقدامكم.

5- إكمال الدين: الهمداني، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن علي بن صدقة، عن علي بن عبد
الغفار قال: لما مات أبو جعفر الثاني (ع) كتبت الشيعة إلى أبي الحسن (ع)
يسألونه عن الامر فكتب (ع) إليهم: الامر لي مادمت حيا فإذا نزلت بي مقادير
الله تبارك وتعالى أتاكم الخلف مني وأنى لكم بالخلف من بعد الخلف.

6- إكمال الدين: العطار، عن سعد، عن موسى بن جعفر البغدادي قال: سمعت أبا
محمد الحسن بن علي(ع) يقول: كأني بكم وقد اختلفتم بعدي في الخلف مني أما إن
المقر بالائمة بعد رسول الله المنكر لولدي كمن أقر بجميع أنبياء الله ورسله
ثم أنكر نبوة محمد رسول الله(ص) والمنكر لرسول الله(ص) كمن أنكر جميع
الانبياء.

Because obedience to our last one is obedience to our first one and
rejecter of our last one is the rejecter of our first one. Behold, my
son will have an occultation in which people will doubt except the ones
whom Allah saves.”

7- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Ali Ibn Himām says, I heard Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān
al-‘Amri, (a.s) say, I heard my father say, Abu Muhammad al-Hasan Ibn
‘Ali (a.s) was asked, while I was with him, about the tradition narrated
from his forefathers, peace be unto them, that the earth does not remain
without the Hujja of Allah over His creation until the Day of Judgment
and that if anyone who dies without the cognition of the Imam of his
Age, he dies a pagan death. He said, “This is true as the daylight is
true.” It was said, “O’ son of the Messenger of Allah, who is the Hujja
and the Imam after you?” He said, “My son M. U. H. A. M. M. A. D. And he
is the Imam and the Hujja after me. Whoever dies not knowing him, will
die a pagan death. Behold, he will have an occultation during which the
ignorant individuals will be perplexed and the invalidators will perish
and the time-assigners will lie. Then he will rise. As if I am gazing at
the white standards waving over his head in the Najaf of Kufa.”

8- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Musā Ibn Ja‘far al-Baghdādi says, A letter came from
Abu Muhammad (a.s) which stated, “They presumed that they want to murder
me in order to cut off my progeny. Allah belied their word, and all
praise is due to Allah.’”

9- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ahmad Ibn Ishāq says, I heard Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
Ibn ‘Ali al-‘Askari (a.s) say, “All praise is due to Allah, the One Who
did not take me from the world until He showed me the heir after me, the
one who our of all people looks most similar to the Messenger of Allah
(a.s) in his physique and in his character. May Allah, the High, protect
him in his occultation and then manifest him, so he may fill the earth
with equity and justice as it will be full of injustice and oppression.”

10- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Banān Ibn Hamdawayh says, The passing
away of Abu Ja‘far (a.s) was mentioned before Abu al-Hasan al-‘Askari
(a.s). He said, “That is so long as I am alive and remaining. However,
how would it be like when they miss the one after me?”

11- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Abu Hāshim al-Ja‘fari says, I said to
Abu Ja‘far (a.s), “Your majesty prohibits me from asking you, would that
you give me permission to inquire from you?” He said, “Ask.” I said, “O’
my master, do you have a son?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “If something
happens, then where should I inquire about him?” He said, “In Medina.”

12- *Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: A congregation of scholars narrates on
the authority of Ahmad Ibn Ishāq that he asked Abu Muhammad (a.s) about
the Patron of this Order, in reply to which the Imam made a gesture with
his hand, meaning he is alive and his neck has hardened.

لأن طاعة آخرنا كطاعة أولنا والمنكر لآخرنا كالمنكر لاولنا أما إن لولدي
غيبة يرتاب فيها الناس إلا من عصمه الله(عز و جل).

7- إكمال الدين: الطالقاني، عن أبي علي بن همام قال: سمعت محمد بن عثمان
العمري قدس الله روحه يقول: سمعت أبي يقول: سئل أبو محمد الحسن بن علي (ع)
وأنا عنده عن الخبر الذي روي عن آبائه (ع) أن الارض لا تخلو من حجة الله
على خلقه إلى يوم القيامة وأن من مات ولم يعرف إمام زمانه مات ميتة جاهلية
(فقال (ع): إن هذا حق كما أن النهار حق. فقيل له: يابن رسول الله فمن الحجة
والامام بعدك؟ فقال: ابني محمد وهو الامام والحجة بعدي، من مات ولم يعرفه
مات ميتة جاهلية) . أما إن له غيبة يحار فيها الجاهلون، ويهلك فيها
المبطلون، ويكذب فيها الوقاتون ثم يخرج فكأني أنظر إلى الاعلام البيض تخقق
فوق رأسه بنجف الكوفة.

8- إكمال الدين: علي بن عبد الله الوراق، عن سعد، عن موسى بن جعفر البغدادي
قال: خرج من أبي محمد (ع) توقيع: زعموا أنهم يريدون قتلي ليقطعوا نسلي وقد
كذب الله قولهم والحمد لله.

9- إكمال الدين: المظفر العلوي، عن ابن العياشي، عن أبيه، عن أحمد بن علي
بن كلثوم، عن علي بن أحمد الرازي، عن أحمد بن إسحاق قال: سمعت أبا محمد
الحسن ابن علي العسكري (ع) يقول: الحمد لله الذي لم يخرجني من الدنيا حتى
أراني الخلف من بعدي أشبه الناس برسول الله(ص) خلقا وخلقا يحفظه الله تبارك
وتعالى في غيبته ثم يظهره فيملأ الأرض عدلاً وقسطا كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً.

10- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: سعد بن عبد الله، عن الحسن بن علي الزيتوني، عن
الزهري الكوفي، عن بنان بن حمدويه قال: ذكر عند أبي الحسن العسكري (ع) مضي
أبي جعفر (ع) فقال: ذاك إلي مادمت حيا باقيا ولكن كيف بهم إذا فقدوا من
بعدي.

11- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: أبو هاشم الجعفري قال: قلت لابي محمد (ع): جلالتك
تمنعني عن مسألتك فتأذن لي في أن أسألك؟ قال: سل، قلت: يا سيدي هل لك ولد؟
قال: نعم، قلت: فان حدث حدث فأين أسأل عنه فقال: بالمدينة.

12- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: جماعة، عن أبي المفضل الشيباني، عن أبي نعيم نصر
بن عصام بن المغيرة الفهري المعروف بقرقارة، عن أبي سعيد المراغي، عن أحمد
بن إسحاق أنه سأل أبا محمد (ع)، عن صاحب هذا الامر فأشار بيده أي إنه حي
غليظ الرقبة.

13- Kifāya al-Athar: Abu al-Mufadhdhal al-Shaybāni narrates from ‘Allān
al-Rāzi, saying, One of our scholars narrated to me that when the
concubine of Abu Muhammad was pregnant, he said to her, “You will give
birth to a boy. His name is M. U. H. A. M. M. A. D. and he is the Qā'im
after me.”

14- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Al-‘Attār narrates through the chain of narration on
the authority of Abu Hātam, who says, I heard Abu Muhammad al-Hasan Ibn
‘Ali (a.s) say, “In the year two hundred and sixty my Shī‘a will go
asunder.” In that year Abu Muhammad (a.s) passed away and his Shī‘a and
supporters went different ways. Some of them followed Ja‘far; some of
them went astray and were seized by doubts; some of them remained on
their perplexity; and some of them remained steadfast on their religion
through the help of God, the Exalted.

15- Al-Kharā’ij wa al-Jarā’ih: ‘Ali Ibn Ibrāhim narrates from his
father, from ‘Isā Ibn Sabīh: Al-Hasan al-‘Askari (a.s) entered upon me
in the prison. I knew him. He said to me, “You are sixty five years and
one month and two days old.” There was a book of supplication with me,
which had my birth date. I looked and it was as he had said. He asked,
“Do you have a son?” I said, “No.” He said, “O’ Allah, give him a son so
he may be his forearm. Good a forearm is a son!” Then he said,

*A person with an arm avenges his oppression*

*Desolate is the one who does not have an arm.*

I asked, “Do you have a son?” He said, “By Allah, soon I will have a son
who will fill the earth with equity. But now, no.” Then he versified,

*Perchance, you will see me one day*

*As I will be with my many sons around me,*

*Because before Tamīm sired a nation*

*He lived a long while amidst the people as he was one man*

13- كفاية الأثر: أبو المفضل الشيباني، عن الكليني، عن علان الرازي قال:
أخبرني بعض أصحابنا أنه لما حملت جارية أبي محمد (ع) قال: ستحملين ذكرا
واسمه م ح م د وهو القائم من بعدي.

14- إكمال الدين: العطار، عن أبيه، عن جعفر الفزاري، عن محمد بن أحمد
المدائني، عن أبي حاتم قال: سمعت أبا محمد الحسن بن علي (ع) يقول: في سنة
مأتين وستين تفرق شيعتي ففيها قبض أبو محمد (ع) وتفرقت شيعته وأنصاره فمنهم
من انتمى إلى جعفر ومنم من تاه وشك ومنهم من وقف على تحيره ومنهم من ثبت
على دينه بتوفيق الله(عز و جل).

15- يج: علي بن إبراهيم، عن أبيه، عن عيسى بن صبيح قال: دخل الحسن العسكري
(ع) علينا الحبس وكنت به عارفاً فقال لي: لك خمس وستون سنة وشهر ويومان
وكان معي كتاب دعاء عليه تاريخ مولدي وإني نظرت فيه فكان كما قال وقال: هل
رزقت ولداً؟ فقلت: لا فقال: اللهم ارزقه ولداً يكون له عضداً فنعم العضد
الولد ثم تمثل (ع):      

إن الذليل الذي ليست له عضد

من كان ذا عضد يدرك ضلامته

 

قلت: ألك ولد؟ قال: أي والله سيكون لي ولد يملأ الأرض قسطاً فأما الآن فلا.

ثم تمثل:

بني حوالي الاسود اللوابـــد

لعلك يوماً إن تراني كأنما

أقام زمانا (وهو) في الناس واحد

فان تميماً قبل أن يلد الحصا
