Occultations of the Apostles and the Qā'im
==========================================

1- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Zaid al-Shahhām narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s)
that the Imam said, “Sālih disappeared from his nation from a long time
and the day he disappeared from them, he was an aged man of open
stomach, beautiful body, dense beard, delicate abdomen, small cheeks,
and when he returned to his people, they did not recognized him with the
appearance he had. When he came back, they were of three categories: One
category rejected him saying, ‘Do not ever come back.’ One category
doubted in him. And the last group of people was on certainty. When he
came back, he began with the doubting congregation and said to them, ‘I
am Sālih’; they belied, cursed, and turned him down and said to him,
‘Allah has turned away from you. Sālih was in a figure other than
yours.’” The Imam said, “He then came to the rejecters, but they did not
listen to his word and dispersed from him in a very cruel manner. Then
he walked to the third category, which were people of certainty about
him, and said to them, ‘I am Sālih.’ They said, ‘Give us a word with
which we will not doubt you are Sālih, for we do not doubt that Allah,
the Exalted, is the Creator and He transfers and transforms His servants
into any figure He desires. Sālih had informed us and taught us when we
he was amongst us the sign of the Qā'im when comes. A word is true
before us when it comes from the heavens.’ Sālih said, ‘I am the Sālih
who brought you the calf.’ “They said, ‘You spoke the truth. This is
what we have been studying. What are its signs?’ “He said, ‘There is a
drink for the calf, and a drink for you on a known day.’ “They said, ‘We
believe in Allah and in what you have brought to us.’ At that time, did
Allah, the Exalted, say, Sālih is a messenger from his Lord. The people
of certainty said, We believe what he has been sent with; and said the
people who were haughtily, who were the doubters and the rejecters, We
disbelieve in that which you believe in.” Zaid al-Shahhām says, I asked,
“Was there at that day a scholar amongst them?” The Imam said, “Allah,
the Exalted, is more just than to leave the earth without a scholar who
would guide to Allah, the Exalted.

#### ما فيه (ع) من سنن الأنبياء والاستدلال بغيباتهم على غيبته صلوات اللـّه عليهم {dir="RTL"}

۱- إكمال الدين: ابن الوليد عن الصفار عن سعد والحميري معا عن ابن أبي
الخطاب عن ابن أسباط عن ابن عميرة عن زيد الشحام عن أبي عبد الله (ع) قال
إن صالحا (ع) غاب عن قومه زمانا وكان يوم غاب عنهم كهلا مبدح البطن حسن
الجسم وافر اللحية خميص البطن خفيف العارضين مجتمعا ربعة من الرجال فلما
رجع إلى قومه لم يعرفوه بصورته فرجع إليهم وهم على ثلاث طبقات—طبقة جاحدة
لا ترجع أبدا وأخرى شاكة فيه وأخرى على يقين فبدأ (ع) حيث رجع بطبقة
الشكاك. فقال لهم أنا صالح فكذبوه وشتموه وزجروه وقالوا برئ الله منك إن
صالحاً كان في غير صورتك قال فأتى الجحاد فلم يسمعوا منه القول ونفروا منه
أشد النفور ثم انطلق إلى الطبقة الثالثة وهم أهل اليقين. فقال لهم: أنا
صالح فقالوا: أخبرنا خبرا لا نشك فيك معه أنك صالح فانا لانمتري أن الله
تبارك وتعالى الخالق ينقل ويحول في أي الصور شاء وقد اخبرنا وتدارسنا فيما
بيننا بعلامات القائم إذا جاء، وإنما صح عندنا إذا أتى الخبر من السماء.
فقال لهم صالح: أنا صالح الذي أتيتكم بالناقة فقالوا صدقت وهي التي نتدارس
فما علاماتها فقال: لها شرب ولكم شرب يوم معلوم قالوا: آمنا بالله وبما
جئتنا به فعند ذلك.

قال الله تبارك وتعالى: إن صالحا مرسل من ربه، قال أهل اليقين: إنا بما
ارسل به مؤمنون. وقال الذين استكبروا وهم الشكاك والجحاد إنا بالذي آمنتم
به كافرون. قلت: هل كان فيهم ذلك اليوم عالم؟ قال: الله تعالى أعدل من أن
يترك الأرض بغير عالم يدل على الله تبارك وتعالى ولقد مكث القوم بعد خروج
صالح.

The nation waited seven days after the exit of Sālih, a period in which
they did not know any Imam, except the Divine religion they had at their
hands and their word was one. When Sālih (a.s) came back, they united
around him. Verily, the example of ‘Ali and the Qā'im is like Sālih.”

2- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: ‘Abdullah Ibn Sanān narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s)
saying, I heard him say, “In the Qā'im there is a tradition from Musā
Ibn ‘Imrān (a.s).”  I asked, “What is the tradition of Musā Ibn ‘Imrān?”
He said, “The secrecy of his birth and his disappearance from his
people.” I asked, “How long did Musā disappear for from his family and
people?” He said, “Twenty eight years.”

3- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Abu Basir says, I heard Abu Ja‘far (a.s) say, “There
are four traditions in the Patron of this Order from four apostles: a
tradition from Moses, a tradition from Jesus, a tradition from Joseph,
and a tradition from Muhammad, bliss be for them all. The tradition from
Moses is that he is fearful, vigilant; the tradition from Joseph is the
prison; the tradition from Jesus is that it is said that he is dead
while he has not died; and the tradition from Muhammad (a.s) is the
sword.”

4- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Sa‘id Ibn Jubair says, I heard the Doyen of the
Worshipers ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain (a.s) say, “In the Qā'im of ours there are
traditions from the traditions of the apostles, peace be with them. A
tradition from Adam, a tradition from Noah, a tradition from Abraham, a
tradition from Moses, a tradition from Jesus, a tradition from Ayyūb,
and a tradition from Muhammad (a.s). The tradition from Adam and Noah is
the length of his life; the tradition from Abraham is the secrecy of his
birth and the desertion of the people; the tradition from Moses is the
fear and the disappearance; the tradition from Jesus is the dispute of
the people about him; the tradition from Ayyūb is relief after the
trials; and the tradition from Muhammad (a.s) is his rise with the
sword.”

5- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Sa‘īd Ibn Jubair says, I heard the Doyen of the
Worshipers ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain (a.s) say, “There is a tradition from Noah
in the Qā'im and that is the length of his life.”

6- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Muhammad Ibn Muslim says, I entered upon Abu Ja‘far
(a.s) while I had the intention of asking him about the Qā'im from the
House of Muhammad (a.s). He began the conversation first, “O’ Muhammad
Ibn Muslim, there are similarities in the Qā'im from the House of
Muhammad to five apostles, Jonah the son of Mathew, Joseph the son of
Jacob, Moses, Jesus, and Muhammad, bliss be for them all. As for his
similarity to Jonah, it is his return from his occultation while he is
young after an old age. As for his similarity to Joseph the son of
Jacob, it is his disappearance from everyone he had in the world and his
vanishing from his brothers and the confusion of his situation to his
father Jacob (a.s) despite the proximity of the distance between him and
his father, his family, and his followers.

سبعة أيام على فترة لا يعرفون إماما غير أنهم على ما في أيديهم من دين
الله(عز و جل) كلمتهم واحدة، فلما ظهر صالح (ع) اجتمعوا عليه، وإنما مثل
(علي و) القائم مثل صالح (ع).

2- إكمال الدين: أبي، عن سعد، عن المعلى بن محمد، عن محمد بن جمهور وغيره،
عن ابن أبي عمير، عن عبد الله بن سنان، عن أبي عبد الله (ع) قال: سمعته
يقول: في القائم سنة من موسى بن عمران (ع) فقلت: وما سنة موسى بن عمران؟
قال: خفاء مولده وغيبته عن قومه، فقلت: وكم غاب موسى عن أهله وقومه؟ قال:
ثماني وعشرين سنة.

3- إكمال الدين: أبي وابن الوليد معا، عن الحميري، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن
سليمان بن داود، عن أبي بصير قال: سمعت أبا جعفر (ع) يقول: في صاحب هذا
الأمر أربع سنين من أربعة أنبياء: سنة من موسى وسنة من عيسى وسنة من يوسف
وسنة من محمد صلوات الله عليهم فأما من موسى فخائف يترقب وأما من يوسف
فالسجن وأما من عيسى فيقال: إنه مات ولم يمت، وأما من محمد(ص) فالسيف.

4- إكمال الدين: علي بن موسى بن أحمد العلوي، عن محمد بن همام، عن أحمد ابن
محمد النوفلي، عن أحمد بن هلال، عن عثمان بن عيسى، عن خالد بن نجيح عن حمزة
بن حمران، عن أبيه، عن سعيد بن جبير قال: سمعت سيد العابدين علي بن الحسين
(ع) يقول في القائم منا سنن من سنن الانبياء (ع) سنة من آدم وسنة من نوح
وسنة من إبراهيم وسنة من موسى وسنة من عيسى وسنة من أيوب وسنة من محمد(ص)
فأما من آدم ومن نوح فطول العمر، وأما من إبراهيم فخفاء الولادة واعتزال
الناس وأما من موسى فالخوف والغيبة وأما من عيسى فاختلاف الناس فيه وأما من
أيوب فالفرج بعد البلوى، وأما من محمد(ص) فالخروج بالسيف.

5- إكمال الدين: ابن بشار، عن المظفر بن أحمد، عن الاسدي، عن النخعي، عن
النوفلي، عن حمزة بن حمران، عن أبيه، عن سعيد بن جبير قال: سمعت سيد
العابدين علي بن الحسين (ع) يقول: في القائم سنة من نوح وهو طول العمر.

6- إكمال الدين: الهمداني، عن علي بن إبراهيم، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن سليمان
بن داود، عن أبي بصير، وحدثنا ابن عصام، عن الكليني، عن القاسم بن العلا،
عن إسماعيل بن علي، عن علي بن إسماعيل، عن عاصم بن حميد، عن محمد بن مسلم
قال: دخلت على أبي جعفر (ع) وأنا اريد أن أسأله عن القائم من آل محمد(ص)
فقال لي مبتدئا: يا محمد بن مسلم إن في القائم من آل محمد(ص) شبها من خمسة
من الرسل: يونس بن متى، ويوسف بن يعقوب، وموسى، وعيسى، ومحمد صلوات الله
عليهم، فأما شبهه من يونس فرجوعه من غيبته وهو شاب بعد كبر السن وأما شبهه
من يوسف بن يعقوب فالغيبة من خاصته وعامته، واختفاؤه من إخوته وإشكال أمره
على أبيه يعقوب (ع) مع قرب المسافة بينه وبين أبيه وأهله وشيعته.

As for his similarity to Moses, it is the continuity of his fear, the
length of his occultation, the secrecy of his birth, the weariness of
his followers from the pains and disregard they saw after him until
Allah, the Exalted, allowed him to rise and helped him and consented him
over his enemies. As for his similarity with Jesus, it is the
disagreement of the disputers about him, so much so that one
congregation said, He was not born; another said, He is dead; another
said, He was killed and crucified. As for his similarity to his
grandfather al-Mustafa (a.s), it is his rise with the sword, his
massacre of the enemies of Allah and the enemies of His Messenger (a.s)
and his massacre of the tyrants and the oppressors; and that he will be
succored through the sword and fright; and that no standard of his will
come back in defeat. From the signs of his rise is the rise of the
Sufyāni from Syria; the rise of the Yemeni; a call from the sky in the
month of Ramadan, and a caller who will call his and his father’s
names.”

7- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Abu Basīr says, I heard Abu Ja‘far (a.s) say, “In the
Patron of the Order there is a tradition from Moses, a tradition from
Jesus, a tradition from Joseph, a tradition from Muhammad (a.s). As for
the tradition from Moses, he is fearful, vigilant; as for the tradition
from Jesus, it is that the same that was said about Jesus will be said
about him; as for the tradition from Joseph, it is the prison and the
taqiyya; as for the tradition from Muhammad (a.s), it is his rise in his
grandfather’s style and illustration of his sayings. Then he will put
his sword over his shoulder for eight months, continuously massacring
the enemies of Allah, until Allah is pleased.” I asked, “How would he
know that Allah, the Exalted, has been pleased?” He said, “He will cast
compassion into his heart.”

8- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Dhuraish al-Kannāsi says, I heard Abu Ja‘far (a.s)
say, “In the Patron of this Age there is a tradition from Joseph. The
boy of a black bondmaid. Allah will restitute his affair in one night.”

*Explanation:* “The boy of a black bondmaid” is contrary to the many
other traditions that have come about hi smother. However, this can be
interpreted as someone who is like the mother or a maid.

9- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Sudair al-Sairafi says, I along with al-Mufadhdhal
Ibn ‘Omar, Abu Basīr, Abān Ibn Taghlib entered upon our master Abu
‘Abdillah Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad (a.s). We saw him sitting on bare earth.
He had a Khaibari woolen cloak that was ringed at the neck, did not have
any pockets and had short sleeves. He was crying like a deeply afflicted
and bereaved mother of a child from the depths of a heart that was full
of mourning. Grief had appeared in the sides of his face, and the change
had spread on to both of his cheeks, and tears were rolling on the sides
of his visage, as he was saying, “My master, your occultation has taken
away my night’s sleep, it has narrowed my bed for me, and has snatched
away the solace from my heart.

وأما شبهه من موسى فدوام خوفه وطول غيبته وخفاء ولادته وتعب شيعته من بعده
بما لقوا من الاذى والهوان إلى أن أذن الله(عز و جل) في ظهوره ونصره وأيده
على عدوه وأما شبهه من عيسى فاختلاف من اختلف فيه حتى قالت طائفة منهم ما
ولد وقالت طائفة مات وقالت طائفة قتل وصلب. وأما شبهه من جده المصطفى (ص)
فخروجه بالسيف وقتله أعداء الله وأعداء رسوله (ص) والجبارين والطواغيت وأنه
ينصر بالسيف والرعب وأنه لاترد له رأية وأن من علامات خروجه خروج السفياني
من الشام وخروج اليماني وصيحة من السماء في شهر رمضان ومناد ينادي باسمه
واسم أبيه.

7- إكمال الدين: علي بن موسى، عن الاسدي، عن النخعي، عن النوفلي، عن الحسن
ابن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبي بصير قال: سمعت أبا جعفر (ع) يقول: في صاحب
الأمر سنة من موسى وسنة من عيسى وسنة من يوسف وسنة من محمد(ص) فأما من موسى
فخائف يترقب، وأما من عيسى فيقال فيه ما قيل في عيسى، وأما من يوسف فالسجن
والتقية، وأما من محمد(ص) فالقيام بسيرته وتبيين آثاره ثم يضع سيفه على
عاتقه ثمانية أشهر ولا يزال يقتل أعداء الله حتى يرضى الله قلت: وكيف يعلم
أن الله(عز و جل) قد رضي قال: يلقي الله(عز و جل) في قلبه الرحمة.

8- إكمال الدين: عبد الواحد بن محمد، عن أبي عمير الليثي، عن محمد بن
مسعود، عن محمد بن علي القمي، عن محمد بن يحيى، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن أبي
أحمد الازدي، عن ضريس الكناسي قال: سمعت أبا جعفر (ع) يقول: إن صاحب هذا
الأمر فيه سنة من يوسف: ابن أمة سوداء يصلح الله أمره في ليلة واحدة.

9- إكمال الدين: محمد بن علي بن حاتم، عن أحمد بن عيسى الوشاء البغدادي، عن
أحمد بن طاهر، عن محمد بن يحيى بن سهل، عن علي بن الحارث، عن سعد بن منصور
الجواشني، عن أحمد بن علي البديلي، عن أبيه، عن سدير الصيرفي قال: دخلت أنا
والمفضل بن عمر وأبو بصير وأبان بن تغلب، على مولانا أبي عبد الله جعفر ابن
محمد (ع) فرأيناه جالساً على التراب وعليه مسح خيبري مطوق بلا جيب مقصر
الكمين وهو يبكي بكاء الواله الثكلى، ذات الكبد الحرى، قد نال الحزن من
وجنتيه وشاع التغير في عارضيه وأبلى الدموع محجريه، وهو يقول: سيدي! غيبتك
نفت رقادي وضيقت علي مهادي وأسرت مني راحة فؤادي.

My master, your occultation has turned my tragedies into the atrocities
of eternity! The loss of one after the other perishes a crowd and a
multitude. No more I feel the tear that drops from my eye, and the moan
that faintly leaves my chest from the places of tragedies and past
calamities except that it exemplifies before my eye the greatest and
cruelest of catastrophes, the most dismal and disdainful mishaps, mixed
with your wrath, and calamities coupled with your anger.”

Sudair says, Our hearts and minds were overwhelmed by that terrifying
scene and mortifying view. We thought that it is the sign of a dreadful
shattering or times have brought him a calamity. So we said, “May Allah,
O’ son of the best of the creation, never bring tears into your eyes.
For what incidents are your eyes pouring and your tears raining and what
situation has led you to this mourning?”

Sudair says, Al-Sādiq (a.s) took a deep sigh that his chest expanded and
his fright enhanced, and he said, “O’ you, I looked at the Book of
al-Jafr this morning, and that is the book that encompasses the
knowledge of deaths, trials and tribulations and the knowledge of all
that has been and all that will be until the Day of Judgment, which
Allah, glory to His name, has exclusively imparted to Muhammad and the
Imams after him, peace be unto him and them. I viewed therein the birth
of our Qā'im and his disappearance and its protraction and the length of
his lifespan and the trials of the believers through him after him in
that period and the generation of doubts in their hearts from the length
of his disappearance and the apostasy of most of them from their
religion and their removing the cord of Islam from their necks, about
which Allah, glory to His name, has said, We have fastened to everyman’s
neck his fateful bird which is the wilāya. So emotions overpowered me
and grieves overwhelmed me.”

We said, “O’ son of the Messenger of Allah, dignify us and bestow honor
upon us by sharing some of what you know from the knowledge.”

He said, “Allah, the Exalted, has consigned three qualities in the Qā'im
of ours, which He had consigned to three of the apostles. He
foreordained his birth like the birth of Moses (a.s); his disappearance
like the disappearance of Jesus (a.s); and his protraction like the
protraction of Noah (a.s). Moreover, He made the lifespan of His
virtuous servant al-Khidhr a proof of his lifespan.”

I said, “Remove the curtains for us, O’ son of the Messenger of Allah,
from the faces of these concepts.”

He said, “As for the birth of Moses: When the Pharaoh discerned that the
demise of his kingdom is on his hands, he ordered the soothsayers be
called, who foretold him about his lineage and that he will be from the
Children of Israel. Pharaoh did not cease to have his men rip open the
abdomens of the pregnant women of the Children of Israel, until he
killed in the pursuit of Moses twenty and some odd thousand babies.

سيدي غيبتك أوصلت مصابي بفجائع الابد وفقد الواحد بعد الواحد يفني الجمع
والعدد، فما احس بدمعة ترقى من عيني، وأنين يفتر من صدري عن دوارج الرزايا
وسوالف البلايا إلا مثل لعيني عن عواير أعظمها وأفظعها وتراقي أشدها
وأنكرها ونوايب مخلوطة بغضبك، ونوازل معجونة بسخطك.

قال سدير: فاستطارت عقولنا ولها وتصدعت قلوبنا جزعا من ذلك الخطب الهائل
والحادث الغائل، وظننا أنه سمة لمكروهة قارعة أو حلت به من الدهر بائقة
فقلنا لا أبكى الله يا بن خير الورى عينيك، من أي حادثة تستنـزف دمعتك،
وتستمطر عبرتك، وأية حالة حتمت عليك هذا المأتم.

قال: فزفر الصادق (ع) زفرة انتفخ منها جوفه، واشتد منها خوفه، وقال: ويكم
إني نظرت في كتاب الجفر صبيحة هذا اليوم وهو الكتاب المشتمل على علم
المنايا والبلايا والرزايا وعلم ما كان وما يكون إلى يوم القيامة الذي خص
الله تقدس اسمه به محمداً والائمة من بعده عليه و(ع)، وتأملت فيه مولد
قائمنا وغيبته وإبطاؤه وطول عمره وبلوى المؤمنين (به من بعده) في ذلك
الزمان وتولد الشكوك في قلوبهم من طول غيبته، وارتداد أكثرهم عن دينهم،
وخلعهم ربقة الاسلام من أعناقهم، التي قال الله تقدس ذكره: "وَكُلَّ
إِنسَانٍ أَلْزَمْنَاهُ طَائِرَهُ فِي عُنُقِهِ" يعني الولاية، فأخذتني
الرقة، واستولت علي الاحزان.

فقلنا: يا بن رسول الله كرمنا وشرفنا باشراكك إيانا في بعض ما أنت تعلمه من
علم قال: إن الله تبارك وتعالى أدار في القائم منا ثلاثة أدارها في ثلاثة
من الرسل قدر مولده تقدير مولد موسى (ع)، وقدر غيبته غيبة عيسى (ع)، وقدر
إبطاؤه تقدير إبطاء نوح (ع) وجعل من بعد ذلك عمر العبد الصالح أعني الخضر
دليلا على عمره فقلت: اكشف لنا يابن رسول الله عن وجوه هذه المعاني.

قال: أما مولد موسى فإن فرعون لما وقف على أن زوال ملكه على يده أمر باحضار
الكهنة، فدلوه على نسبه وأنه يكون من بني إسرائيل ولم يزل يأمر أصحابه بشق
بطون الحوامل من (النساء) بني إسرائيل حتى قتل في طلبه نيفا وعشرين ألف
مولود.

He was unable to murder Moses, for Allah, the Exalted, protected him.
Likewise, when the Umayyads and the Abbasids discovered that the demise
of their kingdom and that of their kings and tyrants will be at the
hands of the Qā'im from us, they showed enmity towards us and took their
swords out for the murder of the House of the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
and to cut off his progeny in order to make certain they have killed the
Qā'im (a.s). However, Allah dislikes not revealing His Command for one
of the oppressors until His light is full, even if the pagans may
dislike this. As for the disappearance of Jesus: The Jews and the
Christians formed unanimity that he has been killed; whereas Allah
belied them in His verse, They did not kill, nor crucify him; but
rather, it was made dubious for them. Likewise is the disappearance of
the Qā'im (a.s) since one congregation denies it for its length—ranging
from one misguided person who says, ‘He was never born’; to another who
says, ‘He was born and he died’; to another who rejects faith by saying
that our Eleventh was barren; to another who deviates by saying, ‘This
will increase to thirteen an upwards’, and another who sins against God,
the Exalted, by saying, ‘The spirit of the Qā'im speaks through the body
of someone else’.

“As for the protraction of Noah: When he prayed for the descent of
punishment against his people from the heavens, Allah, the Exalted, sent
Gabriel, the Trusted Spirit, with seven kernels, and said, ‘O’ Apostle
of Allah, Allah, the Exalted, says to you, ‘They are my creation and my
servants. I will not perish them with a lightening from my thunderbolts
until the call has been stressed upon and the proof has become binding.
Retain your hard labor in making the call to your people, for I will
reward you for that. Plant these kernels, because your relief and
liberation will be at its plantation, outgrowth, and fruition when it
reaches fruition. Give this glad tiding to your believing followers.’
When the trees grew and thrived and their trunks and branches developed
and spread out and their fruits grew big, he asked Allah, the Exalted,
for the fulfillment of the promise. Allah, the Exalted, ordered him to
plant the seeds of those trees and retain patience and hard work and
make the call to his people. He informed the nations that believed in
him; three hundred men of them turned away from him and said, ‘If what
Noah is claiming were true, the promise of his Lord would not have been
violated.’ Then Allah, the Exalted, continued to order him every time to
plant the seeds until they had been planted seven times. Nations of
believers continued to lose congregations until they were left only
seventy and some odd men. At that time, did Allah, the Exalted, sent a
message to him and said, ‘O’ Noah, now the dawn on your eyes has broken
the night as the truth has manifested with clarity and the order of
belief has become pure from impurity by the apostasy of everyone who had
a wicked disposition. If I had destroyed the disbelievers and kept those
who have apostatized from amongst the believers in you, I had not
fulfilled my early promise to the believers from your people who were
sincere in their belief in Me and had adhered to the rope of your
Prophethood that I would make them heirs in earth and empower for them
their religion and replace their fear with security, so that worship be
pure for me by the departure of doubts from their hearts.

وتعذر عليه الوصول إلى قتل موسى لحفظ الله تبارك وتعالى إياه. كذلك بنو
امية وبنو العباس لما وقفوا على أن زوال ملكهم والامراء والجبابرة منهم على
يد القائم منا، ناصبونا العداوة، ووضعوا سيوفهم في قتل آل بيت رسول الله(ص)
وإبادة نسله طمعا منهم في الوصول إلى قتل القائم (ع) ويأبى الله

أن يكشف أمره لواحد من الظلمة إلى أن يتم نوره ولو كره المشركون. وأما غيبة
عيسى (ع) فان اليهود والنصارى اتفقت على أنه قتل وكذبهم الله(عز و جل)
بقوله: " وما قتلوه وما صلبوه ولكن شبه لهم " كذلك غيبة القائم (ع) فان
الأمة تنكرها (لطولها) فمن قائل بغير هدى بأنه لم يولد وقائل يقول: إنه ولد
ومات وقائل يكفر بقوله إن حادي عشرنا كان عقيما وقائل يمرق بقوله إنه يتعدى
إلى ثالث عشر فصاعدا وقائل يعصي الله(عز و جل) بقوله: إن روح القائم (ع)
ينطق في هيكل غيره. وأما إبطاء نوح (ع) فانه لما استنـزل العقوبة على قومه
من السماء بعث الله(عز و جل) جبرئيل الروح الامين بسبعة نويات فقال: يا نبي
الله إن الله تبارك وتعالى يقول لك: إن هؤلاء خلائقي وعبادي ولست ابيدهم
بصاعقة من صواعقي إلا بعد تأكيد الدعوة وإلزام الحجة، فعاود اجتهادك في
الدعوة لقومك فاني مثيبك عليه واغرس هذه النوى فان لك في نباتها وبلوغها
وإدراكها إذا أثمرت الفرج والخلاص فبشر بذلك من تبعك من المؤمنين. فلما
نبتت الاشجار وتأزرت وتسوقت وتغصنت وأثمرت وزهى الثمر عليها بعد زمن طويل
استنجز من الله I العدة فأمره الله تبارك وتعالى أن يغرس من نوى تلك
الاشجار ويعاود الصبر والاجتهاد، ويؤكد الحجة على قومه فأخبر بذلك الطوائف
التي آمنت به فارتد منهم ثلاث مائة رجل وقالوا: لو كان ما يدعيه نوح حقا
لما وقع في وعد ربه خلف. ثم إن الله تبارك وتعال لم يزل يأمره عند كل مرة
أن يغرسها تارة بعد اخرى إلى أن غرسها سبع مرات فما زالت تلك الطوائف من
المؤمنين ترتد منهم طائفة إلى أن عاد إلى نيف وسبعين رجلا فأوحى الله(عز و
جل) عند ذلك إليه وقال: يا نوح الآن أسفر الصبح عن الليل لعينك حين صرح
الحق عن محضه وصفى (الأمر للايمان) من الكدر بارتداد كل من كانت طينته
خبيثة. فلو أني أهلكت الكفار وأبقيت من قد ارتد من الطوائف التي كانت آمنت
بك لما كنت صدقت وعدي السابق للمؤمنين الذين أخلصوا التوحيد من قومك،
واعتصموا بحبل نبوتك بأن أستخلفهم في الأرض وأمكن لهم دينهم وأبدل خوفهم
بالامن لكي تخلص العبادة لي بذهاب الشك من قلوبهم.

How could I provide heirship and empowerment and replacement of fear
with security while I know the weakness of certainty of the people who
apostatized and their wicked dispositions and their evil insides, which
were the outcomes of hypocrisy and the initiation of misguidance. If
they had procured from Me the kingdom that will be given to the
believers at the time of heirship when I will have killed their enemies,
they would have sniffed the smells of its attractions, and it would have
strengthened the inner secrets of their hypocrisy, and eternalized the
strings of misguidance in their hearts, and they would have faced their
brothers with enmity and would have battled them in pursuit of chiefdom
and the distinction of commanding and forbidding. And how can the
religion’s empowerment and the Command’s spread amongst the believers
coexist with rise of mischief and occurrence of wars? Never. Build the
ark under Our eyes and as We reveal.’” Al-Sādiq (a.s) said, “Likewise is
the Qā'im (a.s). The days of his occultation will be lengthy so truth
may become clear and belief may become pure from impurity by the
apostasy of everyone from the Shī‘a with a wicked disposition, who are
feared they are hypocrites when they expect heirship and empowerment and
a vast security in the reign of the Qā'im (a.s).” Al-Mufadhdhal says, I
asked, “O’ son of the Messenger of Allah, the nawāsib believe this verse
has been revealed about Abu Bakr and ‘Omar and ‘Othmān and ‘Ali.” He
said, “May Allah not guide the hearts of the nawāsib. When was the
religion which Allah and His Messenger pleased with empowered through
spread of security in the Ummah and departure of fear from their hearts
and doubts from breasts during the reign of anyone of them? And in the
reign of ‘Ali (a.s) specially with the apostasy of Muslims and mischief
which were occurring in their days and the wars that were breaking out
between the disbelievers and between themselves.” Then al-Sādiq (a.s)
recited this verse, Until, when the apostles despaired and deemed they
were counted liars, Our succor came to him. “As for the virtuous servant
of Allah, Khidir: Allah, the Exalted, did not lengthen his lifespan for
the sake of an apostleship ordained to him, nor for a book sent to him,
nor for a code of law replacing the previous codes from other messengers
before him, nor for an Imamate obliging His servants to follow him, nor
any obedience mandated with respect to him. Instead, since Allah, the
Exalted, knew how lengthy He would make the life of the Qā'im (a.s) in
the days of his disappearance and He knew the rejection of His servants
with respect to the length of that life, He lengthened the lifespan of
the Virtuous Servant for no other reason but to argue on its basis for
the lifespan of the Qā'im (a.s) and so that the argument of the
adversaries may cease and people may not have any proofs against Allah.”

10- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Abu Basīr says, Said Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s), “There are
many prophetic customs in the Patron of this Order: a custom from Musā
Ibn ‘Imrān, a custom from Jesus, a custom from Joseph, a custom from
Muhammad (a.s). As for his custom from Moses, he is fearful, vigilant;
as for his custom from Jesus, it is said about him what was said about
Jesus; as for his custom from Joseph, it is the veil. Allah will put a
curtain between him and the people; they see him but they do not
recognize him. As for his custom from Muhammad (a.s), he strides with
guidance on the Prophet’s guidance and behaves according to his
conduct.”

وكيف يكون الاستخلاف والتمكين وبدل الخوف بالامن مني لهم مع ما كنت أعلم من
ضعف يقين الذين ارتدوا وخبث طينتهم، وسوء سرائرهم التي كانت نتائج النفاق
وسنوح الضلالة، فلو أنهم تسنموا (مني) من الملك الذي اوتي المؤمنين وقت
الاستخلاف إذا أهلكت أعداءهم لنشقوا روائح صفاته ولاستحكمت سرائر نفاقهم
وتأبد حبال ضلالة قلوبهم وكاشفوا إخوانهم بالعداوة وحاربوهم على طلب
الرئاسة والتفرد بالأمر والنهي وكيف يكون التمكين في الدين وانتشار الأمر
في المؤمنين مع إثارة الفتن وإيقاع الحروب كلا "وَاصْنَعْ الْفُلْكَ
بِأَعْيُنِنَا وَوَحْيِنَا." قال الصادق (ع) وكذلك القائم (ع) تمتد أيام
غيبته ليصرح الحق عن محضه، ويصفو الايمان من الكدر بارتداد كل من كانت
طينته خبيثة من الشيعة الذين يخشى عليهم النفاق إذا أحسوا بالاستخلاف
والتمكين والامن المنتشر في عهد القائم (ع). قال المفضل: فقلت: يا بن رسول
الله إن النواصب تزعم أن هذه الآية نزلت في أبي بكر وعمر وعثمان وعلي قال:
لا يهد الله قلوب الناصبة متى كان الدين الذي ارتضاه الله ورسوله متمكنا
بانتشار الامن في الأمة وذهاب الخوف من قلوبها، وارتفاع الشك من صدورها في
عهد أحد من هؤلاء وفي عهد علي (ع) مع ارتداد المسلمين والفتن التي كانت
تثور في أيامهم والحروب التي كانت تنشب بين الكفار وبينهم ثم تلا الصادق
(ع) "حَتَّى إِذَا اسْتَيْئَسَ الرُّسُلُ وَظَنُّوا أَنَّهُمْ قَدْ
كُذِبُوا جَاءَهُمْ نَصْرُنَا." وأما العبد الصالح الخضر (ع) فان الله
تبارك وتعالى ما طول عمره لنبوة قدرها له ولا لكتاب ينـزله عليه، ولا
لشريعة ينسخ بها شريعة من كان قبلها من الانبياء، ولا لامامة يلزم عباده
الاقتداء بها، ولا لطاعة يفرضها له، بلى إن الله تبارك وتعالى لما كان في
سابق علمه أن يقدر من عمر القائم (ع) في أيام غيبته ما يقدر وعلم ما يكون
من إنكاره عباده بمقدار ذلك العمر في الطول، طول عمر العبد الصالح من غير
سبب أوجب ذلك إلا لعلة الاستدلال به على عمر القائم (ع)، وليقطع بذلك حجة
المعاندين لئلا يكون للناس على الله حجة. (الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي) جماعة، عن
أبي المفضل، عن محمد بن بحر الشيباني، عن علي بن الحارث مثله.

10- إكمال الدين: المظفر العلوي، عن ابن العياشي، عن أبيه، عن علي بن محمد
بن شجاع، عن محمد بن عيسى، عن يونس، عن علي بن أبي حمزة، عن أبي بصير قال:
قال أبو عبد الله (ع): إن في صاحب هذا الأمر سنناً من الانبياء: سنة من
موسى بن عمران، وسنة من عيسى، وسنة من يوسف، وسنة من محمد(ص) وعليهم. فأما
سنته من موسى فخائف يترقب. وأما سنته من عيسى فيقال فيه ما قيل في عيسى.
وأما سنته من يوسف فالستر جعل الله بينه وبين الخلق حجاباً يرونه ولا
يعرفونه. وأما سنته من محمد(ص) فيهتدي بهداه ويسير بسيرته.

11- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Muhammad Ibn Sālih al-Bazzār says, I heard al-Hasan
Ibn ‘Ali al-‘Askari (a.s) say, “My son is the Qā'im after me and he is
the one in whom the traditions of lengthy lives and disappearance of the
apostles, peace be with them, will run, until hearts will turn like
stones for the length of the promised time and no one will stay in the
belief in him except the one that Allah, the Exalted, has inscribed
faith in his heart and has succored him with a Spirit from Him.”

12- *Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: Abu Basīr narrates that Abu Ja‘far (a.s)
said, “There is a similarity with Joseph in the Qā'im.”

I asked, “And what is that?”

He said, “Perplexity and disappearance.”

13- *Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: There are traditions which include the
news that the Patron of the Age dies and then lives or is killed and
then lives. View the following traditions for instance,

Abu Sa‘īd al-Khurāsāni says, I said to Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s), “For what
thing has he been named the Qā'im?”

He said, “Because he will rise after he dies. He will rise with the
Order of Allah.”

Abu Basīr says, I heard Abu Ja‘far (a.s) say, “The similitude of our
Order in the Divine Book is the similitude of the owner of the donkey,
Allah made him die for a hundred a years and then raised him up again.”

On the authority of the mu’edhdhin of the red mosque: I asked Abu
‘Abdillah (a.s), “Is there in the Book of Allah a similitude for the
Qā'im?” He said, “Yes, the verse of the owner of the donkey, Allah made
him die for a hundred years, and then He raised him up again.”

Himād Ibn ‘Abd il-Karīm says, Said Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s), “When the Qā'im
rises, people will say, ‘How this can be? His bones have decayed since a
long time ago.”

These traditions and the like have to be interpreted on the grounds that
“his name will die” and many people and not all will believe that “his
bones have decayed,” and then Allah will raise him as He raised the
owner of the donkey after his real death. This is the sound
interpretation of these narrations. Moreover, singularly narrated
traditions, which do not convey certitude, are not trusted with respect
to something that is rationally known and reasoning has led it to and is
supported by inordinate number of traditions. It is necessary not to
rule anything on such an occasion and adherence to what is already
known. We interpreted these traditions, while setting aside the
disputability of their authenticity, as is done in similar situations.

11- إكمال الدين: محمد بن علي بن بشار، عن المظفر بن أحمد، عن الاسدي، عن
البرمكي، عن الحسن بن محمد بن صالح البزاز قال: سمعت الحسن بن علي العسكري
(ع) يقول: إن ابني هو القائم من بعدي وهو الذي يجري فيه سنن الانبياء (ع)
بالتعمير والغيبة حتى تقسو القلوب لطول الامد ولا يثبت على القول به إلا من
كتب الله(عز و جل) في قلبه الايمان وأيده بروح منه.

12- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: روى أبو بصير، عن أبي جعفر (ع) قال: في القائم
شبه من يوسف قلت: وما هو؟ قال: الحيرة والغيبة.

13- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: وأما ماروي من الاخبار التي تتضمن أن صاحب الزمان
يموت ثم يعيش أو يقتل ثم يعيش نحو ما رواه الفضل بن شاذان، عن موسى بن
سعدان، عن عبد الله بن القاسم الحضرمي، عن أبي سعيد الخراساني قال: قلت
لابي عبد الله (ع): لأي شئ سمي القائم؟ قال: لانه يقوم بعدما يموت إنه يقوم
بأمر عظيم، يقوم بأمر الله.

وروى محمد بن عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن أبيه، عن يعقوب بن يزيد عن علي
بن الحكم، عن حماد بن عثمان، عن أبي بصير قال: سمعت أبا جعفر (ع) يقول: مثل
أمرنا في كتاب الله تعالى مثل صاحب الحمار أماته الله مأة عام ثم بعثه.
وعنه، عن أبيه، عن جعفر بن محمد الكوفي، عن إسحاق بن محمد، عن القاسم ابن
الربيع، عن علي بن الخطاب، عن مؤذن مسجد الاحمر قال: سألت أبا عبد الله (ع)
هل في كتاب الله مثل للقائم؟ فقال: نعم، آية صاحب الحمار أماته الله مائة
عام ثم بعثه. وروى الفضل بن شاذان، عن ابن أبي نجران، عن محمد بن الفضيل،
عن حماد ابن عبد الكريم قال: قال أبو عبد الله (ع): إن القائم إذا قام قال
الناس: أنى يكون هذا وقد بليت عظامه منذ دهر طويل. فالوجه في هذه الاخبار
وما شاكلها أن نقول: يموت ذكره ويعتقد أكثر الناس أنه بلي عظامه ثم يظهره
الله كما أظهر صاحب الحمار بعد موته الحقيقي وهذا وجه قريب في تأويل هذه
الاخبار على أنه لا يرجع بأخبار آحاد لا يوجب علما عما دلت العقول عليه
وساق الاعتبار الصحيح إليه، وعضده الاخبار المتواترة التي قدمناها بل
الواجب التوقف في هذه والتمسك بما هو معلوم وإنما تأولناها بعد تسليم صحتها
على ما يفعل في نظائرها ويعارض هذه الاخبار ما ينافيها.
