the Emissaries Who Communicated Between the Shī‘a and the Qā’im During the Minor Occultation
============================================================================================

1- *Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: It has been recorded in certain
narrations that they have said, “Our servants and our caretakers are the
most evil of Allah’s creation.” This statement is not meant to be
general and all inclusive. They have said so because these individuals
included non-Shi‘a and traitors, as we shall mention. Muhammad Ibn
‘Abdillah Ibn Ja‘far al-Humyari narrates on the authority of his father
from Muhammad Ibn Sālih al-Hamdani, saying, I wrote to the Patron of the
Age (a.s) that my family was abusing me and were rebuking me with the
tradition that has been narrated from your forefathers, peace be with
them, “Our servants and our caretakers are the most evil of Allah’s
creation.” The holy Imam wrote back, “Do you not read what Allah, the
High, has said, And We set between them and the cities that We have
blessed, cities apparent. By Allah, we are the cities which Allah has
blessed and you are the cities apparent.

*Ikmāl al-Dīn*: My father and Ibn al-Walīd both have narrated on the
authority of al-Humyari from Muhammad Ibn Sālih al-Hamdāni a similar
account. Then he said, ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘far said, ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad
al-Kulaini narrated this hadith on the authority of Muhammad Ibn Sālih
from the Patron of the Age (a.s).

‘Allāma Majlisi says, Then Sheikh Tūsi mentions some of the companions
of the Imams, Divine bliss be for them, who have been praised. And then
he says, Of the emissaries in the time of the minor occultation, who
have been extolled, their first one is the person appointed by Abu
al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-‘Askari and his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad, peace be with them all. He was the reliable
scholar Abu ‘Amr ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd al-‘Amri and was from the tribe of
Asad. He has been called al-‘Amri on the virtue of the narration of Abu
Nasr Hibatullah Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ahmad al-Kātib Ibn Bint Abi Ja‘far
al-‘Amri (a.s) saying, He was from the Asad, and is known by his
grandfather’s name and therefore, it is said al-‘Amri.

#### أحوال السفراء الذين كانوا في زمان الغيبة الصغرى وسائط بين الشيعة وبين القائم (ع) {dir="RTL"}

1- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي قد روي (في) بعض الاخبار أنهم قالوا خدامنا وقوامنا
شرار خلق الله وهذا ليس على عمومه، وإنما قالوا لان فيهم من غير وبدل وخان
على ما سنذكره. وقد روى محمد بن عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري عن أبيه عن محمد
بن صالح الهمداني قال: كتبت إلى صاحب الزمان (ع) أن أهل بيتى يؤذوني
ويقرعوني بالحديث الذي روي عن آبائك (ع) أنهم قالوا: خدامنا وقوامنا شرار
خلق الله فكتب (ع): ويحكم ما تقرؤن ما قال الله تعالى: "وَجَعَلْنَا
بَيْنَهُمْ وَبَيْنَ الْقُرَى الَّتِي بَارَكْنَا فِيهَا قُرًى ظَاهِرَةً"
فنحن والله القرى التي بارك الله فيها وأنتم القرى الظاهرة.

إكمال الدين: أبي، وابن الوليد معا، عن الحميري، عن محمد بن صالح الهمداني
مثله. ثم قال: قال عبد الله بن جعفر: وحدثني بهذا الحديث علي بن محمد
الكليني عن محمد بن صالح، عن صاحب الزمان (ع).

أقول: ثم ذكر الشيخ بعض أصحاب الائمة صلوات الله عليهم الممدوحين ثم قال:
فأما السفراء الممدوحون في زمان الغيبة فأولهم من نصبه أبو الحسن علي ابن
محمد العسكري وأبو محمد الحسن بن علي بن محمد ابنه (ع) وهو الشيخ الموثوق
به أبو عمرو عثمان بن سعيد العمري وكان أسديا وإنما سمي العمري لما رواه
أبو نصر هبة الله بن محمد بن أحمد الكاتب بن بنت أبي جعفر العمري (ره).

A group of the Shī‘a has said, Abu Muhammad al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali (a.s)
said, “The names Ibn ‘Othmān and Abu ‘Amr shall not gather in one man,”
and ordered him to break his patronym, so he was called al-‘Amri. He is
also called al-‘Askari, because he was from the ‘Askar of Surra Man
Ra’ā. He is also called al-Sammān, because he used to trade grease in
order to conceal his task. When the Shī‘a carried their religious dues
to Abu Muhammad (a.s), they would send it to Abu ‘Amr, which he would
place in containers that were used for grease and carry them to Abu
Muhammad (a.s) because of taqiyya and fear.

A group of scholars narrated to me from Abu Muhammad Hārūn Ibn Musā from
Abu ‘Ali Muhammad Ibn Himām al-Iskāfi, who said Ahmad Ibn Ishāq Ibn Sa‘d
al-Qummi narrated to us, saying, I entered on a certain day upon Abu
al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad, peace be with him (a.s). I said, “O’ my
master, many a time, I go away and then come to your vicinity, yet I am
still not able to find access to you every time I come nearby. So whose
word should we accept and whose order should we obey?” The Imam (a.s)
said, “This is Abu ‘Amr. He is trustworthy and honest. He is the
trustworthy man of the past and my man of trust in my lifetime and after
my death. Whatever he says to you, he says it from us; whatever he
delivers to you, he does so from me.” Abu Muhammad Hārun said, Abu ‘Ali
said, Abu al-‘Abbas al-Humyari said, We would often discuss this
narration and extol the eminence of Abu ‘Amr. A group of scholars
narrated to us from Abu Muhammad Hārūn from Muhammad Ibn Himām from
‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘far, saying, On a certain year after the demise of Abu
Muhammad (a.s), we performed Hajj. I went to Ahmad Ibn Ishāq at the and
saw Abu ‘Amr with him. I said, “This Sheikh,” pointing to Ahmad Ibn
Ishāq, “and he is a trustworthy and admirable man before us, has
narrated to us,” such and such. I narrated to him all of the narrative,
which we have mentioned above on the account of the eminent position of
Abu ‘Amr. I said, “You are now someone whose word and truthfulness is
not dubitable. I beseech you for the sake of Allah and the sake of the
two Imams who have declared you trustworthy, have you seen the son of
Abu Muhammad who is the Patron of the Age?” He wept and then said, “You
cannot inform anyone with this regard so long as I am alive.”  I said,
“Sure so.” He said, “I have verily seen him and his neck is like this.”
He wanted to say that he has the most beautiful and wholesome of the
necks.  I asked, “And the name?” He said, “You have been all forbidden
from that.” Ahmad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Nūh Abu al-‘Abbās al-Sairāfi narrates
through the chain of narration from Muhammad Ibn Ismā‘il al-Hasīn and
‘Ali Ibn ‘Abdillah al-Hasīn, that the two men said, We entered upon Abu
Muhammad al-Hasan (a.s) at Surra Man Ra’ā. There were a congregation of
his devotees and his Shī‘a in his presence when Badr, his servant,
entered and said, “O’ my master, there is a nation, streaked in dust and
with uncombed hair, at the gate.” The Imam said, “They are a
congregation of our Shī‘a from Yemen.”

قال أبو محمد الحسن بن علي قال لا يجمع على امرء ابن عثمان، وأبو عمرو،
وأمر بكسر كنيته فقيل العمري. ويقال له: العسكري أيضا لأنه كان من عسكر سر
من رأى ويقال له: السمان لانه كان يتجر في السمن تغطية على الأمر. وكان
الشيعة إذا حملوا إلى أبي محمد (ع) ما يجب عليهم حمله من الاموال أنفذوا
إلى أبي عمرو فيجعله في جراب السمن وزقاقه ويحمله إلى أبي محمد (ع) تقية
وخوفا. فأخبرني جماعة، عن أبي محمد هارون بن موسى، عن أبي علي محمد بن همام
الاسكافي قال: حدثنا عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري قال: حدثنا أحمد بن إسحاق
ابن سعد القمي قال: دخلت على أبي الحسن علي بن محمد صلوات الله عليه في يوم
من الايام فقلت: يا سيدي أنا أغيب وأشهد، ولا يتهيأ لي الوصول إليك إذا
شهدت في كل وقت فقول من نقبل؟ وأمر من نمتثل؟ فقال لي صلوات الله عليه: هذا
أبو عمرو الثقة الامين ما قاله الحكم فعني يقوله، وما أداه إليكم فعني
يؤديه. فلما مضى أبو الحسن (ع) وصلت إلى أبي محمد ابنه الحسن صاحب العسكر
(ع) ذات يوم، فقلت له: مثل قولي لابيه فقال لي: "هذا أبو عمرو الثقة الامين
ثقة الماضي وثقتي في الحياة والممات، فما قاله لكم فعني يقوله، وما أدى
إليكم فعني يؤديه." قال أبو محمد هارون: قال أبو علي: قال أبو العباس
الحميري: فكنا كثيراً ما نتذاكر هذا القول ونتواصف جلالة محل أبي عمرو.
وأخبرنا جماعة عن أبي محمد هارون، عن محمد بن همام، عن عبد الله بن جعفر
قال: حججنا في بعض السنين بعد مضي أبي محمد (ع) فدخلت على أحمد بن إسحاق
بمدينة السلام فرأيت أبا عمرو عنده فقلت: إن هذا الشيخ وأشرت إلى أحمد بن
إسحاق وهو عندنا الثقة المرضي حدثنا فيك بكيت وكيت، واقتصصت عليه ما تقدم
يعني ما ذكرناه عنه من فضل أبي عمرو ومحله وقلت: أنت الآن من لا يشك في
قوله وصدقه فأسألك بحق الله وبحق الامامين اللذين وثقاك، هل رأيت ابن أبي
محمد الذي هو صاحب الزمان، فبكى ثم قال: على أن لا تخبر بذلك أحدا وأنا حي؟
قلت: نعم، قال: قد رأيته (ع) وعنقه هكذا يريد أنها أغلظ الرقاب حسنا
وتماما، قلت: فالاسم، قال: قد نهيتم عن هذا. وروى أحمد بن علي بن نوح أبو
العباس السيرافي قال: أخبرنا أبو نصر عبد الله بن محمد بن أحمد المعروف
بابن برينة الكاتب قال: حدثنا بعض الشراف من الشيعة الامامية أصحاب الحديث
قال: حدثني أبو محمد العباس بن أحمد الصائغ قال حدثني الحسين بن أحمد
الخصيبي قال: حدثني محمد بن إسماعيل وعلي بن عبد الله الحسينان قالا: دخلنا
على أبي محمد الحسن (ع) بسر من رأى وبين يديه جماعة من أوليائه وشيعته، حتى
دخل عليه بدر خادمه، فقال: يا مولاي بالباب قوم شعث غبر، فقال لهم: هؤلاء
نفر من شيعتنا باليمن.

The narration is long. The two narrators say, Al-Hasan (a.s) said to
Badr, “Go and bring ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd al-‘Amri to us.” It was not long
that ‘Othmān entered. Our master Abu Muhammad (a.s) said to him, “O’
‘Othmān go, for you are the representative and the reliable and
entrusted man with respect to God’s money. Take from these Yemeni
gentlemen the religious dues they have brought.” Then the two narrators
continue their narrative until they say, Then we all said, “O’ our
Master, by Allah, ‘Othmān is of the best of your Shī‘a. You increased
our knowledge with respect to his position in your service and that he
is your representative and your reliable man in God’s money.” He said,
“Yes, and bear witness for me that ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘id al-‘Amri is my
representative and that his son Muhammad is the representative of my son
your Mahdi.”

Abu Nasr, who is the great grandson of al-‘Amri’s daughter, narrates
through his chain of narration that when al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali (a.s) passed
away, ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd (a.s) attended his burial bath and served in all
of his rituals of shrouding, scenting, and burial. He was ordered to be
the caretaker in the superficies, and superficies cannot be rejected but
through the rejection of the reality of things because of their
appearances. The letters of the Patron of the Order (a.s) to his Shī‘a
and the intimate devotees of his father Abu Muhammad (a.s), containing
orders and prohibitions and answers to their queries when they needed to
pose questions, would come through ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd and his son Abu
Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān. These letters were in the same handwriting
that used to come in the lifetime of al-Hasan (a.s). The Shī‘a continued
to recognize him as a righteous man until ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘id (a.s) died
and his son Abu Ja‘far gave him burial bath and took over the task. Then
onwards, all undertakings were accomplished through Abu Ja‘far and the
Shī‘a remained unanimous on his uprightness and trustworthiness and
honesty due to the narration recorded during his father’s lifetime that
enunciated his honesty and uprightness and commanded the Shī‘a to refer
to him in the lifetime of al-Hasan (a.s) as well as after his death.

Ahmad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Nūh Abu al-‘Abbās al-Sairāfi narrates on the
authority of a number of named narrators in a long well-known narration,
in which they all say, We gathered before Abu Muhammad al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali
(a.s) to ask him about the Hujja after him. There were forty men in the
gathering. ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd Ibn ‘Amr al-‘Amri rose and said, “O’ son of
the Messenger of Allah, I want to ask you about a great subject which
you know better than me.” “Sit down, O’ ‘Othmān,” he told him. ‘Othmān
rose to leave. The Imam said, “No one leaves.” None of us left. It was
an hour that the Imam called ‘Othmān. ‘Othmān who rose on his feet. The
Imam said, “Shall I inform you why you have come?” They said, “Yes, O’
son of the Messenger of Allah.” He said, “You have to ask me about the
Hujja after me.” They said, “Yes.” Suddenly, there came a boy, as he
were a piece of the moon and more similar to Abu Muhammad (a.s) than all
the people.

في حديث طويل يسوقانه إلى أن ينتهي إلى أن قال الحسن (ع) لبدر: فامض فائتنا
بعثمان بن سعيد العمري فما لبثنا إلا يسيرا حتى دخل عثمان، فقال له سيدنا
أبو محمد (ع): امض يا عثمان فانك الوكيل والثقة المأمون على مال الله،
واقبض من هؤلاء اليمنيين ما حملوه من المال.

ثم ساق الحديث إلى أن قالا: ثم قلنا بأجمعنا: يا سيدنا والله إن عثمان لمن
خيار شيعتك ولقد زدتنا علما بموضعه من خدمتك وأنه وكيلك وثقتك على مال
الله، قال: نعم، واشهدوا على أن عثمان بن سعيد العمري وكيلي وأن ابنه محمدا
وكيل ابني مهديكم. عنه، عن أبي نصر هبة الله بن محمد بن أحمد الكاتب ابن
بنت أبي جعفر العمري قدس الله روحه وأرضاه عن شيوخه أنه لما مات الحسن بن
علي (ع) حضر غسله عثمان بن سعيد (ع) وأرضاه وتولى جميع أمره في تكفينه
وتحنيطه وتقبيره مأمورا بذلك للظاهر من الحال التي لا يمكن جحدها ولا دفعها
إلا بدفع حقائق الاشياء في ظواهرها. وكانت توقيعات صاحب الأمر (ع) تخرج على
يدي عثمان بن سعيد وابنه أبي جعفر محمد بن عثمان إلى شيعته وخواص أبيه أبي
محمد (ع) بالامر والنهي والاجوبة عما تسأل الشيعة عنه إذا احتاجت إلى
السؤال فيه بالخط الذي كان يخرج في حياة الحسن (ع).

فلم تزل الشيعة مقيمة على عدالتهما إلى أن توفي عثمان بن سعيد (ره) وغسله
ابنه أبو جعفر وتولى القيام به وحصل الأمر كله مردودا إليه والشيعة مجتمعة
على عدالته وثقته وأمانته، لما تقدم له من النص عليه بالامانة والعدالة،
والامر بالرجوع إليه في حياة الحسن (ع)، وبعد موته في حياة أبيه عثمان
(ره). قال: وقال جعفر بن محمد بن مالك الفزاري البزاز، عن جماعة من الشيعة
منهم علي بن بلال، وأحمد بن بلال، ومحمد بن معاوية بن حكيم، والحسن بن أيوب
بن نوح في خبر طويل مشهور قالوا جميعا: اجتمعنا إلى أبي محمد الحسن بن علي
(ع) نسأله عن الحجة من بعده، وفي مجلسه أربعون رجلا فقام إليه عثمان بن
سعيد ابن عمرو العمري فقال له: يا ابن رسول الله اريد أن أسألك عن أمر أنت
أعلم به مني، فقال له: اجلس يا عثمان فقام مغضباً ليخرج، فقال: لا يخرجن
أحد فلم يخرج منا أحد إلى كان بعد ساعة فصاح (ع) بعثمان فقام على قدميه
فقال: اخبركم بما جئتم؟ قالوا: نعم يا ابن رسول الله قال: جئتم تسألوني عن
الحجة من بعدي قالوا: نعم، فإذا غلام كأنه قطع قمر أشبه الناس بأبي محمد
(ع).

The Imam said, “This is your Imam after me and my caliph over you. Obey
him and do not disperse after me, lest you will perish in your
religions. Behold, you will not see him after this day of yours until
ages pass. So, accept from ‘Othmān what he says and obey his order and
accept his word, because he is the caliph of your Imam and the affairs
are in his hands.”

Abu Nasr Hibtullah Ibn Muhammad says in a narration, The tomb of ‘Othmān
Ibn Sa‘īd is on the western side of Baghdad in the street of the turf.
It is in the beginning of the famous place in the gate known as the gate
of Hubla, in the gate of the Mosque on the right side. The tomb is in
the very qibla of the mosque.

Sheikh Tūsi has said, I saw his tomb in the said spot. A wall had been
erected at its face at which the mosque’s mihrāb stood. On its side is a
gate that goes to the tomb in a dark and small room. We used to enter
that room and visit him every month. Such was my practice from the time
of my arrival at Baghdad, which was at the year four hundred and eight,
until the year four hundred and thirty and something. Then the Chief Abu
Mansūr Muhammad Ibn al-Faraj tore down that wall and manifested the tomb
to view and built a sepulcher over it. It is under a ceiling and anyone
who desires can enter and visit it. The neighbors seek blessing by
visiting him and believe that he is a virtuous man. They often say he is
the son of the woman who raised the Doyen of the Martyrs al-Husain (a.s)
and do not know the reality about him. This condition continues until
this day of ours, which is the year four hundred and forty seven.

Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd al-‘Amri
--------------------------------------------------

When Abu ‘Amr ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd died, his son Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn
‘Othmān stood in his place, on the virtue of the clear instructions of
Abu Muhammad (a.s) and the instructions of his father about the time of
the Qā'im (a.s). A congregation of scholars narrated to me on the
authority of Abu al-Hasan Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn Dāwūd al-Qummi and Ibn
Qulawayh from Sa‘d Ibn ‘Abdillah, saying, the Veracious Sheikh Ahmad Ibn
Ishāq Ibn Sa‘d al-Ash‘ari (a.s) narrated to us, and then he mentions the
account which we brought earlier. A congregation of our scholars
narrated to me from all of the eminent personages of Abu al-Qāsim Ja‘far
Ibn Muhammad Ibn Qulawayh and Abu Ghālib al-Rāzi and Abu Muhammad
al-Tala‘kabari, who all narrate from Muhammad Ibn Ya‘qūb al-Kulaini, who
narrates from Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdillah and Muhammad Ibn Yahyā, who narrate
from ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘far al-Humyari, saying, I and al-Sheikh Abu ‘Amr
were with Ahmad Ibn Ishāq al-Ash‘ari al-Qummi. Ahmad Ibn Ishāq made a
gesture to me to ask him about the Heir. So, I asked him, “O’ Abu ‘Amr,
I want to ask you a question; however, I am not unsure about what I want
to ask you, for my faith and my belief is that the earth does not remain
without a Hujja, unless it is forty days prior to the Day of Judgment.
And when that happens, the Hujja is ascended and the gateway of
repentance is shut.

فقال: هذا إمامكم من بعدي وخليفتي عليكم أطيعوه ولا تتفرقوا من بعدي
فتهلكوا في أديانكم ألا وإنكم لاترونه من بعد يومكم هذا حتى يتم له عمر
فاقبلوا من عثمان ما يقوله وانتهوا إلى أمره، واقبلوا قوله، فهو خليفة
إمامكم والامر إليه.

في حديث قال أبو نصر هبة الله بن محمد: وقبر عثمان بن سعيد بالجانب الغربي
من مدينة السلام في شارع الميدان في أول الموضع المعروف، في الدرب المعروف
بدرب حبلة في مسجد الذرب يمنة الداخل إليه والقبر في نفس قبلة المسجد. ثم
قال الشيخ رأيت قبره في الموضع الذي ذكره وكان بني في وجهه حائط وبه محراب
المسجد وإلى جنبه باب يدخل إلى موضع القبر في بيت ضيق مظلم، فكنا ندخل إليه
ونـزوره مشاهرة، وكذلك من وقت دخولي إلى بغداد وهي سنة ثمان وأربعمائة إلى
سنة نيف وثلاثين وأربعمائة ثم نقض ذلك الحائط الرئيس أبو منصور محمد بن
الفرج وأبرز القبر إلى بر او عمل عليه صندوقا، وهو تحت سقف يدخل إليه من
أراده ويزوره، ويتبرك جيران المحلة بزيارته ويقولون هو رجل صالح وربما
قالوا: هو ابن داية الحسين ولا يعرفون حقيقة الحال فيه وهو إلى يومنا هذا،
وذلك سنة سبع وأربعين وأربعمائة على ما هو عليه.

### ذكر أبى جعفر محمد بن عثمان بن سعيد العمري والقول فيه {dir="RTL"}

فلما مضى أبو عمرو عثمان بن سعيد قام ابنه أبو جعفر محمد بن عثمان مقامه
بنص أبي محمد (ع) ونص أبيه عثمان عليه بأمر القائم (ع).

فأخبرني جماعة عن أبي الحسن محمد بن أحمد بن داود القمي، وابن قولويه، عن
سعد بن عبد الله قال: حدثنا الشيخ الصدوق أحمد بن إسحاق بن سعد الاشعري
(ره) وذكر الحديث الذي قدمنا ذكره. وأخبرني جماعة، عن أبي القاسم جعفر بن
محمد بن قولويه وأبي غالب الزراري وأبي محمد التلعكبري، كلهم عن محمد بن
يعقوب الكليني، عن محمد بن عبد الله، ومحمد بن يحيى، عن عبد الله بن جعفر
الحميري قال: اجتمعت أنا والشيخ أبو عمرو عند أحمد بن إسحاق بن سعد الاشعري
القمي فغمزني أحمد بن إسحاق أن أسأله عن الخلف. فقلت له: يابا عمرو إني
اريد أن أسألك وما أنا بشاك فيما اريد أن أسألك عنه فان اعتقادي وديني أن
الأرض لا تخلو من حجة إلا إذا كان قبل القيامة بأربعين يوما فإذا كان ذلك
رفعت الحجة وغلق باب التوبة.

And it will not benefit any soul has it not already believed and earned
good in its belief. They are the wicked of God’s creation and they are
the ones that the Day of Judgment shall stand against them. However, I
desire to increase my certitude, as Abraham (a.s) asked his Lord to show
him how He brings the dead back to life. He said, ‘Do you believe not?
He said, Indeed; rather, for my heart to satisfy. Abu ‘Ali Ahmad Ibn
Ishāq has narrated to me from Abu al-Hasan (a.s). He said, I asked the
Imam, ‘With who should I transact and from whom should I learn and whose
word should accept?’ The Imam said to him, ‘Al-‘Amri is my trustworthy
man. Whatever he delivers to you, he does so from me. And whatever he
says to you, he does so from me. So listen to him and obey him, for he
is a trustworthy and honest man.’ Also Abu ‘Ali narrated to me that he
asked Abu Muhammad al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali the same question and the Imam said
to him, ‘Al-‘Amri and his son are two trustworthy men. Whatever they
deliver to you, they deliver from me; and whatever they say to you, they
say from me. Listen to them and obey them, for they are two trustworthy
and honest men.’ These are the words of two Imams of the past about
you.”

Abu ‘Amr fell into prostration and tears rolled down from his eyes and
then he said, “Ask.” I said to him, “Have you seen the Heir of Abu
Muhammad (a.s)?” He said, “Yes, by Allah. And his neck is like this,”
and he pointed with his hands. I said to him, “I have one more
question.” He said, “Bring it forth.” I said, “His name?” He said, “That
is forbidden to you to ask about. I am not saying this from myself, nor
am I permitted to allow or disallow. Rather, this prohibition is from
the Imam himself (a.s). The scepter’s impression is that Abu Muhammad
(a.s) passed away and did not leave a son behind and that his
bequeathals were divided and taken over by people who were not entitled
to do that. He bore patience on that. There is his household, wandering
about and there is no one who has the courage to recognize them or offer
them something. Should the name come out, search will be on. So fear God
and hold back from that.”

Al-Kulaini said, A Sheikh from our scholars, that my memory fails his
name, said that Abu ‘Amr was asked in the presence of Ahmad Ibn Ishāq
the same question and he gave a similar answer. A congregation of our
scholars narrated to us from Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain Ibn Musā
Ibn Bābawayh from Ahmad Ibn Hārūn al-Fāmi, saying, Muhammad Ibn
‘Abdillah Ibn Ja‘far al-Humyari narrated to us from his father ‘Abdillah
Ibn Ja‘far, saying, A holy letter came out to al-Sheikh Abu Ja‘far
Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd al-‘Amri, may Allah sanctify his soul,
consoling him for his father (a.s). One section of the letter read, “We
belong to Allah and to Him do we return, submit to His command and are
pleased with His destiny. Your father lived fortuitously and died
praiseworthy. May Allah have mercy on him and take him to the company of
his Imams and his masters, peace be with them. He was always dedicated
to their cause and diligent in what would take him near Allah, the
Exalted, and the Imams.

فلم يكن ينفع نفسا إيمانها لم تكن آمنت من قبل أو كسبت في إيمانها خيرا،
فاولئك أشرار من خلق الله(عزوجل)، وهم الذين تقوم عليهم القيامة. ولكن
أحببت أن أزداد يقينا فان إبراهيم (ع) سأل ربه أن يريه كيفى يحيي الموتى،
فقال: أو لم تؤمن؟ قال: بلى ولكن ليطمئن قلبي.

وقد أخبرني أحمد بن إسحاق أبو علي، عن أبي الحسن (ع) قال: سألته فقلت له:
من اعامل؟ وعمن آخذ؟ وقول من أقبل؟ فقال له: العمري ثقتي فما أدى إليك فعني
يؤدي وما قال لك فعني يقول: فاسمع له وأطع فانه الثقة المأمون.

قال: وأخبرني أبو علي أنه سأل أبا محمد الحسن بن علي عن مثل ذلك فقال له:
العمري وابنه ثقتان فما أديا إليك فعني يؤديان وما قالا لك فعني يقولان
فاسمع. لهما وأطعهما فانهما الثقتان المأمونان. فهذا قول إمامين قد مضيا
فيك قال: فخر أبو عمرو ساجدا وبكى ثم قال: سل. فقلت له: أنت رأيت الخلف من
أبي محمد (ع) فقال: أي والله ورقبته مثل ذا وأومأ بيديه، فقلت له: فبقيت
واحدة فقال لي: هات، قلت: فالاسم قال: محرم عليكم أن تسألوا عن ذلك ولا
أقول هذا من عندي وليس لي أن احلل واحرم ولكن عنه (ع) فان الأمر عند
السلطان أن أبا محمد (ع) مضى ولم يخلف ولدا وقسم ميراثه وأخذه من لا حق له.
وصبر على ذلك، وهو ذا عياله يجولون وليس أحد يجسر أن يتعرف إليهم أو ينيلهم
شيئا، وإذا وقع الاسم وقع الطلب فاتقوا الله وأمسكوا عن ذلك.

قال الكليني: وحدثني شيخ من أصحابنا ذهب عني اسمه أن أبا عمرو سئل عند أحمد
بن إسحاق، عن مثل هذا، فأجاب بمثل هذا.

وأخبرنا جماعة، عن محمد بن علي بن الحسين بن موسى بن بابويه، عن أحمد بن
هارون الفامي قال: حدثنا محمد بن عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري، عن أبيه عبد
الله بن جعفر قال: خرج التوقيع إلى الشيخ أبي جعفر محمد بن عثمان بن سعيد
العمري قدس الله روحه في التعزية بأبيه (ع)، وفي فصل من الكتاب: "إنا لله
وإنا إليه راجعون تسليماً لأمره ورضىً بقضائه.

عاش أبوك سعيداً ومات حميداً فرحمه الله وألحقه بأوليائه ومواليه (ع). فلم
يزل مجتهدا في أمرهم ساعيا فيما يقربه إلى الله(عزوجل) وإليهم.

May Allah beautify his visage and forgive him his shortcomings.” Another
segment of the letter reads, “May Allah increase upon you the reward and
may He adorn for you the grieving. This tragedy has struck you and has
struck us. His separation has left you in fright and has left us in
fright. May Allah please him in his eternal abode. Of the best of his
fortuitousness was that Allah gave him a son like you, to stay behind
him and take his place and perform his task and seek mercy for him. I
say, All praise belongs to Allah, for breathes are sacred at your place
and at what Allah has given you and placed before you. May Allah help
you and strengthen you and empower you and grant you success. May He be
your Guardian and Protector and Shepherd.”

2- *Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: A congregation of our scholars narrated
to me from Hārūn Ibn Musā from Muhammad Ibn Himām, saying, ‘Abdullah Ibn
Ja‘far al-Humyari said to me, When Abu ‘Amr (a.s) passed away, letters
continued to come to us with the same handwriting through which we used
to receive letters on the virtue of Abu Ja‘far (a.s) taking his father’s
place.

On the authority of the same chain of narration from Muhammad Ibn Himām,
who says, Muhammad Ibn Hemawayh Ibn ‘Abd al-‘Azīz al-Rāzi recounted to
me in the year two hundred and eighty that Muhammad Ibn Ibrāhim Ibn
Mahziyār al-Ahwāzi recounted that a letter came to him after the demise
of Abu ‘Amr that stated, “And his son, may Allah protect him, has always
been our man of trust during the lifetime of his father (a.s). He is to
us like his father and in his place. He orders to our command and
according to our command he acts. May Allah cherish him. Pay heed to his
word. And let this assertion of ours be known.”

A congregation narrated to us from Abu al-Qāsim Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad Ibn
Qulawayh and Abu Ghālib al-Rāzi and Abu Muhammad al-Tala‘kabari, all of
whom narrate from Muhammad Ibn Ya‘qūb on the authority of Ishāq Ibn
Ya‘qub, who says, I asked Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān al-‘Amri to deliver a
letter of mine, in which I had asked about some queries that had baffled
me. The answer with the hand writing of our Master the Patron of the
House came that stated, “As for Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān al-‘Amri, may Allah
be pleased with him and his father before him: he has my full trust and
his letter is my letter.

3- *Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: Abu al-‘Abbās said, Hibatullah Ibn
Muhammad Ibn Bint Umm Kulthūm Bint Abi Ja‘far al-‘Amri (a.s) narrated to
me from his teachers, who said, The Shī‘a always believed in the
uprightness of ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd (a.s). His son Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn
‘Othmān performed his burial bath and took the charge and assumed
leadership. The Shī‘a were all unanimous on his uprightness and
trustworthiness and honesty, due to the explicit narrations pronouncing
his honesty and uprightness and commanding the people to refer to him in
the lifetime of al-Hasan (a.s) and after his death in the lifetime of
his father ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd.

نضر الله وجهه وأقاله عثرته."

وفي فصل آخر: "أجزل الله لك الثواب وأحسن لك العزاء رزئت ورزئنا وأوحشك
فراقه وأوحشنا فسره الله في منقلبه، وكان من كمال سعادته أن رزقه الله ولدا
مثلك يخلفه من بعده ويقوم مقامه بأمره ويترحم عليه، وأقول الحمد لله فان
الانفس طيبة بمكانك، وما جعله الله(عزوجل) فيك وعندك، أعانك الله وقواك
وعضدك ووفقك وكان لك وليا وحافظا وراعيا."

2- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي وأخبرني جماعة، عن هارون بن موسى، عن محمد بن همام
قال: قال لي عبد الله جعفر الحميري: لما مضى أبو عمرو (ع) أتتنا الكتب
بالخط الذي كنا نكاتب به باقامة أبي جعفر (ع) مقامه.

وبهذا الاسناد عن محمد بن همام قال: حدثني محمد بن حمويه بن عبد العزيز
الرازي في سنة ثمانين ومائتين قال: حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم بن مهزيار
الاهوازي أنه خرج إليه بعد وفاة أبي عمرو: والابن وقاه الله لم يزل ثقتنا
في حياة الاب (ع) وأرضاه ونضر وجهه، يجري عندنا مجراه، ويسد مسده وعن أمرنا
يأمر الابن، وبه يعمل تولاه الله فانته إلى قوله، وعرف معاملتنا ذلك.

وأخبرنا جماعة، عن أبي القاسم جعفر بن محمد بن قولويه وأبي غالب الزراري
وأبي محمد التلعكبري كلهم، عن محمد بن يعقوب، عن إسحاق بن يعقوب قال: سألت
محمد بن عثمان العمري أن يوصل لي كتاب قد سألت فيه عن مسائل أشكلت علي فوقع
التوقيع بخط مولانا صاحب الدار: وأما محمد بن عثمان العمري(رضي الله عنه)
وعن أبيه من قبل فانه ثقتي وكتابه كتابي.

3- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: أبو العباس: وأخبرني هبة الله بن محمد ابن بنت ام
كلثوم بنت أبي جعفر العمري(رضي الله عنه)، عن شيوخه قالوا: لم تزل الشيعة
مقيمة على عدالة عثمان بن سعيد (ره) وغسله ابنه أبو جعفر محمد بن عثمان
وتولى القيام به وجعل الأمر كله مردودا إليه، والشيعة مجمعة على عدالته
وثقته وأمانته، لما تقدم له من النص عليه بالامانة والعدالة، والامر
بالرجوع إليه في حياة الحسن (ع) وبعد موته في حياة أبيه عثمان بن سعيد.

The Shī‘a did not dispute his uprightness nor did they doubt his
honesty. The letters came out through him to the Shī‘a in their
important matters during his life. They were by the same handwriting as
they were in the lifetime of his father ‘Othmān. The Shī‘a did not know
anyone else but him in this position. Nor did they turn to anyone else
but him. Many signs and miracles of the Imam, which appeared through
him, have been narrated. He spoke of the events to the Shī‘a that
increased their faith in this regard and they are well-known before the
Shī‘a. We will bring a fragment of them and will not prolong the
discourse through their repetition, because this much is sufficient for
the fair minded investigator.

Ibn Nūh says, Abu Nasr Hibatullah Ibn Bint Kulthūm Bint Abi Ja‘far
al-‘Amri said to me, Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān al-‘Amri had a
number of books. He had written them on the subject of fiqh on the basis
of his learning from Abu Muhammad al-Hasan (a.s) and the Patron (a.s)
and from his father ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd, who had procured his knowledge
from Abu Muhammad and from ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad, peace be with them. They
included books titled as The Books of Drinks. Al-Kabīra the mother of
Kulthūm the daughter of Abu Ja‘far (a.s) mentioned that the books
reached Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh (a.s) at the time of the final
will to him and they remained in his possession. Abu Nasr says, I
suspect she said that they reached afterwards to Abu al-Hasan al-Samari
(a.s).

Abu Ja‘far Ibn Bābawayh says, Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān al-‘Amri narrated
that by Allah, the Patron of this Order attends the Hajj every year and
sees the people and knows them and they see him but do not recognize
him.

A number of scholars narrated to me on the authority of the named
narrators from ‘Abdullah Ibn Ja‘far al-Humyari that he said, I asked
Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān (a.s) “Have you seen the Patron of this Order?”
“Yes,” he said, “and my last covenant with him was at the Sacred House
of God as he was saying, O’ Allah, fulfill to me what You promised to
me.” He said, “I saw him, Divine bliss be for him, clinging to the
curtains of the Ka‘ba in al-Mustajār as he was saying, O’ Allah, avenge
from Your enemies through me.” Through the same chain of narration from
the father of Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali, who said, ‘Ali Ibn Sulaymān al-Rāzi
recounted to us on the authority of ‘Ali Ibn Sadaqa al-Qummi, who said,
A letter came to Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān al-‘Amri (a.s) without any inquiry
from him, and commanded him to inform the people who were inquiring
about the name of the Imam to either be silent and attain the Paradise
or either talk and be condemned to the Fire. For if they discern the
name, they will spread it, and if they discover the place, they will
lead others to it. Ibn Nūh narrates from Abu Nasr Hibabtullah Ibn
Muhammad, who narrates from Abu ‘Ali Ibn Abi Jayyed al-Qummi, who
narrates from Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Ahmad al-Dallāl al-Qummi, who said,
I entered upon Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān (a.s) on a certain day to
offer him my greetings.

لا يختلف في عدالته، ولا يرتاب بأمانته، والتوقيعات يخرج على يده إلى
الشيعة في المهمات طول حياته بالخط الذي كانت تخرج في حياة أبيه عثمان، لا
يعرف الشيعة في هذا الأمر غيره، ولا يرجع إلى أحد سواه، وقد نقلت عنه دلائل
كثيرة، ومعجزات الامام (التي) ظهرت على يده، وامور أخبرهم بها عنه زادتهم
في هذا الأمر بصيرة، وهي مشهورة عند الشيعة وقد قدمنا طرفا منها فلا نطول
باعادتها فان ذلك كفاية للمنصف إن شاء الله.

قال ابن نوح: أخبرني أبو نصر هبة الله ابن بنت (ام) كلثوم بنت أبي جعفر
العمري قال: كان لابي جعفر محمد بن عثمان العمرى كتب مصنفة في الفقه مما
سمعها من أبي محمد الحسن (ع) ومن الصاحب (ع) ومن أبيه عثمان بن سعيد، عن
أبي محمد وعن أبيه علي بن محمد(ع) فيها كتب ترجمتها كتب الاشربة ذكرت
الكبيرة ام كلثوم بنت أبي جعفر رضي الله عنها أنها وصلت إلى أبي القاسم
الحسين بن روح (ع) عند الوصية إليه، وكانت في يده، قال أبو نصر: وأظنها
قالت: وصلت بعد ذلك إلى أبي الحسن السمرى (ع) وأرضاه.

قال أبو جعفر بن بابويه: روى محمد بن عثمان العمري قدس الله روحه أنه قال:
والله إن صاحب هذا الأمر ليحضر الموسم كل سنة يرى الناس ويعرفهم ويرونه ولا
يعرفونه. وأخبرني جماعة، عن محمد بن علي بن الحسين قال: أخبرنا أبي ومحمد
بن الحسن ومحمد بن موسى بن المتوكل، عن عبد الله بن جعفر الحميري أنه قال:
سألت محمد بن عثمان (ع) فقلت له: رأيت صاحب هذا الأمر؟ قال: نعم، وآخر عهدي
به عند بينت الله الحرام وهو يقول: اللهم أنجز لي ما وعدتني. قال محمد بن
عثمان (ع): ورأيته صلوات الله عليه متعلقا بأستار الكعبة في المستجار وهو
يقول: اللهم انتقم بي من أعدائك. وبهذا الاسناد عن محمد بن علي، عن أبيه
قال: حدثنا علي بن سليمان الزراري عن علي بن صدقة القمي قال: خرج إلى محمد
بن عثمان العمري(رضي الله عنه) ابتداء من غير مسألة ليخبر الذين يسألون عن
الاسم: إما السكوت والجنة وإما الكلام. والنار فانهم إن وقفوا على الاسم
أذاعوه وإن وقفوا على المكان دلوا عليه.

قال ابن نوح: أخبرني أبو نصر هبة الله بن محمد قال: حدثني أبو علي بن أبي
جيد القمي قال: حدثني أبو الحسن علي بن أحمد الدلال القمي قال: دخلت على
أبي جعفر محمد بن عثمان (ع) يوما لأسلم عليه.

He was there and in front of him was a square frame of oak and an
inscriber who was inscribing on it and writing verses of Qur’ān and the
names of the Holy Imams on its sides. I asked him, “What is this oak
for, my master?”

He said, “This is for my grave; it will be in it.” He said either, “I
will be placed over it” or, “I will be raised over it.” Then he said, “I
am done with it, and every day, I descend into it and recite a part of
Qur’ān and come back.”

Abu ‘Ali Ibn Abi Jayyed al-Qummi says, I also think he said, Abu Ja‘far
Ibn ‘Othmān (a.s) took my hand and showed his tomb to me. He told me
that on such and such day of the such and such month of the such and
such year, “I will go towards Allah, the Exalted, and will be buried
here, and this frame of oak will be with me.”

When I came out from his place, all of his providential sayings came
true. I was constantly watching his state. It was not long that he
became ill and then he died on the very day of the month and the year he
had confided in me; and he was buried there. Abu Nasr Hibatullah says, I
heard this narration from someone other than Abu ‘Ali. Also Umm Kulthūm
Bint Abi Ja‘far (a.s) and another congregation of scholars from Abu
Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain (a.s) narrated to me on the
authority of Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Aswad al-Qummi that Abu Ja‘far
al-‘Amri (a.s) dug a tomb for himself and leveled it with oak. I
inquired about it. He mentioned some reasons to the people. Then I asked
him about it. He said, “I have been ordered to gather my affairs.” He
died two months after that. May Allah be pleased with him and may He
please him.

4- *Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: Abu Nasr Hibatullah said I found in the
handwriting of Abu Ghālib al-Rāzi (a.s) that Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn
‘Othmān al-‘Amri (a.s) died at the end of Jamādi al-Ūlā of the year
three hundred and five. Abu Nasr Hibatullah Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ahmad has
mentioned that Abu Ja‘far al-‘Amri (a.s) died in the year three hundred
and four and that he undertook this duty for about fifty years. People
would carry their religious dues to him and letters to them would come
with the same handwriting that they came during the lifetime of al-Hasan
(a.s) addressing their important and vital issues of religious as well
as worldly life and responding their queries with astonishing answers.
May Allah please him and He be pleased with him.

Abu Nasr Ibn Hibatullah says, Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān’s grave is
near that of his mother in the street of gate of Kufa in the place where
his houses and quarters were, which is now in the middle of the desert.
May Allah sanctify his soul.

فوجدته وبين يديه ساجة ونقاش ينقش عليها ويكتب آيا من القرآن وأسماء الائمة
(ع) على حواشيها فقلت له: يا سيدي ما هذه الساجة؟ فقال لي: هذه لقبري تكون
فيه اوضع عليها أو قال: اسند إليها وقد عزفت منه، وأنا في كل يوم أنـزل فيه
فأقرء جزءا من القرآن فأصعد وأظنه قال: فأخذ بيدي وأرانيه فإذا كان يوم كذا
وكذا من شهر كذا وكذا من سنة كذا وكذا صرت إلى الله(عزوجل) ودفنت فيه وهذه
الساجة معي.

فلما خرجت من عنده أثبت ما ذكره ولم أزل مترقبا به ذلك فما تأخر الأمر حتى
اعتل أبو جعفر فمات في اليوم الذي ذكره من الشهر الذي قاله من السنة التي
ذكرها ودفن فيه.

قال أبو نصر هبة الله: وقد سمعت هذا الحديث من غير أبي علي وحدثتني به أيضا
ام كلثوم بنت أبي جعفر رضي الله عنها وأخبرني جماعة، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن
علي بن الحسين (ع) قال:

حدثني محمد بن الاسود القمي أن أبا جعفر العمري قدس الله روحه حفر لنفسه
قبراوسواه بالساج فسألته عن ذلك فقال للناس أسباب ثم سألته عن ذلك فقال: قد
امرت أن أجمع أمري، فمات بعد ذلك بشهرين (ع) وأرضاه.

4- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي وقال أبو نصر هبة الله: وجدت بخط أبي غالب الزراري
(ره) وغفر له أن أبا جعفر محمد بن عثمان العمري (ره) مات في آخر جمادى
الاولى سنة خمس وثلاث مائة وذكر أبو نصر هبة الله بن محمد بن أحمد أن أبا
جعفر العمري (ره) مات في سنة أربع وثلاث مائة وأنه كان يتولى هذا الأمر
نحوا من خمسين سنة فيحمل الناس إليه أموالهم، ويخرج إليهم التوقيعات بالخط
الذي كان يخرج في حياة الحسن (ع) إليهم بالمهمات في أمر الدين والدنيا
وفيما يسألونه من المسائل بالاجوبة العجيبة (ع) وأرضاه.

قال أبو نصر هبة الله: إن قبر أبي جعفر محمد بن عثمان عند والدته في شارع
باب الكوفة في الموضع الذي كانت دوره ومنازله وهو الآن في وسط الصحراء قدس
الله روحه.

Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd al-‘Amri’s Appointment of Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh in His Position after Himself through the Order of the Imam
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Al-Husain Ibn Ibrāhim al-Qummi narrates through the named chain of
narration on the authority of Abu ‘Abdillah Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad
al-Madā’ini, known as Ibn Qazdā in Baghdad, who said, It was my conduct
that when I carried religious dues that were in my hands to al-Sheikh
Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān al-‘Amri (a.s) to say to him something
no one else said its like to him, This money, the amount of which is
such and such, belongs to the Imam (a.s).  He would say, “Yes. Leave
it.”  I would return and say to him, “Say to me it belongs to the Imam.”
And he would say, “Yes, it belongs to the Imam (a.s).” And then he would
take it. The last time I saw him, I went to him with four hundred
dinārs. I talked to him as my custom was. He said to me, “Take it to
al-Husain Ibn Rūh.” I paused and said, “You will take it from me like
every time.” He turned me down like a stranger to my words and said,
“Go, may Allah keep you well, and give them to al-Husain Ibn Rūh.” As I
saw anger on his face, I moved and climbed over my courser. I had gone
some ways that I had doubts, so I returned and knocked on the door. The
servant came to me and asked, “Who are you?” I said my name. He went
inside and sought permission for my entry and came back, turning me
down. I said to him, “Go and ask for permission for me. I must see him.”
He went inside and told him about my return. He had gone to the women’s
quarters. He came out and sat over a bunk, while his feet were on the
ground. He was wearing two slippers, half of beauty of which were due to
good looks of his feet. He said to me, “What prompted you to come back?
And why did you not do what I told you to do?” I said, “I did not dare
do what you asked me to do.” He called on me as he was angry, “Go, may
Allah keep you well, for I have raised Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh to
my position and have assigned him my chair.” I asked, “By the order of
the Imam?” He said, “Go, may Allah keep you well. It is as I told you.”

I did not have any option but to leave. I went to Abu al-Qāsim Ibn Rūh.
He was in a narrow house. I related to him what had happened. He was
pleased and thanked Allah, the Exalted. I gave him the dinārs. I kept
submitting all of my religious dues to him after that. On the authority
of Ja‘far Ibn Ahmad Ibn Matīl al-Qummi, Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān Abu Ja‘far
al-‘Amri (a.s) had about ten people in Baghdad who were his deputies.
Abu al-Qāsim Ibn Rūh was one of them. All of them were closer to him
than Abu al-Qāsim Ibn Rūh (a.s) so much so that when he needed something
or had a task, he would have it fulfilled through someone else, because
Ibn Rūh did not have that kind of proximity to him. When Abu Ja‘far
(a.s) was to pass away, the choice was his and he had the authority to
make his final will.

### ذكر إقامة أبي جعفر محمد بن عثمان بن سعيد العمري أبا القاسم الحسين بن روح رضي الله عنهما مقامه بعده بأمر الامام صلوات الله عليه {dir="RTL"}

أخبرني الحسين بن إبراهيم القمي قال: أخبرني أبو العباس أحمد بن علي بن نوح
قال: أخبرني أبو علي أحمد بن جعفر بن سفيان البزوفري قال: حدثني أبو عبد
الله جعفر بن محمد المدائني المعروف بابن قزدا في مقابر قريش قال: كان من
رسمي إذا حملت المال الذي في يدي إلى الشيخ أبي جعفر محمد بن عثمان العمري
قدس الله روحه أن أقول له ما لم يكن أحد يستقبله بمثله: هذا المال ومبلغه
كذا وكذا للامام (ع) فيقول لي: نعم دعه، فاراجعه فأقول له تقول لي: إنه
للامام فيقول: نعم للامام (ع)، فيقبضه. فصرت إليه آخر عهدي به قدس الله
روحه ومعي أربعمائة دينار فقلت له على رسمي فقال لي: امض بها إلى الحسين بن
روح فتوقفت فقلت: تقبضها أنت مني على الرسم، فرد علي كالمنكر لقولي قال: قم
عافاك الله فادفعها إلى الحسين بن روح. فلما رأيت في وجهه غضبا خرجت وركبت
دابتي فلما بلغت بعض الطريق رجعت كالشاك فدققت الباب فخرج إلى الخادم فقال:
من هذا؟ فقلت: أنا فلان فاستأذن لي. فراجعني وهو منكر لقولي ورجوعي فقلت
له: ادخل فاستأذن لي فانه لابد من لقائه فدخل فعرفه خبر رجوعي وكان قد دخل
إلى دار النساء فخرج وجلس على سرير ورجلاه في الأرض وفيهما نعلان نصف
حسنهما وحسن رجليه فقال لي: ما الذي جرأك على الرجوع ولم لم تمتثل ما قلته
لك؟ فقلت: لم أجسر على ما رسمته لي، فقال لي وهو مغضب: قم عافاك الله فقد
أقمت أبا القاسم الحسين بن روح مقامي ونصبته منصبي فقلت: بأمر الامام؟
فقال: قم عافاك الله كما أقول لك فلم يكن عندي غير المبادرة. فصرت إلى أبي
القاسم بن روح وهو في دار ضيقة فعرفته ما جرى فسر به وشكر الله(عزوجل)
ودفعت إليه الدنانير، ومازلت أحمل إليه ما يحصل في يدي بعد ذلك. وسمعت أبا
الحسن علي بن بلال بن معاوية المهلبي يقول في حياة جعفر بن محمد ابن
قولويه: سمعت أبا القاسم جعفر بن محمد بن قولويه القمي يقول: سمعت جعفر بن
أحمد ابن متيل القمي يقول: كان محمد بن عثمان أبو جعفر العمري- (ع)- له من
يتصرف له ببغداد نحو من عشرة أنفس وأبو القاسم بن روح (ع) فيهم، وكلهم كان
أخص به من أبي القاسم بن روح (ع) حتى أنه كان إذا احتاج إلى حاجة أو إلى
سبب ينجزه على يد غيره لما لم يكن له تلك الخصوصية، فلما كان وقت مضي أبي
جعفر (ع)، وقع الاختيار عليه وكانت الوصية إليه.

Out Sheikhs were saying, We did not have any doubt that if something
should happen to Abu Ja‘far, no one will take his place but Ja‘far Ibn
Ahmad Ibn Matīl or his father, for he was Abu Ja‘far’s confidential and
was at his house mostly. It was known that towards the end of his life,
Abu Ja‘far did not eat any food that was not prepared at the house of
Ja‘far Ibn Ahmad Ibn Matīl and his father, due to an incident that had
occurred. His food was at the house of Ja‘far and his father. Our
scholars did not doubt that if something happened, the position will be
handed to him. When he passed away and Abu al-Qāsim was selected, they
submitted to him and did not reject him. They were all with him and at
his service just as they were with Abu Ja‘far (a.s). Ja‘far Ibn Ahmad
Ibn Matīl continued to serve Abu al-Qāsim as his deputy until his death
as he served Abu Ja‘far al-‘Amri. Anyone who would question Abu al-Qāsim
questions Abu Ja‘far and questions the Hujja (a.s). A congregation of
scholars narrated to us from Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain
Ibn Bābawayh, saying Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Aswad (a.s) said, I
used to carry religious dues procured as waqf to Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn
‘Othmān al-‘Amri (a.s), which he would take from me. One day, I took
some money to him. It was at his last days, two or three years prior to
his demise. He ordered me to give them to Abu al-Qāsim al-Rūhi (a.s). I
always asked Abu al-Qāsim for receipts, so he complained to Abu Ja‘far
(a.s) about it, and he ordered me, “Do not insist on receipts and
everything that reaches Abu al-Qāsim is as it reaches me.” After that, I
used to take the dues to him and would not ask for receipts.

5- *Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: On the authority of Ja‘far Ibn Ahmad Ibn
Matīl, saying, When death approached Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān
al-‘Amri, I was sitting near his head and was asking him questions and
talking to him. Abu al-Qāsim Ibn Rūh was near his feet. He turned to me
and then said, “I have been ordered to confide my final will to Abu
al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh.” I rose from his overhead and took Abu
al-Qāsim’s hand and sat him on my seat and sat myself at his feet.

6- *Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: Ibn Nūh says, Abu ‘Abdillah al-Husain Ibn
‘Ali Ibn Bābawayh came to us in Basra in the month of Rabī‘ al-Awwal of
the year three hundred and seventy eight. He said, I heard the ‘Alawi
lady of al-Saffār and al-Husain Ibn Ahmad Ibn Idrīs mentioning the
following narrative that they were present at Baghdad at that year and
witnessed that. Also a congregation narrated to us on the authority of
Abu Muhammad Hārūn Ibn Musā, saying, Narrated to me Abu ‘Ali Muhammad
Ibn Humām (a.s) that Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān al-‘Amri, may Allah
sanctify his soul, called us before his demise. We were the elite of the
Shī‘a and senior members of the congregation. He said to us, “If the
incident of death befalls me, the command is with Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain
Ibn Rūh al-Nawbakhti. I have been ordered to place him in my position
after me. Refer to him and depend on him in your affairs.”

وقال مشايخنا: كنا لانشك أنه إن كان كائنة من أبي جعفر لا يقوم مقامه إلا
جعفر بن أحمد بن متيل أو أبوه لما رأينا من الخصوصية به، وكثرة كينونته في
منـزله حتى بلغ أنه كان في آخر عمره لا يأكل طعاما إلا ما اصلح في منـزل
جعفر بن أحمد بن متيل وأبيه بسبب وقع له، وكان طعامه الذي يأكله في منـزل
جعفر وأبيه. وكان أصحابنا لا يشكون إن كانت حادثة لم تكن الوصية إلا إليه
من الخصوصية فلما كان عند ذلك (و) وقع الاختيار على أبي القاسم سلموا ولم
ينكروا وكانوا معه وبين يديه كما كانوا مع أبي جعفر (ع)، ولم يزل جعفر بن
أحمد ابن متيل في جملة أبي القاسم (ع) وبين يديه كتصرفه بين يدي أبي جعفر
العمري إلى أن مات (ع) فكل من طعن على أبي القاسم فقد طعن على أبي جعفر
وطعن على الحجة صلوات الله عليه. وأخبرنا جماعة، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي
بن الحسين بن بابويه قال: حدثنا أبو جعفر محمد بن علي الاسود (ره) قال: كنت
أحمل الاموال التي تحصل في باب الوقف إلى أبي جعفر محمد بن عثمان العمري
(ره) فيقبضها مني فحملت إليه يوما شيئا من الاموال في آخر أيامه قبل موته
بسنتين أو ثلاث سنين فأمرني بتسليمه إلى أبي القاسم الروحي (ع) فكنت اطالبه
بالقبوض فشكى ذلك إلى أبي جعفر (ع) فأمرني أن لا اطالبه بالقبوض وقال: كل
ما وصل إلى أبي القاسم فقد وصل إلي فكنت أحمل بعد ذلك الاموال إليه ولا
اطالبه بالقبوض.

5- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي وبهذا الاسناد، عن محمد بن علي بن الحسين قال:
أخبرنا علي ابن محمد بن متيل، عن عمه جعفر بن أحمد بن متيل قال: لما حضرت
أبا جعفر محمد ابن عثمان العمري الوفاة كنت جالسا عند رأسه اسائله واحدثه
وأبو القاسم بن روح عند رجليه فالتفت إلي ثم قال: امرت أن اوصي إلى أبي
القاسم الحسين بن روح قال: فقمت من عند رأسه وأخذت بيد أبي القاسم وأجلسته
في مكاني وتحولت إلى عند رجليه.

6- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي قال ابن نوح: وحدثني أبو عبد الله الحسين بن علي بن
بابويه قدم علينا البصرة في شهر ربيع الاول سنة ثمان وسبعين وثلاث مائة
قال: سمعت علوية الصفار والحسين بن أحمد بن إدريس رضي الله عنهما يذكران
هذا الحديث وذكرا أنهما حضرا بغداد في ذلك الوقت وشاهدا ذلك. وأخبرنا
جماعة، عن أبي محمد هارون بن موسى قال: أخبرني أبو علي محمد بن همام (ع)
وأرضاه أن أبا جعفر محمد بن عثمان العمري قدس الله روحه جمعنا قبل موته
وكنا وجوه الشيعة وشيوخها، فقال لنا: إن حدث علي حدث الموت، فالامر إلى أبي
القاسم الحسين بن روح النوبختي فقد امرت أن أجعله في موضعي بعدي فارجعوا
إليه وعولوا في اموركم عليه.

Al-Husain Ibn Ibrāhim narrated to me through the named chain of
narration on the authority of Abu Ahmad Ibn Ibrāhim and my Abu Ja‘far
‘Abdillah Ibn Ibrāhim and others that when the condition of Abu Ja‘far
al-‘Amri worsened, he gathered a group of the personages of the Shī‘a.
There was Abu ‘Ali Ibn Himām; there was Abu ‘Abdillah Ibn Muhammad
al-Kātib; there was Abu ‘Abdillah al-Bāqitāni; there was Abu Sahl
Ismā‘il Ibn ‘Ali al-Nawbakhti; there was Abu ‘Abdillah Ibn al-Wajnā’ and
other senior individuals of the denomination. They entered upon Abu
Ja‘far (a.s) and said to him, “If some thing happens, who will be at
your place?” He said to them, “This, Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh Ibn
Abi Bahr al-Nawbakhti will sit on my seat and will be the emissary
between you and the Patron of the Order. He will be his representative
and is a reliable and honest man. Refer to him in your affairs and trust
him in your vital enterprises. I have been ordered to that and I
conveyed the message.” Through the same chain of narration from
Hibatullah Ibn Muhammad Ibn Bint Umm Kulthūm Bint Abi Ja‘far al-‘Amri on
the authority of Umm Kulthūm the daughter of Abu Ja‘far (a.s): Abu
al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh (a.s) was the representative of Abu Ja‘far
(a.s) for good many years. He was watching over his properties and would
deliver his secret messages to chiefs of the Shī‘a. He was his intimate
deputy, so much so that Abu Ja‘far would discuss with him things that
happened between him and his concubines, thanks to his proximity to him
and his affinity with him. She said, He would give him every month
thirty dinārs as stipend for him. This was in addition to what he
received from the ministers and chiefs of the Shī‘a, such as the house
of Furāt and the others, due to his prestige and position and his
respectability before them. The Shī‘a had a very majestic impression
about him for his intimacy with my father and the latter’s statements
before them endorsing his trustworthiness, excellence, piety, and all
and other qualities that he bore from this creed. So, the affairs were
facilitated for him during the lifetime of my father until the final
will explicitly pronounced him for that position. No one disputed his
authority and no one doubted it, except someone who must have been
ignorant about my father first. Besides, I do not know anyone from the
Shī‘a who has questioned his position. Hibatullah says, I heard this
from many members from the Nawbakhts, such as Abu al-Husain Ibn Kibriyā’
and others.

A number of scholars narrated to me on the authority of Abu al-‘Abbās
Ibn Nūh, saying, I discovered the first letter that came from Abu
al-Qāsim (a.s) with the handwriting of Muhammad Ibn Nafīs, amongst the
things he wrote in Ahwāz. “We know him, may Allah let him know all that
is good, and His Paradise, and may He render him fortuitous by success.
We came across his letter. He is our man of trust on the position he is.
He is before us in the position and rank that please him. May Allah
increase His favors upon him; He is the All-Mighty Guardian. And praise
belongs to Allah; there is no partner for Him. And may Allah bless His
Messenger Muhammad and his House and greet them many greetings.” This
letter arrived on the Sunday, six nights left from the Shawwāl of the
year three hundred and five.

وأخبرني الحسين بن إبراهيم، عن ابن نوح، عن أبي نصر هبة الله بن محمد قال:
حدثني خالي أبو إبراهيم جعفر بن أحمد النوبختي قال: قال لي أبي أحمد ابن
إبراهيم وعمي أبو جعفر عبد الله بن إبراهيم وجماعة من أهلنا يعني بني نوبخت
أن أبا جعفر العمري لما اشتدت حاله اجتمع جماعة من وجوه الشيعة منهم أبو
علي ابن همام وأبو عبد الله ابن محمد الكاتب وأبو عبد الله الباقطاني وأبو
سهل إسماعيل بن علي النوبختي وأبو عبد الله ابن الوجناء وغيرهم من الوجوه
والاكابر فدخلوا على أبي جعفر (ع) فقالوا له: إن حدث أمر فمن يكون مكانك؟
فقال لهم: هذا أبو القاسم الحسين بن روح بن أبي بحر النوبختي القائم مقامي
والسفير بينكم وبين صاحب الأمر والوكيل له والثقة الامين فارجعوا إليه في
اموركم وعولوا عليه في مهماتكم فبذلك امرت وقد بلغت.

وبهذا الاسناد عن هبة الله بن محمد ابن بنت ام كلثوم بنت أبي جعفر العمري
قال: حدثتني ام كلثوم بنت أبي جعفر رضي الله عنها قالت: كان أبو القاسم
الحسين ابن روح P، وكيلا لابي جعفر (ره) سنين كثيرة ينظر له في أملاكه
ويلقي بأسراره الرؤساء من الشيعة، وكان خصيصا به حتى أنه كان يحدثه بما
يجري بينه وبين جواريه لقربه منه وانسه.

قالت: وكان يدفع إليه في كل شهر ثلاثين دينارا رزقا له غير ما يصل إليه من
الوزراء والرؤساء من الشيعة، مثل آل الفرات وغيرهم لجاهه ولموضعه وجلالة
محله عندهم، فحصل في أنفس الشيعة محصلا جليلا لمعرفتهم باختصاص أبي إياه
وتوثيقه عندهم، ونشر فضله ودينه وما كان يحتمله من هذا الأمر، فتمهدت له
الحال في طول حياة أبي إلى أن انتهت الوصية إليه بالنص عليه، فلم يختلف في
أمره ولم يشك فيه أحد إلا جاهل بأمر أبي أولا مع ما لست أعلم أن أحدا من
الشيعة شك فيه وقد سمعت بهذا من غير واحد من بني نوبخت رحمهم الله مثل أبي
الحسين ابن كبرياء وغيره.

وأخبرني جماعة عن أبي العباس بن نوح قال: وجدت بخط محمد بن نفيس فيما كتبه
بالاهواز: أول كتاب ورد من أبي القاسم (ع): نعرفه عرفه الله الخير كله
ورضوانه وأسعده بالتوفيق، وقفنا على كتابه و(هو) ثقتنا بما هو عليه وأنه
عندنا بالمنـزلة والمحل اللذين يسرانه، زاد الله في إحسانه إليه إنه ولي
قدير والحمد لله لا شريك له وصلى الله على رسوله محمد وآله وسلم تسليما
كثيرا، وردت هذه الرقعة يوم الاحد لست ليال خلون من شوال سنة خمس
وثلاثمائة.

‘Allāmah al-Majlisi says, Sheikh Tusi then chronicles the letters that
came to al-Humyari, which we have brought in the section of the letters.
Then he says, Abu al-Qāsim (a.s) was of the wisest of all people, before
friend and foe. He observed taqiyya. Abu Nasr Hibatullah Ibn Muhammad
says, Each one, Abu ‘Abdillah Ibn Ghālib and Abu al-Hasan Ibn Abi
al-Tayyeb said, I did not see anyone wiser than al-Sheikh Abu al-Qāsim
al-Husain Ibn Rūh. I saw him one day in the house of Ibn Yasār. He had a
great position before the Seyed and the caliph. The commonality of the
Muslims also revered him. Abu al-Qāsim attended that place due to
taqiyya and fear. I remember him. Two men were arguing; one was claiming
that Abu Bakr was the best of the people after the Messenger of Allah
(a.s) and then ‘Omar and then ‘Ali; while the other contended that ‘Ali
was better than ‘Omar. Their debate took long, so Abu al-Qāsim (a.s)
said, “What the companions are unanimous upon is that the Siddīq comes
first, then after him the Fārūq, and then after him ‘Othmān, and then
‘Ali, the Successor. Narrators of traditions uphold this. This is the
correct belief before us.” Everyone who was there was perplexed from
these words. Members of the commonality were raising him over their
heads from gaiety and were praying for him and were cursing those who
were “accusing him to be a Rāfidhi.” Laughter was all the while
overwhelming me. I tried to withhold it and control myself from laughing
by putting my sleeve into my mouth. But then I feared that they will
discern who I am, so I left. The Sheikh looked at me and noticed that.
When I arrived at my house, there was a knock on the door. I came out
and saw Abu al-Qāsim Ibn Rūh was on his mule. He had come to me on his
way to his house. He said, “‘Abdallah, may Allah do you favors, why were
you laughing and were almost cheering me. As if what I said was not true
before you.” I said, “It is true before me.” He said, “Fear God, Sheikh.
I will not forgive you if you consider this word of mine great.” I said,
“My master, someone who is seen to be the companion of the Imam and his
representative, if he says a word as such, it is not awkward and not
laughable.” He said, “By your life, if you say this again, I will desert
you.” He bid me farewell and left. Abu Nasr Hibatullah Ibn Muhammad
said, Abu al-Hasan Ibn Kibriyā’ al-Nawbakhti narrated to us, saying,
Al-Sheikh Abu al-Qāsim (a.s) discovered that his doorman had cursed and
cussed Mu‘āwiya. He ordered that he should be turned away and removed
from his post. For a long time, the doorman was asking him to reinstate
him. But by Allah, he did not reinstate him to his post. Someone from
the houses took him and gave him employment. All of this was due to
taqiyya. Abu Nasr Hibatullah said, Abu Ahmad Ibn Darānawayh al-Abras,
whose house was at the gate of stationeries said to me, I and my
brothers used to go in to Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh (a.s) and
transact with him. He was very polite and had great manners. When we
would go to him, we would be nine or ten people, nine of us against him
and perhaps one of us unsure about him. When we would leave him, nine of
us would be seeking proximity to God through his love, while one us may
be unsure about him.

أقول: ذكر الشيخ بعد ذلك التوقيعات التي خرجت إلى الحميري على ما نقلناه في
باب التوقيعات ثم قال: وكان أبو القاسم (ره) من أعقل الناس عند المخالف
والموافق ويستعمل التقية فروى أبو نصر هبة الله بن محمد قال: حدثني أبو عبد
الله بن غالب وأبو الحسن ابن أبي الطيب قالا: ما رأيت من هو أعقل من الشيخ
أبي القاسم الحسين بن روح ولعهدي به يوما في دار ابن يسار، وكان له محل عند
السيد والمقتدر عظيم، وكانت العامة أيضا تعظمه، وكان أبو القاسم يحضر تقية
وخوفا. فعهدي به وقد تناظر اثنان فزعم واحد أن أبا بكر أفضل الناس بعد رسول
الله(ص) ثم عمر ثم علي وقال الآخر: بل علي أفضل من عمر، فزاد الكلام بينهما
فقال أبو القاسم (ع): الذي اجتمعت عليه الصحابة هو تقديم الصديق ثم بعده
الفاروق ثم بعده عثمان ذو النورين ثم علي الوصي، وأصحاب الحديث على ذلك،
وهو الصحيح عندنا، فبقي من حضر المجلس متعجبا من هذا القول وكانت العامة
الحضور يرفعونه على رؤوسهم وكثر الدعاء له والطعن على من يرميه بالرفض.
فوقع علي الضحك فلم أزل أتصبر وأمنع نفسي وأدس كمي في فمي فخشيت أن أفتضح،
فوثبت عن المجلس ونظر إلي فتفطن لي فلما حصلت في منـزلي فإذا بالباب يطرق
فخرجت مبادرا فإذا بأبي القاسم بن روح راكبا بغلته قد وافاني من المجلس قبل
مضيه إلى داره فقال لي: يا عبد الله أيدك الله لم ضحكت وأردت أن تهتف بي
كأن الذي قلته عندك ليس بحق؟ فقلت له: كذاك هو عندي، فقال لي: اتق الله
أيها الشيخ فاني لا أجعلك في حل تستعظم هذا القول مني فقلت: يا سيدي رجل
يرى بأنه صاحب الامام ووكيله يقول ذلك القول لا يتعجب منه؟ و(لا) يضحك من
قوله هذا؟ فقال لي: وحياتك لئن عدت لاهجرنك وودعني وانصرف. قال أبو نصر هبة
الله بن محمد: حدثنا أبو الحسن بن كبريا النوبختي قال: بلغ الشيخ أبو
القاسم (ع) أن بوابا كان له على الباب الاول قد لعن معاوية وشتمه، فأمر
بطرده وصرفه عن خدمته، فبقي مدة طويلة يسأل في أمره فلا والله مارده إلى
خدمته وأخذه بعض الآهلة فشغله معه كل ذلك للتقية. قال أبو نصر هبة الله:
وحدثني أبو أحمد بن درانويه الابرص الذي كانت داره في درب القراطيس قال:
قال لي: إني كنت أنا وإخواتي ندخل إلى أبي القاسم الحسين بن روح (ع)
نعامله، قال: وكانوا باعة، ونحن مثلا عشرة تسعة نلعنه وواحد يشكك، فنحرج من
عنده بعد ما دخلنا إليه تسعة نتقرب إلى الله بمحبته وواحد واقف.

That was because he would discuss the qualities of the companions
according to our narrations and narrations we did not have, which we
would write down because he was a very nice person.

Al-Husain Ibn Ibrāhim narrated to me from Abu al-‘Abbās Ahmad Ibn ‘Ali
Ibn Nūh on the authority of Nasr Ibn Hibatullah Ibn Muhammad al-Kātib
Ibn Bint Umm Kulthūm the daughter of Abu Ja‘far al-‘Amri (a.s) that the
tomb of Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh was in the district of the
Nawbakhtis at the gate where the house of ‘Ali Ibn Ahmad al-Nawbakhti,
who was appointed at al-Tall. There was the bridge of al-Shawk.

Abu Nasr said to me that Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh died in the
Sha‘bān of the year three hundred and twenty six. I have narrated
inordinate number of traditions from him.

Abu Muhammad al-Muhammadi (a.s) narrated to me from Abu al-Husain
Muhammad Ibn al-Fadhl Ibn Thammām, saying, I heard Abu Ja‘far Muhammad
Ibn Ahmad al-Zakkūzaki say the following as he mentioned to us the book
Kitāb al-Taklīf, which we believed that only people who exaggerated
about the position of the Imams carried it. We heard him in the
beginning when we started writing hadīth say, “Everything that Ibn Abi
al-‘Azāqir has in Kitāb al-Taklīf, he would go to the emissary of the
Imam al-Sheikh Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh (a.s) and would show it to
him and would then narrate it. When it was authenticated, the emissary
of the Imam al-Sheikh Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh (a.s) ordered us to
make copies of it. Abu Ja‘far says, I wrote it into tablets with my
hands. Ibn Thammām says, I said, My master, pass it on to me so I may
write it down from your handwriting. He said, I have lost it. Ibn Tammām
says, Then I found its copy somewhere else and wrote it down after I had
heard this story.

Abu al-Husain Ibn Thammām says, ‘Abdullah al-Kufi, the servant of
al-Sheikh al-Husain Ibn Rūh (a.s) said, The Sheikh was asked about the
books of Ibn Abi al-‘Azāqir after he was denounced and the Imam had
cursed him. He was asked, “How are we going to act according to his
books? Our houses are full of them.”

He said, “I will say to you the same thing, which Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
Ibn ‘Ali (a.s) said when he was asked about the books of the progeny of
Fadhdhāl. They asked, ‘How should we act on their books? Our houses are
full of them.’ The Imam (a.s) said, ‘Take what they have narrated and
discard what they have seen.’”

Abu al-Hasan al-Ayādī (a.s) asked Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh, “Why
is it abominable to have temporary marriage with a virgin?” He said,
“The Prophet (a.s) said, ‘Modesty is part of the faith.’ There are
conditions between you and her and when you convince her to enjoy, she
loses her modesty and faith goes away.” He asked, “If he does it, is he
a fornicator?” “No,” replied the Sheikh.

لأنه كان يجارينا من فضل الصحابة مارويناه وما لم نروه، فنكتبه عنه لحسنه
(ع).

وأخبرني الحسين بن إبراهيم، عن أبي العباس أحمد بن علي بن نوح عن أبي نصر
هبة الله بن محمد الكاتب ابن بنت ام كلثوم بنت أبي جعفر العمري(رضي الله
عنه) أن قبر أبي القاسم الحسين بن روح في النوبختية في الدرب الذي كانت فيه
دار علي بن أحمد البوبختي النافذ إلى التل وإلى الدرب الآخر وإلى قنطرة
الشوك (ع) قال: وقال لي أبو نصر: مات أبو القاسم الحسين بن روح في شعبان
سنة ست وعشرين وثلاثمائة وقد رويت عنه أخباراً كثيرة. وأخبرني أبو محمد
المحمدي (ع)، عن أبي السين محمد بن الفضل بن تمام قال: سمعت أبا جعفر محمد
بن أحمد الزكوزكي وقد ذكرنا كتاب التكليف وكان عندنا أنه لا يكون إلا مع
غال، وذلك أنه أول ما كتبنا الحديث، فسمعناه يقول: وأيش كان لابن أبي
العزاقر في كتاب التكليف إنما كان يصلح الباب ويدخله إلى الشيخ أبي القاسم
الحسين بن روح (ع) فيعرضه عليه ويحكه فإذا صح الباب خرج فنقله وأمرنا
بنسخه، يعني أن الذي أمرهم به الحسين ابن روح (ع).

قال أبو جعفر: فكتبته في الادراج بخطي ببغداد، قال ابن تمام فقلت له: فتفضل
يا سيدي فادفعه حتى أكتبه من خطك، فقال لي: قد خرج عن يدي قال ابن تمام:
فخرجت وأخذت من غيره وكتبت يعد ما سمعت هذه الحكاية. وقال أبو الحسين بن
تمام: حدثني عبد الله الكوفي خادم الشيخ الحسين بن روح (ع) قال: سئل الشيخ
يعني أبا القاسم (ع) عن كتب ابن أبي العزاقر بعدما ذم وخرجت فيه اللعنة
فقيل له فكيف نعمل بكتبه وبيوتنا منها ملاى؟ فقال: أقول فيها ما قاله أبو
محمد الحسن بن علي صلوات الله عليهما وقد سئل عن كتب بني فضال فقالوا كيف
نعمل بكتبهم وبيوتنا منها ملاى؟ فقال صلوات الله عليه: "خذوا بما رووا
وذروا ما رأوا." وسأل أبو الحسن الايادي (ره) أبا القاسم الحسين بن روح: لم
كره المتعة بالبكر؟ فقال: قال النبي (ص): الحياء من الإيمان، والشروط بينك
وبينها فإذا حملتها على أن تنعم فقد خرجت عن الحياء وزال الايمان فقال له:
فإن فعل فهو زان؟ قال: لا.

Al-Husain Ibn ‘Ubaidullah narrates on the authority of Salāma Ibn
Muhammad, saying, Al-Sheikh al-Husain Ibn Rūh (a.s) sent the book Kitāb
al-Ta’dīb to Qum and wrote to a congregation of jurists about it and
asked them to examine the book and see whether there is anything they
disagree with in that book. They wrote to him, “All of it is correct and
there is nothing in it to be differed with except the assertion with
respect to the amount of fitra to be half of a sā‘(a cubic measure) of
food and food before us is the like of barley from every one sā‘.” Ibn
Nūh says, I heard a congregation of our scholars at Egypt mention that
Abu Sahl al-Nawbakhti was asked about how this position reached
al-Sheikh Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh and not him. He said, “They are
more knowledgeable about who they have chosen. I am a man who meets the
adversaries and have debates with them. If I should know his place, as
knew Abu al-Qāsim, and was pressed in my debates for proofs, perhaps I
would lead up to his place. As for Abu al-Qāsim, even if the Hujja were
to be under his cloak, and he were cut by scissors, he would not remove
his cloak.” Or he said something like this.

Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Abu al-‘Azāqir al-Shalmaghāni mentioned in the
beginning of Kitāb *Al-Ghaiba*, which he had written, “As for the
dispute between me and the aforesaid man, may Allah increase his
success, I cannot elaborate on it except to someone this man has
involved him into this, because I am the victim in this and it is my
right.” In another section he says, “Someone upon him the favors of God
are great, many proofs bind him and he must speak the truth in what
hurts and what pleases him. It is not permissible for me, between me and
Allah, but to speak the truth about this man, despite his grave crime.
This man is appointed to a duty from which the public are not allowed to
turn away. Despite this, he is considered a Muslim like other Muslims.”

Abu Muhammad Hārūn Ibn Musā says, Abu ‘Ali al-Junaid said to me, Abu
Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Shalmaghāni said to me, “I did enter into
this contest against Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh but I knew what I
was entering into. We were fighting each other for this position like
dogs fight each other over a dead corps.” Abu Muhammad said, “The Shī‘a
did not pay attention to these words and were unanimous in praying for
his chastisement him and despising him.”

Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Samari, the Last of the Four Deputies
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

A congregation of scholars narrated to me on the authority of Abu
‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Khalīlān who narrates on the authority of his
great grandfather, saying, The Heir Mahdi (a.s) was born on the day of
Friday. His mother is Rayhāna and she is called Narjis; and she is
called Saqīl; and she is called Susan. She was called Saqīl (shining)
because of the luminous pregnancy. His birth was on eight days remaining
from the Sha‘bān of the year two hundred and fifty six.

وأخبرني الحسين بن عبيد الله، عن أبي الحسن محمد بن أحمد بن داود القمي
قال: حدثني سلامة بن محمد قال: أنفذ الشيخ الحسين بن روح (ع) كتاب التأديب
إلى قم وكتب إلى جماعة الفقهاء بها وقال لهم: انظروا في هذا الكتاب وانظروا
فيه شئ يخالفكم فكتبوا إليه أنه كله صحيح وما فيه شئ يخالف إلا قوله في
الصاع في الفطرة نصف صاع من طعام والطعام عندنا مثل الشعير من كل واحد صاع.
قال ابن نوح: وسمعت جماعة من أصحابنا بمصر يذكرون أن أبا سهل النوبختي سئل
فقيل له: كيف صار هذا الأمر إلى الشيخ أبي القاسم الحسين بن روح دونك فقال:
هم أعلم وما اختاروه، ولكن أنا رجل ألقى الخصوم واناظرهم ولو علمت بمكانه
كما علم أبو القاسم وضغطتني الحجة لعلي كنت أدل على مكانه، وأبو القاسم فلو
كانت الحجة تحت ذيله وقرض بالمقاريض ما كشف الذيل عنه أو كما قال: وذكر
محمد بن علي بن أبي العزاقر الشلمغاني في أول كتاب الغيبة الذي صنفه: "وأما
ما بيني وبين الرجل المذكور زاد الله في توفيقه فلا مدخل لي في ذلك إلا لمن
أدخله فيه لان الجناية علي فاني أنا وليها ". وقال في فصل آخر: "ومن عظمت
منة الله عليه، تضاعفت الحجة عليه ولزمه الصدق فيما ساءه وسره وليس ينبغي
فيما بيني وبين الله إلا الصدق عن أمره مع عظم جنايته وهذا الرجل منصوب
لامر من الامور لا يسع العصابة العدول عنه فيه، وحكم الاسلام مع ذلك جار
عليه، كجريه على غيره من المؤمنين " وذكره. وذكر أبو محمد هارون بن موسى
قال: قال لي أبو علي بن الجنيد: قال لي أبو جعفر محمد بن علي الشلمغاني:
"ما دخلنا مع أبي القاسم الحسين بن روح في هذا الأمر إلا ونحن نعلم فيما
دخلنا فيه، لقد كنا نتهارش على هذا الأمر كما تتهارش الكلاب على الجيف ".
قال أبو محمد: فلم يلتفت الشيعة إلى هذا القول وأقامت على لعنه والبراءة
منه.

### ذكر أمر أبي الحسين علي بن محمد السمري بعد الشيخ أبي القاسم الحسين بن روح وانقطاع الاعلام به وهم الابواب {dir="RTL"}

أخبرني جماعة، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي بن الحسين بن موسى بن بابويه قال:
حدثنا محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق، عن الحسن بن علي بن زكريا بمدينة السلام
قال: حدثنا أبو عبد الله محمد بن خليلان قال: حدثني أبي عن جده عتاب من ولد
عتاب بن أسيد قال: ولد الخلف المهدي صلوات الله عليه يوم الجمعة وامه
ريحانة ويقال لها: نرجس، ويقال لها: صقيل، ويقال لها: سوسن، إلا أنه قيل
بسبب الحمل صقيل وكان مولده لثان خلون من شعبان سنة ست وخمسين ومأتين.

His representative was ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd; and when he died, ‘Othmān Ibn
Sa‘īd appointed Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān; and Abu Ja‘far
appointed Abu al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh; and Abu al-Qāsim appointed Abu
al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Samari (a.s). And when it was the time of
final departure of al-Samari (a.s) he was asked to appoint a successor.
He said, “To Allah belongs the Order and He is its Sustainer.” The full
occultation is the one that began after the demise of al-Samari (a.s).
Muhammad Ibn al-Ne‘mān al-Husain Ibn ‘Ubaidillah narrated to me from Abu
‘Abdillah Ahmad Ibn Muhammad al-Safwāni, saying, Al-Sheikh Abu al-Qāsim
confided his final testimony to Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Samari
and appointed him at his duty. So, he undertook Abu al-Qāsim’s task and
when his time came, the Shī‘a gathered before him and asked him about
the representative after him and that who was going to carry his duties
after his demise. He did not express anything with that regard and
mentioned that he has not been ordered to appoint anyone after him for
this position.

A congregation of scholars narrated to me from Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn
‘Ali Ibn al-Husain Ibn Musā Ibn Bābawayh, saying, Abu al-Hasan Sālih Ibn
Shu‘aib al-Tāliqāni (a.s) narrated to us in the Dhū al-Qa‘da of the year
three hundred and thirty nine, saying, Narrated to us Abu ‘Abdillah
Ahmad Ibn Ibrāhim Ibn Mukhallad, saying, I was present in Baghdad in the
companionship of scholars of narration, may Allah bless them. Al-Sheikh
Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Samari, may Allah sanctify his soul,
said without being questioned with this respect, “May Allah have mercy
on ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain Ibn Bābawayh al-Qummi.” The scholars noted the
date of that day. Later, the news came that Ibn Bābawayh had passed away
on that very day. Abu al-Hasan al-Samari died after that in the
mid-Sha‘bān of the year three hundred and twenty nine.

7- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* A congregation of scholars narrated to us
from Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain Ibn Bābawayh that Abu
Muhammad al-Hasan Ibn Ahmad al-Muktib said, I was in Baghdad in the year
in which al-Sheikh Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Samari (a.s) passed
away. I went to him a few days before his demise. He brought a holy
letter to the people that read as follows, “In the name of Allah, the
Merciful, the Compassionate. “O’ ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Samari, may Allah
enhance the reward of your brothers for you, as you shall die within six
days. Pull your affairs together and do not appoint any successor to
carry out your duties after your final transfer. The full occultation
has begun and there shall be no appearance but after Divine permission,
high His name is, and that shall be after lengthy times, and the
hardening of the hearts, and the earth’s repletion with inequity.
Individuals who will claim they have seen me will come to my Shī‘a.
Behold, whoever claims seeing me before the rise of Sufyāni and the
call, he is a liar and a slanderer. And there is no power except through
Allah, the High, the Great.”

ووكيله عثمان بن سعيد فلما مات عثمان بن سعيد أوصى إلى أبي جعفر محمد بن
عثمان وأوصى أبو جعفر إلى أبي القاسم الحسين بن روح وأوصى أبو القاسم إلى
أبي الحسن علي بن محمد السمري(رضي الله عنه) فلما حضرت السمري(رضي الله
عنه) الوفاة سئل أن يوصي فقال: لله أمر هو بالغه. فالغيبة التامة هي التي
وقعت بعد مضي السمري (قدس سره).

وأخبرني محمد بن محمد بن النعمان والحسين بن عبيد الله، عن أبي عبد الله
أحمد بن محمد الصفواني قال: أوصى الشيخ أبو القاسم إلى أبي الحسن علي بن
محمد السمري فقام بما كان إلى أبي القاسم فلما حضرته الوفاة، حضرت الشيعة
عنده وسألته عن الموكل بعده ولمن يقوم مقامه، فلم يظهر شيئا من ذلك وذكر
أنه لم يؤمر بأن يوصي إلى أحد بعده في هذا الشأن.

وأخبرني جماعة، عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي بن الحسين بن موسى بن بابويه قال:
حدثنا أبو الحسن صالح بن شعيب الطالقاني (ره) في ذي القعدة سنة تسع وثلاثين
وثلاث مائة قال: حدثنا أبو عبد الله أحمد بن إبراهيم بن مخلد قال: حضرت
بغداد عند المشايخ رحمهم الله فقال الشيخ أبو الحسن علي بن محمد السمري قدس
الله روحه ابتداء منه: رحم الله علي بن الحسين بن بابويه القمي قال: فكتب
المشايخ تاريخ ذلك اليوم فورد الخبر أنه توفي في ذلك اليوم ومضى أبو الحسن
السمري بعد ذلك في النصف من شعبان سنة تسع وعشرين وثلاث مائة.

7- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي وأخبرنا جماعة عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي بن الحسين
بن بابويه قال: حدثني أبو محمد الحسن بن أحمد المكتب قال: كنت بمدينة
السلام في السنة التي توفى فيها الشيخ أبو الحسن علي بن محمد السمري قدس
الله روحه فحضرته قبل وفاته بأيام فأخرج إلى الناس توقيعا نسخته: "بسم الله
الرحمن الرحيم يا علي بن محمد السمري أعظم الله أجر إخوانك فيك: فانك ميت
ما بينك وبين ستة أيام فاجمع أمرك ولا توص إلى أحد فيقوم مقامك بعد وفاتك،
فقد وقعت الغيبة التامة فلا ظهور إلا بعد إذن الله تعالى ذكره وذلك بعد طول
الامد وقسوة القلب وامتلاء الأرض جورا وسيأتي شيعتي من يدعي المشاهدة ألا
فمن ادعى المشاهدة قبل خروج السفياني والصيحة فهو كذاب مفتر، ولا حول ولا
قوة إلا بالله العلي العظيم."

We transcribed copies of the holy letter and exited from his presence.
When it was the sixth day, we returned to him as he was breathing his
last breathes. He was asked, “Who is your successor after you?” He said,
“To Allah belongs the Order and He is its Sustainer.” He died. These
were the last words heard from him. May Allah be pleased with him and
may He please him.

8- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* A congregation of our scholars narrated
to me from Abu ‘Abdillah al-Husain Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Bābawayh, saying, a
congregation of scholars of Qum, amongst them, ‘Ali Ibn Bābawayh,
narrated that a congregation of scholars of Qum, amongst them ‘Ali Ibn
Ahmad Ibn ‘Imrān al-Saffār and his relative the lady of Saffār and
al-Husain Ibn Ahmad Ibn Idrīs, they said, We were present at Baghdad in
the year in which ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain Ibn Musā Ibn Bābawayh passed away.
Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad al-Samari, may Allah sanctify his soul,
would often ask us of the news of ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain (a.s). We would
answer him that letters are coming that he is well. This continued until
came the day in which Ibn al-Husain died. He asked us about Ibn
al-Husain and we gave him a similar answer. He said, “May Allah reward
you in the event of the demise of ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain. He just died at
this hour.”

We recorded the hour and the day and the month. After seventeen or
eighteen days, the news came that he had died in the very hour in which
al-Sheikh Abu al-Hasan (a.s) had mentioned him. Al-Husain Ibn Ibrāhim
narrated to me from Abu al-‘Abbās Ibn Nūh from Abu Nasr Hibatullah Ibn
Muhammad al-Kātib that the grave of Abu al-Hasan al-Samari (a.s) is in
the street known as the street of al-Khalanji on the quarter of the gate
of al-Muhawwal, near the banks of the stream of Abu ‘Attāb. He mentioned
that he died in the year three hundred and twenty nine.

9- *Al-Ehtejāj:* The Great Gateways and the Praiseworthy Emissaries in
the Time of the Occultation: Their first one is the trustworthy Sheikh
Abu ‘Amr ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd al-‘Amri. Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad
al-‘Askari appointed him first and then his son Abu Muhammad al-Hasan
Ibn ‘Ali (a.s). He undertook to carry out the services of the two Imams
during in their lifetimes and afterwards, undertook the affairs of the
Patron of the Age (a.s). Letters of the Imam of the Age and answers to
the queries of the people would come out through him. And when he died,
his son Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān took his position and carried
out the duties of his father in these matters. And when he died, Abu
al-Qāsim al-Husain Ibn Rūh from the progeny of the Nawbakht undertook
the responsibility. And when he died, Abu al-Hasan ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad
al-Samari undertook the task. None of them assumed this position but
there was explicit instruction with respect to him from the Patron of
the Age, and was appointed by his predecessor. The Shī‘a did not accept
their word except after a miraculous sign from the Patron of the Order
(a.s) was worked on the hands of each one of them, signifying the truth
of their word and propriety of their intentions.

قال: فنسخنا هذا التوقيع وخرجنا من عنده فلما كان اليوم السادس عدنا إليه
وهو يجود بنفسه، فقيل له: من وصيك من بعدك؟ فقال: لله أمر هو بالغه وقضى
فهذا آخر كلام سمع منه (ع) وأرضاه.

8- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي وأخبرني جماعة عن أبي عبد الله الحسين بن علي بن
بابويه قال: حدثني جماعة من أهل قم منهم علي بن بابويه قال: حدثني جماعة من
أهل قم منهم علي بن أحمد بن عمران الصفار وقريبه علوية الصفار والحسين بن
أحمد بن إدريس رحمهم الله قالوا: حضرنا بغداد في السنة التي توفي فيها أبي
(ع) علي بن الحسين بن موسى بن بابويه، وكان أبو الحسن علي بن محمد السمري
قدس الله روحه يسألنا كل قريب عن خبر علي بن الحسين (ره) فنقول قد ورد
الكتاب باستقلاله حتى كان اليوم الذي قبض فيه، فسألنا عنه فذكرنا له مثل
ذلك فقال لنا: آجركم الله في علي بن الحسين فقد قبض في هذه الساعة، قالوا
فأثبتنا تاريخ الساعة واليوم والشهر، فلما كان بعد سبعة عشر يوما أو ثمانية
عشر يوما ورد الخبر أنه قبض في تلك الساعة التي ذكرها الشيخ أبو الحسن قدس
الله روحه. وأخبرني الحسين بن إبراهيم، عن أبي العباس بن نوح، عن أبي نصر
هبة الله بن- محمد الكاتب أن قبر أبي الحسن السمري(رضي الله عنه) في الشارع
المعروف بشارع الخلنجي من ربع باب المحول قريب من شاطئ نهر أبي عتاب وذكر
أنه مات في سنة تسع وعشرين وثلاثمائة.

9- الاحتجاج: أما الابواب المرضيون والسفراء الممدوحون في زمن الغيبة
فأولهم الشيخ الموثوق به أبو عمرو عثمان بن سعيد العمري نصبه أولا أبو
الحسن علي بن محمد العسكري ثم ابنه أبو محمد الحسن بن علي (ع) فتولى القيام
بامورهما حال حياتهما، ثم بعد ذلك قام بأمر صاحب الزمان (ع) وكانت توقيعاته
وجوابات المسائل تخرج على يديه. فلما مضى لسبيله قام ابنه أبو جعفر محمد بن
عثمان مقامه وناب منابه في جميع ذلك فلما مضى قام بذلك أبو القاسم الحسين
بن روح من بني نوبخت فلما مضى قام مقامه أبو الحسن علي بن محمد السمري ولم
يقم أحد منهم بذلك إلا بنص عليه من قبل صاحب الزمان (ع) ونصب صاحبه الذي
تقدم عليه فلم تقبل الشيعة قولهم إلا بعد ظهور آية معجزة تظهر على يد كل
واحد منهم من قبل صاحب الأمر (ع) تدل على صدق مقالتهم وصحة نيابتهم.

At the time of the departure of Abu al-Hasan al-Samari from this
transient abode, he was asked about his successor. A holy letter came to
them, “In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. O’ ‘Ali
Ibn Muhammad al-Samari…” and the letter goes as we narrated from Sheikh
Tusi (a.s).

10- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* In the times of the praiseworthy
emissaries, there were great many trusted individuals who received
letters from the assigned emissaries. Of such individuals is Abu
al-Husain Muhammad Ibn Ja‘far al-Asadi (a.s). Abu al-Husain Ibn Abi
Jayyed al-Qummi narrated to us from Muhammad Ibn al-Hasan Ibn al-Walīd
from Muhammad Ibn Yahyā al-‘Attār from Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn Yahyā from
Sālih Ibn Abi Sālih, saying, Some people asked me in the year two
hundred and ninety to accept religious dues. I refused that request and
wrote a letter, seeking instructions. The answer came, “In Ray is
Muhammad Ibn Ja‘far al-‘Arabi. He should deliver it to him, for he is
from our men of trust.”

Muhammad Ibn Ya‘qūb al-Kulaini has narrated from Ahmad Ibn Yūsuf
al-Shāshi, saying, Muhammad Ibn al-Hasan al-Kātib al-Marwazi said to me,
I sent to Hājiz al-Washshā’ two hundred dinārs and wrote to the Gharīm
(a.s) about it and then I received a receipt. The Imam had mentioned
that I owed one thousand dinārs and had sent only two hundred dinārs to
him. He had said, “If you desire to act through someone, you must refer
to Abu al-Husain al-Asadi at Ray.” Then after two or three days, the
news of Hājiz’s death came. Ahmad Ibn Yūsuf says, I informed Muhammad
Ibn al-Hasan of Hājiz’s death. He became much grievous, so I said to
him, “Grieve not, for you have two signs in the holy letter to you, one
is the Imam’s statement that the money owed is one thousand dinārs and
the second is his command to you to refer to Abu al-Husain al-Asadi, as
he knew the imminent death of Hājiz.” Through the same chain of
narration on the authority of Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Nawbakht:
I intended to go for Hajj and made preparations for this purpose. A
message came, “We dislike that.” I became much anxious and grievous. I
wrote, “I remain a submissive and an obedient. However, I am sad for
missing the Hajj.” A holy letter came, “Grieve not, for you will perform
Hajj next year.” Next year, I sought permission and the answer came in
positive. I wrote, “I am leaving Muhammad Ibn al-‘Abbās behind, and I am
certain of his piety and honesty.” The answer came, “Al-Asadi is the
best of a caretaker. If he should arrive, do not choose anyone over
him.” Al-Asadi came and I left him as my caretaker. Muhammad Ibn Ya‘qūb
from ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad from Muhammad Ibn Shādhān al-Naishāburi, saying,
Five hundred dirhams short of twenty were deposited before me. I did not
like it to be short of this amount, so I weighed another twenty dirhams
from myself and sent the money to al-Asadi. I did not inform him of its
shortage and that I had completed it from my own money. The answer came,
“The five hundred, of which twenty were yours, reached us.” Al-Asadi
died in the Rabī‘ al-Ākhir of the year three hundred and twelve. He was
honest, he never changed, and he was not mentioned disrespectfully.

فلما حان رحيل أبي الحسن السمري عن الدنيا وقرب أجله قيل له: إلى من توصي؟
أخرج توقيعا إليهم نسخته: "بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم يا علي بن محمد السمري…
إلى آخر ما نقلنا عن الشيخ (ره).

10- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي قد كان في زمان السفراء المحمودين أقوام ثقات ترد
عليهم التوقيعات من قبل المنصوبين للسفارة منهم أبو الحسين محمد بن جعفر
الاسدي (ره) أخبرنا أبو الحسين بن أبي جيد القمي عن محمد بن الحسن بن
الوليد عن محمد بن يحيى العطار، عن محمد بن أحمد بن يحيى، عن صالح بن أبي
صالح قال: سألني بعض الناس في سنة تسعين ومأتين قبض شئ فامتنعت من ذلك
وكتبت أستطلع الرأي فأتاني الجواب: بالري محمد بن جعفر العربي فليدفع إليه
فإنه من ثقاتنا. وروى محمد بن يعقوب الكليني، عن أحمد بن يوسف الشاشي قال:
قال لي محمد بن الحسن الكاتب المروزى وجهت إلى حاجز الوشاء مائتي دينار
وكتبت إلى الغريم بذلك فخرج الوصول وذكر أنه كان قبلي ألف دينار وأني وجهت
إليه مائتي دينار وقال: إن أردت أن تعامل أحدا فعليك بأبي الحسين الاسدي
بالرى. فورد الخبر بوفاة حاجز (ع) بعد يومين أو ثلاثة فأعلمته بموته فاغتم
فقلت له: لاتغتم فان لك في التوقيع إليك دلالتين: إحداهما إعلامه إياك أن
المال ألف دينار، والثانية أمره إياك بمعاملة أبي الحسين الاسدي لعلمه بموت
حاجز. وبهذا الاسناد عن أبي جعفر محمد بن علي بن نوبخت قال: عزمت على الحج
وتأهبت فورد علي: نحن لذلك كارهون. فضاق صدري واغتممت وكتبت أنا مقيم
بالسمع والطاعة غير أني مغتم بتخلفي عن الحج فوقع: لا يضيقن صدرك، فانك تحج
من قابل، فلما كان من قابل استأذنت فورد الجواب فكتبت: أني عادلت محمد ابن
العباس وأنا واثق بديانته وصيانته فورد الجواب: الاسدي نعم العديل فان قدم
فلا تختره عليه قال: فقدم الاسدي فعادلته. محمد بن يعقوب، عن علي بن محمد،
عن محمد بن شاذان النيشابوري قال: اجتمع عندي خمسمائة درهم ينقص عشرون
درهما فلم احب أن تنقص هذا المقدار فوزنت

من عندي عشرين درهما، ودفعتها إلى الاسدي ولم أكتب بخبر نقصانها وأني
أتممتها من مالي، فورد الجواب: قد وصلت الخمسمائة التي لك فيها عشرون. ومات
الاسدي على ظاهر العدالة لم يتغير ولم يطعن عليه في شهر ربيع الاخر سنة
اثنتي عشرة وثلاث مائة.

Of such individuals is Ahmad Ibn Ishāq and a congregation in whose
praise a holy letter has come. Ahmad Ibn Idrīs narrates from Ahmad Ibn
Muhammad Ibn ‘Isā from Abu Muhammad al-Rāzi, saying, I and Ahmad Ibn Abi
‘Abdillah were at al-‘Askar when a messenger came from “the man” and
said, “Ahmad Ibn Ishāq al-‘Ash‘ari and Ibrāhim Ibn Muhammad al-Hamdāni
and Ahmad Ibn Hamza Ibn al-Yas‘ are all trusted men.”

11- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Muhammad Ibn al-Husain Ibn Shādhawayh from Muhammad
al-Humyari, from his father, from Muhammad Ibn Ja‘far, from Ahmad Ibn
Ibrāhim, saying, I went to Lady Hakīma the daughter of Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali
al-Redhā (a.s) and the sister of Abu al-Hasan of al-‘Askar (a.s) in the
year two hundred and sixty two. I conversed with her from behind a
curtain and asked her about her religion. She named to me the Imams she
followed and then she said, “And al-Hujja Ibn al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali,” and
mentioned his name. I said to her, “May I be your ransom, do you say
this on the basis of observation or on the basis of the word of the
Infallible?” She said, “Words of Abu Muhammad, which he wrote to his
mother.” I asked, “Where is then the son?” She said, “He is in hiding.”
“To who are the Shī‘a to turn for guidance?” “To the grandmother, the
mother of Abu Muhammad (a.s).” “Who has he emulated in assigning a woman
as his deputy?” “He has emulated al-Husain Ibn ‘Ali (a.s). Al-Husain Ibn
‘Ali (a.s) assigned his sister Zainab Bint ‘Ali in the superficies. The
learning and knowledge coming from ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain (a.s) were
attributed to Zainab Ibn ‘Ali in order to maintain secrecy over ‘Ali Ibn
al-Husain (a.s).” Then she said, “You are scholars of narrations. Have
you not narrated that the inheritance of the ninth from the sons of
al-Husain Ibn ‘Ali will be divided in his lifetime.”

12- Al-Kharā’ij wa al-Jarā’ih: It has been narrated from Muhammad Ibn
Ibrāhim Ibn Mahziyār, saying, Doubts overwhelmed me at the demise of Abu
Muhammad (a.s). This was while great amounts of religious dues had been
deposited with my father, which he carried and boarded a ship. I went
with him to for company. He got fever and said to me, “My son, take me
back. This is my death. And fear Allah in these assets.” He confided his
final will to me and died. I said to myself that my father would not ask
me to do anything wrong. I will carry these assets to Iraq and will rent
a house there and will not inform anyone. If things become clear to me,
I will hand them over, or else, I will spend them. So, I rented a house
on the river. I had remained there but a few days when a messenger
brought me a letter that was saying, O’ Muhammad, you have brought this
and this, accounting for everything that was with me. So, I gave the
assets to the messenger. I remained there a few more days and was not
given any attention, which made me rather sad. Then a letter came, “We
have placed you in the position of your father, so thank Allah.”

13- I‘lām al-Warā: Of the things that indicate the validity of his
Imamate are the narrations explicitly describing his occultation and its
exclusive qualities and its occurrence with the said attributes, so much
so that none of these foretold qualities and attributes have fallen
short.

ومنهم أحمد بن إسحاق وجماعة خرج التوقيع في مدحهم: روى أحمد بن إدريس عن
أحمد بن محمد بن عيسى، عن أبي محمد الرازي قال: كنت وأحمد بن أبي عبد الله
بالعسكر فورد علينا رسول من قبل الرجل فقال: أحمد بن إسحاق الاشعري
وإبراهيم ابن محمد الهمداني وأحمد بن حمزة بن اليسع ثقات.

11- إكمال الدين: محمد بن الحسين بن شاذويه، عن محمد الحميري، عن أبيه، عن
محمد بن جعفر عن أحمد بن إبراهيم قال: دخلت على حكيمة بنت محمد بن علي
الرضا اخت أبي الحسن صاحب العسكر (ع) في سنة اثنتين وستين ومأتين فكلمتها
من وراء حجاب وسألتها عن دينها فسمت لي من تأتم بهم ثم قالت: والحجة ابن
الحسن بن علي فسمته فقلت لها: جعلني الله فداك معاينة أو خبرا؟ فقالت: خبرا
عن أبي محمد كتب به إلى امه فقلت لها: فأين الولد؟ فقالت: مستورة، فقلت:
إلى من تفزع الشيعة؟ فقالت: إلى الجدة ام أبي محمد (ع) فقلت لها: اقتدى بمن
(في) وصيته إلى امرأة؟ فقالت: اقتداء بالحسين بن علي (ع) والحسين بن علي
أوصى إلى أخته زينب بنت علي في الظاهر وكان ما يخرج عن علي بن الحسين (ع)
من علم ينسب إلى زينب سترا على علي بن الحسين (ع) ثم قالت: إنكم قوم أصحاب
أخبار أما رويتم أن التاسع من ولد الحسين بن علي (ع) يقسم ميراثه وهو في
الحياة.

إكمال الدين: علي بن أحمد بن مهزيار، عن محمد بن جعفر الاسدي مثله.

الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: الكليني، عن محمد بن جعفر مثله.

12- الخرائج والجرائح: روي عن محمد بن إبراهيم بن مهزيار قال: شككت عند
وفاة أبي محمد (ع) وكان اجتمع عند أبي مال جليل فحمله فركب السفينة وخرجت
معه مشيعا له فوعك فقال: ردني فهو الموت، واتق الله في هذا المال وأوصى إلي
ومات وقلت لا يوصي أبي بشئ غير صحيح أحمل هذا المال إلى العراق ولا اخبر
أحدا فان وضح لي شئ أنفذته وإلا أنفقته فاكتريت دارا على الشط وبقيت أياما
فإذا أنا برسول معه رقعة فيها: يا محمد معك كذا وكذا حتى قص علي جميع ما
معي فسلمت المال إلى الرسول وبقيت أياما لا يرفع بي رأس، فاغتممت فخرج إلي:
(قد) أقمناك مقام أبيك فاحمد الله.

13- إعلام الورى: مما يدل على صحة إمامته (ع) النص عليه بذكر غيبته، وصفتها
التي يختصها ووقوعها على الحد المذكور من غير اختلاف حتى لم يحرم منه
شيئاً.

It is not ordinary that a massive number of people create a lie, which
predicts a future event, and then that event takes place as they have
described. As the narrations of his occultation precede the time of the
Hujja (a.s), but rather the time of his father and grandfather—to an
extent that many sects such as al-Kīsāniyya, al-Nāwūsiyya, and
al-Mamtūra argued on the basis of these traditions for their beliefs;
Shī‘a narrators recorded them in their books in the days of the Two
Doyens al-Bāqir and al-Sādiq (a.s) and narrated them from the Messenger
of Allah (a.s) and the Imams, one after the other—it is very fair to
conclude the Imamate of the Patron of the Age with the qualities and the
occultation described about him in the narrations of his Imamate. No one
can dare deny this.

Of the reliable narrators and authors from the Shī‘a is al-Hasan Ibn
Mahbūb al-Zarrād, who authored Kitāb al-Mashīkha, which is one of the
primary Shī‘a books and more reputable than Kitāb al-Mazni and its
likes. He wrote this book more than a hundred years before the
occultation. He has recorded therein some of the narrations which we
have mentioned amongst the traditions of occultation. And all that have
been narrated and included in the traditions have occurred with no
inconsistency.

Of such narrations is his narration from Ibrāhim al-Hārithī on the
authority of Abu Basīr from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s). Abu Basīr says, I said
to him, “Abu Ja‘far (a.s) used to say, ‘There will be two occultations
for the House of Muhammad, one long and the other short.’”

The Imam said, “Yes, O’ Abu Basīr. One of them is longer than the other.
Then his appearance will not take place until the progeny of so-and-so
have a dispute, and the circle is tightened, and al-Sufyāni appears, and
trials worsen, and death and murder encompass people and they take
refuge from that to the Sanctuary of Allah and the Sanctuary of His
Messenger (a.s).”

Make a note how the two occultations of the Patron of the Age (a.s) have
occurred in concert with the contents of the narrations from his
forefathers, peace be with them, that have been recorded before his
birth. Then the shorter occultation was when his emissaries were present
as his well-known gateways. The Imāmiyya who upheld the Imamate of
al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali (a.s) did not dispute their authority. Of these
emissaries were Abu Hāshim Dāwūd Ibn al-Qāsim al-Ja‘fari, Muhammad Ibn
‘Ali Ibn Bilāl, Abu ‘Amr ‘Othmān Ibn Sa‘īd al-Sammān, his son Abu Ja‘far
Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān, ‘Omar al-Ahwāzi, Ahmad Ibn Ishāq, Abu Muhammad
al-Wajanā’ī, Ibrāhim Ibn Mahzyār, Muhammad Ibn Ibrāhim, and many others
that perchance they will be mentioned when the need shall arise. The
length of this occultation was seventy four years.

‘Allāma Majlisi says, Then the author of I‘lām al-Warā, Amīn al-Islām
al-Tabrasi, recounts the days of the four emissaries almost similar to
what we mentioned.

وليس يجوز في العادات أن تولد جماعة كثيرة كذبا يكون خبراً عن كائن فيتفق
ذلك على حسب ما وصفوه. وإذا كانت أخبار الغيبة قد سبقت زمان الحجة (ع) بل
زمان أبيه وجده حتى تعلقت الكيسانية والناووسية والممطورة بها وأثبتها
المحدثون من الشيعة في اصولهم المؤلفة في أيام السيدين الباقر والصادق (ع)
وأثروها عن النبي والائمة (ع) واحد بعد واحد صح بذلك القول في إمامة صاحب
الزمان بوجود هذه الصفة له والغيبة المذكورة، في دلائله وأعلام إمامته،
وليس يمكن أحدا دفع ذلك.

ومن جملة ثقات المحدثين والمصنفين من الشيعة الحسن بن محبوب الزراد وقد صنف
كتاب المشيخة الذي هو في اصول الشيعة أشهر من كتاب المزني وأمثاله قبل زمان
الغيبة بأكثر من مائة سنة فذكر فيه بعض ما أوردناه من أخبار الغيبة فوافق
المخبر، وحصل كلما تضمنه الخبر بلا اختلاف.

ومن جملة ذلك ما رواه عن إبراهيم الحارثي عن أبي بصير عن أبي عبد الله (ع)
قال: قلت له كان أبو جعفر (ع) يقول: لآل محمد غيبتان واحدة طويلة والاخرى
قصيرة قال: فقال لي: نعم يا أبا بصير إحداهما أطول من الاخرى ثم لا يكون
ذلك يعنى ظهوره (ع) حتى يختلف ولد فلان وتضيق الحلقة وتظهر السفياني ويشتد
البلاء ويشمل الناس موت وقتل، ويلجؤون منه إلى حرم الله تعالى وحرم رسوله
(ص).

فانظر كيف قد حصلت الغيبتان لصاحب الأمر (ع) على حسب ما تضمنه الاخبار
السابقة لوجوده عن آبائه وجدوده (ع) أما غيبته القصرى منهما فهي التي كانت
سفراؤه فيها موجودين وأبوابه معروفين، لا تختلف الامامية القائلون بإمامة
الحسن بن علي فيهم. فمنهم أبو هاشم داود بن القاسم الجعفري ومحمد بن علي بن
بلال وأبو عمرو بن عثمان بن سعيد السمان وابنه أبو جعفر محمد بن عثمان رضي
الله عنهما وعمر الاهوازي، وأحمد بن إسحاق وأبو محمد الوجنائي وإبراهيم بن
مهزيار ومحمد بن إبراهيم في جماعة اخر ربما يأتي ذكرهم عند الحاجة. وكانت
مدة هذه الغيبة أربعا وسبعين سنة.

أقول: ثم ذكر أحوال السفراء الاربعة نحوا مما مر.

*Explanation:* Apparently, he means by the duration of occultation the
period from beginning of Imamate to the demise of al-Samari, which is
shorter than seventy years, since the beginning of his Imamate,
according to the common understanding is eight days left from the Rabī‘
al-Awwal of two hundred and sixty and the demise of al-Samari is in
mid-Sha‘bān of three hundred and twenty eight. And according to his
account of al-Samari’s demise, this falls one year short as well, as he
says he passed away in the mid-Sha‘bān of three hundred and twenty
eight. Perhaps, he has considered the beginning of the occultation from
the time of his birth and he has mentioned the holy birth to have taken
place in two hundred and fifty five. This would be accurate only on the
basis of the date of demise of al-Samari narrated by al-Sheikh al-Tusi.
According to his own account of the date, it falls short one year.
Perhaps, the date of al-Samari which he mentions is a mistake from his
pen.

بيان: الظاهر أن مدة زمان الغيبة من ابتداء إمامته (ع) إلى وفاة السمري وهي
أقل من سبعين سنة لان ابتداء إمامته (ع) على المشهور لثمان خلون من ربيع
الاول سنة ستين ومائتين، ووفاة السمري في النصف من شعبان سنة ثمان وعشرين
وثلاثمائة: وعلى ما ذكره في وفاة السمري تنقص سنة أيضا حيث قال توفي في
النصف من شعبان سنة ثمان وعشرين وثلاثمائة ولعله جعل ابتداء الغيبة ولادته
(ع) وذكر الولادة في سنة خمس وخمسين ومائتين فيستقيم على ما ذكره الشيخ من
وفاة السمري وعلى ما ذكره ينقص سنة أيضا ولعل ما ذكره من تاريخ السمري سهو
من قلمه.
