Translator’s Word
=================

All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds, and may He bless His
Beloved Prophet our Master and the Master of all Creation, Muhammad, and
his Divinely Ordained Heirs, specially so their first one the Prince of
the Believers and their Last one the Caliph of the All Merciful and the
Personification of the Virtues of Qur’ān our Master al-Imam al-Mahdi. 
Thousands of greetings of peace and love and devotion be unto them and
their followers and devotees.

The oceans of light and seas of illumination that is the *Bihār
al-Anwār* of the greatest ‘Allamah of all ages Muhammad Bāqir Ibn
Muhammad Taqi al-Majlisi is a book of unparalleled worth and value in
Islamic literature.  The thirteenth volume of this reputable ocean of
wisdom and trustworthy arc of salvation—titled by its author as *Kitāb
al-Ghaiba,* that is, the Book of Occultation—is devoted to accounts
about the Last Hujja of Allah the Imam of the Age, may Allah hasten his
appearance.  In the contemporary prints, this volume has been divided
into three volumes, which span from the fifty first to fifty third of
the total one hundred and sixteen volumes.

In your hands is the translation of the first of these three volumes,
namely, the fifty first, which I translated in times of great stress and
duress and lack of access to books and mentors.  All thanks and
gratitude is due to Allah, in the beginning and in the end, in private
and in public, for His blessings as well as His trials.  We thank Him
from the depths of our souls and the bottom of our hearts.

It must be noted that not seeing much need or benefit in translating
chapter eleven, which chronicles the predictions of fortunetellers and
writings found on rocks, and chapter fourteen, which recounts the
stories of the individuals who have lived enormously long lives, these
two sections are not included in this translation.  As I have brought
the Arabic version of the traditions, I did not see any need for

mentioning the long names in the chains of narrations, as they can be
easily seen in the each opposite page in Arabic.  Many a time, the
honorable author has commentaries about certain narrations, which
sometimes only explain literary and grammatical points of a given
tradition, rendering it into simpler Arabic, which can be of great value
only to an Arabic reader.  Such commentaries were not translated
either. 

I hope the kind reader forgives my shortcomings and goes through these
pages with magnanimity.  I confess my knowledge is scant and my writing
skills are poor.  My fond prayer is that Allah benefits me and my
brothers and sisters in faith through this work. 

I would like to extend my special thanks to Brother Kāzim Mamdāni and
Brother Feroze Karimbhoy for their help in this work.
