His Names, Titles, Patronym and Their Reasons
=============================================

1- *‘Ilal al-Sharā'e‘:* On the authority of al-Thumāli: I asked
al-Bāqir, blessings of Allah be unto him, “O’ son of the Messenger of
Allah, aren’t all of you Establishers (*Qā’imīn*) of the Truth?” He
said, “Indeed so.” I asked him then, “Why has al-Qā’im has been named
‘the Establisher’ (*al-Qā’im*)?” He said, “When my forefather Husain,
may Allah bless him, was killed, angels wailed to Allah, the Exalted,
and cried and whimpered. They said, ‘Our Lord, our Master, are You going
to ignore people who killed Your chosen friend and the progeny of Your
chosen and selected friend from Your creation?’ Allah, the Exalted,
revealed to them, ‘Relax my angels. By My Honor and My Majesty, I will
take revenge from them, even if it be after a while.’ Then Allah, the
Exalted, manifested the Imams from the progeny of Husain (a.s) which
made the angels happy. They saw one of them standing (*qā’im*), offering
*salāth.* Allah, the Exalted, said, ‘Through that Standing one
(*al-Qā’im*) I shall avenge from them.’”

2- *‘Ilal al-Sharā'e‘:* ‘Amr Ibn Shamir narrates from Jābir: A man came
to Abu Ja‘far (a.s) while I was present there, and said, “May Allah have
mercy on you. Take these five hundred dirhams and spend them in their
appropriate venues, for they are the zakāt of my wealth.” “Rather, you
take them and spend them on your neighbors, orphans and the needy and
amongst your Muslim brothers,” replied the Imam. “This will happen when
our Qā'im rises, for he will distribute equally and establish equity in
the creation of the All-Merciful, amongst their virtuous and their vice.
Whoever obeys him, he has obeyed Allah, and whoever disobeys him, he
disobeys Allah. He has been called al-Mahdi, because he will guide to a
hidden affair, bringing out the Torah and the rest of books of Allah
from a cave in Antakiya. He will issue verdicts amongst the followers of
the Torah according to the Torah, and amongst the followers of the
Evangel according to the Evangel, and amongst the followers of the Zabūr
according to the Zabūr, and amongst the followers of the Qur’ān
according to the Qur’an.

#### أسماؤه (ع) وألقابه وكناه وعلله {dir="RTL"}

1- علل الشرائع: الدقاق وابن عصام معا، عن الكليني، عن القاسم بن العلا، عن
إسماعيل الفزاري، عن محمد بن جمهور العمي، عن ابن أبي نجران، عمن ذكره، عن
الثمالي قال: سألت الباقر صلوات الله عليه يا ابن رسول الله ألستم كلكم
قائمين بالحق؟

قال: بلى، قلت: فلم سمي القائم قائماً؟ قال: لما قتل جدي الحسين (ع) ضجت
الملائكة إلى الله(عزوجل) بالبكاء والنحيب، وقالوا: إلهنا وسيدنا أتغفل عمن
قتل صفوتك وابن صفوتك، وخيرتك من خلقك، فأوحى الله(عزوجل) إليهم قروا
ملائكتي فوعزتي وجلالي لانتقمن منهم ولو بعد حين ثم كشف الله(عزوجل) عن
الائمة من ولد الحسين (ع) للملائكة فسرت الملائكة بذلك فإذا أحدهم قائم
يصلي فقال الله(عزوجل): بذلك القائم أنتقم منهم.

2- علل الشرائع: أبي، عن سعد، عن الحسن بن علي الكوفي، عن عبد الله بن
المغيرة، عن سفيان بن عبد المؤمن الانصاري، عن عمرو بن شمر، عن جابر قال:
أقبل رجل إلى أبي جعفر (ع) وأنا حاضر فقال: رحمك الله اقبض هذه الخمسمائة
درهم، فضعها في مواضعها فانها زكاة مالي.

فقال له أبو جعفر (ع): بل خذها أنت فضعها في جيرانك والايتام والمساكين وفي
إخوانك من المسلمين إنما يكون هذا إذا قام قائمنا فانه يقسم بالسوية ويعدل
في خلق الرحمان البر منهم والفاجر فمن أطاعه فقد أطاع الله ومن عصاه فقد
عصى الله فانما سمي المهدي لانه يهدي لأمر خفي يستخرج التوراة وساير كتب
الله من غار بأنطاكية فيحكم بين أهل التوراة بالتوراة، وبين أهل الانجيل
بالانجيل، وبين أهل الزبور بالزبور، وبين أهل الفرقان بالفرقان.

All riches and wealth will come to him, be they beneath the earth or
over it, and he will say to people, ‘Come to the riches for which you
forsook your relatives, shed bloods, and committed acts forbidden by
Allah.’ He will dispense wealth in a way no one has done before.” Abu
Ja‘far said, “The Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, ‘He is a man from me.
His name is like mine. Allah will protect me through him. He will act on
my conduct and fill the earth with equity and justice and light as it
will be filled with oppression, inequity, and vice.’”

*Explanation*: “This will happen” refers to the imperativeness of
submitting zakāth to the Imam. “So he will issue verdicts amongst the
followers of the Torah according to the Torah,” does not contradict the
coming narrations asserting there will remain no one but he will accept
Islam, since this can be interpreted on the grounds that he will reason
to them from their books, or will issue verdicts and judgments as such
in the beginnings before the rise of his rule and the manifestation of
his truth. “Allah will protect me through him” means Allah protects my
right and my reverence with respect to him; so He will aide him and
succor him. Or it may mean that Allah will make him such that people
will infer his right and his reverence for his grandfather.

*3- Ma*‘*āni al-Akhbār:* Al-Qā'im has been named the Rising/Standing One
(*Qā'im*), because he will rise after the oblivion of his name.

4- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Al-Saqar Ibn Dalaf says, I heard Abu Ja‘far Muhammad
Ibn ‘Ali al-Redhā (a.s) say, “The Imam after me is my son; his command
is my command; his word is my word; and obedience to him is obedience to
me. Imamate after him belongs to his son al-Hasan; his command is his
father’s command; his word is his father’s word; and obedience to him is
obedience to his father.” Then he became silent, so I said, “O’ Son of
the Messenger of Allah, then who is the Imam after al-Hasan?” He cried
very profusely and then said, “After al-Hasan (a.s) is his son, the
Establisher of the Truth (*al-Qā'im bil-Haqq*), the Awaited Savior.” I
asked him, “O’ Son of the Messenger of Allah, and why has he been named
al-Qā'im?” He said, “Because he will rise after the oblivion of his name
and the apostasy of the majority of the believers in his Imamate.” Then
I asked, “And why is he named al-Muntadhar (the Awaited)?” He said,
“Because the days of his occultation will be many and its time will be
long, with the sincere ones waiting his rise and the doubters denying
it, and the deniers ridiculing it. There will be many predictors then of
the time of his rise. The rushers will go to annihilation and the
submitters will be rescued.”

5- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Al-Kulaini narrates from Abu Muhammad
(a.s) that when the Hujja was born, the Imam said, “The oppressors
assumed that they will kill me in order to discontinue this succession.
How did they see the might of Allah!” He named him al-Mu’ammal (the one
in whom hopes rest).

وتجمع إليه أموال الدنيا كلها ما في بطن الارض وظهرها فيقول للناس: تعالوا
إلى ما قطعتم فيه الارحام، وسفكتم فيه الدماء، وركبتم فيه محارم الله،
فيعطي شيئا لم يعط أحد كان قبله.

قال: وقال رسول الله(ص) هو رجل مني اسمه كاسمي يحفظني الله فيه ويعمل بسنتي
يملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً ونورا بعد ما تمتلئ ظلماً وجوراً وسوءا.

بيان: قوله (ع) "إنما يكون هذا" أي وجوب رفع الزكاة إلى الامام وقوله "يحكم
بين أهل التوراة بالتوراة" لا ينافي ما سيأتي من الاخبار في أنه (ع) لا
يقبل من أحد إلا الاسلام لان هذا محمول على أنه يقيم الحجة عليهم بكتبهم أو
يفعل ذلك في بدو الامر قبل أن يعلو أمره ويتم حجته قوله (ع) " يحفظني الله
فيه " أي يحفظ حقي وحرمتي في شأنه فيعينه وينصره أو يجعله بحيث يعلم الناس
حقه وحرمته لجده.

3- معاني الأخبار: سمي القائم (ع) قائما لانه يقوم بعد موته ذكره.

4- إكمال الدين: ابن عبدوس، عن ابن قتيبة، عن حمدان بن سليمان، عن الصقر بن
دلف، قال: سمعت أبا جعفر محمد بن علي الرضا (ع) يقول: إن الامام بعدي ابني
علي أمره أمري، وقوله قولي، وطاعته طاعتي، والامامة بعده في ابنه الحسن
أمره أمر أبيه وقوله قول أبيه، وطاعته طاعة أبيه.

ثم سكت فقلت له: يابن رسول الله فمن الامام بعد الحسن؟

فبكى (ع) بكاء شديدا ثم قال: إن من بعد الحسن ابنه القائم بالحق المنتظر.

فقلت له: يابن رسول الله ولم سمي القائم؟

قال: لأنه يقوم بعد موت ذكره، وارتداد أكثر القائلين بامامته.

فقلت له: ولم سمي المنتظر قال: لان له غيبة تكثر أيامها ويطول أمدها،
فينتظر خروجه المخلصون وينكره المرتابون ويستهزئ بذكره الجاحدون ويكثر فيها
الوقاتون ويهلك فيها المستعجلون وينجو فيها المسلمون.

5- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: الكليني رفعه قال: قال أبو عبد الله (ع) حين ولد
الحجة: زعم الظلمة أنهم يقتلونني ليقطعوا هذا النسل فكيف رأوا قدرة الله
وسماه المؤمل.

6- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Abu Sa‘īd al-Khurāsāni says, I said to
Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s), “Is the Mahdi and the Qā'im the same?”

He said, “Yes.”

I asked, “For what reason has been named the Mahdi?”

He said, “Because he will be guided to every hidden matter. And he is
named al-Qā'im because he will rise after his name dies. He will
establish a mighty enterprise.”

7- *Al-Irshād:* Muhammad Ibn ‘Ajalān narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s),
“When the Qā'im rises, he will call people to Islam anew and will guide
them to an order that is worn out and the masses have led astray from
it. The Qā'im has been named the Mahdi because he will lead to an order
that is led astray from and he is named al-Qā'im for his rise with the
Truth.”

8- *Tafsīr of Furāt Ibn Ibrāhim:* Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad al-Farāzi narrates
through his chain of narration from Abu Ja‘far (a.s) in reference to the
Divine words, *Whosoever is killed innocently, We have assigned to his
heir the authority,* he said, “This is Husain.” *So he may not exceed in
killing and he is Mansūr* (helped, assisted, and aided), the Imam said,
“Allah has named the Mahdi al-Mansūr as he has been named Ahmad,
Muhammad, and Mahmūd, and as Jesus has been named al-Masih.”

9- *Kashf al-Ghumma:* Al-Qāsim Ibn ‘Uday says, It is said that the
patronym of al-Khalaf al-Sālih (The Virtuous Heir) is Abu al-Qāsim and
he has two names.

The author says: His holy names were mentioned in the previous chapter.
They will also come in the chapter of *Those who have met him,* and
other chapters.

6- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: الفضل، عن موسى بن سعدان، عن عبد الله بن القاسم
الحضرمي عن أبي سعيد الخراساني، قال: قلت لابي عبد الله (ع): المهدي
والقائم واحد؟

فقال: نعم.

فقلت: لاي شئ سمي المهدي.

قال: لانه يهدي إلى كل أمر خفي وسمي القائم لانه يقوم بعدما يموت إنه يقوم
بأمر عظيم. بيان: قوله (ع) "بعد ما يموت" أي ذكره أو يزعم الناس.

7- الإرشاد: روى محمد بن عجلان، عن أبي عبد الله (ع) قال: إذا قام القائم
(ع) دعا الناس إلى الاسلام جديداً وهداهم إلى أمر قد دثر وضل عنه الجمهور
وإنما سمي القائم مهدياً لأنه يهدي إلى أمر مضلول عنه وسمي القائم لقيامه
بالحق.

8- تفسير فرات بن إبراهيم: جعفر بن محمد الفزاري، معنعنا عن أبي جعفر (ع)
في قوله تعالى: "وَمَنْ قُتِلَ مَظْلُومًا فَقَدْ جَعَلْنَا لِوَلِيِّهِ
سُلْطَانًا" قال: الحسين "فَلَا يُسْرِفْ فِي الْقَتْلِ إِنَّهُ كَانَ
مَنصُورًا" قال: سمى الله المهدي المنصور كما سمى أحمد ومحمد ومحمود وكما
سمى عيسى المسيح (ع).

9- كشف الغمة: قال ابن الخشاب: حدثني محمد بن موسى الطوسي، عن عبد الله ابن
محمد، عن القاسم بن عدي، قال: يقال كنية الخلف الصالح أبو القاسم وهو ذو
الاسمين.

أقول: قد سبق أسماؤه (ع) في الباب السابق وسيأتي في باب من رآه (ع) وغيره.
