Prohibition of Mentioning His Name
==================================

1- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*mānī:* Abu Khālid al-Kābuli says, When ‘Ali Ibn
al-Husain (a.s) passed away, I entered upon Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Bāqir
(a.s). “May I be your ransom,” said I, “you have known my dedication to
your father and my affinity towards him, and my reclusion from the
people.” “You spoke the truth, Abu Khālid,” he said. “What do you want?”
“May I be your ransom,” I said, “your father has described the ‘Patron
of this Order’ to me with specific qualities that should I see him on a
trail, I would hold his hand.” He said, “Abu Khālid, what do you want
then?” “I want you to tell me his name, so I may recognize him by his
name.” “You have inquired from me, by Allah, Abu Khālid, about a
question of great caution.” He said, “You have asked me of a subject
that if I were to talk to anyone about it, I would speak to you. You
have asked me of a subject that should the children of Fātimah recognize
him, they will crave to cut him piece by piece.”

2- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Abu Hāshim al-Ja‘fari says, I heard Abu
al-Hasan al-‘Askari (a.s) say, “The Heir is after my son al-Hasan. How
are you going to be when you are left behind the Heir?” I asked, “Why
so, may I be your ransom?” He said, “Because you will not see his
person, nor it is permissible for you to mention him by his name.” “So
how are we to mention him?” I asked. “Say the Hujja from the Household
of Muhammad, blessings of Allah and His greetings be unto him.”

*Ikmāl al-Dīn* narrates an identical narrative on the authority of Ibn
al-Walīd from Sa‘d. *Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi narrates the same from
Sa‘d. *Kifāya al-Athar* narrates the same through another chain from
Sa‘d.

The author says: In some traditions his holy name has been explicitly
mentioned. Al-Sadūq says, This tradition has come like this, mentioning
the name of the Qā'im (a.s); however, my belief is forbiddance of
mention his holy name is binding.

#### النهي عن التسمية {dir="RTL"}

1- الغيبة للنعمانى: عبد الواحد بن عبد الله، عن محمد بن جعفر، عن ابن أبي
الخطاب عن محمد بن سنان، عن محمد بن يحيى الخثعمي، عن الضريس، عن أبي خالد
الكابلي قال: لما مضي علي بن الحسين دخلت على محمد بن علي الباقر (ع) فقلت:
جعلت فداك، قد عرفت انقطاعي إلى أبيك وانسي به ووحشتي من الناس. قال: صدقت
يابا خالد تريد ماذا؟ قلت: جعلت فداك قد وصف لي أبوك صاحب هذا الامر بصفة
لو رأيته في بعض الطرق لاخذت بيده.

قال: فتريد ماذا يا باخالد؟ قال: اريد أن تسميه لي حتى أعرفه باسمه، فقال:
سألتني والله يابا خالد عن سؤال مجهد ولقد سألتني عن أمر مالو كنت محدثا به
أحدا لحدثتك ولقد سألتني عن أمر لو أن بني فاطمة عرفوه حرصوا على أن يقطعوه
بضعة بضعة.

2- الغيبة للنعمانى: أبي، عن سعد، عن محمد بن أحمد العلوي، عن أبي هاشم
الجعفري قال: سمعت أبا الحسن العسكري (ع) يقول: الخلف من بعد الحسن ابني
فكيف لكم بالخلف من بعد الخلف، قلت: ولم جعلني الله فداك؟ فقال: لانكم لا
ترون شخصه ولا يحل لكم ذكره باسمه، قلت: فكيف نذكره؟ فقال: قولوا: الحجة من
آل محمد صلوات الله عليه وسلامه.

إكمال الدين: ابن الوليد عن سعد مثله.

الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: سعد مثله.

أقول: قد مر في بعض أخبار اللوح التصريح باسمه (ع) فقال الصدوق S: جاء هذا
الحديث هكذا بتسمية القائم (ع) والذي أذهب إليه النهي عن تسميته (ع).

3- *Al-Tawhīd:* ‘Abdul-‘Adhīm al-Hasani narrates from Abu al-Hasan, the
Third**[1]** (a.s) that he said about the Qā'im (a.s), “It is not
permissible to mention him by his name until he rises and fills the
earth with equity and justice as it will be full of oppression and
corruption.”

4- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Safwān Ibn Mahrān narrates from al-Sādiq Ja‘far Ibn
Muhammad (a.s): “The Mahdi is from my sons, the Fifth from the sons of
the Seventh. His person will disappear from you and it is not
permissible for you to mention him by his name.”

*Ikmāl al-Dīn* narrates this on the authority of Ibn Abi Ya‘fūr.

*5- Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Muhammad Ibn Ziyād al-Azdi narrates that when the
Qā'im (a.s) was mentioned, Mūsā Ibn Ja‘far (a.s) said, “His birth will
be hidden from the people and it will not be permissible for them to
mention him by name until Allah, the Exalted, manifests him, and He
fills the earth through him with equity and justice as it will be full
of inequity and oppression.”

*Note*: These instructions explicitly refute the assertion that such
forbiddance is specific for the time of the Minor Occultation, an
argument based on hunches and illusions.

6- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Abdul-‘Adhīm al-Hasani narrates from Muhammad Ibn
‘Ali (a.s): “Al-Qā'im is the one whose birth will be hidden from the
people, his person will disappear from them, and it will be forbidden
for them to mention him by his name. He has the same name and patronym
as the Messenger of Allah.”

7- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* My father and Ibn al-Walīd both narrate from
al-Humyari, saying, I was with Ahmad Ibn Ishāq in the presence of
al-‘Amri (a.s). I said to al-‘Amri, “I ask you about a subject, as
Allah, the Exalted, has said in the story of Abraham, *Do you believe
not? He said, Yes, but in order to satisfy my heart.* Have you seen my
Patron?” He said, “Yes, and he has a neck like this,” pointing with both
of his hands to his own neck. “And the name?” I asked. “I warn you not
to seek that, because the commonality believes that this progeny has
been cut off,” he said.

8- *Al-Kāfi*: Abu ‘Abdillah al-Sālihi says, Our scholars urged me after
the demise of Abu Muhammad (a.s) that I should ask about the name and
the place. The answer came to me, “If you should guide them to the name,
they will divulge it, and if they should know the place, they would
guide the others to it.”

9- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Ali Ibn ‘Āsim al-Kūfi says, The following has come
in the epistles of the Patron of the Time (a.s): “Accursed, accursed, is
the person who mentions me by my name in a party of people.”

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** That is, al-Imam Ali al-Hādi al-Naqi.

3- التوحيد: الدقاق والوراق معا، عن محمد بن هارون الصوفي، عن الرؤياني عن
عبد العظيم الحسني، عن أبي الحسن الثالث (ع) أنه قال في القائم (ع): لا يحل
ذكره باسمه حتى يخرج فيملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت ظلما وجورا. الخبر.

4- إكمال الدين: ابن إدريس، عن أبيه، عن أيوب بن نوح، عن محمد بن سنان، عن
صفوان بن مهران، عن الصادق جعفر بن محمد(ع) أنه قال: المهدي من ولدي الخامس
ومن ولد السابع يغيب عنكم شخصه ولا يحل لكم تسميته.

إكمال الدين: الدقاق، عن الاسدي، عن سهل، عن ابن محبوب، عن عبد العزيز
العبدي، عن ابن أبي يعفور، عن أبي عبد الله (ع) مثله.

5- إكمال الدين: الهمداني، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن زياد الازدي، عن
موسى بن جعفر (ع) أنه قال عند ذكر القائم (ع): يخفى على الناس ولادته ولا
يحل لهم تسميته حتى يظهره الله(عزوجل) فيملا به الارض قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت
جورا وظلما.

6- إكمال الدين: السناني، عن الاسدي، عن سهل، عن عبد العظيم الحسني، عن
محمد بن علي (ع) قال: القائم هو الذي يخفى على الناس ولادته ويغيب عنهم
شخصه ويحرم عليهم تسميته وهو سمي رسول الله وكنيه، الخبر. نص: أبو عبد الله
الخزاعي، عن الاسدي، مثله.

7- إكمال الدين: أبي، وابن الوليد معا، عن الحميري، قال: كنت مع أحمد بن
إسحاق عند العمري(رضي الله عنه) فقلت للعمري: إني أسئلك عن مسألة كما قال
الله(عزوجل) في قصة إبراهيم " أو لم تؤمن قال بلى ولكن ليطمئن قلبي " هل
رأيت صاحبي؟ قال: نعم، وله عنق مثل ذي وأشار بيديه جميعا إلى عنقه قال:
قلت: فالاسم قال: إياك أن تبحث عن هذا فان عند القوم أن هذا النسل قد
انقطع.

8- الكافي: علي بن محمد، عن أبي عبد الله الصالحي قال: سألني أصحابنا بعد
مضي أبو محمد (ع) أن أسأل عن الاسم والمكان، فخرج الجواب: إن دللتهم على
الاسم أذاعوه، وإن عرفوا المكان دلوا عليه.

9- إكمال الدين: المظفر العلوي، عن ابن العياشي، وحيدر بن محمد، عن العياشي
عن آدم بن محمد البلخي، عن علي بن الحسين الدقاق، وإبراهيم بن محمد معا، عن
علي بن عاصم الكوفي، قال: خرج في توقيعات صاحب الزمان (ع): ملعون ملعون من
سماني في محفل من الناس.

10- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Muhammad Ibn Ibrāhim Ibn Ishāq says, I heard
Muhammad Ibn Himād say, I heard Muhammad Ibn ‘Othmān al-‘Amri, may Allah
sanctify his soul, say, “An epistle came in a handwriting, which I
recognize, *Whoever mentions me by name in a congregation of the people,
on him is the curse of Allah.”*

11- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ibn Ri’āb narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s): “The
Patron of this Order is a man that no one will mention him by his name
except an infidel.”

12- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Al-Rayyān Ibn al-Salat says, I asked al-Redhā (a.s)
about the Qā'im (a.s). The Imam said, “His body is not seen and he is
not mentioned by his name.”

13- *Ikmāl al-Dīn*: Jābir narrates from Abu Ja‘far (a.s), “‘Omar asked
the Prince of the Believers (a.s) about the Mahdi (a.s), saying, ‘Yā Ibn
Abi Tālib, tell me about the Mahdi. What is his name?’ The Prince of the
Believers (a.s) said, ‘As for his name, my beloved and my bosom friend
has bound me not to speak to anyone of his name until Allah, the
Exalted, raises him. It is of the things that Allah, the Exalted, has
entrusted its knowledge to his Messenger.’”

*Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: Sa‘d narrates the same.

10- إكمال الدين: محمد بن إبراهيم بن إسحاق قال: سمعت أبا علي محمد بن همام
يقول: سمعت محمد بن عثمان العمري قدس الله روحه يقول: خرج توقيع بخط أعرفه:
من سماني في مجمع من الناس باسمي فعليه لعنة الله.

11- إكمال الدين: أبي، عن سعد، عن ابن يزيد، عن ابن محبوب، عن ابن رئاب عن
أبي عبد الله (ع): قال صاحب هذا الامر رجل لا يسميه باسمه إلا كافر.

12- إكمال الدين: أبي وابن الوليد معا، عن سعد، عن جعفر بن محمد بن مالك،
عن ابن فضال، عن الريان بن الصلت، قال: سألت الرضا (ع) عن القائم فقال: لا
يرى جسمه ولا يسمى باسمه.

13- إكمال الدين: أبي وابن الوليد معا، عن سعد، عن اليقطيني، عن إسماعيل بن
أبان، عن عمرو بن شمر، عن جابر، عن أبي جعفر (ع) قال: سأل عمر أمير
المؤمنين (ع) عن المهدي قال: يا ابن أبي طالب أخبرني عن المهدي ما اسمه؟

قال: أما اسمه فلا، إن حبيبي وخليلي عهد إلي أن لا احدث باسمه حتى يبعثه
الله(عزوجل) وهو مما استودع الله(عزوجل) رسوله في علمه.
