His Attributes, Traits and Lineage
==================================

1- ‘Uyūn *Akhbār al-Redhā:* Ahmad al-Qasri narrates from Abu Muhammad
al-‘Askari, who narrates from his forefathers, from Musā Ibn Ja‘far
(a.s) saying, “No one can be the Qā'im but an Imam the son of an Imam
and a Successor the son of a Successor.”

2- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Atā' said, I asked Abu Ja‘far (a.s),
“Your Shī‘a in Iraq are many and by Allah, there is no one in the Ahl
al-Bait like you. So why don’t you make an uprise?” He said, “O’
Abdullah Ibn ‘Atā’, base people have filled your ears. By Allah, I am
not your Awaited Patron*.”* I asked, “So who is our Awaited Patron*?”*
He said, “Watch for the one whose birth will be hidden from the people.
He will be your Patron.”

*Explanation:* That is, you listen to the words of ignorant members of
the Shī‘a community and accept their assertion that we have extensive
numbers of supporters and that we must rise and that I am the promised
Qā'im.

3*- Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Sufyān al-Jurairi says, I heard Muhammad
Ibn ‘Abdi’r-Rahmān Ibn Abi Lailī say, “By Allah, the Mahdi will not be
but from the progeny of Husain (a.s).”

4- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Through the same chain of narration on
the authority of al-Fudhail Ibn al-Zubair: I heard Zaid the son of ‘Ali
Ibn al-Husain (a.s) say, “The Awaited Savior is from the progeny of
Husain Ibn ‘Ali, from the children of Husain and from the heirs of
Husain. Husain is the victim about whom Allah said, *Whosoever is killed
innocently, We have assigned to his heir the authority.* His heir is a
man from his progeny, from his children.” Then he recited, *And He made
it a word to continue in his posterity.* [Al-Zukhruf: 28] *So he may not
exceed the just limit in slaying.* [Al-Isrā’: 33] Zaid (a.s) said, “His
authority is in his proof over all God’s creation, so much so that his
proof will prevail over all people and no one will have a reason against
him.”

#### صفاته صلوات اللـّه عليه وعلاماته ونسبه {dir="RTL"}

1- عيون أخبار الرضا: محمد بن أحمد بن الحسين البغدادي، عن أحمد بن الفضل،
عن بكر بن أحمد القصري، عن أبي محمد العسكري، عن آبائه، عن موسى بن جعفر
(ع) قال: لا يكون القائم إلا إمام بن إمام ووصي بن وصي.

2- إكمال الدين: أحمد بن هارون، وابن شاذويه، وابن مسرور وجعفر بن الحسين
جميعا، عن محمد الحميري، عن أبيه، عن أيوب بن نوح، عن العباس بن عامر.
وحدثنا جعفر بن علي بن الحسن بن عبد الله بن المغيرة، عن جده الحسن، عن
العباس بن عامر، عن موسى بن هلال الضبي، عن عبد الله بن عطا قال: قلت لابي
جعفر (ع): إن شيعتك بالعراق كثير، ووالله ما في أهل البيت مثلك كيف لا
تخرج؟ فقال: يا عبد الله بن عطا، قد أمكنت الحشوة من اذنيك والله ما أنا
بصاحبكم قلت: فمن صاحبنا؟ قال: انظروا من تخفى على الناس ولادته فهو
صاحبكم.

3- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: جماعة، عن التلعكبري، عن أحمد بن علي الرازي، عن
محمد بن إسحاق المقري، عن علي بن العباس، عن بكار بن أحمد، عن الحسن بن
الحسين عن سفيان الجريري قال: سمعت محمد بن عبد الرحمان بن أبي ليلى يقول:
والله لا يكون المهدي أبدا إلا من ولد الحسين (ع).

4- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: بهذا الاسناد، عن الجريري، عن الفضيل بن الزبير،
قال: سمعت زيد بن علي (ع) يقول: المنتظر من ولد الحسين بن علي، في ذرية
الحسين وفي عقب الحسين، وهو المظلوم الذي قال الله: "وَمَنْ قُتِلَ
مَظْلُوماً فَقَدْ جَعَلْنا لِوَلِيِّهِ" قال: وليه رجل من ذريته من عقبه
ثم قرأ "وجعلها كلمة باقية في عقبه" "سُلْطَاناً فَلا يُسْرِفْ فِي
الْقَتْلِ" قال: سلطانه في حجته على جميع من خلق الله حتى يكون له الحجة
على الناس ولا يكون لأحد عليه حجة.

5- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Abu al-Jārūd narrates from Abu Ja‘far,
from his father, from his grandfather: Said the Prince of the Believers
(a.s) on the pulpit, “A man shall come from my progeny in the latter
days; he will be white with a touch of red, of a broad abdomen, with
legs of ample width, and of high shoulders. On his back are two signs,
one sign of the color of his skin and another like the sign of the
Messenger (a.s). He has two names. One name will be hidden and the other
proclaimed. The one that will be hidden is Ahmad and the one that will
be announced is M. U. H. A. M. M. A. D. When his standards will wave,
the east and the west will be illuminated for him. He will put his hand
on the heads of people, so there will remain no believer but his heart
will be stronger than a block of iron and Allah will grant him the might
of forty men. There will remain no dead, but that gaiety will reach him
in his heart and in his grave. The dead will be visiting each other and
felicitating each other for the news of the rise of al-Qā'im (a.s).

6- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Through the same chain of narration from Muhammad Ibn
Sanān, from ‘Amr Ibn Shamir, from Jābir, from Abu Ja‘far (a.s): “The
knowledge of the Book of Allah, the Exalted, and the conduct of His
Messenger (a.s) will grow in the heart of our Mahdi like the best growth
of a plant. So whoever of you remains there until he meets him, he has
to say when he sees him, “Peace be unto you, O’ Household of Mercy and
Prophethood, the Source of Knowledge and the Abode of Apostleship.”

It has also been narrated that the proper greeting for the Qā'im will be
as follows: “Peace be unto you O’ Divine Redeemer on His earth.
(*As-Salāmu* ‘*Alaika Yā Baqiyyat Allah fi Ardhih*)

7- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Jābir al-Ju‘fi says, I heard Abu Ja‘far
(a.s) say, “‘Omar Ibn al-Khattāb walked along the Prince of the
Believers (a.s) and asked, ‘Please tell me about the Mahdi. What is his
name?’” “Said the Prince of the Believers, ‘As for his name, my Beloved
has bound me not to talk of his name until Allah brings him forth.’”
“‘Omar asked, ‘Then tell me about his qualities.’” “Said the Prince of
the Believers, ‘He is a youth with broad shoulders, beautiful face,
elegant hair, with his hair flowing over his shoulders. The light of his
visage surpasses the blackness of his beard and hair. My father be the
ransom of the son of the best of the concubines.’”

*Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni* narrates the same from ‘Amr Ibn Shamir.

8- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Atā says, I went to Hajj
from Wāsit**[1]** and entered upon Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali (a.s).
He asked me about the people and prices. I said, “I left the people
behind while their necks were stretched towards you. Should you rise,
the masses will follow you.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A locality between Basra and Kufa.

5- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: ابن موسى، عن الاسدي، عن البرمكي، عن إسماعيل بن
مالك عن محمد بن سنان، عن أبي الجارود، عن أبي جعفر، عن أبيه، عن جده (ع)
قال: قال أمير المؤمنين (ع) على المنبر: يخرج رجل من ولدي في آخر الزمان
أبيض مشرب حمرة مبدح البطن، عريض الفخذين، عظيم مشاش المنكبين، بظهره
شامتان: شامة على لون جلده، وشامة على شبه شامة النبي 1، له اسمان: اسم
يخفى، واسم يعلن فأما الذي يخفى فأحمد وأما الذي يعلن فمحمد، فإذا هز رأيته
أضاء لها مابين المشرق والمغرب، ووضع يده على رؤس العباد، فلا يبقى مؤمن
إلا صار قلبه أشد من زبر الحديد وأعطاه الله قوة أربعين رجلا ولا يبقى ميت
إلا دخلت عليه تلك الفرحة في قلبه وفي قبره وهم يتزاورون في قبورهم،
ويتباشرون بقيام القائم (ع).

6- إكمال الدين: بهذا الاسناد، عن محمد بن سنان، عن عمرو بن شمر، عن جابر
عن أبي جعفر (ع) قال: إن العلم بكتاب الله(عزوجل) وسنة نبيه (ص) ينبت في
قلب مهدينا كما ينبت الزرع عن أحسن نباته، فمن بقي منكم حتى يلقاه فليقل
حين يراه: السلام عليكم يا أهل بيت الرحمة والنبوة، ومعدن العلم وموضع
الرسالة وروي أن التسليم على القائم (ع) أن يقال: السلام عليك يا بقية الله
في أرضه.

7- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: سعد، عن اليقطيني، عن إسماعيل بن أبان، عن عمرو بن
شمر عن جابر الجعفي، قال: سمعت أبا جعفر (ع) يقول: ساير عمر بن الخطاب أمير
المؤمنين (ع) فقال: أخبرني عن المهدي ما اسمه؟ فقال: أما اسمه فان حبيبي
عهد إلي أن لا احدث باسمه حتى يبعثه الله، قال: فأخبرني عن صفته قال: هو
شاب مربوع حسن الوجه، حسن الشعر، يسيل شعره على منكبيه، ونور وجهه يعلو
سواد لحيته ورأسه، بأبي ابن خيرة الامآء.

غيبة النعمانى: عن عمرو بن شمر مثله.

8- الغيبة للنعمانى: علي بن أحمد، عن عبيد الله بن موسى العلوي، عن محمد بن
أحمد القلانسي، عن علي بن الحسين، عن العباس بن عامر، عن موسى بن هلال، عن
عبد الله بن عطا قال: خرجت حاجا من واسط، فدخلت على أبي جعفر محمد بن علي
(ع) فسألني عن الناس والاسعار فقلت: تركت الناس ما دين أعناقهم إليك لو
خرجت لاتبعك الخلق.

“O son of ‘Atā’,” said the Imam, “you have started lending your ears to
the fools. By Allah, I am not your Awaited Patron. Every man of us
pointed by fingers or signaled by eyebrows will be murdered or will die
in the bed.” I said, “And what dying in the bed?” “He dies by rage in
his bed until Allah sends the one whose birth is unbeknownst.” “And who
is the one whose birth will be unbeknownst?” The Imam replied, “Look who
is the one whom people do not know whether he is born or not, he is your
Awaited Patron.”

9- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Ayyūb Ibn Nūh says, I said to Abu
al-Hasan al-Redhā (a.s), “We hope that you are the Awaited Patron of
this Order and that may Allah lead this to you without any effort of the
sword. You have been pledged allegiance to. Coins have been minted on
your name.” He said, “Anyone of us to whom letters go and come, is
pointed at with fingers, is asked questions, and religious dues are
taken to, is either assassinated or he dies on his bed until Allah sends
a boy from us for this Order. His birth and place of growth will be kept
hidden, but he will not be hidden for himself.”

10*- Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* ‘Abdul-A‘lā Ibn Hasīn al-Tha‘labī
narrates from his father: I met Abu Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali (a.s) in
Hajj or ‘Omra. I said to him, “My age has grown much and my bones have
become fragile, and I do not know whether destiny will allow me another
time to see you or not. So confide in me a promise and let me know when
is the relief?” He said, “The fugitive, the abandoned, the loner, the
forlorn, the only one from his house, the son of an un-avenged father,
carrying the patronym of his uncle, he is the patron of the banners. His
name is the name of an apostle.” I asked him to repeat it for me. He
called for a sheet of skin or paper and wrote it for me.

*Explanation:* “The son of an un-avenged father,” this can be an
allusion to al-‘Askari (a.s) or Husain (a.s) or simply the category of
father in which case it would include all Imams.

11- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni*: Sālim al-Ashal narrates from Hasīn
al-Taghlubī: “I met Abu Ja‘far (a.s) …” and then he mentions a similar
tradition, except that he says, Then Abu Ja‘far (a.s) looked at me when
he had finished his words and said, “Did you memorize this or should I
write them for you.” I said, “If you would like so, please.” Then he
called for a sheet of skin or a paper and wrote it and gave it to me.

Sālim al-Ashal says, Hasīn took the writing out to us and read it for
us, saying, “This is the writing of Abu Ja‘far (a.s).”

12- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni*: Abu Jārūd narrates from Abu Ja‘far
(a.s): “The Patron of this Order is the abandoned, the loner, the son of
an un-avenged father, carrying the patronym of his uncle, the only one
from his house. His name is the name of a prophet.”

فقال: يابن عطا أخذت تفرش أذنيك للنوكى، لا والله ما أنا بصاحبكم ولا يشار
إلى رجل منا بالاصابع ويمط إليه بالحواجب إلا مات قتيلا أو حتف أنفه، قلت:
وما حتف أنفه؟ قال: يموت بغيظه على فراشه، حتى يبعث الله من لايؤبه
لولادته، قلت: ومن لايؤبه لولادته؟ قال: انظر من لا يدري الناس أنه ولد أم
لا؟ فذاك صاحبكم.

9- الغيبة للنعمانى: الكليني، عن عدة من أصحابنا، عن سعد بن عبد الله، عن
أيوب بن نوح، قال: قلت لأبي الحسن الرضا (ع): إنا نرجو أن تكون صاحب هذا
الامر وأن يسوقه الله إليك عفوا بغير سيف، فقد بويع لك وضربت الدراهم
باسمك. فقال: ما منا أحد اختلف الكتب إليه واشير إليه بالاصابع وسئل عن
المسائل وحملت إليه الاموال إلا اغتيل أو مات على فراشه، حتى يبعث الله
لهذا الامر غلاماً منا خفي المولد والمنشأ غير خفي في نفسه.

10- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن الفزاري، عن أحمد بن ميثم، عن عبد
الله بن موسى، عن عبد الاعلى بن حصين الثعلبي، عن أبيه قال: لقيت أبا جعفر
محمد بن علي(ع) في حج أو عمرة فقلت له: كبرت سني ودق عظمي فلست أدري يقضى
لي لقاؤك أم لا؟ فاعهد إلي عهداً وأخبرني متى الفرج؟ فقال: إن الشريد
الطريد الفريد الوحيد، الفرد من أهله الموتور بوالده المكنى بعمه هو صاحب
الرايات واسمه اسم نبي، فقلت: أعد علي فدعا بكتاب أديم أو صحيفة فكتب فيها.

11- الغيبة للنعمانى: ابن عقدة، عن يحيى بن زكريا، عن يونس بن كليب، عن
معاوية بن هشام، عن صباح، عن سالم الاشل، عن حصين التغلبي، قال: لقيت أبا
جعفر (ع) وذكر مثل الحديث الاول إلا أنه قال: ثم نظر إلي أبو جعفر (ع) عند
فراغه من كلامه فقال: أحفظت (أم) أكتبها لك فقلت: إن شئت، فدعا بكراع من
أديم أو صحيفة فكتبها ثم دفعها إلي وأخرجها حصين إلينا فقرأها علينا ثم
قال: هذا كتاب أبي جعفر (ع).

12- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن الفزاري، عن عباد بن يعقوب، عن
الحسن بن حماد، عن أبي الجارود، عن أبي جعفر (ع) أنه قال: صاحب هذا الأمر
هو الطريد الفريد الموتور بأبيه المكنى بعمه المفرد من أهله اسمه اسم نبي.

13- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni*: Al-Hasan Muhammad al-Hadhrami and ‘Āmir
Ibn Wā’ila narrate from Ja‘far Ibn Muhammad (a.s): “The one whom you
seek and have hopes for will rise from Mecca. But he will not rise from
Mecca until he sees what is necessary, even if it happens that organs
eat parts of trees.”

14- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni*: Abu al-Haitham narrates from Abu
‘Abdillah (a.s): “When three names, Muhammad, ‘Ali, and Hasan come in
consecution, their fourth one is the Qā'im (a.s).”

15*- Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni*: Dāwood al-Raqqi says, I said to Abu
‘Abdillah (a.s), “May I be your ransom, this matter has taken much long
on us, so much that our hearts have run out of patience and the grief is
killing us.” He said, “When it reaches the highest level of despair and
the severest point of grief, a caller will call from the heavens the
name of the Qā'im and the name of his father.” I said, “May I be your
ransom, what is his name?” He said, “His name is the name of a messenger
and his father’s name is the name of a successor.”

16- *Al-Ghaiba* of al-Ne‘māni: Yahyā Ibn Sālim narrates from Abu Ja‘far
(a.s): “The Patron of this Order is the youngest of us by age and the
most concealed of us in person.” I asked, “When will he be?” He said,
“When riders march to pledge allegiance to the boy, then every man of
power and authority will rise a standard.” *Explanation:* “When the
riders march” means when the news spreads every where. “To pledge
allegiance to the boy,” that is, the Qā'im (a.s).

17*- Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* ‘Omar al-Yamāni narrates from Abu
‘Abdillah (a.s): “The Qā'im will rise while he is not bound by
commitment to anyone’s allegiance.”

18- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Hishām Ibn Sālim narrates from Abu
‘Abdillah (a.s) that he said, “The Qā'im will rise while he does not owe
anyone any commitment or allegiance.”

19- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Shu‘aib Ibn Abi Hamzah says, I entered
upon Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) and said to him, “Are you the Awaited Patron of
this matter?” He said, “No.” “Then your son?” I asked. “No,” he said.
“Then the son of your son?” “No.” “Then the son of your son’s son?”
“No.” “Then who is he?” “The one who will fill the earth with equity,
just as it will become full of oppression. He may perchance come after a
period of absence of Imams, as the Messenger of Allah (a.s) was sent
after a period of absence of apostles.”

20- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Abu Wābil says, The Prince of the
Believers ‘Ali (a.s) looked at Husain (a.s) and said, “This son of mine
is a liege, just as the Messenger of Allah (a.s) named him a liege.
Allah will bring from his progeny a man by the name of your Apostle, who
will be similar to him in his creation and in his character. He will
rise in a time of oblivion of the people, when the Truth will have died
and perversion will be manifest.

13- الغيبة للنعمانى: ابن عقدة، عن حميد بن زياد، عن الحسن بن محمد الحضرمي
عن جعفر بن محمد(ع)، وعن يونس بن يعقوب، عن سالم المكي، عن أبي الطفيل عن
عامر بن واثلة أن الذي تطلبون وترجون إنما يخرج من مكة وما يخرج من مكة حتى
يرى الذي يحب ولو صار أن يأكل الاعضاء أعضاء الشجرة .

14- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن أحمد بن مابنداد، عن أحمد بن هلال،
عن أحمد بن علي القيسي، عن أبي الهيثم، عن أبي عبد الله (ع)، قال: إذا
توالت ثلاث أسماء: محمد وعلي والحسن كان رابعهم القائم (ع).

15- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن الفزاري، عن محمد بن أحمد المديني،
عن ابن أسباط، عن محمد بن سنان، عن داود الرقي قال: قلت لابي عبد الله (ع):
جعلت فداك قد طال هذا الامر علينا حتى ضاقت قلوبنا ومتنا كمدا! فقال: إن
هذا الامر آيس ما يكون وأشد غماً: ينادي مناد من السماء باسم القائم واسم
أبيه. فقلت: جعلت فداك ما اسمه؟ قال: اسمه اسم نبي واسم أبيه اسم وصي.

16- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن الفزاري، عن عباد بن يعقوب، عن يحيى
بن سالم، عن أبي جعفر (ع) أنه قال: صاحب هذا الامر أصغرنا سناً وأخملنا
شخصاً. قلت: متى يكون؟ قال: إذا سارت الركبان ببيعة الغلام، فعند ذلك يرفع
كل ذى صيصية لواء.

17- الغيبة للنعمانى: علي بن الحسين، عن محمد بن يحيى، عن محمد بن الحسن
الرازي عن محمد بن علي الكوفي، عن إبراهيم بن هاشم، عن حماد بن عيسى، عن
إبراهيم ابن عمر اليماني، عن أبي عبد الله (ع) أنه قال: يقوم القائم وليس
في عنقه بيعة لاحد.

18- الغيبة للنعمانى: الكليني، عن محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن محمد، عن
الحسين بن سعيد، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن هشام بن سالم، عن أبي عبد الله (ع)
أنه قال: يقوم القائم وليس لأحد في عنقه عقد ولا بيعة.

19- الغيبة للنعمانى: الكليني، عن محمد بن يحيى، عن أحمد بن إدريس، عن محمد
بن أحمد، عن جعفر بن القاسم، عن محمد بن الوليد، عن الوليد بن عقبة، عن
الحارث بن زياد، عن شعيب بن أبي حمزة قال: دخلت على أبي عبد الله (ع) فقلت
له: أنت صاحب هذا الامر؟ فقال: لا، قلت: (فولدك؟ قال: لا، قلت:) فولد ولدك؟
قال: لا، قلت: فولد ولد ولدك؟ قال: لا، قلت: فمن هو؟ قال: الذي يملها عدلا
كما ملئت جورا لعلى فترة من الائمة يأتي كما أن رسول الله(ص) بعث على فترة.

20- الغيبة للنعمانى: علي بن أحمد، عن عبيد الله بن موسى، عن بعض رجاله، عن
إبراهيم بن الحسين بن ظهير، عن إسماعيل بن عياش، عن الاعمش، عن أبي وابل
قال: نظر أمير المؤمنين علي إلى الحسين (ع) فقال: إن ابني هذا سيد كما سماه
رسول الله(ص) سيداً وسيخرج الله من صلبه رجلا باسم نبيكم، يشبهه في الخلق
والخلق، يخرج على حين غفلة من الناس وإماتة للحق، وإظهار للجور.

By Allah, if he does not rise his neck will be severed. The dwellers of
the heavens and its inhabitants will rejoice his rise. He is a man of
broad forehead, high nose, thick abdomen, and large legs—his right leg
bearing a dark mole—and his teeth are distanced from one another. He
will fill the earth with equity and justice, just as it will be replete
with oppression and inequity.”

21- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Hamrān says, I said to Abu Ja‘far
(a.s), “May I be your ransom, I entered Medina with a sack on my waste,
which has thousand dinārs in it. I made a pledge to Allah that I will
distribute them at your door one by one or you answer me what I want to
ask you about.” “Hamrān,” he said, “Ask and you will get your answers.
Do not hate your dinārs.” “I beseech you by your relation to the
Messenger of Allah,” I implored, “are you the Awaited Patron of this
affair and the establisher (*Qā'im*) thereof?” “No,” he said. I asked,
“Then who is he? My father and mother be your ransom.” He said, “He is
the one whose pigment has a strike of red, has deep eyes and high
eyebrows, is broad between shoulders. There is a scurf on his hair and a
mark on his face. May Allah have mercy on Musā.”

*Explanation:* “May Allah have mercy on Musā” perhaps suggests that some
people will think that Musā is the Qā'im, while he is not. Or he might
have said, “so and so,” as in a tradition that is to come, and the
Wāqifiyya have interpreted that to mean Musā.

22- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Hamrān Ibn A‘yun says, I asked Abu
Ja‘far (a.s), “Are you the Qā'im?” He said, “The Messenger of Allah
(a.s) has sired me and I am since seeking to avenge the blood and *Allah
does what He desires*.” I repeated the same question to him. He said,
“You will realize when you will go. Your Awaited Patron is the one with
broad abdomen, and there is scurf on his head, and he is the son of
fears.”

23- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* On the authority of the mentioned chain
of narration from Abu Basīr: Abu Ja‘far (a.s) or Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s)—the
doubt is Ibn ‘Isām’s—said, “O’ Abu Muhammad, the Qā'im has two marks.
There is a nevus on his head and has the ache of hizāz in his head, and
has a nevus between his shoulders on his left side. Below his shoulders
is a birthmark below his shoulders like the mark of an *ās.* He is the
boy of six years and the son of the best of the bondmaids.”

24- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Zaid al-Kannāsi says, I heard Abu
Ja‘far Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Bāqir (a.s) say, “The Patron of this Order
bears a similarity to Yusūf from a dark bondmaid. Allah will arrange his
affair in one night.” He purposed absence by similarity with Yusūf
(a.s).

25- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Al-Hakam Ibn Abd al-Rahīm al-Qasīr
says, I asked Abu Ja‘far (a.s), “The saying of the Prince of the
Believers, ‘My father be the ransom of the best of the bondmaids’, is
she Fātimah?” He said, “Fātimah is the best of the Houris.” He said,
“His abdomen is big. His pigment is reddish. May Allah bless so-and-so.”

والله لو لم يخرج لضربت عنقه. يفرح بخروجه أهل السماوات وسكانها وهو رجل
أجلى الجبين، أقنى الانف، ضخم البطن، أزيل الفخذين لفخذه اليمنى شامة أفلج
الثنايا يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً.

21- الغيبة للنعمانى: أحمد بن هوذه، عن النهاوندي، عن عبد الله بن حماد، عن
ابن بكير، عن حمران قال: قلت لابي جعفر (ع): جعلت فداك إني قد دخلت المدينة
وفي حقوي هميان فيه ألف دينار وقد أعطيت الله عهدا أنني انفقها ببابك
دينارا دينارا أو تجيبني فيما أسئلك عنه فقال: يا حمران سل تجب، ولا تبعض
دنانيرك فقلت: سألتك بقرابتك من رسول الله أنت صاحب هذا الامر والقائم به؟
قال: لا، قلت: فمن هو بأبي أنت وامي؟ فقال: ذاك المشرب حمرة، الغائر
العينين المشرف الحاجبين، عريض مابين المنكبين، برأسه حزاز، وبوجهه أثر رحم
الله موسى.

22- الغيبة للنعمانى: عبد الواحد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن رباح، عن
أحمد بن علي الحميري، عن الحسين بن أيوب، عن عبد الكريم بن عمر والخثعمي،
عن إسحاق بن حريز، عن محمد بن زرارة، عن حمران بن أعين قال: سألت أبا جعفر
(ع) فقلت: أنت القائم؟ قال: قد ولدني رسول الله(ص) وإني للطالب بالدم ويفعل
الله ما يشاء ثم أعدت عليه فقال: قد عرفت حيث تذهب، صاحبك المدبح البطن ثم
الحزاز برأسه ابن الارواع رحم الله فلاناً.

23- الغيبة للنعمانى: بهذا الاسناد، عن الحسين بن أيوب، عن عبد الله
الخثعمي، عن محمد بن عبد الله، عن وهيب بن حفص، عن أبي بصير قال: قال أبو
جعفر (ع) أو أبو عبد الله، (ع) الشك من ابن عصام: يابا محمد بالقائم
علامتان: شامة في رأسه وداء الحزاز برأسه، وشامة بين كتفيه، من جانبه
الايسر تحت كتفيه ورقة مثل ورقة الآس ابن ستة وابن خيرة الاماء.

24- الغيبة للنعمانى: ابن عقدة، عن محمد بن الفضل بن قيس وسعدان بن إسحاق
بن سعيد وأحمد بن الحسن بن عبد الملك ومحمد بن الحسن القطواني جميعا، عن
ابن محبوب عن هشام بن سالم، عن زيد الكناسي قال: سمعت أبا جعفر محمد بن علي
الباقر (ع) يقول: إن صاحب هذا الامر فيه شبه من يوصف من أمة سوداء يصلح
الله له أمره في ليلة يريد بالشبه من يوسف (ع) الغيبة.

25- الغيبة للنعمانى: عبد الواحد بن عبد الله، عن أحمد بن محمد بن رباح، عن
أحمد بن علي الحميري، عن الحكم بن عبد الرحيم القصير قال: قلت لابي جعفر
(ع): قول أمير المؤمنين (ع) بأبي ابن خيرة الاماء أهي فاطمة؟ قال: فاطمة
خير الحراير قال: المبدح بطنه المشرب حمرة رحم الله فلانا.

26- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Abu al-Sabbāh says, I entered upon Abu
‘Abdillah (a.s). He said, “What is the news in the locality behind you?”

I said, “Happiness in your uncle Zaid. He believes he is the ‘boy of six
years’ and that he is the Qā'im of this Ummah and that he is ‘the son of
the best of the bondmaids.’”

He said, “It is not as he says. If he rises, he will be killed.”

27- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Yazīd Ibn Hāzim says, I left Kufa and
when I arrived at Medina, I went to Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) and greeted him.
He asked me, “Was there anyone with you?”

I said, “Yes, a man from the Mu‘tazelites came with me.”

He asked, “Which type of things was he saying?”

I said, “He assumed and hoped that Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdillah Ibn al-Hasan
is the Qā'im. His reason for that was that his name was the name of the
Messenger, and his father’s name was the name of the Messenger’s father.
I said to him, If you believe on the basis of names, here, it is also in
the progeny of Husain: Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdillah Ibn ‘Ali. He said to me,
This is a son of a bondmaid, meaning Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdillah Ibn ‘Ali,
and this is the son of a wife, meaning Muhammad Ibn ‘Abdillah Ibn
al-Hasan Ibn al-Hasan.”

Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) said to me, “Did you not answer him?”

I said, “I did not have anything to respond to him.”

He said, “Only if you knew he is a boy of six,” meaning the Qā'im (a.s).

28*- Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Abu al-Jārūd narrates from Abu Ja‘far
al-Bāqir (a.s) that he heard him say, “The Order is in the youngest of
us by age and the most concealed one of us by name.”

*Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Another chain of narration narrates the
same from the Abu Ja‘far (a.s).

29- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Abu Basīr says, I said to one of
them—Abu ‘Abdillah or Abu Ja‘far (a.s)— “Is it possible that this
Imamate may reach a person who has not reached puberty?” He said, “That
will happen.”

“What will he do?” I asked.

“Allah will bequeath him knowledge and epistles, and will not abandon
him to himself,” he said.

30- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Abu al-Jārūd says, Abu Ja‘far (a.s)
said to me, “This Order will not be but in the most concealed of us by
name and youngest of us in age.”

26- الغيبة للنعمانى: ابن عقدة، عن القاسم بن محمد بن الحسين، عن عبيس بن
هشام عن ابن جبلة، عن علي بن المغيرة، عن أبي الصباح قال: دخلت على أبي عبد
الله (ع) فقال: ما ورائك؟ فقلت: سرور من عمك زيد خرج يزعم أنه ابن ستة وأنه
قائم هذه الامة وأنه ابن خيرة الاماء فقال: كذب ليس هو كما قال إن خرج قتل.

27- الغيبة للنعمانى: ابن عقدة، عن علي بن الحسين، عن محمد وأحمد ابنا
الحسن عن أبيهما، عن ثعلبة بن مهران، عن يزيد بن حازم قال: خرجت من الكوفة
فلما قدمت المدينة دخلت على أبي عبد الله (ع) فسلمت عليه فسألني هل صاحبك
أحد؟ فقلت: نعم، صحبني رجل من المعتزلة، قال: فيما كان يقول؟ قلت: كان يزعم
محمد بن عبد الله بن الحسن يرجى هو القائم، والدليل على ذلك أن اسمه اسم
النبي واسم أبيه اسم أبي النبي فقلت له في الجواب: إن كنت تأخذ بالاسماء
فهو ذا في ولد الحسين محمد بن عبد الله ابن علي فقال لي: إن هذا ابن أمة
يعني محمد بن عبد الله بن علي وهذا ابن مهيرة يعني محمد بن عبد الله بن
الحسن، بن الحسن، فقال لي أبو عبد الله (ع): فما رددت عليه؟ قلت: ماكان
عندي شئ أراد عليه فقال: لو تعلمون أنه ابن ستة يعني القائم (ع).

28- الغيبة للنعمانى: علي بن أحمد، عن عبد الله بن موسى، عن ابن أبي
الخطاب، عن محمد بن سنان، عن أبي الجارود، عن أبي جعفر الباقر (ع) أنه
سمعته يقول: الامر في أصغرنا سنا وأخملنا ذكرا.

29- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن أحمد بن مابنداد، عن أحمد بن هليل،
عن أبي مالك الحضرمي، عن أبي السفاتج، عن أبي بصير قال: قلت لاحدهما: لابي
عبد الله أو لابي جعفر (ع): أيكون أن يفضى هذا الامر إلى من لم يبلغ، قال:
سيكون ذلك، قلت: فما يصنع؟ قال: يورثه علما وكتبا ولا يكله إلى نفسه.

30- الغيبة للنعمانى: عبد الواحد، عن محمد بن جعفر القرشي، عن ابن أبي
الخطاب محمد بن سنان، عن أبي الجارود، قال: قال لي أبو جعفر (ع): لا يكون
هذا الامر إلا في أخملنا ذكرا وأحدثنا سناً.

31- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Ishāq Ibn Sabbāh narrates from Abu
al-Hasan al-Redhā (a.s) that the Imam said, “This will reach to the one
for whom is the *haml*.”

*Haml* means pregnancy, or to carry someone—possibly meaning that he
will need to be carried for his young age—or it may be *khaml*, which
means concealment.

32- *Kashf al-Ghumma:* Sadaqa Ibn Mūsā narrates from his father, who
narrates from al-Redhā (a.s): "The Virtuous Heir is from the progeny of
Abu Muhammad al-Hasan Ibn ‘Ali. He is the Patron of the Age and he is
the Mahdi.”

33*- Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Jābir narrates from Abu Ja‘far (a.s),
“The Mahdi is a man from the progeny of Fātimah. He is a man of tanned
color.”

34- *Al-Fusul al-Muhimma:* His noble attributes: He is a young man of
broad shoulders, handsome face, beautiful hair which flows over his
shoulders, fine-looking high nose, and broad forehead. It is said he
disappeared in the cellar (*serdāb*) as the guards were following him.
This was in the year two hundred and seventy six.

31- الغيبة للنعمانى: محمد بن همام، عن أحمد بن مابنداد، عن أحمد بن هليل،
عن إسحاق بن صباح، عن أبي الحسن الرضا (ع) أنه قال: إن هذا سيفضي إلى من
يكون له الحمل.

32- كشف: ابن الخشاب، قال: حدثنا صدقة بن موسى، عن أبيه، عن الرضا (ع) قال:
الخلف الصالح من ولد أبي محمد الحسن بن علي وهو صاحب الزمان وهو المهدي.

33- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: أحمد بن إدريس، عن ابن قتيبة، عن الفضل، عن محمد
بن سنان عن عمار بن مروان، عن المنخل، عن جابر، عن أبي جعفر (ع) قال:
المهدي رجل من ولد فاطمة وهو رجل آدم.

34- الفصول المهمة: صفته (ع): شاب مربوع القامة، حسن الوجه والشعر يسيل على
منكبيه، أقنى الانف، أجلى الجبهة، قيل: إنه غاب في السرداب والحرس عليه
وكان ذلك سنة ست وسبعين ومأتين.
