The Words of Allah and His Messenger About the Qā'im Narrated By the Shiah and the Sunnah
=========================================================================================

1- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne‘māni:* Anas Ibn Mālik says, the Messenger of
Allah (a.s) said, “We the children of ‘Abd al-Mutallib are the lieges of
the Paradise dwellers; the Messenger of Allah, Hamza, the liege of the
martyrs, Ja‘far flying with two wings, ‘Ali, Fātimah, Hasan, Husain, and
the Mahdi.”

*Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi narrates an identical tradition through a
different chain of narration that merges with that of Ne‘māni at Sa‘d
Ibn ‘Abd il-Hamīd.

2- ‘*Uyūn Akhbār al-Redhā:* Al-Redhā (a.s) narrates through his holy
forefathers, from the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The Hour shall not
stand until the Establisher (*Qā'im*) of Righteousness from us uprises.
And that will be when Allah, the Glorified, gives him permission.
Whoever follows him will find salvation and whoever falls behind will
perish. For Allah’s sake, for Allah’s sake! Servants of Allah! Come to
him even if you have to walk on ice, for he is the vicegerent of Allah,
the Exalted, and my vicegerent.”

3- *Al-Amāli of Sadūq:* Ibn ‘Abbās says, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “When I was raised for the Mi‘rāj to the seventh heaven, and from
there to the Lot Tree, and from the Lot Tree to the Veils of Light, my
Lord, the Exalted, called on me, ‘Yā Muhammad, you are my servant and I
am your Lord. So be humble for Me and worship Me and trust Me and have
confidence in Me, for I am pleased with you as a servant, as a beloved,
as a Messenger, as an Apostle; and with your brother as the vicegerent
and as the gateway. He is My Hujja over My servants and the Imam for My
creation. Through him, My friends are known from My enemies and through
him the party of Satan is distinguished from My party. Through him My
religion will be established, and My codes observed, and My rules
executed. Through you, through him, and through the Imams from your
progeny, I confer mercy upon My servants and bondmaids.

### ما ورد من اخبار اللـّه واخبار النبـي (ص) بالقائم (ع) من طرق الخاصة والعامة {dir="RTL"}

1- الغيبة للنعمانى: أحمد بن محمد بن إسحاق، عن إسماعيل بن إبراهيم
الحلواني عن أحمد بن منصور زاج، عن هدبة بن عبد الوهاب، عن سعد بن عبد
الحميد بن جعفر عن عبد الله بن زياد اليماني، عن عكرمة بن عمار، عن إسحاق
بن عبد الله بن أبي طلحة، عن أنس بن مالك، قال: قال رسول الله(ص): نحن بنو
عبد المطلب سادة أهل الجنة: رسول الله، وحمزة سيد الشهداء وجعفر ذو
الجناحين، وعلي وفاطمة، والحسن والحسين والمهدي.

2- عيون أخبار الرضا: باسناد التميمي، عن الرضا عن آبائه (ع) قال: قال رسول
الله(ص): لا تقوم الساعة حتى يقوم القائم الحق منا وذلك حين يأذن
الله(عزوجل) له ومن تبعه نجا ومن تخلف عنه هلك الله الله عباد الله فأتوه
ولو على الثلج فانه خليفة الله(عزوجل) وخليفتي.

3- أمالي الشيخ الصدوق: ابن المتوكل، عن الاسدي، عن النخعي، عن النوفلي، عن
علي بن سالم، عن أبيه، عن الثمالي، عن ابن طريف، عن ابن نباته، عن ابن عباس
قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لما عرج بي إلى السماء السابعة، ومنها إلى سدرة
المنتهى، ومن السدرة إلى حجب النور ناداني ربي جل جلاله: يا محمد أنت عبدي
وأنا ربك فلي فاخضع وإياي فاعبد وعلي فتوكل وبي فثق فاني قد رضيت بك عبداً
وحبيباً ورسولاً ونبياً وبأخيك علي خليفة وباباً فهو حجتي على عبادي وإمام
لخلقي به يعرف أوليائي من أعدائي وبه يميز حزب الشيطان من حزبي وبه يقام
ديني وتحفظ حدودي وتنفذ أحكامي وبك وبه بالائمة من ولدك أرحم عبادي وإمائي.

“‘And through the Qā'im from yours, I will develop My earth with My
*Tasbīh,* My *Taqdīs*, My *Tahlīl*, My *Takbīr*, and My *Tamjīd.*
Through him, I will purify the earth from my enemies and bequeath her to
My friends. Through him, I will make the word of those who have
disbelieved in Me low, and My word high. Through him, I will revive My
lands and My servants with My knowledge. Through him, I will manifest
treasures and riches with My will. I will expose the secrets and the
hidden to him with My resolve; I will help him through My angels to aide
him in the enforcement of My order, and uncovering of My religion. That
is My friend rightfully, and the Mahdi of My servants truly.’”

The author says, Many such traditions were mentioned in the section of
the traditions affirming the Twelve Imams and the section pertinent to
the reasons of his holy names.

4- ‘*Uyūn Akhbār al-Redhā:* Ka‘b al-Ahbār said about the Caliphs: “They
are Twleve. When their demise approaches and a virtuous generation
comes, Allah will prolong their lives. Such has Allah promised this
Ummah.” Then he recited, “*Allah has promised the ones of you who
believe and commit virtuous acts that He will make them heirs on earth,
as He has made heirs the ones before them.”* He said, “Likewise did
Allah, the Exalted, to the Children of Israel. It is not difficult that
He may gather this Ummah in a day or half a day. *And a day before your
Lord is like a thousand years from what you count.”*

5- ‘*Uyūn Akhbār al-Redhā:* Al-Redhā (a.s) narrates through his holy
forefathers from the Prince of the Believers (a.s) saying, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The world will not perish until a man from
the progeny of Husain takes charge of my Ummah. He will fill it with
justice as it shall become full of oppression and injustice.”

6- *Al-Amāli of Sheikh Tusi*: Abu Ayyūb al-Ansāri narrates that the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) said to Fātimah during his malady, “By the One
that my soul is in His hand, there will definitely be in this Ummah the
Mahdi, and he is, by Allah, from your sons.”

The author says, The tradition was mentioned fully in the section
pertinent to the Virtues of People of the Cloak.

7- *Al-Amāli* of Sheikh Tusi: ‘Abd al-Rahmān Ibn Abi Laili says, My
father said, The Messenger of Allah (a.s) gave the standard to ‘Ali Ibn
Abi Tālib (a.s) in the battle of Khaybar and Allah granted him victory.
Then he mentioned how the Prophet appointed him on the day of Ghadīr. He
recounted some of his excellent attributes, which Messenger had
elaborated. My father said, Then the Messenger of Allah (a.s) wept. They
asked him, “O’ Apostle of Allah, why are you crying?” He said, “Gabriel
(a.s) informed me they will oppress him, deny him his right, wage wars
against him, and will kill and tyrannize his progeny after him.

وبالقائم منكم أعمر أرضي بتسبيحي وتقديسي وتهليلي وتكبيري وتمجيدي وبه اطهر
الارض من أعدائي واورثها أوليائي وبه أجعل كلمة الذين كفروا بي السفلى
وكلمتي العليا، به احيي بلادي وعبادي بعلمي وله اظهر الكنوز والذخاير
بمشيتي وإياه اظهر على الاسرار والضماير بارادتي وامده بملائكتي لتؤيده على
إنفاذ أمري. وإعلان ديني ذلك وليي حقا ومهدي عبادي صدقاً.

أقول: قد مضى كثير من الاخبار في باب النصوص على الاثني عشر وبعضها في باب
علل أسمائه (ع).

4- عيون أخبار الرضا: عبد الله بن محمد الصائغ، عن محمد بن سعيد، عن الحسين
بن علي عن الوليد بن مسلم، عن صفوان بن عمرو، عن شريح بن عبيد، عن عمر
والبكائي عن كعب الاخبار قال في الخلفاء: هم اثنى عشر فإذا كان عند
انقضائهم وأتى طبقة صالحة مد الله لهم في العمر كذلك وعد الله هذه الامة ثم
قرأ "وَعَدَ اللَّهُ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا مِنْكُمْ وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ
لَيَسْتَخْلِفَنَّهُم فِي الْأَرْضِ كَمَا اسْتَخْلَفَ الَّذِينَ مِنْ
قَبْلِهِمْ" قال: وكذلك فعل الله(عزوجل) ببني إسرائيل وليس بعزيز أن يجمع
هذه الامة يوما أو نصف يوم وإن يوما عند ربك كألف سنة مما تعدون.

5- عيون أخبار الرضا: باسناد التميمي، عن الرضا، عن آبائه، عن علي (ع) قال:
قال النبي (ص): لا تذهب الدنيا حتى يقوم بأمر أمتي رجل من ولد الحسين
يملأها عدلاً كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً.

6- أمالي الشيخ الطوسي: المفيد، عن إسماعيل بن يحيى العبسي، عن محمد بن
جرير الطبري عن محمد بن إسماعيل الصواري، عن أبي الصلت الهروي، عن الحسين
الاشقر عن قيس بن الربيع، عن الاعمش، عن عباية بن ربعي، عن أبي أيوب
الانصاري قال: قال رسول الله(ص) لفاطمة في مرضه: والذي نفسي بيده لابد لهذه
الامة من مهدي وهو والله من ولدك.

أقول: قد مضى بتمامه في فضائل أصحاب الكساء (ع).

7- أمالي الشيخ الطوسي: الحفار، عن عثمان بن أحمد، عن أبي قلابة، عن بشر بن
عمر عن مالك بن أنس، عن زيد بن أسلم، عن إسماعيل بن أبان، عن أبي مريم، عن
ثوير بن أبي فاختة، عن عبد الرحمان بن أبي ليلى قال: قال أبي: دفع النبي
(ص) الرأية يوم خيبر إلى علي بن أبي طالب (ع) ففتح الله عليه ثم ذكر نصبه
(ع) يوم الغدير وبعض ما ذكر فيه من فضائله (ع) إلى أن قال: ثم بكى النبي
(ص) فقيل: مم بكاؤك يارسول الله(ص) قال: أخبرني جبرئيل (ع) أنهم يظلمونه
ويمنعونه حقه ويقاتلونه ويقتلون ولده ويظلمونهم بعده.

Gabriel (a.s) also informed me from his Lord, the Exalted, that this
will end when their Qā'im rises, at which their word will ascend and the
Ummah will unite on their love, at which their enemies will be reduced,
their haters disgraced, and their praisers will be many. This will
happen when lands change and the servants of God are weakened and lose
hope in an opening. At that time the Qā'im will rise amidst them.” The
Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “His name is like my name, and his
father’s name is like my son’s name. He is from the progeny of my
daughter. Allah will manifest the truth through them and smother vanity
through their swords. People will follow them, some in their love and
some in their fear.”

When the Messenger of Allah (a.s) stopped crying, he said,
“Congregations of the Faithful! Rejoice the glad tidings of salvation,
for Allah’s promise does not fail and His destiny does not falter and He
is the All-Wise the All-Knowing. Victory from Allah is near. O’ Allah,
they are my household, take away uncleanliness from them and purify
them, a thorough purification. O’ Allah, guard them, protect them and be
their Shepherd. Be for them, help them, assist them, honor them and do
not dishonor them, and be my successor amongst them. You are
All-Powerful on everything.”

8- *Al-Amālī* of Sheikh Tusī: Muhammad Ibn Hamrān says, Abu ‘Abdillah
(a.s) said, “When the fate of Husain Ibn ‘Ali reached where it reached,
the Angels wailed to Allah, the Exalted, and said, *O’ Lord, is this
done to Husain, Your chosen friend and the son of Your apostle?* Allah
erected the shadow of al-Qā'im (a.s) for them and said, ‘Through him,
will I avenge from his oppressors.’”

9*- Al-Amālī* of Sheikh Tusi: Jubair Ibn Nauf says, I said to Abu Sa‘īd
al-Khidrī, “By Allah, no new year comes to us but it is worse than the
last, and no ruler but he is worse than the one before him.”

Abu Sa’īd said, “I heard this from the Messenger of Allah (a.s). He was
saying what you are saying. But I heard him say, ‘This will continue so
much so that people will be born in mischief and inequity and they will
not know anything but mischief and inequity, so much so that the earth
will be full of corruption. No one will be able to say, Allah. Then
Allah, the Exalted, will send a man from Me and my family. He will fill
the earth with justice as those who have been before him will have
filled it with injustice. The earth will bring out its riches and
treasures to him. He will disperse wealth, a thorough dispersion without
counting it once. This will happen until Islam is established firmly.’”

10*- Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Al-Redhā (a.s) narrates through his holy forefathers
from the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “By the One Who has sent me with the
Truth as a herald of happy tidings, the Qā'im from my progeny will go
into hiding with a promise from me confided in him—so much so that the
majority of people will say, Allah does not need the household of
Muhammad. The remainders will doubt his birth. Whoever sees his time
must adhere to his religion hard and must not give Satan a way to him,
who will take him off my path and away from my religion. *Verily Satan
brought out your father and mother from the Paradise* before, and Allah,
the Exalted, *has made satans masters of the people who disbelieve*.

وأخبرني جبرئيل (ع) عن ربه(عزوجل) أن ذلك يزول إذا قام قائمهم وعلت كلمتهم
وأجمعت الامة على محبتهم وكان الشانئ لهم قليلا والكاره لهم ذليلا وكثر
المادح لهم وذلك حين تغير البلاد وتضعف العباد والاياس من الفرج وعند ذلك
يظهر القائم فيهم. قال النبي (ص): اسمه كاسمي واسم أبيه كاسم ابني وهو من
ولد ابنتي يظهر الله الحق بهم ويخمد الباطل بأسيافهم ويتبعهم الناس بين
راغب إليهم وخائف لهم قال: وسكن البكاء عن رسول الله(ص)، فقال: معاشر
المؤمنين ابشروا بالفرج فان وعد الله لا يخلف وقضاؤه لايرد، وهو الحكيم
الخبير فان فتح الله قريب اللهم إنهم أهلي فأذهب عنهم الرجس وطهرهم تطهيرا
اللهم اكلاهم واحفظهم وارعهم وكن لهم وانصرهم وأعنهم وأعزهم ولا تذلهم
واخلفني فيهم إنك على كل شئ قدير.

8- أمالي الشيخ الطوسي: المفيد، عن أحمد بن الوليد، عن الصفار، عن محمد بن
عبيد، عن علي بن أسباط، عن سيف بن عميرة، عن محمد بن حمران قال: قال أبو
عبد الله (ع): لما كان من أمر الحسين بن علي (ع) ما كان ضجت الملائكة إلى
الله تعالى وقالت: يا رب يفعل هذا بالحسين صفيك وابن نبيك؟ قال: فأقام الله
لهم ظل القائم (ع) وقال: بهذا أنتقم له من ظالميه.

9- أمالي الشيخ الطوسي: جماعة، عن أبي المفضل، عن أحمد بن محمد بن بشار، عن
مجاهد بن موسى عن عباد بن عباد، عن مجالد بن سعيد، عن جبير بن نوف أبي
الوداك قال: قلت لابي سعيد الخدري: والله ما يأتي علينا عام إلا وهو شر من
الماضي ولا أمير إلا وهو شر ممن كان قبله فقال أبو سعيد: سمعته من رسول
الله(ص) يقول ما تقول، ولكن سمعت رسول الله يقول: لا يزال بكم الامر حتى
يولد في الفتنة والجور من لايعرف غيرها حتى تملا الارض جورا فلا يقدر أحد
يقول: الله ثم يبعث الله(عزوجل) رجلا مني ومن عترتي فيملأ الأرض عدلاً كما
ملاها من كان قبله جورا، ويخرج له الارض أفلاذ كبدها ويحثو المال حثوا ولا
يعده عدا وذلك حتى يضرب الاسلام بجرانه.

10- إكمال الدين: ابن المتوكل، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن الهروي، عن الرضا عن
آبائه (ع) قال: قال النبي (ص) والذي بعثني بالحق بشيرا ليغيبن القائم من
ولدي بعهد معهود إليه مني حتى يقول أكثر الناس مالله في آل محمد حاجة، ويشك
آخرون في ولادته فمن أدرك زمانه فليتمسك بدينه، ولا يجعل للشيطان إليه
سبيلا بشكه، فيزيله عن ملتي ويخرجه من ديني فقد أخرج أبويكم من الجنة من
قبل وإن الله(عزوجل) جعل الشياطين أولياء للذين لا يؤمنون.

11- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ibn ‘Abbās says, The Messenger of Allah (a.s) said,
When my Lord elevated me for the Mi‘rāj, a call came, “O’ Muhammad.”
“*Labbayk*, O’ Lord of Dignity, here I am,” I said. Allah, the Exalted,
addressed me, “Yā Muhammad, in what did the *High Congregation*
dispute?” I said, “My Lord, I do not know.” He said to me, “Yā Muhammad,
you should choose a premier from mankind, a brother and a successor
after you.” I said, “My Lord, who should I choose? You select for me, my
Lord.” Allah said to me, “Yā Muhammad, I select ‘Ali for you from the
mankind.” I said, “My Lord, my cousin!” He said to me, “Yā Muhammad,
‘Ali is your heir and the heir of the knowledge of those after you; he
is your standard bearer on the Day of Judgment and the patron of your
Pond. He will provide water to the believers of your Ummah who will
enter upon him.” Then Allah, the Exalted, said to me, “Yā Muhammad, I
have taken a truthful oath over My Soul that no one will drink from that
Pond who disdains you, your household, and your pure progeny. Truly,
truly, do I say, Yā Muhammad, I will enter the entirety of your Ummah to
the Paradise except the ones who will forbear.” I said, “My Lord, is
there anyone who would desist entering the Paradise?” He said, “Yes.” I
asked, “How does he desist?” So Allah, the Exalted, said to me, “Yā
Muhammad, I selected you from my creation, and I selected for you a
successor for after you. I designated him the position of Aaron from
Moses, except that there will not be an apostle after you. I put his
love in your heart and made him the father of your progeny. His right
after you on your Ummah is like your right on them during your lifetime.
Whoever denies his right, he denies your right. Whoever forbears to take
him as his master, he desists from taking you as his master; and whoever
desists from taking you as his master, he verily forbears entering the
Paradise.” I fell in prostration before Him, thanking His graces upon
me. Then a caller was calling, “Yā Muhammad, raise your head and ask Me.
I shall grant you.”

I asked, “My Lord, unite my Ummah after me on the love of ‘Ali Ibn Abi
Tālib, so they all may enter upon my Pond on the Day of Judgment.”
Allah, the Exalted, said to me, “Yā Muhammad, I have outlined to my
servants before I created them, and My providence is to be fulfilled,
that I will destroy through him whoever I wish, and will guide through
him whoever I wish. I have granted him you knowledge after you and have
made him your legatee and successor after you over your family and over
your Ummah, as a determination of Mine. Will not enter the Paradise
whoever has enmity towards him, despises him, or denies his guardianship
after you. Whoever despises him despises you, and whoever despises you
despises Me. Whoever is an enemy of his is an enemy of you, and whoever
is an enemy of you is an enemy of Me. Whoever loves him loves you, and
whoever loves you, he verily so loves Me. I have assigned this
excellence to him. My grant to you is that I will bring from his
offspring Eleven Men of Guidance, all of whom are from your progeny of
the Virgin Chaste Lady (*al-Bikr al-Batūl*).

- إكمال الدين: ابن إدريس، عن أبيه، عن محمد بن آدم، عن أبيه، عن ابن أياس
عن المبارك بن فضالة، عن وهب بن منبه يرفعه إلى ابن عباس قال: قال رسول
الله(ص): لما عرج بي ربي جل جلاله أتاني النداء يا محمد! قلت: لبيك رب
العظمة لبيك فأوحى الله(عزوجل) إلي: يا محمد فيم اختصم الملأ الاعلى؟

قلت: إلهي لا علم لي. فقال لي: يا محمد هلا اتخذت من الآدميين وزيراً وأخاً
ووصياً من بعدك، فقلت: إلهي ومن أتخذ؟ تخير لي أنت يا إلهي فأوحى الله إلي
يا محمد قد اخترت لك من الآدميين علياً.

فقلت: إلهي ابن عمي فأوحى الله إلي يا محمد إن عليا وارثك ووارث العلم من
بعدك وصاحب لوائك لواء الحمد يوم القيامة وصاحب حوضك يسقي من ورد عليه من
مؤمني امتك. ثم أوحى الله(عزوجل) يا محمد إني قد أقسمت على نفسي قسما حقا
لا يشرب من ذلك الحوض مبغض لك ولاهل بيتك وذريتك الطيبين حقا حقا أقول يا
محمد لادخلن الجنة جميع امتك إلا من أبى، فقلت: إلهي وأحد يأبى دخول الجنة؟
فأوحى الله(عزوجل): بلى، فقلت: فكيف يأبى؟ فأوحى الله(عزوجل) إلي يا محمد
اخترتك من خلقي واخترت لك وصياً من بعدك وجعلته منك بمنـزلة هارون من موسى
إلا أنه لا نبي بعدك وألقيت محبة في قلبك وجعلته أبا ولدك فحقه بعدك على
امتك كحقك عليهم في حياتك فمن جحد حقه جحد حقك ومن أبى أن يواليه فقد أبى
أن يواليك ومن أبى أن يواليك فقد أبى أن يدخل الجنة. فخررت لله ساجدا شكراً
لما أنعم إلي.

فإذا مناد ينادي: ارفع يا محمد رأسك وسلني اعطك فقلت: يا إلهي أجمع امتي من
بعدي على ولاية علي بن أبي طالب (ع) ليردوا علي جميعا حوضي يوم القيامة
فأوحى الله(عزوجل) إلي يا محمد إني قد قضيت في عبادي قبل أن أخلقهم وقضاي
ماض فيهم لاهلك به من أشاء واهدي به من أشاء وقد آتيته علمك من بعدك وجعلته
وزيرك وخليفتك من بعدك، على أهلك وامتك، عزيمة مني ولا يدخل الجنة من عاداه
وأبغضه وأنكر ولايته بعدك فمن أبغضه أبغضك ومن أبغضك فقد أبغضني ومن عاداه
فقد عاداك ومن عاداك فقد عاداني ومن أحبه فقد أحبك ومن أحبك فقد أحبني وقد
جعلت له هذه الفضيلة وأعطيتك أن اخرج من صلبه أحد عشر مهديا كلهم من ذريتك
من البكر البتول.

“Jesus the son of Mary will pray behind the last man of them. Their last
man will fill the earth with equity as it will be full of oppression and
tyranny. I will save through him from annihilation, and guide through
him from ignorance. I will heal through him the blind and cure through
him the sick.” I asked, “My Lord, My Liege, when will this be?”

Allah, the Exalted, said to me, “It will be when knowledge will be
scarce and ignorance manifest; when reciters will be many and action
scant; when murders will be plentiful and guided jurists few; when
jurists of misguidance and treason will be many and poets will be
countless; when your Ummah will make their graves their mosques; when
Qur’ans will be decorated and mosques will be adorned; when tyranny and
mischief will be common; when your Ummah will encourage the vice and
forbid the virtue; when men will suffice men and women will suffice
women; when rulers will be infidels and their friends will be the
aberrant and their supporters will be the oppressors and their thinkers
will be the corrupt. At that time, there will be three eclipses—an
eclipse in the east, an eclipse in the west, and an eclipse in the
Arabian peninsula. Basra will be destroyed by a man from your progeny
whose followers will be a certain generation of blacks. A man will rise
from the progeny of Husain Ibn ‘Ali. The Dajjāl will appear from the
east from Sajistān. And Sufyāni will rise.”

I said, “My Lord, What trials will be after me?” So Allah informed me of
the mischief of the Umayyads, may He curse them, and of the mischief of
the children of my uncle, and all that will happen until the Day of
Judgment. I conferred that knowledge to my cousin when I descended on
earth and conveyed the message. Praise is for Allah for this all, as
apostles have praised Him, and as everything before me has praised Him,
and as all that He has created will praise Him until the Day of
Judgment.

*Explanation:* “In what did ‘*the High Congregation*’ dispute?” refers
to the holy verse, *I do not have any knowledge of the ‘the High
Congregation’ when they were disputing.* [Sād: 69] The common opinion
amongst the Interpreters is that it alludes to the holy verse, *I am
creating on earth a vicegerent,* [Al-Baqara: 29] and the questioning of
the angels with that respect. Perhaps, Allah, the Exalted, asked His
Prophet first about this and then informed him about it and explained
that the earth cannot be without a Hujja and vicegerent and then asked
him about his vicegerent and appointed his successors for him. It is
possible that the angels may have asked at that time about the heir of
the Messenger of Allah (a.s) so Allah informed him of that. Some
assertions with this respect was mentioned in the section pertinent to
Mi‘rāj.

The saying of Allah, the Exalted, “Basra will be destroyed,” is an
allusion to the story of the leader of the *zanj* (a certain tribe from
the blacks) who rose in Basra in the year two hundred and fifty five or
six.

وآخر رجل منهم يصلي خلفه عيسى بن مريم يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت ظلماً
وجوراً انجي به من الهلكة واهدي به من الضلالة وابرئ به الاعمى وأشفي به
المريض.

فقلت: إلهي وسيدي متى يكون ذلك.

فأوحى الله(عزوجل): يكون ذلك إذا رفع العلم وظهر الجهل وكثر القراء وقل
العمل وكثر القتل وقل الفقهاء الهادون وكثر فقهاء الضلالة والخونة وكثر
الشعراء واتخذ امتك قبورهم مساجد وحليت المصاحف وزخرفت المساجد وكثر الجور
والفساد وظهر المنكر وأمر امتك به ونهى عن المعروف واكتفى الرجال بالرجال
والنساء بالنساء وصار الأمراء كفرة وأوليائهم فجرة وأعوانهم ظلمة وذوو
الرأي منهم فسقة وعند ذلك ثلاثة خسوف: خسف بالمشرق وخسف بالمغرب وخسف
بجزيرة العرب وخراب البصرة على يد رجل من ذريتك يتبعه الزنوج وخروج رجل من
ولد الحسين بن علي وظهور الدجال يخرج من المشرق من سجستان وظهور السفياني.

فقلت: إلهي ما يكون بعدي من الفتن؟

فأوحى الله إلي وأخبرني ببلاء بني امية لعنهم الله ومن فتنة ولد عمي وما هو
كائن إلى يوم القيامة.

فأوصيت بذلك ابن عمي حين هبطت إلى الارض وأديت الرسالة ولله الحمد على ذلك
كما حمده النبيون وكما حمده كل شئ قبلي وما هو خالقه إلى يوم القيامة.

بيان: قوله تعالى "فيما اختصم الملأ الاعلى" إشارة إلى قوله تعالى "مَا
كَانَ لِي مِنْ عِلْمٍ بِالْمَلَإِ الْأَعْلَى إِذْ يَخْتَصِمُونَ."
والمشهور بين المفسرين أنه إشارة إلى قوله تعالى "إِنِّي جَاعِلٌ فِي
الْأَرْضِ خَلِيفَةً" وسؤال الملائكة في ذلك فلعله تعالى سأله أولا عن ذلك
ثم أخبره به وبين أن الارض لا تخلو من حجة وخليفة ثم سأله عن خليفته وعين
له الخلفاء بعده ولا يبعد أن يكون الملائكة سألوا في ذلك الوقت عن خليفة
الرسول (ص) فأخبره الله بذلك وقد مضى في باب المعراج بعض القول في ذلك.

قوله تعالى "وخراب البصرة" إشارة إلى قصة صاحب الزنج الذي خرج في البصرة
سنة ست أو خمس وخمسين ومأتين.

He promised to all the blacks who were coming to him to free them and
honor them. When a large number of them gathered around him, his
campaign became forceful and he got the title of ‘the Leader of the
Zanj.’ He believed that he was ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn Ahmad Ibn ‘Isā Ibn
Zaid Ibn ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain Ibn ‘Ali Ibn Abi Tālib (a.s). Ibn Abi
al-Hadīd says, Majority of people question his lineage, specially so the
children of Abu Tālib. The majority of genealogists believe that he is
from the tribe of ‘Abd al-Qais and that he is ‘Ali Ibn Muhammad Ibn ‘Abd
al-Rahīm and that his mother is from the Asad, from Asad Ibn Khuzaima,
and that her grandfather is Muhammad Ibn Hakīm al-Asadi from Kufa. Ibn
al-Athīr has said likewise in *al-Kāmil* and Mas‘ūdi in *Marūj
al-Dhahab.* However, this tradition suggests that his lineage is valid.

It is worth remembering that these signs are not necessary to be
contemporaneous with his victorious rise, since the objective is to
describe that these incidents will occur before his rise. Comparatively,
many of the conditions of the Day of Judgment that the commonality as
well as the elite congregation has narrated have appeared ages and years
before the Hour. The story of ‘the Leader of the Zanj’ was contemporary
with his holy birth and from that time his signs have begun appearing
until he uprises. It is also possible, however unlikely, that the
purpose is to describe the signs of his birth.

12- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ibn ‘Abbās said, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s),
“My successors and heirs and the Hujjas of Allah over the creation after
me are twelve. The first one of them is my brother, and their last one
is my son.” It was asked, “Yā Rasūl-Allah, who is your brother?” He
said, “Ali Ibn Abi Tālib.” He was asked, “Who is your son?” He said, “He
is al-Mahdi. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as it will
be full of oppression and tyranny. By the One Who sent me an apostle
with the truth, even if not one day is left from the world, Allah will
prolong that day until my son al-Mahdi will rise. Then Allah will
descend Rūh-Allah Jesus the son of Mary (a.s), who will pray behind my
son. *And the earth will shine with the illumination of its Lord,* and
his rule will stretch from east to the west.”

13- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Jābir al-Ansāri says, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “Al-Mahdi is from my progeny; his name is my name and his
patronym my patronym. He is the one from all people most similar to me
in his creation and in his character. For him there will be an
occultation and a wonder, in which nations will go astray. Then he will
come like a meteor of piercing brightness, and fill the earth with
justice and equity as it will be full oppression and tyranny.”

14- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Abu Hamzah narrates from Abu Ja‘far (a.s), Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Bliss be for the person who will be in the
time of the Qā'im of my Household, who follows the Qā'im during his
occultation before his rise and loves his lovers and despises his
enemies. Such a person is of my friends and lovers and he is the most
honorable of my Ummah to me on the Day of Judgment.”

ووعد كل من أتى إليه من السودان أن يعتقهم ويكرمهم فاجتمع إليه منهم خلق
كثير وبذلك علا أمره ولذا لقب صاحب الزنج وكان يزعم أنه علي بن محمد بن
أحمد بن عيسى بن زيد ابن علي بن الحسين بن علي بن أبي طالب (ع). وقال ابن
أبي الحديد: وأكثر الناس يقدحون في نسبه وخصوصا الطالبيون وجمهور النسابين
على أنه من عبد القيس وأنه علي بن محمد بن عبد الرحيم وامه أسدية من أسد بن
خزيمة جدها محمد بن الحكم الاسدي من أهل الكوفة ونحو ذلك قال ابن الاثير في
الكامل، والمسعودي في مروج الذهب، ويظهر من الخبر أن نسبه كان صحيحا. ثم
اعلم أن هذه العلامات لا يلزم كونها مقارنة لظهوره (ع) إذ الغرض بيان أن
قبل ظهوره (ع) يكون هذه الحوادث كما أن كثيرا من أشراط الساعة التي روتها
العامة والخاصة ظهرت قبل ذلك بدهور وأعوام وقصة صاحب الزنج كانت مقارنة
لولادته (ع) ومن هذا الوقت ابتدأت علاماته إلى أن يظهر (ع). على أنه يحتمل
أن يكون الغرض علامات ولادته (ع) لكنه بعيد.

12- إكمال الدين: ابن مسرور، عن ابن عامر، عن المعلى، عن جعفر بن سليمان،
عن عبد الله بن الحكم، عن أبيه، عن سعيد بن جبير، عن ابن عباس قال: قال
رسول الله(ص): إن خلفائي وأوصيائي وحجج الله على الخلق بعدي اثنا عشر أولهم
أخي وآخرهم ولدي وقيل: يارسول الله(ص) ومن أخوك؟ قال: علي بن أبي طالب قيل
فمن ولدك؟ قال: المهدي يملاها قسطا وعدلا كما ملئت جورا وظلما والذي بعثني
بالحق نبيا لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحد لاطال الله ذلك اليوم حتى
يخرج فيه ولدي المهدي فينـزل روح الله عيسى بن مريم (ع) فيصلي خلفه وتشرق
الارض بنور ربها ويبلغ سلطانه المشرق والمغرب.

13- إكمال الدين: ابن مسرور، عن ابن عامر، عن عمه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن أبي
جميلة، عن جابر الجعفي، عن جابر الانصاري قال: قال رسول الله(ص): المهدي من
ولدي اسمه اسمي وكنيته كنيتي أشبه الناس بي خلقا وخلقا تكون له غيبة وحيرة
تضل فيه الامم، ثم يقبل كالشهاب الثاقب ويملاها عدلا وقسطا كما ملئت ظلماً
وجوراً.

14- إكمال الدين: ابن الوليد، عن الصفار، عن أحمد بن الحسين بن سعيد، عن
محمد بن جمهور، عن فضالة، عن معاوية بن وهب، عن أبي حمزة، عن أبي جعفر (ع)
قال: قال رسول الله(ص): طوبى لمن أدرك قائم أهل بيتي وهو يأتم به في غيبته
قبل قيامه ويتولى أولياءه ويعادي أعداءه ذاك من رفقائي وذوي مودتي وأكرم
امتي علي يوم القيامة.

15- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Sudair narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s) that the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “Bliss be for the one who will be in the
time of the Qā'im of my household, who will be his follower before his
rise, and will follow him and the Imams of Guidance before him, and
turns away to Allah with disdain from their enemies. They are my friends
and the most honorable of my Ummah to me.”

16- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Abu Basīr narrates from al-Sādiq, who narrates from
his holy forefathers, saying, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The
Mahdi is from my sons; his name is my name and his patronym is my
patronym. He is, of all people, the most similar one to me in his
creation and his character. There will be an occultation and a wonder
about him, so much so that people will go astray from their religion. At
that time, he will come like a meteor of piercing brightness, and fill
it with justice and equity as it will be full of oppression and
tyranny.”

17- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Sālih Ibn ‘Aqaba narrates from his father, who
narrates from al-Bāqir, who narrates from his holy forefathers, bliss of
Allah be for them all, saying, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The
Mahdi is from my offspring. There will be an occultation and a wonder
for him in which nations will go astray. He will bring the treasures of
the apostles and fill the earth with equity and justice as it will be
full of oppression and tyranny.”

18- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ibn ‘Abbās says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s),
“‘Ali Ibn Abi Tālib (a.s) is the Imam of my Ummah and my successor over
them after me. From his offspring is the Awaited al-Qā'im, through whom
Allah, the Exalted, will fill the earth with justice and equity as it
will be full of corruption and oppression. By the One Who sent me with
the Truth as a Herald of Glad Tidings, those who will remain steadfast
in the belief in him in the time of his occultation, they are rarer than
alchemy.” Jābir Ibn ‘Abdillah al-Ansāri stood and said, “O Messenger of
Allah, is the Qā'im from your offspring going to have an occultation?”
He said, “Yes, by my Lord. *And that God may purge the believers and
blot out the unbelievers.* Jābir, this order is a Divine Order, and a
secret from the Divine Secrets, veiled from His servants. Beware not to
doubt in the Divine Order, for it is *kufr.*”

19- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Hishām Ibn Sālim narrates from al-Sādiq Ja‘far Ibn
Muhammad, from his father, from his grandfather, peace be with all of
them, saying, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Al-Qā'im is from my
progeny. His name is my name, his patronym my patronym, his appearance
my appearance, and his conduct my conduct. He will lead the people on my
path and my law, and will call them to the Book of Allah, the Exalted.
Whoever obeys him obeys me and whoever disobeys him, he disobeys me.
Whoever rejects him during his occultation has very so rejected me; and
whoever belies him, verily so belies me. Whoever affirms his truth
verily so affirms my truth. I complain to Allah from my beliers in his
affair and rejecters of my word with regard to him and the ones who will
lead my Ummah astray from his path. *And soon the oppressors will know
to what final place of turning they shall turn back.*”

15- إكمال الدين: عبد الواحد بن محمد، عن أبي عمرو البلخي، عن محمد بن
مسعود عن خلف بن حامد، عن سهل بن زياد، عن إسماعيل بن مهران، عن محمد بن
أسلم الجبلي، عن الخطاب بن مصعب، عن سدير، عن أبي عبد الله (ع) قال: قال
رسول الله(ص): طوبى لمن أدرك قائم أهل بيتي وهو مقتد به قبل قيامه يأتم به
وبأئمة الهدى من قبله ويبرأ إلى الله من عدوهم اولئك رفقائي وأكرم امتي
علي.

16- إكمال الدين: أبي وابن الوليد وابن المتوكل جميعاً، عن سعد والحميري
ومحمد العطار جميعا، عن ابن عيسى وابن هاشم والبرقي وابن أبي الخطاب جميعا،
عن ابن محبوب، عن داود بن الحصين، عن أبي بصير، عن الصادق، عن آبائه (ع)
قال: قال رسول الله(ص): المهدي من ولدي اسمه اسمي وكنيته كنيتي أشبه الناس
بي خلقا وخلقا تكونه له غيبة وحيرة حتى يضل الخلق عن أديانهم فعند ذلك يقبل
كالشهاب الثاقب فيملاها عدلا وقسطا كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً.

17- إكمال الدين: ابن عبدوس، عن ابن قتيبة، عن حمدان، عن ابن بزيع، عن صالح
ابن عقبة، عن أبيه، عن الباقر، عن آبائه صلوات الله عليهم أجمعين قال: قال
رسول الله(ص): المهدي من ولدي تكون له غيبة وحيرة تضل فيها الامم يأتي
بذخيرة الانبياء فيملأها عدلاً وقسطاً كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً.

18- إكمال الدين: ابن المتوكل، عن الاسدي، عن البرمكي، عن علي بن عثمان عن
محمد بن الفرات، عن ثابت بن دينار، عن سعيد بن جبير، عن ابن عباس قال: قال
رسول الله(ص): علي بن أبي طالب (ع) إمام امتي وخليفتي عليهم بعدي ومن ولده
القائم المنتظر الذي يملا الله(عزوجل) به الارض عدلا وقسطا كما ملئت جورا
وظلما والذي بعثني بالحق بشيرا إن الثابتين على القول به في زمان غيبته
لاعز من الكبريت الاحمر، فقام إليه جابر بن عبد الله الانصاري فقال: يارسول
الله وللقائم من ولدك غيبة؟ فقال: إي وربي " وليمحص الله الذين آمنوا ويمحق
الكافرين " يا جابر إن هذا لامر من أمر الله وسر من سر الله، مطوي عن
عباده، فاياك والشك في أمر الله فهو كفر.

19- إكمال الدين: ابن عبدوس، عن ابن قتيبة، عن حمدان بن سليمان، عن عبد
الله ابن الفضل الهاشمي، عن هشام بن سالم، عن الصادق جعفر بن محمد، عن
أبيه، عن جده (ع) قال: قال رسول الله(ص): القائم من ولدي اسمه اسمي وكنيته
كنيتي وشمائله شمائلي وسنته سنتي يقيم الناس على ملتي وشريعتي ويدعوهم إلى
كتاب الله(عزوجل) من أطاعه أطاعني ومن عصاه عصاني ومن أنكره في غيبته فقد
أنكرني ومن كذبه فقد كذبني ومن صدقه فقد صدقني إلى الله أشكو المكذبين لي
في أمره والجاحدين لقولي في شأنه والمضلين لامتي عن طريقته "وسيعلم الذين
ظلموا أي منقلب ينقلبون,"

20- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ghiyāth Ibn Ibrāhim narrates from al-Sādiq, from his
forefathers, peace be with them, saying, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “Whoever rejects al-Qā'im from my offspring has verily so
rejected me.”

21- *Ikmāl al-Dīn:* Ghiyāth Ibn Ibrāhim narrates from al-Sādiq, from his
forefathers, peace be with them, saying, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “Whoever rejects al-Qā'im from my offspring during the time of
his occultation will die an pagan death.”

22- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Jābir Ibn ‘Abdillah says, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Al-Mahdi will come in the End Times.”

23- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Abu Sa‘id al-Khidri says, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “I give you the glad tidings of the Mahdi. He
will be sent to my Ummah when people will be in dispute and concussions.
He will fill the earth with justice and equity as it will be full of
oppression and tyranny. The dwellers of the heavens and the earth will
be pleased with him.”

24- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Abu al-Hajjāf says, Said the Messenger
of Allah (a.s), “Rejoice the glad news of the coming of the Mahdi.” He
said this tree times. “He will come during a time of dispute and severe
concussions of people. He will fill the earth with equity and justice as
it will have become full of corruption and tyranny. He will instill
devotion into the hearts of His servants and will deliver His equity to
them.”

25- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Abu Sa‘id al-Khidri says, I heard the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) say on the pulpit, “Al-Mahdi is verily from my
household, from my family. He will come in the End Times. The heavens
will descend their rain for him and the earth will put forth its crops
for him. He will make the earth full of justice and equity as people
will become full of oppression and tyranny.”

26- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Abu Huraira says, Said the Messenger of
Allah (a.s), “Should there not remain from the world but a single day,
Allah will prolong that day until a man from my household will rise. He
will fill the earth with justice and equity as it will be full of
oppression and tyranny.”

27- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ūd says, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Should there not remain from the world but
one day, Allah will prolong that day until He sends a man from me, whose
name will be like my name and his father’s name like my father’s. He
will fill the earth with justice as it will be full of injustice.”

28- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ūd says, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The world will not end until a man comes to
my Ummah from my household who is called the Mahdi.”

20- إكمال الدين: الهمداني، عن علي، عن أبيه، عن ابن أبي عمير، عن غياث ابن
إبراهيم، عن الصادق، عن آبائه (ع) قال: قال رسول الله(ص): من أنكر القائم
من ولدي فقد أنكرني.

21- إكمال الدين: الوراق، عن الاسدي، عن النخعي، عن النوفلي، عن غياث ابن
إبراهيم، عن الصادق، عن آبائه (ع) قال: قال رسول الله(ص): من أنكر القائم
من ولدي في زمان غيبته مات ميتة جاهلية.

22- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: جماعة، عن التلعكبري، عن أحمد بن علي، عن ابن أبي
دارم، عن علي بن العباس، عن محمد بن هاشم القيسي، عن سهل بن تمام البصري،
عن عمران القطان، عن قتادة، عن أبي نضرة، عن جابر بن عبد الله قال: قال
رسول الله(ص): المهدي يخرج في آخر الزمان.

23- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: محمد بن إسحاق، عن علي بن العباس، عن بكار بن
أحمد، عن الحسن بن الحسين، عن معلى بن زياد، عن العلاء بن بشير، عن أبي
الصديق الناجي، عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله(ص): ابشركم بالمهدي
يبعث في امتي على اختلاف من الناس وزلزال يملأ الأرض عدلاً وقسطا كما ملئت
جورا وظلما يرضى عنه ساكن السماء وساكن الارض تمام الخبر.

24- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: بهذا الاسناد، عن الحسن بن الحسين، عن تليد، عن
أبي الحجاف قال: قال رسول الله(ص): أبشروا بالمهدي قالها ثلاثا يخرج على
حين اختلاف من الناس وزلزال شديد يملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت ظلماً
وجوراً يملا قلوب عباده عبادة ويسعهم عدله.

25- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: بهذا الاسناد، عن الحسن بن الحسين، عن سفيان
الجريري، عن عبد المؤمن، عن الحارث بن حصيرة، عن عمارة بن جوين العبدي، عن
أبي سعيد الخدري قال: سمعت رسول الله(ص) يقول على المنبر: إن المهدي من
عترتي من أهل بيتي يخرج في آخر الزمان تنـزل له السماء قطرها وتخرج له
الارض بذرها فيملأ الأرض عدلاً وقسطا كما ملاها القوم ظلماً وجوراً.

26- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: محمد بن إسحاق، عن علي بن العباس، عن بكار، عن
مصبح عن قيس، عن أبي حصين، عن أبي صالح، عن أبي هريرة قال: قال رسول
الله(ص): لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحد لطول الله ذلك اليوم حتى يخرج
رجلا من أهل بيتي يملأ الأرض عدلاً وقسطا كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً.

27- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: بهذا الاسناد، عن بكار، عن علي بن قادم، عن فطر،
عن عاصم، عن زر بن حبيش، عن عبد الله بن مسعود، قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لو
لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم لطول الله ذلك اليوم حتى يبعث رجلا مني يواطئ
اسمه اسمي واسم أبيه اسم أبي يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت ظلما.

28- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: محمد بن إسحاق، عن عبد الله بن العباس، عن جعفر
بن محمد الزهري عن إسحاق بن منصور، عن قيس بن الربيع وغيره، عن عاصم، عن
زر، عن عبد الله بن مسعود قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لا يذهب الدنيا حتى يلي
امتي رجل من أهل بيتي يقال له: المهدي.

29- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* ‘Amr Ibn al-‘Ās narrates a long
tradition, in which the Messenger of Allah (a.s) says, “…And then will
be the rise of the Mahdi, and he is a man from the offspring of this,”
pointing with his hand towards ‘Ali Ibn Abi Tālib (a.s). “Through him
Allah will take away lies. Through him time will take away severity. He
will remove the disgrace of slavery from your necks.” Then he said, “I
am the first of this Ummah, Mahdi is the middle of it, and Jesus is the
last of it. And in between there is a crooked old man.”

30- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Umm Salama says, I heard the Messenger
of Allah (a.s) say, “Al-Mahdi is from my household from the progeny of
Fātimah.”

*Al-Ghaiba* of Sheikh Tusi: Same narration.

31- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* In a long tradition, narrated by Wahab
Ibn Munabbah, Ibn ‘Abbās says, “…O’ Wahab, then the Mahdi will rise.” I
asked, “Is he from your progeny?” He said, “No, by Allah, he is not from
my progeny. He is from the progeny of ‘Ali (a.s). Bliss be for the one
who reaches his time. Through him Allah will relieve the Ummah’s stress,
until he makes the earth full of equity and justice…”

32- *Al-Ghaiba of Sheikh Tusi:* Abu Sa‘īd has narrated a long tradition,
which we will summarize. He says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s) to
Fātimah, “O’ my dear daughter, we the Ahl al-Bait have been given seven
things that no one has been given before us. Our apostle is the best of
the apostles. Our successor is the best of the successors, and he is
your husband. Our martyr is the best of the martyrs, and he is the uncle
of your father Hamzah. From us is the one who has two crimsoned wings,
by which he glides in the Paradise, and he is your cousin Ja‘far. From
us is the two heirs of this Ummah, and they are your two sons al-Hasan
and al-Husain. And from us is, by the Allah that a deity other than Him
is not, the Mahdi of this Ummah, behind whom Jesus the son of Mary will
pray.” Then he touched Husain’s shoulder with his hand and said three
times, “From him.”

33- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* ‘Abd al-Rahmān Ibn al-Khashshāb
narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah, from his forefathers, peace be with them,
saying, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The similitude of my Ahl
al-Bait is the similitude of the stars of the heavens. Whenever a star
hides, another star rises. When a certain star from them will appear and
they gaze at him with eyes and point at him with fingers, the angel of
death comes to him and takes him. Then you will remain a long period of
time. The children of ‘Abd al-Mutallib will be equal and no one will
know one thing from another. At that time, your star will appear; so
praise Allah and go to him.”

34- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Abān Ibn ‘Othmān says, Abu ‘Abdillah,
(a.s) said, One day the Messenger of Allah (a.s) was at Baqī‘, when ‘Ali
came and gave him greetings.

29- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: جماعة، عن البزوفري، عن أحمد بن إدريس، عن ابن
قتيبة عن الفضل، عن نصر بن مزاحم، عن أبي لهيعة، عن أبي قبيل، عن عبد الله
بن عمرو ابن العاص قال: قال رسول الله(ص) في حديث طويل: فعند ذلك خروج
المهدي وهو رجل من ولد هذا وأشار بيده إلى علي بن أبي طالب (ع) به يمحق
الله الكذب ويذهب الزمان الكلب، به يخرج ذل الرق من أعناقكم ثم قال: أنا
أول هذه الامة والمهدي أوسطها وعيسى آخرها وبين ذلك تيح اعوج.

30- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: محمد بن علي، عن عثمان بن أحمد، عن إبراهيم بن
عبد الله الهاشمي، عن إبراهيم بن هانئ، عن نعيم بن حماد، عن عقبة بن
الوليد، عن أبي بكر بن أبي مريم، عن الفضل بن يعقوب، عن عبد الله بن جعفر،
عن أبي المليح عن زياد بن بنان، عن علي بن نفيل، عن سعيد بن المسيب، عن ام
سلمة قالت: سمعت رسول الله(ص) يقول: المهدي من عترتي من ولد فاطمة.

الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: جماعة، عن التلعكبري، عن أحمد بن علي، عن محمد بن
علي، عن عثمان بن أحمد، عن إبراهيم بن علاء، عن أبي المليح مثله.

31- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: أحمد بن إدريس، عن ابن قتيبة، عن الفضل، عن مصبح،
عن أبي عبد الرحمان، عمن سمع وهب بن منبه يقول عن ابن عباس في حديث طويل
أنه قال: يا وهب ثم يخرج المهدي قلت: من ولدك؟ قال: لا والله ما هو من ولدي
ولكن من ولد علي (ع) فطوبى لمن أدرك زمانه، وبه يفرج الله عن الامة حتى
يملاها قسطا وعدلا إلى آخر الخبر.

32- الغيبة للشيخ الطوسي: جماعة، عن التلعكبري، عن أحمد بن علي، عن أحمد بن
إدريس عن ابن عيسى، عن الاهوازي، عن الحسين بن علوان، عن أبي هارون العبدي
عن أبي سعيد الخدري في حديث له طويل اختصرناه قال: قال رسول الله(ص)
لفاطمة: يا بنية إنا اعطينا أهل البيت سبعا لم يعطها أحد قبلنا: نبينا خير
الانبياء وهو أبوك ووصينا خير الاوصياء وهو بعلك وشهيدنا خير الشهداء وهو
عم أبيك حمزة ومنا من له جناحان خضيبان يطير بهما في الجنة وهو ابن عمك
جعفر ومنا سبطا هذه الامة وهما ابناك الحسن والحسين ومنا والله الذي لا إله
إلا هو مهدي هذه الامة الذي يصلي خلفه عيسى بن مريم ثم ضرب بيده على منكب
الحسين (ع) فقال: من هذا ثلاثا.

33- الغيبة للنعمانى: أحمد بن (علي) البنديجي، عن عبد الله بن موسى
العباسي، عن موسى بن سلام، عن البزنطي، عن عبد الرحمان (بن) الخشاب، عن أبي
عبد الله عن آبائه (ع) قال: قال رسول الله(ص): مثل أهل بيتي مثل نجوم
السماء كلما غاب نجم طلع نجم حتى إذا نجم منها طلع فرمقوه بالاعين وأشرتم
إليه بالاصابع أتاه ملك الموت فذهبت به ثم لبثتم في ذلك سبتا من دهركم
واستوت بنو عبد المطلب ولم يدر أي من أي فعند ذلك يبدو نجمكم فاحمدوا الله
واقبلوه.

34- الغيبة للنعمانى: أحمد بن هوذه، عن النهاوندي، عن عبد الله بن حماد، عن
أبان بن عثمان قال: قال أبو عبد الله (ع): بيننا رسول الله(ص) ذات يوم
بالبقيع فأتاه علي فسلم عليه.

The Messenger of Allah (a.s) said to him, “Sit down” and sat him down on
his right. Then Ja‘far Ibn Abi Tālib came and asked about the Messenger
of Allah (a.s). He was told that he was at Baqī‘. He also came to the
apostle and gave him greetings. The Messenger sat him on his left. Then
came ‘Abbās and asked about the Apostle. He was told that he was in
Baqi‘. He came also and gave greetings. The apostle sat him in front of
him. Then the Messenger of Allah (a.s) turned towards ‘Ali (a.s) and
said, “May I not give you the happy tidings? May I not inform you, O’
‘Ali?” “Please,” said the Prince of the Believers. The Apostle said,
“Gabriel was with me a moment ago and informed me that the Qā'im, who
will rise at the End Times and fill the earth with equity as it will be
full of oppression and tyranny, will be from your progeny from the
offspring of Husain (a.s).” The Prince of the Believers said, “O’
Messenger of Allah, no good has ever come to us from Allah but on your
hands.” Then he turned to Ja‘far and said, “O’ Ja‘far, may I not give
you glad tidings?” “Please,” said Ja‘far. “Gabriel was with me a moment
ago and informed me that the one who will do good to al-Qā'im is from
your progeny. Do you know who he is?” Ja‘far said, “No.” He said, “The
one whose visage will be like a dinār, will have straightly ordered
teeth, and his sword like the blaze of fire. He will enter the mountain
low and come back high. Gabriel and Michael will be protecting him.”
Then he turned to ‘Abbās and said, “O’ uncle of the Apostle, may I
inform you of what Gabriel has informed me?” “Please so, O’ Messenger of
Allah,” said al-‘Abbās. “He said to me, ‘Much pain will reach your
progeny from the sons of al-‘Abbās.” “O’ Messenger of Allah, should I
abstain from women?” asked al-‘Abbas. “Allah is done with what will
happen,” said the Apostle.

35- *Al-Ghaiba of al-Ne*‘*māni:* Sālim al-Ashal says, I heard Abu Ja‘far
Muhammad Ibn ‘Ali al-Bāqir (a.s) say, “Moses the son of ‘Imrān saw in
the First Book what will be given to the Qā'im of the House of Muhammad.
He said, ‘O’ Allah make me the Qā'im of the House of Muhammad.’ It was
said to him, ‘He is from the progeny of Ahmad.’ Then he looked at the
Second Book and found the like of that. He made a similar wish and was
given a similar answer. Then he looked in the Third Book and saw
something similar. He made a similar supplication and received a similar
answer.”

36- *Al-Kāfi:* Mu‘āwiya Ibn ‘Ammār narrates from Abu ‘Abdillah (a.s)
that the Messenger (a.s) came out one day very happy as he was laughing
from gaiety. People said to him, “May Allah ever keep you laughing, O’
Messenger of Allah, and may He increase your happiness.” The Messenger
of Allah (a.s) said, “There is not any day or night but Allah gives me a
gift. Behold, today my Lord bestowed me with a gift that He had not
bestowed by the like of it in the past. Gabriel (a.s) came to me and
read to me greetings from my Lord. He said, ‘Yā Muhammad, Allah, the
Exalted, has chosen seven persons from the children of Hāshim, the likes
of whom He has never created amongst the predecessors, nor will He
amongst the remainders: You, O’ Messenger of Allah, are the liege of the
apostles; ‘Ali Ibn Abi Tālib, your successor, is the liege of the
successors; Hasan and Husain, your grandsons, are the lieges of the
legatees; Hamzah, your uncle, is the liege of the martyrs; Ja‘far, your
cousin, flying in the Paradise, glides with angels wherever he desires;
and from you is the Qā'im, behind whom Jesus the son of Mary will pray
when Allah brings him down to earth. He will be from the progeny of ‘Ali
and Fātimah, and from the offspring of Husain (a.s).”

فقال له رسول الله(ص): اجلس فأجلسه عن يمينه ثم جاء جعفر بن أبي طالب فسأل
عن رسول الله(ص) فقيل: هو بالبقيع، فأتاه فسلم عليه فأجلسه عن يساره ثم جاء
العباس فسأل عنه فقيل هو بالبقيع فأتاه فسلم عليه وأجلسه أمامه. ثم التفت
رسول الله 6 إلى علي (ع): فقال: ألا ابشرك ألا اخبرك يا علي؟ قال: بلى
يارسول الله فقال: كان جبرئيل عندي آنفا وخبرني أن القائم الذي يخرج في آخر
الزمان يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً من ذريتك من ولد الحسين (ع)
فقال علي (ع): يارسول الله ما أصابنا خير قط من الله إلا على يديك. ثم
التفت رسول الله(ص) فقال: يا جعفر ألا ابشرك؟ قال: بلى يارسول الله فقال:
كان جبرئيل عندي آنفا فأخبرني أن الذي يدفعها إلى القائم هو من ذريتك أتدري
من هو؟ قال: لا، قال: ذاك الذي وجهه كالدينار وأسنانه كالمنشار وسيفه كحريق
النار، يدخل الجبل ذليلا ويخرج منه عزيزا يكتنفه جبرئيل وميكائيل. ثم التفت
إلى العباس فقال: يا عم النبي ألا اخبرك بما أخبرني جبرئيل؟ فقال: بلى
يارسول الله: قال: قال لي: ويل لذريتك من ولد العباس فقال: يارسول الله
أفلا أجتنب النساء؟ قال له: قد فرغ الله مما هو كائن.

35- الغيبة للنعمانى: ابن عقدة، عن علي بن الحسين، عن محمد بن علي، عن ابن
بزيع عن عمرو بن يونس، عن حمزة بن حمران، عن سالم الاشل قال: سمعت أبا جعفر
محمد بن علي الباقر (ع) يقول: نظر موسى بن عمران (ع) في السفر الاول بما
يعطي قائم آل محمد قال موسى: رب اجعلني قائم آل محمد فقيل له: إن ذاك من
ذرية أحمد ثم نظر في السفر الثاني فوجد فيه مثل ذلك (فقال مثله فقيل له مثل
ذلك) ثم نظر في السفر الثالث فرأى مثله (فقال مثله) فقيل له مثله.

36- الكافي: العدة، عن سهل، عن محمد بن سليمان، عن هيثم بن أشيم، عن معاوية
بن عمار، عن أبي عبد الله (ع) قال: خرج النبي (ص) ذات يوم وهو مستبشر يضحك
سرورا فقال له الناس: أضحك الله سنك يارسول الله وزادك سرورا فقال رسول
الله 6: إنه ليس من يوم ولا ليلة إلا ولي فيهما تحفة من الله ألا وإن ربي
أتحفني في يومي هذا بتحفة لم يتحفني بمثلها فيما مضى إن جبرئيل (ع) أتاني
فأقرأني من ربي السلام وقال: يا محمد إن الله(عزوجل) اختار من بني هاشم
سبعة لم يخلق مثلهم فيمن مضى ولا يخلق مثلهم فيمن بقي: أنت يارسول الله سيد
النبيين وعلي بن أبي طالب وصيك سيد الوصيين، والحسن والحسين سبطاك سيد
الاسباط، وحمزة عمك سيد الشهداء، وجعفر ابن عمك الطيار في الجنة يطير مع
الملائكة حيث يشاء ومنكم القائم يصلي عيسى بن مريم خلفه إذا أهبطه الله إلى
الارض من ذرية علي وفاطمة ومن ولد الحسين (ع).

37- *Kashf al-Ghumma: Forty Traditions* Compiled by al-Hāfidh Abu Na‘īm
Ahmad Ibn ‘Abdillah, God have mercy on him: The author of *Kashf
al-Ghumma* says, These forty traditions have reached me, all with
respect to the affair of the Mahdi (a.s). I will bring them in the same
continuous manner in which he has narrated them. However, I only suffice
on mentioning the name of the narrator.

I. On the authority of Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri from the Messenger of Allah
(a.s) that he said, “From my Ummah will be the Mahdi. If his life is
short, [his reign] will be seven years, otherwise eight, or otherwise
nine. My Ummah will enjoy blessings in his time, the like of which no
virtuous or vice person has ever enjoyed. The heaven will be showering
over them abundantly and the earth will not withhold any of its plants.”

II. The Mahdi and that he is from the family of the Messenger of Allah
(a.s). On the authority of Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri from the Messenger of
Allah (a.s) that he said, “The earth will be full of oppression and
tyranny. Then a man from my household will rise and make it full of
equity and justice. He will rule for seven or nine [years].”

III. The same narrator says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The
Hour shall not come until a man from my Ahl al-Bait rules over the
earth, filling it with justice and equity as it shall be full of
oppression. He will rule for seven years.”

IV. His Statement to Fātimah, (a.s) that the Mahdi is from her. On the
authority of al-Zahri, from ‘Ali Ibn al-Husain, from his father (a.s)
that the Messenger of Allah (a.s) said to Fātimah, “The Mahdi is from
your progeny.”

V. The Mahdi is from the Progeny of Hasan and Husain (a.s). Ali Ibn
Hilāl narrates from his father: I entered upon the Messenger of Allah
(a.s) as he was in the malady in which he passed away. Fātimah was at
his overhead and she was crying so profusely until her whimpers rose.
The Messenger of Allah (a.s) raised his head to her and said, “My
darling, what is making you cry?” She said, “I fear the loss after you.”
He said, “My darling, don’t you know that Allah, the Exalted, looked
down on earth and selected your father. He sent him with His message.
Then he looked down and selected your husband and sent me revelation to
marry you to him. Yā Fātimah, Allah, the Exalted, has given us, Ahl
al-Bait, seven characteristics, which He has not given to anyone before
us nor will He give to anyone after us. I am the Seal of the Messengers
and the most dignified of the apostles before Allah, the Exalted, and
the most cherished of the creation to Allah, the Exalted, and I am your
father. My successor is the best of the successors, and the most
cherished of them to Allah, the Exalted, and he is your husband. Our
martyr is the best of the martyrs and the most cherished of them to
Allah, the Exalted, and he is Hamzah Ibn ‘Abd al-Mutallib, your father’s
and your husband’s uncle.

37- كشف الغمة: وقع لي أربعون حديثا جمعها الحافظ أبو نعيم أحمد بن عبد
الله S في أمر المهدي (ع) أوردتها سرداً كما أوردها واقتصرت على ذكر الراوي
عن النبي (ص).

الأول: عن أبي سعيد الخدري عن النبي (ص) أنه قال: يكون من امتي المهدي إن
قصر عمره فسبع سنين وإلا فثمان وإلا فتسع يتنعم امتي في زمانه نعيما لم
يتنعموا مثله قط البر والفاجر يرسل السماء عليهم مدرارا ولا تدخر الارض
شيئا من نباتها.

الثاني: في ذكر المهدي (ع) وأنه من عترة النبي (ص) وعن أبي سعيد الخدري عن
النبي (ص) أنه قال: تملا الارض ظلماً وجوراً فيقوم رجل من عترتي فيملأها
قسطاً وعدلاً يملك سبعا أو تسعا.

الثالث: وعنه قال: قال النبي (ص): لا تنقضي الساعة حتى يملك الارض رجل من
أهل بيتي يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت جوراً يملك سبع سنين.

الرابع: في قوله لفاطمة عليها السلام المهدي من ولدك، عن الزهري، عن علي بن
الحسين، عن أبيه (ع) أن رسول الله(ص) قال لفاطمة: المهدي من ولدك.

الخامس: قوله (ص) إن منهما مهدي هذه الأمة يعني الحسن والحسين(ع) عن علي بن
هلال، عن أبيه قال: دخلت على رسول الله(ص) وهو في الحالة التي قبض فيها
فإذا فاطمة عند رأسه فبكت حتى ارتفع صوتها فرفع رسول الله(ص) إليها رأسه
فقال: حبيبتي فاطمة ما الذي يبكيك؟ فقالت: أخشى الضيعة من بعدك، فقال: يا
حبيبتي أما علمت أن الله(عزوجل) اطلع على الارض اطلاعة فاختار منها أباك
فبعثه برسالته ثم اطلع اطلاعة فاختار منها بعلك وأوحى إلي أن انكحك إياه يا
فاطمة ونحن أهل بيت قد أعطانا الله(عزوجل) سبع خصال لم يعط أحداً قبلنا ولا
يعطي أحدا بعدنا: أنا خاتم النبيين وأكرم النبيين على الله(عزوجل) وأحب
المخلوقين إلى الله(عزوجل) وأنا أبوك ووصيي خير الاوصياء وأحبهم إلى
الله(عزوجل) وهو بعلك وشهيدنا خير الشهداء وأحبهم إلى الله(عزوجل) وهو حمزة
بن عبد المطلب عم أبيك وعم بعلك.

Ours is the one who has two wings and flies in the Paradise with angels
wherever he wishes, and he is the cousin of your father and the brother
of your husband. Ours are the two princes of this Ummah, and they are
your sons, al-Hasan and al-Husain, and they are the lieges of the youths
of Paradise-dwellers, and their father, by the One Who sent me with the
Truth, is better than them. “Yā Fātimah, by the One Who sent me with the
Truth, from their offspring is the Mahdi of this Ummah. When the world
is in anarchy and chaos, when mischief manifest and roadways are
blocked, when people loot each other, with no elder pitying any
youngster, nor any youngster respecting an elder, at that time, Allah
will send from the progeny of these two the one who will conquer the
fortresses of misguidance and open sealed hearts. He will establish the
religion in the latter days as I established it. He will fill the earth
with equity as it will be full of oppression. Yā Fātimah, grieve not and
cry not, for Allah, the Exalted, is more compassionate and more
benevolent to you than I am to you; and that is due to your position
from me and your station in my heart. Allah married you to your husband,
who is the greatest of all people in stature, the most dignified of them
in position, the most compassionate of them to the public, the fairest
of them in equity, and the most sapient of them in judgment. I beseeched
my Lord, the Exalted, that you be the first one to join me from my
family.” The Prince of the Believers (a.s) says, “Fātimah did not live
after that but for seventy five days until Allah united her with her
father.”

VI. The Mahdi is from the Progeny of Husain (a.s). Hudhaifa (a.s) says,
The Messenger of Allah (a.s) addressed us and recounted things that will
happen in the future. Then he said, “If there should not remain from the
world but a single day, Allah, the Exalted, will prolong that day until
He sends a man from my progeny, whose name is my name.” Salmān (a.s)
stood and said, “O’ Messenger of Allah, from which of your sons?” “From
this son of mine,” said he, stroking with his hand on Husain (a.s).  

VII. The Village from which the Mahdi Will Rise. ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Omar
says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The Mahdi will rise from a
village called Kar‘a.”

VIII. The Description of the Mahdi’s Visage. Hudhaifa says, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The Mahdi is from my offspring. His face is
like a *glittering star*. [Al-Noor: 35.]

IX. His Color and his Physique. Hudhaifa says, The Messenger of Allah
(a.s) said, “The Mahdi is a man from my progeny. His color is an Arabic
color and his body is an Israelite body. There is a mole on his right
cheek, like a glittering star. He will fill the earth with equity and
justice as it will be full of oppression. The dwellers of the heavens
and the earth and birds of the sky will be happy in his rule.”

X. His Forehead; Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri says, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “The Mahdi is from us, with an open forehead and a high nose.”

ومنا من له جناحان يطير في الجنة مع الملائكة حيث يشاء وهو ابن عم أبيك
وأخو بعلك ومنا سبطا هذه الأمة وهما ابناك الحسن والحسين وهما سيدا شباب
أهل الجنة وأبوهما والذي بعثني بالحق خير منهما. يا فاطمة والذي بعثني
بالحق إن منهما مهدي هذه الأمة إذا صارت الدنيا هرجاً ومرجاً وتظاهرت الفتن
وانقطعت السبل وأغار بعضهم على بعض فلا كبير يرحم صغيراً ولا صغير يوقر
كبيراً فيبعث الله عند ذلك منهما من يفتح حصون الضلالة وقلوبا غلفا يقوم
بالدين في آخر الزمان كما قمت به في آخر الزمان ويملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت
جورا. يا فاطمة لا تحزني ولا تبكي فإن الله(عزوجل) أرحم بك وأرءف عليك مني
وذلك لمكانك مني وموقعك من قلبي قد زوجك الله زوجك وهو أعظمهم حسبا وأكرمهم
منصبا وأرحمهم بالرعية وأعدلهم بالسوية وأبصرهم بالقضية وقد سألت ربي U أن
تكوني أول من يلحقني من أهل بيتي قال علي (ع): لم تبق فاطمة بعده إلا خمسة
وسبعين يوما حتى ألحقها الله به (ع).

السادس: في أن المهدي هو الحسيني. وبإسناده عن حذيفة K قال: خطبنا رسول
الله(ص) فذكرنا ما هو كائن ثم قال: لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحد لطول
الله(عزوجل) ذلك اليوم حتى يبعث رجلا من ولدي اسمه اسمي فقام سلمان- ره-
فقال: يارسول الله من أي ولدك هو؟ قال: من ولدي هذا، وضرب بيده على الحسين
(ع).

السابع: في القرية التي يخرج منها المهدي. وبإسناده عن عبد الله بن عمر
قال: قال النبي (ص): يخرج المهدي من قرية يقال لها: كرعة.

الثامن: في صفة وجه المهدي. بإسناده عن حذيفة قال: قال رسول الله(ص):
المهدي رجل من ولدي وجهه كالكوكب الدري.

التاسع: في صفة لونه وجسمه. بإسناده عن حذيفة قال: قال رسول الله(ص):
المهدي رجل من ولدي لونه لون عربي وجسمه جسم إسرائيلي على خده الايمن خال
كأنه كوكب دري يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت جورا يرضى في خلافته أهل الارض
وأهل السماء والطير في الجو.

العاشر: في صفة جبينه. باسناده عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله(ص):
المهدي منا أجلى الجبين أقنى الانف.

XI. His Nose; Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri narrates from the Messenger of Allah
(a.s) that he said, “The Mahdi is from us the Ahl al-Bait, a man from my
Ummah. He has a high nose. He will fill the earth with equity as it will
be full of corruption.”

XII. His Mole on the Right Cheek; Abu Amāma al-Bāhili says, The
Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “There will be four truces between you
and the Romans. The fourth one will be on the hands of a man from the
house of the Hercules and will last seven years.” “O’ Messenger of
Allah,” called a man from the tribe of ‘Abd al-Qais, who was called
al-Mustawrid Ibn Ghayalān, “who will be the Imam of the people at that
day?” “The Mahdi from my offspring, a man of forty years and with a face
like a glittering star. There will be a black mole on his right cheek.
He will be wearing two Qatari cloaks, seeming as he was from the men of
the children of Israel. He will extricate treasures and conquer the
cities of polytheism.”

XIII. His Teeth are Split: ‘Abd al-Rahmān Ibn ‘Auf says, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Allah will verily send a man from my
household whose teeth will be at distance from one another and whose
forehead will be broad. He will fill the earth with equity and will
grant wealth bountifully.”

XIV. Mahdi the Virtuous Imam: Abu Amāma says, The Messenger of Allah
(a.s) addressed us and mentioned the Dajjāl. He said, “Medina will expel
uncleanliness like mill’s melting furnace purges uncleanliness of out of
iron. That day will be proclaimed the day of *faraj* (salvation).” Umm
Sharīk asked, “Where are the believers at that day O’ Messenger of
Allah?” “They are few at that day,” he said. “The majority of them will
be at Jerusalem. Their Imam will be the Mahdi, a virtuous man.”

XV. Allah Sends him Openly: Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri says that the Messenger
of Allah (a.s) said, “The Mahdi will rise in my Ummah. Allah will send
him openly. The Ummah will enjoy and the cattle will rejoice. The earth
will bring forth its plants and he will give wealth equally.”

XVI. Clouds over his Head: ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Omar says, Said the Messenger
of Allah (a.s), “The Mahdi will rise while there will be a cloud over
his head from which a caller will be calling, *This is the Mahdi, the
Vicegerent of Allah; follow him.*”

XVII. Angel Over his Head: ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Omar says, Said the Messenger
of Allah (a.s), “The Mahdi will rise while an angel will be over him,
calling, *This is the Mahdi, follow him.”*

XVIII. The Happy Tidings of the Prophet to His Ummah about the Mahdi:
Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “I give you
the glad tidings of the Mahdi. He will be sent to my Ummah during a time
of peoples’ dispute and concussions. He will fill the earth with equity
and justice as it will be full of oppression and tyranny. The dwellers
of the heaven and the earth will be happy from him. He will distribute
wealth *sahāhā*.” A man asked him, “What is *sahāhā*?” He said,
“Equality between the people.”

الحادي عشر: في صفة أنفه. بإسناده عن أبي سعيد الخدري عن النبي (ص) أنه
قال: المهدي منا أهل البيت رجل من أمتي أشم الانف يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما
ملئت جوراً.

الثاني عشر: في خاله على خده الأيمن. وبإسناده عن أبي أمامة الباهلي قال:
قال رسول الله(ص): بينكم وبين الروم أربع هدن يوم الرابعة على يد رجل من آل
هرقل يدوم سبع سنين فقال له رجل من عبد القيس يقال له: المستورد بن غيلان:
يارسول الله من إمام الناس يومئذ؟ قال: المهدي (ع) من ولدي ابن أربعين سنة
كأن وجهه كوكب دري في خده الايمن خال أسود عليه عباءتان قطريتان كأنه من
رجال بني إسرائيل يستخرج الكنوز ويفتح مدائن الشرك.

الثالث عشر: قوله (ع) المهدي أفرق الثنايا. بإسناده عن عبد الرحمان بن عوف
قال: قال رسول الله(ص): ليبعثن الله من عترتي رجلا أفرق الثنايا أجلى
الجبهة يملأ الأرض عدلاً يفيض المال فيضا.

الرابع عشر: في ذكر المهدي (ع) وهو إمام صالح. باسناده عن أبي إمامة قال:
خطبنا رسول الله(ص) وذكر الدجال فقال: فتنفي المدينة الخبث كما ينفي الكير
خبث الحديد ويدعى ذلك اليوم يوم الخلاص، فقالت ام شريك: فأين العرب يومئذ
يارسول الله؟ قال: هم قليلا يومئذ وجلهم ببيت المقدس إمامهم المهدي رجل
صالح.

الخامس عشر: في ذكر المهدي (ع) وأن الله يبعثه عياناً للناس. بإسناده عن
أبي سعيد الخدري أن رسول الله(ص) قال: يخرج المهدي في أمتي يبعثه الله
عيانا للناس يتنعم الأمة وتعيش الماشية وتخرج الارض نباتها ويعطي المال
صحاحاً.

السادس عشر: في قوله (ع) على رأسه غمامة. وبإسناده عن عبد الله بن عمر قال:
قال رسول الله(ص): يخرج المهدي وعلى رأسه غمامة فيها مناد ينادي هذا المهدي
خليفة الله فاتبعوه.

السابع عشر: في قوله (ص) على رأسه ملك. وبإسناده عن عبد الله بن عمر قال:
قال رسول الله(ص): يخرج المهدي وعلى رأسه ملك ينادي: هذا المهدي فاتبعوه.

الثامن عشر: في بشارة النبي (ص) امته بالمهدي. باسناده عن أبي سعيد الخدري
قال: قال رسول الله(ص): ابشركم بالمهدي يبعث في أمتي على اختلاف من الناس
وزلازل فيملأ الأرض عدلاً وقسطا كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً يرضى عنه ساكن
السماء وساكن الارض يقسم المال صحاصاً فقال له رجل: وما صحاصاً؟ قال:
السوية بين الناس.

XIX. The Mahdi’s Name: ‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Omar says, Said the Messenger of
Allah (a.s), “The Hour shall not come until a man from my progeny will
rule. His name is like my name. He will fill the earth with equity and
justice as it will be full of oppression and tyranny.”

XX. His Patronym: Hudhaifa says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “If
there should not remain but a single day from the world, Allah will send
a man therein whose name is my name, his character my character, and his
patronym is Abu ‘Abdillah.”

XXI. Ibn ‘Omar says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The world will
not go away until Allah sends a man from my household. His name will be
like my name, and his father’s name like my father’s. He will fill it
with equity and justice as it will be full tyranny and oppression.”

XXII. His Equity: Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri says, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “Verily the earth will be beset with oppression and hostility.
Then a man will rise from my Ahl al-Bait, who will fill it with equity
and justice, as it will be replete with tyranny, hostility, and
oppression.”

XXIII. His Character: ‘Abdullah says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s),
“A man will rise from Ahl al-Bait; his name will be like mine and his
character will be like mine. He will fill the earth with equity and
justice.”

XXIV. His Munificence: Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri says, Said the Messenger of
Allah (a.s), “In latter days when mischief manifest, a man will come who
is called the Mahdi. His grants will be so very pleasant.”

XXV. His Knowledge of the Conduct of the Prophet: Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri
says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “A man will rise from my Ahl
al-Bait and act upon my conduct. Allah will descend for him blessings
from the heavens. The earth will bring forth its bliss. Through him the
earth will be beset by equity and justice, as it will be replete with
oppression and tyranny. He will rule over this Ummah for seven years and
will disembark at Jerusalem.”

XXVI. His Coming and His Standards: Thawbān says, The Messenger of Allah
(a.s) said “When you see black standards coming from Khurasān, then come
to them even if you have to crawl on snow, for the Vicegerent of God the
Mahdi is amidst them.”

XXVII. His Coming from the East: ‘Abdullah said, We were sitting with
the Messenger of Allah (a.s) when a group of youths from the Children of
Hāshim came. When the Prophet saw them, his eyes drowned in tears and
his color changed. The companions said, “O’ Messenger of Allah, we see
in your visage something which we dislike.” He said, “We, the Ahl
al-Bait, Allah has chosen the hereafter for us over this world. My
Household will see trials, banishment, and ostracism after me, until a
nation comes from the east carrying black standards.

التاسع عشر: في اسم المهدي (ع). وبإسناده عن عبد الله بن عمر قال: قال رسول
الله(ص): لا يقوم الساعة حتى يملك رجل من أهل بيتي يواطئ اسمه اسمي يملأ
الأرض عدلاً وقسطاً وكما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً.

العشرون: في كنيته (ع). وبإسناده عن حذيفة، قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لو لم
يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحد لبعث الله فيه رجلا اسمه اسمي وخلقه خلقي يكنى
أبا عبد الله (ع).

الحادي والعشرون: في ذكر اسمه. وبإسناده عن ابن عمر قال: قال رسول الله(ص):
لا يذهب الدنيا حتى يبعث الله رجلاً من أهل بيتي يواطئ اسمه اسمي واسم أبيه
اسم أبي يملأها قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً.

الثاني والعشرون: في ذكر عدله (ع). وبإسناده عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال
رسول الله(ص): لتملأن الارض ظلماً وعدواناً ثم ليخرجن رجل من أهل بيتي حتى
يملأها قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت جورا (عدوانا) وظلماً.

الثالث والعشرون: في خلقه. وبإسناده عن زر، عن عبد الله قال: قال رسول
الله(ص): يخرج رجل من أهل بيتي يواطئ اسمه اسمي وخلقه خلقي يملأها قسطاً
وعدلاً.

الرابع والعشرون: في عطائه (ع). باسناده عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول
الله(ص): يكون عند انقطاع من الزمان وظهور من الفتن رجل يقال له: المهدي
يكون عطاؤه هنيئاً.

الخامس والعشرون: في ذكر المهدي (ع) وعلمه بسنة النبي (ص). باسناده عن أبي
سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله(ص): يخرج رجل من أهل بيتي ويعمل بسنتي
وينـزل الله له البركة من السماء وتخرج الارض بركتها وتملا به الارض عدلا
كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً، ويعمل على هذه الأمة سبع سنين وينـزل بيت المقدس.

السادس والعشرون: في مجيئه وراياته. وبإسناده عن ثوبان أنه قال: قال رسول
الله(ص): إذا رأيتم الرايات السود قد أقبلت من خراسان فائتوها ولو حبوا على
الثلج فان فيها خليفة الله المهدي.

السابع والعشرون: في مجيئه من قبل المشرق. وبإسناده عن عبد الله قال: بينا
نحن عند رسول الله(ص): إذا أقبلت فتية من بني هاشم فلما رآهم النبي (ص)
اغرورقت عيناه وتغير لونه، فقالوا: يارسول الله ما نـزال نرى في وجهك شيئا
نكرهه؟ فقال: إنا أهل بيت اختار الله لنا الآخرة على الدنيا وإن أهل بيتي
سيلقون بعدي بلاءً وتشريداً وتطريداً حتى يأتي قوم من قبل المشرق ومعهم
رايات سود.

They will demand the right and will be denied. So they will wage wars
and will be victorious and will be given what they asked for. But they
do not accept it until they proffer it to a man from my Household. He
will fill the earth with equity and justice, as they have beset it by
tyranny. Whoever reaches that time from amongst you must come to them
even if he has to crawl over ice.”

XXVIII. Islam’s Honorability Through Him: Hudhaifa says, I heard the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) say, “Pity for this Ummah from tyrannical
rulers! How will they be murdering and frightening the pious until one
has to acknowledge obedience to them! The God-fearing believer will put
on with them on his tongue and run away from them in his heart. When
Allah, the Exalted, desires to render Islam honorable again, He will
break every hostile tyrant. And He is All-Powerful over anything He
desires and to set this Ummah right after its corruption.” He said, “O’
Hudhaifa, even if there should not remain but a single day from the
world, Allah will prolong that day until a man from my Household rules.
Fights will be waged on his hands and Islam will become manifest. He
will not violate His promise *and He is Swift in reckoning*.”

XXIX. The Leisure of the Ummah During the Reign of the Mahdi: Abu Sa‘īd
al-Khidri narrates that the Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “My Ummah
will enjoy a leisure in the time of the Mahdi (a.s) the like of which
they have never enjoyed. The heavens will shower over them bountifully
and the earth will not leave any vegetation but to bring it forth.”

XXX. He is a Liege of the Paradise: Anas Ibn Mālik says, The Messenger
of Allah (a.s) said, “We the sons of ‘Abd al-Mutallib are the lieges of
the Paradise: I, my brother ‘Ali, my uncle Hamzah, Ja‘far, Hasan,
Husain, and the Mahdi.”

XXXI. His Kingdom: Abu Huraira says, The Messenger of Allah (a.s) said,
“If there should not remain but one night for the world, a man from my
Household will rule therein.”

XXXII. His Rule: Thawbān says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Three
men, all of them sons of a caliph, will be killed before your treasure,
which will not go to anyone of them. Then black standards will come and
they will massacre them, a massacre never done by any nation. Then the
Caliph of God, the Mahdi, will come. When you hear him, come to him and
pledge allegiance to him, for he is the Caliph of God, the Mahdi.”

XXXIII. Coming to Him and Pledging Him Allegiance: Thawbān says, Said
the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Black standards will come from the
direction of the east. Meseems as their hearts are blocks of iron.
Whoever hears about them must come to them and pledge them allegiance,
even if they have to crawl over ice.”

XXXIV. Through Him Allah will Bring Hearts Together: The Prince of the
Believers (a.s) says, I said, “O’ Messenger of Allah, is the Mahdi from
us the Household of Muhammad or from the others?”

فيسألون الحق فلا يعطونه فيقاتلون وينصرون فيعطون ما سألوا فلا يقبلون حتى
يدفعوه إلى رجل من أهل بيتي فيملأها قسطاً كما ملؤوها جوراً فمن أدرك ذلك
منكم فليأتهم ولو حبواً على الثلج.

الثامن والعشرون: في مجيئه (ع) وعود الاسلام به عزيزاً. وبإسناده عن حذيفة
قال: سمعت رسول الله(ص) يقول: ويح هذه الأمة من ملوك جبابرة كيف يقتلون
ويخيفون المطيعين إلا من أظهر طاعتهم فالمؤمن النقي يصانعهم بلسانه، ويفر
منهم بقلبه فإذا أراد الله(عزوجل) أن يعيد الاسلام عزيزاً قصم كل جبار عنيد
وهو القادر على ما يشاء أن يصلح امة بعد فسادها فقال (ع): يا حذيفة لو لم
يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحد لطول الله ذلك اليوم حتى يملك رجل من أهل بيتي
تجري الملاحم على يديه ويظهر الاسلام لا يخلف وعده وهو سريع الحساب.

التاسع والعشرون: في تنعم الأمة في زمن المهدي (ع). وبإسناده عن أبي سعيد
الخدري عن النبي (ص) قال: يتنعم أمتي في زمن المهدي (ع) نعمة لم يتنعموا
قبلها قط: يرسل السماء عليهم مدراراً ولا تدع الارض شيئاً من نباتها إلا
أخرجته.

الثلاثون: في ذكر المهدي وهو سيد من سادات الجنة. وبإسناده عن أنس بن مالك
أنه قال: قال رسول الله(ص): نحن بنو عبد المطلب سادات أهل الجنة أنا وأخي
علي وعمي حمزة وجعفر والحسن والحسين والمهدي.

الحادي والثلاثون: في ملكه. وبإسناده عن أبي هريرة قال: قال رسول الله(ص):
لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا ليلة لملك فيها رجل من أهل بيتي.

الثاني والثلاثون: في خلافته. وبإسناده عن ثوبان قال: قال رسول الله(ص):
يقتل عند كنـزكم ثلاثة كلهم ابن خليفة ثم لا يصير إلى واحد منهم ثم تجئ
الرايات السود فيقتلونهم قتلا لم يقتله قوم ثم يجيئ خليفة الله المهدي فإذا
سمعتم به فائتوه فبايعوه فانه خليفة الله المهدى.

الثالث والثلاثون: في قوله (ع) إذا سمعتم بالمهدي فائتوه فبايعوه. وبإسناده
عن ثوبان قال: قال رسول الله(ص): تجيئ الرايات السود من قبل المشرق كأن
قلوبهم زبر الحديد فمن سمع بهم فليأتهم فبايعهم ولو حبواً على الثلج.

الرابع والثلاثون: في ذكر المهدي وبه يؤلف الله بين قلوب العباد. وبإسناده
عن علي بن أبي طالب (ع) قال: قلت: يارسول الله(ص) أمنا آل محمد المهدي أم
من غيرنا؟

He said, “Rather, he is ours. Allah will complete the religion through
him, as He opened it through us. Through us they are rescued from
mischief, as they were rescued from polytheism. Through us Allah will
bring their hearts together as brothers after the hostility of mischief,
as He brought them together as brothers in their religion after the
hostility of polytheism.”

XXXV. No Pleasure in Life after the Mahdi: ‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ūd says,
Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Even if there should not remain for
this world but a single night, Allah will prolong that night until a man
from my Household becomes the ruler. His name is my like my name and his
father’s name is like my father’s. He will fill it with equity and
justice as it will be beset by oppression and tyranny. He will
distribute wealth equally. Allah will cast contentment in the hearts of
this Ummah. He will rule for seven or nine years. There is no pleasure
in life after the Mahdi.”

XXXVI. His Conquest of Constantinople: Abu Huraira says, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The Hour shall not rise until a man from my
Household rules over. He will conquer Constantinople and the Mount of
Dailum. Even if there should not remain but one day [from the life of
the world], Allah will prolong that day until he conquers it.”

XXXVII. He will come after Tyrants: Qais Ibn Jābir narrates from his
father, from his grandfather, that the Messenger of Allah (a.s) said,
“After me there will be caliphs, and after the caliphs emirs, and after
the emirs tyrant kings. Then a man from my Household will rise who will
fill the earth with justice after it will be beset with tyranny.”

XXXVIII. Jesus Prays Behind Him: Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri says, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Ours is the one that Jesus the son of Mary
will pray behind him.”

IXL. He Converses with Jesus: Jābir Ibn ‘Abdillah says, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Jesus the son of Mary (a.s) will descend.
Their leader, the Mahdi will say, ‘Come lead our prayers.’ He will say,
‘Behold, there is a certain leader over us, as a token of dignity from
Allah, the Exalted, for this Ummah.’”

XL. Al-Mahdi: ‘Abdullah Ibn al-‘Abbās says, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “Never shall perish an Ummah in the beginning of which I am, in
the end of which is Jesus the son of Mary, and at the middle of which is
the Mahdi.”

38- *Kashf al-Ghumma:* Al-Sheikh Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ibn
Muhammad al-Shāfi‘ī has brought the following in his book *Kifāya
al-Tālib fi Manāqib* ‘*Ali Ibn Abi Tālib,* in the beginning of which he
has said, “I have compiled this book without relying on Shī‘a sources,
to make the argument stronger.” He has this to say about the Mahdi.

فقال رسول الله(ص): لا بل منا يختم الله به الدين كما فتح بنا، وبنا ينقذون
من الفتن كما انقذوا من الشرك وبنا يؤلف الله بين قلوبهم بعد عداوة الفتنة
إخوانا كما ألف بينهم بعد عداوة الشرك إخوانا في دينهم.

الخامس والثلاثون: في قوله (ع) لا خير في العيش بعد المهدي (ع) وبإسناده عن
عبد الله بن مسعود قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا ليلة
لطول الله تلك الليلة حتى يملك رجل من أهل بيتي يواطئ اسمه اسمي واسم أبيه
اسم أبي يملأها قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً ويقسم المال بالسوية
ويجعل الله الغنى في قلوب هذه الأمة فيملك سبعاً أو تسعاً لا خير في العيش
بعد المهدي.

السادس والثلاثون: في ذكر المهدي وبيده تفتح القسطنطينية وبإسناده عن أبي
هريرة عن النبي (ص) قال: لا تقوم الساعة حتى يملك رجل من أهل بيتي يفتح
القسطنطينية وجبل الديلم ولو لم يبق إلا يوم واحد لطول الله ذلك اليوم حتى
يفتحها.

السابع والثلاثون: في ذكر المهدي وهو يجئ بعد ملوك جبابرة وبإسناده عن قيس
بن جابر، عن أبيه، عن جده أن رسول الله(ص) قال: سيكون بعدي خلفاء ومن بعد
الخلفاء امراء ومن بعد الامراء ملوك جبابرة ثم يخرج رجل من أهل بيتي يملأ
الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت جوراً.

الثامن والثلاثون: في قوله (ع) منا الذي يصلي عيسى بن مريم (ع) خلفه
وبإسناده عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله(ص): منا الذي يصلي عيسى
ابن مريم (ع) خلفه.

التاسع والثلاثون: وهو يكلم عيسى بن مريم (ع) وبإسناده عن جابر بن عبد الله
قال: قال رسول الله(ص): ينـزل عيسى بن مريم (ع) فيقول أميرهم المهدي: تعال
صل بنا فيقول: ألا إن بعضكم على بعض امراء تكرمة من الله(عزوجل) لهذه
الأمة.

الاربعون: في قوله (ص) في المهدي (ع) وبإسناده يرفعه إلى محمد بن إبراهيم
الامام حدثه أن أبا جعفر المنصور حدثه عن أبيه، عن جده، عن عبد الله بن
العباس رضي الله عنهما قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لن تهلك امة أنا في أولها
وعيسى بن مريم في آخرها والمهدي في وسطها.

38- كشف الغمة: ذكر الشيخ أبو عبد الله (ع) محمد بن يوسف بن محمد الشافعي
في كتاب كفاية الطالب في مناقب علي بن أبي طالب وقال في أوله: إني جمعت هذا
الكتاب وعريته من طرق الشيعة ليكون الاحتجاج به آكد فقال: في المهدي (ع).

Chapter I: His Uprise in the Latter Eras
----------------------------------------

Zarr narrates from ‘Abdullah, saying, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s),
“The world will not cease to exist until a man from my Household governs
over the Arabs. His name is like my name.” Abu Dawūd narrates this in
his *Sunan.*

The Prince of the Believers narrates from the Prophet (a.s), “Even if
not more than one day is left from the world, Allah will send a man from
my Household. He will fill it with justice as it will be full of
corruption.” Such has narrated Abu Dawūd in his *Sunan.*

Through several narrators from ‘Āsim al-Ābiri in *Manāqib al-Shāfi*‘*ī*,
in which the aforementioned tradition is recorded with the following
addition, “Even if there should not remain from the world but one day,
Allah will prolong that day until He sends a man from me—or from my
Household—his name will be like my name and his father’s name will be
like my father’s name. He will fill the earth with justice and equity as
it will be beset with oppression and injustice.”

Al-Kanji says, Al-Tirmidhi has mentioned the tradition in his book but
has not recorded, “His father’s name will be like my father’s.” Abu
Dawūd has mentioned it though. In the majority of the traditions,
narrated by memorizers of traditions and reliable narrators, it has
only, “his name is my name.” The narration “his father’s name is like my
father’s name,” is an addition added into the tradition. Even if it is
correct, it means “his father’s name has my father’s name,” that is,
Husain’s patronym is Abu ‘Abdillah, which comprises the name of the
Prophet’s father, indicating that he will be from the progeny of Husain,
not Hasan. It is also possible that it is mistake from transcribers, who
have recorded *ibni*, my son, as *abi,* my father. It must be
interpreted on these grounds in order to remove any contradiction
amongst the traditions.

The author of *Kashf al-Ghumma* says, Our Shī‘a scholars do not endeavor
to interpret this tradition differently than what it literally means,
because the name of the Hujja and his father’s name are recorded in
their books. The commonality, however, has suggested that if there is a
segment that adds something in the traditions, then it is necessary to
suggest that it is an addition, so there may be harmony amongst the
traditions.

Chapter II: The Saying of the Prophet: The Mahdi is from my Progeny from the Sons of Fātimah
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sa‘īd Ibn Musayyeb says, We were in the presence of Umm Salama and
talked about the Mahdi. She said, I heard the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
say, “The Mahdi is from my Household from the offspring of Fātimah.” Ibn
Māja narrates this in his *Sunan.* The same narrator narrates from her,
I heard the Messenger of Allah (a.s) say, “The Mahdi is from my
Household from the offspring of Fātimah (a.s).” Abu Dawūd narrates this
in his *Sunan.*

###  

باسناده عن زر، عن عبد الله قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لا تذهب الدنيا حتى
تملك العرب رجل من أهل بيتي يواطئ اسمه اسمي. أخرجه أبو داود في سننه.

وعن علي عن النبي (ع) لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم لبعث الله رجلا من أهل
بيتي يملأها عدلاً كما ملئت جوراً. هكذا أخرجه أبو داود في سننه.

وأخبرنا الحافظ إبراهيم بن محمد الازهر الصريفيني بدمشق والحافظ محمد بن
عبد الواحد المقدسي بجامع جبل قاسبون قالا: أنبأنا أبو الفتح نصر بن عبد
الجامع ابن عبد الرحمان الفامي بهرات، أنبأنا محمد بن عبد الله بن محمود
الطائي أنبأنا عيسى بن شعيب بن إسحاق السجزى أنبأنا أبو الحسن علي بن بشرى
السجزى أنبأنا الحافظ أبو الحسن محمد بن الحسين بن إبراهيم بن عاصم الآبري
في كتاب مناقب الشافعي ذكر هذا الحديث وقال فيه: وزاد زائدة في روايته: لو
لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم لطول الله ذلك اليوم حتى يبعث الله فيه رجلا مني
أو من أهل بيتي يواطئ اسمه اسمي واسم أبيه اسم أبي يملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً
كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً.

قال الكنجي: وقد ذكر الترمذي الحديث في جامعه ولم يذكر "واسم أبيه اسم أبي"
وذكره أبو داود وفي معظم روايات الحفاظ والثقات من نقله الاخبار "اسمه
اسمي" فقط والذي روى "واسم أبيه اسم أبي" فهو زائدة وهو يزيد في الحديث وإن
صح فمعناه "واسم أبيه اسم أبي" أي الحسين وكنيته أبو عبد الله فجعل الكنية
اسما كناية عن أنه من ولد الحسين دون الحسن ويحتمل أن يكون الراوي توهم
قوله "ابني" فصحفه فقال: "أبي" فوجب حمله على هذا جمعاً بين الروايات.

قال علي بن عيسى عفا الله عنه: أما أصحابنا الشيعة فلا يصححون هذا الحديث
لما ثبت عندهم من اسمه واسم أبيه (ع) وأما الجمهور فقد نقلوا أن زائدة كان
يزيد في الاحاديث فوجب المصير إلى أنه من زيادته ليكون جمعا بين الاقوال
والروايات.

### الباب الثاني: في قوله (ص) المهدي من عترتي من ولد فاطمة {dir="RTL"}

عن سعيد بن المسيب قال: كنا عند ام سلمة فتذاكرنا المهدي فقالت: سمعت رسول
الله(ص) يقول: المهدي من عترتي من ولد فاطمة. أخرجه ابن ماجه في سننه.

The Prince of the Believers (a.s) says, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “The Mahdi is from us Ahl al-Bait. Allah will straighten his
affair in one night.”

Chapter III: The Mahdi is from the Lieges of the Paradise
---------------------------------------------------------

Anas Ibn Mālik says, I heard the Messenger of Allah (a.s) say, “We the
children of ‘Abd al-Mutallib are the lieges of the dwellers of the
Paradise—I, Hamzah, ‘Ali, Ja‘far, al-Hasan, al-Husain, and the Mahdi.”
Ibn Māja has recorded it in his *Sahīh.*

Chapter IV: The Messenger’s Command to Pledge Allegiance to the Mahdi
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Thawbān says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Three people will be
killed before your treasury; all of them will be sons of a caliph and
the treasury will not become of anyone of them. Then black standards
will rise from the direction of the east. They will kill you in a
massacre that no nation has killed like it.” Then he said something I do
not remember. The Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “When you see him
pledge allegiance to him, even if you have to crawl over ice, because he
is the Caliph of Allah, the Mahdi.” Ibn Māja has narrated this.

Chapter V: The Help of the People of the East to the Mahdi
----------------------------------------------------------

Jaz’ al-Zubaidi says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “People will
come from the east and will prepare for the Mahdi.” This means they will
prepare for his rule. This is a *hasan* and *sahīh* tradition, narrated
by reliable and firm narrators. Ibn Māja has narrated this in his
*Sunan.*

‘Alqama Ibn ‘Abdillah says, We were with the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
when a group of youths from the Children of Hāshim came. When the
Prophet (a.s) saw him, his eyes drowned in tears and his color changed.
We said, “We see something in your face which we dislike.” He said, “We,
the Ahl al-Bait, Allah has chosen the hereafter for us over this world.
My Household will see trials, banishment, and ostracism after me, until
a nation comes from the east carrying black standards. They will demand
the right and will be denied. So they will wage wars and will be
victorious and will be given what they asked for. But they will not
accept it until they proffer it to a man from my Household. He will fill
the earth with equity and justice, as they have beset it by tyranny.
Whoever reaches that time from amongst you must come to them even if
crawling on ice.”

Ibn A‘tham al-Kufi narrates in *Kitāb al-Futūh* from the Prince of the
Believers (a.s) that he said, “Bliss for Taliqān! Because Allah, the
Exalted, has treasures therein which are neither of gold nor silver.
Rather, there are believing men who know Allah with thorough cognition.
They are also the aides of the Mahdi in the End Times.”

وعنه عنها رضي الله عنهما قال: سمعت رسول الله(ص) يقول: المهدي من عترتي من
ولد فاطمة عليها السلام أخرجه الحافظ أبو داود في سننه وعن علي (ع) قال:
قال رسول الله(ص): المهدي منا أهل البيت(ع) يصلحه الله في ليلة.

### الباب الثالث: في أن المهدي من سادات أهل الجنة {dir="RTL"}

عن أنس بن مالك قال: سمعت رسول الله(ص) يقول: نحن ولد عبد المطلب سادات أهل
الجنة أنا وحمزة وعلي وجعفر والحسن والحسين والمهدي أخرجه ابن ماجة في
صحيحه.

### الباب الرابع: في أمر النبي (ص) بمبايعة المهدي (ع) {dir="RTL"}

عن ثوبان قال: قال رسول الله(ص): يقتل عند كنـزكم ثلاثة كلهم ابن خليفة ثم
لا يصير إلى واحد منهم ثم تطلع الرايات السود من قبل المشرق فيقتلونكم قتلا
لم يقتله قوم ثم ذكر شيئا لا أحفظه قال رسول الله(ص): فإذا رأيتموه فبايعوه
ولو حبوا على الثلج فانه خليفة الله المهدي أخرجه الحافظ ابن ماجة.

### الباب الخامس: في ذكر نصرة أهل المشرق للمهدي (ع) {dir="RTL"}

عن عبد الله بن الحارث بن جزء الزبيدي قال: قال رسول الله(ص): يخرج اناس من
المشرق فيوطئون للمهدي يعني سلطانه. هذا حديث حسن صحيح روته الثقات
والاثبات أخرجه الحافظ أبو عبد الله بن ماجة القزويني في سننه. وعن علقمة
بن عبد الله قال: بينما نحن عند رسول الله(ص): إذ أقبل فتية من بني هاشم
فلما رآهم النبي (ص) اغرورقت عيناه وتغير لونه قال: فقلنا: ما نـزال نرى في
وجهك شيئا نكرهه قال: إنا أهل بيت اختار الله لنا الآخرة على الدنيا وإن
أهل بيتى سيلقون بعدي بلاء وتشريداً وتطريداً حتى يأتي قوم من قبل المشرق
ومعهم رايات سود فيسألون الخير ولا يعطونه فيقاتلون فينصرون فيعطون ما
سألوا ولا يقبلونه حتى يدفعوها إلى رجل من أهل بيتي فيملأها قسطاً وعدلاً
كما ملؤوها جوراً، فمن أدرك ذلكم منكم فليأتهم ولو حبوا على الثلج.

وروى ابن أعثم الكوفي في كتاب الفتوح عن أمير المؤمنين (ع) أنه قال: ويحاً
للطالقان فإن الله(عزوجل) بها كنوزاً ليست من ذهب ولا فضة ولكن بها رجال
مؤمنون عرفوا الله حق معرفته وهم أيضا أنصار المهدي في آخر الزمان.

Chapter VI: The Duration of his Rule
------------------------------------

Abu Sa‘id al-Khidri says, We feared that something may happen after the
Messenger of Allah (a.s), so we asked him about it. He said, The Mahdi
will in my Ummah. He will rise and live five or seven or nine. The doubt
is Zaid’s. Abu Sa‘id says, We asked him, “What is that?” He said,
“Years.” He said, “A man will come to him and say, O’ Mahdi give me
wealth.’ He will throw into his sheet so much as he can carry.”

On the authority of others as well as Abu Sa‘īd that the Messenger of
Allah (a.s) said, “The Mahdi will be in my Ummah, if short for seven
years, otherwise for nine years. During this period, my Ummah will
rejoice a leisure the like of which they have never seen. The earth will
give its blessings and will not forbid anything from them. Wealth on
that day will be like grains. Men would rise and ask, ‘O’ Mahdi, give me
something.’ He would say, ‘Take.’”

On the authority of Umm Salama, the wife of the Prophet (a.s) that the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “At a dispute that will occur at a
caliph’s death, a man from the people of Medina will come out fleeing to
Mecca. A group of the Meccans will come to him and will have him rise,
while he is not fond of it. They will pledge allegiance to him between
the *rukn* and the *maqām.* A Syrian army will be dispatched to him,
which will be swallowed into the earth at al-Baidā’, a locality between
Mecca and Medina. When people see this, saints of Syria congregations of
Iraq come to him and pledge allegiance to him. Then a man will come
whose maternal uncles will be from the tribe of Kalb. He will send an
army to them and will be victorious over them. This will be an army of
the Kalb. Disappointment is for the one who does not witness the booties
of the Kalb. He will distribute the wealth and will rule over the people
on the conduct of the Messenger of Allah (a.s) and will elevate Islam to
its pinnacle all over the earth. He will stay for seven years then he
will pass away and Muslims will pray over him.”

Abu Dawūd says, It has been said that Hishām has narrated nine years.

Chapter VII: He Leads Jesus in Prayers
--------------------------------------

Abu Huraira says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “How would it be
like when the son of Mary will come down to you and your Imam is yours?”

Al-Sheikh Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ibn Muhammad al-Shāfi‘ī says,
This tradition is *hasan* and *sahīh,* and there is a consensus on its
authenticity narrated by Muhammad Ibn Shahāb al-Zuhri. Bukhāri and
Muslim have narrated this in their *Sahihs.*

Jābir Ibn ‘Abdillah says, I heard the Messenger of Allah (a.s) say, “An
assembly of my Ummah will ceaselessly wage wars in the cause of
righteousness and purity until the Day of Judgment. Then Jesus the son
of Mary will come down. Their leader will say to him, ‘Come and lead our
prayers.’ He will say, ‘Behold, one of yourselves is the leader for the
rest, as a token of dignity from Allah for this Ummah.’”

### الباب السادس: في مقدار ملكه بعد ظهوره (ع) {dir="RTL"}

عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: خشينا أن يكون بعد نبينا حدث فسألنا نبي الله(ص)
فقال: إن في أمتي المهدي يخرج يعيش خمساً أو سبعاً أو تسعاً زيد الشاك.
قال: قلنا وماذاك؟ قال: سنين. قال: فيجئ إليه الرجل فيقول: يا مهدي أعطني
قال: فيحثي له في ثوبه ما استطاع أن يحمله.

قال الحافظ الترمذي: حديث حسن. وقد روي من غير وجه أبي سعيد عن النبي (ص)
وعن أبي سعيد أن النبي (ص) قال: يكون في أمتي المهدي إن قصر فسبع وإلا فتسع
يتنعم فيه أمتي نعمة لم يتنعموا مثلها قط تؤتي الارض أكلها ولا تدخر منهم
شيئاً والمال يومئذ كدوس يقوم الرجل فيقول: يا مهدي أعطني فيقول: خذ.

وعن ام سلمة زوج النبي (ص) قال: يكون اختلاف عند موت خليفة فيخرج رجل من
أهل المدينة هاربا إلى مكة فيأتيه ناس من أهل مكة فيخرجونه وهو كاره
فيبايعونه بين الركن والمقام ويبعث إليه بعث الشام فتنخسف بهم البيداء بين
مكة والمدينة فإذا رأى الناس ذلك أتاه أبدال الشام وعصائب أهل العراق
فيبايعونه ثم ينشأ رجل من قريش أخواله كلب فيبعث إليهم بعثاً فيظهرون عليهم
وذلك بعث كلب والخيبة لمن لم يشهد غنيمة كلب فيقسم المال ويعمل في الناس
بسنة رسول الله(ص) ويلقى الاسلام بجرانه إلى الارض فيلبث سبع سنين ثم يتوفى
ويصلي عليه المسلمون.

قال أبو داود: قال بعضهم عن هشام: تسع سنين قال أبو داود: قال غير معاذ عن
هشام: تسع سنين قال: هذا سياق الحفاظ كالترمذي وابن ماجة القزويني وأبي
داود.

### الباب السابع: في بيان أنه يصلي بعيسى بن مريم (ع) {dir="RTL"}

أبو هريرة قال: قال رسول الله(ص): كيف أنتم إذا نـزل ابن مريم فيكم وإمامكم
منكم؟ قال: هذا حديث حسن صحيح متفق على صحته من حديث محمد بن شهاب الزهري
رواه البخاري ومسلم في صحيحيهما. وعن جابر بن عبد الله قال: سمعت رسول
الله(ص) يقول: لا تزال طائفة من أمتي يقاتلون على الحق ظاهرين إلى يوم
القيامة قال: فينـزل عيسى بن مريم (ع) فيقول أميرهم: تعال صلِّ بنا فيقول:
ألا إن بعضكم على بعض أمراء تكرمة الله لهذه الأمة.

Al-Sheikh Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ibn Muhammad al-Shāfi‘ī says,
This is a *hasan* and *sahīh* tradition, narrated by Muslim in his
*Sahīh.* If the former tradition is subject to a different
interpretation, it is not possible to interpret this tradition in a
different manner, as it explicitly declares that Jesus (a.s) will accept
the leadership of the Imam of the Muslims, who at that day will be the
Mahdi (a.s). Therefore, to interpret Jesus’ saying, “Your Imam is from
you” to mean “he leads you according to your book” is unjustified. The
following is conceivable to be asked: Considering these traditions are
valid, which state that Jesus will pray behind the Mahdi (a.s), will
fight under his command, and kill the Dajjāl, and considering leadership
in prayers as well as leadership in jihad obviously denotes superiority,
and as the narrators and validity of these traditions are authentic
before the Sunnis, just as the Shī‘a narrate them in a parallel
manner—which is the valid form of consensus of Muslims, since the belief
and stance of any other group other than the Shī‘a and the Sunni is
discarded and not worthy of attention—the question rises that who is
higher, the Imam or his follower. The answer to this query is that they
both are leaders, one a prophet and the other an imam. And when one of
them is the leader of the other when they are together, the Imam is the
leader of the prophet. Both are above the reproach of any reproacher.
They are both infallible from committing disdainful acts, hypocrisy, and
pretending what they are not. None of the two call to anything that is
outside the boundaries of the Shari‘a. Having said this, the Imam is
better than his follower for the Shari‘a has brought a strong proof with
that regard, which is the saying of the Prophet (a.s), “A person will
lead the congregation who is the best of them in the recitation of the
Qur’ān; and should they be equal in that, their most knowledgeable will
lead; and should they be equal in that, their most sapient will lead;
and should they be equal in that, the one who has preceded them all in
migration will lead; and should they be equal in that, the one who has
the most beautiful face will lead.” Should the Imam know that Jesus is
better than him, it will not be permissible for him to lead Jesus, for
he knows the Sharī‘a well and for Allah, the High, has made him beyond
every abominable act. Likewise, should Jesus know that he is better than
him, it will not be permissible for him to follow the Imam, for Allah
has made him clean from hypocrisy and pretension. Rather, since it is
established that the Imam is more knowledgeable than Jesus, it is
permissible for him to lead him. Likewise, as Jesus knows that the Imam
is more knowledgeable than him, he follows him and prays behind him.
Should this not be the case, it will not be allowed for anyone to wage
jihad under the Messenger of Allah (a.s) or under anyone. What
substantiates our position is the holy verse, *Verily Allah has bought
from the believers their lives and their wealth in exchange that the
Paradise for them. They wage wars in the path of Allah, killing and
getting killed.* *A true promise on Him in the Torah and the Evangel and
the Qur’ān. Whoever fulfills his pact with Allah, rejoice the happy
tidings of your pact to which you pledged allegiance and that is a
mighty achievement.* Since the Imam is the representative of the Prophet
in his Ummah, and it is not permissible for Jesus (a.s) to get ahead of
the Prophet, likewise is the case with respect to his representative.

قال: هذا حديث حسن صحيح أخرجه مسلم في صحيحه فان كان الحديث المتقدم قد اول
فهذا لا يمكن تأويله لانه صريح فان عيسى (ع) يقدم أمير المسلمين وهو يومئذ
المهدي (ع) فعلى هذا بطل تأويل من قال: معنى قوله وإمامكم منكم، أي يؤمكم
بكتابكم. قال: فان سأل سائل وقال: مع صحة هذه الاخبار وهي أن عيسى يصلي خلف
المهدي (ع) ويجاهد بين يديه وأنه يقتل الدجال بين يدي المهدي (ع) ورتبة
التقدم في الصلاة معروفة وكذلك رتبة التقدم في الجهاد وهذه الاخبار مما
يثبت طرقها وصحتها عند السنة وكذلك ترويها الشيعة على السواء وهذا هو
الاجماع من كافة أهل الاسلام إذ من عدا الشيعة والسنة من الفرق فقوله ساقط
مردود وحشو مطرح فثبت أن هذا إجماع كافة أهل الاسلام ومع ثبوت الاجماع على
ذلك وصحته فأيما أفضل الامام أو المأموم في الصلاة والجهاد معا. الجواب عن
ذلك أن نقول: هما قدوتان نبي وإمام وإن كان أحدهما قدوة لصاحبه في حال
اجتماعهما وهو الامام يكون قدوة للنبي في تلك الحال وليس فيهما من يأخذه في
الله لومة لآئم وهما أيضا معصومان من ارتكاب القبايح كافة والمداهنة
والرياء والنفاق ولا يدعو الداعي لاحدهما إلى فعل ما يكون خارجا عن حكم
الشريعة ولا مخالفا لمراد الله ورسوله (ص). وإذا كان الامر كذلك فالامام
أفضل من المأموم لموضع ورود الشريعة المحمدية بذلك بدليل قول النبي (ص):
يؤم بالقوم أقرؤهم فان استووا فأعلمهم فان استووا فأفقههم فان استووا
فأقدمهم هجرة فان استووا فأصبحهم وجها فلو علم الامام أن عيسى أفضل منه لما
جاز له أن يتقدم عليه لاحكامه علم الشريعة ولموضع تنـزيه الله تعالى له عن
ارتكاب كل مكروه وكذلك لو علم عيسى أنه أفضل منه لما جاز له أن يقتدي به
لموضع تنـزيه الله له من الرياء والنفاق والمحاباة بل لما تحقق الامام أنه
أعلم منه جاز له أن يتقدم عليه وكذلك قد تحقق عيسى أن الامام أعلم منه
فلذلك قدمه وصلى خلفه، ولولا ذلك لم يسعه الاقتداء بالامام فهذه درجة
الفضل. في الصلاة. ثم الجهاد هو بذل النفس بين يدي من يرغب إلى الله تعالى
بذلك ولولا ذلك لم يصح لاحد جهاد بين يدي رسول الله(ص) ولا بين يدي غيره
والدليل على صحة ما ذهبنا إليه قول الله I "إِنَّ اللَّهَ اشْتَرَى مِنْ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ أَنفُسَهُمْ وَأَمْوَالَهُمْ بِأَنَّ لَهُمْ الْجَنَّةَ
يُقَاتِلُونَ فِي سَبِيلِ اللَّهِ فَيَقْتُلُونَ وَيُقْتَلُونَ وَعْدًا
عَلَيْهِ حَقًّا فِي التَّوْرَاةِ وَالْإِنجِيلِ وَالْقُرْآنِ وَمَنْ
أَوْفَى بِعَهْدِهِ مِنْ اللَّهِ فَاسْتَبْشِرُوا بِبَيْعِكُمْ الَّذِي
بَايَعْتُمْ بِهِ وَذَلِكَ هُوَ الْفَوْزُ الْعَظِيمُ." ولأن الإمام نائب
الرسول في أمته ولا يسوغ لعيسى (ع) أن يتقدم على الرسول فكذلك على نائبه.

This is further strengthened by Ibn Māja’s long narration about the
descent of Jesus, (a.s): Umm Sharīk Bint Abi al-‘Akar said, “O’
Messenger of Allah, where will be the believers at that day?” The
Messenger of Allah (a.s) replied, “They will be few at that time. Most
of them will be at Jerusalem. Their Imam will be in front of them
leading them for morning prayers when Jesus the son of Mary (a.s)
descends. That Imam will move rearward walking backward to have Jesus
move in the front to lead the prayers of the people. Jesus will put his
hand between his shoulders and say to him, ‘Lead us.’” This is a *sahih*
and confirmed tradition narrated by Ibn Māja in his book.

Chapter VIII: His Looks described by the Prophet
------------------------------------------------

Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The Mahdi
is mine. He is of broad forehead and high and slightly curved nose. He
will fill the earth with equity and justice as it will be full of
oppression and injustice. He will rule for seven years.” Al-Sheikh Abu
‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ibn Muhammad al-Shāfi‘ī says, this is a
*hasan* and *sahīh* tradition narrated Abu Dawūd and many others such as
al-Tabarāni.

Ibn Shirawaih al-Dailami narrates in *Kitāb al-Firdaws* from Ibn ‘Abbās,
Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The Mahdi is the peacock of the
Paradise-dwellers.”

The former source also narrates from Hudhaifa Ibn al-Yamān that the
Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “The Mahdi is from my offspring. His face
is like the glittering moon. The color is an Arabic color and the body
is an Israelite body. He will fill the earth with equity as it will be
replete with injustice. The dwellers of the heavens and the earth and
the birds in the air will be pleased with his caliphate. He will rule
for twenty years.”

Chapter IX: The Mahdi is from the Progeny of Husain
---------------------------------------------------

Abu Hārūn says, I came to Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri and asked him, “Did you
witness the battle of Badr?” “Yes,” he said. “Would that you please
speak to me of something you heard from the Messenger of Allah (a.s)
about ‘Ali and his excellence!” I entreated him. “Yes, I will relate it
to you,” he said. “The Messenger of Allah (a.s) was in a malady from
which he eventually recovered. as I was sitting on the right side of the
Messenger (a.s), Fātimah came to visit him. When she saw the weakness in
the Messenger of Allah (a.s) a weep smothered her throat and her tears
trickled down her cheeks. The Messenger of Allah (a.s) said to her,
“What is letting you weep, O’ Fātimah?” “I fear the loss, O’ Messenger
of Allah,” she said. “Don’t you know, O’ Fātimah, that Allah looked down
on earth and chose your father from them and sent him as an apostle; and
then He looked down at the earth another time and chose your husband
from them and sent me a revelation, on the virtue of which I married you
to him and took him as my successor?

ومما يؤيد هذا القول ما رواه الحافظ أبو عبد الله محمد بن يزيد بن ماجه
القزويني في حديث طويل في نـزول عيسى (ع) فمن ذلك: قالت أم شريك بنت أبي
العكر: يارسول الله فأين العرب يومئذ؟ فقال: هم يومئذ قليل وجلهم ببيت
المقدس وإمامهم قد تقدم يصلي بهم الصبح إذا نـزل بهم عيسى بن مريم (ع) فرجع
ذلك الامام ينكص يمشي القهقرى ليتقدم عيسى (ع) يصلي بالناس فيضع عيسى (ع)
يده بين كتفيه ثم يقول له: تقدم. قال: هذا حديث صحيح ثابت ذكره ابن ماجه في
كتابه عن أبي أمامة الباهلي قال: خطبنا رسول الله(ص) وهذا مختصره.

### الباب الثامن: في تحلية النبي (ص) المهدي {dir="RTL"}

عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله(ص): المهدي مني أجلى الجبهة أقنى
الانف يملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت جورا وظلما يملك سبع سنين، قال:
هذا حديث حسن صحيح أخرجه الحافظ أبو داود السجستاني في صحيحه ورواه غيره من
الحفاظ كالطبراني وغيره وذكر ابن شيرويه الديلمي في كتاب الفردوس في باب
الالف واللام باسناده

عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله(ص): المهدي طاووس أهل الجنة. وبإسناده أيضا
عن حذيفة بن اليمان، عن النبي (ص) أنه قال: المهدي من ولدي وجهه كالقمر
الدري اللون لون عربي الجسم جسم إسرائيلي يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت جورا
يرضى بخلافته أهل السماوات وأهل الارض والطير في الجو يملك عشرين سنة.

### الباب التاسع: في تصريح النبي (ص) بأن المهدي من ولد الحسين (ع) {dir="RTL"}

عن أبي هارون العبدي قال: أتيت أبا سعيد الخدري فقلت له: هل شهدت بدراً؟
قال: نعم، فقلت: ألا تحدثني بشئ مما سمعته من رسول الله(ص) في علي وفضله؟
فقال: نعم اخبرك إن رسول الله(ص) مرض مرضة نقه منها فدخلت عليه فاطمة تعوده
وأنا جالس عن يمين النبي (ص) فلما رأت ما برسول الله(ص) من الضعف خنقتها
العبرة حتى بدت دموعها على خدها فقال لها رسول الله(ص): ما يبكيك يا فاطمة؟
قالت: أخشى الضيعة يارسول الله، فقال: يا فاطمة أما علمت أن الله تعالى
اطلع إلى الارض اطلاعة فاختار منهم أباك فبعثه نبيا ثم اطلع ثانية فاختار
منهم بعلك فأوحى إلي فأنكحته واتخذته وصياً.

Don’t you know that you are in the grandeur of Allah? He married you to
the greatest of them in knowledge, the most forbearing of them in
clemency, and the foremost of them in Islam.” She became very much so
happy. Desiring further insight into the virtues, all the virtues, which
Allah has ordained for Muhammad and his Household, he said to her, “‘Ali
has eight great praises: Belief in Allah and His Messenger, his
sapience, his wife, his sons al-Hasan and al-Husain, his call to the
virtue, and his forbiddance from the wrong. O’ Fātimah, we, the
Household, have been given six qualities, none of the predecessors has
been given one of them, nor anyone of the coming ones will attain them.
Our apostle is the best of the apostles, and he is your father; our
successor is the best of the successors, and he is your husband; our
martyr is the best of the martyrs, and he is Hamzah, your father’s
uncle; from us are the two heirs of this Ummah, and they are your sons
al-Hasan and al-Husain; and from us is the Mahdi of the Ummah, behind
whom Jesus will perform prayers.” Then he touched Husain’s shoulder and
said, “From him is the Mahdi of the Ummah.”

So has narrated al-Dārqatani the author of *al-Jarh wa al-Ta*‘*dil.*

Chapter X: The Munificence of the Mahdi
---------------------------------------

Abu Nadhira says, We were with Jābir Ibn ‘Abdillah. He said, “It is near
that no harvest or money will reach the people of Iraq.” “By whom would
that be?” we asked. “By the non-‘Arabs.” Then he said, “It is near that
no money or crop will reach the people of Syria.” “By whom would that
be?” “By the Romans.” Then he remained silent for a while and then said,
“Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), ‘There will be a caliph at the end
time of my Ummah who will disperse wealth as by scattering it.” Abu
Nadhira and Abu al-A‘alā al-Rayyāni were asked, “Is he ‘Omar Ibn ‘Abd
al-‘Azīz?” “No,” they said. Abu Nadhira narrates from Abu Sa‘īd
al-Khidri, saying, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “One of your
caliphs will disperse wealth with extreme generosity and without
counting it.” Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri says, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “I give you the glad tiding of the coming of the Mahdi. He will
be sent to my Ummah when people will be in disputes and concussions. He
will fill the earth with equity and justice, as it will be beset by
oppression and injustice. The dwellers of the heavens and the dwellers
of the earth will be pleased with him. He will distribute wealth
correctly.” Someone asked, “What is correctly?” He said, “Equally
between the people. Allah will instill lack of need in the hearts of the
Ummah of Muhammad (a.s) and will stretch His equity so much so that a
caller will call, ‘Who is there who has a need for wealth?’ And no one
rises from the people except one man, who says, *I.* The caller says,
‘Go to the treasurer and tell him that the Mahdi orders you to give me
riches.’ He says to the treasurer, *Throw*, while he is collecting the
riches in the lap of his shirt. Remorse overwhelms him and he says, ‘I
have been the greediest soul from the Ummah of Muhammad and have failed
the contentment that dominates them.’

أما علمت أنك بكرامة الله إياك زوجك أغزرهم علما وأكثرهم حلما وأقدمهم سلما
فاستبشرت فأراد رسول الله(ص) أن يزيدها مزيد الخير كله الذي قسمه الله
لمحمد وآل محمد فقال لها: يا فاطمة ولعلي (ع) ثمانية أضراس يعني مناقب
إيمان بالله ورسوله وحكمته وزوجته وسبطاه الحسن والحسين وأمره بالمعروف
ونهيه عن المنكر يا فاطمة إنا أهل البيت اعطينا ست خصال لم يعطها أحد من
الاولين ولا يدركها أحد من الآخرين غيرنا نبينا خير الانبياء وهو أبوك
ووصينا خير الاوصياء وهو بعلك وشهيدنا خير الشهداء وهو حمزة عم أبيك ومنا
سبطا هذه الأمة وهما ابناك ومنا مهدي الأمة الذي يصلي عيسى خلفه ثم ضرب على
منكب الحسين فقال: من هذا مهدي الأمة قال: هكذا أخرجه الدارقطني صاحب الجرح
والتعديل.

### الباب العاشر: في ذكر كرم المهدي (ع) {dir="RTL"}

وبإسناده عن أبي نضرة قال: كنا عند جابر بن عبد الله فقال: يوشك أهل العراق
أن لا يجبى إليهم قفيز ولا درهم قلنا من أين ذاك؟ قال: من قبل العجم يمنعون
ذاك ثم قال: يوشك أهل الشام أن لا يجبى إليهم دينار ولا مد قلنا: من أين
ذاك؟ قال: من قبل الروم ثم سكت هنيهة ثم قال: قال رسول الله(ص): يكون في
آخر أمتي خليفة يحثي المال حثياً لا يعده عدا،ً قال: قلت لأبي نضرة وأبي
العلاء الرياني: إنه عمر بن عبد العزيز؟ قال: لا، قال: هذا حديث حسن صحيح
أخرجه مسلم في صحيحه.

وبإسناده عن أبي نضرة عن أبي سعيد قال: قال رسول الله(ص): من خلفائكم خليفة
يحثو المال حثيا لا يعده عدا قال: هذا حديث ثابت صحيح أخرجه الحافظ مسلم في
صحيحه. وعن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: قال رسول الله(ص): ابشركم بالمهدي يبعث في
أمتي على اختلاف من الناس وزلازل يملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت جوراً
وظلماً يرضى عنه ساكن السماء وساكن الارض يقسم المال صحاحاً. فقال رجل: ما
صحاحا؟ قال: بالسوية بين الناس، ويملأ الله قلوب أمة محمد(ص) غنىً ويسعهم
عدله حتى يأمر مناديا ينادي يقول: من له في المال حاجة؟ فما يقوم من الناس
إلا رجل واحد فيقول: أنا. فيقول: ائت السدان، يعني الخازن، فقل له: إن
المهدي يأمرك أن تعطيني مالاً فيقول له: احث حتى إذا جعله في حجره وأبرزه
ندم فيقول: كنت أجشع أمة محمد نفساً أعجز عما وسعهم.

He returns the riches but they are not taken back from him. It is said
to him, ‘We do not take back something we have given away*.*’ This will
be for seven or eight or nine years. Then there is no pleasure in life
after the Mahdi.” Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri says, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “After a great passage of time and the appearance of mischief
there will be a man called the Mahdi. His grants will be so much very
pleasurable.” Al-Sheikh Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ibn Muhammad
al-Shāfi‘ī says, “This is a *hasan* tradition, recorded by Abu Na‘īm
al-Hāfidh.”

Chapter XI: The Mahdi is not Jesus the Son of Mary
--------------------------------------------------

The Prince of the Believers (a.s) says, I said, “O’ Messenger of Allah,
is the Mahdi from us, the Household of Muhammad, or from the others?”
The Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “No, he is from us. Allah will make
the religion perfect through him as He initiated it through us. Through
us they will be saved from mischief, as they were saved from polytheism.
Through us Allah will bring their hearts together after the hostility of
the mischief, as He brought their hearts together after the hostility of
polytheism. They will become through us brothers after the hostility of
the mischief, as they became brothers in their religion after the
hostility of polytheism.” Al-Sheikh Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ibn
Muhammad al-Shāfi‘ī says, This is a highly *hasan* tradition recorded by
narrators in their books, such as al-Tabarāni, Abu Na‘īm, and ‘Abd
al-Rahmān Ibn Himād.

Jābir says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Jesus the son of Mary
will come down. Their leader, the Mahdi, will say, ‘Come and lead our
prayers.’ Jesus will reply, ‘One of yourselves is the leader of you, as
a token of dignity from Allah, the High, to this Ummah.’” Al-Sheikh Abu
‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ibn Muhammad al-Shāfi‘ī says, This is a
*sahīh* and *hasan* tradition. These explicit statements clearly
indicate that the Mahdi is other than Jesus. The narration, “There is no
Mahdi except Jesus the son of Mary,” is solely narrated by ‘Ali Ibn
Muhammad Ibn Khālid al-Jundi, the *mo’dhin* of Jund. Al-Shāfi‘ī
al-Matlabi says about him, “He was careless in narrating.” Narrations
from the Apostle about the Mahdi are in inordinate numbers with
multitudes of narrators, describing that he will rule for seven years
and will fill the earth with justice, that Jesus the son of Mary will
come with him and will assist him in killing the Dajjāl at the gate of
Ladd in Palestine, that he will be the leader of this Ummah at that day
and that Jesus will pray behind him, and all the other details of his
enterprise. Al-Shāfi‘ī has mentioned this in the book *al-Risāla* that
our chain of narration connects to it. We would narrate it, however, the
chain of narration will be long. At any rate, it is a matter of
consensus that should the narrator of a tradition be known for
indifference and lack of care in narrating, his narrations do not have
credibility and are rejected.

فيرده ولا يقبل منه فيقال له: إنا لا نأخذ شيئا أعطيناه فيكون لذلك سبع
سنين أو ثمان سنين أو تسع سنين ثم لا خير في العيش بعده أو قال: ثم لا خير
في الحياة بعده. قال: هذا حديث صحيح حسن ثابت أخرجه شيخ أهل الحديث في
مسنده وفي هذا الحديث دلالة على أن المجمل في صحيح مسلم هو هذا المبين في
مسند أحمد بن حنبل وفقا بين الروايات. وباسناده عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال:
قال رسول الله(ص): يكون عند انقطاع من الزمان وظهور من الفتن رجل يقال له:
المهدي (يكون) عطاؤه هنيئا. قال: حديث حسن أخرجه أبو نعيم الحافظ.

### الباب الحادى عشر: في الرد على من زعم أن المهدي هو المسيح بن مريم {dir="RTL"}

وباسناده عن علي بن أبي طالب (ع) قال: قلت: يارسول الله(ص) أمنا آل محمد
المهدي أم من غيرنا؟ فقال رسول الله(ص): لا بل منا يختم الله به الدين كما
فتح بنا وبنا ينقذون من الفتنة كما انقذوا من الشرك وبنا يؤلف الله بين
قلوبهم بعد عداوة الفتنة كما ألف بين قلوبهم بعد عداوة الشرك وبنا يصبحون
بعد عداوة الفتنة إخوانا كما أصبحوا بعد عداوة الشرك إخوانا في دينهم. قال:
هذا حديث حسن عال رواه الحفاظ في كتبهم فأما الطبراني فقد ذكره في المعجم
الاوسط وأما أبو نعيم فرواه في حلية الاولياء وأما عبد الرحمان بن حماد فقد
ساقه في عواليه. وعن جابر قال: قال رسول الله(ص): ينـزل عيسى بن مريم فيقول
أميرهم المهدي: تعال صل بنا فيقول ألا إن بعضكم على بعض امراء تكرمة الله
تعالى هذه الأمة قال: هذا حديث صحيح حسن رواه الحارث بن أبي اسامة في مسنده
ورواه الحافظ أبو نعيم في عواليه وفي هذه النصوص دلالة على أن المهدي غير
عيسى.

ومدار الحديث "لا مهدي إلا عيسى بن مريم": علي بن محمد بن خالد الجندي مؤذن
الجند، قال الشافعي المطلبي: كان فيه تساهل في الحديث قال: قد تواترت
الاخبار واستفاضت بكثرة رواتها عن المصطفى (ع) في المهدي وأنه يملك سبع
سنين ويملأ الأرض عدلاً وأنه يخرج مع عيسى بن مريم ويساعده على قتل الدجال
بباب لد بأرض فلسطين وأنه يؤم هذه الأمة وعيسى يصلي خلفه في طول من قصته
وأمره وقد ذكره الشافعي في كتاب الرسالة ولنا به أصل ونرويه ولكن يطول ذكر
سنده قال: وقد اتفقوا على أن الخبر لا يقبل إذا كان الراوي معروفا بالتساهل
في روايته.

Chapter XII: The Mahdi in Middle of the Ummah
---------------------------------------------

Ibn ‘Abbās says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “That Ummah will not
perish that I am in its beginning, Jesus is in its end, and the Mahdi is
in its middle.” Al-Sheikh Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ibn Muhammad
al-Shāfi‘ī says, This is a *hasan* tradition narrated by Abu Na‘im and
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal.

Chapter XIII: His Name and His Looks
------------------------------------

Hudhaifa said, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Even if not more than
one day remains from this world, Allah will send a man whose name is my
name, his physique is my physique, and his patronym is Abu ‘Abdillah.”
Al-Sheikh Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf Ibn Muhammad al-Shāfi‘ī says,
This is a *hasan* tradition.

Chapter XIV: The Village from where he will rise
------------------------------------------------

‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Omar says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The Mahdi
will rise from a village called Kur‘a.” He says that it is a *hasan*
tradition.

Chapter XV: Clouds will Shade over him
--------------------------------------

‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Omar says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The Mahdi
will rise and there will be a cloud over his head, from which a caller
will be calling, *This is the Mahdi, the Caliph of Allah.”* He says it
is a *hasan* tradition.

Chapter XVI: The Angel that will Come with the Mahdi
----------------------------------------------------

‘Abdullah Ibn ‘Omar says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The Mahdi
will rise while there is an angel over his head calling, *This is the
Mahdi! Follow him!”*

Chapter XVII: His Color and Body
--------------------------------

Hudhaifa says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “The Mahdi is a man
from my progeny, his color is an Arabic color and his physique is an
Isreali physique. On his right cheek there is a mole, meseems like a
star glittering. He will fill the earth with equity as it will be full
of oppression. The dwellers of the earth and the dwellers of the heavens
and the birds in the air will be pleased with his rule.” He says this is
a *hasan* tradition.

Chapter XVIII: His Right Cheek Mole
-----------------------------------

Abu Amāma al-Bāhili says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “There will
be four truces between you and the Romans. The fourth one will be on the
hands of a man from the house of the Hercules and will last seven
years.” “O’ Messenger of Allah,” called a man from the tribe of ‘Abd
al-Qais, who was called al-Mustawrid Ibn Ghayalān, “who will be the Imam
of the people at that day?”

### الباب الثاني عشر: المهدي في وسط الأمة {dir="RTL"}

وبإسناده عن ابن عباس قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لن تهلك أمة أنا في أولها
وعيسى في آخرها والمهدي في وسطها. قال: هذا حديث حسن رواه الحافظ أبو نعيم
في عواليه وأحمد بن حنبل في مسنده.

### الباب الثالث عشر: في ذكر كنيته وأنه يشبه النبي 9 في خلقه {dir="RTL"}

وبإسناده عن حذيفة قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم
واحد لبعث الله رجلا اسمه اسمي وخلقه خلقي يكنى أبا عبد الله، قال: هذا
حديث حسن.

### الباب الرابع عشر: في ذكر اسم القرية التي يكون منها خروج المهدي (ع) {dir="RTL"}

وبإسناده عن عبد الله بن عمر قال: قال رسول الله(ص): يخرج المهدي من قرية
يقال لها: كرعة. قال: هذا حديث حسن رزقناه عاليا أخرجه أبو الشيخ الاصفهاني
في عواليه كما سقناه.

### الباب الخامس عشر: في ذكر الغمامة التي تظلل المهدي (ع) عند خروجه {dir="RTL"}

وبإسناده عن عبد الله بن عمر قال: قال رسول الله(ص): يخرج المهدي وعلي رأسه
غمامة فيها مناد ينادي: هذا المهدي خليفة الله، قال: هذا حديث حسن مارويناه
عاليا إلا من هذا الوجه.

### الباب السادس عشر: في ذكر الملك الذي يخرج مع المهدي  (ع) {dir="RTL"}

عن عبد الله بن عمر أنه قال: قال رسول الله(ص): يخرج المهدي وعلى رأسه ملك
ينادي أن هذا المهدي فاتبعوه قال: هذا حديث حسن روته الحفاظ الائمة من أهل
الحديث كأبي نعيم والطبراني وغيرهما.

### الباب السابع عشر: في ذكر صفة المهدي ولونه وجسمه {dir="RTL"}

وقد تقدم مرسلاً وبإسناده عن حذيفة أنه قال: قال رسول الله(ص): المهدي رجل
من ولدي لونه لون عربي وجسمه جسم إسرائيلي على خده الايمن خال كأنه كوكب
دري يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت جوراً يرضى بخلافته أهل الارض وأهل السماء
والطير في الجو. قال: هذا حديث حسن رزقناه عاليا بحمد الله عن جم غفير
أصحاب الثقفي وسنده معروف عندنا.

### الباب الثامن عشر: في ذكر خاله على خده الايمن وثيابه وفتحه مدائن الشرك {dir="RTL"}

وبإسناده عن أبي أمامة الباهلي قال: قال رسول الله(ص): بينكم وبين الروم
أربع هدن في يوم الرابعة على يدي رجل من أهل هرقل يدوم سبع سنين فقال له
رجل من عبد القيس يقال له المستورد بن غيلان: يارسول الله من إمام الناس
يومئذ؟

“The Mahdi from my offspring, a man of forty years and with a face like
a glittering star. There will be a black mole on his right cheek. He
will be wearing two light white cloaks from al-Qatwān**[1]**, seeming as
he were from the men of the children of Israel. He will extricate
treasures and conquer the cities of polytheism.”

Chapter XIX: The Description of the Mahdi’s Teeth
-------------------------------------------------

‘Abd al-Rahmān Ibn ‘Auf says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Allah
will send a man from my household whose teeth will be at distance from
one another and whose forehead will be broad. He will fill the earth
with equity. He will grant riches in grants.”

Chapter XX: His Conquest of Constantinople
------------------------------------------

Abu Huraira narrates that the Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “The Hour
shall not rise until a man from my Household reigns. He will conquer
Constantinople and the Mount of Dailam. If there should not remain more
than a day, Allah will prolong that day until he conquers it.”

Chapter XXI: His Rule comes after Tyrants
-----------------------------------------

Jābir Ibn ‘Abdillah says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “There will
be caliphs after me, and after caliphs emirs, and after emirs tyrant
kings. Then the Mahdi from my Household will rise. He will fill the
earth with justice as it will be replete with oppression.

Chapter XXII: The Mahdi is a Virtuous Imam
------------------------------------------

Abu Amāma narrates, The Messenger of Allah (a.s) addressed us and
mentioned the Dajjāl and said, “Medina will expel its uncleanliness like
melting furnace purges uncleanliness out of iron. That day will be
proclaimed the day of salvation.”

Umm Sharīk asked, “Where are the believers at that day O’ Messenger of
Allah?”

“They are few at that day,” he said. “The majority of them will be at
Jerusalem. Their Imam will be the Mahdi, a virtuous man.”

Chapter XXIII: The Ummah’s Leisure during his Rule
--------------------------------------------------

Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “My Ummah
will enjoy a leisure in the time of the Mahdi (a.s) the like of which
they have never enjoyed. The heavens will shower over them bountifully
and the earth will not leave any of its vegetation but it brings it
forth.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** A locality in Kufa from which these sorts of cloacks come.

قال: المهدي من ولدي ابن أربعين سنة كأن وجهه كوكب دري في خده الايمن خال
أسود عليه عبائتان قطوانيتان كأنه من رجال بني إسرائيل يستخرج الكنوز ويفتح
مدائن الشرك قال: هذا سياق الطبراني في معجمه الاكبر.

### الباب التاسع عشر: في ذكر كيفية أسنان المهدي (ع) {dir="RTL"}

عن عبد الرحمان ابن عوف قال: قال رسول الله(ص): ليبعثن الله من عترتي رجلاً
أفرق الثنايا أجلى الجبهة يملأ الأرض عدلاً ويفيض المال فيضاً. قال: هكذا
أخرجه الحافظ أبو نعيم في عواليه.

### الباب العشرون: في ذكر فتح المهدي (ع) القسطنطينية {dir="RTL"}

عن أبي هريرة عن النبي (ص) قال: لا يقوم الساعة حتى يملك رجل من أهل بيتي
يفتح القسطنطينية وجبل الديلم ولو لم يبق إلا يوم لطول الله ذلك اليوم حتى
يفتحها. قال: هذا سياق الحافظ أبي نعيم وقال: هذا هو المهدي بلا شك وفقا
بين الروايات.

### الباب الحادى والعشرون: في ذكر خروج المهدي (ع) بعد ملوك جبابرة {dir="RTL"}

وبإسناده عن جابر بن عبد الله أن رسول الله(ص) قال: سيكون بعدي خلفاء ومن
بعد الخلفاء امراء ومن بعد الامراء ملوك جبابرة ثم يخرج المهدي من أهل بيتي
يملأ الأرض عدلاً كما ملئت جورا قال: هكذا رواه الحافظ أبو نعيم في فوائده
والطبراني في معجمه الاكبر.

### الباب الثاني والعشرون: في قوله (ص) المهدي إمام صالح {dir="RTL"}

وبإسناده عن أبي أمامة قال: خطبنا رسول الله(ص) وذكر الدجال وقال فيه: إن
المدينة لتنفي خبثها كما ينفي الكير خبث الحديد ويدعى ذلك اليوم يوم الخلاص
فقالت ام شريك: فأين العرب يومئذ يارسول الله؟ قال: هم يومئذ قليل وجلهم
ببيت المقدس وإمامهم المهدي رجل صالح. قال: هذا حديث حسن هكذا رواه الحافظ
أبو نعيم الاصفهاني.

### الباب الثالث والعشرون: في ذكر تنعم الأمة زمن المهدي (ع) {dir="RTL"}

بإسناده عن أبي سعيد الخدري، عن النبي (ص) قال: تتنعم أمتي في زمن المهدي
(ع) نعمة لم يتنعموا مثلها قط: يرسل السماء عليهم مدراراً ولا تدع الارض
شيئاً من نباتها إلا أخرجته. قال: هذا حديث حسن المتن رواه الحافظ أبو
القاسم الطبراني في معجمه الأكبر.

Chapter XXIV: The Mahdi is the Caliph of Allah
----------------------------------------------

Thawbān says, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Three men, all of them
sons of a caliph, will be killed at your treasure, which will not go to
anyone of them. Then black standards will come and they will massacre
them, a massacre never done by any nation. Then the Caliph of God, the
Mahdi, comes. When you hear him, come to him and pledge allegiance to
him, for he is the Caliph of God the Mahdi.”

Chapter XXV: The Mahdi is Living and Alive
------------------------------------------

He is alive and living since the time of his occultation until now and
there is no impossibility therein, as Jesus and Khidr and Ilyās, all
Divine Saints, and Dajjāl and Satan, both enemies of Allah, are living
and alive. The fact that they are all living is proved by the Book and
the Sunnah. While the adversaries agree on this, they deny the
possibility of Mahdi’s being alive. They deny it for two reasons: First,
the length of his life and second, for he lives in the underground
cellar, according to their understanding, while no one provides him food
and water.

Muhammad Ibn Yusuf al-Kanji makes the following argument: Jesus (a.s) is
still alive on the basis of the verse, There is not one of the followers
of the Book but will verily believe in him before his death. Not all of
them have believed in him since the revelation of this verse to this
day. Therefore, this belief in him must take place in the last eras of
the world. The proof for Jesus’ life from the Sunnah is the narration of
Muslim in his Sahīh on the authority of al-Nawās Ibn Sam‘ān. In a long
tradition about the story of Jesus, it is stated, “Then Jesus the son of
Mary will descend by the eastern white minerate of Damascus wearing two
garments, placing the palm of his hand over the wings of angels.” Also
the tradition mentioned earlier, “How would you be like when the son of
Marry comes down Imam is from yourselves.”

Khidhr and Ilyās are alive on the virtue of the assertion of Ibn
al-Jarīr al-Tabari, “Al-Khidhr and Ilyās are living and walking on
earth.” There is also the narration of Muslim in his Sahīh on the
authority of Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri, saying, The Messenger of Allah (a.s)
gave us a long address about the Dajjāl. Amongst the things he said was,
“He will come while it is forbidden for him to enter the interior of
Medina. He will end up by some of the salina that is near Medina. Then a
man will come to him who is of the best of the people and will say, ‘I
bear witness that you are the Dajjāl about whom the Messenger of Allah
(a.s) has spoken to us.’ The Dajjāl will say, ‘If you kill this man and
then bring him back to life, what do you say, would you doubt me?’ They
will say, ‘No.’ “So the Dajjāl kills him and then brings him to life.
The man says as he is brought back to life, ‘By Allah, you do not
possess any more skill than I do.’ The Dajjāl wants to kill him, but
cannot overpower him.” Abu Ishāq Ibrāhim Ibn Sa‘d says, It is said that
this man is al-Khidhr (a.s).

### الباب الرابع والعشرون: في إخبار رسول الله(ص) بأن المهدي خليفة الله تعالى {dir="RTL"}

وبإسناده عن ثوبان، قال: قال رسول الله(ص): يقتل عند كنـزكم ثلاثة كلهم ابن
خليفة لا يصير إلى واحد منهم ثم تجئ الرايات السود فيقتلونهم قتلاً لم
يقتله قوم ثم يجيئ خليفة الله المهدي فإذا سمعتم به فائتوه فبايعوه فانه
خليفة الله المهدي قال: هذا حديث حسن المتن وقع إلينا عاليا من هذا الوجه
بحمد الله وحسن توفيقه وفيه دليل على شرف المهدي بكونه خليفة الله في الارض
على لسان أصدق ولد آدم وقد قال الله تعالى: "يَا أَيُّهَا الرَّسُولُ
بَلِّغْ مَا أُنزِلَ إِلَيْكَ مِنْ رَبِّكَ " الآية .

### الباب الخامس والعشرون: في الدلالة على كون المهدي حياً باقياً مذ غيبته إلى الآن {dir="RTL"}

ولا امتناع في بقائه بدليل بقاء عيسى والخضر وإلياس من أولياء الله تعالى
وبقاء الدجال وإبليس اللعين من أعداء الله تعالى وهؤلاء قد ثبت بقاؤهم
بالكتاب والسنة وقد اتفقوا ثم أنكروا جواز بقاء المهدي لانهم إنما أنكروا
بقاءه من وجهين أحدهما طول الزمان والثاني أنه في سرداب من غير أن يقوم أحد
بطعامه وشرابه وهذا ممتنع عادة قال مؤلف الكتاب محمد بن يوسف بن محمد
الكنجي بعون الله نبتدئ أما عيسى عليه ا لسلام فالدليل على بقائه قوله
تعالى "وَإِنْ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ إِلَّا لَيُؤْمِنَنَّ بِهِ قَبْلَ
مَوْتِهِ." ولم يؤمن به منذ نـزول هذه الآية إلى يومنا هذا ولا بد أن يكون
ذلك في آخر الزمان وأما السنة فما رواه مسلم في صحيحه عن النواس بن سمعان
في حديث طويل في قصة الدجال قال: فينـزل عيسى بن مريم عند المنارة البيضاء
شرقي دمشق بين مهرودتين واضعا كفيه على أجنحة ملكين. وأيضا ما تقدم من
قوله: كيف أنتم إذا نـزل ابن مريم فيكم وإمامكم منكم وأما الخضر وإلياس فقد
قال ابن جرير الطبري: الخضر وإلياس باقيان يسيران في الارض. وأيضا فما رواه
مسلم في صحيحه عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: حدثنا رسول الله(ص) حديثاً طويلاً
عن الدجال فكان فيما حدثنا قال: يأتي وهو محرم عليه أن يدخل نقاب المدينة
فينتهي إلى بعض السباح التي تلي المدينة فيخرج إليه يومئذ رجل هو خير الناس
أو من خير الناس فيقول: أشهد أنك الدجال الذي حدثنا رسول الله(ص) حديثه
فيقول الدجال: أرأيتم إن قتلت هذا ثم أحييته أتشكون في الامر؟ فيقولون: لا
قال: فيقتله ثم يحييه فيقول حين يحييه: والله ما كنت فيك قط أشد بصيرة مني
الآن قال: فيريد الدجال أن يقتله فلا يسلط عليه، قال أبو إسحاق إبراهيم بن
سعد: يقال إن هذا الرجل هو الخضر (ع).

These were the words of Muslim in his Sahīh, as we narrated. The proof
that the Dajjāl is alive is the tradition of Tamīm al-Dāri and the
tradition of al-Jasāsa and the beast that spoke to them. It is a
reliable narration, which Muslim has registered in his Sahīh and has
said, This clearly establishes that the Dajjāl is alive.

The proof of the existence of the accursed Iblīs is the many verses of
the Divine Book, such as, Satan said, My Lord, respite me until the Day
of Judgment. He said, Surely, you are of the respited ones.

The proofs of the existence of the Mahdi (a.s) have come in the Book and
Sunnah. Sa‘īd Ibn Jubair says in the tafsīr of the holy verse, So He may
uplift him over all religions, though the disbelievers may dislike it,
[Barā’a: 34 ] “He is the Mahdi from the House of Fātimah. As for someone
who says that he is Jesus, there is no contradiction between the two
views, because Jesus will be an aide to the Imam.” Maqātil Ibn Sulaymān
and those interpreters who have followed him have said in the tafsīr of
the holy verse, And that is the knowledge for the Hour, [Al-Zukhruf: 61
] “He is the Mahdi, who will be in the End Days and after whose rise
there will be the Day of Judgment and its signs.” The answer to the
question with respect to the length of his life can be on the basis of
narration or rationality. As for the traditions, it was just mentioned
that the three definitely exist in the End Days and none of the three is
to be followed but the Mahdi, because he is the Imam of the Ummah in the
End Days and because Jesus (a.s) will pray behind him, as narrated in
the reliable books of hadith, and will certify the veracity of his
claim. The third of the three is the accursed Dajjāl, who is alive and
existent. As for the rational argument for their existence, it is as
follows: Either their existence is within the bounds of Divine power or
it is not. It is impossible to be outside the bounds of Divine power,
because the Essence Who initiated the creation from nothing and then
perishes it and then brings it back to existence after destruction, must
have the power to keep it in existence. Then it is either that this
continuous existence is the subject of Divine Will or the subject of the
Ummah’s choice. It cannot be the subject of the Ummah’s choice, because
if it were so, then it should be possible for anyone of us to choose
such lengthy life for himself and his progeny. This is not within our
power and therefore, must be the subject of God’s power. On the same
token, the existence of these three entities is either for a reason or
not for a reason. If it is without any reason, it would be an act devoid
of wisdom, which cannot be the work of God. Therefore, it must be for a
reason indicated by the Divine Wisdom. We will mention the reason of the
existence of each one of the three. The reason Jesus is still alive is
the verse, There is not one of the followers of the Book but will verily
believe in him before his death. They have not all believed in him until
this day, and this must happen until the End Days. The accursed Dajjāl
has not done anything since the Messenger of Allah (a.s) told us, “The
One Eyed Dajjāl will come to you. A mountain of bread is going to be
with him, which will travel with him.” And the other signs of his.
Therefore, this must occur in the End Days.

قال: هذا لفظ مسلم في صحيحه كما سقناه سواء. وأما الدليل على بقاء الدجال
فانه أورد حديث تميم الداري والجساسة والدابة التي كلمتهم وهو حديث صحيح
ذكره مسلم في صحيحه وقال: هذا صريح في بقاء الدجال. قال: وأما الدليل على
بقاء إبليس اللعين فآي الكتاب العزيز نحو قوله تعالى: "قَالَ رَبِّ
فَأَنظِرْنِي إِلَى يَوْمِ يُبْعَثُونَ قَالَ فَإِنَّكَ مِنْ
الْمُنظَرِينَ." وأما بقاء المهدي (ع) فقد جاء في الكتاب والسنة أما الكتاب
فقد قال سعيد بن جبير في تفسير قوله(عزوجل) "لِيُظْهِرَهُ عَلَى الدِّينِ
كُلِّهِ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ الْمُشْرِكُونَ." قال: هو المهدي من عترة فاطمة وأما
من قال: إنه عيسى (ع) فلا تنافي بين القولين إذ هو مساعد للامام على ما
تقدم وقد قال مقاتل بن سليمان ومن شايعه من المفسرين في تفسير قوله(عزوجل)
"وَإِنَّهُ لَعِلْمٌ لِلسّاعَةِ" قال: هو المهدي يكون في آخر الزمان وبعد
خروجه يكون قيام الساعة وأماراتها. وأما الجواب عن طول الزمان فمن حيث النص
والمعنى أما النص فما تقدم من الاخبار على أنه لابد من وجود الثلاثة في آخر
الزمان وأنهم ليس فيهم متبوع غير المهدي بدليل أنه إمام الأمة في آخر
الزمان وأن عيسى (ع) يصلي خلفه كما ورد في الصحاح ويصدقه في دعواه والثالث
هو الدجال اللعين وقد ثبت أنه حي موجود وأما المعنى في بقائهم فلا يخلو من
أحد قسمين إما أن يكون بقاؤهم في مقدور الله تعالى أو لا يكون ومستحيل أن
يخرج عن مقدور الله لان من بدء الخلق من غير شئ وأفناه ثم يعيده بعد الفناء
لابد أن يكون البقاء في مقدوره تعالى فلا يخلو من قسمين إما أن يكون راجعا
إلى اختيار الله تعالى أو إلى اختيار الأمة ولا يجوز أن يكون راجعاً إلى
اختيار الأمة لانه لو صح ذلك منهم لجاز لاحدنا أن يختار البقاء لنفسه
ولولده وذلك غير حاصل لنا غير داخل تحت مقدورنا ولابد أن يكون راجعا إلى
اختيار الله سبحانه ثم لا يخلو بقاء هؤلاء الثلاثة من قسمين أيضا إما أن
يكون لسبب أولا يكون لسبب فان كان لغير سبب كان خارجا عن وجه الحكمة وما
يخرج عن وجه الحكمة لايدخل في أفعال الله تعالى فلابد من أن يكون لسبب
يقتضيه حكمة الله تعالى قال: وسنذكر سبب بقاء كل واحد منهم على حدته. أما
بقاء عيسى (ع) لسبب وهو قوله تعالى "وَإِنْ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْكِتَابِ إِلَّا
لَيُؤْمِنَنَّ بِهِ قَبْلَ مَوْتِهِ." ولم يؤمن به منذ نـزول هذه الآية إلى
يومنا هذا أحد ولا بد من أن يكون هذا في آخر الزمان. وأما الدجال اللعين لم
يحدث حدثاً منذ عهد إلينا رسول الله(ص): أنه خارج فيكم الأعور الدجال وأن
معه جبالاً من خبز تسير معه إلى غير ذلك من آياته فلا بد أن يكون ذلك في
آخر الزمان لا محالة.

Imam Mahdi exists because since the beginning of his Occultation until
this day of ours, he has not filled the earth with justice and equity,
as predicted in the narrations, therefore, this must happen in the End
Days. These reasons have all combined to fulfill the declared destiny.
Therefore, the reason of the existence of the three—Jesus, the Mahdi,
and Dajjāl—is for the clear mission lying ahead. They are two virtuous
men, a Prophet and an Imam, and an enemy of God, the Dajjāl. We narrated
the traditions from the Sahīh books of Hadīth about the existence of
Jesus (a.s) and the Dajjāl, so what does make the existence of al-Mahdi
(a.s) impossible? Whereas his existence is in the bounds of God’s power
and he is the sign of the Prophet (a.s). Therefore, he comes first to
exist than the other two, because if the Mahdi (a.s) exists, he is the
Imam of the Age, who will fill the earth with justice and equity;
therefore, his existence is prudent and a lutf*****[1]***** for the
people. Dajjāl on the other hand, if he lives, he will create mischief
in the world, as he will claim godhood and will assault the Ummah.
However, his existence is a test from God so the obedient servants are
purged out from the disobedient ones and the decent from the vice. The
reason that Jesus is living is that the followers of the Evangel and the
Torah believe in him and that he will verify the Prophethood of the
Master of the Prophets Muhammad (a.s) and will explain the message of
the Imam to the believers and certify his claims, by praying behind him
and helping him and calling the people to the Muhammadan religion.
Therefore, the existence of the two is secondary to the existence of the
Imam. So how can the two who are secondary exist while the one who is
prior to the two does not? If that is possible then an effect should
also be able to exist without its cause, which is rationally impossible.
We said that the existence of the Mahdi (a.s) is the reason for the
existence of the two because the existence of Jesus (a.s) lonely by
himself and not in his capacity as an aide to the religion of Islam and
as a witness of the truth of Imam is impossible, because if it were
possible, he would be independent in his governance and his call, and
this will invalidate the call of Islam.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**[1]** *Lutf* in the parlance of theologians means anything that
facilitates the obedience of the people with respect to their religious
duties and without which such duties are impossible to be fulfilled.
There are two elements that are central here: One is that it does not
include the basic capability and power and the means to perform an act
of obedience. For instance, money and means of transportation with
respect to going to Hajj are not *lutf.* The second element is that
though *lutf* facilitates and makes acts of obedience easy and possible;
it must not reach to the level of compulsion and lack of choice and
free-will on behalf of the individuals. Thus, if Allah ordains the
nature of men in such a way that they would perform their prayers
without making any conscious decision in this regard, it will not be
considered *lutf,* as this would mean that praying will no longer be a
religious duty*.* Having said this, Shī‘a theologians have maintained
that *lutf* is necessary for Allah to confer. That is because if He
ordains religious duties upon individuals and the society, as He has,
and then He knows that these duties are impossible to be fulfilled and
that the desired outcome of these laws and requirements cannot be
achieved but through affording a certain act of *lutf,* common sense
indicates that if He does not afford that specific *lutf,* His
ordainment of the duties have been vain and pointless in the first
place. Exalted He is from a position as such.

وأما الامام المهدي (ع) مذ غيبته عن الابصار إلى يومنا هذا لم يملأ الأرض
قسطاً وعدلاً كما تقدمت الاخبار في ذلك فلا بد أن يكون ذلك مشروطا بآخر
الزمان فقد صارت هذه الاسباب لاستيفاء الاجل المعلوم.

فعلى هذا اتفقت أسباب بقاء الثلاثة (وهم عيسى والمهدي والدجال) لصحة أمر
معلوم في وقت معلوم وهم صالحان نبي وإمام وطالح عدو الله وهو الدجال وقد
تقدمت الاخبار من الصحاح بما ذكر ناه في صحة بقاء الدجال مع صحة بقاء عيسى
(ع) فما المانع من بقاء المهدي (ع) مع كون بقائه باختيار الله وداخلا تحت
مقدوره سبحانه وهو آية الرسول (ص). فعلى هذا هو أولى بالبقاء من الاثنين
الآخرين لأنه إذا بقي المهدي (ع) كان إمام آخر الزمان يملأ الأرض قسطاً
وعدلاً كما تقدمت الاخبار فيكون بقاؤه مصلحة للمكلفين ولطفاً بهم في بقائه
من عند رب العالمين.

والدجال إذا بقي فبقاؤه مفسدة للعالمين لما ذكر من ادعاء ربوبيته وفتكه
بالأمة ولكن في بقائه ابتلاء من الله تعالى ليعلم المطيع منهم من المعاصي
والمحسن من المسئ والمصلح من المفسد وهذا هو الحكمة في بقاء الدجال.

وأما بقاء عيسى فهو سبب إيمان أهل الكتاب به للآية والتصديق بنبوة سيد
الانبياء محمد خاتم النبيين ورسول رب العالمين (ص) الطاهرين ويكون تبيانا
لدعوى الامام عند أهل الايمان ومصدقاً لما دعا إليه عند أهل الطغيان بدليل
صلاته خلفه ونصرته إياه ودعائه إلى الملة المحمدية التي هو إمام فيها.

فصار بقاء المهدي (ع) أصلاً وبقاء الاثنين فرعاً على بقائه فكيف يصح بقاء
الفرعين مع عدم بقاء الاصل لهما ولو صح ذلك لصح وجود المسبب من دون وجود
السبب وذلك مستحيل في العقول.

وإنما قلنا إن بقاء المهدي (ع) أصل لبقاء الاثنين لأنه لا يصح وجود عيسى
(ع) بانفراده غير ناصر لملة الاسلام وغير مصدق للامام لانه لو صح ذلك لكان
منفرداً بدولة ودعوة وذلك يبطل دعوة الاسلام من حيث أراد أن يكون تبعا فصار
متبوعاً وأراد أن يكون فرعا فصار أصلاً.

The Prophet of Islam said, “There is no prophet after me. Permissible is
what Allah has rendered permissible on my tongue until the Day of
Judgment and forbidden is what Allah has made forbidden on my tongue
until the Day of Judgment.” Therefore, Jesus must be an aide and a
supporter for him. Likewise is the case of the Dajjāl. He cannot exist
in the End Days if there is no Imam for the Ummah to whom they shall
refer, because if it were so, Islam will be subjugated forever and its
call will be false. Therefore, the existence of the Imam is principal
and prior to the existence of the Dajjāl. The rejection that the Imam
remains in the cellar (serdāb) without anyone serving him water and food
can be answered in two ways. One is that Jesus (a.s) is in the heavens
without anyone serving him food and drinks and he is a man like the
Mahdi (a.s). If he can stay like that in the heavens, likewise the Mahdi
(a.s) can in the cellar. Then al-Sheikh Abu ‘Abdillah Muhammad Ibn Yusuf
Ibn Muhammad al-Shāfi‘ī narrates some traditions.

39- *Kashf al-Ghumma:* Muhammad Ibn Talha says, Of the *sahīh*
traditions about the Mahdi narrated from the Messenger is the narration
recorded by Abu Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhi from Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri, saying,
I heard the Messenger of Allah (a.s) say, “The Mahdi is from me. He has
a broad forehead, a high nose that has a slight curve, and will fill the
earth with equity and justice just as it will be replete with oppression
and tyranny. He will rule for seven years.”

Of such traditions is the narration of Abu Dāwūd from the Prince of the
Believers saying, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s), “Even if not but a
single day remains from the world, Allah will send a man from my
Household, who will fill the earth with justice just as it will be full
of injustice.”

Of such traditions is the narration of Abu Dāwūd from Umm Salama, the
wife of the Apostle, saying, I heard the Messenger of Allah (a.s) say,
“The Mahdi is from my Household from the progeny of Fātimah.”

Of such traditions is the narration of al-Baghawi and al-Bukhāri and
Muslim from Abu Huraira, who said, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s),
“How would you be like when the son of Mary comes down and your Imam is
from yourselves?”

Of such traditions is the narration of Abu Dāwūd and al-Tirmidhi from
‘Abdullah Ibn Mas‘ūd (a.s) saying, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s),
Even if not but one day remains from the world, Allah will prolong that
day until He sends a man from me, or from my household; his name will be
like my name and his father’s name like my father’s; he will fill the
earth with equity and justice just as it has will have been filled with
injustice and oppression.”

In another narration, the Messenger of Allah (a.s) has said, “A man
comes from my Household, his name is like my name.” These traditions are
from Abu Dāwūd and al-Tarmidhi.

والنبي (ص) قال: لا نبي بعدي وقال (ص): الحلال ما أحل الله على لساني إلى
يوم القيامة والحرام ما حرم الله على لساني إلى يوم القيامة فلا بد من أن
يكون له عوناً وناصراً ومصدقاً وإذا لم يجد من يكون له عوناً ومصدقاً لم
يكن لوجوده تأثير فثبت أن وجود المهدي (ع) أصل لوجوده وكذلك الدجال اللعين
لا يصح وجوده في آخر الزمان ولا يكون للامة إمام يرجعون إليه ووزير يعولون
عليه لأنه لو كان كذلك لم يزل الاسلام مقهوراً ودعوته باطلة. فصار وجود
الامام أصلاً لوجوده على ما قلناه. وأما الجواب عن إنكارهم بقاءه في
السرداب من غير أحد يقوم بطعامه وشرابه ففيه جوابان: أحدهما بقاء عيسى (ع)
في السماء من غير أحد يقوم بطعامه وشرابه وهو بشر مثل المهدي (ع) فلما جاز
بقاءه في السماء والحالة هذه فكذلك المهدي في السرداب. فان قلت: إن عيسى
(ع) يغذيه رب العالمين من خزانة غيبه، فقلت: لا تفنى خزائنه بانضمام المهدي
(ع) إليه في غذائه. فان قلت: إن عيسى خرج عن طبيعة البشرية قلت: هذه دعوى
باطلة لانه قال تعالى لأشرف الانبياء (ص) "قُلْ إنَّمَا أنَا بَشَرٌ
مِثْلُكُمْ" فان قلت: اكتسب ذلك من العالم العلوي قلت: هذا يحتاج إلى توقيف
ولا سبيل إليه. والثاني بقاء الدجال في الدير على ما تقدم بأشد الوثاق
مجموعة يداه إلى عنقه مابين ركبتيه إلى كعبيه بالحديد وفي رواية في بئر
موثوق وإذا كان بقاء الدجال ممكنا على الوجه المذكور من غير أحد يقوم به
فما المانع من بقاء المهدي (ع) مكرما من غير الوثاق إذ الكل في مقدور الله
تعالى فثبت أنه غير ممتنع شرعا ولا عادة. ثم ذكر بعد هذه الابحاث خبر سطيح
وأنا أذكر منه موضع الحاجة إليه ومقتضاه يذكر لذي جدن الملك وقايع وحوادث
تجري وزلازل من فتن ثم إنه يذكر خروج المهدي (ع) وأنه يملأ الأرض عدلاً
ويطيب الدنيا وأهلها في أيام دولته (ع) وروي عن الحافظ محمد بن النجار أنه
قال: هذا حديث من طوالات المشاهير كذا ذكره الحفاظ في كتبهم ولم يخرج في
الصحيح.

39- كشف الغمة: قال محمد بن طلحة: وأما ما ورد عن النبي (ص) في المهدي من
الاحاديث الصحيحة. فمنها ما نقله الامامان أبو داود والترمذي رضي الله
عنهما كل واحد منهما بسنده في صحيحه يرفعه إلى أبي سعيد الخدري قال: سمعت
رسول الله(ص) يقول: المهدي مني أجلى الجبهة أقنى الانف يملأ الأرض عدلاً
وقسطا كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً ويملك سبع سنين. ومنها (ماجه أخر) أبو داود
بسنده في صحيحه يرفعه إلى علي بن أبي طالب قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لو لم
يبق من الدهر إلا يوم لبعث الله رجلاً من أهل بيتي يملأها عدلاً كما ملئت
جوراً. ومنها ما رواه أيضا أبو داود في صحيحه يرفعه بسنده إلى ام سلمة زوج
النبي (ص) قالت: سمعت رسول الله(ص) يقول: المهدي من عترتي من ولد فاطمة.
ومنها ما رواه القاضي أبو محمد الحسين بن مسعود البغوي في كتابه المسمى
بشرح السنة وأخرجه الامامان البخاري ومسلم رضي الله عنهما كل واحد منهما
بسنده في صحيحه يرفعه إلى أبي هريرة قال: قال رسول الله(ص): كيف أنتم إذا
نـزل ابن مريم وإمامكم منكم. ومنها ما أخرجه أبو داود والترمذي رضي الله
عنهما بسندهما في صحيحيها يرفعه كل واحد منهما بسنده إلى عبد الله بن مسعود
K قال: قال رسول الله(ص): لو لم يبق من الدنيا إلا يوم واحد لطول الله ذلك
اليوم حتى يبعث الله رجلاً مني أو من أهل بيتي يواطئ اسمه اسمي واسم أبيه
اسم أبي يملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت ظلماً وجوراً. وفي رواية اخرى أن
النبي (ص) قال: يلي رجل من أهل بيتي يواطئ اسمه اسمي. هذه الروايات عن أبي
داود والترمذي رضي الله عنهما.

Of such traditions is the narration of Abu Ishāq Ahmad Ibn Muhammad
al-Tha‘labi from Anas Ibn Mālik, saying, Said the Messenger of Allah
(a.s), “We, the Children of ‘Abd al-Mutallib are the lieges of the
Paradise, I, Hamzah, Ja‘far, ‘Ali, Hasan, Husain, and the Mahdi.” The
author says, al-Seyed Ibn Tāwūs has narrated in the book *al-Tarā’if*
the same narrations on the authority of the *Manāqib* of Ibn
al-Maghāzili mentioned in the ninth chapter.

Ibn Talha says, If it should be said, one of these attributes do not
correspond to the Imam of the Age, as his father’s name is not the same
as the Prophet’s father’s name. Then he answers this after laying out
two premises: One, it is prevalent in the Arabic language to use the
word father with respect to great grandfather, as in the verse, The path
of your father Abraham, and the verse, I followed the religion of my
fathers Abraham…. In the tradition of the Me‘rāj, Gabriel says, “This is
your father Abraham.” Second, al-ism or name many a time is used to
refer to patronym. For instance, al-Bukhāri and Muslim have narrated
that the Messenger of Allah, bliss be for him and his kin, named ‘Ali
Abu Turāb and that he was not fond of another name more than Abu Turāb,
using ism to refer to kunya or patronym. The poet al-Mutanabbi says,

*It is the grandeur of your position to be ‘named’ Mu’naba*

*Whoever ‘gives you a patronym,’, he has given you a name amongst the
Arabs*

Then he says, Since the Hujja is from the offspring of Abu ‘Abdillah
al-Husain (a.s), the Prophet referred to the patronym as ism or name,
alluding succinctly to the fact that he will be from the progeny of
Husain (a.s).

‘Allamah Majlisi says, These narrations narrated by this author here
from al-Bukhāri and Muslim Firdaws al-Dailami correspond to the
manuscripts of these books which are in our possession. There is also in
my possession an old manuscript of Sharh al-Sunnah of al-Husain Ibn
Mas‘ūd al-Baghawi, from which I will narrate the traditions about the
Mahdi (a.s):

On the authority of Abu al-Tufail from the Prince of the Believers ‘Ali
(a.s) that the Messenger of Allah (a.s) said, “Even if not more than a
day remains from the age of the world, Allah will send a man from my Ahl
al-Bait, who will fill the earth with justice just as it will be replete
with corruption.”

On the authority of Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri: The Messenger of Allah (a.s)
mentioned the trials befalling this Ummah so much so that a man will not
find a refute to seek protection from the tyranny and then Allah will
send a man from Household, who will fill the earth with equity and
justice, as it shall be beset by injustice and oppression. The dwellers
of the heavens and the earth will be happy from him. The heaven will not
leave any of its blessings but descend it generously, the earth will not
leave any of its plants but to bring it forth, so much so that the
living ones will wish the dead. He will live in that for seven or eight
or nine years.

ومنها ما نقله الامام أبو إسحاق أحمد بن محمد الثعلبي K في تفسيره يرفعه
بسنده إلى أنس بن مالك قال: قال رسول الله(ص): نحن ولد عبد المطلب سادة
الجنة أنا وحمزة وجعفر وعلي والحسن والحسين والمهدي. أقول: روى السيد ابن
طاووس في كتاب الطرايف من مناقب ابن المغازلي نحوا مما مر في الباب التاسع
إلى قوله: ومنا والذي نفسي بيده مهدي هذه الأمة روى صاحب كشف الغمة عن محمد
بن طلحة الحديث الذي أورده أولا في الباب الثامن عن أبي داود والترمذي
والحديث الاول من الباب الثاني عن أبي داود في صحيحه والحديث الاول من
الباب السابع عن صحيحي البخاري ومسلم وشرح السنة للحسين بن مسعود البغوي
والحديث الثاني من الباب الاول عن أبي داود في صحيحه والحديث الثالث من
الباب الاول عن أبي داود والترمذي مع زيادة " واسم أبيه اسم أبي " وبدونها
وحديث الباب الثالث عن تفسير الثعلبي ثم قال ابن طلحة: فان قيل بعض هذه
الصفات لا تنطبق على الخلف الصالح فان اسم أبيه لا يوافق اسم والد النبي
(ص) ثم أجاب بعد تمهيد مقدمتين: الاول أنه شائع في لسان العرب إطلاق لفظ
الاب على الجد الاعلى كقوله تعالى " مِلَّةَ أَبِيكُمْ إِبْرَاهِيمَ" وقوله
حكاية عن يوسف: "وَاتَّبَعْتُ مِلَّةَ آبَائِي إبْرَاهِيمَ" وفي حديث
الاسراء أن جبرئيل قال: هذا أبوك إبراهيم والثاني أن لفظة الاسم تطلق على
الكنية وعلى الصفة كما روى البخاري ومسلم أن رسول الله(ص) سمى علياً أبا
تراب ولم يكن اسم أحب إليه منه فأطلق لفظ الاسم على الكنية ومثل ذلك قول
المتنبي:  
  

ومن كناك فقد سماك للعرب

أجل قدرك أن تسمى مؤنبة

 

ثم قال ولما كان الحجة من ولد ابي عبد الله الحسين فأطلق النبي على الكنية
لفظ الاسم إشارة إلى أنه من ولد الحسين (ع) بطريق جامع موجز انتهى. أقول:
ذكر بعض المعاصرين فيه وجها آخر وهو أن كنية الحسن العسكري أبو محمد وعبد
الله أبو النبي (ص) أبو محمد فتتوافق الكنيتان والكنية داخلة تحت الاسم
والاظهر ما مر من كون "أبي" مصحف "ابني." أقول: ما رواه عن الصحيحين وفردوس
الديلمي مطابق لما عندنا من نسخها وعندي من شرح السنة للحسين بن مسعود
البغوي نسخة قديمة أنقل عنه ما وجدته فيه من روايات المهدي (ع) باسناده
قال: أخبرنا أبو الفضل زياد بن محمد بن زياد الحنفي أخبرنا الحسين بشر بن
محمد المزني أخبرنا أبو بكر أحمد بن محمد بن السري التميمي الحافظ بالكوفة
أخبرنا الحسن بن علي بن جعفر الصيرفي حدثنا أبو نعيم الفضل ابن دكين، عن
القاسم بن أبي بردة، عن أبي الطفيل، عن علي، عن النبي (ص) قال: لو لم يبق
من الدنيا إلا يوم لبعث الله رجلا من أهل بيتي يملأها عدلا كما ملئت جورا.
وأنبأنا معمر، عن أبي هارون العبدي، عن معاوية بن قرة، عن أبي الصديق
الناجي، عن أبي سعيد الخدري قال: ذكر رسول الله(ص) بلاء يصيب هذه الأمة حتى
لا يجد الرجل ملجأ يلجأ إليه من الظلم فيبعث الله رجلا من عترتي أهل بيتي
فيملأ الأرض قسطاً وعدلاً كما ملئت جوراً وظلماً يرضى عنه ساكن السماء
وساكن الارض لا يدع السمأ من قطرها شيئا إلا صبه مدراراً ولا يدع الارض من
نباتها شيئا إلا أخرجته حتى يتمنى الاحياء الاموات تعيش في ذلك سبع سنين أو
ثمان سنين أو تسع سنين.

On the authority of Umm Salama, saying, I heard the Messenger of Allah
(a.s) say, “The Mahdi is from my Household from the progeny of Fātimah.
He will narrate, and act amidst the people according to, the conduct of
their Prophet. He will remain seven years and then he will die and
Muslims will pray over him.” On the authority of Abu Sa‘īd al-Khidri,
saying, Said the Messenger of Allah (a.s) with respect to the event of
the Mahdi, “Then a man will come and say, ‘O’ Mahdi, give me, give me.’
He will throw to him all that man can carry.” Abu Sa‘īd says, Said the
Messenger of Allah (a.s),”A Caliph will come in the End Times, who will
distribute unaccountable wealth.” ‘Allama Majlisi says, Ibn al-Athīr has
narrated on the authority of a number of a number of companions ten
traditions about the Mahdi (a.s), his name, his personality, and that
Jesus (a.s) will pray behind him, which we left out fearing prolixity.
For a man of reason, what we have chronicled is sufficient to prove the
point.

40- Al-Tarā’if: Al-Tha‘labi has mentioned in the Interpretation of Hā
Mim *‘*Ayn Sīn Qāf that Sīn refers to sanā’ or the lofty of position of
the Mahdi (a.s) and Qāf refers to the quwa or power of Jesus when he
comes down and kills the Christians and destroys Churches. He also
narrates that the Prophet (a.s) said in reference to the story of the
People of the Cave that the Mahdi (a.s) will greet them and Allah, the
Exalted, will bring them back to life for him and then they will go back
to their resting places and will not rise until the Day of Judgment.

41- Tarā’if: Ibn ‘Abbās narrates from the Prophet (a.s), “Al-Mahdi is
the peacock of the people of the Paradise.”

42- Kifāya al-Athar: Muhammad Ibn al-Hanafiyya narrates on the authority
of the Prince of the Believers (a.s) from the Prophet (a.s), “O’ ‘Ali,
you belong to me and I belong to you. You are my brother and my support.
When I die, loathing hidden in the breasts of the people will manifest
at you. There will be a dumb dark mischief after me in which every
secret and close relation will be dropped. That will happen when the
Shī‘a will lose the Fifth from the sons of the Seventh. The dwellers of
the heavens and the earth will grieve his departure. How abundant will
be the believing men and women who will be sorry, grieved, and confused
for missing him.” Then he lowered his head in contemplation for a moment
and then raised his head and said, “My father and mother be the ransom
of my namesake, my look-alike, and the look-alike of Musā Ibn ‘Imrān.
There are garments of light over him, which shine with glitters of
sanctity. As if I see them in their utmost despair when they are called
with a cry that is heard from faraway as it is heard from the near. This
will be a call of benevolence for the believers and a cry of
chastisement for the hypocrites.” I asked, “What is that call?” He said,
“Three calls in Rajab. The first will be, Behold, the curse of God be on
the oppressors. The Second will be, The Near Event draws nigh. The Third
will be that they will see an obvious body with the sun, calling,
‘Behold, God has sent’ so-and-so, recounting his lineage until ‘Ali,
peace be with him. This will entail the destruction of the oppressors.
Then relief will come and Allah will heal the breasts of the believers
and He will take away the rage of their hearts.” I asked, “O’ Messenger
of Allah, how many Imams are there going to be after me?” He said, “Nine
after Husain. Their ninth is their Qā'im.”

ويروى هذا من غير وجه عن أبي سعيد الخدري وأبو الصديق الناجي اسمه بكر بن
عمر. وروى عن سعيد بن المسيب، عن ام سلمة قالت: سمعت رسول الله(ص) يقول:
المهدي من عترتي من ولد فاطمة ويروى: ويعمل في الناس بسنة نبيهم فيلبث سبع
سنين ثم يتوفى ويصلي عليه المسلمون. وروى عن أبي نضرة، عن أبي سعيد الخدري
قال: قال رسول الله(ص) في قصة المهدي قال: فيجئ الرجل فيقول: يا مهدي أعطني
أعطني فيحثي له في ثوبه ما استطاع أن يحمله. أخبرنا أبو الفضل زياد بن محمد
الحنفي، أخبرنا أبو معاذ عبد الرحمان المزني أخبرنا أبو بكر أحمد بن محمد
بن إسماعيل المقري الآدمي ببغداد، حدثنا محمد بن إسماعيل الحسائي، حدثنا
أبو معاوية، عن داود بن أبي هند، عن أبي نضرة، عن أبي سعيد قال: قال رسول
الله(ص): يخرج في آخر الزمان خليفة يعطي المال بغير عدد هذا حديث صحيح
أخرجه مسلم، عن زهير بن حرب، عن عبد الصمد بن عبد الوارث عن أبيه، عن داود
انتهى. أقول: روى ابن الاثير في جامع الاصول ناقلا عن عدة من صحاحهم عن أبي
هريرة وجابر وابن مسعود وعلي (ع) وام سلمة رضي الله عنها وأبي سعيد وأبي
إسحاق عشر روايات في خروج المهدي (ع) واسمه ووصفه وأن عيسى (ع) يصلي خلفه
تركناها مخافة الاطناب وفيما أوردناه كفاية لاولي الالباب.

40- الطرائف: ذكر الثعلبي في تفسير (حمعسق) باسناده قال: السين سناء المهدي
(ع) والقاف قوة عيسى (ع) حين ينـزل فيقتل النصارى ويخرب البيع وعنه في قصة
أصحاب الكهف عن النبي (ص) أن المهدي (ع) يسلم عليهم ويحييهم الله(عزوجل) له
ثم يرجعون إلى رقدتهم فلا يقومون إلى يوم القيامة.

41- الطرائف: ابن شيرويه في الفردوس باسناده إلى ابن عباس عن النبي (ص):
المهدي طاووس أهل الجنة.

42- كفاية الأثر: بالاسناد المتقدم في باب النصوص على الاثني عشر، عن محمد
بن الحنفية، عن أمير المؤمنين (ع) عن النبي (ص) أنه قال: يا علي أنت مني
وأنا منك وأنت أخي ووزيري فإذا مت ظهرت لك ضغاين في صدور قوم وستكون بعدي
فتنة صماء صيلم يسقط فيها كل وليجة وبطانة وذلك عند فقدان الشيعة الخامس من
ولد السابع من ولدك تحزن لفقده أهل الارض والسماء فكم مؤمن ومؤمنة متأسف
متلهف حيران عند فقده ثم أطرق مليا ثم رفع رأسه وقال: بأبي وامي سميي
وشبيهي وشبيه موسى بن عمران عليه جيوب النور أو قال جلابيب النور تتوقد من
شعاع القدس كأني بهم آيس ما كانوا نودوا بنداء يسمع من البعد كما يسمع من
القرب يكون رحمة على المؤمنين وعذابا على المنافقين قلت: وما ذلك النداء؟
قال: ثلاثة أصوات في رجب الاول ألا لعنة الله على الظالمين الثاني أزفة
الآزفة الثالث يرون بدنا بارزا مع قرن الشمس ينادي: ألا إن الله قد بعث
فلان بن فلان حتى ينسبه إلى علي (ع) فيه هلاك الظالمين فعند ذلك يأتي الفرج
ويشفي الله صدورهم ويذهب غيظ قلوبهم قلت: يارسول الله فكم يكون بعدي من
الائمة؟ قال: بعد الحسين تسعة والتاسع قائمهم.
