Introduction: Comparing Notions of Anxiety
==========================================

“I often feel that I must have this life -*Angs* t - it is essential to
me - and that I would not exist without it.”  Edvard Munch

Both fear and anxiety are pivotal when it comes to literature, art and
philosophy.  Nevertheless, the two are often confused, at least partly
because they are in many cases intertwined. Both terms can be
distinguished easily enough. Fear is in reference to a certain object or
situation-one is afraid of “something.” Anxiety, on the other hand, is a
state of mind, or mood; its object and/or source is never clear and
remains a source of torment for the person who experiences this emotion.

Immanuel Kant and Martin Heidegger provide us with the tools for
distinguishing fear and anxiety. Kant in*The Critique of Judgment*
discusses anxiety in relation to the sublime. Distinguishing between the
mathematically and the dynamically sublime, the former gives birth to
anxiety through its size, i.e. by enforcing a feeling in man of being
diminished; the latter, which is evident in nature, resonates anxiety
when the subject feels helpless in the face what is overwhelming - as
long as a certain distance or safety is in play. In such cases, anxiety
produces a sense of and the sublime.

For Heidegger, anxiety lies at the core of the authentic Dasein. For
this reason, anxiety performs a crucial role in*Being and Time* .
Through anxiety the Self is revealed, and since the Self is
transcendental, it is irreducible to the object-world. In moments of
anxiety, we confront ourselves; we come to terms with what defines us;
the world is the background to understanding the ontological “who.” In
this situation, anxiety allows the self to emerge as unique to the
individual; it is no longer collective and does not follow “the they.”
In other words, anxiety allows the Self to be authentic.

Fear is almost always noticeable. In literary texts, the tone and the
language used by the author can communicate fear directly. Both
description and dialogue can indicate that fear is felt on a simple
emotional level. Anxiety, however, is not as easy to detect. In some
cases, the word “anxiety” appears, thus asserting its presence; however,
in other instances, one needs to read between the lines in order to
understand the complexity of the character in question, along with the
situation at hand. This allows the reader to detect the air of anxiety,
which is commonly present throughout the text. Anxiety can appear in
many forms; it can be the result of frustrations, mental complexities,
stress, insanity and/or depression; nevertheless, in every case, this
pivotal mode of existence needs to be deeply examined and contemplated
if the reader is to fully grasp the meaning of the text.  In the case of
painting, anxiety can be expressed through a variety of techniques. Such
techniques would include strong, rough, or short brushstrokes,
variations in composition, the artist’s choice of color, and the
positioning of figures in space. These techniques are sometimes possible
to relate to autobiographical factors that give them special meaning.

Norwegian artist, Edvard Munch, was “painfully aware of not belonging in
this world” (Schwabsky, 144). He is often labeled the father of
Expressionism, an art movement that marks a high-point of anxiety in the

history of art. Labeled “degenerate” by the Nazi regime and often
scrutinized by critics during his own lifetime, Munch nevertheless
revolutionized art in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries.   When looking at the historical timeline of art, we cannot
ignore that Munch’s leap of faith, in terms of style, marks a pivotal
moment; without him, Expressionism, which “designates a dominantly
subjective art,” would not developed when it did (Longman, 13). From the
standpoint of art’s future, we might say that his paintings opened up
(a) “world” (Heidegger, 41). The Norwegian genius was in fact the person
who opened up this (new) world of art, making it visible and accessible.
As a matter of fact, we might go as far as to say that he*became*
“Munch”*because* he stepped beyond an age dedicated to realism, which
dominated the art scene throughout much of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries. His work thus dramatizes an undeniable shift in style.

In*The Private Journals of Edvard Munch,* the artist says that his art
“is a self-confession” but also expresses the view that it might “help
others understand their search for sanity” (Holland, 20). Munch
discovered himself in his art. Realism clearly could not express the
feelings, moments, and issues that he wanted to present on his
roughly-treated canvases, thus giving birth to the version of
expressionism that came rather naturally to him. Furthermore, when
looking at his works, we are faced with a continuously pulsating feeling
of anxiety, which, to use Heidegger’s terminology, brushes away the veil
of*Das Mann* , forcing spectators to view themselves in their utter
nakedness - in terms of an authentic self.

Kant’s understanding of beauty would have been dominant in Munch’s
Norway. His conciliatory view of the common world, or*sensus communis* ,
would have provided artists with public validation for their work.
During this period, however, painting needed Munch to break out of a
representational approach to art and allow for more authentic human
expression. According to Munch, “what one paints must be done with will
and feeling,” just as he strived to “paint people who love and suffer”
(Holland, 29; TIME, 1).  In other words, Munch was needed to help art
free itself from the bonds of realism and naturalism. My thesis contains
four major chapters that will follow through on the development of
Munch’s expressionism and the philosophical implications of his new
approach to painting.

For Heidegger, anxiety, referred to as*Angst* , is associated with a
feeling of ‘uncanniness’, or not-being-at-home. It is a state of mind
that lies within*Dasein* , which is basically the philosopher’s term for
human being.*Anxiety* is usually hidden or ‘asleep’ and in due time it
awakens and shakes*Dasein* to the core.*Angst* has two components: one
is either anxious in the face of something or about something, and both
refer to being-in-the-world.*Dasein* has anxiety about its involvements
within the world and in the face of ‘thrownness’, or*Geworfenheit* :
“The mood of*Angst* puts us in direct contact with nothingness, which
goes hand in hand with being, for being is finite and only becomes
accessible against the empty background of the ‘not’” (Harman, 70).
Death also plays a role with respect to*Angst* for the authentic

*Dasein* . He or she understands that death is a possibility that at
some point will be actualized and should thus be anticipated.

But why is anxiety so troubling? According to Heidegger,*Angst*
drives*Dasein* out of its immersion in the world of things and forces it
to confront itself  - and thus, the latter experience cannot be
explained by ‘the they’, or*Das Man* , the anonymous ‘one’ who
constitutes most of those surrounding*Dasein* . Heidegger argues
that*Angst* frees*Dasein* from the inauthenticity of*Das Man* .
Additionally, “Dasein is thrown into death as a constant possibility of
its being, as revealed in Angst. It is not death itself that interests
Heidegger, but being-*towards* -death, since this attitude is with us at
all times even when it is concealed” (Harman, 71).

For Kant, in contrast, anxiety is closely linked to his notion of the
sublime, which cannot really be represented in aesthetics but forms the
basis for the transition between aesthetics and morality. Kant argues
that a lack of harmony is also closely linked to the experience of the
sublime. The sublime is very subjective - one may refer to it as an
evanescent experience - but it does reveals the mental situation of the
person who experiences it: “true sublimity must be sought only in the
mind of the [subject] judging, not in the natural Object, the judgment
upon which occasions this state” (Kant, 117). In a sense, one may say it
individuates, as opposed to the beautiful, which entails a*sensus*
*communis* and brings together a community based upon agreement. The
voice of nature is expressed through the sublime and imposes a sense of
respect upon us. Kant also distinguishes between the types of the
sublime, namely the mathematically sublime (as related to the idea of
absolute greatness) and the dynamically sublime (as related to the idea
of might). These notions will be related to my discussion of the role of
the sublime in Munch’s paintings.

Hence, Chapter One:*Kant and Munch: the Sublime in Nature* , will zoom
in on the dynamically sublime in relation to Munch with a special focus
on Munch’s “nature paintings.” These paintings epitomize Kant’s
description of man as feeling overwhelmed with the grandiosity, power,
strength and danger of nature. This feeling combines both pain and
pleasure. Munch’s “nature” paintings, namely*The Storm* (1908),*Forest*
(1903),*Young Girl by the Shore* (1896), The*Sun* (1912),*Towards the
Forest* I (1897), The*Wave* (1921) and*Starry Night* (1923), all express
Kant’s dynamically sublime and extend this experience to any possible
audience of spectators.

Chapter Two:*Heidegger and Munch: Anxious Dasein* , will discuss
Heidegger’s definition of anxiety in greater detail in addition and take
up the importance of anxiety with respect to authentic*Dasein* .
Following an elaborate explanation, Heidegger’s understanding will be
applied to Munch’s paintings in an attempt to underscore the role of
anxiety in his work. In an article titled “Existential Anxiety: Angst,”
James Park discusses how “anxiety usually hides behind ordinary fears
and worries,” and assumes an “existential” form when it produces images
that no not necessarily correspond to real threats:

Our existential anxiety can also create phantom fears: Are we pursued in
the dark by impossible monsters? Or do we have dreams of horror, danger,

menace, threat? Even in our waking hours, we might sometimes dream up
unlikely dangers to explain our anxiety to ourselves. (5)

Heidegger discusses the importance of anxiety in his works, beginning
with*Being and Time.* Particularly when*Dasein* dwells in the
inauthentic mode, anxiety lies dormant, but it nevertheless remains in
force. Anxiety is one of the most vital moods and lies at the core
of*Dasein’s* innermost being. The tragic hero, as a special example of
authentic*Dasein* , is aware of anxiety, experiences it, and thus feels
caught up in a world where he or she feels thrown into a world of
groundless existence. The paintings to be discussed in this chapter
are*Anxiety* (1894),*Evening* *on* *Karl* *Johan* (1892),*Puberty*
(1895),*Summer Night’s Dream (The* *Voice)* (1893), and*The* *Scream*
(1893).

Chapter Three:*Munch - Combining Heidegger and Kant,* will once again
underscore the notion that anxiety is an essential feature of*Dasein -*
that it is, specifically, the key to authentic*Dasein* . Here Kant’s
idea of pain, which indicates the experience of the sublime and also
points to the realm of the supersensible, will be combined with
Heidegger’s understanding of*being-towards-death* as leading to anxiety.
These paintings will be used to develop this comparison:*Vampire*
(1893),*Ashes* (1894),*Death in the Sickroom* (1895),*Woman in Three
Stages (Sphinx)* (1894),*Self-Portrait: Between the Clock and Bed*
(1940-1942),*White Night* (1901), and*The Dance of Life* (1899-1900).

Numerous texts have been written on Kant, Heidegger, and Munch, but none
before has offered a view of art that combines the work of all three
figures.  With respect to Munch, much literature discusses his mental
illnesses along with his views on women and sexuality in relation to his
works. Nevertheless, several aspects of the artist’s work and life have
not been addressed.  Four basic questions remain unanswered: (1) How
does Munch*become* the “Munch” known to the present-day art lovers? (2)
How does Munch enter*and* exist in the frame of art itself? (3) How does
the artist open up a “new” world? (4) Finally, in addition to the
psychological aspect of his work, which already infuses the spectator’s
mind with anxiety, how and why is it that spectators shudder and “take
off their hats in awe, the way they do in church” when confronting
Munch’s work (Strickland and Boswell, 123)? In relation to the final
question, Munch’s manipulation of space, color, composition, and texture
will be thoroughly analyzed.


