Chapter 1: Kant and Munch: the Sublime in Nature
================================================

“One doesn’t paint

after nature  -

one takes from it.”*(* Munch, 60)

In his*Private Journals* , Munch once asked, “How should one paint true
weeping after nature?” (Holland, 2) This was a question that truly
puzzled him throughout his career.  The artist strived in his own way to
“copy nature” (Munch, 89), but then added, “we certainly could not catch
nature anyway - better to give the feeling - in oneself” (Munch, 89).
Inspired by Paul Gauguin’s reaction against Realism and James Abbott
McNeil Whistler, who once claimed that “art is not an imitation of
nature,” Munch believed that nature should be transformed according to
how the artist experiences it. Of Gauguin’s work, the poet Stephane
Mallarmé once wrote, “[. . ] symbolism: to evoke an object bit by bit in
order to show a mood” (Munson, 62). Art historians agree that Gauguin
strived to develop “an aesthetic based on simplification of forms”
(Munson, 62), a notion that becomes evident in Munch’s paintings.

Munch’s art can also be seen in relation to Romanticism, which promoted
imagination, emotion and genius, giving birth to an expressive theory of
art during the late eighteenth century. “According to this theory, art
was seen as the means of portraying the unique, individual feelings and
emotions of the artist” (Bourne, 1). The Romantics were evidently
against all forms of mimesis: “There is no copying, there is no
adaptation, there is no learning of the rules, [. . ] there is no
structure which you must understand and adapt yourself to before you can
proceed (Berlin, 119). It was William Wordsworth who defined poetry as
“the spontaneous overflow of powerful feelings.” (Abrams, 21).

As an important precursor to Romanticism, Kant believed that the laws of
nature are grounded in human reason (Routledge, 1). The exaltation of
nature led Kant to the notion of the sublime. In the*Critique of
Judgment* , Kant wrote that “for the most part nature excites the Ideas
of the sublime in its chaos or in its wildest and most irregular
disorder and desolation, provided size and might are perceived” (104).
He also added that “we must seek (a ground) for the Sublime merely in
ourselves and in our attitude of thought which introduces sublimity into
the representation of nature” (104). The sublime is not to be found in
nature, as such, but in the subjective apprehension of nature as grasped
by the human mind. Surely Munch’s view of the sublime, as reflected in
his paintings, can be related to the increasingly subjective attitude
towards life and experience that entered mainstream European culture as
a consequence of Romanticism.

Romanticism of a strongly Symbolist cast is clearly evident, for
instance, in Munch’s*The Wave* (1921), a painting that has gone largely
unmentioned in the available criticism. This painting is concerned with
violent, strong waves and is dominated by indigo and marine blue hues -
“colors Munch associated with worlds outside the everyday . the
otherworlds of death and of art” (Steinberg, 13). The waves are formed
of occasional splashes of turquoise, brown and white apparently to
attack the shore, or better yet, devour it.  Minus the brown intervals,
the waves reflect the sky, which

would appear calm, if viewed as isolated from the rest of the work. The
paint daubs are smoother than the artist’s rough handling, and the
results, which Munch referred to as*hestekur,* or “kill or cure”
treatment, sum up his manner of treating canvases, which sometimes
caused them to tear (Aslaksby, 1)

The background in*The Wave* presents a clear yet deformed landscape,
dominated by shades of green on the right side, and gradually morphing
into neutral and blue hues.  Five tall trees bend in accordance with the
blowing wind, supporting the wave’s force and “pushing away” the
remaining parts of the emerald scenery, forcing the elements to blend
together, forming amorphous shapes. Behind the trees, deep indigo
mountains produce a haunting effect and assert their presence in a
minimalist manner. A curved brown line, created by mixing red ochre and
red lake (Singer, et al, 283), almost splits the painting into two
parts, and yet its function is not strongly evident. What starts as a
coastline ends in a boardwalk, where, before the canvas ends, a distant,
lonesome figure appears, suggesting a person “dwarfed” by the immensity
and force of nature in a way that recalls Kant’s definition of the
dynamical sublime.

Nevertheless, what is it about*The Wave* that compels the spectator to
perceive the painting in terms of the sublime? Munch closely studied and
applied the intuitive color systems of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe as
well as more mystical and astral theories of the occultists to his color
compositions (Steinberg, 11-12). He certainly believed that “blues and
violets bring an anxious, tender, longing mood, because they always
convey darkness and coolness; the deepest purple has an unsettling
effect” (Steinberg, 13).  Undeniably, the artist’s choice of colors does
play a major role in his use of the uncanny and the sublime. Naturally,
the painter’s violent brush strokes that appear in the foreground create
the wave’s force, resonate with strength, and also help depict the
dynamically sublime. Furthermore, Munch’s placement of the lone figure
right before the canvas ends, as well as his decision to make him almost
unnoticeable at first glance, emphasizes how small the human being
really is when faced with the overpowering grandeur of nature, thus
fulfilling the requirements of the dynamically sublime, which resonates
anxiety when it evokes a feeling of helpless in the face of nature.

*Towards the Forest I* (1897), a colored woodcut, fits more into the
artist’s “common” style, including a nude, female figure, “at once
vulnerable and seductive” (Berman), a fully dressed male one, as well as
the discernable and enveloping red hair -  all common motifs evident in
his*Frieze of Life* series. At first glance, the female nude, turned
away from the spectator, stands out against the dark and dim colors of
this work, asserting Munch’s belief in the power of women’s sexuality.
The male figure, who also presents his back to the spectator, is fully
dressed in dark garments. This figure appears in a stark contrast to the
woman, whose red hair erotically slides down her back and onto the man’s
shoulder and head. Munch strongly believed in the power of hair, which
can “envelop and strangle, or provide a sought-for connection” (Harris,
7). His use of this

motif is even more evident in works such as*Vampire* (1893) and*Ashes*
(1894), which will be discussed later.

Both figures are moving forward - right leg first, at a pace, which
seems to be rather slow or poised - while gazing at the unknown. They
are trotting on green grass, broken up by pale yellow strokes, while the
moon’s reflection is hidden behind the large trees and reaches up
towards the sky. The scene becomes darker and creates an uncanny
undertone as they enter deeper into the unknown. The proposed “union”
transforms into one that no longer seems passionate and loving (Zogaris,
23). The dark blue waters appear to fall into the world of Hades, where
the ferryman, possibly the male figure, will escort the dying across the
river to be submerged into the underworld for eternity. The erect trees,
possibly a phallic symbol, amplify the man’s role; he is taking her
into*his* domain . but where, or for what purpose exactly (Slavoj, 3)?
The spectator slowly forgets about the man and the woman and is
overwhelmed by their uncanny surroundings, which arouse a sense of the
sublime, due to the figures in the foreground, who are also spectators
and appear at a safe distance from an engulfing nature, allowing them,
and us, “to feel this soul-stirring delight” (Kant, 49). The uncertainty
of the situation*is* what creates the sublime, because “obscurity is
necessary” (Burke, 13). Last but not least, the visible grains of the
wood, in addition to the evidently rough and textured strokes of the
artist, add to an uncomfortable feeling that vibrates from this woodcut,
especially since the strokes becomes rougher, shorter and faster as the
eye wanders away from the central figures.

Munch’s painting,*The Sun* , was painted in 1912, after his psychotic
episode, which lasted from 1908-1909 (Steinberg and Weiss, 409). This
painting formed the centerpiece for a set of works that were
commissioned after Oslo gained independence in 1905 (Berman):
“Originally, Munch had considered the Nietzschean idea of a mountain of
men, struggling towards the sun’s light, but the idea was disliked by
the selecting authorities” (Smith, 21). Much different from his darker,
more nocturnal works, “nature is shown [in this painting] as a
constructive force with the sun as a life-giving force that energizes
everything around it” (Berman). Here Munch opts for a brighter, more
festive, color scheme but remains true to his iconic “column,” which in
this case was reserved for the reflection of the sun and once again
might be interpreted as a phallic symbol. The powerful rays spring forth
from the canvas in bright, daring shades of yellow and red, producing
diagonal and “aggressive” strokes. This brush technique looks forward to
German Expressionism, especially to Wasilly Kandinsky’s painting,*Der
Blaue Reiter* , and captivates the viewer with its overpowering force
(Smith, 112). The blue waters and sky act as a backdrop, which amplifies
the grandeur of the “magnificent” and “causes the sublime” (Burke, 23).
According to Kant “the sublime is to be found in an object even devoid
of form, so far as it immediately involves, or else by its presence
provokes, a representation of limitlessness” (40).

An earlier painting,*The Storm* (1893), is dominated by dark hues,
specifically browns, yellows, greens, with neutral tones in between.
This painting depicts Åsgårdstrand, which is normally “a haven of peace
in his

work” but here becomes the scene of a natural disaster as witnessed by
Jens Thiis, the director of the Oslo National Gallery and one of Munch’s
personal allies (Smith, 64). Nevertheless, the background (as in many of
Munch’s paintings) contains a degree of realism. Compared to*The Sun* ,
this work, which was executed prior to the artist’s major psychotic
episode, is much darker, mysterious, and painted in abstraction
(Steinberg and Weiss, 409).  The rocks in the bottom-right corner
gradually merge with the surrounding area in a water-like flow; the
patch of grass gradually darkens until it turns black, thus echoing the
houses in the background, with the exception of the central, stable, lit
house.

In this painting, Munch “scratched” out yellow hues from the
surroundings of the house, only to draw the spectator’s attention to the
bright windows, forming the “safe haven,” which the women have left
behind (Bischoff, 38). The painting “conjures a sense of psychic
distress,” largely due to the “anguished gestures” of the protagonist,
dressed in white, and her “followers,” who match the broader
color-scheme (MoMA, 1).  “Undeniably dramatic, the impersonality of the
figures, like a Greek Chorus, has a lot in common with the dramatic
ethos of symbolism and the quest for ‘universality’” (Smith, 64). The
women, even though presented in minimalistic fashion with feathery
brushstrokes and devoid of facial traits, echo the same gesture, which
is present in Munch’s most iconic work,*The Scream* (1893).

In the bottom-left corner of the canvas, we might observe a darkened
patch, possibly a small surface of water, and yet it could also serve a
purpose that also performs a role in works such as*Puberty* (1895). Some
scholars have argued that the later painting suggests links between the
shadow and ancient traditions, but a more strongly psychological
interpretation of this phenomenon has also been proposed:

Munch also wrote of a shadowy presence, perhaps attributable, at least
in his view, to both a physio-and psycho-pathology of the brain. [. .]
shadowy presences appear frequently in Munch’s visual works as well,
perhaps indicating, among other things, the burden of creative thought.
(Cordulack, 49, cited in Kuuva, 68)

Unlike most of Munch’s other shadows, which more commonly appear*behind*
the protagonist, the shadowy presence in*The Storm* appears in the
foreground. For this reason, its existence seems vague and indiscernible
compared to the previously mentioned shadows. It has been proposed in
addition that the shadow symbolizes death (Schneede, 46).

Munch’s placing of the loud, “angry” storm against the safe and sound
house clearly evokes Kant’s dynamical sublime, which involves
boundlessness and terror before the forces of nature: “The ambiguity of
pose and gesture of the huddled (women) [. .] stresses the fragility of
the human compact with nature, and the lack of security in the face of
terrors” (Smith, 64). The women, however, seem to be motionless, with
the exception of the protagonist in white, who appears to be moving
towards the shore. The direction of her movements is easy to assume,
since this specific location, favored by Munch, did have a sea view
(Bischoff, 38). The woman in white is apparently turning away from the
protected boundaries of society, i.e., the

warmly lit house, in order to dive into the unknown.  She thus presents
us with an interesting form of escapism. In*The Storm* , which is
“primarily about the effects of nature on people,” the sublime acts like
a “call,” as opposed to a “repelling” force (Smith, 64).

Munch’s*Starry Night* (1923) contains blue and green hues that might
remind the spectator of Vincent Van Gogh’s painting, which carries the
same name. This would not be a coincidence, since Munch saw Van
Gogh’s*Starry Night* on display in 1889 and created his more uncanny
version four years after the Dutch artist’s death as a tribute to him
and a pessimistic commentary on the world. While Van Gogh’s work is
filled with large, hopeful, fiery stars, Munch’s sky is dominated by
darkness, barely allowing the yellow dabs of paint to shine in a gloomy
atmosphere (Schneede, 55). Representing the coastline at Åsgårdstrand,
south of Oslo, where Munch spent his summers from 1880 onwards, the
artist used his favorite blend of blue-indigo-violet to represent the
melancholy and mysticism of a familiar landscape.

Dominated by an abstract black mound in the foreground, this painting
evokes sadness and a sense of the uncanny. With the exception of a
single fine white line cutting through the “trees,” black is the leading
agent. As the spectator’s eye travels to the middle ground, a faint
black line divides the waters from the sky, marking a vacant horizon. A
few pale yellow patches stand out in the sky, perhaps to represent
nebulae, unless they are simply meant to conjure the realm of the
unknown. A sense of the uncanny brings forth anxiety, while also
introducing the presence of the sublime. Even though there is no obvious
shelter visible in this work, the profound stillness of the scenery
could serve as a safe haven, allowing the sublime to be present - by
establishing and supporting the grandeur of nature - while ensuring
safety when it projects an aura of silence.

*Young Girl by The Shore* (1896) is yet another early painting that
resonates with sublimity. In this work, Munch’s*hestekur* technique is
highly visible, especially in the foreground. The rough “scratches” on
the canvas appear at the bottom of the canvas, eventually diverging into
the unknown right under the protagonist’s white dress. The colors are
dim and faded, which could be due to the artist’s rough handling of his
canvases; nevertheless, the chosen effect could also be intentional.
Stone-like patches appear in the foreground as well, slowly losing even
more shape as the eye dives into the painting. Unlike the previously
discussed works, the foreground, middle ground and background are
clearly divided into indigo-purple, black, and sky blue, once again
indicating Munch’s favored colors. The curved coastline gradually
embraces the waters, which are not separated from the sky. The horizon
is unclear, and the female protagonist seems to be frozen in time and
space, staring into oblivion.

In this painting, the young girl dressed in white, represents the
virgin, innocent and pure. Half of her figure is lit up by the sun,
while the second figure, standing closer to the coastline, is darkened
by a shade, or indirect shadow. The innocent girl, as often depicted in
Munch’s works, stands with her back facing the spectator, at the
farthest place from the unknown and with her hands presumably near her
side. Her pose is suggestive of

contemplation, laced with worry. Is she capable of proceeding into the
unknown?  Will she face the challenge? Possibly she is lost in an
“aesthetical judgment” as she gazes ahead in awe (Kant, 123). For now,
she chooses to settle on the most distant point, the safe haven, her
protected world, which enables the feeling of the sublime to issue forth
uninhibited.

Finally, even a quick look at*Forest* (1903) fills the spectator with an
air of anxiety concerning the powerful forces of nature, since
“sublimity [. . ] does not reside in anything of nature, but only in our
mind” (Kant, 129). The abstract globules of trees and rocks dominating
the foreground serve to raise a question mark and produce strong
anxiety. Starting with the foreground, the branches and rocks seem to be
in a sort of whispering dialogue, creating muted voices while the storm
subsides. In the middle ground, white froth dominates. Could this
represent clouds that have fallen from the sky? What the white globules
are remains a mystery. In the background, the pastel sky seems to come
to a rest along with the sea. But two small sailing boats are visible at
a safe distance from the forest, asserting the feeling of the sublime in
which “the mind feels itself*moved* ” (Kant, 120).


