Chapter Two: Heidegger and Munch: Anxious Dasein
================================================

“Munch is a painter of ghastly masks, shattered by life’s horrors, of
heads which seem gnawed off and wasted away from within.  He is a
painter of skulls which have been burnt and shrunk in the fires of
modern hells.” (Salda, 149)

Throughout his life, Edvard Munch suffered from a deep, powerful
anxiety, which he believed was pivotal to his existence. In his private
journals he wrote: “Still I often feel that I must/ have this life -
angst - it is essential/ to me - and that I would not exist/ without
it - ” (18). The exact reasons behind his constant feeling of angst
cannot be truly defined, and according to most scholars, the blame is to
be placed on his troubled childhood. The latter explanation, however, is
contradicted when one considers with Heidegger that “the face of which
one has anxiety is characterized by the fact that what threatens
is*nowhere* . Anxiety ‘does not know’ what that in the face of which it
is anxious.” Although anxiety does not have an object, we cannot infer
on this basis that is it a mere vapor. In*Being and Time* , Heidegger
goes on to say that anxiety in*not* being there “is so close that it is
oppressive and stifles one’s breath, and yet it is nowhere” (231).

One cannot claim to have found the reason behind the artist’s anxiety
when such a claim would go against the definition of the feeling itself.
Heidegger believes that “anxiety [. . ] is the basic state-of-mind of
the finite Dasein” (Cassirer, 162). Anxiety defines authentic Dasein’s
being-in-the-world as well as its segregation from inauthentic*Das Man*
, who fall under “the kind of Being of everydayness” (Heidegger, 164).

Several elements contribute to expressing the artist’s anxiety. The
titles of Munch’s paintings, such as*Anxiety* (1894) and*The* *Scream*
(1893), speak for themselves.  Furthermore, the dominant colors in his
works - indigo, blues, and reds - also aid him in terms of projecting
his powerful angst. His choice of subject matter, especially in his
earlier paintings that were finished prior to his psychotic episode
ending in 1909 (Steinberg and Weiss, 409), along with his highly
developed*hestekur* technique, further serve as an important tool of
expression. Munch himself , as well as certain figures in his works, is
the epitome of the anxious Dasein. Through his own words as well as his
works and techniques, his overbearing anxiety shines forth, pulling him
away from fallenness and “putting him into direct contact with
nothingness” (Harman, 107).

*Anxiety* (1894), often referred to as “Angst,” evidently shares the
red-and-yellow threatening sky of*The Scream* (1893). The blood-red sky
vibrates with the soul of the uncanny, filling us with an air of anxiety
even before we look at the figures in the foreground. Munch painted
“mask-like numbed faces and eyes wide open with terror, as if driven by
an invisible power and without a will of their own” (Xani, 48); the
cropped, “groundless” figures appear to be at “the mercy of external
forces,” being driven to follow a certain, unknown, and possibly
discarded, path (Crockett, 63), highlighted by the demonic sky. The
figures are staring at the viewers in a rather provoking manner as they
walk towards the “unknown,” possibly

the pace of their death, and this movement emphasizes the temporality of
Dasein, according to Heidegger (Sheehan, 10). They are moving towards
both - the “all-knowing” and the “un-knowing” - faces of death (Kroug,
400), filling them with all-powerful anxiety.

Other than the strong coloring used by Munch for his sky, the yellow
tones used for the faces of his figures is also salient and clearly
symbolizes a loss of vitality and sense of corruption (Harris, 4). As
the eye travels from the foreground to the background, the faces
gradually start losing their features as they flow backwards into the
horizon.  Staying partly hidden, however, the figures stand out, being
concealed, in other words, in not “showing it all.” The now-anxious
spectator is forced to think, knowing that only a part of the whole is
being presented, and this once again raises the level of anxiety. One
could also wonder: Who are these figures? Are they each an authentic
Dasein, or - since they seem to be following each other rather blindly -
are they in fact Das Man? Is the artist trying to punish the masses,
which possibly rejected him by casting a “spell of anxiety” upon them?
The latter interpretation appears to be true, mainly due to the gradual
deletion of facial features from many of his street figures, making them
anonymous - a simple “crowd” -  thus Das Man.

In 1893 Munch painted his most iconic work to date,*The Scream* ,
sometimes referred to as*The Cry* . “Obsessed by the tragedy of
existence” (Karpinski, 126), the artist viewed life itself as fearful,
haunted by painful memories and ailments rooted in his past.  Most of
his works are a clear depiction of his inner, anxious Being, allowing us
to label him as “authentic,” according to Heidegger’s definition of the
term. In his private journals he clearly described this overbearing and
anxiety-filled experience. He “felt a great scream,” and “the lines of
nature - the lines and colors vibrated with motion” (Munch, 64), explain
the vibrating and undulating lines used in his work.

The epitome of existential agitation, the artist strived to depict the
anxious and lonely human being, or Dasein, confronted with suppressed
existential dread (Xani, 48) in nature, a nature that does not console,
but rather screams (Bischoff, 53). Munch was known for painting what he
remembered and not what he directly perceived.  For this reason,*The
Scream* is a perfect example of the artist’s recollection and
heightening of specific memories. Facing the spectator, the somewhat
nebulous figure once again provokingly draws attention to itself as it
seems to move towards death. Better yet, it could be moving towards the
death and anxiety of all mankind (Schneede, 50). Is this authentic
Dasein, carrying the burden of anxiety due to the insensitivity of its
inauthentic companions? In view of the latter possibility, “Munch shared
the belief that illusions are shattered and all faith destroyed through
contact with reality” (Lund, 64).

Munch’s pessimism in this regard resonates with Heidegger’s belief that
authentic Dasein, once in contact with anxiety, suffers at least to some
degree. Munch painted the head in a skull-like manner, suggesting that
he was trying to free it from its case but also to produce the
impression that he sought to keep it intact. The central figure was
given a prominent spatial position to convey a powerful message, that of
a break with reality (Eggum,

4). His “explosive statement of psychological excitement” (Longman, 13)
is rooted in his ontological anxiety as well as in his fear of non-being
(Lacoque and Loeb, 99). In addition, the central figure seems to have
made his acquaintance with the uncanny, which in itself*is* bound up
with anxiety (Bernstein, 111). The absence of nose and ears further
supports the idea that the scream is not heard, at least by no one else,
because anxiety is too taut for it to find an outlet in vocalization
(Zizek, 46-48). Its “fetal features” (Zizek, 52) could suggest that the
figure is once more being reborn, after having left an inauthentic life
behind. According to Heidegger, “to undergo an experience . means that
this something befalls us, strikes us, overwhelms us, and transforms us
. the experience is not of our own making . we endure it, suffer it,
receive it as it strikes us, and submit to it” (Kenny, 100).

It is no secret that Edvard Munch took an interest in the esoteric world
and possibly saw auras, which are “fine, ethereal radiation or
emanations surrounding each and every human being” (Panchadasi, 4).
In*The Scream* , a mild aura seems to combine both a sickly lemon
yellow, indicating intellectual power, and a slate, murky green,
indicating deceit and malice (Panchadasi, 14). The artist’s free and
large brushstrokes, which clearly resonate strength and movement, have a
strong underlying emotional tone. The artist in this way captures a
moment in which he cracks under the psychic forces that are pressing
down on him - or the figure (McCarthy, 11). Munch represents a century’s
anguish, as well as his own, but was well aware that his contemporaries
would link his blood-red sky to the explosion of Karakatoa, the
Indonesian volcanic island, which turned the skies, especially at
sunset, into a bloodshot hue (Olsen et al, 133). Nevertheless, Munch
managed to let his work “speak,” to use Heidegger’s terminology, thus
transporting the spectator and “revealing the distant and deeper origin
of being” (Long, 100). In*The Origin of the Work of Art* , Heidegger
explains that “in the work is truth, not only something true, that is at
work” (54). In other words, a work of art*is* the authentic site for the
happening of the truth (Long, 100).

In*Evening on Karol Johan* , painted in 1892, Munch chose to depict
Oslo’s main road, with the parliament building as well as the Grande
Hotel café (Schneede, 40). The spectator is faced with a moving mob,
dominated by pale and ambiguous faces, coming closer and closer; “the
crowded pavement is full of movement, yet the figures are dressed as if
in mourning, and the features of the nearest walkers are almost
skull-like - not much sign of spring here” (Ingles, 15). The staring
faces are filled with apprehension and hostility, repeatedly viewed as a
representation of the “clamp-down” by the Norwegian government - and
that of the bourgeois - on the freethinking bohemians, a group to which
Munch belonged (Ingles, 15). Another interpretation is linked to the
artist’s breakup with Milly, his obsessional love; after she left him
and returned to her stable marital life, he started frantically looking
for her on Karl Johan (Seidel, 53), feeling “so alone . people who
passed by looked strange and awkward . all these faces stared at him,
pale in the evening light” (Smith, 56).

The looming force of the crowd is laced together with tremendous
anxiety, due to Munch’s cropping technique, which in itself creates an
air of unease. The dark blue sky acts as a velvet shield, disguising the
terror felt down below, keeping it intact; the sky forms a bubble around
the inhabitants, or das Man. The sun has set far away, reminding us of
human mortality. A terrified crowd moves away from this ominous scene,
while a single figure gazes into the darkness ahead of him. The viewer
catches sight of someone in the background who seems to be aware of his
separateness - and also that death is inevitable. The viewer of the
painting is also driven into the distance, just as the people themselves
move steadily away from us and vanish into the remote background. The
man looks on as the light fades and death seems to define this
melancholy world as a whole.

Nevertheless, the latter analysis is not the sole one. The following
should be considered as well: the single black figure, with its back
towards the spectators, is moving against the stream, which “evokes
Munch’s own situation as a radical artist” (Smith, 56). Heidegger
suggests, however, that the figure’s movement could be interpreted more
universally; the lone figure, presumably the artist himself, would then
be interpreted as an authentic Dasein, moving against the stream of
inauthentic beings in his midst. This one figure understands that he is
a distinctive entity and thus has a sense of his own authenticity in
contrast to what he must confront in his immediate surroundings
(Warnock, cited in Hornsby, 3).

*Puberty* of 1895 is the third version of this work, while the first was
destroyed in a fire. The artist in this painting depicts a naked young
girl, an anxious protagonist, filled with the realization of her
imminent physical and psychological transformation into a woman. Seated
upon a bed, she is menaced by a large “amorphous” (Ehrenpreis, 499)
shadow to her left that evokes the anxiety she feels. There is a feeling
of tension in the painting that comes from the anxiety felt by the young
girl threatened by the terror of the unknown (MoMA, 2), revealing her
“determination and fragility.” She confronts the viewer with a haunted
stare (Ehrenpreis, 481). The young girl is without protection and is
thus subject to*Existenzfurcht* , fear or existence, as well
as*Todesängste* , or the fear of death (Schneede, 46). Sexuality is seen
as an overwhelming force (Slatkin, 13), pressing down on its ‘victim’.
One may translate the latter awareness into an acknowledgement that
death is near: with the girl’s maturity comes her growing awareness of
aging. Thus Heidegger’s notion of being-towards-death seems appropriate
as a phenomenological description in this case. She is completely alone,
and the haunting shadow only serves to individuate her further as she
“changes rapidly from virgin to femme fatal” (Ehrenpreis, 499).

The relaxed yet self-controlled (Smith, 70) protagonist in*Summer
Night’s Dream (The Voice)* of 1893 carries a calm and projecting
expression. The lone figure is once again an adolescent girl “at the
brink of sexual awareness” (Jayne, 28). In addition to her static pose,
the lack of detail suggests the feminine as a symbol (Jayne, 28), as
opposed to the depiction of a specific woman in relation to the artist.
The young girl is depicted in the psychological state of “becoming
aware” (Zogaris, 20). Filled with anxiety, she is evidently stiff, in
other words, she feels her inner

sexual will rising for the first time; she is not yet accustomed to it,
and is thus unsure of how to react. Dressed in white, carrying an
innocent expression, the protagonist is eager, yet vulnerable (Jayne,
28). Her wide and staring “vampire-like eyes” (Zogaris, 20) could be
linked to the protagonist’s slow, but gradual, transformation into the
seductress, which later appears in another version of*The Voice*
(1894-95).

Nevertheless, the chosen title still raises a few questions. Through
looking at Munch’s works in relation to his titles, we observe that he
favors ambiguous titles or multifaceted ones. In this case, according to
Zogaris, the woman’s sexual desire is associated with an inner voice
that is trying to push its way out of her (21). It is also vital to note
the positioning of her arms, namely, behind her back. The latter appears
in numerous works by the artist and symbolizes the figure’s readiness to
present herself to the man, while also holding herself back (Frossman,
528). Nevertheless, her hair, which is tied up in a neat bun, shows the
spectator that she has not yet reached the femme fatal stage, in
contrast to some of the women depicted in other works, such as*Vampire*
(1893),*Ashes* (1894), or*The Voice* (1894-95). The reflection of the
moon, another symbol that appears in numerous works, clearly represents
the male personage in this painting (Zogaris, 21).


