Commentary of Suratul Jinn
==========================

  

Commentary of Verse 1
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ أُوحِيَ إِلَيَّ أَنَّهُ اسْتَمَعَ نَفَرٌ مِنَ الْجِنِّ فَقَالُوا
إِنَّا سَمِعْنَا قُرْآنًا عَجَبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Say (O' Muhammad to the people), 'It has been revealed to me (from
Allah) that a group from amongst the Jinn has listened (to the
recitation of the Qur'an) and (upon returning back to the other Jinn)
told them (the other Jinn), 'Verily we heard an amazing recital.''”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
***We have heard an amazing recital!***

In the first verse of this Surah, it is mentioned that: “Say (O'
Muhammad): It has been revealed to me that a party of Jinn has listened
(to the recitation) of the Qur'an and has told (their people), 'Verily
we have heard an amazing recital.'”[^1]  
    
 The phrase 'it has been revealed to me' shows that the Prophet (prayers
of Allah be upon him and his family) himself did not see the Jinn -
rather, he was informed of them listening to the Qur'an through Divine
Revelation.  
    
 This verse also clearly shows that the Jinn possess intelligence,
discernment, understanding and comprehension.  We can also defer that
they too have a responsibility and accountability towards their
Creator. 

Not only do they understand and comprehend speech and various languages
and are able to discern between discourse that is a miracle and that
which is not, but they also realize their own responsibility in
propagation and spreading the Truth and thus, are addressed in the
Qur'an.  
    
 The hidden traits of these living creatures (the Jinn) are only
discernable from this verse of the Qur'an.  These creations also have
other characteristics, which by the power of Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He), we will explain at the end of the discussion of this
Surah.  
    
 The Jinn had a right to regard the Qur'an as a miracle since the sound
and style of the Qur'an - not to mention the effect and power that it
has that attracts the listener - is something that is indescribable.  

The contents and power (of this heavenly word) of transformation is
something that is also remarkable, and the fact that the one who brought
it was one who had not formally studied during his entire life and was
one who lived amongst the Illiterates is also something to ponder
upon.  
    
 It is a speech that both in its apparent readings and its hidden
meanings, is completely different than any other speech, and because of
this, the Jinn held firm to the belief of the miraculous nature of the
Qur'an.  
  

Commentary of Verse 2
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَهْدِي إِلَى الرُّشْدِ فَآمَنَّا بِهِ ۖ وَلَنْ نُشْرِكَ بِرَبِّنَا
أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*(This Qur'an which we heard) guides (people) to the right path, so
then we have believed in it and we shall never join in worship anyone or
anything with our Lord (Allah).”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 The first thing that the Jinn said was that this Qur'an was a book that
guides to the right way, therefore, they believed in its contents and
said they shall never join (in worship) with their Lord, any other
gods.  
    
 The meaning of the word '**الرشد'** or 'the right path' is one that has
a vast, comprehensive meaning that conveys any path that one goes upon
that is completely pure and clean (of spiritual impurities).  It is a
path which is also free of all turns and bends; one that is obvious and
manifest that would lead the wayfarer on the path to complete and
absolute satisfaction.  
    
 After this phrase, the Jinn had other things to say to their community
which the Qur'an mentions in the following 12 verses, each starting with
the 'Arabic pronoun 'أَنَّ' which is used for emphasis.[^2]  
    
  

Commentary of Verse 3
---------------------

   

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ تَعَالَىٰ جَدُّ رَبِّنَا مَا اتَّخَذَ صَاحِبَةً وَلَا
وَلَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
 “And *verily He (Our Lord - Allah) glory be to Him has not taken a
consort or a son (for Himself).”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 After expressing their complete belief in Allah (Glorified and Exalted
is He) and negating all forms of polytheism, the Jinn continued their
speech by declaring the characteristics of Allah (Glorified and Exalted
is He). 

They said that He - exalted be the majesty of the Lord (from comparing
Him and His creations and from all sorts of defects and faults) has
never taken a companion/spouse, or a son.  
    
 The word 'جَدُّ' has many meanings including: greatness, force,
unquestionability, share, portion or something that is new, among other
meanings. 

However, its original root meaning, as *Raghib* in his book
*al-Mufradat* mentions is that of being cut off, since any creation that
has any sort of greatness or majesty is always independent of any other
thing.  In this verse, this word has come in the meaning of greatness;
however as for the other meanings of this word, we can also apply them
to this verse.  
    
 In \`Arabic, the grandfather is also referred to as '**جَدٌّ'** because
of the great station (amongst the family members) that he holds or due
to his age.  
    
 Some of the commentators of the Qur'an have mentioned a much more
finite and restricted meaning of this word and have taken it to be an
attribute; others have taken it to mean power; while others understand
it to mean mastership and sovereignty.  Still other commentators have
said it refers to a blessing; while the last group feels that it is in
the meaning of a name - although all these meanings are contained in the
meaning of greatness.   
    
 In any case, the meaning of this word is just as is commonly held and
that is being the grand father.  In some of the ahadith it has been
mentioned that without knowledge, a group of the Jinn used this
inappropriate word, meaning that they were trying to express that no one
should never use such a word to refer to Allah.[^3]  
    
 It is possible that this type of speech would be accurate where such an
association of beliefs is taking place, however, the Qur'an concurs with
the speech of the Jinn in this verse and agrees with its correctness. 
Also, in some of the speeches contained in Nahjul Balagha, we see that
this word is used as well.  
    
 In speech 191, Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him)
is quoted as saying:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْحَمْدُ لِلٌّهِ الْفٌاشِي فِي الْخَلْقِ حَمْدُهُ وَ الْغٌالِبَ
جُنْدُهُ وَ الْمُتَعَالَى جَدُّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*All praise belongs to Allah who has spread His praise throughout His
creation and whose army is victorious and who is the Highest over His
Greatness.”*  
    
 In another hadith it has been mentioned that Anas ibn Malik said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كٌانَ الرَّجُلُ إِذٌا قَرَأَ سُوْرَةُ الْبَقَرَةُ جَدُّ فِي
اَعْيُنِنٌا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Whenever a person would read Suratul Baqarah, he would be seen as
great in our eyes.”*[^4]  
    
 In any case, the use of this word in the meaning of greatness and
majesty is something that is in line with what has been mentioned in the
dictionaries and also in its practical application.  
    
 It is interesting to note that at this point, those speaking these
words - the Jinn - have placed special emphasis on the issue that Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) has neither a spouse nor any child.  It is
possible that this pertains to the corrupt beliefs that were prevalent
amongst the \`Arabs who believed that the Angles were the daughters of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and that He had taken a Jinn as His
spouse!  
    
 This hypothesis is substantiated by the contents of Suratul Saffat
(37), verse 158:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَعَلُوا بَيْنَهُ وَبَيْنَ الْجِنَّةِ نَسَبًا ۚ وَلَقَدْ عَلِمَتِ
الْجِنَّةُ إِنَّهُمْ لَمُحْضَرُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“They have said that there is a relationship between Him and the
Jinn.”*  
   

Commentary of Verse 4
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ كَانَ يَقُولُ سَفِيهُنَا عَلَى اللَّهِ شَطَطًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

  “And *verily he (the dimwitted one - the Devil/Shaytan) among us has
been telling confused lies about Allah (in order to try and misguide
us).”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 The Jinn then continued their speech by saying that they complained
that the dimwitted one (Shaytan) had been speaking unpleasantly and
sayings things which were far from the truth about Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He).  
    
 It is possible that the word '**سفيه'** in this verse could refer to a
species or group meaning that, 'the foolish from amongst us believed
that Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) has a spouse and children and
has chosen one similar to Himself as a partner (another god) and thus,
they have gone astray from the straight path and have exaggerated their
speech.'  
    
 Many commentators of the Qur'an have also expressed the probability
that '**سفيه'** is in the meaning of that single individual - referring
to Iblis - who after disobeying Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)
attributed many things unbefitting to Him.  Of course he had disobeyed
Allah's (Glorified and Exalted is He) command to perform prostration to
Adam (peace be upon him), an act which he thought to be something beyond
anyone's intelligence (to bow down to another creation) and considered
himself to be better than Adam (peace be upon him).  
    
 Since Iblis was a Jinn, thus the believers from amongst the Jinn
disassociated themselves from him and called his speech exaggerating and
confused lies even though apparently, Iblis was a very knowledgeable
person (\`Alim) and the foremost worshipper of Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) (\`Abid).  However, he was an \`Alim who did not act
according to his knowledge and was a worshipper who worshipped for
himself, and became misguided and full of pride and vanity - these
points are all clear from the word **'سفيه'.**  
    
 The word '**شطط'** refers to something leaving its state of balance and
equity and falling far away (from this state).  Therefore any talk which
is far from the truth is referred to in \`Arabic as **'شطط'.**  It is
also because of this that in \`Arabic, the banks of a large river which
are very far away from the water are referred to as **'شطّ'.**  
  

Commentary of Verse 5
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا ظَنَنَّا أَنْ لَنْ تَقُولَ الْإِنْسُ وَالْجِنُّ عَلَى اللَّهِ
كَذِبًا 
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And *verily we thought that Man or Jinn could never tell lies about
Allah (however, we are definitely wrong).”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 Continuing their speech, the Jinn said that they thought that no man or
Jinn could ever tell lies about Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).  
    
 It is possible that what they meant here was the blind following that
some of them were pursuing in relation to the previous generations who
believed that Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) had partners, wives
and children. 

Thus, these Jinn thought to themselves, 'If we accept these notions from
those who came before us without having any proof because we want to
have good thoughts about those who came before us (that they would not
lie), we could never imagine that Mankind and Jinn would ever have the
audacity to attribute such grand lies to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He)!' 

They continued on with their thoughts and said to themselves, 'now that
we have reached to a level of being able to conduct research and have
arrived to the truth and accepted it, we see the error in following the
previous generations and thus, we turn away from our own mistake and the
misguidedness of the polytheists from among the Jinn.'   
   

Commentary of Verse 6
---------------------

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ كَانَ رِجَالٌ مِنَ الْإِنْسِ يَعُوذُونَ بِرِجَالٍ مِنَ
الْجِنِّ فَزَادُوهُمْ رَهَقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

  “And *verily men from among human beings would seek refuge with men
from among the Jinn and this increased the rebelliousness of those
Jinn.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 The Jinn said that another way that the Jinn and Mankind were misguided
was that men from among the humans would seek refuge with men from among
the Jinn, and this act lead to an increase in the misguidance, sins and
insurgence of the Jinn.  
    
 The original meaning of the word '**رهق'** is to cover something with
anger, violence and victory and since evils such as misguidance, sins,
rebellion, and fear take complete control over the heart and soul of a
person, thus, this word is explained as such.   
 A group of commentators of the Qur'an have said that this verse refers
to other superstitions which existed during the period of Ignorance. 
One such superstition was that whenever a group of \`Arabs would enter
into a valley in the evening, they would say:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَعُوذُ بِعَزِيزِ هَذَا الْوَادِي مِنْ شَرِّ سُفُهاءُ قَوْمِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*I seek refuge from the great one of this valley from the evil of the
chief of his (Shaytan) tribe.”*[^5]  
    
 And by saying this, they felt that the large or main Jinn would be
protected from the evils of the smaller (in power) Jinn.  
    
 Since the various corrupt ideas would lead to a pollution of one's
thoughts and the fear of being misguided, thus at the end of the verse
it is mentioned that, “this increased the Jinn in their insurgence.”  
    
 From this verse, we can deduce that the Jinn too are also divided into
male and female since the words used in this verse are “men from among
the Jinn.”[^6]  
    
 In any case, the meaning of this verse is vast and includes people from
among mankind seeking refuge of any type from people of the Jinn and the
various corrupt ideas that have been mentioned above are just a sample
of the adulterated thoughts.  
    
 We know that among the \`Arabs, there were many soothsayers and oracles
who truly believed that through the Jinn many problems could be solved
and information on events that would occur in the future could be
foretold.

Commentary of Verse 7
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُمْ ظَنُّوا كَمَا ظَنَنْتُمْ أَنْ لَنْ يَبْعَثَ اللَّهُ
أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

  “And *verily they (those people) thought just as you all thought that
Allah would never bring raise up a single person (as a Messenger).”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
*In the past, we used to steal a listening*  
*from the heavens, however now…*  
    
 The Jinn start out by saying that a group of humans thought, just as
they thought, that after them (Prophets Musa and \`Isa), Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) would not appoint another Prophet.  
    
 They disbelieved in the Qur'an and the raising of the final Prophet
Muhammad (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family), however when the
Jinn listened with attention to the heavenly verses of this book, the
truth of these words was made clear to them.  However, the disbelievers
from among the Jinn are just like the polytheists from among mankind,
who have chosen the path of disbelief and are bound to meet the same
fate as they will!  
    
 This speech is a warning to the polytheists that they should know that
when the Jinn have such a belief and judgment, they should wake up and
just like the Jinn, hold firm to  and have belief in the Qur'an and the
Noble Prophet (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family).  
    
 Some commentators have suggested that the phrase:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
'أَنْ لَنْ يَبْعَثَ اللهُ أَحَداً'
  </p>
</blockquote>

or that 'Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) would never appoint anyone'
refers to the denial of the Resurrection and not the denial of the
sending of Prophets.   
    
 Others have said that without doubt, this verse and the previous verse
constitute the speech of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and not
that of the believing Jinn and these verses have been placed within
their speech as a form of interrogation and that the people being
addressed in these two verses are actually the polytheists from among
the \`Arabs.   
    
 According to this explanation, the verse under discussion could be
translated as follows that ”*O' polytheists from among the \`Arabs!  You
had the same belief just like the Jinn had that Allah would never
appoint a Messenger, however, after hearing the Qur'an, we realize our
mistake and the time has now come for you too to realize your
mistake.”*  
    
 However it is highly unlikely that this is the true explanation.  Thus
apparently, this speech is a continuation of the believers among the
Jinn and those whom they are speaking to are none other than the
disbelievers from among the Jinn. 

Commentary of Verse 8
---------------------

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا لَمَسْنَا السَّمَاءَ فَوَجَدْنَاهَا مُلِئَتْ حَرَسًا شَدِيدًا
وَشُهُبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

 “*And* *verily we searched the heavens however we found in them, strong
protecting missiles waiting for us.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 After this the believers from among the Jinn speak about one of the
signs of truth in their speech that all other Jinn would be able to
discern for themselves, by looking at the natural world.  They said that
they had been searching through the heavens and found them full of
strong protectors, guardians and missiles.[^7]  
  

Commentary of Verse 9
---------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا كُنَّا نَقْعُدُ مِنْهَا مَقَاعِدَ لِلسَّمْعِ ۖ فَمَنْ
يَسْتَمِعِ الْآنَ يَجِدْ لَهُ شِهَابًا رَصَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*And* *verily we used to sit near by and try to listen (to the news
coming from the heavens), but shooting missiles now await those who try
to do that.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 Continuing with the conversation of the Jinn, they mentioned that until
now, they used to sit in the heavens and steal a listen of the news that
was occurring (in the universe) which they would then convey to their
friends.  However, now whoever tries to go to the heavens and steal a
listen are met with missiles which are aimed directly at them!  
    
 Does this new state of affairs not point to the fact that with the
coming of the Holy Prophet and the revelation of a Heavenly Book, that a
complete upheaval has take place in the world?  Why is it that in the
past the Jinn were able to steal a listen from the heavens, however none
of them possess this ability now?   
    
 Does this verse not have a wider meaning that the previous age of evil
works, old age and trickery have come to a close?  Has not the period of
mental darkness and ignorance ended and in its place, the sun of
knowledge, revelation and Prophethood has risen?  
    
 The original meaning of the word '**شِهَابٌ'** is a flame that shoots
out from the fire.  Also, the elongated flames of fire that are visible
in the heavens that shoot out and are seen by us are also referred to in
\`Arabic as '**شهاب'. **  
    
 In accordance with the researchers of today, these 'flames' are
actually small pieces of rock that have been moving  and when they come
close to the Earth, they become under the influence of the gravitational
pull of the planet and fall to the Earth at a high velocity. 

When they enter into the atmosphere, the pull of gravity of the Earth
drags them faster which results in them becoming hotter and thus they
resemble the flames of fire.  In the end, they come down to the ground
and turn into ashes.  
    
 In these verses of the Noble Qur'an, it refers to the natural phenomena
that these shooting flames are actually missiles which are aimed towards
the Shaiatin who are trying to steal a listen from the heavens. 

Thus we must ask the question that: what does it mean to steal a listen
from the heavens?  How is it possible for the Shaiatin (Devils) and the
Jinn to run away from the heavens because of these Divine missiles that
are being shot at them?  
    
 A complete, detailed description of this can be found in our discussion
on Suratul Hijr, verse 18 (Volume 11, Page 40 of Tafsir Namuna in Farsi)
and Surahtul Saffat, verse 10 (Volume 19, page 15 of Tafsir Namuna in
Farsi). 

The word 'رَصَداً' is in the meaning of preparing for something while
one is in the state of waiting.  This word also comes in the meaning of
the *verbal name* meaning the person or thing that is waiting, and this
is the meaning that is conveyed in this verse.  
  

Commentary of Verse 10
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا لَا نَدْرِي أَشَرٌّ أُرِيدَ بِمَنْ فِي الْأَرْضِ أَمْ أَرَادَ
بِهِمْ رَبُّهُمْ رَشَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

  “And *verily we do not know if He intends evil to those who are in the
Earth or if their Lord intends guidance for them.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 Continuing in their talk, the Jinn mentioned that with the new state of
affairs that had taken place, they did not know if the prohibition of
stealing a listen from the heavens was a prelude to something bad that
was going to be inflicted on the people of the Earth or if Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) had intended to guide the people.   
    
 In other words, the Jinn did not know if this was a lead up to the
sending down of punishment and trials from Allah (Glorified and Exalted
is He) or if it was the prologue to guidance?  
    
 However, the believers from among the Jinn understand that them being
prevented from stealing a listen from the heavens - which was around the
same time as the raising up of the Prophet of Islam (prayers of Allah be
upon him and his family) and the cutting off of their soothsaying or
fortune telling and other things that occurred, was actually the
shutting of the doors of the period of darkness and ignorance and the
heralding in of the period of divine light (nur) and guidance for
mankind.  
    
 However as we see that the Jinn had a special interest and love in
stealing a listen from the heavens, and thus they could not believe that
by them being prevented from this act, there could be a sign of goodness
and blessings (for humanity).  
    
 It is interesting to note that in this verse, the issue of guidance of
mankind is attributed to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He), however
the doer or 'guide' to evil and wickedness is kept unknown and is not
attributed to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).  

This confirms the fact that whatever comes from Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) is good and its ultimate purpose is guidance, whereas
evil and corruption all stem from mankind and the transgression of the
blessings that Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) has graced them
with.  
    
 Although it is known that the opposite of '**شَرٌّ'** or *evil* in
\`Arabic is '**خَيرٌ'** or *good*, however since in this verse the
meaning of good is guidance, thus we have taken this meaning in our
explanation.  
   

Commentary of Verse 11
----------------------

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا مِنَّا الصَّالِحُونَ وَمِنَّا دُونَ ذَٰلِكَ ۖ كُنَّا
طَرَائِقَ قِدَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*And* *among us, certainly some of us are righteous and others are not.
Verily, all of us are following different paths.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
*We have heard the truth and have submitted (to it)*  
    
 In this verse, which is the first verse that is the direct speech of
the Jinn, they say that among themselves there are those that perform
righteous acts and others who do not and that they too are divided into
various groups and factions.  
    
 It is possible that the Jinn mentioned this in the beginning of their
speech, since Iblis is one of the Jinn and this thought may have come
into the minds of others - that the natural disposition of the Jinn is
that they commit evil, wicked deeds.  People may have thought that it is
not possible for the light of Divine Guidance (*Nur*) to ever enter into
their hearts.  
    
 By the believers from among the Jinn saying this, they make it clear to
others that they too have the freedom and choice to make their own
decisions and that in their midst too are those who perform righteous
deeds and those that are wicked.   
    
 This speech lays down the groundwork for those Jinn who wish to be
guided.  As it is known that one of the ways in which propagation of the
faith or beliefs is bound to have an impact on others is when a person
attributes personality or character to the other party and lets them
know that they too have the potential to be guided and reach to a level
of perfection in their lives.   
    
 This possibility also exists that the believers from among the Jinn
spoke this since at that point in time, they were prevented from
stealing a listen from the heavens. 

Thus, they said what they meant that even though a group of the Jinn
used to steal information from the heavens and then present it to those
evil people on Earth in order to misguide them, however, not all of the
Jinn were like this.  
    
 This verse also amends the incorrect notions that people may have in
their minds concerning them, that the word Jinn is always associated
with Shaytan, corruption, evil, and misguidedness.  This verse tells us
that the Jinn too are broken up into various categories - righteous and
non-righteous.  
    
 The word **'قِدَداً'** is the plural of the word **'قِدَّ'** and means
anything that is cut off - and whenever a group or faction of people
break apart from the rest of the group or majority, they are referred to
with this word.  
  

Commentary of Verse 12
----------------------

  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا ظَنَنَّا أَنْ لَنْ نُعْجِزَ اللَّهَ فِي الْأَرْضِ وَلَنْ
نُعْجِزَهُ هَرَبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And *verily we thought that we could never challenge Allah whether we
stayed on the Earth if we fled elsewhere.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 The Jinn continue their speech by warning their comrades by saying that
certainly, they could never be victorious over the intention and plan of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) on the Earth, nor could they have
any authority over the power of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).  
    
 Thus, if they thought that they could run away from the punishment of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) by hiding in the corners of the
Earth or somewhere in the heavens, then they were in manifest error!

Thus, the first sentence of this verse refers to running away or hiding
from the power of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) on the Earth,
while the second sentence refers to running away from the power of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) in general - whether it be on the Earth or
in the Heavens.  
    
 There is also another possibility that can be extracted from this verse
and that is that the first part refers to the fact that the Jinn would
never be victorious over Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He), while the
second half of the verse refers to the fact that they would never be
able to have authority over His justice *(\`Adalah)*.  
    
 Therefore, when one sees that it is not possible to run away from the
power of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He), nor is there anyway to
have authority or power over His justice, then, there is no other option
left for anyone except to submit to His commands and His justice
completely.  
   

Commentary of Verse 13
----------------------

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا لَمَّا سَمِعْنَا الْهُدَىٰ آمَنَّا بِهِ ۖ فَمَنْ يُؤْمِنْ
بِرَبِّهِ فَلَا يَخَافُ بَخْسًا وَلَا رَهَقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

 “And *verily we have surely listened to the guidance (of the Qur'an)
and so we believe in it. And whoever believes in his Lord will not fear
loss or oppression.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 The believers from among the Jinn continued their talk by stating that
they listened to the guidance that has come from the Holy Qur'an and
have believed wholeheartedly in it. 

If they are inviting others to the truth of the Qur'an, then those who
are being invited should rest assured that the Jinn who have already
accepted it are also practicing it. 

Was this not the case, they would not be calling others to believe and
act in the way they are until they themselves believe and act upon it.  
    
 The Jinn then summarize - in one short sentence - the benefit of
believing in the Qur'an and its contents by stating that whosoever
believes in their Lord will never fear any sort of loss or oppression.  
    
 The word '**بخس'** refers to any kind of loss that would come about
through despotism or persecution while the word '**رهق**' just as was
previously mentioned, refers to covering or concealing something by
force.  
    
 Other scholars have mentioned the difference between these two words as
being: the word '**بخس'** means something that is good or upright which
will never be taken away, whereas the word '**رهق'** means something
that is bad or evil which will never have anything added to it.  
    
 As well, other scholars have mentioned that '**بخس'** refers to no
reduction in the good deeds, whereas '**رهق'** refers to a difficult
responsibility.  
    
 In any case, the overall meaning of this verse is that no matter how
large or small the act that a believer performs, he is guaranteed to
receive his reward for the act with no reduction or decrease in its
compensation.   
    
 It must be mentioned that the Justice of Allah (Glorified and Exalted
is He) is not limited to only the believers, however, since
non-believers do not have any righteous actions on their deed of
records, thus, there is no mention for the reward of their acts.  
  

Commentary of Verse 14
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّا مِنَّا الْمُسْلِمُونَ وَمِنَّا الْقَاسِطُونَ ۖ فَمَنْ
أَسْلَمَ فَأُولَٰئِكَ تَحَرَّوْا رَشَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
  “And *verily among us are Muslims and among us are those who have
deviated from the Truth. So then whosoever submits (to Allah) then
verily it is they who have followed the right guidance.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 In this verse, as an added explanation, the discussion focuses on the
eventual end of both the believers and disbelievers, by stating that by
way of the guidance contained in the Qur'an, from among the Jinn, there
are those who submit and others who are oppressors.[^8]  
    
 However, as for those who accept Islam (submission to Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He)), verily they have chosen the proper path and since
they have taken steps towards guidance, the reward of Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He) is for them.[^9]  
    
  

Commentary of Verse 15
----------------------

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمَّا الْقَاسِطُونَ فَكَانُوا لِجَهَنَّمَ حَطَبًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*And* *however, as for the deviators from the Truth, they shall be the
fuel for hell.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
*However, as for the oppressors, they will be the fuel for the hell
fire!*  
    
 It is important to note that in these verses, the word '**مسلم'** or
*one who has submitted* is used, as the opposite of '**ظالم'** or *an
oppressor* which points to the fact that the thing which takes a person
out of being an oppressor is true faith.  Otherwise, an individual
without faith will always remain spiritually polluted as an oppressor
and tyrant.   
    
 Also, this verse shows that the true believer is that person who has
never been an oppressor or tyrant, just as the hadith from the Noble
Prophet of Islam (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family) states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلْمُؤْمِنُ مَنْ آمَنَهُ النٌّاسَ عَلـى أَنْفُسِهِمْ وَ
أَمْوٌالِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*The true believer is one with whom other people's lives and wealth are
protected.”*[^10]  
    
 In another hadith from the Prophet (prayers of Allah be upon him and
his family) it is mentioned that:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لْمُسْلِمُ مَنْ سَلِمَ الْمُسْلِمُونَ مِنْ لِسٌانِهِ وَ يَدِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*The Muslim is one whom other Muslims are protected from his tongue and
his hand (verbal or physical assault).”*[^11]  
    
 The phrase used in this verse '**تحروا رشداً'** points to the fact that
the believers, through paying attention, keeping a true intention and
through research and investigation will come towards guidance.  True
guidance can never be brought about through sealed eyes, blind following
and acceptance, thus the greatest reward that they will receive is
attaining or reaching to the truth, under which all the other bounties
and pleasures of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) will be granted.   
    
 However, the worst of situations and predicaments for the oppressors is
that they will be the fuel for the hell fire, meaning that the fire of
hell will be stirred up with them!  
  

Commentary of Verse 16
----------------------

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنْ لَوِ اسْتَقَامُوا عَلَى الطَّرِيقَةِ لَأَسْقَيْنَاهُمْ مَاءً
غَدَقًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*And* *had they (the Jinn and Mankind) remained steadfast in their
religion (of al-Islam), We would certainly have given them abundant
water to drink.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
*You will be Tested with Countless Blessings!*  
    
 Apparently, the following four verses are a continuation of the speech
of the believing Jinn among their own group (even though a group of
Commentators of the Qur'an believe these verses to be the direct speech
of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) inserted in between the speech of
the Jinn).   
    
 However, if we regard these verses as being the speech of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) inserted in between the speech of the
Jinn, then this definitely goes against the apparent reading of the
verses. 

Since the wording in these verses bears closer semblance to the speech
of the previous verses which were the speech of the Jinn, thus, it is
impossible for us to consider these as not being the words of the Jinn
as well.[^12]  
    
 In any case, the previous verses were in reference to the rewards that
the believers would receive in the next life, however in this section,
the verses talk about the benefits and rewards that will be gained in
this very world.   
    
 The showering of Mercy would have been conferred upon these people and
the fountainheads and springs of the life-giving water would have been
placed at their disposal.   
    
 It is known that in those places where water is in abundance,
everything else is also in abundance, and thus, through their belief,
the various blessings of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) would be
placed at the disposal of the Jinn.  
    
 The word '**غدق'** mentioned in this verse means a large supply of
water.  This is not the first time in the Noble Qur'an that this issue
has been emphasized, that not only are both faith and piety (taqwa) two
traits that lead to spiritual benefits, but rather these are also the
source of all material benefits in this world and the increase in
blessings from Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).  
    
 This blessing can also be seen in various verses of the Qur'an such as
Surah Nuh (71), verses 10 to 12:

> فَقُلْتُ اسْتَغْفِرُوا رَبَّكُمْ إِنَّهُ كَانَ غَفَّارًا {10}يُرْسِلِ
> السَّمَاءَ عَلَيْكُمْ مِدْرَارًا {11}وَيُمْدِدْكُمْ بِأَمْوَالٍ
> وَبَنِينَ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ جَنَّاتٍ وَيَجْعَلْ لَكُمْ أَنْهَارًا {12}

“…*And he (Prophet Nuh) told them, 'Ask forgiveness from your Lord; He
is All-Forgiving.  He will send you abundant rain from the sky,
strengthen you by (providing) you with wealth and children, and make
gardens and streams for you.'”*  
    
 It is important to note that according to what is mentioned in this
verse, that which leads to an increase in blessings and favours from
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) is having firm, continued belief and
not just simply believing since faith that is temporary or transient has
no value and does not guarantee the blessings from Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He).

What is important is to have firm, continued un-wavering belief -
something that many people find difficult to hold on to. 

Commentary of Verse 17
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِنَفْتِنَهُمْ فِيهِ ۚ وَمَنْ يُعْرِضْ عَنْ ذِكْرِ رَبِّهِ يَسْلُكْهُ
عَذَابًا صَعَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*So that We may try them with respect to it; and whoever turns away
from the reminder of his Lord, He will make him enter into an afflicting
punishment.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 In this verse, we are guided to another reality when Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He) tells us that the purpose of being blessed with
bounties is a means to test us.   
    
 Are blessings and bounties the reason for us to become negligent and
forgetful of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He), or are they a means
for us to wakeup, thank and pay even more attention to Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He)?  
    
 From this verse it is clear that one of the most important tests that
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) puts us through is by giving us
blessings.  It is also interesting to note that when Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He) tests us with bounties, this test is actually more
difficult and harder to pass than if He tests us with punishments and
hardships.   
    
 It is a part of human nature that when one is given bounties, he
immediately becomes engrossed and drowns himself in these blessings and
allows his passions and inner desires get the best of him.  Without
doubt, it is these things that actually drag us further away from Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) and allow the plots of Shaytan (the devil)
to take effect.   
    
 The only person that is able to keep away from the negative effects
that the bounties and blessings of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)
have is that person who is continuously in a state of remembrance of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and does not ever forget Him, and
therefore through this act, the heart of such a person is protected from
the influence of Shaytan.[^13]  
    
 Thus, after this, it is mentioned that whoever turns away from the
remembrance of His Lord will be met with a painful punishment and
extended hardships during his life.  
    
 The word mentioned in the end of this verse is **صَعَداً** which is in
the meaning of elevating or being raised, and it sometimes comes in the
meaning of rising smoke or dust.   
    
 A great number of Commentators of the Qur'an have elucidate on this
verse in this particular manner by stating that the meaning is a
punishment which will be very difficult to bear.  The same theme can be
found in Suratul Muddathir (74), verse 17 in which it will be said to a
group of the polytheists:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سَأُرْهِقُهُ صَعُودًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

”*I will make a distressful punishment overtake him.”*  
    
 However, it is possible that what has been mentioned above may actually
be an explanation of the difficulties in bearing the punishment, and
refer to the addition of punishments as well.  
    
 Therefore, in the above-mentioned verse, the traits of true belief and
Allah-consciousness are attributed to as being blessings from Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He). 

On the other hand, the increase of blessings is attributed to being an
increase in the tests that Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) puts His
servants through.  From a third point of view, those who do not remember
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) are threatened with a continued,
perpetual, painful and grievous punishment.  
    
 This can also be seen in various verses of the Qur'an such as in Surah
Taha (20), verse 124 where we read:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَنْ أَعْرَضَ عَنْ ذِكْرِي فَإِنَّ لَهُ مَعِيشَةً ضَنْكًا ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*And* *whoever forsakes the remembrance of Me (Allah) then without
doubt such a person will have a cramped, confined life.”*  
    
 In Suratul Naml (27), verse 40, Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)
mentions the following from the speech of Prophet Sulayman ibn Dawud
(peace be upon him):  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هَٰذَا مِنْ فَضْلِ رَبِّي لِيَبْلُوَنِي أَأَشْكُرُ أَمْ أَكْفُرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*This is from the grace of my Lord so that He may test me - am I
grateful or I be ungrateful.”*  
    
 Also, in Suratul Anfal (8), verse 28 it is mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا أَمْوَالُكُمْ وَأَوْلَادُكُمْ فِتْنَةٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*You (all) should know that without doubt your wealth and your children
are all a test (for you.)”*  
    
  

Commentary of Verse 18
----------------------

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ الْمَسَاجِدَ لِلَّهِ فَلَا تَدْعُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

   
 “And *verily the Masajid (places of worship) are solely reserved for
Allah, so then do not call upon anyone (anything) else with Allah.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 In this verse, we read what the Jinn themselves said with their own
tongues while preaching to their communities and inviting them to the
belief of the Oneness of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).   
    
 They informed their followers that the Masajid all belong to Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He), therefore no one should call upon anyone
with Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) (in them).  What is the meaning
of Masajid in this verse?  Various commentaries have been given in
relation to this word.   
    
 The first being that the meaning of Masajid is the actual physical
building in which people prostrate to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He) of which, the most perfect of places that this is performed is the
Masjid al-Haram and then following this sacred place, all other Masajid
in the world.  The wider scope would cover all places where a person
performs his Salat and prostrates to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He).  
    
 According to the well-known hadith of the Prophet (prayers of Allah be
upon him and his family), it is stated:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَجُعِلْتُ لِيَ الأَرْضَ مَسْجِداً وَ طَهُوراً 
  </p>
</blockquote>

”*The whole Earth was made a place of prostration and purifier
(tayammum) for me.”*[^14]  
    
 Therefore, all the places on Earth are covered by this verse.   
    
 Accordingly, this verse is also a reply to the \`Arab polytheists and
those like them who took the Ka\`bah as a place to worship idols.  This
would also apply to the Christians who have gone astray by worshipping
the 'three' in their Church and have taken to worshipping their 'three
gods' (the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost).   
    
 The Qur'an says that all the places of worship are reserved only for
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and in these sacred places, it is
not permitted to worship or prostrate to anyone other than Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He).  
    
 The second meaning of the word Masajid is the seven parts of the body
that must be placed on the ground in the state of prostration.  These
seven parts of the body must only be placed on the ground for the
worship of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and it is not allowed to
use them for the worship of anyone or anything other than Him.  
    
 In the famous hadith from the 9th Imam, Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Jawad
(peace be upon him) it is narrated that in the gathering of a group of
scholars from the Ahl as-Sunnah in which Mu\`tasim \`Abbas was also
present, he (Mu\`tasim) asked that from where should the hand of the
thief be cut off? 

Some of the scholars said from the wrist and used the verse of Tayammum
as their proof.  Others said from elbow and brought the verse of Wudhhu
as their proof.   
    
 The 'caliph' Mu\`tasim then asked Imam Muhammad ibn \`Ali al-Jawad
(peace be upon him) what his answer was.  At first, the Imam excused
himself and asked that he not answer the question.

However Mu\`tasim was determined to get the answer from the Imam, and
thus, the Imam replied, “All that these people have said is completely
wrong.  The only thing that is permitted to be cut off is the four
fingers (other than the thumb) - the palm of the hand and the thumb must
remain.”   
    
 When Mu\`tasim asked for proof of this ruling, the Imam brought the
ruling from the Prophet of Islam (prayers of Allah be upon him and his
family) and said that at the time of prostration the seven parts of the
body - the forehead, palms of both hands, both knees and the two large
toes - must be placed on the ground. 

After saying this he added that if the hand were to be cut off at the
wrist or the elbow, then there would remain no palm for the person to
perform prostration with while Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) has
commanded that the Masajid (places of prostration) - meaning the seven
parts that must be placed on the ground are reserved for Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) and that which is reserved for Allah must
therefore not be cut off.  
    
 This speech of the Imam startled Mu\`tasim and thus, he ordered his
court to act upon the ruling of the Imam and ordered that only the four
fingers of the thief be cut off.[^15]  
    
 There are also many other ahadith in relation to this ruling[^16],
however, those that have been related are usually without a chain of
narrators or through a weak chain of authorities or have other problems
and thus, to use these ahadith to answer questions or concerns is
difficult.   
    
 For example, it is well known among the Islamic Scholars (Fuqaha) that
if a thief steals something for a second time (after the punishment has
been meted out to him the first time) then the foot must be cut off such
that the top of the foot (leg) remains - however, the big toe which is
on the foot is also one of the parts of prostration.  
    
 The same situation comes up concerning a person who starts a war in
which his punishment is that his hand and foot must be cut off.  
    
 The third meaning of Masajid is the actual act of prostration, meaning
that this act of worship must not be performed for any other one or
thing than Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He); however this meaning
goes against the apparent reading of the verses and has no proof to
substantiate it.  
    
 Summarizing all that has been mentioned, we reach the conclusion that:
that which is in accordance to the apparent reading of the verse is the
first explanation given which is in complete unity with the verse that
came before it and that which comes after it, in relation to Tawhid and
how worship is completely reserved for Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He) only.  
    
 It is possible that the third explanation may be accepted to add
emphasis to the meaning of the verse however there is no proof to
attribute the third meaning to it.  
  

### Tahrif (Alteration in the Meaning) of the  Commentary of this Verse

   
 The issue regarding Tawassul by way of the Prophet of Islam (prayers of
Allah be upon him and his family) and the intimate friends of Allah
(blessings upon all of them) - meaning taking these people as an
intermediary and intercessor in the presence of Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) - is an issue that does not negate the reality of Tawhid,
nor does it go against the verses of the Noble Qur'an.  Rather, it acts
as a confirmer and verifier of Tawhid, meaning that it shows us that all
things come from Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).   
    
 In the various verses of the Qur'an, the topic of intercession has been
repeatedly mentioned and so has the issue of the Prophet of Islam
(prayers of Allah be upon him and his family) asking forgiveness for the
believers.[^17]  
    
 There are some people who have no connection with the true teachings of
Islam and the Qur'an and therefore are completely against any form of
Tawassul or Intercession and to prove their point, find weak excuses and
try to rely on verses of the Qur'an such as the above verse under
discussion:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّ الْمَسَاجِدَ لِلَّهِ فَلَا تَدْعُوا مَعَ اللَّهِ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And verily the Masajid (mosques) are only for Allah, so then do not
call upon other than Allah in them.”[^18]  
    
 These people say that according to this verse of the Qur'an, we are
commanded to not call upon anyone except for Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He); not to expect (anything) from other than Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) and not to ask intercession from anyone!  
    
 However, to be fair to such people (in dealing with them), we state
that this verse has no connection or relation with what they are
claiming, rather, the meaning of this verse is that it negates all forms
of polytheism - to place anything on the same level of Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He) in worship or for asking one's needs.  
    
 In other words, if a person asks other than Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) for something that only Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He) is able to fulfill and believes that the one who he is asking from
is the one who is the ultimate authority and is completely free in
performing what he is asked to do, then this person would be considered
as a polytheist.   
    
 Therefore, the word in this verse **'مع'** or the sentence '**فلا تدعوا
مع الله'** is in the meaning that, 'we bear witness that we must not
place anyone or anything along side with Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He) that we consider to be the initial (and independent) source of
having an affect on our lives.'  
    
 However, if we ask intercession from the Prophets of Allah (blessings
of Allah be upon all of them) or we ask for them to act as
Intermediaries in the presence of the Almighty, then not only do we not
negate this belief, rather, the Qur'an has itself invited the Prophet
(prayers of Allah be upon him and his family) to this (Intercession) and
sometimes, other people have even been commanded to seek Intercession
from the Prophet of Islam (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family)
as well.  
    
 In verse 103 of Suratul Tawbah (9) we read the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خُذْ مِنْ أَمْوَالِهِمْ صَدَقَةً تُطَهِّرُهُمْ وَتُزَكِّيهِمْ بِهَا
وَصَلِّ عَلَيْهِمْ ۖ إِنَّ صَلَاتَكَ سَكَنٌ لَهُمْ ۗ وَاللَّهُ سَمِيعٌ
عَلِيمٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“(O' Prophet Muhammad!) Take from their (the believers) wealth some
Sadaqah.  This act will purify them and make them clean and (at the time
of taking a portion of their wealth, also) pray for them. Verily your
prayers for them act as tranquility for them and Allah is the
All-Hearing, All-Knowing.”*  
    
 Also, in verse 97 of Surah Yusuf (12), Yusuf's brothers speaking to
their father Ya\`qub, ask of him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالُوا يَا أَبَانَا اسْتَغْفِرْ لَنَا ذُنُوبَنَا إِنَّا كُنَّا
خَاطِئِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O' our father (Ya\`qub), please ask forgiveness (from Allah) for our
sins.  Verily we are the ones who had committed an error.”*  
    
 Not only did Prophet Ya\`qub (peace be upon him) not refute or reject
their request, rather, he cooperated with them and said in verse 98 of
Surah Yusuf (12):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ سَوْفَ أَسْتَغْفِرُ لَكُمْ رَبِّي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Soon shall I seek forgiveness for you from My Lord*.”  
    
 Thus, according to these proofs, the issue regarding Tawassul and
seeking Intercession from others, has been mentioned in the Holy Qur'an
and is actually one of the clear commandments of Allah.  
  

Commentary of Verse 19
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ لَمَّا قَامَ عَبْدُ اللَّهِ يَدْعُوهُ كَادُوا يَكُونُونَ
عَلَيْهِ لِبَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And *then surely when the servant of Allah (Muhammad) stood up calling
upon Him (and calling others towards himself and read the Qur'an to
them), they almost crowded him (to death).”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 In the continuation of the speech, in order to explain the amazing
effect that the Glorious Qur'an and the worship of the Prophet (prayers
of Allah be upon him and his family) had on others, it is mentioned that
when the servant of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He), Muhammad
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) would stand up to
worship Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He), and call upon his Lord, a
group of the Jinn would gather around him.[^19]  
    
 The word '**لبد'** in this verse is in the meaning of placing various
things on top of or above one another.  This term is used to refer to
the astonishing surge of believing Jinn who had gathered around the
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) to listen to
the recitation of the Qur'an during their first encounter with these
heavenly words.  This word is also used to refer to the incredible power
of attraction that the Salat of the Prophet (prayers of Allah be upon
him and his family) had upon the Jinn.  
    
 Two other commentaries also exist in relation to this verse.  The first
one is that the believing Jinn were trying to communicate to the
companions of the Prophet (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family)
that in order to hear the Prophet's words, how it is possible that such
a small number of Jinn who lived in Makkah would all gather around him
and climb over top of one another.  The meaning of this is that the
group of Jinn had taken an example from his conduct and had hastened
towards faith.  
    
 The second interpretation is to state that when the Prophet (prayers of
Allah be upon him and his family) was busy in his Salat and recitation
of the Qur'an, the polytheists of Makkah would crowd around him so much
and thus, they would make fun and annoy him.  
    
 However, the last commentary given is not appropriate to suit the
purpose of the Jinn who wanted to convey to the others about the
religion and to encourage them towards accepting the faith; thus, one of
the other two commentaries is much more suitable to accept.  
    
  

Commentary of Verse 20
----------------------

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَدْعُو رَبِّي وَلَا أُشْرِكُ بِهِ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Say (O' Muhammad): Surely I only call upon my Lord, and I do not
associate anyone or anything with Him.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
*Say:  I am not the guardian of the good or bad that reaches you!*  
    
 In these next five verses, in order to make the foundations of Tawhid
(Oneness of Allah) even firmer and to negate all forms of polytheism
which have been mentioned in the previous verses of this Surah, the
Prophet (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family) is first commanded
to say to the people that he calls only upon his Lord and that he
worships only Him and does not perform even the smallest amount of
polytheism!  
  

Commentary of Verse 21
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي لَا أَمْلِكُ لَكُمْ ضَرًّا وَلَا رَشَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ”*Say (O' Muhammad): Surely I do not control for you evil and nor (do I
control for you) any good.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 The Prophet is then commanded to say to the people that he himself does
not control or hold any authority in the evil or good that will come
upon a person.  
  

Commentary of Verse 22
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنِّي لَنْ يُجِيرَنِي مِنَ اللَّهِ أَحَدٌ وَلَنْ أَجِدَ مِنْ
دُونِهِ مُلْتَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Say (O' Muhammad): Surely I have no protection from Allah from anybody
and nor can I find any place of refuge from other than Him.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 In this verse, the Prophet adds that even if he were to act against the
Truth, then he too would have no protection from Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) and other than Him, he has no place of refuge or
safety.[^20]  
    
 In this manner, no one can give Muhammad (prayers of Allah be upon him
and his family) shelter or security, nor can anything provide him with
this protection (other than the Creator).  
    
 From one point of view, this speech covers the topic of Tawhid in
\`Ibadat which states that worship is reserved only for Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He); and from another point of view, it negates all forms
of *Ghuluw* or extremism in relation to the Prophet of Islam (prayers of
Allah be upon him and his family).   
    
 As for the people at that time, this verse showed them that not only do
the false idols that they made with their own hands have absolutely no
control or power over the lives of the people, but also the Prophet
(prayers of Allah be upon him and his family) too with all his greatness
and prestige could not directly be a place of refuge from the severe
punishment of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).   
    
 The final point of this verse is that it shows that there are things
that the Prophet (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family) could not
do by his own leave, and whatever powers or abilities he had, were all
from Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and this also confirms the fact
that Intercession and Tawassul (seeking an intermediary for one's
requests) are only permitted by the permission of Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He).  
    
 The word '**ملتحد'** mentioned in this verse is in the meaning of a
place of certain security or safety and originally came from the root
word '**لحد'** which is in the meaning of a pit or hole, similar to the
hole that is dug inside the grave of a person so that on one side of the
grave, it resembles a niche and it is inside this niche that the body of
the deceased is placed so that when the dirt is thrown on top of the
grave to seal it, it does not fall on the body of the deceased.  This
niche also serves to protect the body from wild animals who may try to
attack the corpse.  Thus, any place that can be considered as a safe and
secure place of safety has been referred to with this word.  
    
 Just as has been mentioned in the previous verses, the meaning of this
phrase too is that in relation to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He),
the Prophet (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family) even has no
power or ability on his own.  However, he is able to request Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) to remove the difficulties from a person
or request Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) to guide people worthy of
receiving direction, and this is the essence of Tawhid and definitely is
not polytheism!  
    
 It is worthy to note that in this verse, the word '**ضر'** or loss is
used as the opposite of '**رشد'** or guidance.  This points to the fact
that the true profit and benefit for a person is guidance, just as has
been explained in the speech of the Jinn in the previous verses where
'**شر'** or evil had been used as the opposite of '**رشد'** or guidance
and thus, these two words go along with one another.  
  

Commentary of Verse 23
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا بَلَاغًا مِنَ اللَّهِ وَرِسَالَاتِهِ ۚ وَمَنْ يَعْصِ اللَّهَ
وَرَسُولَهُ فَإِنَّ لَهُ نَارَ جَهَنَّمَ خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا أَبَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

 “*(It is) only a delivering (of revelation) from Allah and (delivering
of) His messages; and he who disobeys Allah and His Messenger, then
surely for him is the fire of hell to abide therein for eternity.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 In this verse it is mentioned that the Prophet is also commanded to
tell the people that the only responsibility that he has is to convey
the messages that He has been given from Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He).[^21]  
    
 This verse is somewhat similar to what is found in Suratul Maidah (5),
verse 92 in which it is mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…أَنَّمَا عَلَىٰ رَسُولِنَا الْبَلَاغُ الْمُبِينُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…*know that only a clear deliverance of the message is (incumbent) on
Our Apostle.”*  
    
 In verse 188 of Suratul A\`raf (7), it is mentioned:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَمْلِكُ لِنَفْسِي نَفْعًا وَلَا ضَرًّا إِلَّا مَا شَاءَ
اللَّهُ ۚ وَلَوْ كُنْتُ أَعْلَمُ الْغَيْبَ لَاسْتَكْثَرْتُ مِنَ
الْخَيْرِ وَمَا مَسَّنِيَ السُّوءُ ۚ إِنْ أَنَا إِلَّا نَذِيرٌ
وَبَشِيرٌ لِقَوْمٍ يُؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Say: I do not control any benefit or harm for my own soul except as
Allah pleases; and had I known the unseen I would have had much of good
and no evil would have touched me; I am nothing but a warner and the
giver of good news to a people who believe.”*  
    
 For this verse too, there are other commentaries from the elucidators
of the Qur'an such as: 'I (Muhammad) have no place of protection for my
own self except for the delivering of the message of Truth and the
carrying out of the message.'[^22]  
    
 At this point, we need to ask the question that what is the difference
between '**بلاغ'** or to convey and **'رسالات'** which also means to
convey a message?    
    
 Some commentators have said that **'بلاغ'** is in reference to the
conveyance of the *Usul ad-Din,* or the Roots of the Religion; whereas
the word '**رسالات'** is in reference to the propagation of the *Furu\`
ad-Din,* or the Principles of the Religion.  
    
 Others believe that the word '**بلاغ'** refers to the conveyance of the
rules of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) whereas '**رسالات'** refers
to the actual application and putting into effect these rules and
regulations.  
    
 However, it is our opinion that both of these views return back to the
first meaning and are actually emphasis for one another.  This is based
on various other verses of the Qur'an in which these words have been
used in the same meaning such as in verse 62 of Suratul A\`raf (7) where
it is stated:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُبَلِّغُكُمْ رِسَالَاتِ رَبِّي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*I convey to you the messages of my Lord.”*  
    
 This is also mentioned in other verses of the Qur'an.  
    
 In conclusion, at the end of this verse (of Suratul Jinn), a warning is
given that whosoever disobeys Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and
His Apostle will have the fire of hell to abide in forever.   
    
 From this verse it is clear that not every sinner, but rather the
polytheists and the unbelievers are the ones who will be in the fire for
eternity.  
  

Commentary of Verse 24
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
حَتَّىٰ إِذَا رَأَوْا مَا يُوعَدُونَ فَسَيَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ أَضْعَفُ
نَاصِرًا وَأَقَلُّ عَدَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Until when they all see that which they are threatened with, then
shall they know who is weaker in helping and fewer in number.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 The theme of these verses continues with the mention of the condition
of the disbelievers and polytheists who continue to annoy the Muslims
and consider them as being weak and vulnerable.  This attitude of theirs
will continue until the time when what they have been promised (by Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He)) comes upon them.  It is at that time that
they will realize who was truly the weaker and vulnerable and who was
truly smaller in number![^23]  
    
 In this verse, we must ask the question, what is the meaning of the
phrase '**ما يوعدون'** or that which they had been promised - does it
refer to the punishment of this world or the next life or both??

There are various commentaries on this, however that which is the most
appropriate is that its meaning is general and wide, because being small
in number and weaker in ability and help is most often related to this
world and thus, a group of Commentators have related this to the Battle
of Badr as it was in this battle that the strength and power of the
Muslims was weak.   
    
 In various ahadith, this verse has also been used as commentary for the
time of the return of al-Mahdi (may our souls be sacrificed for him).   
    
 Therefore, if we take the meaning of this verse to be a wide,
all-encompassing one, then it will apply to all of these explanations.  
    
 In addition, in verse 75 of Surah Maryam (19), it is mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… حَتَّىٰ إِذَا رَأَوْا مَا يُوعَدُونَ إِمَّا الْعَذَابَ وَإِمَّا
السَّاعَةَ فَسَيَعْلَمُونَ مَنْ هُوَ شَرٌّ مَكَانًا وَأَضْعَفُ جُنْدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Until they see what they were threatened with, either the punishment
or the hour; then they shall know who is in more evil plight and weaker
in forces.”*  
    
 In any case, the tone of this verse clearly points to the fact that the
enemies of Islam - although powerful and large in number - would
eventually be defeated.   
    
 The Holy Qur'an gives the believers heart-warming and good tidings that
in the end, even though they are small in number and over powered, they
will be victorious and their enemies will be the ones who will be
destroyed.  
    
    
  

### A Few Points

### Truthfulness of the Leaders Sent by Allah

   
 One of the characteristics of the leaders sent by Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He), as opposed to the leaders sent by Shaytan, is that the
leaders sent by Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) are never
pretentious, nor do not think themselves as greater than others, proud,
or conceited.  
    
 However, with the likes of Fir\`awn, we see him foolishly proclaim:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَنَا رَبُّكُمُ الْأَعْلَىٰ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*I am your lord, the most high!”*[^24]  
    
 We also see Fir\`awn proclaim to the masses that:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
… وَهَٰذِهِ الْأَنْهَارُ تَجْرِي مِنْ تَحْتِي...
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*And* *these rivers that flow beneath me by my permission.”*[^25]  
    
 The leaders sent by Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) are humble and
modest and always consider themselves as low, humble servants of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) who, in the presence of His power, have no
ability or command.  
    
 In verse 110 of Suratul Kahf (18), we read the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنَّمَا أَنَا بَشَرٌ مِثْلُكُمْ يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Say (O' Muhammad), verily I am only a human being just like you.  It
has been revealed to me (by Allah)…”*  
    
 In another place in the Qur'an, it is mentioned:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..وَمَا أَدْرِي مَا يُفْعَلُ بِي وَلَا بِكُمْ ۖ إِنْ أَتَّبِعُ إِلَّا
مَا يُوحَىٰ إِلَيَّ وَمَا أَنَا إِلَّا نَذِيرٌ مُبِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*And* *I do not know what will happen to me or to you and I follow
nothing except that which has been revealed (by Allah) to me and I am
not but a clear warner to you.”*[^26]  
    
 In yet another verse of the Qur'an, we read the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ لَا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ عِنْدِي خَزَائِنُ اللَّهِ وَلَا أَعْلَمُ
الْغَيْبَ وَلَا أَقُولُ لَكُمْ إِنِّي مَلَكٌ …
  </p>
</blockquote>

”*Say (O' Muhammad!) I do not say to you that with me are the treasures
of Allah nor do I have knowledge of the Unseen nor do I say (to you)
that I am an angel.”*[^27]  
    
 Even if some of these leaders of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)
reached to a level of temporal power over the creations, they still did
not change and people such as Prophet Sulayman (peace be upon him) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
..هَٰذَا مِنْ فَضْلِ رَبِّي…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“..*This is from the grace of my Lord.”*[^28]  
    
 It is interesting to note that in various verses of the Glorious
Qur'an, there are some very stern and harsh phrases that are used to
address the Prophet of Islam (prayers of Allah be upon him and his
family).  In such verses, Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) threatens
and warns him that he too must be very careful of his
responsibilities.   
    
 The entire collection of these verses and the previous ones discussed,
which are not a small number in the Qur'an, attest as a living proof of
the truthfulness of this noble Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny). 

If this were not so, then what would be the use that amongst the people
who were willing to grant him any rank or position in the community, the
Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) would
announce his noble rank to the people which was completely out of the
thought and imagination of the people and which was something completely
unquestionable.  This (claiming a high status or rank in the community)
is something that a great number of leaders of Shaytan have done in the
past, as history tells us.  
    
 Without doubt, the verses that are currently under discussion are a
living proof of the truth of the message of the Prophet of Allah
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny).  
  

### A Large Number of Followers is not Important, the Faith of the Followers is Important!

   
 In various verses of the Qur'an, this point has constantly been brought
up that in every time period, the oppressors and tyrants pull large
groups of people into their following and lead these people against the
Prophets.  
    
 In order to ridicule and make fun of the companions of Musa (peace be
upon him), Fir\`awn said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ هَٰؤُلَاءِ لَشِرْذِمَةٌ قَلِيلُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Most surely, this is a small group of people.”*[^29]  
    
 The polytheists of \`Arabia are quoted as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالُوا نَحْنُ أَكْثَرُ أَمْوَالًا وَأَوْلَادًا وَمَا نَحْنُ
بِمُعَذَّبِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*We have more wealth and more children and we will not be
punished.”*[^30]  
    
 Sometimes, even one person who has riches but does not have any belief
or faith will stand up in front of a believer and people around him and
addressing him say:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.. أَنَا أَكْثَرُ مِنْكَ مَالًا وَأَعَزُّ نَفَرًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*I have greater wealth than you and am mightier in followers.”*[^31]  
    
 On the opposite side however, the believer who is trying to emulate the
Prophets and leaders appointed by Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)
will never rely on having a large group of people around him.  Their
thought pattern and logic will be:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.. كَمْ مِنْ فِئَةٍ قَلِيلَةٍ غَلَبَتْ فِئَةً كَثِيرَةً بِإِذْنِ
اللَّهِ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*How often has a small party of people defeated a large party of people
by the permission of Allah.”*[^32]  
    
 Amir al-Mu'minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) has been
quoted as saying:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهٌا النٌّاسُ لاٌ تَسْتَوْحِشُوا فِي طَرِيقِ الْهُدى لِقِلَّةِ
أَهْلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*O' people! Do not be frightened while on the path of guidance due to
the small number of people on it.”*[^33]  
    
 The history of the lives of the Prophets, especially the life of the
Prophet of Islam (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family) also
shows us how a large group of people who had no faith, however possessed
all forms of power and strength were defeated, by a small group of
believers.   
    
 The Holy Qur'an, narrating the story of the Bani Isra'il, Fir\`awn,
Talut, Jalut and the verses in reference to the Battles of Badr and
Ahzab also display this fact to us.

Commentary of Verse 25
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ إِنْ أَدْرِي أَقَرِيبٌ مَا تُوعَدُونَ أَمْ يَجْعَلُ لَهُ رَبِّي
أَمَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ”*Say (O' Muhammad): I do not know whether that with which you are
threatened with is close or if my Lord will appoint for it (the Day of
Judgement) the term.*  
  

\*\*\*

   
*The Knower of the Unseen is Allah* *(Glorified and Exalted is He)!*  
    
 Since in the previous verses, there was a hint that sooner or later the
punishment of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) will overcome these
evil people, this question comes to mind that when will this promise
take place?   
    
 Just as the Commentators of the Qur'an have mentioned in relation to
the events surrounding this verse that some of the polytheists such as
Nadhr ibn Harith, who after the previous verse was revealed asked this
same question, the Qur'an in reply to his queries answered him thus:
“Say: I do not know whether that with which you are threatened be nigh
or whether my Lord will appoint for it a term.”  
    
 This knowledge (of the Time) is something that is specifically reserved
to the Pure Essence of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and is
something that He has kept hidden from His servants, in order for
Allah's (Glorified and Exalted is He) examination and trial of the
people to be perfected.   
    
 Why is this done?  In simple terms, if we knew that the time of the Day
of Judgement was very close or in the distant future, then the tests and
trials that we are put through would have no value.  
    
 The word in this verse **'أمد'** is in the meaning of a period of time,
with a difference that according to *Raghib* in his dictionary of
Qur'anic terms, *Al-Mufradat*, he mentions that **'زمان'** or a period
of time refers to a time period that has both a beginning and an end,
however, **أمد** as found in this verse is only used when referring to
the end of a time period.  
    
 It has also been mentioned that '**أمد'** and the word **'أبد'** are
the same from the point of view of their meaning with a slight
difference that **'أبد'** is in the meaning of a time period which is
not fixed, whereas '**أمد'** is for a fixed time period, even if it be
an extended or prolonged time period.  
    
 In any case, in the verses of the Glorious Qur'an, we see that every
time the Noble Prophet (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family)
would be asked about when the Day of Judgment would take place, he would
express his lack of knowledge and reply that this knowledge is only with
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).  
    
 It has been mentioned in a hadith that one day, the Angel Jibra'il
(peace be upon him) came to the Prophet of Islam (prayers of Allah be
upon him and his family) in the form of a desert \`Arab, and of the many
questions that he asked the Prophet, one of them was:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَخْبِرْنِي عَنِ السٌّاعَةِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Tell me, when will the Day of Judgement take place?” *  
    
 The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) replied:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مٌا الْمَسْئُولُ عَنْهٌا بِأَعْلَمَ مِنَ السٌّائِلِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The person whom you are asking this question to (regarding this issue)
is no more knowledgeable that the one who is asking the question!”*  
    
 Once again, the desert \`Arab, this time in a loud voice asked:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يٌا مُحَمَّدَ! مَتـى السٌّاعَةُ؟؟ 
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“O' Muhammad! When will the Day of Judgement be??” *  
    
 The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) replied:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَيْحَكَ أَنَهٌّا كٌائِنَةٌ فَمٌا أَعْدَدْتَ لَها؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Woe upon you! The Day of Judgement WILL COME!  Go ahead* *and tell me
what you have prepared for that day?” *  
    
 The \`Arab replied, “I have not read many Salat nor have I fasted a
lot, but I love Allah and His Messenger.”   
    
 The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) replied:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَأَنْتَ مَعَ مَنْ أَحْـبَبْتَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

”*Thus, you will be with those people who you love!”*  
    
 Anas, one of the companions of the Prophet relates that:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَما فَرِحَ الْمُسْلِمُونَ بِشَيْءٍ فَرِحَهُمْ بِهذٌا الْحَدِيثِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Muslims were not delighted with any other speech, as they were
with this one.”*[^34]  
  

Commentary of Verse 26
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلَا يُظْهِرُ عَلَىٰ غَيْبِهِ أَحَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*The Knower of the Unseen! So then He does not reveal His secrets to
anyone.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 Continuing in this discussion, one general rule is mentioned in
relation to the Knowledge of the Unseen (\`Ilm al-Ghaib) that Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) does not reveal the hidden knowledge,
except to those people whom He wants to give this knowledge to.[^35]  
  

Commentary of Verse 27
----------------------

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلَّا مَنِ ارْتَضَىٰ مِنْ رَسُولٍ فَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِنْ بَيْنِ
يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ رَصَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Except to him whom He is pleased with from among (His) Messengers so
then surely He places before him and behind him a guard.”*

\*\*\*

   
 Thereafter, one exception to this rule (of Knowledge of the Unseen) is
expounded upon.  Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) tells us that the
Knowledge of the Unseen is limited to all except Him and those whom He
is pleased with from among His Messengers.  When Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) intends to grant Knowledge of the Unseen to His select
servants, then He sends revelation (Wahi) to them.  
    
 Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) also adds that He places in front
of and behind such a Messenger a guardian.  
    
 The original meaning of the word in this verse '**رصد'** is the root
meaning which is to prepare to protect something and it also applies to
the person doing this action and the thing he is protecting.  This word
is used in both the singular and plural form - meaning that it can refer
to a single person protecting something or a group of people protecting
something.  
    
 The meaning of this word in this particular verse refers to the Angels
that Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) commands - after sending down
the revelation - to protect the Prophet from any forms of evil, to keep
all the evils of Shaytan from the Jinn and humanity away from him, and
to keep all types of evil whisperings away from the Prophet of Allah
(blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) so that the message of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) can be conveyed to the people
without any reduction or increase in its content.  
    
 This in itself is one of the proofs of the infallibility of the
Prophets, that with the help of these hidden forces and the assistance
of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and the watchful guidance of the
Angels, they are safe from slips and errors.  
  

Commentary of Verse 28
----------------------

 

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لِيَعْلَمَ أَنْ قَدْ أَبْلَغُوا رِسَالَاتِ رَبِّهِمْ وَأَحَاطَ بِمَا
لَدَيْهِمْ وَأَحْصَىٰ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ عَدَدًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

 ”*So that He may know that they have truly delivered the messages of
their Lord, and He encompasses what is with them and He records the
number of everything.”*  
  

\*\*\*

   
 In this final verse of the Surah, the evidence of a protector and
defender (of the Sacred word) is explained as one that “…may know that
they have truly delivered the messages of their Lord…”[^36]  
    
 However the meaning of this verse is not that Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) does not know anything about his Prophets, and then later
comes to know of it - since the knowledge of Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) is Eternal meaning that His knowledge was always there,
will always be there, and is never ending. 

Rather, the meaning of this verse is that the knowledge of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) takes shape externally in the physical
world.  Thus, the Prophets are charged with propagating His message and
teachings, and through this, they have fulfilled their responsibility to
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).  
  

[^1]: The word نفر, according to a group of experts in \`Arabic Language
and Commentary refers to a group of 3 to 9 individuals.

[^2]: Among the scholars of Nahw (Arabic Grammar), it is commonly known
that when انّ occurs at the beginning of speech, it must be pronounced
with a Kasrah at the beginning (on the Fatha) (as in إِنَّ), and in this
verse and the verses that follow we see that in the first instance, it
is pronounced with a Kasrah, however the verses that follow, since they
are connected with this first verse, they are pronounced with a Fatha. 
Because of this, a great number of commentators were forced to say that
there is something to be taken as a “taqdir” which means that there is
an implication of a missing syntactical part (grammatically speaking) in
the sentence or they had to come up with other reasons (to explain the
difference between the laws of the Nahw and the way this word has been
used in these verses).  However, what is the harm in saying that this
law of Nahw has its exceptions and in this case we mean that if a phrase
is connected with another verse, then it is permitted to recite it with
a Fatha and the proof for this statement are these verses of Suratul
Jinn.

[^3]: Tafsir Majma\` Al-Bayan, Volume 10, Page 368; Tafsir Nur
ath-Thaqalain, Volume 5, Page 435; the same point has been alluded to in
the Tafsir of \`Ali ibn Ibrahim.

[^4]: Tafsir Qurtubi, Volume 10, Page 6801.

[^5]: Tafsir Majma\` Al-Bayan, Volume 10, Page 369; Tafsir Ruh
Al-Ma\`ani, Volume 28, Page 85.

[^6]: In the commentary of this verse, there is another interpretation
which a group of the commentators of the Qur’an have related as a
possibility of its meaning.  They mentioned that because a group of the
humans sought refuge with the Jinn, this resulted in the Jinns
increasing in their rebelliousness and thus, they thought themselves to
be the beginning and completion of important acts (in the universe);
however, in our opinion, the first commentary given is more correct
(according to the first commentary given, the pronoun in the word زادوا
returns back to the Jinn and the pronoun of هم returns back to the
humans, however in the second commentary mentioned above, the opposite
is mentioned).

[^7]: The word لـمسنا comes from the root of لـمس whose meaning is
well-known; however in this verse, it alludes to looking and searching
for something (according to Raghib in his book Al-Mufradat and Fakhr
Al-Ra¤hi in his Tafsir Al-Kabir and also Tafsir Al-Qurtubi).   Also, the
word حرس whose plural is حارس is in the meaning of a protector or
guardian and some Scholars have mentioned that this word is actually a
plural form of the verb.

[^8]: The word قاسط comes from the root of قسط which means dividing
something equally or justly and when applied to pattern of the 'Arabic
verb افعال, it is changed to اقساط whose meaning is to apply justice. 
However, when it is used in its original pattern and form as in this
verse, its meaning is of oppression and to stray away from the path of
Truth.

[^9]: The word تحروا comes from the root word تحرى which means making an
intention for something.

[^10]: Tafsir Ruh Al-Bayan, Volume 10, Page 195.

[^11]: Al-Usul min Al-Kafi, Volume 2, Section: “The Believer and his
Traits and Characteristics”.

[^12]: It should be noted that perhaps the only thing that has led these
commentators of the Qur’an to accept that these verses were the speech
of Allah inserted between the words of the Jinn is the pronoun known in
\`Arabic as (متكلم مع الغير) or The First Person Plural which have been
used in these verses.  In one place it is mentioned that, ”We would
certainly have given them abundant water to drink.“  In another place,
it is mentioned ”So that We might try them with respect to it…” However,
anytime we take these types of speech as being sentences related or
narrated to others, then there is no problem (in understanding the
meaning of such sentences).  A good example of this is when a person
relates a story to one of his friends and then says, “Such and such
person is of the belief that I am a good person.”  (Obviously, the
person whom he is speaking about would not have used the word “I”,
rather, he would have used the word “he”, however the person who is
listening would automatically understand what the person is saying.)

[^13]: Some Commentators of the Qur’an have given the possibility that
the meaning of طريقة in this verse is that path of disbelief and the
increase in blessings which one would be entitled to receive after
staying firm on this path (of disbelief).  In reality, the preliminary
stage (that Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He tests His servants with)
is that of punishment (for their sins) and this is done through being
lured or enticed by blessings (from Allah, Glorified and Exalted is He)
however this commentary does not fit with the tone of the verse under
discussion nor would it ever correspond with the verses that precede and
follow this verse.

[^14]: Wasa’il ash-Shi\`a, Volume 2, Page 970, hadith 3.

[^15]: Wasa’il ash-Shi\`a, Volume 18, Page 490 (Section on the Islamic
Penalty for Theft, Section 4, hadith 5)

[^16]: Tafsir Nur ath-Thaqalain, Volume 5, Page 439 and 440

[^17]: In regards to the issue of Intercession from the viewpoint of the
Qur’an and ahadith, a complete discussion has been carried out in volume
1 of this Commentary (Tafsir-e-Namuna) under verse 48 of Suratul
Baqarah.  In relation to the truthfulness of Tawassul, a discussion in
volume 4 of the same Tafsir verse 45 of Suratul Ma'idah has also been
carried out.

[^18]: Suratul Jinn, 72:18.

[^19]: According to this commentary and since this sentence is from the
speech of the believing Jinn, the use of the pronoun of غائب or The
Third Person in place of متلكم or The First Person has been done for
drawing the attention, or due to the fact that a group of the Jinn had
spoken these words in relation to another group of the Jinn to explain
their actions (pay attention to this point).

[^20]: In reference to the event of revelation of this verse, some
commentators have mentioned that the non-believers from among the
Quraish had asked the Prophet to leave his religion so that they would
give him protection and thus, the verse under discussion was revealed
which was a reply to the Quraish. (See Tafsir Abul Futuh Al-Razi, Volume
11, Page 293)

[^21]: Seeing as how the word (بلاغ) can only be made transitive through
the particle (عن), some commentators of the Qur'an have mentioned that
the particle (من) used in this verse comes in the meaning of the
particle (عن) while others have taken the word (کائن) as being in
“taqdir” meaning that there is an implication of a missing syntactical
part (grammatically speaking) in the sentence such that the verse would
read (إلا بلاغا كائنا من الله).

[^22]: According to this, the explanation of this sentence is an
exclusionary condition for the sentence that came before it that reads
(و لن أجد من دونه ملتحداً) and according to the first explanation
offered, it would be an exclusionary condition for the previous verse.

[^23]: The particle (حتی) is commonly used to convey or express the
completion or conclusion of something and in this verse it takes on two
different interpretations.  The first meaning is that that completion or
outcome is actually a sentence which has been omitted such that in
“taqdir” {meaning that there is an implication of a missing syntactical
part (grammatically speaking) in the sentence} the verse would read: (و
لا يزالون يستهزؤن و يستضعفون المؤمنين حتى إذا رأوا ما يوعدون…).  The
second interpretation is that the completion or outcome would be the
part of the verse that reads (يكونون عليه لبدا) which came a few verses
before this verse however the first interpretation is much more
appropriate.

[^24]: Suratul Nazi'at (79), verse 24.

[^25]: Surah az-Zukhruf (43), verse 51.

[^26]: Suratul Ahqaf (46), Verse 9

[^27]: Suratul An\`am (6), Verse 50

[^28]: Surah an-Naml (27), Verse 40

[^29]: Surah ash-Shuara\` (26), Verse 54

[^30]: Surah Saba (34), Verse 35

[^31]: Suratul Kahf (18), Verse 34

[^32]: Suratul Baqarah (2), Verse 249

[^33]: Nahj Al-Balagha, Speech 201

[^34]: Tafsir Al-Muraghi, Volume 29, Page 105

[^35]: The phrase عالم الغيب is the predicate for a nominal clause which
has been eliminated and in actuality, it was هو عالم الغيب.  Some
commentators have taken this phrase to be an attribute (of Allah) or an
appositional substantive for another substantive for the word ربي in the
previous verse.

[^36]: A group of commentators have said that the pronoun (he) in ليعلم
refers to the Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
family) and have stated that this means that Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) has appointed protectors and overseers for the secrets of
the revelation and the message so that the Prophet would know that
definitely, what is coming to him is revelation from Allah (Glorified
and Exalted is He) and thus, he would have no doubt or uncertainty in
the revelation.  However, this explanation, keeping in mind that the
deliverance of the message is the job of the Prophet (blessings of Allah
be upon him and his family) and not the job of the Angels and seeing as
how in the previous verse the word رسول has been used, and a few verses
previously, the word رسالات was used in relation to the personage of the
Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family), it is
highly unlikely that this (second) explanation is correct - thus, the
truth lies in the commentary given.


