Various Points
==============

 

1. An in-depth investigation regarding \`Ilm al-Ghaib
-----------------------------------------------------

   
 By paying close attention to the various verses of the Qur'an, it is
clear that there exists two groups of verses in relation to \`Ilm
al-Ghaib - Knowledge of the Unseen.  The first group are those verses
which limit this knowledge strictly to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He) and negate it for all others such as verse 59 of Suratul An\`am:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِنـدَهُ مَفٌاتِحُ الْغَيْبِ لاٌ يَعْلَمُهٌا إِلاَّ هُوَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“And *with Him are the keys of the unseen treasure - none knows them
except He…”*  
    
 Also, we have in the Qur'an, that which has been mentioned about the
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) in Suratul
An\`am, verse 50:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُـلْ لاٌّ أَقُولُ لَكُمْ عِنـدِي خَزٌآئِـنُ اللٌّهِ وَلاٌ أَعْلَـمُ
الْغَيْبَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Say (O' Muhammad): I do not say to you that I have with me the
treasures of Allah, nor do I know the unseen.”*  
    
 In verse 188 of Suratul A\`raf, we read the following:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَوْ كُنتُ أَعْلَمُ الْغَيْبَ لاَسْتَكْثَرْتُ مِنَ الْخَيْرِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Had I known about the unseen, I would have gained much good.'”*  
    
 The last verse in this discussion is found in Surah Yunus, verse 20, we
read:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَقُلْ إِنَّمٌا الْغَيْبُ لِلٌّهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Say (O' Muhammad):* *Certainly the (Knowledge of the) Unseen is solely
reserved for Allah.”*  
    
 There are many more verses such as these in the Qur'an, however, we
will suffice with these.  
    
 The second group of verses are those which clearly indicate that the
Prophets and intimate friends (Awliyah) of Allah (Glorified and Exalted
is He) have a general knowledge of the Unseen as has been mentioned in
verse 179 of Surah Ale \`Imran which states:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمٌا كٌانَ اللٌّهُ لِيُطْلِعَكُمْ عَلَى الْغَيْبِ وَلٌكِنَّ اللٌّهَ
يَجْتَبِي مِن رُّسُلِهِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*And* *Allah does not inform you of the unseen.  He chooses for such
information anyone of His Messengers as He desires.”*  
    
 Also, in relation to some of the miracles of Prophet \`Isa al-Masih
(peace be upon him), it is mentioned that:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأُنَـبِّئُكُم بِمٌا تَأْكُلُونَ وَمٌا تَـدَّخِرُونَ فِي بُيُوتِكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“I (Prophet 'Isa) inform you of what you eat and what you store in your
house.”*[^1]  
    
 If we look at the exception mentioned in the verse under discussion
(verse 27 of Suratul Jinn), we see that Allah (Glorified and Exalted is
He) has allowed a portion of the Knowledge of the Unseen to be known to
His chosen Messenger (since in \`Arabic, if there is ever an exception
(in a sentence) preceded by a negation, it always refers to an
affirmation):  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاٌّ مَنِ ارْتَضَى مِن رَّسُولٍ فَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِنْ بَيْنِ
يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ رَصَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Except to him whom He is pleased with from among (His) Messengers so
then surely He places before him and behind him a guard.”*[^2]  
    
 From another point of view, the number of verses of the Qur'an that
give us information about hidden matters are not few, such as the second
to fourth verses of Suratul Rum:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
غُـلِبَتِ الرُّومُ فِـي أَدْنَى الأَرْضِ وَهُم مِّن بَعْدِ غَلَبِهِمْ
سَيَـغْـلِبُونَ فِي بِضْـعِ سِنِينَ لِلٌّهِ الأَمْرُ مِن قَبْـلُ
وَمِـن بَعْـدُ وَيَوْمَـئِذٍ يَفْرَحُ الْمُـؤْمِنُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Romans are vanquished. In a near land, and they, after being
vanquished, shall overcome (within a few years) and they will be
victorious.  All matters of the past and future are in the hands of
Allah.  The believers will enjoy the help of Allah on that Day. ”*[^3]  
    
 Also, in verse 85 of Suratul Qasas, Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He)
tells us:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِي فَرَضَ عَلَيْكَ الْقُرْآنَ لَرٌادُّكَ إِلَى مَعٌادٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Certainly the One who had made the Qur'an incumbent upon you will
return you to your starting point (Makkah).”*  
    
 Also, in verse 27 of Suratul Fath, we read the following:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَتَدْخُـلُنَّ الْمَسْجِدَ الْحَرٌامَ إِنْ شٌاءَ اللٌّهُ آمِنِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Certainly you shall enter into the Masjid al-Haram, with the
permission of Allah, in security.”*  
    
 There are also many more verses of the Qur'an such as these.  
    
 In principle, the heavenly revelation *(Wahi)* that is sent down to the
Prophets is also a form of Knowledge of the Unseen which is placed at
their disposal - thus, how can we claim that these personalities do not
have access to the Knowledge of the Unseen when we know that revelation
has come down to them?  
    
 Besides all of these proofs, we have numerous ahadith that show that
Prophet Muhammad (prayers of Allah be upon him and his family) and the
Infallible A'immah (peace be upon all of them) had access to the
Knowledge of the Unseen.  
    
 Sometimes, they were given the knowledge of what would happen in the
future such as the victory of Makkah, and the event surrounding Hatib
ibn Abi Balta\`ah, who wrote a letter to the people of Makkah which he
gave to a woman named Sarah and she was to convey the letter to the
polytheists of Makkah.  She was close to being attacked by the Muslim
army when she hid the letter under her long hair and continued on
towards Makkah.   
    
 The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) ordered
\`Ali (peace be upon him) and a company of troops to go after her. 

The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) also
informed the group of Muslims that when they reach to an area known as
*Rawdha al-Khak* they will meet this woman, who has a letter from Hatib
in her possession which is supposed to be given to the polytheists of
Makkah. 

The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) also
commanded them to take the letter from her.  When the Muslim army found
her, she initially denied having such a letter, however after repeated
requests to her, she finally handed over the writing to \`Ali (peace be
upon him) and the group of Muslims.[^4]  
    
 There are also events such as the prediction of the Battle of Mutah,
and the martyrdom of Ja\`far ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) and other
soldiers and warriors in the Muslim army, which the Prophet (blessings
of Allah be upon him and his progeny) told his followers while they were
still in Madinah.[^5]  
    
 Such examples in the life of the Holy Prophet (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) are not small in number.  
    
 In Nahj al-Balagha, there are many forecasts to the events that would
take place in the future, which show that Imam \`Ali ibn Abi Talib
(peace be upon him) also had access to this hidden knowledge.  One such
example of this can be seen in the 13th Khutbah in which the people of
Basrah were degraded, in which Imam \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon
him) said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَأَنِّي أَنْظُرُ إِلىٌ مَسْجِدِهٌا كَجُؤْجُؤْ سَفِينَةِ قَدْ بَعَثَ
اللٌّهُ عَلَيْهٌا الْعَذٌابِ مِنْ فَوْقِهٌا وَ مِنْ تَحْتِهٌا و غَرَقَ
مَنْ فِي ضَمْنِهٌا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“So then it is as though I see its Masjid like the upper part of a boat
or a sitting ostrich which Allah had sent down punishment to from above
and below and drowned all that were within her protection.”*  
    
 In other ahadith which have been narrated in both the books of the Ahl
as-Sunnah and Shi\`a, there are many other forecasts from Imam \`Ali
(peace be upon him) concerning events that would happen in the future;
such as one where he told Hajr ibn Qais that after his death, Hajr would
be forced to curse \`Ali (peace be upon him).[^6]  
    
 Another example concerns Marwan in which it was mentioned that he would
hold the flag of corruption and despotism in his old age.[^7]  
    
 Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him) told Kumail
bin Ziyad (may Allah be pleased with him) that the tyrant Hajjaj ibn
Yusuf would be his killer.[^8]  
    
 In regards to the Khawarij of Nahrawan, Imam \`Ali (peace be upon him)
mentioned that in this battle, people would not die from his side and
from the opposite side, not even ten people will be saved, and just how
he predicted, it came true.[^9]  
    
 Concerning the burial place of Imam Husayn (peace be upon him), when
Imam \`Ali (peace be upon him) was passing by the land of Karbala, he
spoke certain words in regards to this to his companion, Asbagh ibn
Nabatah.[^10]  
    
 In the book, Fadhail al-Khamsah, there are countless ahadith from the
Ahl as-Sunnah in regards to the vast knowledge of Imam \`Ali (peace be
upon him) of which, to narrate them all here is not possible for
us.[^11]  
    
 As well, in the ahadith from the Ahl al-Bait (peace be upon him), there
are many traditions which point to the fact that the sinless A'immah had
Knowledge of the Unseen.  For those who would like to read more about
this, one can refer to al-Kafi, Volume 1, in the various sections which
mention these ahadith.  
    
 Also, the Late \`Allamah Majlisi in his work, Bihar al-Anwar in volume
27, has narrated quite a large number of ahadith, which fill some 22
chapters on this topic.  
    
 These ahadith which speak about the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny) and the A'immah having Knowledge of the Unseen have
actually reached to the level of *tawatur* (meaning that these ahadith
have been so consecutively narrated that it is not possible to deny the
text) in terms of \`Ilm al-Hadith.  
    
 Now the question remains that:  How can one explain some of the verses
of the Holy Qur'an and the ahadith which deny that anyone other than
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) has Knowledge of the Unseen, while
other verses state some can have this knowledge?  
    
 Different answers are given to this question - including the
following:  
    
 1. The most popular answer which helps us reconcile these two
conflicting views is that the meaning that “Knowledge of the Unseen is
confined to Allah” is that it is His Own and Personal knowledge. 
Therefore, no other person has the ability to know this knowledge except
with His permission and whatever knowledge others have is from Him and
through His Grace upon them.  
    
 The proof of this is the verse that is under discussion which states:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلاٌّ مَنِ ارْتَضَى مِن رَّسُولٍ فَإِنَّهُ يَسْلُكُ مِن بَيْنِ
يَدَيْهِ وَمِنْ خَلْفِهِ رَصَداً عٌالِمُ الْغَيْبِ فَلاٌ يُظْهِرُ
عَلَى غَيْبِهِ أَحَداً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“The Knower of the Unseen! So then He does not reveal His secrets to
anyone. Except to him whom He is pleased with from among His Messengers
so then surely He places before him and behind him a guard.”*  
    
 In Nahj al-Balagha, this same point has been mentioned when \`Ali
(peace be upon him) informed others of events that would happen in the
future (for example, the invasion of the Moguls into the Islamic
Empire).  One of his companions said, 'O' Amir al-Mu’minin!  Do you
claim to have Knowledge of the Unseen?'  The Imam laughed and replied:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ هُـوَ بِعِلْمِ غَيْبِ وَ إِنَّـمٌا هُوَ تَعَلـَّمَ مَنْ ذِي
عِلْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“This is not Knowledge of the Unseen, rather, this is that knowledge
which was taught to me by the possessor of knowledge (the
Prophet).”*[^12]  
    
 This explanation is one that a great number of scholars and researchers
have agreed upon.  
    
 2. The Knowledge of the Unseen are of two types - the first is that
which is specifically limited to Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) and
no one except for Him knows it, such as when the Day of Judgement will
take place and other such issues.  The second type is that knowledge
which He teaches to His Prophets (peace be upon them) and intimate
friends.  Again, in Nahj al-Balagha, under the same speech (as quoted
above), we read the following:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَ إِنَّمٌا عِلْمُ الْغَيْبِ عِلْمُ السٌّاعَةِ وَ مٌا عَدَدَهُ اللٌّهُ
سُبْحٌانَهُ بِقَوْلِهِ: إِنَّ اللٌّهَ عِنْدَهُ عِلْمُ السٌّاعَةِ، وَ
يُنَـِّزلُ الْغَيْثَ، وَ يَعْلَمُ مٌا فِي الأَرْحَامِ، وَ مٌا تَدْرِي
نَفْسٌ مٌا ذَا تَكْسِبُ غَداً وَ مٌا تَدْرِي بِأَيِّ أَرْضٍ تَمُوتَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Verily knowledge of the Unseen is the knowledge of the Day of Judgment
and what Allah has mentioned in His Saying: {Verily, Allah is He with
Whom is the knowledge of the Hour and He sends down the rain, and He
knows what is in the womb; and no soul knows what he shall earn
tomorrow; nor does any soul know in what land he shall die in.}*”[^13]  
    
 Then to further explain this, the Imam (peace be upon him) added:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَيَعْلَمُ اللٌّهُ سُبْحانَهُ ما فِي الأَرْحامِ مِنْ ذَكَرٍ أَوْ
أُنْثَى وَ قَبِيحٍ أَوْ جَمِيلٍ وَ سَخِيٍّ أَوْ بَخِيلٍ وَ شَقِيٍّ
أَوْ سَعِيدٍ وَ مَنْ يَكُونُ فِي النٌّارِ حَطَباً أَوْ فِي الْجِنانِ
لِلنَّبِيِّينَ مُرافِقاً فَهذَا عِلْمُ الْغَيْبِ الَّذِي لا يَعْلَمُهُ
أَحَدٌ إِلاٌّ اللٌّهُ وَ ما سِوَى ذٌلِكَ فَعِلْمٌ عَلَّمَهُ اللٌّهُ
نَبِيَّهُ (صَلَّى اللٌّهُ عَلَيْهِ وَ آلِهِ وَ سَلَّمَ) فَعَلَّمَنِيهِ
وَ دَعا لِي بِأَنْ يَعِيَهُ صَدْرِي وَ تَضْطَمَّ عَلَيْهِ جَوانِحِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Therefore, Allah alone has knowledge in reference to that which is in
the womb of the mother - whether it is a boy or a girl; whether it is
beautiful or ugly; whether it will be generous or miserly; whether it
will be successful or misfortunate; whether that (which is in the womb)
would be the fuel for the hell fire or relaxing in the gardens in the
company of the Prophets. *

*This is the Knowledge of the Unseen which no one knows other than
Allah.  Other than this, there is knowledge which Allah taught His
Messenger (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) which he has
taught me and he (the Prophet) also prayed for me that my bosom may
retain it and my ribs may hold it.”*[^14]  
    
 It is possible that some people are given general knowledge in relation
to the state or sex of the fetus, or the falling of the rain, or other
things like this, however, complete and comprehensive knowledge and the
ability to inform others of those particular characteristics is only
reserved to the pure Essence of Allah.   
    
 This can be seen in the knowledge of Qiyamah that we too have a general
knowledge of this day; however we are not given information of the
particular characteristics and all of the peculiarities of it.   
    
 Therefore, if in the ahadith we see that the Prophet (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his progeny) or the A'immah (peace be upon them)
gave others knowledge of a baby that would be born, or when the end of
the life of a person would come, then we must say that this knowledge is
related to that general knowledge that they were granted by Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He).  
    
 3. Another way to combine the interpretation of these two theories by
using the verses of the Qur'an and ahadith is to state that the secrets
of the unseen are recorded in two separate areas:  the **لوح**
**المحفوظ** (Lawhul Mahfuz) or the Guarded Tablet (this is the special,
guarded knowledge only available to Allah) in which no changes or
variations can take place and of which not a single soul has information
of; and the second area is the **لوح محو و إثبات** (Lawh Mahw wa Ithbat)
or the Tablet of Change and Confirmation. 

The knowledge contained on this tablet is changeable and alterable
depending on certain conditions.  It is the knowledge contained here,
which is also Knowledge of the Unseen, that is not limited to Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) alone, and thus, others can have access to
this knowledge.  
    
 It is because of these two different areas where knowledge is stored
that we have the following narration from Imam Ja\`far as-Sadiq (peace
be upon him):  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لِلٌّهِ عِلْماً لَمْ يَعْلَمْهُ إِلاٌّ هُوَ، وَ عِلْماً
أَعْلَمْهُ مَلائِكَتَهُ وَ رُسُلَهُ، فَما أَعْلَمَهُ مَلائِكَتُهُ وَ
أَنْبَيائَهُ وَ رُسُلَهُ فَنَحْنُ نَعْلَمُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One type of knowledge is that which only Allah has and no one else
knows.  Another type of knowledge is the type which He has informed
Angels, Prophets and Apostles, and we (the Ahl al-Bait) also know
it.”*[^15]  
    
 The following has been narrated from Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn (peace be
upon him):  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ لا آيَةٌ فِي كِـتابِ اللٌّهِ لَحَدَّثْتُكُمْ بِما كٌانَ وَ ما
يَكُونُ إِلـى يَـوْمِ الْقِيامَةِ! فَقُلْتُ لَهُ أَيَّةُ آيَةُ؟
فَقالَ: قَوْلِ اللٌّهِ: يَمْــحُوا اللٌّهُ مَا يَــشَاءُ وَ يُثْبِتُ
وِ عِنْدَهُ أُمُّ الْكِتَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

”*If one verse had not been in the Holy Qur'an, I also would have
informed you of the past happenings and what will happen until the Day
of Judgement.”*

*The Narrator says that he asked the Imam: “Which verse is that?” The
Imam replied: “Allah says: 'Allah makes to pass away and establishes
what He pleases, and with Him is the basis of the Book.'”* [^16]  
    
 In this argument, the knowledge has been divided into *definite* and
*indefinite*. In the preceding argument it was part or full (how much of
the knowledge). (Ponder over it).  
    
 4. Another way to explain the difference is that in practice, Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) has complete knowledge over all that which
is hidden (to others) and it is possible that the Prophets and intimate
friends of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He), in practice or on their
own, do not have access to this knowledge. 

However, when they intend or wish to know such things, then Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He) teaches it to them.  Of course this
intention or wish is only with the permission and pleasure of Allah
(Glorified and Exalted is He).  
    
 Therefore, to summarize the verses of the Qur'an and ahadith that tell
us that the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny),
A'immah (peace be upon them) and others do not have Knowledge of the
Unseen means that at that exact time, they do not possess the knowledge;
and those verses or ahadith which say that they do possess Knowledge of
the Unseen mean that they have the ability to gain such knowledge (from
Allah, (Glorified and Exalted is He)).   
    
 This can be compared to a person who is given a letter from someone and
is requested to pass the letter to a third person.  In this example we
can say that the person who was given the letter does not know what it
contains. 

However at the same time, he is able to open the letter and read it
contents (as long as the person who gave him the letter gave him the
permission to do so).  In this event, he would have knowledge of what is
contained in the letter.  If he does not give him permission, then he
would remain unaware of its contents.  
    
 The best example of Knowledge of the Unseen, after combining all the
meanings of the ahadith that have been mentioned can be found in Al-Kafi
in the section titled, '*Surely the A'immah, when they want to know
something, they are taught it!'*  
    
 There is a hadith from Imam Ja\`far as-Sadiq (peace be upon him) in
which he stated:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اذٌا أَرادَ الإِمامُ أَنْ يَعْلَمَ شَيْئاً أَعْلَمَهُ اللٌّهُ
بِذٌلِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“When the Imam intends to know something, Allah teaches that thing to
him.”[^17]  
    
 This interpretation clears up a lot of the difficulties and
misunderstandings in relation to the knowledge of the Prophet (blessings
of Allah be upon him and his family) and the A'immah (peace be upon them
all) such as: how is it possible for them to drink water or eat food
that is laced with poison whereas we know that it is not permitted for a
person to do an act that will lead to danger of losing his life. 

Thus, we must say that in such examples, the Prophet (blessings of Allah
be upon him and his family) or the A'immah (peace be upon them all) have
not been given the permission by Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) to
make use of the Knowledge of the Unseen that is there and usually
available to them.  
    
 Also, sometimes the betterment requires that the Prophet (blessings of
Allah be upon him and his family) and A'immah (peace be upon them all)
are not made aware of a certain thing or that they are not told of it,
so that the event can pass as a test for them which would result in
their completeness as a human being. 

For example, it has been mentioned in the event recorded in history
known as *Lailatul Mabit* in which \`Ali (peace be upon him) slept on
the bed of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family),
in which it has been narrated from \`Ali (peace be upon them all) that
he himself said that he did not know whether the polytheists of the
Quraish would attack him on that night and he would become a martyr in
the way of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) or if his life would be
spared?  
    
 In this instance, the betterment requires that the Imam (peace be upon
him) is not made aware of the outcome of his actions so that the Divine
test of Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) can take form. 

Thus, if the Imam (peace be upon him) knew that he was going to be
sleeping on the bed of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and
his family) and then the next morning, he would wake up safe and sound,
then this would not be an act of honour or glory for the Imam (peace be
upon him); and that which is mentioned in the verses of the Qur'an and
the ahadith in relation to the importance of this act of self-sacrifice
would not have had any meaning.  
    
 Of course, the issue of Knowledge of the Unseen being accessible if the
Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his family) or A'immah
(peace be upon them all) wish clears up this and other types of
confusions.  
    
 5. Another way to reconcile these differing views that are found in the
ahadith in relation to Knowledge of the Unseen (however, please note
that this way of reconciliation is in relation to some of the narrations
as well and that the people who were being spoken to in these various
ahadith were different people) is that some of the companions of the
Prophet and A'immah had the ability to understand and accept the issue
of Knowledge of the Unseen in relation to the A'immah (peace be upon
them all) such that it could be told to these companions in its
entirety.  However in relation to various other companions, they were
either to weak (of faith) or unable to understand and accept such
concepts.  
    
 For example, we read a hadith that once Abu Basir and a large group of
companions were in the house of Imam Ja\`far as-Sadiq (peace be upon
him) when all of a sudden the Imam entered the room upset, sat down and
said the following:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِيَا عَجَباً لِأَقْوامٍ يَزْعُمُونَ أَنَّا نَعْلَمُ الْغَيْبَ! مَا
يَعْلَمُ الْغَيْبَ إِلاٌّ اللٌّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلّ، لَقَدْ هَمَمْتَ
بِضَرْبِ جَارِيَتِي فُلانَةَ فَهَرَبْتَ مِنِّي فَما عَلِمْتُ فِي أَيِّ
بُيُوتِ الدَّارِ هِيَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*It is surprising that some people think that we have Knowledge of the
Unseen (\`Ilm al-Ghaib). No one apart from Allah has this knowledge. I
wanted to reprimand my female-slave however she has disappeared from my
presence and I do not know which room of my house she is in.”*[^18]  
    
 The narrator of the hadith then said, “When the Imam stood up and left
the assembly, me and a group of the companions got up and went into the
house of the Imam and said to him, 'May we be sacrificed for you!  In
regards to what you said relating to one of your female servants that
you do not have the Knowledge of the Unseen, however we know that you
have various types of knowledge, thus, why did you say what you did
concerning your female slave?'”  
    
 The Imam (peace be upon him) then elaborated on his statement which
contained an explanation about *Knowledge of the Unseen*.  
    
 It was clear that in the gathering, there were people who did not have
the ability or aptitude necessary to understand and comprehend the
meaning, nor did they have a deep cognizance of the Imam (and this is
why he said what he did).  
    
 It must be pointed out that these five points mentioned do not oppose
or contradict one another and all of these points can be taken as
truthful. (Ponder on this)  
  

2. Another Way to Prove that the Prophets and A’immah have Knowledge of the Unseen
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

   
 At this point, we present two other proofs that confirm the truth that
the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) and the
Sinless A'immah (peace be upon them all) have a general Knowledge of the
Unseen.  
    
 First: The jurisdiction of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him
and his progeny) and the A'immah (peace be upon them all) was universal
and for all time, thus it was not limited.  Rather, the Apostleship of
the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) and the
leadership of the A'immah (peace be upon them all) was world-wide and
eternal.  Thus, how is it possible that someone can be given such a wide
jurisdiction and authority, but yet at the same time are only given
knowledge of that particular time and place in which they are living
in?   
    
 Is it possible for a person who is for example, given the
responsibility of being a governor or administrator of a large country
to not be aware of that area and at the same time be able to fulfill his
role of authority or control over that area?  
    
 In other words, the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his
progeny) and A'immah (peace be upon them all) had to give guidance,
instructions and lay down laws which would help people who would come in
the future and in all lands and not only be limited to those who were
their contemporaries. This is not possible except by possessing at least
a small portion of the Knowledge of the Unseen.  
    
 Secondly: There are three verses of the Holy Qur'an which if we place
them next to one another, would fully explain the Knowledge of the
Unseen that had been granted to the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon
him and his progeny) and A'immah (peace be upon them all).  
    
 1. The first is about a person named Asif bin Barkhiya, who in the
twinkling of an eye, brought the throne of Bilqis to the court of
Prophet Sulayman (peace be upon him):  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَـالَ الَّذِي عِندَهُ عِلْمٌ مِّنَ الْكِـتَابِ أَنَا آتِيكَ بِهِ
قَبْلَ أَنْ يَرْتَدَّ إِلَيْكَ طَرْفُكَ فَلَمٌّا رَآهُ مُسْتَقِراً
عِندَهُ قٌالَ هَذَا مِن فَضْلِ رَبِّي
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*One who had some knowledge of the book said: I will bring it to you in
the twinkling of an eye. Then when he saw it settled beside him, he
said: This is by the grace of my Lord.”* [^19]  
    
 2. The second verse states:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ كَفَى بِاللٌّهِ شَهِيداً بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَكُمْ وَمَنْ عِندَهُ
عِلْمُ الْكِتَابِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Say: Allah is sufficient as a Witness between me and you and whoever
has knowledge of the book.”*[^20]  
    
 In many narrations both in the books of the Ahl as-Sunnah and Shi\`a,
it is stated that when the Prophet (peace be upon him and his family)
was asked by Abu Sa\`id Khudri about “One who had some knowledge of the
book *(min al-Kitab)?”*[^21]

The Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) replied
that it was the successor of his brother Sulayman bin Dawud.  Then he
asked the Prophet that who was the one who “has (complete) knowledge of
the Book?”[^22]  He replied: It is my brother \`Ali ibn Abi
Talib.”[^23]  
    
 Paying attention to the first verse that states, '…some knowledge of
the book' (which has been related to be in reference to Asif ibn
Barkhiya) is a fraction or a share of the knowledge; whereas in the
second verse, 'knowledge of the book' (which has been related to be in
reference to \`Ali ibn Abi Talib (peace be upon him)) is complete
knowledge. 

Therefore, the difference between the station of knowledge that was
granted to Asif and that which was granted to \`Ali (peace be upon him)
is made clear.  
    
 3. The third verse under discussion is:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…وَنَزَّلْنَا عَلَيْكَ الْكِتَابَ تِبْيَاناً لِّكُلِّ شَيْءٍ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…*and We have revealed the Book to you clearly explaining everything…”*
[^24]  
    
 It is clear that one who knows the secrets of this Book, must also have
Knowledge of the Unseen, and this is in itself clear proof that it is
possible for men from among the intimate friends of Allah (Glorified and
Exalted is He) to have Knowledge of the Unseen, by the permission of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He).[^25]  
  

3. An in-Depth Study Regarding the Creation of the Jinn
-------------------------------------------------------

   
 The Jinn, just as the literal meaning of the word denotes, are
creations which are unseen as having many characteristics.  It has been
mentioned in the Qur'an that:  
    
 1) They are beings that have been created from fire, as opposed to man
who has been created and fashioned from dirt:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَ الإِنْسَانَ مِنْ صَلْصَالٍ كَالْفَخٌّارِ وَخَلَقَ الْجَانَّ مِن
مٌّارِجٍ مِّن نٌّارٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*He created man from dry clay like Earthen vessels, and He created the
Jinn from fire free of smoke.”*[^26]

2) The Jinn are creatures that have knowledge and understanding and are
able to discern between truth and falsehood.  They also have the power
of logic and deduction. (See various Ayat of Suratul Jinn, as have
already been mentioned)

3) The Jinn too have a responsibility towards their Creator. (Various
Ayat of Suratul Jinn and Suratul Rahman)  
    
 4) A group of them are righteous believers, and a group of them are
non-believers:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنٌّا مِنٌّا الصٌّالِحُونَ وَمِنٌّا دُونَ ذٌلِكَ كُنٌّا طَرَائِقَ
قِدَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*As for us, certainly some of us are righteous and others are not.  We
have all followed different paths.”*[^27]  
    
 5) They too have a day when they will be brought together and will have
to account for their deeds:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَمٌّا الْقٌاسِطُونَ فَكَانُوا لِجَهَنَّمَ حَطَباً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"However, the deviators from the Truth will be the fuel for
hell.”*[^28]  
    
 6) They used to have the ability to go to the heavens and even received
knowledge from there and used to steal information, but this was later
on was forbidden for them:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنٌّا كُنٌّا نَقْعُدُ مِنْهَا مَقَاعِدَ لِلسَّمْعِ فَمَنْ
يَسْتَمِعِ الآنَ يَجِدْ لَهُ شِهَاباً رَّصَداً
  </p>
</blockquote>

”*We used to sit near by and try to listen to the heavens, but shooting
flames now await those who try to do that.”*[^29]  
    
 7) Some of them are able to meet and communicate with human beings, and
are able to increase their limited knowledge and information, relating
to some of the secrets of the world:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنَّهُ كٌانَ رِجٌالٌ مِّنَ الإِنسِ يَعُوذُونَ بِرِجَالٍ مِّنَ
الْجِنِّ فَزَادُوهُمْ رَهَقاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"Certain human beings sought refuge with certain Jinn and this
increased the rebelliousness of those Jinn.”*[^30]  
    
 8) From among them, we find some that have great powers and strength,
just as we find among humans beings as well:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قَالَ عِفْريتٌ مِّنَ الْجِنِّ أَنَا آتِيكَ بِهِ قَبْلَ أَن تَقُومَ
مِنْ مَّقَامِكَ وَإِنِّي عَلَيْهِ لَقَوِيٌّ أَمِينٌ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*"A monstrous Jinn said, “I can bring it (the Throne of Bilqis) before
you even stand up.  Verily I am powerful and trustworthy.”*[^31]  
    
 9) Some of them have the ability to perform tasks on behalf of human
beings, as has been mentioned in the Qur'an:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمِنَ الْجِنِّ مَن يَعْمَلُ بَيْنَ يَدَيْهِ بِإِذْنِ رَبِّهِ…
يَعْمَلُونَ لَهُ مٌا يَشٌاءُ مِن مَّحَارِيبَ وَتَمَاثِيلَ وَجِفَانٍ
كَالْجَوٌابِ ..
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…*and of the Jinn there were those who worked before him (Sulayman) by
the command of his Lord … they made for him what he pleased of
fortresses and images, and bowls (large) as watering troughs and
cooking pots…”*[^32]  
    
 10) Their creation and placing on the Earth, took place before the
creation of mankind:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَالْجَآنَّ خَلَقْنَاهُ مِن قَبْلُ مِن نَّارِ السَّمُومِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“…*and We created the Jinn before (the human being) of smokeless
fire.”*[^33]  
    
 In addition to this, from the verses of the Qur'an, we can clearly see
that contrary to that which is in the minds of the common people (who
feel that they are better than the Jinn), there are truly some people
who are better than them and our proof is that all of the Prophets of
Allah are human beings that were chosen (for the role of Prophethood)
and it was the Jinn who were commanded to believe in the Prophet of
Islam (blessings of Allah be upon him and his progeny) who was a human
being and were commanded to followed him.  
    
 Above all, Shaytan who, according to the Qur'an was of the Jinn (see
verse 50 of Suratul Kahf), was commanded to perform Sajdah to Prophet
Adam (peace be upon him) and this shows the greatness and eminence of
mankind over the Jinn.  
    
 Up until this point, our discussion was centered on the facts that were
mentioned in the Holy Qur'an, which is free from all sorts of
corruption, in relation to this unseen creation.  

However, as we know, the common people and those who are irrational have
conjectured up various adulterated ideas in relation to this creation of
Allah (Glorified and Exalted is He) which both the intelligence and
logic can not accept.  
    
 Due to this, a corrupt and unrealistic view of this creation has been
made such that whenever the word Jinn is mentioned, a whole group of
corrupt thoughts and beliefs pop up in the mind of the people.  Some
things that people mention are that the Jinn have the ability of
metamorphosis, thus, they take the shape and form of various strange,
wild and scary creatures.  They are also thought to be creations full of
anger and rage and that if they were to throw a bowl of hot water into
an empty area of a house then the whole house would catch on fire; and
other beliefs such as these.  
    
 However, if the issue of the Jinn was to be studied without all of
these strange and wrong misconceptions, then the primary topic at hand
would be completely understood and accepted, since we have no proof that
living creatures that exist are limited to only those that can be seen
by the naked eye.  Rather, the scholars of Religion, and the Scientists
and Researchers of the natural sciences have said that any creature that
mankind is able to discern by using his senses, cannot be compared to
those creatures that cannot be perceived by the five natural senses.  
  

Until recently when unseen creations the size of atoms had not been
discovered, nobody would have believed that in one drop of water or one
drop of blood, there exists thousands and thousands of living organisms
which we as humans did not have the power to see.  
    
 Also, the scientists have mentioned that our own eyes are limited in
what colours it can see; also, our ears are limited to the spectrum and
frequencies of sounds which it can hear.  The colours which we cannot
see and the sounds which we cannot hear are much more in number than we
are able to see or hear!  
    
 When we see that the state of the world and our surroundings are such,
then it is no place of amazement that there can be various types of
living creatures in this universe which we are not able to perceive. 
Thus, when the true light - the Prophet of Islam (blessings of Allah be
upon him and his progeny) - informs us about such creations, why is it
not possible for us to accept them?  
    
 In any case, on one hand, we have the Qur'an - the true spoken word -
which has informed us of the Jinn along with their special
characteristics as mentioned above; and on another side, we have no
logical proof that can be brought forth to deny their existence.  Thus,
we must accept their existence and stay away from all wrong and corrupt
ideas.  We must also keep away from all contaminated ideas that are in
the minds of the common people while discussing the Jinn.  
    
 It is also important to mention this final point that the word Jinn
sometimes carries a much wider meaning which includes various unseen
creations - both those that possess intellect and those who do not. 
Sometimes, even some animals that can be seen by the naked eye, but are
hidden inside their nest or den are also included in this wider meaning
of Jinn.  
    
 An example of this can be seen in the narrations from the Prophet of
Islam (blessings of Allah upon him and his family) in which he said:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَلَقَ اللٌّهُ الْجِنَّ خَمْسَةَ أَصْنَافٍ: صِنْفٌ كَالْرِيحِ فِي
الْهَوَاءِ وَ صِنْفٌ حَياتٌ وَ صِنْفٌ عَقَارِبٌ وَ صِنْفٌ حَشَرَاتِ
الأَرْضِ وَ صِنْفٌ كَبَنِي آدَمَ عَلَيْهِمُ الْحِسَابِ وَ الْعِقَابِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Allah has created the Jinn in five different types: One group is like
the wind (unseen); another group is in the form of a snake; a third
group is in the form of a scorpion; the next group is those wild animals
of the land; and the last group is just like humans which have
accountability for their good and bad deeds.”*[^34]  
    
 By paying close attention to this hadith and its wide definition (of
the Jinn), very many difficulties and problems which are mentioned in
various other ahadith and stories in relation to the Jinn are solved.  
    
 For example, in some of the ahadith from Amir al-Mu’minin \`Ali ibn Abi
Talib (peace be upon him), we read the following:  
  

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاٌ تَشْرِبُ الْمَــاءَ مِنْ ثُلْمَةِ الأَنَاءِ وَ لا مِنْ عَرُوتِهِ
فَإِنَّ الشَّيْطٌانَ يَقْعُدُ عَلـى الْعُرْوَةِ وَالْثَلَمَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

“*Do not drink water from a broken or defective glass, since verily*
*Shaytan* *sits in the defective and broken (glasses).”*[^35]  
    
 Keeping in mind that Shaytan is from the Jinn and that a broken dish
and the area where it is kept is a place where all types of microbes and
germs gather, it is not difficult to assume that the words Jinn and
Shaytan (as used in these ahadith) carry a general meaning and would
include these things (germs and microbes) too even though this hadith
(and others) have a specific meaning that the Jinn or Shaytan is a being
with understanding and intelligence and have a responsibility to their
Creator and the ahadith in these regards are also quite numerous.[^36]  
    
  

[^1]: Surah Ale Imran (3), Verse 49.

[^2]: Suratul Jinn (72), Verse 27.

[^3]: Surah ar-Rum (30), Verse 2 – 4.

[^4]: A commentary on this event and its complete references can be
found in the commentary of Surah Mumtahinah.

[^5]: Kamil ibn Athir, Volume 2, Page 237 in the section on the Battle
of Mutah.

[^6]: Mustadrak Al-Sahihain, Volume 2, page 358

[^7]: Tabaqat of ibn Sa\`d, Volume 5, page 30.

[^8]: Al-Isabatu of ibn Al-Hajr, Volume 5, Section 3, Page 325.

[^9]: Haythami in the book Majma\`, Volume 6, Page 241.

[^10]: Al-Riyadh Al-Nadhirah, Volume 2, Page 222.

[^11]: Fadhail Al-Khamsah, volume 2, Pages 231 to 253.

[^12]: Nahj Al-Balagha, Speech 128.

[^13]: Surah Luqman (31), Verse 34.

[^14]: Nahj Al-Balagha, Speech 127. Bihar Al-Anwar, Volume 26, Page 160,
hadith 5, there are many ahadith on this topic from the same source.

[^15]: Bihar Al-Anwar, Volume 26, Page 160, hadith 5, there are many
ahadith on this topic from the same source.

[^16]: Tafsir Nur ath-Thaqalain, Volume 2, Page 512, hadith 160.

[^17]: Al-Kafi, Section: “Surely the A'immah, when they want to know
something, they are taught it”, hadith 3.  There are also other ahadith
in this section on this topic.

[^18]: Usul Al-Kafi, Volume 1, hadith 3.

[^19]: Surah an-Naml (27), Verse 40.

[^20]: Surah ar-Ra\`d (13), Verse 43

[^21]: Surah an-Naml (27), Verse 40

[^22]: Surah ar-Ra\`d (13), Verse 43

[^23]: Refer to Volume 3 of the book Ahqaq Al-Haqq, Pages 280-281 and
the Tafsir Nur ath-Thaqalain, volume 2, Page 523.

[^24]: Surah an-Nahl (16), Verse 89

[^25]: In the commentary (of Ayatullah Nasir Makarim Shirazi,
Tafsir-e-Namunah) in Suratul An'am, verses 50, 59 (Volume 5, Pages 245
and 268) and Suratul A'raf, verse 188 (Volume 7, Page 46), this subject
has been discussed in detail.

[^26]: Suratul Rahman (55), Verse 15.

[^27]: Suratul Jinn (72), Verse 11.

[^28]: Suratul Jinn (72), Verse 15.

[^29]: Suratul Jinn (72), Verse 9.

[^30]: Suratul Jinn (72), Verse 6.

[^31]: Suratul Nahl (16), Verse 39.

[^32]: Surah Saba (34), Verse 13.

[^33]: Suratul Hijr (15), Verse 27

[^34]: Safinat Al-Bihar, Volume 1, Page 186 (Under جن).

[^35]: Al-Kafi, Volume 6, Page 385, Section on “Book of Drinking”
section on “Types of Vessels”, hadith 5.

[^36]: In the first volume of the book, The First University and the
Last Prophet, there are approximately 23 Ahadith in relation to this
topic.


