Introduction Hussain - the Universalist Preface
===============================================

( 05 )


Imam Hussain (a.s.) has been the source of much interest for scores of
writers and researchers. His revolt against the autocratic rule of
Yezid, of the Umayyad dynasty, has been a particular magnet for this
flurry of writing

However, there remains a vast area yet to be discovered about this
great revolutionary, not least because he so closely emulated his
father, Imam Ali (a.s.) and his grandfather - Mohammad, the Prophet of
Islam (s.a.w.). In this regard, it is worth noting that, in his praise,
the Prophet said, "Hussain and I are one".

In this booklet, the author discusses Imam Hussain's revolt in brief as
he had already examined the revolt in great detail in his monumental
work "The Hussaini Epic - al-Malhamal Hussainiyyah".

The author differs with the arguments of mainstream biographers and
historiographers. Though this does not mean that we must agree with
every detail he has put forward, the opinions expressed in this text are
novel and worthy of pondering.

And despite the brevity of the booklet, the approach is far from
ambiguous; it is direct, clear and to the point. Thus, reading the
booklet will, no doubt, serve in some measure to get to grips with the
subject matter of Imam Hussain's revolt. A rising that has been a symbol
of Shi'ism and Alawite gallantry and a bravery that has characterised
this Muslim School of Thought,

i.e. the followers of the Progeny of the Prophet (s.a.w.).

We take pride in presenting this great work of the martyr Murtadha
Mutahhari about the life and sacrifices of the Lord of martyrs Imam
Hussain (a.s.). This is also a manifestation and recognition of the
played Hussaini rising in supporting the umma's work with sublime
principles for which the Imam laid his life.

In the end, I pray to Allah, the Most High to bestow success on us all
and guide us to that which is capable and worthy of bringing us closer
to Him.


