Introduction Hussain - the Universalist
=======================================

( 09 )

It is in the very nature of great reformers that they belong to
everybody, everywhere. Hussain's noble deed is so relevant to the entire
human race that I am sure there is a far bigger audience waiting for him
somewhere than the one he already has. All that is required is to draw
people's attention.

Contemporary society, irrespective of race and religion, would do well
to have a closer look at the Hero of Karbala as his message transcends
the barriers of caste creed, race and religion. Advocates of human
rights, sociologists, reformers, theologians, all included, will find
"delightful wisdom, sweet instructions, and a meaning suited to their
mind", in his story. His message is certainly not an exclusive preserve
of any particular group. It embraces the entire human race. It was not a
power struggle. Hussain persistently and explicitly expounded, " What
matters to me is to "correct not conquer" - An affirmation that he would
die in the firm belief that a despot's idiosyncrasies could never be an
effective instrument of religious policies. Yezid became too big for his
boots and assumed the characteristics of a despot who, almost as a
condition of his position, made boastful and frivolous claims that he
alone could lead the nation [ummah].

Hussain was, however, committed to redeeming Islam and maintaining the
faith intact.

He hoped that matters would improve and kept a low profile to preserve
amity. He had a clear choice: stand aside and let Yezid act according to
his whims; (and thus join in and implicitly justify his abominable
escapades) or counter his devious bluster. Hussain had to decide: to
take the situation in its stride as a price worth paying for the "status
quo"; or view it as an ominous foretaste of the consequences of the
extensive damage done by the far-reaching anti-Islamic activities of
Yezid, the mammon of unrighteousness, whose lust for power prompted him
to beat the nation into the mould he favoured. He and his profane crew
conspired to scuttle the ship of Islam by worse than heinous deeds,
violating the aims for which Islam was born.

Hussain had no desire to live under such a corrupt Caliph. He wanted to
act as quietly and as "spontaneously" as possible so as to limit the
possibilities of an open clash with the Calip. But Yezid bargained hard.
Hussain could not take his effervescent nonsense perpetually and did
what was right.

If the moral standards of human behaviour were as high as they were in
the person of Hussain the world would be a better place to live in, is
the obvious inference. His incredible cool and superhuman moral courage
to achieve his mission stirs our deepest emotions. His exemplary
conduct, throughout, and

adorable conscience tore Yezid's monstrous designs to shreds.

The virtuous people will continue to do their duty to maintain
righteousness in this world and in this they are entitled to universal
recognition and support. Hussain's acceptance of persecution in the
cause of humanity was most convincing and moving proof of God's
immanence in men. He was a man par excellence who maintained the highest
standards set by the martyrs and heroes of all ages. With a courage that
was more than human he managed to leave a message for the entire world,
"Do not submit to exploitation, of any kind; maintain a tenacious grip
on veracity; better die with honour than live in shame". He surely
deserves universal recognition. "He is an immortal heir of universal
praise". More than Fourteen hundred years have passed but the memory of
that adorable hero, who resolutely faced the soul-searching trials and
tribulations, has not diminished. On the contrary, it has grown in
intensity. Imbued with exemplary fortitude, moral fibre and aplomb,
Hussain has emerged as the most revered and meritorious martyr the world
has produced, who established the highest standards of excellence of
which humanity prides itself. \* Excerpts from the Introduction to
"Sunshine at Midnight (The Karbala Epic)", a rhymed version of the story
of Karbala in English, by the late S.A. Mahdi, 1985.


