The Truth About Al-hussain's Revolt
===================================

( 12 )

In the Name of God, the Compassionate the Merciful

Different phenomena vary as to their realities. Similarly, every
uprising or revolt is unique as to the truth/s underlying its eruption
[and eventual success or otherwise].

In order to understand a particular matter, or a state of affairs, you
should know the deeper reasons underling its existing form and the
characteristics that gave it that specific appearance. You should also
be conscious of the material causes of that matter, or issue, i.e. its
constituents or ingredients. In other words:

1. The forces/causes that produced the revolt or uprising, which
signify its truth are called "the causes at work".
2. The nature of the revolt and its goals represent "its intents and
purposes".
3. The actual action plan, implementing it, and all what goes with it
represent "its material causes".
4. The end result that the revolt has come to produce represents its
"overall picture".
[Applying these parameters], was Imam Hussain's uprising a result of an
angry outburst?

Islam is different from some other movements for change or reform that
took place as a result of certain circumstances that in turn led to
eruptions. Dialectics, for example, encourages heightening
disagreements, inciting discontent, and showing opposition even for
genuine reforms in order to bring things to a head on collision, i.e. an
explosive revolution, not a conscious one.

Islam does not subscribe to these types of revolutions. The history of
most Islamic revolts or uprisings speaks of the rationale behind such
revolts, in that they came as a result of a complete understanding of
the status quo they were determined to change.

Thus, Imam Hussain's revolt was not a result of an angry outburst,
prompted by the pressures exerted by the Umayyad rule, especially during
the reigns of Mu'aawiyah [the founder of the dynastic rule], and his
son, Yezid. Rather, it was a very well calculated move. What
substantiates the position the Imam (a.s.) took in this regard was the
letters he exchanged with both the men; and the sermons he gave on
different occasions, especially that one he addressed the Companions of
the Prophet (s.a.w.) in Mina, [in present day Saudi Arabia] with. All
this evidence points in the direction of one conclusion. That is, the
Imam was fully aware of what he was intending to do, viz. taking on the
ruling establishment. His revolt was free from any angry reaction;
rather, it was a purely Islamic uprising.

Looking at Imam Hussain's revolt from another perspective, i.e. the way
he was treating his followers, one can only come out with one
conclusion. He was determined not to let the feelings of his
companions

run high, in a bid to avoid his revolt's earning any description of an
explosive one. Of this strategy was his repeated attempts to appeal to
his companions to leave his company, with a view to sparing them the
fate that was awaiting them all, i.e. him included. He used to remind
them every now and then that they should not expect any materialistic
gain in their march, other than definite death. After he commended his
companions, describing them as among the best of friends, he pleaded
with them one last time, i.e. on the eve of the 10th of Muharram, [62
AH, 680 CE], to leave if they so wished, making it clear to them that
they would be safe, for the Umayyad's were after his head alone.

You can hardly find a leader who aspires to utilise the dissatisfaction
of his people to push them to revolt who talks in the same way Imam
Hussain (a.s.) was talking to his companions. It is true that he was
responsible for outlining to them their religious duty to rise against
the despotic rule, in that resisting injustice and repression is such an
obligation they have to discharge, yet he was seeking that his
companions would discharge their responsibility of their own accord,
i.e. without coercion. That was why he reiterated to them to melt away
from the battlefield under the cover of darkness because the enemy was
not going to pursue them had they taken flight, nor had he wanted to
force them to fight. He further advised them that he would absolve them
from their oath of allegiance to him, should they have chosen to forsake
him, in that he left it to their own consciences. That is, whichever way
they decided, it had to be dictated by siding with the right, i.e.
without compulsion, either

from him or from the enemy. It would be their own choice alone.
However, their decision to remain with the Imam gave the martyrs of
Karbala the high regard they are held with.

To draw a comparison between the position taken by Imam Hussain (a.s.)
and Tariq bin Ziyad in the battle of Jabal Tariq [the Rock of
Gibraltar], we would say that what Ibn Ziyad resorted to of action is
symptomatic of a leader with a politician's mentality, whereas Imam
Hussain (a.s) was conscious not to force the fight on his comrades in
arms.

What Ibn Ziyad did was to burn all the food supplies save that which
could sustain his troops for twenty-four hours. He then addressed them
in a sermon to the effect that they had no choice but to win the battle,
making it clear that if they did not win, the result would be one of
two: They would either be routed by the army of the enemy or got drowned
in the sea, should they have chosen to flee. In contrast, Imam Hussain
(a.s.) left the choice to the small band of his followers to engage the
enemy in combat or turn back, for neither the enemy nor he were coercing
them to fight.

Indeed, the Imam's revolt had its roots in the complete understanding,
by all parties of his camp, of its inevitability. Thus, it should not be
described as though it were brought about by a disgruntled man. This
responsible revolt had a multiplicity of factors, in that it was neither
a single entity nor a single-aim movement.


