Supplement
==========

( 16 )

Among the differences that exist between matters of the physical world
and the social one is that in the material world minerals always
demonstrate a single essence. For instance, you cannot find, as a raw
material, gold and copper in a single entity. In contrast, in social
phenomena, it is quite possible that a single phenomenon might
demonstrate a variety of realities and essences. Man is such a wonder
because he can boast several essences at the same time.

Jean-Paul Sartre, [1905 - 1980], the French existentialist philosopher
and writer, maintained that the existence of man precedes his essence.
He is right in this part of his statement. In addition to that, man
could possess different semblances at the same time. For example, he
could demonstrate a semblance of an angel, a pig, and a tiger.

['Existentialism' is a loose term for the reaction led by Kierkegaard,
against the abstract rationalism of Hegel's philosophy. As against
Hegel's conception of \`abstract consciousness' within which all
oppositions are supposedly reconciled, Kierkegaard insisted on the
irreducibility of the subjective, personal dimension of human life. He
characterised this in terms of the perspective of the 'existing
individual'. Kierkegaard rejected the claim that we can look forward to
a time when the different interests and concerns of people can be
satisfied through their comprehension within an all-embracing objective
understanding of the universe.]

According to this, it can be said that social phenomena might exhibit
multi-dimensional realities. Imam

Hussain's revolt is such a multi-faceted event, not least because
several factors were jointly at work to produce it. For example, there
might erupt a revolt in reaction to a particular occurrence, i.e. under
the spur of the moment. It might as well be a positive reaction to a
certain trend and a negative one in the face of another trend. All these
factors were present in Imam Hussain (a.s)'s revolt, hence the
description, "a multi-character revolt".

Historically, the first factor in the Imam's uprising was the Umayyad's
demand of him to swear allegiance to Yezid, [their second Caliph]. In a
bid to secure the following of the generality of Muslims to his son,
Yezid, Mu'aawiyah sent an emissary to Medina to secure the pledging of
such allegiance from Imam Hussain (a.s). In so doing, Mu'aawiyah had
aimed to set a precedent for those rulers who would follow him to
appoint their successors, turning the caliphate into a dynastic rule. It
is noteworthy that insisting on securing the Imam's swearing of
allegiance meant giving legitimacy to the caliphate. What was Imam
Hussain (a.s)'s response to that demand? Naturally, it was turned down,
not least because Hussain (a.s.) was the grandson of the Prophet
(s.a.w.) and was widely known for his piety and scant regard for worldly
pleasures.

Upon receiving the news of the Imam's rejection, the ruling
establishment issued threats to him. His response was that he would
rather die than endorse Yezid's succession to the caliphate. Up to that
point in time, the Imam's reaction was of the passive type to an
unlawful demand. In other words, a reaction based

on piety and a reality stemming from the slogan, "There is no god but
God", which makes it incumbent on the believer to say no to any
illegitimate demand.

That rejection was not the only reason for the Imam's revolt. There was
another issue, which demonstrated the underlying principle of his
revolt; it was a positive reaction. That is, after the demise of
Mu'aawiyah, the people of Kufa, [Iraq] cast their memories some twenty
years back, i.e. to the days of the caliphate of Imam Ali (a.s.).
Despite the fact that many of Ali's disciples were liquidated by the
Umayyad terror machine, such as Hijr bin Adi, Amr bin Hamq al- Khuza'ie,
Rashid al-Hijri, and Maythem at-Tammar, just to render Medina bereft of
the heavyweights among the companions of the Prophet, the people called
to mind how Ali (a.s.) was the example of the true Muslim and his rule a
just one. Thus, they convened in Kufa and agreed among themselves to
reject the endorsement of Yezid as caliph, turning their attention to
Imam Hussain (a.s.) with the offer to become their Islamic caliph. They
wrote to the Imam to this effect, expressing their readiness to welcome
him to re-establish the Islamic rule in Kufa. Some one hundred thousand
people signed those letters. As a result, those people did not leave the
Imam with any choice other than to accede to their request. That was the
positive reaction. In conclusion, it can be safely said that the true
nature of the Imam's movement was a legitimate one, in that a group of
Muslims initiated the action and the Imam had to provide them with his
positive response.

Upholding his religious obligation, the Imam had no choice but to
announce his outright rejection to sanctioning Yezid's appointment [by
his father] as Caliph, not least for raising his pure self above that
blemish they wanted to stain him with. However, had he agreed to
Abdullah bin Abbas's proposition to retire to the mountains of Yemen to
escape the troops of Yezid, he would have secured his safety. On the
other hand, he would have absolved himself from condoning the
appointment of Yezid as Caliph. And yet, since the issue was one which
related to the appeal to him by those hundred thousand people, he had no
alternative but to agree to that appeal out of a religious obligation.
That is, despite the fact that all the indications were telling him that
the Kufans were not up to the task and that they were both inactive and
apprehensive. Nevertheless, his sense of responsibility made it
incumbent on him to respond to their call and thus provide the right
answer to history. Had he chosen to ignore the plea of the Kufans, we
would have stood today criticising him for "not doing so".

