Introduction by First Publisher
===============================

This book is a collection of five lectures delivered in 1972 on “Goal of
Life”, as part of a series called “World in Islamic Perspective.”

In those years the matter of compiling a book entitled “Islamic World
Perspective” and presenting it to the younger generation had attracted
the attention of religiously enlightened people. This topic and its main
outline was discussed in a small group consisting of not more than ten
members.

It was Mutahhari's custom to propound an interesting topic many times in
big and small sessions and subject it to criticism and analysis before
it was presented to the public. Then, he would begin writing it in his
charming style. His “Introduction to the Islamic World Perspective” was
eventually written in the summer of 1978 in an abridged form under seven
sections and gradually published in a series. (This collection is taken
from a tape which is unfortunately not available.)

What encourages us to publish these lectures are the refined and
original ideas of Mutahhari, which have their source in Islam. Secondly,
we had in mind the recommendation of the Present Imam to enable the
young generation to benefit more from the works of this martyred scholar
which provide guidance to the Islamic society of modern Iran. We have,
therefore, considered it our duty to offer the original text without any
alteration, except a few phrases, to those readers interested in the
works of Murtadha Mutahhari, We hope that they will find it acceptable.

In these lectures, our scholar discusses the “Goal of Life” from the
viewpoints of the Qur'an and various human schools of thought, and opens
up the intellectual horizon in every direction to allow the human mind
to assimilate freely. For if the goal of life is to be defined as the
Qur'an requires it and to be heeded, it will be to gain a warmth and
enlightened way of life, which will produce men and communities
different from those of today, and this is what mankind is longing for.

Are all the pains and sufferings, which have made life so bitter for
mankind today, not due to the lack of human recognition of the goal of
life?

Life is not bitter and unpleasant in itself. It is deviation from the
right path that imposes all these pains and sufferings on mankind.

Today the young generation of our society is more than ever in need of
an important discourse on life, such as presented here to avail its
sublime spiritual revolution, to illuminate the dark paths of
modernistic materialism through a precise knowledge of the goal of life.


