Chapter 3: Faith, Schools of Thought and World Vision
=====================================================

Intellectual and philosophical definition, as well as faith are
essential requirements of a soundly conceived ideology.

It presupposes a universal perspective based on a particular logic and
insight and supported by a systematic reasoning concerning the world, as
well as faith. Faith gives it the power of creating attachment and love
for objectives higher than the individualistic and private ones, a fact
recognised in some modern schools of thought like existentialism.

They intend to create an ideology minus faith. They wish to set up a
system on pure philosophy, without faith, as a kind of love for a higher
objective, and that is not possible.

Sometimes they set up a remote shadow which is based on human fancy, and
nothing more. Yet, an ideology is based on faith that makes it sacred,
If its foundation is not faith and is merely an intellectual system, it
cannot rouse love and affection, since it lacks a logical basis, though
it can be imposed by force or suggestion.

A school of thought is a single, practical system, and not only a
theoretical one or something related to theoretical sciences. This
system means the idea about what exists. For example, Aristotle's or
Newton's physics each represents a theoretically conceived system.

A practical system is what it is. For the ancients too, knowledge was
divided into theoretical and practical. In an empirical system, an
investigation aims at finding out the best way, such as concerning how
should man live, and how a society ought to be, one pillar of it is
organization, which consists of parts each of which has its own place,
task and significance.

It cannot be a collection of scattered thoughts which cannot lead to a
coherent system, A school of thought is a collection of harmonious ideas
related to real life, that is, what it should be and what it should not
be. Theoretical thoughts are its basis and spirit, That is why we said
every ideology is based on a universal perspective, which, in turn,
means viewing the world as it is, as distinct from viewing man as he
should be.

The spirit of a school of thought must, on one hand, possess vision and
evaluation of existence, and on the other, create ideals, that is, not
only a philosophical basis but a religious basis . It should offer
something to be loved, a moral, as well as a social ideal, Astronomy
gives us some knowledge about the celestial bodies that exist But it
says nothing about how they should be or should not be, since such
matters do not concern human life.

A school of thought offers something in which an ideal is presented to
man. Monotheism is capable of providing a basis for philosophizing in an
universal perspective, so as to obtain an insight into existence. At the
same time, it represents the uniqueness of God, as contained in the
Qur'anic expression: “There is no god, but God.”

The ancients divided monotheism into several kinds; Monotheism of
Essence, of Attributes, of Deeds, and of Worship.

Monotheism of Essence means a belief that God has no equal or partner.
Monotheism of Attributes means that His Essence is not contrary to His
Attributes, which, in turn, are not contrary to one another. In his
unity and Wisdom He possesses all perfections. Monotheism of Deeds means
also the unity of acts, Monotheism of Worship means that He only is
worthy of worship and must be worshipped and this is inherent in the
soul of man. The Qur'an says:

***“Do you seek other than God's religion, while everything in heaven
and on earth is bound to obey Him?” (3: 83)***

Our worship is in fact a kind of voluntary surrender and obedience, as
indicated in Genesis[^1] in which everything that is created sings His
praises. In Monotheism of worship, God's Essence is the ideal of man. As
He is unique, there is no dualism for Him, and He is the origin of
Universe, and the only object of worship, and worthy of it. Thus,
monotheism has two properties: it is firstly a kind of vision and
evaluation of existence, and secondly an ideal for man .

Marxism is entirely different, It is a materialistic vision, which
accounts for living, but is not an ideal, and can never offer an ideal,
aside from an economic kind, It offers to safeguard the interests of
deprived classes as an objective and tells them to try and seize their
rights. But this is only a defective goal. and may be supposed to be an
ideal until one attains it, and once attained, what then? It is an end
of ideology and goal.

A materialistic goal cannot be construed as a sacred goal, It is not
above human objectives and self-sacrifice in it is illogical, since it
comprises the materialistic ideal. To secure material gains through
self-sacrifice is essentially self-contradictory, Can that be called an
ideal?

Marxism is in fact an absence of ideals and is a return to individual
instincts. Its power lies in breaking fetters. It cannot account for all
aspects of life, including political, social, economic, and moral ones,
except indirectly, In such a case justice and ethics lose their real
meanings.

A school of thought may evidence a spirit determined by the
relationships of cause and effect, However, a school of thought must
have a suitable idea so as to lend a world perspective. The converse is
not true, since a world vision without a suitable ideal does not by
itself provide an overall elan or spirit in a school of thought.

To be constructive, man looks to the future, not to the past and
present. Therefore, philosophy alone is not enough. World visions have
also another difference with one another; one of them creates an
obligation, while another does not. In other words, one of them gives
man responsibility, while another does not.

Monotheistic world vision creates a divine obligation, Others like
existentialism lack a spiritual foundation. A man may say: “I am
responsible for myself, because I am free,” But this kind of freedom
does not make sense, since it is unrelated to everything else, thus
causing many difficulties. Suppose I am free and ungoverned by any
obligation, either environmental or divine.

So, as they say, I am responsible for myself, and none else is
responsible for me. Does that involve responsibility to others, too?
Should I choose something for myself which would be profitable for
others also? If they put this responsibility on me, where does it come
from? Others are free, too, and that absolute freedom has no harmony
with responsibility before others.

In this kind of freedom they speak of, becoming a model for others is
also meaningless. It would mean giving generality to my choice and claim
that that choice is not only good for me, but also for others. But
others are free, too, and no agent can be preferred to one's own will.

Moreover, we may agree so far that my choice may be so proper that it
would affect and encourage others in their choice, But this influence is
different from a feeling of responsibility in my conscience. Who would
create an obligation in me to act in a particular way or not, keeping in
view its effect on others? Is there a God to call me to account? You
would say 'no'. Is there a conscience? Again, you would say 'no', Who
then?

Monotheistic world vision, because of its ability to create ideals,
obligation and responsibility, also serves as a guide. It shows the way
to attain its goal, It gives joy and encouragement, and promotes in us a
spirit of self-sacrifice. Above all, as Tabatabai, the great scholar,
has said, it can be an element consisting of all the elements of
teachings, The principle of monotheism is like water which saturates the
roots of all thoughts, or like blood which carries the food to all parts
of the body, or like a spirit which gives life and dynamism to a school
of thought,

Concerning an ideal, Sartre and others say that man should not stop at a
boundary, but he should go beyond it and change the previous plan for a
new goal, and in this way advance constantly, This means perpetual
motion in a direction without having a definite goal and destination
from the beginning, like someone who walks as far as he can see until a
new horizon opens before him to go on, He does not wish to reach a
definite point, for, he considers it the point of death.

In monotheism, however the goal is always there from the very beginning,
clear, and unlimited, as well It always remains new and challenging. No
other world vision constitutes the source and spirit of a school of
thought, as both an ideal and a motivating force. At the same time,
monotheism creates obligation, produces joy, provides guidance and
encourages self-sacrifice, It sustains comprehensive development of a
community, so that all problems may be solved, It is only monotheistic
world vision which is comprehensive enough to possess all the above
qualities.

[^1]: The Qur'an: 62: 1, 61: 1, and 13: 15.


