Chapter 4: Islamic Faith and Human Perfection
=============================================

What is that faith which is spoken of in Islam and referred to
throughout the Qur'an, as an axis around which all questions revolve? It
refers to faith in God in the first place. In the second place, it
connotes faith in angels, holy books, prophets, Resurrection, etc. In
Islam, is faith a goal for mankind or a means for other goals?

All these are goals for man, for no divine goals or means are involved.
These goals are meant as human accomplishments towards perfection.

Is faith itself a human perfection which has been recommended to him? Or
has man been called upon to have faith because of its good effects?
Philosophers put this question like this: “Is faith a blessing for man,
or something useful?” There is a difference between a blessing and being
useful. A blessing is in itself a perfection desired for itself, not for
something else. But anything useful is good because of its beneficial
effect. It is a prologue to a blessing, but not a blessing in itself.

In discussing Islam as a school of thought, it must be clarified whether
faith is a goal and a blessing, irrespective of its effect. We speak of
effects of faith and say it gives tranquility and fortitude against
calamities, and in a society the people can trust one another, and show
benevolence and avoid malevolence.

But is faith good because of its effects, or because it seeks perfection
in itself? Here comes the question: What does human perfection consist
of? This is more difficult to answer than the perfection of other
matters. In the world we can often distinguish perfection of things. We
can say how a perfect apple should be; it refers to its flavor, color,
delicacy and shape, and if an apple has these qualities we call it
perfect.

A perfect house can easily be defined, so can a horse. But it is most
difficult to define a perfect human being Therefore various views
concerning him must be studied to see which is right, or if we cannot do
so scientifically, at least we should see how and to what extent such
views are confirmed by the Qur'an.

Can it be said that a perfect being is he who gets maximum benefit from
nature which is external to him? But this is wrong for two reasons:

Firstly we do not define other things in this way. We do not say a horse
is perfect merely because it gets the highest benefit. We should
consider its own particular qualities and assets. We do not think a
horse perfect because of eating a large quantity of fodder. Nor do we
call an apple perfect because of its getting more air, water and light.
Secondly, it is hard to conscientiously agree that the most perfect man
is one who benefits most from nature For it implies that a defective man
is he who benefits less or least!

Let us compare two human beings: Muawiyah enjoyed maximum benefits in
his eighty years of life. He was ruler of Syria for forty years (Twenty
years as a powerful governor, and another twenty as a powerful Caliph).

Then there was Ali (a) who lived an ascetic life, with a philosophy for
it, whether this philosophy was to be free, or generous or humane, or
not to be taken in by the world, but to give his heart to spiritual
things, Whatever it was, his share of this world's gifts was a few
loaves of bread, Should we then call him imperfect on account of his
benefiting least from the world?

If we say this, we are making out man to be less than an animal, for, we
do not evaluate any animal by the standard of its benefiting from the
world, even though some people have no other thought but this in
evaluating human beings. But there is no one who believes this to the
extent of negating every spirituality.

Here another point comes up, that is, if such benefiting is not human
perfection in this world, what about the next one? This would mean the
perfection of man is to deserve and benefit from God's gifts. However,
this is not possible in its utmost measure in this world, so people pray
for securing maximum benefit in the next world. In speaking of such
worship, Ibn Sina (Avicenna) says; “For such men worship is like working
for which a wage is expected so that, without that wage, there would be
no willingness to work.”

From the viewpoint of Islamic logic, such a belief would mean a
deficient kind of worship, to show devotion and worship only in order to
be rewarded in heaven, There are many references to this by the Imams
(t) such as this: “Those who worship for fear, act like slaves fearing
their master.”

Similar are the words of Ali (The Nahj ul Balaghah, Wisdom 229: “Some
worship God for the sake of their desires, and that is merchants'
worship; some worship for fear, and that is slaves' worship; and some
worship out of gratitude and that is the worship of the noble,”)

Again, in another saying, Ali (a) is even more explicit: “O God, I do
not worship you for fear of your Fire or for cupidity in desiring
heaven; I worship you because you are worthy of it.”

Therefore, it is not right to think of human perfection as the ability
to secure maximum material benefits, even by negating every virtue in
this world, or to postpone such benefits to future life. There are
various materialistic views all of which end with the idea of benefit,
Spiritual views are of the following types:

**1)** The first and perhaps the most important is the view of the
gnostics concerning “Perfect Man .” Their view is derived from various
religions They are inspired by ideas, such as 'Adam', 'Prophets',
'Saints' and the 'Perfect Man' like the “awaited Mahdi” . Mackinion has
written a book entitled “Perfect Man in Islam” which has been translated
into Arabic by Abdur Rahman Badawi, In it he says: “The theory of
perfect man is not a Hellenic bequest, for, Greek philosophy has said
nothing of it . “

In the Islamic world this topic has been presented by the Sufis, and
especially by Mohuyuddin Arabi. There are similar books by Abdo-Karim
Deylami, Aziz-el-Din Nasafi, and a Sufi poet called Sayyid Muhammad
Bururgedi. The gnostics have a clear view about man's perfection and a
perfect man, which may not be wholly acceptable to others, but they
offer it with a decisive finality.

They believe that there is one truth and that is God. They consider
other things shadows of the truth. In their opinion everything is an
attribute of God. If we die without recognizing the truth we would have
died in infidelity, ignorance, darkness and absolute unawareness.

A man is perfect when he understands the truth and attains it They think
it impossible for God to appear in man or be allied to him, For them
incarnation is dualism, so attaining the truth or God means losing one's
identity in Him, and that is when man understands the whole truth, and
then he will know himself. God is the only truth and everything else is
its manifestation, This is some- what similar to the phrase of
'approaching God, except that they believe in phases of proximity,
subject to a definite order. So, there are stages of gnosticism before
truth is attained, One who does not attain it is imperfect, and man's
humanity consists of knowing and attaining truth.

What helps this advance towards God and truth are love, affection and
familiarity. The way to Him is through the heart, not the mind or
philosophy Every other perfection is derived from this perfection, and
for that reason alone it may be considered perfection. Is asceticism
perfection? They will say, yes, because it is a condition for following
this path. So are humility and other qualities like assistance, and
guidance which are moral goodness.

**2)** Divine philosophers have a view different from that of the
gnostics. They think human perfection depends on two things: (1)
recognition of facts, or wisdom. Gnostics emphasize truth, but the
philosophers attach importance to wisdom, which for them is
understanding the reality of things and existence as they are, generally
but not to wisdom. For example, the properties of an apple are related
to science, not to wisdom. Similarly knowing a city or a house as a
whole unit, is different from knowing parts of it.

A sage considers human perfection is the general context of proper and
scientific recognition of the universe, His subjective world is a
scientific and intellectual one which corresponds with the objective
world. For example in an objective world there is God, and His Universal
Order, material, and immaterial, In the scientific and intellectual
world, too, these things must exist.

For them, then, a perfect human being must recognize wisdom. We may
discuss the proof and evidence of wisdom, but we cannot discuss its
origin and principle, The Qur'an says:

***“The blessing of wisdom may be granted to anyone who He wishes, and
he who received it, found much goodness. “(1:269)***

Beside wisdom, as a requisite of perfection, a sage also considers
justice as a requisite, that is, moral justice on which social justice
depends. This means that there should be an equilibrium between human
powers and instincts ruled over by his intellectual power. In other
words, the intellect must dominate all appetites, passions and
imagination, so that each of these powers should be given the moderate
share it deserves. In the terminology of a sage what is related to
wisdom is called speculative intellect, and what is related to justice
is a named practical intellect.

The question that was about 'faith' may be repeated in connection with
wisdom, Does wisdom represent to a man an end or means? And is knowledge
an end in itself or means, or both?

Is knowledge human perfection? If it is, then it involves benefits, and
without benefits it is useless, and the more it benefits, the better it
is.

**3)** A third view is that human perfection lies in sentiments, that
is, love. This is an ethical viewpoint that claims that a man who has
more affection for others is perfect, and if he shows little affection
to others he is imperfect, The basis of moral depravity is selfishness;
the more one abandons selfishness and shows love for others, the more
perfect he is. This is a point emphasised also by Hindus. Gandhi insists
thoroughly on this point in his book “This is my Faith . “ Hindus
emphasize both truth and love, and criticize western civilization which
has negated these two things.

4) Another view is that human perfection is beauty. This, of course,
does not refer only to physical beauty, but mainly to spiritual beauty.
Artistic things show an artistic spirit which creates beautiful things.

**5)** Another view which may be called a prevalent western one is
materialistic, and holds that human perfection lies in power. The more
powerful a man is and the more dominating over his environment and other
beings, the more perfect he is. Darwin's Theory of Evolution reflects
this idea. According to Darwin's criteria, a more perfect being must be
powerful enough to preserve himself and remove his rival in the struggle
for survival.

Darwin is criticized for having annihilated morality by his survival
principle. Some Westerners claim to have discovered that knowledge is
what benefits mankind, makes him more powerful, and prevails over
nature. Thus they promoted empirical science, to be used as an
instrument of developing civilization and technology.

This idea had its uses, but they went to such excess that it caused more
damage than benefit. They ignored the sacredness of wisdom, truth, love
and faith in which men had believed before. To them, everything became
subordinate to power, and so they tried to change the course of human
advancement. Since then, mankind tends to be devoid of faith in any
spirituality, and if they claim spirituality they act in a contrary
manner.

Nietsche' s philosophy, has been criticized for being too extravagant .
In any case he has been frank and outspoken. The logical conclusion of
his (and of the intellectual path Bacon and others have followed) is to
place science in the service of power, and to recognize human perfection
only in power.


