Preface
=======

**In the name of Allah, The Beneficient, The Merciful**

All Praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the Universe. And Allah’s
blessing and peace be upon our Prophet Muhammad and his progeny.

We, the Shias, have been accustomed to meeting with accusations and have
had to put up with them. The accusations against us started on the death
of our Prophet (blessings and peace be upon him) and thus we were made
the adversary in the history of Islam. As the adversary we have had to
bear the persecution and torture of the ruling authorities and the
accusations, annoyance, and hurt from people.

Throughout the ages, there was no difference in this state of affairs
except in the severity of the attack. Sometimes, something would happen
to make the accusation and persecution a little lighter, and then
something else would be the cause for a strong assault or set an excuse
for another attack.

What occurred in our time was that the Shia committed a great sin and
made a serious mistake. According to a verdict issued by the leading
religious authority, the Shia in Iran revolted against their shah. The
West and the Jews became very angry with this, as were the rulers of
many Muslim countries. They started their activities against the Shiite
state. It was not long before the anger reached the books and the
writers inimical to the Shia and a new attack arose against the Shiism.
The old accusations of the Umayyad State were repeated in a new dress,
looking for a new axe to grind.

What could be the aim of such writers and editors? Were these works done
with good intentions, or is there a logical way to interpret them?

Anyone can analyze and arrive at the conclusion that our time is a
peculiar time just as history has been a peculiar history with respect
to the Shia! We have been fated to be always paying the price, to put up
with the fabrications and lies that have accumulated against us, we must
witness, in our time, the alliance between enemy and foreigner, and then
we are told: Silence! Do not defend yourselves, if you want us to
recognize your Islam, you have to disavow the Prophet’s progeny whom he
(s) ordered us to follow along with the Qur’an!

Anti Shia attacks had reached such a degree that writers among our Sunni
brothers had to refute some of these accusations. They said; why do you
slander and level accusations against a respected sect known for a long
time in the history of Islam for their great love for the Prophet and
his progeny?

Perhaps, the idiocy of the accusers and the weakness of their proofs
made thousands of learned Muslims search for Shiism to find their
long-sought goal, and declare the honour of belonging to it. But that
did not take the responsibility away from the ulama. As a result, some
of the Shiite ulama set out to answer the accusations. One of them was
the great pious Sheikh Abu Talib at-Tabrizi, to whom we offered some of
these accusations and he conceded to write these chapters.

Darul- Qur’anul-Kareem  
 Ali al-Kurani al-Aamili  
 23/5/1417 A.H.


