The Twentieth Spurious Argument: Rejecting Analogy and Discretion
=================================================================

Some people erroneously criticize the Shias in that they reject analogy
and discretion, and the expediencies transmitted in jurisprudence upon
which the Companions and their successors depended. They also criticize
the Shia of accusing those who adopt these methods as using analogy just
as did Iblis (the Devil) who said to Allah,

***I am better than he (Adam), Thou hast created me of fire, while him
Thou didst create of clay. Qur’an 7:12)***

The Answer
----------

Analogy means proving a verdict on a matter of Sharia simply based upon
its similarity in some ways to another matter. It is obvious that the
mere similarity between two things does not require them having the same
verdict. There are many subjects in the Sharia that are similar in some
way or other but have different verdicts.

Discretion means regarding an act as approvable or not approving a deed
and then issuing the appropriate verdict according to personal
discretion. This is clear innovation, for innovation is nothing but
linking that which is one approves to the Sharia and issuing a verdict
that considers personal discretion as a part of the Sharia!

This is definitely unacceptable when we know that no Sunni, except for
the Mu’tazilites, has ever committed himself to subordinate the laws of
the Sharia to the personal advantage of the individual and his personal
disadvantage.

It is true that we who believe in reason are partisans of justice and
are duty bound by it. However, how can any jurist comprehend the
advanteges and rulings behind Allah’s acts? Allah is aware of advantages
and disadvantages to an infinite degree, but the deficient minds of
human beings cannot realize them to this degree. They therefore cannot
find out Allah’s rulings simply by taking into consideration some
advantage or disadvantage in an action.

Indeed, if a transmitted text explains the general cause of a ruling, it
proves that the cause is not limited to what is only in the text, but it
will include others having the same cause.

They fell into innovation because they turned away from the path of
knowing the Islamic Law which the Prophet (s) had determined for the
Muslims. He said, I am leaving to you two weighty things; the Holy
Qur’an and my family. You will not go astray if you keep to them.” He
made his family the guide for Muslims like the Holy Qur’an and told them
that they (his family) were the depositories of the knowledge of the
Sharia. He (s) said: I am the city of knowledge and Ali is its gate.

Imam Ali (a) said: The Messenger of Allah had taught me one thousand
sections of knowledge from each one thousand sections are opened.

Imam Ali deposited this knowledge with the Infallible

Imams and each in turn inherited it.


