The Twenty-first Spurious Argument: Joining the Prayers
=======================================================

Some people criticize the Shia for combining the five prayers offering
them at only three times. They combine the Zhuhr and Asr Prayers and the
Maghrib and “Isha Prayers, whereas the Prophet (s) and Muslims offer
them at their five specified times.

The Answer
----------

According to the opinion of the majority of scholars, it has been
established that the Prophet (s) combined the Zhuhr and Asr Prayers
without fear (of war) or traveling. The author of Jami’ul-Usul vol. 6 p.
459 quoting from the Sahih of Muslim says, The Prophet (s) offered the
Zhuhr and Asr Prayers at one time without being in a state of fear or
while traveling.” He added that az-Zubeir said, I asked Sa’id, “Why did
the Prophet (s) do that?’ He answered, “I asked ibn Abbas about this and
he answered: The Prophet (s) did not want to cause difficulty for the
umma.” In another quotation, he added, without fear and there was no
rain.’

It has been established from the traditions of the Infallible Imams that
when the sun passes the zenith, it is the time for the two prayers but
this (the first prayer) is before that (the second prayer). Similarly,
when the evening comes, it is time for the two prayers but this is
before that.

Allah has permitted the joining of the prayers and His Messenger did so
without any purpose other than of making it easy for his umma. Why
should Muslims have to make it difficult upon themselves just to make
the separation of the prayers obligatory and sometimes miss the Asr and
the “Isha Prayers which has happened not only to ordinary people but to
some of the Sunni scholars as well?


