The Second Spurious Argument:Constraint and Free Will
=====================================================

Some people find a problem with the Shias in that they believe neither
in constraint nor in free will but that they adopt an interpretation in
between and that they refute the Ash’arite concept of constraint.

The Answer
----------

The Ash’arites from among the Sunnis, believed in constraint and the
Mu’tazilites, also Sunni, believed in free will. The Shias, following
their Imams (a), adopted an intermediary position between the two. First
of all, we will try to refute constraint and free will by resorting to
Qur’anic verses, then we will investigate those traditions that have
come from our Imams (a) negating the two of them and establishing the
intermediary position between the two.

Quranic Verses that reject constraint
-------------------------------------

### The First Kind

The verses that attribute good and bad deeds to the person himself such
as the following Suras; al-Isra’ 15, Yunus 108, and az-Zumar 41: Whoever
goes aright, for his own soul does he go aright, and whoever goes
astray, to its detriment only does he go astray.

***Say if I err, I err only against my own soul. (Qur’an 34:40).***

There are a great number of verses in a similar vein.

### The Second Kind

There are verses that hold the Divine Precinct of Lordship (i.e as
Provider and Guide) to be above injustice. For example when Allah says,
Surely Allah does not do injustice to the weight of an atom.” (4:40).
There are forty such verses.

### The Third Kind

There are some verses showing that Allah tests His servants whether they
choose faith and obedience or choose disbelief and disobedience. Allah
says,

***Who created death and life that He may try you, which of you is best
in deeds. (Qur’an 67:2)***

There are nearly sixty-seven verses having this meaning.

### The Fourth Kind

There are some verses calling people to faith, guidance, supplication,
piety and the like, and that Allah, no doubt, likes people to do these
things. He says:

***So that they should believe in the meeting of their Lord. (Qur’an
6:154)***

***That you may warn a people, to whom no warner has come before you,
that they may follow the right direction. (Qur’an 32:3)***

***And that they may warn their people when they come back to them that
they may be cautious. (Qur’an 9:122)***

***Then We seized them with distress and affliction in order that they
might humble themselves. (Qur’an 6:42)***

***Thus does Allah make clear His communications for men that they may
guard against evil. (Qur’an 2:187)***

There are seventy-nine verses conveying such a meaning.

### The Fifth Kind

There are some verses showing that Allah’s reward and punishment are a
requital of what people have earned out of their deeds. Allah says,

***Then every soul shall be paid back in full what it has earned and
they shall not be dealt with unjustly. (Qur’an 2:281) (Qur’an 3:161)***

***That every soul may be rewarded for what it has earned and they shall
not be wronged. (Qur’an 45:22)***

***Every soul is held in pledge for what it earns. (Qur’an 74:38)***

***And whoever commits a sin, he only commits it against his own soul.
(Qur’an 4:111)***

***Thus, it is that their recompense is Hell, because they disbelieved
and held My communications and My apostles in mockery. (Qur’an
18:106)***

***And for those who disbelieved in their Lord is the punishment of
Hell, and evil is the resort (Qur’an 67:6)***

***But as to those who are careful of (their duty to) their Lord, they
shall have gardens beneath which rivers flow. (Qur’an 3:198)***

***Their reward with their Lord is gardens of perpetuity beneath which
rivers flow. (Qur’an 98:8)***

There are many other verses with such a meaning in the Holy Qur’an.

### The Sixth Kind

***There are verses that censure and rebuke the disbelievers and the
corrupt, and this would not be correct unless they possessed freedom of
choice in their actions. Allah says, How do you deny Allah and you were
dead and He gave you life. (Qur’an 2:28)***

***But how do you disbelieve while it is you to whom the communications
of Allah are recited, and among you is His Apostle. (Qur’an 3:101)***

***How, then, will you guard yourselves, if you disbelieve, on the Day
which makes children gray- headed. (Qur’an 73:17)***

***Why do you disbelieve in the communications of Allah, and Allah is a
witness of what you do. (Qur’an 3:98)***

***Will they still believe in the falsehood and disbelieve in the favor
of Allah? (Qur’an 29:67)***

***Were not My communications recited to you but you used to reject
them? (Qur’an 23:105)***

### The Seventh Kind

There are some verses showing that people themselves are responsible for
disbelief and belief, obedience and disobedience. Allah says,

***And Musa said If you are ungrateful, you and those on Earth all
together, most surely, Allah is Self-Sufficient, Praised. (Qur’an
14:8)***

***and whoever disbelieves in the communications of Allah then surely
Allah is quick in reckoning. (Qur’an 3:19)***

***Shall We treat those who believe and do good like the mischief-makers
in the earth? (Qur’an 38:28)***

***And he who obeys Allah and His Apostle, and fears Allah, and is
careful of (his duty to Him), such are those that will achieve. (Qur’an
24:52)***

***this was because they disobeyed and used to exceed the limit. (Qur’an
5:78)***

We have mentioned these verses only as examples. Those verses that
ascribe actions to the servant are indeed much more than these.

### The Eighth Kind

There are verses showing that Allah gives people the option to choose
between belief and disbelief, obedience and disobedience. Allah says:

***So let him who pleases believe, and let him who pleases disbelieve.
(Qur’an 18:29)***

### The Ninth Kind

There are verses urging the doing of good before opportunities pass by.
Allah says,

***And hasten to forgiveness from your Lord. (Qur’an 3:133)***

### The Tenth Kind

There are some verses showing that people should ask for help from
Allah. Allah says,

***Thee do we serve and Thee do we beseech for help (Qur’an 1:5)***

This means that man is the performer of his deeds and

Allah assists him in his good actions.

### The Eleventh Kind

There are some verses that include asking Allah for forgiveness. Allah
says,

***Our Lord! We have been unjust to ourselves, and if Thou forgive us
not, and have (not) mercy on us, we shall certainly be of the losers”
(Qur’an 7:23)***

### The Twelfth Kind

There are some verses which indicate that the confession of the
disbelievers on the Day of Resurrection shows that they themselves were
responsible for disbelief and disobedience. Allah says,

***They said: we were not of those who prayed, and we used not to feed
the poor, and we used to enter into discourse with those who entered
into vain discourses. (Qur’an 74:43-45)***

### The Thirteenth Kind

There are verses showing that the disbelievers, on the Day of
Resurrection, would wish that they could come back to the life of the
world to be pious. Allah says,

***Send me back my Lord, in order that I do good. (Qur’an 23:99-100)***

Verses that refute Free Will
----------------------------

Some verses ascribe creational guidance to Allah the Almighty. There is
seventy-eight such verses. Allah says,

***These are they whom Allah has guided; therefore, follow their
guidance. (Qur’an 6:90)***

Such verses show that the source of guidance is Allah, praise be to Him,
but there are others showing that man has freedom of choice included in
his guidance. Allah says,

***so let him who pleases believe, and let him who pleases disbelieve.
(Qur’an 18:29)***

***Whoever disbelieves, he shall be responsible for his disbelief, and
whoever does good, they prepare (good) for their own souls. (30:44)***

Allah’s being the source of guidance means that He has given man the
ability of perception, made the way of guidance and knowledge easy for
him, and protected him against the delusions of the devils among jinn
and humankind. Were it not for this, man would be a disbeliever and
disobedient. Thus, Allah is worthier of man’s good deeds than man
himself.

Man’s deviation has originated from the negative application of his free
will. Even with the delusions of the Devil and many things else, he
still has a free will. Allah has given him the ability of belief and
disbelief and the ability of perception, and has made the signs and
evidence of guidance and Divine Unity at his disposal and plain for him
to see. Allah therefore, does not cause man’s deviation, although He,
the Almighty, has irresistible power over His servant.

Allah says, If He pleased, He would guide all of Mankind. Allah can
force Mankind to accept guidance willingly or unwillingly, but since He
has made the way and the means to guidance easy, and has made Man free
to choose between guidance and deviation, He has given man a great
favor. If he choses deviation and rejects guidance, then he would stand
accused.

An example of the aforementioned idea is that of an individual who gave
a poor man some money to buy bread, but the latter bought some poison
instead, drank it and killed himself. The giver is not to be blamed, for
he bestowed a favor upon him in order that he spend the money in his
benefit and not for his destruction.

Some Qur’anic verses show that none except Allah possesses power and
capability, praise be to Him. He says,

***There is no power save in Allah. (Qur’an 18:39)***

There is no contradiction at all between this meaning and man’s freedom
of choice and power to do whatever he likes, because in the face of the
Divine power and Lordship he is completely impotent, having no authority
over good or bad for himself.

Taking into consideration that Allah has given man power and ability,
man’s very power is a manifestation of Allah’s power, thus eliminating
the inconsistency between the establishment of power in man and the
meaning of His words when The Most High says, There is no power save in
Allah.” A very large number of verses attest to this meaning. Allah
says,

***... so let him who pleases believe, and let him who pleases
disbelieve. (Qur’an 18:29)***

***Whoever disbelieves, he shall be responsible for his disbelief, and
whoever does good, prepare (good) for their own souls. (Qur’an 30:44)***

***... and whoever is grateful, he is grateful only for his own soul,
and whoever is ungrateful, then surely my Lord is Self-Sufficient,
Honored. (Qur’an 27:40)***

Some verses show that benefit and harm are in the hands of Allah
exclusively. Allah says,

***Say: I do not control any benefit or harm for my own soul except as
Allah pleases. (Qur’an 7:188)***

***... so let him who pleases believe, and let him who pleases
disbelieve. (Qur’an 18:29)***

***... and had your Lord pleased they would not have done it. (Qur’an
6:112)***

***... and if Allah had pleased, they would not have done it (Qur’an
6:137)***

From these verses, we notice that Allah has given man the ability to
believe if he wants, or to disbelieve if he wants. If Allah wants to
prevent man from that freedom of choice, He will deprive him of ability
and make him unable to do what he wants. Later on, we will prove that
this is one aspect of the Shias’ concept of intermediacy.

Shias’ Interpretation of the Conception of Intermediacy
-------------------------------------------------------

Despite their variety, the two groups of Qur’anic verses mentioned above
show that man’s actions have two aspects. One aspect concerns man
himself, in that he has the option and the will to do whatever he wants.
This is clear from the many Qur’anic verses that show that man is
responsible for his deeds. The other aspect concerns Allah. The verses
that ascribe guidance and deviation to Allah are numerous and clear,
however, the manner in which these two aspects relate to each other, as
has been gathered from the Qur’anic text, is based upon one of three
opinions:

First: Man’s existence, and all his actions, whether from his body or
his soul, has its source in the Creator, Exalted and Elevated is His
Might. He has given man the ability to do good or bad and to choose the
good that takes him to the elevated stations of the Highest Ones whose
ranks cannot be attained without freedom of will.

Thus, if man is the cause of his actions, and Allah is the cause of
man’s existence, his abilities, and his will to do or not to do, then
Allah is a remote cause of man’s actions.

Second: The power of the Maker encompasses the actions of man. Thus If
He wants to prevent man from choosing certain actions or to let him act
in other ways He can, He says,

***If He pleased, He would guide you all. (Qur’an 6:149)***

Allah has created people to try them. He (Elevated is His Might) says,

***Who created death and life that He may try you, which of you is best
in deeds. (Qur’an 67:2)***

Thus He does not prevent them from exercising their choice in thinking
and belief, rather, He has placed it within the sphere of their will. He
says,

***... so let him who pleases believe, and let him who pleases
disbelieve. (Qur’an 18:29)***

In short, the actions of man are related to Allah in so far as there is
no prevention or opposition to what man chooses to do.

Third: Lusts and instincts that mislead and delude man are from Allah
(Exalted is He). Allah has given man the ability to do good or bad deeds
so as to try him in this worldly life.

Since lusts and instincts are from Allah, deviating is from Allah,
despite the fact that man goes astray willingly and of his own free
volition. What Allah says about the idols in the story of Prophet
Ibrahim (a) confirms this although Allah does not want people to
deviate. He (Exalted is He) says,

***My Lord! Surely, they have led many men astray. (Qur’an 14:36)***

The people deviated on their own. The idols were just sculptures having
no sense and they could not lead people astray, for they had no will.

In summary, the conditions for the actions of man are a part of the
sufficient cause of his actions, which is from Allah (Exalted is He).

Another proof confirming the Shia concept of intermediacy between
constraint and free will is when Allah says,

***... and you did not smite when you smote (the enemy), but it was
Allah Who smote. (Qur’an 8:17)***

This verse clearly ascribes the smiting to man himself for Allah says,
when you smote,” at the same time it includes the opposite for Allah
also says and you did not smite” this negates the ascription of the act
to man thus proving the concept of intermediacy.


