The Fourth Spurious Argument: The Interncession of the Prophets, Imams and Saints
=================================================================================

Some people find fault with the Shias claiming that they believe in the
intercession of the Prophet, the Imams and Saints and that they ask them
to be intercessors for them with Allah on the Day of Judgment.

The Answer
----------

Evidence for the validity of intercession is found in the Holy Qur’an.
We have talked about this topic in detail in our book titled al-Jami’ li
Barahin Usul ul-I’tiqadaat p.419-422.

Intercession, according to the Holy Qur’an, is of two types:

### The First Type

The first type is intercession without Allah. It is an intercession to
other than Himself that Allah (Blessed and Exalted is He) denies. Allah
says,

***There is no guardian for them or any intercessor besides Him. (Qur’an
6:51)***

There are other verses having the same meaning.

Generally, intercession depends upon the power over conveying the needs
of the person requesting the intercession and the obligation of the one
interceded to fulfil this need even if he is not pleased with it. Such
intercession cannot be for other than Allah (Exalted is He). Allah says:

***Say: Allah's is the intercession altogether. His is the kingdom of
the heavens and the earth. (Qur’an 39:44)***

Believing in the intercession of any other save Allah in this respect is
a form of polytheism. The idolaters worshipped idols in order to obtain
such an intercession, as testified to in the Holy Qur’an.

### The Second Type

The second type is intercession with Allah’s permission. Allah has made
this type of intercession an exception from that intercession that he
has denied and has granted it to whomever He has willed. Allah says,

***Who is he that can intercede with Him but by His permission? (Qur’an
2:255)***

***Whose intercession does not avail at all except after Allah has given
permission to whomsoever He pleases and chooses. (Qur’an 53:26)***

***...and they do not intercede except for him whom He approves (Qur’an
21:28)***

This type of intercession consists of simply asking Allah on behalf of
him who is to be interceded for.

Another kind of intercession is asking Allah to forgive others. Allah
has permitted his Prophet Muhammad (s) to ask Him for forgivness for
believing men and believing women. Allah says,

***and ask pardon for them, and take counsel with them in the affair.
(Qur’an 3:159)***

***and ask forgiveness for them from Allah. (Qur’an 24:62)***

***and ask forgiveness for them (women) from Allah.(Qur’an 60:12)***

Allah has promised to forgive whoever asks Him for forgiveness and
beseeches the Prophet (s) to intercede for him. He, The Almighty says,

***And had they, when they were unjust to themselves, come to you and
asked forgiveness of Allah and the Apostle had (also) asked forgiveness
for them, they would have found Allah Oft-Returning (to mercy),
Merciful. (Qur’an 4:64)***

Allah has mentioned that the angels ask Him to forgive the believers. He
says,

***Celebrate the praise of their Lord and believe in Him and ask
protection for those who believeÖ grant protection to those who turn (to
Thee) and follow Thy way, and save them from the punishment of Hell.
(Qur’an 40:7)***

Allah has also mentioned the prayer of the prophet Noah and his asking
Allah to forgive the believers,

***My Lord! Forgive me and my parents and him who enters my house
believing, and the believing men and the believing women. (Qur’an
71:28)***

He has also spoken about the prophet Ibrahim’s prayer and his asking
Allah to forgive the believers. He says,

***O our Lord! Grant me protection and my parents and the believers on
the Day when the reckoning shall come to pass!( Qur’an 14:41)***

Allah has taught the believers how to ask Him for forgiveness,

***Our Lord! Surely, we believe, therefore forgive us our faults and
save us from the chastisement of the Fire. (3:16)***

***Our Lord! Forgive us our faults and our extravagance in our affair.(
Qur’an 3:147 and other verses)***

Allah has forbidden asking Him to forgive the polytheists. He says,

***It is not (fit) for the Prophet and those who believe that they
should ask forgiveness for the polytheists, even though they should be
near relatives, after it has become clear to them that they are inmates
of the flaming Fire. And Ibrahim asking forgiveness for his sire was
only owing to a promise, which he had made to him; but when it became
clear to him that he was an enemy of Allah, he declared himself to be
clear of him. (Qur’an 9:113-114)***

Allah, likewise, has forbidden asking Him to forgive the disbelievers
and confirmed He will not accept it. He says,

***It is alike to them whether you beg forgiveness for them or do not
beg forgiveness for them, Allah will never forgive them. (Qur’an
63:6)***


