The Sixth Spurious Argument: Inheriting from the Prophets
=========================================================

The Shias are suspected of believing that the prophets bequeath what
they possess to their inheritors like the rest of Muslims and they
believe that the tradition which was narrated by Abu Bakr, when he said,
We, the prophets, do not bequeath. What we have left is to be considered
as charity is untrue.

The Answer
----------

The Shias believe that the Prophets may bequeath what they possess to
their inheritors just like other people. The Holy Qur’an has confirmed
this when Allah says,

***Solomon was David's heir. (Qur’an 27:16)***

Zachariah prayed to Allah saying óas Allah mentions in the Holy Qur’anó,

***And surely I fear my cousins after me, and my wife is barren,
therefore grant me from Thyself an heir, who would inherit from me and
inherit from the children of Jacob, and make him, my*** ***Lord, one in
whom thou art well pleased. O Zachariah! Surely, We give you good news
of a boy whose name shall be Yahya: We have not made before his equal.
(Qur’an 19:5-7)***

It is agreed upon by all Muslims that this tradition (We, Prophets, do
not deviseÖ) was narrated by Abu Bakr only. It also runs contrary to the
Holy Qur’an and has no support. It therefore cannot repeal the Holy
Qur’an especially since afterwards it has been refuted by the Prophet’s
family and denounced as untrue by Fatima az- Zahraa (peace be upon her),
the Chief of the Women of all the Worlds, based upon irrefutable textual
evidence attested to by all.

She silenced the Caliph Abu Bakr when she reasoned that it would have
been incomprehensible for the Prophet to have informed Abu Bakr alone
about this and not inform his heirs. But how surprising it is that there
are those who try to bring down the Holy Qur’an down to their level,
abrogating its verses because of a narration by one Companion singled
out for the purpose in spite of the fact that the purified family of the
Prophet has denied that tradition and considered it as untrue!


