The Translatorâ€™s Note
=====================

My friend Riaz Ahmed gave me a copy of the Urdu translation of the book
to read and attempt its translation into the English language. He told
me that the sponsors are keen to have the book published in the English
language for the benefit of young, eligible, girls, newly married
couples and expectant mothers who do not have proficiency in Persian,
the language of the original text, nor can they read Urdu in which it
has been translated and published.

After reading the book I am convinced that it is a highly commendable
project. I feel a copy should reach every household. It should be a part
of the dower of newly wed brides, it should be presented to the young
married couples and it must be there on every family bookshelf. The book
should adorn the bed-side table of every young couple and will be a very
useful reference and guide for proper upbringing of children.

Ayatollah *Ustadh* Ibrahim Amini has rightly pointed out in his foreword
that the western libraries are chock full of works on child rearing and
upbringing, but we find hardly any comprehensive reference on the
subject with particular emphasis on the Islamic norms and guidelines for
upbringing of children.

The Western works are more materialistic which emphasize only on the
material and moral aspects of child rearing. It is Islam that covers all
the aspects including the religious and spiritual guidelines for
bringing up the children as good Muslims and citizens. He has
extensively quoted from the Holy Book and the Traditions of the Holy
Prophet and his Infallible Descendants.

The need for English translations of Islamic works is universally felt
and lot of work is being done in this direction. There is a very large
section of Muslim youth, although fluent at speaking in their native
languages, are more comfortable communicating in English which has
assumed the status of lingua franca for them.

We also come across people from other faiths who are curious to know
more about Islam and they wish to have access to good literature on the
subject in the English language. If the publication of the translation
of this book sees the light of the day, it will be another small, but
significant step, towards dissemination of Islamic precepts to a wide
spectrum of people in the East and the West. *Insha Allah*.

Syed Tahir Bilgrami  
 e-mail: <sytabil@yahoo.co.uk>  
 11, Methodist Colony, Begumpet,  
 Hyderabad-500016, INDIA


