Chapter 8: The Mothers Nutrition
================================

Research on the different types of food materials is not in the scope of
this book nor can we enumerate the qualities of each because it is a
subject that requires consideration at length. Nor is the author an
expert on the subject of nutrition. Luckily many useful books have been
published on the subject and the readers interested in a more detailed
study may refer to such books. But it will not be out of place if we
have a cursory look on the subject.

Although the nutrition intake requirement of pregnant women increases,
it is a matter of worry that their appetite generally reduces in this
condition. Many of them feel listless and dull. In such a state they
need to plan to consume concentrates which are foods with lesser bulk
and more nutritive value. The nutrients required by the human body are
contained in different types of food materials. Therefore keeping
variety in the ration of a pregnant woman gives scope for designing
ideal feeding program for her.

The experts in this field write:

“To keep the body fit not only food intake is necessary but also it
should be a planned mix of food materials taken at planned
intervals.”[^1]

The mother should ensure that she takes supplemental vitamins and
minerals with the morning and evening meals that will help the foetus in
the seventh month. This will not only help in the proper growth of the
teeth and the gums but also some other important bones of the body.[^2]

Dr. Giasuddin Jazairi writes:

“Consumption of yoghurt and cheese during pregnancy provides vitamins
and fats to the woman and prevents her from consuming many other
unnecessary things which she might otherwise be inclined to eat. She
should however avoid taking sour yoghurt. Stale cheese may also not
taste well. At breakfast she should take a glass of milk and a broth of
oats. Vitamin B is present plentifully in liver, kidneys, intestines
that are useful foods and should form a part of the pregnant woman’s
diet.[^3]

It is better that the pregnant women should take milk at regular
intervals. This is a complete food and the Prophets in the past were
very fond of this food.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq says:

“Milk is the food of the Prophets."[^4]

Dr. Giasuddin Jazairi writes:

“Most women feel pain in the limbs and the back due to deficiency of
calcium during pregnancy. They also find their nails breaking during
this period. They are therefore advised to consume fruits and vegetables
that are rich in calcium. They have also to be particular to regularly
take soup made from bones of sheep and lemon juice.” [^5]

Generally for people and in particular for the pregnant women the raw
and cooked vegetables and fruits are considered good food. The plants
derive the nutrients from the soil, water, air and sunlight and store
the food for us. All the fruits have good nutritive value but
particularly apples, quince, pears, dates are very useful.

Likewise every vegetable has its own nutritive value. Different vitamins
and minerals are provided to the body by different food grains, fruits
and vegetables. A person who wants to take good care of his nutrition
should take a mix of fruits and vegetables and try to eat all the
seasons fruits, even if occasionally. Particularly, the pregnant women
should make a careful mix of different food materials in their diet.
Islam exhorts its people and the pregnant womenfolk to eat fruits and
vegetables. A few quotations are given here to prove our point:

Imam as-Sadiq says:

“Everything adorns some place or other and similarly the vegetables
adorn the dining area." [^6]

One day when Imam Ridha’ sat for his meal he found the vegetable salad
missing from the fare. He told to his servant, “You know that I don’t
eat food without the salads. Please bring the salads for me.” When the
salads were brought the Imam commenced his meal.

The Holy Prophet is on record saying,

“Eat quince because it enhances your intelligence, removes worries and
makes the child gentle."[^7]

The Prophet also said:

“Eat quinces and present its good fruits to your friends because it
improves the eyesight and makes the hearts mellow. The pregnant women
too draw lots of benefit from this fruit and their new born children are
pretty and healthy."[^8]

“During the last months of pregnancy the women should eat the dates that
their children have forbearing natures."[^9]

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“Eat the dates that they are the cure of all pains."[^10]

There are innumerable traditions of the Prophet and his Infallible
Descendants that throw light on the high nutritive value of different
fruits and vegetables. Nutritionists can devise ideal diet schedule
including appropriate quantities of these fruits and vegetables for
various requirements. Consulting a nutritionist or a specialist medical
practitioner will be very useful.

[^1]: Ilm o zindagi, p 462

[^2]: Biography Pesh uz tawallud, p. 80

[^3]: Aijaz khurakia, p.223

[^4]: Bihar al-anwar

[^5]: Aijaz khurakia

[^6]: Mustadrak al-wasail, v 3, p. 148

[^7]: Makarim al akhlaq, v 1, p. 196

[^8]: Makarim al akhlaq, v 2, p. 116

[^9]: Makarim al akhlaq, v 3, p. 113

[^10]: Makarim al akhlaq, v 3, p. 112


