Chapter 13: Clean Environment
=============================

The growing child in the mother’s womb requires oxygen although the
foetus cannot breathe itself. But it utilises the oxygen acquired by the
mother from the atmosphere. The mother not only consumes oxygen for her
own sustenance but also provides it to the foetus. If the mother
breathes in a clean and hygienic atmosphere she can ensure her own
health and that of the child she is bearing.

If the mother’s environs are polluted and she is breathing poisonous
air, then there will be danger of illness afflicting her and the child.
The pregnant women are therefore advised to take particular care of the
environment in which they live. They should move in pollution free
environment and breathe deeply. The pregnant women should also avoid
late nights, which might tire them excessively.

During pregnancy the women should avoid smoking and protect themselves
from breathing in any polluted environment. While sleeping they should
keep the windows of the bed-room open so that fresh breeze is available
to them. It must be noted that deficiency of oxygen might be very
harmful to the foetus.

We are repeating the following paragraph from Dr Jalali, which has also
appeared earlier in this book, for your attention:

“Various defects in the body like cleft lips, flat soles of the feet,
sunken and small eyes were previously thought to be of genetic reasons.
But now it has been found that these defects in the new born children
are because of the environmental conditions and particularly the
deficiency of oxygen during the pregnancy of the women."


