Chapter 15: Difficult Deliveries
================================

Pregnancy generally lasts for nine months and ten days. The pregnancy
period is very sensitive and full of risks because it has a bearing on
the future of the growing foetus. The child in the period spends its
life within that enclosure over which it has no control and can be
exposed to several physical and psychological dangers.

The child will not have capabilities of himself confronting and
contending with these risks. After completing the nine months in the
womb successfully it has to pass through another risky phase which is
delivery. The process of delivery is not easy and simple but it is very
sensitive and difficult.

The child grows to a size in the nine months that particularly its head
at this stage is much larger than other parts of the body that its
delivery from the narrow passage of the womb becomes very difficult. The
possibility during delivery is always there that the child’s bones get
crushed or twisted. There can also be the likelihood of the brain
getting damaged due to the pressure during parturition.

One expert writes:

“The process of delivery can possibly cause psychological defects in the
child. Psychiatrists are of opinion that the process of delivery of a
child will have a significant bearing on its entire life. In their view
delivery is a revolutionary change in the environment and life of the
child and deprives it of the security and rest, which it had so far in
the foetus. At the time of delivery fear and concern becomes a part of
the psyche of the person. The future life of the person is spent
imagining unknown thoughts of troubles. The life spent in the foetus was
carefree and delivery is the arrival in the travails of the world.[^1]

Dr. Jalali writes:

When a child arrives in the world, it will be under pressure for a few
hours and the most affected will be its head that will be the largest
part of the body at birth. If the delivery is not normal then the
arrival will be more difficult and besides the risk of the environment,
the child has to face the risks of handling with mechanical instruments
used during the delivery. In such cases there is chance of infantile
mortality. The illnesses like madness and paralysis in children may also
me related to difficult deliveries.[^2]

Therefore, delivery of children is not a simple process and requires
utmost care and skill to ensure safety of the mother and the child. A
little carelessness on the part of the handlers might cause great damage
to the mother and the child, sometimes resulting in mortality of either
or both. But nowadays the facilities of skilled doctors and specialty
medicines are in the access of people and the likelihood of harm to the
mother or the child is much reduced.

The pregnant ladies are advised that if they have access to a good
gynecologist or a nursing home, they should consult them much ahead of
the delivery. They must ascertain from the doctor the expected date of
delivery and seek admission to the nursing home ahead of the delivery
that they get better care than they can at home.

The main advantage in such cases is that the doctors and nurses are
available at the nursing homes and if there is any emergency it can be
attended to without much loss of time. If, while staying at home, a
pregnant woman faces an emergency, the delay in reaching her to the
doctors might result in danger to the mother and the child.

The other valid reason for sending the pregnant woman to the maternity
home prior to the delivery is that the same sanitary environment and
personalized medical attention cannot be provided at her own home.

Another advantage of going to the maternity home is that the chances of
the pregnant lady facing unnecessary and unwarranted interference and
opinions of the other women from the family will not be there. Generally
such opinions are not educated and they may at times be harmful.

The husband too has a big responsibility during the pregnancy and
delivery of his wife. Religiously and morally it is his duty that during
this delicate and hazardous time he should provide help and courage to
the wife and take all the possible steps to ensure safe delivery of the
child.

Carelessness on the part of the husband may even sometimes result in the
loss of the mother and the child or they sustain physical and
psychological damage. Such heedless husbands will be deemed criminal in
the eyes of religion and the society and they will be answerable on the
Day of Judgment. They will also suffer the pangs of remorse if for
reasons of carelessness or miserliness they avoid providing necessary
care to the pregnant wives.

Sometimes, because of the neglect at the required time the husbands have
to incur much more expense to salvage the resultant damage. If the
families of the pregnant women do not have access to the maternity homes
then they should take the services of the competent midwives who have
necessary skills and experience of attending to deliveries. In this
regard the following precautions must be taken:

1. The temperature of the labor room should be moderate and it should
not be too cold. This is important because the pregnant women will be
under tremendous pressure and due to the long hours of labor pain they
will be indisposed and sweating and there can be likelihood of the
babies catching colds and getting exposed to several ailments. If the
delivery room becomes colder after the delivery the mother will most
likely catch cold.

The cold wind is very harmful for the new born baby because the
environment in the mother’s womb will be warmer (having the normal human
temperature (37.5 degrees Centigrade) and the room temperature will be
much less. The body of the baby at the delivery will not have sufficient
strength to adjust to the change Such babies are likely to fall ill and
their treatment is rather difficult. Mortality rate in such babies is
rather high.

2. It is necessary to prevent the air in the delivery room from becoming
poisonous with the smoke of burning kerosene oil or coal. Breathing such
polluted air is dangerous for both mothers and children.

3. It is advisable to maintain privacy in the delivery rooms to the
extent possible. Keep unnecessary visitors out of the labor room. Such
visitors might cause embarrassment and unease to the pregnant woman and
may carry infections when they come from outside. Other women looking at
the private parts of a woman is prohibited under Islam. During
deliveries the pregnant women will be unable to cover their private
parts. Imam Sajjad ordered other women to leave the labor room when a
pregnant woman was delivering lest her private parts are exposed to them
[^3]

A responsible pregnant woman should exercise all care during pregnancy
and delivery that she delivers a healthy baby to the society that it
becomes a useful member of the community. In the view of Allah too it is
the best service that a woman can give and will get its reward. One day
the Prophet was speaking on the subject of Jihad.

One lady asked, “O, Prophet of Allah Will the women be deprived of the
benefits of Jihad?” The Prophet replied that the woman too gets the
benefit of the Jihad that the time from the conception to delivery and
feeding of the child till its weaning the woman is like the man who is
at the battlefield doing Jihad. If that woman dies during this period
she would have achieved martyrdom.[^4]

[^1]: Biography Pish az tawallud, p. 160

[^2]: Ruwan shinashi kudak, p. 193

[^3]: Wasail al-shia, v 10, p. 119

[^4]: Makarim al-akhlaq, v 1, p. 268


