Chapter 21: If the Mother is Deficient in Milk
==============================================

If the mother is unable to satisfy the appetite of the baby, she has no
right to deprive the baby of her own milk. She must breast feed the baby
to the extent of the milk available with her and supplement it with
other milk and nutrition. But if the mother is totally dry, which
condition is quite rare, she can wean the child and turn to the cow’s
milk, which is qualitatively very similar to the mother’s milk. When
shifting to the cow’s milk the following have to be borne in mind:

1. The cow’s milk is generally denser and heavier than the mother’s
milk. Therefore it should be diluted with some boiled water before
feeding to the child so that it comes closer to the density of the
mother’s milk. The milk should also be sweetened with a little sugar.

2. The cow’s milk should be boiled for fifteen minutes to ensure that
any germs present there are destroyed.

3. The milk, while feeding to the baby, should neither be too hot nor
very cold. The temperature of the milk to be ideally close to the
temperature of the mother’s milk.

4. Every time the child is given milk, ensure that the feeding bottle is
properly washed and free from contamination to prevent the child from
getting infected. .

5. Efforts have to be made to ensure that right type of milk is used for
feeding.

If the mother wishes to use dried milk powders for feeding the child
then it is necessary to consult a pediatrician to get the recommendation
for the baby food suitable for the child. There are several products
available in the market to suit specific requirements of children of
varying ages and physical condition and only an expert can decide on the
product suitable for any particular child.

If the milk recommended by the doctor is not found suitable, then the
mother should refer back to the doctor and get a fresh recommendation.


