Chapter 27: The Most Delicate Period of Life
============================================

The most delicate and crucial period of life is the childhood. The
foundation for the future personality of the individual is established
at this time. The slightest neglect might cause irreparable harm to the
child’s future personality and temperament. In fact, the first three
years of the child’s life play a very crucial role in the metamorphosis
of its personality and character.

Perhaps all, and definitely most, people don’t realize this very
important aspect of upbringing of a child. They generally say,

“Small children, and babies in particular, have no capacity to
comprehend anything. They cannot speak and therefore are incapable of
expressing their thoughts and feelings. They are so helpless that they
even have no control over their bowels and hence have no capability to
learn anything on their own".

With such an attitude the parents squander the period of early childhood
of the baby. This is the most impressionable and delicate period of the
child’s life. During this apparently uncomplicated period the moral,
cultural and religious instincts of the child take shape.

In this early three years’ period the child picks up several hundred
words and gets acquainted with their meanings. It will start
distinguishing between good and bad, friendship and enmity, pretty and
ugly, small and big; it will also get the faculty of identifying
different colors, the taste of foods.

It develops the faculty of observation and speech. It starts showing
rudiments of the thought process. It learns to crawl and walk. It will
learn to laugh and to cry. During this three years’ period there will be
thousands of events that might affect the psyche of the child and have a
bearing on its future temperament.

Despite all this, there will hardly be any person who can recall events
of the first three years of his life. All the events of the time will be
under a cloud of oblivion and forgetfulness. But, all the same, those
forgotten memories would already have had tremendous effects on the
nature and personality of the individual. Several psychological
ailments, fears, traumas, anger etc are the products of the events of
the first few years of the person's life.

One psychologist writes:

“If the child doesn’t develop a strong personality in the early years of
his life, then he will not have the capability to bear the onerous
responsibilities which will confront him in the future. He will become
the victim of several psychological defects. Therefore it is observed
that the origin of nervous defects in a person can be traced to his
childhood. …….

Whenever a psychiatrist investigates the causes of any mental illness he
draws an inference that the person had such conditions in his early
childhood that are affecting the chances of his escape from his existing
psychological problems" [^1]

Dr Jalali writes:

“The foundation of the child’s social behaviour is laid in the first
year of its life. ….Its bent of mind becomes evident during this period
only.”[^2]

Because of this, the responsible parents don’t neglect this delicate and
impressionable period in the child’s life. They do not postpone the
training of the child for the future. In fact the training and
upbringing of the child commences with its birth.

Some intellectuals observe:

The child starts getting trained from its birth itself. The attention
that the adults and other children around give him will be the first
step of his training. Similarly the scenes and anecdotes that the child
experiences and the sounds that he hears will have impact on its
subconscious and have a bearing on his learning experience. Several
habits and experiences that are the building blocks of the person’s
character are connected with his childhood. Whatever attitude the
parents adopt towards the child from its birth will have definite
bearing on its upbringing and education.[^3]

The time for commencement of moral training is the moment of the birth
of the person. This is the time when the training commences without any
possibility of failure. If the training is commenced later on, there
will be likelihood of confronting negative attitudes in the child.[^4]

‘Ali told to his son, Imam Hasan

“The child’s mind is like the virgin land. Whatever is put into it, will
be accepted. Therefore, before your heart turned hard and engrossed
otherwise, I took steps to make you polite."[^5]

[^1]: Ruwan shinasi Khudak o baligh, p. 106

[^2]: Ruwan shinasi Khudak o baligh, p. 302

[^3]: Ilm al nafs al Tarbi, p. 19

[^4]: Dar tarbiat, p. 79.

[^5]: Wasail al-shia, p. 197


