Chapter 1: The Parents Responsibility
=====================================

In the eyes of Islam the status of the father and the mother is very
exalted. Allah, the Holy Prophet and the Infallible Imams have exhorted
the people in this regard. There are a lot of verses in the Holy Book
relevant to the subject. The exemplary behavior of children towards
their parents is rated as one of the best invocations.  
 Allah says:

***"Your God has decreed that thou shalt worship only Him and adopt good
behavior with (thy) parents” (Qur’an, 17:23)***

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq observes:

"Three actions are the best: (a) Offer the five mandatory prayers with
punctuality. (b) Maintain good behavior with your parents. (c) Struggle
in the cause of Allah[^1]

Now the question arises why this exalted position has been bestowed on
the parents of the Faithfull’s Allah giving this status for no specific
reason? What big deed the parents perform for their progeny that they
are deemed deserving of the august status. The father, in satisfaction
of his carnal desire transfers his sperm into the womb of the mother
where it compounds with the ovum and a new being starts to develop and
after nine months of the incident arrives into the world as a tiny babe.

The mother suckles it and gives it other nutrition. Sometimes she cleans
it and sometimes changes its raiment. She cares of its wetness and
dryness. During this time the father takes care of the expenses required
for the upkeep of the child.

Don’t the parents have any other responsibility besides these? Is it
because of performing these duties that the parents have been endowed
with the exalted status? Do the parents only have a right over their
off-spring and the children don’t have any rights over them? In my
opinion no one will accept any such one sided privilege. The traditions
of the Infallibles of the Holy Prophet’s Family are quoted in this
regard:

The Holy Prophet of Islam has said: "As your father has a right over
you, so does your progeny have a similar right.”[^2]

The Prophet also said: "As are the children disinherited for their
disobedience so also it is possible that the parents may be disowned by
the children for not fulfilling their bonding duties.[^3]

The Prophet said: "Allah’s curse on such parents who become the cause of
disinheriting their children.”[^4]

Imam Sajjad said: "Your children have a right that you consider if they
are good or they are bad. You have been the cause of their birth and the
world recognizes them as your offspring. It is your responsibility that
you teach them good manners and guide them toward the recognition and
obedience of Allah. Your behavior towards your children must be of a
person who believes that a good deed shall get a suitable reward and ill
treatment shall call for retribution.”[^5]

The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali says: "Beware, your behavior might
render your family and your relatives part of the ill fated people.”
[^6]

The Prophet said: "Whoever wishes that his children are safe from
disinheritance, he should help them performing good deeds.” [^7]

The Prophet also said: "To whomsoever a daughter is born should strive
to impart norms of good behavior to her and make efforts to educate her.
Provide means of comfort to her that she becomes a cause of his
deliverance from the Hell Fire.[^8]

Above all, Allah says in the Holy Qur’an:

***"O, Believers Save yourselves and your dependents from the fire whose
fuel are humans and the stones.”(Qur’an, 66:6)***

The time when a child is in the process of adopting a way of life which
can make him either virtuous or wicked, he can be metamorphosed into a
perfect human being or a degraded wild animal. The virtue or wickedness
of a person will be dependent on the upbringing he receives and this
responsibility rests squarely on the shoulders of the parents.

In fact the parents are instruments of shaping a human being, good or
bad, from the child. The greatest service which the parents can render
to their children is that they train them to be good mannered, kind,
friends of humans, well meaning, freedom loving, bold, just, wise,
righteous, noble, faithful, dutiful, hard working, educated.

The parents must mould their children in such a way that they are
successful both in the world and hereafter. Only such people are those
who are endowed with the exalted status of parenthood, and not those who
in fulfillment of their carnal desire caused the birth of children and
left the children to fend for themselves and rendering them likely to
fall into evil ways.

The Holy Prophet said: "The best thing a father provide to his child is
good manners and ethical training.” [^9]

The mother has a more important function to perform towards the
upbringing of the progeny. Even during the pregnancy the mother’s food
habits and her behavior affects the future virtuosity or otherwise of
the developing child.

The Prophet of Islam said:

"Lucky is the one whose foundation of his virtue has been made in the
womb of the mother and unlucky is one whose wickedness had its rudiments
in the mother’s womb as well”[^10]

“Heaven (i.e. *janna*) is under the feet of one’s mother.”[^11]

The parents, who don’t pay attention to the education and training of
their children, become guilty of gross negligence. Such parents must be
asked whether the innocent child pleaded with him to give him birth in
the world to be abandoned like sheep and cattle. Now that you have
become the cause of his existence, by virtue of religious tenets and
human wisdom his education and training is your bonden duty.

The parents are also answerable to the society. Today’s children will be
men and women, the citizens of tomorrow. The fabric of the society will
be made of these individuals. Whatever lessons they learn today, they
shall put them into practice tomorrow. If their upbringing today is
perfect, the society of tomorrow shall be flawless. And if today’s
generation follows a faulty program of training it is imperative that
tomorrow's society will be evil and perverted.

The personalities in the field s of politics, education and society
shall emerge from these elements. Today’s children are tomorrow’s
parents. Today’s children can be tomorrow’s reformers. If they have
received good training at the hands of their parents, they in turn can
carry forward this practice with their children. If the parents have the
will, they can be the instruments of the reform of the society for the
future and with neglect of the children they can be the cause of the
ruination of the society. By giving the right training to their
children, the parents can render invaluable service to their society.

Education and training should not be treated as an insignificant
subject. The efforts which the parents make to educate their children
and the hardships that they undergo in this quest result in the creation
of thousands of professors, doctors, and engineers. It is the parents
who strive to nurture perfect human beings, capable and pious mentors
and other professionals.

The mothers in particular bear more responsibility for the upbringing of
the children. The children spend most of their childhood with the
mothers. The foundation of the direction their future is bound to take
is laid here. So, the key to the vice or virtue of a person and the
progress or decline of a society is with the mothers of the society. The
woman’s place is not in the shop floor, ministerial or administrative
positions. These functions don’t measure up to the importance of a woman
as a mother. Mothers breed perfect human beings. Virtuous ministers,
lawyers, professors owe their positions to the loving care received from
their mothers during their formative years.

The parents, who nurture truthful, pious children not only serve their
children and the society but also create a niche for themselves in the
society. These children will be a support of the parents in their frail
old age. If parents strive towards the education and upbringing of their
children they reap the harvest of their troubles during their lifetime
only.

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“Evil off-spring is among the greatest hardships for the
parents.”(*Ghurar al hukm*, p. 189)

“Evil off-spring causes loss of respect for the parents and the
successors are shamed." (*Ghurar al hukm*, p. 780)

The Prophet of Islam says:

“May Allah bless the parents who trained their children to behave justly
with them." *(Makarim al akhlaq*, p. 517)

Therefore those who attain parenthood have great responsibility on their
shoulders. This responsibility is to Allah Almighty as also to their
fellow human beings and also to their own children. If they discharge
the responsibility properly they will be rewarded in this world and
hereafter.

But if they falter in the discharge of this responsibility then they
themselves will be the losers and they will be tantamount to have
cheated their own children and the society at large and they would be
perpetrating an unpardonable sin.

[^1]: Usul al Kafi, book 2, p. 158

[^2]: Majma al zawaid, v 8, p. 146

[^3]: Bihar al-anwar, v 19, p. 93

[^4]: Makarim al akhlaq, p 518

[^5]: Makarim al akhlaq p. 484

[^6]: Ghurar al hukm, p. 802

[^7]: Majma al zawaid, v 8, p. 158

[^8]: Majma al zawaid, v 8, p. 158

[^9]: Majma al zawaid, v 8, p. 159

[^10]: Bihar al-anwar, v 77, pp. 115-133

[^11]: Mustadrak al-wasail, v 2, p 38


