Chapter 29: Religious Upbringing of the New Born
================================================

It is a fact that the new born children are unable to comprehend the
meaning of what is told to them but they definitely are able to identify
the surroundings and the faces around them. They do hear the sounds and
their senses and the minds take note of them. Therefore it is not
correct to say that the newborn babies don’t take any impression from
what they see and what they hear in early childhood.

Although the new born are unable to understand the meaning of the talk
going on around them, the sounds of the words are registered on their
minds and in stages they start to understand the meanings and they
become a part of their vocabulary. Even amongst adults it is noted that
the words which impress the mind most are retained in the memory. The
adults recognize well-known persons easier than casual or occasional
acquaintances.

Similarly the new born baby too, living in a spiritual environment,
hearing the recitation of the Holy Book, the word of Allah coming to
their ears and having seen the parents offering prayers in their
presence will develop into religiously upright persons. On the other
hand the new born babies who are surrounded by irreligious persons, hear
the sounds of uncivil and abusive language, are exposed to amoral music
and songs, will no doubt grow up to be persons similar to those in whose
company they are growing up.

Intelligent and thoughtful parents will not waste any opportunity of
training their children. They go to the extent that they take care to
see that the children get to hear only good sounds and see good things.

The prophet of Islam too has given his view on this important aspect of
training of the children. He has said:

“No sooner the child is born, recite the *adhan* ( the Call for Prayer )
in the right ear and the *iqamah* ( the Call to rise for offering the
Prayer ) in the left."

‘Ali narrates from the Holy Prophet:

“When a child is born in any family, the *adhan* should be recited in
the child’s right ear and the *iqamah* in the left ear that the child is
protected from the evil of the Satan. He (The Prophet) gave the same
instruction at the birth of Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn. In addition he
asked for recitation of ayat al Kursi, the final verses of Hashr, al
Ikhlas, al Nas, and al Falaq to reach the child’s ears"[^1]

In some traditions it is narrated:

“The Holy Prophet himself recited the *adhan* and the *iqamah* in the
ears of Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn at their birth."

Yes. The Holy Prophet was aware that a child is not able to comprehend
the meanings of *adhan* and *iqamah* recited into its ears, but the
impact of the words which will be there on the mind of the new-born was
not over looked. The Prophet was stressing on the point that these pious
words would have salutary effect on the mind and spirit of the new
arrival.

Perhaps, the Holy Prophet was intending to instruct the parents about
the proper upbringing of their children, that they commence their task
right from the birth of the child. When a thoughtful parent recites the
*adhan* in his child’s ear, then he is proclaiming that he is attaching
his child to the group of worshippers of Allah.

The effects the child takes in its early days are not related to the
sense of hearing only. But, it can be said that whatever exposure the
child’s other senses get will impact its mind and memory. For example,
if a child witnesses any amoral act, although it may not understand the
purport of the act, it will definitely have effect on its psyche.

This is the reason the Holy Prophet has said:

“If the child in the cradle is seeing, the man should refrain from
copulating with his wife." [^2]

[^1]: Mustadrak al-wasail,v2, p. 619

[^2]: Mustadrak al-wasail, v 2, p. 546


