Chapter 31: When the Child Starts to See the World around Him
=============================================================

The child is a man in miniature and its nature too will be social. It
needs the help and support of others to live. It will have its attention
focused on others; it derives benefit from them and provides benefits to
them in return. But for a few months the newborn does not recognize
others and is not capable of giving them any attention.

By the time it is four months old the rudiments of social nature start
showing in his acts. From this time it gives attention to the
surroundings and starts observing the action of its mother. It starts
reacting to the acts of the mother. If the mother smiles, it smiles
back. If the mother moves her eyebrows, it does the same in return. It
looks at the toys with interest and smiles. It starts gauging others
feelings of happiness and anger. It is taken aback at the slightest
expression of anger.

When the child is confronted with happy and bright faces it jumps
towards them. It wants to sit up and look at the world around it.

At this stage the parents should take care with realization that the
child has developed a sense of the surroundings and is a full-fledged
member of the family. The child is able to give attention to the others
in the family and is, to an extent, able to understand their feelings.
In the four months of its life the child has gone through experiences
and experiments and has acquired memory for things around him.

This is the dawn of the future social being in him. If the parents are
thoughtful in trying to nurture this instinct in the child, he can be
helped to develop into a useful member of the society. Otherwise, the
child starts becoming oblivious of the outside world and becomes
restricted to the valley of its own inner world. He can turn into an
introvert and becomes a recluse. He will become a victim of inferiority
complex.

The parents therefore carry an onerous responsibility. They should be
aware that the child has feelings and takes effect of their behavior.
They must keep their attention focused on him. They should come to the
presence of the child with a smiling and pleasant face. They should talk
with the child affectionately. They should provide to the child
educational toys so that it gets acquainted with the outside world with
ease and comfort.

If the felt needs and desires of the child are fulfilled, it will feel
comfortable. It starts feeling that others wish him well and are his
benefactors. When he receives good treatment, the child gets ready to be
a good member of the society. Good and thoughtful parents don’t beat the
children nor do they treat them harshly. They are aware that such
attitude will have adverse effect on the mind of the child and render
him a defeatist and timid person.

The Prophet of Islam has said:

“Respect your children and give them a good upbringing that Allah
blesses you."[^1]

[^1]: Makarim al-akhlaq, p. 255


