Chapter 37: Sucking of Thumbs
=============================

It is the common habit of small children that they suck their thumbs.
Generally at three months age the babies commence thumb sucking and keep
doing it for some time. The natural cause of this habit can be the
breast-feeding of the baby. When it is hungry it either suckles the
breast of the mother or the rubber-soothers.

The child feels that sucking gives it comfort and over a time learns
that it can suck its thumb when the mother’s breast is not available to
it. This is a part of the learning process of the child. It detects the
usefulness of sucking its thumb and gets used to the habit.

This habit comes handy to the child when it is hungry and the feed is
not available to it; also it can allude to thumb sucking if it has any
feeling of discomfort. Many parents think that thumb sucking is not a
good habit and devise ways of stopping the child from doing it. Here it
must be mentioned that orthodontists consider thumb sucking adversely
affects the natural configuration of teeth and the mouth, many dentists
and doctors have felt that thumb sucking in children is not so harmful.

One expert says:

“Many psychologists and pediatricians opine that thumb sucking habit in
children is not harmful in any way and in most instances it doesn’t
become the cause of any defect in the mouths. They also observe that
this habit tapers off automatically once the child has set its milk
teeth."[^1]

But, nevertheless it is possible that this habit might cause some health
problems because generally the child’s fingers are exposed to the
atmosphere and might carry some infectious material into the mouth. Most
parents therefore don’t want their child to get into the habit of thumb
sucking.

Apparently this habit of thumb sucking is not a serious problem and if a
child gets used to it, the habit will leave him as he grows up. But if
the parents want, they can take steps to see that the child does not get
into the habit at the initial stages. Preventing a child from the habit
of thumb sucking is far easier than stopping it after it has got
habituated.

When the parents initially notice the tendency of thumb sucking in the
child, they should try to find the reason, give it more milk if its
hunger is not satiated, and if it gets hungry between the feeding
schedule give it some fruit juice or biscuit. But if the reason for
thumb sucking is some discomfort, it must be properly investigated and
remedy found. If the child gets into the habit of thumb sucking despite
all the preventive steps, then it will be difficult to check the habit.

Another method of checking this habit in children is to provide them
with good and soft toys with a view to divert their mind from thumb
sucking. If the child is provided company of some other child to play
with, it might not suck the thumb during the time they are at play. The
other alternative tool for avoiding thumb sucking is to give the child a
rubber-soother to suck. But here too there will be a chance of the child
getting habituated to the tool for a period of time.

However, the parents have to practice patience and restraint in checking
this habit in children and they should not have recourse to punishing
the child to the detriment of its psyche. The parents should bear in
mind that however strong the habit of thumb sucking in a child, it will
leave him by about four or five years of age.

[^1]: Ruwan shinashi kudak, p. 172


