Chapter 38: Fear
================

Fear is a universal phenomenon. Every living creature has the instinct
of fear to a lesser or greater extent. In abstract terms fear is
essential for the safety of human beings. A person who doesn’t have the
instinct of fear is not a psychologically normal person. This is the
fear which makes man run away from dangerous calamities and save himself
from death. Therefore, fear is a blessing that God has infused in the
nature of human beings. But this blessing is useful only when man
utilises it judiciously. Otherwise it will bring about harmful results.
Fear manifests itself in two main forms:

First: Imaginary, misplaced and inane fears.

Second: Meaningful, reasonable and legitimate fears.

Inane Fears
-----------

The first category of inane fear can be the fear of devils, evil
spirits; fear of the darkness, fear of harmless animals like cats, rats,
frogs, camels, horses. Fear of thieves and burglars, fear of cadavers,
the coffins; fear of the doctor and the shots he injects, fear of the
lightning and fear of sleeping alone; fear of the examinations; fear of
disease and death. There are a lot of such baseless fears that can
become the bane of a person if he is not able to overcome them.

He is always obsessed with the fears and wakes up sometimes from sleep
shouting and yelling as a result of seeing disturbing and horrendous
dreams. Unnecessary fear and tension is a psychic illness that can have
very harmful effects on the child’s future life. A timid person will
lack courage and while taking any major decisions he will be subject to
great pressure. He will avoid meeting people and will always be worried
and crestfallen. He will run away from congregations and will prefer a
lonely existence. Several psychic illnesses spring from such inane fears
in a person.

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“Fear is calamitous."[^1]

Therefore a good mentor will makes efforts to see that the child remains
free of unfounded fears. We have some suggestions here for the
consideration of the mentors:

1. Preventing fears is far better than curing them. Try to ensure that
the child is not exposed to situations of unfounded fears that it turns
timid. Psychologists observe that the sound of a running locomotive,
lightning, thunders, sound of alarms and noises near the head of a baby
can be the initial causes of fear in a child. As far as possible protect
the child from such exposures.

2. Fear is infectious. The child by nature is not timid. But if the
parents and others in his environment are timid, then the child gets
into this habit. If you wish that your child had no fears, then seek a
cure for your own fears. Don’t express fear over unfounded causes of
fear.

3. Watching films on the subject of crime and punishment, watching and
listening to horror stories on the television and radio, reading and
hearing mystery stories and even reading accounts of fearsome events in
the papers and journals can be harmful for the children. As far as
possible keep the impressionable children away from such things. Never
talk about the Jinns and fairies to the children. If they have heard
from some quarters about these, convince them that the existence of the
Jinns is confirmed by the Qur’an but they also lead lives like the human
beings and don’t do us any harm.

4. Abstain from intimidating the child for his training. Don’t frighten
him with mention of the devil and evil spirits. These methods might be
effective momentarily but they can render the child timid. As a
punishment for misdemeanor the child should never be confined to a
lonely dark corner. Some thoughtless mothers produce the sound of a cat
or a dog from behind a wall to quieten their crying children. They don’t
know the harm such things might cause to the impressionable mind of the
little child.

A person writes in his diary:

“Our grandma was in the habit of going to another room in the house and
shouting in a changed tone,’ I am the devil have come to your house to
eat you !”We used to fall quiet with fear and in the belief that it was
really the devil. Over a period of time such acts rendered me a timid
person. This is the reason that I cannot stir alone out of my house. I
am now a timid and nervous adult"

One woman writes:

“I was around five years then. I was playing one day in the courtyard
with my cousin. Suddenly we noticed a horrible apparition. It had a big
head, shining eyes, big long teeth, long and lose black dress and big
black shoes in its feet. It was in the middle of the courtyard. Making
weird sounds it wanted to gobble us. We yelled and ran into the dark
attic. I clawed the wall with such intensity that my fingers were
bruised. I fell unconscious with fear.

I had to be rushed to the doctor to revive me. For a long time I used to
hide myself in corners with fear and the slightest commotion would upset
my nerves. Even now I have shattered nerves and am unable to concentrate
on any activity. Later on I learnt that the apparition was a practical
joke of another of my cousins. She put a painted earthen pot over her
head to frighten us out of our wits. She has become the cause of my
nervous condition."

5. If your child is timid because of your carelessness or other causes,
then don’t neglect his condition any further. Try to rectify the
situation as soon as possible. If the child realizes that his fears are
unfounded, he will become normal by himself. But shouting at the child
and ridiculing him and putting him to shame in front of others is no
solution for the problem.

Such acts on the one hand do not remove the child’s fears and on the
other hand make him morose and despondent. He doesn’t want to remain
timid. Your carelessness and other causes have made him timid. Try to
find the causes of his fears with patience and thoughtfulness. Then
search for remedies.

If the child is afraid of imaginary devils and evil spirits, convince
him that there are no such things. Tell him that the Jinns have nothing
to do with the humans. If the child fears the harmless animals,
demonstrate to him practically that the animals are harmless. If the
child is scared of darkness, acquaint him with places with reduced
lighting. When you are yourself with the child, momentarily put off the
light. Then progressively increase the period of darkness. When you are
in the same room with the child at some distance, repeat the experiment
of putting off and switching on the lights. Repeat these trials with
patience till the fear of darkness is removed from the mind of the
child.

Remember No harsh methods should be employed to correct the fear complex
of the child. Forcing a child to face the things he fears will have
negative results. If the child is afraid of going to the doctor and
taking vaccinations then convince him with love and affection about the
need for the treatment. Sometimes the situation demands that the child
has to be admitted to a pediatric hospital. It will be a difficult time
that the child does not like to be away from the parents. If the child
is forced to admit in the hospital against his wish, it can be very
difficult on him Sometimes it is useful to acquaint the child with the
environment of a hospital.

When the parents go visiting a patient in a hospital, they should take
the child there for a short visit that he gets acquainted with the
environment. Meeting the kind doctors and nurses in the hospital will
remove the fear from the child’s mind and in the event of his needing
hospitalization he would agree to comply without much fuss.

Before taking the child to the hospital the parents should convince him
that his health needs the attention of the kind doctors and nurses and
he must go to the hospital to get well soon and return. Tell him that
they would visit him at the hospital along with other members of the
family. Never tell a falsehood to the child. When you have to leave him
in the hospital bed, don’t tell him that he should sleep and you will
remain seated there. Don’t give him a false hope that he would not be
given the medicines. Convince him that he is ill and the treatment at
the hospital is necessary for his quick recovery.

Legitimate Fears
----------------

As far as the legitimate fears of a child are concerned, the mentor
should adopt a clever, thoughtful attitude towards them. Mention about
dangerous situations to the child and discuss their remedies. Inform him
about the bad consequences of negligence. Demonstrate to him the correct
use of matches, gas and electrical gadgets and the dangers associated
with these things.

Teach him the right way of crossing a busy road and acquaint him with
the traffic rules for the pedestrians. Frankly mention to the child the
dangers which might confront him in his daily life. Acquaint him with
the safety measures and create in him the faith on himself and trust in
Allah. He should be prepared to meet the challenges in his daily life,
rather than getting scared of the dangers around him.

Another legitimate fear is the fear of death. But excessive fear of
death turns into a psychic ailment. This fear takes away the spiritual
calm and composure from a person. And blunts his physical capabilities.
It is therefore necessary to take preventive measures against this type
of fear. For sometime the child does not understand the meaning of
death. It is better the mentor don’t talk about this phenomenon at this
stage. But sometimes the child learns about this at the death of someone
close to him. It is quite possible the child might ask questions about
death in such a situation.

If the child has reached the stage of understanding at that time, then
the parents must reveal to him the truth. They must tell him that death
is not anything special but it is a transition from the present world to
another. In that world he will get reward for his good deeds and
retribution for his evil deeds committed in this world. Everyone has to
die one day. Allah says in the Holy Qur’an, ‘***All people will die***’.
Death is not important but the actions in this life are important that
the Judgment in the other world is made according to the actions of the
person in this life.

Excessive thought of death is not good. It should not enter the realm of
a lurking fear . This will be harmful.  
 Another positive aspect of fear is the fear of God and the fear of the
Day of Judgment. These fears should not be so intense that they result
in nervous tensions for the person. These fears encourage a person to do
good deeds and stop him from evil acts. Therefore Allah says in the Holy
Book:

***“If you are among the faithful, fear not others and fear Me alone."
(Qur’an, 3:175)***

Also the Qur’an describes the hardships and retributions of the Day of
Judgment. Therefore a thoughtful and faithful mentor puts the idea of
the rewards and punishments of the Hereafter in the impressionable minds
of his charges.

It will be in place to remind that a good mentor should not all the time
talk of the Heaven and the Hell and give an impression to the child that
God is severe on His creations. But the mentor should acquaint the child
more with the benevolence of Almighty Allah.

[^1]: Gharar al hukm, p. 8


