Chapter 50: Magnanimity
=======================

Generosity and magnanimity are excellent traits in a person. A
magnanimous person strives hard to acquire wealth, but he will not have
excessive attachment to riches. He wants wealth, but to share it with
others. He doesn’t believe in hoarding wealth. He spends his life with
his family and wholeheartedly participates in the welfare activities of
the community. He helps the deprived and the needy. He makes the right
use of his wealth.

A parsimonious person hoards wealth. He neither spends it on himself nor
gives a helping hand to the needy. Such a person will be amassing wealth
for the posterity.

Islam has condemned miserliness and praised generosity in very clear
terms.

The Prophet of Islam says:

“Generosity is a part of *iman* ( the Faith) and the *iman* shall take
one to the Heaven."[^1]

"Generosity is such a tree in the Heaven the branches of which have
reached the Earth. Whosoever caught hold of one of the branches, he will
reach the Heaven."[^2]

“*Behisht* ( the Heaven ) is the home of the generous people."[^3]

“Allah is Munificent and Generous and likes generosity in men."[^4]

The Prophet of Islam said:

“It is not proper for the mumin ( the pious ) to be miserly and
cowardly."[^5]

Generosity and magnanimity attract hearts and affections. People like a
generous person and respect him. With generosity and magnanimity hearts
can be subdued.

The Prophet of Islam says:

“A generous person is closer to Allah’s creations and the Heaven. He is
away from the Hell. The miserly person is away from Allah, His creations
( the men) and the Heaven. But he is closer to the Hell Fire."[^6]

A miserly person doesn’t pay the legitimate rights. He therefore becomes
eligible of the Retribution on the Day of Reckoning. .Generosity makes a
person acceptable here and also in the Hereafter. The quality of
generosity is instinctive as are the other virtues of men. But the
parents have to nourish these qualities in their children.

It is true that every child is born with his own individual nature, but
some natures readily accept to become generous and others tend towards
miserliness. The parents training and upbringing can have important
effect on the moulding of the natures of the children. They can
influence the child in curbing the miserly tendencies to a greater
extent and encourage him to be more generous.

The thing that has the maximum effect on the child’s progress is the
character of the parents. The parents are always the role models for the
children. If the parents are generous in spending on good causes, the
children too will try to emulate them. In stages this habit of
generosity takes root in the nature of the children. If, to the
contrary, the parents are miserly, the children too will mould
themselves on the same pattern. Habits go a long way in moulding
characters.

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:  
 “  
 Train yourself to be generous, select the best of virtues and these
virtues will become your habit."[^7]

“Generosity is amongst good habits."[^8]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq said:

“To be a sinner it is sufficient for a person to spend nothing for his
family and deprive them."[^9]

Parents can make use of the following guidelines for cultivating the
habits of generosity and magnanimity in their children:

1. Encourage the child to give a part of the things he has to the
parents and his other siblings. The child must be suitably praised for
the generous act and thanked. .In the beginning the child may be
reluctant to part with his possession, but, by and by, he will get into
the habit of being generous. When the child is reluctant for this
experiment, he should not be forced into giving. This might make the
child stubborn.

2. Sometimes encourage the child to allow other children to play with
his toys. The child should also be encouraged to share his sweets and
chocolates with other children. When he does it, give him a pat on his
back.

3. Sometimes encourage him to give a part of his pocket money to the
poor and the needy. Or ask him to spend some money for any good cause.
If this becomes a habit, it would have a salutary effect on the
character of the child as he grows up.

4. Ask the child to invite his friends home for a meal and see that he
entertains them with care.

5. The parents can give some money to the child everyday to be given as
alms or for some good cause.

6. Discuss with the child the difficulties and hardships of poor people.
If possible take him along with you to the hospital, the orphanage and
the home for the poor and aged. In his presence help some needy persons

This way the child can be initiated into the habit of generosity. We,
however, cannot claim that this method will work on all the children.
The parents should make their best efforts and the success can differ
from child to child. Every individual has his own nature and the
capacity to accept change. For the children their habits also come as a
genetic factor inherited from generation to generation. But careful
breeding can definitely have some good effect.

A lady writes in a letter thus:

“…. At a pleasant place we had an orchard. Different varieties of fruits
used to grow there in abundance. My Mom and Granny used to send some
fruits to the needy. They were particularly generous to such of those
needy persons who were serving our family. They used to entrust this
task to me. From the age of six or seven years I got into the habit of
doing this work. In the village there were families of two blind
persons.

My heart used to feel much for them. Every day when I visited them, I
used to catch their hands, bring them out for some fresh air and take
them back to their homes. .I used to bring fresh water for them from the
lake. These blind men used to bless me and pray for me. When I told my
Mom and Dad about this, they were very pleased. My mom said, one who has
become blind is really deserving of all help.

My parents always used to encourage me for doing good deeds. I used to
save from my pocket money and give to the needy. Slowly I got habituated
of doing this. I am now a member of a social help organisation that is
taking care of fourteen needy families*.*

My children too have taken good effect from my attitude. One day a child
said,’ Give me some money every morning.’ I asked him, ‘ Why?’ he said,
‘ I shall save this money’ I give him the money regularly and remind him
not to waste it. After some days he came to me with his treasure-trove.
He had forty-eight coins in that. He said, ‘ Mom, if you permit me, I
shall give the money to a blind person. He lives on the way to our
school.’ I was very pleased with the child and I kissed and hugged him.”

[^1]: Jam’i al Sa’adat, v 2, p. 113

[^2]: Jam’i al Sa’adat, v 2, p. 114

[^3]: Jam’i al Sa’adat, v 2, p. 114

[^4]: Jam’i al Sa’adat, v 4, p. 113

[^5]: Jam’i al Sa’adat, v 2, p. 112

[^6]: al-mahajjatul bayda,v 3, p. 248

[^7]: Bihar al-anwar, v 77, p. 213

[^8]: Gharar al hukm, p. 17

[^9]: Wasail al-shiah, v 15, p. 251


