Chapter 51: A Helping Hand in Good Work
=======================================

Certain tasks that are big and important cannot be accomplished
single-handed. But if there is some help available, the same job is done
with ease. If man keeps working alone he will fall behind in doing many
tasks. It seldom happens that a single person starts and runs an
organisations for social welfare. An individual cannot run a hospital,
school, mosque, orphanage, library etc without having others to help
him. In fact, a person cannot even manage the administration of any such
organization individually. But with others’ help and co-operation the
work can be accomplished to perfection. Any nation where the population
has the spirit of mutual help and co-operation will be a prosperous
nation.

In this respect Islam is a complete congregational system that invites
people to come together for common good. The Holy Qur’an says:

***“Help ye ( one another ) in righteousness and piety, and help ye not
( one another ) in sin and aggression" (Qur’an, 5:4)***

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“Co-operating to withhold the truth is fidelity and probity."[^1]

The spirit of co-operation and camaraderie takes root from childhood
only. Luckily human beings have gregarious nature by birth. But there is
always the need to utilize this instinct to advantage. The parents who
are keen to give good upbringing to their children encourage the
instinct of fellowship in them and provide to them toys and games that
need group participation.

They can give them toys that need assembling by more than one child.
They can encourage them to have a jointly save their money for use for a
good cause with guidance from the parents. With this collective saving
they can buy fruits and sweets to distribute to the sickly, poor and
needy.

The parents can add some money to this amount and also help them to buy
and distribute the fruits etc. They can also give the savings
periodically to some welfare organization. They may also give the money
to some public library to help buy new books. The parents can also
encourage the children to form a small committee and initiate some
welfare activity by themselves.

If the parents are members of a welfare organization, they should
initiate the children too to the activity. They can give some money to
the child to personally contribute to the fund of the organization and
make him a regular member.

[^1]: Gharar al hukm, p. 48


