Chapter 54: Respect for the Children
====================================

The child too is a human being and every human being instinctively loves
oneself. He wishes that others recognize his worth and respect him. When
others show respect to him he feels proud and thinks that he has been
praised. The parents who love their children should show them due
consideration and respect. In the training of a child, showing respect
to him is considered as a very important element.

The child who receives respect and estimation will grow into a sober and
respectable person. He always tries to maintain his reputation and
refrains from doing anything wrong. He tries to keep doing good things
to rise in the estimation of others. The child who is not treated by his
parents with due respect, he tries to emulate them while dealing with
others. The child is a man in miniature and like all men he loves
himself. He will be displeased if he is not treated properly and with
respect.

The parents who treat children badly without giving any thought to their
hurt feelings, create rancor in their young minds. Sooner or later such
children turn hostile and become stubbornly difficult. Ignorant parents,
whose number unfortunately is not small, consider that treating the
children with respect spoils them. They take cool, condescending, and
vain attitude towards the children. This way they crush the personality
of the children and give birth to the inferiority complex in their
impressionable minds.

From the point of view of good breeding this attitude of the parents
proves a major impediment. If the parents treat their children with
respect, then the child will try to reciprocate. The child will get the
understanding from that very tender age that the parents treat him
humanely and give him importance. He will therefore abstain from doing
anything that is not considered good in the society*.*

He will try to do good things to maintain the respectable treatment he
has been receiving from the parents. It is a matter of concern that in
our societies the children are not treated with respect. They are not
treated as members of the family till they are grown up. In parties and
celebrations they are generally not invited and go with the parents as
appendages.

In parties they are seated at an insignificant corner When they arrive
at the party and leave it, they are not given any attention. In the car
they will not have any space for themselves. They either go standing or
sit on the lap of the father. They are not allowed to speak in the
party. And even if they take courage in their hands to speak, they don’t
get any attention from the elders. They are summoned, if ever, with
indecorum.

Islam gives all attention to the need for showing respect to the
children. The Prophet of Islam has said:

"Respect your children and give them good training so that Allah rewards
you."

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“The meanest person is one who shows disrespect to others."[^1]

The Prophet always, and everywhere, used to treat children with
affection and respect. Whenever he returned from his travels, the
children used to run out and receive him. He used to hug and kiss them.
Some of the children used to mount with him on the steed. He used to ask
his other companions to take the other children on their horses. This
way he used to enter the ramparts of the city.

Insulting behaviour with children, even with babes in arms, is
forbidden. Umm al Fadhl says:

“The Prophet, when Imam Husayn was a babe in the arms, one day took him
from me and hugged him, the child wet his clothes. I snatched Husayn
away from the Prophet at that moment, when the child started crying. The
Prophet told me, ‘Umm al Fazl, Keep your cool. Water can clean my
clothes. But who will remove the displeasure and hurt of the child
Husayn’"[^2]

One gentleman writes:

“I had no significance in the consideration of my parents. Not only that
they did not have any respect for me, they used to insult and admonish
me time and again. They never allowed me to do any work. If ever I took
initiative to do some work, they used to find fault. They used to insult
me in the presence of their friends and mine.

They never allowed me to say anything while others were around. All
these things made me carry the feelings of inferiority and shame for
myself. I started considering myself a useless person. Now that I am a
grown up man, I continue to labour under the same feelings of dejection.
If I am confronted with difficult tasks, I feel myself helpless and
incapable of doing it.

I feel that because I am unable to have my own opinion about my
capability, others should volunteer their opinion about me. I consider
myself insignificant and absolutely incapable. I have no confidence on
myself. Even I find myself at a loss to speak in the presence of others.
When I utter something in such situations, I ponder for hours whether
what I said was right for the occasion or not"

[^1]: Bihar al-anwar, v 104, p. 45

[^2]: Hadiya al ahbab, p. 176


