Chapter 58: Respect
===================

It is always the wish of the parents that their children are well
behaved. Good and polite children are a source of pride for every
parent. The well behaved children politely greet the person they visit,
shake hands with him, enquire about his health, converse softly, limit
the conversation to what is asked of them and say proper adieus when
departing from the hosts place. Such children give due respect to the
elders, when elders arrive they politely stand up, show deference to the
scholars, religious figures and generally respect pious and good
persons.

In a gathering they remain cool and collected, don’t talk loudly, thank
the person who gives them something, don’t interrupt others,
particularly the elders during conversations. They say Bismillah ( In
the name of Allah the Beneficent the Merciful), the Islamic Grace,
before starting to eat, they take small morsels of food, don’t eat
excessively, don’t throw food on the table or the floor and follow all
the required table manners.

They take care of their dresses that they don’t get stained and try to
remain clean and tidy. They will be considerate to the others and never
hurt others feelings. They walk with a decent gait and give the
impression of being obedient and decent children. They don’t ridicule
others with practical jokes and when someone speaks to them, they listen
with rapt attention.

It is not only the parents who like polite children, but they are
popular with all who happen to interact with them. Impertinent and
impolite children are abhorred by all.

The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali, says:

“Respectability is the zenith of humanity."[^1]

“Respect ( politeness ) in a man is like pretty raiment."[^2]

“Good behavior (politeness) is required by people more than silver or
gold."[^3]

“There is no better embellishment than politeness in a man."[^4]

“The best inheritance a father can give to his son is to train him to be
of polite."[^5]

“An impolite person will have more failings" [^6]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq says:

“Allow your child to play till the seven years of age, then teach him
good manners and politeness."[^7]

The Holy Prophet of Islam said:

"The child has three rights over its parents: 1. They select a good name
for him/her. 2. Make him/her respectful ( polite).3. Arrange a good
spouse for him/her .[^8]

The fondest hope of every parent will be that their children grow into
polite and respectable persons. But this hope cannot be fulfilled
without sincere and continued efforts. It will not be possible to infuse
this trait in the children with sermonizing. The best route to this end
is setting ideal example before the children by the parents with their
exemplary behavior in their daily lives.

‘Ali has said:

“Best behavior is that which you yourself start to practice."[^9]

“Start instruction with oneself and then teach others. First make your
character perfect and then sermon and advise others."[^10]

Children are natural mimics. The capability to copy is very strong in
their nature. The children imitate the ways of their parents and others
around them. He will talk like them and he would try to walk like them.
Instruction, off course, is a very important aspect of training, but it
is not as strong as the capacity to mimic and learn, particularly in the
early stages of childhood.

The parents, who are particular that their children should be polite and
well behaved, must take special care to see that they are training them
by personal examples. If the parents are polite to one another,
naturally the children will follow suit.

The parents who themselves are devoid of politeness and good manners,
should not expect good manners from their children. They might lecture
the children hundreds of times on the norms of good behavior and
politeness, but the children would be behaving under the experience of
the attitude of the parents and others in the household. If the parents
are impolite and abusive to each other, they will be setting a negative
example to their growing children.

Children from such homes will be as bad mannered as the parents or,
perhaps, more so. Any attempt at correcting them will fall on deaf ears.
They will naturally think that the parents are asking them to do what
they themselves don’t practice.

Example is always better than precept. But it is not right to think that
lecturing will be totally ineffective. Good parents, who also set good
example for their children, can always talk to them about the norms of
good conduct and they will definitely accept their advice. This advice
too has to be given with politeness.

There are parents who express their anger rather harshly when they
notice the children doing something wrong. Sometimes they might say,
"You naughty fellow Why didn’t you wish the visitor? Why didn’t you say
‘Bi’ to him? Are you dumb? Stupid and manner less child, why did you
spread your legs impolitely in front of elderly visitors? Why were you
noisy while visiting our friend’s home You beast Why do you impolitely
interrupt the conversation!”

These ignorant parents think that they are correcting their children
with such talk. They don't know that good manners are not taught with
bad manners. If the child is guilty of any indiscretion, he must be
politely cautioned. There should not be others present at such sessions
that should be conducted in a cool and friendly manner.

The Prophet of Islam used to greet the children and say, “I greet the
children so that greeting becomes their habit."

[^1]: Gharar al hukm, p. 34

[^2]: Gharar al hukm, p. 21

[^3]: Gharar al hukm, p. 242

[^4]: Gharar al hukm, p. 830

[^5]: Gharar al hukm, p. 293

[^6]: Gharar al hukm, p. 634

[^7]: Bihar al-anwar, v104, p. 95

[^8]: Wasail al-shiah, v 15, p. 123

[^9]: Gharar al hukm, p. 191

[^10]: Nahj ul balagha, v3, p. 166


