Chapter 61: Anger
=================

Anger and angst are a part of the human nature. They are present in the
basic instinct of every person. This phenomenon rises from the heart and
the mind of an individual. Then it assumes the shape of a flame and
pervades the entire body. The eye and the visage become red, the limbs
start shaking and froth comes forth from the mouth.

The senses escape out of the control of the person. The intelligence of
the angry person disappears momentarily and in that condition there
would be hardly any difference between him and a mad person. In this
inebriated condition he might commit acts for which he would have to
repent his entire life.

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“Keep away from anger because it starts with rage and ends in
remorse.[^1]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq says:

“Anger is the key to all ills."[^2]

Anger is also harmful to the piety and faith of the person. It can
nullify his goo acts and make him a sinner.

The Prophet of Islam has said:

“Angst destroys the piety of a person as vinegar does destroy good
honey."[^3]

In a condition of frenzy a person utters unintelligent words and his
actions are such that he becomes unpopular in the eyes of others.

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“Anger is a bad companion which exposes the failings of a person. It
brings him closer to evil and takes him away from good."[^4]

Perpetual anger affects the heart and the nerves of a person. And makes
them debilitated and weak. Therefore, a person who is concerned about
his reputation, health and piety he must fight the bad instinct of anger
with full force at his command, lest it destroy his nerves, repute and
faith.

It must also be borne in mind that anger is not unnecessary and harmful
under all circumstances. At certain times its use is legitimate and
advantageous. It must be used judiciously when the situation demands.
This instinct only helps one protect his life and property from vandals
and undesirable elements.

When the person has to protect his faith, his country or to defend the
humanity in general, the instinct of anger will be a part of his
chivalry. Without the presence of this instinct a person will be in the
ranks of cowards who bow down their heads to any insults or ill
treatment from others, If the instinct of anger remains in the control
of the instinct of wisdom, it can be an asset for a person.

Fighting in the defense of one’s country, the cause of one’s faith ( Amr
bil Maroof nahi an-il Munkar ), to protect one’s family is legitimate.
The instinct of angst makes one capable of taking part in such difficult
tasks.

A pious and responsible Muslim will not remain a silent spectator to
tyranny, injustice, dictatorship, perpetuation of sins, the forces of
imperialism and colonialism etc. Islam permits its people to stand
firmly and confront these forces with courage and equanimity, In such
situation, however, the angst of the people, should not prevail over
wise counsel.

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“If you become a follower of anger, it will take you towards
destruction."[^5]

This is not right to totally suppress the instinct of anger and make the
human being insensitive, unconcerned and shameless. What is required is
the need to avoid excessive and unnecessary expression of anger. This is
possible with proper upbringing and grooming of the young persons.

Like the other instincts in a person, anger too is in its rudimentary
form since the very childhood. The quantum of anger in a person is the
reflection of the upbringing he has received, and the environment he has
been living in. If the parents maintain the instinct of anger at a
moderate level in their affairs, the child too will learn to follow
suit. The children of excitable and wrathful parents too will learn to
be similar in their future lives.

The child sometimes shouts and rants in anger, his body shivers, the
color of his face changes, he hits the ground with his feet, starts
rolling on the floor, utters angry word and tries to go to a corner and
hides himself. But all these antics of the child may not be all pranks.
It can be in anger and the parents have to investigate the cause of the
anger and try to remove it.

Anger definitely arises because of some worry or discomfort. Excessive
pain, tiredness, sleeplessness, hunger, excessive thirst, cold and heat
make the child restless and give rise to anger. Doing things against the
wish of the child, suppressing his freedom of movement, the feeling of
undue attention to other children, feeding him forcibly can make the
child restless and angry. Some parents teach the children in a subtle
way to be angry. They shout at them and become unduly strict. If the
child gets angry, they reciprocate with anger instead of trying to calm
him down. The child thus gets trained to be a compulsively angry person.

If the child is hungry and thirsty, give him something to eat and drink.
If he is tired, help him to sleep. If the child is angry because of your
actions, try to amend them. If the anger of the child is because of some
rambling thought, calm him down with sweet talk and lullabies. If the
child is angry because he needs something, try to find out his need and
fulfill it. When the child becomes normal, tell him that he need not cry
and become angry to get something. Assure him that he has only to ask
for the thing, and if the thing is good for him it will be given to him.
Also warn him that if he cries and misbehaves in the future, his wishes
may not be granted.

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“Beware of anger lest it dominates you and becomes a habit."[^6]

Excitable children become angry at the slightest pretext because their
nature is not strong. They are notable to tolerate any undesirable thing
and get affected with the slightest disturbance and become angry.

[^1]: Mustadrak al-wasail, v 12, p. 326

[^2]: Usul al-Kafi, v 2, p. 303

[^3]: Usul al-Kafi, v 2, p. 302

[^4]: Mustadrak al-wasail, v 2, p. 326

[^5]: Mustadrak al-wasail, v 2, p. 226

[^6]: Gharar al hukm, p. 809


