Chapter 64: Fault Finding
=========================

Criticizing others and finding faults in them for no reason is one of
the worst habits of human beings. People hate the persons who habitually
keep on finding fault with others. They try to avoid such troublesome
persons. Sometimes this faultfinding becomes the cause of enmity and
conflict. If someone’s faults are mentioned when he is not around, it is
termed as backbiting (*ghaibat*) and even if this is done in the
presence of the person, it is an affront and not desirable. The Religion
of Islam has termed *ghaibat* as a major sin. There are many traditions
on the subject. For example:

The Prophet of Islam, delivering a sermon, has said in a pronounced
tone:

“Those people Who profess to be believers with their tongues; but the
faith has not entered their hearts Don’t ever do backbiting and
criticism of the Muslims and don’t keep searching their faults. Because
one who tries to find his brother’s faults Allah will bare his own
faults and render him the laughing stock for others."[^1]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq says:

“Whoever says something injurious to the reputation of a Mu’min, Allah
shall remove him from the group of His friends and send to the band of
Satan who too will refuse to accept him as a friend."[^2]

The Prophet of Islam said:

Whoever does *ghaibat* of any believer man or woman, Allah will not
accept his prayer (*salat*) and fasting (*sawm*) for forty days, unless
he obtains the pardon of those whose backbiting he has done.”[^3]

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq said:

“*Ghaibat* and faultfinding are taboo. And they destroy the virtues of a
person as the fire destroys the fuel."[^4]

Unfortunately such a major sin has become an everyday routine for our
people. It has reached such grave proportions that the people don’t
consider that they are sinning backbiting and finding faults in others.
The mother criticizes the father and the father finds fault with her.
Neighbors and relatives don’t tire counting each other’s faults. The
innocent children pick up this loathsome habit from their home and
parents. Children do backbiting of other children. When they grow up
doing this, it becomes difficult to shun the bad habit.

Some parents pamper and praise their children to the sky. While, in
fact, they need to gloss over their shortcomings. Sometimes the parents
falsely praise the child for the things he has not achieved to put him
to ridicule for his failures.

In such situations the children might turn hostile to the parents. Or
even they may get the habit of uttering blatant falsehoods. They can
also become the victims of inferiority complex. It is better, therefore,
for the parents not to unnecessarily talk of the failures of the
children derisively.

[^1]: Jam’i al sa’da, v 2, p. 203

[^2]: Jam’i al sa’da, v 2, p. 305

[^3]: Jam’i al sa’da, v 2, p. 304

[^4]: Jam’i al sa’da, v 2, p. 305


