Chapter 66: Friends and Friendship
==================================

A good friend and companion is the greatest gift of God. In adversity, a
friend only is the refuge for a person and solace for his heart and
soul. In this world, that is full of hardships and hurdles, presence of
a true friend is absolutely necessary for every individual. One who
doesn’t have any friend, will be like a person, all alone, away from
home. He will not have anyone to commiserate with him in the times of
need.

Imam Musa ibn Ja’far was asked what is the ideal source for comfort in
this world. The Imam replied:

“An airy house and plenty of friends!"[^1]

Imam ‘Ali says:

“The weakest person is one who cannot make anyone his friend and
brother."[^2]

“Not having friends is like being a stranger in ones own land and being
a loner." [^3]

As the grown ups need friends, the children too want friends and
companions. A child who doesn’t have friends, will always be lonely and
forlorn. The child, by nature, needs a friend and companion. He cannot
be denied this natural need. There is also a subtle difference between a
friend and acquaintance. Perhaps, a child may have acquaintances but no
friends. Sometimes a child selects a friend from his class fellows and
the children in his neighborhood. The cause for picking up a particular
person as a friend may not be evident. Perhaps the spiritual similarity
between the two has brought them together.

The Commander of the Faithful, ‘Ali, says:

“The hearts of people are like migrant nomads, whosoever loves them,
they are attached to him." [^4]

A friend cannot be thrust on anyone. The parents cannot very much
restrict the child to accept particular persons as friends. The child
must be free to make his own choice of friends. But this freedom will be
with some conditions and restrictions. The character and conduct of the
friends will have to be observed by the parents before they permit the
child to pick a friend. If a child selects a courteous and polite
friend, he will definitely benefit by picking up his good habits. To the
contrary, if the friend has undesirable habits then, naturally, the
child will take to some of his bad habits. There are plenty of children
and youths fallen into the morass of sin because of indiscreetly
selecting bad friends. .

The Prophet of Islam has said:

“A man follows the faith, ways and habits of his friend."[^5]

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“The most fortunate are those who have connections with good
people."[^6]

This is the reason the Religion of Islam exhorts its peoples to abstain
from bad company.

‘Ali said:

"Avoid making friendship with transgressors and sinning persons because
evil creates evil."[^7]

Imam Zain ul Abidin told to his son, Imam Muhammad al Baqir:

“O My son Avoid acquaintance of five type of persons: 1. Don’t be
friends with a liar. He will be like a mirage. He will trick you. When a
thing is far, he will say it is near; and when it is at hand, he will
say that it is very far. 2. Don’t make a transgressor and sinner your
friend because he might sell you for as low a price. 3. Don’t make a
parsimonious and stingy person your friend who may not help you in times
of need. 4. Don’t make a stupid person your friend, lest he bring harm
to you with his stupidity. It is possible that with all good intentions,
he might bring harm to you with his foolish actions. 5. Don’t be friend
with those who deprive their kin of their rights. Such persons are shorn
of Allah's Blessings and are accursed people.[^8]

Responsible and thoughtful parents will not be totally unconcerned with
the type of friends their children cultivate. While the parents must
know the type of friends a child has, they should not appear to be
interfering in their personal matters.

If the parents can provide a good friend to their child, they have made
a great contribution to his virtuous future. But this is not such an
easy task. The best way is to acquaint the child with what is good, and
what is not, when he comes to the age of understanding. They should
explain to the child the defects that might be there in undesirable
friends.

The parents must keep a subtle watch over the activities of the child
and his friends from a distance. If they find that the friends are good,
they must appreciate them. They should create opportunities for the
child to meet such friends. But if they notice that the child has picked
up an undesirable acquaintance, then they should discreetly try to cut
this friendship short. If the child persists in such friendship, deal
with the matter strictly.

The parents can help the child in making good friends by another method.
They should pick children in their neighborhood with good behavior,
character and background. Create opportunities for the children to meet
and react with one another. If they become friends, encourage them to
cement the friendship. This way, even if there are some minor defects in
their own child, they can be warded off in the company of good children.
For example, if a child is timid, he might overcome his timidity by
being friends with a bold and courageous child.

The parents should not be totally oblivious of the type of friends their
child has. Particularly when the child is on the threshold of youth.
This will be the period in his life when habits take root. .Any
negligence on the part of the parents might result in irreparable harm
to the character and conduct of the child, if he persists to be in bad
company. They should remember the dictum: Prevention is better than
cure!

‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“For everything there is a calamity, and for virtue the calamity is a
bad friend."

One gentleman writes:

"My parents never permitted me to meet my friends. If sometimes friends
visited me, I tried to send them away quickly after talking with them
for a while. One friend of mine used to live very near our home. My
parents knew him well but never allowed us to visit each other. I used
to wish to have friends, meet them, chat and play with them.

But my parents were the impediment. I was very sad about this. One day I
had decided to visit my friend, whatever cameI told my Mom that I had to
go for my exams. I took permission for going to attend the examination
but, in fact, I made a beeline to my friend’s house. This friend’s house
was at a little distance from our home. I boarded an omnibus and reached
his place. There were other children too at my friend’s place. We had
lots of fun together, When I returned home in the evening, Mom asked me
why I was so late. To hide one lie, I had to utter another.

Now I wonder if Mom was not aware that the children too need friends and
companions. Why did they restrict me so much?!’

One girl writes:  
 "Once I invited some friends home. I had some savings from my pocket
money. With this money I ran to the neighborhood grocery and brought a
pack of ice cream. My mother was away visiting some people. While my
friends were eating the ice cream, Mom returned home. I was very scared
that she might scold me. She didn't bother a bit about my feelings and
said angrily to my friends,’ You girls are making Saima waste her
money!’

My friends abruptly went away. My Mom didn’t stop at this. She visited
my school the next day and complained to our class teacher that my
friends visit our home and encourage me to waste my money. She told the
teacher that the girls visited a day earlier and asked me to buy ice
cream for them.

My friends, who were also my class fellows, said, ‘Aunty We shall pay
you the price of the ice cream we ate at your home yesterday‘ I felt so
ashamed and belittled that I wished the earth went asunder and I fell
into the abyss. Ever since that day, I had never gone to the school. All
my friends progressed in their studies. Today I am a forlorn and lonely
person, lagging behind in all walks of life."

[^1]: Bihar al-anwar, v 74, p. 177

[^2]: Bihar al-anwar, v 74, p. 154

[^3]: Bihar al-anwar, v 74, p. 179

[^4]: Bihar al-anwar, v 74, p. 178

[^5]: Usul al-Kafi, v 72, p. 375

[^6]: Gharar al hukm, p. 189.

[^7]: Bihar al-anwar, v 74, p. 199

[^8]: Usul al-Kafi, v 72, p. 376


