Chapter 5: Starting Life as a Mother
====================================

When the sperm of the man enters the womb of the woman and fuses with
the ovum, the process of fertilization and the woman becoming a mother
commences. The fertilized egg (the ovum) starts fast metamorphosis and
ultimately takes the final shape of a human being. In fact the age of a
person can be counted from the day the process of fertilization takes
place.

One intellectual writes:

“When a person arrives in this world, he would already have completed
nine months of his age. And in these preliminary nine months he passes
through a metamorphosis which determines the shape he gets ultimately as
a complete human being for a complete lifetime."

When a woman is pregnant, she becomes a mother from that moment. She
bears the responsibility for the child developing in her womb. It is a
fact that the father’s germ has a bearing on the legal inheritance, the
physical and psychological make up of the person but the new arrival’s
future depends more on the care of the mother. The father’s germ is like
the seed but the development depends much on the developing environment
it gets.

Another intellectual writes:

“The parents of a child can provide a growth environment which is ideal
for its progress and can also give an environment which may be
deleterious to its optimum development. If the growth environment is not
proper it is not congenial for the immortal spirit of the off spring.
This is the reason that the parents bear a heavy responsibility for the
upbringing of the child."

Every person’s welfare, illness, strength, weakness, looks, character
take shape in the mother’s womb. The rudiments of the child’s morals and
fate are established from the very womb of the mother.

The Holy Prophet says:

“The Fate, good or bad, of a person is determined when he is in the womb
of the mother."[^1]

The pregnancy is a very delicate period and puts tremendous
responsibility on the expectant mother. A woman who is aware of her
responsibility does not consider the pregnancy as an ordinary time and
doesn’t indulge in careless behavior. She knows that slight carelessness
might affect her health badly and the baby she is carrying might get
damaged. This damage could be so severe that the child arrives with
irreparable defects that it may have to carry for the life.

Another intellectual writes:

“The mother’s body and the events connected with it have an effect on
the child she is carrying. The child in the mother’s womb is very
sensitive to the changes her body is undergoing. This is because the
mother’s body is complete and the child is developing to take the final
shape*.* Therefore it is the duty of every expectant mother to keep a
good environment at the house.

She can succeed in this if she knows what events can have salutary
effect on the child and what will not. A careful mother can provide the
right environment for the ideal development of the child in her womb. An
ideal environment for the child in pregnancy and immediately after birth
is an utopia.

But the parents make their best effort to see that they provide an
environment as near to perfect as possible. But the accidents of
ignorance cannot be ruled out. If people are not aware of the
consequences of carelessness, they may be faced with problems during
pregnancy and after delivery of the child. One should realize that
coming into the world without any physical defect is the right of every
human being.

[^1]: Bihar al-anwar, v 77, p. 115


