Chapter 70: The Child and the Radio and Television
==================================================

The radio, television and cinema are very useful inventions. They can be
very good tools for training and education. The tenets of faith and
moral values can be propagated through these media. The thoughts of the
people can be sharpened by means of these mediums. Information on
agricultural and industrial developments could be disseminated through
them. Awareness on the aspects of health and sanitation can be
popularized through these media.

Man can derive innumerable benefits from the electronic media. But while
they have advantages, they have many disadvantages for the society too.

When these media fall into the hands of irresponsible profiteers, they
can put them to wrong use and create tremendous problems for the
society. For their personal benefit they present programs which are
harmful to the health, morals, faith and the general economy of the
society. Radio and television are very widely and intensively used these
days. Most people consider them only as a source of entertainment and
recreation. The children and youth are literally addicted to the idiot
box.

Knowledgeable people are of opinion that the Iranian children are much
more addicted to the television than the children in the developed
countries like America, France, Great Britain and Japan. In Iran 40%
television viewers are children, 20% youth and the rest adults. It must
be remembered that the childhood and youth are the prime time for
education and learning.

Whether the radio and television programs are good or bad, they will
have impact on the impressionable minds of the children. Watching these
programs should not be considered as harmless pastime. The child should
not be given freedom to watch or listen to all the programs of his
choice. Many programs will definitely be harmful to the psyche of the
child.

The producers of the television and radio programs should do
introspection about the damage they are causing to the delicate minds of
the children by presenting shows that are very harmful for the children
and youth. For them it may be the freedom of expression that drives them
to their irresponsible act, but for the children and the youth, viewing
these shows with keen interest, it will be sheer damnation. The parents
too are responsible that they must keep a careful watch over their
children’s viewing of the television shows and stop them from watching
bad programs.

A major part of the television programming will consist of movies and
serials dealing with stories of crime, horror, murder, fights, cheating,
robbery etc. The children watch such programs with great interest. These
stories can be harmful to the children in many ways. For example:

1. The impressionable and delicate minds of the children are very
proactive to outside influences. Watching such shows the children may
develop restlessness, fear and horror in their minds. They may have
disturbed sleep in the nights and get up shouting after seeing bad
dreams. They may start getting chronic headaches. In extreme cases, on
watching the horror movies they may swoon and fall unconscious.

2. There can be very damaging effects of such movies on the morals of
the children who watch them. These movies can motivate the children to
commitment of crime and sins. Sometimes the children are so much
impressed with the bravado of the hero of the movie that they try to
emulate him in real life and land into trouble.

*UNESCO* has recorded in one of it’s reports that 27% of youth convicted
for crimes were motivated for the act after watching similar acts in the
movies. In the United States of America, amongst the juvenile criminals
convicted by the courts, 10% of the boys and 25% of the girls have
confessed to have drawn their motivation for the crimes from the movies
they had watched.[^1]

According to another survey, 49% of criminals caught carrying illegal
firearms, commit 28% of those who commit burglaries and 21% of acts of
running away from the law derived inspiration from what they have
watched in the movies. It is also reported that 25% of women who take to
street walking have taken inspiration from the movies showing such
stories. 54% of women have gone into houses of ill repute in emulation
of famous cinema actresses.[^2]

Professor Walksman of the University of Los Angeles says:

“The radiation coming out of the television screen is very harmful for
the human organs. The rays coming out of the television and other
household electronic appliances are of the short wave variety and the
first ill effect is that they cause headaches to those who are exposed
to them for longer spells. The thinking capacity of the person will be
curbed, the blood pressure will become abnormal and the white corpuscles
in the blood will be affected. These waves will have lot of impact on
the nerves and cause several illnesses.[^3]

Dr Alexis Carl writes:

The radio, television and inappropriate computer games destroy the
emotions of the children."[^4]

The *Daily Ittelaat* in its Issue No.15743 reports about a European
student thus:

“A college student aged 18 years was arrested and produced in the court.
He is accused of kidnapping the son of a film actor and demanding for a
ransom of $ 50,000 and threatened to kill the child if the ransom money
was not paid to him. In his statement to the court the accused confessed
that the thought of committing the act came to his mind on watching a
movie on the televisions depicting a similar act.  
 .  
 The police is of opinion that several such instances have come to their
notice that the youths get motivated to commit crimes on watching movies
on the television. A ten years old boy in Mashad , after watching a
Karate show on the television, kicked his friend so hard that boy
collapsed instantaneously and died. [^5]

The Deputy Minister for Education and Training, Mr. Safi Niya says:

"When the television is there to effectively provide evil lessons, the
best of teachers cannot do anything!"[^6]  
 (Majalla Maktab Islam, v 18, Issue 1)

One Cuban boy, Ronny Zamora, murdered a 83 years old woman. He did this
crime in Florida and is now serving a life sentence in a prison there.
His parents have sued three American television channels for damages to
the tune of $2,500,000. He has produced evidence that the child had
learnt about manslaughter from the television programs. Last September
there was a hearing of the case in the Court when it was mentioned that
when the child was small he was very fond of watching television and
used to sit in front of it for eight hours at a stretch. A night before
the crime, the youth watched a movie on the television where robbery at
a rich woman’s house was depicted.

A pretty girl of fifteen years, whose name was Razaia, watched a horror
movie on the television. She was so horrified watching the movie that
she fell down dead on the ground. When she saw in the movie that a white
person was scalping the skin of the head of a black girl in the movie,
she shouted in horror and had sudden cardiac arrest. The doctors said
that she had a brain hemorrhage.

Dr Jalal Baremani, an expert in psychiatry says:

"The horror and adventure movies have a negative impact on the minds of
the children. It is noticed that a child watching a film depicting
violent acts tried to imitate the hero and beats his brother or sister.
Such movies can have a very negative effect on the future personality of
the child. Watching horror movies the children become timid and
cowardly. Violent movies motivate them to become violent themselves. The
effects of these exposures will be there in the minds of the persons,
and they might themselves get motivated to commit violent acts.

Another psychiatrist, Dr. Shukr Allah Tariqati says:

“The effects of watching bad movies on the minds of children cannot be
denied. These movies have such negative effect on the children that when
they grow into adults, they might themselves commit wrong acts under the
influence of the movies they had seen long ago. .I therefore advise the
parents not to allow their children to see such bad movies. They should
take particular care to see that the children don’t watch movies made
and certified to be watched by adults only. They should ensure that the
children don’t watch any movies shown on the television after 10 PM.
These are generally adult movies.".

A professor of the Tehran University, and Criminologist, Dr Ridha’
Mazloomi says:

“Most of the movies shown on the television and cinema houses are
harmful for our society. Their effects are so dangerous that watching a
movie, a girl lost her life due to cardiac arrest seeing a horrible
scene. I can put it boldly that most of the crimes and acts of terror in
this world are directly related to the effects of watching movies."[^7]

Dr Arnold Fremani, who works in a hospital at New York, has proved with
advanced electronic gadgets that the migraine headaches and nervous
weaknesses in persons are due to listening to blaring music on the FM
Radio stations.[^8]

The Newspaper, The Times, in one of its issues of 1964 writes:

"A pediatric doctor, made observations at two air force bases that the
children of the staff in the age group of three to twelve years
continuously complained of headaches, sleeplessness, insomnia and tummy
troubles like diarrhoea. Medically, they were not able to establish any
cause for the symptoms. After a detailed investigation it was
established that the children spend long hours in front of the
television screens. The doctors recommended that the children should be
stopped from watching the television. This regime was effective that the
complaints like headaches, nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea in the
children had tapered off. [^9]

The thoughtful parents who love their children should not allow them to
watch television for long hours, particularly in the nights. They should
allow them to watch only such programs that are not harmful to their
spirit and mind.

[^1]: Majalla Maktab Islam, v 15, Issue No.11.

[^2]: Majalla Maktab Islam, v 15, Issue No.11.

[^3]: Majalla Maktab Islam, v 18, Issue No.1.

[^4]: Majalla Maktab Islam, v 15, Issue 3

[^5]: Majalla Maktab Islam, v 15, Issue No.11.

[^6]: Majalla Maktab Islam, v 18, Issue No.1.

[^7]: Daily Ittelaat, 10 Aban, 1352

[^8]: Majalla Maktab Islam, v 15, Issue 3

[^9]: Paiwandhai Kudak wa Khanwada, p. 131


