Chapter 71: The Gender Problems
===============================

Sexuality is one of the most sensitive instincts of the human nature.
This in fact is a highly constructive instinct of the human race. It
will have both positive and negative effects on the psychological and
physiological life of the human beings. Many acts of the human beings
and the causes of several physical and psychological ailments can be
attributed to this instinct.

If the upbringing of the individual takes place in a proper and
thoughtful manner, the instinct of sex can prove a boon for the welfare
and contentment of the person. But if the upbringing is in an atmosphere
of lechery, lasciviousness and excesses, there is every probability that
the instinct of sexuality might become the cause of many physical and
psychological aberrations that can become definite cause of ultimate
destruction of the person in this life and Hereafter.

It is not proper to think that the instinct of sexuality manifests
itself only after puberty. The instinct will be present in every
individual since birth; however, it remains dormant for quite some time.
Even then, it manifests itself at different times during the childhood
in a subtle way. Sometimes small children fondle their genitals and feel
pleasure. This creates in them a sort of emotion.

They feel the pleasure when the parents caress and kiss them. They feel
attracted towards beautiful persons and things, and sometimes they
express these feelings in words too. At the age of two or three years
the children start distinguishing between boys and girls and look at one
another’s private parts with deep interest. When they grow up a little,
they are attracted to beautiful pictures. They look at them with
surprise. Sometimes they might utter bad words. They start showing
inclination towards the opposite sex. They try to have the attention of
the persons of the opposite gender.

Sometimes, they even ask the parents questions concerning sex. They try
to eavesdrop over the whisperings of the parents. They like to sit with
friends in a quiet corner and exchange secrets. All these go to prove
that the children have within them the latent instinct of sex that tries
to find expression in their actions. Without proper guidance and
knowledge, the instinct keeps driving the children. They won’t know what
they want. Their only attention is to derive pleasure from any source.
But they don’t know how to get this pleasure. Till the age of ten to
twelve years the children continue in this state of suspense. From the
age of twelve to fifteen, the instinct of sexuality dawns on them with
speed.

Responsible parents will not be oblivious of this instinct of their
children. They cannot continue without devising a strategy to properly
handle the matter. Sex education is one of the most difficult and
delicate aspects of the education of children. Slightest mistake or
neglect on the part of the parents might push the children into the
abyss of destruction.

The parents should focus their attention towards the fact that prior to
puberty the children won’t have the faculty of procreation. Therefore
God has kept the instinct of sex latent in them. It is in the best
interest of the children that their instinct of sexuality does not have
a premature awakening. If this happens prematurely, the child will
suffer many types of social stigmas and physical ailments.

The parents must abstain from everything that might provoke the sex
instinct in the children. They must provide to them such healthy
environment that their minds don’t get diverted towards premature
expression of sex instinct. The thoughtful parents can themselves decide
what is desirable for the children and what is not. But here we are
mentioning a few of the things that the parents would like to keep in
their minds.

They should discreetly ensure that the children don’t touch their
private parts, they don’t look at pictures of models in the magazines,
listen to love ditties and watch romantic movies, praise good looks and
beauty of others, stare at beautiful faces and exposed limbs of others,
intently listen to bawdy jokes or courtship of the parents or other
elders. These and many other attractions might cause a flutter in the
sex instinct of the child.

The parents should not allow children of five to six years of age to
live unattended. They might sometimes play with each other’s private
parts and emotions might awaken in them. The children should not be
allowed to lie in their beds when they are awake. Have separate beds for
children of the age of six years.

If the children sleep on the same bed, their bodies might rub against
each other and give rise to the sex instinct. The parents should not
make children of five to six years of age sleep with them in the same
bed. This should be particularly so in the case of a child of the
opposite sex. Even the mother should not rub her body with the body of
her six –year-old daughter.

The Prophet of Islam has said:

“When the child reaches the age of seven years, arrange a separate bed
for him."[^1]

Imam as-Sadiq narrates from his ancestors:

“The women and children of ten years must have separate individual
beds."[^2]

"If a mother rubs her body against the body of her own daughter, she is
doing a sort of molestation."[^3]

“A man should not kiss his six year old daughter, and a woman should not
kiss her seven year old son." [^4]

It is a practice in many households that the women move around in
partially revealing dresses. Many men too are not far behind in this.
They will have loincloth up to their knees and keep moving around in the
house with the sons and daughters present. They think that they are all
members of the same family and Mahram, or close relations, from whom the
women don’t have to hide.

The parents also think that their exposed limbs will not affect their
children and that they are still very young to be conscious of any such
thing. They think that their daughters’ breasts not covered with a cloth
(chador) and exposed limbs will not affect their son in any way. This
they think because the children are brother and sister to one another.
This is not the right thinking. The instinct of sex is one of the
strongest instincts and when aroused it may not allow the person to
think of any relationship.

Imam ‘Ali, The Commander of the Faithful, says:

“It is very much possible that at a glimpse the instinct of love and sex
might awaken."[^5]

Such mercurial urges might become the cause of grave consequence to the
innocent children. Perhaps in such circumstances the child might commit
rape or incest. For any such thing the parents will be squarely
responsible for their careless attitude.

Here it will be in place to quote the writing of an intellectual:

“For the psychic welfare of the children, we should not expose our
bodies to them. Sometimes the children might peep through the crevices
in the bathroom door while we are bathing. or changing our clothes. We
must ensure that the children don’t develop such habits."[^6]

This is true that the parents are Mahram for their children and can live
in the same house together. But the parents should not sacrifice the
collective rights of the children for their pleasure and freedom. This
way they would be exposing their children to ruination. As a consequence
their lives will be condemned to shame and melancholy.

A person’s thigh was exposed from his robe. The Prophet noticed this and
said.:

“Hide your thigh, because it is one of the things that shall not be
exposed to others."[^7]

It is not proper that a four years old son takes a shower along with his
mother. Similarly a four years old daughter should not bathe with her
father. The children and youth should not remain alone doing nothing.
Loneliness might create the urge for masturbation. The private parts of
a small boy must be kept covered, not exposed, to his other siblings.
Never use abusive invectives with the children. The husband and wife
should not sleep on one bed in the presence of their children. They
should not play pranks on each other while the children are around.

One problem of a couple with children is the sexual relations between
the man and wife. It is a right of the couple to sleep together. But
when there are a few children in the family, there will be the problem
of having some privacy. Any way, they should continue their private
relationship without giving a hint about it to the children. Otherwise
there will be the danger of the sexual urge rising in the children and,
at their age, it would be prone with horrible consequences.

Imam Ja’far as-Sadiq says:

“The husband should not go near his wife while the child is in their bed
room. Otherwise it will be like committing a rape."[^8]

The Prophet of Islam has said:

“By Allah! someone copulates with his wife when his child is in the
room, and the child looks at them and hears their sound, then that child
will never prosper. Be it a girl or a boy, either will get besmirched in
adultery ( for the mere observation of the act)."

Whenever Imam Zain ul Abidin wanted to be near his spouse, he used to
send out his servants, bolt the door from inside and put down the
curtains.[^9]

The Prophet of Islam has prohibited man coming near his wife when the
little baby looks at them from the cradle.[^10]

Therefore the husband and wife who have a child, should not be as
unrestricted as they used to be before getting the child. To guard the
chastity of the children, the couple should keep their conjugal life
totally away from their view. This may not be so easy a process. But
they have no other alternative. They should not think that the child is
innocent and will not comprehend anything at that age. But to the
contrary, the children are very sharp. They will deduce their own
conclusions from what they observe. They will be inquisitive to know
what the parents do in privacy.

Sometimes even they pretend to be asleep to know and see what is going
on. They also try to peep from behind the doors and curtains. It is
better if the parents have a secure, private room for themselves in the
house. As far as possible this room should be at some distance from the
children’s quarters. The children should be trained to announce their
arrival when they enter the parents’ room. The parents should avoid
their conjugal affairs when the children are around at home, or until
they have not soundly gone to sleep.

A Western intellectual writes thus:

“Most modern dwellings are made in such a way that the planners overlook
the privacy for the conjugal relations of the inmates. In fact the homes
these days can be termed as the dwellings that are against sexual
requirements of the dwellers. Most homes or apartments are such that
there is no provision of separate bedroom for the parents. And if they
are there, the walls of the rooms are so thin that the children living
in the next room can hear even if the children whisper sweet nothings to
each other. .It is a bitter fact that because of not having a proper
place for their conjugal life, the parents will have a suffocated
existence."[^11] *(*)

But one disadvantage of the parents sleeping in a separate bedroom is
that they will not know what the children are up to. Particularly when
there is a slightly grown up boy and there is also a girl in the group
of the children. In this situation leaving the children together in one
room may not be advisable. In a situation of this type, the parents may
have to sacrifice their own convenience. If the parents have to sleep
with the children in the same dormitory, they should use separate beds.
For their conjugal satisfaction they shall have to find a quiet corner
late in the night when all the kids have gone to sleep. When the parents
are responsible persons and they have the will, they can find solution
to the problem without much difficulty.

Allah says in the Holy Qur’an:

***“O ye who believe Let those whom your right hands possess and those
of you who have not reached puberty seek permission of you three times
(a day) (ere they come into your presence) before the morning prayer,
and when ye lay aside your garments for the heat (at midday), These are
the three times of privacy for you; It is neither for you nor for them a
sin (if) after those (three times) ; some of you go round attending upon
the others; Thus doth God maketh clear unto you the signs; and God is
all-Knowing, All-Wise." (Qur’an, 24:58)***

Before puberty the children ask direct and indirect questions about sex.
Some parents avoid such questions. For example they say:, ‘Keep quiet
Don’t ask such silly questions!’ ‘ These things don’t concern you!’ ‘You
will understand everything when you grow up!’

They can momentarily quieten the children with these vague replies*.*
But some parents do give replies to the child’s questions. But these
answers too are wrong and contrary to the facts. The child subtly
understands that the parents are not telling the truth to him.

Both the above attitudes are wrong. Because the child is asking
questions out of his thirst for knowledge, and if he is not given a
proper reply, he might be more inquisitive and might get information
from other quarters that may not be in his best interests.

Fortunately, the questions asked by the children about sex prior to
puberty are not so complicated that answering them could be very
difficult for the parents. The one question that troubles every child is
the difference between the private parts of a boy and a girl. A child
fully understands that there is difference between his private part and
that of his sister. But he wants to know, why this difference?.

Sometimes he fears that he has some defect in himself that he is not
like his sister. At other times he thinks that the sister is defective.
He wants to know the cause for the difference and asks for an
explanation from the parents. It is the duty of the parents to give a
satisfactory reply to the child. They must tell him that all boys are
made like him and all the girls are like his sister. Then the boys grow
up to be fathers and the girls grow into mothers. They will have the
children of their own and the cycle will thus go on and on.

You need not imagine for a moment that the child wants to know all the
facts about sex in one go. He wants to get the answer only for what he
has in his mind at that moment. Neither anything more, nor less than it
Before a child reaches the age of understanding, he must be informed
about sex to the extent it is absolutely necessary and within his easy
comprehension.

If you don’t reply to his queries, he might pick up harmful details from
the elder urchins in the neighborhood or from the other boys at school.
If you guide the child properly, he will be safe from damaging
information from other quarters.

When your child attains puberty, and you know that his sexual instinct
has awakened to an extent, and there is speedy metamorphosis in him,
then at an appropriate moment you must inform him thus:

When children grow up, they will have a desire to have a companion. The
girls like boys as companions and the boys like the girls. There is no
harm in this. But, if the companion is pious and gentle, then it will be
fortunate for both the boy and the girl. Otherwise, a bad companion for
a person can be a curse for him or her.

After marriage the responsibilities multiply many times. The expenses on
the wife and, when the children arrive, the expenses keep mounting. All
these responsibilities have to be borne by the husband. You too must
complete your education properly that you settle into a good job. Then
we can arrange your marriage. Work hard at your studies. If you are a
capable person, people will like you and you can get a good bride for
yourself.

Beware of masturbation. It is a sin. It is also harmful for a person’s
health. A person who does it, may not be suitable marriage later on.

Avoid bad company and don’t pick the habits of bad friends. Some of
these habits destroy a person."

When children grow, they start getting furze in their armpits and the
pubic area. The children get scared seeing this for the first time.
Guide them appropriately. Explain to them the method of removing the
unnecessary hairs. The girl starts getting menses. When she sees the
blood stains on her clothing, she gets scared. Guide her about the
periodic menstruation that a girl gets after puberty. Her breasts start
growing, some girls get worried about this development too.

Similarly when the son shows the signs of puberty, he will see
disturbing dreams in his sleep. During the dreams his emotions will rise
and ejaculation will come. Sometimes, innocent and ignorant, children
think that they have some serious disease. Sometimes they think that
they are committing a sin. They worry and keep the matter to themselves
as a closely guarded secret. In such times, it is the duty of the
parents to prepare the child in advance.

The mother should take the daughter into confidence and explain to her
that getting hair in certain regions of the body and bleeding periods
with the onset of puberty are normal phenomena for girls. She must teach
the daughter about the personal hygiene during these periods and the
method of cleansing after the period is over. She must also be told that
during the periods she should not observe fasts nor should she offer her
mandatory prayers. The *Ramadhan* fasts that she has missed during the
period, she can observe later on, at her convenience.

The father too should tell to his son that he is a grown up person now.
He will get hair in his arm-pits and the pubic region. He will
experience emotional dreams with ejaculation. This is a normal
phenomenon with all boys who have attained puberty. He needn’t worry
about this. Whenever he ejaculated in his dream, he will have to take
the mandatory cleansing bath. The father should explain to the son the
method of taking the cleansing bath. In this way the parents can put the
minds of their children, who are at the threshold of adult life now, at
rest.

[^1]: Makarim al akhlaq, v 1, 256

[^2]: Wasail al shiah, v 14, p. 268

[^3]: Wasail al shiah, v 14, p. 170

[^4]: Wasail al shiah, v 14, p. 170

[^5]: Gharar al hukm, p. 416

[^6]: Paiwand hai Kudak wa Khanwada, p. 177

[^7]: Mustadrak al-wasail, Hakim, v 4, p. 181.

[^8]: Wasail al shiah, v 14, p. 94

[^9]: Wasail al shiah, v 14, p. 94

[^10]: Mustadrak al-wasail, v 2, p. 546

[^11]: Paiwand hai Kudak wa Khanwada, p. 176


