Recollections
=============

Clothes of prayer
-----------------

   
 A villager came to me asking for an item of Imam's clothing which he
would have worn whilst saying his prayers.  
    
 I went to see the Imam.  When I had finished my work with him, I said,
"Someone has asked me for an item of your clothing which you have worn
whilst saying your prayers."  The Imam smiled and cheerfully said, "No
problem".  He then gave me his own cloak so that I could give it to the
villager.   
    
 I was surprised at how kind such a great personality was as compared to
others and that in the face of such a request how extremely cheerfully
he behaved.  
    
 Ayatollah Mohamed Yazdi  
  

Prayer and supplication
-----------------------

   
 Amongst all of Imam’s duties and responsibilities, he gave great
importance to reciting Quran and supplications and to praying on time. 
Imam would recite Quran between three and five times daily. During the
Holy month of Ramadhan he would complete the recitation of the Quran
thrice.  
    
 Mostly he would recite supplications from Mafaatihul Jinaan.  On
Thursday nights he would recite Dua-Kumail.  
    
 I remember one day before Imam passed away, one of the ladies of his
household asked me to sit besides him and recite a supplication.  I
recited Dua-e-Adeela which is appropriate at the time of death.  I read
it from Imam's Mafaatihul Jinaan.  Whilst reading, I noticed a page
marked in the book.  I saw that it was Dua-Ahad that had been marked. 
This is the supplication that if some recites for 40 days they will
arise from their grave at the time of the coming of Imam Mehdi (a.s) and
will be able to meet him.  
    
 Ayatollah Tawassuli  
  

Quran and Prayers
-----------------

   
 Imam would always recite Quran before the time of prayer set in.  As
soon as the time of prayer set in, he would immediately recite his
prayers with humility and presence of the heart. After saying his
prayers, Imam would always recite supplications in a soft whisper.  
    
 Hujjat al-Islam Aashtiyani  
  

Carefully
---------

   
 When Imam would wake in the middle of the night to recite the
Namaz-e-Shab he would light the way ahead with a small torch.  He would
never switch on the room light and would always move about quietly so as
not to wake anyone else.   
    
 Such was the extent that Imam considered the rights of others.  He
would always have regard for Islamic laws and behaviours.  
    
 Agha Bourujardi - Imam's son in law  
  

Supplication after prayers
--------------------------

   
 After each prayer, Imam would recite Takbir 3 times.  He would then
recite the Tasbeeh of Hazarat Fatema (a.s.) (34 times Allahu Akber (God
is Great), 33 times Alhamdolillah (Praise be to God), 33 times
Subhanallah(Glory be to God)), followed by Sura Fateha and Ayatul
Kursi.  He would then recite verses 18, 26, and 27 of Sura
Aal-e-Imraan.  
    
 Agha Maseeh Bourujardi - Imam's grandson  
  

Devotion to Imam Hussein (a.s.)
-------------------------------

   
 Imam had great affection and respect for the Master of Martyrs.  Before
and after each prayer he would send his salutations to Imam Hussein
(a.s.).  With his Salaams and Ziyaraats, he would show his sincerity to
Imam Hussein (a.s.).  
    
 Agha Ahmad Bahai al-Din  
  

Paternal concern
----------------

   
 Imam believed that children should be taught right and wrong and
Islamic laws before they became Baaligh.   
    
 Occasionally Imam would ask my 8 year old son, "Have you said your
prayers?"  I would reply, "Agha, he is not as yet Baaligh."  Imam would
say, "Children should form a habit of praying before they become
Baaligh."   
    
 Each time Imam would see a child, he would ask, "Have you prayed?"  If
the child had not prayed, he would give them his own prayer mat and
would say, "Go and do your wudhu and quickly say prayers."  After they
had finished praying, he would say, "How much better it would have been
had you prayed on time. Allah would have been more pleased."  
    
 Mrs Fatema Tabatabai - Imam's daughter in law.  
  

A Bomb at Friday prayers
------------------------

   
 I had gone for the Friday Prayers in Tehran on the occasion that a bomb
had been planted there.  My mother who was at the Imam's house at the
time became really worried as I was late returning back.  
    
 When I finally got home, she said to me, "Why did you go for the Friday
prayers especially as you are pregnant?  For the sake of your child you
should not have gone.  It was common knowledge that there would be
bombings at places of prayer."  
    
 My mother had been worried for this reason.  However Imam who was
sitting at the table having lunch laughed and said to me, "Are you ok?
Thank God."  Then Imam whispered in my ear, "It was a very good thing
you did in going.  You have made me very pleased that you went to such a
prayer."  
    
 Mrs Zahra Ashraqi - Imam's granddaughter  
   

Questioning about prayers
-------------------------

   
 Once when I was a child, I went and stood behind the Imam whilst he was
saying his prayers copying all of the actions he performed.  After the
prayers he gave me several volumes of books especially for children.  
    
 After that, every time I would go to his room or he would see me, he
would first ask me whether I had recited my prayers or not.  If I had,
he would congratulate me.  If I had not, he would tell me to go and pray
and advise me to recite my prayers on time.  
    
 Imam's grandchild  
   

Call and action of our travel companion
---------------------------------------

   
 At home, whenever we would observe the Imam do something, we would try
and copy that action.  We would always try to be like the Imam.  He was
a role model for us in terms of training and education.  
    
 Whenever he would tell us not to do something, we would notice that he
would also not do that thing.  We would also therefore not do that
thing.  
    
 When he would give us advice on prayers, he himself half an hour before
the midday prayers would perform his wudhu and busy himself in
supplications.  This had a great effect on us.  
    
 During winter, on mornings that I would have to get up in order to do
wudhu, Imam would bring me some warm water and would say: "Do your wudhu
with this warm water."  
    
 Mrs Fareeda Mustafawi - Imam's daughter.  
   

Quran and Mafaati
-----------------

   
 Every night, Imam would pray Namaz-e-Shab and would usually wake up an
hour before Azaan to pray.  If time remained before Azaan, he would read
newspapers and would listen to overseas radio broadcasts.  
    
 Imam gave great importance to listening to the news.  He wanted to know
what other countries where thinking about Iran.  Even when the Imam was
in hospital, the radio was always by his side and he would listen to the
news.  
    
 The Quran and the Mafaati were also always by his side.  Even in the
hospital until his last day, the Quran and the Mafaati were by his
bedside and he would recite them as per his usual routine.  
    
 People saw from television pictures that right until Imam was put on a
drip, he would say his prayers with sincerity and presence of heart.  
    
 One of Imam's relatives narrates: "Once just before the time of Fajr
prayers, I entered the Imam's room in the hospital. I found him in an
unusual state.  He had been crying so much that his whole face was wet
with tears.  Such was Imam whispering and supplicating to God that it
left a profound impression on me.  
    
 Hujjatal Islam Ashtiyani  
   

Imam and the prayers of children
--------------------------------

   
 I had just become baaligh during the time Imam was under the watch of
Shah's agents in Tehran.  One day, my family and I had gone to Ketri to
see the Imam.  He was reciting the Magrib and Isha prayers.  All the
members of my family and some others stood for prayers behind the Imam. 
No one wanted to miss praying congregational prayers behind him.   
    
 I was but a child then and by the time I had performed my wudhu, the
Imam had finished sajdah of the first rakaat.  Incorrectly, I joined the
prayers at that moment copying the Imam's actions.  My mother signalled
to me that my prayers were not correct but I carried on praying.   
    
 After the Magrib prayer my mother said, "Your prayer was not correct. 
You must pray your Magrib prayers again. Then you can join the Imam for
Isha."  I was very upset.  Crying I went to Imam.  He was reciting
supplications between the Magrib and Isha prayers. 

My mother also came near the Imam and said, “Whatever I say to this
child, she does not listen.  I think she will only listen to you.  She
says that if Imam sees her then he will accept her prayers".  A number
of people were sitting next to the Imam.  My mother said to me, “Don't
bother the Imam."  However Imam said, "I will certainly explain to her
till she understands."  Then, for a period of about 15 or 20 minutes,
Imam proceeded to explain to me whilst everyone waited for the Imam to
continue the prayers.  
    
 Mrs Mariam Pasnedeedeh  
   

Prayers whilst ill
------------------

   
 One of the physicians in Qum narrates: When we heard that Imam was
suffering with a heart problem, I myself went to his bedside and
measured his blood pressure.  The Imam's blood pressure was very low and
from a medical viewpoint was very critical.  I quickly gave the Imam
emergency treatment.  After two hours, his condition had improved
slightly but remained critical.  At that time, I saw that Imam had
gotten up from his place. 

I asked the Imam why he had gotten up.  He replied that it was for
prayers.  I said to him, “In the field of Islamic jurrisprudence, you
are a Mujtahid.  However, in the medical field, I am a specialist.  In
my opinion, moving about for you is haraam.  It is better that you pray
lying down."  Imam quickly heeded my words.  
    
 Mrs Fatema Tabatabai – Imam's daughter-in-law  
   

Prayers in the hospital
-----------------------

   
 In the last few days of the Imam's life, when he was taken to the
hospital, his first order was that he should be told whenever the time
of prayers had set in. 

During one of those days, a tray of food was brought to his room.  Imam
asked, "Has the time of prayers set in?"  Those present replied, "Yes,
it is already the time for prayers."  Very sternly, Imam said to those
around him, "So why did you not wake me?"  They replied, "We were
concerned about your health."  Imam unhappily said, "Take the food away
until I have said my prayers."  
    
 Hujjatul Islam Jamaaraani  
   

Meeting with God
----------------

   
 Imam would wear his cleanest clothes whilst saying his prayers.  After
doing his wudhu, he would comb his blessed beard, would apply perfume,
wear his turban, then stand for prayers.  Right up until the time Imam
became ill after he was operated on he would wear his cleanest clothes
for prayers.  
    
 Agha Mu'tamadi  
  

Prayers until the end
---------------------

   
 A day before Imam passed away, he prayed his Zohr and Asr prayers
having done wudhu.  As of one hour before the time of Zohr, he would ask
anyone who passed by as to how much time remained before Zohr.  His aim
was to make sure he said his prayers on time.  
    
 At 3.30 in the afternoon, Imam became unconscious.  The doctors tried
to revive him.  At around Magrib time, the doctors knowing that Imam had
a deep attachment with prayers, called to him and said, "Agha, it is the
time for prayers."  Imam, who was still unconscious at the time,
responded to this call with a movement.  Then, with the motion of his
hands and eyebrows, he proceeded to pray the Magrib prayers.  
    
 Mrs Farishteh I'rabi   
    

Teaching students
-----------------

   
 Imam was very particular about praying on time.  Imam would get very
upset if a student in his class said his prayers late.  I too was a
student of Imam's.   Imam was so particular about prayer that and I too
tried hard to pray on time so that I would not be deprived of the
opportunity of sitting in his classes.  
    
 Ayatollah Khalkhali – Imam's student  
   

Prayers in youth
----------------

   
 Imam used to say, " When I was young I would go out of town on
Thursdays and Fridays with my friends for a break.  Our destination
would often be Jamkaran.  During the snowy and rainy seasons we would
sit in our room talking.  However, when we would hear the call of the
Muedhin, we would all stand for prayers.  
    
 Ayatollah Subhani – Imam's student  
   

Prayers on time
---------------

   
 Even in his youth, Imam would say his prayers on time.  One of his
friends narrates:  At first, God forbid, we used to think that perhaps
it was out of self pretentiousness that Imam would pray on time.  For
this reason we decided to test Imam. 

For example, when on a journey, we would lay out food right at prayer
time.  However Imam would say, "You eat. I am saying my prayers and will
eat whatever is leftover."  Or, when setting out on a journey, we would
decide to set out right at prayer time.  However, Imam would say, "You
go.  I will catch up with you." 

Many of these occasions transpired.  Not only would Imam always say his
prayers on time, but he instilled this practice in us to such an extent
that we now always say our prayers on time.   
    
 Ayatollah Ibaadi – Imam's student   
  

Lover of the night
------------------

One year, it snowed so much in Qum that half the town was flooded.  That
year, I witnessed that every night in the Fiziyeh school, Imam, no
matter how hard, would break the ice in the fountain and would do his
wudhu.  Then, in the dark of night, he would say his prayers with
sincerity.  Till now, I am unable to explain how he was able to be so
happy at that time.   
    
 This lover of the night would stay awake till the Adhaan of the dawn
prayers reciting supplications. At the time of Adhaan, he would go to
the Haraam of Hazarat Masuma (as) and in the mosque of Mosque of Balaa
Sar, he would say his prayers behind Agha Mirza Jawadi Aqaamalaqi. 
After prayers he would study.  I am able to say that in terms of
worship, there were very few like him amongst the religious scholars.  
    
 Ayatollah Khaansaari  
  

Travel companion
----------------

   
 I have travelled many times with Imam.  Only God knows how on journeys
he was like a father to us.  To such an extent, that every time I recall
those times I am moved.  
    
 Once I went with Imam to Mashad for the Ziyarat of Imam Raza (a.s.). 
At that time, parts of Iran were under the control of Russia, America,
and England.  On the way back from Mashad, in the middle of the journey,
the Russians stopped our car for inspection and we were forced to get
out.  
    
 Because Imam was always punctual about his prayers and would always
wake for Namaz -e-Shab, he wanted to pray.  We were in the middle of the
desert and there was no water available.  However, at one point we
looked and water was flowing.  Imam rolled up his sleeves and did
wudhu.  We did not know where he found this water or whether it was
still there or not after prayers.  
    
 Shaheede Mihraab Ayatollah Sadooqi.  
   

Congregational prayers
----------------------

   
 During Feveredin 1342 (english date?) on the occasion of the
anniversary of the martydom of Imam Jaffer Sadiq (as), a mourning
gathering was held in the house of Imam Khomeini at which he was also
present.  Suddenly a number of people wailing and chanting slogans
entered the house. 

They were those who had been wounded by the Shah's agents at the
Fidhiyeh school.   Some of them wanted to shut the door of the house. 
However Imam said, "Leave the door open." He then said to all those
present, "Get ready for prayer. 

How much better it would be if Shah's executioners attack whilst we are
praying so that we can receive salvation.  It would be a huge blow for
them and an immense blessing for us."  
    
 Gulamhussein Ahmadi  
  

Prayers in prison
-----------------

   
 Imam narrated:  At the time when Shah's agents took me to Eshratabad
prison, I wanted to do wudhu so that I could pray.  They took me to a
very remote place away from the prison to do wudhhoo.  There I did wudhu
and came back.  The agents were very scared of me.  They didn't even
allow the officers and soldiers to look at me."  
    
 Ayatollah Khalkali – Imam’s student  
  

Prayers on the way to prison
----------------------------

   
 Imam once told me: Once, Shah's agents burst into my house, arrested
me, and took me towards Tehran. On the Qum-Tehran road I told them it
was the time for the Fajr prayers and I asked them to stop at a place
where I could do wudhu. 

They replied that they did not have permission to do so.  I said to
them, "You are armed and I am weapon less.  I won't be able to do
anything."  Again they said that they did not have permission.  I knew
it was pointless and they would not stop the car.  I said, "At least
stop for a while so that I can do Tayammum by the side of the road."  
    
 In the end they stopped the car.  However, they did not let me get
down.  Whilst still sitting in the car, I bent down and did tayammum.  I
then said my prayers with my back facing Qibla.   
    
 That day I said my prayers with tayammum, my back towards Qibla, and in
a moving vehicle. Perhaps those two rakaat prayers will achieve God's
pleasure.  
    
 Mrs Farida Mustafa – Imam's daughter  
  

Suspension of congregational prayers
------------------------------------

   
 Despite his advanced age, Imam would fast the 18-hour fasts in the
month of Ramadhan in the 50 degree temperatures of Najaf.  He would
break his fast after the Magrib and Isha congregational prayers.  
    
 Early one evening he found out that Shah's agents in Iraq wanted to
execute a group of innocent people.  As a protest, Imam suspended the
congregational prayers.  He called upon the governor of Najaf so that
perhaps he could save the lives of some of those Muslims.  
    
 Hujjatal Islam Syed Hameed Ruhani  
    
  

Respect for people's rights
---------------------------

   
 During the period when Imam used to live in the Holy city of Najaf, he
would often go to the Holy city of Kerbala.  There he would stay in a
small house.  
    
 Whilst in Kerbala, he would say his Magrib and Isha prayers in the
mosque of Ayatollah Bouroujardi and he would lead the Zohr and Asr
congregational prayers at his house.  The courtyard of his house was
very small and the carpet was insufficient. 

However because people had a great affinity for Imam, a large number of
them would come for prayers laying out their prayer mats.  When Imam
would enter, he was very careful not to step on people's shoes and
cloaks.  Through his own actions, he taught how to respect the rights of
people.  
    
 Ayatollah Qarhi  
   

A Mosque is the people’s home
-----------------------------

   
 During the period that Imam was in Najaf, a number of people from Iran
took their Khums (Sehme Imam) money to him.  It amounted to quite a
sum.  At that time, they asked Imam, "We want to build a mosque here in
the local vicinity.  Do you give us permission to spend some of this
money to build it?"  Imam replied: "No I do not give permission."

The people pleaded.  Imam said, "Muslims of each vicinity should build
their own mosque because mosques belong to them.  I cannot give you this
Sehme Imam to build the mosque.  Does it make sense that I would pay for
the mohrs you use? The mosque is your property.  You have to meet its
costs."  
    
 Ayatollah Ma'arifat  
   

Shia of Ali (a.s.)
------------------

   
 In all of the 15 years that Imam was in exile, he did not miss even one
night going to the shrine of Hazarat Ali (a.s.), except when he was
ill.  Every night until dawn, Hazarat Imam would go to the Haraam and
would stand for a long time reciting Ziyarat.  When he would go to
Kerbala, every morning and evening he would go and recite Ziyarat at the
shrine of his grandfather Imam Hussein (a.s.) and the shrine of Hazarat
Abbas.  
    
 Ayatollah Qadeeri – Imam's student  
   

Tranquil Heart
--------------

   
 None of us knew what would befall us on the night that it was agreed
that Imam would go to Kuwait. It was not certain whether Kuwait would
let us enter nor did we know what events lay in store for us.  In Najaf,
our house was quite a scene.  Every moment was tense and worrying.   
    
 I focused my attention on Imam (?).  Just as in previous nights he
slept on time and as always one and a half hours before the Fajr Adhaan
he woke for prayers.  
    
 Haj Ahmed Agha Khomeini – Imam's son.  
  

God's guest
-----------

   
 Haj Ahmed Agha narrates:  One night during the month of Ramadhan, I was
sleeping on the rooftop.  Imam's house was small being only 45 square
metres.  I woke up and heard a sound.  I realised that Imam was saying
his prayers in the dark.  His hands were stretched out towards the sky
and he was crying.  
    
 During Ramadhan, it was Imam's routine that he would stay awake until
dawn reciting prayers and supplications.  After the dawn prayers he
would rest a little and then get ready for his work.  
    
 Hujjatal Islam Nasari  
   

Prayers on the road to Kuwait
-----------------------------

   
 When the Ba'ath regime in Iraq put pressure on Imam, he headed towards
the Kuwaiti border.  On the way, it was approaching the time of the Zohr
prayers when we arrived at a mosque.  Imam asked, "Does this mosque have
an Imam for congregational prayers?".  Imam was told it did.  Imam said
to his companions, "We either pray congregational prayers behind the
Imam or we should go elsewhere to pray because if we want to wait to
pray by ourselves in the mosque it will be an insult to the Imam."  
    
 We set out till we reached one of the borders between Iraq and Kuwait.
Friends went to see to the border control requirements and Imam wanted
to pray in a room.  Suddenly his eyes fell on a huge picture of Saddam
Hussein that was on the wall of the room.  Imam said, "Lets go somewhere
else to pray."  
    
 Truly how so very careful Imam was.  In places where it was necessary
to protect the respect of a religious scholar, he was very careful not
to be disrespectful.   And in places where it was essential not to show
respect to tyrants, he said, "Let us leave this place."  
    
 Hujjatal Islam Naasari – Imam's student  
   

Tired body, alive mind
----------------------

   
 We wanted to leave Iraq for Kuwait.  At the border, the Kuwaitis would
not let us enter. At that time Imam was 80 years old.  We had left Najaf
at 5 am in the morning.  When the Kuwaitis would not let us enter, we
had no choice but to return to the Iraqi border.  There they treated
Imam very badly.  They didn't even give him a room in which he could
rest.  In the end, Imam laid out his cloak on the floor and lay down. 

After an hour, orders came from Baghdad that we had to go to Basra.  We
arrived in Basra at one o'clock after midnight and Imam slept at two
o'clock.  It was not long before an alarm clock rang.  It was four
o'clock in the morning.  I saw that Imam was getting up for
Namaz-e-shab.  Truly how wonderful it was.  A man 80 years of age who
from 5 the previous morning till 2 at night had not slept remembered to
set his alarm before going to sleep so that he could get up for
Namaz-e-shab.  
    
 Hujjatal Islam Haj Ahmed Agha Khomeini – Imam's son  
   

The sentiment of the worshipper
-------------------------------

   
 The weather was fine the first few days during the time Imam was in
Paris.  For this reason, there was no need for sleeping blankets during
the night, though some of the brothers would use them.  Certainly, the
windows and the doors were left open.

One morning when I got up, I noticed that the windows were closed and
that the brothers who did not usually cover themselves with blankets had
blankets draped over them.  No one knew how this had happened.  Even Haj
Ahmed Agha did not know when we asked him.  Later, we found out that
Imam, who had woken up in the middle of the night to do wudhu, had shut
the windows and covered the brothers with blankets because it had been
cold.  
    
 Hujjatal Islam Duayee – Imam's student  
  

The Day the Shah fled
---------------------

   
 We were in Paris the day the Shah fled from Iran.  The French police
closed the main road of Neuphille Chateau.  News reporters from various
countries from Asia, Africa, Europe, and America had gathered.  There
were over 150 reporters with cameras present ready to film. 

The Shah had gone and the reporters wanted to know what Imam was going
to do.  Imam had been sitting on a chair and talked for a few minutes. 
I was standing beside him.  Suddenly, he turned around and asked me:
"Ahmed, is it Zohr time yet?" I replied that it was.  Without
hesitation, Imam said: "Peace and God's mercy and blessings be upon
you." 

It can be seen how quickly Imam cut short his conversation.  So
particular was Imam about saying his prayers on time that right when the
world's press was broadcasting Imam's remarks which millions of people
were watching, he cut short his talk and went off to pray.  
    
 Marhum Haj Ahmed Agha khomeini – Imam's son  
   

Organised
---------

   
 Imam was very organised in everything he did - whilst reading books and
newspapers, whilst reading letters, whilst in meetings, and even whilst
doing wudhu. We all would know precisely at what time Imam would do his
wudhu because he used to do it at a particular time.  Imam was also so
particular about praying on time that the French police would set their
watches by the times that Imam would stand for prayer.  
    
 Mrs Marziya Hadeedechi  
  

Meeting with the leaders of Muslim Countries
--------------------------------------------

   
 The leaders of some Muslim countries came to meet Imam for peace talks
in relation to the Iran-Iraq war.  During the meeting, the call to
prayer was heard.  Imam stood up and said, "I want to pray."  He then
applied some perfume and stood for prayers.  The leaders of the Muslim
countries also stood for congregational prayers behind Imam.  Such was
Imam that on no account would he let the value of this important
religious duty be lessened.  
    
 Ayatollah Tusali – Imam's student  
  

Allah takes pride in the worship of the youth
---------------------------------------------

   
 One of Imam's relatives narrates: Right from the time we used to live
in Khomein, Imam from the age of 15 would recite Namaz-e-shab.  So as
not to wake anyone else at that time of night, Imam would use a small
lamp to light his way.  He would then go to a corner of the house and
say his prayers.   
    
 Imam's wife would say, "I was never once woken up by Imam praying
Namaz-e-Shab because he would never switch on the room light.  When he
would go do wudhu, he would place a sponge in the sink under the tap so
that the sound of the falling water would not wake me.  
    
 Mrs Naeemeh Ashraqi - Imam's granddaughter  
   

The lover's weeping
-------------------

During the last month of Imam's life, he was ill and in need of
increased supervision.  During the nights, a soldier would sleep just
outside the door to Imam's room.  Once I asked that soldier whether he
had any recollections of Imam from the period when he used to watch over
him.  
    
 The soldier narrates: Imam would normally wake up 2 hours before the
time of the Fajr prayer.  One night I heard Imam crying loudly.  I also
started crying.  When Imam came out of his room in order to refresh his
wudhu, he noticed me and said, "Oh soldier.  Value your youth and
worship God.  The pleasure of worship is in youth. When you get old,
your heart will want to worship, but you will not have the health and
strength to do so."  
    
 Ayatollah Tawasulli  
  

Friday Etiquette
----------------

   
 A group of American reporters had come to Paris to interview Imam.  It
was agreed that the interview would be a live broadcast.  If the
interview took place, then European countries would also want to
interview Imam.  Imam's message and the call of revolution would be able
to reach the world.  
    
 I went to see the Imam and informed him of the situation.  Imam said:
"Today is Friday and it is the time of performing the recommended
etiquettes (Friday supplication, bath, et)."  When Imam had completed
these Friday acts of worship, he said: "Now I am ready for the
interview."  
    
 Mrs Marziya Hadeedechi  
  

Namaz-e-Shab on the airplane
----------------------------

   
 It was the night of the 12th of Bahman 1357 (eng date?).  The aeroplane
of the revolution was flying from France towards Iran.  It was 3 hours
since we had left Paris.  Suddenly Imam rose from the place where he was
sitting and went to the front of the plane in order to pray.  His face
was truly shining and a halo of light could be seen around it.  I swear
that I saw that halo of light around the perimeter of his face.  Imam
went for prayers with complete tranquillity.  The rest of us however
were worried.  We did not know what lay in wait for us.  I myself was
not even able to sleep.  
    
 Agha Kuffash Bashi  
  

Tehran in unrest.  Imam calm
----------------------------

   
 On the 21st of Bahman 1357 (eng date?), military rule was declared.
Through the orders of Imam, people overthrew the military rule and
poured onto the streets.  
    
 That night, worry could be seen on the faces of some of Imam's friends
and relatives.  They were worried in case Shah's regime would savagely
attack putting Imam's life in danger.  
    
 In the end, a few of Imam's relatives approached him and urged him to
go to a safe place.  Imam in a state of complete calm said: "I am not
leaving here."  Then, just as in previous nights, he prayed Namaz-e-Shab
and passed the night in complete tranquility.  
    
 Hujjatal Islam Ashtiyani  
   

The Time for Meeting with God
-----------------------------

   
 A meeting with the President, Leader of Parliament, and army commanders
had been arranged in Imam's small room.   
    
 Imam was sitting on a chair and we were seated on the carpet facing
him.  After an hour of talks, it was the turn of one of the commanders
to present his report.  Suddenly Imam stood up in order to leave the
room.  We were all surprised by this.  The person whose turn it was to
present his report also did not know what to say. 

Agha Hashemi Rafsanjani asked Imam, "Did something happen to make you
unwell?"  Imam quickly replied, "No. It is the time of prayers."  We
looked at our watches.  I knew the prayer times in Tehran from before. 
I noticed that Imam had not even delayed a moment in order to pray. In
any case the Imam’s behaviour had a profound effect on us.  Imam stood
for prayers and we quickly got ready and prayed with him.  
    
 After prayers, a question struck me.  How in a meeting of such
importance about the war, could Imam leave in order to pray?  He did not
even allow the commander to complete his report.  That day I understood
how high Imam's level of worship and submission of his soul was that he
was not willing to delay saying his prayers even for a moment.  
    
 Shaheed Siyaad Shirazi  
   

Care with the use of water
--------------------------

   
 I had on a number of occasions seen Imam doing wudhu.  In between each
of the actions of wudhu, Imam would close the tap for fear of wasting
water. Only when it was necessary would he open the tap.  Many of us do
not take care not to waste water.  Whereas when Imam wanted to do wudhu,
he took a lot of care to make sure water was not wasted.  
    
 Agha Mahmood Bouroujardi-Imam's son in law  
  


