The Freedom of Belief and Expression
====================================

Albeit, by reflecting on the earlier discussions, the perspective of
Islam on the freedom of belief as well as the freedom of expression is
clear, since there are more emphasis these days in the political
literatures of our country on the topic of freedom of belief and after
that freedom of expression and press freedom, we will examine these two
topics separately.

Some of the so-called intellectuals say: The freedom of belief and
freedom of expression are among the rights and freedoms that are above
the law, which no law has the right to set limit on. Every person in
whatever circumstance, social system, value system, and religion he
belongs to is free to choose whatever belief, thought or idea he would
choose. And then he is also free to express this belief and thought, to
propagate and discuss and engage in a dialogue with others regarding the
same. He has equally the right to print and disseminate it to the
society (freedom of the press).

This is something that has been accepted in the world today (or it is
better for us to say that it is claimed that all countries of the world
have accepted it) and one of the requisites of the democratic nature of
a government is this very issue. If in a country every person is free
such that he could think whatever he likes, say whatever he likes, and
write whatever he likes, that society is a democratic one, while the
opposite is undemocratic. Nowadays, one of the problems of our Islamic
system, they are saying, has something to do with this issue.

Freedom of Belief as an Affair beyond the Realm of Law
------------------------------------------------------

As what we have indicated, one of the freedoms which has been given much
importance and chanted as slogan is the freedom of belief. Man is free
to have whatever belief he is inclined with. No one has the right to
insult the belief of others, or to condemn, prosecute and punish them on
account of their belief. Of course, there are Muslim legal experts, both
in Iran and other countries, who have come to the defense of the Islamic
viewpoint in this regard, publishing numerous works on these topics.

What we are able to state as of the moment is that at the outset this
question must be posed: Is “belief” [*‘aqidah*] as a conviction and a
personal affair related to the heart, in principle related to the matter
of law [*huquq*], or not? Sometimes we want to express a belief or to
make practical steps derived from it. If this is the case, this is no
longer related to the freedom of belief; instead, it is freedom of
expression or freedom of action.

Belief is that which is in the heart and mind. Our question also is
this: Is such a thing, in principle, related to the law, or not? In our
opinion, the answer to this question is a negative one. The subject of
law is the social behaviors, and legal laws are enacted for establishing
order to the social relations.

Any affair that is purely individual and personal, and totally belongs
to the private realm of individual life has nothing to do with law. This
kind of affair is situated at the realm of ethics. It would possibly
find belongingness in the ideological and moral “must” and “must-not”,
but the legal law is not enacted for it.

An action can possibly be so abominable from the moral perspective, but
in any case since it is a personal affair nothing has been written about
it in the legal law books. As a personal and private affair, belief is
not situated in the realm of law.

Whether it is good or bad, correct or wrong, belief has nothing to do
with law. The goodness and badness, or correctness and wrongness of a
belief must be examined within the pertinent field. If a person believes
in a superstitious and irrational affair—of course, it is not a rational
act—yet, in any case, it is not related to law.

As such, to advance the proposition that legally speaking man is free to
have whatever conviction he wants is incorrect and fallacious because
the scope of law and legal rules is the social behaviors and relations
while conviction is a personal and individual affair related to the
heart. So, in the legal laws of Islam a law pertaining to belief does
neither positively nor negatively exist:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…الدّينِ فِى اِكْراهَ لآ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“There is no compulsion in religion.”***[^1]

This noble *ayah* [verse] is a witness to the fact that since it is an
affair related to the heart and soul, religion is not for compulsion and
imposition. Conviction cannot be imposed. Belief cannot be created by
force; coercion cannot change it either. Belief cannot be subjected to
law such that we could express it “legally” or “legally” remove it from
the mind and heart of human beings. Belief is based on reason.

So long as the reason behind it exists, belief will also remain. If the
reason behind it was altered, belief will also fade away. If the reason
was proved false, the belief will also die out. Therefore, the question
on whether belief has freedom in Islam or not is an irrelevant question
because neither Islam nor any other legal system could positively or
negatively formulate a law concerning belief.

Yes, once the belief is expressed, propagated and disseminated, and put
into action so as to draw the attention of others toward it, at the time
it will enter the sphere of social action, and enacting legal law
regarding it becomes possible. From then on, the discussion is on the
freedom of expression, which we will examine.

Freedom of Expression in the West: From Slogan to Reality
---------------------------------------------------------

Before describing the viewpoint of Islam regarding the freedom of
expression, it is fitting to take a glance at the condition of freedom
of expression in the West. The truth of the matter is that freedom of
expression in the West is merely a slogan.

Its claimants have never practically accepted it as an obligation and
they do not. Like many other slogans, this slogan is only a means to put
pressures on countries that are not ready to abject surrender themselves
to the capricious desires and unreasonable demands of the World
Arrogance. If there is an issue, which is incongruous with their
interests, there is no mention of freedom of expression.

Of course, in a bid to deceive public opinion, they usually attempt to
surreptitiously and clandestinely create these restrictions, not
imposing them in a conspicuous and lucid manner. There are a lot of
relevant instances. We will cite here two or three cases as examples.

I have personally a piece of reliable information that sometime in the
past, the representative of the Supreme Leader (Ayatullah al-‘Uzma
Sayyid ‘Ali Khamene’i) in London had submitted a news item to the
newspapers for publication. Although he was ready to pay the necessary
amount, none of the newspapers was ready to publish it. The pretext was
that the news item was related to a speech of the Supreme Leader, which
was not concordant with the British policy.

After much effort, and many mediations and recommendations, one
newspaper was finally willing to publish the news item. After its
publication, the newspaper was immediately prosecuted. This is while
they are regularly propagating to us that Britain is one of the most
liberal countries with respect to the freedom of the press.

Another example is related to Mr. Roger Garaudy, the famous contemporary
French researcher and thinker. He is considered one of the luminaries of
France in this era. He is a philosopher as well as a historian who has
written and published numerous books many of which have been translated
into different languages. He recently wrote a book in which he proved as
substantiated by evidence and documents that the massacre of millions of
Jews during the Second World War in Germany and some other countries is
a sheer lie.[^2]

The nature of the case was that if there is a controversy on this claim
of Mr. Garaudy, another person or persons could present counter
documents and evidence proving its inaccuracy. But the way they dealt
with Mr. Garaudy in France, the “bastion of freedom”, was that they
prohibited his book, summoned him in court, tried him, and convicted him
to pay heavy fine.

More interesting was that a German publisher who translated into German
and published his book was forced to sell his publishing company.
Thereafter, the said publishing company was totally effaced and omitted
from the list of German publishers. As if it did not exist at all; that
it has no external existence. The crime they accused Professor Garaudy
of was that he has offended the Jews throughout the world.

This is while the publication of a book such as *The Satanic Verses* is
not prohibited not to mention the fact that it won literary award and
was translated into tens of languages. The British government is also
spending thousands of pounds daily for the security of the book’s
writer; for Iran and some Muslim countries they set the abolition of the
religious edict [*fatwa*] against Salman Rushdie as the prerequisite for
the improvement of diplomatic relations with Britain.

The Islamic View on Freedom of Expression and the Press
-------------------------------------------------------

First Exposition
----------------

The discussion on whether the press and mass media *must* be free or
*must not* be free is included in the group of “must and must-not” cases
and the class of values-related cases. Therefore, the discussion on this
issue opens another fundamental discussion on the criterion and origin
of determining values.

There are those who believe that values are based on the desire and
preference of people in every society. For this reason, one cannot talk
about “must” and “must-not” as well as universal values that remain in
every period and place. It is natural that on such a basis we have to
determine in which period and in which society we are in so that we
could know what to tell based on the desire and preference of people of
that period and that society.

Yet, in our opinion, this basis is unacceptable and we believe that all
social values cannot be determined by means of conducting opinion survey
and referring to the public demand. Instead, many of the values are
described on the basis of the real interests of human beings. This is
apart from the fact that all social values of a society must finally
have a rational foundation and must emanate from a coherent and logical
system.

On this basis, regarding the second question we will also naturally
arrive at the conclusion that the “must” and “must-not” we are talking
about in the context of the freedom of the press will be based on the
values system of Islam in the same manner that this issue in any other
values system in which it is discussed will be based on the same values
system.

The values system of Islam is a pyramid-like system with a central point
on top and its surfaces below are arranged together in such a way that
their placement together would lead us to the top of the pyramid. The
ultimate point of values on top of the pyramid is the same thing that we
described as “nearness to Allah” [*qurb illa’llah*]. In the parlance of
philosophy, we regard the “ultimate perfection” of man as “nearness to
Allah.”

All values in Islam are designed and arranged in such a manner that they
are gearing toward the attainment of the ultimate perfection of man,
i.e. “nearness to Allah.” In this manner, the criterion and standard of
values are also specified. With the acceptance of this basis, everything
that has role in attaining perfection will find a positive value, and
everything that is a hindrance in the attainment of that perfection will
be considered anti-value.

Everything that draws man toward Godliness is a “good” and desirable
affair, and everything that separates man from God and draws him toward
materiality and bestiality is “bad” and will have a negative value. The
Islamic government and state is also duty-bound to endeavor to preserve
and promote values, and to negate and hinder the growth and spread of
anti-values.

So, the single criterion in determining “must” and “must-not”, “good and
bad” and “value and anti-value”, and philosophically speaking, “*hasan*”
and “*qabah*” is whether or not it is along the ultimate perfection of
man and nearness to Allah. Freedom of the press and mass media can be
evaluated on the basis of the same ruling.

If the press and mass media are effective for the perfection and
nearness of man to God, it is a desirable affair and will have a
positive value, and if they cause separation from God and lagging behind
in the path toward his perfection, it will be considered anti-value and
in many cases it is incumbent upon the government to prevent them.

If we give opinion on the issue from the philosophical viewpoint, speech
and statement are among the human acts. Although in the common usage and
public culture it is possible that sometimes action is used in contrast
to speech, philosophically, speech is actually a kind of action. In
philosophy action means any movement performed deliberately and
willingly by man. In sum, action means deliberate movement.

With such a perspective, action is sometimes done by hands, at other
times by the tongue, at another by the mind, and at yet other times by
the other senses. Now, the general ruling we mentioned about values will
be conformed here. That is, human actions, both individual and social,
must be placed within the framework of the value system of Islam, and
they must not be inconsistent with the movement of man toward the
pyramid summit of “nearness to Allah.”

Of course, not all values can be related to “law” in its general sense.
One set of values is technically called “moral values”, which are beyond
the domain of law. The moral values are also sometimes called religious
values notwithstanding the fact that in one sense religious values can
also be divided into two: legal values and moral values.

The significant difference between ethics and law is that ethics is
related to the domain of private, individual and personal lives of human
beings while legal laws are enacted in the context of social actions of
human beings and are responsible in organizing social relations.

Therefore, moral values, i.e. individual values, and legal values, i.e.
social values and in other words, so long as an action—as per its
philosophical definition we have just made—is done totally within the
personal and private domain of individual and having no social
implication whatsoever, is not covered by the legal laws, and the state
and government, which guarantees their implementation, has nothing to do
with it.

However, as soon as an action acquires social dimension and in some way
finds relationship with others, the legal laws will encompass it and the
political system and the government as the guarantor of their execution
will take supervision of it.

Earlier, we have also pointed out that freedom of thought and freedom of
belief, for example, are essentially not subjects of legal laws because
belief and thought are purely personal and private affairs related to
the heart. Yes, if the belief and thought wanted to be expressed by the
tongue or to be published in the newspaper, magazine and book, this is
no longer freedom of belief. Instead, it entered the domain of the
freedom of expression, which is the subject of our present discussion.

But regarding the freedom of expression and the press, we have to state
that it is natural that they are covered by the legal laws, for speaking
and writing are two kinds of actions, which are not only related to the
person in question as they may have relations with other members of the
society.

In such an assumption, they are social actions and will be covered by
the legal laws unless we assumed that a person writes something only for
himself and delivering a talk only to himself. Of course, it is obvious
that the point of the discussion, and in other words, the point of
dispute on the freedom of expression and the press can never be such
assumptions.

Speech and writing have social effects, and as such, they are social
actions. Apart from that, it must be said that sometimes speech and
writing have such social effects that other social actions do not have.
The greatest social developments, whether in the positive dimension or
negative dimension, have been the result of effects of these two
actions.

The most important instrument of the prophets who have been the greatest
catalysts of change throughout history in the realm of social life of
humanity has been speech and talking. Many political and social tumults
and disorders are also formed as a result of the influence of speech and
writing.

Nowadays, the role of the newspapers and periodicals in the different
arenas of human societies cannot be denied. Thus, there is no doubt that
speech and writing must be regarded as important social actions and that
the state and government has the right in the set of legal laws to take
into account particular rulings for them. It is for this reason that
speech is a very important and influential action and it is never been a
simple action. Islam has also opened a special account for speech,
explaining many decrees and teachings about language and speaking.

Second Exposition
-----------------

From the viewpoint of Islam, everybody is free to express his or her own
belief unless doing so is inconsistent with the human interests.

What is referred to as “interests” includes material and spiritual as
well as worldly and otherworldly interests. This issue is similar to the
case of a food manufacturer and pharmaceutical company that are free to
produce any food or drug unless it is detrimental to the health of human
beings. The mere probability of the existence of poisonous and dangerous
food or drug in the productions of a producer will render its
productions as banned.

Now, you have observed that due to the effect of the spread of the mad
cow’s disease in Britain,[^3] other countries have banned all imported
beef products from Britain. Here, there is no more discussion about free
trade. Why? It is because with a probability, let’s say, of one in a
million, there is a chance that on account of consuming contaminated
meat one person will be harmed.

Owing to this minute probability, (import-export) transactions are
stopped and no one in the world has also complained as to why you, for
example, are acting against the spirit of free trade.

If other things which are detrimental to the human health are also
banned, no one will protest why buying and selling them are declared
prohibited and their producers prosecuted, and no one either will say
that it is against human rights and that human beings are free to
produce whatever they like. They are free to produce so long as it is
not harmful to others.

Those that exist in the world and are the focus of attention are usually
these harms that will be inflicted on the human body and physique. But
apart from physical harm, Islam also pays attention to the spiritual and
religious damages. It acknowledges freedom so long as it is not
physically and spiritually harmful to man.

The people of the world usually regard justifiable the imposition of
limit on freedom only on matters harmful to man from the material and
physical dimensions, while paying little attention to cases that are
damaging to the humanity from the spiritual and religious aspects; in
the present period, it can be said that the latter has not been given
attention at all.

Alcoholic drinks that obliterate the human intellect, damage the heart
and liver, and have numerous other harms, are not prohibited, for the
people like them. They say that since the primary right of every human
being is freedom in the choice of occupation, if someone wants to open a
beverage shop you cannot and should not prevent him. If we would prevent
such an occupation and job, we have behaved against human rights.

Prior to the Revolution, by resorting to similar arguments there were
hundreds of liquor stores in Tehran and other cities in our country.
They were saying that the concerned person has freedom to sell liquor
and of course, you are also free to buy as the demand of human rights is
that he is free in his job and those who regard it as unlawful [*haram*]
and against the religion are also free not to buy.

Concerning *hijab* [Islamic modest dress] they are also saying that it
must be free. Anyone who wants to have *hijab* can have it while anyone
who does not like it can have without it. Freedom in the choice of
attire and dressing is a primary right of human beings. You cannot
compel anyone to have *hijab*. This is against human rights!

What is interesting is that such words are sometimes uttered even by
those holding offices or partially holding offices in the Islamic system
particularly in some ministries and government organs. Recently, they
allegedly sought for the solution in such a manner that a non-government
organization in a government building held a meeting for the removal of
discrimination against women, and numerous foreign women without *hijab*
participated in this program.

Perhaps, you have also seen in the newspapers its picture. They wanted
to issue a decree and put to test the people so as to see to what extent
the people are sensitive toward the religious laws and decrees. Thanks
to God, because of the intense reaction that was shown by the people,
they kept silent. So long as such people are present in this country,
the other Islamic values will remain respected, and if some things have
ever diminished, by the grace of God and His will, they will be
redressed.

In any case, in the Western culture these freedoms do exist and are
deemed respectable. They are saying that no law can set limit on them.
We who are Muslims and observing the Islamic law have fundamental
disagreement with them in this context. For them to merely say that they
have been stipulated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, for
us the said declaration is not a divine revelation. They have stated and
written them based upon their culture while we do act based also upon
our own Islamic and religious culture, and we do not have any compulsion
on the observance of matters contrary to the decree of God and His
Messenger (S).

Nonverbal and Media Expression
------------------------------

An issue that must be given attention is that books, periodicals, media,
films, the Internet and, in sum, anything that in one way or another
performs the function of message transfer, is, in reality, one of the
various kinds of expression and communication. In order to communicate
to others his thoughts, beliefs, inclinations, and anything transpires
in his mind and heart, man makes use of language, speech and writing.

Similarly, in a bid to communicate his message to others, he sometimes
makes use of other body parts such as the eyes, eyebrows, hands, and
feet. At other times, he does the same through drawings and paintings.
All of them are means to do a single work, i.e. transfer of one’s
message to others. With such a perspective, it is very clear that the
newspaper, magazine, book, theatre, film, caricature, radio, television,
the Internet, etc. in reality are all “various kinds of expression”, and
every legal decree that expression and speech have can also be applied
to them.

Therefore, if, for example, Islam states that insulting or embarrassing
others, or divulging the secret of the private and personal life of
others by means of talking and speaking are not allowed and in some
cases they are to be prevented, prosecuted and penalized, doing the same
acts through film, newspaper, book, and caricature has the same ruling
and it makes no difference whether a person insults and embarrasses
others by speaking, or does it by writing in a book or newspaper.

Some think that the paper of the newspaper has sanctity such that by
speaking you cannot baselessly attribute something unjustifiable to
somebody, but without any supporting document and evidence and only
based on the fact that “it is said” or “it is heard” a whole page of the
newspaper can be filled with accusations against an individual.

Sometimes you talk to a person face to face from a close distance,
expressing to him love and affection. At other times, you write the same
expression of love, interest and affection in a letter, which you send
to the person concerned. Do these two forms of expression differ from
each other? Does the face-to-face way an expression of love while the
one inscribed on the paper an expression of hatred?

Once the subject is the same, whether it is uttered by the tongue or
inscribed by the pen on a sheet of paper, there is no difference. Yes,
there is a difference between them, for once you write and publish it in
the book and newspaper its effect is ten times, hundred times, or
probably thousand times greater.

If abusing, calumniating and accusing a person by means of speech face
to face is bad, writing it in a letter or expressing it through a film
and play is equally bad and unacceptable; it makes no difference (as far
as the badness of the act is concerned).

If embarrassing a person in front of others by means of speech is bad,
embarrassing him in front of thousands and millions of people by means
of publishing an essay in a book and newspaper is far worse. It is not
that all at once the ruling would be changed and since it was in the
newspaper, it is not only not bad but also it would be regarded as
sacred.

Therefore, mass media in Islam has no ruling distinct from that of oral
expression. If the “spoken” form of something has been morally deemed
forbidden, expressing the same through other media is also morally
forbidden. If its “spoken” form has been unlawful [*haram*], its
expression in any other means is also unlawful.

If the “spoken” expression of something has been recognized by the legal
law as not allowed and prohibited and penalty for doing so is
determined, the ruling for expressing the same through other media is
also the same. On the contrary, if “spoken” expression of something and
spoken reaction to it is deemed obligatory [*wajib*], in the case of
having facilities expressing the same through other communication media
is equally obligatory.

The Responsibility of Expression
--------------------------------

Of course, it should not be imagined that regarding expression (both
spoken and via media) Islam is only concerned with prohibiting and
restricting it. Such a notion is totally wrong. So many expositions and
statements (both spoken and via media) is deemed permissible from the
viewpoint of Islam, without restricting them howsoever.

Many expositions and statements are not only permissible but they are
also obligatory. Not only that they are obligatory; instead, some are
among the most obligatory things. In a situation wherein the
enlightenment of a society and its deliverance from the misguidance of
unbelief [*kufr*] and polytheism [*shirk*] and impiety depends upon the
use of the tongue, pen, film, and any other media, it is incumbent upon
man, should he be capable of, to use them all to express the truth and
refute falsehood.

Sometimes, this issue is so important in that to exercise dissimulation
[*taqiyyah*][^4] is unlawful, and in the words of the late Imam Khomeini
(may his soul be sanctified), “To take action is obligatory unless there
is nothing to convey.”

The movement of Imam Khomeini (*r*)[^5]—this greatest socio-political
movement of the twentieth century—commenced with the pen and speech. The
Imam began his work by issuing manifestos and delivering speeches.[^6]
He regarded speaking and “expression” for him as the most obligatory of
all obligations and deemed himself “obliged” to do it. In some cases,
his view concerning this “duty” is as what he said: If a person does not
shout and voice out (the truth of the matter), he has committed major
sin. In this connection, the Holy Qur’an also states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَيِّنّاهُ ما بَعْدِ مِنْ وَالهُدى البَيِّناتِ مِنَ أنْزَلْنا مآ
يَكْتُمُوْنَ الَّذينَ اِنَّ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( اللاَّعِنُوْنَ وَيَلْعَنُهُمُ اللهُ يَلْعَنُهُمُ أولَئِكَ الكِتَابِ
فِي لِلنّاسِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Those who hide the proofs and the guidance which We revealed, after
We had made it clear in the Scripture: such are accursed of Allah and
accursed of those who have the power to curse.”***[^7]

Those learned men who do not convey the truths of religion that God
revealed for the people, do not resist against heresies and exercise
voluntary silence for the sake of his personal interests are the subject
of God’s curse and that of the angels and all those who are entitled to
curse. In such cases as per the text of the Holy Qur’an, to express is
among the most obligatory things and anyone abandoning it deserves the
curse of those who are entitled to curse.

What is meant by “expression” [*bayan*] is not solely “speaking.”
Instead, it includes writing, radio, television, and any media that can
possibly be used to spread the truth and save human beings from
deviation, ignorance and impiety. In such cases, to express is not only
a “right” [*haqq*] but also a “duty” [*taklif*]. Enjoining what is right
and forbidding what is wrong is one of the most important among them.

Of course, there are different stages of its duty. One stage of the duty
of expression is related to the people in general while another stage of
which is for the individuals who have peculiar facilities, powers and
capabilities. In this context, the highest stage of duty is shouldered
by the Islamic state and government, which possesses the greatest power
and facilities in this respect.

In principle, the general criterion of proving duty for the government
is the same general ruling, which we discussed in relation to values.
That is to say, what is related to the “interests of society” and along
the path of the society in general toward “nearness to Allah”, it is
necessary for the government to the extent of its capability to provide
them as far as possible.

And it is also incumbent upon the government to remove whatever is
detrimental for the interests of society, both material and spiritual,
and serves as an impediment for the realization of human perfection.

For instance, if expression of an issue (whether orally or through any
other means) is harmful for the welfare of society, its spread must be
hindered in the same manner that distribution of poisonous, contaminated
and perilous foodstuffs and medicines in the society shall be
prohibited.

The Freedom to Ask
------------------

An issue that has remained untouched is that sometimes the motive of a
person in expressing a subject is not in propagating and promoting it,
but in posing the question. That is, as an academic or scientific
discussion and subject he wants to make clear for himself this issue.
What is the ruling for this issue from the viewpoint of Islam?

In this regard, we have to say that Islam places special importance and
value to posing a question and academic discussion, although it would be
about the most crucial Islamic principles and teachings. Islam never
suppresses raising a question and does not prohibit it.

Not only does Islam not hinder posing a question but also it gives
importance to giving the reply and clarifying the doubt to such an
extent that if a person from the enemies of Islam at the middle of the
battlefield wants to ask a question about the truths of religion Islam
has ordered to provide the opportunities for him to come and get a due
answer:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْمَعَ حَتَّى فَأجِرْهُ اسْتَجارَكَ المُشْرِكِيْنَ مِنَ أَحَدٌ اِنْ
وَ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( يَعْلَمُوْنَ لا قَوْمٌ بِأنَّهُمْ ذَلِكَ مَأمَنَهُ أبْلِغْهُ ثُمَّ
اللهِ كَلامَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if anyone of the idolaters seeketh thy protection (O Muhammad(,
then protect him so that he may hear the word of Allah; and afterward
convey him to his place of safety. That is because they are a folk who
know not.”***[^8]

But the point that must be given attention in this regard is that “there
is a place for every talk and position for every point.” Question and
inquiry are respectable, but they must be placed within the framework of
the same general values system of Islam.

In other words, the manner and circumstances of raising question should
not be in such a way that it is harmful to others, make them lag behind
in the ultimate perfection and make them deviate from the path of
perfection.

Religious and scientific inquiry and question must be posed in their
proper place, and not that, for example, doubt would be raised before
the assembly of schoolchildren or any other assembly that has no
familiarity with the fundamentals of Islam and philosophical and
scholastic matters.

Anyone who has a question has to raise it at the academic centers and at
the circle of pertinent experts at the religious seminary and other
similar academic assemblies. And there is no problem for that. There is
no problem either with scientific discussions on religious controversies
provided that their particular requisites and etiquettes are properly
observed.

If it is so, apart from being not harmful, it also paves the ground for
the growth and consolidation of the religious principles and precepts.
But if a person does not observe the proper requirements and
regulations, and asks the question in such a manner that it leads to the
corruption of belief and deviation of others, he must be stopped in the
same manner that distribution of any harmful item shall be checked.

Under the pretext of freedom in medical issues, can one spread any
microbe in the alley and street?!

This is while there is no problem and impediment in bringing the same
microbe in the laboratory and before the experts for study and research
on it. Not only that there is no problem but rather it is very important
because out of studying it, the experts can discover the means to
prevent its infection, to resist against it and to cure those who are
afflicted with it, and thus, saving the lives of thousands and millions
of people.

Intellectual and religious doubts are exactly similar to it. Raising
them in the public opinion of society bears no result except heavy, and
sometimes, irreparable and catastrophic losses. But raising them in the
academic circle of pertinent experts will result in the further growth,
blossoming and exaltation of thought, learning and religion.

[^1]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:256.

[^2]: In his book, Les Mythes fondateurs de la politique israelienne
(The Founding Myths of Israeli Policy), Garaudy questions the holocaust
as a historical fact and as a valid basis for the usurpation of
Palestine, including Jerusalem, by European Jewry with no links to the
land, and at best dubious historical claims to it. [Trans.]

[^3]: See, for example, M.S. Ahmed, “Mad Cow Disease: ‘Proud UK’ can’t
admit it is poisoning the world,” Crescent International, November 1-15,
1997,http://www.muslimedia.com/archives/special98/madcow.htm. [Trans.]

[^4]: Taqiyyah: prudential dissimulation of one’s true beliefs under
conditions of acute danger to one’s life, property, or honor, a practice
based on Qur’an, 3:28. As its observance depends on certain terms and
conditions, it may be obligatory [wajib], recommended [mustahab],
abominable [makruh], or forbidden [haram]. For a fuller discussion of
taqiyyah, see Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, Taqiyyah (Dar es Salaam: Bilal
Muslim Mission of Tanzania, 1992), http://www.al-islam.org/taqiyyah;
Al-Taqiyya/Dissimulation,
http://www.al-islam.org/encyclopedia/chapter6b.html; and ‘Allamah
Tabataba’i, Shi‘ite Islam (Albany, N.Y., 1975), pp. 223-225,
http://www.al-islam.org/anthology. [Trans.]

[^5]: The abbreviation, “r” stands for the Arabic invocative phrase,
rahmatullah ‘alayhi, rahmatullah ‘alayha, or rahmatullah ‘alayhim [may
peace be upon him/her/them], which is used after the names of pious
people. [Trans.]

[^6]: For information on the role of Imam Khomeini’s speeches in the
victory of the Islamic Revolution, see Kauthar: An Anthology of the
Speeches of Imam Khomeini Including an Account of the Events of the
Islamic Revolution (1962-1978), Volumes 1-3 (Tehran: The Institute for
Compilation and Publication of Imam Khomeini’s Works, Winter 1995).
[Trans.]

[^7]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:159.

[^8]: Surah at-Tawbah 9:6.


