Clarification of Doubts
=======================

By reflecting on the previous discussions, many answers to doubts will
become clear, but in a bid to elucidate better the earlier subjects, we
will embark on describing some doubts and the corresponding answers to
them.

Doubt 1: Mandatory laws are against the demand of humanity
----------------------------------------------------------

In the parlance of logic, freewill is the reason, assessor and
controller of man and it constitutes the essence of humanity. Now, if we
deny him of freewill and freedom and compel him, we have denied him of
humanity and uniquely made him like an animal, in whose neck a bridle is
placed and is drawn to this and that way.

So, showing respect to man and preserving his essence of humanity
necessitates granting him the right to choose. As such, religion is not
supposed to have mandatory decrees and urge him to obey the Prophet, the
Imams, and the deputies and representatives of the infallible Imams. In
this manner, his humanity is disrespected and he is made like a
domesticated animal that is drawn to this and that direction.

Reply
-----

If we submit to the skepticism and say that since man is autonomous,
mandatory law then should not be imposed on him. No government can have
mandatory orders for human beings. They are autonomous to do whatever
they like. Imposition is tantamount to denying freedom and denying
freedom means denying humanity. Thus, no law is valid and we have
accepted the law of the jungle and chaos. Basically, compulsoriness is
the enduring feature of law and an account will become a law if it
entails compulsoriness.

In any system and structure, once a person accepts the laws and
directives, he has to observe them in all circumstances. It is not
possible for a person to acknowledge the law, but once its execution is
detrimental to him and he is subjected to the dictums of the law, he
would not abide by it and take into account his own gains and losses.

In this manner, the system will disintegrate and will never recover. So
long as a law is regarded valid and official by the legislative
authorities, everybody is supposed to obey. Even if a defect can be
noticed in it, it is the duty of the concerned authorities to redress
it. Under the pretext of the defect in the law, others are not supposed
to refrain from obeying it.

Doubt 2: The government’s imposition of limitations is against the demand of freedom
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No government has the right to set penalties and impose limitations on
the people because in doing so, out of fear of the penalties, and on
account of the pressure put on them, the people will not commit any
violation. However, if there were no penalties and limitations, they
could have freely done whatever they like, whether it is good or bad.

Reply
-----

The problem with the above argument is that it stands on the principle
of absolute freedom. They have discussed some preliminary points of this
principle and on the basis of which they imagine that in this world man
must be totally free and no limit and pressure should be imposed upon
him.

No one is supposed to compel him to do a certain action and to hinder
him doing a certain action. Without doubt, this principle is illogical
and for any person with intellect and common sense, it is wrong and
unacceptable.

No man has absolute, limitless and unrestricted freedom in that he can
do whatever he likes, and no law would restrain him. (Here, what we mean
by law is not the moral and rationally independent laws, which have no
guarantor of their execution. Rather, it refers to the legal laws in
their general sense, whose execution is guaranteed and backed up by the
government.)

There must be laws and regulations, and the people must be urged to
observe the laws and regulations. If a person violated them, he must be
dealt with accordingly. If a person usurped the rights of people, he
must be urged to grant them their rights. There must be traffic and
driving rules, and the violators who sometimes are responsible for the
death of many people, must be penalized and fined.

Apart from the fact that the existence of laws and regulations and their
acceptance by all people everywhere throughout history bear witness to
the fact that absolute freedom—that no one has the right to exert
pressure on others, impose limit on them and to deny them some of their
freedoms—is unacceptable and wrong. In practice, no one has ever been
obliged to it. Acceptance of the principle of absolute freedom means
denial of civility and acceptance of the savagery and law of the jungle.

If man is really a civil creature, he must have a social system.
Individuals must respect the rights of others. There must be laws and
regulations. Penal laws must be taken into consideration for the
violators.

The government must guarantee the execution of the laws. In reality, the
notion of absolute freedom and this claim that no one is supposed to
exert pressure on people to do or not to do a certain act, is a denial
of the necessity of the existence of government and is undertaking that
the government should cease to exist because the government, ruling
system and executive power basically take form in the context of the
existence of social laws and regulations and their duty is to guarantee
and implement laws.

Certainly, such an idea and thinking is inconsistent with law abidance,
civil society, civilization, and the need to observe the laws. The
foundation of human civilization is the acceptance of responsibility and
the acknowledgment of a power whose concern is to implement laws in the
society, and certainly, along its performance of responsibility, the
government will also exert pressure on the people.

The government’s duty is that in case of necessity, by exerting pressure
and forceful and powerful actions, it has to urge the lawbreakers to
abide by the regulations and to penalize the violators. If mere
reminders and admonitions will suffice, then it is enough for the
government to act as a teacher and instructor, and not as a ruling
authority.

The duty of the preachers, teachers and trainers is only to admonish and
remind the people to observe social morality and human etiquettes. They
have no executive leverage for following their admonitions and
reminders, and it is essentially not their duty to urge the people to
observe human dignities.

But it is the government’s duty to impose the law to the people even by
force and threat and to deal with the violators accordingly. It has to
fine the violator, and in case he tries to escape from the ambit of law,
he has to be pursued and apprehended, and for him it has to implement
the laws and regulations.

Therefore, the existence of government and executive power is the basis
that man does not possess absolute freedom. Absolute freedom is
inadmissible and inharmonious with civilization, humanity and social
life.

It makes no difference whether the government is the executor of civil
laws, which have been codified based on the demands of people, or the
government is the executor of the divine laws.

Doubt 3: The need for obeying God and the Prophet is against the demand of the Qur’anic verses
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

If religion wanted to interfere in the political and social affairs of
people, and obliged them to have a particular behavior or to obey
someone, this is contradictory with the freedom of man. Man is a
creature having freedom and freewill, who is supposed to do whatever he
likes. No one is supposed to oblige and compel him to perform a certain
act. And that religion has to set the duty for him and urge him to obey
someone, and an absolute obedience it is. This is discordant with
freedom.

The Holy Qur’an also negates dominating and controlling others, and does
not regard even the Messenger of God (S) as having dominion (over
others). We will cite below some verses that indicate this point:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( بِمُصَيْطِرٍ عَلَيْهِمْ لَسْتَ \* مُذَكِّرٌ أنْتَ اِنَّما فَذَكِّرْ
)
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Remind them, for thou art but a remembrancer.***

***Thou art not at all a warder over them.”***[^1]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( بِوَكِيْلٍ عَلَيْهِمْ أنْتَ وَما حَفِيْظًا عَلَيْهِمْ جَعَلْناكَ
وَما …)
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“We have not set thee as a keeper over them,***

***nor art thou responsible for them.”***[^2]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(…البَلاغُ اِلاَّ الرّسُولِ عَلَى ما )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The duty of the messenger is only to convey (the message).”***[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَفُوْراً( واِمّاَ شَاكِراً اِمَّا السَّبِيْلَ هَدَيْنَاهُ اِنَّا )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! We have shown him the way,***

***whether he be grateful or disbelieving.”***[^4]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(…فَلْيَكْفُرْ شاءَ مَنْ وَ فَلْيُؤْمِنْ شاءَ فَمَنْ رَبِّكُمْ مِنْ
الْحَقُّ قُلِ وَ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Say: (It is) the truth from the Lord of you (all). Then whosoever
will, let him believe, and whosoever will, let him disbelieve.”***[^5]

Reply
-----

In the face of verses that the skeptic cited to negate the dominance and
authority of the Messenger of God and the lack of necessity of obeying
him are verses that are contradictory with the first group of verses on
account of the skeptic’s wrong understanding of it. Let us cite some of
these verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللهُ قَضَى اِذا مُؤمِنَةٍ لا وَ لِمُؤْمِنٍ كانَ وَمَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…أمْرِهِم مِنْ الخِيَرَةُ لَهُمُ يَكُونَ أنْ أمْراً رَسُوْلُهُ و
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And it becometh not a believing man or a believing woman, when Allah
and His messenger have decided and affair (for them), that they should
(after that) claim any say in their affair.”***[^6]

The above verse categorically points out the need to obey and submit to
God and His Messenger, giving a reminder that the believers have no
right to refuse obeying and following the Messenger of God.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّمَا وَلِيُّكُمُ اللَّهُ وَرَسُولُهُ وَالَّذِينَ آمَنُوا الَّذِينَ
يُقِيمُونَ الصَّلَاةَ وَيُؤْتُونَ الزَّكَاةَ وَهُمْ رَاكِعُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Your friend can be only Allah; and His messenger and those who
believe, who establish worship and pay the poor due, and bow down (in
prayer).”***[^7]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(…أنْفُسِهِمْ مِنْ بالْمُؤْمِنِينَ أوْلى النَّبِيّ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The Prophet is closer to the believers than their selves.”***[^8]

Which of the verses cited we should take as preeminent in the sense of
having guardianship [*wilayah*]? And which is to be taken to mean more
deserving? In both cases the verses substantiate the fact that the
Prophet’s right of decision-making for the people prevails over their
right of decision-making for themselves.

All exegetes of the Qur’an [*mufassirin*] acknowledge this point, and on
this basis, the people should prefer the decision of the Prophet over
their own decision, having no right to oppose his decision and view.

Of course, the verse only expresses the principle of guardianship of the
Messenger of God (S). It does not express the limit of the
guardianship—whether the limit of guardianship and the preeminence of
the Prophet’s decision over that of others are social affairs, or apart
from being social they are personal affairs as well.

Undoubtedly, it is not expected from the skeptics who have cited the
first group of Qur’anic verses to negate the guardianship of the
Messenger of God and his successors (*‘a*) to give answer to the
apparent contradiction between the two groups of Qur’anic verses. So
many of them are either unaware of the existence of the second group of
verses or do not accept the substance of these verses.

Yet, since we do not believe in the existence of contradiction and
inconsistency among the verses of the Qur’an, we should try to remove
the apparent contradiction of the verses. For this important endeavor we
shall scrutinize the context of both groups of verses by taking into
consideration the preceding and succeeding verses as well as the purport
of the verses and their addressees so that we could comprehend the real
contents of the verses as a whole.

The Reason behind the Difference between the Two Approaches in the Qur’an
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Once we scrutinize the verses in both the first and second groups, we
will realize that the purport and expression of the verses are different
from one another. The first set of verses is pertaining to those who
have not yet embraced Islam. As such, God wants to enlighten them on the
truths of Islam, describing in detail the benefits to be accrued from
submitting to Him.

Since God knows that the Prophet, who is the embodiment of divine mercy
and compassion, is worrying for the people lest they refused accepting
Islam in the way of truth and submitting to God and as a result they
would be thrown to the hellfire, He is consoling him—“Why are you
putting in danger your life for the grief and sorrow you have for the
people’s refusal to embrace the faith? We revealed Islam so that the
people accept it out of their own decision and freewill. Otherwise, if
We wanted so, We have the power to guide all the people”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كُلُّهُمْ الاَرْضِ فِي مَنْ لآمَنَ رَبُّكَ شاءَ لَوْ وَ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( مُؤْمِنينَ يَكُونُوا حَتّى النّاسَ تُكْرِهُ أفَأنْتَ جَمِيْعاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And if thy Lord willed, all who are in the earth would have believed
together. Wouldst thou (Muhammad) compel men until they are
believers?”***[^9]

The aim of God in sending the messengers (*‘a*) is to guide the people
in recognizing the truth and the path of their felicity. Then, it is for
them to accept the religion of truth out of their freewill. It is not
that God would forcibly and compulsorily ask the people to embrace the
faith.

The faith that emanates from compulsion and imposition has no value and
it is not harmonious with human training [*tarbiyyat-e insani*]. Human
training aims that out of cognition and awareness, man would understand
and accept the truth, and not that he would be forced to submit to it.
As such, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نُنَزِّلْ نَشَأ اِنْ \* مُؤْمِنينَ يَكُونُوا ألاّ نَفْسَكَ بَاخِعٌ
لَعَلَّكَ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( خاضِعينَ لَها أعْناقُهُم فَظَلَّتْ آيَةً السَّماءِ مِنَ عَلَيْهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“It may be that thou tormentest thyself (O Muhammad) because they
believe not. If We will, We can send down on them from the sky a portent
so that their necks would remain bowed before it.”***[^10]

Thus, the pillar of Islam and faith lies on this belief in the heart and
such a belief stems from cognition and awareness, sound and solid
proofs, and freewill, and it is not acquiescent to coercion.

On this basis, God says to His Prophet: “You have performed your duty.
Your duty is to convey the message and the divine signs to the people.
Do not worry anymore about the polytheists not embracing the faith. You
are not supposed to imagine that you have not done your mission. It is
not part of your mission to compel the people to become Muslims because
We have made you dominant over the unbelievers that you would compel
them to become Muslims.”

In opposite of the first group of Qur’anic verses, the second group of
verses is addressed to those who have accepted Islam out of their own
cognition, awareness and freewill. They are reminded to perform the
precepts of Islam, to obey the Prophet whom they believe is inspired by
God and his decrees and orders as all coming from God, to submit to his
submission, and that they do not have the right to choose and select
with respect to his orders.

Prior to embracing the faith, man has the right to choose, but after
embracing the faith, he must obey all the ordinances. Anyone who
believes in only a part of the divine decrees has hardly earned the
pleasure of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الَّذِينَ يَكْفُرُونَ بِاللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ
يُفَرِّقُوا بَيْنَ اللَّهِ وَرُسُلِهِ وَيَقُولُونَ نُؤْمِنُ بِبَعْضٍ
وَنَكْفُرُ بِبَعْضٍ وَيُرِيدُونَ أَنْ يَتَّخِذُوا بَيْنَ ذَٰلِكَ
سَبِيلاً
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
…حَقّاً الكافِرُونَ هُمُ أولئِكَ \*
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! those who disbelieve in Allah and His messengers, and seek to
make distinction between Allah and His messengers, and say: We believe
in some and disbelieve in others, and seek to choose a way in
between.*** ***Such are disbelievers in truth.”***[^11]

Acceptance of some decrees and denial of the others, acceptance of some
laws and rejection of the others in reality means lack of acceptance of
the essence of religion because if the criterion of the acceptance of
religion is the dictum of God, one must observe the core of the divine
order, and the divine order is directed toward the acceptance of all
decrees and laws, even if the criterion of accepting the religion is the
interests and evils that God informed them of and has noted in His
orders. Undoubtedly, God is cognizant of what is good and what is bad;
so, why do they accept only some decrees?

Thus, one who has believed in God is he who also believes in His
Prophet, obeys his decision, decree and directive, is pleased with God
and the Prophet, and does not nurse ill-feeling against them:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَلَا وَرَبِّكَ لَا يُؤْمِنُونَ حَتَّىٰ يُحَكِّمُوكَ فِيمَا شَجَرَ
بَيْنَهُمْ ثُمَّ لَا يَجِدُوا فِي أَنْفُسِهِمْ حَرَجًا مِمَّا قَضَيْتَ
وَيُسَلِّمُوا تَسْلِيمًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But nay, by thy Lord, they will not believe (in truth) until they
make thee judge of what is in dispute between them and find within
themselves no dislike of that which thou decidest, and submit with full
submission.”***[^12]

It shows that the true believer is pleased in his heart with respect to
the order and decision of the Messenger of God (S), having no worry at
all for the reason that he believes that he (the Prophet) is sent by God
and his decree is the decree of God; he does not ill speak of him
either:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( اللهُ اَراكَ بِما النّاسِ بِينَ لِتَحْكُمَ بِالحَقِّ الكِتابَ
اِلَيْكَ أنْزَلْنا اِنّا )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! We reveal unto thee the Scripture with the truth, that thou
mayst judge between mankind by that which Allah showeth thee.”*** [^13]

A person who, after accepting Islam and believing in it, would say, “I
am free in obeying the laws of Islam; if I want, I will do, and if I do
not want I will not,” is similar to this one: In a country where a
democratic and liberal system is governing, the people would voluntarily
participate in the referendum, and through their votes they select their
own representatives and officials of the social system. But once the
legitimate government came to power, they would evade from doing it!

Once that government obliged the people to pay their taxes, they would
say, “We will not pay taxes; we were free in accepting the principle of
government and in voting for it; now we are also autonomous in obeying
its orders or to defy its orders.” Certainly, no rational person will
ever accept such a behavior and conduct.

Yes, in the beginning no one is forced to accept Islam because
basically, the pillar of Islam lies on faith and conviction of the
heart. Through force, one cannot believe in Islam, God and the
hereafter. But once he accepted Islam and he is asked to perform his
prayers, if he would say that he will not pray; or when he is asked to
pay *zakat*[^14] he would refuse to pay, no rational being will ever
believe that he really accepted Islam. Is it possible for a person to
have accepted a religion, yet he would not submit to its laws and act
according to his own desire?

Whoever accepts Islam should obey its laws in the same manner that a
government will not accept that a person would vote for it, but in
practice he would refuse accepting its laws and regulations. Commitment
to pledges and responsibilities is the quintessence of social life. If
there were no word of honor, commitment to pledge, promise and covenant,
and performance of duty, social life would never take form.

Therefore, there is no point for a person to say that he does accept
Islam and believe in the Prophet as the Messenger of God, but does not
obey his orders and does not accept his (the Prophet’s) guardianship and
sovereignty over himself. Indisputably, there is a vivid contradiction
in accepting Islam and the Messenger of God, on one hand, and lack of
fellowship to the Prophet, on the other.

It is clear that if we honestly took a look at the verses of the Qur’an,
scrutinizing the connotation, context and purport of the two groups of
verses cited above, contradiction in the Qur’an would never be found.
The doubt on the incompatibility of obedience and submission to others
with the principle of man’s freedom—which the Qur’an also has
sanctioned—would be uprooted.

But ailing hearts do not approach the Qur’an in sincerity, truthfulness
and fairness. Even if they happened to consult the Qur’an, it is only to
look for pretext for their flimsy and deviant idea. And as such, in
studying the verses of the Qur’an, they engage in selectively picking up
verses or part of verses without taking into account their purport and
connotation.

According to the injunction of the Qur’an, they ignore the clear
revelations [*muhkamat*] of the Qur’an and engage in following the
allegorical ones [*mutashabihat*]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الفِتْنَةِ ابْتِغاءَ مِنْهُ تَشابَهَ ما فَيَتَّبِعُونَ زَيْغٌ
قُلُوبِهِمْ في الّذينَ فَأمّا …)
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(…وَابْتِغَاءَ تَأْوِيلِهِ ۗ وَمَا يَعْلَمُ تَأْوِيلَهُ إِلَّا اللَّهُ
ۗ وَالرَّاسِخُونَ فِي الْعِلْمِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But those in whose hearts is doubt pursue, forsooth, that which is
allegorical seeking (to cause) dissension by seeking to explain it. None
knoweth its explanation save Allah and those who are of sound
instruction.”***[^15]

Beyond following the allegorical ones, some people dissect and mutilate
the verses and select a statement while taking out the proceeding and
succeeding portions. Then, they imagine that the verses of the Qur’an
are contradicting one another!

As it has been discussed, without taking into account the purport and
discourse of the Qur’anic verses, they conformed their doubt on the
inconsistency of the guardianship and dominance of the Prophet and the
divine authorities with the principle of man’s freedom to some verses.
We have stated earlier that the verses whose purport is the lack of
dominance of the Messenger of God over the people are addressed to the
unbelievers prior to the acceptance of Islam as the Messenger of God
does not have dominance over them and cannot invite them to Islam by
force.

In reality, based on the verses, freedom of action and freewill in
accepting the divine orders is prior to the jurisdiction of Islam.
Otherwise, after the jurisdiction of Islam, every Muslim must accept the
guardianship and dominance of the Prophet and the divine authorities; he
is duty-bound to observe the Islamic values.

Although the Islamic government does not interfere in the personal and
private life of individuals and in issues that take place in secret, in
relation to the social life and in interacting with one another
everybody is obliged and duty-bound to observe the divine limit. He
should sternly resist against transgression upon the sanctuary of divine
values, insult to the religious sanctities, and engagement in debauchery
and indecencies.

This in fact is a showcase of the guardianship of the Islamic
authorities over the individuals constituting the society who persuade
them so as to be equipped with the amenities of faith and Islam—Islam
which they have voluntarily chosen.

Doubt 4: The imposition of limitations in actions is against the demand of the natural law
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There is a set of natural and inborn rights, which are above the law and
no lawmaker has the right to set limit on.

Among these rights, for example, the freedom to choose one’s residence
can be cited. This means that man is free to live in any city and place
he likes and no one can prevent him in doing so—as to why he has bought
a house in a certain place and has chosen residence.

Another example is the freedom to choose one’s occupation, which means
that everyone is free to choose whatever occupation he likes and no law
can condemn him as to why he has chosen a certain occupation. Similar is
the case of freedom in choosing a spouse, meaning that man is free to
choose as his spouse and marry anyone whom he likes, and no law can
prevent him from choosing the spouse whom he likes.

Reply
-----

Let us pose this question to anyone who raises this doubt: Which does he
mean, these rights are indeed absolutely and unconditionally fixed for
individuals, or there are existing laws related to them? If he says that
there are existing laws related to them, then he has blemished his own
claim because in principle the spirit and nature of enactment of law is
nothing but setting red line and imposing limitations.

But if he chooses the first line of argument and says that there are no
existing law, condition and requisite in relation to them, the problem
is that in practice such a thing is impossible. For instance, one of the
rights that is said to be above the law is the right to be free. Yet, is
there a single country in which there is absolute, unconditional and
unrestrained freedom and the individuals are free to do whatever they
like? In essence, the social system cannot tolerate such a thing.

If there were no law in the society and law did not fix the limit and
boundary for the action of human beings, everything would disintegrate
and the social system would cease to exist. If all these freedoms are
above the law as it is claimed, then we have the following: right for
residence, right for occupation, right for spouse, right to freedom of
expression, etc. Is there anyone in the world who, under the pretext of
freedom of expression, has the right to vilify and pour scorn on
others?!

Is there anyone in the world who, under the excuse of freedom to choose
residence, has the right to usurp the house and land of people and to
dwell therein?! Is there anyone in the world who, under the ploy of
freedom to choose a spouse, has the right to marry his own mother or
sister?!

Therefore, those who claim that there are rights that are above the law
are themselves not bound by this basis and do not allow the lawmaker to
determine limits and boundaries as well as conditions and requisites
regarding them. This is a contradiction they are facing, and its
solution is for them to abandon this claim because taking out the limits
and boundaries in the social conduct, as what we have said, is
impossible and leads to chaos and the disintegration of the system.

Doubt 5: Religion cannot impose limit on freedom.
-------------------------------------------------

Freedom is above religion and religion cannot create limitations for the
freedom of human beings and through its laws it cannot deprive the
people of benefiting from freedom.

Reply
-----

In reply to the previous skepticism, it was clear that the essence of
law is the setting of limitation. As it comprises of social and
political laws, religion also regulates and restricts the social and
political actions of man, ordering that those actions must be done
within their particular framework.

If religion means other than this, what is the purpose behind its
existence? If religion is meant for this that every person can behave in
whatever way he likes, then what is the status of religion? What is the
station of religion?

The existence of religion and law has no other sense except setting
limit on the freedoms of man. Thus, that which is said that freedom is
above religion is nonsense. Yes, it is possible that there are those
who, in the name of religion, wanted to put restriction on the
legitimate freedom of people, and wanted to prohibit that which has been
made lawful by God through superstitions and ethnic customs.

For example, unfortunately there are still some ethnics and tribes in
this and that corner of our country that prohibit some of those made
lawful by God. In the same manner, in the culture of our present society
some of those made lawful by God are considered abominable. Had it not
been the case, many of the sexual corruptions in the society could be
prevented. The Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَقِىّ اِلاّ زنى ما الْمُتْعَةِ فِى الخَطّابِ ابْنِ مِنِ سَبَقَ لَوْلا
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Had (‘Umar) ibn al-Khattab not prohibited fixed-time marriage
[*mut‘ah*],[^16] no one would ever commit adultery and fornication
[*zina*] except a wretched person.”[^17]

Regrettably, in our culture this thing made lawful by God, which is a
key solution for many problems, is still considered abominable. Yes, if
there are those who under the name of religion wanted to declare lawful
those that are made unlawful by God, this act is abominable. Apart from
being abominable, it is also unlawful [*haram*] and it is a kind of
religious innovation [*bid‘ah*]. The same is true for its opposite.
Forbidding the lawful is also an innovation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِعَزائِمِهِ يُؤْخَذَ اَنْ يُحِبُّ كَما بِرُخصِهِ يُؤْخَذَ اَنْ
يُحِبُّ اللهَ انَّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Verily, God loves the people to benefit from the permissible
[*mubahat*] and lawful [*halal-ha*] things just as He loves them to
perform the compulsories [*wajibat*] and shun the unlawful
[*muharramat*] things.”[^18]

Thus, under the name of religion, or under the name of tribalism or
local, ethnic and clannish prejudices nobody has the right to declare
unlawful some of those made lawful by God. In the same manner, setting
limits on freedoms is unlawful and an innovation. No one is amenable
with these.

But if what is meant by “freedoms” is the illegitimate freedoms,
naturally no one is expecting also that religion would not oppose
illegitimate freedoms!

Doubt 6: Servitude is against the demand of the natural disposition [fitrah] of man.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

As it is known to you, in the past human societies the system of slavery
was prevalent. Through trick and force, they used to transport some
people from far distance regions and force them to work as slaves in
their own countries.

These people who were deprived of the rights of citizenship used to work
in the farms and factories of their masters.

In the system of slavery racial discrimination and exploitation of the
weak classes were exemplified in the worse manner. Such a system is
inconsistent with the human spirit and nature. And all people strongly
detest being slaves and servants of other people.  
 Slavery or being a servant in general is blameworthy, and thus, man
should not be a slave by even God.

Reply
-----

That this statement is contradictory with our religious teachings is
very clear. The Holy Qur’an mentions the human beings as “servants of
God”:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( بِالْعِبادِ رَؤُفٌ اللهُ وَ …)
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah hath compassion on (His) bondmen.”***[^19]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( لِلْعِبادِ ظُلْماً يُرِيدُ اللهُ ما وَ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And Allah willeth no injustice for (His) slaves.”***[^20]

God, the Exalted, calls the most beloved and noble of human beings,
namely, the Eminent Prophet of Islam, Hadrat Muhammad (S) as ‘servant’
[*‘abd*]:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَسْجِدِ اِلَى الْحَرامِ الْمَسْجِدِ مِنَ لَيْلاً بِعَبْدِهِ أسْرى
الَّذي سُبْحَانَ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( البَصِيرُ السَّمِيعُ هُوَ اِنَّهُ اياتِنا مِنْ لِنُرِيَهُ حَوْلَهُ
بارَكْنا الَّذي الأقْصَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Glorified be He Who carried His servant by night from the Inviolable
Place of Worship to the Far Distant Place of Worship the neighbourhood
whereof We have blessed, that We might show him of Our tokens! Lo! He,
only He, is the Nearer, the Seer.”***[^21]

Equally, those who acquired sublime stations of humanity and reached the
status of the “soul in peace” [*nafs al-mutma’innah*] are called
‘servants’ [*‘ibad*] and are included in the rank of the special
servants of God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
\* مَرْضِيَّةً راضِيَةً رَبِّكِ اِلى ارْجِعي \* الْمُطْمَئِنَّةُ
النَّفْسُ أيّتُهَا يا )
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( جَنَّتي ادْخُلي وَ \* عِبادي في فَادْخُلِي
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But ah! thou soul at peace!***

***Return unto thy Lord, content in His good pleasure!***

***Enter thou among My bondmen!***

***Enter thou My Garden!”***[^22]

Therefore, in the culture of the Holy Qur’an, to be a ‘servant of God’
is not only not blamable and contemptuous but rather a badge of honor
and nobility. After excessive acts of worship, His Holiness the
Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) used to humbly bow down in prostration
and utter:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبّاً لى تَكُونَ اَنْ فَخْراً بى كَفى وَ عَبْداً لَكَ اَكُونَ اَنْ
عِزّاً بى كَفى اِلهى
  </p>
</blockquote>

“O God! It is an enough honor that I am you servant and it is an enough
poverty that Thou art my Lord.”[^23]

As such, in the culture of the *Ahl al-Bayt*[^24] (*‘a*) to be a servant
does not indicate the abjectness and meanness of man. From the viewpoint
of the Qur’an and the Sunnah [Prophetic tradition], servitude to God is
the highest honor for man. Yet, in order to remove the doubt, we shall
deal with the issue in detail. You know that belief in monotheism
[*tawhid*] means belief in the One True God Who is the Cherisher and
Sustainer [*rabb*] of all the worlds.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( الْعالَمِينَ رَبِّ للهِ الْحَمْدُ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Praise be to Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the
Worlds.”***[^25]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( عِبَادُكَ فَإنَّهُمْ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! They are Thy slaves.”***[^26]

It is the foundation of all divine religions, and all the heavenly
scriptures have emphatically enjoined it. The need for the human beings
to obey God, apart from the narrative proofs and devotional testimonies
expressed in the Qur’an and the Prophetic tradition, has also
philosophical evidence. Its philosophical evidence is based on the
“ought to be” deduction from the “being.”

The explanation of these “beings” is of two kinds:

(1) “beings” that can be deduced as “ought-to-be’s” and

(2) “beings” that cannot be deduced as “ought-to-be’s.”

Expressing the difference between the two requires a precise scientific
and technical study, which is beyond our concern. What can be stated
well here is that when in a logical analogy a passage of “beings” is the
absolute cause of a phenomenon in the passage of “ought-to-be’s”, in
reality this kind of drawing a conclusion is the deduction of “effect
from cause.” But if the one located at the side of “beings” is not
“absolute cause”, the effect cannot be deduced from the cause because in
case of the existence of the absolute cause, the effect finds its
necessity of existence. In this manner, it can be said that the effect
has the deductive necessity [*wujub-e bi’l-qiyas*] with respect to the
absolute cause.

Now, that we say that man is the servant and slave of God (passage from
the group of “beings”) is the absolute cause for the reason that man
must obey God (passage from the group of “ought-to-be’s”). God, the
Exalted, has created our material and physical existence and has
breathed us of His spirit.

In addition, He has endowed us with innumerable blessings such as air,
water, food, bodily members, power to think, and everything that is
related to the life of man. The ownership of God to these material and
immaterial blessings cannot be negated.

Therefore, God is the Owner and Grantor of all our existence and
blessings, which we use for our own subsistence, growth and perfection.
Now that our Master is God and that we are His servants and slaves, on
the basis of the dictate of reason that “the owner can occupy his
possession in whatever manner he likes,”

He has the right to “appropriate” us in any manner, and we should be
subservient and obedient to Him, for quintessentially we are nothing. In
the system of slavery the slave has the ability to oppose. He can escape
from the clutches of his master. He can be sold to another master or be
turned over to another.

Such things can be materialized in the “delegated ownership”
[*malikiyyat-e i‘tibari*]. This is in contrast with the “real ownership”
[*malikiyyat-e haqiqi*] in which assuming such affairs in regard to it
is impossible and unattainable. God cannot take away the ownership of
His servants from Himself or delegate them to others.

Of course, this “incapability” is not on account of impotence and
inability. Instead, basically, such an act cannot intrinsically pertain
to power. Just as God cannot annihilate Himself or commit suicide, one
cannot imagine Him also to be not the “Owner” of His servants and the
human beings to be not His “servants” for only a moment.[^27]

In other words, the label “Creator” [*khaliq*] for God and “creature”
[*makhluq*] for the human beings and other beings are eternal and
perpetual appellations.

To assume that He dismissed man from being an intrinsic “servant” is a
contradiction, for its meaning will be this: that man both exists and is
His servant, and does not exist and not His servant.

The existence [*mawjudiyyah*] of every being [*mawjud*] is like that of
‘creatureship’ [*makhlukiyyah*], servanthood [*mamlukiyyah*] and
servitude [*‘ubudiyyah*], and our servitude in relation to God can never
be cut off in the same manner that the light cannot be assumed to have
no brightness, or the fire be regarded as having no heat.

“Real Ownership” [malikiyyat-e i‘tibari] and “Delegated Ownership” [malikiyyat-e i‘tibari]
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What we said about the impossibility of negating the “master and
servant” [*malik wa mamluk*] relationship between God and man is related
to the “real and intrinsic ownership or mastership” [*malikiyyat-e
haqiqi wa takwini*]. As what we have indicated, ownership or mastership
is classified into two:

(1) “real and intrinsic ownership or mastership” [*malikiyyat-e haqiqi*]
and

(2) “delegated ownership” [*malikiyyat-e i‘tibari*].

The concept of “ownership or mastership” [*malikiyyah*] among the human
beings is a “delegated affair” [*amr-e i‘tibari*]. For example, by
giving an amount of money, I will become the owner of a garment. That is
to say that a contract between me and the garment’s owner will be forged
in the basis of which by giving a certain amount of money on my part,
the garment will belong to me and I will become its owner while the
other person will own the money. I can do whatever I like to the
garment. For instance, I would sell it and give it to somebody. Such an
affair is the demand of my “ownership.”

When a person has a delegated or contractual ownership, he can
expropriate in various ways that one he owns. Of course, man has also
intrinsic ownership [*malikiyyat-e takwini*], which in comparison to the
intrinsic ownership of God in relation to all the worlds is so weak; for
example, man’s ownership of his own will, or man’s ownership with
respect to the “intellectual being” [*mawjud-e dhihni*] he has envisaged
in his mind. Man can wish for and imagine a thing anytime he likes and
not wish for and imagine it at another time.

In these two examples, albeit man has intrinsic ownership, it is yet
different from the “intrinsic and real ownership of God” because the
existence of man and his will and imagination are all creatures of God.
In spite of it, man has the diverse capabilities to expropriate them.
Thus, through the primary way, God, Who is the “Real Owner” [*malik-e
haqiqi*] and the “Cherisher and Sustainer of all the worlds”
[*rabb’ul-‘alamin*], can expropriate His creatures in any fashion.

Some of the concepts used in the social life and particular cases
sometimes experience expansion-oriented shift and are also used beyond
the social life. Now, if the previous value-laden one is used in a new
circumstance, a fallacy has been committed.

Concerning our discussion, the slavery of man by another man, which
existed in the past social system, is laden with a negative value, but
the slavery of man in relation to God is, apart from being negatively
value-laden, is laden with the highest positive value, for it is under
the auspices of servitude to God that man can attain his ultimate
perfection and be included among those who are thus addressed by God:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( عِبادي في فَادْخُلِي )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Enter thou among My bondmen!”***[^28]

God, the Exalted, addresses as “servant” [*‘abd*] His most beloved
servant, namely, Hadrat Muhammad (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْمَسْجِدِ اِلَى الْحَرامِ الْمَسْجِدِ مِنَ لَيْلاً بِعَبْدِهِ أسْرى
الَّذي سُبْحَانَ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( البَصِيرُ السَّمِيعُ هُوَ اِنَّهُ آياتِنا مِنْ لِنُرِيَهُ حَوْلَهُ
بارَكْنا الَّذي الأقْصَى
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Glorified be He Who carried His servant by night from the Inviolable
Place of Worship to the Far Distant Place of Worship the neighbourhood
whereof We have blessed, that We might show him of Our tokens! Lo! He,
only He, is the Nearer, the Seer.”***[^29]

One cannot accept God as the Supreme Being while not regarding himself
bound by servitude to Him. According to this outlook on servitude, man
is the servant of God and obedience to Him is obligatory on man.

The Requisite of Divine Godhood as Cosmic and Religious Lordship
----------------------------------------------------------------

The requisite of acknowledging the existence of God is acknowledgment of
one’s servitude to Him and the requisite of acknowledging one’s
servitude to God is total obedience to His decrees. In other words, the
requisite of divine Godhood is cosmic Lordship [*rububiyyat-e takwini*]
and religious Lordship [*rububiyyat-e tashri‘i*].

Some believe that God created the universe, but has abandoned it and has
no hand in its management; the management of the universe and its
internal evolution is done mechanically!

These people do not believe in the cosmic Lordship of God in relation to
the universe. They do not know the scope of monotheism [*tawhid*], for
monotheism in its true sense, which all the heavenly religions and
divine prophets have enjoined, is a monotheism consisting of three
pillars:

(1) Divine Godhood [*Uluhiyyat-e Ilahi*],

(2) cosmic Lordship, and

(3) religious Lordship.

In conclusion, the monotheism of anyone, who believes in the godhood of
God but denies the cosmic or religious Lordship of God, is problematic.

According to the Holy Qur’an, God is not only the Creator of the
universe, but also the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds
[*rabb’ul-‘alamin*], and the universe is evolving and revolving
continuously by His will:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَسْأَلُهُ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ وَالْأَرْضِ ۚ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ هُوَ فِي
شَأْنٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“All that are in the heavens and the earth entreat Him. Every day He
exerciseth (universal) power**.”*[^30]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
.قالبها ريزد فرو ، آنى كند نازى اگر
  </p>
</blockquote>

“Once He demurs, the moulds would collapse.”

The requisite of accepting the cosmic Lordship is the belief in the
religious Lordship; that is, belief in the fact that whatever God has
enjoined must be obeyed.

If we believed in the first level of monotheism [*tawhid*], that is, the
Godhood of the One God, we have become nearer to His truth and felicity.
Then, if we accepted that God has also cosmic Lordship and that the
management of the universe is solely under His will, we become a little
bit nearer to the truth and the reward for our deeds becomes more. In
the end, if we also believed in “monotheism in worship and obedience” we
have become further nearer to His felicity.

One who believes in these three [levels of] monotheism is so different
with a person who does not believe in God at all or a polytheist.

The former believes in all the levels of monotheism while the latter
does not believe at all in the existence of God, let alone having
accepted “monotheism in Lordship” or “monotheism in obedience.” The
former is in the highest stage of bliss and human perfection while the
latter is in the lowest ebb of wretchedness.

Perhaps, the initial notion of all of us is that the one who denies God
and does not accept any of the levels of monotheism is the farthest than
anybody else to the divine mercy and will be doomed to perdition and
chastisement while the one who believed in at least one of the levels of
monotheism—for example, monotheism in the creative power—is to the same
extent near to felicity and perfection.

By referring to the Holy Qur’an, the incorrectness of this notion will
become clear. According to the Holy Qur’an, only the one who believes in
all the levels of monotheism (that is, monotheism in the creative power,
monotheism in the cosmic Lordship, and monotheism in the religious
Lordship) will attain eternal bliss and salvation. The totality of these
beliefs has been incorporated in the expression, “There is no god but
Allah” [*La ilaha illallah*].

Even the belief in two of the levels of monotheism (monotheism in the
creative power and monotheism in the cosmic Lordship) will not cause the
salvation and felicity of anyone. In other words, the state of such a
person will be no better than the one denying God. The best evidence for
this matter is the account of Iblis’s (Satan) disobedience, which the
Qur’an recounts.

We do not know of a being that is more unfortunate and wretched than
Iblis in the world. But, was Iblis a denier of the existence of God?
From his conversation with God it is clear that he has believed in the
“creative power of God”, because in his reason for not prostrating
before Hadrat Adam (*‘a*) he said: “Thou hast created me from fire and
created him (Adam) from clay.”

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
؟ أمَرْتُكَ اِذ تَسْجُدَ ألاّ مَنَعَكَ ما قالَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَخَلَقْتَهُ مِنْ طِينٍ نارٍ مِنْ خَلَقْتَني مِنْهُ خَيْرٌ أنا قالَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He said: What hindered thee that thou didst not fall prostrate when
I bade thee? (Iblis) said: I am better than him. Thou createdst me of
fire while him Thou didst create of mud.”***[^31]

Therefore, Satan acknowledges the creative power of God. Was Iblis a
denier of the cosmic Lordship of God? In his conversation with God, he
addressed the Divine Sacred Essence as “Lord” [*rabb*]. As such, Iblis
believed in God as the One managing the universe:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَلَأُغْوِيَنَّهُمْ أَجْمَعِينَ الأرْضِ فِي لَهُمْ لأُزَيِّنَنَّ
أغْوَيْتَني بِما رَبِّ قالَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He said: My Lord, because Thou has sent me astray, I verily shall
adorn the path of error for them in the earth, and shall mislead them
every one.”***[^32]

Was Iblis a denier of the Day of Judgment? The answer is negative. He
requested respite from God till the Day of Resurrection:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( يُبْعَثُونَ يَوْمِ اِلى فَأنْظِرْني رَبِّ قالَ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“He said: My Lord! Reprieve me till the day when they are
raised.”***[^33]

Was Iblis refusing to worship God? By referring to the words of His
Holiness the Commander of the Faithful (*‘a*) in the *Nahj
al-Balaghah*[^34] the answer to this question will become clear.
Concerning the devotion of Iblis, he says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أمِنْ يَدْرى لا سَنَةٍ آلافِ سِتَّةَ اللهَ عَبَدَ قَدْ كانَ وَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
واحِدَةٍ ساعَةٍ كِبْرِ عَنْ الآخِرَةِ سَنِىِّ مِنْ أمْ الدُّنْيا
سَنِىِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

“He nullified his great acts and extensive efforts on account of the
vanity of one moment, although Satan had worshipped Allah for six
thousand years—whether by the reckoning of this world or of the next
world is not known.”[^35]

Now, the fundamental question is this: What was the cause of Iblis’s
misfortune? The answer is that he had problem with respect to the
religious Lordship and he did not accept the “monotheism in the
religious Lordship;” that is, the belief that only God has the right to
enjoin and forbid (a thing) and all the orders of God must be obeyed
unconditionally.

The problem of Iblis was not in the affairs such as monotheism in the
creative power (of God), monotheism in the cosmic Lordship, worshipping
God, and belief in the Day of Judgment. He believed in all these
affairs, but the denial of the “religious Lordship of God” subjected him
to eternal damnation.

Keeping in view of the subject just discussed, it becomes clear that man
has “obligation” [*taklif*] in relation to God. The foundation of Islam
also rests on the “duty-centeredness of man.” If the duty is taken away,
nothing from Islam will be left.

For instance, prayers and fasting are among the obligatory acts in
Islam. If the duty is not present, it necessarily follows that these two
affairs are not mandatory! Also, acts of tyranny and oppression are
unlawful [*haram*]. If the base of duty is taken out, oppressing others
will become permissible!

Doubt 7: The era of duty-centeredness has ended and the modern man is in pursuit of his rights
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Some say: In view of the development and progress that have transpired
in the various periods in the life of man as well as the new beliefs,
outlooks, and intellectual and facility structures that have emerged for
the modern human civilization, today religion must be in pursuit of
expressing the rights of human beings, and not presenting duties and
mandatory orders.

Since they were facing the system of slavery and the rule of force and
despotism, the human beings of the past used to shoulder
responsibilities and duties determined for them. Yet, now the age of
slavery has ended, and the era of his sovereignty and divine vicegerency
[*khilafatullah*] has arrived. Today’s human being is not in pursuit of
duty, but rather in pursuit of getting and exercising his rights.

Indeed, modernism and the new civilization have created a high wall
between us and the human beings of the past who were subjects, slaves,
servants, and beasts of burden for others. Therefore, the modern man has
closed the book account of duty- and responsibility-centeredness—which
belonged to the period of barbarism and intransigence—and is endeavoring
to claim his rights.

Nowadays, talking about duty and performance of responsibility is
retrogression and returning to the pre-modern era, and in this age,
which is that of talking about human rights and by the blessings of
democracy man has been delivered from slavery and exploitation, the time
has come for the ancient religions, which emerged conducive for the age
of slavery and concerned with duty and responsibility, to leave the
scene, and we should formulate the new religion that talks about the
rights of human beings.

Reply
-----

That it can be said absolutely that today’s man is only in pursuit of
right, and not duty, is a misleading and idle talk, for the philosophers
of law also say: No right is ever established for a person unless a duty
is realized reciprocally for others.

For example, if the right to have clean and unpolluted air for the
citizens is established, the other citizens are duty-bound not to
pollute the air. So, if all have the right to pollute the air, the right
to have clean air will become meaningless.

By the same token, if a person has the right to expropriate his
properties, the others must be obliged not to expropriate his
properties; otherwise, the right to make use of properties will not be
actually realized.

In the same manner, every right proved for a person necessitates a duty
that he has with respect to others. If a person has the right to benefit
from public utilities, he is reciprocally duty-bound to render public
services, accept (public) responsibilities and duties, and not be a
burden for others.

Therefore, right and duty require each other, and the statement that
human beings are only in search of right and do not accept duty is
rejected.

Considering the fact that all divine and non-divine scholars and
philosophers of law in general do not negate responsibility and duty and
in fact they acknowledge the existence of duty and commitment, we will
find out that the “duty” referred to in the statements of the skeptics
is the “divine duty.”

The spirit of their statements refers back to this point: God is not
supposed to set a duty for us, or else, according to them also, it is
escape from the social duties vis-à-vis rights that the individuals
have, for these duties are accepted by all the wise men. What I have
said is substantiated by the fact that they have unambiguously said that
the mastership [*mawlawiyyah*] and servanthood [*‘ubudiyyah*]
relationship, the issuance of order on part of the master, and the need
of obeying him are all appropriate for the culture of slavery.

The Background of Those Who Rebelled against God
------------------------------------------------

It is not only the modern man who does not bow his head in submission to
God, religion and divine duties. In fact, many human beings throughout
history, on account of the satanic insinuations, did not submit to the
divine duties and threaded the path of rebellion and lawbreaking.  
 This statement that mankind is in pursuit of rights and not duties is
not a new one. In fact, in the beginning Qabil (Cain), the rebellious
son of Adam (Adam) (*‘a*) obviously did not submit to the divine duty
and rules, and under the aegis of lawbreaking and egotism, he murdered
his brother Habil (Abel):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَاتْلُ عَلَيْهِمْ نَبَأَ ابْنَيْ آدَمَ بِالْحَقِّ إِذْ قَرَّبَا
قُرْبَانًا فَتُقُبِّلَ مِنْ أَحَدِهِمَا وَلَمْ يُتَقَبَّلْ مِنَ
الْآخَرِ قَالَ لَأَقْتُلَنَّكَ ۖ قَالَ إِنَّمَا يَتَقَبَّلُ اللَّهُ
مِنَ الْمُتَّقِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“But recite unto them with truth the tale of the two sons of Adam,
how they offered each a sacrifice, and it was accepted from the one of
them and it was not accepted from the other. (The one) said: I will
surely kill thee. (The other) answered: Allah accepteth only from those
who ward off (evil).”***[^36]

The historical accounts of the divine prophets narrated in the Qur’an
are indicative of the fact that most people considered their own prophet
as a liar. Apart from not responding submissively to his prophetic call,
they used to calumniate their own prophet, mock and deride him, and even
murder him and drive him out of their own town. If a prophet would
express a thoroughly important message for them and for example, as the
Qur’an describes, discourage them from practicing shortchanging:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(…وَلَا تَبْخَسُوا النَّاسَ أَشْيَاءَهُمْ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And wrong not mankind in their goods.”***[^37]

They would say to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أوْ آباؤُنا يَعْبُدُ ما نَتْرُكَ أنْ تَأمُرُكَ أصَلَوتُكَ شُعَيْبُ يا
قالُوا )
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( الرّشيدُ الحَليمُ لأنْتَ اِنَّكَ نَشاءُ ما أمْوالِنا في نَفْعَلَ أنْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“They said: O Shu‘ayb (Jethro)! Doth thy way of prayer command thee
that we should forsake that which our fathers (used to) worship, or that
we (should leave off) doing what we will with our own property. Lo! thou
are the mild, the guide to right behavior.”***[^38]

Here, it can possibly be said that what have happened throughout the
history of the opposition and confrontation with the prophets and saints
of God have been the result of idol-worship, polytheism and fellowship
to the Satan, while our point is that mankind should remove from their
neck the chain of slavery to any object of worship and reverence and
also not follow idols and the Satan.

Yet, this argument from the true viewpoint and perspective of divine
revelation is erroneous and idle, for from the viewpoint of divine
revelation man is at the threshold of two paths of servitude: (1)
servitude to God and (2) servitude to the *taghut*,[^39] and it is
impossible for him to be neither of the two types of servitude.

If even one would chant a slogan that he is not the servant of anybody
or anything, in reality he is the servant of the *taghut* and his carnal
desire. On this basis, the Qur’an thus states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُ وَلِيُّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا يُخْرِجُهُمْ مِنَ الظُّلُمَاتِ إِلَى
النُّورِ ۖ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا أَوْلِيَاؤُهُمُ الطَّاغُوتُ
يُخْرِجُونَهُمْ مِنَ النُّورِ إِلَى الظُّلُمَاتِ ۗ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Allah is the Protecting Friend of those who believe. He bringeth
them out of darkness into light. As for those who disbelieve, their
patrons are false deities. They bring them out of light into darkness.
Such are rightful owners of the Fire. They will abide therein.”***[^40]

Elsewhere in the Qur’an, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَدُوٌّ لَكُمْ اِنَّهُ الشَّيْطانَ لاتَعبُدُوا اَنْ آدَمَ بَني يا
اِلَيْكُمْ اَعْهَدْ اَلَمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَأَنِ اعْبُدُونِي ۚ هَٰذَا صِرَاطٌ مُسْتَقِيمٌ مُبِينٌ \*
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Did I not charge you, O ye sons of Adam, that ye worship not the
devil Lo! He is your open foe! But that ye worship Me? That was the
right path.”***[^41]

The purport of the verse is that after setting aside the worship of
Satan, there is no need to obey and worship anyone else. Instead, the
worship of God should be taken up just as in the declaration of
monotheism, the phrase “There is no god…” [*La ilaha…*] is followed by
“…but Allah” […*illallah*].

Therefore, those who wakened up from the slumber of negligence through
the manifestation of revelation have discerned that they should worship
the Deity Who is their Creator and Real Master and on Whom depends the
life and death, youth and old age, health and sickness. For them,
servitude to Him is the ultimate honor. Those that He made obligatory
have stemmed from the spring of the everlasting wisdom and mercy, and
the performance of which will be the source of human felicity and
perfection.

We found out that the habit of refusing to accept God and aloofness from
the performance of duties and responsibilities are the result of crooked
training of man, brutish and bestial temperament, and fellowship to
Satan, which have always existed in history and are not the monopoly of
the modern man. In reality, it is this modern man who has desisted from
utilizing the facilities of civility, sunk in ignorance and savagery,
and is the reactionary.

In contrary, those who received training in the school [*maktab*] of the
prophets (*‘a*) have desisted from bestial temperament and savagery, and
have embraced civility through the rule of law, acceptance of duties and
responsibilities in their true sense, because civilization and civility
are the opposite of savagery, and the basic requisite and condition of
which is the acceptance of law.

So, how could some people afford to say that the modern civilization
demands that man should not accept any responsibility?! Is this savagery
or civilization? Basically, civilization is centered on the acceptance
of limitations, law and the assumption of responsibility; otherwise, it
will have no difference with savagery.

As such, anyone who refrains from accepting law, duty and assumption of
responsibility, are prone to return to savagery and barbarity.
Certainly, anyone who has this idea and disposition could never be noble
and vicegerent of God [*khalifatullah*] to pose as the model for us. (It
is necessary to note that the slogan of civility and law-orientation
that has gained currency today in our society means the attainment of
the apogee of civility and pinnacle of law-orientation.

It is not that a new event has happened, our society has been in
savagery for the past 19 years[^42] after the Revolution, and now it has
adopted civility. It is not so. Basically, our Revolution took shape on
the basis of the ancient Islamic civility and civilization. Among its
principal mottos and aims is the observance of the divine law in all
aspects.)

Adherence to God and Freedom
----------------------------

Again, in relation to the fact that the essence of the prophets’ mission
to the obedience to and worship of God and non-adherence to the
*taghut*, God says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
(…وَلَقَدْ بَعَثْنَا فِي كُلِّ أُمَّةٍ رَسُولًا أَنِ اعْبُدُوا اللَّهَ
وَاجْتَنِبُوا الطَّاغُوتَ ۖ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And verily We have raised in every nation a messenger,
(proclaiming): Serve Allah and shun false gods.”***[^43]

Given this explanation, it cannot be accepted that the edifice of Islam
is founded on disobedience to others including God. Essentially, any
religion that does not call on us to obey God is a false one and the
spirit of the mission of the prophets is absolute obedience to God, from
Whom the entire world of being emanates, and Who is the Alpha and the
Omega as well as the Real Master and Owner:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( راجِعُونَ اِلَيْهِ اِنّا وَ للهِ اِنّا )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! We are Allah's and Lo! Unto Him we are returning.”***[^44]

Now, once we recognized God as the Real Master and Owner of the entire
world of being, how can it be accepted that He has no right to issue
order and decree to us? Is ownership nothing but the fact that the owner
can expropriate what he owned in whatever manner he likes?

It is unacceptable that we claim to have accepted Islam but made
ourselves free from the requisite of servitude to God, for this absolute
freedom is not only condemnable from the religious viewpoint but the
intellect cannot accept it as well.

Islam and religion are the harbingers of freedom, but it is the freedom
and deliverance from the worship of and obedience to other than God and
*taghut*s, and not deliverance from obedience to God. Albeit man has
been created free and autonomous, he is religiously and legally
duty-bound to obey God. That is to say that out of his freewill he has
to obey God.

Essentially, in the realm of creation the seal of servitude and
servanthood has been put on every phenomenon. Intrinsically, no being
has existed without the sign of servitude to God, and the existence of
every being exactly means servitude to Him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تُسَبِّحُ لَهُ السَّمَاوَاتُ السَّبْعُ وَالْأَرْضُ وَمَنْ فِيهِنَّ ۚ
وَإِنْ مِنْ شَيْءٍ إِلَّا يُسَبِّحُ بِحَمْدِهِ وَلَٰكِنْ لَا
تَفْقَهُونَ تَسْبِيحَهُمْ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“The seven heavens and the earth and all that is therein praise Him,
and there is not a thing but hymneth his praise; but ye understand not
their praise.”***[^45]

In relation to the servitude and worship of the creatures, God also
says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ اللَّهَ يُسَبِّحُ لَهُ مَنْ فِي السَّمَاوَاتِ
وَالْأَرْضِ وَالطَّيْرُ صَافَّاتٍ ۖ كُلٌّ قَدْ عَلِمَ صَلَاتَهُ
وَتَسْبِيحَهُ ۗ...
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Hast thou not seen that Allah, He it is Whom all who are in the
heavens and the earth praise; and the birds in their flight? Of each He
knoweth verily the worship and the praise.”***[^46]

Yet, on account of his possession of wisdom and intellect, man has been
created free and autonomous. Although God, the Exalted, has showed him
the path of guidance and the way of deviation, he is free to choose
which path to tread. As what God Almighty has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّا هَدَيْنَاهُ السَّبِيلَ إِمَّا شَاكِرًا وَإِمَّا كَفُورًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! We have shown him the way,***

***whether he be grateful or disbelieving.”***[^47]

Nevertheless, he has to take into account the purpose and goal behind
his creation. He has to know that he ought to engage in serving and
obeying God and that the religious law of God does not permit him to
tread the path of obedience to the Satan and servitude to other than
God. Instead, he has to shoulder the servitude and divine
responsibility, for God has created him for such a purpose:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنْسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“I created the jinn and humankind only that they might worship
Me.”***[^48]

Now, in view of the fact that worshipping God is harmonious with the
system of creation and universe, shouldering the divine responsibility
and performance of one’s responsibility and duty to Him is actually a
gesture of gratitude and thankfulness to the Merciful Creator Who
endowed us with life and through His grace and favor He granted us with
health and innumerable blessings. As God has said through the tongue of
Hadrat Ibrahim (Prophet Abraham) (*‘a*):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
\* وَالَّذِي هُوَ يُطْعِمُنِي وَيَسْقِينِ يَهدينِ فَهُوَ خَلَقَني
الَّذي
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يُحْيِينِ ثُمَّ يُميتُني \* وَالَّذِي يَشْفينِ فَهُوَ مَرِضْتُ وَإِذَا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“(He is the Lord of the worlds) Who created me, and He doth guide me,
and Who feedeth me and watereth me. And when I sicken, then He healeth
me, and Who causeth me to die, the giveth me life (again).”***[^49]

How could we refuse to adhere to Him? Is it not far from justice and
fairness that we say that the modern man is not subservient to duty and
obedience and is in pursuit of his rights? Does Islam accept this logic?
Without doubt, such a thinking is devoid of rationality and far from
humanity, let alone having Islamic basis.

Doubt 8: The demand of the Divine Vicegerency [khilafatullah] means absolute freedom of man
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes, it can be said that man, according to the description of the
Qur’an, is the vicegerent of Allah [*khalifatullah*] and it means that
he is the representative of God on earth and functions like God. Just as
God has created the world, man has to “create” the phenomena, too. Just
as God is managing the universe as He wills, man is in control of the
earth and has to act as he likes.

Reply
-----

The reply to the above doubt is this: The meaning of vicegerency of God
must be understood correctly and it must be noted that the title,
“vicegerent of Allah” [*khalifatullah*] given to Hadrat Adam (Prophet
Adam) (*‘a*) in the Qur’an[^50] is not pertaining to all the sons of
Adam because the Qur’an labels some of his sons as “devils”
[*shayatin*], stating:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَكَذَٰلِكَ جَعَلْنَا لِكُلِّ نَبِيٍّ عَدُوًّا شَيَاطِينَ الْإِنْسِ
وَالْجِنِّ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Thus have We appointed unto every Prophet an adversary devils of
humankind and jinn.”***[^51]

Undoubtedly, human devils are neither “vicegerents of Allah” nor
included among whom the angels were required to bow down in prostration
before them when God said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذْ قَالَ رَبُّكَ لِلْمَلَائِكَةِ إِنِّي خَالِقٌ بَشَرًا مِنْ
صَلْصَالٍ مِنْ حَمَإٍ مَسْنُونٍ
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
\*فَإِذَا سَوَّيْتُهُ وَنَفَخْتُ فِيهِ مِنْ رُوحِي فَقَعُوا لَهُ
سَاجِدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And (remember) when thy Lord said unto the angels: Lo! I am creating
a mortal out of potter's clay of black mud altered. So, when I have made
him and have breathed into him of My spirit, do ye fall down,
prostrating yourselves unto him.”***[^52]

The vicegerent of Allah [*khalifatullah*] has great qualifications and
characteristics, among which are:

(1) knowledge of the names:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعَلَّمَ آدَمَ الْأَسْمَاءَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“And He taught Adam all the names”*****;**[^53]

(2) the vicegerent of God should have the competence to implement
justice on earth.

So, the wicked man who commits carnage on earth, feels no inhibition in
perpetrating any sort of crime, and does not observe justice cannot be
the viceroy of God. Is God iniquitous in that his envoy is also
iniquitous? The vicegerent of Allah is he who manifests divine
attributes in both his private and social life, and not just any
two-footed beings.

Therefore, those who are endeavoring to misguide the people and topple
down the Islamic government, apart from being not the noblest creatures,
are exactly the same devils [*shayatin*] from among mankind whom God
regards as more abject than the animals and concerning whom He says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
( لايَعْقِلُونَ الّذينَ الْبُكْمُ الصُّمُّ اللهِ عِنْدَ الدَّوابِّ
شَرَّ اِنَّ )
  </p>
</blockquote>

***“Lo! The worst of beasts in Allah's sight are the deaf, the dumb, who
have no sense.”***[^54]

The statement that the nobility of man lies on freedom and any thing
that sets limit on freedom is condemnable and rejected is a deceptive
slogan that has been brought up in the Western world, and in other
countries also some have also accepted it without taking into account
its ramifications, and they regularly stand on this proposition.

What is meant by saying that man must be absolutely free and should have
no limitation whatsoever? Does it mean that there should be no mandatory
law? No rational person will ever accept it because it implies that
everyone is free to do whatever he likes.

Everyone is free to commit murder, to encroach upon the chastity of
people, and create disorder in the society!

Without doubt, the first harm and defect of such thinking will be
inflicted upon its proponents. Is it possible at all to live in a
society wherein such a freedom has taken root? As such, there is
certainly no unlimited freedom and man is not free to do whatever he
likes at any time.

After it became clear that freedom is limited and conditional, this
question comes to the fore: Who is the one that determines the scope and
limitation of freedom? And where are the bounds and limits of freedom?

If every person is supposed to determine the extent, limit and boundary
of freedom for himself, the result will be this: everyone will do
whatever he likes, and it will experience the problem related to the
absolute freedom. So, having no good option, to refer to a law must be
considered in describing and determining the scope, limit and boundary
of freedom.

In this case, if a person accepts that God exists Who knows better what
is good and bad for man than what he himself knows, that no benefit from
the life of human beings will reach Him, and that He only wishes for the
good of His Servants, is there anybody for him who is more deserving to
determine the limit of freedom?

Thus, there is no contradiction in the intellectual and belief system of
Muslims because they believe in God Who knows best what is good and bad
for human beings and what will cause them felicity, and He, too, has
announced the limit and boundary of freedom.

If we did not believe in God, however, or assuming to have belief in
monotheism we did not recognize God as the Authority in determining the
limit and boundary of freedom, we would be inflicted with thousands of
mischief, for never would all the people arrive at a unanimous view and
opinion.

Now, even if there were a majority and it embarked on determining the
limits of freedom, how could the minority that does not accept the
limits of freedom determined by the majority get its rights? Thus,
though freedom is a beautiful and attractive term, it is not absolute
and unlimited, and no one can have an absolute freedom.

Doubt 9: Creating ambiguity in defining the legitimate freedom
--------------------------------------------------------------

In reply to the above statement, it can possibly be said that we do not
say to have absolute freedom. Our point is that there should be
legitimate freedoms.

Reply
-----

We ask this question: What do you mean by “legitimate”? Do you mean it a
thing that the religious law accepts? In language, there are two
meanings for the word “legitimate.” The first meaning is that which the
religion has permitted. If what you mean is this one, then it is the
same with what we are talking about, for we are saying that freedoms
must be within a framework that has been allowed by the religion.

The other meaning of “legitimate” is that which is legal. According to
this meaning also, in the Islamic Republic of Iran, as what the
Constitution stipulates, the law must be concordant with Islam.

Our Constitution monolithically shows that all rulings and laws must be
consistent with Islam, and essentially, the philosophy behind the
existence of the jurist-members of the Guardianship Council,[^55] as per
the Constitution, is to study the bills that the Islamic Consultative
Assembly (the Iranian Parliament or Majlis) has approved so as to
determine whether they are consistent with Islam or not.

Assuming that all the people and deputies in the Majlis (with the
exception of the deputies of religious minorities whose rights are also
reserved) are all Muslims, religious and committed. Nonetheless,
sometimes it is also possible that they would be complacent and approve
a thing that is inconsistent with Islam.

According to the Constitution, the bills of the Majlis should be
examined in the Guardianship Council whether they are consistent with
Islam or otherwise. The jurist-members of the Guardianship Council
confirm the Islamic nature of the Majlis bills while the lawyers of the
Guardianship Council confirm their compatibility with the Constitution.

If our Constitution does not regard it necessary (to check) the Islamic
nature of the laws, what then is the philosophy behind the existence of
the Guardianship Council? What for are all these emphases on the
sovereignty of Islam and the absolute Guardianship of the Jurist that
have been laid down in the articles of the Constitution?

Then, one should not be surprised if there are those who introduced
themselves as legal experts would say: “Since the Constitution states
that freedom should be respected, no religion and no law has the right
to set limits on those freedoms”!

Which one that the Constitution states: to have legitimate, or
illegitimate freedoms? Do you yourselves say legitimate freedoms? What
do you mean by “legitimate freedoms”? If the word “legitimate”
[*mashru‘*] is taken from “religion or religious law” [*shar‘*], i.e.
freedoms that the religion [*shar‘*] confirms, and by “legitimate”
[*mashru‘*] it means “legal”, then according to the Constitution, the
freedoms that the religion and the law would confirm are the
“legitimate” freedoms.

Doubt 10: Observance of the religious precepts is against the demand of the sovereignty of man over his own destiny
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

There are those who say that based upon the Constitution, the human
beings must be the sovereign over their own destiny. But then if they
were compelled to observe religion only, they would no longer be the
sovereign over their destiny.

Reply
-----

Has our Constitution highlighted this point only? Has it not been
stipulated in the same Constitution that sovereignty emanates from God,
the Exalted? Does the same Constitution not state that the laws to be
implemented in the country must be Islamic laws? Do these subjects not
extant in the Constitution, and has it stipulated only this principle
that the people must be the master over their own destiny?

Perhaps, it can be said that these two principles of the Constitution
are contradictory, and it needs interpretation and solution. Yet, if we
try to examine closely, we will understand the meaning of these two
principles.

When in the first principle it states that sovereignty emanates from God
and then it states that the people are the master over their own
destiny, it means that under the auspices of the sovereignty of God, the
people are the master over their own destiny.

Thus, those who are excluded from the Islamic society and people of this
country have no right to impose their idea, predilection, religion, and
law on us. That is, America has no right to impose its law on us. It is
these people who would approve their own desired law and the people have
voted for the Constitution.[^56]

Some would perhaps say: “We do not accept the meaning of constitution
the way you are defining it.”

In reply, it must be said: If there were any ambiguity existing in the
Constitution, its interpreter is the Guardianship Council.

If you do not accept this Constitution, you can see that it does not
give you the authority to interpret it and it has determined itself the
solution for contradictions and removal of doubts.

If you believe in this Constitution, then you have to ask for its
interpretation from the Guardianship Council. It is the Guardianship
Council that is the guardian of Islam and the Constitution, and it has
been consisted of Muslim jurists whose duty is the preservation and
vouchsafing of the Islamic laws.

[^1]: Surah al-Ghashiyah 88:21-22.

[^2]: Surah al-An‘am 6:107.

[^3]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:99.

[^4]: Surah al-Insan (or, ad-Dahr) 76:3.

[^5]: Surah al-Kahf 18:29.

[^6]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:36.

[^7]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:55.

[^8]: Surah al-Ahzab 33:6.

[^9]: Surah Yunus 10:99.

[^10]: Surah ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:3-4.

[^11]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:150-151.

[^12]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:65.

[^13]: Surah an-Nisa’ 4:105.

[^14]: Zakat: the tax levied on various categories of wealth and spent
on the purposes specified in Qur’an, 9:60. [Trans.]

[^15]: Surah Al ‘Imran 3:7. The whole verse is as follows: “He it is Who
hath revealed unto thee (Muhammad) the Scripture wherein are clear
revelations [muhkamat]. They are the substance of the Book and others
(which are) allegorical [mutashabihat]. But those in whose hearts is
doubt pursue, forsooth, that which is allegorical seeking (to cause)
dissension by seeking to explain it. None knoweth its explanation save
Allah and those who are of sound instruction who say: ‘We believe
therein; the whole is from our Lord; but only men of understanding
really heed.’”

[^16]: For information on the issue of mut‘ah, see, among others, Sayyid
Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i, Al-Mizan: An Exegesis of the Qur’an, trans.
Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi (Tehran: World Organization for Islamic
Services, 1992), vol. 8, under the commentary on Qur’an 4:24, pp.
104-111; Sayyid ‘Abdul-Husayn Sharafuddin Musawi, Questions on
Jurisprudence, trans. Liyakatali Takim (Ontario: Hydery Canada Ltd.,
1996), chap. 4, http://www.al-islam.org/masail/4.htm; Sachiko Murata,
“Temporary Marriage in Islamic Law,” Al-Serat 13, no. 1,
http://www.al-islam.org/al-serat/al-serat\_muta/title.htm. [Trans.]

[^17]: Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah Ibn Abi’l-Hadid, vol. 12, p. 253.

[^18]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 69, p. 360.

[^19]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:207.

[^20]: Surah al-Ghafir (or al-Mu’min) 40:31.

[^21]: Surah al-Isra’ 17:1.

[^22]: Surah al-Fajr 89:27-30.

[^23]: Bihar al-Anwar, vol. 77, p. 400.

[^24]: Ahl al-Bayt: according to authentic hadiths recorded in both the
Sunni and Shi‘ah sources, the term Ahl al-Bayt, and interchangeably
Itrah and Al, is a blessed Qur’anic appellation that belongs exclusively
to the Prophet, ‘Ali, Fatimah, Hasan, and Husayn (‘a). The members of
this Family of five, with the Prophet Muhammad (S) at its head, were the
ones alive at the time the Qur’anic verses regarding their virtue were
being revealed to the Prophet (S). However, nine other Imams from the
descendants of Imam al-Husayn (‘a) are also in this chosen Family, the
final one being Imam al-Mahdi (‘a). For further information, visit:
http://www.al-islam.org/faq. [Trans.]

[^25]: Surah al-Fatihah 1:2.

[^26]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:118.

[^27]: For concise information about this issue on the essential
attributes of God, see Sayyid Saeed Akhtar Rizvi, God: An Islamic
Perspective (Tehran: World Organization for Islamic Services, 1998),
http://www.al-islam.org/god-an-islamic-perspective/ [Trans.]

[^28]: Surah al-Fajr 89:29.

[^29]: Surah al-Isra’ 17:1.

[^30]: Surah ar-Rahman 55:29.

[^31]: Surah al-A‘raf 7:12.

[^32]: Surah al-Hijr 15:39.

[^33]: Surah al-Hijr 15:36.

[^34]: Nahj al-Balaghah (Peak of Eloquence) is a collection of speeches,
sayings and letters of the Commander of the Faithful, Imam ‘Ali ibn Abi
Talib (‘a) compiled by Sharif ar-Radi Muhammad ibn al-Husayn (d. 406
AH/1016). Contents of the book concern the three essential topics of
God, man and the universe, and include comments on scientific, literary,
social, ethical, and political issues. Except the words of the Glorious
Qur’an and of the Holy Prophet (S), no words of man can equate it in
eloquence. So far, more than 101 exegeses have been written on the Nahj
al-Balaghah, indicating the importance of this treatise to scholars and
learned men of research and investigation. For more information, visit:
http://www.al-islam.org/nahjul. [Trans.]

[^35]: Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon 191, known as al-Khutbah al-Khasi‘ah
(Sermon of Disparagement).

[^36]: Surah al-Ma’idah 5:27.

[^37]: Surah al-A‘raf 7:85.

[^38]: Surah Hud 11:87.

[^39]: The term taghut applies to any idol, object, or individual that
prevents men from doing what is good, and leads them astray. The term
has been used eight times in the Qur’an. Prior to Islam, taghut had been
the name of the one of the idols of the Quraysh tribe. This name is used
also to mean the Satan. Moreover, the term is used to indicate one who
rebels against lofty values, or who surpasses all bounds in his
despotism and tyranny and claims the prerogatives of divinity for
himself whether explicitly or implicitly. [Trans.]

[^40]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:257.

[^41]: Surah Ya-Sin 36:60-61.

[^42]: That is at the time of delivering this series of lectures.
[Trans.]

[^43]: Surah an-Nahl 16:36.

[^44]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:156.

[^45]: Surah al-Isra’ 17:44.

[^46]: Surah an-Nur 24:41.

[^47]: Surah al-Insan (or, ad-Dahr) 76:3.

[^48]: Surah adh-Dhariyat 51:56.

[^49]: Surah ash-Shu‘ara’ 26:78-81.

[^50]: In this regard, God says: “And when thy Lord said unto the
angels: Lo! I am about to place a viceroy in the earth, they said: wilt
Thou place therein one who will do harm therein and will shed blood,
while we, we hymn Thy praise and sanctify Thee? He said: Surely I know
that which ye know not.” (Surah al-Baqarah 2:30)

[^51]: Surah al-An‘am 6:112.

[^52]: Surah al-Hijr 15:28-29.

[^53]: Surah al-Baqarah 2:31.

[^54]: Surah al-Anfal 8:22.

[^55]: To guard the laws of Islam and the Constitution against
contradictions of the approvals of the Majlis, a council named
Guardianship Council is set up in the Islamic Republic of Iran. It is
composed of six just and learned jurists and six lawyers in various
branches of the law (Art. 91 of the Constitution). They will be
appointed for a period of six years (Art. 92). The Islamic Consultative
Assembly has no legal validity without the Guardianship Council (Art.
93). All bills approved by the Majlis shall be forwarded to the said
Council for confirmation and to check them for compatibility with the
Islamic tenets and the constitutional law (Art. 94). [Trans.]

[^56]: In the referendum on the Islamic Republic shortly after the
victory of the Islamic Revolution on February 11, 1979, the Iranian
people unanimously declared their final and firm decision to bring about
a new political order, an Islamic Republic, by a 98.2% majority vote.
[Trans.]


