Worship Is a Permanent Human Need
=================================

Rites enjoy an important role in Islam. Their injunctions represent an
important part of jurisprudence and worshipping conduct which formulates
a noticeable phenomenon in the daily life of the religious person.

The system of rites in Islamic jurisprudence represents one of its
static facets which cannot be affected by the general trend of life or
the circumstances of civil progress in man's life except by a small
portion, contrary to other judicial aspects which are flexible and
dynamic;

the method of their application and utilization is affected by the
circumstances pertaining to civil progress in man's life, such as the
system of deals and contracts.

For example, in the sphere of worship, the man of the age of
electricity and space prays, fasts and performs the pilgrimage just as
his ancestor from the age of stone mill used to pray, fast and perform
the pilgrimage.

It is true, however, that in the civil aspect of getting prepared for a
rite may differ from this and that; for this travels to his pilgrimage
in a plane, while that used to travel within a camel caravan; when this
covers his body - while praying - with clothes manufactured by the
machine, that covers his body with clothes he hand-sewed them. But the
general formula of worship, as well as its method and legislation, is
the same. The necessity of its application has never suffered any
change, nor has its legislating value been affected or shaken up by the
con- tinuous growth of man's control over nature and his means of
living.

This means that Islamic shad \`ah (Jurispru- dence) has not prescribed
prayer, fast, pilgrimage and other Islamic rites temporarily, or as a
juridical formula limited to conditions it lived in its early epochs of
history; rather, it enjoined these rites on man while he uses the atomic
energy to mobilize the engine just as it has enjoined them on man while
ploughing his field with a hand plough.

Thus do we derive the conclusion that the system of rites treats a
permanent need in the life of man, with whom it is created, remaining
the same in his own entity in spite of the continu- ous progress in his
life-style. This is so because the application of a fixed prescription
requires a fixed need. Hence, this question comes up:

Is really there a fixed need in the life of man ever since
jurisprudence started its cultivating role, remaining as such until
today, so that we may interpret - in the light of its stability - the
stability of the formulas whereby jurisprudence has treated and
satisfied this same need, so that in the end we can explain the
stability of worship in its positive role in man's life?!

It may seem, at the first look, that to suggest such a fixed need of
this sort is not acceptable, that it does not coincide with the reality
of man's life when we compare today's man with distant tomorrow's, for
we certainly find man continuously getting further - in the method,
nature of problems and factors of progress of his life - from the
circumstances of the tribal society wherein appeared the conclud- ing
jurisprudence, his pagan problems, worries and limited asnir' ations.

Such continuous dist- ance forces a basic change in all of his needs,
worries and requirements, and in the end in the method of treating and
organizing these needs. Therefore, how can rites - in their own par-
ticular juristic system - perform a real role on this field which is
contemporary to man's life- span, in spite of the vast progress in means
and methods of living? If rites such as prayers, ablution, ceremonial
washing and fasting had been useful during some stage in the life of the
Bedouin man, taking part in cultivating his behaviour, his practical
commitment to clean his body and keep it from excessive eating and
drinking, . . . well, these same goals are achieved by modern man
through the very nature of his civilized life and the norm of social
living. So, these rites are no more a necessary need as they used to be
once upon a time, nor have they retained a role in building man's
civilization or solving his sophisticated problems . . . !

But this theory is wrong, for the social progress in means and tools,
in the plough changing in man's hand to a steam or electrical machine;
rather, all this imposes a change in the relationship between man and
nature and in any material form it takes ... Anything repre- senting the
relationship between man and nature such as agriculture which represents
the relation- ship between the land farmer, progresses ma-
terialistically in form and function accordingly. As for rites, these
really do not form a relationship between man and nature so that they
might be affected\` by such a progress.

They form, instead, a relationship between man and his Lord. Such a
relationship possesses a spiritual role controlling the relationship
bet- ween man and his brother man. In both cases, however, we find that
humanity, historically, lives a certain number of fixed needs faced
equally by the man of the age of oil as well as that of the age of
electricity. The system of rites in Islam is the fixed solution for the
fixed needs of this sort, and for problems whose nature is not
sequential: instead, they are problems which face man during his
individual, social and cultural build-up. Such solution, call- ed
"rites", is still alive in its objectives until today, becoming an
essential condition for man to overcome his problems and succeed in
pract- ising his civilized vocations.

In order to clearly know all this, we have to point out some fixed
lines of needs and problems in man's life, and the role rites play in
satisfying such needs and overcoming such problems.

These lines are as follows:-

1) The need to be linked to the Absolute;
2) The need for subjectivity in purpose and self-denial;
3) The need for inner feeling of respon- sibility to guarantee
execution.

These are the details of such outlines:

**1. THE NEED TO BE LINKED TO THE ABSOLUTE**

The system of rites is a way to organize the practical aspect of the
relationship between man and his Lord; therefore, it cannot separate his
evaluation from that of this very relationship and of its role in man's
life! From here, both of these questions are inter-related:-

First: What is the value achieved by the relationship between man and
his Lord for this man in his civilized march? And is it a fixed value
treating a fixed need in this march, or is it a sequential one linked to
timely needs or limited problems, losing its significance at the end of
the stage limiting such needs and prob- lems?

Second: What is the role practised by rites as regarding that
relationship and the extent of its significance as a practical
dedication to the relation between man and God? What follows is a
summary of the necessary explanation concerning both questions:-


