The Link Between the Absolute Is a Two-edged Problem
====================================================

The observer, scrutinizing the different acts of the stage-story of man
in history, may find out that the problems 'are different and the
worries diversified in their given daily formulas.

But if we went beyond these formulas, infiltrat- ing into the depth and
essence of the problem, we would find, through many of such different
daily formulas, one mainly essential and fixed problem with two edges or
contrasting poles wherefrom mankind suffers during his civilized
advancement along history.

It is from one angle expressing this problem: the problem of loss and
non-entity, thus expressing the negative side of the problem. And from
another angle, it expresses the problem of extreme in entity and
belonging by c:olinecting the relative facts to which man belongs to an
Absolute; thus express- i ng the positive side of the same problem. The
Concluding Jurisprudence (of Islam) has given the name "atheism' to the
first problem, which it expresses very obviously, and the name
"idolatory" and shirk (believing in one or many partners with God), as
also an obvious expres- sion of it. The continuous struggle of Islam
against atheism and shirk is, in its civilized reality, a struggle
against both problems in their historical dimensions.

Both problems meet into one essential point, and that is: deterring
man's movement to advance from a continuously good imaginative
creativity, for the problem of loss means to man that he is a being in
continuous loss, not belong- ing to an Absolute, to Whom he can support
himself in his hard march of a long range, deriving from His Absolutism
and Encompass- ment help, sustenance and clear vision of the goal,
joining through that Absolute his own movement to the universe, to the
whole exist- ence, to eternity and perpetuity,

defining his own relationship to Him and his position in the inclusive
cosmic framework, for the movement at loss without the aid of an
Absolute is but a random movement like that of a feather in the wind,
the phenomena around it affect it without being able to affect them.
There is no accom- plishment or productivity in the great march of man
along history without a connection to and promulgation with an Absolute
in an objective march.

But this same connection, on the other hand, directs the other side of
the problem, that of extreme entity, by changing the "rela tive" to
"absolute", a problem which faces man continuously. For man weaves his
loyalty to a case so that such loyalty provides him with the ability to
move and continue marching.

But such loyalty freezes gradually and gets stripped off its relative
circumstances within which he was accurate, and the human mind will
derive out of it an "absolute" without an end, without a limit to
responding to its demands. In religious terminology, such an "absolute"
eventually changes to a god worship- ped instead of a need that requires
fulfillment.

When the "relative" changes to an "absolute," to a "god" of this sort,
it becomes a factor in encircling man's movement, freezing its capa-
cities to develop and create, paralysing man from performing his
naturally open role in the march:

Associate not with Allah any other god, lest you sit despised,
neglected. (Qur'an, 17:22)

This is a true fact applicable to all "gods" mankind made along
history, albeit if they were made during the idolatory stage of worship
or its succeeding stage. From the stage of tribe to that of science, we
find a series of gods which deterred mankind who worshipped them, treat-
ing them as an "absolute," from making any accurate progress . . .

Indeed, from the tribe to which man sub- mitted his alliance,
considering it as an actual need dictated by his particular living
circum- stances, he went to the extreme, changing it to an "absolute,"
without being able to see any- thing except through them. Hence, they
became an obstacle in his way to progress.

To science, to which modern man deserv- edly granted alliance, for it
paved for him the way to control nature . . ., but he sometimes
exaggerated such an alliance, turning it to an absolute alliance,
trespassing his limits while being infatuated by it. Thus, man derived
out of science, with which he was infatuated, an "absolute" to worship,
offering it the rites of obeisance and loyalty, refusing for its own
sake all ideals and facts which can never be measured by metres or seen
by microscopes.

Accordingly, every limited and relative thing, if man wove out of it,
at a certain stage, an absolute to which he thus relates himself,
becomes at a stage of intellectual maturity a shackle on the mind that
made it, because of its being limited and relative! Hence, man's march
has to have an Abso- lute . . . !!!

And He has to be a real Absolute capable of absorbing the -human march,
directing it to the right path no matter how much advance ment it
achieves or how far it extends on its lengthy line, wiping out all gods
that encircle the march and deter it . . . ! Thus can the problem be
solved in both of its poles ... !

**Belief in God is the Remedy**

Such a remedy is shown by what Divine Jurisprudence has presented man
on earth: The Belief in God as the Absolute to Whom limited man can tie
his own march without causing him any contradiction along his long
path.

Belief in God, then, treats the negative aspect of the problem,
refusing loss, atheism and non-entity, for it places man in a position
of responsibility: to whose movement and manage- ment is the whole
cosmos related, becoming the vicegerent of God on earth. Vicegerency
implies responsibility, and the latter puts man between two poles: one
Deputy before Whom man bears responsibility, and a reward he receives
accord- ing to his conduct, between God and resurrec- tion, infinitude
and eternity, while he moves within such a sphere a responsible and
purpose- ful movement.

Belief in God treats the positive aspect of the problem - that of the
extreme in entity, forcing restrictions on man and curbing his

swift march - according to this manner:

First: This aspect of the problem is created by changing the limited
and relative to an "absolute" through intellectual exertion and by
stripping the relative off its circumstances and limitations. As for the
Absolute provided by the belief in God, this has never been the
fabrication of a stage of the human intellect, so that it may become,
during the new stage of intellectual maturity, limited to the mind that
made it . . . !

Nor has it ever been the off- spring of a limited need of an individual
or a group, so that its becoming absolute may place it as a weapon in
the hand of the individual or group in order to guarantee its illegal
inter- ests . . . ! For God, the Praised, the High, is an Absolute
without limits, one whose fixed Attributes absorb all the supreme ideals
of man, His vicegerent on earth, of comprehension and knowledge, ability
and strength, justice and wealth. This means that the path leading to
Him is without a limit; hence, moving towards Him requires the
continuity and relative movement and a relative acceleration of the
limited (man) towards the Absolute (God) without a stop:

O' thou man! Verily thou art ever toiling on towards thy Lord -
painfully toiling, - but thou shalt meet Him! (Qur'an, 84:6) He grants
this movement His own supreme ideals derived from comprehension,
knowledge, ability and justice, as well as other qualities of that
Absolute, towards Whom the march is directed . . . ! The march towards
the Absolute is all knowledge, all potential, all justice and all
wealth. In other words, the human march is a continuously successive
struggle against all sorts of ignorance, incapacity, oppression and pov-
erty.

As long as these are the very goals of the march related to this
Absolute, they are, then, not merely a dedication to God, but also a
continuous struggle for the sake of man, for his dignity, for achieving
such supreme ideals for him And if any strive (with might and main),
they do so for their own souls: for Allah is free of all needs from all
creation. (Qur'an, 29:6) . . . He, then, that receives guidance bene-
fits his own soul: but he that strays injures his own soul ... (Qur'an,
39:41)

Contrariwise, whimsical absolutes and false gods cannot absorb the
march with all its aspir- ations, for these manufactured absolutes are
the children of an incapable man's brain, or the need of the poor man,
or the oppression of the oppressor; therefore, they jointly are linked
to ignorance, incapacity and oppression; they can never bless man's
continuous struggle against them... !

Second: Being linked to God Almighty as the Absolute Who absorbs all of
the aspirations of the human march means at the same time rejecting all
of those whimsical absolutes which used to cause excessive entity and
waging a continuous war and endless struggle against all sorts of
idolatory and artificial worship. Thus, man will be emancipated from the
mirage of these false absolutes which stood as an obstacle in his way
towards God, falsifying his goal and encircling his march:

But the Unbelievers, their deeds are like a mirage in sandy deserts,
which the man parched with thirst mistakes for water; until when he
comes up to it, he finds it to be nothing: but he finds Allah (ever)
with him ... (Qur'an, 24:39)

. . . Are many lords differing among them- selves better, or Allah the
One, Supreme and Irresistible? If not Him, ye worship nothing but names
which ye have named, ye and your fathers, for which Allah hath sent down
no authority: . . . (Qur'an, 12:39-40)

. . . Such is Allah your Lord: to Him be- longs all Dominion. And those
whom ye invoke besides Him have not the least power. (Qur'an, 35:13)

If we consider the main slogan heaven put forward in this respect:
"There is no god but Allah," we will find out that it joined in it the
linking of the human march to the True Absolute with the rejection of
every artificial absolute . . .

The history of the march, in its living actuality, came across ages to
emphasize the organic link between this rejection and that strong and
aware tie to God Almighty. For as far as he goes away from the True God,
man sinks in the labyrinth of different gods and lords. Both rejection
and positive link to "There is no god but Allah" are but two faces for
one fact, the fact which is indispensable to the human march along its
lengthy path. It is but the Truth which is worthy of saving the march
from loss, helping it explode all its creative energies, emancipating it
from each and every false and obstructing "absolute" . . .


