3. the Inner Feeling of Responsibilities
========================================

If we observe humanity in any of its historical periods, we will find
it following a particular system of its life, a specific manner in
distributing rights and responsibilities among people, and that
according to the amount it acquires of securities for its members to
cling to this system and to its implementation, it will be closer to
stability and the achievement of the general goals expected from that
system.

This fact is equally true concerning the future, as well as the past,
for it is an established fact of man's civilized march along its lengthy
range.

Among the securities is that which is objective, such as penalties
enforced by the group to punish the individual who transgresses beyond
his limits. And among them is that which is inner, i.e., man's inner
feeling of responsibility towards his social obligations, towards
whatever obligations the group demands of him, determining,
spontaneously, his own rights.

In order to be an actual fact in man's life, the inner feeling of
responsibility needs the belief in a supervisor from whose knowledge not
an atom's weight in earth or sky escapes, and to a practical application
through which such a feeling grows, and according to which the feeling
of such an inclusive supervision lays roots.

The supervision, for whose knowledge not even an atom's weight escapes,
is created in man's life as a result of his link with the True Absolute,
the All-knowing, the Omnipotent, the One Whose knowledge encompasses
everything, for this link with His self saves man the need for such a
supervision, thus enabling the creation of an inner feeling of
responsibility.

The practical application, through which this inner feeling of
responsibility grows, ma- terializes through practising rites. For
worship is the duty imposed by the Unseen, and by this we mean that
checking it externally is imposs- ible.

Any external measures to enforce it can never be successful, for it
stands through the self's own purpose and the spiritual attachment to
work for God; this is a matter which cannot be included in the
calculation of a subjective supervision from the outside, nor can any
legal measure guarantee that either. Rather, the only capable
supervision in this respect is the one resulting from the attachment to
the Absolute, the Unseen, the One from Whose knowledge nothing escapes .
. .

The only possible assurity on this level is the inner feeling of
responsi- bility. This means that the person who prac- tices worship is
performing a duty - which differs from any other social obligation or
pro- ject - when he borrows and pays back, or when he contracts and
adheres to the conditions, when he borrows money from others and returns
it to the debtor . . . , he performs a duty which lies within the range
of social super- vision's monitoring; hence, his estimation, in another
manner, of the predictment of social reaction - in case he backs up -
dictates to the same person the decision to do it.

The ritual duty, towards the Unknown, is one whose inner implication
none knows except God, the Praised One, the Omnipotent, for it is the
result of the inner feeling of responsibility. Through religious
practices, such an inner feel- ing grows, and man gets used to behave
accord- ing to it. Through the medium of such feeling can we find the
good citizen. It is not sufficient for good citizenship that a person is
reluctant to perform the legal rights of others for fear of the social
reaction towards such reluctance.

Rather, good citizenship is achieved by man who does not relax his own
inner feeling of responsibility. Had the feeling of fear of social
reaction towards reluctance been the basis of good citizenship in a good
society, then the escape from such obligations is quite possible in many
cases when, say, it is possible for the individual to hide his
reluctance, or give a false interpretation of it, or protect himself
from the social reaction in this manner or that. Then, there is no
guarantee in all of these cases except the inner feeling of
responsibility.

We notice that it is often recommended to perform optional rites
secretly, rather than publicly. There even are rites which are secretive
by nature such as fasting, for it is an inner curb which cannot be
checked externally.

There are rites for which a secretive environment is chosen, avoiding
the public stage, such as the nightly (nafl) optional prayers whose
performance re- quires after mid-night time. All this is for the sake of
deepening the aspect of worshipping the Unseen, linking it more and more
to the inner feeling of responsibility. Thus, this feeling gets deepened
through the practice of rites, and man gets used to behave on its basis,
form- ing a strong guarantee for the good individual's discharge of his
duties and obligations.


