General Outlooks of Rites
=========================

If we cast a general look at the rites we have observed in this book,
comparing them with each other, we can then derive some general outlooks
of these rites; here are some of these general outlooks:-

**The Unseen in Explaining Rites**

We came to know previously the important role worship performs totally
in man's life and that it expresses a fixed need in his civilized
march.

From another aspect: if we scrutinize and analyse the particulars which
distinguish each worship from the other, we often are able, in the light
of advanced science, to be acquainted with the pieces of wisdom and
secrets Islamic jurisprudence expresses in this regard and mod- ern
science has been able to discover.

This wonderful agreement between the out- comes of modern science and
many particulars of Islamic jurisprudence, and whatever rules and
regulations it decided, expresses a dazzling support for the position of
this jurisprudence, deeply emphasizing its being God-inspired.

In spite of all this, however, we quite often face unseen points in
worship, i.e., a group of details whose secret cannot be comprehended by
the person practising worship, nor can he interpret them
materialistically; for must sun- set prayer be three prostrations
(rak\`ah) while the noon-time prayer more than that?! And why should
each rak'ah include bowing down once instead of twice, two prostrations
instead of one?! . . . beside other questions of this sort which can be
put forth.

And we call such an aspect of worship, which cannot be interpreted,
"unseen." We find this aspect, in this manner or that, in most rites
brought forth by the Islamic jurisprudence.

From here, we can consider obscurity in the meaning we have already
mentioned as a general phenomenon in rites one of their common
characteristics.

This obscurity is linked to the rites and to their imposed role
jointly, for the role of rites, as we have already come to know
previously, is to emphasize the attachment to the Absolute and deepen
that practically. The bigger the element of submission and yielding in a
worship is, the stronger its effect in deepening the link between the
worshipper and his Lord. If the deed practised by the worshipper is
understood in all its dimensions, clear in its wisdom and benefit in all
details, the element of submission and yielding gets minimized, and it
will be dominated by motifs of interest and benefit, no more a worship
of God as much as it is a deed of benefit practised by the worshipper so
that he might derive advantage out of it, bene- fiting of its results.

Just as the spirit of obedience and attach- ment in the soldier grows,
getting deepened through military training, by giving him orders and
requiring him to perform them with obedi- ence and without discussion,
so does the feeling of the worshipping person grow and get deep- ened in
its attachment to his Lord through requiring him to practice these rites
in their unseen aspects with submission and yielding.

For submission and yielding require the assump- tion of the existence
of an unseen aspect and the attempt to question this unseen aspect of
worship. Demanding its interpretation and limi- tation of interest means
stripping worship off i ts reality - as a practical expression of sub-
mission and obedience - and measuring it by measurements of benefit and
interest like any other deed.

We notice that this obscurity is almost ineffective in rites
representing a great general interest, one that conflicts with the
personal interest of the worshipper, as is the case with jihad that
represents a great general interest which contrasts the desire of the
person per- forming it to preserve his life and blood, and also in the
case of zakat which represents a great general interest which contrasts
the strong desire of the person paying it to preserve his wealth and
property.

The issue of jihad is very well understood by the person performing it,
and the issue of zakat is generally understood by the person who pays
it, neither jihad nor zakat thus loses any element of submission and
obedience (to God), for the difficulty of sacrificing life and property
is what makes man's acceptance of a worship - for which he sacri- fices
both life and property - is indeed a great deal of submission and
obedience.

Add to this the fact that jihad and zakat, and their likes of rites,
are not meant to be merely aspects of upbringing just the individual,
but also the achievement of social benefits secured thereby.
Accordingly, we observe that obscurity is high- lighted more and more in
rites dominated by the educating aspect of the individual, such as
prayer and fasting.

Thus do we derive the conclusion that the unseen in worship is strongly
linked to its educating role in attaching the individual to his Lord,
deepening his relationship with his Lord ...

**Inclusion in Worship**

When we observe the different Islamic rites, we find in them an element
of inclusion of all different aspects of life. Rites have never been
limited to specific norms of rituals, nor have they been restricted to
only needs which embody the manner of glorifying God, the Praised, the
High, like bowing, prostrating; pray- i ng and invoking; rather, they
have been extend- ed to include all sectors of human activity.

jihad, for example, is a rite. It is a social activ- ity. zakat is a
rite. It, too, is a social activity, a financial one. Fasting is a rite.
It is a nutritious system. Both ablution and ghusl (ceremonial bath) are
norms of worship. They are two ways of cleaning the body. This inclusion
of worship expresses a general trend of Islamic upbringing aiming at
linking man, in all his deeds and activities, with Almighty God,
converting each useful deed to worship, no matter what field or type! In
order to find a fixed basis for this trend, fixed rites were distributed
to the differ- ent fields of human activity,

preparing man to train himself on pouring the spirit of worship over
all his good activities, and the spirit of the mosque over all places of
his works: in the field, the factory, the ship or the office, as long as
his deed is a good one, for the sake of God, the Glorified, the High.

In this respect, Islamic jurisprudence differs from two other religious
trends, one: a trend to separate worship from life; and another: a trend
to limit life to a narrow frame of worship as do monks and mystics.

As for the first trend, it separates worship from life, leaving worship
to be conducted at places made especially for it, requiring man to be
present in these places in order to pay God His dues and worship Him, so
much so that when he gets out of them to different fields of life, he
says farewell to worship, giving himself up to the affairs of his life
until he goes back again to those holy places! This duality of worship
and different activities of life paralyse worship and obstruct its
constructive upbring- ing role to develop man's motifs and make the
objective, enabling him to go beyond his ego and narrow personal
interests in various scopes of his deeds.

God, the Glorified and Praised, never insisted on being worshipped for
the sake of His own Person, since He is independent of His worshippers,
so that He would be sat- isfied with a worship of this sort, nor did He
ever put Himself as the goal and objective of the human march, so that
man may bow his head down to Him within the scope of his worship, and
that is it . . . ! Rather, He meant such worship to build the good
person who is capable of going beyond his ego, participating in a bigger
role in the march. The exemplary achievement of this cannot be reached
except when the spirit of worship gradually extends to other activities
of life, for its extension - as we have already seen - means an
extension of objectivity of purpose and the inner feeling of responsible
behaviour, and the ability to go beyond the self to be in harmony with
man within his inclusive cosmic frame, with eternity, immortality that
both encompass him ... !

From here came. Islamic jurisprudence to distribute the rites on the
different fields of life, urging the practice of ritual rites in each
good deed, explaining to man that the difference between the mosque,
which is God's house, and man's home is not in the quality of building
or slogan; rather, the mosque has deserved to be God's house because it
is the yard whereupon man practises a deed that goes beyond his ego and
wherefrom he aims at a bigger goal than that dictated by the logic of
limited material- istic interests, and that this yard ought to extend to
include all life's stages. Each yard, whereupon man does a deed that
goes beyond his self, aiming thereby to achieve the pleasure of God and
all people, does, indeed, carry the mosque's spirit.

As for the second trend, which restricts life in a narrow frame of
worship, it tried to confine man to the mosque instead of extending the
meaning of the mosque to include all the yard which witnesses a good
deed of man ... !

This trend believes that man lives an inner conflict between his soul
and body, and that he cannot accomplish one of these two except at the
cost of the other. Therefore, in order he may spiritually grow and be
elevated, he has to deprive his body from the good things, shrinking his
presence on life's stage, battling continuously against his desires and
aspirations in different fields of life, until he finally achieves
victory over all of them through long abstention and deprivation and the
practice of certain rituals.

Islamic jurisprudence rejects this trend, too, because it wants rites
for the sake of life. Life cannot be confiscated for the sake of rites.
At the same time, it tries hard to ensure that a good man pours the
spirit of worship over all of his behaviour and activity. This must not
be taken to imply that he has to stop his different activities in life
and confine himself between the altar's walls; rather, it means that he
converts all his activities to rituals ... !

The mosque is but a base wherefrom a good man sets to conduct his daily
behaviour, but it is not limited to that behaviour only! The Holy
Prophet has said to Abu Dharr al-Ghifari: "If you are able to eat and
drink for the sake of none save Allah.... do it!"

Thus, worship serves life. Its upbringing and religious success is
determined by its exten- sion, in meaning and spirit, to all fields of
life.


