Worship and Senses
==================

Man's perception is not merely by his senses, nor is it merely an
intellectual and non- material reasoning either! It is a mixture of
reasoning plus material and non-material feeling.

When worship is required to perform its func- tion in a way with which
man interacts perfect- ly, and whereby it harmonizes with his charac-
ter, worship is composed of a mind and senses; worship then must contain
a sensitive aspect and a non-material intellect, so that worship will be
compatible with the worshipper's person- ality, and the worshipper,
while performing his worship, lives his attachment to the Absolute with
all his existence.

From here, the intention, as well as psy- cholological contention of
worship, always rep- resents its intellectual and non-material aspect,
for it links the worshipper to the True Absolute, the Praised, the High,
and there are other aspects of worship representing its material aspect.
The qiblah, towards whose direction each worshipper must direct his face
while praying;

and al-Baytu'l-haram, visited by both those who perform the pilgrimage
and those who do the umrah, around which they both perform tawaf; and
the as-safa and al-marwah, between which he runs; and Jamratu'l- aqabah,
at which he casts stones;

and the Mosque, which is a place especially made for adoration wherein
the wor- shipper practises his worship . . . all these are things
related to the senses and tied to worship: there is no prayer without a
qiblah, nor tawaf without al-Baytu'l-haram, . . . and so on, for the
sake of satisfying the part related to the senses in the worshipper and
giving it its right and share of worship!

This is the midway direction in organizing worship and coining it
according to man's in- stincts as well as his particular intellectual
and sensual make-up.

Two other directions face him: one of them goes to the extreme in
bringing man to his senses, if the expression is accurate at all,
treating him as though he had been a non- material intellect, opposing
all sensual expres- sions of his in worship's sphere, for as long as the
True Absolute, the Praised One, has no li mited place or time, nor can
He be represent- ed by a statute; then His worship has to stand on such
a premise, and in the manner which enables the comparative thinking of
man to address the Absolute Truth.

Such a trend of thinking is not approved by Islamic jurisprudence, for
in spite of its concern about the intellectual aspects brought forth by
the hadith: "An hour's contemplation is better than a year's adoration,"
it also believes that pious worship, no matter how deep, cannot totally
fill man's self or occupy his leisure, nor can it attach him to the
Absolute Truth in all his existence, for man has never been purely an
intellect ... !

From this realistic and objective starting- point, rites in Islam have
been based on both intellectual and sensous bases. The person per
forming his prayers is practising by his intention an intellectual
adoration, denying his Lord any limits, measurements, or the like.

For when he starts his prayer with "Allahu akbar (God is Great)", while
taking at the same time the holy ka'bah as a divine slogan towards which
he directs his feelings and movements, so that he lives worship by both
intellect and feeling, logic and emotion, non-materialistically as well
as intellectually.

The other trend goes to the extreme in the part related to the senses,
changing the slogan to an idenity and the hint to reality, causing the
worship of the symbol to substitute what the symbol really stands for,
and the direction 70 towards the hint instead of the reality it points
to; thus, the worshipping person sinks, in this manner or that, in shirk
and paganism.

Such a trend totally annihilates the spirit of worship and it stops its
function as a tool linking man and his civilized march to the True
Absolute, converting it to a tool for linking him to false absolutes, to
symbols which change - through false intellectual stripping of the mat-
ter - to an absolute. Thus, false worship becomes a veil between man and
his Lord, instead of a link between both of them ... !

Islam has rejected such a trend because Islam convicted paganism in all
its norms, smash- ing its idols and putting an end to all false gods,
refusing to take any limited thing as a symbol for the True Absolute,
God, the Glorified, or as a personification of Him. But it deeply
distinguish- ed between the meaning of the idol which it crushed and
that of the qiblah it brought, which meaning conveying nothing more than
a particu- lar geographical spot has been divinely favoured by linking
it to prayer for the sake of satisfying the worshipper's aspect related
to the senses.

Paganism is really nothing but a deviated at- tempt to satisfy such an
aspect, and Islamic jurisprudence has been able to correct it, provid-
ing a straight path in harmonizing between the worship of God, as being
dealing with the Absolute Who has neither limit nor person- ification,
and the need of man who is composed of feeling and intellect to worship
God by both of his feeling and intellect ... !


