The Social Aspect of Worship
============================

Essentially, worship represents the relation- ship between man and his
Lord. It provides this relationship with elements of survival and stabil
ity. But this has been formulated in the Islamic j urisprudence in a way
which often made it an instrument for the relationship between man and
his brother man, and this is what we call the social aspect of
worship.

Some rituals force, by their nature, segrega- tion and the
establishment of social relations among those who practise that ritual.
For example, jihad requires those fighting worship- pers of God to
establish among themselves such relations as would naturally happen
among the corps of a fighting army.

There are other rituals which do not necessarily enforce congregating,
but in spite of this, they are linked in this way or the other to
congregation, in order to bring forth a mix- ture between man's relation
with his Lord and his own relation with his brethren men.

Among prayers' rituals is the congrega- tion wherein the individual's
prayer becomes a group's worship, strengthening the ties among the
group, deepening the spiritual links among them through their unity in
practising the rituals.

The tenet of pilgrimage has definite timings and places, and each
participant in it has to practise it within those timings and places;
hence, such participation evolves as a great social activity!

Even the tenet of fasting, which by nature is a purely individual act,
is tied to the fitr Feast, as the social facet of this tenet, uniting
its participants in their ecstasy of vanquishing their desires and
inclinations!

While siding by man's relation with his Lord, the tenet of zakat
creates spontaneously a relation between him and his patron to whom he
pays it, or to the poor man, or to the charitable project channelled
directly by zakat.

So do we observe that the social relation is found in this way or the
other side by side with the relation between the worshipper and his Lord
in performing one ritualistic practice of a social role in man's life,
and it cannot be considered successful except when it becomes a dynamic
force properly directing whatever social relations it faces.

The social aspect of worship reaches its zenith through whatever
slogans worship puts forth on the social stage as spiritual symbol to
the nation's unity, feeling of genuinity and distinction. The qiblah or
haram House, is but a slogan put forth by Islamic jurisprudence through
its legislation of worship and prayers.

Such a slogan has not been taken as merely a religious dimension, but
it also has its social dimension as the symbol of this nation's unity
and genuinity. Therefore, when this jurispru- dence legislated for them
their new qiblah, Muslims faced a great deal of harassment from the
mongers, as the Holy Qur'an states, for those mongers realized the
social implication of this jurisprudence, and that it was a phenom- enon
which endowed the nation its personality, making it an even nation:

Thus have We made of you an ummah justly balanced, that ye might be
witnesses over the nations, and the Apostle a witness over yourselves;
and We appointed the qiblah to which thou wast used, only to test those
who followed the Apostle from those who would turn on their heels (from
the Faith). Indeed it was (a change) mo- mentous, except to those guided
by Allah. And never would Allah make your faith of no effect. Allah is
to all people most surely full of kindness, most Merciful.

We see the turning of thy face (for guid- ance) to the heavens: now
shall We turn thee to a qiblah that shall please thee. Turn then thy
face in the direction of the sacred Mosque: wherever ye are, turn your
faces in that direction . . . (Qur'an, 2:143- 144) These are just few
remarks on rites in Islamic jurisprudence.

In addition to all this, there are other general important lines
representing the role of rites in man's life and their social character
i stics as we have discussed above, the roles and detailed particulars
of each rite. For each rite brought forth by Islamic jurisprudence there
are effects, characteristics and hues of output for the worshipper, and
for man's civilized march as a whole. There is no room here to deal with
that in detail. Therefore, we leave the roles, detailed particulars and
the exposition of axioms and benefits implied in the instructions of the
legislator concerning each of these Islamic rites to another level of
discourse. We have already given some of our students permission to
cover that.

From God do we derive assistance, and Him do we implore not to deprive
us of the honour of worshipping Him, praying Him to reckon us and His
pleased servants, to forgive us through His Mercy and Bounty; verily,
His Mercy has encompassed all things:

Why should I not worship Him Who has created me, and to Him do ye
return?! (Qur'an, 36:22) This book has been finished on Jamadi al-awwal
2, 1396 Hijri.

All praise is due to Allah, Lord of the worlds; prayers and salutations
be upon Muhammad and all those purely-guided ones among his progeny.


