Sadra’s Life
============

Mulla Sadra was born in Shiraz in 979-980/1571-1572 into a wealthy and
influential family, his father reportedly having been the governor of
the province of Fars. Following the tradition of classical madrasah
education, Sadra was trained first in what is called the transmitted
sciences (*al-'ulum* *al-naqliyyah* ), which included such disciplines
as grammar (*nahw* ), Qur'anic exegesis (*tafsi* r), jurisprudence
(*fiqh* ), and the science of the sayings of the Prophet and Shiite
Imams (*'ilm al-hadith* ). Sadra's firm training in the transmitted
sciences appears to have a lasting impact on his philosophical work as
he was to write an incomplete commentary on the Quran. Considering that
the majority of Muslim philosophers prior to Sadra were concerned with
transmitted sciences only in a secondary way and that very rarely did
they compose works in this field, Sadra stands out as a conspicuous
exception, a figure who combines both the transmitted-religious and
intellectual-philosophical sciences.

Having completed his formal education in Shiraz, Sadra left his hometown
for Isfahan that had then become a major center of high culture in arts
and sciences primarily thanks to the visionary leadership of Shah Abbas
II (1588-1629), known with the honorific title of the ‘Great’.[^4] The
vivid intellectual environment of Isfahan was to offer Sadra a unique
opportunity to join the line of such Shi’ite philosophers as Mir Damad,
Baha’ al-Din ‘Amili, and Mir Abu’l-Qasim Findiriski on the one hand, and
to encounter the fierce opposition of many Shi’ite jurists to Sufism and
other gnostic tendencies, on the other. When Sadra began his
philosophical career in Isfahan, the cultural and religious framework of
the Safavid Iran had been to a large extent consolidated, and the
process of establishing Twelve Imam Shi’ism as the official religious
code of Iran, begun in 1501 by Shah Isma’il, the founder of the Safavid
dynasty, had been completed[^5] . The origins of the conflict between
the Shi’ite religious authorities and the mystically oriented
philosophers go back to the beginning of the Safavid dynasty when Shah
Isma’il (1501-1524) and his son Shah Tahmasp (1524-1576) engaged in
forcefully promoting Twelve Imam Shi’ism against Sunnism and Sufism[^6]
. By the end of the 16th and the middle of the 17th centuries, the Sunni
character of the greater Khorasan, the heartland of Persia, was already
erased, and such Sufi orders as the Naqshbandiyyah, Khalwatiyyah,
Nurbakhshiyyah, Ni’matullahiyyah, and the Qalandariyyah/Malamatiyyah
were either completely subdued or driven out of the Safavid Empire.[^7]
One of the direct consequences of this policy was the migration of a
number of notable Sufi masters to India and other places, and the
drastic decline of Persian Sufi poetry in the heartland of Iran.[^8]

This process was further invigorated by the revival of Akhbarism by
Mulla Muhammad Amin Astarabadi (d. 1627). The akhbari traditionalism,
grounded in a strong pietistic anti-intellectualism, was particularly
opposed to mystical and philosophical interpretations of the Qur’an and
the sayings of the Imams. The followers of this school relied solely on
the literal authority of the sayings of the Imams, bolstering the
socio-religious status of rulers and scholars who claimed family descent
from the Shi’ite Imams. The proponents of the akhbari movement, who had
gained the unmistakable favor of the Safavid court until the reign of
Shah Safi (1629-1642) and Shah Abbas II (1642-1666), came to be called
the ‘people of the exterior’ (*ahl-i zahir* ) and the ‘scholars of the
skin or surface’ (*‘ulama-yi qishr* ) by their opponents. The mounting
tension between the two groups is vividly recorded in contemporary
chronicles as well as in Sadra’s fierce and relentless attacks against
the exoterist*‘ulama’* as we see especially in his*Sih asl* . The
menacing power of the exoterist Shi’ite*‘ulama’* , however, do not
appear to have deterred Mulla Sadra and his mentor Mir Damad from
pursuing a serious career in either speculative metaphysics or
theoretical mysticism.

It was against this background that Sadra gave himself completely to the
thorough study of intellectual sciences in Isfahan. He studied with the
most celebrated teachers of the time, among them especially Sayyid Baqir
Muhammad Astarabadi, known as Mir Damad (d. 1040/1631) and Baha’ al-Din
Muhammad al-Amili known more popularly as Shaykh-i Baha’i (d.
1031/1622). Some sources add Mir Abu'l-Qasim Findiriski (d. circa
1050/1640-1) to the list of the masters with whom Sadra studied in
Isfahan even though no direct historical connection between the two has
been established in a satisfactory manner. The life spans of the two, if
we can trust Findiriski’s date of death, which is the same as that of
Sadra, suggest that the two must have been colleagues rather than
student or mentor for one another. Furthermore, Sadra does not mention
Findiriski’s name when he speaks of his masters in his autobiography in
the*Asfar* . The fact that the traditional sources associate Sadra with
Findiriski in one way or another is nevertheless interesting for
Findiriski is considered to be a mystic, even a somewhat ‘eccentric’
one, with such habits as mixing with the low caste vagabonds, dressing
up poorly, and having alchemical and mystical powers. Mir Findiriski’s
extant works reveal him as a follower of the Avicennan school. This,
however, is not sufficient to qualify him as a Peripatetic in the
ordinary sense of the term.[^9] Mir Findiriski is also known for his
travels to India where he is reported to have met a number of Hindu
sages and ascetics.[^10] One of the fruits of these travels is his
Persian commentary on the Hindu mystical and philosophical
text*Yoga-Vasishtha* , which is an important text from the point of view
of both comparative philosophy and cultural history during the Safavid
era.

Among Sadra’s teachers, Mir Damad occupies a special place. It is
apparent from his writings as well as personal letters that Sadra had an
intimate relation with Mir Damad in addition to his having studied under
his tutorship. Mir Damad is best known for his*al-Qabasat haqq al-yaqin
fi huduth al-‘alam* (“Firebrands: The Certain Truth Concerning the
Temporal Origination of the World”), which is an attempt to recast some
of the central problems of traditional philosophy from the point of view
of Peripatetic philosophy with some influences from the School of
Illumination. Mir Damad's prominence as a philosopher and teacher is
shown by the honorific title given to him as the 'third teacher'
(*al-mu'allim al-thalith* ) after Aristotle and Farabi..[^11] Sadra
seems to have made his first full-fledged introduction to formal
philosophy under Mir Damad’s generous tutelage. This is evinced by the
fact that he mentions, in his short autobiographical essay at the
beginning of*Asfar* , that he was once an upholder of the fundamental
primacy of quiddity (*asalat al-mahiyyah* ) over being (*wujud* ), a
doctrine which sums up the Illuminationist ontology of Suhrawardi and
Mir Damad and from which Sadra was shortly thereafter to depart once and
for all. Sadra became so successful in mastering the intellectual
sciences under Mir Damad that he eventually outshone his teacher. Today,
Mir Damad is virtually unknown in the West and outside of Persia.[^12]
Even though the difficult language and structure of Mir Damad's works is
admitted by both classical and modern authors, his destiny of remaining
a background figure in the annals of Islamic philosophy is without doubt
related to the overpowering fame and dominance of his most celebrated
student.

In addition to the study of intellectual sciences, Sadra continued his
education of the transmitted sciences in Isfahan under Baha' al-Din
al-Amili, one of the most famous jurists and theologians of the Safavid
era.[^13] Al-Amili was not, however, an ordinary scholar of religious
sciences. He was a polyvalent par excellence: he was at once a
philosopher, theologian, jurist, mathematician, architect, Sufi, and
poet. This must have had some effect on Sadra's intellectual upbringing
as he wrote works in nearly all branches of the intellectual and
transmitted sciences. The influence and presence of transmitted sciences
in the Sadraean corpus can be seen at two interrelated levels. The first
level pertains to the works dealing specifically with such traditional
disciplines as Qur’anic commentary and Hadith. Sadra’s thorough
knowledge of these and other related sciences are easily visible in his
writings. His commentaries on certain Qur’anic verses and philosophical
glosses upon the famous Shi’ite book of Hadith collection*Usul al-kafi*
are the two examples that show Sadra’s deep grounding in the transmitted
sciences. The second level concerns the fact that many of Sadra’s ideas,
especially those on cosmology, psychology, and eschatology, are always
presented as a synthesis of purely religious language and philosophical
terminology. Sadra’s writing style easily moves between Greek
philosophical terms, long domesticated by the previous Muslim
philosophers, and a verse from the Qur’an debated by theologians and
jurists over the centuries. Sadra’s unfailing derisive remarks against
the theologians (*mutakallimun* ) seem to derive partly from his
confidence in his traditional education.[^14] In this regard, Sadra’s
style of philosophical writing differs considerably from that of the
Peripatetics and comes rather close to such mystical writers as Sadr
al-Din al-Qunawi, Dawud al-Qaysari, and Mulla Jami, all of whom are the
members of the school of Ibn al-‘Arabi.

In his autobiographical essay, Sadra states that after mastering the
views of the previous philosophers and “whatever he was able to find in
the books of the Greeks”,[^15] he was confronted with the fierce
opposition of some simple-minded scholars of the Shari’ah, i.e.,
the*akhbari* s, whom he compares to the Hanbalite scholars of Hadith,
known in Islamic history for their strict literalism and
anti-intellectualism.[^16] He uses a strong language in describing the
feeble-mindedness of such people, and admonishes them for failing to
understand the grand philosophical system that he calls 'transcendent
wisdom' (*al-hikmat al-muta'aliyah* ). This opposition seems to have
been a major factor in Sadra's decision to retreat from the public life
of both Isfahan and his hometown Shiraz.

Sadra, however, gives his own reasons and explains his retreat on the
basis of his philosophical vocation whose ultimate end cannot be reached
by mere study and learning.[^17] As it is repeated throughout his
autobiographical essay, such spiritual practices as the cleansing of the
soul, finding the inner calm in oneself, and asking God's help in
resolving the difficult problems of metaphysics are a*sine qua non* of
the realization or verification (*tahqiq* ) of what one learns from
written and oral sources. Thus he says that

“I refrained my thoughts from dealing with people and mixing with them,
and abstained from their companionship and friendship. Then the turning
of cycles [i.e., the passing of days] and the obstinacy of the people of
the present time became easier for me. I released myself from their
repudiation and acceptance, and their praise and harm became equal for
me. Then I turned my face to the Cause of all causes, and humbled myself
before the One who makes all difficult matters easy. I stayed in this
state of secrecy, retreat, obscurity, and withdrawal for a long time. I
busied myself with long moments of spiritual exercise as a luminous
work, and my heart burned with the desire of attaining more spiritual
discipline in a very strong way. Then the lights of the angelic world
(*anwar al-malakut* ) began to emanate upon my heart, the secrets of the
world of Dominion (*jabarrut* ) were unfolded, the light of the One
reached it, the Divine subtleties came upon it, and I obtained the
secrets of which I was not aware before. The symbols were unveiled to
me, and this unveiling (*inkishaf* ) was not a result of logical
demonstration (*burhan* ). On the contrary, with a plenitude of direct
witnessing and seeing of the Divine mysteries, I witnessed everything
that I had learned before through logical demonstration.”[^18]

That Sadra’s retreat was in tandem with his philosophical pursuit is
attested by numerous other passages in his writings. In one such
passage, Sadra, after quoting various views on the soul and its
faculties all the way from Aristotle to Ibn Sina, admonishes speculative
philosophy and insists on the necessity of spiritual practice:

“Know that [the meaning of] this subtle point and its likes that belong
to the study of beings cannot be obtained except through esoteric
unveilings (*mukashafat batiniyyah* ) and the witnessing of secrets and
with the help of being. In these matters, it is not sufficient to
memorize the principles of speculative philosophy and essential and
accidental concepts. These unveilings and witnessings cannot be reached
except through spiritual practice and effort in spiritual retreats by
abstaining completely from the companionship of people and cutting
oneself off from the lures and false desires of the world, its delusive
arrogance, and its illusionary security. Most of the words of this
philosopher [i.e., Plotinus, the author of the ‘Uthu lu jiya , thought
to be Aristotle] testify to the prowess of his unveiling, the light of
his inner reality, and the proximity of his station [to the Divine in
the spiritual path].”[^19]

Sadra's physical and spiritual retreat to Kahak, a small village near
Qom, constitutes the second phase of his life, during which time he
continued his studies in solitude and completed the groundwork for the
composition of his major works. After terminating his solitary years in
Kahak and upon the request of Shah Abbas II, Sadra returned to Shiraz to
teach at the Khan*madrasah* built by Allahwirdi Khan. The third phase of
Sadra's life begins here in the Khan*madrasah* , whose building is still
extant in its original form in the city of Shiraz, Iran. It was here
that Sadra taught, composed his major works, and trained his choice
students. As a devout philosopher-sage, he went on pilgrimage on foot to
Mecca seven times, and died in Basra in 1050/1640 on his way back from
his seventh pilgrimage.

Among the students whom Sadra trained, Mulla Muhsin Fayd Kashani (d.
1680) and 'Abd al-Razzaq ibn al-Husayn Lahiji (d. 1662) are particularly
significant. Fayd Kashani is best known for his*al* -*Kalimat
al-maknunah* , an important work of philosophy-cum-theology. Lahiji,
Sadra’s second important student, played an important role in the spread
of his master’s ideas by writing Persian summaries of his works, among
which*Shawariq al-ilham* is to be noted. In addition to their
intellectual lineage, both Kashani and Lahiji married Sadra's daughters,
carrying their master-disciple bond to a personal level. In addition to
these two immediate students, Sadra had a long list of followers after
his death as his ideas continued to influence the Persian and Indian
worlds in the post-Safavid era. Aqa Muhammad Bidabadi (d. 1783), Qadi
Sa’id Qummi, Mulla ‘Ali ibn Jamshid Nuri (d. 1830), Mulla Muhammad
Isma’il Isfahani (d. 1860), Mulla ‘Abdullah Zunuzi, Mulla Muhammad
Ja’far Langarudi, Mulla Isma’il Khaju’i, Mulla Hadi Sabziwari (d.1873),
Mulla ‘Ali Mudarris Zunuzi (d. 1889), Aqa Muhammad Rida Qumsha’i (d.
1888-1889), Mirza Mahdi Ashtiyani, and most recently Muhammad Husayn
Tabataba’i are among the most prominent figures of the school of Mulla
Sadra.

In addition to these philosophers, Sadra also influenced a number of
prominent scholars and philosophers of other schools during and after
the Safavid period. Among these, we can mention Muhammad Baqir Majlisi
(d. 1111/1699-1700), the great Shi’ite theologian and the author of
monumental*Bihar al-anwar* , Mulla Haydar Khwansari (d. 1099/1688), the
author of the*Zubdat al-tasanif* , Mulla Salih Mazandarani (d.
1080/1669), and Shaykh Ahmad Ahsa’i (d. 1241/1826). The most important
figure in this list is Shaykh Ahmad Ahsa’i, the founder of a school
known as Shaykhism. Ahsa’i wrote commentaries on Sadra’s*Kitab
al-Masha’ir* and*al-Hikmat al-‘arshiyyah* but also criticized two
principal ideas of his ontology, namely the primacy of being (*asalat
al-wujud* ) and the idea that a simple being contains in itself all
levels of reality (*basit al-haqiqah kull al-ashya’* ). Ahsa’i’s
connection to Sadra, however, is more interesting for the role it played
in the rise of Babism and, later, Bahaism. Babism, a controversial and
heterodox Shi’ite movement, branched out from Shaykhism when Sayyid ‘Ali
Muhammad of Shiraz, considered to be the founder of Babism, claimed in
1844 that he was the*bab* , i.e., the ‘gate’ through which the hidden
Imam of Shi’ism spoke to his followers. This was a major claim with
tremendous implications for the Shi’ite religious and political life,
and in 1852 Nasir al-Din Shah was forced to take action against the
political activities of the Babis.

In the wake of the persecution of the followers of the Bab, Mirza Husayn
‘Ali Nuri Baha’ullah (d. 1892), an ardent follower of Sayyid ‘Ali
Muhammad al-Bab, established Baha’ism by declaring himself the Bab’s
successor and later claiming to be a prophet and to have received
revelation from heaven. In the history of the rise of both Babism and
Baha’ism, the highly questionable link that some scholars have
established between Mulla Sadra and these movements goes back to the
fact that Sayyid ‘Ali Muhammad Bab, the founder of Babism, was a
follower of Shaykh Ahmad Ahsa’i. Considering this historical link and
Ahmad Ahsa’i’s commentaries on Mulla Sadra’s works, Muhammad Iqbal,[^20]
E. G. Browne[^21] , and Carl Brockelmann[^22] have claimed a
philosophical continuity between Sadra’s ideas and the doctrines of
Babism and Baha’ism. Even though Henry Corbin rejects any direct link
among the three, he argues that “Mulla Sadra’s text have furnished the
Shaykhi school with an occasion to formulate and clarify its proper
positions”.[^23] In light of available evidence, however, it is not
possible to verify any of these claims. No compelling evidence has been
presented as to how Sadra’s ideas might have influenced or contributed
to the foundation of the Shaykhi school. Furthermore, there is no direct
reference to Sadra, his works or his school either in the current
literature of Babism or Baha’ism.


