Sadra’s Works
=============

Mulla Sadra was a prolific writer and his extant corpus ranges from the
monumental Asfar to treatises of a few pages. With the exception of his
Sih asl and diwan of poetry in Persian, he wrote all of his works in
Arabic. His style stands out as one of the most lucid and systematic
forms of philosophical writing in Arabic. As a general trait of his
philosophy, Sadra weaves together the strictly logical discourse of the
Peripatetic philosophers with the ecstatic language of the mystics. Very
often we see Sadra bursting into various aphorisms, exhortations, and
ecstatic exclamations, comparable only to the language of such figures
as Ghazali and Ibn al-‘Arabi, after discussing a particular
philosophical or cosmological problem in a rigorously analytical manner.
In cases where prose seems to fall short of conveying Sadra’s intended
meaning, he does not hesitate to quote poetry both in Arabic and
Persian.

Sadra’s corpus spans the entire spectrum of traditional philosophy.
Metaphysics, cosmology, ontology, epistemology, axiology, eschatology,
psychology, and natural philosophy are treated in their traditional
formats. In addition to his purely philosophical works, Sadra has a
lengthy yet incomplete commentary on the Qur’an and few other works on
understanding the Qur’an and Shiite hadith. For purposes of
classification, I shall divide Sadra’s works into two broad categories
of transmitted and intellectual sciences.

Sadra’s Qur’anic commentaries are the first works to come to our
attention in the field of transmitted sciences. Sadra is certainly not
the first Muslim philosopher to write commentaries on the Qur’an. Ibn
Sina wrote a short commentary on the famous light verse of the Qur’an
(24:35), which describes God as the ‘light of the heavens and the
earth’. With this commentary, Ibn Sina has initiated a new genre of
philosophical exegesis soon to be followed by Ghazali and Suhrawardi.
None of these philosophers, however, wrote extensive glosses over the
Qur’anic verses. In this sense, Sadra differs from his predecessors by
giving a more prominent place in his writings to the verses of the
Qur’an and the sayings of the Prophets and the Shi’ite imams. In fact,
his commentaries amount to a considerable size and have been edited and
published by Muhammad Khwajawi in 7 volumes as Tafsir al-qur’an
al-karim, which will be discussed below. Sadra’s Qur’anic commentaries
are of particular importance for they are written from the point of view
of his philosophy, i.e., ‘transcendent wisdom’ (al-hikmat
al-muta’aliyah), giving one of the finest examples of philosophical and
mystical exegesis. This aspect of Sadra’s works has been largely
ignored, and consequently there are only a few short essays we can
mention on the subject in European languages.[^24]

Sadra has also written a mystico-philosophical commentary on the famous
Shi’ite book of hadith Usul al-kafi compiled by Kulayni. As in his
Qur’anic commentaries, Sadra deals with various sayings of the Prophet
and Shi’ite Imams to bring out their philosophical significance. His
commentary on the Usul al-kafi is titled Kitab al-‘aql wa’l-jahl (“The
Book of Intelligence and Ignorance”), in which he interprets many
sayings of the Imams within the context of such metaphysical issues as
the primacy of being (wujud), God’s Names and Attributes, and bodily
resurrection. In writing these glosses, Sadra seems to be particularly
interested in showing the intrinsic relation between two sources of
knowledge, viz., transmitted-religious and intellectual-philosophical.

Mulla Sadra’s most important works that have gained him numerous
honorific titles, however, are in the field of intellectual sciences,
particularly in traditional metaphysics and philosophy. Although a great
majority of these works have been published due to the single-handed and
indefatigable efforts of Sayyid Jalal al-Din Ashtiyani and, more
recently, Muhammad Khwajawi, we are far from having a complete list of
Sadra’s works critically edited and published. The following
bibliography will give a detailed discussion of these works.

Sadra’s philosophical works occupy a special place in the annals of
Islamic intellectual history. Without claiming to be exhaustive, we can
highlight three aspects of this immense corpus. The first point concerns
the historical period in which Sadra composed his works. Sadra was a
contemporary of Descartes, and is considered to be one of the peaks of
the post-Avicennan Islamic philosophy. The fact that Sadra wrote his
books in the 17th century and was able to influence a whole generation
of philosophers, which eventually resulted in the formation of the
school known under his name, disproves the two-centuries old claim of
the Orientalists and Western historians of Islamic philosophy that
philosophical activity in the lands of Islam came to an end with
Ghazali’s attack on Ibn Sina in his Tahafut al-falasifah. Even though
this view is no longer held by the serious scholars of Islam, the number
of studies on philosophers prior to Ibn Sina is incomparably more than
what has been produced on the history of post-Avicennan Islamic
philosophy. His school also points to the continuity of philosophical
activity in the Persian-speaking world up to our own day.

Secondly, Sadra represents the culmination of various philosophical
strands of Islamic intellectual history. Standing at the crossroads of
the four major traditions of Aristotelian philosophy (*mashsha’i* )
associated with Farabi and Ibn Sina, the School of Illumination
(*ishraq* ) established by Suhrawardi, Islamic theology (*kalam* ), and
finally metaphysical mysticism or gnosis (*‘irfan* ) represented chiefly
by Ibn al-Arabi and his school, Sadra launched a grand project of
synthesizing them into a coherent whole in the form of a highly original
and comprehensive philosophical system that he called ‘transcendent
wisdom’ (*al-hikmat al-muta’aliyah* ). Thus the Sadrean corpus displays
a remarkable blend of various strands of thought from the purely logical
and analytical discussions of quiddity and logical categories to the
extremely poetic and ecstatic discourses on the all-inclusive reality of
being and unveiling (*kashf* ) as a direct way of knowing Divine
mysteries. In this regard, Sadra attempts to complete a project whose
origins go back to Suhrawardi, namely the reconciliation of analytical
and discursive thinking (*nazar* ) with mystical experience (*dhawq* )
and spiritual training.

To highlight the ‘synthetic’ nature of his thought, Sadra seeks to
combine three established sources of knowledge in the Islamic
intellectual tradition:*burhan* referring to logical-analytical
thinking,*‘irfan* referring to realized knowledge, and*qur’an* referring
to revealed knowledge. Furthermore, Sadra appears to be acutely
conscious of these traditions, their differences and similarities as he
analyzes a particular problem or adopts a particular point of view
within the context of these intellectual traditions. This makes Sadra’s
corpus an invaluable source for the history of Islamic philosophy. In
many ways, reading Sadra’s text amounts to reading the entire history
behind the problem under investigation.

The third important aspect of Sadra’s works is their originality and
cogency as a whole. Sadra is known for a number of novel ideas and
formulations in the history of Islamic philosophy. Primacy of being
(*asalat al-wujud* ), the idea that a simple reality contains in itself
all things that belong to its class (*basit al-haqiqah kull al-ashya’*
), gradation of being (*tashkik al-wujud* ), unification of the
intellect and the intelligible (ittihad al-‘aqil wa’l-ma’qul),
substantial motion (*al-harakat al-jawhariyyah* ), and the bodily
origination and spiritual subsistence of the human soul (*jismaniyyat
al-huduth ruhaniyyat al-baqa’* ) are only few of the major contributions
that have earned Sadra a unique place among the pioneers of Islamic
philosophy.

In the West, Comte de Gobineau’s*Les Religions et les philosophies dans
l’Asie centrale* is the earliest work to refer to Mulla Sadra. In his
doctoral thesis*The Development of Metaphysics in Persia* , Muhammad
Iqbal presented a survey of Sadra*a lá* Sabziwari, Sadra’s great
commentator. The German scholar Max Horten is the first European scholar
to have devoted a separate work on Sadra. Horten wrote two books on the
subject:*Die Gottesbeweise bei Shirazi* (Bonn, 1912) and*Das
philosophische System von Shirazi* (Strasburg, 1913), in which he both
translated from Sadra’s works and provided a fairly complete analysis of
his system.

The French philosopher and Islamisist Henry Corbin, who had started out
his career in Western philosophy by translating Heidegger’s*Sein und
Zeit* into French, marks a turning point in Sadrean studies. Corbin
translated*Kitab al-Masha’ir* , Sadra’s own summa of his philosophy,
into French under the title*Le Livre des pénétrations métaphysiques*
(Téhéran-Paris, 1956), which contains an extensive analysis of Sadra’s
thought with a parallel commentary on the Masha’ir. In addition to
devoting a large section to Sadra in his*En islam iranien: aspects
spirituels et philosophiques* (4 Vols., 1971-2), Corbin also made a
partial translation of Sadra’s commentary on Suhrawardi’s*Hikmat
al-ishraq* along with Qutb al-Din Shirazi’s commentary in his*Le Livre
de la Sagesse Orientale* (*Kitab Hikmat al-ishraq* ) (Lagrasse: Editions
Verdier, 1986).

Seyyed Hossein Nasr, who is largely responsible for putting Sadra on the
map in the English language, has written a number of seminal essays on
Sadra in addition to his*Sadra al-Din al-Shirazi and His Transcendent
Theosophy* published in 1978 (the second expanded edition 1997). Fazlur
Rahman’s*The Philosophy of Mulla Sadra* (Albany: State University of New
York Press, 1975) deals with Sadra’s philosophy as a whole. Although
written from a strictly Peripatetic point of view and thus failing to
give a balanced view of Sadra’s ideas on philosophy, kalam, and
mysticism, Rahman’s work is the only book-size analysis of Sadra’s
thought.*al-Hikmat al-‘arshiyyah* , Sadra’s most important work on
eschatology, has been translated by James Winston Morris as*The Wisdom
of the Throne: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mulla Sadra*
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981) with a long introduction
and extensive commentaries. A new study of*al-Hikmat al-‘arshiyyah* by
Zaylan Morris called*Revelation, Intellectual Intuition and Reason in
the Philosophy of Mulla Sadra: An Analysis of the Al-Hikmah
Al-'Arshiyyah* is scheduled for publication in 2003. An English
translation and bilingual edition of*Kitab al-masha’ir* has been brought
out by Parwiz Morewedge as*Metaphysics of Mulla Sadra* (New York, 1992).
Christian Jambet has translated*Risalat al-hashr* , a treatise on
resurrection, into French as*Se rendre immortel: Traité de la
résurrection* (Paris: Fata Morgana, 2000) with a well-informed
introduction to Sadra’s eschatology. Sadra’s important work on the
temporal origination of the world called*Risalah al-huduth* has been
translated into German by Sayed Bagher Talgharizadeh as*Die Abhandlung
über die Entstehung* (Berlin, 2000). An English translation of Sadra’s
Iksir al-‘arifin by William Chittick is also scheduled for publication.
al-Shawahid al-rubuiyyah is being currently translated by Caner Dagli of
Princeton University. Most recently, S. H. Nasr has completed a new
translation of the*Masha’ir* with a commentary and notes, which is
currently being edited by I. Kalin.

We can now turn to Sadra’s own works, which I shall present in
alphabetical order.


