A: Works in the Field of Transmitted Sciences
=============================================

*1- Asrar al-ayat wa anwar al-bayyinat* (“The Secrets of the Verses and
the Lights of Evident Proofs”). One of Sadra’s major commentaries on the
Qur’an, the book consists of an introduction and three parts (*taraf* ).
The first part deals with the knowledge of the Divinity (*‘ulum rububi*
) in three witnesses (*mashhad* ) and twenty-one principles (*qa’idah*
). The second part discusses, in four witnesses and twenty-five
principles, the acts of the Divine, emanation of the world of
multiplicity from the One, and its return to It. The third part is
devoted to return or resurrection (*al-ma’ad* ) in twelve witnesses and
nine principles. Forty manuscripts of the*Asrar* have been found in
Tehran, Mashhad and Qom libraries.[^25] M. Khwajawi has edited the
treatise with a Persian translation and notes as*Asrar al-ayat* (Tehran:
Mu’assasa-yi Mutala’at wa Tahqiqat-i Farhanghi, 1363 (A. H.
Lunar)/1984). A second Persian translation is available by ‘Alawiyyah
Humayuni (Tehran: 1362).

*2- Ayat al-kursi* (“Commentary on the Verse of ‘al-Kursi’, the Throne”)
also known as*Tafsir al-‘urwat al-wuthqa* . An extensive commentary on
the verse of the Throne (*al-kursi* ), (the Qur’an 2:255), importance of
which have been stated in a number of*hadith* s. It consists of an
introduction (*muqaddimah* ), twenty chapters (*maqalah* ), and a
conclusion (*khatimah* ). Each chapter has a different name:*maqasid*
(intentions),*masha’ir* (penetrations),*isharat* (allusions),*latifat*
(subtleties),*fawa’id* (benefits), and so on. Among the issues discussed
are the reality and unity of being, God’s mercy, intercession and its
conditions, and the legitimacy of the Shi’ite Imams. Thirty-one
manuscripts of the text have been found.[^26] Published in
Khwajawi,*Tafsir al-Qur’an* , Vol. 4, pp. 8-342.

*3- Ayat al-nur* (“Commentary on the Verse of ‘al-Nur’, the ‘Light’”).
Sadra’s important commentary on the Light Verse (the Qur’an, 24:35),
which has been the subject of many other philosophical and mystical
commentaries before him. It consists of an introduction (*muqaddimah* ),
an introductory discussion (*tamhid* ) on the meaning of light (*nur* ),
seven sections (*fasl* ), and a conclusion with Sadra’s testament
(*wasiyyah* ). Among the subject discussed are the definition of light
as the perfection of things, emanation of light upon the heavens and the
earth, God’s knowledge being identical with His essence, meanings of the
breast (*al-sadr* ), the heart (*al-qalb* ) and the spirit (*al-ruh* ),
man as the microcosm, and the doctrine of the perfect man (*al-insan
al-kamil* ) and its relation to cosmology. The book has been edited and
published with a Persian translation by M. Khwajawi as*Ayat-i nur ya
bayan-i maratib-i afarinish* (Tehran: Intisharat-i Mawla, 1362 (A. H.
Lunar), 2.nd edition 1377 (A. H. Lunar)). Also published in
Khwajawi,*Tafsir* , vol. 4, pp. 345-427. Forty-four manuscripts of the
commentary have been found.[^27]

4-*Ma’ani al-alfaz al-mufradah min al-qur’an* (“The Meanings of Qur’anic
Terms”). A short exposition of certain Qur’anic terms and expressions.
Each term is analyzed under a different*‘bab’* (section). Two
manuscripts of the text are in Tehran Central and Parliament
libraries.[^28]

*5- Mafatih al-ghayb* (“Keys of the Invisible World”). One of Sadra’s
most important works in this category of writings, consisting of an
introduction (*muqaddimah* ) and twenty ‘keys’ (*miftah* ). It contains
the most extensive discussion of Sadra’s approach to the Qur’an and his
methodology of interpreting the Sacred Book. Sadra culls together a
number of philosophical and gnostic themes, and explains them under a
different*‘miftah’* . The first*‘miftah’* discusses the secret and
wisdom behind the creation of the universe; second, the Divine intention
in sending the Qur’an; third, knowledge and its degrees; fourth,
unveiling (*kashf* ) and its degrees; fifth, knowledge of the Divine;
sixth, the meaning of ‘balance’ (*mizan* ) in the Qur’an; seventh,
unveiling the knowledge of the essence of God, His Names and Attributes,
and His signs in the visible universe; eighth, God’s acts (*af’al* );
ninth, the angels, their hierarchy, and their attributes; tenth, the
divisions of physical bodies; eleventh, the intelligible substances as
the treasures and power of the Divine; twelfth, the temporal origination
of the world; thirteenth, existence of the world of the spirits;
fourteenth, the spiritual path leading to salvation; fifteenth, man’s
creation and journey from birth to the day of resurrection; sixteenth,
the angelic power (*malakut* ) as stages of man’s spiritual journey;
seventeenth, resurrection of human beings and the universe; eighteenth,
bodily resurrection and its demonstration; nineteenth, degrees of
resurrection on the Day of Judgment; and twentieth, spiritual discipline
and its kinds. Twenty-seven manuscripts of the*Mafatih* have been
located.[^29] Mulla Hadi Sabziwari, the most important commentator of
Mulla Sadra in the 19th century, has written a commentary on
the*Mafatih* , under the title*Hashiyah mafatih al-ghayb fi’l-tafsir* .
During the Qajar period, a certain Husam al-Din Shirazi has translated
the*Mafatih* into Persian.

*6- Mutashabihat al-qur’an* (“Allegorical or Metaphorical Verses of the
Qur’an”). Sadra’s explanation of the Qur’anic verses that are called
allegorical or metaphorical (*mutashabih* ) by the Qur’an (Al-i ‘Imran,
3:7) such as ‘God sitting on the Throne’ and ‘God’s hand’. Although
Sadra does not add anything new to what he has already established as
his methodology of commenting upon the Qur’an in*Mafatih al-ghayb*
and*Tafsir ayat al-kursi* , he discusses and criticizes the opinions of
previous commentators and theologians before stating his own views on
the subject. The book consists of six parts (*fasl* ). The first part
discusses various views on the allegorical verses of the Qur’an; second,
the views of those commentators who emphasize ‘transcendence’ (*tanzih*
); third, the rejection of the views of those theologians who are
called*‘mu’attilah’* or*‘ahl al-ta’til’* , viz., those who deny God any
kind of attribution; fourth, Sadra’s own views on the subject; fifth,
further elaboration on the fourth part; and finally six, Sadra’s partial
interpretations of certain allegorical verses from the point of view of
unveiling (*kashf* ) and gnosis (*‘irfan* ). The treatise has been
published in Sayyid Jalal al-Din Ashtiyani,*Sih Risalah* (Mashhad:
Mashhad University Press, 1352 (A. H. Lunar)). Eleven manuscripts of the
text have been found.[^30]

7-*Sharh usul al-kafi* (“Commentary on the*Usul al-kafi* ”). A
commentary on the famous Shi’ite book of Hadith compiled by Abu Ja’far
Muhammad ibn Ya’qub Kulayni (d. 329/940). One of Sadra’s most important
works in the category of transmitted sciences,*Sharh* is a*tour de
force* of Sadra’s philosophical and esoteric interpretations of the
sayings of the Shi’ite Imams. Corbin considers it one of the most
important works of Twelve Imam Shi’ism.[^31] Being an excellent example
of the Sadrean blend of transmitted and intellectual sciences, it is a
philosophical commentary on the thirty-four sayings of the*Usul al-kafi*
grouped under the title*Kitab al-‘aql wa’l-jahl* . All of the sayings
are directly related to the intellect, intellection, knowledge, and
ignorance. Sadra first narrates each*hadith* in full with its chain of
transmission, discusses its sources and authenticity, and then provides
his commentaries. The first twelve sayings are analyzed together, after
which Sadra takes a long detour and discusses various issues related to
philosophy, metaphysics, and gnosis in over 140 pages in the printed
edition. Among the issues discussed are the meaning and degrees of the
intellect (*al-‘aql* ) and ignorance (*al-jahl* ), God’s Essence, Names
and Attributes, the cosmos and its creation, relation between the
intellect and the heart (*al-qalb* ), and the role of the intellect in
achieving happiness. This is followed by the longest commentary of the
book on*hadith* number fourteen, which is the saying that ‘God has
created the intellect’. Here Sadra delves into a very detailed
discussion of the subject by quoting a number of other sayings of the
Imams from other sources. The*Sharh* has remained incomplete, and some
have claimed that Sadra died in the middle of composing it.[^32]
Seventy-two manuscripts of the text have been found.[^33] The critical
edition is by Muhammad Khwajawi (Tehran: Mu’assasa-yi Mutala’at wa
Tahqiqat-i Farhanghi, 1366 (A. H. Solar)).

8-*Surat al-a’la* (“Commentary on the Chapter ‘al-A’la, the Most High”).
A philosophical and gnostic commentary on Chapter 87 of the Qur’an. It
consists of an introduction (*muqaddimah* ) and ten ‘praises’ (*tasbih*
). Published in Khwajawi,*Tafsir* , vol. 7, pp. 342-407.

9-*Surat al-baqarah* (“Commentary on the Chapter ‘al-Baqarah’, the
Cow”). An incomplete yet long commentary on Chapter 2 of the Qur’an up
to verse 65. In explaining the verses, Sadra criticizes the viewpoint of
the Ash’arites and the Mu’tazilites on certain issues. He also discusses
the meaning of the ‘separate letters’ (*huruf muqatta’ah* ) in the
Qur’an. Twelve manuscripts of the text have been listed.[^34] Published
in Khwajawi,*Tafsir* , vols. 1-3.

10-*Surat al-fatihah* (“Commentary on the Chapter ‘al-Fatiha’,
Opening”). Also known as*Surat al-hamd* . A philosophical and gnostic
commentary on the opening chapter of the Qur’an. Sadra discusses many
issues ranging from the significance of the*basmalah* (i.e., the
expression ‘in the Name of God, the Most Merciful, the
All-Compassionate’) to his theory of substantial motion (*al-harakat
al-jawhariyyah* ), and the differences among human beings in their
journeys towards salvation. 19 manuscripts of the text have been
found.[^35]

11-*Surat al-hadid* (“Commentary on the Chapter ‘al-Hadid’, the Iron”).
A gnostic interpretation of Chapter 57 of the Qur’an. The commentary is
divided into four parts: ‘unveiling’ (*mukashafah* ), ‘divine gleaming’
(*lam’ah ilahiyyah* ), ‘benefit’ (*fa’idah* ), and ‘conclusion’
(*khatimah* ). Twenty-six manuscripts have been listed.[^36] Published
in Khwajawi,*Tafsir* , vol. 6, pp. 140-327.

12-*Surat al-jum’ah* (“Commentary on the Chapter ‘al-Jum’ah’, Friday”).
A gnostic commentary on Chapter 62 of the Qur’an. It has an introduction
(*muqaddimah* ), twelve chapters or ‘dawns’ (*matla’* ), and a
conclusion (*khatimah* ). Sadra discusses a number of ontological issues
and elaborates on the Avicennan distinction between the kind of beings
that subsist by themselves and those that are ontologically dependent on
others for their existence (i.e., necessary-by-itself and
necessary-through-others). Twenty-five manuscripts have been
listed.[^37] Published in Khwajawi,*Tafsir* , vol. 7, pp. 136-305.

13-*Surat al-sajdah* (“Commentary on the Chapter ‘al-Sajdah’, the
Prostration”). An esoteric commentary on Chapter 32 of the Qur’an with
an introduction, nine chapters (each with a different title), and a
conclusion. One of Sadra’s finest writings concerning man’s spiritual
journey and its stations. Twelve manuscripts have been listed.[^38]
Published in Khwajawi,*Tafsir* , vol. 6, pp. 1-135.

14-*Surat al-tariq* (“Commentary on the Chapter ‘al-Tariq’, the Morning
Star”). A short philosophical and gnostic commentary on the chapter 86
of the Qur’an. In the introduction, Sadra states that his comments are
based on the Divine intuitions given to him. Twenty-two manuscripts of
the text have been found.[^39] Published in Khwajawi,*Tafsir* , vol. 7,
pp. 308-359.

15-*Surat al-tawhid* or*al-ikhlas* (“Commentary on the Chapter
‘al-Tawhid’, Unity or ‘al-Ikhlas’, Sincerity”). A philosophical and
gnostic commentary on chapter 112 of the Qur’an, which is also known
as*Surat al-ikhlas* . In six chapters or ‘benefits’ (*fa’idah* ), Sadra
discusses the names of this*surah* , reasons for its revelation, meaning
and degrees of unity (*tawhid* ), and God’s knowledge in the light of
intellectual (*‘aqli* ) and transmitted (*naqli* ) arguments. The
critical edition is published in two parts in Isfahani,*Majmu’a-yi
rasa’il-i falsafi-yi Sadr al-Muta’allihin* (cited hereafter as*Majmu’ah*
) (Tehran: Intisharat-i Hikmat, 1375 (A. H. Lunar)) (fifteenth and
sixteenth treatises; pp. 395-439). Three manuscripts have been
listed.[^40]

16-*Surat al-waqi’ah* (“Commentary on the Chapter ‘al-Waqi’ah’, the
Event”). A gnostic and philosophical commentary on Chapter 56 of the
Qur’an. Throughout the commentary, Sadra discusses various issues
including resurrection, the spirit, and the concept of being.
Twenty-four manuscripts have been listed.[^41] Published in
Khwajawi,*Tafsir* , vol. 7, pp. 8-134.

17-*Surat al-zilzal* (“Commentary on the Chapter ‘al-Zilzal’, the
Quake”). A philosophical commentary on Chapter 99 of the Qur’an on the
basis of Sadra’s notion of substantial movement and eschatology.
Twenty-two manuscripts of the text have been recorded.[^42] Published in
Khwajawi,*Tafsir* , vol. 7, pp. 410-444.

18-*Surat Ya-Sin* (“Commentary on the Chapter ‘Ya-Sin’”). An extensive
philosophical commentary on Chapter 36 of the Qur’an with special
emphasis on the Day of Judgment and bodily resurrection. The
introduction (*muqaddimah* ) contains a detailed discussion of the
importance of intellection (*ta’aqqul* ) in the Qur’an. Seventeen
manuscripts of the text have been listed.[^43] Published in
Khwajawi,*Tafsir* , vol. 5.

19- Various*Hadith* commentaries. Sadra has written commentaries on a
few sayings of the Prophet, among which the most important is
the*Hadith* “I was a hidden treasure”. Many Sufis have commented on this
hadith before Sadra. Following his esoteric hermeneutics, Sadra gives a
full exposition of the*Hadith* . Three manuscripts of this short
commentary have been listed.[^44]


