B: Works in the Field of Intellectual Sciences
==============================================

1-*Ajwibat al-masa’il al-kashaniyyah* (“Answers to Ka sha ni’ s
Questions”).S adra ’s answers to five questions on the soul posed by
Mulla Muz affarH usayn Ka sha ni, a contemporary ofS adra and a disciple
of Mi r Findiriski . In his answers,S adra elaborates on various aspects
of the soul, its perceptual and intellectual faculties, and the
differences among the human souls from the state of potentiality and
imperfection to full realization and spiritual perfection. The critical
edition of the text appears in Is faha ni ,*Majmu’ah* (third treatise;
pp. 125-160).

2-*Ajwibat al-masa’il al-nasiriyyah* (“Answer to the Nasirean
Questions”).S adra ’s answers to three questions posed by Nasi r al-Di n
al-Tusi to Shams al-Di n ‘Abd al-H ami d ibn ‘I sa Khusrawsha hi , which
had remained unanswered. The first question asked byTusi and answered
byS adra is about motion and its relation to time. The second question
is about potentiality (*al-imkan* ) and how it relates to the physical
and spiritual growth of human beings. The third question deals with
multiplicity, how it has originated from the One, and whether
multiplicity emanates from the One in a single act of creation or in an
order of descent. The lithograph edition appears on the margins ofS adra
’s*al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma’ad* and*Sharh al-hidayah* . The critical edition is
in Is faha ni ,*Majmu’ah* (sixth treatise; pp. 163-177).

3-*Ajwibat al-masa’il Shams al-Din Muhammad Ghilani* (“Answers to Ghi la
ni’ s Questions”).S adra ’s responses to five philosophical questions
asked by the Peripatetic philosopher Mulla Shamsa -yi Ghi la ni , also
known as Shamsa , who was a student of Mi r Da ma d.[^45] In a sense,
the questions can be considered to be a Peripatetic critique ofS adra ’s
transcendent philosophy by one of the prominent figures of the circle of
Mi r Da ma d. Ghi la ni’ s questions, it appears, have givenS adra an
opportunity to further clarify some of his ideas against his critics.
The five short questions asked by Ghi la ni are as follows: 1) change in
the category of quantity (*kamm* ), to whichS adra replies by discussing
the meaning of change in the categories; 2) the nature of the vegetative
soul (*nafs nabati* ), how it is, if any, transformed, and the
detachment of the human soul (*tajarrud al-nafs* ) from corporeal
existence; 3) mental existence (*wujud dhihni* ) and how the mind
conceives such categories as quality, quantity, position, and place; 4)
differences between human and animal perceptions, which have led both
Ghi la ni andS adra to discussing the interesting question of whether
the animals will also be resurrected like human beings; and 5) the
creation of the spirit of each human being before the creation of their
bodies on the basis of the*hadith* that “I was a prophet when Adam was
between water and clay [i.e., before he was created]”. Previously
published on the margins onS adra ’s*al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma’ad* , it appears
in*Sih Risalah* edited by S. J. Ashtiya ni . The critical edition of the
text is published in Is faha ni ,*Majmu’ah* (second treatise; pp.
107-122). Six manuscripts of the treatise have been listed.[^46]

4-*Asalat ja’l al-wujud (Risalah)* (“Treatise on the Primacy of the
Instauration of Being”). A treatise on an important part ofS adra ’s
ontology, i.e., instauration (*ja’l* ), which refers to the primacy
of*wujud* in the existentiation of things.S adra has dealt with this
problem extensively both in the*Asfar* and in the*Masha’ir* . In this
relatively small work,S adra discusses major points of view on the
subject and divides them into three categories. The first is the primacy
of the instauration of quiddity defended by Suhrawardi and his school.
The second is the conjoining of being with quiddity, whichS adra
attributes to the Peripatetic philosophers. And the third is the primacy
of the instauration of*wujud* , which isS adra ’s own position. The
critical edition appears in Is faha ni ,*Majmu’ah* (fifth treatise; pp.
181-191).

5-*Dibaja-yi ‘arsh al-taqdis* , also called*Risalat al-khalsah* . A
three-page introduction to Mi r Da ma d’s*Asfar* . The*Dibajah*
and*al-Khalsah* have sometimes been listed as two separate works but in
reality they are the two parts of the same treatise. In the first part,
which is called*Risalat al-khalsah* ,S adra narrates a dream that he had
in the last night of the month of Ramada n, 1028 (A. H. Solar), with a
following interpretation. In the dream,S adra sees the Prophet of Islam
and then himself setting out on a journey after finishing his
supererogatory prayers (*nawafil* ). In climbing a steep and narrow
mountain road,S adra goes through a number of easy and difficult stages,
sometimes walking, sometimes on an ass. After a while, a noble and
virtuous man appears and tellsS adra that his ass is not made for the
hardships of this journey. Upon hearing this,S adra leaves his mount and
embarks upon the path by himself with full consciousness and energy.
After narrating the dream,S adra gives a spiritual interpretation of it
and its various stages. The second part of the three-page treatise,
which is known under its Persian title*Dibajah* , praises Mi r Da ma d
and his work. The two parts of the treatise are published in Is faha ni
,*Majmu’ah* , (eighth and ninth treatises; pp. 265-7).[^47]

6-*Hashiyah sharh hikmat al-ishraq* (“Glosses upon the Commentary upon
the ‘Wisdom of Illumination’ of Suhrawardi ”). Although written in the
form of a commentary upon Qut b al-Di n Shi ra zi ’s famous commentary
on Suhrawardi ’s*Hikmat al-ishraq* , the most definitive text of the
School of Illumination (*ishraq* ), it is amongS adra ’s important
philosophical works.S adra presents the relation and differences between
the Peripatetic and Illuminationist schools with remarkable lucidity and
depth. The*Hashiyah* is also important to understandS adra ’s overall
position towards the two schools from which he has incorporated many
elements into his own thought. A partial translation ofS adra ’s
commentary has been published along with Qut b al-Di n Shi ra zi ’s
commentary by Henry Corbin in his translation of the*Hikmat al-ishraq* .
See his*Le Livre de la Sagesse Orientale* (*Kitab Hikmat al-ishraq* )
(Lagrasse: Editions Verdier, 1986), pp. 441-669. Nine manuscripts of the
text have been listed.[^48]

7-*Al-Hashr (Risalah)* (“The Treatise of Resurrection”). It is known
under several different names:*Hashr al-asya’ wa ma’ad kull shay’*
,*Tarh al-kawnayn fi hashr al-‘alamayn* , and*Hashr al-‘awam fi ma’ad
al-ashya’ wa hashriha* . The main theme of the treatise is the
resurrection of all existence, including the animal and plant kingdoms
and the mineral world.S adra extends the meaning and scope of
resurrection to all existence in tandem with his ontology and natural
philosophy, which considers the world of creation to be nothing but
various degrees and modes of the all-inclusive reality of being (*al-
wujud* ) through ontological gradation (*al-tashkik* ). The treatise is
divided into eight chapters (*fasl* ). In the introduction,S adra
classifies beings into five ‘layers’ or ‘classes’ (*tabaqah* ) in a
descending order. These are the separate intellects, which belong to the
Divine realm and in which the archetypes and the Platonic Forms/Ideas
reside; the spirits operating in the intelligible world and related to
lower and higher ‘bodies’ (*ajram* ); particular spirits such as demons
and humans where the human realm begins; plant and animal souls, which
serve as a bridge between the human and material spheres; and finally
the beings of the lowest degree (*asfal al-safilin* ), viz., inanimate
bodies. Having given this classification,S adra explains, in eight
chapters, the resurrection of all beings from the separate intellects to
the grossly material entities. The first part discusses the resurrection
of the highest order of being, i.e., the separate intellects and their
subsistence (*baqa’* ) in and by God; second, resurrection of the
‘rational souls’ (*al-nufus al-natiqah* ), whichS adra divides into
‘celestial’ (*falakiyyah* ) and ‘human’ (*insaniyyah* ); third,
resurrection of the ‘animal souls’ (*al-nufus al-haywaniyyah* ) in
whichS adra argues for the return of such animal faculties as
perception, hearing, and seeing to their archetypal forms; fourth,
resurrection of plant and other animate powers such as growth and
regeneration whereS adra construes the plant kingdom as having a degree
of consciousness lower than the animal and human kingdoms but higher
than the inanimate domains; fifth, resurrection of physical entities and
elements whereS adra assigns a degree of consciousness even to material
bodies by virtue of their sharing something of existence (*al-wujud* );
sixth, the return and resurrection of perceptual faculties
(*al-hissiyyat* ); seventh, resurrection of*materia prima* (*al-hayula
al-ula* ) and other material entities in whichS adra defines the
existential share of the*materia prima* as pure potentiality (*al-imkan*
); and eighth, the final assessment of the resurrection of all beings.
The treatise ends with a conclusion and testimony. Throughout his
discussion,S adra makes occasional references to Plato and the
Peripatetics. The treatise was first printed in the*Rasa’il* (eighth
treatise). Muhammad Khwa jawi has published a critical edition with
Persian translation under the title*Risalat al-hashr ya kitab-i
rastakhiz-i jahan* (Tehran: Intisha ra t-i Mawla , 1377 (A. H. Lunar;
second edition)). Thirty manuscripts have been found.[^49]

8-*Al-Hashriyyah* (“Treatise on the Resurrection”). A treatise dealing
with questions about the other world and resurrection. This treatise,
which appears only in Isfahani’s collection, is a summary ofS adra ’s
views on the subject taken from the*Asfar* ,*al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma’ad*
,*Mafatih al-ghayb* ,*Asrar al-ayat* , and*al-Shawahid al-rububiyyah*
.[^50] As the text of the*Hashriyyah* is almost verbatim copied fromS
adra ’s other works, it might have been only a compilation byS adra
himself or one of his students rather than a separate treatise. The
treatise is divided into nine chapters (*fasl* ). The first chapter
discusses briefly the graveyard and punishment therein; second, the
meaning and reality of resurrection; third, the bridge of*al-sirat*
described in the Qur’an, over which human beings will be asked to cross
on the Day of Judgment; fourth, the enumeration and weighing of actions
done in this world; fifth, the events that will take place in the
Doomsday such as the opening of the books of records, the descent of
angels upon the good and demons upon the evil; sixth, degrees of those
who will be questioned by God, whichS adra divides into various
categories; seventh, description of paradise and hell; eighth, the
ultimate return of all human being to their primordial nature
(*al-fitrah* ); and ninth, the termination and recreation of the cosmos
on the Day of Judgment. The critical edition of the text appears in Is
faha ni ,*Majmu’ah* (seventh treatise; pp. 239-262).

9-*Khalq al-a’mal (Risalah fi)* (“Treatise on the Creation of Human
Acts”); known also as*Jabr wa tawfid al-qadar wa af’al al-‘ibad* . A
short treatment of the theological problem of free will and
determination.S adra aims at striking a balance between the two extreme
theological positions of absolute determinism (*al-jabr* ) and absolute
free will (*al-tafwid* ). To address the issue,S adra identifies four
positions that have vied with each other in Islamic history. The first
view held by the Mu’tazilites gives man absolute freedom over his
decisions and actions. The second view championed by the theological
school called the ‘determinists’ (*al-jabriyyah* ) admits no ‘doer’
(*fa’il* ) and ‘agent’ (*mu’aththir* ) in the world except God, thus
slipping into fatalism. The third view defended by the Ash’arites
identifies God as the ultimate cause of all causes (*musabbib al-asbab*
) but allows a partial will (*al-iradat al-juz’iyyah* ) to man for his
actions.S adra hails this position as far more reasonable and convincing
than the first two. The fourth view is upheld by those whom he calls
‘firm in knowledge’ (*al-rasikhun fi’l-‘ilm* ), a name taken from the
Qur’an (3:7), and proposes it as the only acceptable position which
strikes a balance between the two extremes. In this section,S adra
quotes from the Shi’ite Imams and refers to the famous saying of the
sixth Shi’ite Imam Ja’far al-Sa diq concerning free will and
predetermination that ‘the [truth of the] matter is neither absolute
determination nor absolute free will but something in between [the two
extremes]’. The treatise is published in S. J.A shtiya ni ,*Rasa’il*
(Tehran: 1302 (A. H. Lunar)). The critical edition of the text appears
in Is faha ni ,*Majmu’ah* (fifteenth treatise; pp. 271-279). Twenty-five
manuscripts of the text have been listed.[^51]

10-*Al-Hikmat al-‘arshiyyah* (“The Wisdom of the Throne”).S adra ’s most
important work on eschatology and application of his transcendent
philosophy to eschatological questions. The book is divided into two
main parts. The first part deals with God and His Names and Attributes
in summary fashion, whichS adra presents as an introduction to the main
theme. The second part deals with resurrection and the posthumous state.
The second part is further divided into three sections. The first
section deals exclusively with psychology: the human soul (*al-nafs* ),
its levels, sense-perception, relation between the soul and the body,
and the soul as a gateway to the eternal world. The second section is
devoted to a detailed discussion of resurrection whereS adra , using his
philosophical vocabulary, demonstrates the possibility of bodily
resurrection, which has been rejected by Fa ra bi and Ibn Si na . The
third section revolves around the posthumous state of human beings.
Here,S adra bases his analysis on Qur’anic eschatology and discusses
such issues as paradise and hell, the isthmus (*al-a’raf* ) and its
inhabitants (i.e., those who are between paradise and hell), and whether
the animals will have a ‘gathering’ similar to that of human beings.
This book has led to a long-standing controversy among the posterity,
especially among the Shi’ite theologians. Shaykh Ah mad Ahsa’i , the
founder of the Shaykhi school referred to above, has a commentary upon
the*‘Arshiyyah* in which he rejectsS adra’ s main arguments. Mulla Isma
’i l Is faha ni wrote a response to Ahsa’i’ s criticism. James Winston
Morris translated the full text of the*‘Arshiyyah* into English as*The
Wisdom of the Throne: An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mulla Sadra*
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981). Fifty-one manuscripts of
the text have been found.[^52]

11-*Al-Hikmat al-muta'aliyah fi'l- asfar al-'aqliyyah al-arba'ah* (“The
Transcendent Wisdom in the Four Intellectual Journeys”) .S adra ’s
magnum opus. Written in four parts (9 volumes in the printed edition) in
the form of ‘four journeys’, the*Asfar* is the most definitive text of
the Sadrean corpus. It is also one of the most important works of the
post-Avicennan Islamic philosophy. It covers the entire spectrum of
traditional philosophy from ontology and epistemology to psychology and
eschatology. Using the imagery of journeying (*safar* ) taken without
doubt from the Sufis,S adra divides the*Asfar* into ‘four intellectual
journeys’ (*al-asfar al-‘aqliyyah al-arba’ah* ). The first journey,
divided into three parts (*juz’* ) and ten stages (*marhalah* ), is from
the world of creation to the Truth and/or Creator (*min al-khalq
ila’l-haqq* ) whereS adra addresses the questions of metaphysics and
ontology known also under the rubric of ‘general principles’ (*al-umur
al-‘ammah* ) or ‘divine science in its general sense’ (*al-’ilm al-ilahi
bi’l-ma’na al-a‘amm* ). It is in this part of the*Asfar* thatS adra
deals with the ontological foundations of his system including such
topics as the meaning of philosophy, being (*wujud* ) and its primacy
(*asalah* ) over quiddity (*mahiyyah* ), gradation of being (*tashkik
al-wujud* ), mental existence (*wujud dhihni* ), Platonic Forms
(*al-muthul al-aflatuniyyah* ), causality, substantial movement, time,
temporal origination of the world, the intellect, and the unification of
the intellect with the intelligible.

The second journey is from the Truth to the Truth by the Truth (*min
al-haqq ila’l-haqq bi’l-haqq* ). The first part is further divided
into*funun* (meaning arts or sciences) and the second part into
six*funun* . It is in the second journey that we find a full account of
Sadra’s natural philosophy and his critique of the ten Aristotelian
categories. Among the issues discussed extensively are the categories,
substance and accidents, how physical entities come to exist,*hylé* and
its philosophical significance, matter and form (hylomorphism), natural
forms, and the hierarchy of the physical universe.

The third journey, divided into two parts (*juz’* ) and ten stations
(*mawqif* ), is from the Truth to the world of creation with the Truth
(*min al-haqq ila’l-khalq bi’l-haqq* ) where Sadra goes into his
reconstruction of theology, which is discussed under the name of
‘metaphysics’ or ‘divine science in its particular sense’ (*al-‘ilm
al-ilahi bi’l-ma’na’l-akhass* ). It is in this section of the*Asfar*
that the theological dimension of Sadra’s thought and his relentless
attacks on the theologians (*mutakallimun* ) come to the fore. Among the
issues Sadra addresses are the unity and existence of God and the
previous*kalam* proofs given of it, the ontological simplicity of the
Necessary Being, the Names and Qualities of God, God’s knowledge of the
world, His power, Divine providence, speech (*kalam* ) as a Divine
quality, good and evil (theodicy), procession of the world of
multiplicity from the One, and the unity of philosophy
(‘wisdom’,*hikmah* ) and the Divine Law (*shari’ah* ).

The fourth and final journey, divided into two parts (*juz’* ) and
eleven ‘gates’ (*bab* ), is from the world of creation to the world of
creation with the Truth (*min al-khalq ila’l-khalq bi’l-haqq* ) where
the great chain of being is completed with psychology, resurrection, and
eschatology. This has two closely related meanings in Sadra’s thought.
First, the intellectual journey of the traveler (*salik* ) comes to an
end in the present and posthumous state of human beings. Second, the
material and spiritual journey of the order of existence, which has
started with the creation of the world and the reality of being, is
brought to full completion in its ultimate return to God. This part of
the*Asfar* provides a tour de force investigation of traditional
psychology with material culled from the Peripatetic psychology of Ibn
Sina and the gnostic views of Ibn al-‘Arabi. As in the other parts of
the*Asfar* , Sadra presents a critical history of the ideas and theories
on the human soul from the Greeks to Muslim philosophers and
theologians. Among the issues discussed are the soul and its states,
various powers of the soul in its interaction with physical and
intelligible worlds, sense perception, imagination (*takhayyul* ) and
the imaginal world (*‘alam al-khayal* ). Sadra also discusses his
celebrated doctrine that the soul is bodily/material in its origination
and spiritual in its subsistence’ (*jismaniyyat al-huduth ruhaniyyat
al-baqa’* ), the impossibility of transmigration (*tanasukh* ),
spiritual and bodily resurrection, and the reality of heaven and
hell.[^53]

The lithographed edition of the*Asfar* was first published in Tehran,
1282 (A. H. Lunar). A modern edition of the*Asfar* in 9 volumes has been
prepared by Muhammad Rida al-Muzaffar and published in Beirut (Dar Ihya’
al-Turath al-‘Arabi, 1981) with glosses by Mulla Hadi Sabziwari (d.
1873), ‘Ali Mudarris Zunuzi Tabrizi (d. 1889-1890), Aqa Muhammad Rida
Qumsha’i (d. 1888-9), and Muhammad Husayn Tabataba’i. Many other
commentaries and glosses have been written upon the*Asfar* by Aqa
Muhammad Bidabadi (d. 1783), Mulla ‘Ali ibn Jamshid Nuri (d. 1830),
Mulla Isma’il Isfahani (d. 1860-1), Mirza Hashim Gilani Rashti
Ashkiwari, Mulla Aqa-yi Qazwini, Mirza Muhammad Musawi Khwansari, and
Muhammad ibn Ma’sum Zanjani.[^54] Contemporary Persian scholar Hasan
Hasan-zadah Amuli published a new edition of the*Asfar* with his own
notes and glosses (Tehran: Mu’assasat al-Tiba’ah wa’l-Nashr, 1414 (A. H.
Lunar)). Three volumes of this edition have been published so far. Two
hundred thirty manuscripts of the*Asfar* have been recorded.[^55]

12-*Huduth al-‘alam* (“Temporal Origination of the World”).S adra ’s
most important work on the temporal origination of the world.S adra
considers this topic essential for the unity of philosophical and
revealed forms of knowledge. It is also a question to whichS adra has
devoted considerable space in the*Asfar* . The concept of substantial
motion, of whichS adra makes full use to link his natural philosophy to
metaphysics, stands out as the central thesis of the treatise.S adra
first provides a brilliant survey of the issue, starting with the
pre-Socratics, Plato (with quotations from the*Timaeus* ), and
Aristotle. He then moves to the presentation and critique of the views
of Muslim philosophers and theologians. The treatise consists of an
introduction, twelve chapters (*fasl* ), and a conclusion. The
introduction presents the issue as one of the most difficult problems of
philosophy, and discussesS adra’ s reasons for composing the book. The
first chapter analyzes the concepts of necessity and contingency;
second, the concepts of potency and actuality; third, motion and rest;
fourth, the demonstration of nature (*tabi’ah* ) as the innate principle
of motion and change in every mover; fifth, the continuous renewal of
the substance of the rational soul; sixth, nature as the immediate
principle of renewal in corporeal bodies; seventh, circular motion as
the oldest and most perfect motion; eighth, demonstration of the reality
of time; ninth, the antecedence of time to everything; tenth, the
summary of the points discussed so far; eleventh, the relation of the
temporally originated to the eternal; and twelfth, the existence of the
Active Intellect. In the conclusion,S adra sums up the views of the
previous philosophers and presents his overall evaluation. Printed in
the*Rasa’il* (Qom: Maktab al-Mus tafawi , 1302 (A. H. Lunar)) (first
treatise). Twenty-nine manuscripts have been listed.[^56]

13-*Iksir al-‘arifin fi ma’rifat tariq al-haqq wa’l-yaqin* (“The Elixir
of the Gnostics for Knowing the Path of the Truth and Certainty”). One
ofS adra ’s rather gnostic and Sufi works, it is divided into four main
chapters (*bab* ) with further sub-sections (*fasl* ) under each
chapter. The first chapter discusses, in five sections, knowledge and
the classification of sciences; second, the human soul as the recipient
of all knowledge and man’s ability to know; third, the soul and its
states; and fourth, the end of all knowledge and the ultimate return of
things to God. Printed in the*Rasa’il* (seventh treatise). Thirty-four
manuscripts of the text have been recorded.[^57] An English translation
of the*Iksir* by William Chittick is scheduled for publication in 2003.

14-*Ittihad al-aqil wa’l-ma’qul* (“Unification of the Intellector with
the Intelligible”).S adra ’s most important philosophical work on the
intellect and the intelligibles. It isS adra ’s own summary of the third
part of the first journey of the*Asfar* titled ‘on the intellect and the
intelligible’ (*fi’l-’aql wa’l-ma’qul* ). The treatise consists of an
introduction and two sections (*maqalah* ). The first chapter is further
divided into six chapters (*fasl* ) and the second into three.S adra
begins by discussing the three meanings and levels of the intellect,
i.e., the material or hylic intellect (*al-‘aql al-hayulani* ), the
actual or acquired intellect (*al-’aql bi’l-fi’l* ), and the active or
agent intellect (*al-‘aql al-fa’’al* ). Throughout his discussion,S adra
criticizes the philosophers in general and Ibn Si na in particular for
failing to understand the unification of the intellect with the
intelligible as the true definition of knowledge. To that end, he quotes
from Alexander of Aphrodisias and Plotinus (from the*Uthulujiya* wrongly
attributed to Aristotle), defends Porphyry against Ibn Sina’s
disparaging remarks, and employs many principles of his philosophy
including the primacy of being (*asalat al- wujud* ), substantial motion
(*al-harakat al-jawhariyyah* ), and the idea that a simple reality
contains all things in itself (*basit al-haqiqah kull al-ashya’* ).S
adra also provides a long discussion of the active or agent intellect,
as interpreted by the Peripatetic philosophers, to substantiate his
views on the unification of the intellect with the intelligible. The
treatise ends somewhat abruptly with a discussion of some technical
terms and a quote from the*Uthulujiya* . The critical edition of the
treatise is published in Is faha ni ,*Majmu’ah* (first treatise; pp.
63-103). Nineteen manuscripts have been listed.[^58] I have prepared an
English translation of the text with notes and cross-references toS adra
’s other works and will publish it in my upcoming book onS adra ’s
concept of knowledge.

15-*Ittisaf al- wujud bi’l-mahiyyah* (“Conjunction of Being with
Quiddity”). A treatise on how being and quiddity are related to one
another.S adra deals with one of the cardinal issues of ontology, viz.,
how being (*wujud* ) is attributed to quiddities (*mahiyyah* ). He
begins his analysis by admitting and underlining the difficulties caused
by this problem, and criticizes the*kalam* views on the subject,
especially those of Fakhr al-Di n al-Ra zi and Jala l al-Di n Dawa ni .
The discussion revolves around the following two questions: can the
quiddities be said to ‘exist’, and can being (*wujud* ) be a predicate
of quiddity? The treatise is printed in the*Rasa’il* (second treatise).
Sixteen manuscripts have been listed.[^59]

16-*Kasr al-asnam al-jahiliyyah fi dhamm al-mutasawwifin* (“The
Demolition of the Idols of Ignorance in Blaming those who Pretend to be
Sufis”).S adra ’s attack on those who pretended to be Sufis and held
excessive views. The treatise is important for understandingS adra ’s
views on the Sufi tradition from which he borrows freely and extensively
as well as on its pretentious followers.S adra admonishes those who
ignore Divine knowledge (*al-‘ilm al-ilahi* ) by defining it as a veil.
He quotes a number of Qur’anic verses and sayings of the Prophet as well
as from the philosophers. The treatise consists of an introduction, four
chapters (*maqalah* ), each chapter with sections (*fusul* ), and a
conclusion. The first chapter establishes, in three sections, the
meaning of Divine knowledge by underscoring the reciprocity between
knowledge (*ma’rifah* ) and spiritual practice (*riyadah* ). The second
chapter defines, in nine sections, the ultimate goal of worship
(*‘ibadah* ) to be the acquisition of Divine knowledge. The third
chapter discusses, in nine sections, the qualities of the virtuous
(*al-abrar* ), whomS adra takes to be the only true travelers of the
spiritual path. The fourth chapter contains, in five sections, a series
of sermons and advises with particular reference to the lower status of
the world and of those who adhere to it. It has been edited by M. T. Da
nechepazu h (Tehran: 1340 (A. H. Solar)). Thirteen manuscripts have been
recorded.[^60]

17-*al-Lama’at al-mashriqiyyah fi’l-mabahith (al-funun) al-mantiqiyyah*
(“The Gleamings of Illumination Concerning the Matters of Logic”) also
known as*al-Tanqih* and*al-Tanqiyah* . A short treatise on logic written
from the point of view of Suhrawardi ’s critique of Aristotelian logic
and categories. Hence the title ‘Gleamings of Illumination’. Because of
its critical analysis, the treatise has some times been called ‘Treatise
on the Refutation of Logic’ (*risalah dar naqd-i mantiq* ) in Persian
manuscript catalogues. It is a summary ofS adra ’s longer glosses on the
logical section of Suhrawardi ’s*Hikmat al-ishraq* . It consists of nine
chapters or illuminations (*ishraq* ) with each ‘illumination’ further
divided into ‘gleamings’ (*lam’ah* ).S adra begins with the definition
of logic (*mantiq* ) and knowledge (*‘ilm* ) and addresses nearly all
the major issues of classical logic including the simple and composite
concepts, the five universals (*al-kulliyyat al-khamsah* ), propositions
(*al-alfaz* ), predication (*al-haml* ), definition (*al-hadd* ),
possibility (*al-imkan* ) and necessity (*al-wujub* ) as logical
categories, analogy (*al-qiyas* ) and its kinds, logical proof
(*al-burhan* ), and sophistry (*sufistiqi* and*mughalatah* ). The
critical edition of the text is published in Is faha ni ,*Majmu’ah*
(sixth treatise; pp. 195-234). Six manuscripts have been listed.[^61]

18-*Limmiyat ikhtisas al-mintaqah bi-mawdi’ mu’ayyan min al-falak* (“On
Why the Zodiac is Located in a Particular Position of the Sphere”); also
known under the title*al-Limmiyat fi ikhtisas al-falak bi-mawdi’
mu’ayyan* . A four-page treatise on the astronomical problem why the
Zodiac has the position it has rather than any other. Some sources
mention a treatise called*Hall al-ishkalat al-falakiyyah* as a separate
book on the basis of a reference to it in the*Asfar* . It is, however,
almost certain that these two are one and the same work.[^62] In
addressing this astronomical issue,S adra delves into a philosophical
discussion about the procession of the Zodiac and other stars from the
universal intellect (*al-‘aql al-kulli* ), and advances three
ontological arguments to prove the emanation of the spheres from the
angelic world. The critical edition is in Is faha ni ,*Majmu’ah*
(thirteenth treatise; pp. 365-8). Five manuscripts of the text have been
recorded.[^63]

19-*Al-Mabda’ wa’l-ma’ad* (“The Beginning and the Return”). A treatise
on cosmogony and eschatology. As the title suggests,S adra gives his
account of the great chain of being based on his ontological and
eschatological doctrines. It discusses the main divisions of traditional
philosophy such as metaphysics (*al-ilahiyyat* ), natural philosophy
(*al-tabi’iyyat* ), psychology (*‘ilm al-nafs* ), and the genesis of the
cosmos with a discussion of Islamic prophetology (*nubuwwah* ) at the
end. The work is divided into main parts or ‘sciences’ (*fann* ). The
first part deals with the nature of God, whichS adra calls ‘*rububiyyat*
’, and the second part with natural philosophy. The first part is
divided into three chapters (*maqalah* ). The first chapter discusses
the origin of being (*wujud* ) and God’s existence; second, God’s Names
and Attributes; and third, God’s acts in the cosmos. The second part is
divided into four chapters. The first chapter discusses the creation and
constitution of the cosmic order from various elements; second, bodily
resurrection; third, resurrection of man in the light of gnostic
principles; and fourth, Islamic prophetology. The fourth chapter of the
second part is presented as a summa ofS adra ’s political philosophy in
which he addresses such issues as the role of the prophets in religion,
miracles, the difference between revelation (*wahy* ) and intuition
(*ilham* ), politics, and the aims of the Divine Law (*al-Shari’ah* ).
Sabziwa ri has written a commentary (*hashiyah* ) upon the*al-Mabda’
wa’l-Ma’ad* . Two Persian translations are available, one by Sayyi d Ah
mad Ardaka ni and the other by Ah mad ibn Muh ammadH usayni with a
parallel Persian commentary. A Persian summary of the work has been
prepared by Naz ar ‘Ali Ghi la ni under the title*Khulasa-yi Mabda’ u
Ma’ad* . Most recently, it has been edited by Jala l al-Di n Ashtiya ni
with Persian and English introductions by S. H. Nasr (Tehran: 1976).
Seventy-nine manuscripts of the text have been listed.[^64]

20-*Al-Masa’il al-qudsiyyah wa’l-qawa’id al-malakutiyyah* (“Sacred
Questions and Angelic Principles”). One ofS adra ’s later works written
after the*Asfar* as he refers to it in the treatise as ‘our large book’
(*kitabuna’l-kabir* ). This is most probably the same treatise
as*al-Masa’il al-qudsiyyah fi’l-hikmat al-muta’aliyah* mentioned by
Nasr.[^65] The treatise focuses on three major problems with whichS adra
deals in his other works, and these are the reality of being analyzed in
the first chapter (*maqalah* ), God as the necessary being discussed in
the second chapter, and the reality of mental existence analyzed in the
third chapter.S adra states that the arguments put forward in
the*Masa’il* are not derived from the discursive speculations of formal
philosophy (*al-falsafah al-rasmiyyah* ), theological debates, blind
imitation of the public, or the false arguments of the sophists. Rather,
they have been given to him as inspirations of the heart (*al-waridat
al-qalbiyyah* ). It has been printed inA shtiya ni ,*Sih Risalah*
(second treatise). Seven manuscripts have been listed.[^66]

21-*Kitab al-masha’ir* (“The Book of Metaphysical Penetrations”). One
ofS adra ’s later works in which he gives a summa of his ontology with
short and dense discussions of some theological issues. The treatise is
divided into two main parts, the first part consisting of eight*mash’ar*
s, and the second part consisting of three*manhaj* s, with a conclusion.
The first part deals with such principles ofS adra ’s ontology as the
absolute simplicity and primacy of being, its conjunction with quiddity,
mental existence, particularization of being, and ontological causality.
The last*mash’ar* of the first part contains a short discussion of
causality and instauration (*ja’l* ) as a transition to the second part.
The remainder of the*Masha’ir* is devoted to the concept of God as the
Necessary Being (*wajib al- wujud* ), generation of the world
multiplicity from the One, God’s Names and Attributes seen from the
point of view ofS adra ’s ontological categories, His acts in the
cosmos, and the temporal origination of the world of creation. The*Kitab
al-masha’ir* is one ofS adra ’s most studied works both among the
posterity and in modern times. A number of commentaries have been
written by such 19th century Persian philosophers as Shaykh Ah mad
Ahsa’i (d. 1241/1826), who has written an important commentary in which
he rejects one ofS adra ’s cardinal premises that ‘a simple reality
contains all things’, Mulla ‘Ali Nu ri (d. 1246/1830), Mulla Muh ammad
Ja’far Langaru di La hi ji , Mulla Isma ’il Is faha ni (d. 1277/1860),
Mirza Ah mad Ardaka ni Shi ra zi , Mulla Zayn al-‘A bidi n ibn Muh ammad
Jawa d Nu ri , and Mirza Abu ’l-H asan Jilwah (d. 1314/1896).[^67] In
the modern period, the*Masha’ir* has been translated into French by
Henry Corbin as*Le Livre des pénétrations métaphysiques* and published
with introduction, notes, and the Persian translation of the Qajar
prince*Badi’al-Mulk Mirza ‘Imad al-Dawlah* (died in the first part of
the 19th century)[^68] . Another Persian translation by Ghula mH usaynA
ha ni appeared in 1961. Toshihiko Izutsu has translated it into
Japanese. The first English translation by Parwiz Morewedge was
published as*The Metaphysics of Mulla Sadra* . The most recent
translation of the*Masha’ir* into English is by Seyyed Hossein Nasr with
a parallel commentary on the text, which is currently being edited with
an introduction and notes by Ibrahim Kalin. One hundred fifty-one
manuscripts of the text have been listed.[^69]

22-*Al-Mazahir al-ilahiyyah fi asrar al-‘ulum al-kamaliyyah* (“Divine
Manifestations concerning the Secrets of the Sciences of Perfection”).
One ofS adra ’s major theological works synthesizing philosophical
arguments with quotations from the Qur’an. The work is divided into two
main parts or ‘sciences’ (*fann* ) with an introduction and conclusion.
The first*fann* is devoted to metaphysics and the second to eschatology,
each of which is further divided into eight ‘manifestation’ (*mazhar* ).
The first*mazhar* of the first*fann* discusses the principles and aims
of the Sacred Book, i.e., the Qur’an; second, proofs for the existence
of God; third, God’s unity (*tawhid* ); fourth, God’s Names and
Qualities; fifth, God’s knowledge of Himself and things other than His
essence; sixth, God’s divinity (*ilahiyyah* ); seventh, the temporal
origination of the world (*huduth al-‘alam* ); and eighth, the beginning
and end of things. The first*mazhar* of the second*fann* discusses the
proofs concerning bodily resurrection; second, creation of man as a
complete being with his/her perceptual and intellectual powers; third,
the reality of death; fourth, graveyard and punishments and rewards
therein; fifth, the initial creation (*al-ba’th* ) of human beings;
sixth, resurrection (*al-hashr* ); seventh, the bridge of*sirat* ; and
eight, the opening of the books of records for man’s actions in this
world. The conclusion (*khatimah* ) contains a vivid discussion of the
way in which the Doomsday will take place according to the descriptions
given in the Qur’an. The book ends withS adra ’s will (*wasiyyah* ) in
which he urges his readers to follow the spiritual path leading to God.
The*Mazahir* has been edited twice. The first edition (Qom: Markaz-i
Intisha ra t Daftar-i Tabligha t-i Isla mi , 1377 (A. H. Lunar)/1419 (A.
H. Solar)) is by S. J. Ashtiya ni with a Persian introduction and short
Arabic notes. The second critical edition (Tehran: Bunya d-iH ikmat-i
Isla mi -yiS adra , 1378) is by Sayyid Muh ammad Khamanei with a long
Persian introduction which discusses the Greek and neo-Platonic sources
of Islamic philosophy and the school of Mulla S adra . Seven manuscripts
of the text have been listed.[^70]

23-*Al-Mizaj (Risalah fi)* (“Treatise on the Temperament”). A
philosophical and psychological treatise on temperament based on
traditional cosmology and psychology. It is a summary of the relevant
sections of the*Asfar* and divided into six chapters (*fasl* ). The
first chapter discusses the meaning of temperament in terms of physical
constitution and sense perception; second, relation between temperament
and the four elements; third, evaluation of Ibn Si na ’s views in
the*Shifa’* ; fourth, faculty of sight and how the elements are joined
together to form different temperaments; fifth, critique of Ibn Si na ’s
views on potentiality and actuality in relation to the faculties of the
soul; and sixth,S adra ’s own views on temperament and the conjoining of
elements. The critical edition of the*Mizaj* is in Is faha ni
,*Majmu’ah* (sixteenth treatise; pp. 371-392).

24-*Namaha-yi Sadra* (“S adra ’s Letters to his Master Sayyid Mi r Da ma
d”). A collection of four or five letters byS adra to his teacher Mi r
Da ma d. The letters are written in highly stylized Arabic and Persian
and contain a number of questions posed byS adra including a request for
permission to travel to Qom or Ka sha n, which attests to the close
personal bond betweenS adra and Mi r Da ma d. One of the Arabic letters
has been published byA shtiya ni ,*Sharh-i hal wa ara’-yi falsafi-yi
Mulla Sadra* (Tehran, 1378 (A. H. Lunar), second edition), pp. 269-272.
One of the Persian letters is published, with some omissions, in Muh
ammad Khwa jawi ,*Du Sadr al-Din ya du awj-i shuhud wa andisha dar
jahan-i islami* (Tehran: Intisha ra t-i Mawla , 1378 (A. H. Lunar)), pp.
175-177.

25-*Al-Qada’ wa’l-qadar fi af’al al-bashar* (“Divine Decree and Destiny
in the Actions of Man”). A treatise on the theological problem of free
will and predestination. Even though addressing the same issue, it is
written in a more detailed manner than the*Khalq al-a’mal* . The
structure of the treatise and, to a certain extent, its content is
comparable to a treatise by ‘Abd al-Razza q Ka sha ni bearing the same
title. The treatise is divided into six main chapters (*fasl* ). The
first chapter discusses the meaning of Divine providence (*‘inayah* )
and destiny; second, the locus of decree (*qada’* ) and destiny (*qadar*
); third, the ultimate perfection of the world of actuality as it
exists, which is another formulation of the celebrated doctrine of the
best of all possible worlds; fourth, theodicy and the problem of evil in
the creation of the world; fifth, man’s free actions in the face of the
Divine decree; and sixth, the significance of obeying God’s commands
(*ta’ah* ) and the effects of prayer (*du’ah* ). Printed in the*Rasa’il*
under the title*Risalah mas’alat al-qadar fi’l-af’al* (ninth treatise).
Twenty-three manuscripts have been recorded.[^71]

26-*Sarayan nur wujud al-haqq fi’l-mawjudat* (“The Penetration of the
Light of the Being of the Truth in Existents”). A philosophical and
gnostic treatment of the all-inclusive reality of God as present in all
things.S adra attempts to answer the thorny question of how God exists
in all things through His being and knowledge without His Essence being
tainted by it. Although written from the point of view of the primacy of
quiddity (*asalat al-mahiyyah* ) whenS adra still followed the*ishraqi*
ontology of his tutor Mi r Da ma d, the work deals with a problem that
has occupiedS adra in his other works. Printed in the*Rasa’il* (fourth
treatise). Fifteen manuscripts of the text have been listed.[^72]

27-*Sharh al-hidayah al-athiriyyah* (“Commentary upon the*Hidayah* of
Athi r al-Di n Abhari ”).S adra ’s commentary on the famous
logico-philosophical treatise of Athi r al-Di n Fad l ibn ‘Uma r
al-Abhari al-Samarqandi . Abhari ’s work is one of the most widely
circulated texts of classical formal logic (*al-mantiq al-suri* ),
natural philosophy and metaphysics, and many commentaries and glosses
have been written upon it.S adra ’s commentary is one of his early
works, in which he remains faithful to the premises of Peripatetic logic
and philosophy in general and denies change in the category of
substance. It consists of an introduction on the definition of
‘philosophy’ (*al-hikmah* ), two parts, devoted to natural philosophy
(*al-tabi’iyyat* ) and metaphysics (*al-ilahiyyat* ), and a conclusion.
The first part is further divided into three sections or ‘arts’ (*fann*
). The first section discusses atomism and its criticism; second,
spheres and the celestial world; and third, the elements out of which
the cosmos is made, and the faculties of the soul. The second part is
also divided into three sections. The first section discusses the
concept of existence, causality, potentiality and actuality, and the ten
Aristotelian categories; second, the proofs for the existence of the
Necessary Being; and third, the separate intellects (*al-‘uqul
al-mujarradah* ) and how they are interpreted as angels in the language
of the doctors of law and as pure lights in the School of Illumination
and Sufism. The conclusion contains a short discussion of the hereafter
and bodily resurrection. Many glosses by Persian philosophers have been
written uponS adra ’s commentary among which we can mention Mulla Qut b
al-Di n al-Saha lawi , Muh ammad al-H usayni known as Ghula m Nu r,
Mulla ‘Ali Zunu zi , and Mirza Abu ’l-H asan Jilwah.[^73] The*Sharh* has
also become very popular in the sub-continent of India as many
manuscripts of the text have been found in libraries in India and
Pakistan. One hundred twelve manuscripts have been listed.[^74]

28-*Al-Shawahid al-rububiyyah fi’l-manahij al-sulukiyyah* (“The Divine
Witnesses in the Paths of Spiritual Journey”).S adra ’s summary of his
own thought and perhaps the most important work after the*Asfar* . It is
divided into five ‘abodes of witness’ (*mashhad* ) with each*mashhad*
divided into further ‘witnesses’ (*shahid* ). The first*mashhad* is
devoted to general metaphysics in whichS adra discusses, in five
‘witnesses’, the fundamental questions of ontology. The first witness
discusses the concept and reality of existence; second, mental
existence; third, the Necessary Being and God’s unity; fourth, such
concepts as anteriority, posteriority, unity, and multiplicity analyzed
as ontological categories; and fifth, quiddity and other universal
concepts. The second*mashhad* deals with God’s existence and unity, and
is divided into two ‘witnesses’. The first witness discusses God’s Names
and Attributes as the first stage of the ontological self-determination
of God; and second, the objects of the Divine realm, viz., the separate
intellects and Platonic forms as the archetypes of the world of
multiplicity. The third*mashhad* is devoted to whatS adra calls the
‘science of the return of all things to God’ (*‘ilm al-ma’ad* ). It is
divided into three witnesses. The first witness discusses the generation
of the cosmos; second, psychology and philosophical anthropology with an
analysis of the soul and its degrees; and third, the meaning of the
intellect (*al-‘aql* ) and various degrees of it such as the potential
and acquired intellect. The fourth*mashhad* is on eschatology and bodily
resurrection, and is divided into three witnesses. The first witness
discusses various opinions about bodily resurrection and their
criticism; second, the reality and various aspects of the hereafter
(*al-akhirah* ); and third, the differences between this and the next
world and the inhabitants of the hereafter. The fifth*mashhad* deals
with Islamic prophetology (*al-nubuwwah* ) and sainthood (*al-wilayah*
), and is divided into two witnesses. The first witness discusses
prophethood, miracles, faculties of the prophets, and the differences
between revelation and inspiration; and second, political philosophy,
Divine law, and the conditions of rulers. Being a popular and accessible
text, many commentaries have been written upon the*Shawahid* by such
figures as Mulla ‘Ali Nu ri , Muh ammad Rida Qumsha’i , and Sabziwa ri
whose monumental commentary is the most important. Three Persian
translations of the text are available by Sayyi d Ah madH usayni Ardaka
ni, Shaykh Abu ’l-Qas im ibn Ah mad Yazdi and Jawa d Mus lih . A modern
edition of the*Shawahid* with Sabziwa ri ’s important commentary has
been published by S. J. Ashtiya ni with an introduction by S. H. Nasr
(Tehran: 1340 (A. H. Lunar); second edition, 1981). One hundred
twenty-one manuscripts have been listed.[^75]

29-*Sih asl* (“Three Principles”).S adra ’s only treatise written in
Persian. It is one ofS adra ’s important works on spiritual ethics and
of particular importance to show his critical attitude towards the
Shi’ite literalists of his day. In the treatise,S adra gives a critique
of the exoterist*‘ulama’* , called*ahl al-zahir* , who were opposed to
the path of knowledge and spirituality (*‘irfan* ) defended by the Sufis
and gnostic Shi’ites. The work contains some autobiographical remarks
and Persian poetry inserted in betweenS adra ’s discussion.S adra
criticizes, in fourteen chapters or ‘gates’ (*bab* ), the three
principal deficiencies of human nature, which he analyzes in relation to
the pretentious attitudes of the exoterist scholars of the Law. The
first principle is the ignorance of the knowledge of the self along with
the knowledge of the afterlife.S adra posits the knowledge of the self
and its degrees as a*sine qua non* for the attainment of happiness. The
second principle is the love of the world and worldly possessions. The
third principle is the temptation of the soul by worldly pleasures. In
the remainder of the work,S adra discusses various aspects of the
spiritual and ethical life. A number of Qur’anic verses and Prophetic
sayings are quoted throughout the text.*Sih asl* was critically edited
by S. H. Nasr with a Persian introduction and excerpts fromS adra ’s
Persian diwan of poetry (Tehran: 1340 (A. H. Lumar); third edition, 1377
(A. H. Lunar)). Eleven manuscripts have been located.[^76]

30-*Ta’liqat ‘ala ilahiyyat al-shifa’* (“Glosses upon the Metaphysics of
the*Shifa’* of Ibn Si na ”). An incomplete philosophical commentary on
the Metaphysics of Ibn Sina’s*Shifa’* up to the sixth*maqalah* , which
is on causality. In his glosses,S adra discusses the sources of Ibn
Sina’s ideas and explains difficult expressions and points. Like in his
commentary on Abhari ’s treatise on philosophy,S adra remains faithful
to the Peripatetic point of view and does not introduce any of his own
ideas. Twenty-eight manuscripts have been recorded.[^77]

31-*Al-Tasawwur wa’l-tasdiq* (“Concept and Judgment”). A treatise on the
logical problem of concept or description and judgment.S adra discusses
different meanings of concept and judgment and criticizes the views of
the theologians. He occasionally quotes from Ibn Si na and other
Peripatetic philosophers. There are also references to Qut b al-Di n Ra
zi and his commentary on Qazwi ni ’s*Shamsiyyah* , an important treatise
on classical formal logic. It has been translated into Persian and
commented upon by*Mahdi Ha’iri Yazdi* . Seventeen manuscripts have been
listed.[^78]

32-*Al-Tashakhkhus (Risalah fi)* (“Treatise on Individuation”). A
philosophical treatise on individuation. It is divided into three parts
(*fasl* ).S adra discusses an important problem of traditional
philosophy, i.e., how things are differentiated from each other and how
they assume their individual identity and constitution. In addition to
discussing various opinions on the matter, he criticizes the view that
individuation does not have a reality*in concreto* . The treatise is
important for the later development ofS adra ’s thought on the question
of existential determination and individuation with which he deals very
extensively in the*Asfar* . It is printed in the*Rasa’il* (third
treatise). Twelve manuscripts have been listed.[^79]

33-*Al-Waridat al-qalbiyyah fi ma’rifat al-rububiyyah* (“Inspirations of
the Heart concerning the Knowledge of the Lord”). A mystical treatise on
some philosophical problems with a powerful critique of the
exoterist*‘ulama’* and their support for the unjust rulers. As in
the*Shawahid* ,S adra begins his work with a discussion of metaphysics
and then moves into ontology, knowledge of the Necessary Being, the
origin of good and evil, and the science of the soul and its
purification. The text has been edited and translated into Persian by
Ahmad Sha fi ’i ha (Tehran: The Iranian Academy of Philosophy, 1978).
Also published in the*Rasa’il* (sixth treatise). Thirty-two manuscripts
have been listed.[^80]

34-*Al-Wujud* *(Risalah)* (“Treatise on Being”). A short treatise
summarizingS adra ’s concept of being.S adra analyzes the major schools
of ontology under three headings. The first is the view of the school of
Illumination, which considers*wujud* as a mental abstraction. The second
position is that of the theologians, which is very similar to the first
view. And the third is the view of the Sufis who consider*wujud* as the
ultimate source and reality of all things. As a defense of the third
position,S adra gives a detailed analysis of the ontological views of
the Sufis and devotes several pages to the discussion of the unity of
being (*wahdat al-wujud* ). The treatise is published in Is faha ni
,*Majmu’ah* (seventeenth treatise; pp. 453-463).

35-*Yad-dashtha-yi Mulla Sadra* (Mulla S adra ’s Notes).S adra ’s short
notes and stray reflection on various subjects ranging from a discussion
of the Imamate based on Ghazali ’s*Sirr al-‘alamayn* and definition of
philosophy to various supplications and short Persian poems. The title
of the book does not belong toS adra himself. The notes have been edited
and published by Muh ammad Baraka t (Qom: Intisha ra t-i Bi da r, 1377
(A. H. Lunar)) with a list of the personal library ofS adra , containing
one hundred and four books.

36-*Zad al-musafir* (“Provisions of the Traveler”) also known as*Zad
al-salik* and*Ma’ad al-jismani* . A short treatise summarizingS adra ’s
views on eschatology. Divided into twelve chapters, it discusses all the
major issues concerning the Doomsday, bodily resurrection, isthmus
(*barzakh* ), and the return of the world of multiplicity to the One. As
in his other works on eschatology,S adra employs religious,
philosophical, and gnostic proofs throughout the text, and discusses
various arguments advanced by the theologians, Philosophers, and the
Illuminationists. Sayyi d Jala l al-Di nA shtiya ni has written an
important Persian commentary on the*Zad* under the title*Sharh bar Zad
al-musafir-i Mulla Sadra* (*Ma’ad-i jismani* ) (Tehran: Mu’assa-yi
Intisha ra t-i Ami r Kabi r, 1379 (A. H. Lunar)). Five manuscripts have
been listed.[^81]

In addition to the works listed above, Sadra has also a*mathnawi*
(couplets) of Persian poetry on various themes such as love, worship,
and sincerity with occasional explanations of some Qur’anic verses. Some
excerpts from the*Mathnawi* were first published as an appendix to
the*Sih asl* edited by S. H. Nasr.[^82] A larger collection was
published by Muhammad Khwajawi under the title*Majmu’a-yi ash’ar*
(Tehran: Intisharati Mawla, 1376 (A. H. Solar)/ 1418 (A. H. Lunar). The
complete edition of the*Mathnawi* containing over two thousand verses of
poetry has been edited and published by Mustafa Faydi under the
title*Mathnawi-yi Mulla Sadra* (Qom, 1376 (A. H. Solar)/1417 (A. H.
Lunar)).

The following works have been attributed to Mulla Sadra but their
authenticity remains in doubt.

*1- Adab al-bahth wa’l-munazarah* (“Manners of Investigation and
Debate”). A treatise on the manners of research and debate.

*2- al-Fawa’id* (“Benefits”). Collection of four short treatises, one of
which is a commentary on the famous*hadith* “I was a hidden treasure…”.
Mentioned also by Brockelmann.[^83] Even though Isfahani considers
the*Fawa’id* to be one of Sadra’s works and has thus included it in
his*Majmu’ah* (twelfth treatise, pp. 345-361), its authenticity has not
been fully established.

*3- Ithbat al-bari’ (Risalah fi)* (“Treatise on the Demonstration of the
Existence of God”). A theological treatise on the existence of God.

*4- Jawabat al-masa’il al-‘awisah* (“Answers to Difficult Questions”).
Nasr considers it to be a work by Mir Damad.[^84]

*5- Sirr al-nuqtah* (“The Secret of the Point”). An esoteric analysis of
the point most probably by Hamdani. This is the same work
as*al-Qudsiyyah fi asrar al-nuqtah al-hissiyat al-mushirah ila asrar
al-huwiyyah* mentioned by Nasr.[^85]

*6- Ithbat wajib al-wujud* (“Demonstrating the Existence of the
Necessary Being”). This is most likely the same as Amir Sadr al-Din
Dashtaki’s theological treatise on the Necessary Being.

*7- Hawashi bar sharh-i tajrid* (“Glosses upon the Commentary of
Tusi’s*Tajrid al-kalam* ”). Most probably the same as Sadr al-Din
Dashtaki’s treatise.

*8- Hawashi bar sharh-i lam’ah* (“Glosses upon the Commentary of
the*Lum’ah* ”). A treatise most likely by Sadra’s son Aqa Mirza Ibrahim.

*9- Shubhat al-jazr al-asamm* (“Doubt on the Irrational Root”). Even
though its title suggests that the treatise is on the mathematical
problem of the irrational root, it is about the logical problem of truth
and falsity. The treatise is a response to Jalal al-Din Dawani’s attempt
to solve the riddle, and definitely by Sadr al-Din Dashtaki. Brockelman
attributes it to Sadra.[^86] It has been published in
Isfahani,*Majmu’ah* (eighteenth treatise; pp. 467-478).

*10- Hawashi bar rawashih-i samawiyya-yi Mir Damad* (“Glosses upon Mir
Damad’s*al-Rawashih al-samawiyyah* ”). Even though Ashtiyani considers
it to be a possible work by Sadra, its authenticity has not been
established.[^87]

In addition to these, Brockelmann attributes the following works to
Sadra:*Tajrid maqalat Aristu* ,*Risalah fi rumuz al-qur’an* , which is
most probably the same as*Ma’ani al-alfaz al-mufradah min al-qur’an*
under a different title, and*Risalah fi’l-kufr wa’l-iman* .[^88]


