Notes
=====

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1] For the place of this classification in Islamic thought, see Seyyed
Hossein Nasr, Three Muslim Sages (New York: Caravan Books, 1997), pp.
63-[^4]:

[^2] Kit a b hikmat al-ishr a q in Oeuvres Philosophiques et Mystiques,
ed. by Henry Corbin (Tehran: 1977), Tome II, p. [^12]: See also the
English translation by John Walbridge and Hossein Ziai The Philosophy of
Illumination (Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1999), p. 3.

[^3] Suhrawardi lists eight classes of the seekers of truth with
variations in between, which can be summarized under the following three
groups: The first are the godly philosophers described above; second,
those who are plunged only in the purely rational and discursive
thinking, which is a reference to the Peripatetics; and third, the
anti-philosophical mystics who lack in rigorous thinking and logical
analysis. See Suhrawardi, Hikmat al-ishr a q, op. cit., pp. 11-2;
English translation, p. [^3]: The word muta'allih must be related to the
Platonic philosopher-king who combines in himself the power of
philosophical analysis and Divine light. Echoing Suhrawardi’s
discussion, S adr a proposes the following classification: 1] those who
know God (‘ a lim bi’Llah) but not his commands; 2] those who know God’s
commands (‘ a lim bi-amr Allah) but not Him; and 3] those who know both.
See his Muqaddimah to Sharh u su l al-k a fi (Kit a b al-‘aql
wa’l-jahl), ed. by Muhammad Khw a jawi (Tehran: 1366 A. H. Lunar)), p.
173.

[^4] For a comprehensive overview of the intellectual life during the
Safavid period, to which S adr a belongs, see S. H. Nasr, ‘Spiritual
Movements, Philosophy and Theology in the Safavid Period’ in The
Cambridge History of Iran, ed. by Peter Jackson and Laurence Lockhart,
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), Vol. VI, pp. 656-[^97]:

[^5] The roots of the Safavid dynasty go back to Shaykh S afi al-Din of
Ardabil (1253-1334), a powerful Sufi master of the Safawiyyah order, who
himself was a Sunni. The word Safavid is the adjectival form of ‘ s
afi’, referring to Shaykh S afi al-Din himself. The group of people,
whom the Ottomans called the ‘qizilb a sh’, read-heads, were Shaykh S
afi al-Din’s staunch followers, and when Sh a h Ism a ’il, himself of
Turkish origin, declared his independence against the Ottomans, he was
also considered to be the protector of the ‘qizilb a sh’.

[^6] For the religious character of this period, see B. S. Amoretti,
‘Religion in the Timurid and Safavid Periods’, in The Cambridge History
of Iran, Vol. VI, pp. 610-[^655]:

[^7] Said Amir Arjomand, The Shadow of God and the Hidden Imam:
Religion, Political Order, and Societal Change in Shi’ite Iran from the
Beginning to 1890 (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1984), pp.
112-[^9]:

[^8] E. G. Browne has put this question to Mirz a Muhammad Kh a n of
Qazwin, whose response, which was sent to Browne in 1911, reveals an
interesting perspective on the Safavid period by a Persian man of
letters. Mirz a Muhammad identifies the root of the problem as the
propagation of the exoterist Shi’ism by the Safavid rulers who ‘by
reason of their political aims and strong antagonism to the Ottoman
Empire, devoted the greater part of their energies to the propagation of
the Shi’a [sic] doctrine and the encouragement of divines learned in its
principles and laws… Now the close connection between poetry and Belles
Lettres on the one hand, and Sufiism [sic] and Mysticism on the other,
at any rate in Persia, is obvious, so that the extinction of one
necessarily involves the extinction and destruction of the other. Hence
it was that under this dynasty learning, culture, poetry and mysticism
completely deserted Persia, and the cloisters, monasteries, retreats and
rest-houses [of the darwishes] were so utterly destroyed that there is
now throughout the whole of Persia no name or sign of such charitable
foundations, though formerly, as, for instance, in the time of Ibn
Battutah, such institutions were to be found in every town, hamlet and
village…there exists now not a single monastery throughout the whole of
Persia, while in those parts of Turkey, such as Mesopotamia, Kurdistan
and Sulaymaniyya, which did not remain under the Safawi dominion, there
are many such buildings just as there were in Ibn Battuta’s days.’ The
letter appears in E. G. Browne, A Literary History of Persia,
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1953), Vol. IV, pp. 26-[^7]:

[^9] Fazlur Rahman, for instance, calls Findiriski a Peripatetic
philosopher, which, given his preponderance for Sufi practices, is a
questionable qualification. See his The Philosophy of Mull a S adr a ,
(New York: State University of New York Press, 1976), p. [^1]:

[^10] Fathullaj Mujtabai, Hindu Muslim Cultural Relations (New Delhi,
1978), p. 82; Edward G. Browne, A Literary History of Persia Vol. IV,
pp. 257-[^8]:

[^11] For Mir D a m a d and his intellectual milieu, see Hamid Dabashi,
‘Mir D a m a d and the Founding of the “School of I s fah a n”’ in A
History of Islamic Philosophy, ed. by Seyyed Hossein Nasr and Oliver
Leaman (London: Routledge, 1996), Vol. 1, pp. 597-[^634]:

[^12] Toshihiko Izutsu, Mahdi Mohaghegh and Fazlur Rahman have published
a number of studies on Mir D a m a d. We are, however, still far from
having a comprehensive analysis of his ideas. For some of the current
literature, see Hamid Dabashi, op. cit.; F. Rahman, ‘Mir D a m a d’s
Concept of Huduth Dahri: A Contribution to the Study of God-World
Relationship Theories in Safavid Iran’ Near Eastern Studies 39 (1980),
139-151; and Izutsu’s English Introduction to Kit a b al-Qabas a t, ed.
with an introduction by Mehdi Mohaghegh, Toshihiko Izutsu, ‘Ali Musawi
Bihbah a ni and Ibr a him Dib a ji (Tehran, 1977). See also S. H. Nasr,
‘The School of Isfahan’ in A History of Muslim Philosophy, ed. by M. M.
Sharif, Vol. 2 (Wiesbaden: O. Harrasowitz, 1966), pp. 904-932, reprinted
in The Islamic Intellectual Tradition in Persia, ed. by Mehdi Amin
Razavi (Curzon Press, 1996), pp. 239-[^270]:

[^13] For Bah a ’ al-Din A mili, see Nasr, ‘The School of Isfahan’, and
Dabashi, op. cit.

[^14] Browne draws attention to the same fact when he compares S adr a
with the ‘qishri’ (exoterist) ‘ulam a ’ of his time, to which most of
the akhb a ris belong. Browne, op. cit., p. [^376]:

[^15] Asf a r, I, 1, p. [^4]:

[^16] Ibid., p. [^6]:

[^17] It is in more than one place that S adr a refers to his spiritual
experiences as a way of attaining the ultimate meaning of philosophical
truth that he has learnt from books. In some cases, he even mentions
dreams and divine illuminations as the only solution of the problem he
deliberates upon. In the Asf a r, 7, p. 255, for instance, he speaks of
his own personal experience in solving the problem of the soul,
referring to the illumination of his soul by the Divine light, and
comparing his experience to Suhrawardi’s celebrated dream of Aristotle,
in which the First Teacher instructs Suhrawardi on the primacy of
self-knowledge. For Suhrawardi’s dream, see his Kit a b al-Talwi ha t,
Oeuvres Philosophiques et Mystiques, ed. by Henry Corbin, (Tehran-Paris,
1976), Tome I, pp. 70-[^74]: S adr a quotes Suhrawardi’s dream in the
Asf a r, Vol. III, p. 376.

[^18] Asf a r, pp. 7-[^8]:

[^19] Quoted in S. J. A shtiy a ni, Sharh-i ha l wa a r a -yi falsafi-yi
Mull a S adr a , p. [^243]:

[^20] The Development of Metaphysics in Persia, (London: Luzac, 1908) p.
175 where Iqbal says that ‘philosophy of S adr a is the source of the
metaphysics of early Babiism’ without presenting any concrete evidence.

[^21] A Literary History of Perisa, Vol. IV, p. [^430]: Browne remains
content with only quoting Iqbal on the issue.

[^22] Geshichte der Arabischen Litteratur (GAL), (Leiden: E. J. Brill,
1938), II. Supplement, p. 588 where Brockelmann says that ‘... an seine
[i.e., S adr a ’s] Metaphysik knupfte der Grunder der Saihisekte, Saih
A. Ahs a’i , seine Lehre an, und auf dieser fusste wieder die Theosophie
des Bab’.

[^23] Corbin, Le Livre des pénétrations métaphysiques (Teheran: Institut
Francais d’Iranologie de Téhéran, 1982), p. [^20]:

[^24] See, Nasr, ‘The Qur’anic Commentaries of Mull a S adr a ’ in Being
and Consciousness: Studies in Memory of Toshihiko Izutsu, ed. by S. J.
Ashtiy a ni, H. Matsubara, T. Iwami, A. Matsumoto (Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten
Publishers, 1998) reprinted in the revised edition of S adr al-Din Shir
a zi and His Transcendent Theosophy (Tehran: Institute for Humanities
and Cultural Studies, 1997), Chapter 7, pp. 123-135; L. Peerwani,
“Quranic Hermeneutics: The Views of S adr al-Din Shir a zi” British
Society for Middle East Studies Proceedings, 1991, pp. 468-477; Muhammad
Hossein Khamanei, Principles of Interpretation and Quranic Hermeneutics
According to Mull a S adr a (London: Islamic Studies Press, 1999).
Muhsin Salih has completed a Ph.D. Thesis entitled The Verse of Light: A
Study of Mull a S adr a ’s Philosophical Qur’an Exegesis, Temple
University, [^1993]: In Arabic, the work of Muhammad Khw a jawi, who has
edited and published all of S adr a ’s Qur’anic commentaries in 7 vols.,
is the most important source. His edition is titled Tafsir al-qur’ a n
al-karim (Qum: Bidar Press, 1366-1369/1987-1990). See also his Law a mi’
al- a rifin fi ahw a l S adr al-muta’allihin (Tehran: A riy a n Press,
1366/1987).

[^25] For the manuscript references, see Kit a b shin a si-yi j a mi’-yi
Mull a S adr a , N a hid B a qiri Khurram-dashti with F at imah ‘Asghari
(Tehran: Buny a d-i Hikmat-i Isl a mi-yi S adr a , 1378/1999), pp.
29-[^34]:

[^26] Ibid., pp. 39-[^43]:

[^27] Ibid., pp. 43-[^47]:

[^28] Ibid., p. [^74]:

[^29] Ibid., pp. 77-[^81]:

[^30] Ibid., 76-[^77]:

[^31] Henry Corbin, Le Livre des pénétrations métaphysiques, p. [^38]:

[^32] Mirz a Abu’l-Hasan Jilwah is of this opinion. See Khurram-dashti,
op. cit., p. [^87]:

[^33] Khurram-dashti, op. cit., pp. 89-[^96]:

[^34] Ibid., pp. 38-[^39]:

[^35] Ibid., pp. 35-[^37]:

[^36] Ibid., 53-[^56]:

[^37] Ibid., pp. 57-[^59]:

[^38] Ibid., pp. 51-[^53]:

[^39] Ibid., pp. 64-[^66]:

[^40] Ibid., p. [^72]:

[^41] Ibid., pp. 60-[^62]:

[^42] Ibid., pp. 69-[^71]:

[^43] Ibid., pp. 48-[^51]:

[^44] Ibid., p. [^99]: See also pp. 96-98 for references to other short
hadith commentaries.

[^45] I s fah a ni, op. cit., p. [^22]: Both S adr a and Ghil a ni must
have been Mir D a m a d’s students around the same time. In any case,
there appears to be a close relationship between the two as S adr a has
dedicated his Huduth al-‘ a lam to Mull a Shams a -yi Ghil a ni who had
asked the foregoing five questions after a close examination of the Asf
a r.

[^46] Khurram-dashti, op. cit., pp. 117-8; Nasr, op. cit., p. [^40]:

[^47] Nasr, op. cit., p. [^40]:

[^48] Khurram-dashti, op. cit., p. 134; Nasr, op. cit., p. [^49]:

[^49] Ibid., pp. 237-[^9]:

[^50] Isfahani, op. cit., p. [^30]:

[^51] Khurram-dashti, op. cit., pp. 253-[^7]:

[^52] Ibid., pp. 241-245; Nasr, op. cit., p. [^41]:

[^53] For a more detailed discussion of the contents of the Asf a r, see
Nasr, op. cit., pp. 55-[^68]:

[^54] Corbin, op. cit., pp. 31-[^2]:

[^55] Khurram-dashti, op. cit., pp. 142-[^166]: See also pp. 166-176 for
the manuscript information on the commentaries and glosses written upon
the Asf a r.

[^56] Ibid., pp. 136-9; Nasr, op. cit., pp. 41-[^2]:

[^57] Ibid., pp. 124-[^7]:

[^58] Ibid., pp. 111-[^3]:

[^59] Ibid., pp. 114-6; Nasr, op. cit., p. [^42]:

[^60] Ibid., pp. 106-7; Nasr, op. cit., [^42]:

[^61] Ibid., p. [^301]:

[^62] I s fah a ni, op. cit, p. [^41]:

[^63] Khurram-dashti, op. cit., pp. 198-[^9]:

[^64] Ibid., pp.278-[^286]:

[^65] Nasr, op. cit., p. [^44]:

[^66] Khurram-dashti, op. cit., pp. 200-[^1]:

[^67] For Ahmad Ahs a’i and other commentators, see Henry Corbin, op.
cit., pp. 47-[^52]:

[^68] Corbin’s edition and translation also contains a detailed survey
on S adr a , the Mash a ’ir and its philosophical significance. See
Corbin, op. cit., pp. 1-[^86]:

[^69] Khurram-dashti, op. cit., pp. 202-[^217]:

[^70] Ibid., pp. 291-[^2]:

[^71] Ibid., pp. 274-[^7]:

[^72] Ibid., pp. 177-[^8]:

[^73] For the glosses written upon S adr a ’s Sharh, see ibid., pp.
191-[^198]:

[^74] Ibid., pp. 180-[^191]:

[^75] Ibid., pp. 258-[^270]:

[^76] Ibid., pp. 104-[^5]:

[^77] Ibid., pp. 130-[^133]:

[^78] Ibid., pp. 298-[^9]:

[^79] Ibid., pp. 128-[^9]:

[^80] Ibid., pp. 229-[^232]:

[^81] Ibid., pp. 292-[^3]:

[^82] Sih a s l, ed. by S. H. Nasr, (Tehran: 1340 (A. H. Lunar); third
edition, 1377 (A. H. Lunar)), pp. 117-[^134]:

[^83] Brockelmann, op. cit., p. [^589]:

[^84] Nasr, S adr al-Din Shir a zi and His Transcendent Theosophy., p.
[^50]:

[^85] Nasr, op. cit., p. [^46]:

[^86] Brockelmann, op. cit., p. [^589]:

[^87] A shtiyani, Sharh-i ha l wa a r a -yi falsafi-yi Mull a S adr a ,
p. [^267]: For some other minor works attributed to S adr a , see
Khurram-dashti, op. cit., pp. 319-331.

[^88] Brockelmann, op. cit., p. [^589]:
