Introduction
============

Every activity engaged in by man, whether on the level of individual or
social life, is undoubtedly a result of particular psychological drives
and inclinations, and is fashioned with the aid of sense perception and
bodily skills and powers under different temporal and spacial
conditions. For example, man is driven to eat and drink by his instinct
to nourish himself, and is motivated to help the weak and the needy
because of his emotions of sympathy for other human beings. Then, by
using his sense organs, he identifies the desired foods or identifies
the weak and needy to be assisted, and carries out the desired tasks
through the use of his bodily faculties.

The above-mentioned activities could be said to possess the specific
"human" characteristic when they are guided by his reason, in addition
to his instinctive and emotional drives, which man shares with other
animals. That is,. the eating of food and the drinking of water should
be done with the aim of maintaining one's health and strength, and the
emotions and instincts must be satisfied within the framework of some
rational principles and under the guidance of reason. In many cases,
however, reason is overwhelmed by emotion and instinct, and is unable to
perform an effective role. When this happens, the activity is considered
devoid of any human value.

The practical guidance provided by reason is itself controlled by the
general notions and ideas which constitute the fundamental basis of
man's existence as an intelligent being. For example, the belief in the
necessity of maintaining one's health, or the urge to make sacrifices
for the sake of a higher aim, is based on particular conceptions of the
individual and society. It is these general conceptions and basic
patterns of thinking that play the major role in giving shape and
direction to man's efforts and struggles, and either make them
meaningful and worthwhile in the human sense or deprive them of human
meaning and worth. These basic patterns of thought are termed as
\`world-view'. It is on account of the differences in world view that
fundamental divergence in personal behaviour and social outlook takes
place.

Just as the guidance provided by reason on practical matters is ignored
in acts lacking in the \`human' character, when it loses all its
effective force, so also the theoretical decrees of reason are not
always given the attention they require. Many people never think of the
\`why' of their actions, and do not build their lives on the basis of
well-thoughtÂ­out ideas. Such people either content themselves with
imitating others, or are simply indifferent to fundamental questions,
although perceptive observers find their behaviour to conform to a
particular type of world-view. For example, the conduct of an individual
who thinks of nothing other than enjoyment of transitory pleasures and
pursuit of selfish interest is consistent with an individualistic and
materialistic world-view, even if he has not accepted materialism
consciously as a reasoned philosophical viewpoint.

Therefore, our efforts and activities are \`human' and \`reasonable'
when, firstly, they are performed not merely under the influence of
animal instinct but on the basis of understanding and under the guidance
of reason; secondly, when they are based on a logical and coherent
system of thought and a correct world-view, not on raw adopted notions,
or on an illogical and incorrect world-view.

In view of the above-mentioned principle, the necessity for the
selection of a reasonable world-view capable of lending itself to
rational justification is clear. Moreover, the existence of strong and
conflicting currents in the realm of thought and belief, and the
vulnerability of undefendable beliefs clearly indicates the need for
learning logical arguments which confirm the chosen world-view and the
necessity of acquiring the capacity to defend it.

