Chapter 1 : the Fundamental Problems of World-view
==================================================

The world evidently consists of various kinds of phenomena, the study
of whose characteristics has given birth to specialized fields of
science. Moreover, despite the expansion in different spheres of
knowledge and the vast number of wonderful and valuable discoveries made
in various disciplines, there still remain, in our immediate
surroundings and on this very planet, many things unknown, the effort to
solve whose mystery has occupied our inquisitive scientists.

However, as already mentioned, man has always been confronted with a
series of fundamental questions. The need to find correct and convincing
answers to such questions is a pressing demand of his innerÂ­most nature.
Furthermore, since these problems concern matters outside the realm of
the senses and empirical experience, their solution cannot be expected
from the experimental sciences and must be provided by reason and logic
alone. [^1]

It so happens that the correct solution of the aforementioned problems
is of fundamental importance in giving meaning and value to human
existence, and directing man's voluntary activities into proper
channels. The opposite of this is also true, in that giving wrong
answers to these questions makes life empty, meaningless, and devoid of
worthwhile goals, dragging man into the abyss of irreparable loss. Nor
can man afford to ignore these fundamental questions, since by doing so
he would, in addition to having to endure the pain of doubt, perplexity,
and anxiety, deprive himself of the opportunity of attaining the
ultimate aim of creation: perfection and everlasting felicity.

One of those fundamental questions which man must answer is whether the
phenomena we encounter in our world owe their existence solely to
material actions and reactions, without any participation or
intervention of a nonmaterial power. Is there no nonmaterial power
involved either in the emergence of the phenomena or in the existence of
matter itself? Or, to put it another way, does matter constitute the
totality of being, or does it constitute only a part of existence and
relies on something beyond itself for its being?

The above question, which itself can be analysed into a number of other
questions, is not limited to the properties and characteristics of any
particular group of physical creatures, so that it may be answerable by
some specific science through its own particular method. It is, on the
contrary, a philosophical question, which must be studied by reason
through intellectual speculation and analysis, even though the starting
point for such speculation is empirical knowledge in its widest sense,
which includes inner and direct experience as well.

The answer to the above question, whether in the positive or the
negative, constitutes a part of one's world-view, plays an important
role in forming a basic aspect of a person's intellectual approach which
may be called "ontology".

Another basic question is whether the life of each individual human
being is limited to the few years he lives in this world, or whether
there is another life for him after he passes away, much longer and
probably even an everlasting one. And this question in turn raises
another one: Does man, beside possessing a physical body, also possess a
soul which can continue to live after the death of the body or not?
Then, there is the last question, which is also related to the first
ontological question, whether being is equivalent to material existence
or is wider than that.

The solution to the above-mentioned problem also, whatever it may be,
constitutes another aspect of an individual's world-view, which may be
called here \`anthropology'.

And finally, the third fundamental issue to be settled before turning
one's attention to the details and selecting a particular course for
one's life is: What is the most certain way of knowing the best
programme for individual and social life? Is there any fool-proof way
beside the usual ways commonly adopted by most people which so often
lead to contradictory results, which would guarantee the certainty of
results?

The importance of the last question becomes more evident when the
answer to the second question is in the affirmative; that is, when we
conclude that man is immortal and that one must prepare beforehand for
the felicity of afterlife through conscious effort during the limited
period of this life. When such a belief is accepted, the need for a sure
way of determining the relationship between the two lives, and an
elaborate plan that would guarantee everlasting felicity becomes
clearer. And the more the importance ascribed to the everlasting life,
the greater is the significance of the path leading to felicity in it.
This issue may therefore be called the problem of "methodology."
Accordingly, the fundamental problems of world-view are: ontology,
anthropology, and methodology.

**Notes:**

[^1]. This matter shall be discussed in greater detail later on.

