Chapter 2 : Evaluating the Fundamental Problems
===============================================

The solution of the aforementioned fundamental problems is of foremost
importance, because it plays a basic role in shaping and giving
direction to man's personal and social life, and, logically, should be
taken up before any other issue. Also, it is of special significance
because it involves unlimited gain and loss. In other words, if the
answer to the fundamental questions raised is in the affirmative, the
possibility is opened up for man of deriving infinite benefit from his
life.

If it is proved that being is not coextensive with matter, and that the
world has a supreme Creator who is the Maker, Sustainer, and Nourisher
of all things, and possesses infinite power, knowledge, and mercy, and
if it is proved that man's life is not limited to this short, worldly
existence, but that it is followed by an everlasting life accompanied
either by felicity or misery, and that our life in this world is a
preliminary stage in which we determine the course of our life in the
Hereafter through our voluntary actions, and if it is proved that there
is a guaranteed method for obtaining the knowledge of a correct
life-programme that can take care of our felicity in both the lives, and
that this method has been communicated by the Almighty God through His
chosen messengers to mankind in general, it will have a tremendous
impact on man's life. In fact, the value given to the vital human
activities by such a view of reality is incomparably greater than the
combined worth of all the advancements made by science and the
discoveries and inventions made by man. This is so because however great
the value of these inventions and discoveries may be, it is still finite
and limited, while the value of this view is unlimited since it makes it
possible for man to attain unlimited and everlasting felicity. And it is
obvious that the unlimited cannot be compared with the limited.

The objection may be raised here that the probability of the
fundamental questions being answered positively is so small that it is
not worth considering. It should be kept in mind, however, that however
small this probability may be (1/n), it would still retain its positive
value since its multiple is infinity; (infinity x n = infinity). To put
it in the language of economics, the \`expected value' of any investment
depends on two factors: (1) the percentage of probability of success,
and (2) the estimated amount of the profit. It is the product of these
two that determines the \`expected value.' For example, if we want to
see which of two business ventures is more profitable for investment, it
is not enough to take into account the percentage of probability of each
one alone. We should also consider the estimated amount of profit each
venture is likely to yield. Thus, if the percentage of the probability
of success in the first venture is 10%, while that of the second venture
is 20%, but if the amount of the profit the first venture is likely to
yield is ten times that of the second venture, then we must conclude
that the expected profit in the first venture is five times greater than
that in the second one, despite the fact that the probability of success
in the first venture is half of that of the second one. This is so
because the product of the two multiples in the first case (0.1 x 10 =
1) is five times greater than that in the second case (0.2 x 1 = 0.2).

The conclusion that may be drawn from the above example is that it is
highly preferable to handle problems whose solution promises unlimited
benefit, even if our chances of solving them be very small. Furthermore,
the value of insight into such problems cannot be compared to that of
any other science, even if the results produced by these sciences be one
hundred per cent certain and reliable. Thus, indifference to the various
aspects of one's world-view and negligence of its fundamental problems
is not a reasonable and rationally justifiable attitude. Answering these
fundamental questions in the negative without any sufficient evidence is
even more unjustifiable.

$ Spiritual and Materialist Philosophies]

Although the fundamental questions facing man have been answered in
different ways and the differences in these answers have created various
philosophies and schools of thought, yet by taking into account the
positive and negative answers, we can distinguish and divide the various
philosophies into the two general categories of materialist and
spiritual. Islam is a perfect example of the spiritual schools of
thought [^2], whereas the most prominent contemporary example of the
materialist schools is Marxism.

The tenets of the Islamic world-view are none other than the well足known
threefold doctrines of the faith. [^3] These are: the belief in the One
God (al-tawhid); the belief in resurrection on the Day of Judgement
(al-ma\`dd); the belief in what God has revealed to His prophets (wahy,
nubuwwah). In other words, Islam answers in the affirmative to each of
the fundamental questions, and considers faith in them to be the real
basis of man's happiness and felicity. It undertakes the solution of
life's all other problems by relying on these three basic doctrines. In
fact, it considers all solutions as the branches of a tree whose roots
are these three principal beliefs. On the contrary, the materialist
philosophies deny the existence of anything nonmaterial, do not believe
that man has any life except this brief earthly existence, and deny the
assurance held out by revelation.

Although the fundamental doctrines of the Islamic faith have been
expounded and proven throughout the past centuries and on various
levels, and there does not remain any doubt or uncertainty about any of
them, this does not affect the basic fact that the contemporary strength
of any set of beliefs hinges on two sorts of studies: one devoted to
proving the validity of those beliefs, and the second, devoted to
refuting contrary viewpoints. In other words, a double insight is
necessary. In the case of Islam, unless the points of disagfee足ment with
other ideologies are identified, the areas that are made the targets of
the opponents' criticisms and attacks are pinpointed, and a proper
defence consisting of clear and logical answers is provided to the
common Muslim individual, we cannot be sure of the stability of the
faith on the level of the general public, and be certain of the people's
steadfastness in the face of the waves of challenging ideologies.
More足over, just as in the past ideological and theological books were
written in accordance with the intellectual challenges of the times and
with the aim of answering their prevailing doubts, so must the
ideological discussions of today be formulated in accordance with the
philosophies and schools of thought now current, and with the aim of
repelling their ideological attacks.

What makes defensive discussions specially essential today is that
materialist philosophies are not being set forth for the mere purpose of
proposing solutions to the fundamental theoretical questions, but are,
in fact, being propagated in order to serve the political interests of
the superpowers who consider exploitation of the emotions of the world's
hardworking and simple people as the best means of attaining their
colonialist aims. Thus in order to disarm the people of their
deep足rooted, liberating spiritual world-view, they have taken recourse
in a philosophy tuned to the shallow understanding of the majority of
workers and farmers. At the same time, they have tried to adorn
materialism, which is one of the most reactionary and baseless of the
ancient dogmas, with scientific embellishments, and pretend that it is a
modern and "scientific" philosophy. Nor have they spared the use of all
sorts of sophistry, paralogism, and misrepresentation to achieve this
end.

The truth of the matter is that the superpowers have used materialism,
which is based on empiricism, as a means of attracting the uneducated
masses and as an excuse for sanctioning their propensities for improper
and unethical conduct. In order to deceive the educated classes, they
have borrowed some of the postulates of the experimental sciences and
incorporated them into materialism. Moreover, to make sure that the
probable rejection of these postulates does not destroy the foundations
of their philosophy, they have taken refuge in "dialectical logic,"
presenting all truths to be relative and variable, so that scientific
progress not only would not invalidate their doctrines, but would, on
the contrary, appear to support them.

We may maintain, therefore, that defending the positions of Islamic
ideology, clarifying any of its ambiguities which may lend themselves to
misrepresentation, and exposing all those who have made spiritual
philosophy the target of unfair and dishonest accusations, is not only
an authentic philosophical and intellectual duty and a divinely ordained
obligation in regard to guiding the Muslims and strengthening the
foundations of their faith, but is also an Islamic social responsibility
in regard to defending Islam and the existence of the Muslim countries,
which have become targets of ideological, political, and colonialist
attacks by the communist block.

It must be pointed out here that by emphasizing the necessity for
\`double insight' and \`two-faceted defence' we do not mean to say that
such insight and understanding is the \`sufficient cause' for creating
faith and inclination towards the right path, or that the only reason
for being drawn towards atheism and other devious paths is ignorance
about correct, logical, and convincing answers to criticisms. Our
purpose is simply to indicate the importance of defensive arguments
alongside the affirmative ones, and to emphasize that these two
activities are some of the necessary conditions for creating a stable
faith, though are not the sufficient condition for it. There are other
conditions necessary for the stability of faith, specially in regard to
the masses of people, the most important of which is spiritual readiness
and freedom from moral corruption. Just as hedonism and moral
irregularities may be caused by belief in materialism, belief in
materialist philosophies may also be occasioned by strong attachment to
bodily pleasures and moral corruption; since one's love of pleasures and
lusts may lead him, unconsciously, to search for and be attracted by
philosophies which promote and sanction such conduct, and to avoid all
schools of thought which teach abstinence from such endless pursuit of
carnal pleasures.

It is, therefore, necessary that the real seeker after truth should
cleanse himself of all moral impurities and all selfish and carnal
desires, and, relying on nothing except logic and reason for guidance,
liberate himself from the bondage of blind imitation of individuals,
groups, or nations, simply because they possess some kind of social,
political or technical superiority.

**Notes:**

[^2]. This is not to say that Islam is one kind of philosophy; what is
meant is that the basic principles of Islamic faith concern issues which
fall into the same category as philosophical ones. To put it another
way, Islam has philosophical foundations just as Marxism does.

[^3]. The two other principles of Islamic belief, that is, \`adl
(justice) and imamah, are in fact implicit in the doctrines of al-tawhid
and nubuwwah (prophethood).

