Chapter 3 : Spiritual Philosophy and Scientific Truths
======================================================

A glance at the fundamental philosophical questions, to which spiritual
and materialist philosophies give contradictory answers, clearly shows
that the areas of contention between the two opposing points of view
have nothing to do with experimental matters. Whatever the solutions
found to scientific problems, they would not in any way affect the way
these philosophical questions are answered. For example, accepting or
rejecting Euclid's theory of space, holding to the view that mass is
absolute or relative, or the validity or invalidity of the theory of
mutation in biology, and other conflicting theories in the various
sciences-none of these tell us anything about whether the divine or the
materialistic philosophies are true; since the subject of discussion in
philosophy is not the same as that of the experimental sciences, and the
methods of investigation used in the two fields are completely different
from each other.

It is wrong to imagine, therefore, that it is materialistic philosophy
alone that accepts scientific facts and affirms the validity of the laws
governing the transformations and interactions of physical phenomena,
while spiritual philosophy denies them and sets forth the theory of
creation in their place. The materialists hold that belief in the theory
of creation finds its genesis, in the distant past, in man's ignorance
of the physical causes of phenomena. Therefore, now, when due to the
advances in the experimental sciences, the system of physical causation
has been fully discovered, there is no room left for such notions as
that of creation or the dependence of phenomena on the will of the
Creator . [^4]

We know, however, that the dispute between the spiritual and the
materialist points of view is not about affirming or denying the
relationÂ­ship between various phenomena, the nature of such
relationships, or the laws which govern nature. What the dispute is
about is whether the material world, with all the relationships existing
between its various parts, be they known or as yet undiscovered by us,
depends on a Being which transcends matter or not.

It is obvious that if such a dependence does exist, it would not be of
the sort that exists between material bodies, and, therefore, cannot be
studied by experimental methods; because just as the nonmaterial Being
(if it exists) cannot be known through sense experience, the dependence
of material phenomenon on it, also, cannot be studied through laboratory
instruments. In order to make this point even clearer, we must briefly
discuss philosophy and the experimental sciences, the fundamental
differences between the problems with which they deal, and the
methodologies which they employ.

**Notes:**

[^4]. This is one of the most notorious fallacies propagated by the
Marxists.

