Chapter 4 : Philosophy and Science
==================================

By the way of an introduction we would like to remind the readers that
there are many words which have a number of meanings. At times one of
them has a wider and more general signification than the others.
Sometimes the use of such words may lead to misunder­standing, and it is
necessary to make sure that one understands the exact sense in which a
word is being used. In philosophy, there are a number of such terms; for
example, \`potentiality,' \`possibility,' \`soul,' \`reason,' and so
on.

Among the terms that share common significations are the words
\`philosophy' and \`science.' In the past the word philosophy (lit.
\`the love of wisdom') was applied to all branches of knowledge,
including the natural sciences, mathematics, divinities, ethics, and
politics. Every branch of knowledge had a special methodology of its
own, although sometimes it happened that inappropriate methods were
used; for example, a problem belonging to the natural sciences was
investigated through a purely rationalist approach, whereas it should
have been studied through the experimental method.

In the Middle Ages other branches of learning were added to the
aforementioned list, until it came to include almost all the thinking of
that age.

After the Renaissance, and specially from the seventeenth century
onward, those sciences whose method of enquiry was experimental,
gradually separated from philosophy, and the term eventually came to be
applied exclusively to that branch of learning the problems of which lay
outside the realm of experiment and could be solved only through a
purely rational, theoretical method. This branch of learning is called
"metaphysics" or "the first philosophy". The term "philosophy" is also
used to refer to the process of explaining the basic principles
necessary for investigating the problems of a particular science, such
as the philosophy of science and the philosophy of ethics.

The word "science," which literally means "knowledge," is technically
used to mean systematized knowledge of problems dealing with a
particular subject. According to this definition, the term "science"
could also be applied to metaphysics. In recent centuries, however, the
usage of the term has become more limited, and has come to refer to the
experimental sciences alone, in opposition to philosophy.

According to the latter definition, philosophy and science each
possesses its own distinct subject matter and methodology. That is,
philosophy's subject of study consists of the general problems of
existence, which are in the main part abstract and are also called,
"secondary concepts," [^5] and its method is rational and theoretical.
Science, on the other hand, is concerned with the study of the
accidental properties of particular objects the existence of which is
taken for granted; its method is experimental. For example, physics
deals with matter and energy and their interactions in the fields of
mechanics, acoustics, optics, heat, electricity, magnetism, radiation,
atomic structure, and nuclear phenomena; chemistry studies the
composition, structure, and properties of substances and the
trans­formations they undergo. Physiology investigates the organic
processes and phenomena of living organisms, while psychology discusses
mental conditions and characteristics. However, none of these sciences
has any­thing to say about the essential nature of the subject it
studies or the fundamental principles underlying its methodology. In
other words, neither physics and chemistry express any opinions about
the existence of matter, nor physiology and psychology discuss the
reality of life and the soul. Nor does any of these sciences examine the
principle of causal­ity and its subordinate laws.

What philosophy concerns itself with are general abstract questions
such as: cause and effect, permanence and change, the material and the
abstract, the contingent and the necessary, etc. And since these issues
are not directly connected with sense perception, the problems related
to them cannot be settled empirically. The key to their solution must be
found in rational investigation and analysis. The way these rational
investigations are carried out and the value of their findings
constitute the subject matter of an important part of modern philosophy
known as "epistemology." It follows then that we cannot expect
scientific progress to help us in resolving philosophical disputes, and
science to act as a referee in the quarrel between spiritual and
materialist philosophies.

Unfortunately, there have been numerous attempts in the history of
science and philosophy to invoke scientific laws or theories for help in
the solution of philosophical problems, or to tip the scale in favour of
a particular metaphysical position. On the contrary, others have sought
refuge in the philosophical mode of reasoning and the rational method to
help them solve a scientific problem. This, despite the fact that such
intrusions are dangerous for both philosophy and science, and keep them
from following the paths appropriate to their fields of study and
solution of their problems through the use of methods prescribed by the
nature of those problems.

As an example of such unjustified intrusion, we can mention the sort of
argument some modern physicists have used to "prove" the existence of
necessity in the relationship between cause and effect (determinism) by
referring to findings in the field of macro-physics, while other
physicists have pointed to certain phenomena observed in micro-physics
as evidence that no such necessity exists. There is yet a third group
that has endeavoured to reconcile the two positions by proposing that
determinism is valid in the case of macro-physical phenomena and invalid
in the case of micro-physical ones. All this while any philosopher knows
that the law of causation is a general philo­sophical and metaphysical
law which is, according to the definitive judgement of reason, fixed and
unchanging.

What we must do is to search in nature for cases which would verify the
law of causation through experimental investigations. What we definitely
shouldn't do is to consider the discovery of a few examples of its
applicability as a proof of its validity, or the inability to apply it
in few cases as evidence of either its invalidity or lack of generality;
since such failure is definitely a result of the inadequacy of our
instruments. In fact, it is the self-evident principle of causality that
has moved scientists to seek the causes of phenomena and to discover the
laws and secrets of nature. To attempt, therefore, to prove this
metaphysical principle through reference to physical phenomena and the
discoveries of the experimental sciences is like trying to play the
flute by blowing through its wrong end.

It should not go unsaid, however, that philosophy and science are
related to each other in a number of ways, the most important of which
is that philosophy proves the existence of the subject matter and the
validity of the fundamental principles of the sciences, while the
sciences provide a widening background for philosophical inquiry. In any
case, there should be no mixing of either their problems or methods and
no expecting of solutions to scientific problems from philosophy or of
philosophical problems from science.

**Notes:**

[^5]. That is, concepts that are formulated as a result of rational
analysis; such as, necessity, contingency, and causation.

