Chapter 5 : Scientific Philosophy
=================================

Admitting the existence of problems that must be investigated on a
philosophical plane, Marxism has tried to pretend that these problems
can be solved by using the discoveries made by the experimental
sciences. The way Marxist writers go about doing this is that they first
give an example from nature, and follow it with an example drawn from
social or historical phenomena. Their third step is to draw a general
conclusion by forcing a connection between these two examples, thereby,
in their own imagination, proving the philosophi­cal principle in
question. Supposedly, the whole exercise authorizes them to call their
philosophy as "scientific" and as based on discoveries made by the
experimental sciences. Although this procedure may have some effect on
those who are unfamiliar with philosophical problems and scientific
methodology and are, therefore, unable to distinguish the weak points
and fallacies hidden in this line of reasoning, it has no philosophical
value and is considered a form of sophistry and public fraud by those
who are knowledgeable in such matters.

We do not deny that there has been a fragmentation in the sciences
caused by the extensive specialization of the various fields, and there
is, therefore, a need for synthesizing the results of their
investiga­tions and bridging the gaps separating the numerous fields of
science. Nor do we have any objection to such an endeavour's being
called "scientific philosophy," since there is no ethical or legal
injunction against coining new terms and names. What we do object to,
however, is the abuse of terms and covering up of facts under misleading
labels. This, we believe, is reprehensible and must be fought against.

It should be kept in mind that Marxist writers have not created their
so-called "scientific philosophy" in order to serve the world of science
and scholarship, by making a synthesis of the results of the
investigations of the different sciences, and by connecting the
endeavours of the diverse fields with one another. Far from such
altruistic aims, their real motivation is to provide a justification for
their baseless ideology and a philosophical foundation for their
immature and inconsistent ideas. Moreover, even though the very

notion of relying on scientific findings for finding solutions to
metaphysical problems is incorrect and unfruitful-and as it has been
stated before, philosophical issues cannot be settled in such a
manner­the Marxists are not even loyal to this misguided approach, since
they ignore many irrefutable scientific facts, and rely, instead, on
weak and unproven theories lacking any scientific value whatsoever. And
when the fallacy of these theories is proven, instead of learning a
lesson from all the wasted effort and recognizing the futility of their
approach, or having recognized it, admitting it, they move on with
undaunted courage to grasp at another theory, and through peculiar
intellectual acrobatics at which they are so adept, set it forth as
further proof of the validity of dialectical materialism.

We shall leave an examination of the fumblings and public deceptions of
the Marxists to some future occasion and simply state the fact that the
notion of a "scientific philosophy"-in the sense of a philosophy that
attempts to solve philosophical problems through the application of the
methodology of the experimental sciences with reliance on scientific
discoveries alone-is an anomaly unacceptable to any competent thinker.
And the adjective "scientific" for philosophy not only does not add
anything to its worth, since it ascribes to it a characteristic
inappropriate to philosophy, but it simply exposes the bankruptcy of its
originators which proves that they were unable to distinguish the
boundaries separating science from philosophy and the correct method of
tackling philosophical problems. It seems that our Marxist wizards
justify this blatant contradiction as an example of "dialectical
contradiction," and set it forth as a highly advanced philosophical
phenomenon to the credulous devotees of "dialectics."

Another point to be noted here is that just as ascribing the term
"scientific" to discussions of philosophical issues is caused either by
ignorance, or intentions to deceive the public, to denigrate and condemn
them as "unscientific" is also a form of distortion and abuse of the
prestige of the word "scientific". And just as being characterized as
"scientific" adds nothing to the value of metaphysical investigations,
their being labelled as "unscientific" does nothing to bring down their
value either. Since, as we mentioned before, being "scientific" means
that a subject must lend itself to empirical verification, whereas the
quality that purely theoretical problems transcend the realm of sense
experience is essential to them, and is not a shortcoming or defect on
their part. In other words, just because something is outside the realm
of sense experience and cannot be proved through experimental methods,
it does not mean that it is worthless or unverifiable. It means, rather,
that it should be analysed with the help of the rational method and by
the means of the self-evident axioms -of reason. Moreover, as shall be
demonstrated later, scientific problems themselves are in need of
metaphysical and rational principles.

