Chapter 6 : Metaphysics
=======================

We said earlier that the word "philosophy" has a number of meanings one
of which is synonymous with "metaphysics". It should be kept in mind,
however, that the word "metaphysics" itself has various meanings-a fact
that may give rise to confusion and misunder­standing.

Derived from the Greek term meta physika, [lit., the (works) after the
physical (works)], metaphysics is the name given to that part of
philosophy which concerns itself with the general principles of
existence, and it appears that the ancient philosophers dealt with this
subject after the section dealing with the natural sciences (physics) as
a matter of didactic convenience. Thus it came to be called "after
physics." As we said earlier, when all the other fields of learning
separated from philosophy, what was left behind was metaphysics.

Since metaphysics deals with nonmaterial existence, a misunder­standing
has arisen that metaphysics deals with supernatural phenom­enon, and
this misunderstanding has in turn caused spiritual philos­ophies to be
branded as "metaphysical." The fact of the matter is that metaphysical
considerations are not limited to theistic philosophies; the materialist
schools are in as much need of metaphysics as others. This is the case
because anyone who wishes to discuss the general and fundamental
principles of existence-principles which do not fall within the
exclusive domain of any particular science-must enter the realm of
metaphysics, irrespective of the sort of conclusions he might reach. For
example, a discussion of the principle of causality is a philosophical
and metaphysical one, and although it is considered to be an axiom and
used as such by all the experimental sciences, they cannot investigate
it through the use of the scientific method and prove its validity. This
is so even though their investigations are based upon it, and the
formulation of universal scientific laws is possible only because of the
law of causation. Even if someone wants to reject the principle of
causality or any of its subordinate laws, he would still have to engage
in a metaphysical discussion, and as they say, "philosophy can be
refuted only through philosophy."

Recently an English philosopher, Robin George Collingwood, has written
a treatise on metaphysics in which he has described it as a series of
presuppositions which can neither be proved nor disproved. He says that
these presuppositions are accepted unconsciously under certain
conditions and rejected under a different set of conditions.'

Mr. Collingwood's treatise is a jumble of confused ideas, a product,
according to one commentator of his works, of his days of illness. It
represents a subjective statement or hypothesis devoid of any
philosophical value, and cannot be counted as an inquiry into the nature
of metaphysics.

Considering what has been said above, it becomes clear that issues of
importance in the First Philosophy are also relevant to the physical
sciences, and whatever general issues fall outside the framework of
science, would be considered as metaphysical. Moreover, even if the
doctrine of dialectical materialism should be proven to be true, it
would also be a metaphysical principle; since dialectical materialism,
as its adherents claim, is not limited to any specific sphere or
science, but applies to all natural, social, political, historical, or
intellectual phenomena. Therefore, there is no opposition between
dialectical materialism and metaphysics. There would, however, be
opposition between materialism and metaphysics if the latter is taken to
signify the \`realm of the supernatural.’ Thus the opposition assumed by
the Marxist writers between dialectics and metaphysics is completely
groundless and without foundation.

The nature of metaphysical problems is such that they have given rise
to differing and even contradictory judgements regarding them. And even
though man's nature thirsts for answers to them and, as said before, the
human character of man's existence depends on correctly solving some of
these problems, yet some European thinkers have judged them as
insoluble, while others have considered them useless and even
meaningless.

It is obvious that a thorough examination of the aforesaid
characteristics of its problems and the numerous opinions expressed on
the subject of metaphysics, is outside the scope of this work, requiring
far more space. I hope to undertake such an attempt in the future, when
I shall examine in detail the misunderstandings that have given rise to
such judgements, and explain the issues in simple terms. Here, I shall
content myself with mentioning the following points:

A. Since man's immediate and ordinary perceptions are acquired through
the medium of the senses, shallow thinking people imagine that there is
nothing beyond the perceived world, or, more precisely, beyond the range
of our sense perceptions. And if, supposedly, such a thing did exist, it
cannot be verified. It was this kind of shortsighted­ness that caused
the Children of Israel to say to Moses:

...We shall never believe in you [and affirm your prophethood] until we
see God manifestly (with our eyes) ....(2:55)

The position of those who say that the soul does not exist since we
cannot find it through surgery is similar.

In answer to such shortsighted views, it would suffice to say that
there are many things in this very physical world that cannot be
perceived through the senses, such as electricity, electromagnetic
waves, and other things, whose existence is considered certain by the
con­cerned sciences. People who deny the existence of anything beyond
the range of our senses must either deny all these realities, or admit
that knowledge is not limited to that gained through direct sense
perception; and that reason can apprehend the existence of the
supersensible through the knowledge of its perceptible effects.

B. Exclusive reliance on sense perception (despite its errors and
shortcomings) can justify only abstinence from making any judgements
regarding the supersensible world. It certainly cannot justify any
categorical denial of the supersensible world. It follows, then, that
the empiricists have no right to deny the existence of a world lying
beyond the range of senses. They must adopt an agnostic attitude towards
the subject, allowing the probability of its existence, and act in
accordance with the deny znd of such a probability.

C. There is a set of metaphysical principles the validity of which
cannot be denied by any reasonable man although they cannot be verified
by the senses. The nature of these principles is such that even if
someone does try to deny them, he will end up by unconsciously affirming
them. For example, the law of contradiction is a metaphysical
conception, which cannot be perceived through any of the senses. Not
even the individual concepts which constitute it can be apprehended
through any of the senses. That is, the idea of contradiction is not
\`perceived' by the senses. Despite it, however, no reasonable person
can deny the validity of this self-evident principle, and even the claim
that it is invalid proves its validity.

If someone says that contradiction is possible, can he, at the same
time, believe that it is impossible and that it is possible? And if he
is told that his claim, although one hundred per cent correct, is also
one hundred per cent wrong, would he accept it? Of course not. It is
thus proven that the very claim that this principle is invalid proves
its validity.

It is clear that all those who have stated the view that contradic­tion
is possible or necessary, either had some other meaning of
"contradiction" in mind, or have not understood the meaning of the
concept correctly. Otherwise, the impossibility of contradiction-if its
meaning is correctly understood-is far too obvious to be questioned by
any reasonable person.

The existence of such principles as mentioned above proves that man
possesses a faculty of apprehension other than the senses, a faculty
that can apprehend certain realities independently. Thus we cannot say
that the content of a particular proposition is unknowable or
unverifi­able just because it is outside the range of perception.

It follows, therefore, that the solution to metaphysical problems must
be found through the rational method; that is, through the application
of self-evident axioms, solutions to nonempirical problems are found.
Moreover, if used correctly, this method can lead to results even more
definite than those attained in the empirical sciences. In fact, as
already pointed out, the certitude of the results attained by the
empirical sciences and their generality depend entirely on metaphysical
principles.

Every human being, throughout life, perceives things both inside and
outside himself. Mostly these perceptions are attained through natural
means, and sometimes through artificial devices. In any case, neither an
isolated perception nor all of them could be said to consti­tute a
"science," in the sense of a set of general principles. Perception
acquires scientific value only when it transcends the limits of the
particular and the personal and enters the realm of generality.
Moreover, these generalities cannot be in the form of simple concepts,
but must take the composite form of postulates consisting of a number of
concepts possessing a special relationship amongst them.

For example, the seeing of different colours and shapes, the hearing of
various sounds, and other sense-data, give man some knowl­edge about
objects existing in his environment; but this knowledge is not what is
meant by the word "science." In other words, the partic­ular bits of
information thus obtained do not constitute the science of physics or
chemistry, or any other science, even though they are more or less
connected with scientific issues. Such postulates, for instance, as "the
sum of the angles of a triangle is equal to two right angles," "metals
expand when exposed to heat," and "the atoms of one element can be
changed into those of another element," etc. are scien­tific statements.
As it can be clearly seen, these notions do not represent particular
perceptions of any particular individual, and are not subject to any
limitation of time or space. That is, just as they are true of the
triangles, metals, and atoms of the past and the present, they are also
true of the triangles, metals, and atoms of the future. Nor are these
truths in any way affected by spatial considerations. This is the
characteristic which distinguishes scientific concepts from particular
perceptions.

Now we have to see how man can come to possess the faculty of being
able to pass judgement equally on past, present, and future. It is
obvious that none of the senses has the ability to look into the past
and the future in the manner mentioned above, and the sense
percep­tions, if they be in accordance with reality, can portray only
such phenomena as exist at the time of perception, not those which have
long ceased to exist or have not yet come into existence.

There is no doubt that these general postulates, which are based on
particular perceptions and are abstracted from them, are trans­formed
through a certain intellectual process into general, definite, and
necessary laws. This being so, the next question that presents itself
is: how and according to what laws does the human mind extend particular
perceptions and turn them into general postulates, and that too in a
definitive form, invulnerable to scepticism?

In answer we can say that whenever we perceive two phenomena either
together or following one another, we realize that there exists a
relationship between them called "the causal relationship," and thus
foresee that whenever the cause is present the effect would also be
present. For example, whenever heat is produced in metals, their
expansion would also follow.

However, without going into meticulous philosophical considera­tions,
it can be said that what we can perceive through the senses is either
the simultaneous existence of two phenomena or the fact that one of them
follows the other. But by what means do we perceive that the existence
of one phenomenon depends on that of another? And, secondly, even if we
determine that such a dependence does exist in a particular case, how do
we know that such a dependence has existed in the past and will exist in
the future, in all locations?

Of course, we admit that all scientists do understand the things just
mentioned, and it is on the basis of this understanding that they pursue
scientific research and seek for the causes of various phenomena and
their interrelationships. We should know, however, that this
under­standing is not the work of sense organs and the perceptual
faculties related to them, -but is the work of another inner faculty
called "intellect" which is capable of comprehending fixed realities
uncondi­tioned by spatial and temporal limitations. One such unchanging
reality is the law of causality and its corollaries to which all
scientific laws owe their generality and certainty. Moreover, since
these perceptions (rational truths) have not been apprehended through
the medium of sense and experience and cannot be verified by any of the
experimental sciences, they are therefore metaphysical truths.

In conclusion we can say that not only man's knowledge is not limited
to perceptions gained through sense and experience, but the laws of the
empirical sciences are themselves in need of nonempirical knowledge and
metaphysical principles.

