Prophet Muhammad [s]
====================

***“Muhammad is not the father of any one of your men, but he is the
Messenger of Allah and the Last of the prophets...”*** ***Holy Qur'an
(33:40)***

Allah sent Prophet Muhammad [s] as a Messenger to all mankind and
revealed through him the Holy Qur'an.

It was the Angel Gabriel [a], who brought the holy verses of the Qur'an
to the Prophet by reciting parts until it was completed, which took
twenty three years.

Allah tells us through the Holy Qur'an that Prophet Muhammad [s] is the
last, and the seal, of all the prophets, that no prophet will come after
him. The religion conveyed to the whole of mankind is Islam, being the
seal of all religions.

Allah sent various prophets, whose number is reckoned to be one hundred
and twenty four thousand, in order to guide and teach people their
religion, in each period of time. So Allah, the Most Exalted, did not
leave His servants without any messenger to advise them of their duties
and the divine path to follow.

The first prophet whom Allah sent down to people was Adam [a], the
father of all mankind, and the last Prophet sent was Prophet Muhammad
[s]. The Holy Qur'an mentions the names of only the great prophets but
not all the others. It quotes the names of twenty five: Adam, Idris,
Noah, Hud, Salih, Lot, Abraham, Ismael, Isaac, Jacob, Shu'aib, Moses,
Aaron, David, Solomon, Job, Dhul Kifl, Jonah, Elias, Zacharia, John,
Jesus, Muhammad (May Allah's blessings be upon them all).

Muslims believe in all the messengers sent by Allah culminating with
Prophet Muhammad [s], the last Prophet, who brought forth Islam, the
ultimate religion. Allah, therefore, does not accept any religion other
than Islam and the followers of Prophet Muhammad [s].


