Miracles
========

Allah sent the prophets to teach people their religion, guide them
towards righteous deeds and forbid them to do evil and spread
corruption. But most people did not believe them. Instead, they asked
for some evidence to prove their truthfulness and prophethood.

Thus, Allah bestowed upon His prophets certain powers which were
difficult or impossible for others to perform. This was to make people
realize that such things were the work of Allah and could only happen
because of His Omnipotence.

Allah is the One Who makes miracles
-----------------------------------

The miracles of the prophets include:

The Miracle of the Prophet Abraham [a]: When he called his people to
give up their idols and to worship Allah, they disbelieved him and their
ruthless king decided to burn him. After collecting firewood and putting
Abraham [a] in the middle, they set it on fire. The fire remained
burning for a long period, but Abraham [a] was not burnt as he was saved
by Allah's permission and Omnipotence.

Abraham [a] came out of this fire alive instead of being burnt to ashes.
Yet, how was he saved against such fire? Only by a miracle performed by
Allah to let people know that Abraham [a] was a messenger of the
Almighty.

Another miracle is that concerning Prophet Muhammad [s] and his midnight
journey to the seven heavens. His means were not by any form of
transport, only the Omnipotence of Allah made him transcend. Another
miracle of Prophet Muhammad [s] is the Holy Qur'an sent down to him by
Allah, the Most High. It is impossible for others to compose anything
like it, not even a single sentence of the profound text, neither during
the Prophet's lifetime nor afterwards.

People, therefore, on hearing this great miracle (the Qur'an) not only
believed him but also believed that it could only be the Word of Allah
and not of man. If it was not so, other people could surely write
something like it. But being Allah's, no one can bring anything to
resemble the Qur'an. Only Allah, the Exalted.

Miracles are something extraordinary which no one is capable of doing
and Allah specifies that the miracles of His prophets are only to make
people trust and believe them.


