Allah's Capability
==================

Allah, the Most High, says:

***“Or the like of him (Uzair) who passed by a town, in ruins to the
very roofs. He said: 'How will Allah (ever) give it life after its
death?' So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then raised him
to life. He (Allah) said: 'How long have you tarried?' He said: 'I have
tarried a day, or a part of a day'.***

***Said He: 'No! you have tarried a hundred years; but look at your food
and drink - years have not passed over it. And took at your ass! And
that We may make you a sign to people, and took further at the bones,
how We bring them together, and clothe them with flesh; so when it
became clear to him, he said: 'I know that Allah is All-Powerful over
all things.” Holy Qur'an (2: 259)***

In the above verse, the Holy Qur'an tells us the story of a prophet, who
when riding his donkey, passed by a town in which all the inhabitants
had long ago died and their dwellings were in ruins. Then, he started
asking himself how could it be possible for Allah to re-create those
dead people and give them life. He doubted Allah's capability in this.

Therefore, Allah wanted to make clear His capability both to him and his
people. So, He caused the prophet to die at the beginning of the day and
remain there with his donkey as being dead for a hundred years. Then He
brought him back to life at the end of that day.

Upon being resurrected, he was asked how long he had been remained dead.
At first, he thought that he had slept only a day or a part or a day,
but he was told that he had tarried for a hundred years, but he should
look at his food and his donkey.

Then he looked at his food; he found it fresh and unchanged but he did
not understand. This proof showed Allah's ability because the food would
have been spoiled if it had remained for more than a day. It could only
remain fresh for one hundred years by power beyond man's capability.

Then be looked at his donkey, and he saw that it had long ago died and
its bones were scattered. Wild animals had eaten its flesh as it
decomposed, during a hundred years.

Allah wanted to demonstrate His ability to give life to the dead and so
He returned the bones to their proper positions and flesh appeared on
them as before. Life was restored to the donkey once more.

Seeing this divine miracle the Prophet said: *“Surely I know now that
Allah is All-Powerful over everything, but I wanted proof of Allah's
greatness, and His capability in re-creating the dead.”*

*“And guard yourselves against the Day on which you shall be returned to
Allah.”*


