Paradise
========

Paradise is the dwelling place for the obedient believers of Allah in
the Hereafter.

Indeed, Allah has described for us life in Paradise by saying:

Surely the Paradise which He created for His obedient servants is as
wide as the width of the heavens and the earth. In it there will be
trees and fruits, of which their abundance will not be curtailed;
springs flowing with delicious liquids such as nectar and ginger; rivers
flowing with pure sweet water, honey and milk; different kinds of foods
and meats, which mankind likes and enjoys.

There will exist everything which the believers desire, including
beautiful sights and views that are a comforting to the hearts.

Their dwellings will be beautiful: great palaces and elegant mansions,
furnished with exquisite carpet with various decorations.

There, the believers, with their companions, will sit on comfortable
chairs. In their meetings, they will exchange conversation with each
other, giving thanks and praise to Allah, the Almighty. They will be
content with the blessings and peace that Allah has bestowed upon them.
Their clothes will be made of luxurious green silk, and they will have
bracelets of gold and silver.

Everything that exists in Paradise, including food, drink and palaces,
has no equal or likeness in our present world.

In Paradise, there will be neither summer heat nor winter cold; neither
is there day or night.

The dwellers will not suffer from illness nor be hurt nor sad. There
will be no enmity or problems occurring among the dwellers. Thus, they
will live in happiness, love and bliss and be served by servants the
like if whom are not found on this earth.

Therefore, the dwellers of Paradise will live in blissful peace as a
result of their righteous deeds and their sincerity to Allah, the Most
High.

Life in Paradise will be everlasting. Thus man never dies there nor is
transferred to another world.


