Hell
====

*Hell is the dwelling place for the disobedient servant of Allah in the
Hereafter.*

Verily, the justice of Allah, the Most Glorious, is that He will treat
every man according to his or her deeds. While the dwellers of Paradise
have earned their destiny as a result of their righteous deeds, the
corrupted and disobedient have their recompense in Hell where they will
be imprisoned like a criminal jailed in this world. Some, such as
disbelievers and polytheists will remain there forever; others will
remain for long periods those who believed in Allah but disobeyed Him or
committed crimes, or sins such as giving up praying.

Allah, the Most Glorious, describes the life in the Hereafter: Surely
the dwellers of Hell will be tormented with unimaginable kinds of
punishment which cannot be described. There is no likeness of such
torment and suffering in our present world. They will be bound with long
chains and cast into a blazing fire; such fire cannot be found in this
world. This fire will blaze forever, guarded by angels.

The food of the inhabitants will be made of zaqqum tree oil (a cursed
tree growing in Hell's lowest depths); their drink will be boiling
water, they will be forced to drink the filthy pus oozing from their
bodies - the result of intense punishment. There, such people will wish
to die to cease their suffering but will find none to save them from
such punishment. Allah will keep them alive and suffering, and whenever
their skins are burned away, they will be replaced by another to be
burned afresh.

Surely, the dwellers of Hell will cry out from the intense punishment
but will find none to help. There is no escape and instead it will be
said to them: 'Fie! You have no right to say a word.'


