Need to Worship
===============

The Almighty Allah has said:

***“And I have not created the jinn and the people except that they
should worship Me.” Holy Qur'an (51:56)***

***“...there is no god but I; therefore worship Me (only) and keep up
prayer in My remembrance.” Holy Qur'an (20:14)***

Whoever thinks and ponders about this world and Allah's blessings will
recognize not only the Greatness of the Creator and His might, but also
the great favours of Allah, the Most High, has bestowed upon man.

Intellect, hearing, seeing, and endurance are but a few attributes. He
prepared this earth for man with all its contents. He made everything in
this life suitable and helpful to him, such as the sun, and the moon,
and stars, the land and the sea, heat, and cold, humidity, air, food,
water, animals and plants.

When thinking of Allah's greatness and His blessings, one recognizes the
following:

Allah is certainly the Creator and the Owner of all creation.

He is the Manager and the Director of everything in this world,
including plants, stars, land, man and animals...etc.

He is the Bestower of blessings upon man.

This knowledge makes us grateful to our Creator for creating us and
bestowing His blessings upon us. Human sense and inner consciousness
dictate it is obligatory to thank the benefactor. Therefore whosoever
bestows any favours upon us or does us any goodness deserves our thanks
and glorifying.

Indeed, Allah, the Most Glorious, is the source of all goodness and
blessings. Among His great blessings upon us is that He created us and
brought us into existence out of nothing. He gave us everything we need
in this life, consequently He deserves the greatest thanks and
worshipping.

Thus, one of the motives behind our worship of Him is because of His
blessings upon us. Such benevolence should be met with gratitude, so we
thank Him through our hearts and tongues and obey Him through our deeds.

We know that the All-Capable Creator has indeed created our world and
the Hereafter. The Hereafter will be the world of judgement; of reward
and punishment. We pray we will be worthy of Paradise and its blessings.
So, worshipping and obeying Allah is not a choice, it is obligatory. It
is the cause of saving man from punishment and torment. Man, when
fearing any danger or harm, strives with all his might to save himself
from such a threat, and certainly there can be no more important fate to
prevent than the threat of Hell.

Surely, if man recognises Allah and believes in Him, his heart will be
filled with love of Him, he will want to befriend Him and have a growing
attachment to Him. Indeed, this love obliges man to obey and worship
Him.

A lover neither angers his beloved nor does anything which dissatisfies
him.

Hence, the following are the three reasons which make it compelling for
us to thank, worship and obey Allah, the Almighty:

1. The need to thank the Blesser.

2. The need to safeguard oneself against harm in the Hereafter.

3. The love of Allah and being filled with desire to be close to Him.

**Praise be to Allah, Lord of the worlds.**


