Allah's Love
============

You have seen how a mother embraces and suckles her little baby, how she
expresses her feelings towards the infant. She does this due to her love
and emotion for the baby.

You will also have seen how birds care for their young, how they bring
food and water and put morsels in their mouths. They protect their young
if they are attacked by other birds, by a snake or by other predators.

And even though they suffer as a consequence, birds surely love their
young, show them great mercy and forbid evil being committed against
them. This kind of mercy that fathers, mothers, and people generally, as
well as animals, show within themselves, is from the Almighty Allah. It
is He Who created such compassion and it is He Who instilled in animals
how to love their young.

Allah bestows mercy into the souls of humans and animals. He is the
All-Beneficent, the All-Merciful, showing His love for all His
creatures. He created love and mercy in the soul so that people and
animals may have compassion for each other. Verily His love and mercy to
us is far more than can be bestowed by our parents and families.

It is He Who created and provided us with the amenities for life on
earth including the necessities for the time we were in our mother's
womb.

He sent us the prophets to teach us the right path, to keep us far from
evil and corruption, so we may enter paradise and be saved from fire and
torment.

Surely He is the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful; constantly
demonstrating His love and His sympathy for His creatures. In return, we
should love our Creator by thanking and worshipping Him. He Who has such
love and mercy for us deserves great praise and gratitude.


