The Oneness of Allah
====================

In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful

***“Say: He is Allah, the One and Only Allah, the Eternal, Absolute. He
begets not, nor is He begotten. And there is none like Him.” Holy Qur'an
(112:1-4)***

During the time of ignorance in the pre-Islamic period (Jahiliyah),
polytheists used to worship idols which they themselves made out of
iron, stone, wood and other materials. They believed that the idols
themselves had the ability to provide, give benefit and inflict harm.
They would offer presents or carry out sacrifices for their idols, whom
they asked to meet their needs. For instance, the sick would ask to be
cured, the poor for sustenance and childless couples for a child.

The people at that time were polytheists, who worshipped other than
Allah; Who thus sent Prophet Muhammad [s][^1] to bid them to stop
adoring idols and tell them that these statutes were merely stones,
which could neither benefit nor harm them.

The above-mentioned surah (chapter) of the Holy Qur'an was sent down to
explain to people that the only god whom they should worship is the One
God and there is no god save Him. It is He alone Who creates, provides,
gives life and causes death, and it is He towards Whom people should
turn for help.

Indeed Allah is not like any other creature; He has neither father nor
mother, nor wife nor children. It is people who are in need of a father,
mother and children because they themselves are created and have needs
to produce young. Some are similar to others, but Allah the Creator is
One and has no equal.

None of Allah's creatures are like Him. He, Who alone is Ever-Lasting
and All-Powerful. It is He Who creates, provides and knows everything,
no one can be characterised with such great attributes except Him. It is
He alone Who deserves praise, obedience, and thanks.

[^1]: [s] is an abbreviation for an Arabic phrase “sallalahu aleihi wa
alihi wa salam” meaning “peace be upon him and his holy family”. It is
recommended for all Muslim's to invoke this salutation when mentioning
the name of Apostle Muhammad [s] or referring to him.


