The Bestower of Provision
=========================

Allah, the Almighty says:

***“Surely Allah is the Bestower of provision, Lord of Power, the
Almighty”. Holy Qur'an (51:58)***

People, birds, fish, animals, insects and reptiles are all creatures,
which need food, air and water. Allah has bestowed His sustenance on
each and every creature on earth and all must work and search for their
provision.

Allah, the Most High says:

***“And He set on the earth firm mountains standing above its surface,
and He blessed the earth and measured therein nourishment for all
things, in four periods: in accordance with the needs of the seekers”.
Holy Qur'an (41:10)***

People are the seekers of sustenance, for food, water and money, on this
earth. In our organized society we get them through working in different
fields such as: agriculture, industry, cattle-rearing, commerce and
other kinds of employment such as carpentry, science, medicine,
engineering, tailoring, etc.

Consider the food which you eat at every meal and think from where it
came?

The vegetables, grain, fruit, meat, fish, poultry, milk, eggs or dairy
products and so on.

Who brought forth the crops which farmers grow to be processed into
delicious food?

Who created animals whose flesh may be cooked to give us sustenance, or
from which milk is obtained?

Only our Creator is the Maker of provisions for us on this earth. And
surely, to gain these we need to work. Indeed prophets themselves have
striven for the sake of obtaining sustenance.

Prophet Moses [a][^1] used to graze cattle and so did Prophet David [a].
Prophet Noah [a] worked as a carpenter, as did Prophet Muhammad [s], who
also used to graze cattle, and who worked in commerce in Mecca for a
certain time.

The acquisition of provision needs supplies, demand and surety. Allah
has provided such basic requirements as oxygen, sunlight and rain in
order that land can be irrigated, plants cultivated and animals reared.
For man to survive and be healthy and strong in both body and mind he
needs to think, work and to organise his life around him.

Those Deprived
--------------

Allah's blessings upon us are numerous and uncountable. He provides
basic provisions and favours for all mankind. So why, it can be asked,
do we see that some poor people starve, and have no material benefits or
dwellings? Verily the reason behind this can be seen very clearly.

At one end of the scale, some people are lazy and have no inclination to
work for the sake of earning their provision. And indeed Allah dislikes
them.

At the other end of the scale, some people behave as oppressors and
tyrants, amassing fortunes out of their own greed and not for the good
of society. They use the poor and needy for their own ends and neglect
their welfare.

This is despite the fact that Allah has made it obligatory to help the
poor so that no one remains in need.

Therefore, the real reason for people's poverty in most cases is the
deprivation of their rights by the rich, upon whom Allah has placed
responsibility to alleviate their burden.

*Surely Allah is the Bestower of Provision, the Lord of Power, the
Almighty.*

[^1]: [a] is an abbreviation for the Arabic phrase “aleihi/aleiha/
aleihim salam” meaning “peace be upon him/her/them”. It is recommended
for all Muslims to invoke this salutation when mentioning the names of
the fourteen members of the Ahlul Bayt [a] or any of the prophets,
messengers or pure saints [a].


