Allah, the Omniscient
=====================

Allah, the Almighty, says:

***“Say: Do you instruct Allah about your religion? But Allah knows all
that is in the heavens and on the earth; Allah is Knowing of all things”
Holy Qur'an (49:16)***

When we look at an airplane, we are aware that the engineers who
designed must it have had great knowledge and understanding of
aerodynamics and other fields of science to make it fly in the sky.
Without such capabilities, the achievement could never have been
accomplished.

If you read an interpretation of the Holy Qur'an, you will realise that
he who wrote and composed it was a scholar of Islamic theology.
Otherwise he would be unable to produce such a great book.

A man suffers with his sight and is unable to see. And then a doctor
cures him. His eyes recover, so he becomes able to see again. What can
you say concerning this doctor?

Surely that he has knowledge regarding medicine, otherwise he would not
have been able to treat such a patient.

You will recognize that these achievements indicate the ability of
scientists who have knowledge and skill in their field.

In that case, what can we say about the creation of man, his body, mind
and vision, which he has been given? It can only be concluded that He
Who created man and gave him this wisdom is Allah, the Almighty, Who
knows all things.

***“Read! In the name of your Lord Who created. Created man of a clot.
Read! And your Lord is the Most Bountiful, who taught man what he knew
not...” Holy Qur'an (96:1-5)***

Now think and further ponder about the creation of the heavens, the
earth, the seas and the stars. Do not these indicate that He Who created
them is Omniscient? Indeed they demonstrate for all to know that He Who
created them has ultimate knowledge and acquaintance of existence.

Otherwise He would not have been able to make and create them.

“Indeed, their creator can only be Omniscient, the Able One”.

We realise that scientists, engineers and designers who make aeroplanes,
televisions, and cars, and doctors with medical knowledge, have gained
and learned their subjects through schools, books and research. But
their vast knowledge is limited and they are not able to know everything
or even have in-depth understanding in several fields.

An engineer, who makes aeroplanes, is not familiar with the medical
sciences, and eye-specialists have no knowledge of curing stomach
sickness or heart complaints. It should also be noted that scientists
and doctors depend upon tests and experiments before an invention can be
developed, or a patient diagnosed. Their knowledge is based upon what
has previously been learnt from higher knowledge that can come only from
Allah.

Reading these examples, one is automatically led to understand that
Allah's knowledge differs immensely from that of people.

And it is obvious that Allah, the Almighty, is Omniscient and needs no
one to teach Him. It is He Who teaches man.

Allah the Omniscient knows everything in the heavens, what is on the
earth and what is in the depths of seas.

Verily He knows the unseen, what will happen tomorrow, after tomorrow
and in the distant future, because He is the Creator of man and all
creatures altogether. He knows what is known, what will be known and
what never will be known by man because He created them, knowing
everything in them, like an engineer who knows the machine which he
himself made.

Allah knows what is going on in the human soul, though He speaks not. He
knows all secrets and whatever man does of good and bad deeds.

There are no mysteries for the Omniscient regarding what man does not
understand about the world, about its atmosphere and about its life: why
there is tranquillity, why there is war; how many different species make
up a harmonious planet and what causes disaster and destruction.


