The Just
========

Truly Allah created mankind on this earth, giving people wisdom with
which to think, and to differentiate right from wrong, and to know
useful things from harmful ones, and having the ability to do good or
evil. Thus man is able to worship Allah, pray, fast, help the poor,
reconcile among people in case of a conflict, behave well towards his
parents, relatives and neighbours and do other good deeds.

All these actions can be distinguished as good and righteous as opposed
to bad, through man's use of his mind.

On the one hand, man is able to do good deeds, and on the other hand he
is able to do evil and wicked ones. He is able to steal, lie, cheat,
kill, hurt people, disbelieve in Allah, and obey the oppressor, while
his wisdom is able to differentiate that these actions are wicked and
evil.

Man can do good or evil deeds through his own will and choice and he
himself decides between the two. Allah gave him this ability so it is up
to man how he behaves.

Allah, the Almighty, bids man to do good and pious deeds and forbids him
to commit wicked and evil actions.

Thus, He sent the prophets to mankind to make clear to people what is
bad and harmful and what is forbidden. He also clarified for them what
is useful and lawful and obligatory for people to follow. Verily, the
Almighty, will charge us on the Day of Resurrection regarding our deeds
which we do in our life. Those who do evil and disobey Him are cast into
hell and those who do good and obey Him enter the Garden of Paradise.

Surely Allah in His wisdom and justice does not make the doer of good
and evil equal.

According to their deeds, each will be either rewarded or punished on
Judgement Day.

Among Allah's justice is that He does not place any burden upon a
person, which is beyond their ability to bear. For instance, no sick or
old person will be blamed for not fasting because it would harm their
health. Obligations, however, are quite modest, like prayer being only
five short duties a day, which virtually no one should find difficult to
perform.

*O Allah, bless Muhammad and his Progeny.*


