The Testament
=============

**In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful**

The magnificent Islamic Revolution in Iran, which has been the
accomplishment of millions of estimable people and the product of the
effort of thousands of memorable martyrs and disabled citizens -the
Living Martyrs- and which is the hope of millions of world Muslims and
oppressed masses, is so great an achievement whose description defies
the power of pen and speech.

I, Ruhollah Musavi Khomeini, who, despite the bulk of my faults, am not
hopeless about the great benevolence of the Supreme Lord, and who am
setting out to the next world with a travel kit for this perilous
journey solely of my trust in the benevolence of the Generous Supreme
Being, take this opportunity to mention a few items -repetitious as they
may seem- in my capacity as a humble student of religion, placing my
hope, like my brothers-in-faith, on this revolution and on the
permanency of its fruits and its further fruition, doing so as my last
will and testament to the present generation and to our dear future
generations, and imploring God, the Merciful, to inspire me with
absolute sincerity in my so doing.

1. We understand that this Great Revolution which curtailed influences
of world-devourers and tyrants[^1] from the great Iran triumphed with
the Invisible Help of His Divinity. In the face of the vast propaganda
against Islam and the ulama, especially during the present century; of
the bulk of the divisive insinuations by publicists, and silver-tongued
people in the print media and in public meetings disguised as
expressions of nationalistic sentiments; of the bulk of the facetious
poetry and derisive witticisms, of the number and variety of quarters
for prostitution, gambling, immoral amusements, drinking and narcotics
aimed at attracting the young generation -a generation with an inherent
commitment to the progress of our beloved country- towards corruption
and indifference towards the treacherous acts of the corrupt Shah and
his uncultured father; of the governments and puppet parliaments imposed
on the nation by foreign embassies in Iran; of the status of colleges,
universities, high schools and educational institutions with their
West-struck or East-struck (gharbzadeh ya sharqzadeh) teachers and
professors hostile to Islam, to the Islamic and national culture, for
that matter, posing themselves as promoters of nationalism, against the
presence in their circles of committed and very concerned people who
could not do anything because of their being only a hard-pressed small
minority; of tens of other problems, such as the government led
isolation of the scholars (ulama) and the adulteration of the ideology
of many of them by force of the state propaganda machinery, this nation
of 36 million could not possibly have succeeded in their solid uprising
with a unity of purpose and with the call of God is Great (Allahu Akbar)
relying solely on their own miraculous self-sacrifices, sweeping out the
ruling powers in the country and doing away with the foreign powers,
making themselves the master of their own fate.

No doubt, therefore, the Islamic Revolution in Iran stands out from all
other revolutions for its origin, for the features of its struggle and
for the motive behind it. Doubtless the Revolution in this country has
been a gift of God and a favor from the Invisible bestowed on this
ravaged and tyrannized nation.

2. Islam and the Islamic government are divine entities, the fulfillment
of which guarantee prosperity in this world and salvation in the
Hereafter in its optimum form. It is capable of nullifying injustices,
tyrannies, ravages and corruption, and of helping humanity attain its
loft y goal. It is an ideology which, unlike irreligious ideologies, has
guidelines for and oversees every aspect of the private life of the
people as well as the social, material, spiritual, cultural, political,
military and economic system of the society without overlooking any
point, however trivial it may seem in connection with the education of
men, and the society and their material and spiritual progress,
reminding man of stumbling blocks and impediments on the road to
perfection and offering solutions to those problems.

Now that with the grace of God the Islamic Republic has been instituted
with the mighty hands of the committed people of this country, and
bearing in mind the supremacy of Islam and Islamic edicts as far as it
concerns the Islamic Republic, it is the obligation of the noble people
of Iran to strive for the fulfillment of all aspects of the system,
since the preservation of Islam takes precedent over all other
obligations.

The great prophets, starting from Adam (A.S) to Seal of the Prophets
(S.A.W), performed acts of self­ sacrifice and struggled untiringly for
that cause without allowing themselves to be hampered by any stumbling
block for this cause, and their struggle was upheld later by their
self-committed disciples, and by the Imams (A.S) who did their utmost
for the promotion of that cause without hesitating to shed their blood
for it.

Today, it is a responsibility of all Muslims generally and the Iranian
nation specifically to safeguard as best as they can the divine
entrustment which has been officially pronounced in Iran and which has
produced great results over a short period of time, and to create the
conditions necessary for its perpetuation as well as remove obstacles
and surmount hindrances on its way, so that hopefully its brilliant rays
may eventually illuminate all Muslim countries, prompting governments
and peoples to reach mutual understanding in relation to this vital
issue and helping them to eliminate, once and for all, the influence of
world-devouring superpowers and the criminals of history from the
tyrannized and downtrodden people of the world.

I, who am now taking the last breaths of life, beg to present hereunder
in response to my obligation to the present and future generations, some
of the elements which are instrumental in the protection and
perpetuation of this divine gift, as well as some of the obstacles and
hazards which threaten it, and I ask the Almighty for the success and
prosperity of all.

A. Indisputably the secret of the permanence of the Islamic Revolution
in Iran is the same secret that caused its triumph. The nation already
knows the secret of the victory of the Islamic Revolution, and the
future generation will read in their history books that two principal
constituents of the Revolution were its divinely-based ideology and the
solidarity of the people throughout the country with a unity of motto,
with same spirit and for the same goal.

I advise all generations, present and future, who want to witness the
continued life of the divine rule and witness also the eliminating the
influences of colonialists and exploiters, in, or outside of, the
country, from their land, cannot do better than to continue to preserve
the same theocentric feelings which the Supreme Lord has emphasized in
the Holy Qur'an; a feeling which helps us to forget individual
differences. The complex international propaganda machinery, which is
the mouthpiece of our enemies as well as their local offshoots here and
there, is exploiting all its resources for airing rumors and divisive
lies and expending billions of dollars on that for an obvious purpose.

So, too, are the regular trips to the cities of the region by the
enemies of the Islamic Republic of Iran, among them, unfortunately,
being certain turban­ wearing pharisees, overlords and chiefs from
certain Muslim nations who think but only of their own personal good,
who are unprotesting servants to the United States. To thwart the
divisive and destructive propaganda should he the concern of the Iranian
nation and the world Muslims today and tomorrow.

I advise Muslims, and especially the Iranians of the contemporary
period, to react to all hostile propaganda, to solidify their ranks and
their unity by whatever means and thereby dishearten the unbelievers and
the hypocritically self-righteous enemies [of Islam and the Islamic
Revolution].

B. Among the noticeable conspiracies during the present century and
especially during the last few decades and since the victory of the
Islamic Revolution is the vast worldwide propaganda for dismaying
nations and especially the self-sacrificing people of Iran with a view
to making them lose their confidence in Islam and eventually renounce
it.

Sometimes they do it directly, albeit crudely, suggesting, for example,
that the edicts of Islam which were established one thousand and four
hundred years ago cannot possibly be relied on as laws on the basis of
which to administer countries in the present century; that Islam is a
reactionary religion opposed to every innovation and to the
manifestation of modem civilization, or that in the present era the
world's countries cannot discard the world's civilization and its
manifestations.

And similar foolish and occasionally malicious and vicious propaganda
nicely wrapped and offered in the form of pro-Islamic propaganda and
under the pretext of support for the sanctity of Islamic says, among
other things, that Islam and other divine religions are concerned about
the spiritualities, about the moral rectification of mankind, that they
invite them to resign earthly pursuits, that they invite man to renounce
the material World and engage himself in acts of worship, saying prayers
and devotions which, they argue, bring man nearer to God and distance
him from the material world; that involvement in the administration of
state and government and politics is against that lofty and spiritual
goal because the latter activities are solely for this material world,
which is against the teachings of the great prophets.

And it is unfortunate that the propaganda of the latter category has
affected certain Muslim clerics and religious persons who are uninformed
about Islam, even leading them to conclude that interference in politics
and government tasks is a cardinal sin; and perhaps some know the
magnitude of this very disaster which has befallen Islam.

Advocates of the first notion, are either virtually uninformed about
government, laws and politics or feign ignorance for their private
purposes; for the execution of laws based on justice, equality and
fairness; the checking of oppressors and oppressive rules, the promotion
of justice for individuals and the society, the checking of corruption
and prostitution and of other deviated indulgences; and alternatively
recognition of civil liberties on the basis of reason and justice for
attaining independence and self-sufficiency, and for preventing
colonialism, exploitation, slavery and servitude; for executing corporal
punishments on the basis of justice and for preventing the corruption
and destruction of society; as well as engagement in politics and the
administrative affairs of society on the basis of reason, justice and
equity and other (factors) are not things which might become
old-fashioned or out-dated in the passage of time and for man's communal
life.

The argument to the contrary would only be as sound as suggesting that
in our present century the common sense laws as well as the laws of
mathematics should be replaced by new laws, or that although as early as
the beginning of man's creation the Almighty ordained that social
equality be administered, and tyranny, plundering and homicide be
prevented, today at the nuclear age those divine laws are old­ fashioned
and outdated.

The pretension that Islam is opposed to technological innovations -such
as the perception of the ousted Muhammad Reza Pahlavi that they [the
ulama and advocates of the Islamic Revolution] advocate travel by
quadrupeds- is but a stupid allegation.

If by "the manifestations of civilization and innovations'' they mean
inventions and new products and advanced technology which contribute to
the progress of man and his civilization, the idea has never been, nor
will it ever be opposed by Islam or any other divine religion. On the
contrary, Islam and the Holy Qur'an stress the value of science and
learning and technology.

But if "civilization and modernity" is to be interpreted according to
the terminology of some professional intellectuals who define it as
liberty to engage in religiously prohibited acts, including prostitution
and even homosexual relations and the like, then I can only say that the
idea is invariably opposed by all divine religions and people, however,
the West and East may advocate the idea and propagate these same
practices in their blindfold adherence to conventionalism.

But as for the second category of opponents of Islam who have malicious
designs, and who separate Islam from government and politics, they need
only be reminded that the Holy Qur'an and the traditions of the
Messenger of God (S.A.W.) have more edicts in relation to government and
statecraft than in any other area. More importantly, many of the
apparently devotional precepts in Islam are truly politico-devotional
precepts, the overlooking of which has been responsible for the present
afflictions of the Muslim world.

The Prophet of Islam (S.A.W .) instituted a government like other
governments of the world except that his was one for the purpose of
promoting social justice and, likewise, the early Muslim caliphs had
full-fledged governments and so was Imam Ali's (A.S.) government which
was broader and more inclusive and which is an obvious record in
history. Subsequent governments, too, were established in the name of
Islam, and even today the governments which pretend to be Islamic and to
have been founded on the edicts of Islam and Prophet Muhammad (S.A.W.)
are varied and many.

In this last will and testament of mine I will do it as briefly as I
can, trusting that our men of letters, our sociologists and our
historians will disillusion Muslims that the prophets were (A.S.)
concerned solely with spiritualities, that involvement in government and
management of the state affairs is condemned in religions, that the
prophets and the saints refused to get themselves involved in these
areas and that, by the same token, we, too, must guard against getting
ourselves involved in those concerns is a sad mistake which entails the
destruction of Muslim nations and opens the door for the bloodthirsty
colonialists.

On the contrary, the idea that is discountenanced is the very existence
of satanic and dictatorial tyrannical governments which are instituted
for the very purpose of domination over the masses. Corrupt worldly
pursuits, including the accumulation of wealth, the gaining of power and
the status of worldly gods and, in essence, involvement in such worldly
concerns which tend to make man overlook the Blessed and Supreme Lord.

Institution of a government for administering justice in the interest of
the oppressed and downtrodden masses, for preventing tyranny and
oppression and for instituting social equality similar to what Solomon
and the Glorious Messenger of Islam (S.A.W) and his noble disciples
struggled for is among prime duties and -its establishment is a lofty
act of worship since the rational politics which mark such governments
is a principal social requisite.

I exhort the wakeful and vigilant people of Iran to neutralize such
plots relying on their Islamic perceptions, and also exhort our
self-committed writers and public speakers to help our nation, and
thereby eliminate the conspiring worldly satans of our time.

C. And of the same category of plots -and perhaps more malicious than
the rest -is the hostile propaganda by way of rumor-making which
regularly festers the air throughout our country, boiling down in
essence to such insinuations that the Islamic Republic, like its
predecessor, has not done anything for the people; that the 'poor'
people, with such fervor and enthusiasm as they had, did acts of
self-sacrifice to rid themselves of the tyrannical rule of the
oppressors only to find out eventually that they were plagued by a worse
regime; that the arrogant moneyed class has become even more arrogant,
that the oppressed masses have become more oppressed, that the prisons
have become crowded with the young people who were the hope for the
future of the country, that acts of torture are now more common than and
more beastly than they were during the past regime, that everyday a
number of people are executed in the name of Islam, that the government
here would have been wiser if it did not call itself 'Islamic', that
these times are ever more terrible than it was during the times of Reza
Khan and his son, that the people are being drowned in a deluge of
agonies, hardships and 'high cost of living, that the people at the helm
of the state are transforming this government into a communist
government, that the personal properties of the people are being
expropriated, that they are being denied civil liberties in every
aspect, and the likes of such rumors which are being published as a
strategy for a malicious scheme.

That they are the tools for promoting a conspiracy can be readily
witnessed. Rumor making is undertaken as a periodical and regular
device, each rumor being published for several days until another is in
the air; the usual platforms for airing them being our taxi cabs, our
city buses, and wherever a small gathering of people presents itself as
a potential form for airing those rumors; and once one rumor has lost
its credibility another is invented and aired.

And it is unfortunate that some of our ulama who are unsophisticated
about satanic devices are likely to fall prey to publishers of rumors
and allow themselves to conclude that what they hear in the form of
rumors is true, because they are uninformed about the state of world
affairs, about the world revolutions, and about the developments and the
inescapable hardships that have followed other revolutions elsewhere in
the world, and about the developments which are in the interest of
Islam, and who listen to those rumors with blind eyes and who out of no
ill will, or perhaps with deliberate ill will, promote the same
insinuations.

I ask of you all not to try to find fault with the Islamic government
and not to try to discredit the government or indulge in scurrilities
against the system without first having studied the present status of
world affairs and compared the Islamic Revolution in Iran with other
revolutions elsewhere in the world, without first having studied the
situation in other countries during and after revolutions, without first
having looked at the afflictions inflicted on this country by Reza Khan
and his son Muhammad Reza as a result of their plundering of the wealth
of this nation, without first having studied the destructive
pre-revolution dependence [on foreign powers], as well as the ruling
system in government ministries at that time, without first having
studied the status of the nation's economy before the revolution, and of
its armed forces; without first having looked at the centers for corrupt
fun-making, and recalled the places for dispensing intoxicants [liquor
stores] and for promoting an abandoned way of life and irresponsible
attitude ,in every aspect of the people's daily life, without first
having recalled the shabby status of education in the pre-revolution
time, and the ruling situation in high schools, and in our colleges and
universities; without first having recalled the status of our movie
houses, and recalled also the professional places for debauchery, the
status of our youths, our women, and the afflictions of the holy, the
religious people and self-committed freedom-lovers and our oppressed but
virtuous women during the past regime, without first having recalled the
status of our mosques at that time and also studied the cases of those
who were executed after the Islamic Revolution or who were found guilty
and sentenced to prison terms, without first having investigated the
performance of public officials, and observed the collection of data on
the assets of capitalists and big landlords and on the status of
hoarders and profiteers, without having investigated the condition of
the post-revolution courts and revolutionary tribunals against the
status of our justice system before the revolution.

And having compared the post- revolution judges with their predecessors
before the revolution, and investigated the status of the deputies of
the majlis [parliament] of the Islamic Republic and members of the
cabinet as well as governors and other post-revolutionary officials and
compared it with that of their predecessors, without having studied the
performance of the government and of the Construction Jihad[^2] in
under-privileged villages, which did not even have piped water and basic
health care services, and compared it with the situation during the past
regime in light of the burden of the war imposed on Iran and its natural
consequences, such as the multi­ million war refugees and bereaved
families and war-injured people and the million-strong refugees from
Afghanistan and Iraq in the face of economic sanctions against Iran and
regular plots against Iran by the United States and its agents in and
outside of Iran, to say nothing of the shortage of Islamic
propagandists, religious judges, and the confusion created since the
culmination of the Islamic Revolution by the enemies of Islam and
deviated people and even by feeble-minded friends of the Islamic
Revolution, or of tens of other things.

I ask of you all to have mercy upon this estranged Islam which, in the
wake of hundreds of years of the tyranny of power-wielders and as a
result of the ignorance of the masses is now only revived unsteadily
like a tottering child beleaguered by enemies in and outside of our
country, and ask of you also to judge for yourselves whether you would
not do better by supporting the oppressed and the tyrannized people
rather than condemning the Islamic Revolution, and think of the
assassinated people, rather than supporting the hypocritically
self-righteous[^3], the tyrants, the capitalists, and the cruel
hoarders.

I have never said before, nor do I propose to claim now, that the great
Islam is observed and implemented in its full implications in our
Republic, or that there are none who act against the instructions of
Islam either out of ignorance, or for personal hatred or lack of
self-discipline; but I say that the legislative branch as well as the
judiciary and the executive branches of the government have been trying
hard to Islamicize this country, that a multi-million nation here
support the government, and that if this minority of naggers and
obstructionists, too, lend a helping hand, the aspirations of the
Revolution will be attained more easily and more speedily; and that if,
God forbid, they do not come to their senses they will not be able to
stand against this roaring deluge of the people.

Since the millions of masses are wakeful and conscious of the situation
and at the scene, the humanitarian and Islamic aspects of the Revolution
will eventually materialize. I say with confidence now that the Iranian
nation and the multi-million masses in this country today are better
than the people of Hijaz at the time of God's Messenger (S.A.W.), and
the people of Kufa and Iraq during the era of Imam Ali (A.S.) and Imam
Hussein (A.S.).

At the time of our Prophet (S.A.W.) the people of Hijaz would not obey
his order to go to the battlefronts and would bring excuses to evade the
task so much so that in the Chapter Repentance (The Holy Qur'an: 9) the
Almighty has reproached them, and assured them of retribution, and they
imputed to him so many lies so far so that as has been related he cursed
them on the pulpit; and also the people of Iraq and Kufah wronged Imam
Ali (A.S.) as much as they could and they disobeyed him, and the
complaints of His Holiness of those people of his time is recorded in
religious and history books.

Also, the Muslims in Iraq and Kufa were the same people at whose time
that greatest injustice of all time befell the Master of All martyrs
[Imam Hussein(A.S.)], and even, those of the people of Kufa who did not
actively challenge him with swords either fled the scene or chose to sit
back and watch what would happen.

In contrast, however, today we see that the Iranian nation, including
the armed forces and the military men and the Sepah [Islamic
Revolution's Guards Corps-IRGC] and Basij [the Mobilized] and populist
forces of tribes and of other volunteers are performing acts of
self-sacrifice at the war fronts and that the people behind the fronts
are doing the same with the utmost enthusiasm and create epics, and we
see our respectable people throughout the country giving liberal
contributions to the national effort.

We also see that the bereaved families who have lost their relatives at
the battlefronts and the relatives of wounded veterans say only
encouraging words to us with fervor and confidence, which is evidence of
their love of and their faith in God and Islam and the Hereafter,
despite the fact that they are living neither at the time of His
Holiness the Greatest Prophet (S.A.W.), nor at the time of Infallible
Imam.

In so doing, they are motivated solely by their faith in the Invisible,
which is the secret to victory in its various dimensions, and Islam
should take pride in rearing such offsprings, and it is a matter of
great pride to live in this era and to be in the presence of such a
nation.

And I take this occasion to address myself to those who, with various
motives, oppose the Islamic Republic, as well as the youth­ both boys
and girls- who are being exploited by the monafiqan (hypocrites) and
opportunist deviants who seek their benefit at the expense of others,
and call on them to judge for themselves without bias and with a clear
mind, and examine the propaganda of those who wish to see the collapse
of the Islamic Republic, as well as watch their behavior with the
oppressed masses, and the groups and the (foreign) governments which
have supported them, and the people in our country who are their
supporters and their periodical change of position which they make at
various junctures.

I wish the people who would like to see the collapse of the Islamic
Republic to investigate the character of those who were martyred in the
hands of the hypocrites and deviants and reevaluate them against thei1
enemies. There are recorded tapes of those martyrs and you, too, may
have recorded tapes of the opponents of the system. Just find out for
yourself which group is really concerned about and committed to the
oppressed and tyrannized people.

My dear brothers, you are not reading these pages while I am living, but
probably after my death. Then, I am not among you to be tempted to
exploit your sentiments for selfish interests or do so in a struggle for
power. Because you are meritorious youths I long for you to spend your
youthful years at the service of the Almighty, our beloved Islam and the
Islamic Republic so that you will become prosperous both in this world
and in the Hereafter.

I implore God, the Forgiver of Sins, to lead you along the straight path
of humanity, and to forgive our and your past with His Bountiful Mercy.
You, too, implore Him for the same in your private moments, and rest
assured that He is the Leader and the Compassionate.

And I have a word by way of this last will and testament of mine to the
noble people of Iran and to other nations who are plagued by corrupt
governments and are under the yoke of the big powers. I call on the dear
Iranian nation to endear the blessing which they have gained with the
great struggle of their own and with the blood of themselves and the
blood of their young ones and to cherish it as the most beloved thing,
to safeguard and protect it, to toil for this great divine blessing and
this great divine entrustment, to challenge the obstacles on this
straight way, without fear because

***"If*** ***you help Allah. He will help you and will make your
foothold firm." [The Qur'an: 47:7].***

Contribute to the solving of the problems of the Islamic Republic with
your hearts, to consider the cabinet and the majlis [parliament] as
being of your own, and to protect them as an endeared blessing.

And I also exhort the majlis, the government and administrators to
appreciate the merits of this nation and to serve them and especially
the oppressed and tyrannized masses who are the light of our eyes and
benefactors of all, who instituted the Islamic Republic as a result of
their acts of self-sacrifice; the survival, of which, too, is the result
of their services. Consider yourselves as having risen from the masses
and consider the masses as being in your circle; always condemn the
governments of the oppressors that were and are uncultured plunderers
and empty­ headed bullies, by humane acts befitting an Islamic
government.

And as for Muslim nations, I exhort them to follow the example of the
Islamic government in Iran and of Iran's struggling people, and
subjugate your own cruel governments in the event that they do not yield
to the demands of their people, which is the [same as the] demand of the
Iranian nation, and exhort them to remember that the government
dependent on either the West or East is the cause of the misfortune of
Muslims.

And I advise you against heeding the hostile propaganda of the enemies
of Islam and the Islamic Republic, for they all intend to do away with
Islam so that the interests of the superpowers will be safeguarded.

D. A satanic scheme of the big colonialist powers and imperialists,
underway for years now, which reached its climax in Iran during the
reign of Reza Khan and was followed by Muhammad Reza was the scheme of
isolating the ulama. During the reign of Reza Khan the strategy) was to
oppress the ulama, to defrock them, to imprison them, to banish them, to
slight them and to execute them, and at the time of Muhammad Reza the
scheme was followed up by other means, such as [pitting] the university
students and university educators and the ulama against each other, and
they did this with the help of vast propaganda which unfortunately
because of the negligence and unsophistication of both groups about the
satanic devices of the superpowers, proved to work.

On the one hand, they did their best to make sure that teachers in
elementary schools, High schools and college professors and chancellors
of universities were selected from among those who were West-struck or
East-struck or from among the un-Islamic individuals and deviated people
who do not adhere to any religion.

They did their best to ensure that the self-committed pious people would
be a small minority, and to ensure that those who take the helm of the
country in the future would be the same people who hate all religions,
especially Islam, and the people associated with religions, particularly
the ulama. At that time they pretended that such people, the ulama were
the agents of Britain and advocates of the capitalists, and big
landlords and advocates of reactionaryism and later they said the ulama
were opposed to progress and civilization.

Alternatively, by their sophisticated hostile propaganda they led the
ulama to fear college students and university educators because the
propaganda invariably labeled all college student educators as being
irreligious abandoned and opposed to Islam and other religions.

The idea was to make sure that the people at the helm were opposed to
Islam and other religions and the ulama and religious people, and that
anything related to the government, and that deep schism between the
government and the masses and university students and educators would
pave the way for the indulgence of plunderers so that every aspect of
the business of the government would be in the hands of plunderers who
could pocket the resources of our country, as they had during the
previous regimes and were continuing to do, with obvious implications.

Now that by the will of the Blessed and Supreme Lord and due to the
struggles of the nation, including the ulama, college students, and
traders and toiling men and farm workers and other sectors of the
society the people have broken the shackles of bondage and the hindrance
of the superpowers and rid the nation from their hands and from the
hands of the agents of those powers.

I exhort the present and future generation against tending to overlook
the implications of the situation, and I call on the college students to
solidify their bond with the ulama and religious students of theology,
and never to neglect the schemes and conspiracies of our treacherous
enemies, to guide and admonish any individual whom they should see
trying to sow the seeds of discord between them, and in the event their
words did not work on him renounce and ostracize him so that the plots
against us will not take root, because it is easier to stop the current
from the fountainhead.

If they should encounter a professor at their college who tends to
mislead the youth, the students should guide him and if they should be
unsuccessful they should reject him as a professor. I have addressed
myself here mainly to the ulama and theological students, since plots at
the universities are very grave and every respectable strata of our
society who are the think-tank of our society should watch for plots.

E. Among the gravest plot which, unfortuntely, has left destructive
effects on our beloved country has been the plot to alienate
colonialized countries and make them look to the West and East as their
models. So much so that those nations eventually lost their self
al-steem and their trust in their own cultures [and are] looking to the
West and East as the two poles of power with a nobler generation and
loftier culture and concluded that their countries could not but become
dependent on either of the two powers.

This has been a long and saddening story and the blows we suffer from
the two powers are pounding and deadly. More saddening, however, is that
the two powers have checked the progress of the nations whom they
attempt to make consumption-oriented countries, and instil a fear in us
of their technological advancements and of their satanic power and
destroy our self-confidence to test our own intuition, so that we
entrust whatever we have to their hands and sit quiet and blindfolded
and leave the administration of the state to those powers.

This sense of self-nothingness and this feeling of dullness as
inculcated in us by the big powers served to make us distrust our own
knowledge and expertise and capacity in all areas and led us to simply
try to imitate the West and East blind foldedly, our own West-struck and
East-struck uncultured men of letters and public speakers disparaging
our own culture and literature and technology and intuition. As little
or as much as we had, belittling our own inherent capacities and
alternatively publicizing the exotic culture of foreigners, even though
they might be totally absurd and ridiculous and forcing those cultures
upon the nations by admiring even in our own time.

To cite an example, if a book or an article or a lecture should also
include several non-native words, that book or article or lecture is
likely to be commended and its writer or the speaker very likely to be
commended as a learned and intellectual person. For the nomenclature of
our native things, too, names from the Western or Eastern languages seem
to suggest status and civilization and are likely to be received by the
public with applause. Be they the name for anything ranging from
'cradle' or ‘grave', whereas native names would be outmoded and a sign
of reactionism.

The craze for Western culture persists in all areas: if our children
happen to have Western names they feel proud and if they have native
names they feel embarrassed and backward. The names of our city streets,
shops, companies, drug-stores, bookshops, as well as the writings on
materials and other commodities would sound a lot better if they were
foreign words, even though those commodities are domestically produced,
which will ensure better reception by the people.

European-styled mannerisms in every behavior, in social contacts, and in
every aspect of our daily living is a source of pride and a sign of
being civilized and progressive, and in contrast manifestations of
native culture are signs of backwardness and of being old-fashioned. To
remedy your illness, however trivial and curable it may be at home, you
should go abroad, and thereby belittle and reject your native but
capable doctors.

[As the propaganda for western and eastern cultures suggests]. To go to
England, France, the United States and Moscow is a source of pride for
the Iranian traveler, and to go to Mecca and to other holy shrines for
pilgrimage is a sign of backwardness. A lack of concern about religion
and its related topics and spirituality is evidence of intellectuality
and, in contrast, a commitment to such things is a sign of backwardness
and reactionism.

I do not claim that we ourselves have everything we need. Obviously,
during recent history and especially during the past few centuries they
[the foreign powers] blocked our progress in every area, and the
treacherous people at the helm, and especially those during the Pahlavi
Dynasty, and the destructive propaganda against our native capacities as
well as the infusion of the feeling of self-unworthiness, served to
block our every effort for technological advancement.

The importation of foreign-made products of whatever category, the
induced preoccupation of women and men, especially the youth, with a
wide variety of imported goods, including cosmetics, luxury items and
childish toys, the pitting of people and families against each other in
a race for consumption-it is a sad story- and the pulling of our
youth -potentially the most active members of the society- to
prostitution and to places for that purpose and for sensual pleasures,
as well as tens of other devices, are schemes for keeping the countries
backward.

Now that we have largely disentangled ourselves from those traps, seeing
the unprivileged present generation rising up to work and contribute to
the technological and industrial progress of our country, many of our
factories manufacturing such things as aircraft, in the face of initial
feelings of their incapacity for turning the wheels of our factories and
the feelings of an eventual turning to the West or East for help, our
youth manufacturing many parts and components to cope with economic
sanctions and the imposed war and offering those items at lower prices
than similar foreign-made products and demonstrating the native
capacity, by this last will and testament of mine I beg to offer this
nation my heartfelt advice against allowing themselves to be lured to
the international plunderers and succumbing to the satanic insinuations
of the politicians dependent on West and East, and advise them to rise
up for ending the remaining symptoms of dependence with diligence,
resting assured that the Aryans and the Arabs are not inferior to the
Europeans, to the Americans and to the Soviets, and assure them that
once they have discovered their true selves [they will] discard
self-distrust and the tendency to expect help from others. Certainly, in
the long run, you people will demonstrate the talent and the capacity to
manufacture absolutely everything, and you are able to go as far as
other people, like you have, provided only that you trust m the Blessed
and Supreme Lord and have self-confidence and are committed to the goal
of ending your [technological] dependence on foreign countries and are
ready to tolerate the burden of hardships for attaining a dignified life
and ridding yourselves of foreign domination.

It is incumbent upon governments and people at the helm, now and in the
future, to appreciate their own native expertise, cheering them on by
their material help and by their moral encouragement, to prevent the
inflow of luxury but needless or ruinous products and to help the nation
survive with what it has until they make everything they need.

I call on the youth, both boys and girls, not to sacrifice independence,
freedom and humanitarian values for attaining a luxurious life, however
hard it may be, or for sensual pleasures and abandonment and for
visiting the dens of prostitution which may be offered to you by the
western powers or by their treacherous local agents. Based on all past
experiences they think only of seeing your destruction, of beguiling you
into forgetting about what is going on in your own country and
preoccupying you with other concerns so that they may plunder your
wealth, and put the shackles of colonialism and dependence on your feet,
and make you solely a nation of buyers of foreign-made goods. This is a
device whereby they mean to keep you backward and, according to their
own term. 'semi-savage’.

F. Among the plots of the western powers, as I have all too frequently
reminded, is to control our public educational system, especially our
colleges and universities, which are centers for nurturing people for
taking the helm of the country in the future. With the ulama and the
holy and theological students they have a scheme which differs from that
for high schools and universities.

Their scheme is to do away with the scholars (ulama) and to isolate
them, either by suppressive measures such as they did at the time of
Reza Khan -which backfired and led to opposite results- or by publishing
defamatory propaganda and implementing other satanic devices for
alienating the ulama from the college students and college graduates and
so called the intellectuals which device was implemented by suppressive
measures at the time of Reza Khan and which continued, though cunningly
rather than by power of force, during the reign of Muhammad Reza.

At the college and universities the ideal of the foreign powers is to
alienate students from their own native culture and lure them to the
West or East and to select government administrators from the same
category of graduates and install them 1n ranking positions so that the
foreign powers may then exploit them as tools for doing whatever they
want to do to this nation; so that they [the educated] will lead the
country along a course ensuring the plundering of its wealth by foreign
powers, and its orientation towards western cultures, the ulama being
unable to counter the scheme because of their being isolated, hated and
defeated.

That is the best scheme for keeping colonized nations backward and for
plundering their wealth, since it assures the superpowers of the
unobstructed, unprotested, and cost-free pocketing of the wealth of
nations.

Therefore, now that the universities and teaching colleges are being
reformed with an academic and administrative purge, we have a
responsibility to extend a helping hand to the people in charge so that
we will ensure that never again in the future will our universities be
misled to deviate education and anywhere we should happen to encounter a
symptom of deviation we should try to rectify it as speedily as we can.

This vital goal should be implemented first and foremost by the mighty
hands of the youth in colleges and universities and teacher colleges,
and to salvage the colleges and universities from academic ruin is to
salvage the country and the nation.

I first and foremost exhort the youth and the youngsters and secondly
their parents and friends and the people at the helm and self-committed
intellectuals to endeavor with all their hearts in this concern and
entrust the universities to future generations, as they should be. I
also advise all future generations to protect the universities against
the pitfalls of inclinations to West and East, and by the humanitarian
and Islamic endeavor eliminate the influences of big powers from their
country and make them feel frustrated in their plots. May God be your
Supporter and your Savior.

G. A principal thing is the commitment of the members of the Islamic
Consultative Assembly (Majlis). We witnessed what Islam and the nation
suffered as a result of unqualified and deviate parliaments from the
advent of the Constitutional monarchy until the rule of the criminal
Pahlavi Dynasty, and we remember the bulk of afflictions and grave
losses as a result of the involvement of the worthless and servile
criminals in state affairs. Which sufferings were the worst of the past
history.

During a period of fifty years a treacherous pseudo-majority [in the
parliament] against an oppressed minority acted virtually as the
extended hands of the British and the Soviets and more recently the
Americans for carrying out the wishes of those powers in Iran and for
plunging the country into its doom.

Since the institution of the Constitutional monarchy in this country,
almost none of the important articles of the constitution were observed.
Before Reza Khan, the promoter of the Western culture and a handful of
tribal chiefs and big landlords acted as local agents of the foreign
powers and during the reign of the Pahlavis, by the very same criminal
regime and its stooges.

Now that with the Blessings of the Supreme Lord and the willpower of the
glorious nation of Iran the people are exercising the right of
self-determination, the majlis deputies as true representatives of the
people selected by the people and for the people, without the
interference of the government and tribal chiefs, and in view of their
commitment to Islam, there is hope to expect that all forms of
divergence from the right path will be prevented.

By this last will and testament of mine I exhort the nation to send only
self-committed and qualified candidates to the majlis; people who are
committed to Islam and to the Islamic Republic and people who usually
hail from the middle-class families as well as from the deprived masses,
who do not diverge from the right path. Who are not inclined to the
Western or Eastern ideologies or to other deviated schools, who are
educated and well-informed about political developments and Islamic
politics.

I advise the revered ulama, and especially our highest religious sources
(maraje'), not to be indifferent to and not to evade involvement in the
significant issues of the society and especially in such issues as
presidential elections and majlis elections. You all witnessed -and the
future generation will read and hear- how the veteran politicians
inclined to West and East managed to eliminate the ulama from the
political scene: a people who had instituted Constitutional monarchy
with their toil and much hardship, and how the ulama too, were taken in
by politicians into believing that involvement in state affairs and in
the affairs of Muslims is below their dignity, and you witnessed their
retiring from the scene and their giving of the political arena over to
the crazy adherents of western culture wreaking the havoc as they did to
the Constitutional monarchy and Islam to make good on, which would still
take a long time.

Now that with the grace of the Almighty the obstacles have been removed
and a favorable atmosphere avails itself for the participation of all
sectors of the society, there is no good excuse for evading our
individual responsibility, and I remind you that to neglect the affairs
of Muslims is a cardinal sin.

Every person within his power and within the power of his influence must
be in the service of Islam and the country, and must diligently prevent
the infiltration of agents of the two colonialist powers, as well as the
adherents of the Western or Eastern bloc ideologies, and rest assured
that the enemies of Islam and Muslim nations, that is the ravaging
superpowers, infiltrate Muslim countries gradually, systematically and
in a creeping manner, exploiting the very people in those countries for
luring them to the trap of exploitation.

You must watch against such things and rise up against them as soon as
you witness an indication of such infiltration, and you should not give
them a respite. May God be your Aid and Protector. I also call on the
members of the Islamic Consultative Assembly (majlis), present and
future, to refuse votes of confidence to any person who should be found
to be deviated and who should have paved the way to the majlis by
fraudulent means and political artifice, and make sure that not one
subversive and foreign-inspired element will find his way to the majlis.

I also advise the officially­ recognized religious minorities to learn a
lesson from the era of the Pahlavi Dynasty, and elect their
representatives from among the individuals who are committed to their
own religion and to the Islamic Republic, who are not inspired by the
world -devouring foreign powers, who are not inclined to atheistic,
deviate or eclectical schools of thought.

I call on all majlis members to maintain a fraternal spirit and good
will in their daily association with one another, and to make sure that,
God forbid, the majlis bills will not be un-Islamic, that they are loyal
to Islam and observe the divine decrees so that they will prosper in
this world and in the Hereafter.

I call on the respectable Council of Guardians (Shuraye Negahban), and
the future councils, to carry out their Islamic and national duties with
the utmost care and scrupulousness without allowing themselves to
succumb to any power and prevent the ratification of law bills which are
against pure Islam and the Constitution without any hesitation, and also
have an eye to the exigencies of the day which sometimes will have to be
executed by way of Secondary Ordinances (Ahkam Thanaviyah) and at other
times by way of the decree of the Guardianship of the Jurisconsult
(Wilayah al- Faqih).

I call on the noble people of Iran to be in the political scene, whether
on the occasion of the elections for the majlis or presidential
elections, or for [the Assembly of] Experts for determining the
leadership council or the leader. For example, 1n elections of Experts
for determining the leadership council they should remember that if they
do so carelessly and if they do not elect experts for the council on the
basis of religious criteria and the relevant laws, it is likely that
they will thereby have inflicted irreparable damage to Islam and to the
country, in which case everyone will be responsible before the Supreme
God. Therefore, to keep oneself aloof in such circumstances would be a
cardinal sin, whether committed by the people, or the ranking ulama, or
businessmen, or farmers or workers, or government employees who are
responsible for the fate of this country and Islam.

Then as the old saying goes, an ounce of prevention is better than a
pound of cure, or else the situation will be out of everybody's control.
This was truly experienced after the Constitutional monarchy. There is
no better remedy than to have a nation who, throughout the country, does
only according to the Islamic dictates and the Constitution, to have a
people who solicit the opinion of the committed educated people and
people independent of the foreign powers and people who are well-reputed
for their faith in Islam and in the Islamic Republic as well as the
committed members of the ulama on such occasions as presidential
elections, elections for the majlis and who make sure that the President
and majlis deputies will be elected from among the candidates who have
felt the oppression and deprivation of the oppressed masses and who are
concerned about their welfare rather than from the group of capitalists,
or landlords and aristocrats who indulge in sensual pleasures and who
know nothing of the bitter taste of deprivation and hunger and the
barefooted.

We should remember that as long as our presidents and our majlis
deputies are worthy people and are committed to Islam and concerned
about the country and the people, the [country's] problems would be
fewer and more easily managed. The same considerations should be
emphatically observed when electing Experts for determining the
leadership council or a leader.

The Experts who are elected by the nation should also consult the
leading ulama of their time, and the religious personalities and
committed learned men and make sure that as long as they work with
scrupulousness they will prevent many problems, and will easily solve
those that may be encountered. Articles 109& 110 of the Constitution
define the serious responsibility of the people for electing Experts and
in turn the latters for electing leadership council or for electing the
leader, and it is evident that the slightest negligence and carelessness
is most likely to inflict grave damage upon Islam and the country, make
them responsible to God for their carelessness.

This era being the era of the inroad of the superpowers and their
dependent elements in and outside of Iran seemingly in the name of
Islamic Republic and actually against the Islamic Republic, and more
truly against Islam, I admonish that the responsibility of the leader
and the leadership council is to consecrate their lives to the service
of Islam, the Islamic Republic and the deprived and oppressed masses,
and watch against the notion that they are dignified by reason of their
offices since, truly speaking, offices like that are very heavy and
precarious responsibilities in the performance of which any lapse, if,
God forbid, is committed out of worldly pursuits, will be a life-long
infamy upon the incumbent and will entail God's wrath upon him in the
Hereafter.

I implore the Beneficent Almighty God and supplicate Him to receive you
and me in His Kingdom only after He has helped us to pass proudly
through this grave ordeal and to save us in our endeavors, the rest of
the public officials ranging from the president to lower-level
officials, depending on the gravity of their responsibilities, too are
likely to lapse into pitfalls, today and in the future, wherefore they
should always feel conscious of the presence of the Blessed and Supreme
Lord wherever they are and feel themselves as being in His blessed
company. May Almighty God lead them on the right path.

H. Judicature is a prime business of the government, and a branch which
deals with the lives, properties and chastity of the people. By this
last will of mine I call on the leader and the leadership counc1l to do
their best in the designation of an incumbent for the highest judicial
position and make sure he is self­ committed, has experience. and is an
authority in sharia laws, as well as Islam in general and politics, I
call on the High Judiciary Council to rehabilitate, as diligently as
they can, the judicial affairs which during the past regime had
degenerated into a shabby and deplorable condition, and to dismiss
people who might be occupying judiciary seats in our law courts toying
with the lives and assets of people without being really concerned about
Islamic justice, to gradually reform the justice adm1ninstration
diligently and steadily, and to replace judges incompetent and
unqualified from the point of Islam by other religiously educated and
competent nominees with the contribution of our theological schools,
especially graceful Qum Theological School, so that with the grace of
the Blessed and Supreme Lord, Islamic justice will prevail throughout
the country, By this last will and testament and in view also of the
traditions attributed to the Infallible Fourteen[^4] (A.S.) in relation
with the gravity of judiciary affairs and also in relation with perilous
position of the judgments, I exhort all respectable judges of today and
tomorrow to assume this task with due commitment and prevent the
occupation of judiciary seats by unfit people, and advise the qualified
people not to reject the offer of involvement in the task. Let them know
that as great as the risks of this position are, just as great is its
divine recompense, and know also that for qualified persons to engage in
the task is a religious duty.

I. As for our theological schools, by this last will and testament of
mine I feel impelled to repeat what I have said on frequent occasions
before, namely, that our time is marked by a struggle of the opponents
of Islam and the Islamic Republic for doing away with Islam by satanic
designs and by the strategy of introducing deviate and vicious people
into our theological schools; that as such the immediate, though grave,
implication of the strategy would be to disrepute our theological
schools by their unbefitting behavior and deviated ethics and
principles, and that its long-term and exceedingly grave impact would be
the coming to higher offices of one or a number of imposters who, by
virtue of their insight of Islamic sciences, win the favor and affection
of the masses and the innocent people, only to pound a deadly blow upon
Islam, theological schools, and our country when the opportunity avails
itself.

We know that the big plundering world powers have their own various
agents of different categories among the people of other nations, such
agents including nationalists, the imposter­ intellectuals and
turban-wearing hypocrites, the latter being the most dangerous of all if
given the chance. Sometimes they live among the people for thirty or
forty years, assuming a quasi­ Islamic, a clerical and a sanctimonious
and saintly appearance, or hide themselves under such masks as
'pan-Iranism' or pretend to be patriotic, resorting to all possible
subterfuges, and when they find the opportunity inflict their blow upon
the society.

Since the culmination of the Islamic Revolution, our beloved nation has
seen examples of such people, among them the Mujahideen Khalq
Orgamza1ion (MKO), the Fada'eyan Khalq[^5], the Tudeh Party[^6] and
others and it is necessary that we all vigilantly neutralize such forms
of plots.

But most important of all are our theological schools in which the purge
must be carried out with the joint effort of our respectable theological
teachers and senior scholars and with the approval of religious
authorities of the time. Perhaps the proposition that 'order' is in
'disorder' is the sinister indoctrination theory of the very same
plotters.

At any rate, my testamentary reminder on the topic is that in the face
of the increasing plots and conspiracies in our time a breakthrough
attack for giving a system to our theological schools is necessary, and
it is necessary that our revered theological teachers invest time and
effort in that so as our theological schools and especially the Qum
Theological School will be protected against harm.

It is incumbent upon the ulama and theological teachers to make sure
that principal topics related to fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence) are
presented unadulterated and in their proper format, which have been
bequeathed to us by the leading pioneers in the field, and make sure
that each and every day more and more scrutiny than in the past, with a
view to safeguarding the traditional fiqh which is the bequest of our
elders and betters to deviate from which would be to undermine the
foundations of our scholarship, and so that new scholarship will
regularly follow previous scholarships.

Naturally for other areas of human learning other programs will be
prepared. and more people should be provided education in those area,
but among the most exalted areas of human learning and education are the
spiritual sciences of Islam such as ethics, spiritual edification and
moral uplifting, which are the hardest struggles of all.

J. The executive branch of the government is one that needs to be
purged, reformed and protected. At times it is likely that plausible
bills are ratified by the majlis and endorsed by the Council of
Guardians and then communicated to responsible administrators by the
relevant government minister, but that the law degenerates in the hands
of the former, or its execution becomes entangled in customary red tape
and bureaucracy, which may be deliberately hampered with for the purpose
of disconcerting the people and gradually arousing their revolt.

My exhortation to our government ministers and their future successors
is: You and the employees of government ministries make a living by
receiving salaries from a budget which belongs to the nation and,
therefore, you should all be serving the people and especially the
oppressed masses. To needlessly inconvenience the people and behave
against the responsibility is now a religiously sinful act which may
sometimes, God forbid, incite divine wrath. You all need the support of
the nation.

We owe the victory of the Islamic Revolution to the support of the
people, and especially to the support of the oppressed masses, and owe
it to them for having stopped the tyrannical monarchy from plundering
our land and from its resources. Bereft of their support, you will be
done away with and tyrants such as there were during the monarchy will
occupy your offices. Therefore, in the face of this obvious reality you
should do your best to win the favor of the nation, and to discard
un-Islamic behavior.

By the same token, I advise the future incumbents of the Interior
Ministry to exercise maximum scrupulousness in their selection of
Governors-General and to make sure that they will be meritorious, pious,
self-committed, wise and well-behaved people so that the country will
have complete peace.

Although invariably all government ministers are completely responsible
for administering the affairs of their ministry according to the
dictates of Islam, some have a heavier responsibility than others, among
them the Foreign Ministry, which is in charge of our embassies abroad.
At the beginning of the victory of the Islamic Revolution I gave
periodical advice in connection with the prevailing monarchical morality
in our government ministries and the need to reform government agencies
consistent with the character of an Islamic Republic.

Some government ministers, however, either refused to reform their
ministries or were unsuccessful in their efforts for doing so. Today,
three years[^7] since the victory of the Islamic Revolution, the Foreign
Minister has undertaken various measures for this purpose and I hope
this significant undertaking will be accomplished by the investment of
more time and by continued application.

My testamentary advice to the Foreign Minister and to future incumbents
of his ministry is: You are shouldering a grave responsibility. Both for
reforming the Foreign Ministry and our embassies and for recasting our
foreign policy and protecting the nation's independence and its
interests and for establishing friendly relations with the foreign
governments which do not intend to interfere in our internal affairs and
avoid anything that is contaminated by any kind of dependency.

Remember that although in some areas dependence on a foreign country
might seem perfectly all right with certain transitory advantages, in
the long run it will cause the destruction of the country. Do your best
to improve your relations with Muslim nations, to awaken the people at
the helm in other [Muslim] countries, call them to solidarity and unity,
and rest assured that Almighty God will assist you.

I advise Muslim nations against expecting external help for attaining
their goal that is Islam and the institution of Islamic edicts. You
should help yourself in this vital task which ensures your freedom and
independence. So let the ulama and preachers in Muslim states call on
their governments to rid themselves from dependence on big foreign
powers and to come to an understanding with their own people, which
assures them victory.

Let them call on the nations for unity and for discarding racism, which
is against Islam. Let them shake a brotherly hand with their
brothers-in-faith of whatever race, since Islam refers to them as
brothers, and once this spirit of brotherhood has become a matter of
fact between all Muslim governments and Muslim nations you will see that
Muslims are the greatest power on earth. Let us hope to witness this
brotherhood and this equality between Muslim nations, God willing.

I advise the Ministry of Guidance (Ershad) for all time, especially in
this particular era, to do its best in propagating right against wrong
and for portraying a true picture of the Islamic Republic. Now that we
have eliminated the superpowers from our country we are the subject of
much hostile propaganda by the mass media dependent on the big powers.
The writers and spokesmen dependent on the superpowers have accused us
of whatever they wanted, and sadly enough the majority of Muslim
governments which, according to the dictates of Islam, must extend a
brotherly hand to us are rising against us and against Islam and, our
propaganda power being very weak, every foreign government aligned with
the world-devouring powers is making some sort of inroad against us.

You know that today the world turns on the wheels of propaganda. It is
saddening that the so-called intellectual men of letters privately
inclined to either of the two powers, hampered by their selfishness, and
by opportunism and monopolism, are incapable of thinking about the good
of their 1ation and their people and are unable to compare the freedom
and independence in the Islamic Republic with its status during the past
regime.

They would not set the honorable life such as they now have, although
devoid merely of the material plentifulness and extravagant sensuality
of their past, against what they earned during the autocratic monarchy
in this country at the cost of their subservience, their servant-like
status, and by eulogizing and raising the elements of corruption and the
fountainheads of tyranny and prostitution.

They would not stop levelling unfair remarks and unjust accusations
against this new-born Republic and they would not push pens or lash
their tongues in a single file with the nation and government against
the worldly gods and the fiendish.

Tablighal [ideology-oriented publicity work] is not the task solely of
the Ministry of Guidance, but of all scholars, public speakers, writers
and artists. The Foreign Ministry must do its best 10 ensure that our
embassies abroad will have ideology-oriented publicity periodicals to
unveil the brilliant vision of Islam to the world people.

Once the graceful visage of Islam to which the Holy Qur'an and
traditions have invited humans is seen unmasked by enemies and once the
mask of the enemies of Islam and its misinterpreting friends is taken
off, then Islam will be universal, and its proud banner will be hoisted
in the four corners of the world. How agonizing and tragic it is that
Muslims have a possession unique since the beginning of history until
its end, and not only have they failed to present this valuable gem to
other people who, simply by reason of their human nature are its natural
seekers, but they have consigned it to oblivion, are ignorant of it, and
sometimes even run away from It.

K. Another extremely important social and cultural determinant is the
status of educational institutions ranging from kindergartens to
colleges and universities, which I would like to point out again, due to
its extreme importance. The ravaged people of Iran must know that during
the past fifty years Iran and Islam have suffered more with regard to
the universities than they have suffered from anything else.

If our universities and our other educational centers had a curriculum
and status consistent with Islam and our national interests, our country
would not be swallowed by England and later by the U.S. and the Soviet
Union: and in that case predatory agreements would never be imposed upon
our nation; never would foreign advisers find their way to Iran; never
would the wealth and the black gold [oil] of this suffering people be
pocketed by the satanic world powers, and never would the Pahlavi
Dynasty and their dependents be able to plunder the wealth of the people
with which to build palaces in and outside of our country on the bodies
of oppressed masses and fill foreign banks with the plundered wealth of
those tyrannized people or spend the same for their corrupt fun-making
and for the hedonistic orgies of their dependents.

If our majlis, our cabinets, our judiciary power. and our other organs
had been manned by graduates of Islamic and national universities, then
our nation today would not have to tackle with such ruinous problems; if
upright personalities with Islamic belief in its true sense-as opposed
to the anti-Islamic mentality today-had found their way from the
universities to the three branches of the government, then we would have
different things today, and a different nation, and our deprived people
would have rid themselves of the claws of deprivation, and would have
cleared our society of the bits and pieces of a tyrannical monarchy, of
prostitution, addiction, and of houses of ill fame, each of which was
alone capable of leading our valuable and active youths to their doom;
and if things were otherwise our people would not have been handed over
a self-ruining and nationally-destructive legacy.

If our universities were conceived with Islamic, humane and
nationalistic values then they could have produced hundreds and
thousands of educators for the Iranian society. But it is unfortunate
and saddening that our colleges and universities and our high schools
were supervised and our youngsters were educated all- except for an
oppressed minority- by people who were West-struck or East-struck and
there being no other alternative, our youth were nurtured in the bosom
of the wolves dependent to the superpowers and would upon graduation
occupy legislative, public and judiciary offices to act only according
to the dictates of the tyrannical Pahlavi regime.

Now, thanks the Blessed and Supreme Lord, our universities are rid of
the claws of the criminals; the people and the government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, for all time in the future, have a responsibility to
prevent infiltration into colleges and universities of proponents of
irreligious and deviate ideologies or of ideologies of either of the two
power blocs so that they will not encounter problems in the future, and
so that the society will be in control. My advice to students at
colleges, universities and teacher-colleges is that themselves rise
boldly against deviations so that the independence and freedom of
themselves and of their country will be safeguarded.

L. The armed forces: the army, including also the Sepah (Islamic
Revolutionary Guards Corps), the gendarmery, the state­ police, the
committees, the Basij (Mobilized forces), and tribal forces are
important in their own capacities. They are powerful hands of the
Islamic Republic and are protectors of our boundaries, roads, towns and
cities and villages, and of our security at home, and as such should be
subject to the special attention of the nation, the government, and the
majlis.

And they should all bear in mind that the big powers and destructive
policies tend to exploit the native armed forces of other countries more
than they exploit any other group or institution in that country. It is
the armed force that is likely to fall prey to political foul plays,
state coups, and to devices for chaining governments and regimes.
Fraudulent people and scoundrels attempt to buy the chiefs in the armed
forces and get hold of countries with the aid of those local chiefs, and
as result of the collusions of deceived army commanders, dominate and
deprive people of their freedom and independence.

But as long as army commanders are upright and chaste, the enemies of
the nations will not be able to stage coups in other countries or occupy
those countries, or if they venture to do such things, their schemes
will be aborted by committed commanders in those countries.

In Iran, too, in which the people worked this great miracle of our time
[the Islamic Revolution], the armed forces had a great role to play, and
today when th15 damned war that is being imposed upon us by Saddam
[Hussein] by the order of the United States and other world powers is,
after two years since its outbreak, bringing political and military
defeat for the invading Ba'athist army of Iraq, a success which has been
accomplished by our armed forces and by the Sepah [Islamic Revolutionary
Guards Corps], and by the effort of populist forces and the liberal
support of the masses and their contributions to the war effort both at
war-fronts and behind the fronts, and they are the people who have made
Iran proud, and the various internal plots designed and engineered by
the pawns of the arch-leaders of the Western bloc and Eastern bloc
countries were foiled, thanks to the mighty hands of our youth in
Committees [Islamic Revolution Committees][^8] and to our zealous
people.

And our committeemen are the same people who keep overnight vigils so
that the people might now rest peacefully. May God be their Aider.

Therefore, in these last days of my life I offer my brotherly advice to
our armed forces as follows: You dear people who endear Islam and who
are performing acts of self-sacrifice at the battlefronts and other
valuable services elsewhere throughout our country for the cause of God
and prompted by your love for reunion with God, be wakeful that the
sharp edge of the weapon of treachery and murder of political operatives
and veteran West­ struck and East-struck politicians as well as the
secret hands of behind-the-scene criminals are pointing at you more than
at any other group.

They want to exploit you who have brought forward the victory of the
Islamic Revolution with your acts of self-sacrifice and who revived
Islam -for toppling the Islamic Republic, and plan to sever you from the
nation and throw you into the fold of either one of the world-devouring
poles and cancel your efforts and your acts of self-sacrifice by
political intrigues with a show of commitment to Islam and nationalism.

I enjoin the armed forces not to subscribe to any political party or
group and that they keep themselves aloof of political games, and adhere
to the relevant discipline. This applies invariably to all sectors of
the armed forces, including army men, security forces, Islamic
Revolutionary Guardian Corps, Basij [Mobilized forces] and others
Volunteers. Only then will they be able to maintain their military power
and prevent in-fighting due to personal differences. The commanders,
too, have a responsibility to prevent the people under their supervision
from subscribing to political parties.

Because the Revolution belongs to the people and its protection is the
responsibility of all, it is the religious and national responsibility
of the government, the people, the Defense Council and the Islamic
Consultative Assembly to oppose any act by the armed forces and their
commanders of whatsoever level which is judged to be against the
interests of Islam and the country, and also to oppose their
subscription to political parties, or their involvement in political
games, which will certainly entail their doom.

It is the responsibility of the leader or leadership council of the
Islamic Republic to firmly stand against such things so that our nation
will be protected from harm. At the end of this earthly life of mine, I
sincerely exhort all members of the armed forces to be loyal to Islam,
as you have been to this point, which is the only religious ideology for
independence and freedom and in which the Blessed and Supreme Lord
invites all men with the leading rays of Islam to a most exalted status.
It rids you, your country and your nation of the disgrace of dependence
on the foreign powers who want you only for serving them as slaves and
who will keep your country and people backward, and only as a consumer
nation and under the burden of oppression.

Then prefer a dignified human-like life, although fraught with
obstacles, to a humiliating life of slavery to foreigners, although it
may be marked by animalistic comfort. Remember that as long as you
extend an asking hand to foreigners for your needs in advanced
technology and as long as you lead a beggarly life in the international
community you will not witness the growth of your inventive talent in
technology.

In the wake of the economic sanctions against Iran you witnessed with
your eyes that the same Iranians who used to judge themselves as being
unable to do many of the things previously done solely by expatriate
workers and who had been previously been told that they would not be
able to turn the wheels of their country's industries, and who
distrusted their own inherent capacity for doing so, eventually ventured
to rely on their own talent and thereby responded to the needs of the
armed forces and their various factories and plants.

Therefore, this war economic sanctions, and the ouster of foreign
experts from Iran was, in fact, a divine blessing for us the value of
which we did not appreciate in the beginning. Now if the government and
if our armed forces voluntarily ban foreign-made products and instead
increase their efforts for improving native capacities in technical and
industrial areas, there is hope to believe that our country will become
self-sufficient and will be rid of begging its own enemies for technical
and industrial help.

I must hasten to add that our need for advanced industries of
progressive countries is indisputable, but that is not to be interpreted
that for advanced technology and scientific know-how we will have to
depend on either of the two power blocs politically.

Our government and armed forces should make an effort to send
self-committed students for higher studies to the countries which do not
adhere to colonialism or pursue colonialistic policies rather than send
them to the U.S. or the Soviet Union and to certain other countries
which follow and promote the policies of either of the two poles.

Except, perhaps when the two powers have admitted their past mistakes
and have abandoned their predatory policies and adopted a foreign policy
based on humane principles, or when, God willing, the oppressed masses
of the world, the wakeful nations and committed Muslims have subdued
them. May that day comes.

M. The radio, the television, the print media, the theaters and the
cinemas have been successfully used to intellectually anesthetize
nations, and especially the youth. During the present century,
particularly during the latter half of the century, the broadcast and
print media have been used to full capacity as a propaganda tool against
Islam and the serving ulama, as tools for airing the propaganda of the
colonialist Western and Eastern power blocs, as a tool for marketing
products, especially luxury items of every sort, ranging from building
items to ornamental products, drinks, clothing, etc. promoting not just
products but also a form of life as a prestigious model, so much so that
to look like Westerners in every aspect of one's daily life became a
status symbol impelling people, especially affluent ladies, to adapt
their daily conversation, their attire and their fashions to prevailing
fashions in the West, the mentality conspicuous also in the people's
craze for using European words in their daily conversations as well as
in their writings, which needlessly complicated their utterances and
rendered them incomprehensible even by their peers.

Television films were products of either Western or Eastern countries,
tending to lead the young generation and men and women away from the
healthy business of life, work, and industry and production and
learning, and plunge them into a world of self­ estrangement or of
disrespect for and mistrust of everything native, including their
country and even their culture, and their native artifacts, many of
which were taken to museums and libraries in the Western and Eastern
bloc countries.

The magazines publishing scandalous articles and shameful pictures, and
the dailies running the race of anti-Islamic and anti­ national culture
proudly lured the people and especially the more socially instrumental
youth to the ruling culture of the West or East. To say nothing of a
never ending propaganda for legitimizing centers for corruption, houses
of ill fame, gambling and lottery houses, and promoting shops and other
centers for dispensing fancy items and promoting whatnot in modish
extravaganzas of Western culture, including cosmetics, entertainment,
alcoholic beverages, extravagant gift-shop items, including toys and
dolls, and hundreds of their [things] unknown to me and to my peers
against the export of oil, gas and other of our resources to the West.

And if God forbid the servile and ruinous Pahlavi regime had survived
longer certainly our young people, the children of Islam and of our
country to whom the nation looks for its future would succumb to the
satanic plots and conspiracies of the corrupt Pahlavi regime and to the
propaganda of the mass media and to the insinuations of the Western and
Eastern-oriented intellectuals or would ruin their youthful days in
corrupt quarters or perhaps would serve the world-devouring powers and
pitch the nation into total ruin. The Blessed and Supreme Lord obliged
us and our youth by ridding us of the evil of the corrupt and predators.

My last word now to the Islamic Consultative Assembly for today and for
all times and to the present and future presidents, and to the Council
of Guardians and to the Supreme Judiciary Council and to the government,
present and future, is that they should look out for any deviation from
the true course of Islam and from the interests of the nation by our
news agencies and print media.

We should all remember that the 'freedom' of the Western brand which
causes the ruin of the youth and boys and girls is condemned in Islam
and by common sense, and that to hear, to write, to speak and to publish
against the dictates of Islam and in a manner abhorrent to the moral
virtue and ethical principles of society and against the best interests
of the country is prohibited (haram), the prevention of which is the
individual responsibility of all of us and all Muslims.

Destructive freedoms, and anything religiously prohibited or against the
social propriety in the Islamic Republic or against the reputation of
the Islamic Republic should be prevented, or else each and everyone of
us will be responsible for it. If the people and the youth of
Hezbollah[^9] should encounter instances of the violation of such
considerations they must report the same to relevant institutions, and
if officials in those institutions should show indifference towards it
the youth are responsible for taking action to prevent it. May the
Supreme Lord be the Aider of all.

My last word to the [political] groups [parties] and grouplets
[factions] and to other people who are active against the nation and the
Islamic Republic, and primarily my last word to their leaders in and
outside of Iran is to call on them to have a retrospective glance at
their long experience to find out for themselves that having tried their
hands at everything, at every plot, and having tried their luck with any
foreign country and personality should have proved to them that they
cannot change the course of the life of a patriotic nation by
assassinations, bomb blasts, disreputing and nonsensical propaganda;
that no government can be toppled by such inhuman devices, and
especially the government of the Islamic Republic, which relies on a
nation of young children and adults, old men and women who do perform
acts of self-sacrifice for their goal, for the Islamic Republic, for the
Holy Qur'an and their religion.

You know (and if you don't know, you are far too simple­ minded) that
the nation is not with you, and that the armed forces are your enemies;
and if -only taking it for granted- they were once your sympathizers,
you repelled them by your crude acts and as a result of criminal acts
perpetrated by your provocations, you could not win friends but made
enemies for yourselves.

N. My last word of altruistic advice to you in the last days of my life
is that I wonder how you may bring yourself to fight a tyrannized nation
which, for 2,500 years, has been plagued by cruel monarchies and which
rid itself of the oppression of a regime such as that of the Pahlavi's
and the world-devouring Western and Eastern powers by giving away their
best children and youth as martyrs in their fight for freedom.

How could a human being bring himself to behave like that with his own
people for [the sake of] attaining some office; safeguarding neither
children nor the elderly? I exhort you to cease such useless and unwise
perpetrations and guard against playing into the hands of the
world-devouring powers.

If you have not committed a crime return to your homeland and into the
fold of Islam, wherever you are, and repent and rest assured that God is
Compassionate and Merciful and, God willing, the Islamic Republic and
the Iranian nation will forgive your wrongdoing, and if you have
committed a crime for which there is a divinely-decreed punishment still
turn back midway and repent, and if you are bold enough accept the
punishment you should suffer and thereby save yourself from God's
retribution. If you do not want to return home, then do not waste your
life any longer and spend the remainder of your life in a vocation which
ensures your eventual good.

I also advise the supporters of these people in and outside Iran to
think about the reasons why they consecrated their youth to serve a
people who are indisputably working for the world-devouring powers? Why
they promote their schemes? Why [are they] entangled in their traps? In
whose interests and for the sake of whom are you wronging your own
people? You are playing into their hands, and if you are in Iran you
will see for yourself that the million-strong masses are loyal to the
Islamic Republic, for which they perform acts of self-sacrifice.

You clearly see that the present government in this country is
wholeheartedly at the service of the people and the impoverished masses.
Those who hypocritically pretend to be committed to the masses or bear
such labels as mujahid or fada’eyan [devotees] are actually antagonizing
the very people who are God's creatures, and they are exploiting you for
their own purposes and for one of the world-devouring power poles. If
they [the masterminds and leaders of the two grouplets] are outside Iran
they are having fun at the heart of either one of the two criminal power
poles, and if they are in Iran, they live in their sumptuous common
hide-outs as wretched criminals, continuing their criminal acts and
plunging you youthful people into the jaws of death.

My sincere advise to you is this: I would urge you to take the opposite
course ·and reunite with the deprived masses who are serving the Islamic
Republic wholeheartedly, and to work for an independent and free Iran so
that your country and your people will be rid of the evil of opponents
and so that you may all continue honorable lives.

Wherefore and for how long do you intend to take orders from a people
who think not but of their own interests; (a people) who, resting in the
lap of the superpowers and sheltered by them, are fighting their own
people, and who are sacrificing you for their own dire ambitions and for
their craze for power. During the past few years since the triumph of
the Islamic Revolution, you have readily seen that their acts do not
tally with their pretensions; that pretensions are only devices for
cheating unsophisticated youth.

You know that you are no power against the roaring ocean of the nation,
and that by what you do; you will only harm yourself and ruin your life.
I have now fulfilled my obligation for guiding you, and I hope you will
heed this advice of mine which is reaching you after my death and which
is untainted by ambition or self-interest, and hope also that you will
save yourself from the Eternal Punishment of God. May the Beneficent
guide you onto the right path.

I give my last word and advice to the leftists, such as the communists,
the Fada'eyan Khalq Organization and others, by asking them: How did you
bring yourself to subscribe to a broken­ down school of thought without
first having formed a sound idea of other schools and Islam, with the
help of people who are well­ oriented about schools, especially Islam?
Whatever prompted you to indulge your fancy unjust a few 'isms' which
are devoid of content among learned and inquisitive people? What motive
is prompting you to pull your country into the fold of the Soviets or
China, and wherefore should you be prompted to wage a war with your own
people in the name of concern for the 'people,' and why should you have
contributed to plots against your nation and against the tyrannized
masses in this country and in the interests of foreign enemies? You see
that since the birth of communism, those who have pretended to subscribe
to its ideology have led the worst authoritarian, most absolute, and
worst monopolistic governments in the world.

Look at the nations who were trampled under the feet of the Soviets, the
advocates of the 'people', and who lost everything they had. The people
of the Soviet Union, Muslims and others, are hard pressed under the
dictatorial oppression of the Communist Party; they are denied any form
of liberty and are subjected to a strangulation which is the worst among
all dictatorships in the world today.

We saw the coming to power of Stalin, who was one of the so-called
brilliant figures of the Communist Party. We saw his aristocratic life
and we witnessed how luxuriously moved around. Now you give your lives
for the sake of your love for that regime while the oppressed masses in
the Soviet Union and in the Soviet bloc countries like Afghanistan[^10]
lose their lives because of the Soviets' oppression and, heedless of
those developments, you pretend to support the 'people', apparently
forgetting the crimes you committed against the very 'people' whom you
claim to support, against the noble people in Amol[^11] whom you falsely
claimed were your supporters, many of whom you instigated against the
Islamic government and other people, and let them get killed in an armed
challenge to the Islamic government. You went beyond all limits in your
criminal perpetrations and now you 'supporters of oppressed people' wish
to put the oppressed and deprived masses in Iran into the fold of Soviet
dictatorship, doing it under the cover of Fada' eyan Khalq and advocates
of the oppressed and deprived masses, and the Tudeh Party doing the same
more slyly under the cover of support for the government of the Islamic
Republic, and other political groups, by force of fire arms,
assassinations and bomb blasts.

My last word to you, political parties, who are either known as
leftists -though there are indications that they are American inventions
and pro-American groups- or fed and inspired by the West and those who
are using firearms in a contention for self-rule and under the cover of
support for the Kurds and Baluchis, and who have wreaked havoc in
Kurdestan and in other areas of the country and prevented educational,
health, economic, and reconstruction services in those provinces, such
as the Democratic Party and Koumeleh[^12], is to call on you to reunite
with the rest of the masses and remember your bitter experience, which
has only served to make the people in those provinces miserable, and
admit that whatever you do, you will only bring misery to the people in
those areas of the country.

So remember that it is for your own ultimate good -and in the interest
of the people whom you pretend to support- to join forces with the
government and stop revolting and serving foreign enemies and betraying
your own nation. Lend a helping hand to the building of the country and
rest assured that for you Islam is a better alternative than the
criminal power pole of the West and the dictatorial power pole of East.

My last word to errant Muslim groups who are inclined to the West or
occasionally to Eastern ideology, who have occasionally voiced support
for the hypocrites -whose treachery was exposed to the public- due to
their misconceptions, at times cursed and flouted the enemies of the
opponents of Islam is to call on them not to persist in their erroneous
judgment, but to admit their mistaken beliefs, relying on their Islamic
courage, and tojoin forces with and align themselves to the government,
the majlis and the oppressed people for God's satisfaction, and rid the
oppressed masses of contemporary history of the evil of oppressors.

Remember the words of (Seyyed Hassan] Moddaress[^13] , the
clear-sighted, morally undefiled and self-committed scholar (alim) who
said at a sad majlis session of his time that if the ulama [and the
Islamic thought] are to be destroyed, why should they pave the way with
their own hands? Today, in memory of that martyr of the cause of God, I
tell my devoted brothers that if one day it be destined that we be wiped
out from the world scene it would be better for us to go by the criminal
hands of the Americans and the Soviets, and better for us to seek
reunion with God with our sanguine bodies, rather than choose to have a
comfortable and aristocratic life under the banner of the Red Army of
the East or the black banner of the West.

This has been the way of life of the prophets, of the Imams of Muslims
and religious sages. We too, should follow the same course and should
inspire ourselves with the conviction that if a nation decides to live
without relying on foreign powers they certainly can, and that the world
powers cannot impose a way of life on them which is contrary to their
own convictions. Afghanistan is a contemporary example proving this
argument. Although the usurping government in that country and leftist
parties there were and are aligned with the Soviets, they have not yet
been able to subjugate the masses.

Moreover, the deprived nations of the world are now waking up and before
long their wakefulness will culminate in uprisings and revolts and
revolutions, and they will gradually rid themselves of the domination of
oppressors. You Muslim people who believe in Islamic values readily see
that we are witnessing the fruits of ending our reliance on the Western
and Eastern power blocs already in our country.

You see that our capable native brains are working to lead us to
self-sufficiency, and we see the accomplishment of things which the
treacherous expatriates here said were beyond our technical capacity to
undertake and which, God willing, we will be successfully undertaking in
the future. Alas for the late institution of this Revolution, for if it
had been undertaken at least at the start of the cruel and dirty reign
of Muhammad Reza, then our plundered Iran today would be a different
one.

To the writers, public speakers, intellectuals and obstructionists,
naggers and people driven against the Islamic Revolution by their own
complexes, I say: Instead of spending your time doing things against the
interests of the Islamic Republic, and instead of depleting all your
energy in acts of antagonism and in malicious thoughts and for censoring
the majlis and the government and other serving people, [acts] which
serve to push your country into the fold of the superpowers, sit at a
private place on a still night for a self-trial before God -or before
your own conscience if you do not believe in God- and find out your own
latent motives which may be in the subconscious of many men and which
drive you into acting and speaking as you do.

Find out why and on the basis of what criteria you are looking down at
the blood of our youth who are ripped to pieces in the battlefronts, and
why you are waging a psychological war with a nation determined to
liberate itself from the burden of oppressors and plunderers in and
outside of our country, and also determined to safeguard, with whatever
self­ sacrifices, the independence and freedom which it has obtained at
the cost of shedding its blood and the blood of its children.

Find out why you are feeding the fire of division and why you promote
treacherous conspiracies against the nation. Would you not do better to
push your pen and use your tongue to safeguard your country? Would you
not do well to help this deprived and tyrannized nation and to help
institute the Islamic government? Do you really consider this majlis,
this president and this cabinet and this judiciary council to be worse
than their counterparts during the past regime? Have you really
forgotten the cruelties of that accursed regime upon this oppressed and
helpless people?

Do you not really know that at that time this Islamic country used to be
a military base for the United States and that they [the Americans]
treated our country as their colony? That the majlis, the government and
the armed forces were in the clutches of the Americans? Do you not
really know what advisors, their technicians and the expatriate
Americans did to our resources? Have you really forgotten the increasing
prostitution throughout our country as well as the steadily growing
number of centers for corrupt entertainment, ranging from houses of ill
fame to gambling houses, wine cellars and liquor stores, movie houses
and other quarters which were important elements for ruining the young
generation? Have you realty forgotten those corrupt mass medias and
periodicals and those papers in that regime?

Now you are shouting protest cries because while corruption is not
dispensed in our city streets, this or that young man, mainly under the
influence of deviate groups, may be put on trial for having committed
wrongful acts, or may be executed for being corrupt on earth (mufsid-fil
ardh) or for [armed) revolt against Islam and the Islamic Republic. You
join causes and shake brotherly hands with the people who expressly
condemn Islam or challenge it by firearms or in writing and in rhetoric
which is more saddening than armed challenge. You call 'the apple of
your eye' the people whom God decrees to be executed. You sit beside the
political actors who conducted a bloodbath on March 5[^14] killing
innocent youth, and calmly watch the scene, and you consider your
attitudes and your acts as being consistent with Islam and the operation
of the government and the judiciary council, which punish sworn enemies
of Islam and the Islamic Republic], and the deviated atheists for their
wrongdoing as being unjust, and cry out for help.

Knowing somewhat the past of some of you, my brothers-in-faith, and
having liking for some of you I am sorry for you, but I am not sorry for
those who were bandits disguising themselves as nice people md wolves
clad in shepherds' garb, and about humbugs who hoodwinked all and who
meant to ruin the country and the nation md serve one of the predatory
power poles.

Those who have martyred valuable youth and men and ulama who are
educators of the society, and who did not even spare the innocent
children of Muslims, have brought infamy upon themselves and have made
themselves wretched beings before God. For them the return road is
closed, since they are totally governed by the animal in themselves.

But you pious brothers-in-faith, why not help the government and the
majlis, which endeavor to assist the deprived, the oppressed, the
barefooted and those people deprived of all means of livelihood? Why do
you complain? Have you compared the bulk of government services for the
people during the short interval since the establishment of the Islamic
Republic -allowing for all hard luck and post-revolution afflictions
which are common to every revolution, including the imposed war and the
millions of Iranian and non-Iranian war refugees and the innumerable
obstructions­ with development services for the same period during the
past regime?

Do you not know that at that time development services were the
privilege almost solely of cities, and even then of the affluent sector
of the cities with poor and deprived people benefitting little, if at
all, from those services, whereas the present government as well as
Islamic institutions render services for those groups of deprived people
with all their hearts. Therefore, you pious people, too, support the
government so that the projects will be implemented sooner, and hope
that on your journey to heaven you will be wearing the badge of service
to God's men. (I, myself remored sections from here).

O. One of the topics which needs be recalled here is that Islam does not
approve of tyrannical capitalism, which tends to deprive the oppressed
and downtrodden masses. On the contrary, it sharply condemns it in the
Book and so do the traditions.

They consider ii counter to social justice, although certain half-witted
people who are uninformed about the Islamic government and political
issues in an Islamic state have somehow pretended and still persist in
their writings and in their lectures that Islam advocates uncontrolled
capitalism and private ownership, and with such interpretations of the
Islamic dictates they have marred the brilliant visage of Islam, thereby
paving the way for the invasion against Islam by malevolent people and
for intimating that an Islamic government is a government like
capitalist governments of the West, such as the United States, England
and other plunderers of the West, and there are others who, relying on
the judgment of such silly people, or perhaps maliciously and without
bothering to check with true Islamicists, they are fighting Islam.

But at the other extreme Islam is not a system of government like
communism and Marxist­ Leninism, which condemn private ownership and
which advocate community ownership with varying degrees, and which have
undergone certain transformations over the past years, once recognizing
the principle of communal ownership, to even authorize polyandry and
homosexuality under an absolute dictatorship, but [an Islamic
government] is rather a moderate system of government which recognizes
private ownership only to a level and allowing it only within bounds,
the implementation of which system in its true form will ensure the
turning of the wheels of a healthy economy which is required for a
healthy political system.

Alternatively others, relying on their own corrupt interpretation of
Islam and due to their lack of sophistication about Islam and the
healthy economy that it advocates, have adopted a position at the other
extreme, even occasionally adducing certain verses from the Holy Qur'an
or from the Nahjul-Balaghah pretend that Islam is compatible with such
deviated schools as Marxism, disregarding other verses in the Holy
Qur'an and in the Nahjul­ Balaghah, advocating community ownership
according to their own myopic outlooks, and supporting blasphemy,
dictatorship and strangulation of the masses by a small ruling body
which acts like animals.

My last word to the majlis and the Council of Guardians, the government,
the President and the Supreme Judiciary Council is to call on them to be
resigned to divine decrees, to resist falling prey to the empty
propaganda of the marauding pole of capitalists and the irreligious
communists, to recognize and respect legitimate private ownership and
private capital obtained within the bounds of Islam and to assure the
people of your recognition of such principles so that private capital
will be invested in productive activities so that it will contribute to
the self-sufficiency of the government and the country both in light and
heavy industries.

In addition, my last word to the wealthy and the owners of
legitimately-obtained money is to invest their lawful money in healthy
enterprises, in farms, factories and our villages, resting assured that
the enterprise is a lofty act of worship.

I exhort all to endeavor for the welfare of the deprived masses, and
remind them that their eventual good is dependent on serving the
deprived masses of the society who have suffered hardships and agonies
during monarchies and the rules of feudal lords. And benevolent are
those of our moneyed people who volunteer to build houses for
pit-dwellers and shanty-dwellers, and who provide for their welfare, and
let them be assured that such acts will bring them good in this world
and in the Hereafter and of course it is far from equal that one person
should be homeless and another have many apartment houses.

P. My last word to that sector of the ulama and imposter clerics who
oppose the Islamic Republic with different motives, who spend their
lives in subversive schemes, who collaborate with conspiring
oppositionists and political actors, sometimes reportedly doing so with
the aid of the colossal amounts of money they receive from the ungodly
capitalists, is: To date you have not gained anything by such wicked
acts, nor do I see it likely that you will do so at any future time.

If you have done such acts as you have for worldly purposes, which God
will prevent you from fulfilling, then it is better that as long as it
is not too late for repentance you repent your acts and join the cause
of the oppressed and impoverished nation, and support the Islamic
Republic, which guarantees your good in this world and in the Hereafter,
though I feel it is unlikely that you will want to repent before it is
too late.

But as for those who antagonize the Islamic Republic based on the
misjudgments of certain other individuals or groups or on the strength
of their verdicts which, whether with or without malice, antagonize the
Islamic government, and who -in their own judgment- try to subvert it
for the cause of God, and who pretend that this Republic is as bad as or
worse than the toppled monarchy, I only advise them to think things over
with a clear heart in solitude and compare this Islamic Republic with
the past regime, and also remember that all revolutions throughout the
world have also been characterized by chaos and transgressions, and
instances of opportunism as unavoidable realities.

If you consider the afflictions of this Islamic Republic, such as plots
and conspiracies, malicious propaganda, armed attacks from across the
borders and by others inside our country, the unavoidable infiltration
of certain corrupt people and opponents of Islam in all government
organizations for rousing the people against Islam and the Islamic
Republic, the lack of experience of all or the majority of
administrators of the Islamic government, the airing of malicious rumors
by those who are now unable to reap the unjust profits such as they did
during the previous regime or who pocket less than they did at that
time, the acute shortage of religious judges, the onerous economic
burdens, the colossal problems in the administrative purging affecting
several million employees as well as their ideological reformation, the
shortage of well-wishing experts, and tens of other problems which may
not be known by anybody except by those who themselves are in the scene,
the mal-wishing monarchists and owners of large amounts of capital who
engage in usury, outrageous profiteering, sending out foreign exchange,
smuggling and hoarding and thereby pressuring the impoverished and
deprived masses of the society and leading the society to corruption;
who at times come to you for campaigning dishonestly and for cheating
you, occasionally pretending to be true Muslims by handing over sums of
money to you as religious tariffs on their shoulders, who shed crocodile
tears and make you angry and rouse your feelings against the Islamic
government- many of them privately sucking the blood of people by
illegitimate profiteering and crippling the national economy; I only
humbly advise them in a spirit of brotherhood to guard against falling
prey to such gossipy rumors, and instead uphold this Islamic Republic
for the sake of God and Islam, and I must remind them that if this
Islamic Republic should happen to collapse it will not be replaced by an
Islamic government having the seal of approval of the Imam of Our Time,
or doing according to the wishes of people like you, but that the regime
to substitute this Islamic Republic will be one such as is the wish of
either of the two superpowers.

At that time, the deprived masses of the world who have placed their
trust in Islam and the Islamic system of government and who look to it
as their refuge will be disappointed and frustrated and it will be too
late then for making good on past mistakes. If you people expect to see
things being reformed according to the principles of Islam and to divine
decrees overnight then you are in error, for never at any time in the
past did men witness such a miracle, nor are they likely to experience
that overnight transformation any time in the future.

Do not allow yourselves to think that once, God willing, the Last
Reformist should make his advent then the people will witness the
miracle of a universal reformation in only one day, but even at that
time the tyrants will be suppressed and isolated only as a result of the
self­ sacrificing efforts of the people. If, however, you belong in the
circle of those aberrant and ignorant people who maintain that to speed
up the advent of the Imam of Our Time we should try to spread injustice
and tyranny throughout the world as the preliminary requisite for his
advent, then why, of course, We are all from God and to Him shall we
return.

Q. My last word to Muslims and oppressed masses of the world is: You
should not sit back and expect to be gifted with independence and
freedom by the people at the helm of your country or by the foreign
powers. At least during the present century, which has witnessed the
gradual coming of the big world­ devouring powers to all Muslim
countries as well as to other [third world] countries, you and we have
observed or read in true history books that hardly any one government in
those countries was concerned about the freedom, independence and
welfare of its own people, nor are they so at the present time.

On the contrary, the large majority of those governments have either
tyrannized and strangulated their own people, doing so to safeguard only
the interests of a few or a small group or for the welfare of the
well-to­ do upper class society in the face of the deprivation of
tyrannized people and of those living in reed shelters and pit-dwellers
who are denied all comforts of life and even such things as water, bread
and the means of daily sustenance; and exploiting the oppressed masses
only for the benefit of the well-to-do class and fun-making people; or
[they] have been puppet governments of the big powers which have done
everything in order to subjugate countries and nations and make them
dependent countries, only markets for the products of the Western or
Eastern bloc countries, protecting the interests of the latter and
keeping nations backward and consumption­ oriented. Even today they are
pursuing the same plot.

You oppressed masses of the world, you Muslim countries and you Muslims
Rise to your feet and get your dues with your teeth and claws, defying
the noisy propaganda of the superpowers, and expel the criminal men and
the helm who give out the fruits of your toil to your enemies and the
enemies of Islam, and let the self­ committed and serving sectors of the
society take the helm of your country, all joining together under the
dignifying banner of Islam and rising against the enemies of Islam,
marching towards an independent and free Islamic Republic and resting
assured that the realization of the proposition would mean the
subjugation of all oppressors of the world, and helping the oppressed
masses to become leaders and inheritors of your lands. Let us hope for
the advent of that day which the Supreme Lord has promised us.

R. At the conclusion of this last Will and Testament of mine I wish to
remind the noble nation of Iran that man toils, and suffers and performs
acts of self-sacrifice and self-abnegation to the extent of the
loftiness and worthy sublimity of his goal.

What you rose for, what you pursue, what you sacrifice your lives and
your means for is the noblest of all goals since the creation of the
universe throughout eternity. It is the divine ideology in the extended
sense of the word and the idea of the unity of God in its lofty
magnitude, which is the foundation and the final goal of the earthly
world and of the Invisible and which idea is fully crystalized in the
Muhammadan faith, and which was the goal of all leading prophets (A.S.W)
and is something without which man will not attain absolute perfection
or find reunion with the Absolute Glory and the Infinite Beauty of His
Divinity.

It is this very same thing which has exalted earthlings beyond the rank
of those in the Kingdom of God, and the journey to that very destination
by an earthling has a consequence unique solely to him and not to any of
His other creatures, visible or invisible. You struggling people, you
are marching under a banner hoisted throughout the material and the
spiritual world.

Whether or not you will realize what your quest is, you will have
marched on the same road that was the path of all prophets (A.S.W.) and
is the only road to absolute salvation. It is this same motive which
prompts all saints to embrace martyrdom on that path and which makes the
sanguine death sweeter to them than honey[^15].Your youngsters have
taken a gulp of that in the battlefronts and have felt elated at doing
so, the effect of which is also manifest in their mothers, sisters,
fathers and brothers. Truly we must say: Blessed be they with that
cheerful zephyr and with that inspiring sign.

We must remember also that one aspect of this divine revelation is
manifest to all who struggle in such other places as the blazing
farmlands, factories, workshops and in the centers for industries and
technological developments, and to the majority of those who engage in
our markets, in our city streets, in our villages and to all others who
have assumed a task for the cause of Islam, the Islamic Republic and for
helping the country move towards self­ sufficiency. God willing, as long
as the spirit of cooperation prevails in our society our country will be
protected from all worldly harm.

Thanks God our theological schools, our universities, our beloved youth
and our educational and learning centers are gifted with this divine
gift; those centers are under their total command and the hands of
criminals and deviated people are very far from those centers.

My last word to all is to march towards a better knowledge of ourselves
and towards self-sufficiency and independence in their full scope, and
no doubt as long as you are at the service of God and as long as you
contribute to the progress and exaltation of this Islamic country with a
spirit of cooperation the hand of God will be with you, and based on my
observations of our people's vigilance, wakefulness, self-commitment,
self-sacrifice and of the spirit of firmness and resistance in the cause
of God, I believe there is hope that this same spirit is inherited and
improved upon by all future generations.

With a tranquil and confident heart and a conscience hopeful God's
beneficence, I now take leave of my sisters and brothers for a journey
to my eternal abode while I very greatly need your blessing, and
supplication of the Blessed and Supreme Lord to accept my pleas for His
pardoning of my negligence, my faults and my failings, and I hope the
nation, too, will pardon my shortcomings, my negligence and faults and
march on firmly and resolutely, assured that the absence of one servant
will not cause a crack in the iron like ranks of the nation, for there
are better and more noble servants among you, and Allah will protect
this nation and the oppressed masses of the world.

**Ruhollah al-Mousavi al-Khomeini**

**February 15, 1983**

[^1]: Originally toghut, a post-revolutionary term and expression
adopted from the Holy Qur'an and descriptive of the nature of monarchy
in Iran. (T).

[^2]: National Construction Corps originally formed upon Imam Khomeini's
decree after the triumph of the Islamic Revolution. Volunteers for
performing basic services in development, health, agriculture and
related fields in rural areas and less-privileges areas in Iran comprise
it. It expanded and undertook diversified tasks shortly after the
outbreak of the Iraq-Iran war in 1980. (T).

[^3]: A title used for the outlawed Mujahideen Khalq Organization (MKO).

[^4]: According to Shi'ism, the fourteen are Prophet Muhammad(S.A.W ),
his daughter her Holiness Fatimah (A.S ) and the twelve Imams (A.S ).
(T).

[^5]: A communist-Marxist party officially disbanded in Iran sometime
after the triumph of the Islamic Revolution.

[^6]: Communist party of Iran leaning towards Moscow, now disbanded.

[^7]: The Islamic Revolution in Iran culminated on Feb. II, 1979, and
Imam Khomeini's last will and testament has been written in 1982.

[^8]: A paramilitary force with various disciplinary and peace­ keeping
duties formed immediately after the triumph of the Islamic Revolution in
Feb. 1979. (T).

[^9]: Literally, 'Party of God' as referred to in the Holy Qur'an, and
by extension ardent and militant supporters of the Islamic Revolution.

[^10]: The document was written when Afghanistan was under the Soviet
occupation.

[^11]: A city in northern Iran, Mazandaram Province.

[^12]: Leftist Party in Kurdestan Province of Iran.

[^13]: A Muslim scholar, a majlis deputy and political activist, and
outspoken critic of the policies of Reza Shah died in Kash mar, in 1937.

[^14]: Reference is to the clash between Bani-Sadr's supporters and the
members of the party of God in 1982.

[^15]: Reference to the words of Ali Asghar, son of Imam Hussein (A.S.)
in the eve of Ashura in Karbala.


