Preface
=======

" To comprehend the foundations and purposes of Imam Mahdi's (a) global
government it is necessary to analyse the prevailing world situation and
how the present status will pave way for the ultimate revolution of
mankind. In doing so, this paper begins by outlining the prospect of the
global government and presenting the existing global conditions to draw
from the need of his return. In evaluating mankind's needs, this paper
will not substantiate his return, since his coming has been ordained.

It will however examine the 'time of his appearance' to meet these
needs. These will help to formulate the purpose of his global
governance. His coming will be in response to the peaceful kingdom of
God on earth that has been promised to man. The paper will then cite
evidence of his coming through the Quran and Hadith, to prove his return
being authentic and then draw upon past governed systems to project the
foundation of his governance. This will lead to proposing the
foundations of the Imam's governance in the global perspective, which
will remain purely hypothetical.

The idea of a global government is not wishful thinking; rather it is
an aspiration of every individual who believes in the essence of
humanity and who looks towards an ideal world where kindness and
humanity intertwines in spirit. This expectation of solace is geared
towards the 'Saviours return' alias the Mahdi (a) who will lead to the
emergence of the system of governance that will dominate the entire
world arena.

This belief in universal peace forms an anchor of faith which one
cannot lose hope in, yet stirs resistance to despair and oppression. The
foundation of this belief springs from several divine books such as the
Quran, Torah and Psalms and the notion that 'The righteous among my
slaves shall inherit the earth". (Surah al-Anbia. 21:105) is a sign
towards hope.

The current world governing powers constitutes the Group of Eight (G8)
with the United States of America (US) leading. They dictate who is to
be supported and maintained, who is to be alienated and sanctioned.
Their decisions are based on who tows the line of the big powers or
stands up to oppose them.

To work against these powers often means walking alone as Iran, Cuba,
Venezuela and some other nations have chosen to do. One of the global
bodies which was formed to freeze world crisis was the United Nations
Organization (UN). However the UN's inability to establish authoritative
rules has been its greatest failure.

The genuine desire to make the UN more effective is being underplayed
by forces controlling the world economy namely the G8 which is strongly
influenced by the US. They are maintaining pressure to ensure
international economic policy is kept out of UN's control and
transferred to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank
which they totally control. Right now these very nations that talk of
democracy make dirty deals with strategic allies who have no use of
democratic values. These are double standard policies which govern the
world.

The global situation shows that the world economy is being looted by
powerful nations under the pretext of democracy. Nearly 80% of the known
oil reserves of the world are in the hands of government controlled
national oil companies. Countries are attacked and their economies are
looted under the guise of terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and
undemocratic rule, whereas the real reasons are found in enriching their
own coffers and those of their allies.


