Supplement 2
============

Therefore just as the Jews enjoyed security and freedom, all other
religions will be offered the same treatment. Freedom in practising
religion will be upheld and through this act of equality and justice,
people will be drawn towards the true Islam.

His appearance will spring forth from the House of Allah and will
spread towards Kufa and beyond. The city of Qum has been indicated to be
the centre of piety and the teachings of Islam will be proclaimed from
it. Upon his establishment he will first address the believers and bring
to task those who have shunned their responsibility.

He will question why people have abandoned the essence of religion to
fit their preferred meanings. They will be given an opportunity to
re-learn Islamic social and moral teachings and apply it to their lives.
The whole approach towards real Islam will surface and eliminate
practices of sinful behaviour. Paying lip service to the sacrifice of
Imam Hussein (as) will be seen as destroying the goals of Kerbala. Piety
will not be limited to the mosques but will require participation of
everyone in society by exercising the duty of commanding good and
forbidding evil and fighting off innovations that have invaded Islam.

The foundation of governance will surpass any current governing system.
The transition from injustice and turmoil to tranquility and peace will
not be a smooth one. His first and foremost directive will be
maintaining a powerful army in order to gain control of territories.
With the support of his 313 close helpers, the Imam (a) will establish a
Central Bureau of governance. He will appoint governors among these 313
to represent the approximately 200 countries of the world. The Imam will
lead the hub of this governance.

In forming the foundation of his global government, Imam Mahdi (a)
shall realize the principles of all Prophets in the path of truth. His
coming will materialise the failing and collapse of the current
governances.

With the coming of the Imam the oppressing powers ruling the earth will
be defeated as promisedâ€¦ "every nation can only live for an appointed
time. When its term ends, it will not remain alive for a single hour nor
will they die before the appointed hour' (Surah al A\\'raf 7:34 and
Surah al-Nahl 16:61). His mandate in establishing a world government
will focus on reclamation and rehabilitation of the whole earth so that
no area remains wasted. It will involve the maximum utilization of the
gifts of the earth and will strive for equal distribution of wealth and
property among all human beings. He will open the scope of opportunities
for everyone and all the lands will derive benefit from their own
natural resources.

The syndicate of the multinationals to loot any country's oil or gas
reserves will be sanctioned and natural resources will benefit the
people of their own land. The Imam's government will ensure that there
is no monopoly or restrictions in military power or technology. The
prospect of eradicating weapons of mass destruction will be witnessed
and the will to abide by nuclear non-proliferation treaty will be
controlled by the Imam. The finances used to acquire weapons will be
diverted to alleviate poverty.

It is only then that the millennium development goals will be fully
realised, as the means to serve humanity will be led by one whose aim
will not be in promoting himself but in developing human kind.

The government will endeavour to eradicate all vices that have engulfed
mankind such as adultery, fornication, usury, intoxication, treachery,
theft and homicide. The mission will also focus on eradication of war
and restoration of peace, friendship and co-operation with coherence
between man and nature (Al-Sadr, B.; Muttahari, M.).

It will be a government based on righteousness, virtue, justice and
will lead people to freedom from forces of egoism, tyranny, deceit and
fraud. He will bestow recognition to every human being, irrespective of
his religious background with peace and equality. His foundation will be
to 'restore man to follow the true path of religion of their own free
will and develop the habit of simple living and high thinking and give
up the desire of seeking undue favours and unjustifiable pleasures'.

This is the kind of men God and the Prophet wanted people to be. He
will attach more importance to general welfare than to personal good. He
will introduce equality and equity and make people accept the principles
of brotherhood of man and general amity towards human beings. He will
make people model subjects of the kingdom of God, to be adopted by those
who desire peace and prosperity under a benign rule (Reza A., 2000).

Reference of the fall of oppressors taking place is cited in many
supplications of the Ahl ul Bait, but most beautifully in the
supplication of Nudba (Almanac) where the news of the demolisher of
polytheist and hypocrisy will spread the flag of victory and annihilate
the oppressors. The supplication of Iftitah also describes how his
coming will put 'order into our affairs and gather and unite the flocks
of believers and increase the numbers from being minority and easing of
difficulties (Kassamali, H.; T.). These citations offer proof to the
kind of rule that we look forward to.

It is through supplications that we realize the importance of the
belief in the Mahdi (a) as a form of salvation from hopelessness.
Persistence in this belief brings about certitude in waiting for his
appearance. It is this hope that gives reason to perseverance in today's
struggles.

To bring about such an unparalleled revolution, the Imam will need a
legion of companions who are determined and can endure all sorts of
untold calamities in their way. The men who will form the Imam's
government and become his army generals will need to have strong
commitment in serving God. These qualities will be found in the 313 who
will come immediately to help Imam (a) after his appearance.

It is not possible to determine which country or nation will lead in
backing the Imam's revolution. It is likely that Muslims will rise in
unison to defeat the big powers. On the other hand it could also be
isolated states joining hands and coming to heed the call of Tawhid to
take up the challenge of becoming leaders of human civilization. It is
the response to his call that will decide who takes precedence in
offering support to the Imam's revolution.

Will the people accept him as a true leader? This may not be very
difficult, as human beings are becoming more aware that their traditions
and religions do not have the ability to satisfy their conscience. The
natural thirst in moving towards God and the search for attaining peace
has not been quenched.

Thus this drive in search of truth will lead people to be open and
approachable for the right guidance and when Imam Mahdi (a) will present
the true Islam, it will appeal to their hearts and they will come
towards the truth. It will be a time when human beings will have
attained the level of perfection that is necessary to accept the
government of truth (Amini A., 2003). The time will then be right for
the world stage to relive the scene of the Prophet's (saw) victory at
the time of Fath Makka in 8 A.H (Razwy A.,1997) with the banner of
'truth has come and falsehood has vanished\` (Isra 17:81).

This final rule on earth will be the result of the toil of 124,000
Prophets and the 11 guided Imams and this governance will prevail to
show the manifestation of the Almighty. The essence of the whole
creation of mankind will come to life on this stage. It will be a time
when man will witness the rule of justice and peace functioning on a
global scale. When the final victory will prevail over all evils, the
Imam will govern the world under one Islamic government. His appointed
governors will rule under his guidance and the rulings will reflect the
most equitable for the right and be the most universal way of justice.
The fundamental constitution will reflect the rights of the ummah.

The ummah of Islam will comprise members living anywhere on earth and
also include non Muslims living in the Muslim lands who are at peace
with Islam. The ummah will also comprise members who will perform
collective responsibilities and attain collective well being and will be
bound by moral outlook with a commitment to do what is right and shun
what is wrong. The significance of this ummah will be the absence of any
racial, political, territorial or any other discrimination. A similar
rule of this notion of the ummah was started by Ameerul Momineen Ali
ibne Abi Taleb (as) during the period of his Khilafat.

In conclusion the foundation of the governing rule will uphold the
famous creed of Ali ibne Abi Taleb to his governor whereby he declared:
"Control your passions and check your hearts from doing what is not
lawful for you. Train your heart to feel compassion for the people, to
love them and be kind to them. Do not stand over them like a ferocious
beast.

For the people are of two categories: If he is not a brother to you in
religion, he is a fellow like you in humanity'. (Extract from the
document of the letter of Ameerul Momineen sent to Malik e Ashtar,
Nahjol Balagha). The supremacy of God in His might to manifest Himself
as the Most Kind and Merciful Lord through His last guide, the Mahdi (a)
will then become apparent. The Imam (a) will triumph and the people will
finally realise the essence of real living within the spectrum of
brotherhood. Islam will conquer the hearts of man and become the rule of
the globe.


