Moment By Moment Expectation of the Savior
==========================================

**Introduction**

During their missions, all the Prophets and Apostles have emphasized
the fact that a savior will arrive at the end of time who will implement
the government of justice over the globe. This news has been heard since
the human being appeared on the earth. Allah has indicated this promise
in all the early scriptures and commanded humans throughout ages to wait
for the manifestation of the kingdom of Allah. The Holy Quran also gives
glad tidings of the day for which all the believers of the world are
enthusiastically awaiting, and confirms that the righteous and virtuous
servants of Allah shall finally inherit the earth:

"The earth is Allah's. He gives it as a heritage to whom He wills, and
the end is for the watchful. (7:128)" The Most Glorious also said:

"And indeed We wrote in the Psalm (Zabur) after the reminder that My
righteous servants shall inherit the earth." (21:105)

Allah confirmed that He will revive the earth and will give it a true
life after it has become dead as a result of corruption by mankind:

"And indeed We wrote in the Psalm (Zabur) after the reminder that My
righteous servants shall inherit the earth." (21:105)

Allah confirmed that He will revive the earth and will give it a true
life after it has become dead as a result of corruption by mankind:

In a number of verses in Quran Allah has emphasized that what He has
promised will certainly take place. For instance:

"Verily that which you are promised is true. (51:5)"

"And Allah shall never break His Promise. (22:47)"

"Surely, Allah shall never fail to keep the promised event. (3:9)"

"Glory to our Lord! Truly the promise of our Lord is a fulfilled one!
(17:108)" Besides the indications in the Quran and the early scriptures,
the testimonies of the last Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) that have been
narrated by all Islamic schools in numerous traditions leave no doubt
that this promise will be fulfilled by the hand of a man from his
progeny. The Sunnis have narrated:

The Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) said, "Even if only one day has remained
for the duration of the world's existence, Allah shall prolong that day
to send a person from my Ahl al-Bait whose name is the same as my nameâ€¦
He shall fill out the earth with peace and justice just as it has been
filled with injustice and tyranny."[^1]

The above tradition shows that although Allah may delay this divine
promise even as much as the last days of the world's duration,
nevertheless it will certainly take place. As such, all the true
believers should expect its happening through the hands of the Mahdi of
the family of Muhammad (PBUH&HF).


**The signs before reappearance of al-Mahdi (AS)**

There are many traditions narrated by all Islamic schools where the
Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) has portrayed the events just prior to the
uprising of al-Mahdi (AS). The Shi'ite traditions that have been
narrated from the Prophet (PBUH&HF) and the Imams of Ahl al-Bait (AS)
provide much more details for the events that are supposed to take place
before the reappearance of Imam al-Mahdi (AS). Some of these signs are
about the hard condition of people in the world before his reappearance.
For instance, Abu Hamza al-Thumali and Abu Basir both narrated:

Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (AS) said, "The Qa'im shall not rise until after
a great fear from people, the earthquake, afflictions, trials, and the
disease have inflicted people, the war between Arabs, great disagreement
between people, break ups in their religion, changing their state such
that the wishers wish death every morning and night due to the greatness
of what is observed, and the eating of people by people. The rising of
(al-Qa'im) shall be at the time of despair and hopelessness of people
for finding any opening/relief."[^2]

On the other hand, some signs are about the miraculous events that will
happen just prior to the rising of al-Qa'im. For instance, there will be
a lunar eclipse at the end of the month of Ramadhan. The eclipse at the
end of the month is a supernatural phenomenon that has never happened
before. Badr Ibn Khalil al-Azdi narrated:

I was sitting with Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (AS) when he (AS) said,
"There shall be two signs before the rising of al-Mahdi (AS) that have
not occurred since Adam (AS) descended on the earth. The sun shall be
eclipsed in the middle of the month of Ramadhan and the moon (shall be
eclipsed) in the end of that month." A man in the presence said, "O Son
of the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF)! The sun shall be eclipsed in the end
of the month and the moon in the middle." The Imam replied, "I know what
you say. But these are the signs that have never happened since Adam
descended."[^3]


