The Possibility of Canceling the Signs of the Reappearance
==========================================================

The reported signs were the information that Allah willed about their
occurrence in future and were in effect at the time that the Imams (AS)
spoke about them. In other words, with their vision in the knowledge of
what had been willed to happen, the Imams (AS) mentioned some of the
signs that Allah had willed and planed at that time. However, Allah has
not promised the occurrence of the planned signs, and thus all such
signs are subject to change due to Allah's new decision (al-Badaa).

The traditions state that amongst all the signs there are few sings
that are definite, which means it is unlikely that Allah changes His
will on their occurrence. Thus, they are very likely to take place
before the advent of Imam al-Mahdi (AS). Umar Ibn Hanzala narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said, "There are five definite signs before the
rising of al-Qa'im, which are: (the rising of) al-Yamani and al-Sufyani,
the (heavenly) cry/call (by Gabriel which will be heard all over the
world), the murder of Nafs al-Zakiyya, and the sink (of the Sufyani
army) into (the land of) al-Baydaa (located between Mecca and
Medina)."[^4]

Even for such definite signs Allah reserves al-Badaa. Al-Badaa is the
origination of a new plan by Allah. We will discuss the phenomenon of
al-Badaa and its significance in the next section. Allah may change
those of the definite wills that are not categorized as His Sunan or His
promises. For instance, Allah informed us through His Apostle (PBUH&HF)
that before the reappearance of Imam al-Mahdi (AS), al-Sufyani would
certainly rise. This is a definite will, but it is not categorized as a
promise.

It is just an insisted future event meaning that it is unlikely that
Allah cancels His permission for the occurrence of this event, though it
is still possible. According to the following tradition, Allah may make
Badaa even in such insisted news. Dawud Ibn al-Qasim al-Ja'fari
narrated:

We were with Imam al-Jawad (AS) when the issue of Sufyani was brought
up and the traditions which state that his advent is of the definite
matters. I said to Imam al-Jawad (AS), "Does Allah make Badaa in the
definite matters?" He (AS) replied, "Yes." I said, "Then, we have a fear
that Allah makes Badaa in (the rising of) al-Qa'im." The Imam replied,
"al-Qa'im is of the promises, and Allah does not break His promises
(referring to verses 3:9 and 13:31)."[^5]

In other words, Allah will not fail in any of His promises including
the annihilation of injustice and the establishment of the government of
justice on the earth by Imam al-Mahdi (AS). This was Allah's testimony
in verses of Quran that we quoted in previous section. However, Allah
may make Badaa on the time of reappearance of Imam al-Mahdi (AS) and may
advance or postpone it. Moreover, He may cancel the occurrence of the
definite signs that were supposed to take place before the Imam's (AS)
advent, as the above tradition explained.

The question that may arise here is that what the significance of
canceling a sign by Allah is. To answer this, let us first discuss the
notion of al-Badaa. This is one of the complex issues that has confused
many people's minds, and consequently the enemies of the Ahl al-Bait
(AS) have taken the advantage of this confusion to attack our faith.


**The Badaa and its significance**

There are many pieces of evidence in the Quran and the traditions
expressing that Allah may change what He has already willed and He may
initiate a new will. However, as we discussed earlier, there is an
exception for His Sunan and His promises that He has chosen not to
change at all.

The will of Allah is the creation of Allah. Thus, this change only
occurs to the created information and does not imply a change in His
Eternal Knowledge/His Essence. In other words, the novelty occurs in
Allah's action, and not in Allah's Essence. Allah eternally knew what He
would change later. By al-Badaa, only the created information that has
been visible (al-Shahada) for the vice-regents of Allah becomes
invisible (al-Ghaib) and vice versa. The visible information is about
what Allah has willed to happen in the past and in the future (Ilm Ma
Kan wa Ma Yakun), and the invisible information is about all other
infinite possibilities that Allah has not willed to happen (Ilm Ma Lam
Yakon).

There are numerous verses in Quran that prove Allah's hands are open to
originate or change anything in His creation. For instance:

"And the Jews said, 'The hand of Allah is tied up'. Be their hands tied
up and be they accursed for what they uttered. Nay, His hands are
outstretched. (5:64)"

"Allah erases whatever He wills and records/establishes (likewise), and
with Him is the Mother-Book. (13:39)" "Thy Lord creates whatever He
wills, and He chooses. No choice have they (in what He has not
permitted, or in leadership as per another Hadith). Glory to Allah! And
far is He above the partners they ascribe! (28:68)"

"If He so wills, He removes you and brings in a New Creation. Nor is
that (at all) difficult for Allah. (14:19-20; 35:16-17)" "Every day He
brings in a (new) matter/situation. (55:29)"

"He increases in the creation what He wills, for Allah has power over
all things. (35:1)" "Nor is an individual's life prolonged, nor does
anything decrease from his life span, except that it is (being
reflected) in a Book. All this is easy for Allah. (35:11)"

In a very long discourse narrated from Imam Ali (AS), he has stated the
following regarding al-Badaa:

Imam Ali (AS) said, "As for he who denies al-Badaa, (it would suffice
that) Allah said in His Book, 'So turn away from them, and you are not
blameworthy (51:54)' (by which) Allah, the exalted, intended their
destruction on the earth at that time. Then, Allah rectified for them by
His mercy, and made Badaa regarding to their destruction, and revealed
to His Apostle, 'And remind, for reminding benefits the Believers
(51:55)'.

A similar case is His saying, 'But Allah was not to punish them whilst
you were amongst them; nor was He to punish them whilst they ask for
forgiveness. (8:33)' Then Allah made Badaa (by revealing), 'But what
plea have they that Allah should not punish them when they keep out
(men) from the Sacred Mosque? (8:34)' Similarly, it is His saying, 'If
there are twenty tolerant amongst you, they will overcome two hundred,
and if there are a hundred (like them) amongst you, they will overcome a
thousand of those who disbelieve. (8:65)'

He then made Badaa and said, 'Now, Allah lightened your (burden) for He
knew that there is a weakness in you. Thus, if there are a hundred
tolerant amongst you, they will overcome two hundred, and if there are a
thousand (like them) amongst you, they will overcome two thousands by
the leave of Allah. And Allah is with those who are patient.

(8:66)' This way, Allah carried out the matter in the abrogating
(Nasikh) and the abrogated/cancelled (Mansukh). This shows the
reformation of what was originated. Furthermore, it is His saying,
'Allah wipes off whatever He wills and records (likewise), and with Him
is the Mother-Book. (13:39)' Hence, does He wipe off except that which
existed [i.e., its will was existent]? And, does He record except that
which did not exist [i.e., its will was non-existent]? There are many
examples like these in the Quran..."[^6]

In another verse of the Quran, Allah stated:

"Why had not there been a township (among those We decreed to destroy)
whose people would accept faith so that their faith should have profited
them, except for the People of Jonah (Yunus)? When they believed, We
removed from them the chastisement of ignominy in the life of this
world, and permitted them to enjoy (their life) for a while. (10:98)"

The above verse points to a glaring example of al-Badaa that took place
for the People of Prophet Yunus (AS) whose calamity was kept off and
prevented. Due to their rejections and disbelief, they became subjected
to the severe wrath of the Almighty. At the time that the punishment was
about to manifest, Prophet Yunus (AS) distanced himself from them and
went far away. Upon his leave, people came to their senses and suddenly
changed their behavior and became mindful of Allah. They pleaded for
mercy from the Almighty Allah from the depth of their hearts.
Subsequently, Allah decided to avert the calamity that was about to
inflict them all.

Another example for Allah's change of decision is when we pray to Him.
If Allah chooses to respond to our prayer, He initiates real change in
the outside world and may re-plan our future. Allah states in the
Quran:

"Call on Me so that I answer you (40:60)".

My Lord would have not concerned Himself with you if it were not for
your call (upon Him). (25:77)"

There are sayings from the Imams (AS) that show Allah may cancel a
decisive/confirmed decree (Qadhaa al-Mubram) regarding a worldly
punishment that is about to take place, just due to the Du'aa of His
servant. It is narrated:

Imam Musa al-Kadhim (AS) said, "I advise you to Du'aa. Certainly Du'aa
and request from Allah, the Mighty and the Majestic, drives away an
affliction that was planned, was passed, and all that was remaining was
its execution (Imdhaa). When Allah is implored, He averts the affliction
an amazing averting."[^7]

As we have seen, there are massive pieces of evidence in the Quran that
clearly disprove the doctrine that states "the Pen has dried up for all
future events". In contrast, the followers of Ahl al-Bait (AS) do not
emulate the Jews who considered Allah had concluded the matter. We
believe Allah's hands are open to do as He wills and chooses.
Nevertheless, Allah does not act without purpose.

The changes in decree have educational purposes for people including
the Prophets and the Imams, peace be upon them. Although people are
usually unaware of the details of all such changes, yet by realizing the
general concept of al-Badaa, one will truly understand that everything
is in the hand of Allah and He is able to do all things at any time, and
that it is never too late for Him to do anything He wills. It
demonstrates the absolute freedom of Allah in all His actions and that
He is never restricted by His own creations, including His previous
will.

Moreover, it removes the suspicion of compulsion and non-revocable
pre-destination, and gives the sinners hope that Allah may totally
revive their past and future. It encourages them to strive hard, to
implore Allah, and to act upon good deeds with the hope that Allah may
fix their deeds and may change their fate. Zurara Ibn A'ayun and Hisham
Ibn Salim narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said, "Allah was not worshipped to the extent that
He was worshipped due to al-Badaa. Allah was not glorified as much as He
was glorified due to al-Badaa."[^8]


