The Sudden Nature of the Advent of Al-qa'im (as)
================================================

The Shia and the Sunni traditionalists have narrated that the advent of
Imam al-Mahdi (AS) will be rectified by Allah within just one night. In
other words, its time is very unpredictable and depends on Allah's
sudden choice of action and his advent will take place miraculously. The
Sunnis have narrated from Muhammad Ibn Hanafiyya (RA) and Imam Ali (AS)
that the Holy Prophet (PBUH&HF) said:

"al-Mahdi is of us Ahl al-Bait (AS); no doubt, Allah will rectify his
matter within a night."[^9] In some other traditions, the Imams (AS)
stated that the time of the rising of al-Qa'im (AS) is like the time of
the Hour of resurrection, which is completely unpredictable and is known
only by Allah. The time of resurrection has not yet been decreed and
Allah shall enforce it suddenly once He wills. Di'bil narrated:

Imam Ali Ibn Musa al-Ridha (AS) said, "The Imam after me is my son,
Muhammad (AS), and after him is his son Ali (AS), and after Ali is his
son al-Hasan (AS), and after al-Hasan is his son the Proof of Allah who
shall stand (al-Hujjat al-Qa'im). He is awaited during his occultation
and is obeyed during his manifestation. Even if there remains from the
life of the world but a single day, Allah shall expand that day until he
rises and fills the world with justice in the same way that it was
filled with tyranny and injustice.

But when? As for news of the time (of reappearance), indeed my father
told me having heard it from his father who heard it from his ancestors
who heard it from Ali (AS) that it was asked from the Prophet (PBUH&HF),
'O the Apostle of Allah! When will al-Qa'im from your offspring appear?
He said, 'His similitude is the similitude of the Hour (of
resurrection). None but He shall manifest it at its time. It is heavy
for the heavens and the earth. It will not come to you unless suddenly.
(7:187)'"

Allah stated in Quran:

"They ask thee about the Hour - when will be its appointed time? Say,
The knowledge thereof is with my Lord (alone). None but He shall
manifest it at its time. It is heavy for the heavens and the earth. It
will not come to you unless suddenly. They ask thee as if thou were
eager in search thereof. Say, The knowledge thereof is with Allah
(alone), but most men know not. (7:187)"

In fact, the traditions state that some of the Quranic terms and verses
that apparently refer to the day of resurrection alternatively refer to
the day of rising of al-Qa'im (AS). These terms include, "the hour
(al-Saa'a)"[^10], "the hereafter (al-Akhira)"[^11], "the days of Allah
(Ayyam Allah)"[^12], "the day of the religion (Yawm al-Din)"[^13], etc.
One of the most important common specifications of both events is their
sudden, unexpected, and miraculous manifestation.

Once Allah makes Badaa and creates His decree on the sudden advent of
Imam al-Mahdi (AS), the first one who will become aware of it is the
Imam (AS) himself through inspiration. Mufadhdhal Ibn Umar narrated:

On the commentary of verse, "Then, when it is knocked in Naqur (74:8)",
Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said, "Certainly, of us will be an Imam who will be
victorious and will be concealed. Once Allah, the Glorious, wills to
manifest his affair, He shall impact his heart with a hint, and
thereupon, he will emerge and will rise by the authority of Allah, the
Glorious."[^14]

Moreover, Abu Jarud narrated:

I said to Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (AS), "May I be sacrificed for you,
inform me about the holder of this matter." The Imam (AS) replied, "He
turns from the most fearful person to the most confident one overnight,
and his program will be revealed to him in a matter of one night and one
day." I asked, "Is this revealed to him?" The Imam (AS) replied, "O Aba
Jarud, this is not the revelation of the prophethood. Rather, it will be
a revelation similar to the one that He gave to Maryam, the daughter of
Imran, to the mother of Moses, and to the honeybee. O Abu Jarud, the
Qa'im of the family of Muhammad (PBUH&HF) is more honorable than Maryam,
the mother of Moses, and the honeybee!"[^15]

The sudden change of the state of Imam Mahdi (AS) from the state of
fear to the state of security, which is also pointed out in verse, "He
will most certainly, after their fear, give them security in exchange
(24:55)," shows that even the Imam (AS) does not know the time of his
uprising until Allah initiates Badaa and makes it a knowable reality and
permits his rising. Thus, like his followers, the Imam (AS) is himself
an expectant. Of the titles that have been mentioned in the traditions
for Imam al-Mahdi (AS) are: "the expected (al-Muntadhar)" and "the
expectant (al-Muntadhir)".

All the above pieces of evidence, among others, prove that the time of
the rising of Imam al-Mahdi (AS) is of suspended matters (Mawquf) and
that his coming is very unpredictable and sudden. This event will be one
of the greatest manifestations of Allah's power, which will take place
at the time that most people would consider it unfeasible. Allah will
suddenly make Badaa and will fully accommodate the Imam's advent within
one night. Although the rising of al-Mahdi (AS) is in Allah's will, the
time of his rising has not yet been decreed.


**Moment by moment expectation due to the unpredictability of the time
of rising**

The Shia authorities narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said to his companions, "Be more hopeful on the
things that you consider far-fetched than that which you presume very
likely. Verily, Musa Ibn Imran (AS) went to bring fire (to provide heat
and light) for his family and he came back to them while he was an
Apostle, and this way, Allah rectified the matter of His servant and His
Prophet, Musa (AS), within a night. In the same way Allah shall treat
al-Qa'im, the twelfth of the Imams (AS). He shall rectify his matter in
one night and shall take him from discomfort and concealment into the
light of relief and reappearance."[^16]

There are many other Shi'i transmitted traditions, which convey the
similarity of the sudden advents for some ancient Prophets (AS) with
that of Imam Mahdi (AS).[^17]

The following tradition also shows that we should expect the rising of
al-Qa'im at every moment and make ourselves ready for his arrival
because his coming is very unpredictable. It is narrated:

Imam Ja'far Ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (AS) said, "Expect the
command/kingdom of your master in every day and night of your (life),
and Allah (said) 'Every day He brings in a (new) matter/situation.
(55:29)'."[^18]

The notion of continual awaiting/expecting and hoping to see the golden
days of the earth at any moment has many positive benefits in our lives.
It constantly reminds us the absolute power of Allah. A faithful servant
who believes Allah has power to do all things, does not consider
anything far-fetched for Him.

Moreover, so long as we expect the Imam (AS), we are hopeful for a
better future and will not be disappointed by the difficulties and the
problems of our present life no matter how severe they are. In addition,
when we realize that Allah may advance the advent of al-Qa'im (AS) to a
very near future, we do our best to prepare our spiritual state to
receive him. In the last part of this work, we will discuss our duties
as the expectant of al-Qa'im (AS), which would lead to Allah's
satisfaction so that Allah might decide to waive the remaining time of
occultation.

As we have seen, the existence of al-Badaa plays a central role in our
way of expecting al-Qa'im (AS). Due to the possibility of Badaa, the
fore-told signs are subject to change. If the signs were unchangeable
there would be no point to wait all the time and in every moment. Having
faith in change and alteration by Allah, everyone would keep himself
ready every morning, every evening and all the time in between to
receive the Imam (AS). According to the traditions, waiting for the Imam
(AS) at any moment is the best deed and the most significant act.

Such action is meaningful only when the changes in the aforementioned
signs are possible. A person who has no faith in alteration of signs and
thinks of the reappearance of Imam (AS) after sighting of the signs is
actually waiting primarily for the sighting of signs and then for the
Imam (AS). Such an individual may deny Imam al-Mahdi (AS) if he
reappears without the signs being fulfilled. To the contrary, the
traditions give prime importance to the promise of the reappearance of
the Imam (AS) and consider the appearance of the signs as an inferior
issue. Abu Ubaida al-Hadhaa narrated:

I asked Imam al-Baqir (AS) about this matter (i.e., the rising of
al-Mahdi (AS)). He (AS) replied, "Because you expect that it comes to
you in a (certain) way, do not deny it (if it happens in another
way)."[^19]

It is now clear that we should wait for the reappearance of Imam (AS)
and not for the sign, and should not consider reappearance before
witnessing the foretold signs impossible. It is only in this situation
that imploring Allah to hasten the reappearance of Imam (AS) is
meaningful. Allah is free to shower His blessings any time He wants. He
has created a leader for this task so long ago and has kept him on call
in concealment. He can order the reappearance of the Imam (AS) even
before the sighting of signs or can change the signs for his early rise.
Much more than any of His followers, our Imam (AS) is eagerly waiting
for receiving Allah's permission at any moment.

**The significance and the purpose of specifying the signs**

Specifying the signs before the time of reappearance has its own
advantages and benefits. Since the time of reappearance is not known to
people, the only way to describe the reappearance is to describe its
signs. Observing any of the mentioned signs strengthens one's faith in
the reappearance of Imam (AS) and increases his anticipation.

Although whatever indications were given by the Imams (AS) regarding
the incidents which are to occur are totally based on the previous
decreed decisions, they should not be ignored and should not be
considered as insignificant. These signs were not given for the purpose
of predicting the time of reappearance, or for urging people to search
the scientific data to estimate the time of the occurrence of the sign
itself. They, rather, become a reminder for people only after they occur
miraculously.

Once a sign occurs, the believers realize that it was amongst the signs
that they were foretold, and thus, their faith and confidence will
increase, and they will realize that the time of reappearance is closer
than ever.

Keeping in mind the issue of al-Badaa, all the mentioned signs before
his arrival, even if they finally occur, they may happen miraculously in
an unpredictable manner. As we have seen in the second section, some of
the signs such as an eclipse of the moon at the end of the month can
only happen miraculously. Even for some other signs that can occur
naturally and can be predicted by the available physical information,
they may still occur supernaturally and thus their predicted schedules
may be proven wrong.

The more interesting observation is that, one of the mentioned signs at
the end of the time is the rising of the sun from the west, which shows
that Allah will miraculously change the direction of the heavenly
bodies, and thus, all astronomical data will change according to the new
movements. This means that all timely predictions based on the available
astronomical data will be proven false due to this single miracle of
Allah.

Thus, instead of worrying about the time of the occurrence of the
cancelable or at least the unpredictable signs before the rising of Imam
al-Mahdi (AS), one should care about keeping faith in the Imam (AS) and
following his Sunna. Only in that way, will one be safe from the
afflictions of the end of time no matter if those signs finally occur or
not. If some the signs occur he will gain more hope and energy that the
appointed time is fast approaching, and if he did not observe the signs
he will still remain hopeful to receive the Imam (AS) because he
believes that Allah is never restricted by His creation including His
previous will and has power to do all things at any moment.


