Will There Be Any Confusion in Identifying Al-qa'im (as)?
=========================================================

The occurrence of the signs indicates that the rising of al-Qa'im is
about to take place. The question that may arise here is that, since the
signs may change or may be cancelled, will there be any confusion for
people to recognize Imam al-Mahdi (AS) once he starts his mission?
Moreover, if there would be no confusion that he is the promised Mahdi
(AS), why would then people oppose him?

According to the traditions, once Allah let Imam al-Mahdi (AS) rise,
all people around the world, believers and disbelievers likewise, will
become aware of him immediately and without any shadow of doubt. In the
first tradition quoted below, the rising of Imam al-Mahdi (AS) is
compared to the rising of the Messenger of Allah (PBUH&HF), which took
place very clearly. In the second tradition, it is mentioned that his
rising will be as clear as sunshine and will be identified by all
people. Jabir narrated:

Imam al-Baqir (AS) said, "The similitude of the rising of al-Qa'im from
our Ahl al-Bait is that of the rising of the Messenger of Allah
(PBUH&HF). And the similitude of any of us Ahl al-Bait who rises before
the rising of al-Qa'im is that of a little bird who tries to fly but
falls down from its nest and becomes the toy of children."[^20]

Narrated Jabir Ibn Yazid:

Imam al-Baqir (AS) said, "Be calm so long as the heavens and the earth
are calm/in place, i.e., do not rise against anyone. Verily your matter
(i.e., the rising of al-Imam) shall not take place secretly as it shall
be a sign from Allah, not from people. Be hold! It shall be brighter
than sunshine so much so that it shall not remain hidden from the
righteous and the evildoer (likewise). Do you know morning/dawn? It
shall be like the dawn and there shall be no hidden thing in it."[^21]

As per another tradition, Imam al-Ridha (AS) explained the sentence,
'Be calm so long as the heaven and the earth are calm' as 'Be calm so
long as the heaven is calm from the call (of Gabriel) and the earth is
calm from sinking the army (of al-Sufyani).'[^22]

Thus, there is nothing to worry about identifying Imam al-Mahdi (AS)
once he rises. We only should worry about our belief before his rising
since believing in him after his rising is not beneficial. Those who
will oppose Imam al-Mahdi (AS) when he rises will not have any doubt
that he is Imam al-Mahdi (AS). They will oppose him since they did not
believe in his sayings and practices, as it does not match with their
innovations and the innovations of their ancestors.

We do not know of anything brighter than sunshine, which could be
sensed by our faculties. The reappearance Imam Mahdi (AS) will be
clearer than that, and no one would remain ignorant about Imam al-Mahdi
(AS) when he starts his mission. However, no one would be able to
believe in him if he denied/disbelieved him (his existence, his rights,
or his Sunna) before the time of his reappearance; or, it is better say,
believing in him at that time would be of no use for a disbeliever. It
is just like believing in Allah on the Day of Judgment, which will be of
no benefit for the disbelievers. Those who remain doubtful about his
existence during the time of occultation will have no way to escape from
his sword once they meet him (AS). Allah stated in Quran:

"... On the day that certain signs of thy Lord do come, no one would
benefit from believing in (that sign) if he did not believe (in that)
before, or such belief is no good for him. Say, 'Wait! We too are
waiting/expecting'. (6:158)"

Ibn Ri'ab narrated that on the commentary of the above verse, Imam
Ja'far al-Sadiq (AS) said:

"The 'Signs' are the Imams (AS), and the 'expected sign' is al-Qa'im
(AS). On that day, no one would benefit from believing in (that sign) if
he did not believe in him before his rising by sword even if such person
believed in (the Imamat of) his ancestors, peace be upon them."[^23] The
bad news, however, is that most of those who believe in Imam al-Mahdi
(AS) will doubt his existence over time due to the length of the time of
occultation and because of various types of afflictions that befall
people during this period. Therefore, when the Imam (AS) starts his
mission, the believers will be very few in number. Saqr Ibn Dilf
narrated:

I asked Imam al-Jawad (AS) why Imam al-Mahdi (AS) is called al-Qa'im.
He (AS) wept and replied, "Because he will rise after his remembrance is
dead (in the society) and when most of the believers in his Imamat have
turned back (from their belief)." I asked why he is called al-Muntadhar
(the awaited). He (AS) replied, "Because there shall be an occultation
for him whose period shall be prolonged.

The sincere ones shall wait for him, the doubtful ones shall deny him,
the rejecters shall ridicule his remembrance, and the proposers of time
(for his reappearance) shall increase. In that period, those who hasten
in movement (al-Musta'jilun) shall perish, and those who submit (to
Allah's commands and decrees) shall be saved." [^24] Another tradition is
narrated by Mufadhdhal Ibn Umar, who said:

I heard Imam al-Sadiq (AS) saying, "Be hold! By Allah, your Imam shall
disappear for a number of years in your lifetime and you will be
afflicted with hardship until some people say he (AS) has died or has
been killed, which valley is he in? Verily the eyes of the believers
shall remain full of tears for him, and you will be overturned like the
ships are overturned in the waves of the sea. None would survive but
those from whom Allah has taken oath, whom He has written faith in their
heart, and has helped them by a spirit from Him.

And there shall appear 12 confusing banners that will not be recognized
from each other." I cried and said, "What could we do at that time?" He
(AS) looked towards the beam of sunshine that was in the room and said,
"O the servant of Allah! Do you see this sunlight?" I said, "Yes." He
(AS) continued, "By Allah! Our matter (i.e., the rising of al-Mahdi once
it comes) is more evident than this sun."[^25]

In addition, it is narrated from Ali Ibn Ja'far that:

Imam al-Kadhim (AS) said, "When the fifth (offspring) from the seventh
of the Imams disappears, then, I adjure you by Allah to watch for your
religion so that no one would take it away from you. Without doubt,
there shall be an occultation for the holder of this matter until such
time that (most) people who believe in his Imamat would leave their
belief. Verily this (occultation) is but a test by Allah, the Glorious,
for his creation."[^26]

Musa al-Baghdadi narrated:

I heard Imam Hasan al-Askari (the eleventh Imam) saying, "I see that
you will differ after me concerning my successor. Whoever accepts the
Imams after the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) but denies my son is like a
person who accepted all the Prophets and the Apostles but denied the
prophethood of Muhammad, the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF). And whoever
denies (Muhammad) the Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) is like one who has
denied all the Prophets. This is because obeying the last of us is like
obeying the first of us and denying the last of us is like denying the
first of us. Beware! Verily, for my son there shall be an occultation
during which all people shall fall into doubt except those whom Allah
protects."[^27]

Notice that according to the traditions, denying the transmitted
teachings of Ahl al-Bait (AS) is equivalent to denying the Ahl al-Bait
(AS). Thus, some of those who claim to believe in Imam Mahdi (AS) as the
twelfth Imam during the time of occultation will oppose him after his
rise because they used to oppose their teachings and used to follow
their own inventions. Fudhail Ibn Yasar narrated:

I heard Imam al-Sadiq (AS) saying, "When our Qa'im (AS) rises he will
face the ignorance of people more severe than what the Apostle of Allah
(PBUH&HF) faced during the days of al-Jahiliyya." I asked, "Why should
it be so?" The Imam replied, "The Apostle of Allah (PBUH&HF) came to
people who were worshipping the stones and the carved wood. However, our
Qa'im (AS) shall come to people who will all interpret the Book of Allah
against his interpretation, and will argue with him by that. By Allah,
al-Qa'im shall enter his justice inside their houses, just as the heat
and the cold enter them."[^28]

During the period of occultation, people gradually leave the traditions
of Ahl al-Bait (AS) and interpret Quran according to their own opinion,
and prefer the words of fallibles to the words of infallibles.
Consequently, many religious instructions will be forgotten as if they
had never been a part of the religion. On the other hand they consider
many man-made products as if they really have been a part of the
religion. When Imam al-Mahdi (AS) comes, he will fight all the
innovations and will restore the truth of the religion. For this reason,
at the beginning of his mission, many people think he has brought a new
religion. Muhammad Ibn Ijlan narrated:

Imam al-Sadiq (AS) said, "When our Qa'im rises he shall call people
anew to Islam and shall guide them to the things that were annihilated
and from which people had turned away. He is called Mahdi because he
will guide people to the thing from which they have been separated. He
is called al-Qa'im because of his rise for the truth."[^29]

Thus, the opposition against Imam Mahdi (AS) is not due to people's
failure in identifying him. It is rather due to their disbelief in the
original laws of the religion, their overlooking of the transmitted
traditions, and their following man-made ideas and opinions in the
domain of religion. Is lack of the occurrence of signs a reason for the
delay in Relief?

If Imam Mahdi (AS) has not appeared yet, it is not because certain
signs did not take place, but because people do not follow the
commandments and the instructions of Ahl al-Bait (AS). In a Tawqi' from
Imam al-Mahdi (AS) it is written that:

"If our followers-may Allah grant them success for His obedience-all
had truly kept their covenant (with us) the blessing to meet us would
not have been postponed and they would have seen us with true
recognition. Nothing holds us back from them except that which reaches
to us (of their actions) that we dislike and that which we do not
consider proper for them."[^30]

Moreover, Muhammad Ibn al-Faraj narrated:

Imam Baqir (AS) wrote to me, "When Allah becomes angry at His
creatures, He makes us away from their proximity."[^31] Imam al-Mahdi
(AS) wrote the following to one of his special deputies, namely Muhammad
Ibn Uthman (RA), in response to people's questions about what was the
cause of occultation:

Imam Mahdi (AS) said, "… As for the reason for the occurrence of
occultation, Allah, the Mighty and the Majestic, states, 'O ye who
believe! Ask not questions about things which, if made plain to you, may
cause your dislike. (5:101)' There was no one amongst my fathers except
that a Bai'a (oath) of a tyrant of his time was placed on his neck. But
I will rise while I do not have any Bai'a on my neck to any of the
tyrants. As for my benefit during my occultation, it is like the benefit
of the sun (for people) when the clouds make it absent from the eyes.
Certainly I am amnesty for the inhabitants of the earth just as the
stars are amnesty for the inhabitants of the heaven. Thus, close the
doors of question over what is not related to you and do not charge
yourself with what you have been discharged to know. (Instead) increase
your Du'aa to hasten the Relief (al-Faraj), for this is indeed your
relief..."[^32]

Referring to verse 5:101 in the above Hadith as a response to people's
query for the reason behind occultation shows that our disobedience has
been one of the major reasons for occultation, which is also supported
by previously quoted traditions.

**How can we become an expectant of al-Qa'im (AS)?**

It is, now, clear that the problem of occultation is due to the ugly
actions that we have committed, and that we have not submitted to the
traditions of Ahl al-Bait (AS). Allah, the most merciful, has assigned
for us an Imam who is ready to relieve us, but we have turned away from
his commands and the commands of his ancestors. This has caused the
wrath of Allah in the form of occultation. Our only chance for relief is
to try to seek the pleasure of Allah and His Hujja (AS) so that Allah
may waive the remaining time of occultation. But how can we do that?

We cannot seek the pleasure of Allah by inventing some duties during
the time of occultation according to our opinion. The Ahl al-Bait (AS)
have already mentioned the specific duties that we have during the time
of occultation, and we cannot add to it. Wasting our time on searching
the astronomical data and proposing time for the Imam's reappearance
will only displease Allah. It will also serve the impostors who try to
take the advantage of astronomical events for their own agenda, as well
as those who want to weaken our faith about Imam al-Mahdi (AS) by
claiming that these alleged signs did not accompany his reappearance,
and thus making us doubtful about his existence.

Below are some of the things we can do to seek the pleasure of Allah
and His Hujja (AS) so that Allah may decide to waive the remaining time
of occultation. There are many traditions that support each item below,
but here I only quote a few:


