Chapter 7 the Power of Love in Society
======================================

The power of love is a great and effective force in relation to
society; the best societies are those which are administered by the
power of love: both the love of the leader and the ruler for the people,
and the love and devotion of the people for the leader and ruler.

The feeling and love of the ruler is an important factor in the
stability and longevity of a government, and until that factor exists
the leader cannot, or finds it very difficult to, lead the society,
train people to be law-abiding individuals, and even establish justice
and egality in that society. But once he does so, people will be so
lawfully minded that they will see the affection of their ruler and it
is this affection which will attract them to obedience and
dutifulness.

The Qur'an addresses the Prophet and says to him that he has a great
power in his hands to influence people and to administer society

It is by some mercy of Allah that thou art gentle to them; hadst thou
been harsh and hard of heart, they would have scattered from about thee.
So pardon them, and pray forgiveness for them, and take counsel with
them in the affair. (A1 \`Imran, 3: 159)

Here it is made clear that the cause of the people's coming to the
Prophet is the affection and love which he has bestowed on them. Then it
orders him to forgive them and to ask for forgiveness for them and to
consult with them. These are all among the effects of love and
friendship, just as tolerance, patience and forbearance are also among
the degrees of love and kindness.

By the sword of clemency he (Ali) redeemed so many throats Of such a
multitude from the sword.

The sword of clemency is sharper than the sword of iron;Nay, it is more
productive of victory than a hundred armies. [^21]The Qur'an also says:
Not equal are the good deed and the evil deed. Repel with that which is
fairer and behold, he between whom and thee there is enmity shall be as
if he were a loyal friend. (Fussilat, 41:34 ) Forgive, o son, that man
can trap By goodness and do savage deeds with fetters, Chain the neck of
the enemy with mercy, Which noose no blade can cut. In his firman to
Malik al-Ashtar, when he appointed him to the governorship of Egypt,
Amir al-mu'minin also explained how his behaviour with the people should
be: Awaken in your heart mercy for (your) subjects and love for them,
and kindness towards them . . . So give them of your forgiveness and
your pardon, just as you would like Allah to give you of his forgiveness
and pardon. [^22] The heart of the ruler must be a focus of affection and
love towards the nation; power and force are not enough. People can be
driven like sheep by power and force, but their inner strengths cannot
be awakened and put to use. Not only is power and force not sufficient;
even justice, if it is lifelessly enforced, is not enough. Rather the
ruler must love the people from his heart like a loving father, show his
affection towards them and also have an attractive personality which
fosters devotion, so that he may make use of their wills, their
ambitions and their great human strengths in furthering his own divine
aim. Notes: [^21]. Rumi, bk.l [^22]. Nahju 'l-balaghah, Letter no. 53
