Chapter 8 :the Best Means For Refining the Soul
===============================================

The previous discussion on the subject of love and affection was an
introduction, and now we want gradually to draw a conclusion. The most
important part of our discussion - it is in fact the foundation of our
discussion -is whether love and affection for those near to God, and
devotion to persons of excellence, is an aim in itself, or whether it is
a means for refining the soul, reforming one's morals, and acquiring
human virtues and excellences.

In animal love, all the interests and endeavour of the lover is towards
the form of the loved one and the harmony of the loved one's limbs and
the colour and beauty of the skin, and these are instincts which pull
and attract man. However, after the satisfying of the instinct, these
fires have no brightness, become cool, and are eventually
extinguished.

But human love, as we have said, is life and vitality; it engenders
obedience and loyalty. This is the love which makes the lover resemble
the loved one, makes him try to be a manifestation of the loved one and
a copy of the loved one's behaviour, just as Khwajah Nasiru'd-Din
at-Tusi says in his commentary to Ibn Sina's Kitabu 'l-isharat wa
't-tanbihat (Book of Directives and Remarks)

(The love of) the soul is that whose source is the essential
resemblance of the soul of the lover with the soul of the beloved. Most
of the lover's delight is in the characteristics of the beloved which
proceed from the soul of the beloved . . . It makes the soul tender,
yearning and ecstatic and gives it a delicacy of feeling which detaches
it from the distractions of the world. [^23]

Love pushes towards similarity and resemblance, and its power causes
the lover to assume the form of the beloved. Love is like an electric
wire which joins the being of the beloved to the lover and transfers the
qualities of the beloved to him; and it is here that the choice of a
beloved is of fundamental importance. Thus Islam has given much
importance to the subject of finding a friend and taking a companion.
There are many verses (of the Qur'an) and sayings (of the Prophet and
the Imams) in this domain, because friendship causes resemblance,
creates beauty and brings imprudence. Where its shines its light it sees
the defect as art, and the thorn as rose and jasmine. [^24]

In some of the verses (of the Qur'an) and sayings (of the Prophet and
Imams) a warning is given about frequenting and befriending unwholesome
and rotten people, and in some of them a call is made to pure-hearted
friendship.

Ibn \`Abbas said: "We were in the presence of the Prophet when it was
asked: \`Who is the best companion?' He replied: \`That person who when
you see him, you are reminded of God; when he speaks, your knowledge
increases; when he acts, you fall to thinking of the hereafter and the
Resurrection.' " [^25]

Mankind is in dire need of the elixir of love for pure and virtuous
people, so that love may be cultivated, and so that love for such people
may create a resemblance and similarity to them in mankind.

A variety of ways have been recommended for reforming one's morals and
refining the soul, and various methods have come into existence, one of
which is the Socratic method. According to this, man must reform himself
by way of his intellect and his own devising. A man should first of all
find complete faith in the benefits of the purification of, and the harm
of confusion in, the morals, and then, one by one, find the blameworthy
qualities with the instrument of his intellect - like someone who wants
to pick out the hairs from inside his nose one by one, or like a farmer
who, by his own hand, pulls out the tares from the furrows of his land,
or like someone who wants to clean his wheat of small stones and soil by
his own hand - and then cleanse these bad qualities from the harvest of
his being. According to this method, one must gradually remove moral
depravities by patience, perseverance, careful reckoning and applied
thought, and purify the gold of one's being from false coin. Perhaps it
should be said that it is not possible for the intellect to acquit
itself of this task.

Philosophers seek to reform morality by thought and reckoning. For
example, they say that purity and continence are the cause of man's
honour and character in the eyes of people, and greed and avarice are
the consequences of hardship and inferiority; or they say that knowledge
is the consequence of power and ability, knowledge is like this and like
that, knowledge is "the seal of the kingdom of Solomon", knowledge is
the light along man's path which illuminates the pitfalls in his way; or
they say that envy and malevolence are spiritual sicknesses, from which
evil consequences will result as far as society is concerned; and so
on.

There is no doubt that this way is a correct way, and this means is a
good means; but we are talking about the balance of the value of this
means in comparison with any other means. Just as a car is, for example,
a good means, but when it is compared to an airplane we must examine
carefully the extent of its value.

First of all, we have no argument with the value of the way of the
intellect as regards guidance, that is to say from the point of view of
how far so-called intellectual reasoning reveals reality in the matter
of ethics, how far it is true, and in conformity with the facts, and is
not faulty and erroneous. We will only say this much, that there are
countless philosophical schools of ethics and education, and this
problem has still not passed beyond the boundaries of discussion and
argument as far as reasoning is concerned. Moreover we know that the
Sufis are all in agreement when they say:

The leg of the reasoners is of wood;A wooden leg is very infirm. [^26]

At the moment, our discussion does not concern this aspect, instead it
concerns how far this way can reach.

The mystics and people of the spiritual journey have recommended the
way of love and fellowship in place of following the way of the
intellect and reasoning. They say that one should find a perfect being
and hang the halter of love for, and fellowship with, him round one's
heart, since this is both less dangerous that the way of the intellect
and reasoning, and also swifter. By way of comparison, these two paths
are like the old-fashioned way of doing something by hand and the way of
doing it by machine. The effect of the power of love and fellowship on
the doing away with moral vices from the heart is similar to the effect
of chemicals on metals; for example, an etcher removes what is unwanted
on his plate by the application of strong acid, not by using a nail, or
the point of a knife, or anything like that. However, the effect of the
intellect in reforming moral evils is like the work of someone who wants
to separate iron-fillings from dust by hand; how excruciating and
troublesome that would be! If he had a powerful magnet to hand, perhaps
he could separate them with one sweep. The force of love and fellowship
gathers the vicious qualities like the magnet and castes them away. The
mystics believe that love of, and fellowship with, purified and perfect
individuals is like an automatic apparatus which gathers the vices
together by itself and ejects them. If the state of being attracted
finds the right object, it is one of the best states, and it is this
which refines and bestows exceptional qualities.

Truly those who have taken this path want to reform their morality
through the strength of love, and they have relied on the power of
affection and fellowship. Experience has shown them that companionship
with the pure and fellowship and love for them has affected their
spirits to an extent which reading hundreds of volumes on ethics has
not.

Rumi has related the message of love by the complaint of the reed; he
says:

Whoever saw a poison and antedote like the reed?
Whoever saw a sympathiser and a longing lover like the reed?
Whoever's garment is torn by love Is entirely cleansed of covetousness
or blemish.

Hail, O Love, that bringest us good gain -O physician of all our ills.
[^27]

Sometimes we see some great person whose followers imitate him even in
the way of walking, dressing, meeting with people and gesturing. This
imitation is not voluntary, it is automatic and by the force of nature.
It is the strength of love and fellowship which has influenced all the
elements of the lover's existence and has made him resemble his beloved
in every one of his states. This is why every human being must search
for a man of reality and truth for his own reformation, and devote
himself to him so that he can truly reform himself.

If there is the desire for union in your head, O Hafiz,You must become
like clay in the craftsman's hands.

When a man who, however much he may at first have decided to be pious
and do good deeds, again falls prey to weakness in the fundamentals of
his aspiration, finds love and fellowship, that weakness and lethargy
will then go away, and his resolution will become firm and his ambition
strong.

Love of the good ones unscrupulously took away heart and religion;The
rook in chess cannot take as much as a beautiful face can capture.

Do you imagine that Majnun became deranged by himself ?

It was the glance of Layla that transported him among the stars.

I did not find my way alone to the source of the sun,I was a mote, and
love for you bore me up.It was the curve of your eyebrow, it was your
heavenly hand,Which circled round in this revelry and drove my heart
insane . [^28]

History tells of great persons in whose spirit and soul a revolution
was created by love and fellowship with a perfect one - at least
according to the idea of their followers. Mawlana Rumi is one of such
persons. He was not from the first so consumed (by love) and full of
commotion. He was a scholar, and was calmly and quietly engaged in
teaching in a corner of his town. But from the day that he encountered
Shams-a Tabrizi and the desire for fellowship with him seized his heart
and soul his manner completely changed and a fire flared up inside him.
It was like a fuse which has fallen into a gunpowder store and bursts
into flames. He was, apparently, a follower of Ash'arism, but his
Mathnavi is without doubt one of the greatest books in the world. All
the poetry of this man is surging, in movement. He composed the Divan of
Shams in memory of his desire, his beloved; and in the Mathnavi too, he
mentions him a great deal. We see Mawlana Rumi in the Mathnavi searching
after something, but as soon as he remembers Shams a wild storm brews up
in his spirit, and roaring waves surge up in him; he says:

At this moment my soul has plucked my skirt;He has caught the perfume
of Joseph's vest.(He said:) "For the sake of our years of
companionship,Recount one of those sweet ecstasies,That earth and heaven
may laugh,That intellect and spirit and eye may increase a hundred fold.
"

I said: "The one who is far from his beloved is Like an invalid who is
far from the doctor.How should I describe (not a vein of mine is
sensible) That Friend who hath no peer.The description of this severance
and this heart's blood Do thou at present leave over till another
time.Do not seek trouble and turmoil and bloodshed:

Say no more concerning Shams-a Tabrizi. [^29]

And this is the fitting meaning of what Hafiz said:

The nightingale learnt its song by the favour of the rose, otherwise
there would not have been Any of this song and music fashioned from its
beak.From this we can infer that exertion and being drawn, or action and
attraction must go together. Nothing can be accomplished from effort
without attraction, just as being drawn where there is no effort will
not reach its aim.

**Notes:**

[^23]. Sharh Kitab al-isharat wa 't-tanbihat, Tehran, 1379 A.H., vol.3,
p.383.

[^24]. As for love, there are blemishes also. Among these is the fact
that the lover, as a result of his preoccupation with the goodness of
his beloved, is heedless of the beloved's defects:

Love of anything brings a blindness and a deafness.

Anyone who loves something, his sight becomes defective and his heart
sick. (Nahju 'l-balaghah).

Sa'di wrote in his Rose Garden (Gulistan):

For everyone it is the same, one's own mind seems perfect and one's own
child beautiful.

This bad effect is not inconsistent with what we said earlier on, i.e.,
that the effect of love is a sensitization of the intelligence and
perception; sensitization of the intelligence means that it brings man
out of slow-wittedness, and actualises his potential. However, the bad
effect of love is not that it dulls man's wits but that it makes man
heedless, and the question of intelligence is different from that of
heedlessness. Very often, as a result of the preservation of a balance
in sensibilities, dim-witted persons are less prone to heedlessness.

Love makes the understanding more keen, but the attention one-sided and
one-tracked. Thus, we said before that the property of love was
singleness, and it is as a result of this singleness and focality that
the defect arises, and attention to other things diminishes.

What is more, not only does love cause defectiveness, but it shows the
defects as something good; for one of love's effects is that wherever it
shines its light, it makes that place seem beautiful, it turns one speck
of goodness into the sun. It even makes black seem white and darkness
light. As Vahshi said:

If you sat in the ball of my eye, Naught would you see but the goodness
of Layla.

And it is perhaps for this reason that love is unlike knowledge, which
is completely a function of what is known. Love's inward and psychic
aspect is greater than its outward and real aspect; that is to say, the
equilibrium of love is not a function of the scales of goodness, but
more a function of the scales of the potentiality and essence of the
lover. In fact, the lover has an essence, a matter, a latent fire which
is seeking an excuse, an object. Whenever it happens to encounter an
object and finds compatibility - the secret of this compatibility is
still unknown, and that is why it is said that love is unreasonable -
this inner potentiality manifests itself and creates goodness according
to its own ability, not according to what exists in the beloved. This is
what the sentence above refers to when it says that the lover sees the
defect of the beloved as art and the thorn as rose and jasmine.

[^25]. Biharu 'l-anwar, vol. 15, bk. 10, p.51 (old edition).
[^26]. Rumi, Mathnawi, bk.l
[^27] Ibid.
[^28]. \`Allamah Taba'taba' i.
[^29]. Adapted from Nicholson's translation of Rumi, Mathnavi, bk.1

