Chapter 20 :the Politics of "using" the Qur'an
==============================================

It is now some thirteen centuries that the politics of "holding the
Qur'an upon a spear" has been more or less prevalent among the Muslims.
It becomes especially rife among those who wish to profit from it
whenever sanctimoniousness and exotericism increases and it becomes
fashionable to display one's piety and asceticism. There are two lessons
to be learnt from this.

Firstly, whenever the ignorant, the unknowing and the uninformed put on
a show of sanctity and piety, and people take them to be the symbol of
the practising Muslim, an excellent tool is available for unscrupulous
schemers. Such schemers always turn these people into an instrument for
their own ends, and make their presence a strong hindrance to the ideas
of real reformers. It is quite common to see anti-Islamic elements
making quite open use of this means, that is to say, setting the power
of Islam itself to work against Islam. Western colonialism has had much
experience in the use of this means, and has in its turn profited from
deceitful arousal of the sentiments of the Muslims, especially in the
field of the creation of schisms between them. What a disgrace it is
when, for example, afflicted Muslims plan to drive out foreign
influence, and then see the very people they wanted to save turn into a
barrier in their path in the name, and under the banner, of religion.
Indeed, if the masses of the people are ignorant and uninformed,
hypocrites will use the fortress of Islam itself. In Iran, where the
people have the honour to love and follow the Household of the Prophet
(Ahlu'l-bayt), hypocrites are creating a fortress against the Qur'an,
Islam and the Household of the Prophet to help the usurping Jews, out of
the holy fortress of love of the Household of the Prophet, and in their
sacred name, and this is the most abominable part of the injustice
against Islam, the Qur'an, the Prophet and his Household. The Prophet
said:

I am not anxious about the incursion of poverty among my community;
that about which I am afraid for them is crooked thinking. That which
poverty of thought will bring my community is much worse than that which
economic poverty will bring them.

Secondly, we must try to make our methodology of derivation from the
Qur'an a true one. The Qur'an is a leader and a guide when it is
subjected to true reflection, when it is interpreted wisely, when
guidance is taken from the people who really know the Qur'an, who are
firmly rooted in the sciences of the Qur'an. As long as our methodology
is wrong, and as long as we do not learn how to benefit from the Qur'an,
we shall not drive any profit from it. Profiteers or ignorant people
sometimes read the Qur'an, and then follow up an incorrect possibility.
Just as you have probably heard in the words of Nahju 'l-baldghah, "they
say the word "truth", and then set their minds of falsehood!" This is
not practicising the Qur'an or bringing it to life, this is putting it
to death. The Qur'an is put into practice when it is understood with a
true understanding.

The Qur'an always presents its project in a general and fundamental
form, but the deduction and harmonisation of the particular to the
universal depends on our correct understanding and conceptualisation.
For example, we do not find written in the Qur'an that in a war that
took place on a certain day between 'Ali and Mu'awiyah, 'Ali was in the
right; all we find in the Qur'an is that:

If two parties of believers fight, put things right between them; then,
if one of them is insolent against the other, fight the insolent one
till it reverts to Allah's commandment. (al-Hujarat, 49:9)

This is the Qur'an and its way of explanation; but it does not say in
such-and-such a war so-and-so was in the right and the other was in the
wrong.

The Qur'an does not spell out names; it does not say: after forty
years, more or less, a man called Mu'awiyah will appear who will fight
with 'Ali, and you should fight in that war for \`Ali. And neither
should it enter into particulars. The Qur'an's task is not to make a
list of subjects and point out which is right and which is wrong; such a
thing would be impossible. The Qur'an came to stay for ever, so it has
to make fundamental and universal things clear, so that falsehood can
take its place face to face with truth in every age and people can act
according to the criterion of these universalities. It is therefore a
duty for people to open their eyes to the basic advice: "If two parties
of believers fight. . . ", and distinguish between the party doing the
terrorizing and the one that is being terrorized; and to accept if the
unruly party ceases to be unruly. But if they stop, and try to be
cunning so as to save themselves from defeat, and prepare themselves for
a new attack, and become unruly again, and, in the words of the Qur'an,
"if one of them is insolent against the other", be firm, and do not give
way to their cunning.

It is up to the poeple themselves to discriminate in all these matters.
The Qur'an seeks that the Muslims should be intellectually and socially
mature, and a necessary consequence of such intellectual maturity is the
ability to differentiate between the just man and the unjust man. The
Qur'an did not come to be always for people like a guardian over a
juvenile, to carry out the particular details of their lives like a
personal protector, and to specify each special case by a material sign
and indicator.

Actually, knowing people, the degree of their competence, the limits to
their fitness for, and relationship to, Islam and Islamic realities is
itself a duty, and frequently we neglect this duty.

\`Ali, may peace be upon him, said:

You will never know truth and follow the right way unless you know the
person who has abandoned it. [^21]

Knowing the principles and the generalities is alone not enough unless
their correspondence and reference to particulars has been found, for it
is possible that, through an error of judgement concerning persons and
individuals or through ignorance of the situation, one will act in the
name of truth and Islam and under the banner of Islam against Islam and
truth and for

Injustice and the unjust, justice and the just are mentioned in the
Qur'an, but their applications must be sought out. We must not mistake
injustice and justice for injustice, and then cut off the head of
justice and truth in the name of what we imagine to be a universal
principle and the judgement of the Qur'an.

**Notes:**

[^21]. Nahju 'l-balaghah, Sermon no. 146.

