Chapter 21 B:the Necessity of Fighting Hypocrisy
================================================

The most difficult struggle is the one against hypocrisy, for it is the
struggle against the cunning who use the stupid as their weapon. This
fight is several degrees more difficult than the fight with unbelief,
because, in the battle with unbelief, the struggle is against an
unconcealed, open and unhidden current, while the struggle against
hypocrisy is in fact a struggle against concealed unbelief. Hypocrisy
has two faces: one is the outward, face - Islam and Muslim; the other
inward - unbelief and evil. It is very difficult for the ordinary people
to spot this latter aspect, and sometimes impossible; and thus the
struggle with hypocrisy ends in failure because the great majority of
people cannot extend the reach of their perception beyond outward forms
and the hidden does not become apparent. They do not have a long enough
range to penetrate the depths of the inward nature of things.

Amir al-mu' minin (as) wrote in the letter he sent to Muhammad ibn Abi
Bakr

The Messenger of Allah said to me: "I do not fear for my community from
the believer or the unbeliever. As the believer, Allah will protect him
because of his belief, and, as for the unbeliever, Allah will humiliate
him because of his unbelief. But I fear about everyone of you who is a
hypocrite in his heart and learned in speech. He speaks what you can
accept, but he does what you cannot accept. [^22]

The Prophet here points out the danger in hypocrisy and the hypocrite,
because the majority of people are uninformed and unaware, and are taken
in by outward appearances. [^23]

Care must be taken over the fact that with every bit that stupidity
increases, the way opens further for hypocrisy. The struggle with the
stupid and stupidity is the struggle with hypocrisy too, for the stupid
are the tool in the hands of the hypocrites. Naturally, the struggle
with the foolish and with foolishness is to disarm the hypocrites, and
take the sword out of their hands.

**Notes:**

[^22]. ibid., Letter no.27.
[^23]. Thus we see throughout the history of Islam that every time a
reformer arises on behalf of the people to reform the state of their
society and religion, and the interests of the unjust and the profiteers
are endangered, these latter immediately don the disguise of sanctity,
and display their piety and religion.
When al-Ma'mun ar-Rashid, the \`Abassid Caliph famous in the history of
rulers for his epicurianism and extravagance, saw that the \`Alawis were
on the ascendence, he put on a change of clothing and showed himself in
public in a new light. Then Abu Hanifah al-Iskafi, who neither took a
penny from him, nor benefited from him, praised him for this and
composed the following panegyric:
O Ma'mun, the like of whom among the rulers of the State of Islam Has
never been seen, by Arab or by simple peasant,Wore a coat of fur for so
long That it became old, worn and tatty.His close companions were amazed
at this excess And asked him for the reason for this.

He said: "Tales are left behind by kings Among the Arabs and the
non-Arabs, not by fine cotton and linen! "

And so on, each in his way excelling in the well-tried and oppressive
politics of "holding the Qur'an up on spears", and defeating all effort
and self-sacrifice, nipping each new resurgence in the bud. This is
nothing but the ignorance and unknowing of people, which does not know
how to distinguish between slogans and reality, thus closing the way of
resurgence and reformation to themselves, and then realising that all
the preparatory work has been cancelled out and that they must start at
the beginning again.

Of all the great points we learn from the life of 'Ali, we see that
this kind of struggle is not confined to any special group, but that
everywhere that a group of Muslims, or those who are got up in the garb
of religion, become a tool for the advance of non-Muslims and the
progress of colonialism, and the colonialists, for the protection of
their own interests, give them cover, and then use them as their shield,
so that it becomes impossible to fight them without doing away with the
shields, then it is necessary to begin by fighting with these shields
and destroying them so as to remove the obstacle in the way and be able
to attack at the heart of the enemy. Perhaps the machinations of
Mu'awiyah had something to do with the Khawarij's sabotage, and
therefore even on that day Mu'awiyah, or at least people like al-Ash'ath
ibn al-Qays, and other elements in the sabotage and disturbances, gave
cover to the Khawarij.

The history of the Khawarij teaches us the fact that in every
resurgence the "shields" must first be got rid of and the fools fought
with, just as 'Ali, after the events of the arbitration, first of all
attacked the Khawarij and then intended to follow upon the tracks of
Mu'awiyah.


