Chapter 22 :'ali, the True Imam and Leader
==========================================

In all aspects of 'Ali's existence, of his history and biography, of
his dispositions \`and habits, of his character and behaviour, of his
words and speech, there is instruction, examples to follow, teaching and
leadership.

Just as 'Ali's "power of attraction" taught us and instructed us, so
also does his "power of repelling". Usually in ziyarat [^24] to 'Ali and
the other Pure Ones we claim we are "the friend of your friend and the
enemy of your enemy". Another way of putting this would be to say: "We
will go towards that point which is in the lines of force of attraction
to you and which you attract, and we will choose to be far from that
point which you repulse."

What we have said in this book is an intimation of 'Ali's powers of
"attraction and repulsion", and our brevity is particularly apparent in
the case of his "repulsion". How-ever, it is clear from what we said
that 'Ali strongly repelled two groups - artful hypocrites, and stupid
ascetics.

These two lessons are sufficient for those who claim to be his
"party" - the Shi\`ahs - to open their eyes and not be duped by
hypocrites, to keep their vision acute and dismiss the outward aspect of
things, two things with which the Shi\`ah community is now sorely
afflicted.


The End

**Notes:**

[^24]. A kind of supplication addressed to one or all of the fourteen
ma'sum (immaculates) - the Prophet, his daughter Fatimah, and the twelve
Imams. (tr.)

