Foreword
========

The great, expansive personality of Amir al-mu'minin (Commander of the
Believers), \`Ali - may peace be upon him - is broader and more
multi-faceted than anything that one person can enter into in all its
aspects and parts, or bring his restless mind to reflect. For a single
individual, the most that is possible is that he choose one or several
specific, limited areas for study and research, and content himself with
that.

One of the aspects and areas of the being of this great individual is
the effect he had on people, either positive or negative, or, in other
words, his powerful "attraction and repulsion", which still now exerts
its active influence; and it is with this that we shall be concerned in
this book.

The personalities of individuals are not all the same in the reaction
they .produce in spirits and souls. The weaker the personality, the
fewer minds it engages and the fewer hearts it excites and agitates. The
greater and more powerful it is, the more it excites and provokes a
reaction in the mind, although the reaction may be positive or
negative.

Those personalities who excite minds and provoke a reaction are spoken
of everywhere, they are the subjects of debates and disputes, they
become the themes of poetry, painting and other arts, and the heroes of
stories and other writings. These are all things which are true to the
greatest extent in the case of 'Ali (as) [ (as): is the abbreviation of
the Arabic phrase \`alay-hi/ha/himu 's-salam (may peace be upon
him/her/them).] and in this respect he has no rival, or at least very
few rivals. It is said that Muhammad ibn Shahrashub al-Mazandarani, who
was one of the greatest Shiite scholars of the 7th century A.H. (13th
century A.D.), had a thousand books with the title "Manaqib" (Noble
Virtues), in his library, all written about \`Ali (as) , at the time he
wrote his own famous "Manaqib". [^1] This is one indication of how much
the exalted personality of the master has engaged minds throughout
history.

The basic mark of distinction of 'Ali (as) and other people who are
bright with the rays of Truth is that as well as engaging people's minds
and occupying their thoughts, they give light, warmth, love, joy, faith
and strength to their hearts.

Philosophers like Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Ibn Sina or Descartes are
also heroes of the mastering of ideas and the exercise of the mind. The
leaders of social revolutions, especially in the last two centuries,
have, to a greater extent, created a kind of adoration among their
followers. The shaykhs of Sufism from time to time bring their followers
so far into the stage of "submission" that if "the keeper of the tavern"
gives the cue, they will stain their prayer-rugs with wine.' But in none
of these cases do we see fervour and ardour combined with gentleness,
kindness, sincerity and compassion as history has shown among the
followers of \`Ali. If the Safavids made dervishes into a war-like army
of skilled fighters, they did so in the name of \`Ali, not in their
own.

Spiritual goodness and beauty, which love and sincerity bring about, is
one thing; supremacy, benefit, and what is of advantage in life, which
is what the social leader deals in, or intellect and philosophy, which
is what the philosopher deals in, or the establishing of "sovereignty"
and "power" which is what the gnostic deals in, is something else.

There is a well-known story that one of Ibn Sina's students said to his
teacher that if, with his extraordinary understanding and intelligence,
he were to make a claim to prophecy, people would gather round him; but
Ibn Sina said nothing, till once, when they were on a journey together
in wintertime, Ibn Sina awoke from his sleep one morning at dawn, woke
up his student, and told him he was thirsty and to go and fetch some
water. The student procrastinated and made excuses: however much Ibn
Sina persisted, the student was not prepared to leave his warm bed in
the cold winter. At that moment the cry of the muezzin called out from
the minaret: "Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar ..... ". Ibn Sina saw that this
was a good opportunity to give the answer to his student, so he said:
"You, who averred that if I made claim to be a prophet people would
believe in me, look now and see how the command I just gave to you, who
have been my student for years and have benefited from my lessons, has
not even had enough effect to make you leave your warm bed to fetch me
some water. But this muezzin has obeyed the four hundred year old
command of the Prophet, got up from his warm bed, climbed up to this
height and borne witness to the unity of God and to his Prophet. Look
and see how great the difference is! "

Philosophers produce students, not followers; social leaders create
followers but not complete men; qutbs and shaykhs of Sufism make "lords
of submission", not active fighters for Islam.

In 'Ali we find the characteristics of the philosopher, the
characteristics of a revolutionary leader, the characteristics of a Sufi
shaykh and some of the characteristics of prophets. His school is the
school of the intellect and thought, the school of revolution, the
school of submission and discipline, and the school of goodness, beauty,
ecstasy and movement.

Before he became the just leader (imam) of others, and behaved with
justice towards them, \`Ali (as) was himself a harmonised, equilibrated
being; he had gathered together the perfections of humanity. He
possessed both a deep and far reaching mind, and tender and overflowing
affections; he had both perfection of body and perfection of spirit; in
the night, in worship, he cut himself off from everything else, and
during the day he was active among the people. In the daytime, people
saw his kindness and altruism, and listened to his advice, counsel and
wise words; at night, the stars looked down on the tears of his worship
and the heavens heard his prayers of love. He was both a learned man and
a wise man, both a gnostic and a leader of society, both a man who
denied his self and a soldier, both a judge and a worker, both a speaker
and a writer. In sum, in all senses of the word he was a perfect man
with all his attractiveness.

The present book is a collection of four lectures which were delivered
between the 18th and 21st of the blessed month of Ramadan 1388 A.H.
(1969 A.D.) in the Husayniyah-a Irshad, in Tehran. The book consists of
an introduction and two parts. In the introduction the generalities of
attraction and repulsion in their broader sense, and the "attraction"
and "repulsion" of men in particular, have been discussed. In the first
part, the power of attraction of \`Ali (as), which has, and always will,
pull the hearts of people towards him, its philosophy, advantages and
results, is the subject of discussion, and, in the second part, his
powerful repelling effect, and how he strongly warded off and drove away
certain elements, is examined and explained. It is shown that \`Ali (as)
was a man with these twin powers, and that everyone who wants to be
taught in his way must possess these twin powers.

It is not enough just to point to the dual powers of this path in order
to make it known. In this book we have tried to show, as far as
possible, what kind of individuals were attracted by his force of
attraction, and what type of person was warded off by his force of
repulsion. How often have we, who claim to follow the way of \`Ali,
pushed away the very people that \`Ali attracted, and attracted those
who were repulsed by him. In the part on \`Ali's force of repulsion, we
have contented ourselves with a discussion of the Khawarij, but since
there are other groups which are subject to this force of his, perhaps
another time, or at least in a future printing of this book, this
deficiency, as well as the other deficiencies of the book, will be
amended.

The trouble of correcting and completing the lectures has been borne by
the erudite Mr. Fathullah Umidi. Half the book owes its existence to his
stylish pen, for, after extracting it from recorded tapes, he wrote it
again, occasionally correcting and improving it. The other half of it is
the writing of this scholar himself, or, sometimes, after his
appropriate corrections, the additions of some points by myself. I trust
that on the whole it will be useful and instructive. We beseech Allah,
the Exalted to make us true followers of 'Ali (as).

Murtada Mutahhari
11th Isfand, 1349 Sh.
4th Muharram, 1391 A.H.
2nd March, 1971 A.D.
Tehran - IRAN

**Notes:**

[^1]. 3 vols., Najaf, 1376/ 1956.
[^2]. See Hafiz:
Let wine upon the prayer-mat flow,And if the taverner bids so;Whose
wont is on this road to go Its ways and manners well doth know.

(transl. A.J. Arberry, in Fifty Poems of Hafiz, Cambridge, 1947,
p.83)

