Chapter 3 :the Elixir of Love
=============================

The Persian poets called love the "elixir" (iksir). The alchemists
believed that there existed a material in the world which they called
the "elixir" [^5] or "the philosopher's stone" (kimiya) which could
change one matter into another matter, and they searched after this for
centuries. The poets took over the use of this terminology and said that
the real "elixir" which has the power of transformation is love, because
it is love which can transmute a substance. Love, absolutely, is the
"elixir" and has the properties of the philosopher's stone, which
changes one nature into another, and people also are different
natures.

People are mines, like gold-mines and silver-mines.

It is love which makes the heart a heart, and if there is no love,
there is no heart, just clay and water.

Every heart that is not aflame is no heart;A frozen heart is nothing
but a handful of clay. O God! Give me a breast that sets ablaze,And in
that breast a heart, and that heart consumed with fire. [^6]One of the
effects of love is power; love is the power of glory, it makes the
coward courageous.

A hen will keep its wings folded by its side as long as it is alone. It
will strut about quite peaceably, looking about to find small worms to
swallow. It will start at the slightest noise, and not stand its ground
even in front of the weakest child. But when the same hen has chickens,
love takes up its dwelling at the centre of its being and its character
completely changes. The wings which were folded by its side are now
lowered in a sign of preparation for defence, it assumes an aggressive
posture, even the sound of its clucking becomes stronger and more
courageous. Previously it fled at the possibility of danger, but now it
attacks where there is that possibility, and it attacks bravely. This is
love which displays the frightened hen in the form of a valiant
animal.

Love makes the heavy and lazy nimble and cunning, and even makes the
slow-witted astute. A boy and girl neither of whom, when they were
single, found themselves thinking about anything except what was
directly related to their own persons, see that they have become
concerned about the fate of another being for the first time as soon as
they fall in love and set up a family environment. The radius of their
wants extends; and when they become parents, their spirit completely
changes. That heavy and lazy adolescent boy has now become active and
mobile, and that girl who used not to get out of her bedclothes even
during the day moves like lightning when she hears the cry of her child
in the cradle. What is this power which has so galvanised the languor
and weariness in these two young people? It is nothing but love.

It is love which turns the miser into a benefactor, and an impatient
and intolerant person into someone with endurance and tolerance. It is
love which gave the selfish bird which collected grain only with itself
in mind and looked only after itself, the form of a generous creature
which calls for its chickens when it finds a grain of corn; or which, by
some wonderful power, makes the mother, who was until yesterday a
spoiled child who just ate and slept and was irritable and impatient,
persevering and forbearing when faced with hunger, lack of sleep and
dishevelment, which gives her the patience to endure the hardships of
motherhood.

The bringing into existence of tenderness in, and the removal of
heaviness and coarseness from, the spirit, or, put in another way, the
purification of the feelings, and also the unification and singleness of
purpose and concentration, and the disappearance of distraction and
dispersion are the strengths and, in the end, power which is produced by
the coming together of all the resulting effects of love.

In the language of poetry and literature, when love is spoken of, we
encounter one effect more than any other, and that is the power of love
to bring inspiration, and its prodigality.

The nightingale learnt its song by the favour of the rose,otherwise
there would not have been Any of this song and music fashioned from its
beak. [^7]Although the favour of the rose is, if we attend only to the
words, a matter outside the existence of the nightingale, it is in fact
nothing but the force of love itself.

Do you imagine that Majnun became deranged (majnun)

by himself? It was the glance of Layla that transported him among the
stars. [^8]

Love awakens sleeping powers, and frees chained and fettered forces,
just like the splitting of the atom and the freeing of atomic power. It
fires with inspiration and builds heroes - how many poets, philosophers
and artists there have been who were created by a strong and powerful
love.

Love perfects the soul and brings out astounding latent abilities. From
the point of view of the powers of perception, it inspires, and from the
point of view of the emotions, it strengthens the will and
determination, and when it rises to its highest aspect it brings
miracles and supernatural events into existence. It purifies the spirit
from the tempers and humours of the body; or, in other words, love is a
cathartic, it purges the base qualities arising from egotism, or from
coldness and lack of warmth, such as envy, avarice, cowardice, laziness,
conceitedness and self-admiration. It removes grudges and malevolence,
although it is possible that deprivation of, and frustration in, love
may produce, in their own turn, complexes and aversions.

By love, bitternesses became sweet,By love, pieces of copper became
gold. [^9]

In the spirit, the effect of love is in terms of its development and
thriving; in the body, in terms of melting and decomposition. The effect
of love in the body is the complete opposite of what it is in the
spirit. In the body love is the cause of ruination, and the reason for
pallor and emaciation in the body, for indisposition and disorder in the
digestive and the nervous systems. Perhaps all the effects which it has
in the body are destructive; but in connection with the spirit it is not
so - it depends on the object of love and how the person responds to
that object. Leaving aside its social effects, it is predominantly
perfecting in the spirit and the individual, because it produces
strength, compassion, serenity, singleness of purpose, and
determination; it abolishes weakness, meanness, annoyance,
uncollectedness and dullness. It removes the confusions which are called
dassa in the Qur'an (91:10), meaning adulterations of purity with
impurity, destroys deceit and purifies the cheat.

The spiritual way ruins the body,And, after having ruined it, restores
it to prosperity:O happy the soul who, for love and ecstasy,Gave up
hearth and home, wealth and riches,Ruined the house for the sake of the
golden treasure,And with that same treasure rebuilt it better;Cut off
the water and cleansed the river-bed,Then caused drinking-water to flow
in the river-bed;Cleft the skin and drew out the iron point -Then fresh
skin grew over it.

The perfect ones who are aware of the secret of reality Are in ecstasy,
bewildered, intoxicated and deranged with love.

Not bewildered in such wise that his back is towards Him,But so
bewildered that (they are) drowned and intoxicated with the Beloved.
[^10]

**Notes:**

[^5]. In the Persian-Language dictionary "Burhan-a qati"' the following
is written about "elixir" (iksir): "It is a substance which melts down,
combines and perfects; that is to say it makes gold from copper and
useful drugs beneficial. It seems that "perfection" is also called "the
elixir" metaphorically." It so happens that in love the same three
properties are present - it "melts down", it "combines" and it
"perfects" - but the well-known and famous metaphorical aspect of it is
third one, its perfecting transformative power. Thus poets have
sometimes called love by the name of "the doctor", "the drug (dawa')",
"Plato" or "Galen". In the prologue to the Mathnavi Rumi writes:

Hail, O Love that bringest us good again -Thou that art the physician
of all our ills,The remedy of our pride and vainglory,Our Plato and our
Galen! (transl. Nicholson, bk.1, 1.23)

[^6] From Vahshi Kirmani, Iranian poet (991/1583)
[^7] Hafiz
[^8] \`Al'amah Taba'taba'i
[^9] Rumi, Mathnavi
[^10] Adapted from Nicholson's translation of Rumi, Mathnavi, bk. 1

