Preface
=======

I was requested to deliver a speech on the honored character of Fatima
(peace be upon her). Granting this request would show my impotence to
the utmost, because knowing Fatima (peace be upon her) and naturally,
introducing her is a demanding task. What could I say about the one,
whom no one really has known her save Allah; and indeed, no one has
discovered her real character except Prophet Mohammed (a.s) and Imam Ali
(peace be upon him).

The limit of my mind and knowledge does not allow me to describe her as
she really is. In addition, any debate on the character of Fatima (peace
be upon her) needs courage, rhetoric, full knowledge, and above all,
thorough conversance with the celestial world, because she is the “Lady
of the heavenly wOmmen”. Only he who has got a real understanding of the
heaven would characterize her.

Right now, Fatima (peace be upon her) is not physically present among
us, but her extensive aspects of her life, thoughts, and policies affect
our minds and lives. Who is that does not know a brief of Fatima (peace
be upon her)’s life and wishes not to follow her way? She has passed
away, but the rich facets of her life get more extensive as time goes
by.

Moreover, I consider it a great honor to introduce Fatima (peace be upon
her) from the Prophet Mohammed (peace be upon him and his descendants),
Imam Ali (peace be upon him), and the Imams’ words, and talk about her
various roles, her life and purity, her seeking for administering
justice, lending the people a helping hand, and, at last, her martyrdom.
Although our speech does not really characterize her, it has the great
value to remind us for sOmme hours of Fatima (peace be upon her),
Allah’s pure servant and the Prophet’s esteemed daughter.

Dr. Ali Ghaemi


