Islam and the Samples:
======================

As a developed school on the way of advancing its purposes and
establishing the construction backgrounds, knowing that presenting
samples makes the way smoother earlier, Islam tries to present samples.
The holy Quran states in this regard as saying,

<p dir="rtl">
«و لقد كان لكم في رسول الله أسوة حسنة»
</p>

*“And that we appointed ‘Mohammed’, the Messenger of Allah as a good
model for you.”*

Therefore, people have to follow the Messenger of Allah in their life
affairs and circumstances. Also, in another verse, it states,*“We
appointed you as a moderate nation to be a sample for other peoples, and
the Messenger to be your model”.*

In the Islamic traditions, it is recommended to invite the people to
truth through presenting true samples and practices and not only through
the word of mouth. Our religious leaders have been the incarnation of
Islam and Quranic concepts. When Ayesheh, the Prophet’s wife, was asked
what were the Prophet’s morals like? she answered, “ Quranic morals”.

Our infallibles are like the scales and measure for us according to
their own interpretation. When one infallible was asked, “What does the
holy Quran mean by the word scale”? “We are meant” he answered. “We are
the scales in the next world, and the peoples’ deeds are measured by our
deeds”.

Islam has granted special values for the sample, believing that the
basic movement towards the goal should be based on the sample. According
to Imam Ali (peace be upon him), Muslims must endeavor to be like the
accurate samples or in their samples’ footsteps. The samples must cause
creating religious motivation, sensation and affection, attract and lead
us, and therefore, prepare the ground for bearing a resemblance to the
samples.

In spite of the fact that there exist no practical samples in man-made
schools, and they are forced to think idealistically, fortunately, in
the real Islamic school, that is, Shiism, there exist a lot of samples.
If in following a school or philosophy, one is misled, he should not be
reproached, because there is not any practical samples in the out world
for him, and the leader of that school may even contradict and act
against what the school says. But if a Muslim or a Shia is misled, he
should be reprimanded. Due to the fact that his samples are tangible in
the external world and their manners and behaviors are imitative.

In our school, we have some samples such as Mohammed and Ali (peace be
upon him), Fatima (peace be upon her) and Zeineb (peace be upon her ),
Hasan (a.s), and Hossein (a.s) as well as other infallible Imams. Their
children are considered as samples for our children, their daughters the
samples for our daughters, and their sons and youth for our sons and
youth. Even their disciples are deserved to be our leaders and teach us
the lessons of life and honor. Isn’t Omme Aiman a woman of character?
Isn’t Fezzah deserving of being the sample? Aren’t Salman, Abuzar,
Meitham, Hojr ibn Adi, etc, samples?

Hossein ibn Ali (peace be upon him) is our Imam, but his house alone can
be a sample for us. Fatima (peace be upon her)’s family was only a
family but can be considered as a sample for all families, willing to
lead the human life to gain high esteem.

The existence of samples makes our duties heavier. If a western woman is
misled, her excuse is sOmmehow justifiable, but if a Muslim and Shia
woman is misled, what excuse does she have to present before Allah? She
surely will be asked that why she did not follow Fatima’s lifestyle and
behavior? Why she did not ask Zeineb, Imam Ali’s daughter, the mystery
of honor? Why she did not take the lesson of life from Khadijeh and
Fezzah?


