The Exigency of Discussion about Fatima (peace be upon her):
============================================================

The fact that Fatima (peace be upon her) is discussed is owing to some
reasons, mentioned in brief:

Firstly, today is Fatima’s birthday anniversary, and naturally, in such
an auspicious time that occurs once a year, we would take steps to
discuss her character in order to know her and make her known as well.

Secondly, the discussion is about a woman, who has played many crucial
roles in her life. Although she has got a short life, the book of her
life is in a way that every page of it, is a lesson of life for us and
the next generations; a lesson, having a new point to teach every time
we study. Studying her life is instructive and a factor for reforming
and improving the society. Because, we believe that if the women are
amended in a society, the people will be amended and the society will be
developed.

Thirdly, the discussion of Fatima (peace be upon her) is in fact the
discussion of a mother, the source of amendment. It is she, who brings
up healthy and duteous children, and delivers them to the society. It is
she, who takes the responsibility of the generation leadership, etc.

Who is the sample of our mothers to bring up healthy children? Isn’t it
better that Fatima (peace be upon her) be the teacher of motherhood
classes?

Fatima (peace be upon her) is a mother, a fidle, steadfast, leading,
mother, that despite poverty, educated her children well because of
love. She was her children’s life shelter, inspired the (spirit of) love
and fidelity in them, and taught them the way of life as well as
self-sacrifice. If we teach Fatima’s point of views to others, we have
established a way for the society prosperity.

Fourthly, discussing Fatima (peace be upon her) as well as introducing
her character is a resolver for all, because in our era that is the era
of philosophy and ideology miscellany, some have been puzzled how to
approach the clear purpose of life. They don’t know what to do and where
to go! The samples are presented in magazines and newspapers, that is
not clear where their materials cOmme from. Due to this fact, the world,
especially the wOmmen’s world, is losing its last shelter of life. In
this situation, it is better to present Fatima’s way, having been
confirmed by foe and friend and having had all aspects of being an
all-out sample.

We believe that if our women knew Fatima (peace be upon her), and
applied her manner in their lives, they would manage to inspire a new
life in the body of the society and present new dimensions of life. The
way of Fatima (peace be upon her) is a great and straight way, and can
release us from straits of this machinery and uproaring life and direct
us to the destination.

Fatima (peace be upon her) has got a grand grandeur, not well known in
her own era and even in our own time. Our hobby and concerns do not
allow us discover and apply the aspects of her noble character.


