The Memory and Remembrance of Fatima (peace be upon her):
=========================================================

The name of Fatima (peace be upon her) restores some scenes in our
minds.…

Fatim’s name revives the memory of jihad and her confidence to Ali
(peace be upon him) in minds as well as the story of Fadak and the
stroke of the door on her side. Fatima (peace be upon her)’s memory
exists in Medina, Kufeh mosque, Karbala and everywhere.

And at the time when there is a discussion of martyrdom, democracy,
administering justice, and love, all of a sudden, Fatima (peace be upon
her) is remembered (peace be upon her), because we see all these
attributes in her character and life. When Hossein and his martyrdom are
put into discussion, the continuation of Ashora mission is talked over,
and speaking of Hossein’s revolution as well as Hasan’s peace with his
tender-heart is set forth. One involuntarily is set thinking who is the
source of such education that has brought up such individuals?

In general, the more time passes, the livelier Fatima (peace be upon
her) will be. Her remembrance reminds us of jihad and makes us smell the
scent of Karbala Torbat (soil). Besides, the lesson of life and grandeur
must be learnt from Fatima (peace be upon her). And she must be taken as
a sample due to the fact that all her attributes are instructive: her
childhood beside mother, her maidenhood in father’s house, her marriage,
her motherhood in relation with her sons and daughters, her
housekeeping, her life beside her husband, her love, her worship, her
demise, etc.


