Introducing Fatima (peace be upon her):
=======================================

Introducing Fatima (peace be upon her) as it really is, seems difficult.
We can just state what is related to her external aspects and then
commence introducing her from this viewpoint:

1. Her Descent:
---------------

Her name is Fatima (peace be upon her), her father, Mohammed (peace be
upon him and his descendants), the last Prophet, her mother: Khadijeh,
entitled as the mother of orphans. Fatima (peace be upon her) was the
fourth and the last daughter. Her titles are Zahra, Omme Abeeha that
means the mother of her father, Zohreh, the mistress of the women of the
worlds, and at last, a goddess in man’s form.

Her father was the messenger of Allah, a distinguished man and a unique
character. Her mother Khadijeh was known as the mother of orphans, and
had some other titles. But among them, she was fond of this title and
all-out sample in achieving that title. Her mother is a woman that Allah
has not dedicated a better one to the messenger, as Ayesheh quoted from
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants).

While the people blasphemised Mohammed (peace be upon him and his
descendants) and made every endeavor to make him yield by means of
economic sanctions, it was Khadijeh, who believed in and helped him with
her own wealth. And at last, while everybody in that era had cut
relation to Mohammed (peace be upon him and his descendants), it was
Khadijeh, who kept contact with him and was even proud of that relation.

Fatima (peace be upon her) was begotten after forty days, passed in
prayer and worship due to the fact that they wanted Fatima (peace be
upon her) to be clean and continued her father’s mission. She consoled
her Father’s sorrow and tried to remove the pain lines of his face.

She later must be the manifestation of all senses (of emotion),
policies, and vehemence of the women’s rights, and a sample for them.
She must reveal some unknown facts, their new duties as well as the
eternal way of life for them.

2. Her Education:
-----------------

She opened her eyes to this world in the fifth year of Prophetic
mission, when Islam emerged in the house of revelation. The hand of a
great coach like the Messenger was over her head, and the affection of a
gracious mother was giving heat to her life. Owing to this fact, she was
never polluted to sin.

She was just seven that her mother passed away, and left Fatima (peace
be upon her)lonely. Her father, achieving the two main parts of
parentship well made up the lack of motherhood affection.

She passed half of her life in Mecca beside the Messenger and the next
half in Ali’s house in Medina. She was trained in revelation environment
i.e. the Prophet’s house, and passed a part of her life in the house of
the husband, who continued carrying the heavy load of the prophetic
mission, that is Imamate. And that was Fatima’s happiness and prosperity
to elevate her character in these two houses.

3. Her marriage:
----------------

Ali (peace be upon him) grew up in Fatima’s house [the house of Prophet
(peace be upon him and his descendants)], and they were trained under
the supervision of the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants).
When her marriage was posed, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) said that the situation of her marriage won’t be clear
unless he receives revelation in this regard, and after that, Ali (peace
be upon him) acted as a suitor, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) broke the silence and said: ”O, Ali, don’t be embarrassed,
express your request.” Ali(a.s) said modestly and prudently, “I want to
make your affection complete with marriage to Fatima.”

In this regard, it can be stated that if there existed no Ali (peace be
upon him), there would exist no husband for Fatima (peace be upon her) ,
and vice versa. The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) put
Fatima’s hand into Ali’s, and the fruit of this marriage was some
children, as Hasan, Hossein, Zeineb and Kolthum (a.s).


