The Translator’s note:
======================

Due to the high importance of the esteemed character of Fatima (peace be
upon her) as a real genuine role model for the wOmmen of the world, I
deemed it necessary to translate this book and provide the ground for
the readers’ better understanding. The book seeks to introduce the
invaluable dimensions of Fatima’s character.

To achieve this end, I put a lot of efforts into the work for about
three successive months night and day, hoping that it can deliver me on
the Day of Resurrection. In addition, I have attempted to give as
transparent and as fair translation of the book as possible, yet still
it is not devoid of faults, and I am responsible for anything in the
translation that is amiss. I should be very glad to hear from the
readers using the book who will find mistakes, or who have comments or
suggestions of any kind. Please write me at***ghq142002@yahoo.com*** .

As the last word, it is clear as day that the creation of any work
usually involves the collaborations and efforts of a variety of persons.
This work is no exception. To my intimate friend and advisor, Mr.
Heshmatullah Zaheri Sarabi, for giving me the idea of translating the
book, I express my deep appreciation. Besides, I seize the opportunity
to thank Mr. Masud Meshki for his valuable comments on the translation
and Mr. Mehdi Hassanzadeh for all his sincere efforts to publish the
book.

In addition, I owe my wife,*Tooran Khazraie,* a debt of gratitude for
encouraging and freeing me from many of life’s daily demands, so that I
could translate freely. Without their support, this translation simply
would not exist.

**Mehdi Ghasemi,**

April, 2004


