Fatima’s Honor:
===============

Fatima (peace be upon her) has endowed with honor and grand dignity; the
honor no one could achieve it as Fatima (peace be upon her) did.
Expressing all her aspects of her character is not feasible; therefore,
some points are stated:

1. She is Allah’s beloved:
--------------------------

She is the pure servant of Allah, and is always in worship and contact
with Him in order to give her servanthood superiority over her other
positions, so that no luxury, effort, or attachments could prevent her
from fulfilling her conscious duty. As that the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his descendants) appreciated her and praised her position was
due to the fact that she was pious and in contact with Allah, and not
because she was the Prophet’s daughter.

Fatima’s generosity, thought, and efforts are all for Allah’s pleasure.
Fatima (peace be upon her) is so dissolved in the Divine grandeur and
majesty that she devotes all her things in His way: her position, her
rank, her silver bracelet, her wedding dress, the screen of her house,
etc. In this case, shouldn’t she be the dear of Allah?

2. She is the Prophet’s dear:
-----------------------------

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) knows her as a part
of his body and soul, as he says,

<p dir="rtl">
بضعة منه و روحة اللذي بين جنبيه
</p>

In the age of Ignorance and the hard times of his Prophethood, she was
as a mother to her father in Mecca. She cleansed the thorns and dust
that the people had thrown over the head of the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his descendants) with her little hands and soothed him.
Sometimes, she would cry for his loneliness and caressed for his beaten
body.

She was her father’s consular at the time of Hijra, she was so dear for
him in Medina that Ayesheh stated, “There was no one dearer than Fatima
(peace be upon her) to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants); he attended her house every day and asked about her mood
repeatedly. When he was setting for trips, Fatima (peace be upon her)
was the last one, visited at the time of departure by him, and at the
time of arrival, Fatima (peace be upon her) was the first one, visited”.

Owing to her dignity and action, purity and sincerity, she reached to a
rank that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) stated, “
ابوهافداها ”*[May his father be sacrificed to her].*

Once, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) saw Ali and
Fatima (peace be upon them), grinding wheat. He asked, “who gives her
place to me to turn the mill?” Ali said to Fatima (a.s), “rise, ‘cause
you are tired?” and then the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) sat on her place and continued her job.

Even on his point of death, she was closest to the Prophet (peace be
upon him and his descendants). The Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) whispered in her ear, “Dear Fatima, sit beside me, and
recite Quran”. Yes, the whispers and Quran recitation of Fatima (peace
be upon her) could sooth the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants).

3. She is Ali’s wife:
---------------------

As stated before, if there was no Fatima (peace be upon her), there
would be no one deserving to be her husband. Her marriage was determined
by the Word of Revelation. She was a wife, kind and fidle, and the
perfect symbol ofلتسكنو ايها; confidant with her husband…

She never shattered her family estate under the pretext of ornament and
did not make the life bitter for her husband for the false worldly
allure.

They had a house, apparently made of clay; a house, void of ornaments,
but full of purity, sincerity, faith, piety, and chastity. Their dishes
consisted of wooden and earthen bowls, but their soul bowls were full of
grandeur and overfilled with cordiality and affection. Their bed clothes
were shorter than their height, but they were full of faith, sympathy,
unanimity, purity, and understanding.


