Fatima (a.s), the Cause of Continuation of the Prophetic Mission:
=================================================================

It is her clean and pure womb that can be the source of grace and the
origin of light and the originator of eleven clean offspring, who are
the Prophet’s successors and continuance of the Prophetic mission from
generation to generation.

It was not haphazard that the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) knew Fatima’s wrath his wrath and her torment or
satisfaction his torment or satisfaction. He said, “those, who make
Fatima (peace be upon her) happy, have made me happy, and those who
tease her, have in fact teased me.”

Yes, she was the continuance of the Prophetic mission, and made any kind
of endeavor to promote the Islamic teachings along with Ali (peace be
upon him). As a trustful trustee, she went to the companions’ houses at
night and delivered them an ultimatum. She explained them that Ali is
with right, and right is with Ali (peace be upon him), and if they do
not adapt it, they must answer back to Allah. She wanted the people to
know that what a big crime they would commit if they negate Ali’s (a.s)
right, and what undesired future they would expect.

Fatima (peace be upon her) is the continuance of the Prophetic mission.
She is Ali’s witness and assistance. She confirms his speeches, and
tried to prove his claims, and in this way, she is not afraid of the
door stroke, causing damages on her body, and as a result miscarriage.
Even the enemy’s whips cannot stop her from defending Ali; the martyrdom
and death in Allah’s way cannot prevent her from continuing the
Prophetic mission.

She is the continuance of the Prophetic mission, because she has managed
to rear a generation that were the preservers of the religion the
Karbala mission, that was the continuance of the Prophetic mission.

She is the continuance of the Prophetic mission, because Imamate, the
continuation of Prophethood, belongs to her generation, and Imam Mahdi
(may God hasten his reappearance), who will defend Fatima’s purpose will
rise to revive Islam.

How did this way of Prophetic mission continue and what happened to her
offspring, who were the followers of the Prophet and Ali (peace be upon
him)? Prison, torture, homelessness, banishment, stroke of sword,
poison, separation from dynasty and children were some of the hardships
they suffered in the way to achieve their holy end.


