Fatima (a.s), the Sample of Deconstruction:
===========================================

The role of Fatima (peace be upon her) in women’s revival was fabulous.
She is the sample of deconstruction of the misleading customs, which
were prevalent among the people in the society and had captured their
hearts.

She was the practical sample of laws, through which the Prophet (peace
be upon him and his descendants) managed to apply the Islamic principles
and programs.

Like the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants), Fatima (peace
be upon her) tried to instruct the parents how to revere and love their
daughters. While the people buried their daughters alive, the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his descendants) kissed Fatima (peace be upon
her) and said,” daughter is Allah’s gift.” When she was a child, the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) sat her on his knees,
and through this action wanted the people to take lesson.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) should show the high
position of women and how they should be viewed in Islamic ideology
through her method. Kissing Fatima’s hand is the symbol of campaign and
rebellion against the society viewpoint. It is a revolution against
burying girls alive, teaches us indirectly that wOmmen as the gift of
Allah must be revered and not heated.

The girls and wOmmen at her era were not believed, and even they were
forced to work hard in the farms. They were not considered as kin; they
were deprived from inheritance, retaliation was completely fulfilled for
them, etc. A woman having some daughters and no son was considered as
barren .

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) through having
Fatima (peace be upon her) proved that having no son does not mean
barrenness as the shortsighted think. On the contrary, she can be the
source of abundant felicity for her own family and relatives.

She was the sample of deconstructing the wrong marriage customs. In that
age, the rich just married to the rich, but she deconstructed this
custom and married to Ali (peace be upon him), her cousin who was poor
and by selling his chain mail had managed to provide the marriage costs.

In fact, if there existed no Fatima (peace be upon her), how these false
customs were deconstructed, and how the real practical samples in the
Prophetic mission were achieved?

If there existed no Fatima, how the complexes, disgrace, irregularity,
making the women’s souls weak, were removed?


