The variety of Fatima’s roles:
==============================

Fatima (peace be upon her) is a woman, but has several crucial roles and
in each role a real sample. She is a woman, the sample of leadership and
grandeur , the one, through fulfilling her roles, has managed to give a
practical face to sOmme aspects of the Prophetic mission.

In achieving her role as a sample, she has got a heavy load over her
shoulders; the motherhood responsibility, caring the people, helping the
poor, administering justice in the society, looking after children,
family management, etc. Expressing all Fatima’s aspects and roles needs
a separate and lengthy book, but whatever can be stated here in brief
consists of:

1. Fatima (peace be upon her) as a Muslim:
------------------------------------------

Before being the Prophet’s daughter, Ali’s wife or the mother of eleven
Imams, she is a Muslim, a worthy Muslim, and before being a woman with
different roles, she is Allah’s servant. She does not forget Him even
for a moment, and never neglect the heavy load of responsibility.

She is a Muslim, who achieves worship and from the other side, fulfills
family duties as well as social duties. And how active, energetic, and
successful she has been in dividing her time and facilities for
achieving her mission. Her nightly vigils , her worship, her essential
social responsibilities, her important political conflicts and campaigns
to stand against injustice in the society, her sense of confidence with
Ali (peace be upon him), and her teachings for women all and all were in
Allah’s way and for His satisfaction.

2. As a Daughter:
-----------------

Fatima (peace be upon her) is a daughter, pure and clean, duteous and
obedient Although she is her father’s dear, she reveres the Divine
position of her father. She calls him” Rasool Allah” that means the
Messenger of Allah, and when she is asked by father about the reason,
she answers, “The holy Quran addresses you as so.”

She is a daughter full of affection so that she was called “Omme Abiha”
that means the mother of her father, because she was very kind towards
her father like a mother to her son.

While the enemy threw dust to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants), she cleansed them by his figure, caressed him as if this
is her mission to soothe to her father, have sympathy towards him, and
delicate her affection as a reaction against the people’s wrath and
oppression.

3. As a Wife:
-------------

Unlike her sisters, she married a poor but illuminated man in order to
deconstruct the inner group marriage (the marriage of the people in the
same level), and more important is that in order to provide the family,
she worked along with her husband.

Despite all pains, Fatima (peace be upon her) is satisfied with herself,
because she does some significant roles in and out of the house through
which she proves the importance of the women in the society.

She is Ali’s company in life struggles, his confidant and his consultant
in life affairs. She helps Ali (peace be upon him) to administer his
right.

She is an ideal wife. Her love towards Ali (peace be upon him) is real;
she loves him for Allah’s sake and pleasure, and in this way, she never
said any discouraging word to Ali (peace be upon him) throughout her
life.

4. As a Mother:
---------------

What kind of mother was she! A sample and unique. What kind of children
did she bring up! What kind of flowers did she produce in her garden!
All sincere and the real obedient to Allah. The children who devoted
themselves for the people and had the responsibility of serving the
religious laws and its revival.

She educated the children, who were the defenders of Islam; the guards
of the sublime ideological values, and are stable in this way. One by
his own peace [Imam Hassan (a.s)] and the other by his bloody revolution
[Imam Hussein (a.s)] watered the Islam tree and made it grow.

Her daughters were well-reared and purposeful, zeineb and Kolthum (a.s)
continued the mission of Imam Hasan and Hossein (a.s). They recorded the
voice of Hossein in the day of Ashora, and in Kufa and Sham (Damascus)
and on the way made the people hear it. Hossein’s martyrdom is completed
by their efforts, and they were the loudspeakers of Hossein’s movement.

5. As a House Manageress:
-------------------------

Although she was the apple of the Prophet’s eyes, and there was no one
nobler than her, she worked in the house and turned the mill so that her
hands had injured.

She had made the house a place of peace so that when there were a lot of
pressure on Ali (peace be upon him) due to sorrow, pains, difficulties,
and disorders, he resorted to the house, hoping that through speaking to
Fatima (peace be upon her), he could be tranquilized.

She kept the house clean, peaceful, and calm, and although nothing is
found for eating, it was overflowing with sincerity and love; her purity
and tenderness was the food of the household and made them satisfied.

At the night of her marriage, she went to Ali’s house along with the
Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants), the latter said to her,
“My daughter, whatever is related to the inner side of the house belongs
to you and whatever is related to out of the house belongs to Ali. Ali
has the responsibility of providing the house economic aspects, and you
have the responsibility of providing the peace and quietness of the
house.”

6. As a Lady of the House:
--------------------------

In the house, there existed a lot of chores; on the other hand, she was
young, and had a number of children while each of them needed care.
Therefore, she must have a fellow-work but not a slave maid. she shared
the chores with her and lent a hand to her. Also, she was not as an
aristocrat to sit and order, but she always gave a hand to her; washed
clothes, cleaned the house, milled the wheat, etc.

Unlike the aristocrats, Fatima (peace be upon her) did not make the maid
do everything and be the cause of the husband’s sensuality and make up
like doll.

The Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) once said to her,
“My daughter, a maid is a human and must be treated as a man”. Her
treatment towards a maid signifies Fatima’s justice that she regardes
the equality with her maid in the house chores.


