Fatima’s Outlook:
=================

Fatima (peace be upon her) is the student of Islamic school. She was
brought up in revelation house and under the supervision of the Prophet
(peace be upon him and his descendants), and even when she married Ali
(peace be upon him), she had a close contact with her father. Her view
towards the world and its aspects is the view of Prophet (peace be upon
him and his descendants). It is as if she has derived all her views from
the Prophet’s.

In the Islamic school, she was Ali’s classmate. They have got the same
views. She was developed under the protection of the Islamic Ideology,
taught by the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants).

It seems difficult to express and study all aspects of Fatima’s outlook,
but whatever based on her practice, her speech, her view, can be stated
includes:

1. Her View on the World:
-------------------------

Fatima’s view on the world is that it is a farm for cultivation. Its
facts and appearance are interconnected, and it has been created by a
Creator. We must love the world, but not absorb in it; it is a means and
not an end. Therefore, approaching the end, one must use the means but
not attach himself to it. According to Fatima (peace be upon her), the
world deserves love, but not attachment.

The world is the scene of action. It is the field of struggle and
effort. The world is a means to make us reach to the otherworldly
felicity.

2. Her View on Wealth:
----------------------

Fatima (peace be upon her) wants property and wealth but not for
acquiring value and credit. She wants it for providing her life and
protecting her honor.

Those who think of money as an end and seek for it all days and nights,
in fact, they have got a complex, and are misleading between means and
end. Whatever is achieved in life is not limited to eating, drinking,
and wearing. Therefore, we’d better do our utmost to gain wealth but
dedicate the rest to our end after satisfying our needs. Fatima (peace
be upon her) never limited herself to wealth and did not think of it as
the end, because according to her view, the abundant wealth in man’s
hand can bring Allah’s pleasure and His affection if he knows how to use
it.

The best wealth is her inner richness and generosity, the hand that pays
sincerely will receive Allah’s pleasure, instead , and Fatima (peace be
upon her) had got such an espirit.

3. Her View on Happiness:
-------------------------

Her view on happiness and felicity is different from others. She doesn’t
see happiness in a doll’s life, luxury, beauty, materialism, decoration,
make-up, etc. because these factors cannot solve man’s problems and
prepare the ground for inner peace and tranquility. They are considered
as worldly things and can be lost through the passage of time and as a
result, involves man in a heart-rending regret.

Any love and adherence to them are wrong, because they will swallow us
in themselves and make us forget our real end and our selves.

The feeling of happiness under the protection of wealth, position, and
property is a plot and a deceit, a plot for the decline of our
character, and a deceit for keeping us negligent of our development and
perfection process. Therefore, we must have another view of happiness.
Fatima (peace be upon her) sees happiness in the eternal moments in
which man finds himself in the way of Allah; the time that he fulfills
Allah’s orders, and obeys the Divine verdicts.

Happiness is in freedom from all bonds and limitations, having captured
our minds, and not in pleasure and fruition. Fatima (peace be upon her)
never spends her lifetime for happiness with the same misconception of
ordinary people, and she is more rational to dissipate her life for
reaching to pleasure and fruition.

Fortunately, Ali (peace be upon him), as her husband, is also not a
person to provide pleasure with negative concept for her, because he
deserves a great value and credit for his life and wife.

4. Her View on Mankind:
-----------------------

She is a responsible and duteous being. She is responsible to develop
her character and elevate her soul, and tries to achieve her aims and
responsibility, and exalt right perfection of mankind, come to people
rescue, make progress, and make the people progress.

According to Fatima (peace be upon her), man is more exalted than he
passes his life in the way of his passion as a means for a shameful
life. Therefore, she tried to elevate her soul.

She was exposed to different exams during her life, in good and bad
conditions, misery and happiness , pains and pleasure. She must endeavor
to show herself as she really is and endeavor as she must be.

5. Her View on Death:
---------------------

She has got another view of death. She thinks of it as a means of
transfer from this world to the next as well as a door to happiness and
prosperity.

She knows that everything in this world is temporary, even its light,
its darkness, its pleasure, and its groan. The time when death arrives
and Doomsday occurs, everything will be clear; the people are called to
account, and man is put in “Dar Ul-Gharar”; the place of stability.

She is not frightened of death. And at the time of the Prophet’s death
when he sees Fatima’s great love towards himself, he feels he must
console her only; therefore, he puts his head into her ears and says,
“You are the first person that will join me after my departure”. And
then, Fatima (peace be upon her) not only does not get sad, but also
happy. Yes, the news of death is joyful for her, because she knows that
there is prosperity, comfort, and glory to those who have achieved good
deeds in this world. She knows that even death for criminals is a bless
due to the fact that it prevents them from more crimes and keeps them
away from the abyss of adversity.


