Fatima’s Faith and Worship:
===========================

According to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants), belief
to Allah was so penetrated in her nature and heart that she neglected
all things at the time worshipping Allah. And under the protection of
Allah’s recognition, she believed in Him and was proud of having
relationship with Him.

The love towards Allah has so penetrated in her soul that she did not
have any repose. In all times and situations, her deeds showed clearly
her servitude to Allah through her treatment, praise to Allah, and way
of life. Her ultimate attraction is towards the Divinity.

She worships Allah but not as to go to a corner, fleeing from the
society and the people, and it does not mean that she stops her duties
and social mission, but she resists against her ego, and, as a result,
finds a new character.

Fatima’s motto is

<p dir="rtl">
اغير الله اتخذوا اوليا فاطرالسموات والارض
</p>

*Can I choose another Lord except Allah, who is the creator of the skies
and the earth? No, it seems impossible.*

But Allah is her guardian, and that is He, who guardians the pious and
competent people. When an opportunity raised, she started to praise and
worship Allah. And that is a cause not only for her development and
perfection, but also for helping the people to be kept in safety and
purity.

Imam Hassan (a.s) remembers his childhood and says,” I saw my mother
worshiping and praying every night and always praying for people.” I
asked her, “Mother, why you do not first pray for us as your children?”
she answered, “My son, first neighbors, then house”. الجار ثم الدار

All her deeds were in the direction of the Divine will, and all her
deeds were considered as worship: her work, life, housekeeping, taking
care of children, helping the poor, etc. are all in Allah’s way and for
Allah’s pleasure.


