Fatima’s Psychic Mind:
======================

Fatima (peace be upon her) had got psychic mind that have made everybody
astonished, and we do not know it in anybody. Her character is
harmonious and moderate, and her natural aspects are concordant and
excellently sublime. She hears by all her nature and sees by all her
nature. She tries to submit herself to Allah, and resist against all
things that want to make her far from Allah. All her attention is
directed to Him, and all her care and efforts are for His satisfaction.
On the contrary, she does not care about other phenomena which are
valueless and void.

Introducing and describing all her psychic mind in brief seems
impossible. Therefore, whatever makes her as a sample includes:

1. The Elevation of Fatima’s Soul:
----------------------------------

Fatima (peace be upon her) has got an elevated soul. Therefore, she is
Ali’s confidant and consolleur.

Her elevation of soul is so that she abandoned herself to luxuries and
allurements of the world, as if she was not an earthly being and related
to this world. The gaudiness and allurements could not catch her eyes or
make a tendency in her. Her soul was high-flying so that was not
satisfied except joining to the Infinite, and seeking for His
satisfaction. She was willing to join the Eternity and as a drop, join
the Eternal Ocean.

This signifies her elevation of soul that she does not stop her efforts
in front of all oppressions of the people, taking root from their
ingratitude. She suffered from the transgressions and discrimination,
but not to reserve her own right but to think of the people’s
prosperity. Even she was not inclined to have any tomb, and because of
having purpose, she asked Ali (peace be upon him) to be buried at night
so that her grave not be known.

2. Fatima’s Loneliness:
-----------------------

The greatness of Fatima’s soul and its culmination caused her
loneliness. This sense of loneliness was in each great character who has
got high and great thoughts, and took Mohammed (peace be upon him and
his descendants) to Hara Cave, Ali (peace be upon him) to the
palm-grove, and Fatima (peace be upon her) to Beit ul-Ahzan (the house
of cry). To be great is to be misunderstood.

Fatima (peace be upon her) was lonely, but not due to the fact that she
was fleeing from the society and her social duties, but resorting to a
private place, she wanted to be far from the social uproar and dive into
the depth of her great soul, searching for the undiscovered aspects of
her soul.

She was lonely from the beginning. She was born at the time when
unbelief and idolatry had filled everywhere, and indecency was raging
everywhere. She believed in monoism and seemed strange in her own area
and time; thus, she did not find any confidant and was lonely in her own
society. Even today, despite her grandeur, among women society, she is
strange and lonely, as she was in her own time. Who is her own confidant
and fellow, and who is her follower?

3. Fatima’s Stout Heart:
------------------------

She is a woman full of affection and in search of the end that is
Allah’s pleasure. She is resistant in the Divine way and energetic to
achieve her end.

When Ohod battle was terminated, the people turned back to Medina. The
Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) also turned back home
but with an injured and bloody face. He gave his bloody sword to Fatima
(peace be upon her) to wash, and afterward, Fatima (peace be upon her),
personally, washed her father’s injured face. Ali (peace be upon him)
poured water, and Fatima (peace be upon her) washed the blood from the
Prophet’s face away.

This stout heart existed in Fatima (peace be upon her) since childhood.
When her mother, Khadijeh, was laying dying, said to Fatima (peace be
upon her), “My daughter! After me, you will face so many problems. Your
sisters will live in their houses comfortably, but you?!”

Although being a child, Fatima (peace be upon her) answered
encouragingly, “Mother, do not worry, and be sure that Fatima (peace be
upon her) will do her utmost to surmount the problems.

4. The Speed of Fatima’s Understanding:
---------------------------------------

Fatima (peace be upon her) has got a supernatural talent as if she
understands everything with a gesture. Her sensitivity and soul is so
that she understands everything with a glance of her father. Once, her
father went to see Fatima (peace be upon her) and saw her silver
bracelet. He turned back without saying a word. Immediately, she gave it
to Salman to take it to the mosque to be dedicated to the poor for
Allah’s sake. Later, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants)
said to her “ابوهافداها “ that means her father be sacrificed for her.
Another time, the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants)
observed a curtain at the door of her house and turned without
greetings. Soon, she gave it to the Prophet (peace be upon him and his
descendants) to be the poor clothes.

This is the fast understanding, which makes the teacher’s duty easier
and accelerates the development of learning. She comprehends the phrases
by a word, and books by a sentence, and that is the teacher’s honor,
i.e. the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants).


