Fatima (a.s) in Relationship with Ali (peace be upon him):
==========================================================

She is the wife of the greatest man in the history, and has got a great
spiritual power to support him; to be his confidant, his consolleur, and
the supporter of his esteem, dignity, and position. When Ali (peace be
upon him) was going to jihad, it was she who brought his body armor, and
after it, she washed the blood away from his sword. When Ali (peace be
upon him) lost patience by the harassment and tortures of some ignorant
people, she tried to soothe him and when Imam raised an objection
against the Caliphs to prove his truthfulness and supremacy over them,
it was Fatima (peace be upon her), who went to the houses of the
Prophet’s disciples, administered for justice, and bore witness to Ali’s
truthfulness.

She was Ali’s confidant in all affairs and at all times; in happiness,
in sorrow, in anxiety, in poverty, in suffering. She never groaned,
expressed weakness or gave up.

She did her utmost to make the minds concentrate on the facts and the
incidents in which a certain and eternal right was disregarded by the
Islamic Omma. She then collected the Mohajerin (the Emigrants) and Ansar
(the Helpers) women and started to support Ali’s rightfulness in this
way:

“I do not know which one of Ali’s attributes was indecent that they left
him alone. I swear to Allah, it was caused by Ali’s sharp sword, firm
steps, and his strict treatment in executing justice. But by Allah, they
sustained losses. If Ali achieved Caliphate, the people would not get
any pains or oppressions. He would make them enter the world of justice
and knowledge and glut them completely”.

In this regard, Fatima’s relationship with Ali (peace be upon him) is
not limited to conjugal relationship, but wider, deeper, and further
than what other people possess in the society. It is a relationship,
cordial in defending the human rank and honor of her husband, causing
the defense of the benefits of human society.


