Fatima’s Private Life:
======================

Fatima (peace be upon her) should not be taken as a simple-minded woman,
being limited, and she could not be forced to lead a special kind of
life; it must be stated that she is the daughter of Prophet (peace be
upon him and his descendants) and one the noblest (people). Besides, her
private life based on simplicity, purity, sincerity, affection,
motivation, activity, and revolution is sample. Some aspects of her life
are described as follows:

1. Life Simplicity and Purity:
------------------------------

Her life was simple and delightful. this sense of delight was because of
her life simplicity and purity.

She had no similarity with women, seeking for luxury and allurements.
She took inspiration from Islamic School, propagating simplicity and
purity. She just tried to satisfy her natural wants and it should be
programmed well enough, but not to confine herself to materialism and
the world beauty. She was similar to the Prophet (peace be upon him and
his descendants) in deeds and manners, who always said:“الفقرفخري” to
absolutely be free of wants. Wealth and property were not regarded as an
end not to be the means, stealing her heart and faith and capturing her
character and sublimity.

This ordinary way of life was not because of poverty, but her inner
riches. Because there was no difference in her way of life when she had
Fadak and when it was usurped. The Fadak income was great, but there was
no change in her way of life and behavior and did not lose the
simplicity and purity of her life.

2. Her House:
-------------

She had got a house, small and made of clay, simple and without
decoration, and it was just worthy to be a shade for protecting her from
the sun rays and a roof for protecting her from the rain. Although Ali
(peace be upon him) was poor, he did not change his small house when he
got Fadak. Allah’s name was always alive in their house, and their
hearts were heated by His memory. There existed a dynamic education in
it. The persons educated there, were dynamic, revolutionary, and the
real fond of the peoples’ rights and Islam.

There existed indigence in this house, but it was enriched by affection
and Allah’s blessings. The light and heat of faith had made up for its
coldness. The family relationships were strong in it, and all its
members were living there based on a firm principle.

3. Her Ornaments:
-----------------

The house was void of any kind of ornaments, having the tinge of luxury.
All things there, were limited to some mattresses, pillows, plates, and
mat.

Ali and Fatima (peace be upon them) had got a bed sheet so short that
their feet were out from that when they covered their heads.

In this house, there existed no additional, luxurious or expensive
ornaments. On the contrary, it was a house, replete of emotion and
faith, love and purity, liberty and honor, responsibility and justice.

4. Her Trousseaus:
------------------

Although Fatima (peace be upon her) was a high rank woman in Islam, her
marriage portion was according to the common custom (about 500 Dirham),
and her trousseaus was few. When she decided to marry Ali (peace be upon
him), all the trousseaus, provided for this glorious marriage ceremony,
consisted of: a canvas shirt, a wool scarf, a veil, a bed, two
mattresses, one made of linen and the other of date-palm fiber, four
pillows of ewe skin, a curtain of camel wool, a mat of desert leaves, a
metal bowl, a leathern bottle, a wooden bowl, a leathern vessel, two
pitchers, a mud-plate, and two silver bracelets.

When observing Fatima’s simple trousseaus, the Prophet (peace be upon
him and his descendants) got delighted and said, “O, Allah, make the
life auspicious to those who have this status and earthen dishes.”

All Fatima’s house furniture were limited to whatever was stated. During
her lifetime, she not only did not add anything more to her furniture,
but also dedicated some part of it for Allah’s pleasure, such as the
silver bracelets, the door curtain, etc. And even sOmmetimes, she sold
sOmme of her furniture to buy sOmme wheat, make it floor, knead it, make
some bread, and dedicate it to the poor for Allah’s pleasure.


