Fatima’s Social Responsibilities:
=================================

Fatima (peace be upon her) was a responsible and duteous woman,
believing that she was not able to think of herself alone and lead a
life for her own sake, because Islamic Omma belongs to all and regards
all people as the members of one body.

<p dir="rtl">
“ كنتم خيرامة أخرجت للناس”
</p>

She had got this strong sense of responsibility since childhood and had
been her father’s confidant when she was only five or six. She lent her
mother a hand in house works, and when she grew up, she felt sympathetic
towards all the people and was willing to solve their problems.

1. She was parallel with people:
--------------------------------

Why Fatima (peace be upon her) was slapped in the face? Why the enemy
whipped her? Was she meant to promote her husband’s position? Was she
meant to build up a reputation for herself? Wasn’t she the daughter of
the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants)? Had she done
anything to abuse this honor and title?

The history has recorded that all Fatima’s effort and anxiety, and all
her activities were for the sake of the people. She was of the opinion
that by the usurpation of Ali’s right, the right of the people keeping
Ali (peace be upon him) away from the caliphate is an oppression to the
humanity. Due to this fact, she is ready to tolerate all pains so as to
stop occurring such oppression.

Observing the necklace in Fatima’s neck, the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his descendants) pointed out to her by his look that there were more
vital necessities in the society that must be regarded. Fatima (peace be
upon her) opened the necklace and sent it to her father. The father then
said, “Dear Fatima! You are of me. We must attend to the people’s
pains”. Then, he spent it to ameliorated the life of the poor through
selling it. She thinks of the people so that she would not like anybody
to deceive the Omma through her martyrdom and prove his leadership
through attending her funeral ceremony and carrying her coffin.

2. She is in Charge of the Women Leadership:
--------------------------------------------

Before the women be abused or taken as a means, Fatima (peace be upon
her) endeavored to save them from being a plaything.

She raised an opportunity in which women could set themselves free from
being ignorant and inferior and made her utmost so as to achieve a noble
character for them. She tried to save the lives of the women from
absurdity, not to be a means for the satisfaction of men’s passion, and
not to jeperdise their grandeur and honor.

She taught the women how to obstruct the way of exploitation and be free
by regarding their Quranic and Islamic character. Fatima (peace be upon
her) proved that woman should not be bargained as goods with a heavy
marriage portion. She also proved that marriage just for the
satisfaction of the passion and ambition is a pernicious form of social
life and the cause of collapse of woman’s value.

3. She is a Sample for Women:
-----------------------------

Fatima (peace be upon her) is a sample for all the women at all times,
especially those who are willing to preserve their honor and defend
their purity and piety, since her age to Doomsday.

She is a perfect sample for wOmmen in all aspects of man’s life. She is
the sample and symbol of freedom and is far from impurity and sin,
slavery and captivity. She aimed to teach the people how to elevate
their souls instead of indecency and insipid adornment and; therefore,
managed to attract the hearts through this way. She taught the women
that they could do manly jobs in case of necessity, but have to keep
their eyes pure from the strangers and preserve their purity and
nobility. She also taught them how to rise against the oppression,
usurpation, and injustice. To teach them the aforementioned lessons
practically, Fatima (peace be upon her) tried so much that the flames of
her life light were extinguished. But she never stopped fulfilling her
mission until the end of her life.

4. She is at the Service of the People of Society:
--------------------------------------------------

She was always thinking about the people and their needs before thinking
about herself, and she knew it as a responsibility for herself, and in
this way, she thought of both material and spiritual aspects. She had
devoted her life to them, thinking day and night how to ameliorate the
quality of this service.

She dedicated her wedding dress to the poor at her wedding night and
went to Ali’s house with her old dress.

Like her husband and children, she dedicated her food which they had to
break their fast to the orphan, poor, and captive for three successive
nights as the Prophet (peace be upon him and his descendants) said in
this regard,

<p dir="rtl">
“واغوثاه اهل بيت محمد يموتون من الجوع”.
</p>

Although she knew that there existed no food storage in the house, she
spent the Fadak income for the poor.

She sent her house curtain to her father in order to provide a shirt for
the poor.

Sometimes, she dedicated her share of food to the poor and remained
hungry.

She was worshipping and praying during the night and wished luck and
prosperity for the people first.

Yes, she was a woman, but thought of human beings as the divine prophets
and guardians. Also, she was ruthful and merciful to the believers.

Yes, she should be so, because she is the source of the abundant
blessing, and has learnt the lesson of the philanthropy in the school of
revelation and under the supervision of a professor as Mohammed (a.s),
the father of humanity. She should be benevolent toward people, because
she is under the supervision the one, the holy Quran said about him, “
وما ارسلناك الا رحمة للعالمين”.


