Fatima’s Pains:
===============

Fatima (peace be upon her) did not live according to the norms, accepted
by the society. She always felt a thorn in her eyes and was tormented by
it, as the thorn that her husband felt in his eyes, and that was the
poisonous thorn of the Caliphs’ arrogance.

The human-like bullies tried to belittle her grandeur and sublimity and
did intolerable damages on her soul and body. The torments were diverse
and painful for her. Some of them were:

1. Omma Discrepancy:
--------------------

The discrepancy among Omma took roots from the arrogance of the
chieftains’ of the society. Once, they were living in ignorance,
contempt and disgrace, but it was Mohammed (peace be upon him and his
descendants), who managed to elevate their minds and ranks. Soon after
his demise, they passed everything into oblivion; and as a result, they
weakened the Islam.

Disunity for Islamic Oma was a grief and took root from the Caliphs’
disobedience, which caused the collapse of the regulations, and
jeopardized the life of the newly-established Islam in the days of
Fatima (peace be upon her).

Being in fact the guardian of Islam, she suffered from these threats,
because she was witnessing the devoted efforts of her father, her
husband, and the great men of Islam in vain, and the blood of the
martyrs, futile. Due to this fact, she expected a dark future for Islam.

Fatima (peace be upon her) never complained that why she had got a poor
life, never cried that why she had not got wealth and property, why she
did not live aristocratically, but on the contrary, she felt pity for
the arrogance and self-centredness, causing anxiety and disunion for the
Oma.

2. Injustice Settlement:
------------------------

It was as if the whole devoted efforts of the Prophet (peace be upon him
and his descendants) and the great men of Islam were to promote the
ranks of the sheikhs. It was as if the people devoted themselves so as
to make Abubakr attain Caliphate, and he abandoned it to Omar after
himself. And on the whole, it is as if all the Muslims’ depravity ,
disappointment, holy wars, and conflicts were to attain position and
title for Caliphs.

If only Caliphs had had any privilege over others except illogicality;
if only they were truth seeking, well-intentioned, and well-aware of the
ideological aspects of Islam. But unfortunately, it was not so.

Witnessing how the Caliphs’ sharp claws of arrogance had held the body
and soul of Islam, how the injustice had settled itself in the place of
justice, and how Ali (peace be upon him), the chosen of Allah and His
Messenger, had been removed from his real position irritated Fatima.

Fatima (peace be upon her) was sorrowful on the account that she was
observing Abubakr on the Prophet’s pulpit, and Ali (peace be upon him),
who was indeed the leader, deprived from his right. Although this unjust
settlement had a short life, it was intolerable for Fatima (peace be
upon her) and burnt her heart.

3. People’s Poverty:
--------------------

The material poverty is not only meant here, because it can be curable,
but what about the spiritual, moral, cultural, and ideological poverty?
The people were in the mid of the way to attain their purpose, but the
new policies prevented them from continuation, and put them on the way
of ignorance, unawareness, and collapse again. Because the Caliphs had
themselves nothing to deliver, and their minds could not satisfy the
peoples’ needs. Therefore, the people were kept passive, and even
sometimes it was pretended through imposing their ideas that truth was
what they said.

Besides, she was sorrowful due to the fact that she could observe that a
lot of weakened people had nowhere to resort, and nobody felt
responsibility for them. They had to attach themselves to one of the
poles or blocs to continue their lives, and attachment could endanger
their beliefs and, as a result, Islam.

4. Lack of Confidence:
----------------------

The main problem, originated by the enemy, was that the peoples’
relationship with Ali and Fatima (peace be upon her) was limited. The
society was not in parallel with Ali and Fatima (peace be upon her),
because the people did blindly obey the Caliphs ,and therefore, did not
elevate.

The situation in which the people were put in it signified that their
future were dark. Their purpose was limited to gluttony and
extravagance. Their atmosphere was polluted and pernicious. They were
divested of their rights, and they had no right to complain.

Fatima (peace be upon her) witnessed how the seed, planted today, was
growing. It was as if she could foresee the stroke of the sword, killing
Ali (peace be upon him), in the mosque while praying, could observe
Hasan’s peace treaty for Oma safety, could witness the martyrdom of her
dear son, Hossein and his shout, saying,

<p dir="rtl">
“ هل من ناصر ينصرني”
</p>

*[is there anyone to assist me?].*

She then could see that her generation consisted of the Imams and the
religious leaders were martyred in prisons because of the people’s
short-sightedness as well as the wrong basis, founded in the society by
unjust Caliphs.

5. Other Pains:
---------------

Despite all these pains, Fatima (peace be upon her) tolerated other
pains, related to her personal life. The pain of poverty, the pain of
hunger, the guardianship of her life and home, the pain on her body,
taking root from the strokes of the whip, the pain of her broken side,
the pain of miscarriage, the pain of losing her father, and the pain of
people’s insult to Ali (peace be upon him), that were not considered as
real pains for her.


