The Policies:
=============

Our thinkers follow the pre-thought policies with no shadow of doubt,
but it must be questioned that is the way like that there exist plenty
of thinkers ?

Moreover, there are cases proving that we pave a way without knowing its
result and end. We follow a way, providing us with instantaneous and
today wants, but what is beyond it, is of less significance for us, and
sometimes, we even hope others to pave the way for us, and then, we take
it for granted with no effort and analysis.

We hope to be of one face and nobody conceive us to be a real Jekyll and
Hyde. If we claim to be Muslims, we’d better not to blasphemize under
the name of Islam; and at last, we should not pass life in indifference
when we assume any responsibility. If we lay greetings aside, it must be
admitted that our nature is not so well as we think.

Though rejecting oppression, we are oppressed, and though rejecting
exploitation, we are exploited. There exist a lot of internal and
external cases of irregularity in us, but we have a false feeling of
prosperity. Our affairs are all in disorder, but, on the other hand, we
pretend order.

There exist a lot of responsibilities over us and our mothers and
women’s shoulders, and egligence in their fulfillment will result in
both Divine punishment and earthly losses. We suppose all our affairs
are achieved successfully with a revolutionary appearance, but this is
not the case. We do not deny that a part of the long way has been paved,
but other steps and stages have to be taken.

We have naturally been brought up optimistic and superficial, supposing
that by making a skeleton, we have built a house and can settle in it-
negligent that there is no possibility of living in it at ease until it
is not completed.


