E - book Afterword
==================

CIVILIZATIONAL DIALOGUE AND THE ISLAMIC WORLD
=============================================

When discussing civilizational dialogue, it is necessary first of all to
ask what we mean by civilization. For several centuries in the West, the
power and glitter of the world dominated by modern civilization had made
the very term civilization synonymous with modern Western civilization
and all the other civilizations were considered as stages in the
development of this particular civilization, which the Encyclopedists
called la civilization. For a long time intellectual discourse in the
West had reduced the use of the term civilization to the singular and
since the nineteenth century many a modernized Asian and African also
surrendered to this Western view. But despite the overwhelming power of
Western civilization, which itself came into being as a result of
rebellion against the Christian civilization of the European Middle
Ages, the other civilizations, although weakened in many ways, did not
die out. And now, at the beginning of a new Christian century and
millennium, there is again talk of civilizations in the plural, despite
the aggressive spread to the farthest corners of the earth of global
consumerism and with it some of the shallowest aspects of Western
popular culture. No, the other civilizations have not died out, and
some, especially the Islamic, are in fact seeking to revive themselves.
It is therefore necessary to turn to the traditional understanding of
the very concept of civilization, an understanding which enjoyed a
remarkable universality among various traditional human collectivities
which have occupied the world over the millennia, before dealing with
the contemporary situation.

The term civilization is related to the word civitas or city in European
languages, civitas itself being derived from the Greek root kei which
means to lie outstretched. “A city is thus a ‘lair,’ in which the
citizen ‘makes his bed’ on which he must lie.”1 The question then arises
as to who occupies this city. The Sanskrit word for city, pur, reveals
the answer, for it is also the root of the word purusa or Universal Man
(al-insan al-kamil) of Islamic metaphysics. The dweller of the ideal
city is purusa who is, according to the Upanishads “the citizen in every
city,”2 or as Philo has said, going even further, “As for
lordship*(kyrios)* , God is the only citizen.”3 This city which is at
once cosmic, social, and microcosmic, is the origin of the traditional
understanding of civilization.

This city at once transcends the human order and penetrates into the
traditional civilizations but in different forms and according to the
religious norms which are the foundations of all civilizations. All the
realities that comprise the life of a tradition are contained in the
particular “City of God” whose manifestation on earth has created the
particular civilization in question. Moreover, each human being contains
this “City” within himself and is able to realize it if he or she is
able to perfect himself or herself spiritually. Traditionally speaking,
the truly civilized man is one who has realized this civitas Dei within
himself and gained the inner vision with which he is able to realize
that the only master of this city is the Immortal

Spirit within and not his rebellious ego. Without this realization, man
lives in barbarism even if he invents the fanciest of gadgets.

From another point of view, it might be said that every traditional
civilization is dominated by a “Presiding Idea,”4 or a heavenly given
dispensation whose spirit guides that civilization and whose form
determines its particular formal structure in conjunction with the
ethnic genius of the people destined to create and be members of that
civilization.

That “Presiding Idea” may also be identified with religion in its most
universal sense (al-din in Arabic). A traditional civilization remains
always aware of this at once transcendent and immanent reality. The
people of such a civilization have always lived in a space which is like
the space of a circle with an immutable Supreme Center and have
experienced time always in relation to the Origin, which is also their
End, that is, the alpha and omega of their existence.5 Traditional
civilizations never lost site of either the Center or the Origin.6

This common vision does not of course mean that the “Presiding Idea” is
the same in every traditional civilization, despite the inner unity that
binds them together. As Marco Pallis writes, “The fact is that every
civilization that can be called authentic is endowed with a principle of
unity peculiar to itself, which is reflected in varying degrees, in all
the institutions of the civilization in question. By a principle of
unity is meant a predominant idea, corresponding to a given aspect of
the truth, which has been recipient of particular emphasis and for the
expression of which, if one may so put it, that civilization shows a
peculiar ‘genius.’”7

The inner or transcendent unity to which we have referred does not in
any way annul the reality of the principle of unity peculiar to each
traditional civilization. Consequently, as traditionally understood,
there are multiple civilizations, each with its own particular formal
order and “mandate from Heaven” yet with remarkably similar perspectives
on the nature of reality resulting from the universal truths which
through different forms have created, presided over, and sustained
traditional civilizations over the ages.8

In contrast to all that has been said, modern civilization, which was
created in the West on the basis and also in opposition to many of the
basic tenets of Latin Christian civilization but which has now spread to
all the four corners of the globe, is based on the absolutization of
terrestrial man, on a Promethean individualism, rationalism, and
humanism. For the most part it has substituted the kingdom of man for
the kingdom of God.9 It no longer possesses a transcendent “Presiding
Idea” as did all traditional civilizations and the ethical and spiritual
values that are present in it are the heritage of the Christian
civilization which it has sought to supplant. In fact, strictly
speaking, one cannot speak of modern Western civilization as a new
civilization.

Rather, it is both a continuation of and reaction against Western
Christian civilization. From the traditional point of view in the
present day situation all civilizations have decayed and fallen from
their ideal except that the Oriental civilizations began to decay in a
passive way during the past few centuries and Western civilization in an
active way since the Renaissance.10

More recently, a certain type of decadence associated with Asia and
Africa in modern times is now beginning to appear in the West and that
active decay in the form of deviation from traditional norms in
non-Western civilizations. This reality must be considered in any
serious civilizational dialogue.

Today, we see on the globe several major and a few smaller civilizations
including the Western, the Eastern European and Russian, the Islamic,
the Indian, the Chinese and Japanese, the black African, and the various
remnants of indigenous civilizations and cultures. Some like Samuel
Huntington would count South America as a civilization separate from the
Western and the Japanese as a civilization distinct from the Chinese.11
There are also many sub-sets within each of these civilizations
distinguished by ethnicity, nationalism, various religious
interpretations, languages and other factors. Nevertheless, the reality
of these civilizations can hardly be doubted.

There are today no intact traditional civilizations. Nevertheless, there
is a major difference between modern Western civilization and the others
in that it is this civilization which represents most of all modernism
and is still powerful enough to project its world view and values upon
other civilizations, whereas the reverse is not true. If there had been
a movement to carry out civilizational dialogue six centuries ago, the
situation would have been very different.

Each civilization would have then been based on that “Presiding Idea”
which offered remarkable similarities with the “Presiding Idea” of
another civilization despite obvious differences. If they were to
discuss the nature and goal of human life, there would be remarkable
resemblances.

When one reads the list of basic virtues in Confucianism and
Neo-Confucianism, it is as if one were reading an Islamic text on
ethics. And most important of all they would all agree that all external
reality of the cosmos and of man is derived from and based upon an
Ultimate Reality, which  is both beyond and within all things. They
would have little difficulty understanding each other on the
metaphysical level, whether they were speaking of Brahman, Atman, the
One, Ahura mazda, Deus,*Allah* or for that matter nirvana.12

Such of course is not the case of modern Western civilization in which
there are still Christian and Jewish elements but in which a secularist
and scientistic discourse dominates much of public life as well as
philosophy, science, and the arts. Today civilizational dialogue means
on the one hand dialogue between traditional civilizations weakened and
modernized to various degrees and between each of those civilizations
and the modern and post-modern Western civilization in which there still
exist important religious and spiritual elements but which is also the
driving force behind all the ideas and ideals which seek to destroy the
very foundations of the still existing albeit weakened traditional
civilizations.

To carry out serious dialogue under these difficult conditions, one must
first of all remember that all the civilizations of which we have
knowledge, those still living and those which have perished, have been
created by a religion or the “Presiding Idea” already mentioned. Chinese
civilization is

based on Confucianism and Taoism, Western civilization on Christianity,
Islamic civilization on Islam -

as Roman civilization was based on the Roman religion and Egyptian
civilization on the Egyptian religion. This does not mean that a
civilization does not borrow from what came before it, but a new
dispensation from Heaven integrates various elements of what went before
into a new unity reflecting its own spiritual genius. The Christian
civilization of Europe certainly owes much to Greece and Rome but is not
simply their continuation. There is nothing more different from a Roman
temple than a Romanesque Church or from a Greek temple a Byzantine
Church. It is the new spirit blown by a new religion upon the “material”
and “earthly” elements to which it is sent that creates a civilization
with its own distinct social structure, ethical norms, sciences, and the
arts.

Because of this centrality of religion in the creation of each
civilization, understanding between religions, which are the sources of
values and ideals of these civilizations, and accord between religions
lie at the heart of civilizational dialogue if this dialogue is also to
lead to mutual respect and understanding. It is here that the
traditional perspective of perennial philosophy, which sees an inner
truth that unites the religions on the supra-formal and universal level
without in any way violating the sanctity of their particular formal
structures, becomes so important in the current discussion about
civilizational dialogue. If this dialogue is to result in understanding,
one must first of all accept what Frithjof Schuon has called “the
transcendent unity of religions”13 and realize that despite differences
of a formal order all authentic spiritual paths “lead to the same
summit.”14 Nothing is more important for civilizational dialogue than a
common understanding of first principles even between non-Western
civilizations and the West where many of these principles have been
discarded by the dominating paradigm but nevertheless survive not only
among Jews and Christians, but even to a large extent among those who
have turned their back consciously or unconsciously upon the religion of
their ancestors.

\*

\* \*

It is not accidental that at the dawn of this new millennium the call
for civilizational dialogue rather than clash should come from the
Islamic world, more specifically from Sayyid Muhammad Khatami, the
president of the Islamic Republic of Iran, a land which has been one of
the major foci of Islamic civilization during the past thirteen
centuries and before that period the heart of a major empire and
civilization. The Islamic world has always been aware of itself as a
unified civilization bound together by Islam as both religion, in the
ordinary sense of the term, and a complete way of life. The Islamic
world stretched form the very first century of its existence form the
heart of France to the borders of China. It created a civilizationally
unified world with two distinct zones, the Arabic and the Iranic or
Persianate, to which later zones were added. It contained within itself
such diverse ethnic groups as Arabic, Iranian, Turkic, Indian, Malay,
Black African, European, and even Chinese. It was witness to not only
much greater geographical and climatic difference than Western European
civilization, but also a greater

diversity of ethnicities and languages. The main language of Western
Christendom was Latin and all the European languages save for very small
linguistic groups belong to a single family whereas the three main
languages of the Islamic world, namely, Arabic, Persian, and Turkish
belong to three totally different families of languages. Yet, very early
in its history, Islam had a powerful awareness of itself as a distinct
civilization while it integrated many elements of previous civilizations
especially in the domain of the arts and sciences into its universe.

Classical Islamic historians even wrote about the religious and
philosophical as well as historical significance of other civilizations,
as we see in the works of al-Tabari, al-Mas‘udi and the like. One of
them, Ibn Khaldun, was the father of what one might call civilizational
studies and wrote with exceptional depth about the rise, continuity, and
decline of civilizations.15 Another major Islamic historian, Rashid
al-Din Fadl-*Allah* , was the author of the first universal history ever
written, a work which dealt with the Franks and the Chinese and nearly
everyone in between.16 In fact, Islamic civilization was the only one
before modern times to have had experience of nearly every other major
civilization of the world. It inherited much of the learning, the
sciences and philosophy and the technology of ancient Egypt, the
Mesopotamian civilizations, ancient Greece, ancient Persia, and to some
extent Rome, India and even China, and on the basis of what it had
inherited created the vast traditions of Islamic science and philosophy
which also influenced the West deeply.17 It also learned many ancient
artistic and architectural techniques into which it breathed the spirit
of the Islamic revelation, thereby creating a very distinct art whose
influence is to be seen to this day in South and Central America in the
form of mudejar art. And once it came into existence, Islamic
civilization had direct contact with and experience of the Chinese and
Indian civilizations in the East, the Byzantine and Western Christian
worlds in the West and the Black African world to the South, not to
speak of Mesopotamia, Egypt, and Persia which became part of the Islamic
world. In contrast to the West where experience of other civilizations,
except for the Islamic, was combined with the advent of modernism, Islam
had full awareness of many other civilizations and also religions before
modern times. For a thousand years it saw itself as both the central and
the most powerful of all civilizations, hence the extreme shock of the
realization of its weakness before the modern West brought home to the
heartland of the Islamic world with the Napoleonic conquest of Egypt in
1798, combined with the sudden weakness and strings of defeat of the
Ottomans in Europe as well as the destruction of Muslim power in India
by the British.

From the eighteenth century, Islamic civilization began to weaken to
various degrees in different areas. Much of the Islamic world became
colonized by various European powers, chief among them the British, the
French, the Dutch, and the Russians. From the nineteenth century onward
modernized Muslims, seeking to emulate the West with the hope of gaining
power and therefore making themselves independent, began to weaken
Islamic civilization in the name of trying to save it and this process
continued to accelerate up to the end of the first half of the twentieth

century. At first there was much resistance, but governmental
authorities, controlled by either colonial powers or modernized Muslims
who did their bidding, usually won the day. Islamic dress began to
change in favor of Western dress, as did art, architecture and city
planning.

Western style educational systems were established everywhere to
introduce Western science and learning at the expense of Islamic ones.
Even laws, which had been that of the*Shari‘ah* or Divine Law based on
the Quran and the traditions*(Hadith)* of the Prophet of Islam, were
changed in many lands in favor of Western legal codes. Many thought that
soon nothing would be left of Islamic civilization.

Yet, despite the unbelievable havoc brought about in nearly every
domain, Islamic civilization did not die out completely because the
religion of Islam which had created it was still very strong. From the
1950s onward, along with the revival of Islamic thought and rejection by
many newly educated Muslims of the complete and blind imitation of the
West, which itself was beginning to experience a major crisis in the
domain of values, gradually some aspects of Islamic civilization began
to be renewed. This process is still very much going on and, because it
seeks to re-assert the Islamic identity of the Islamic world rather than
simply to emulate a West no longer completely certain of where it is
going itself, it is often construed as being anti-Western. For obvious
political reasons, opposition to Western “interests” in the Islamic
world is often interpreted as being opposition to the West itself,
whereas the current revival of things Islamic makes no claim whatsoever
about the West’s right to do what it wants in its own world. But because
the West has “interests” in various Islamic countries which it wants to
protect and it is still more powerful and dominant than all non-Western
civilizations, some of these attempts at self-assertion by Muslims take
extreme forms, often using Western ideologies to combat the West. In
many places they find no other channel for the achievement of their
goals, which should normally be through peaceful means.

But these extremist actions, no matter how much aggrandized in the
Western media, are secondary factors compared to the larger reality of
the desire of Islamic civilization to re-assert its own identity and
preserve its own religious and cultural ethos even under the
unprecedented pressures that it faces. The vast majority of Muslims have
no desire to have clashes with other civilizations nor wish to have
“interests” in the Gulf of Mexico or the English Channel, which would
then need to be protected through clashes. In fact where there are
clashes in the Islamic world today, such as in Palestine, Kashmir, or
Chechnya, it is always the question of Muslims seeking to protect their
rights, freedoms, or land that has either been taken away or is being
threatened, and not to conquer others and then try by force to rule over
them.

\*

\* \*

There are numerous factors today which oppose dialogue and understanding
between civilizations and even within civilizations. There are economic
interests, ethnic and nationalistic assertions, and even the missionary
zeal of imposing ones views on others by either political or

economic means. But there are also forces which seek to heal rifts
bothwithin each civilization and among civilizations, realizing that
without accord with other men and with God’s creation there is no future
for human life on earth.

Man’s future seems to hinge between clash or dialogue of civilizations.
Men and women of good will, whether Jewish, Christian, or Muslim, Hindu
or Buddhist, or even some outwardly agnostic now realize that there is
no way for the human species to survive save through dialogue and accord
even with those with whom we disagree on principles.

In the present context there must first of all be a civilizational
dialogue between members of what remains of the traditional
civilizations on the basis of the unity of that transcendent Truth which
binds them together. Then there must be an accord on the basis of mutual
respect and the acceptance of the thesis of agreeing to disagree even
with those who do not accept the traditional principles. If an accord
could be created between the religions including those in the West where
secularism has become victorious in so many domains, civilizational
dialogue leading to understanding would become much more facilitated.
And then on the basis of that mutual understanding a greater accord
could be created at least on the level of action between those who
accept a transcendent Principle and an ultimate goal of human life
beyond the purely mundane and earthly and those who do not.

Every civilization today, each in its own way, is faced with an
unprecedented crisis. There are wars, the breakdown of social order, the
weakening of ethical norms, and most ominously the destruction of the
natural environment for which all the civilizations are to blame. Each
civilization should be given the freedom based on mutual respect to turn
its attention to its own spiritual, intellectual and social problems.
And on the basis of mutual respect various civilizations must be able to
join hands in facing global problems such as the environmental crisis or
the spread of new bio-technologies without consideration of their
ethical consequences. These problems recognize no national or
civilizational boundaries and only dialogue and accord and not clash or
brutal military or economic force can hope to confront and solve them.

In this complicated process upon whose success depends the future of
humanity, Islam and Islamic civilization are destined to play a central
role. Islam is the last major religion of this cycle of human history
and the Quran speaks explicitly of the veracity of religions sent to
mankind before Islam. As for Islamic civilization occupying the middle
belt of the world, by geography as well as by its historical experience,
it is suited in every way to carry out civilizational dialogue with
various civilizations and be itself a bridge between East and West,
reflecting the light of that blessed olive tree to which the Quran
refers as being neither of the East nor of the West as it is also the
message of surrender to the Lord Who is the Lord of all the Easts and
all the Wests.

***Seyyed Hossein Nasr***

Notes of Epilogue
-----------------

1 A. K. Coomaraswamy, “What is Civilization?,” Ipswich, Golgonooza
Press, [^1989]:

In Islamic languages, the terms for civilization are also related to the
city as traditionally understood. In Arabic the word civilization,
al-hadarah, is derived form the root hdr meaning a place of settlement
or town or city. In Persian and many other Islamic languages such as
Urdu and Turkish, the term tamaddun or madaniyyat usually used for
civilization are also related to the word madam, which likewise means
town or city.

2 Coomaraswamy, op. cit, p.[^2]:

3 Ibid., p. [^2]:

4 See M. Pallis, Peaks and Lamas, London, The Woburn Press, 1974,
chapter XXII, pp. 299-[^32]:

5 As we have had occasion to mention elsewhere, there are numerous
treatises on traditional metaphysics and philosophy in the Islamic world
with precisely the title al-Mabda’wa’l-ma’ad in Arabic or Aghaz wa anjam
in Persian, both terms meaning origin or beginning and end.

6 “The whole existence of the peoples of antiquity, and of traditional
peoples, in general, is dominated by two presiding ideas, the idea of
Center and the idea of Origin.” F. Schuon, Light on the Ancient World,
trans. Lord Northbourne, Bloomington (Ind.), World Wisdom Books, 1984,
p. [^7]:

7 M. Pallis, The Way and the Mountain, London, Peter Owen, 1991, p.
[^178]:

8 See R. Guénon,”Principles of Unity of the Oriental Civilizations,” in
his Introduction to the Study of Hindu Doctrines, trans. M. Pallis,
London, Luzac & Co., 1945, pp.19 ff.

9 See T. Lindbom, The Tares and the Good Grain, trans. A.

Moore, Macon (G A), Mercer University Press, [^1983]:

10 “All civilizations are in decline, but in different ways; the decline
of the East is passive and that of the West is active.

“The fault of the East in decline is that it no longer thinks; that of
the West is that it thinks too much and thinks wrongly.

“The East is sleeping over truths; the West is living in error.”

F. Schuon, Spiritual Perspectives and Human Facts. P.

Townsend, Pates Manor, Middlesex, Perennial Books, 1987, pp. 22-[^23]:

11 S. Huntington, The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World
Order, New York, Simon and Shuster, 1996, pp. 40 ff.

12 On how the Buddhist perspective can be integrated into the
understanding of this wisdom or philosophia perennis, see S. H. Nasr’s
response to Sally King in E. Hahn et.al.

(eds.), The Philosophy of Seyyed Hossein Nasr, Library of Living
Philosophers, vol. XXVIII, Chicago, Open Court, 2001, pp. 22 ff.

13 See F. Schuon, The Transcendent Unity of Religions, Wheaton (Ill.),
The Theosophical Publishing House, [^1993]: See also S. H. Nasr,
Knowledge and Sacred, Albany (N.Y.), The State University Press of New
York, 1989,  chapter nine, pp. 280-308; and Nasr, Religion and the Order
of Nature, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1996, chapter 1, pp. 3-38.

14 See A. K. Coomaraswamy, “Paths that Lead to the Same Summit,” in his
The Bugbear of Literacy, Pates Manor, Bedfont, Middlesex, 1979, pp. 50
ff.

15 See his Muqaddimah, trans. F. Rosenthal, 3 vols., Princeton,
Princeton University Press, 1967; also M Mahdi, Ibn Khaldun’s Philosophy
of History, London, George Allen &Unwin, [^1957]:

16 See his Kitab jami’ al-tawarikh, 2 vols., ed. E. Blochet, Leiden,
Brill, [^1911]:

17 On the transmission of the ancient sciences and the rise of Islamic
science and learning see S. H. Nasr, Islamic Science - An Illustrated
Study, Chicago, Kazi Publications, 1995, pp. 3 ff.
