Bibliography
============

***Ahmed, Nazeer. Islam in Global History, 2 vols. Chicago: Kazi
Publications, 2000.***

A clear and detailed history of the Islamic world from the advent of
Islam to the modern period.

***Armstrong, Karen. Muhammad: A Biography of the Prophet. San
Francisco: HarperSanFrancisco, 1992.***

A detailed and fairly sympathetic account of the life of the Prophet by
a major Western writer on religion.

***Asad, Muhammad. The Road to Mecca. Louisville, KY: Fons Vitae,
2001.***

A moving account of the experience of an Austrian journalist who went to
the Islamic world in 1927, embraced Islam, and became a major Muslim
intellectual figure.

***Bill, James, and John A. Williams. Roman Catholics and Shi‘i Muslims:
Prayer, Passion and Politics. Chapel Hill and London:***

***University of North Carolina Press, 2002.***

The first comparative study of Catholicism and Shi‘ism showing some of
the remarkable resemblances between the two traditions.

***Burckhardt, Titus. Fez: City of Islam. Cambridge: Islamic Texts
Society, 1992.***

A unique in-depth study of the spiritual, religious, artistic,
intellectual, and social life of one of Islam’s greatest traditional
cities, with numerous insights that apply to the Islamic world as a
whole.

***Cleary, Thomas. The Essential Koran. Edison, NJ: Castle Books,
1998.***

A lucid and highly readable translation of selections from the Quran.

***Eaton, Charles le Gai. Islam and the Destiny of Man. Albany: State
University of New York, 1985; Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 1985.***

A profound study of some of the basic tenets of Islam by a leading
British Muslim writer.

***---. Remembering God: Reflections on Islam. Chicago: Kazi
Publications, 2000; Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 2000.***

An eloquent treatment of Islamic spirituality and the existential
problems created by living as a Muslim in the modern world.

***Esposito, John. Islam: The Straight Path. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1998.***

An account of Islam and the development of contemporary Islamic trends
by a very perceptive scholar of modern developments in various parts of
the Islamic world.

***Hallaq, W. A History of Islamic Legal Theories. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1999.***

A scholarly treatment of the historical development of the theories of
Islamic Law.

***Herlihy, John. In Search of the Truth. Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Pustaka
Islam, 1990.***

An American’s journey to Islam and his reflections on traditional
Islamic themes.

***Kamali, Mohammad Hashim. Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence.
Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 1991.***

The best available work in English on the Islamic understanding of the
principles underlying Islamic jurisprudence.

***Khadduri, Majid. The Islamic Conception of Justice. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984.***

A detailed study, on the basis of the most authentic Islamic sources, of
justice in Islam from a political, theological, philosophical, and
ethical perspective, including the question of justice among nations,
social justice, and changing conceptions of justice among some Muslims
under modern conditions.

***Lings, Martin. Muhammad: His Life Based on the Earliest Sources.
Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 1991; New York:***

***Inner Traditions, 1983.***

The best biography of the Prophet in English based on traditional
Islamic sources, written with great elegance and narrative power.

***Murata, Sachiko. The Tao of Islam. Albany: State University of New
York, 1992.***

A unique work using the Far Eastern yin and yang to explain gender
relationships in Islam on both the spiritual and the social level.

***Murata, Sachiko, and William Chittick. The Vision of Islam. New York:
Paragon House, 1994.***

An exposition of all the major facets of Islam and Islamic thought on
the basis of the*hadith* of Gabriel, in which the meaning of islam,
iman, and ihsan are explained.

***Nasr, Seyyed Hossein. Ideals and Realities of Islam. Chicago: ABC
International Group, 2001; Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 2001.***

Deals from the traditional point of view with the major aspects of Islam
including the Quran, the Prophet, the Law, the spiritual path, and
Sunnism and Shi‘ism.

***---. Islam and the Plight of Modern Man. Chicago: ABC International
Group, 2001; Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 2002.***

Deals with both metaphysical and existential questions arising from the
encounter between Islam and modernism.

***---. Traditional Islam in the Modern World. London: Kegan Paul
International, 1990.***

A clarification of the differences between traditional, modernist, and
so-called fundamentalist Islam and an elucidation of various aspects of
traditional Islam.

***---. A Young Muslim’s Guide to the Modern World. Chicago: Kazi
Publications, 1996; Cambridge: Islamic Texts Society, 1994.***

A summary of the teachings of Islam and various aspects of Western
civilization and the manner in which young Muslims must face the
challenges of the modern world.

***---, ed. Islamic Spirituality: Foundations. New York: Crossroad,
1989.***

Contains numerous seminal essays on basic aspects of Islamic
spirituality by some of the leading scholars from both the Islamic world
and the West.

***Pickthall, Muhammad Marmaduke. The Meaning of the Glorious Koran.
Many editions.***

One of the most widely read renditions of the Quran in English, one that
also received the approval of leading Islamic religious authorities at
the time of its appearance before World War II.

***Renard, John. Seven Doors to Islam: Spirituality and the Religious
Life of Muslims. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.***

A perceptive introduction to the inner meaning of Islam through seven
different doors leading to the inner courtyard of the religion.

***Schimmel, Annemarie. And Muhammad Is His Messenger. London and Chapel
Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1985.***

The only work in English that explains through various Islamic literary
texts the veneration of the Prophet and his role in Islamic piety.

***---. Islam: An Introduction. Albany: State University of New York,
1992.***

A succinct account of the different basic teachings of Islam, written
with much love and empathy.

***Schuon, Frithjof. Understanding Islam. Bloomington, IN: World Wisdom
Books, 1994.***

The most profound work on the inner meaning of Islam and its relation to
other religions ever written by a Western author.

***Sells, Michael. Approaching the Qur’an: The Early Revelations.
Ashland, OR: White Cloud Press, 1999.***

Highly poetical renditions into English of selections from the Quran
that bring out some of the literary quality of the original text.

***Tabat.aba’i, ‘Allamah. The Quran in Islam. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1987.***

A short but masterly work on the significance of the Quran and the
manner in which to study it by the author of the most monumental
commentary written on the Quran in the twentieth century.

About the Author

*Professor Seyyed Hossein Nasr was born in Tehran, Iran in 1933. He
received his advanced education at M.I.T. and Harvard University,
returning to teach at Tehran University from 1958-1979, where he also
served as Dean of the Faculty of Letters and Vice Chancellor. He founded
the Iranian Academy of Philosophy and served as its first president, and
was also for several years president of Aryamehr University. Since 1984,
he has been University Professor of Islamic Studies at George Washington
University in Washington, D.C., and President of the Foundation for
Traditional Studies.*

Also by Seyyed Hossein Nasr

A Young Muslim’s Guide to the Modern World

An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines

Ideals and Realities of Islam

Islam-Religion, History, and Civilization

Islam and the Plight of Modern Man

Islamic Art and Spirituality

Islamic Life and Thought

Islamic Science-An Illustrated Study

Knowledge and the Sacred

Man and Nature-The Spiritual Crisis of Modern Man

Muhammad-Man of God

Religion and the Order of Nature

Science and Civilization in Islam

Sufi Essays

The Islamic Intellectual Tradition in Persia

The Need for a Sacred Science

Three Muslim Sages

Traditional Islam in the Modern World

All translations of poetry are by S. H. Nasr unless otherwise noted.

THE HEART OF ISLAM: Enduring Values for Humanity

*Copyright © 2002 by Seyyed Hossein Nasr. All rights reserved under
International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By payment of the
required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-transferable
right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of
this text may be reproduced, transmitted, downloaded, decompiled,
reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced into any information
storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any means, whether
electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the
express written permission of PerfectBound™.*

**“Civilizational Dialogue and the Islamic World” copyright © 2002 by
Seyyed Hossein Nasr.**

**PerfectBound ™ and the PerfectBound™ logo are trademarks of
HarperCollins Publishers, Inc.**

**Adobe Acrobat E-Book Reader edition v 1. October 2002 ISBN
0-06-051665-8**

*Print edition first published in 2002 by HarperCollins Publishers,
Inc.*

*10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1*

About the Publisher

Australia

HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.

25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)

Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia

http://www.harpercollins.com.au

Canada

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900

Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada

http://www.harpercanada.com

New Zealand

HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited

P.O. Box 1

Auckland, New Zealand

http://www.harpercollins.co.nz

United Kingdom

HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.

77-85 Fulham Palace Road

London, W6 8JB, UK

http://www.fireandwater.com

United States

HarperCollins Publishers Inc.

10 East 53rd Street

New York, NY 10022

http://www.perfectbound.com

Please visit*www.perfectbound.com* for free e-book samplers of
PerfectBound titles.
