CHAPTER ONE: ONE GOD, MANY PROPHETS
===================================

The Unity of Truth and the Multiplicity of Revelations

***Say: He, God, is One, God the Self-Sufficient Besought of all.***

***He begetteth not, nor is begotten, and none is like Him.***

***Quran 112: v.1-41***

GOD THE ONE
-----------

At the heart of Islam stands the reality of God, the One, the Absolute
and the Infinite, the Infinitely Good and All-Merciful, the One Who is
at once transcendent and immanent, greater than all we can conceive or
imagine, yet, as the Quran, the sacred scripture of Islam, attests,
closer to us than our jugular vein. The One God, known by His Arabic
Name,*Allah* , is the central reality of Islam in all of its facets, and
attestation to this oneness, which is called tawhid, is the axis around
which all that is Islamic revolves.*Allah* is beyond all duality and
relationality, beyond the differences of gender and of all qualities
that distinguish beings from each other in this world. Yet He is the
source of all existence and all cosmic and human qualities as well as
the End to Whom all things return.

To testify to this oneness lies at the heart of the credo of Islam, and
the formula that expresses the truth of this oneness,*La ilaha
illa’Llah* , “There is no god but God,” is the first of two
testifications (*shahadahs* ) by which a person bears witness to being a
Muslim; the second is*Muhammadun rasul Allah* , “Muh.ammad is the
messenger of God.” The oneness of God is for Muslims not only the heart
of their religion, but that of every authentic religion. It is a
reassertion of the revelation of God to the Hebrew prophets and to
Christ, whom Muslims also consider to be their prophets, the revelation
of the truth that “The Lord is one,” the reconfirmation of that timeless
truth that is also stated in the Catholic creed, Credo in unum Deum, “I
believe in one God.” As the Quran states, “We have never sent a
messenger before thee except that We revealed to him, saying, ‘There is
no god but I, so worship Me’” (21:25). Like countless Muslims, when I
read the names of the prophets of old in the Quran or in the traditional
prayers, I experience them as living realities in the Islamic universe,
while being fully conscious of the fact that they are revered figures in
Judaism and Christianity. I also remain fully aware that they are all
speaking of the same God Who is One and not of some other deity.

The One God, or*Allah* , is neither male nor female. However, in the
inner teachings of Islam His Essence is often referred to in feminine
form and the Divinity is often mentioned as the Beloved, while the Face
He has turned to the world as Creator and Sustainer is addressed in the
masculine form. Both the male and the female are created by Him and the
root of both femininity and masculinity are to be found in the Divine
Nature, which transcends the duality between them. Furthermore, the
Qualities of God, which are reflected throughout creation, are of a
feminine as well as a masculine nature, and the traditional Islamic
understanding of the Divinity is not at all confined, as some think, to
a purely patriarchal image.

The Quran, which is the verbatim Word of God for Muslims, to be compared
to Christ himself in Christianity, reveals not only the Supreme Name of
God as*Allah* , but also mentions other “beautiful Names” of God,
considered by traditional sources to be ninety-nine in number, Names
revealing different aspects of the Divinity. The Quran states, “To God
belong the most beautiful Names (*alasma’al-husna* ). Call on Him
thereby” (7:180). These Names are divided into those of
Perfection*(Kamal)* , Majesty*(Jalal)* , and Beauty*(Jamal)* , the first
relating to the essential oneness of God

Himself beyond all polarization and the last two to the masculine and
feminine dimensions of reality in divinis (in the Divine Order). The
Names of Majesty include the Just, the Majestic, the Reckoner, the Giver
of Death, the Victorious, and the All-Powerful, and those of Beauty, the
All-Merciful, the Forgiver, the Gentle, the Generous, the Beautiful, and
Love. For Muslims the whole universe consists of the reflection in
various combinations of the Divine Names, and human life is lived amid
the polarizations and tensions as well as harmony of the cosmic and
human qualities derived from these Names. God at once judges us
according to His Justice and forgives us according to His Mercy. He is
far beyond our reach, yet resides at the center of the heart of the
faithful. He punishes the wicked, but also loves His creatures and
forgives them.

The doctrine of God the One, as stated in the Quran, does not only
emphasize utter transcendence, although there are powerful expressions
of this truth such as*Allahu akbar* , usually translated as “God is
great,” but meaning that God is greater than anything we can conceive of
Him, which is also attested by the apophatic theology of both the
Catholic and Orthodox churches as well as by traditional Judaism. The
Quran also accentuates God’s nearness to us, stating that He is closer
to us than ourselves and that He is present everywhere, as when it
states: “Whithersoever ye turn, there is the Face of God” (2:115). The
traditional religious life of a Muslim is based on a rhythmic movement
between the poles of transcendence and immanence, of rigor and
compassion, of justice and forgiveness, of the fear of punishment and
hope for mercy based on God’s love for us. But the galaxy of Divine
Names and the multiplicity of Divine Qualities reflected in the cosmos
and within the being of men and women do not distract the Muslim for one
moment from the oneness of God, from that Sun before whose light all
multiplicity perishes. Striving after the realization of that oneness,
or tawhid, is the heart of Islamic life; and the measure of a successful
religious life is the degree to which one is able to realize tawhid,
which means not only oneness, but also the integration of multiplicity
into Unity.

Moreover, since there is no official sacerdotal authority in Islam like
the magisterium in Roman Catholic Christianity, the authenticity of
one’s faith in Islam has by and large been determined by the
testification of tawhid, while the degree of inward realization of this
truth has remained a matter to be decided by God and not by external
authorities. This has been the general norm in Islamic history, but
there have also been exceptions, and there are historical instances when
a particular group or political authority has taken it upon itself to
determine the authenticity or lack thereof of the belief in tawhid of a
particular person or school. But there has never been an Inquisition in
Islam, and there has been greater latitude in the acceptance of ideas,
especially mystical and esoteric ones, than in most periods of the
history of Western Christianity before the penetration of modernism into
Christian theology itself.

Now, although Islam is based on the reality of God, the One, in His
Absoluteness and Suchness, it also addresses humanity in its essential
reality, in its suchness. Man, in the traditional sense of the term

corresponding to insan in Arabic or homo in Greek and not solely the
male, is seen in Islam not as a sinful being to whom the message of
Heaven is sent to heal the wound of the original sin, but as a being who
still carries his primordial nature (al-fit.rah) within himself,
although he has forgotten that nature now buried deep under layers of
negligence. As the Quran states: “[God] created man in the best of
stature (*ah. san altaqwim* )” (95:4) with an intelligence capable of
knowing the One. The message of Islam is addressed to that primordial
nature. It is a call for recollection, for the remembrance of a
knowledge kneaded into the very substance of our being even before our
coming into this world. In a famous verse that defines the relationship
between human beings and God, the Quran, in referring to the precosmic
existence of man, states, “Am I not your Lord?’ They said: ‘Yes, we bear
witness” (7:172). The “they” refers to all the children of Adam, male
and female, and the “yes” confirms the affirmation of God’s Oneness by
us in our pre-eternal ontological reality.

Men and women still bear the echo of this “yes” deep down within their
souls, and the call of Islam is precisely to this primordial nature,
which uttered the “yes” even before the creation of the heavens and the
earth. The call of Islam therefore concerns, above all, the remembrance
of a knowledge deeply embedded in our being, the confirmation of a
knowledge that saves, hence the soteriological function of knowledge in
Islam. Islam addresses the human being not primarily as will, but as
intelligence. If the great sin in Christianity is disobedience, which
has warped the will, the great sin in Islam is forgetfulness and the
resulting inability of the intelligence to function in the way that God
created it as the means to know the One. That is why the greatest sin in
Islam and the only one God does not forgive is shirk, or taking a
partner unto God, which means denying the Oneness of God, or tawhid.

This direct address from God, the One, to each human being in its
primordial state requires total surrender to the Majesty of the
Absolute, before whom ultimately nothing can in fact exist. In an
ordinary sense it means the surrender of ourselves to God, and in the
highest sense it means the awareness of our nothingness before Him, for,
as the Quran says, “All that dwells in the heavens and the earth
perishes, yet there abideth the Face of thy Lord, Majestic, Splendid”
(55:26-27). The very name of the religion, Islam, comes from this
reality, for the Arabic word al-islam means “surrender” as well as the
peace that issues from our surrender to God. In fact, Islam is the only
major religion, along with Buddhism (if we consider the name of the
religion to come from Budd, the Divine Intellect, and not the Buddha),
whose name is not related to a person or ethnic group, but to the
central idea of the religion. Moreover, Islam considers all authentic
religions to be based on this surrender, so that al-islam means not only
the religion revealed through the Quran to the Prophet Muhammad, but all
authentic religions as such. That is why in the Quran the prophet
Abraham is also called muslim, that is, one who is in the state of
al-islam.

True surrender is not, however, only concerned with our will. It must
involve our whole being. A shallow understanding of surrender can lead
to either a passive attitude, in which one does not strive in life as
one should

according to the promulgations of the religion, or to mistaking one’s
own imperfect understanding of Islam for the truth and performing acts
that are against God’s teachings while claiming that one is acting in
surrender to God. Islam states that a person must be the perfect servant
(‘abd) of God in the sense of following His commands. But since God has
given us many faculties, including free will and intelligence, our
surrender must be complete and total, not limited to only certain
faculties. It must involve the whole of our being.

Otherwise, hidden thoughts and emotions as well as false ideas can
combine with a fallacious sense of external surrender of one’s will to
God to produce acts in the name of religion that can have calamitous
consequences.

Such acts have appeared from time to time historically and can be seen
especially in this day and age, but they are deviations rather than the
norm. The norm by which the vast majority of Muslims have lived over the
ages has meant surrender to God with one’s whole being, following the
Divine Law and the ethical teachings of Islam to the extent possible,
striving in life according to religious teachings to the extent of one’s
ability, and then being resigned to consequences that ensue and
accepting what destiny has put before us. It is in this sense that the
common Arabic saying maktub, “It is written,” marking the sign of
resignation to a particular event or results of one’s actions, must be
understood.

This surrender has certainly not meant either fatalism or an
individualistic interpretation of Divine norms in the name of surrender.
It has, on the contrary, led to an inward and outward striving combined
with serenity that characterizes traditional patterns of Islamic life,
in contrast to both modernistic and much of the so-called fundamentalist
currents found in the Islamic world today.

CREATION OF THE WORLD AND OF HUMAN BEINGS
-----------------------------------------

Since the One God is Infinite and Absolute as well as the Infinitely
Good, He could not but create. His infinitude implies that He contains
within Himself all possibilities, including that of negating Himself,
and this possibility had to be realized in the form of creation.
Moreover, as St. Augustine also stated, it is in the nature of the good
to give of itself, and the Infinitely-Good could not but radiate the
reality that constitutes the world and, in fact, all the worlds.

But creation or radiation implies separation, and it is this ontological
separation from the Source of all goodness that constitutes evil. One
might say that evil is nothing but separation from the Good and
privation, although it is real on its own level, in a sense as real as
our own existential level on which we find it.1 And yet the good belongs
to the pole of being and evil to that of nonbeing.

Throughout the history of Islam there have been numerous profound
metaphysical and theological discussions concerning the question of
evil, as there have been in other religions, especially Christianity.
But in contrast to the modern West, in which many people have turned
away from God and religion because they could not understand how a God
who is good could create a world in which there is evil, in the Islamic
world this question of theodicy has hardly ever bothered the religious
conscience of even the most

intelligent people or turned them away from God. The emphasis of the
Quran upon the reality of evil on the moral plane combined with the
sapiential and theological explanations of this question have kept men
and women confronted with this problem in the domain of faith. The
strong emphasis in Islam on the Will of God has also played a role in
resigning Muslims to the presence of evil in the world (which they must
nevertheless combat to the extent possible), even when they cannot
understand the causes involved.

In any case, God has created the world, in which there is imperfection
and evil, but the world itself is considered by the Quran to be good, a
view corresponding to that found in the book of Genesis. And creation
has a purpose, for, as the Quran says, “O Lord, Thou didst not create
this [the world] in vain” (8:190). The deepest purpose of creation is
explained by a famous*hadith* qudsi (a sacred saying of the Prophet not
part of the Quran in which God speaks in the first person through the
mouth of the Prophet): “I was a hidden treasure. I loved to be known.
Therefore, I created the creation so that I would be known.” The purpose
of creation therefore is God’s love for the knowledge of Himself
realized through His central agent on earth, humanity.

For a human being to know God is to fulfill the purpose of creation.
Moreover, God loved to be known. Hence, the love of God and by God
permeates the whole universe, and many Islamic mystics of Sufis over the
ages have spoken of that love to which Dante refers at the end of the
Divine Comedy when he speaks of “the love that moves the sun and the
stars.” This sacred*hadith* (h. adith qudsi) also speaks of God’s being
“a hidden treasure,” which is a symbol of the truth that everything in
the universe has its origin in the Divine Reality and is a manifestation
of that Reality. Everything in the total cosmos both visible and
invisible is a theophany, or manifestation, of the Divine Names and
Qualities and is drawn from the “treasury” of God. The Wisdom of God
thus permeates the universe, and Muslims in fact see the cosmos as God’s
primordial revelation. Everything in the universe, in reflecting God’s
Wisdom, also glorifies Him, for, as the Quran says, “There is nothing
but that it hymns His praise” (17:44). In fact, the very existence of
beings is nothing but their invocation of God’s Names, and the universe
itself is nothing but the consequence of the breathing upon the
archetypal realities of all beings in the Divine Intellect of the Breath
of the Compassionate (*nafas al-Rah. man* ). It is through His
Name*al-Rahman* , which means the Infinitely-Good and also Merciful,
that the universe has come into being. It is significant to note that
much of the Quran is devoted to the cosmos and the world of nature,
which play an integral role in the traditional life of Muslims. All
Islamic rites are harmonized with natural phenomena, and in general
Muslims view the world of creation as God’s first revelation, before the
Torah, the Gospels, the Quran, and other sacred scriptures were
revealed. That is why in Islam, as in medieval Judaism and Christianity,
the cosmos is seen as a book in which the “signs of God,” the vestigia
Dei of Christian authors, are to be read.

The Islamic understanding of anthropogenesis, the creation of human
beings, resembles those of Judaism and Christianity in many ways, but
also

differs on certain significant issues. In fact, there are also important
differences between Judaism and Christianity when it comes to the
question of original sin. As for Adam’s original creation, the Quran
speaks of God creating Adam from clay and breathing His Spirit into him,
“And I breathed into him My Spirit” (15:29). The Quran continues:

And when thy Lord said unto the angels: “Verily! I am about to place a
vicegerent*(khalifah)* on earth,” they said, “Wilt Thou place therein
one who will bring corruption therein and will shed blood, while we, we
hymn Thy praise and sanctify Thee?” He said: “Surely, I know that which
ye know not.”

And He taught Adam all the names, then showed them to the angels,
saying: “Inform me of the names of these, if ye are truthful.”

They said: “Be glorified! We have no knowledge save that which Thou hast
taught us.” (2:30-32)2

The angels were then asked by God to prostrate before Adam, and all did
so except Iblis, that is, the Devil or Satan, who refused because of
pride. God placed Adam and his wife in paradise and permitted them to
eat of the fruits there, except the fruit of the forbidden tree. But
Satan “caused them to deflect therefrom,” and the Fall ensued.

But a revelation was sent to Adam. He repented and became the first
prophet as well as the father of humanity.

The Quranic account contains all the main features of the sacred
anthropology of Islam and its view of the nature of men and women. First
of all, God chose the human being as His vicegerent*(khalifah)* on
earth, which means that He has given human beings power to dominate the
earth, but on the condition that they remain obedient to God, that is,
being God’s servant, or ‘abd*Allah* . There are numerous Quranic
references to this truth. The two primary features of being human are
servanthood and vicegerency:

being passive toward Heaven in submission to God’s Will, on the one
hand, and being active as God’s agent and doing His Will in the world,
on the other. Moreover, Adam was taught all the names, which means that
God has placed within human nature an intelligence that is central and
the means by which he can know all things. It also means that human
beings themselves are the theophany, or visible manifestation, of all of
God’s Names. There is in principle no limit to human intelligence in
knowing the nature of things (the question of knowing the Divine Essence
is a different matter) unless there is an obstacle that prevents it from
functioning correctly. That is why Muslims believe that any normal and
wholesome intelligence will be naturally led to the confirmation of
Divine Oneness and are at a loss when rationalist skeptics from the West
refuse to accept the One (most Muslims are unaware of the obstacles in
the soul of such a skeptic that reduce the intelligence to analytical
reason and prevent it from functioning in its fullness).

Adam, the prototype of humanity, is superior to the angels by virtue of
his knowledge of the names of all things as well as by being the
reflection of all the Divine Names and Qualities.

As for Iblis, his rebellion comes from pride in considering his nature,
which was made of fire, superior to that of Adam, who was made of clay.

He refused to prostrate himself before Adam, because fire is a more
noble element than earth or clay. He could not see the effect of the
Spirit that God had breathed into Adam. Satan was therefore the first to
misuse analogy, to try to replace intelligence with ordinary logical
reasoning. His fall was thus also connected to the domain of knowledge.
The lack of total knowledge on his part created the sense of pride,
which in Islam, as in Christianity, is the source of all other vices.

The Quran mentions Adam’s wife, but not her name.

*Hadith* sources however confirm that her name was Hawwa’, or Eve. In
fact, the Islamic names for the first parents of humanity, Adam and H.
awwa’, are the same as in Judaism and Christianity. The Quran, however,
does not mention how she was created. Some traditional commentators have
repeated the biblical account of her creation from Adam’s rib, while
other authorities have mentioned that she was created from the same clay
from which God created Adam. It is important to note for the Islamic
understanding of womanhood and women’s roles in both religious and
social life that, in contrast to the biblical story, Eve did not tempt
Adam to eat the forbidden fruit. Rather, they were tempted together by
Iblis and therefore Eve was not the cause of Adam’s expulsion from
paradise. He was also responsible; they shared in performing the act
that led to their fall, and therefore both men and women are faced
equally with its consequences. As far as the forbidden fruit is
concerned, again, the Quran does not mention it explicitly, but
according to traditional commentaries it was not an apple, as believed
by Christians and Jews, but wheat.

The creation of human beings complements the creation of the cosmos and
adds to the created order a central being who is God’s vicegerent,
capable of knowing all things, of dominating the earth, given the power
to do good, but also to wreak havoc and, in fact, corrupt the earth.
According to a famous hadith, “God created man upon His form,” although
here form does not mean physical image, but rather the reflection of
God’s Names and Qualities. But human beings are also given the freedom
to rebel against God, and Iblis can exercise power over them. The human
being contains, in fact, all possibilities within himself or herself.
The soul itself is a vast field in which the signs of God are
manifested. As a Quranic verse states, “We shall show them our
signs*(ayat)* upon the horizons and within their souls until it becomes
manifest unto them that it is the truth” (41:53). Therefore, in a sense,
the human being is itself a revelation like the macrocosm.

It might be said that from the Islamic point of view creation and
revelation are inseparable, and that there are in fact three grand
revelations: the cosmos, the human state, and religions-all three of
which Islam sees as “books.”

There is, first of all, the cosmic book to be read and deciphered.

Then there is the inner book of the soul, which we carry within
ourselves. And finally there are sacred scriptures, which have been sent
by God through His Mercy to guide humanity throughout the ages and which
are the foundations of various religions and keys for reading the other
two books, that of the cosmos and that of the soul.

MANY REVELATIONS, MANY PROPHETS
-------------------------------

In the Islamic perspective, the oneness of God has as its consequence
not the uniqueness of prophecy, but its multiplicity, since God as the
Infinite created a world in which there is multiplicity and this
includes, of course, the human order. For Islam, revelation and prophecy
are both necessary and universal. Humanity, according to the Quran, was
created from a single soul, but then diversified into races and tribes,
for, as the Quran states, “He created you [humanity] from a single soul”
(39:6). The single origin of humanity implies the profound unity within
diversity of human nature, and therefore religion based on the message
of Divine Oneness could not have been only meant for or available to a
segment of humanity. The multiplicity of races, nations, and tribes
necessitates the diversity of revelations.

Therefore, the Quran, on the one hand, asserts that “To every people [We
have sent] a messenger” (10:48), and, on the other hand, “For each
[people] We have appointed a Divine Law and a way. Had God willed, He
could have made you one community. But that He may try you by that which
He hath given you. So vie with one another in good works. Unto God ye
will all return, and He will then inform you concerning that wherein ye
differed” (5:48). According to these and other verses, not only is the
multiplicity of religions necessary, but it is also a reflection of the
richness of the Divine Nature and is willed by God.

Religion*(din)* , revelation*(wahy)* , and prophecy*(nubuwwah)* have a
clear meaning in the context of the Islamic worldview and therefore need
to be carefully defined in the modern context, where all of these terms
have become ambiguous in ordinary discourse. The closest word to the
English term “religion” in Arabic is din, which is said by many to have
been derived from the root meaning “to obey, submit, and humble oneself
before God.” Al-din means religion in the vastest sense as the sacred
norm into which the whole of life is to be molded. It is the total way
of life grounded in teachings that have issued from God.

These teachings reach humanity through revelation, which means the
direct conveying of a message from Heaven (revelation being understood
apart from all the psychological entanglements it has acquired in much
of modern Western religious thought). Revelation, moreover, must not be
confused with inspiration*(ilham)* , which is possible for all human
beings.

Islam sees revelation not as incarnation in the Hindu or Christian
sense, but as the descent of the Word of God in the form of sacred
scripture to a prophet. In fact, the Quran uses the term “Book”*(kitab)*
not only for the Quran, but also for all other sacred books and the
totality of revelations. The Quran considers all revelations to be
contained in that “archetypal book,” or Umm al-kitab (literally, “the
Mother Book”), and the sacred scriptures to be related in conveying the
same basic message of the primordial religion of unity in different
languages and contexts.

As the Quran states, “We never sent a messenger save with the language
of his people” (14:4). Even when the Quran states that “the religion
with God is al-islam” (3:19) or similar statements, al-islam refers to
that universal surrender to the One and that primordial religion
contained in the heart of all heavenly inspired religions, not just to
Islam in its more particular sense. There is, moreover, a criterion of
truth and falsehood as far

as religions are concerned, and the Quran’s confirmation of the
universality of revelation does not mean that everything that has passed
as religion yesterday or does so today is authentic. Throughout history
there have been false prophets and religions, to which Christ also
referred, as well as religions that have decayed or deviated from their
original form.

Islam sees itself as heir to this long chain of prophets going back to
Adam and believes all of them, considered to be 124,000 according to
tradition, to be also its own. It does not believe, however, that it has
inherited their teachings through temporal and historical transmission,
for a prophet owes nothing to anyone and receives everything from
Heaven, but it does believe that its message bears the finality of a
seal. Islam sees itself as at once the primordial religion, a return to
the original religion of oneness, and the final religion; the Quran
itself calls the Prophet of Islam the “Seal of Prophets.” And, in fact,
fourteen hundred years of history have confirmed Islam’s claim, for
during all that time there has not been another plenary manifestation of
the Truth like the ones that brought about the births of Buddhism and
Christianity, not to speak of the earlier major religions. The two
characteristics of primordiality and finality have bestowed upon Islam
its trait of universality and the capability to absorb intellectually
and culturally so much that came before it. It has also made spiritually
alive the prophetic presences that preceded it, so that, for example,
such figures as Abraham, Moses, and Christ play a much greater role in
the spiritual universe of Islam than Abraham and Moses do in the
Christian universe.

While speaking of the finality of the Islamic revelation for this cycle
of human history, which will last until the eschatological events at the
end of historic time, something must be said, from the Islamic point of
view, about the “order” and “economy” of revelation. Muslims believe
that each revelation takes place through the Divine Will, but also on
the basis of a spiritual economy and is not by any means ad hoc. Each
revelation fulfills a major function in human history seen from the
religious point of view. For example, around the sixth to fifth century
B.C. which also marks the transition from mythological time to historic
time, a qualitative change took place in the march of time, which for
Islam, as for Hinduism, is not simply linear. This is the period when
the myths of Homer and Hesiod recede as Greek history flowers and the
stories of mythical Persian dynasties are left behind as the Persian
Empire takes shape.

From the human point of view, this qualitative change in the terrestrial
life of humanity required new dispensations from Heaven, and from the
metaphysical perspective, these new dispensations themselves marked the
new chapter that was to begin in human history.

This period, which philosophers such as Karl Jaspers have called the
Axial Age, was witness to the appearance of Confucius and Lao-Tze in
China and the new crystallization of the primal Chinese tradition into
Confucianism and Taoism, and the appearance of Shintoism in Japan and
the beginning of the terrestrial life of the solar emperors, who marked
the beginning of historical Japanese civilization.

This age was also witness to the life of the Buddha, whose teaching
spread throughout India and Tibet and soon transformed the religious
life of

East and Southeast Asia. At nearly the same time, we see the rise of
Zoroaster, who established Zoroastrianism in Persia and whose teachings
greatly influenced later religious life in western Asia. Finally, around
the same time we have the rise of Pythagoras and Pythagoreanism, which
was central to the spiritual life of ancient Greece and from which
Platonism was born. This remarkable cluster of figures, which also
includes some of the Hebrew prophets, figures whom Muslims would call
prophets, transformed the religious life of humanity, although the still
living and viable religions of the earlier period such as Judaism and
Hinduism survived. Moreover, this list of figures does not exhaust all
the notable sages and prophets of the Axial Age.

One would think that the cycle of revelation would have been terminated
in the Axial Age. But the decadence of the Greek and Roman religions
around the Mediterranean Basin and the weakening of the northern
European religions created a vacuum that only a new revelation could
fill. Therefore Christianity was revealed by God. Although originally a
Semitic religion, providentially it soon became, to some extent,
Hellenized, and Christ was transformed almost into an “Aryan” solar hero
for the Europeans, who were destined to find the path of salvation
through this new dispensation from Heaven. It certainly was no accident
that in Europe Christianity remained strong and unified, while in the
eastern Mediterranean and North Africa, destined to become part of the
future “Abode of Islam,” it splintered into numerous small denominations
fighting among themselves as well as against Byzantium.

This latter situation, added to the inner weakness of Zoroastrianism in
the Persian Empire and certain other religions elsewhere, created
another vacuum to be filled, this time by a new Semitic religion-Islam.
Islam, like Judaism, remained faithful to its Semitic origin, but, like
Christianity, was not confined to a particular ethnic group. Islam thus
came to reassert the full doctrine of Divine Oneness on a universal
scale after the Axial Age and the appearance of Christianity, placing in
a sense the last golden brick in that golden wall that is revelation.
With it, the structure of the wall became complete, and, as far as
Muslims are concerned, although small religious movements may take place
here and there, there is to be no plenary revelation after Islam
according to the Divine Providence and the spiritual economy of God’s
plans for present-day humanity. When asked how they know such a truth,
Muslims point to the Quran itself and the fact that no previous
revelation had ever made such an explicit claim. Being the final
religion of this cycle, Islam is not only closely related to its sister
monotheisms, Judaism and Christianity, but also possesses an inward link
to the religions of the Axial Age as well as to Hinduism. It is this
link that made it easier for Islam than for Christianity to incorporate
so much of the wisdom Hinduism and of the religions of the Axial Age,
from Buddhism and Pythagoreanism to Zoroastrianism and even later to
Confucianism, within its sapiential perspective.

Paradoxically, the insistence of Islam upon God as the One and the
Absolute has had as its concomitant the acceptance of multiplicity of
prophets and revelations, and no sacred scripture is more universalist
in its

understanding of religion than the Quran, whose perspective concerning
the universality of revelation may be called “vertical triumphalism.”

In contrast, in Christianity, because of the emphasis on the Triune God,
God the One is seen more in terms of the relationality of the three
Hypostases, what one might call “Divine Relativity”; the vision of the
manifestation of the Divine then became confined to the unique Son and
Incarnation, in whom the light of all previous prophets was absorbed. In
Christianity the vision is that of the Triune God and a unique message
of salvation and savior, hence extra ecclesiam nulla salus (no salvation
outside the church), whereas in Islam there is the One God and many
prophets. Here is to be found the major difference between how Muslims
have viewed Jews and Christians over the centuries and how Christians
have regarded Jews and Muslims as well as followers of other religions.
For Muslims, the Quran completes the message of previous sacred texts
without in any way denigrating their significance. In fact, the Torah
and the Gospels are mentioned by name as sacred scriptures along with
the Quran in the text of the Quran. Likewise, although the Prophet
terminates the long chain of prophecy, the earlier prophets lose none of
their spiritual significance. Rather, they appear in the Islamic
firmament as stars, while the Prophet is like the moon in that Islamic
sky.

THE QURAN
---------

The sacred scripture of Islam, known in Arabic by many names, of which
the most famous is al-Qur’an, “the Recitation,” is considered by all
Muslims, no matter to which school they belong, as the verbatim
revelation of God’s Word made to descend into the heart, soul, and mind
of the Prophet of Islam through the agency of the archangel of
revelation, Gabriel, or Jibra’il in Arabic. Both the words and meaning
of the text are considered to be sacred, as is everything else connected
with it, such as the chanting of its verses or the calligraphy of its
phrases. Muslims are born with verses of the Book, which Muslims call
the Noble Quran, read into their ears, live throughout their lives
hearing its verses and also repeating certain of its chapters during
daily prayers, are married with the accompaniment of Quranic
recitations, and die hearing it chanted beside them.

The Quran (also known as the Koran in English) is the central theophany
of Islam, the fundamental source of its metaphysics, cosmology,
theology, law, ethics, sacred history, and general worldview. In a way
the soul of the traditional Muslim is like a mosaic made up of phrases
of the Quran, which are repeated throughout life, such as the basmalah,
“In the Name of God, the Infinitely Good, the All-Merciful,” with which
all legitimate acts begin and are consecrated; alh. amduli’Llah, “Praise
be to God,” with which one terminates an act or event in the attitude of
gratefulness; insha’a’Llah, “If God wills,” which accompanies every
utterance concerning the future, for the future is in God’s Hands and
nothing takes place save through His Will. Even the daily greeting of
Muslims, al-salamu ‘alaykum, “Peace be upon you,” which the Prophet
taught to his companions as the greeting of the people of paradise,
comes from the Quran. As some Western scholars of Islam have noted,
there is perhaps no single book that is as influential in any religion
as the Quran is in Islam.

To fully understand the significance of the Quran, a Westerner with a
Christian background should realize that, although the Quran can in a
sense be compared to the Old and New Testaments, a more profound
comparison would be with Christ himself. In Christianity both the spirit
and body of Christ are sacred, and he is considered the Word of God. The
Quran is likewise for Muslims the Word of God (kalimat*Allah* ), and
both its inner meaning, or spirit, and its body, or outer form, the text
in the Arabic language in which it was revealed, are sacred to Muslims.
Arabic is the sacred language of Islam and Quranic Arabic plays a role
in Islam analogous to the role of the body of Christ in Christianity.

Moreover, as Christians consume bread and wine as symbols of the flesh
and blood of Christ, Muslims pronounce, using the same organ of the
body, that is, the mouth, the Word of God in the daily prayers. The
rationalist and agnostic methods of higher criticism applied by certain
Western scholars to the text of the Quran, which was not compiled over a
long period of time like the Old and the New Testaments, is as painful
and as much a blasphemy to Muslims as it would be to believing
Christians if some Muslim archeologists claimed to have discovered some
physical remain of Christ and were using DNA analysis to determine
whether he was born miraculously or was the son of Joseph.

In any case, for Muslims themselves, Sunni and Shi‘ite alike, there is
but a single text of the Quran consisting of 114 chapters of over 6,000
verses revealed to the Prophet of Islam in Mecca and Medina over the
twenty-three years of his prophetic mission. As verses were received and
then uttered by him, they would be memorized by companions, who were
Arabs with prodigious memories. The verses were also written down by
scribes. The order of the chapters of the Quran was also given by the
Prophet through Divine command. During the caliphate of the third
caliph, ‘Uthman, some twenty years after the death of the Prophet, as
many of those who had memorized the Quran were dying in various battles,
the complete text of the Quran was copied in several manuscripts and
sent to the four corners of the Islamic world. Later copies are based on
this early definitive collection.

It is said in Islam that God gives to each prophet a miracle
corresponding to what was important in his time. Since magic was so
significant in Egypt, God gave Moses the power to turn his staff into a
serpent. Since medicine was such an important art at the time of Christ,
God gave him the miracle of raising the dead to life. And since poetic
eloquence was the most prized of all virtues for pre-Islamic Arabs, God
revealed through the Prophet by far the most eloquent of all Arabic
works. In fact, the greatest miracle of Islam is said to be the
eloquence of the Quran. Its eloquence not only moved the heart and soul
of those Arabs of the seventh century who first heard it, but also moves
to tears Muslim believers throughout the world today, even those whose
mother tongue is not Arabic, although Arabic is the language of daily
prayers for all Muslims, Arab and non-Arab alike. The grace, or barakah
(corresponding both etymologically and in meaning to the Hebrew barak),
of the text transcends its mental message and moves souls toward God in
much the same way that hearing Gregorian chant in Latin would for
centuries in the West deeply affect even those who did not understand
the

Latin words. Of course, the same can be said for the Latin Mass itself,
whose beautiful liturgy was of the deepest significance for some fifteen
hundred years even for those Catholics who did not know Latin.

The Quran has many names, each revealing an aspect of its reality. It is
al-Qur’an, or “recitation,” which also means “gathering” or
“concentration.” It is al-Furqan, or “discernment,” because it provides
the criteria for discerning between truth and falsehood, goodness and
evil, beauty and ugliness. It is Umm al-kitab, the archetypal book
containing the root of all knowledge, and it is al-Huda, the guide for
the journey of men and women toward God. For Muslims, the Quran is the
source of all knowledge both outward and inward, the foundation of the
Law, the final guide for ethical behavior, and a net with which the
Divine Fisherman ensnares the human soul and brings it back to Unity.

The Quran contains several grand themes. First of all, it deals with the
nature of reality, with the Divine Reality and Its relation to the realm
of relativity. Second, the Quran says much about the natural world, and
in a sense the Islamic sector of the cosmos participates in the Quranic
revelation. Then the Quran contains many pages on sacred history, but
the episodes of this history are recounted more for their significance
as lessons for the inner life of the soul than as historical accounts of
ages past. Sacred history in the Quran contains, above all, moral and
spiritual lessons for us here and now.

The Quran also deals with laws for the individual and society and is the
most important source of Islamic Law, or the*Shari‘ah* . Furthermore,
the Quran comes back again and again to the question of ethics, of good
and evil, of the significance of living a virtuous life. Finally, the
Quran speaks, especially in its last chapters, in majestic language
about eschatological events, about the end of this world, about the Day
of Judgment, paradise, purgatory, and hell.

The language of the Quran, especially in dealing with eschatological
realities, is concrete and symbolic, not abstract, or descriptive in the
ordinary sense, which would in any case be impossible when one is
dealing with realities our earthly imaginations cannot grasp. This trait
has caused many outsiders to criticize the Quran for its sensuous
description of the delights of paradise as if they were simply a
sublimation of earthly joys and pleasures. In reality every joy and
delight here below, especially sexuality, which is sacred for Islam, is
the reflection of a paradisal prototype, not vice versa.

According to the Prophet and many of the earliest authorities such as
‘Ali and Ja‘far al-Sadiq, the Quran has many levels of meaning, of which
the highest is known to God alone. In the same way that God is both the
Outward (al-Z. ahir) and the Inward (al-Bat.in), His Book also has an
outward and an inward dimension or, in fact, several levels of inner
meaning. Throughout Islamic history, Quranic commentaries have been
written from both points of view, the outward and the inward. The first
is called tafsir and the second ta’wil. Works of both categories are
crucial for the understanding of the text of the Quran, each word and
letter of which is like a living being with many levels of significance,
including a numerical

symbolism, which is studied in the science called jafr, corresponding to
Jewish and Christian Kabbala.

The chapters*(surahs)* and verses*(ayahs)* of the Quran are both the
path and the guidepost in the Muslim’s earthly journey. The root of
everything Islamic, from metaphysics and theology to law and ethics to
the sciences and arts, is to be found in it. Every movement that has
begun in Islamic history, whether religious, intellectual, social, or
political, has sought legitimization in the Quran, and the permanent
flow of the daily life of traditional Muslims unaffected by such
movements has also been marked in the deepest sense by the presence of
the Quran. Jurists have sought to interpret its legal verses and Sufis
its inner meaning. Philosophers have drawn from its philosophical
utterances and theologians have debated its assertions about the nature
of God’s Attributes and His relation to the world. Today, as when it was
revealed, the Quran remains the central reality of Islam and the heart
of Muslim life in both its individual and social aspects.

THE PROPHET OF ISLAM
--------------------

The Prophet of Islam, to whom we shall henceforth refer simply as the
Prophet, is for the West the most misunderstood reality within the
Islamic universe. For over a millennium he has been maligned in various
European sources as an apostate, a pretender, and even the Antichrist,
and one has had to wait well over a thousand years until the twentieth
century to see fair treatments of him appear in European languages.
Until recently, Christians usually compared him, of course very
unfavorably, to Christ, assuming that he holds the same position in
Islam as Christ does in Christianity.

Westerners therefore called Islam Mohammadanism until a few decades ago,
a term detested by Muslims, and concentrated their attacks against him
in order to vilify Islam. Even those who admitted to his remarkable
achievements in this world refused to accept him as a prophet.

Christian attacks against him were, in fact, the most painful and
divisive element in Islam’s relationship with Christianity over the
centuries. Even today the general misunderstanding of the Prophet in the
West remains a major obstacle to mutual understanding. In modern times
certain Western writers opposed to Christianity tried to use the Prophet
as an instrument in their attacks on Christianity without any real
appreciation or understanding of the Prophet himself.

Rarely does one find in earlier Western history a figure such as the
German poet Goethe, who harbored deep respect and even love for the
Prophet.

To understand the heart of Islam it is, therefore, essential to
understand the significance of the Prophet from the point of view of
traditional Muslims-not that of either Muslim modernists who neglect his
spiritual dimension or the so-called puritan reformers who for other
reasons belittle his significance in the total religious economy of
Islam.

The Quran asserts clearly that the Prophet was a man and not divine, but
also adds that God chose him as His final messenger, the “Seal of
Prophets,” that he was given the most exalted and noble character, and
that he was chosen as a model for Muslims to emulate as mentioned in the
verse, “Verily you have in the Messenger of God an excellent exemplar
for him

who looks to God and the Last Day and remembers God often” (32:21). This
verse is the basis for the emulation of the Sunnah, or wonts (in the
sense of actions and deeds) of the Prophet, that is central to the whole
of Islam. For Muslims, the Prophet is a mortal man*(bashar)* , but also
God’s most perfect creature, or what the Sufis, the mystics of Islam,
call the Universal Man (al-insan al-kamil). As a Sufi poem recited often
throughout the Islamic world asserts, Muhammad is a man, but not like
other men. Rather, he is a ruby and other men are like stones.

The Prophet was born in Mecca in the “Year of the Elephant,” that is,
570 C.E., into an aristocratic branch of a major tribe of Mecca known as
the Quraysh. His own family descended from Hashim, and so he and his
descendants are known as Hashimites, which was a branch of the Quraysh.
His father, ‘Abd*Allah* , died before he was born and his mother,
Aminah, also died when Muh.ammad, whose most famous name means “the most
praised one,” was very young, leaving him an orphan. He was brought up
in the household of his uncle Abu T. alib, the father of ‘Ali, the
fourth Sunni caliph and the first Imam of Shi‘ism.

The young Muhammad also spent some time with the Bedouins in the desert
to master Arabic eloquence and to learn their ways, which had been the
custom of the people of Mecca from ancient times. From his early days he
was known for his honesty and sincerity and given the title of al-Amin,
“the Trusted One.” He also had a strong contemplative tendency, which
caused him to retreat often into the desert for prayer. Although the
Meccans at that time practiced a crass form of idolatry, there were
among them those who still followed the primordial monotheism of Abraham
and are referred to in the Quran as the hunafa’, the primordialists.

The Prophet was one such person and believed in the one God even before
being chosen as prophet.

As a young man Muhammad began to travel with caravans to Syria, and
Muslims believe that it was during one of these trips that a Christian
monk, Bah. irah, predicted that he would become a prophet. Because of
his honesty and earnestness, which had become famous, he attracted the
attention of a wealthy businesswoman of Mecca, Khadijah, who was fifteen
years his senior, but who proposed marriage and asked him to manage her
business affairs. Muh.ammad accepted and had a very happy marriage, from
which issued four daughters, the most famous of whom is Fat.imah. She
later married ‘Ali and is the mother of all the descendants of the
Prophet, who are called sayyids or sharifs and who have played an
extraordinary role in Islamic history. The Prophet had a monogamous
marriage until Khadijah died when he was fifty years old. It was only in
the last years of his life that he contracted other marriages, mostly
for the political purpose of unifying the various tribes of Arabia.

When Muh.ammad was forty years old and praying in a cave called al-H.
ira’ near Mecca, the archangel Gabriel came to him with the first verses
of the revelation that constitutes the beginning of Surah 96, “The
Clot.” Thus began his prophetic mission, which was to be carried out in
the most difficult situation conceivable, for the message was one of
uncompromising monotheism in a city that was the center of Arabian
idolatry. The Ka‘bah, or

the House of God, which stands at the center of Mecca and is the most
holy site in Islam, was built originally, according to Muslim belief, by
Adam himself and rebuilt by Abraham. But this primordial sanctuary had
now become filled with the idols of various tribes who would regularly
visit Mecca for the purpose of pilgrimage. Mecca had therefore also
become a major center for trade, and much of the power and wealth of
Meccans derived from the presence of the Ka‘bah in their city. The
message of the Prophet struck therefore at the heart of not only the
religion, but also the source of power and wealth of the people of his
own city, including his family.

At first only Khadijah, ‘Ali, and the Prophet’s old friend Abu Bakr
accepted the message that was revealed to him.

Gradually, however, a number of others, including such eminent
personalities as ‘Umar ibn al-Khat.t.ab, who was later to become the
second caliph after Abu Bakr, and ‘Uthman ibn ‘Affan, the future third
caliph, embraced Islam. The very success of the Prophet’s mission made
the opposition to him and his followers more severe every day.

There were several attempts on his life until, in the year 622

C.E., after agreements made with emissaries sent from the city of
Yathrib to the north to Mecca, he migrated by Divine command to that
city along with his followers. That migration, called al-hijrah in
Arabic, marks the major turning point in Islamic history, when Islam was
transformed from a small group of devotees to a full-fledged community.

Yathrib became known as Madinat al-nabi, the City of the Prophet, and is
known to this day as Medina. Here the first Islamic society, which has
remained the ideal model for all later Islamic societies, was founded.

Shortly before the migration, an event of supreme spiritual and
religious significance took place in the Prophet’s life, an event that
is also mentioned in the Quran. According to Islamic tradition, he was
taken on what is called the Nocturnal Journey, or al-mi‘raj, on a
supernatural horse, called al-Buraq, by Gabriel from Mecca to Jerusalem.
Then, from the place where the mosque of the Dome of the Rock is now
located, he was taken through all of the heavens, that is, all the
higher states of being, to the Divine Presence Itself, meeting on the
journey earlier prophets such as Moses and Jesus. The mi‘raj is the
prototype of all spiritual wayfaring and realization in Islam, and its
architecture even served as a model for Dante’s Divine Comedy. The
experiences of this celestial journey, moreover, constitute the inner
reality of the Islamic daily prayers and also the bringing to completion
the performance of their outward form.

It was during this journey that the Prophet reached the Divine Presence,
beyond even the paradisal states at the station that marks the boundary
of universal existence; beyond this station, which the Quran calls the
Lote Tree of the Uttermost End, there is only the hidden mystery of God
known to Himself alone. It was in this most exalted state that the
Prophet received the revelation that contains what many consider to be
the heart of the credo of Islam:

“The Messenger believeth, and the faithful believe, in what has been
revealed unto him from his Lord. Each one believeth in God and His
angels

and His books and His messengers: we make no distinction between any of
His messengers. And they say: we hear and we obey: grant us, Thou our
Lord, Thy forgiveness; unto Thee is the ultimate becoming” (2:285).3

Jerusalem had been the first direction that Muslims faced when
praying*(qiblah)* , before it was replaced by Mecca by Divine order, and
is also considered to be the site of the eschatological events at the
end of time according to Islamic tradition. But the Nocturnal Journey
made Jerusalem even more significant for Muslims. In fact, the three
holy cities of Islam, namely, Mecca, Medina, and Jerusalem, are
inextricably intertwined with the life of the Prophet.

In Medina the nascent community was confronted immediately with attacks
from the Meccans, and several wars called maghaziwere fought in which
the Muslims prevailed usually against unbelievable odds. Finally, the
message of Islam spread throughout Arabia. The Prophet returned in
triumph to Mecca, forgiving all those who had done so much to harm him
and his followers. He purified the Ka‘bah of the idols in and on top of
it and then performed, along with other rites, circumambulations of the
House of God, following the footsteps of Abraham, a pilgrimage called
hajj, which continues to this day, being one of the “pillars,” or
fundamental elements, of the religion. But he did not remain in the city
of his birth and upbringing.

Rather, he returned to Medina, where he died in 632 after three days of
illness. He was buried in his own apartment, which was adjacent to the
mosque he had built. Called the Mosque of the Prophet, or Masjid
al-nabi, it is the original model of all later mosques and is visited to
this day by millions of Muslim pilgrims every year from all over the
world.

The Prophet died having unified Arabia, ended the prevalent violence,
and created peace among tribes that had been fighting each other since
time immemorial. With few means, a man who had been an orphan and who
had suffered in countless ways, laid the foundations for a new religious
society and civilization that was soon to make its mark upon a large
portion of the world and begin a new chapter in human history. This
summary account of the life of the Prophet brings into focus the way in
which Muslims view the life of the founder of their religion. In order
to understand Islam, it is essential to grasp the significance of this
account for Muslims and not to accept blindly what earlier revisionist
Christian polemicists or contemporary agnostic historians may have
written in the West about him.

To comprehend the significance of the Prophet in Islam, it is necessary
to remember that the great founders of religions are of two types. The
first constitutes the category of those figures who preach detachment
from the world and a spiritual life that does not become entangled with
ordinary worldly matters with all their ambiguities and complexities.

Supreme examples of this type are found in Christ and the Buddha, both
of whom founded what were originally small spiritual communities
divorced from and not integrated into the political, social, and
economic conditions of the larger society. Christ who said that his
kingdom was not of this world did not marry and was not the leader and
ruler of a whole human society, and the Buddha left the married life of
a prince to devote himself to the monastic life and the attainment of
illumination.

The second type is exemplified by Moses, David, and Solomon in the
Abrahamic world and by Rama and Krishna in Hinduism. Such figures,
whether seen as prophets or avatars, entered into the complexity of the
ordinary human order to transform and sanctify it. The Hebrew prophets
as well as some avataric figures from Hinduism were also political
leaders and rulers of a human community. They were married and had
children and therefore appear to those who have been brought up gazing
upon the dazzling spiritual perfection of Christ or the Buddha as being
too immersed in the life of the world and therefore less perfect.

Such a judgment neglects the truth that once Christianity and Buddhism
became religions of a whole society, they too had to deal with the
earthly realities of human society, with justice, war and peace, and the
question of family and sexual relations.

In any case, the Prophet must be seen as belonging to the second
category. His contemplativeness was inward, while outwardly he had to
face nearly every possible human situation. He experienced being an
orphan, living the life of a merchant, suffering persecution. He grieved
deeply the loss of his beloved wife Khadijah and his two-year-old son
Ibrahim, but he also knew the happiness of family life and of final
triumph in the world. He, who loved solitude and contemplation, had to
deal with the affairs of men and women, with all their frailties and
shortcomings. He had to rule over a whole society and to sit as judge in
cases of one party’s complaints against another. One might say that his
mission was to sanctify all of life and to create an equilibrium in
human life that could serve as the basis for surrender and effacement
before the Divine Truth.

In every religion all the virtues of its adherents derive from those
existing in the founder of the religion. In the same way that no
Christian can claim to have any virtue that was not possessed to the
utmost extent by Christ, no Muslim can have any virtue that was not
possessed in the most eminent degree by the Prophet. More specifically,
the Prophet exemplifies the virtues of humility; nobility, magnanimity
and charity; and truthfulness and sincerity. For Muslims, the Prophet is
the perfect model of total humility before God and neighbor; nobility
and magnanimity of soul, which means to be strict with oneself but
generous, charitable, and forgiving to others; and finally, perfect
sincerity, which means to be totally truthful to oneself and to God.
This crowning Islamic virtue requires the melting of our ego before God,
for, as a Sufi saying asserts, “He whose soul melteth not away like snow
in the hand of religion [that is, the Truth], in his hand religion like
snow away doth melt.”4

Love for the Prophet is incumbent upon all Muslims and in fact
constitutes a basic aspect of Islamic religious life. It might be said
that this love is the key for the love of God, for in order to love God,
God must first love us, and God does not love a person who does not love
His messenger.

The Prophet is also held in the greatest esteem and respect. He has many
names, such as Ahmad (“the most praiseworthy of those who praise God”),
‘Abd*Allah* (“servant of God”), Abu’l-Qasim (“Father of Qasim”), and
al-Amin (“the Trusted One”), as well as Muh.ammad.

Whenever any of these names are mentioned, they are followed with the
formulaic phrase, “May peace and blessings be upon him.” It is
considered a sign of disrespect to mention his name or the name of any
of the other prophets without invoking the benediction of peace upon
them.

The invocation of benediction upon the Prophet is so central for Muslims
that it might be said to be the only act that is performed by both God
and human beings, for, as the Quran says, “Verily, God and His angels
shower blessings upon the Prophet. O ye who have faith! Ask blessings on
him and salute him with a worthy salutation” (33:56).

The love and respect for the Prophet also extends to other prophets who
remain spiritually alive in the Islamic universe. In fact, Muslims do
not consider the fact that the message of the Prophet was conclusive to
mean that it was also exclusive. The Prophet is for them both the person
they love and admire as God’s most perfect creature and the continuation
of the long chain of prophets to whom he is inwardly connected. A pious
Muslim would never think of praising the Prophet while denigrating the
prophets who came before him, particularly those mentioned in the Quran.
In the metaphysical sense, the Prophet is both a manifestation of the
Logos and the Logos itself, both the beginning of the prophetic cycle
and its end, and, being its end and seal, he contains from an essential
and inward point of view the whole prophetic function within himself.

It is in this sense that Mah.mud Shabistari sang of the Prophet, using
his esoteric name Ah. mad, in his Gulshan-i raz (“The Secret Garden of
Divine Mysteries”):

Since the number hundred has come, ninety is also with us. The name of
Ahmad is the name of all the prophets.

The love for the Prophet, therefore, far from diminishing respect for
other prophets, has only increased the admiration of Muslims for the
prophets who preceded the Prophet of Islam and for whom he himself held
the greatest respect, as reflected in the many traditions, or sayings,
transmitted from him.

These sayings, called in the plural ah. adith, were assembled after his
death and, after much critical study, collected in canonical collections
by both Sunni and Shi‘ite scholars.

They form, after the Quran, the most important source of everything
Islamic and constitute, in fact, the first commentary upon the Quran.
Technically, the*Hadith* is part of the Sunnah, which means all the
doings or wonts of the Prophet. The*Sunnah* is the model upon which
Muslims have based their lives, including the rituals ordained by the
Quran. Along with the teachings of the Quran, the*Sunnah* is the primary
cause for the unity so observable among Muslims from so many diverse
ethnic groups and cultures. As for the Hadith, some deal with the most
sublime spiritual truths and others with everyday aspects of life, such
as how to carry out an economic transaction justly or how to deal fairly
with one’s family. They include such sayings as:

“No person is a true believer unless he desires for his brother that
which he desires for himself.”

“Illumine your hearts by hunger, and strive to conquer your ego by
hunger and thirst; continue to knock at the gates of Paradise by
hunger.”

“To honor an old person is to show respect for God.”

“There are heavenly rewards for every act of kindness to a live animal.”

“God is beautiful and He loves beauty.”

“Charity is a duty for every Muslim. He who has not the means thereto,
let him do a good act or abstain from an evil one. That is his charity.”

“When the bier of anyone passes by you, whether Jew, Christian, or
Muslim, rise to your feet.”

“God is pure and loves purity and cleanliness.”

“The best jihad is the conquest of the self.”

“Heaven lies at the feet of mothers.”

“The key to Paradise is prayer.”

“God saith, ‘I fulfill the faith of whosoever puts his faith in Me, and
I am with him, and near him, when he remembers Me.’”

The spiritual reality of the Prophet is ever present in Islamic society
through the living character of his*Sunnah* and the authority of his
Hadith. It is moreover experienced through the grace that emanates from
his spiritual reality and is called “Muh.ammadan barakah,” a grace that
is ever present in the life of Sufism, in the litanies chanted in honor
of the Prophet, in the visitation to holy sites throughout the Islamic
world, which are like so many extensions of Medina, and in the heart of
all Muslims for whom the love of the Prophet is both the necessary
concomitant and means of access to the love of God. This love for the
Prophet also entails love and respect for other messengers, to which the
Quran refers so frequently. Even the Islamic definition of faith
(al-iman) states the necessity of having faith in God, His angels, and
His messengers, not only His messenger. As the Quran states, “O ye who
believe! Believe in God and His messenger and the Scripture which He has
revealed unto His messenger and the Scripture which He revealed before.
Whosoever disbelieves in God, His angels and His Scriptures and His
messengers and the Last Day, he verily has wandered far away” (4:136).
It is not only disbelief in the messenger, but in all of God’s
messengers that leads a person away from the path of correct belief and
faithfulness. But, of course, to be a Muslim requires specifically the
acceptance of the messengership and prophethood of Muhammad; hence the
second testification*(shahadah)* of Islam, Muh.ammadun rasul*Allah*
(“Muh. ammad is the Messenger of God”). Through this pronouncement along
with the first shahadah a person formally becomes a Muslim. The first
shahadah, La ilaha illa’Llah (“There is no god but God”) is by itself in
fact universal testimony to the acceptance of religion as such, to
al-din, which lies at the heart not only of Islam, but of all the
authentic religions revealed before the descent of the Quran.

ISLAM’S ATTITUDE TOWARD OTHER RELIGIONS IN HISTORY
--------------------------------------------------

In light of what has been said of the Islamic conception of revelation
and religious diversity, it is important to mention that before modern
times Islam was the only revealed religion to have had direct contact
with nearly all the

major religions of the world. It had met Judaism and Christianity in its
birthplace in Arabia and afterward in Palestine, Syria, and Egypt; the
Iranian religions such as Zoroastrianism and Manichaeism after its
conquest of Persia in the seventh century;

Hinduism and Buddhism in eastern Persia and India shortly thereafter;
the Chinese religions through the Silk Route as well as through Muslim
merchants who traveled to Canton and other Chinese ports; the African
religions soon after the spread of Islam into Black Africa some fourteen
hundred years ago; and Siberian Shamanism in the form of the archaic
religions of the Turkic and Mongolian peoples as they descended into the
Islamic world. Centuries ago Zoroaster and the Buddha were common
household names among Muslims of the eastern lands of the Islamic world,
especially Persia. Indian Muslims had come to know of Krishna and Rama a
thousand years ago. The Persian polymath al-Biruni had composed a major
work on India in the eleventh century, one that is still a valuable
source of knowledge for medieval Hinduism. Furthermore, numerous works
of classical Hinduism and some of Buddhism were translated into Persian
centuries ago, including the Upanishads and the Bhagavad Gita. Chinese
Muslim scholars knew the Confucian classics and many considered
Confucius and Lao-Tze prophets.

The global nature of the religious knowledge of a learned Muslim sitting
in Isfahan in the fourteenth century was very different from that of a
scholastic thinker in Paris or Bologna of the same period. On the basis
of the Quranic doctrine of religious universality and the vast
historical experiences of a global nature, Islamic civilization
developed a cosmopolitan and worldwide religious perspective unmatched
before the modern period in any other religion.

This global vision is still part and parcel of the worldview of
traditional Muslims, of those who have not abandoned their universal
vision as a result of the onslaught of modernism or reactions to this
onslaught in the form of what has come to be called “fundamentalism.”

Within this global religious context, it is, of course, the Jewish and
Christian traditions with which Islam has the greatest affinity. The
Hebrew prophets and Christ are deeply respected by Muslims. The Virgin
Mary is considered by the Quran to hold the most exalted spiritual
position among women. A chapter of the Quran is named after her, and she
is the only woman mentioned by name in Islam’s sacred scripture.
Moreover, the miraculous birth of Christ from a virgin mother is
recognized in the Quran.

Respect for such teachings is so strong among Muslims that today, in
interreligious dialogues with Christians and Jews, Muslims are often
left defending traditional Jewish and Christian doctrines such as the
miraculous birth of Christ before modernist interpreters who would
reduce them to metaphors and the sacred history of the Hebrew prophets
to at best inspired stories.

The sacred figures of Judaism and Christianity are often mentioned in
the Quran and even in prayers said on various occasions. The tombs of
the Hebrew prophets, who are also Islamic prophets, are revered and
visited in pilgrimage by Muslims to this day. One need only recall the
holiness for

Muslims of the tomb of Abraham in al-Khalil, or Hebron, in Palestine, of
that of Joshua in Jordan, and of Moses’ resting place on Mt. Nebo, also
in Jordan. Some Muslims have occasionally criticized intellectually and
also engaged militarily Jews and Christians, but they have not
criticized the Jewish prophets or Christ (even if certain theological
differences with followers of Judaism and Christianity did exist), at
least not those who have heeded the call of the Quran and understood its
message. Islam sees itself as the third of the Abrahamic religions,
which are bound together by countless theological, ethical, and
eschatological beliefs even though they are marked by differences willed
by God.

To speak of the Judeo-Christian tradition against which Islam is pitted
as the “other” is an injustice to the message of Abraham and also
theologically false, no matter how convenient it might be for some
people. There is as much difference between Judaism and Christianity as
there is between Christianity and Islam. In certain domains Judaism is
closer to Islam than it is to Christianity: it has a sacred language,
Hebrew, like Arabic in Islam, and it has a sacred law, the Halakhah,
corresponding to the*Shari‘ah* .

Furthermore, they share an opposition to all forms of idolatry and to
the creation of iconic sacred art, which would allow an image of the
Divinity to be painted or sculpted. In certain other ways Islam is
closer to Christianity: both emphasize the immortality of the soul,
eschatological realities, and the accent on the inner life. Then there
are those basic principles upon which all three religions agree: the
Oneness of God, prophecy, sacred scripture, much of sacred history, and
basic ethical norms such as the sanctity of life, reverence for the laws
of God, humane treatment of others, honesty in all human dealings,
kindness toward the neighbor, the application of justice, and so forth.
Islam is an inalienable and inseparable part of the Abrahamic family of
religions and considers itself to be closely linked with the two
monotheistic religions that preceded it. Islam envisages itself the
complement of those religions and the final expression of Abrahamic
monotheism, confirming the teachings of Judaism and Christianity, but
rejecting any form of exclusivism.

WHO IS A BELIEVER AND WHO IS AN INFIDEL?
----------------------------------------

With this framework in mind, it will be easier to understand the
categorization in Islam of people into believers (*mu’mins* ) and what
has been translated in the West as “infidels” or
“nonbelievers”*(kafirs)* , which means literally “those who cover over
the truth.” Every religion has a way of distinguishing itself from the
other religions. Judaism speaks of Jews and Gentiles, and Christianity
of the faithful and the heathens or pagans. Each of these
categorizations has both a theological and a popular and historical root
related to the self-understanding as well as the history of that
religion. In the case of Islam, the distinction is based more on the
question of faith, or iman, and less on the more general term islam. In
the Quran faith implies a higher level of participation in the religion,
as we shall discuss in the next chapter, and even today only those who
take their religion very seriously and are virtuous are called*mu’min*
(or possessors of iman). And yet the Quran does not limit the
term*mu’min* only to those who follow the Islamic religion; it includes
the faithful of Islam along with followers of other religions, as is

evidenced by the Quranic assertion, “Verily, those who have faith [in
what is revealed to the Prophet] and those who are Jews and Christians
and Sabaeans-whosoever has faith in God and the Last Day and does
right-surely their reward is with their Lord, and no fear shall overcome
them and neither shall they grieve” (2:62). In this verse as well as
verse 69 of Surah5 (“The Table Spread”), which nearly repeats the same
message, recognition of other religions is extended even beyond Judaism,
Christianity, and Sabaeanism to include “whosoever has faith in God,”
and the possibility of salvation is also made explicitly universal.
Likewise, the boundary between the Muslim faithful and the faithful of
other religions is lifted. One could therefore say that in the most
universal sense whoever has faith and accepts the One God, nor the
Supreme Principle, is a believer, or mu’min, and whoever does not is an
infidel, or a kafir, whatever the nominal and external ethnic and even
religious identification of that person might be.

As a result of this explicit universality of the Quranic text, the use
of the terms “believer” or “faithful” and “infidel” or “nonbeliever” is
much more complicated than what we find in Christianity. In Islam there
is, first of all, the Sufi metaphysical view of absolute Truth, which is
seen to be beyond all duality, even beyond the dichotomy of iman and
kufr, or faith and infidelity; yet, to reach that transcendent Truth
beyond all duality one must begin with faith and start from the formal
foundations of Islam, which distinguishes itself clearly from kufr. The
esoteric understanding of kufr and iman, so prevalent in classical Sufi
poetry, especially among the Persian poets such as Rumi, Shabistari, and
H. afiz. must not, therefore, be confused with the prevalent idea in
certain Western circles that one can reach the absolute Truth by simply
avoiding the world of faith as well as infidelity. On the levels of
external religious forms, iman has to do with truth and kufr with
falsehood. This dichotomy is not destroyed by the exhortation of the
Sufis to go beyond kufr and iman, which means to reach tawhid, or
oneness beyond all oppositions and dichotomies.

On the formal and popular plane, traditional Muslims have often used the
category of “believer” or “faithful” for Muslims as well as followers of
other religions, especially Christians and Jews. But there have been
also historical periods in which the term “faithful” was reserved for
Muslims and kafir, or “infidel,” was used for non-Muslims, as in the
Ottoman Empire, where Europeans were called kuffar, infidels. The
situation is, however, made even more complicated by the fact that
throughout Islamic history certain Muslim groups have called other
Muslim groups infidels, some even going to the extent of treating them
in practice as enemies. For example, during early Islamic history the
Khawarij, who opposed both the Sunnis and Shi‘ites as infidels, attacked
both groups physically and militarily. Later, Isma‘ilis were considered
kuffar by many Sunni scholars, and even in mainstream Islam over the
centuries some Sunni and Twelve-Imam Shi‘ite scholars have called each
other kafir. In the eighteenth century the Wahhabi movement, which began
in Najd in Arabia, considered orthodox Sunnis and Shi‘ites both not to
be genuine Muslims, and often cast the anathema of being infidels, or
what is called takfir, upon them, while many Ottoman H. anaf i scholars
considered the Wahhabis themselves to be kuffar.

The prevalent image in the West that all Muslims are united as the
faithful against the infidels-even if some wellknown Christian preachers
repeat to their flocks this assertion made by some extremists within the
Islamic world-is simply not true. There have always been those who have
spoken of the necessity of the unity of Muslims as the faithful, and in
a certain sense that unity has been always there despite diversity on
many levels. But the whole question of who is a believer, or a person of
faith, and who is an unbeliever, or infidel, requires a much more
nuanced answer than is usually given in generally available sources.

Moreover, the term kafir has both a theological and judicial definition
and a popular political and social definition, and the two should not be
confused. In the conscience of many devout Muslims, a pious Christian or
Jew is still seen as a believer, while an agnostic with an Arabic or
Persian name is seen as a kafir. And the anathema of kufr, far from
involving only outsiders, has also concerned various groups within the
Islamic world itself. Today, even while some Muslims hold “infidels”
responsible for the onslaught of a secularist culture from the West,
they also use the same characterization for those within the Islamic
world itself who, while still formally Muslim, accept and preach
secularist ideas that negate the very foundations of the Islamic
revelation.

As a matter of fact, secularism is the common enemy of all the Abrahamic
traditions, and the erosion of moral authority in secular societies that
we observe today poses as many problems for Jews and Christians as it
does for Muslims.

ISLAM AND RELIGIOUS PLURALISM TODAY
-----------------------------------

Muslims today continue to experience the presence of other religions in
their midst as they have done over the centuries. In the middle part of
the Islamic world there are Christian minorities, the largest being in
Egypt, and still some Jews, especially in Iran and Turkey, although most
of the Jews from Arab countries migrated to Israel after 1948. There are
still Zoroastrians in Iran, and Muslims live with Hindus in India, of
course, but also in Bangladesh, Nepal, Malaysia, and Indonesia, and with
Buddhists in Sri Lanka, Thailand, Ladakh, Burma, China, and elsewhere.
They also live with Confucians and Taoists not in only China, but also
in Malaysia and Indonesia. By and large, through most periods of Islamic
history, the relation between Muslims and religious minorities living in
their midst has been peaceful. Exceptions have arisen when severe
political issues, such as the partition of Palestine or India, have
altered ordinary relations between Muslims and followers of other
religions. Today, despite some abuses here and there issuing from
socalled fundamentalist currents in various Islamic countries, religious
minorities in the Islamic world usually fare better than Muslim
minorities do in other lands, except in America and some Western
countries, where they have been able to practice their religion until
now without manifest or hidden restrictions. All one has to do is to
compare the situation of the Christian minorities of Syria, Iraq, and
Iran, three states not known for their leaning toward the West, with
Muslim minorities in China, the Philippines, India, and the Russian
Caucasus, not to speak of the

Balkans, where the horror inflicted by Christian Serbs upon Muslim
Bosnians and Kosovars is still fresh in everyone’s memory.

The peaceful presence in the Islamic world of various religious
minorities, especially Christians, has been upset to a large extent in
recent times by Western missionary activity, which has caused severe
reaction not only among Muslims, but also among Hindus, Buddhists, and
others. This question of Christian missionary activity (of the Western
churches, not Orthodoxy) is a complicated matter requiring an extensive
separate treatment, but it must be mentioned briefly here. Suffice it to
say that, as far as the Islamic world is concerned, this activity was
from the beginning of the modern period combined with colonialism, and
many Western Christian missionaries have preached as much secularized
Western culture as Christianity. Many of them have tried and still try
to propagate Christianity not through the teachings of Christ alone, but
mostly by the appeal of material aid such as rice and medicine, given in
the name of Christian charity, but with the goal of conversion.

Many of their schools have been happy if they could wean the Muslim
students away from firm belief in Islam, even if they could not make
them Christian. It is not accidental that some of the most virulent
anti-Western secularized Arab political leaders of the past decades have
been graduates of American schools in the Middle East first established
by missionaries, schools where these students were religiously and
culturally uprooted.

To understand current Islamic reactions to Christian missionary activity
in many countries, one should ask how the people of Texas and Oklahoma,
where many American evangelists come from, would respond to the
following scenario. Suppose that, with vast oil money from the Islamic
world, Islamic schools were to be established in those states. Because
of their prestige, these schools attracted the children of the most
powerful and well-todo families, and these future leaders, in attending
these schools, underwent a systematic process of cultural Arabization
even if they did not participate in the encouraged formal conversion to
Islam.

Western missionary activity is not like that of medieval Christian
preachers of the Gospels, or like the Orthodox missionaries among the
Inuits of Canada, who would adopt the language of the Inuits and even
their dress. Most modern Western missionary activity throughout Asia and
Africa has meant, above all, Westernization and globalization combined
with the cult of consumerism, all in the name of Christianity. Were
there not to be such a powerful political, economic, and even military
pressure behind the presence of these missionaries, then their presence
would be in a sense like that of Tibetan Buddhists or Muslims in Canada
or the United States and would not pose a danger to the very existence
of local religions and cultures. But the situation is otherwise, and
therefore Christian missionary activity, especially in such places as
Indonesia, Pakistan, and sub-Saharan Africa, plays a very important role
in creating tension between Islam and Christianity and indirectly the
West, which gives material and political support to these missionaries
even if, as in France, the state is avowedly secularist.

Of course, this identification with modern Western secularist and now
consumerist culture has not always been the case with all missionaries.
The French Catholic Père de Foucault lived for a long time among Muslim
North Africans as a humble witness to Christ and was greatly respected
by his Muslim neighbors, as were a number of other monks and priests.
There have also been humble Protestants who came to Muslims to represent
a presence of Christ’s message without aggressive proselytizing through
material enticement of the poor. Such exceptions have certainly existed.
Nevertheless, Western Christian missionary activity, supported as it is
directly or indirectly by all the might of the West, poses a major
problem for contemporary Muslims’

dealings with Western Christianity, in contrast to local forms of
Christianity with which Muslims have lived usually in peace for
centuries. One need only recall in this context that while Baghdad was
being bombed during the Persian Gulf War, no Iraqi Muslims attacked any
local Iraqi Christians walking down the street, whereas the reverse has
not been true since the tragic September 11 terrorist acts; a number of
American and European Muslims have been attacked and harassed as a
result of the religious, racial, and ethnic xenophobia that has been
created in certain circles by that great tragedy.

In speaking of missionary activity, it is necessary to say something
about Islamic teachings concerning apostasy*(irtidad)* , which has been
criticized by missionary circles and others in the West. According to
classical interpretations of the*Shari‘ah* , the punishment for apostasy
for a Muslim is death, and this is interpreted by many Westerners to
mean the lack of freedom of conscience in Islam. To clarify this issue,
first of all, a few words about conversion. The Quran says, “There is no
compulsion in religion” (2:256), and in most periods of Islamic history
there was no forced conversion of the “People of the Book.” In fact,
forced conversion is an affront to God and the dignity of the human
conscience created by Him. Arabia at the time of the Quranic revelation
was an exception. There the pagan Arabs who practiced a most crass form
of polytheism were given the choice of either becoming Muslims or
battling against them. It was very similar to the choice offered by
Christian to European “pagans” once Christianity gained power on that
continent. But even in Arabia, the Jews and Christians were not forced
to become Muslims.

The Shari‘ite ruling on apostasy may therefore seem strange in light of
Islam’s attitude toward other heavenly inspired religions. The reason
for such a ruling must be sought in the fact that attachment to Islam
was related before modern times to being a member of the Islamic state
as well as community, and therefore apostasy was seen as treason against
the state, not just religious conversion.

Today when the state is no longer Islamic in the traditional sense in
most Islamic countries, many religious scholars have spoken against
capital punishment for apostasy. Moreover, in practice, although the law
is still “on the books,” in many places it is hardly ever applied, as
can be seen by the presence of several million Christians converted from
Islam by Western

missionaries in recent times in such countries as Indonesia, Pakistan,
and several West African nations.

In practice this law is somewhat like laws against adultery that are
still “on the books” in England, but not applied.

Sectarian fighting between Muslims and newly converted Christians still
occurs in Indonesia, Pakistan, Nigeria, the Sudan, and a few other
places, but these have more to do with local political, economic, and
social issues than with the traditional Shari‘ite ruling about apostasy.

The traditional Shari‘ite ruling, which is now being amended by some
legal authorities and for the most part ignored because of changed
conditions, must be understood not in the context of the modern West,
where religion has been to a large extent marginalized and pushed away
from the public arena, but in the framework of the Christian West. One
only has to think what would have happened to Christians in medieval
France or seventeenthcentury Spain if they had converted to Islam. In
any case, the question of apostasy raised so often by those who ask
about Islam’s relation to other religions must be understood in both its
classical context and the present-day situation, when it is largely
overlooked because of changed conditions and is, in fact, being
reinterpreted by a number of important Islamic legal experts.

Another issue often raised in the West when discussing Islam’s relation
to other religions is that Islam does not allow the presence of
non-Muslims in a certain area around Mecca while Christianity allows
non-Christians even into the Vatican. Now, it must be understood that
each religion has its own regulations concerning sacred spaces. In
Hinduism certain areas in Benares are closed to all non-Hindus, and
Muslims respected those rules even when they ruled over that city and
did not force their way into the Monkey Temple or other sacred sites.
Like Hinduism and several other religions, Islam has a sacred space
around Mecca whose boundaries were designated by the Prophet himself and
where non-Muslims are not allowed.

That has never meant that the rest of the Islamic world has been closed
to the presence of other religions and their houses of worship. Churches
dot the skyline of Cairo, Beirut, Damascus, and many other cities, and
synagogues are also found everywhere a Jewish community lives from
Tehran to Fez. Within the Ottoman Empire in many places in the Balkans
where Jews, Christians, and Muslims lived together, synagogues,
churches, and mosques were built next to each other. To this day this
harmonious presence of different houses of worship is visible in
Istanbul itself. Outside of the harim, or sacred precinct, in Arabia, it
is the duty of the Muslim state, according to the*Shari‘ah* , to allow
the building and maintenance of houses of worship of the “People of the
Book,” and any order to the contrary is against the tenets of Islamic
Law and traditional practice.

Of course, during Islamic history there were occasions when after a
major triumph a church was converted into a mosque, as happened with the
Hagia Sophia, but the reverse also took place often, as when the Grand
Mosque of Cordova was converted into a cathedral. Altogether for Islam,
the general norm is the one established by ‘Umar, who, when he conquered
Jerusalem, ordered the Church of the Holy Sepulchre to be honored and

protected as a church. Otherwise, most of the churches in the Islamic
world that later became mosques were those abandoned by Christian
worshipers, somewhat like what one sees in some cities in Great Britain
these days.

On the intellectual plane, there is a great deal of interest in the
Islamic world today in religious dialogue, the impetus for which
originated in Christian circles mostly after World War II. In many
countries, such as Morocco, Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, Iran,
Malaysia, and Indonesia, religious dialogue has even been encouraged by
governments as well as by individuals and religious organizations.
Numerous conferences have been held in many parts of the world with
Protestants, Catholics, and more recently Orthodox Christians; with
Hindus in India and Indonesia; and with Buddhists and Confucians in
Malaysia. Because of the Palestinian-Israeli problem, the dialogue with
Judaism has been somewhat more difficult, but even that has also
continued to some extent in both the Middle East and the West. In these
dialogues scholars from many different schools of thought have
participated, both those within the Islamic world and those Muslims
living in the West. There have been some exclusivists who have opposed
such dialogues, as one sees also among Christians and Jews, but the
activity of religious dialogue has gone on for decades in the Islamic
world and is now an important part of the current Islamic religious and
intellectual landscape.

Even on the more theoretical and philosophical level, what has come to
be known as religious pluralism has become a matter of great interest
and a major intellectual challenge in many Islamic countries today,
including some of those called “fundamentalist” in the West. There is no
country in the Islamic world in which there is greater interest in the
theological and philosophical questions involved in the issue of
religious pluralism than Iran. There works of such famous Protestant and
Catholic writers on the subject as John Hick and Hans Küng have been
translated and are being discussed even in the public media; there the
views of traditionalist metaphysicians such as Frithjof Schuon, who
speaks of the “transcendent unity of religions,” a view that is also my
own, are part and parcel of the general intellectual discourse. The same
keen interest is also to be found in countries as different as Turkey,
Pakistan, and Malaysia.

Faced with the danger of loss of identity and the enfeeblement of
religion as a result of the onslaught of modernism with its secularist
bias, some Muslims, many very active and vocal, espouse a radical
exclusivist point of view when it comes to the question of the relation
of Islam to other religions. But for the vast majority of Muslims, the
Quranic doctrine of the universality of revelation and the plurality of
prophets under the One God still resonates deeply in their hearts and
souls, and they remain ever mindful of the many verses of the Quran
concerning the reality of One God and the multiplicity of revelations
sent by Him. When they think of their beloved Prophet, they are mindful
of these words of God:

We inspire thee [Muh.ammad] as We inspired Noah and the prophets after
him, as We inspired Abraham and Ishmael and Isaac and Jacob and the
tribes, and Jesus and Job and Jonah and Aaron and Solomon, and as We
imparted unto David the Psalms;

And messengers We have mentioned unto thee before and messengers We have
not mentioned unto thee; and God spoke directly to Moses; Messengers of
good news and warning; in order that mankind might have no argument
against God after the messengers. God is Mighty, and Wise. (4:163-65)
