CHAPTER TWO: THE SPECTRUM OF ISLAM
==================================

Sunnism, Shi‘ism, and Sufism and Traditional, Modernist, and
“Fundamentalist” Interpretations of Islam Today

***O, mankind! Verily We have created you maleand female, and have made
you nations and tribes that ye may know each other.***

***(Quran, XLIX:13)***

*Differences between the scholars of my community are a mercy from God.*

*Hadith*

ISLAMIC PATTERNS
----------------

Often in the West Islam is depicted as a monolith, and little attention
is paid to the rich diversity within both the religion and civilization
of Islam. Recent events, however, have made the Islamic world the focus
of much attention. Although the attempt by the media to deal more with
Islam is laudable, what is presented is usually highly selective and
politically charged, dominated by the Arab-Israeli conflict and
extremism manifesting itself in threats or acts of terror.

Therefore, despite greater interest in covering matters pertaining to
Islam, the reductionist message associated with extremism continues to
dominate the scene, hiding from the Western public the great diversity
of the Islamic world and the multiple interpretations of the Islamic
religion.

The vast world of Islam is actually like a Persian medallion carpet; it
has incredible diversity and complexity, yet it is dominated by a unity
into which all the complex geometric and arabesque patterns are
integrated. This complexity can be better understood if one views it as
the superimposition of a number of patterns upon the plane of the
carpet.

In the vast world of Islam also, one can gain a better grasp of the
whole by separating the patterns and seeing how each is related to
vertical and horizontal dimensions of the religion of Islam itself as
well as to cultural, ethnic, and linguistic factors. Then reuniting the
patterns and seeing how they all fit together yields a vision of the
total spectrum of Islam, in which unity leads to diversity and diversity
is integrated into unity.

FACTORS THAT CREATE UNITY
-------------------------

Before turning to the components of the Islamic spectrum and the
question of diversity, let us first ask which factors have created and
sustain unity in the Islamic world. Despite political fragmentation,
theological differences, and ethnic distinctions, there is a strong
sense of the unity of the Islamic community*(ummah)* and a constant
desire for greater political unity within the “Abode of Islam” (*dar
al-islam* ) in the hearts of all Muslims, and there is, of course, a
visible unity in Islamic civilization.

The central factor in the creation of unity among Muslims is the Quran.
For all Muslims, it is the very Word of God, with the same text, which
is chanted as well as read and written, and the same message for all
Muslims, although interpretations of that message differ among various
Muslim groups and there are levels of meaning to the text.

Then there are the*Sunnah* and Hadith of the Prophet, which are very
powerful unifying factors, although again there are local variations of
interpretation of certain facts and features of the Prophet’s life,
actions, and words.

Despite these variations in the understanding of the twin sources of the
Islamic religion, that is, the Quran and the*Sunnah* (along with the
H.adith), there are three central doctrines upon which all schools of
Islam agree, namely tawhid, or Divine Oneness, nubuwwah, or prophecy,
and ma‘ad, or eschatology, to which we shall turn in Chapter 6.

Only very small groups here and there have deviated from these basic
principles, which are the source of Islam’s sapiential and practical
teachings

and whose unifying power can hardly be overestimated. Those who have
deviated from these basic doctrines have sometimes brought about civil
and religious crises within the community and sometimes even violence.

Another unifying factor is Islamic Law, or the*Shari‘ah* , which is
interpreted according to different schools but the basic elements of
which are the same throughout the Islamic world, especially as they
concern the rites of the religion.

These rites, which consist of the five daily prayers performed in Arabic
whether one is in Malaysia or Bosnia, the annual pilgrimage (h. ajj)
made from all parts of the Islamic world, the fast of the month of
Ramad.an carried out by all healthy adult Muslims throughout the seven
climes, the tithe paid to the poor, and other religious acts, bind
Muslims together wherever they might be. Over the ages the ethical norms
related to the*Shari‘ah* , the injunctions of the Quran and Sunnah, and
the spiritual etiquette, or adab, associated with ethics and based on
the Prophetic model have also acted as powerful integrating forces. To
these must be added the presence of Sufi orders, which cut across
confessional and ethnic boundaries and which, basing themselves by
definition on the Unity that transcends all multiplicity, have been a
major factor in the integration of Islamic society. Finally, on the
plane of forms, one must mention Islamic art, from the chanting of the
Quran to geometric patterns found on articles and structures, an art
that, despite local differences, has its own unique genius and has
played a very important role in bringing about unity on the physical
plane while permitting local variations and cultural diversity.

SOURCES OF DIVERSITY: THE HIERARCHICAL LEVELS OF MEANING AND INTERPRETATION OF THE TRADITION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

To understand the sources of diversity in the Islamic world, one must
first of all turn to the hierarchy within the religion of Islam itself.
The total religion called Islam may be said to consist of the levels of
islam, iman, and ihsan, or surrender, faith, and spiritual beauty. The
Quran refers often to the muslim, the possessor of surrender, the
mu’min, the possessor of faith, and the muh. sin, the possessor of
virtue.

Although the Quran emphasizes that all Muslims stand equally before God,
it also insists that human beings are distinguished in rank according to
their knowledge of the truth and virtue, as in the verses, “Are those
who know equal with those who know not?” (39:9), to which the Quran
gives the resounding answer of no, and, “Verily, those of you most close
to God are those who are the best in conduct” (59:13). These verses
refer to degrees of perfection of believers, as one sees also in
Christianity, and do not imply in any way exclusion, ostracism, or
support for violence against certain groups.

Later Islamic sages, especially the Sufis, have also spoken of the
hierarchy of the*Shari‘ah* , or the Divine Law, the Tariqah, or the
spiritual path, the Haqiqah, or the Divine Truth, which is the origin of
both. Islam is then envisaged as a circle whose center is the Haqiqah.
The radii of the circle are the turuq (plural of Tariqah), later
identified with the Sufi orders, and the circumference is the*Shari‘ah*
. Each Muslim is like a point on the

circumference, whose totality composes the Islamic community, or ummah.
To reach the Haqiqah, one must first stand on the circumference, that
is, practice the*Shari‘ah* , and then follow the Tariqah, or Path to
God, whose end is the Center, God Himself, or the Haqiqah.

In a famous tradition of the Prophet known as the hadith of Gabriel,
this primary vertical structure and hierarchy, which does not in any way
obviate the reality that each Muslim stands as his or her own priest
before God, is made evident:

‘Umar said, “One day when we were sitting with the Messenger of God
there came unto us a man whose clothes were of exceeding whiteness and
whose hair was of exceeding blackness, nor were there any signs of
travel upon him, although none of us knew him.

He sat down knee unto knee opposite the Prophet, upon whose thighs he
placed the palms of his hands, saying: ‘O Muhammad, tell me what is the
surrender*(islam)* .’ The Messenger of God answered him saying:

‘The surrender is to testify that there is no god but God and that
Muhammad is God’s Messenger, to perform the prayer, bestow alms, fast
Ramad.an and make, if thou canst, the pilgrimage to the Holy House.’ He
said: ‘Thou hast spoken truly,’ and we were amazed that having
questioned him he should corroborate him. Then he said: ‘Tell me what is
faith*(iman)* .’ He answered: ‘To believe in God and His Angels and His
Books and His Messengers and the Last Day, and to believe that no good
or evil cometh but by His Providence.’

‘Thou hast spoken truly,’ he said, and then:

‘Tell me what is excellence*(ihsan)* .’ He answered: ‘To worship God as
if thou sawest Him, for if thou seest Him not, yet seeth He thee.’ ‘Thou
hast spoken truly,’ he said. . Then the stranger went away, and I stayed
a while after he had gone; and the Prophet said to me: ‘O, ‘Umar,
knowest thou the questioner, who he was?’ I said: ‘God and His Messenger
know best.’

He said: ‘It was Gabriel. He came unto you to teach you your
religion.’”1

It is clear from this hadith clarifying din, or religion, for Muslims
that islam encompasses what is expected of all Muslims in the acceptance
and performance of the “pillars”*(arkan)* of Islam, with which we shall
deal later. Iman, or faith, involves not only belief in the ordinary
sense in God, His angels, messengers, His revealed books, and the
eschatological (end-time) realities, but also knowledge of these
matters, and it was into this dimension of the Islamic tradition that
intellectual disciplines such as theology and traditional philosophy
were integrated. As for ihsan, it is obvious that not everyone can
worship God as if they saw Him. This is the station of the saintly, and
ihsan, which means both “virtue” and “beauty,” is associated with the
spiritual path that leads to sanctity and is considered practically a
definition of Sufism.

Not everyone who is a muslim is a*mu’min* and not everyone who is
a*mu’min* is a muh. sin, but a muh. sin must also be a*mu’min* and
a*mu’min* a muslim. Reference to this hierarchical distinction is also
made in some sources as the exoteric, or outward (z.ahir), and esoteric,
or inward (bat.in), dimensions of the tradition. In any case, throughout
Islamic history there have been the ordinary believers, or muslims,
those of intense piety, or

*mu’mins* , and those who have sought God here and now, or muh. sins,
about whom the Quran says, “God loves the muh. sinin” (3:133, and many
other verses). Ihsan later became crystallized almost completely but not
exclusively in Sufism, which can still be found throughout the Islamic
world. Serious attachment to Sufism also requires attachment to
the*Shari‘ah* , and therefore a person who is a Sufi must also be the
follower of this or that school of Law. Some Shari‘ite Muslims may
reject Sufism, especially today among both modernized and so-called
fundamentalist or reformist circles, but the Sufis show the greatest
attachment to the*Shari‘ah* , whose inner significance they seek to
reach. And they must of necessity follow one of its schools.

It is meaningless to ask, as many Western scholars and especially
anthropologists have done, whether a particular Muslim is a Sunni or a
Sufi, or for that matter a Shi‘ite or a Sufi. A Sunni or a Shi‘ite can
be a Sufi or not a Sufi, but the situation is not one of alternatives,
because these dimensions of the religion are not situated on the same
level of reality. That is why the presence of Sufism has never been a
cause for division in traditional Islamic society. In contrast, it has
been a cause of integration and the return to that inner unity whose
attainment is the goal of Islam. The first division in the structure of
the religion must, in fact, be sought not in the difference between
Shari‘ite Islam and Sufism, but in the separation of Sunnism and Shi‘ism
from each other in the first century of Islamic history. The
Sunni-Shi‘ite division is the most important in the formal structure of
Islam, although even this division does not destroy the unity of Islam
and both share the unifying elements already mentioned. Moreover,
Sufism, representing the inner dimension of the religion, transcends
this dichotomy. Not only are there Sunnis as well as Shi‘ites who are
Sufis, but Shi‘ism and Sufism also share together the original inner
message of the Prophet and the power of spiritual and initiatic guidance
(walayah/wilayah), so that the situation is somewhat more complex than
stated. But for the present discussion it suffices to say that Sufism,
or the Tariqah, belongs to the inner dimension of Islam and transcends
Shari‘ite differences, and Sunnism and Shi‘ism mark a division within
Islam on the formal and legal level.

While on the subject of Sufism, it must be recalled here that Sufism has
had the greatest role in the spread of Islam itself, in addition to its
vital function in the preservation and purification of ethical life, the
creation of the arts, and the exposition of unitive knowledge (ma‘rifah)
and metaphysics within Islamic society. From the eleventh and twelfth
centuries onward, Sufism became organized in orders usually named after
their founders; older ones, such as the Rifa‘iyyah and Qadiriyyah, which
still survive, were followed by many later ones, such as the
Shadhiliyyah, the Khalwatiyyah, the Mawlawiyyah, the Chishtiyyah, the
Naqshbandiyyah, and the Ni‘matullahiyyah. Some of the orders have died
out over time and occasionally new ones are created, but they all rely
on the continuity of the “initiatic” chain, or silsilah, which goes back
to the Prophet.

There is hardly an Islamic country in which Sufi orders are not to be
found, and since the beginning of the twentieth century some orders,
beginning with the Shadhiliyyah, have spread into Europe and America. In

some countries, such as Senegal and the Sudan, the Sufi orders are so
popular that people’s identification on the Shari‘ite level is often
combined with their Tariqah affiliation. Such a situation is found,
however, only in Sunnism and not in Shi‘ism, unless one identifies the
Isma‘ili branch of Shi‘ism as a Tariqah in itself, as many Isma‘ilis
themselves tend to do.

It is important to recall here the fact that, in contrast to the claim
of those who only look at the quantitative aspects of things and
consider the esoteric element of religion to be marginal and peripheral,
the esoteric dimension actually lies at the heart of religion and is the
source of both its endurance and renewal. We observe this truth not only
in Islam, but also in the Kabbalistic and Hasidic traditions in Judaism
and various mystical currents in Christianity. In Islam itself, Sufism
has been over the centuries the hidden heart that has renewed the
religion intellectually, spiritually, and ethically and has played the
greatest role in its spread and in its relation with other religions.

SUNNISM AND SHI ‘ISM AND THEIR BRANCHES
---------------------------------------

Today about 87 percent of all Muslims are Sunnis and about 13 percent
are Shi‘ite. The Sunni majority within Islam is the largest in
comparison with any denomination in other religions, such as Catholicism
within Christianity and Mahayana within Buddhism. But the Shi‘ite
population is located almost completely in the heartland of Islam, that
is, in the area between Egypt and India. Such countries as Iran, Iraq,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, and Islamic Lebanon have majority Shi‘ite
populations, and India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Syria, Saudi Arabia, the
Persian Gulf states, and East Africa have notable Shi‘ite minorities.
Both intellectually and historically, Shi‘ism has played a much greater
role in the Islamic world than its number might warrant, and the accord
or discord between Sunnism and Shi‘ism today is one of the most
important factors in contemporary Islamic society.

The word sunni in Arabic comes from the term ahl alsunnah wa’l-jama‘ah,
that is, people who followed the*Sunnah* of the Prophet and the
majority, while Shi‘ism comes from the Arabic term shi‘at ‘Ali, meaning
partisans of ‘Ali ibn AbiTalib. After the death of the Prophet, while
‘Ali, his son-in-law and first cousin, and the rest of the family were
burying him, the rest of the community gathered in Medina and chose Abu
Bakr as the Prophet’s successor, not in his prophetic function but as
ruler of the newly established Islamic community. He was thereby given
the title of khalifah rasul*Allah* , or the vicegerent of the Messenger
of God, from which comes the title caliph, taken not only by the first
four caliphs, who are called the “rightly guided”*(rashidun)* , but also
by later Muslim rulers of the Umayyad, ‘Abbasid, and Fat.imid dynasties
and even by the Ottomans. A number of people thought that ‘Ali should
have become the Prophet’s successor and rallied around him, forming the
first nucleus of Shi‘ism. ‘Ali himself refused to oppose Abu Bakr and in
fact worked closely with him and his two successors, ‘Umar and ‘Uthman,
until he himself became the fourth of the “rightly guided” caliphs of
Sunni Islam. It was only after his death at the hands of a member of the
Khawarij, an extremist group that rejected the claims of both
Mu‘awiyyah, who had contested the caliphate of ‘Ali, and ‘Ali himself,
that Shi‘ism became an organized religio-political movement in Iraq.

The major point of contention between Sunnism and Shi‘ism was not only
the question of who should succeed the Prophet, but the question of what
the qualifications of such a person had to be. For Sunnism, the function
of the caliph was to protect the borders of Islam, keep security and
peace, appoint judges, and so forth. For the Shi‘ites, such a person
also had to have the deepest knowledge of Islamic Law as well as
esoteric knowledge of the Quran and Prophetic teachings. He could
therefore not be elected, but had to be chosen by the Prophet through
Divine command.

The Shi‘ites believe that this investiture did in fact occur at the pool
of water called Ghadir Khumm when the Prophet was returning to Medina
from pilgrimage to Mecca. According to Shi‘ites, the person chosen by
him was ‘Ali, whom they consider their first Imam, using this term in
the special sense of someone who bears the Muh.ammadan Light (al-nur
al-muh. ammadi) and the power of initiation within himself and who is
master of

both the exoteric and the esoteric sciences. Otherwise the term imam,
coming from the root meaning “standing before or in front,” is used in
general for the person who leads the daily prayers, and in Sunni Islam
also as an honorific title given to great religious scholars such as,
for example, Imam al-Ghazzali, one of the foremost theologians and Sufis
in Islamic history. Sunni authors have also occasionally referred to the
caliph as imam, but all of these meanings must be distinguished from the
specific Shi‘ite usage of the term.

The understanding of the term imam therefore differs greatly in Sunnism
and Shi‘ism. In Sunni Islam the term has many uses, but it is never used
in the mystical and esoteric sense given to it in Shi‘ism. In Shi‘ism,
the Imam, like the prophets, is inerrant (ma‘s.um) and protected from
sin by God. He possesses perfect knowledge of both the Law and the Way,
both the outer and inner meaning of the Quran. He also possesses the
power of initiation (*walayah/wilayah* ) and is the spiritual guide par
excellence, like the Sufi masters within their orders. In fact, the
first eight Shi‘ite Imams are also central spiritual authorities or
poles of Sufism and appear in the initiatic chain of nearly every Sufi
order. ‘Ali, who is the representative par excellence of Islamic
esoteric teachings, is not only the first Imam of Shi‘ism, but also at
the origin of the initiatic chain of nearly all Sufi orders. There are
in fact many Sunnis, such as the majority of Egyptians, almost all of
whom are Sunnis, who have the same love and respect for the Shi‘ite
Imams and the Ahl al-bayt, that is, members of the family of the Prophet
with whom the Imams and Shi‘ism itself are associated, as do Persian or
Iraqi Shi‘ites.

As far as Sunnism is concerned, its followers are divided according to
the schools of Law*(madhhab)* they follow. In the eighth and ninth
centuries the schools of fiqh, or jurisprudence, were codified by the
doctors of the Law.

Some of these codifications or schools died out, but four have survived
during the past millennium and constitute the main body of traditional
Sunnism. They are the Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi‘i, and Hanbali. Hanafism was
founded by a Persian, Imam Abu Hanifah (d. 768), who was a student of
Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq (d.757), the sixth Imam of Shi‘ism and founder of
Twelve-Imam Shi‘ite Law, which is called Ja‘fari Law. Imam Abu Hanifah
sought to create possibilities for the integration of local practices
into the Law as much as possible. His school held great attraction from
the beginning for Turks as well as Muslims of the Indian subcontinent.
Today the Hanafi School has the largest number of followers in the Sunni
world, including most Sunni Turks, the Turkic people of Caucasia and
Central Asia, European Muslims, and the Muslims of the Indian
subcontinent. As for the Sunni part of Afghanistan, its people are, like
the Sunnis of Pakistan, mostly Hanafi, and this is one of the elements
that especially links the eastern part of Afghanistan to Pakistan.

Malikism, founded by Imam Malik ibn Anas (d. 795), is based mostly on
the practice of Medina and is very conservative in its approach to the
Law. There have been some Malikis in the Arab East and especially in
Egypt, but the heart of Malikism is North Africa. In fact, the whole of
Islamic North and West Africa outside of Egypt is solidly Maliki, and
this legal

homogeneity has made an important contribution to the cultural unity of
the area, which in traditional Islamic geography is called al-Maghrib,
or the West, the name that is now used for the “Far West” of the Islamic
world, that is, Morocco.

The Shafi‘i School was founded by a student of Imam Abu H. anifah, Imam
Muh.ammad al-Shafi‘i (d. 820). It is he who completed and perfected the
methods of jurisprudence in Islamic Law. In many ways, of the different
Sunni schools of Law, his school is the closest to the Ja‘fari School.
Buried in Cairo, he is greatly loved and admired by Egyptians, nearly
all of whom are Shafi‘is, as are many others south of Egypt as well as
most of the Malays in Southeast Asia, whether they are in Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, or Thailand.

The Hanbali School, founded by Imam Ah.mad ibn Hanbal (d. 855) from
Baghdad, based itself solely on the Quran and Hadith and gave a very
strict interpretation of the*Shari‘ah* . Although in days of old it had
many followers in Iraq, Persia, and other lands, in recent times its
adherents have been confined mostly to Syria. Wahhabism, which is
dominant in Saudi Arabia, is an offshoot of H. anbalism, but must not be
simply identified with it. Wahhabism, which arose as a reformist
movement in the eighteenth century in Najd in southern Arabia, opposed
the later refinements of Islamic culture in the form of philosophy and
theology as well as the arts; in the domain of religion itself it
strongly opposed both Sufism and Shi‘ism, the visit to the tombs of
saints, and intercession by saints before God for an individual
believer. It was opposed not only by Shi‘ites, but also by orthodox
Sunnis, and in the nineteenth century the Ottoman caliph even sent an
army to defeat the movement. But through an alliance made between the
Wahhabi scholars and the House of Sa‘ud, the movement was kept alive in
Najd until the beginning of the twentieth century, when it began to
consolidate political power. After World War I it captured Hijaz, where
Mecca and Medina are located, and created the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
As a result of this historical process, Wahhabism became accepted
throughout Saudi Arabia as the official interpretation of Islam. Despite
its opposition to mainstream Sunni Islam, Shi‘ite, and Sufism, however,
Wahhabism was not in itself always violent, although it was quite
exoteric and exclusivist in its interpretation of Islam. Its influence
remained, however, confined to Saudi Arabia until the increased wealth
in the kingdom due to income from oil made it possible for Wahhabi
schools and mosques to be established in many other areas of the world.
But even then its influence remained limited, and today the vast
majority of Sunnis cannot in any way be described as Wahhabi, not to
speak of Shi‘ites, who have always opposed Wahhabism. Within Arabia
itself during the past two decades there has been a notable opening in
certain religious circles toward other schools of Islam, both Sunni and
Shi‘ite, although the influence of Wahhabism is still dominant.

The four founders of the traditional schools of Sunni Law mentioned
above are highly respected and revered by all Sunnis. Converting from
one school to another takes place occasionally, and in modern times some
governments have drawn from various schools, including the Shi‘ism, to
create civil laws in their countries. The difference between the Sunni

schools of Law and the Ja‘fari or other Shi‘ite schools of Law is minor,
especially when it comes to the practice of rites. In certain fields,
such as laws of inheritance or the legality of temporary marriage, there
are, however, notable differences.

As for Shi‘ism, although one could distinguish the various schools from
each other on the basis of their legal orientation, a more telling
criterion for distinction, used by Muslims themselves as well as by
Western scholars, is the position each branch of Shi‘ism takes on the
Imams. After ‘Ali, his son H. asan became Imam. He lived a quiet,
politically inactive life in Medina disseminating knowledge of the
Quran, but his brother H. usayn, who became the third Imam, arose
against Yazid, the son of Mu‘awiyyah, who had opposed ‘Ali and who had
founded the Umayyad caliphate with its capital in Damascus. H. usayn was
invited to go to Iraq by the people of the Iraqi city of Kufa, who
promised to support him. And so in the year 680 he set out with his
family and many followers from Medina for Iraq. Before reaching Kufa,
however, he was met by the army of Yazid in Karbala’, where he and all
the male members of the family of the Prophet, save Zayn al-‘Abidin, who
was ill, were killed. H. usayn’s body was interred in Karbala’ and his
head brought to Damascus, but Yazid, afraid of the reactions that might
follow, tried to distance himself from the incident and exiled Zaynab,
the sister of H. usayn, to Egypt with the head of her brother. According
to Sunni tradition, she buried the head at a site that became the heart
of what was later to become the city known as al-Qahirah, or Cairo.

This tragic event crystallized the Shi‘ite movement in Iraq and later
elsewhere, especially in Persia, and finally led to the downfall of the
Umayyads. To this day the tragedy of Karbala’ is commemorated on the
tenth of Muh. arram in many countries, especially Iran, Iraq, the
Indo-Pakistani subcontinent, and Lebanon, and these events are the most
notable popular religious ceremonies in Islam after the annual
pilgrimage, or hajj. Recollection of vast religious processions,
sermons, and passion plays of Muh. arram, which dominated the life of
Tehran during my childhood spent in that city, are still indelibly
etched in my memory.

All other Imams of Shi‘ism were descendants of H. usayn through his one
son who survived, Zayn al-‘A bidin al-Sajjad, who became the fourth
Imam. The main branch of Shi‘ism, which includes the vast majority of
Shi‘ites, is called Ithna ‘ashariyyah, or Twelve-Imam Shi‘ism, which is
dominant in Iran and is a majority in Iraq, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, and
among the Muslims of Lebanon. The Twelvers accept a chain of Imams
descending from the fourth, including his son, Muh.ammad al-Baqir, the
fifth Imam, and his son, Ja‘far al-Sadiq, the sixth Imam, down to the
Twelfth, Muh.ammad al-Mahdi, whom they believe to have been given a
mysteriously long life by God, but who is in occultation*(ghaybah)* . He
is alive like Elijah, who was taken to Heaven alive according to Jewish
belief. But the Twelfth Imam is also the secret master of this world and
can appear to those who are in the appropriate spiritual state to see
him. He will appear publicly before the end of time, when inequity and
oppression have become dominant, to reestablish justice and peace on
earth, and he will prepare for the second coming of Christ, an event in
which Muslims have as firm a

belief as Christians. This eschatological expectation is therefore
called Mahdiism and is by no means confined to Shi‘ism. Sunnism also
contains such teachings, the difference being that Shi‘ites claim to
know here and now who the Mahdi is, whereas Sunnis expect a figure with
such a name to appear in the future.

Apocalyptic thought, although present in Islam, does not, however, play
the same role there as it does in contemporary Christianity, especially
among certain televangelists in America who have commercialized their
contentious interpretations of the Book of Revelation and other
Christian sources on the basis of an exclusivism that is utterly
astounding. In the Islamic world, although the idea of the coming of the
Mahdi exists, there is much less public talk about it, especially on
television, and there is little emphasis on creating an exclusive club
of those who will be saved while the rest will be damned. Although in
Black Africa there have been a few Mahdiist leaders with followers
willing to die for them, in the heartland of Islam phenomena such as
Waco and Jonestown have not existed, except for the one episode in Mecca
in 1980 when a person claiming to be the Mahdi entered the Holy Mosque
with his followers and was finally killed when government forces
attacked the group inside the mosque.

The second most important branch of Shi‘ism is Isma‘ilism, which
separated from the main body of Shi‘ism over the question of the
identity of the seventh Imam. The sixth Imam, Ja‘far al-Sadiq, had
chosen, by Divine command according to Shi‘ite belief, his son Isma‘il
as the seventh Imam, but Isma‘il died while his father was still alive.

Subsequently, Imam Musa al-Kaz.im was chosen as the seventh Imam, but a
number within the Shi‘ite community refused to accept this investiture
and continued to consider Isma‘il their imam, hence the name Isma‘ilism.
For some time their imams were not present in public, until suddenly in
the tenth century the Isma‘ilis arose in Tunisia to declare themselves
rulers and were able to extend their domination to Egypt, much of the
rest of North Africa, and even as far as Syria. They established the
Fat.imid caliphate, which vied with and opposed the Sunni ‘Abbasid
caliphate, which had its capital in Baghdad. They made Cairo their
capital and built it into a great center of the sciences and the arts.
Al-Azhar University, over a thousand years old and the most important
seat of Sunni learning in the Islamic world today, was built by the
Fat.imids, whose rulers were also Isma‘ili imams.

Fat.imid Isma‘ilism was its most moderate form, but other more radical
movements followed from it. The Fat.imid caliph Mustans.ir bi’Llah had
transferred the investiture of the imamate from his older son, Nizar, to
his younger son, Musta‘li. Upon his death in 1094, some Isma‘ilis
followed Nizar and others Musta‘li. The Musta‘lis, or followers of
Musta‘li, continued the moderate teachings of the earlier Fat.imids, but
those who followed Nizar became more radical. In Iran the Nizaris
created fort cities on top of mountains, of which the most famous was
Alamut. The Persian Isma‘ili Hasan S. abbah. had a major role to play in
the creation of these forts and the propagation of the Nizari cause. In
1164 the Isma‘ili imam of the time, H. asan, declared the “Great
Resurrection” and proclaimed that henceforth only the spiritual and
esoteric aspect of Islam mattered and the

legal and formal aspect was to be put aside. Nizari Isma‘ilism became a
radical and revolutionary force until finally defeated by the Mongols.
It is said that Isma‘ili devotees, who would sacrifice their lives as
martyrs and were called fada’iyan, assassinated their Sunni opponents
who were oppressing them. The English word “assassin,” in fact, comes
most likely from the name H. asan, although some Western scholars have
claimed that it derives from hashish, which the assassins are said by
their enemies to have taken before committing acts of assassination.

The revolutionary character of Isma‘ilism died down after the Mongol
invasion in the thirteenth century, and in Persia itself most Isma‘ilis
went underground. Meanwhile, the Musta‘lis were flourishing in the
Yemen. There was also a third group of Isma‘ilis, who had settled in
Sindh and Gujrat in India in early Islamic history and also converted
some Hindus to Isma‘ilism. This community was split later and the major
group came to be known as the Sat Panth (True Path). This branch of
Isma‘ilism was very eclectic in its practices, incorporating many Hindu
themes. Its religious poetry, called the Ginan, has verses in which the
major figures of Islamic sacred history such as ‘Ali are compared to and
even identified with various Hindu avatars. By the nineteenth century
the Persian and Yemeni branches of Isma‘ilism, known as the T.
ayyibiyyah, were also centered in India, especially with the migration
of the Aga Khan from Persia to India. One now has primarily two branches
of Isma‘ilism, the Aga Khanid and the Bohras, both having their
concentration of followers in India and to some extent Pakistan. But
there are also notable Isma‘ili communities in Central Asia, Persia,
Syria, East Africa, and Canada, to which many Isma‘ilis from East Africa
migrated after the political tragedies of the 1960s and 1970s.

No one outside of the Isma‘ili community knows the exact number of
Isma‘ilis, although, since their imam is alive and functioning as the
head of the community, they are well organized and have a strong global
network that embraces the whole community. Although their number is
relatively small in comparison to the Ithna ‘ashariyyah, Isma‘ilis have
played an important role in Islamic history, intellectually,
artistically, and politically, and constitute, despite their relatively
small number, a notable part of the Islamic spectrum.

Finally, the third branch of Shi‘ism, the Zaydi, chose Zayd, the son of
the fourth Imam, as its leader. The Zaydis represent a moderate form of
Shi‘ism and, in contrast to the Isma‘ilis, do not emphasize the esoteric
over the exoteric dimension of the religion. They had many followers in
Persia and the Arab East in the tenth century, but gradually they
receded to the Yemen, where they constitute almost half the population
today and where they ruled for a thousand years until 1962, following
the Egyptian invasion of the Yemen. Zaydiism has its own school of law
and theology as well as a political philosophy according to which any
Muslim who is pious and learned and can defend the country and preserve
peace and security can be accepted as imam and ruler.

Although the Zaydis and Isma‘ilis number in the few millions,
Twelve-Imam Shi‘ism has some 150 million followers.

The history of its early expansion was less connected to political
institutions than to the spread of its teachings by individual
adherents. In fact, its political expression came later than both
Zaydiism and Isma‘ilism. It was not until 1499 that the Safavids
established themselves as rulers of Persia, which included not only
present-day Iran, but also Afghanistan as well as parts of Pakistan,
Caucasia, and Central Asia. They established Twelve-Imam Shi‘ism as the
state religion and gave support to Shi‘ism elsewhere, especially in
Iraq, over which they ruled for some time before losing it to the
Ottomans. There were also local dynasties in India that were Twelve-Imam
Shi‘ite. Consequently, the number of Twelve-Imam Shi‘ites rose
considerably during the past few centuries and today it constitutes the
vast majority of Shi‘ites throughout the world.

RELIGIOUS SECTS WITHIN THE ISLAMIC WORLD
----------------------------------------

There is a hadith of the Prophet according to which his community would
become divided into seventy-two groups, of which only one would possess
the Truth, but this saying pertains more to theological*(kalam)*
differences rather than to Shari‘ite ones. In practice there are far
fewer sects in Islam than there are in Christianity, which has
experienced continuous fragmentation and division within Protestantism
since the Reformation. First of all, Sunnism and majority Shi‘ism must
be understood as the orthodox mainstream and not as sects as this term
is used in English.

In the context of Islam, the term “sect”*(firqah)* can be used in its
classic sense to refer to small groups entertaining particular
theological views that deviate from the general norm, or one can use
this term in its current English usage to mean “a dissenting
denomination” or “a schismatic group holding to a distinctive doctrine,”
but apply it to the case of Islam. The classic meaning has to be put
aside in a work such as this because the discussion of firaq (plural of
firqah) in classical Islamic thought would require delving into minutiae
of Islamic theology and sacred history with which we cannot be concerned
here. It is, however, important, in order to understand all the details
of the tapestry of the present-day Islamic world, to mention some of the
more important small religious groups that qualify as sects as this term
is currently understood in English.

There are, first of all, the remnants of the early Khawarij, who existed
in the seventh century and opposed both Sunnism and Shi‘ism. At that
time they were a revolutionary and violent movement with some following
among the nomads. Later they settled down into established communities.

Today they are to be found mostly in southern Algeria and Oman and are
known as ‘Ibadis. They have their own school of law and although they
began as a sect, today they are closer to the mainstream than other
sects.

Before modern times, most of the sects in Islam issued from extreme
forms of Shi‘ism deviating in the direction of the divinization of ‘Ali
or some other personage or in emphasizing some esoteric teachings
without the appropriate exoteric ones. To this day there is a sect known
as the ‘Aliallahi in Iraq and Iran that divinizes ‘Ali. The Druze, who
live in southern Lebanon and Syria as well as northern Israel, broke
away from Fat.imid Isma‘ilism and consider the seventh Fat.imid caliph,
al-H. akim bi’Llah, to be a divine incarnation. In Turkey there are the
‘Alawis (not to be confused with the ‘Alawis of Syria or with the ‘Alawi
Sufi orders). The Turkish ‘Alawis, who live mostly in central Anatolia,
are remnants of Shi‘ites who, after the rise of the Safavids and the
Ottoman opposition to them, became isolated and oppressed, forgetting
many of the tenets of traditional Shi‘ism. The ‘Alawis of Syria, also
known as Nus.ayris, who now hold political power in the country, were
originally a pre-Islamic religious sect with roots in Gnosticism and
Babylonian religions. They have survived by describing themselves as a
school of Shi‘ism and have, in the past few decades, been trying to gain
more Shi‘ite legitimacy.

There are other small communities of this kind in the Islamic world,
such as the Yazidis of Iraq, the inhabitants of Kafirestan in northern
Afghanistan, and the Sabaeans of Iraq and Iran. Like the Nus.ayris, they
are remnants of

pre-Islamic religions and cannot properly be called Islamic sects. There
are also groups of this kind among Muslims of Black Africa. It must be
emphasized, however, that the number of all these and similar sects is
quite small. They came to play a more prominent role only when they
became a factor in the balance of power in local situations, as one sees
in the case of the Druze in Lebanon as well as in Israel, or in the
exceptional case of the ‘Alawis of Syria, a small sect that has been
able to take hold of the reins of power. The case of the Taliban in
Afghanistan presents another example of an extremist minority group that
was able to dominate the country for several years.

In the early nineteenth century, one of the responses to the domination
of the Islamic world by colonial powers was a wave of Mahdiism that
swept over many Muslim lands. In certain areas it produced local Mahdis
with considerable religious and political influence, as one sees in the
case of ‘Uthman Dan Fadio, who changed the religious landscape of West
Africa, or the Mahdi of the Sudan, whose followers play an important
role in that country to this day. But such movements did not give rise
to new sects. Movements that did, however, create sects include Babism
in Persia and the Ah. madiyyah movement in the Punjab, the former
issuing from a Shi‘ite and the latter from a Sunni background. In Persia
there had developed already in the eighteenth century the Shaykhi
movement, which was a very pious form of Shi‘ism with extreme emphasis
on reverence for the Imams and an “anti-intellectual” attitude in
theology and law. The movement remained, however, still within the fold
of Twelve-Imam Shi‘ism. From its background there arose in the early
decades of the nineteenth century the Babi movement, whose founder,
Sayyid Muh.ammad Bab, claimed to be the bab, or “gate,” to the Mahdi.
One of the Bab’s students, Baha’*Allah* , went further and declared
himself not only the Mahdi, but a new prophet and founder of Baha’ism,
which also exists in the West today, but which, although based on a
Shi‘ite background, cannot be called Islamic. Rather, it is a modernist
religious movement seeking to attach iself to certain of the prophetic
and universalist principles of Islam, but not in the way that Muslims
understand those principles.

The Ah.madiyyah movement, founded by Ghulam Ah.mad in what is now
Pakistan, was in many ways a reaction to English missionary activity in
India. Its founder claimed for himself a new Divine dispensation, if not
an out-and-out prophetic mission. He established for the first time in
Islam missionary activity along the lines of the Christian version.

Supported to a large extent for political reasons by the British, the
Ah. madiyyah established the first major mosque in Britain, which still
stands, and sent many missionaries to Africa as well as Europe. In
practice the Ah. madiyyah, in contrast to Baha’is, follow Islamic
practices, but their theological views are rejected by the mainstream
Islamic community, especially their view that Christ migrated to and
died in India and Ghulam Ah. mad’s subtle challenge to the finality of
the prophethood of the Prophet of Islam. Since its inception, the status
of the Ah. madiyyah has been somewhat ambiguous. Some Muslims have
accepted them as an Islamic sect, although deviant in some ways, while
others have declared that they

are not Muslims. In any case their status vis-à-vis Islam is different
from that of Baha’ism, which separated itself clearly from Islam and
cannot be considered in any way as a sect or branch of Islam.

INTELLECTUAL AND THEOLOGICAL DIVERSITY
--------------------------------------

In addition to those variations delineating Sunnism and Shi‘ism and the
numerous sects, there have existed since the beginning of Islamic
history, within the mainstream, different theologies and philosophies
that have contributed to diversity within the Islamic world, even within
a particular school of Law. When one thinks of Islam, it is important to
remember that, on the intellectual and theological levels, as well as on
the juridical one, Islam is not a monolithic structure, but displays
remarkable diversity, the elements of which are bound together by the
doctrine of tawhid, or unity. Over the centuries, Islam has created one
of the richest intellectual traditions of the world, favorably
comparable in its depth and diversity to those of India, China, and the
Christian West. In medieval times, in fact, many Jewish and Christian
theological and philosophical schools in Europe were created as a result
of the influence of and in response to Islamic philosophical and
theological teachings.

To discuss in depth all the different theological and philosophical
schools or even the most important ones would not be possible here. What
is important in the present context is to at least mention the
best-known schools and point out that even on some of the most important
central religious issues-the meaning of Divine Unity especially in
relation to multiplicity, the nature of God’s Names and Qualities, the
relation between faith and works in human salvation, predestination and
free will, revelation and reason, the relation between God’s Mercy and
His Justice, and questions of eschatology, not to mention political
philosophy-there have existed numerous views, sometimes opposed to each
other.

In theology, which in Islam is called ‘ilm al-kalam or simply kalam,
there developed in the Sunni world in the eighth century, first of all,
the Mu‘tazilite school, which favored extensive use of reason in the
interpretation of religious matters, a position to which certain strict
literalist interpreters of the Quran and Sunnah, such as the Hanbalis,
were opposed. In fact, the Hanbalis have remained opposed to all forms
of kalam until today, as has their Wahhabi offshoot.

To this day the teaching of any form of kalam is forbidden in religious
universities in Saudi Arabia.

In the tenth century a new school of kalam called the Ash‘arite arose in
Baghdad with the aim of creating a middle ground on many questions, such
as the use of reason in religious matters. Ash‘arism, which many
orientalists have identified with Islamic theological orthodoxy as such,
spread quickly among the Shafi‘is and reached its peak in many ways with
al-Ghazzali, who did, however, hold some non-Ash‘arite views, and with
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, in the eleventh and twelfth centuries. Gradually
Ash‘arism spread among the Hanafis and Malikis as well and became the
most widely held school of kalam in the Sunni world until the
contemporary period. But there were also other Sunni schools of kalam
that held sway in certain localities, such as Maturidism in Khurasan and
Central Asia and T. ahawism in Egypt. Since the late nineteenth century,
certain Muslim “reformers” such as Muh.ammad ‘Abduh of Egypt have sought
to revive Mu‘tazilism, because it

made greater use of reason rather than relying predominately on the
tenets of the revelation.

In Shi‘ism also, kalam has had a long history. Isma‘ili kalam, which
began to be developed from the eighth century onward, was closely allied
to Isma‘ili philosophy and took greater interest in what in the West
would be called mystical theology than Sunni schools of kalam. As for
Twelve-Imam Shi‘ite kalam, it developed along more intellectual lines
than Ash‘arite kalam and received its systematic formulation in the
thirteenth century in the hands of Nas.ir al-Din T. usi, who was also
one of the greatest philosophers, mathematicians, and astronomers of
Islam. The Zaydis adopted more or less Mu‘tazilite kalam, which
therefore survived in the Yemen long after it had become eclipsed by
Ash‘arism after the eleventh century in the intellectual centers of the
heartland of the Islamic world in the Arab East and Persia.

Islamic philosophy was developed by Islamic thinkers rooted in the
Quranic revelation and meditating upon translations of Greek and Syriac
texts into Arabic. The result was the integration of ideas drawn mostly
from Pythagoreanism, Platonism, Aristotelianism, Neoplatonism,
Hermeticism, and to some extent Stoicism into the Quranic worldview and
the creation of new philosophical perspectives.

Various schools were developed, starting with the Peripatetic
(mashsha’i) and Isma‘ili from the ninth century onward. This early
period produced such famous philosophers as al-Kindi, al-Farabi, Ibn
Sina*(Avicenna)* , and Ibn Rushd*(Averroës)* , whose influence on the
medieval West was immense. One cannot conceive of either the Christian
philosophy of the Middle Ages and such figures as Albert the Great, St.
Thomas, and Duns Scotus or medieval Jewish philosophy as represented by
such masters as Ibn Gabirol and Maimonides (who wrote his most famous
work, The Guide of the Perplexed, first in Arabic), without
consideration of the influence of early Islamic philosophy and to some
extent kalam upon them.

Although the influence of Islamic philosophy upon the West came more or
less to an end in the thirteenth century with the translation of
Averroës and earlier Islamic philosophers into Latin, Islamic philosophy
itself not only did not come to an end, but was revived in the eastern
lands of Islam and especially Persia. In the twelfth century Suhrawardi
founded a new school of philosophy called the School of
Illumination*(ishraq)* and in the seventeenth century S. adr al-Din
Shirazi created a major synthesis of philosophy, doctrinal Sufism or
gnosis in the sense of illuminative and unitive knowledge (‘irfan), and
theology in a new school he called “the transcendent theosophy” (al-h.
ikmat al-muta‘aliyah). Both of these schools are still very much alive
and have played a major role in the intellectual life of Persia, India,
and as far as the school of ishraq is concerned, to some extent, Ottoman
Turkey.

Another major school that developed in the later history of Islam is
doctrinal Sufism, or gnosis, associated with, more than anyone else, the
name of the thirteenth-century Andalusian Sufi Muh. yi al-Din ibn
‘Arabi, the most influential intellectual figure in Islam during the
past seven centuries.

His teachings spread from Sumatra and China to Mali and Mauritania, and
his school produced numerous major thinkers and poets in nearly every
Islamic land.

All of these schools of kalam, philosophy, and gnosis along with the
philosophy of law, methods of Quranic commentary, and the study of other
transmitted sciences with which we cannot deal here, as well as various
schools of the sciences from medicine to astronomy, all of which are so
important for both Islam and the development of science in the West, had
both their adherents and opponents, and all of them must be seen as so
many strands in the total tapestry of the Islamic intellectual
tradition. Although they were all concerned with either the intellectual
aspects of the religion, the cosmos in light of the truths of
revelation, or purely theoretical knowledge, they often also exercised
either direct or indirect influence on the popular level. In any case,
their diversity must be considered when studying the spectrum of Islam
in its totality. Their very existence also demonstrates the remarkably
open universe of intellectual discourse within the framework of the
Islamic tradition, an openness that marked many periods of Islamic
history yet did not lead to rebellion against the sacred framework
established by Islam, as was to happen in Christianity in the West after
the Middle Ages.

THE QUESTION OF ORhTHODOXY AND HETERODOXY
-----------------------------------------

The question of orthodoxy in any religion is of the utmost importance,
for the very word means “correctness of belief or doctrine.” If there is
truth, there is also error, and if nothing is false, then there is no
truth. As the Quran says, “The truth has come and falsehood has
perished” (17:81).

Orthodoxy means possession of religious truth, and orthopraxy, the
correct manner of practicing and reaching the truth. In the context of
the totality of the Islamic tradition and in light of what has been said
of the spectrum of Islam, orthodoxy and orthopraxy can be understood as
the state of being on the “straight path” (al-s.irat. al-mustaqim);
Islam itself is sometimes called the “religion of the straight path.”

There is no magisterium in Islam, as there is in Catholicism, to
determine the correctness of doctrine, and on the level of belief and
doctrine Islam has been less stringent than Catholicism in determining
what is orthodox. Usually acceptance of the testifications of faith,
that is, “There is no god but God” and “Muh.ammad is His Messenger,” has
sufficed, even if opposition has been made to other beliefs and
interpretations of a particular person or group. Like Judaism, Islam has
insisted more on the importance of orthopraxy than orthodoxy. Although
it has been lenient on the level of orthodoxy as long as the principle
of tawhid and the messengership of the Prophet have been accepted, it
has been more stringent on the level of practice of the daily prayers,
fasting, pilgrimage, and so forth; in observing dietary laws such as
abstention from pork and alcoholic drinks; and in following moral laws
dealing with sexual relations, theft, murder, and so on.

As to what plays the role of the magisterium in Islam, the best response
is the ummah, or the Islamic community itself, and for Shi‘ism the
guidance of the Imam. Throughout Islamic history, the consensus of the
community has decided in the long run what new interpretations of the
Quran and*Sunnah* on the level of both thought and action are
permissible and what is to be rejected. But this action by the community
must always remain subservient to the teachings of God’s Word and those
of His Prophet. At that level any innovation (bid‘ah) has always been
seen as a major sin and deviation from the “straight path,” but the
strong rejection of bid‘ah in its technical religious sense has never
meant opposition to adaptation and application of the immutable
principles of Islam to new conditions and situations, as has happened
often throughout Islamic history.

With these definitions in mind, we can now turn to the spectrum of Islam
and pose the question “What constitutes orthodox Islam?” In most Western
studies, orthodoxy is limited to its exoteric aspect, and when Islam is
considered, the four Sunni schools of Law alone are considered orthodox.

But this appraisal is totally inadequate. There is an exoteric orthodoxy
and orthopraxy and there is an esoteric orthodoxy and orthopraxy.
Traditional and orthodox Sufism is not only part of Islamic orthodoxy,
but is its heart and must not be seen as analogous to various mystical
and occult manifestations in postmedieval Christianity that are called
heterodox. Sufism is as much a part of Islamic orthodoxy as Franciscan
or Dominican spirituality was part of Catholic orthodoxy in the Middle
Ages.

To understand the position of Shi‘ism within the Islamic tradition, one
must compare it not to Protestantism, which arose many centuries after
the foundation of Christianity as a protest against Catholicism, but to
Eastern Orthodoxy, which has been there from the beginning. Although
Catholicism and Orthodoxy have been at odds with each other for nearly
one thousand years, both belong to the totality of Christian orthodoxy.
The same holds true for Sunnism and mainstream Shi‘ism of the
Twelve-Imam School. One might say that in the middle of the spectrum of
Islam as far as orthodoxy and heterodoxy are concerned stand Sunnism and
Twelve-Imam Shi‘ism. On the side of Sunnism leaning in the direction of
extremism stand the Khawarij and similar groups, and on the side of
Shi‘ism after the Zaydis and moderate Isma‘ilis stand those called
Shi‘ite extremists*(ghulat)* , including eclectic forms of Isma‘ilism
and the various sects described above. Certainly on the formal and
exoteric level all the four schools of Sunni Law, Twelve-Imam Shi‘ism,
Zaydiism, as well as those at the two sides of the central bands of the
spectrum, whether they be Isma‘ilis or ‘Ibadis, as long as they practice
the*Shari‘ah* , belong to the category of Islamic orthodoxy, as does of
course all normative Sufism that bases itself on the practice of
Shari‘ite injunctions. In fact, because of the centrality of orthopraxy
one could say that Muslims who practice the*Shari‘ah* belong also to
Islamic orthodoxy as long as they do not flout the major doctrines of
the faith such as the Prophet being the seal of prophecy, as do the Ah.
madiyyah.

The use of such terms as “heterodox” and “sect” must be weighed closely
in light of the nature and structure of the Islamic tradition. One
should never refer to Shi‘ism as a whole as a sect, any more than one
would call the Greek Orthodox Church a sect. Nor should one call Sufism
heterodox, unless one is pointing to a particular figure or group which
has adopted either beliefs or practices that are indeed heterodox as
judged by the consensus, or ijma‘, of the mainstream community on the
basis of the Quran and the Sunnah, but such a phenomenon pales into
insignificance when compared with the vast reality of Sufism.

Authentic esoterism, far from being heterodox, lies at the heart of
orthodoxy and orthopraxy in their most universal sense.

CULTURAL ZONES IN ISLAMIC CIVILIZATION
--------------------------------------

People often speak of Arabic, Persian, or Turkish Islam as if they were
three Islams. In reality there is only one Islam, but with local
coloring related to the ethnic, linguistic, and cultural traits of the
different peoples who became part of the Islamic community. Wherever
Islam went, it did not seek to level the existing cultural structures to
the ground, but to preserve and transform them as long as they did not
oppose the spirit and form of the Islamic revelation. The result was the
creation of a single Islamic identity. The vast area of the “Abode of
Islam” (*dar al-islam* ) therefore came to display remarkable diversity
on the human plane while reflecting everywhere the one message of the
Quran revealed through the Prophet. This cultural and ethnic
diversification must therefore be added to all of the factors already
mentioned to make clearer the patterns that, superimposed upon each
other, have created the great diversity in unity found in Islam.

The first cultural zone in the Islamic world is the Arabic zone, which
stretches from Iraq and the Persian Gulf to Mauritania and before 1492
into the southern part of the Iberian Peninsula. Needless to say, in
contrast to what many in the West think, the Arab world is not by any
means synonymous with the Islamic world. In fact, Arab Muslims
constitute less than a fifth of all Muslims, being around 220 million in
number, but since the Quran was revealed to the Arab Prophet of Islam
and the first Islamic society was established in Arabia, the Arabic zone
of the “Abode of Islam” is the oldest part of the Islamic community and
remains central to it. One of the great mysteries of early Islamic
history is that as the Arab armies came out of Arabia, the lands that
they conquered to the north and the west became both Islamicized and
Arabized. The word “Arab” is a linguistic and not an ethnic term when
used in a phrase like “the Arab world.” There was also much Arab
migration into this world, but what made it decisively Arab was the
adoption of the Arabic language from Morocco to Iraq. Even a country
with such an unparalleled ancient past as Egypt became Arab and in fact
remains to this day the center of Arabic culture. In contrast, the
people of the Persian Empire under the Sassanids, who were conquered by
the Arabs in the seventh century, became Muslim, but they did not adopt
the Arabic language. Rather, they developed Persian on the basis of
earlier Iranian languages and retained a distinct cultural zone of their
own. Iraq was the only exception. Although the seat of the Sassanid
capital, it became Arab and in fact the center of the ‘Abbasid
caliphate, but it always retained strong Persian elements.

It is interesting to compare this development with the spread of
Christianity into Europe. Through becoming Christian, Europe also became
to some extent a part of the Abrahamic world, but remained less
Semiticized than the non-Arab Muslims who embraced Islam, because
through St. Paul Christianity itself had already become less “Semitic”
before spreading into Europe. That is why the Christianization of Europe
was not accompanied by the spread of Aramaic or some other Semitic
language in the same way that Arabic spread in the Near East and Africa
and also among Persians and Indians, who belonged to the same linguistic
and racial stock as the Europeans.

Not only were the Gospels written in Greek and not Aramaic, which Christ
spoke, but also the Bible itself was translated early into Latin as the
Vulgate and became linguistically severed from its origin. Latin became
the closest in its role as the language of religion and learning in the
West to what Arabic was in the Islamic world, with the major difference
that Arabic is the sacred language of Islam as Hebrew is that of
Judaism, whereas Latin is a liturgical language of Christianity along
with several other liturgical languages such as Greek and Slavonic. The
Arabization of what is now the Arab world and the significance of Arabic
among non-Arab Muslims cannot therefore be equated with the
Christianization of Europe and the role of Latin in the medieval West,
although there are some interesting parallels to be drawn between the
two worlds.

The Arabic zone, characterized by the use of Arabic as not only the
language of religion, which is common to all Muslims, but also as the
language of daily life, is further divided into an eastern and a western
part, with the line of demarcation being in the middle of Libya. The
western lands, called in classical Arabic al-Maghrib, that is, “the
West,” are further divided into the “near West,” including western
Libya, Tunisia, and most of Algeria, and “the far West,” including
western Algeria, Morocco, Mauritania, and in earlier periods of Islamic
history al-Andalus, or Muslim Iberia. Also within the western zone are
important non-Arab groups, the most important being the Berber, who
inhabit mostly the Atlas Mountains and who have their own distinct
language.

The second zone of Islamic culture, whose people were the second ethnic
group to embrace Islam and to participate with the Arabs in building
classical Islamic civilization, is the Persian zone, consisting of
present-day Iran, Afghanistan, and Tajikistan (with certain cities in
Uzbekistan).

The dominant language of the people of all these countries is Persian,
known locally by three different names, Farsi, Dari, and Tajik, all of
which are the same language; the differences between them are no greater
than differences between the English of Australia, England, and Texas.
This zone also included southern Caucasia, the old Khorasan,
Transoxiana, and parts of what is today Pakistan before the migration
south of Turkic people from the tenth and eleventh centuries and
subsequent ethnic and geopolitical changes. The people of this zone are
predominantly of the Iranian race, which is a branch of the Aryan or
Indo-Iranian-European peoples, and Persian is related to the
Indo-European languages as are other Iranian languages spoken in this
zone, such as Kurdish, Baluchi, and Pashtu.

This zone has a population of some 100 million people, but its influence
is felt strongly beyond its borders in other zones of Islamic culture in
Asia from the Turkic and the Indian to the Chinese.

The first Persian to embrace Islam was Salman-i Farsi, a slave whom the
Prophet caused to become free, making him a member of his “Household.”
From the beginning the Persians were deeply respectful of the “Family of
the Prophet” and many of the descendants of the Prophet, including the
eighth Imam, ‘Ali al-Rid.a, are buried in Persia.

But it would be false to think that the Persians were always Shi‘ites
and the Arabs Sunnis. Shi‘ism began among Arabs and in the tenth century

much of the Arab east was Shi‘ite, while Khorasan, a major Persian
province, was the seat of Sunni thought. It is only after the
establishment of the Safavids that Persia became predominantly Shi‘ite
and this majority increased when Afghanistan, a part of Baluchistan, and
much of Central Asia, which were predominantly Sunni, were separated
from Persia, and Iran in its present form was created. As far as
Afghanistan is concerned, during the Safavid period until the eighteenth
century it was part of Persia. Then the leader of the Afghan tribes
defeated the Safavids and killed the last Safavid king.

Shortly thereafter Nadir Shah, the last oriental conqueror, recaptured
lands all the way to Delhi, including what is today Afghanistan. After
his death, however, eastern Afghanistan became independent, and in the
nineteenth century finally, under British pressure, Persia relinquished
its claim on Herat and western Afghanistan, and thereafter Afghanistan
as we now know it came into being.

The third zone of Islamic culture is that of Black Africa.

Among the entourage of the Prophet, in addition to Salman, there was
another famous companion who was not Arab. He was Bilal ibn Rabah
al-Habashi, the muezzin or caller to prayer of the Prophet, who was a
Black African.

His presence symbolized the rapid spread of Islam among the Blacks and
the creation of the Black African zone of Islamic culture, encompassing
a vast area from the highlands of Ethiopia, where Islam spread already
in the seventh century, to Mali and Senegal. The descendants of Bilal
are said to have migrated to Mali, forming the Mandinka clan Keita,
which helped create the Mali Empire. Some of the companions of the
Prophet also migrated to Chad and established Islam there a generation
after the Prophet.

Altogether Islam spread in Black Africa mostly through trade, and such
tribes as the Sanhaja, who themselves embraced Islam early, became
intermediaries between Arab Muslims to the north and Black Africans. By
the eleventh century a powerful Islamic kingdom was established in
Ghana, and by the fourteenth century the Mali Empire, which was Muslim,
was one of the richest in the world; its most famous ruler, Mansa Musa,
one of the most notable rulers in the whole of the Islamic world.

In East Africa, which received Islam earlier than West Africa, the
process of Islamization took a different path and was influenced greatly
by the migration of both Arabs and Persians into the coastal areas of
West Africa. By the twelfth century a Swahili kingdom was established
with its capital in Kilwa, and from the mixture of Arabic, Persian, and
Bantu the new Swahili language, perhaps the most important Islamic
language of Muslim Black Africa, was born.

But in contrast to the Arab and Persian worlds, where one language
dominates, the Black African zone of Islamic culture consists of many
subzones with very distinct languages ranging from Hausa and Fulani to
Somali. Some of these languages are also spoken by Christians and are
culturally signficant for African Christianity.

Although the north of the African continent was already Arab a century
after the rise of Islam, the area called classically the Sudan, which
included

the steppes and the grasslands from present-day Sudan to Senegal, also
became to a large extent Muslim over a millennium ago. It is, however,
only since the nineteenth century that Islam has begun to penetrate
inland into the forest regions south of the classical Sudan. There are
of course also intermediate regions between the Arabic north and Black
Africa where the two zones become intermingled, such as present-day
Sudan, Eritrea, and Somalia. The zone of Black African Islamic culture
with a population of well over 150 million people is bewilderingly
diverse and presents a remarkable panorama of ethnic and cultural
diversity within the local unity of Black African culture and the
universal unity of Islam itself.

The fourth zone of Islamic culture is the Turkic zone, embracing all the
people who speak one of the Altaic languages, of which the most
important is Turkish, but which also include Adhari*(Azeri)* , Chechen,
Uighur, Uzbek, Kirghiz, and Turkeman. The Turkic people, who were
originally nomadic, migrated south from the Altai Mountains to conquer
Central Asia from the Persians, changing its ethnic nature but remaining
culturally very close to the Persian world. By the time they had entered
the Persia of that historical period, they had already embraced Islam
and in fact became its great champions. Not only did they defeat local
Persian rulers such as the Samanids, but they soon pushed westward
toward Anatolia, defeating the Byzantine army at the Battle of Manzikert
(Malazgirt in Turkish) in 1071. This was one of the pivotal battles of
Islamic history. It opened the Anatolian pasturelands to the Turkic
nomads and led to the Turkification of Anatolia, the establishment of
the Ottoman Empire, and finally to the conquest of Constantinople in
1453. The Turks were powerful militarily and ruled over many Muslim
lands, including Persia and Egypt, and their role in later Islamic
history can hardly be exaggerated. Today the Turkic peoples, composed of
more than 150 million people, are spread from Macedonia to Siberia and
all the way to Vladivostok and are geographically the most widespread
ethnic and cultural group within the Islamic world. There are notable
Turkic groups also within other areas that are not majority Turkic,
including Persia, Afghanistan, Egypt, Jordan, Syria, and Russia, which
has important Turkic minorities who are remnants of people conquered
during the expansion of the Russian Empire under the czars.

The fifth major zone of Islamic culture is that of the Indian
subcontinent. Already in the first decade of the eighth century, the
army of Muh.ammad ibn Qasim had conquered Sindh, and thus began the
penetration of Islam into the subcontinent during the next few
centuries, but Islam spread throughout India mostly through Sufi orders.

There were also invasions by various Turkic rulers into India, and from
the eleventh century onward and until the British colonization of India
Muslim rulers dominated over much of India, especially the north, where
the Moghuls established a major empire in the sixteenth century. Indian
Islam is ethnically mostly homogeneous, with some Persian and Turkic
elements added to the local Indian population, but it is culturally and
linguistically very diverse. For nearly a thousand years the
intellectual and literary language of Indian Muslims was Persian, but
several local languages, such as Sindhi, Gujrati, Punjabi, and Bengali,
also gained some

prominence as Islamic languages. Gradually, from the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, a new language was born of the wedding of the
Indian languages and Persian with Turkic elements added and became known
as Urdu.

Written in the Arabic-Persian script, Urdu became, like Swahili, Ottoman
Turkish, and several other Islamic languages, a major language of
Islamic discourse and was later adopted as the official language of
Pakistan. The Indian zone of Islamic culture includes Pakistan,
Bangladesh, Muslims of India and Nepal, and the deeply rooted Islamic
community of Sri Lanka. There are some 400 million Muslims in this
region, more than in any other. The reason for this vast population is
the rapid rise of the general population in all of India since the
nineteenth century, including both Hindus and Muslims, and the fact that
more than one-fourth of Indians had embraced Islam, which was able to
provide providentially a path of salvation for those who could no longer
function within the world of traditional Hinduism. They have created
some of the greatest works of Islamic art and culture, and although
ruled often by Turkic dynasties, they have been very close in cultural
matters to the Persian world until modern times.

The sixth zone of Islamic culture embraces the Malay world in Southeast
Asia. Islamicized by Arab traders from the Persian Gulf and the Arabian
Sea and also by merchants and Sufis from India from the thirteenth
century onward, Malay Islam displays again much ethnic homogeneity and
possesses local traits all its own. Influenced deeply from the beginning
by Sufism, which played a major role in the spread of Islam into that
world, Malay Islam has usually reflected a mild and gentle aspect also
in conformity with the predominant ethnic characteristics of the people.
Dominated by Malay and Javanese languages, Malay Islam embraces
Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei, and sizable minorities in Thailand as well
as the Philippines and smaller minorities in Cambodia and Vietnam.
Altogether there are over 220 million Muslims in this zone, and although
this part of the Islamic world is a relative newcomer to the “Abode of
Islam,” its adherents are known for their close attachment to Mecca and
Medina and love for the Prophetic traditions.

As is the case with Africa and India, Malay Islam is highly influenced
and colored operatively and intellectually by Sufism.

Besides these six major zones of Islamic culture, a few smaller ones
must also be mentioned. One is Chinese Islam, whose origin goes back to
the seventh century, when soon after the advent of Islam Muslim
merchants settled in Chinese ports such as Canton. There has been a
continuous presence of Islam in China since that time, but mostly in
Sinkiang, which Muslim geographers call Eastern Turkistan.

The Islamic population of China includes both people of Turkic origin,
such as the Uigurs, and native Chinese called Hui. Even among the Hans
there are some Muslims. The number of Muslims in China remains a great
mystery and figures from 25 to 100 million have been mentioned. There is
a distinct Chinese Islamic architecture and calligraphy as well as a
whole intellectual tradition closely allied to Persian Sufism. The
Islamic

intellectual tradition in China began to express itself in classical
Chinese rather than Persian and Arabic only from the seventeenth century
onward.

Then there are the European Muslims-not Turkish enclaves found in
Bulgaria, Greece, and Macedonia, but European ethnic groups-that have
been Muslims for half a millennium. The most important among these
groups are the Albanians, found throughout Albania, Kosovo, and
Macedonia, and Bosnians, found mostly in Bosnia but to some extent also
in Croatia and Serbia. These groups are ethnically of European stock,
and the understanding of their culture is important for a better
comprehension of both the spectrum of Islam in its totality and the
rapport between Islam and the West in today’s Europe.

Finally, there are the new Islamic communities in Europe and America,
including both immigrants and converts (or what many Muslims prefer to
call reverts, that is, those who have gone back or reverted to the
primordial religion, which is identified here with Islam). These include
several million North Africans in France, some 3 million Turks and a
sizable number of Kurds in Germany, some 2 million mostly from the
Indian subcontinent in Great Britain, and smaller but nevertheless
sizable populations in other European countries. In America there are
both immigrants, mostly from the Arab East, Iran, and the subcontinent,
and converts, primarily among African Americans but also some among
whites. The spread of Islam among African Americans began with Elijah
Muhammad, who created the Nation of Islam, which espouses reverse racism
against whites. This movement later split into two groups and most of
its members, along with other African American Muslims, soon joined the
mainstream of Islam.

In this process the role of El-Hajj Malik El-Shabazz, better known as
Malcolm X, was of particular significance. There are some 25 million
Muslims in Europe, some 6 million (although some have claimed other
figures ranging from 5 to 7 million) in America, half a million in
Canada, and perhaps over 2 million in South America. To view the
spectrum of Islam globally, it is necessary to consider also these
Islamic communities in the West, especially since they play such an
important role as a bridge between the “Abode of Islam” (*dar al-islam*
), from which they come, and the West, which is their home.

These zones of Islamic culture described briefly here display a
bewildering array of ethnicities, languages, forms of

![](books/0753-the_heart_of_islam/images/image002.jpg)

![](books/0753-the_heart_of_islam/images/image003.jpg)

art and music, and differing habitats for human life. Islam is practiced
from the jungles of Borneo to the Hindu Kush mountains to the deserts of
Mauritania. It includes whites, blacks, yellow-skinned people, and
practically every intermediary type. Its followers have black as well as
blond hair, brown as well as blue eyes. But within this remarkable
diversity there reigns the unity created by Islam, a unity that can be
seen in the recitation of the Quran in Arabic from east to west, in the
daily prayers in the direction of Mecca, in the emulation of the single
model of the Prophet, in the following of the*Shari‘ah* , in the
spiritual perfume of the Sufi orders, in the universal patterns and
rhythms of Islamic art, and in many other factors. Unity in Islam has
never meant uniformity and has always embraced diversity. To understand
both this unity and this diversity within unity is to grasp the way in
which Islam has been able to encompass so many human collectivities, to
respect God-given differences and yet create a vast civilization unified
and dominated by the principle of tawhid, or unity.

TRADITIONAL, MODERNIST, AND “FUNDAMENTALIST” INTERPRETATIONS OF ISLAM TODAY
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

All that has been said thus far provides the necessary context and
framework for understanding the recent developments in the Islamic
world. Until the impact of European colonialism on the heart of the
Islamic world, there were those who fought against Western rule in the
extremities of the “Abode of Islam,” but there were no Muslim modernists
or fundamentalists. Muslims were all traditional and fitted into the
complex pattern of the spectrum of Islam outlined above. But with the
advent of European domination of the heartland of Islam, represented by
the Napoleonic invasion of Egypt in 1798, the period of diverse
reactions and interpretations leading to the contemporary period began.

The European encroachment upon the Islamic world had actually begun over
two and a half centuries earlier with the Portuguese and later Dutch and
British domination of the Indian Ocean, which had been a major economic
lifeline for Islamic civilization. There had also been European
invasions of North Africa, the decisive defeat of the Ottoman navy in
the Battle of Lepanto in 1571, which cut the Ottomans off from the
western Mediterranean, and the defeat of the Ottomans in their siege of
Vienna in 1683, which marked the beginning of the waning of their power.
But none of these events, nor the Dutch colonization of the East Indies,
nor British penetration into India, moved the minds and souls of Muslims
as did the conquest of Egypt. That event awakened Muslims to a challenge
without precedence in their history.

The Quran states, “If God aideth you, no one shall overcome you”
(3:159). In the eyes of Muslims, twelve centuries of Islamic history had
demonstrated the legitimacy of their claim and the truth of their call.
God had been “on their side” and aided them over all those centuries,
notwithstanding the defeat of Muslims in Spain and the destruction of
the Tartar kingdom by the Russians, because these were at the margins of
the world of Islam and lack of internal unity was considered as the
reason for these defeats.

Otherwise, wherever Islam had gone, it had become victorious; even the
powerful Mongols had soon embraced Islam. But these Europeans, whom
Muslims had neglected for so long and considered their cultural
inferiors, were now dominating the Islamic world and there was no
possibility of their accepting Islam as the Turks or Mongols had. They
claimed themselves to be superior and were so proud of their own culture
that they showed no interest in anything else. This situation created a
crisis of cosmic proportions with eschatological overtones.

Several attitudes could have been taken in face of this crisis, and in
fact every one of them was adopted by one group or another. One view
held that Muslims had become weak because they had strayed from the
original message of the faith and had become corrupted by luxury and
deviations.

This was the position of the so-called puritanical reformists, of whom
the most famous, the eighteenthcentury Muhammad ibn ‘Abd al-Wahhab from
Najd, lived in fact before the Napoleonic invasion of Egypt at the end
of the

eighteenth century, but whose message sought to respond to causes for
Muslim weakness. Although his message remained mostly in Arabia, this
type of puritanical reformism, which was usually against Sufism,
Shi‘ism, Islamic philosophy and theology, and the refinement of
classical Islamic cities as demonstrated in the arts, became known as
the Salafiyyah, that is, those who follow the early predecessors, or
salaf, disregarding the thirteen or fourteen centuries of development of
the Islamic tradition from its Quranic and Prophetic roots.

A second possibility was to turn to eschatological*hadiths* concerning
the end of the world, when, it was said, oppression would reign
everywhere and Muslims would become weakened and dominated by others. As
a result of this focus, a wave of Mahdiism swept across some areas of
the Islamic world in the early nineteenth century, ranging from the
Brelvi movement in the northwestern province of present-day Pakistan; to
the movements of Ghulam Ah.mad and the Bab already mentioned; to
uprisings by major figures in West Africa, of whom the most significant,
although his career began somewhat earlier, was ‘Uthman Dan Fadio, the
founder of the Sokoto Caliphate, whose influence spread even to the
Caribbean; to the Mahdiist movement of the Sudan, which inflicted the
only defeat on the British army in the nineteenth century. As with every
millennialist movement, this Mahdiist wave gradually died down, in this
case by the second half of the nineteenth century.

The third possibility was to say, in the manner of European modernists,
that the regulations of Islam were for the seventh century and times had
changed; therefore religion had to be reformed and modernized. The
modernists began in Egypt, the most famous of whom were Jamal al-Din
al-Afghani, who was of Persian origin, and Muh.ammad ‘Abduh. They also
appeared in Ottoman Turkey, especially within the Young Turk movement;
in India, with such figures as Sir Sayyid Ah.mad Khan; and in Persia,
which produced several other figures besides al-Afghani, whose effect
was, however, more local. These modernists varied in their degree of
modernism and approach, but in general they were great admirers of the
West and of rationalism, nationalism, and modern science. The most
philosophical of all of them was Muh.ammad Iqbal, who belongs to the end
of this first period of response to the West, which lasted until World
War II. When Western scholars speak of Islamic reformers, they have
mostly such figures in mind, along with the so-called puritanical
reformers. From the ranks of the modernists rose nationalists and
liberal thinkers, men who sought to modernize Islamic society, on the
one hand, and fight against the West in the name of national
independence, on the other. The colonial wars fought against Western
powers for national independence by such figures as Ataturk, Sukarno,
Bourgiba, and others were carried out in the name of nationalism, not
Islam.

Consequently, when Western powers left their colonies, at least
outwardly, in many areas they left behind them ruling groups who were
Muslim in name, but whose thinking was more like that of the colonizers
they had replaced.

There were, of course, also groups of fighters for independence who were
not modernists at all, but traditional Muslims, often associated with
various Sufi orders. They usually carried out military resistance to
preserve their homelands with a degree of nobility and magnanimity that
deeply impressed their European enemies. One can cite as a supreme
example of this type Amir ‘Abd al-Qadir, the great Algerian freedom
fighter and Sufi sage; his opponent, a French general, wrote back to
Paris saying that fighting against the Amir was like confronting one of
the prophets of the Old Testament. Another notable example is Imam
Shamil, who fought for years in Caucasia against Russian encroachment.
The example of the saintly nature of these men and the manner in which
they treated their enemies as well as noncombatants, no matter what the
other side was doing, is of the utmost importance for Muslims as well as
Westerners to remember in the present-day situation.

Most of the Islamic world in the period between, let us say, 1800 and
World War II did not react in any of the three manners described above.
They were the traditional Muslims for whom the life of the*Shari‘ah* as
well as the Tariqah continued in its time-honored manner. There were, of
course, continuous renewals from within that must not, however, be
confused with reform in its modern sense. Many great scholars of Law
continued to appear and Sufism was rejuvenated in several areas,
especially in the Maghrib and West and East Africa, as we see in the
rise of the Tijaniyyah and Sanusiyyah orders as well as the appearance
of such great masters as Shaykh al-Darqawi, Shaykh Ahmad al-‘Alawi, and
Shaykh Salamah al-Rad.i, all of whom revived the Shadhiliyyah Order.
Nevertheless, the modus vivendi of traditional Muslims was not reaction,
but continuation of the traditional Islamic modes of life and thought.

After World War II most Islamic countries had become politically free,
except for Algeria, which gained its independence in 1962 after a war
that cost a million lives, and Muslim areas within the Communist world.
The general population of Muslims had expected that with political
independence would come cultural, social, and economic independence as
well. When the reverse occurred, that is, when with the advent of
political independence Westernized classes began ruling over a deeply
pious public, as can be seen in countries as different as Turkey, Iran,
Egypt, and Pakistan, major reactions set in that can be seen throughout
the Islamic world to this day.

The old modernist and liberal schools of thought became discredited, as
did the modernists as a political class, which had failed to solve any
of the major problems that society faced in addition to suffering
humiliating defeats, especially in the several Arab-Israeli wars.
Nevertheless, modernism continued, often with a new Marxist component,
and remained powerful because it controlled and still controls the state
apparatus in most Muslim lands. But its intellectual and social power
began to wane and weaken nearly everywhere except in Turkey, where
Ataturk’s secularism remains strong, held in place by the force of the
army. Iran was the first country in which a political revolution removed
the modernist government in favor of an Islamic one. A process of
internal Islamization also took

place, gradually and without revolutionary upheaval, in Pakistan,
Afghanistan, Malaysia, the Sudan, Jordan, Egypt, and some other
countries, and that process continues.

As for what is called “fundamentalism,” the earlier form of it as found
in Saudi Arabia became transformed in many ways. By the 1960s there was
a general malaise in the Islamic world caused by the simple emulation of
a West, which, according to its leading thinkers, did not know where it
was going itself. Many people, even among the modernized classes, turned
back to Islam to find solutions to the existential problems posed by
life itself and more particularly the actual situation of Muslims. The
desire of the vast majority of people was to be left alone to solve the
problems of the Islamic world, to preserve the religion of Islam,
including the revival of the*Shari‘ah* , and to rebuild Islamic
civilization, but the dominant civilization of the West hardly allowed
such a thing to take place. Many organizations were nevertheless
established to pursue these ends by peaceful means, chief among them the
Ikhwan al-Muslimin, or Muslim Brotherhood, founded in Egypt in the 1920s
by H. asan al-Banna’, and the Jama‘at-i islami, founded by Mawlana
Mawdudi in 1941, both of which remain powerful to this day.

In the past few decades this desire to preserve religion, re-Islamicize
Islamic society, and reconstruct Islamic civilization has drawn a vast
spectrum of people into its fold, all of whom are now branded
indiscriminately in the West as “fundamentalist.” The majority of such
people, however, pursue nonviolent means to achieve their goals, as do
most Christian, Jewish, or Hindu “fundamentalists.” But there are also
those who take recourse to violent action, nearly always when they are
trying to defend their homeland, as in Palestine, Chechnya, Kashmir,
Kosovo, or the southern Philippines, or sometimes in exasperation to
defend their faith and traditional cultural values, as one sees in
occasional violent eruptions in Indonesia, Pakistan, and elsewhere.

But to act Islamically is to act in defense. Those who inflict harm upon
the innocent, no matter how just their cause might be, are going against
the clear teachings of the Quran and the*Shari‘ah* concerning peace and
war (to which we turn later in Chapter 6). In any case, the unfortunate
use of the term “fundamentalism,” drawn originally from American
Protestantism, for Islam cannot now be avoided, but it is of the utmost
importance to realize that it embraces very different phenomena and must
not be confused with the demonizing usage of the term in the Western
media.

Disappointment among Muslims with the lack of true freedom after the
attainment of political freedom after World War II also led to a new
wave of Mahdiism, as seen in the coming of Ayatollah Khomeini to power
in Iran at the time of the Iranian Revolution of 1979 (which was a major
event in modern history and which definitely possessed eschatological
overtones), the taking over of the Grand Mosque in Mecca in 1980, and
the appearance of Mahdi-like figures in Nigeria during the last two
decades.

There is no doubt that there is again a presence of Mahdiism in the air
throughout the Islamic world, as there are millennialist expectations
among both Jews and Christians today.

As for traditional Islam, in contrast to the first phase of the
encounter with the West, from the 1960s onward it began to manifest
itself in the public intellectual arena and to challenge both the
modernists and the so-called fundamentalists.

Scholars deeply rooted in the Islamic tradition but also well acquainted
with the West began to defend the integral Islamic tradition, the
Tariqah as well as the*Shari‘ah* , the intellectual disciplines as well
as the traditional arts. At the same time they began in-depth criticism
not of Christianity or Judaism, but of secularist modernism, which was
first incubated and grew in the West, but later spread to other
continents. Such scholars base themselves on the universality of
revelation stated in the Quran and seek to reject the substitution of
the “kingdom of man” for the “Kingdom of God” as posited by modern
secularism. Their criticisms of the modern world have drawn much from
Western critics of modernism, rationalism, and scientism, including not
only such traditionalists as René Guénon, Frithjof Schuon, Titus
Burckhardt, and Martin Lings, but also such well-known European and
American critics of the modernist project, including modern science and
technology, as Jacques Ellul, Ivan Illich, and Theodore Roszak. The
traditional Islamic response began with those trained in Western-style
educational organizations, but during the past two decades has come to
also include figures from among the class of religious scholars, or
‘ulama’, and traditional Sufis. These scholars and leaders seek to
preserve the rhythm of traditional Islamic life as well as its
intellectual and spiritual traditions and find natural allies in Judaism
and Christianity in confronting the challenges of modern secularism as
well as globalization.

The great majority of Muslims today still belong to the traditionalist
category and must be distinguished from both secularist modernizers and
“fundamentalists,” as the latter term is now used in the Western media.
In fact, it would be the greatest error to fail to distinguish the
traditionalists from the “fundamentalists” and to include anyone who
wishes to preserve the traditional Islamic way of life and thought in
the “fundamentalist” category. It would be as if in contemporary
Catholicism one were to call Padre Pio and Mother Teresa
“fundamentalists” because they insisted on preserving traditional
Catholic teachings. It is essential to realize that the notion of
extremism implies a center, or median, of the spectrum; phenomena are
judged “extreme” according to their distance, on either side, from this
designated center. Unfortunately in the Western media today, that center
is usually defined as the modernizing elements in Islamic society, and
it is forgotten that modernism is itself one of the most fanatical,
dogmatic, and extremist ideologies that history has ever seen. It seeks
to destroy every other point of view and is completely intolerant toward
any Weltanschauung that opposes it, whether it is that of the Native
Americans, whose whole world was forcibly crushed by it, or Hinduism,
Buddhism, or Islam, or for that matter traditional Christianity or
Judaism. Orthodox Jews have as much difficulty resisting the constant
assault of modern secularism upon their worldview and religious
practices as do Hindus or Muslims. If one is going to speak of
“fundamentalism” in religions, then one must include “secularist
fundamentalism,” which is no less virulently proselytizing and
aggressive

toward anything standing in its way than the most fanatical form of
religious “fundamentalism.”

In the case of Islam, there are today certainly religious extremists of
different kinds, but they do not define the mainstream, or center, of
Islam. That center belongs to traditional Islam. And that center is the
one against which one should view fanatical religious extremism, on the
one side, and the rabid secularist modernism found in most Islamic
countries, but especially in such places as Turkey, Tunisia, and
Algeria, on the other. Traditional Islam is not opposed to what the West
wishes to do within its own borders, but to the corrosive influences
emanating from modern and postmodern Western culture, now associated so
much with what is called globalization, that threaten Islamic values,
just as they threaten Christian and Jewish values in the West itself.
But the philosophy of defense of traditional Islam has always been to
keep within the boundaries of Islamic teachings.

Its method of combat has been and remains primarily intellectual and
spiritual, and when it has been forced to take recourse to physical
action in the form of defense of its home and shelter, its models have
been the Amir ‘Abd al-Qadirs and Imam Shamils, not the Reign of Terror
of the French Revolution or homegrown models of Che Guevara.

To understand events in the Islamic world today, even the most
outrageous and evil actions carried out in the name of Islam, it is
necessary to have a context within which to place these actions, in the
same way that Westerners are able to place Jonestown, Waco, bombs by the
Irish Republican Army, Serbian ethnic cleansing, or the killings carried
out by Baruch Goldstein or Rabbi Kahane’s group in context and not to
identify them simply with Christianity or Judaism as such. This context
can only be provided by looking at the vast spectrum of Islam outlined
above. Yes, there are those in the Islamic world today who have taken
recourse to military action and violence using modern technology with
the supposed aim of ameliorating real or imaginary wrongs and
injustices. Considering the history of the recent past, it is hardly
surprising that such extremist illicit and morally reprehensible actions
by a few using the name of Islam should take place, especially when
injustices and suppressions within Islamic societies are added to
external ones. Nor does asking why despicable actions take place in the
name of Islam by the few and coming to understand the background of
these actions in any way condone or excuse them.

![](books/0753-the_heart_of_islam/images/image004.jpg)

The vast majority of Muslims still breathe in a universe in which the
Name of God is associated above all with Compassion and Mercy, and they
turn to Him in patience even in the midst of the worst tribulations. If
it seems that more violence is associated with Islam than with other
religions today, it is not due to the fact that there has been no
violence elsewhere-think of the Korean and Vietnam wars, the atrocities
committed by the Serbs, and the genocide in Rwanda and Burundi. The
reason is that Islam is still very strong in Islamic society. Because
Islam so pervades the lives of Muslims, all actions, including violent
ones, are carried out in the name of Islam, especially since other
ideologies such as nationalism and socialism have become so bankrupt.

Yet this identification is itself paradoxical because traditional Islam
is as much on the side of peace and accord as are traditional Judaism
and Christianity. Despite such phenomena, however, if one looks at the
extensive panorama of the Islamic spectrum summarized below, it becomes
evident that for the vast majority of Muslims, the traditional norms
based on peace and openness to others, norms that have governed their
lives over the centuries and are opposed to both secularist modernism
and “fundamentalism,” are of central concern. And after the dust settles
in this tumultuous period of both Islamic and global history, it will be
the voice of traditional Islam that will have the final say in the
Islamic world.
