CHAPTER THREE: DIVINE AND HUMAN LAWS
====================================

***And now We have set thee (O Muhammad) on a clear road (Shar‘) of Our
Commandment; so follow it, and follow not the whim of those who know
not.***

***Quran 45:18***

***It is the Law of God which has taken course aforetime. Thou wilt not
find any change in the Law of God.***

***Quran 48:23***

THE PHILOSOPHY OF LAW IN ISLAM
------------------------------

One of the most difficult aspects of Islam to understand for modern
Westerners is the “philosophy of law,” which provides the conceptual
foundation for the*Shari‘ah* (literally, “road” or “path”), or Divine
Law, in Islam. Since Christ did not promulgate a law like those of the
prophets of the Old Testament and the Prophet of Islam, but rather came
to break the letter of the law in the name of the Spirit, religious law
in the West developed in a very different manner than it did in Islam.
Even during the Middle Ages, when Western society was thoroughly
Christian, everyday laws were drawn from Roman sources or common law.
These sources were clearly distinguished from Divine Law, which in the
Christian context involved spiritual principles and not ordinary laws
dealing with society in general. Moreover, Christian theologians
developed an elaborate doctrine of natural law, which does not have an
exact counterpart in Islam, although there are striking developments
worthy of comparison in this domain within the two traditions.

Originally, natural law meant a system of rights or justice common to
all human beings and derived from nature. St. Thomas Aquinas provided
the greatest elaboration of this concept, stating that eternal law
exists in God’s mind and is known to us only in part through revelation
and in part through reason. For St. Thomas, the law of nature is the
“participation of the eternal law in the rational creature.”

Human law, based on precepts that human beings can derive by their own
reason, must be a particular application of that law. Now, although
Muslim theologians also debated among themselves whether our God-given
reason can know the good without revelation, they did not develop a
theory of natural law such as one finds in Thomism. Their view was
closer to that of John Duns Scotus and Francisco Suarez, who believed
that the Divine Will, rather than reason, was the source of law. In any
case, even in the Middle Ages there were differences between the Islamic
and certain of the predominantly Catholic schools of theology concerning
the philosophy of law.

From the Renaissance onward laws became more and more secularized in the
West, and they came to be seen as ever-changing regulations devised and
defined by society to be made and discarded as circumstances dictate.
And with the rise of parliamentary democracy, these laws came to be made
and abrogated by the representatives of the people.

Within the context of such a background, it is easy to see why the
understanding of the Islamic, and more generally the Semitic, concept of
law, which is associated with the Will of God and is meant to determine
society rather than be determined by it, poses such a problem for modern
Westerners.

Yet such a view should not be so difficult to understand in the West if
one only turns to Jewish Law and the Old Testament, which is of course
also a part of Christian sacred scripture. In the Old Testament is
stated a clear theology that determines the meaning of law for human
society.

According to it, God is the Transcendent Reality Who is all powerful and
sovereign over human beings. He is the only ultimate sanction of law,
and

the laws of human society are the embodiments of His Will. In the Bible,
law is designated as God’s commandments (mitsvah; as in Deut.11:13),
teaching or instruction (torah; Gen. 26:5), utterance (davar; Deut.
4:13), and norm (mishpot; Exod. 21:1), along with other expressions.
Violation of law is seen not only as an offense against society, but
also as a moral sin and a violation of God’s order to humanity, for
which human beings are accountable to God (Gen. 20:6; Lev. 19-

20, 22). The Bible makes no distinction between religious and secular
offense against the law, and the law is seen as a norm by which not only
men and women, but all beings must abide (Gen. 2:11-17; 9:1-7). For the
rabbis, there was no distinction between fas, God-given laws, and lex,
human laws, as claimed by the Romans; all laws were seen as expressions
of God’s Will.

Now, this whole understanding of the meaning of law in the Bible
corresponds very much to that of the Quran. If modern Westerners were
only to grasp what the Old Testament says about law or how contemporary
traditional Jews comprehend and practice Talmudic Law, it would be much
easier to understand the “philosophy of law” in Islam. For Muslims also,
God as the supreme and transcendent Sovereign has revealed His Laws
through His prophets. The*Shari‘ah* is the concrete embodiment of the
Divine Will, and in its most universal sense it embraces the whole of
creation; what we call laws of nature are “the*Shari‘ah* ” of various
orders of corporeal reality. There is no distinction between the
religious and secular realms, although the existence of non-Shari‘ite
laws are recognized in practice, as we shall see later.

In the Islamic perspective, Divine Law is to be implemented to regulate
society and the actions of its members rather than society dictating
what laws should be. The injunctions of Divine Law are permanent, but
the principles can also be applied to new circumstances as they arise.

But the basic thesis is one of trying to make the human order conform to
the Divine norm, not vice-versa. To speak of the*Shari‘ah* as being
simply the laws of the seventh century fixed in time and not relevant
today would be like telling Christians that the injunctions of Christ to
love one’s neighbor and not commit adultery were simply laws of the
Palestine of two thousand years ago and not relevant today, or telling
Jews not to keep Sabbath because this is simply an outmoded practice of
three thousand years ago.

Modern secularists might advance these arguments, but it is difficult to
understand how Jews or Christians who still follow their religious
tradition could do so. As far as Christianity is concerned, how
Christians hold the spiritual teachings of Christ to be immutable can be
a key for the understanding of how Muslims regard the*Shari‘ah* . As for
Jews, such an understanding should be even easier, because the Islamic
understanding of Divine Law is so similar to that found in Judaism, and
the*Shari‘ah* and Halakhah hold very similar positions in the two
religions, respectively.

As in Judaism, for Islam Divine Law is more central than theological
thought to the religious life. One can be a very serious Muslim without
interest in kalam, or Islamic theology, but one cannot be a serious
Christian

without interest in Christian theology unless one is a mystic or
pietist. One could, in fact, say that what theology is to Christianity,
the*Shari‘ah* , or Divine Law, is to Islam. To be a Muslim is to accept
the validity of the*Shari‘ah* , even if one is too weak to practice all
of its injunctions, and to understand the*Shari‘ah* is to gain knowledge
of the formal religious structure of Islam. Even those who have sought
to go beyond the formal level, through the Tariqah to the absolute
Truth, which transcends all forms, have never ceased to revere
the*Shari‘ah* and to practice it. The greatest philosophers of Islam
from Avicenna to Averroës practiced the*Shari‘ah* ; so did the greatest
saints and mystics, such as Ibn ‘Arabi, who wrote that his heart was the
temple for idols and house for the Torah, the Gospels, and the Quran,
but who never broke the Divine Law or stopped saying his daily prayers,
promulgated by the*Shari‘ah* , until his death.

The transcending of the Law in Islam in the direction of the Spirit has
never been through the flouting of the Law, through breaking or denying
its formal structure, but by transcending it from within. If there have
been exceptions for those crazed by the love of God and in a paranormal
state of consciousness, they have been there as exceptions to prove the
rule. To speak of Islam on the level of individual practice and social
norms is to speak of the*Shari‘ah* , which has provided over the
centuries guidelines for those who have wanted or wish today to live
according to God’s Will in its Islamic form. When we hear in the Lord’s
Prayer uttered by Christ “Thy Will be done on earth as it is in Heaven,”
for the Muslim His Will is expressed in the*Shari‘ah* , and to live
according to this Will on earth is, first of all, to practice the
injunctions of the Divine Law. It is on the basis of this practice,
meant for all Muslims, that the saintly can then surrender their whole
will to the Will of God.

God, then, is the supreme Legislator (*al-Shari‘* ).

Through His Laws, before which according to Islam all men and women are
equal, human life is sanctified. The Divine Law embraces every aspect of
life and removes the distinction between sacred and profane or religious
and secular. Since God is the creator of all things, there is no
legitimate domain of life to which His Will or His Laws do not apply.
Even the most ordinary acts of life carried out according to
the*Shari‘ah* are sanctified, and persons of faith who live a life
according to the Divine Law live a life immersed in grace, or what in
Arabic is called barakah.

Their life gains meaning, and they move through the journey of life
certain that they are following a road (shar‘) designated by God, a road
that leads to salvation and felicity in the ultimate encounter with Him.
To live according to the*Shari‘ah* in both form and inner meaning is to
live an ethical life in the fullest sense.

THE SOURCES OF THE SHARI‘AH AND THE METHODOLOGY OF ISLAMIC JURISPRUDENCE
------------------------------------------------------------------------

The most important source of the*Shari‘ah* is the Quran, which some
scholars claim to be the only basic source; all other sources serve only
to elucidate and elaborate the roots and principles contained in the
Sacred Text. There are some 350 legal verses, or what Western law calls
juris corpus, in the Quran. Some of them deal with specific legal issues
and penalties for illicit and illegal acts. A large number deal with the
principles of the acts of worship and in some cases the details of such
actions. Another group of verses deals with commercial and economic
issues. In addition, many verses deal with the questions of justice,
equality, evidence in law, legal rights, and so forth. Together these
verses constitute only a small part of the Quran, but they are essential
as the roots of Islamic Law.

The injunctions of the Quran would not, however, be fully understood
without the*Sunnah* and Hadith of the Prophet, which constitute its
first commentary. The Quran orders Muslims to pray, but how to pray was
learned from the model established by the Prophet. After the Quran,
therefore, the*Sunnah* and Hadith are the second most important source
of the*Shari‘ah* . All schools of Law, Sunni and Shi‘ite alike, accept
these two as the absolutely necessary sources for Islamic Law. It is
important to note that it was only after the canonical collections of
Hadith were assembled in the ninth century that the definitive work on
the methodology of jurisprudence was produced by Imam al-Shafi‘i.

Other*Shari‘ah* sources are accepted by some schools and not by others.
They include qiyas, or analogy, in its juridical sense, which
technically means the extension of a Shari‘ite ruling or value from a
known and accepted case (*asl* ) to a new case with the same effective
cause, legally speaking. These sources also include ijma‘, or consensus,
which is usually considered to be the consensus on a legal matter of the
legal scholars who are specialists in the*Shari‘ah* , but which in
Islamic history has also been the consensus of the whole community over
a long period, as in the case of the banning of slavery and the
acceptance of tobacco as being halal, that is, legally acceptable rather
than forbidden. There is, in fact, a hadith of the Prophet that asserts:
“My community shall never agree on error.”

Then there is istihsan, or equity, which differs from equity in Western
law in that in the latter equity relies on the concept of natural law,
whereas istihsan relies on the*Shari‘ah* ; otherwise, they are similar
in that both are concerned with the idea of fairness and conscience in
law. Finally, in this brief account one must mention mas.lah. ah
mursalah, or considerations of public interest that are harmonious with
the*Shari‘ah* and the objectives of the Lawgiver.

An important point here is the position within the*Shari‘ah* of human
custom and law as distinct from the Divine Law. What in classical texts
is called ‘urf or ‘adah, meaning human custom or habit, is considered
valid in the*Shari‘ah* itself if such a custom or habit does not
contradict or contravene the*Shari‘ah* . Therefore, human laws not
derived from the Divine Law can become integrated into the Islamic legal
system as long as they do not oppose the edicts of the*Shari‘ah* . This
occurred often

throughout Islamic history. Divine Law is referred to as*Shar‘* , and
human law is referred to as*qanun* (from the Greek word kanon, which is
also the source for the word “canonical” in Western law). Paradoxically,
nonreligious law in Islam uses the same term as religious or
ecclesiastical law in Christianity.

From the point of view of the*Shari‘ah* , to follow the*qanun* of any
country in which one finds oneself is itself commended as long as
that*qanun* or law does not contradict the injunctions of the*Shari‘ah*
.

Historically and in contrast to the modern period, there was much
harmony between*Shar‘* and*qanun* in the Islamic world, and traditional
Muslims did not feel any appreciable tension between Divine Law and
human law.

This tension is a modern phenomenon that began in the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries with the abrogation of the*Shari‘ah* in
certain Muslim countries and the forced implementation of various
European legal codes, for example, in Persia, Egypt, Turkey, and North
Africa. In these and similar countries, needless to say, the
substitution of European laws for the*Shari‘ah* created a tension
between private religious life and the public domain and drew the
majority of the population further away from their governments, which
they began to view as anti-Islamic or at best indifferent to Islam.

In the hierarchy of the sources mentioned above, the Quran stands at the
highest level, followed by the*Sunnah* and*Hadith* . An elaborate
methodology was developed to deduce rulings from these sources and
create the body of Islamic laws. This science of deriving juridical
decisions from sources is called the “principles of jurisprudence”
(*us.ul al-fiqh* ) and is central to Islamic Law. Although*fiqh* itself
originally meant “understanding” or “knowledge” in general, gradually it
came to be associated with the “science of the law,” or jurisprudence,
corresponding to what the Romans called iurisprudentia. It deals with
the body of the law and ways of concluding legal views from the
principles and sources of the law.*Fiqh* has, therefore, a more
technical legal meaning than the*Shari‘ah* , which includes moral laws
and the general framework for the religious life of Islam.

Fiqh, according to traditional authorities, is knowledge of the
practical regulations and rules of the*Shari‘ah* acquired by reference
to and detailed study of the sources.

Although the fifth and sixth Shi‘ite Imams, Muh.ammad al-Baqir and
Ja‘far al-Sadiq, said much about*fiqh* and its principles, it was Imam
al-Shafi‘i who, in his Risalah (“Treatise”), established the systematic
methodology for deriving laws from the sources. To exercise such an
intellectual undertaking is called ijtihad, and the person who can give
fresh views on matters of law by going back to the sources is called a
mujtahid. In the Sunni world the “gate of ijtihad” closed after the
tenth and eleventh centuries, when the major schools were established,
whereas in the Shi‘ite world it has remained open to this day and in
each generation the mujtahids have derived the laws from the established
principles and sources, which for

Shi‘ites are the Quran, the*Hadith* of the Prophet, and the teachings of
the Imams.

Through the meticulous following of the methodologies elaborated
in*us.ul al-fiqh* , the major schools of Sunni Law already mentioned,
that is, the Hanafi, Maliki, Shafi‘i, and Hanbali, came into being, as
did the Twelve-Imam Ja‘fari School and the Zaydi, Isma‘ili, and ‘Ibadi
schools. Since the last century, a great debate has taken place in the
Sunni world about opening the “gate of ijtihad” again, and in both the
Sunni and the Shi‘ite worlds, fundamental discussions are taking place
today about the future development and application of the*Shari‘ah* to
Islamic society facing major new challenges, including those issuing
from biotechnology and all the problems that it poses for ethics.

In this domain the recent responses of Jewish and Christian thinkers are
close to Muslim ones, and the followers of the three monotheistic faiths
can certainly collaborate together on many issues in the fields of
bioethics and environmental ethics.

The*Shari‘ah* can best be understood through the use of the symbol of
the tree, mentioned in the Quran: “Seest thou not how God coineth a
similitude: A good saying, as a goodly tree, its roots set firm, its
branches reaching into heaven” (14:24). This symbol has many levels of
meaning, one of which concerns the*Shari‘ah* . Divine Law is like a tree
whose roots are sunk firmly in the ground of revelation, but whose
branches extend in different directions and have grown in various ways.
The firmness of the roots does not mean that the tree is not living. On
the contrary, it is the very firmness and immutability of the roots that
guarantee the flowing of the sap into the branches and the continuous
life of the tree. The*Shari‘ah* has developed in many different cultural
and political climates over the centuries.

It has harbored many differences of interpretation, and yet it has
remained the*Shari‘ah* . Today it is faced with unprecedented challenges
both from within the borders of the “Abode of Islam” and from outside,
but it remains a living body of law that Muslims consider the concrete
embodiment of God’s Will for them to follow on the basis of their faith
and free will.

TO WHOM DOES THE SHARI‘AH APPLY?
--------------------------------

According to all schools of Islamic Law, the injunctions of
the*Shari‘ah* of Islam apply to all Muslims, male and female, who have
reached the legal age and only to them. All Muslims are in principle
equal before the law, whether they are kings or beggars, women or men,
black or white, rich or poor. The Quran especially emphasizes that its
injunctions concern both men and women in several verses where both
sexes are addressed clearly and in a distinct manner, as when it says:

Verily, men who surrender unto God, and women who surrender, and men who
believe and women who believe, and men who obey and women who obey, and
men who speak the truth and women who speak the truth . and men who give
alms and women who give alms, and men who fast and women who fast, and
men who guard their modesty and women who guard (their modesty), and men
who remember God much and women who

remember-God hath prepared for them forgiveness and a vast reward.
(33:35)

In a society ruled by the*Shari‘ah* and in which Muslims are the
majority, accepted religious minorities are absolved from following the
Islamic*Shari‘ah* except in that which concerns public order. According
to the Islamic*Shari‘ah* itself, Jews, Christians, and other “People of
the Book,” which in India included Hindus and in Persia the
Zoroastrians, have their own*Shari‘ah* , and therefore their personal
and communal affairs should be left to them. This is how the “community
system,” or millat system, of the Ottoman world functioned for many
centuries. In the millat system the central government, although
Islamic, recognized fully the social, economic, and especially religious
rights of established minorities, so that there was no danger of the
majority destroying the presence or identity of minority groups. Under
the Ottomans the rights of Jews and Christians were guaranteed by the
state itself. Although there were occasionally social frictions, by and
large there was certainly much greater tolerance between various groups
than what we have observed in Yugoslavia since its breakup, with all
those horrendous acts of ethnic cleansing and genocide that followed.

CATEGORIES OF ACTIONS AND VALUES
--------------------------------

According to Islamic Law, the Lawgiver, that is, God, has made a demand
upon human beings in five categories:*wajib* or*fard*
(obligatory),*mandub* (recommended),*haram* (forbidden),*makruh*
(abominable), and*mubah* or halal (permissible). Each of these
categories possesses nuances and subdivisions into which we cannot go
here. Just to cite one example,*wajib* or*fard* can involve the
individual (*‘ayni* ) or the collectivity (*kafa’i* ). The daily prayers
are*wajib ‘ayni* , incumbent upon each and every individual, while
building orphanages and hospitals is obligatory upon the community as a
whole (wajib*kafa’i* ) and not on a particular person.

Obligatory injunctions include the “pillars of Islam,” or the rites to
which we shall turn later, and taking good care of one’s health to the
extent possible. They also include supporting one’s family, feeding the
hungry, and paying the dowry of one’s wife. Recommended*(mandub)* acts
are not required, but are pleasing in the eyes of God and bring reward
in the Hereafter. Such acts are called acts of rectitude and bring with
them reward from God*(thawab)* .

They include acts of nonobligatory charity, for example, building a
school or mosque, performing extra prayers, and following the example of
the Prophet in personal matters recommended but not required by
the*Shari‘ah* .

The category of the forbidden (*haram* ) includes all acts the
commission of which is punishable and the omission of which is rewarded.
This includes all the “Thou shalt not” injunctions in the Ten
Commandments such as murder, adultery, and theft as well as others such
as the eating of pork, the drinking of blood, use of alcoholic
beverages, usury, gambling, marrying two sisters at the same time, and
looking at the private parts of others (excluding one’s spouse). This
category covers a wide range from moral and ethical issues to practical
dietary matters.

Something is abominable*(makruh)* if omitting it is better than
performing it, and this category is the opposite of what is
recommended*(mandub)* . The person who commits an act that is*makruh*
cannot be punished by law, but the person who avoids the*makruh* gains
merit with God.

Something such as divorce, which is permitted but considered to be “the
most abominable of permitted things” in the sight of God, is*makruh* .
Another example is the wearing of gold and silk by men. There are
also*makruh* acts in the economic field, such as making an offer to buy
something for which another person has already made an offer.

Finally, the permissible, or*mubah* , pertains to any act a person has
the equal option of performing or not performing.

The most obvious case is that of consumption of food that the Quran
and*Sunnah* consider to be permissible to Muslims. Also, a sinful act
committed under necessity can become permissible and*mubah* An example
of this would be eating a carcass of a dead animal when one is dying of
hunger and has no other means of nourishment. In general any act that
does not belong to one of the other four categories is permissible,
provided it does not cause harm.

Since many Muslims now live in the West, the term halal has practically
entered into everyday English vocabulary.

This fact necessitates elucidating somewhat further how the category of
halal pertains to dietary regulations, although of course this category
is far from limited to these matters.

Like Judaism and Hinduism and in contrast to Christianity, Islam has
dietary regulations that have a religious basis and are a means of
sanctifying everyday life. Islamic dietary laws are not as complicated
as those of Hinduism and Judaism, but they share some elements with the
latter. Like Jews, Muslims refrain from eating products of the swine,
whether flesh or grease derived from the flesh. And also like Jews, they
eat only certain animals, such as cows, sheep, birds, and so on, but on
condition that they have been killed ritually and in the Name of God.
For Christians the sacrifice of Christ removed the necessity of the
ritual slaughter of animals in order that their meat might be consumed,
but not for Jews and Muslims. What is called kosher meat in Judaism
corresponds closely to halal meat in Islam. Muslims also refrain from
the use of any alcoholic beverages, not because they are chaotic in
their very substance like the flesh of swine (the swine is envisaged by
both Judaism and Islam from the point of view of ritual purity for human
beings and in light of what it consumes as an animal), but because, as
the Quran says, its harmful effects outweigh its positive ones. The
Quran speaks of the pure wine the virtuous shall taste in Paradise, and
wine as a symbol of realized knowledge of God combined with love for Him
plays a central role in Sufi poetry.

Some in the West have claimed that the Shari‘ite division of acts into
five categories destroys the spontaneity of religious life and reduces
it to a mechanical exercise without grace. Nothing could be further from
the truth for either Islam or other religions with similar views of
Sacred Law, such as Hinduism and Judaism. The Shari‘ite categories are
so many signposts along the road of life, but men and women still have
to travel on this road and in every step there is the tension between
the good and the evil tendencies of the soul, between what Simone Weil
called gravity and grace. The drama of human existence and the
tremendous responsibility that having free will entails for the human
being are not in any way diminished by any Sacred Law, but are enacted
and lived in each religious universe according to the principles and
norms dominating that universe.

But the drama within the soul is nevertheless there for all religious
beings whether they are Jews, Zoroastrians, Christians, Muslims, Hindus,
Buddhists, Taoists, Confucians, or followers of one of the primal
religions. The*Shari‘ah* for Muslims neither destroys that drama nor
removes human responsibility before God and one’s own conscience.
Rather, it provides the framework for the religious life of the
individual and the community and sanctifies daily life.

THE CONTENT OF THE SHARI‘AH: ACTS OF WORSHIP AND TRANSACTIONS
-------------------------------------------------------------

Traditionally the*Shari‘ah* has been divided into two parts: the
‘ibadat, or acts of worship, and the mu‘amalat, or transactions. The
heart of the*Shari‘ah* may be said to be the part dealing with the
‘ibadat. Even in modern times, when in many lands governments have
replaced much of the*Shari‘ah* with European laws, the part dealing with
worship continues to be practiced and could not but continue to be the
foundation of the religion, or what Muslims themselves call arkan
al-din, the “pillars of the religion.”

These “pillars” include (besides bearing witness to the two shahadahs)
the daily prayers (s.alah), fasting (s.awm), almsgiving*(zakah)* , and
pilgrimage*(hajj)* . As for jihad, meaning “exertion in the path of
God,” to which we shall turn extensively later in this book, it is a
necessity for carrying out any act pleasing to God including all the
“pillars.”

### Acts of Worship

###

Daily Prayers: Of all the Islamic rites, the most important and central
are the daily prayers (s.alah), whose form was revealed by God to the
Prophet and was then taught by him to Muslims. This rite is obligatory
upon all men and women (except during their menstrual period) from the
age of puberty until death. Five times a day, determined by cosmic
events and not any mechanical or electronic means, Muslims must make a
ritual ablution, which is a purification like the Catholic confession,
and then perform the prayers.

The ordinary ablution involves the ritual washing with clean water of
the hands, face, arms, feet, and the top of the head. This is in
addition to the washing of the anus and the male or female organ after
relieving oneself. A total ablution, which involves the washing of the
whole body, must be performed after certain states and actions such as
sexual intercourse. That is why every Muslim town and city from the
seventh century onward has always had public baths, some of which that
have survived being outstanding works of art. Before modern times, for
many centuries the only towns in Europe that had bathhouses were those
that were or had been ruled by Muslims. The ritual ablution, a very
important aspect of the Islamic pattern of life, is also closely
associated with the importance of cleanliness. Certain verses of the
Quran and sayings of the Prophet constitute the Islamic counterpart of
the Western adage that cleanliness is related to godliness.

After making the ablution, wearing ritually clean clothing and standing
on clean ground, Muslims turn in the direction of Mecca and perform the
prayers. These involve the recitation of verses of the Quran and the
making of certain bodily movements that integrate the psycho-physical
dimension of the human being into its spiritual archetype.

In the prayers each person acts as his or her own priest standing
directly before God. But when two or more people are present, it is
recommended that the prayers be said in assembly with one person, called
the imam, leading it. On Fridays the major weekly congregational prayers
include a sermon, which often contains an important social and political
message as well as an ethical and spiritual one.

The heart of s.alah is the first chapter of the Quran, called the Surat
al-Fatihah (or Opening Chapter), which is repeated in every unit of the
canonical prayer. It is the heart of the Quran and contains the message
pertaining to the dimensions of the ultimate relation between human
beings and God. The surah is as follows:

Praise be to God, the Lord of the worlds, the Infinitely Good, the
All-Merciful, Master of the Day of Judgment.

Thee we worship, and in Thee we seek help.

Guide us upon the straight path, the path of those on whom Thy Grace is,
not those on whom Thine Anger is, nor those who are astray. (1:2-7)1

The life of the practicing Muslim is punctuated ever anew by the daily
prayers, which break the hold of profane time upon the soul and bring
men and women back to a sacred time marked by the meeting with God and
to a sacred space pointing to the supreme center of the Islamic
universe, Mecca, where the celestial axis penetrates the plane of
earthly existence. The prayers are a rejuvenation for the soul,
protection against evil acts, and a shelter for believers amid the storm
of the life of this world. They have many levels of meaning, from the
most outward to the most esoteric known to and experienced only by the
sages and saints who are the friends of God. The canonical prayers were
constituted in such a way that all kinds of people with various degrees
of understanding and perspicacity can participate in them and be
nourished by them according to their own capacity. They are a Divine
norm transcending the individual order, and yet they act as the gate for
the individual’s access to the universal. There are in Islam two other
modes of prayer, the prayer of the heart, meant only for those following
a spiritual path, or Tariqah, and individual prayers (du‘a) that
Muslims, like Christians, Jews, and others, perform from time to time.
The s.alah, however, is incumbent upon all Muslims, for it is the
guarantee of our living in accordance with our theomorphic nature as
beings reflecting God’s Names and Qualities and the means whereby we
stand directly before God to address Him as His vicegerents on earth.

Fasting: Like the daily canonical prayers, fasting (s.awm) is an
obligatory rite to be performed during the lunar month of Ramad.an by
all Muslim men and women from the age of puberty until old age. It is a
fast from all food, drink, smoke, and sexual activity (also evil
thoughts and deeds) from dawn to sunset (and for Shi‘ites until dusk).

This rite is, however, obligatory only for those who have the physical
capability to carry it out. Exceptions are made for the sick and those
on a journey (who must make it up later), women in their menstrual
period or pregnant or nursing a child, and those who are too weak
because of old age. The month of Ramad.an was the month of the descent
of the Quran. In this holiest of Islamic months, Muslims combine
physical and psychological purification with an intensification of
prayer, recitation of the Quran, and acts of charity. During this month,
in almost all Islamic cities, vast amounts of food are provided free for
the poor, and the cost of the one meal that one and one’s family does
not eat each day is given to the needy.

During the fast one puts on, in a sense, the dress of death and
distances oneself from the passions that attach one to the world. It is
a time for great

self-discipline and the practice of the virtues of patience and
persistence in hardship for the sake of God. It is also a time to
develop greater compassion toward the needy and to realize what it means
to suffer from hunger. The Prophet loved fasting, and in a way fasting
from food in Islam corresponds to abstaining from sexuality in
Christianity, which exists as a religious ideal although only practiced
fully by those who observe celibacy. The Founder of Islam fasted on many
other days during the year, and there are many who emulate his model to
this day. But the only obligatory fast is that of Ramad.an, which is
practiced by the vast majority of Muslims throughout the world to this
day.

It is necessary here to say something about the Islamic lunar calendar,
which determines the period of fasting as well as other religious rites
and ceremonies. In Islam all religious events are based on the lunar
calendar, although the solar calendar is used for agricultural and other
matters.

In fact, the most accurate solar calendar ever devised, more accurate
than the Julian or Gregorian calendars, is the Jalali calendar, devised
by the famous mathematician-poet ‘Umar Khayyam and others in the twelfth
century and still in use in Iran and Afghanistan. This solar calendar
divides the year into twelve months, the first six of which have
thirty-one days, the next five, thirty days, and the twelfth month,
twenty-nine days, except on leap year when it has thirty days. It
therefore makes it easier to keep count of how many days are in each
month as compared with the Western calendar and is also astronomically
more precise. But Islam explicitly bans intercalation, which means
adding a number of days to the lunar year to make it the equivalent of
the solar year. Consequently, the Islamic lunar calendar moves through
the solar calendar completing one cycle every thirty-three years. As a
result, Ramad.an is sometimes in the winter and sometimes in the summer,
sometimes during long and hot days and sometimes during short and cool
ones. Since Islam is a global community, this injunction banning
intercalation, as foreseen in the Quran, guarantees fairness and justice
as far as conditions go for fasting, the hajj, and early morning prayers
for people living in different geographical latitudes and in the two
different hemispheres of the globe.

Almsgiving: The word for almsgiving, zakah, comes from the root zky,
meaning “to purify.” It is a tithe or alms whose payment is obligatory
according to the*Shari‘ah* and is the means of “purifying” what bounties
God has given by sharing some of it with the poor and the needy. In
traditional Islamic society, this sum was paid to the public treasury.

Many projects for public use, such as the creation and maintenance of
schools, hospitals, orphanages, and the like, were implemented by use of
the sums collected through this religious tax.

Those familiar with Jewish and Christian practices can see obvious
similarities in the use of tithing in the three Abrahamic traditions.
The word “tithe” comes from the Old English word meaning “tenth,” but
the practice goes back to Judaism, where Mosaic laws prescribed the
paying of tithes for the support of the Levites and temple service.

The book of Numbers (18:21) in the Old Testament states, “I have given
the children of Levi all the tithes in Israel for an inheritance in
return for the work which they perform.”

The practice was followed later by the Roman Catholic Church and
revenues were used for the support of clergy, churches, and the poor. It
became enjoined by ecclesiastical law from the sixth century onward and
enforced by secular law starting in the eighth century. It provided the
main source of funds for the building of the beautiful medieval
cathedrals. Martin Luther approved of tithing, while the French
Revolution repealed it. In contrast to Catholicism and Protestantism,
however, the Orthodox Church did not accept the practice of tithing. As
far as the United States is concerned, the practice of tithing was never
enforced except by Mormons. Looking at Western Christianity in general,
one can therefore see that tithing and zakah are similar, although the
amount of the alms or religious tax has not been the same in the three
Abrahamic faiths.

In Shi‘ite Islam in addition to zakah, there is also another obligatory
religious tax called khums, meaning one fifth. Moreover, there are many
other kinds of almsgiving common to all Muslims, such as s.adaqah, a sum
given to the poor in gratefulness to God for the warding off of some
danger or the receiving of a special blessing, or fit.riyyah, money
given to the poor at the end of the month of Ramad.an. These forms of
almsgiving must not, however, be confused with the zakah, which is
obligatory and one of the “pillars” of Islam.

In general, the*Shari‘ah* encourages giving*(ithar)* in the path of God,
and Muslims agree completely with the dictum of the Gospels, “It is more
blessed to give than to receive.” Much of the social and economic life
of Islamic society, in fact, continues to be financed through various
forms of religious charity. The institution of waqf, or religious
endowment, whose conditions are set forth in Islamic Law, has played the
greatest role in Islamic history in the creation of public facilities,
especially schools and hospitals.

Today in most Islamic countries the waqf is taken over by governments,
but traditionally the waqf was like the endowments created and sustained
by the private sector in America today, except that it was always of a
religious character.

Pilgrimage: Thanks to radio and television broadcasts available
globally, most of the world has now heard of the Muslim pilgrimage, the
hajj, and most likely seen images of what is perhaps the largest annual
religious gathering in the world. The hajj, which is obligatory at least
once in a Muslim’s lifetime if he or she has the financial means and is
physically able to perform it, involves pilgrimage to Mecca during a
particular period in the lunar month of Dhu’lhijjah. The rite retraces
the acts of Abraham after he rebuilt the Ka‘bah (the cubic structure at
the center of Mecca considered by Muslims to be the most ancient
sanctuary, built originally by Adam) and follows the model established
by the Prophet. It is in a sense an Abrahamic rite within the final
expression of monotheism, that is, Islam, which revived and
reestablished pure Abrahamic monotheism.

The pilgrim, whether male or female, must wear a special white cloth,
called ih. ram, before entering the sacred precinct around Mecca, within
which only Muslims are allowed, a cloth that is often used later as
one’s shroud. In becoming muh. rim, that is, clothed with this special
cloth, men and women must leave the world behind. During the hajj they
must abstain from sexual activity and devote themselves wholly to God,
whose House, the Ka‘bah, they are visiting. Here all external
distinctions are erased; king and peasant are dressed in the same
manner. The complicated rites involve among other acts circumambulation
around the Ka‘bah in a counterclockwise direction with the awareness
that one is moving against the march of time and washing away from one’s
soul all the dross that has accrued within as the result of the flow of
time. Through these rites, which include the sacrifice of an animal
symbolizing the sacrifice of one’s passionate soul before God, the
pilgrim returns to the state of primordiality, or the Edenic state in
which he or she was created, and God forgives that person’s sins if the
hajj is performed with full sincerity and devotion. That is why many
older people make the pilgrimage with the hope of dying in the process
and therefore leaving this world cleansed of their sins. At the corner
of the Ka‘bah is to be found the black stone that symbolizes the
covenant between human beings and God. All pilgrims seek to kiss and
touch it to remind themselves concretely of the primordial covenant they
have made with God to accept the state of being human, which means to
accept the Lordship of God and surrender to Him.

The hajj is both the means of purification of the individual and the
integration of society. Muslims from all parts of the world are to be
seen at the hajj. Today the over 2 million people who perform it each
year come from all quarters of the world and include Arabs, Persians,
and Turks as well as Black Africans and Malays, Chinese and
Indo-Pakistanis as well as Germans and Americans, black-skinned as well
as fair-skinned people, pilgrims with dark eyes as well as blue ones.
Nowhere else in the world is the ethnic and racial diversity of the
Islamic community unified in the surrender to the One God more evident
than in Mecca during the hajj. Here, exchange of ideas and goods also
takes place between Muslims from various parts of the world, and the
Divine and Human Laws 137 hajj has been called by some Western scholars
the world’s first international scientific congress as well as
international economic fair. But more than anything else, through the
hajj, pilgrims are purified and in returning home bring something of the
grace, or barakah, of the Center to the farthest outreaches of the
Islamic world.

With the global population explosion, the problem of accommodating all
the pilgrims who wish to make the hajj has become acute. Although the
number of pilgrims has now risen to over 2 million, this is still a
small percentage of the 1.2 billion Muslims in the world, not all of
whom, however, fulfill the conditions necessary to make the hajj.

The number of those who do qualify annually according to the Divine Law
to make the hajj, however, is much larger than those given permission to
perform it. There is therefore a great deal of pressure on most Muslim
governments as well as on Saudi Arabia to permit more pilgrims every
year,

while at the same time the very logistics of such a large gathering and
the space limitations make it impossible to continue to increase the
number of pilgrims. In view of the limitations, some Muslims make the
pilgrimage to Mecca outside of the specified season to benefit from the
grace of the visit to the House of God even if it is not during the days
specified by Islamic Law.

The hajj, however, is not the only form of Islamic pilgrimage, but the
only one that is obligatory according to the*Shari‘ah* if certain
conditions are fulfilled. Today in America, pilgrimage does not play
such a central role in the religious life of Protestants, although there
are still those who make pilgrimage to Jerusalem. As for Catholics, both
in America and Europe there are still those who make pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, Lourdes, or Rome, and in Central and South America to local
shrines such as that of the Virgin of Guadalupe in Mexico City. In the
Middle Ages, however, pilgrimage was much more common in the West, not
only to Jerusalem, which served as the excuse for the Crusades, but also
to many local sites such as Canterbury in England and Santiago de
Compostela in Spain. The importance of pilgrimage in Islam today must be
compared more to practices in the earlier eras of Christian history than
those today, especially in America.

In the Islamic world, those who make the hajj also visit the tomb of the
Prophet in Medina and before the 1967

Israeli takeover of Jerusalem, they also made pilgrimage in large
numbers to this third holy city of Islam. Many local sites of pilgrimage
are loci of grace associated with the tombs of descendants of the
Prophet and the great saints.

All of these sites are so many extensions of Medina and expand the
barakah of the city of the Prophet and his sacred remains to the various
areas of the Islamic world.

Some of these sites are the tomb of Ah.mad Bamba in Touba, West Africa;
the two Moulay Idrises in the proximity of Maknes and in Fez; the Mosque
of the “Head of Husayn” in Cairo; the tomb of Sayyid Ah.mad Badawi, the
patron saint of Egypt, in Tanta; and the “sacred stations” of Zaynab in
Cairo and Damascus. The many holy sites in Iraq include the tomb of ‘Abd
al-Qadir al-Jilani and the mausoleums of the Shi‘ite Imams, especially
those of ‘Ali in Najaf and H. usayn in Karbala’. The mausoleum of Jalal
al-Din Rumi in Konya, Turkey; the holy cities of Mashhad and Qom in
Iran; the mausoleum of Khwajah ‘Abd*Allah* Ans.ari in Herat and that of
Baha’ al-Din Naqshband near Bukhara; and the tombs of many of the great
Sufi saints of the subcontinet of India such as that of Dadaji
Ganjbakhsh in Lahore, Niz.am al-Din Awliya’ in Delhi, and Mu‘in al-Din
Chishti in Ajmer, which are among the greatest sites of religious life
in Islam. During annual commemorations of the death of these saints,
often hundreds of thousands of people gather at these locations for
religious rites and to receive blessings.

It is important to note that these sites of blessing are not limited to
the sacred station*(maqam)* , or mausoleum, of males, but include those
of females as well. In Cairo, after the Mosque of the “Head of H.
usayn,” the most important sanctuary and center for pilgrims is the
maqam of the

granddaughter of the Prophet, Zaynab, whose other maqam in Damascus is
in many ways the religious center of the city. Also in Cairo, the
mausoleum of Sayyidah Nafisah, a great scholar, saint, and descendant of
the Prophet, is a major religious site. In Iran, after Mashhad, the city
of Qom, which is the center of Twelve-Imam Shi‘ism, is the most
important shrine in Iran because of the tomb of Had.rat-i Ma‘s.umah, the
sister of Imam Rid.a, who is buried in Mashhad. And before the Wahhabis
destroyed the mausoleums of the wife and daughter of the Prophet,
Khadijah and Fat.imah, in the Hijaz, those sites were also major centers
for pilgrimage. Naturally, these mausoleums of female saints are visited
especially by women, but not exclusively.

Both men and women participate in large numbers in pilgrimage to all of
these sites, whether they are associated with a male or female saintly
figure.

Visits and pilgrimage to the tombs of saints is strongly opposed by
Wahhabis and other puritanical reformers and also discouraged by
modernists. The Wahhabi opposition is based on the idea that to visit
the tomb of a saint is like idol worship and takes one’s attention away
from the transcendence of God; modernists have discouraged such
pilgrimages in order to secularize social life, but their opposition has
never been as severe as that of the Wahhabis. Still, the practice of
pilgrimage to various holy sites remains to this day at the heart of the
religious life of the Islamic world.

One cannot understand the religious practice of Islam without paying
attention to the significance of pilgrimage, which ranges hierarchically
from the hajj and the pilgrimage to Medina to visitation of local sacred
sites that exist in most Muslim lands. These “lesser” forms of
pilgrimage do not, however, in any way detract from the centrality of
the hajj, but are like so many foretastes and reflections of it.

The visit to the “House of God” remains supreme in the mind of Muslims
when it comes to pilgrimage, and many visit it even outside the
designated season in what is called ‘umrah. That is why today, when
populations have increased and travel is easier, every day of the year
there are numerous pilgrims in Mecca, and in the middle of any night
during any season one finds thousands of pilgrims circumambulating
around the Ka‘bah and praying before the house rebuilt by Abraham in
celebration of the One God who in the Old Testament uttered, “I am That
I am.”

Besides all these rites promulgated by the*Shari‘ah* , there are also
many other religious practices in Islam based on the*Sunnah* of the
Prophet and later traditional elaborations thereof. They include
ritualized ways of feeding the poor, sessions of special prayers,
ritualized sermons, sacrifice of animals whose meat is then distributed
among the needy, and many other activities. In the traditional Islamic
world, in fact, nearly every necessity of life is sanctified, and
the*Shari‘ah* considers even the earning of one’s daily bread a
religious act. It is the totality of the obligatory rites as well as the
recommended ones together with the sacralized forms of many different
actions that constitute the Islamic way of life, in which, in principle,
there is no distinction between the sacred and the profane and what we
now call ordinary or everyday life is integrated into the matrix of the
sacred.

Transactions It is precisely the all-embracing nature of the*Shari‘ah*
that has necessitated its dealing with what are called transactions
(mu‘amalat)-social, environmental, economic, and political matters such
as personal laws, the family, the neighbor, and so forth. Social
teachings are dealt with in the next chapter, but here it is necessary
to say a few words about the environmental, economic, and political
teachings of the*Shari‘ah* , some of which are parts of jurisprudence,
or fiqh, and others principles to be applied by various generations of
Muslims to specific situations in the absence of explicit legal rulings.

Environmental Teachings: The environmental crisis is primarily the
consequence of an inner malaise and a whole worldview that gives human
beings unlimited power over nature seen as a desacralized reality. This
manner of looking at things has resulted in the reduction of nature to
only a resource for economic production. As far as dealing with it on
the social and legal planes is concerned, however, for Islam
environmental matters may be said to be a legal issue already treated in
principle in the sources and applications of Islamic Law, whereas in the
West law seems to be trying to “catch up” with the problems caused by
this crisis. The traditional Islamic worldview is totally opposed to the
prevalent modern paradigm of the relation between human beings and
nature, which has caused unprecedented harm to the natural environment,
has led to the loss of many species, and now threatens the very future
of human life on earth. Islam sees men and women as God’s vicegerents on
earth. Therefore, in the same way that God has power over His creation
but is also its sustainer and protector, human beings must also combine
power over nature with responsibility for its protection and sustenance.
The Quran is replete with references to nature, and the phenomena of
nature are referred to as God’s signs and are therefore sacred. In
traditional Islamic society human beings lived in remarkable harmony
with their natural environment, as can be seen in the urban design of
traditional Islamic cities and also in the life in the villages, which,
as in other premodern parts of the world, is still based on remarkable
harmony with the rhythms of nature and makes full use of what is now
called recycling.

On the basis of the Quran and*Hadith* , the*Shari‘ah* has extensive
teachings, both legal and moral, concerning the natural environment: the
way that animals should be treated kindly, trees preserved and not cut
unless absolutely necessary, vegetation guarded even in war, running
water protected, and many other relevant issues. The Prophet himself was
always very kind to animals. As for trees, he emphasized the
significance of creating what is today called green space; He said, “It
is a blessed act to plant a tree even if it be a day before the end of
the world.” The*Shari‘ah* promulgates certain general principles
concerning the environment, such as that of balance*(mizan)* between all
parts of God’s creation, the prohibition of waste, and respect for all
life forms, and specific injunctions, such as the creation of protected
areas for wildlife.

But in many areas where crises have been created during the past century
as a result of the advent of modern technology, overpopulation, economic
plunder, and so on, specific Shari‘ite laws are missing. For some time
the

Islamic world, like the rest of the non-Western world, neglected the
environmental crisis and thought that it was a problem only for highly
industrialized countries. As the dimensions of the crisis grew, however,
the situation changed during the last two decades of the twentieth
century. A whole new branch of the*Shari‘ah* is now being developed on
the basis of the traditional sources of the Divine Law to address the
crucial problems posed by the environmental crisis in the Islamic world
as elsewhere. From Nigeria to Malaysia, legal scholars are applying
themselves to these issues, and this branch of the*Shari‘ah* is one of
the most challenging and dynamic aspects of it in the present day.

Economic Teachings: Before modern times there was no such thing as
economics among the Islamic sciences, just as it was not part of
European divisions of learning before the Renaissance. Both
civilizations knew the Latin word oeconomicus (itself of Greek origin),
from which the modern word is derived, but understood it in its original
sense of managing the affairs of one’s household. The modern Arabic word
for economics, al-iqtis.ad, in fact, had the completely different
meaning of “moderation” or the “just mean” in classical Arabic and is
part of the title of one of the most famous works of Islamic theology by
al-Ghazzali.

One could not say, of course, that there was no economics in Islam, but
the area or activity known as economics as we understand it today was
never isolated by itself in Islamic society. It was always combined with
ethics and was seen as an organic part of the life of human beings, all
of which should be dominated by ethical principles. That is why the very
acceptance of economics as an independent domain, not to speak of as the
dominating factor in life according to the prevailing paradigms in the
modern world, is devastating to the Islamic view of human life.

If we were to accept the modern definition of economics, then we could
say that the Quran has many verses that refer to economic life,
including questions of inheritance, religious tax, opposition to
excessive amassing of wealth, and so forth. It also contains, as does
the*Hadith* , numerous ethical teachings that bear directly upon
economic life and are incorporated into the*Shari‘ah* . These include
opposition to greed, the importance of honesty in all economic
transactions, the inviolability of private property, and so on. As far
as property is concerned, in principle “all property belongs to God,”
but God has given human beings the right to possess their own property,
although a limit is set on the right to private property when it comes
to what is meant for everyone and should remain public such as
mountains, forests, and rivers.

The*Shari‘ah* promulgates a work ethic of central importance to economic
life. The Quran states, “O ye who have faith! Be faithful to your
covenants (‘uqud)” (5:1). This verse connects work ethics explicitly to
human religious life. Covenants can be between human beings and God,
between the human being and his or her own soul, or between an
individual or group and another person or group. The third covenantal
relationship is at the foundation of Islamic work ethics, but at the
same time is inseparable from the other two. On the basis of this and
other verses, the*Shari‘ah* teaches that in all economic transactions
the two sides must strictly observe

the conditions on the basis of which a transaction is to take place.
Both the employer and employee or the buyer and seller have a
responsibility to keep their covenant, and the manner in which they
carry out a transaction affects their soul as well as their relation to
God.

As far as the relation between employer and employee is concerned,
the*Shari‘ah* emphasizes the significance of personal relationship and
recommends fairness and kindness on the part of the employer, who is in
a position of power over the employee. According to a*hadith* , a worker
should be paid wages due before the sweat on his or her brow has dried.
This personal relationship in economic transactions is so emphasized in
Islamic civilization that to this day, even amid modern impersonal
economic practices, most Muslims still rely on and trust personal
contact above all else.

This personal relationship was of course also very much emphasized in
the production of goods, as we see in the guilds, to which we turn in
the next chapter.

The*Shari‘ah* , moreover, opposes certain economic practices, some of
which are forbidden and others discouraged.

The practice of usury (riba’) is forbidden in the Quran and according to
Islamic Law, as it was forbidden in the Roman Empire, in Europe in the
Middle Ages, and even in England before Henry VIII. The excessive
amassing of wealth, to which the Quran refers in terms of gold and
silver is also forbidden, as is dealing with substances that are
themselves haram, such as making or selling alcoholic beverages. Such
acts are considered both illegal and sinful. Altogether the*Shari‘ah*
envisages a society in which economic life is organic, based on the flow
of goods and capital through various parts of society like the blood
circulating through the human body.

In contrast to the Christian West, where mercantile activity was looked
down upon up until the Renaissance, in the Islamic world from the
beginning trade and economic transactions were seen in a positive light
from the religious point of view. The Prophet himself had originally
been a merchant, as had his wife Khadijah, and throughout Islamic
history the merchant class associated with the bazaar has been among the
most pious in Islamic urban areas, as have been farmers living in the
countryside and villages. Traditional Islamic society succeeded in
creating a notable integration of economic life and religion. It is also
important to remember that in the economic domain, participation was not
limited to men and integration concerned the whole of society. Women
were active in the production of many goods from agricultural products
to carpets and also as merchants and property owners. The*Shari‘ah* has
given economic rights to women that did not exist in any large society,
including the West, until very recently.

There has been a great deal of effort during the past few decades to
study the economic principles and injunctions (in the Western sense)
contained in the*Shari‘ah* , which many now call Islamic economics, and
to put them into practice. Interest-free banks, called Islamic banks,
have been created in several Islamic countries and in the West and
interest-free loans made available. But the deeper issues have rarely
been tackled in the face of

problems created by the fact that the Islamic world is forced to be
involved in a global economic system based on very different tenets and
presumptions. But the field remains, nevertheless, among the most lively
on the contemporary Islamic intellectual and religious scene.

Political Teachings: The Quran does not outline a particular political
structure, but presents certain basic principles for rule, the most
important of which is consultation, or shawra, as stated in the verse,
“and consult with them concerning conduct in affairs” (3:159). The rule
of the Prophet in Medina and the document called the Constitution of
Medina are also central to all later Islamic political thought and
action, but, again, this constitution does not outline a particular form
of government in the absence of the Prophet, who was both prophet and
ruler of the community. What the Quran and*Hadith* emphasize, however,
is that the domain of politics cannot be separated from that of
religion, which, however, must not be interpreted as “church” in the
Western sense of the term. In America one always speaks of the
separation of church and state, although religion itself has never been
totally separated from political life from the time of the writing of
the American Constitution onward. In Europe, during the premodern period
there were always two powers, the papacy and the empire or monarchy, and
the latter received its religious legitimacy and investiture from the
former. Later, states became secularized, especially after the French
Revolution, but in many countries state religions have been maintained
to this day, and in Great Britain the monarch is still the head of the
Church of England.

None of these models apply, however, to the Islamic world, where there
is no church or pope and where the classical caliphate was neither like
the papacy nor like the emperorship of the Holy Roman Empire. Some have
said that the Islamic model is a theocracy, but this is not exactly true
as this term has been understood in the context of Western history or
even that of ancient Egypt or classical Japan. A theocracy means the
rule of the priesthood or the priestly class, of whom the ruler is the
head or leader. In Islam, however, there is no priesthood comparable to
that found in Christianity, Hinduism, or Buddhism; the closest class in
Islamic society to priests is the ‘ulama’, or religious scholars, who
are knowledgeable in the Divine Law and serve as its guardians and
interpreters. Moreover, except for Iran since the Revolution of 1979,
the ‘ulama’ have never ruled directly over Islamic society, and even in
Iran, the rule of the jurisprudent (wilayat-i faqih) is modified by the
presence of an elected parliament. In any case, facile comparisons
between the views of Christian fundamentalists concerning “theocracy”
and Islamic views of government are simply false. Technically speaking,
the Islamic ideal is that of a nomocracy, that is, the rule of Divine
Law. It is true that all power, including political power, belongs
ultimately to God, as the Quran states, “The command rests with none but
God” (6:57; 12:40). But in the case of Islam, the rule of God was never
associated with the rule of the priestly class; rather, it was
associated with that of the*Shari‘ah* . The Islamic Republic of Iran is
the first case in Islamic history in which the religious ‘ulama’, the
closest one can come in Islam to a priestly class, has ruled directly
over a major Islamic country.

During Islamic history, first the institution of the caliphate and then
that of the sultanate were developed in Sunni Islam. Shi‘ism rejected
the caliphate as a political institution, but accepted the sultanate, or
monarchy, as the least imperfect form of government in the absence of
the Mahdi. This was even the view of Ayatollah Khomeini in his earlier
writings, before he turned against the institution of the monarchy in
favor of the new concept of the “rule of the jurisprudent” (wilayat-i
faqih). In any case, in all the different forms of government, the ruler
sought legitimacy by protecting the*Shari‘ah* , or at least claiming to
do so, and seeking the backing of those who were the custodians of
the*Shari‘ah* , namely, the ‘ulama’. Even the legitimacy of the monarchy
relied not so much on blood, as in Europe, but on the ability to
preserve order and to protect the*Shari‘ah* . Of course, many rulers did
not follow the teachings of the*Shari‘ah* , which in principle applied
to them as to everyone else. But the ideal of protecting and preserving
the*Shari‘ah* was always there, and, in fact, in practice the*Shari‘ah*
often served as a shield for the protection of the people against the
whims of powerful authoritarian rulers, although there were, again,
exceptions.

In Islamic political theory, the role of the government is always
limited, and in practice such major areas as justice, health, and
education were left to the private sector before the rise of modern
states in the Islamic world. Rule was also usually personal, and before
modern times caliphs and kings would hold regular sessions with their
ordinary subjects during which the petitions of the latter were received
and answered. Today there is much talk of Islam and democracy. If
democracy is understood as the rule of the will of the people, then
there were mechanisms in traditional Islamic society where the will of
the people was reflected to the ruling class, including the caliph or
sultan, and it definitely played a role in those governments that were
successful and that endured. If it means the particular institutions
developed during the past few centuries in the West, then there is no
parallel for them in premodern Islamic history, no more than there is
for them in premodern Japan, China, or India. Although many Islamic
countries have tried to introduce Western models of democracy during the
past century, usually with little success, and although there is much
turmoil in this domain today, the one principle that remains clear to
all Muslims is that sovereignty belongs ultimately to God as expressed
in the Divine Law and an Islamic society is one in which this
sovereignty is accepted; but that still leaves a vast domain in which
the people can exercise their views and act freely as long as they do
not oppose the Divine Law.

With the fall of the Ottoman caliphate and the many twentieth-century
revolutions based on the European model that followed, the whole
question of political rule in its relation to Islamic teachings, the
wishes of the people, and the form that an Islamic government should
take has become central. There is today great confusion and turmoil in
the Islamic world on this matter. Some have adopted Western republican
models, others have continued the older form of sultanate or monarchy,
and yet others want to revive the caliphate. It will take some time
before Islamic civilization can again develop its own authentic
political forms, a task that is being made

much more difficult today by the fact that it is under constant external
pressure and is not able to create institutions based on the inner
dynamic of Islamic society. Paradoxically, many Western-oriented Islamic
countries that are praised in the West for having “secularist”
governments do not allow Western-style democratic practices; if they did
in the sense of allowing people to really express their preferences, the
result would be a much more Islamic government as far as the rule of
the*Shari‘ah* is concerned. This is because the vast majority of all
Muslims, even in the most Westernized and modernized countries, would
like to live according to the*Shari‘ah* and to have their own freedom
and democracy on the basis of their own understanding of these concepts
and ideals rather than on how they are understood in the modern and
postmodern West.

PUNISHMENTS AND RESTRICTIVE ORDINANCES
--------------------------------------

To speak of law is also to speak of restrictive ordinances and statutes
(h. udud), or punishment, under that law. Of course, to disobey the
Divine Law is a sin, but it also has its legal consequences in this
world, as we also see in Jewish law. In the modern world, religious
statutes of this kind are often called “medieval” and “barbaric” on the
basis of the idea that through progress people have now become much more
“civilized” and “humane”-as if waiting on death row for a dozen years
and then being executed is a lesser torture than being hanged shortly
after being found guilty. And usually this criticism is immediately
leveled at the Islamic restrictive ordinances. To make the situation
clear it is necessary to point out, however, that these statutes and
ordinances, called hudud in Islamic Law, are fewer than in Jewish Law,
where thirty-six crimes such as adultery, sodomy, idolatry, sorcery, and
murder are punishable by death by hanging, beheading, burning, or
strangling. I mention especially Jewish Law, because according to Islam,
the Jewish laws brought by the Hebrew prophets remained valid as long as
they were not abrogated by Islamic laws. A case in point is the stoning
of an adulterer or adulteress, which is not mentioned in the Quran, but
which was a Jewish practice that was continued in Islam with the
addition of restrictions to the conditions needed to prove guilt in a
Shari‘ite court.

The Quran says, “He [God] is the most swift of reckoners” (6:62), and
many verses of the Quran, such as 2:187, 229, 230 and 4:13-14, are
concerned with ordinances, or hudud, which literally means “limits” set
by God. For example, “Those who disobey God and His Messenger and
transgress His limits (h. udud) will be admitted to a fire, to abide
therein: and they shall have a humiliating punishment” (4:14). Quranic
punishment, based on the concept that God is just and the reckoner of
our deeds, involves acts forbidden in the Sacred Text; such acts are
both illegal and a sin against God. These acts include illicit sexual
intercourse and false accusation of it, drinking wine, theft, robbery,
and murder. According to the*Shari‘ah* , the punishment for adultery is
stoning, but there has to be either a confession by the party or parties
involved or four just witnesses.

That is why such a punishment has been extremely rare in traditional
Islamic society. Punishment for theft and highway robbery, if it
involves homicide, is death by sword or hanging, and if it does not, the
amputation of a finger or in extreme cases a hand or foot. But many
other conditions, according to some jurists twelve in number, have to be
met before the punishment of amputation can be carried out. That is why
this punishment has also been very rare.

For lesser cases there is flogging. The punishment for murder is death
unless the family of the victim accepts blood money. Although these are
transgressions against God, repentance is accepted and the*Hadith*
strongly limits the application of hudud, as we also see in the case of
Jewish Law. In a Shari‘ite court, proof of offense is made very
difficult, and the judge or qad.i, is even permitted to accept the
withdrawal of confessions. Many religious scholars, over the ages, have
given the edict that the punishment for theft should only be carried out
in a society that is Islamically just from

the economic point of view and that it should not be applied to a petty
thief who has stolen because of poverty and dire need.

Although a great deal is made today in the West of the extreme nature of
such punishments in certain so-called fundamentalist countries, little
is said about how rare, in fact, such punishments are in the Islamic
world as a whole.

More important, few want to face the fact that the number of people who
die or are seriously injured in crimes involving theft and rape in
America is far greater than the number of people punished for theft or
adultery in a land such as Saudi Arabia, where they deal severely with
these matters.

In trying to understand the Shari‘ite restrictive ordinances, one must
do so in the context of the historical reality of Islam and in light of
all the mitigating circumstances that limit them in practice.
Furthermore, it is important to see such matters not in the matrix of
what is popular in the West today, but also in relation to the whole
history of the West and the punishments meted out until only recently in
both Europe and America for various crimes. The Islamic world is in the
process of observing and studying the recent changes in the West in
these matters and will not follow the same course as has the West, if
the results of current social and legal experiments in Europe and
America do not succeed in noticeably diminishing the crimes for which
various societies, including the Islamic, had set punishments over the
ages.

DIVINE AND HUMAN LAWS: CRISIS AND CONFRONTATION TODAY
-----------------------------------------------------

Already in the middle of the nineteenth century in many Islamic
countries, the rule of the*Shari‘ah* as a legal system was either
limited to personal laws governing the family, inheritance, and so on or
replaced by Napoleonic codes or English common law and European-style
courts. By the time most Islamic countries gained their independence
after World War II, the full*Shari‘ah* was applied only in a few lands
such as Saudi Arabia, the Yemen, and Afghanistan.

These countries may have had various political and economic problems,
but at least they did not experience the tension between two different
legal systems and philosophies that other Islamic countries did.
Unfortunately, the application of the*Shari‘ah* did not prevent Yemen
and Afghanistan from being invaded by foreign forces and having their
traditional patterns of life, including their legal aspects, deeply
disturbed and in some places shattered.

Despite these tragedies, however, Shari‘ite Law played a central role in
preserving the religious character of the life of the people of these
countries even under great duress.

Despite all the political turmoil in the Islamic world during the past
half century, there has been an attempt in most Islamic countries to
return to the Divine Law as contained in the*Shari‘ah* , while
incorporating and taking into consideration human laws associated with
modern situations in which Muslims find themselves. Moreover, there
continues to be extensive discussion on the*Shari‘ah* itself.

In the Sunni world, as already mentioned, many want to open the gate of
ijtihad again, and there are those who speak of combining rulings from
different classical schools of Law such as the Shafi‘i and the Hanafi.
Also, there are now a number of lay lawyers (not formal members of the
class of ‘ulama’, the traditional custodians of the*Shari‘ah* ) who
believe that they have the right to make juridical decisions*(fatwas)*
and formulate new Shari‘ite rulings. Even in Shi‘ite Iran, where the
ijtihad is practiced afresh in every generation, a number of modernized
religious thinkers speak of the “dynamic*Shari‘ah* ,” which they
contrast with the old static one. In the field of law, just as in the
field of politics, which is closely related to it, there is much debate
and discussion going on throughout the Islamic world, but there is no
doubt that the question of the revival of the*Shari‘ah* after its
eclipse during the colonial period is at the center of the concerns of
contemporary Islam.

THE DIVINE LAW, ETHICS, AND THE RELIGIOUS ETHOS
-----------------------------------------------

The*Shari‘ah* is not only concrete positive law, but also a set of
values and framework for the religious life of Muslims.

The books of jurisprudence*(fiqh)* contain the specific laws of
the*Shari‘ah* , but the*Shari‘ah* itself also includes ethical and
spiritual teachings that are, strictly speaking, not of a legal nature,
although the legal is never separated from the moral in Islam. On the
basis of the Quran and*Hadith* , the*Shari‘ah* teaches Muslims to
respect their parents, to be kind to their neighbors, to be charitable,
to be always truthful, to keep their word, to be honest in all affairs,
and so forth. The whole ethics of Islam is related on the individual and
social plane to the*Shari‘ah* , while the inner purification of the soul
and the penetration into the inward meaning of the*Shari‘ah* are for the
spiritual path, or the Tariqah, which is of necessity always based on
the formal practice of the Divine Law.

Today, in many parts of the Islamic world, Divine Law, or the*Shari‘ah*
, is no longer fully practiced on the level of law, but the ethics that
are contained in its teachings still permeate Islamic society.
The*Shari‘ah* , in fact, determines the religious ethos of Islam on both
the personal and the social level and is inseparable from the life of
faith. For the vast majority of Muslims, the practice of the injunctions
of the*Shari‘ah* is their manner of practicing their surrender to the
Will of God and of living a virtuous and righteous life leading to
felicity and salvation in the Hereafter. Even those who do not practice
the*Shari‘ah* but still consider themselves Muslims draw their ethics,
their understanding of right and wrong, and their frame of reference in
the chaos of this world from the*Shari‘ah* . And those who aim to reach
God in this life and to walk the path of the Tariqah to that Truth, or
Haqiqah, which is the source of both the Law and the Way are more aware
than anyone else how indispensable the Divine Law is, the law that alone
can provide the sacred forms that are the sole gateways in this world of
change and becoming to the immutable empyrean of the Formless.
