CHAPTER FOUR: THE VISION OF COMMUNITY AND SOCIETY
=================================================

***People were one community and God sent unto them prophets as bearers
of good tidings and as warners, and revealed therein the scripture with
the truth that it might judge between people concerning that wherein
they differed.***

***Quran 2:213***

***This community of yours is a single community.***

***Quran 21:92***

THE CONCEPT OF COMMUNITY
------------------------

One of the key concepts of the Quran and of Islam as a religion is that
of community*(ummah)* . There is no doubt that Islam meant to create a
community based on justice, one in which the pursuit of the Divine Law
was made possible, not just injunctions for private behavior. In the
debate between those who claim the primacy of society and those who
emphasize the primal significance of the individual, Islam takes a
middle course and believes that this polarization is in fact based on a
false dichotomy. There is no society without the individual; nor can the
individual survive without society. The social nature of the human being
is part of the wisdom of God’s creation, and the Quran asserts, “There
is no secret conference of three but He is their fourth, nor of five but
He is their sixth, nor of less that that or more but He is with them
wheresoever they may be” (58: 7). This truth does not refer only to
God’s omniscience, but also to the profound reality of God’s Presence in
all human assembly. He is present in human community as He is within the
heart or center of the individual.

Yet the role of religion is to save human souls, and on the Day of
Judgment, according to Islam, human beings are judged individually and
not collectively. The human community is judged in the Quran according
to the degree to which it allows its members to live the good life, in
the religious sense, based on moral principles. It judges a community to
be good to the degree that it reflects the constant presence of the
Transcendent Dimension in human life and is based on spiritual and
religious ideals. A community as a whole can be judged and punished by
God in this world, but a whole community does not enter paradise or hell
as a collectivity. Only individual souls do so. Hence our personal
responsibility before God remains, in whichever community we happen to
live.

Islam recognizes communities according to their religious affiliation.
Christians are referred to as the ummah, or community, of Christ and
Jews as the ummah of Moses, as Muslims constitute the ummah of the
Prophet. Abraham himself is called an ummah “obedient unto God”
(16:120), and each community has a set of rites chosen for it by God,
“And for every community have We appointed a ritual” (22:34). Originally
there was only one ummah: “People were only one community” (10:19), but
with the passage of history, different communities came into being and
many faded away or were destroyed. The Quran depicts in elaborate terms
the rise, decay, and falling away of various communities, which can also
be understood as nations in the biblical sense. In fact, “every
community has a term, and when its term comes, they cannot put it off an
hour nor yet advance [it]” (7:34). And the decay and destruction of
communities or nations has happened, according to the Quran, not because
of loss of wealth or economic power or even military defeat, but because
of moral corruption and straying from the religious norms willed by God
for the community in question. The earth belongs to God, and He allows
deserving communities or nations to rule over it as long as they deserve
to do so. Once they lose their moral authority, they are replaced by God
with other communities or nations.

For Islam, community implies above all a human collectivity held
together by religious bonds that are themselves the foundation for
social, juridical, political, economic, and ethical links between its
members. In our period of human history, there is not one, but many
communities or nations, which means many religions, as mentioned in
Chapter 1, and this is set in the Quran as a condition willed by God,
for, “Had God willed, He could have made them one community” (42:8). It
is within the context of a world with many communities, all of which
Islam sees in religious terms, that the Islamic understanding of itself
as an ummah must be situated and understood.

First of all, Islam emphasizes the unity of its own ummah. Although
after the first few years of Islamic history various theological and
political rifts began to set in and although after the end of the
Umayyad caliphate in the East in the eighth century the political unity
of Islam was never again realized, the ideal of the unity of the ummah
has remained strong throughout Islamic history. In modern times it has
manifested itself in various pan-Islamic movements going back to Jamal
al-Din al-Afghani in the nineteenth century. The unity of the Islamic
community lies, however, primarily in ethical and spiritual realities
within the hearts of the true believers, who emphasize the Quranic
dictum that “Verily the believers are brothers” (49:9). Yet although
this theme is repeated endlessly in sermons in mosques and elsewhere on
various religious occasions, in practice some Muslims have made a
mockery of it. This sense of unity and brotherhood, which also includes
of course sisterhood, has become weakened by many ethnic, sectarian, and
personal factors over the ages, especially in modern times.

Besides seeing themselves as an ummah ordered by God to “call to the
good,” Muslims also see themselves as the “middle community” in the
world on the basis of the famous Quranic verse in which Muslims are
addressed as follows: “Thus We have appointed you a middle community
(ummah wasat.ah) that you may be witnesses unto the people and the
messenger may be a witness unto you” (2:143). This verse can be and in
fact has been understood in many ways. On the most external level, it
means that Islam was destined to occupy the middle belt of the classical
world from the Mediterranean to the China Sea, with many non-Muslim
communities and peoples to the north and south. On a theological level
and within the Abrahamic family, Muslims interpret this verse to mean
that while Judaism emphasizes laws for this world and Christianity
otherworldliness, Islam came to emphasize the middle ground, to strike a
balance between this world and the next. Another interpretation, which
is primarily ethical, is that “middle community” means that God chose
for Muslims the golden mean, the avoidance of extremes in ethical and
religious actions. Yet another meaning of this verse, with global
implications, is that Muslims constitute “the middle community,” because
they have been chosen by God to create a balance between various
communities and nations.

This last interpretation, however, does not at all mean that Muslims see
themselves as the chosen people in the Jewish sense of the term. On the
contrary, Muslims see all communities, Muslim and non-Muslim alike, to
have been chosen by God, given their own sacred institutions and rites,
and

held responsible to Him. The role Muslims have always envisaged for
themselves in the arena of human history as the “middle community” does
not mean that other human collectivities do not have their own
God-ordained roles to play. Nothing is further from Islam’s traditional
understanding of itself than being God’s chosen people, unless one
expands this claim to say that all ummahs, or communities, are God’s
chosen people, each brought into this world to perform a function in
accordance with the Divine Wisdom and Will.

Today in the Islamic world, the ummah is politically more divided and
even culturally more fragmented, as a result of the impact of modernism,
than at any time in its history. And yet it would be a great mistake to
underestimate the significance of the Quranic vision of community that
most Muslims bear within their hearts and minds. This vision is still
very much alive and manifests itself in unforeseen ways not only
politically and economically, but also socially and culturally, not to
mention within the domain of religion itself.

DAR AL-ISLAM AND DAR AL-HARB
----------------------------

The Islamic idea of community, or ummah, is closely related to that
of*dar al-islam* , or the “Abode of Islam,” which corresponds in many
ways to the Western notion of Christendom.*Dar al-islam* is the
geographic area in which the Islamic ummah lives as a majority and where
Islamic Law is promulgated and practiced, although there may be other
ummahs such as Jews and Christians living within its borders.
Classically,*dar al-islam* was juxtaposed with*dar al-harb* , or the
“Abode of War,” in which Muslims could not live and practice their
religion easily because the*Shari‘ah* was not the law of the land,
although there were in practice always Muslim minorities living in
various parts of it. Later Islamic jurists added a third category,
dar*alsulh* , the “Abode of Peace.” By this category they came to mean a
land that was not part of the Islamic world but one in which Muslims
could practice their religion in peace. In the contemporary context
Muslims living in America or Western Europe could be said to be living
in dar al-sulh, in contrast to those living in the former Soviet Union
or present-day Burma, who would be or are living in*dar al-harb* .

The presence of the “Abode of War” did not necessarily mean, however,
that the Islamic world should be at war with that region, as some have
claimed. According to the Islamic law of international treaties, Muslims
could make treaties of peace and live at peace with countries outside
of*dar al-islam* if they themselves were not threatened by them. The
best example of such a situation is the friendly relations the Prophet
himself had with then Christian Abyssinians, who had in fact given
refuge to some of the Muslims from Mecca shortly after the advent of the
Quranic revelation. Many instances of such peaceful coexistence are also
to be seen between Muslim and Christian kingdoms in Spain and Hindu and
Muslim states in India. In this domain the Islamic principles must not
be confused with matters of political expediency and particular actions
of this or that ruler over the ages. What is important is to understand
the Islamic principles involved.

As far as living in*dar al-harb* is concerned, Islamic Law requires that
Muslims in such a situation respect the laws of the land in which they
live, but also insists that they be able to follow their own religious
practices even if to do so is difficult. If such a way of living were to
become impossible, then they are advised to migrate to the “Abode of
Islam” itself. As for following local laws and practices, as long as
they do not contradict Islamic laws and practices, the same injunctions
hold for dar al-sulh as they do for*dar al-harb* . The Shi‘ites, who
have been a minority during most of their history and often suffered
persecution, have added the principle of dissimulation*(taqiyyah)* ,
according to which they should hide their religious beliefs and
practices from the larger public if revealing them would endanger their
lives or property.

MUSLIM MINORITIES
-----------------

In the same way that throughout history many Christians have lived
outside of Christendom, throughout Islamic history parts of the Islamic
ummah have lived outside of*dar al-islam* in many different cultural and
religious settings from West Africa to China. Today, the largest single
minority in the world is the Islamic community in India, which has a
population of around 150 million. There are also tens of millions of
Muslims living in China, possibly 20 million in Russia, sizable
minorities in many Black African countries, and small but old and firmly
established communities in the Balkans, Finland, Bulgaria, Greece,
Tibet, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, Vietnam, and Cambodia.

There are also, of course, newer Islamic communities in most European
countries as well as in North and South America. As already mentioned,
in the United States alone there are some 6 million Muslims.

In practice, the situation of such minorities has varied and still
varies greatly from country to country. In some places they have
established a notable local culture of their own; in others they have
remained as an enclave within the much larger society, clinging to their
religious identity but not able to express much creativity on the larger
cultural scene.

These minorities have represented over the ages an Islamic presence in
different parts of the world and have interacted with many diverse
cultures, often acting as a bridge between those non-Islamic cultures
and*dar al-islam* . Such Muslim minorities now have a major
responsibility to fulfill this task as far as the relation of the
Western world to*dar al-islam* is concerned.

MINORITIES WITHIN THE “ABODE OF ISLAM”
--------------------------------------

Except for the central part of the Arabian Peninsula, there is no area
in the “Abode of Islam” where there are not minorities belonging, from
the Islamic point of view, to other ummahs. In the heartland of the
Islamic world these minorities have been usually Jews, Christians, and
Zoroastrians, but there have also been and continue to be other
minorities, such as the Druze, the Yazidis, and the ‘Alawis, who have
survived over the ages in the very cradle of Islamic civilization.
Traditionally Islam has categorized societal groups on the basis of
religious affiliation, and therefore categories of minorities based on
factors such as race or language have been of much lesser consequence.

Kurds, who are linguistically a distinct minority, have become rulers of
Arabs, as have Blacks, who in some cases were members of a racial
minority in those lands where they gained political power.

Islamic Law requires the lives, property, and freedom of religion of
religious minorities to be guaranteed if they are a “People of the
Book,” a category applied widely during Islamic history. On the basis of
the verse of the Quran that speaks about fighting nonbelievers and those
who do not acknowledge the Religion of the Truth even among the People
of the Book “until they pay the jizyah” (9:29), religious minorities
were required to pay a special religious tax*(jizyah)* and given in
return protection from external attack and security for their lives and
property. In the modern world, where the idea of the modern nation and
citizenship in it has become prevalent, the classical Islamic theory has
been often criticized, and in the contemporary Islamic world it is not
even always practiced. That is because even in the Islamic world, on the
outward level for certain groups loyalty to the state and the modern
nation has lately come to replace to some extent loyalty to religion,
something that did not occur even in Europe until fairly recently.

The Islamic system must be understood in terms of the premises of the
Islamic conception of society, whose goal is to provide a just system
and a beneficial environment for the spiritual and religious growth of
human beings. From that point of view, minorities in the Islamic world
certainly did not fare worse than those in the West, as one can see in a
comparison of the history of Judaism in the “Abode of Islam” and its
history in Europe. Also during five hundred years of Ottoman domination
of Greece, Mt. Athos remained the most vibrant and living center of
Orthodox spirituality. As for economic life, it might seem a paradox,
but in most Islamic countries the religious minorities are in a better
economic situation than the Muslim majority, as one can see in the case
of the Christians of Lebanon and Egypt.

Of course, no human institution is without imperfections and abuses.
Each theory of viewing the component communities that make up society is
based on certain premises and provides certain advantages as well as
disadvantages.

The Islamic system, sometimes called the millat system (the word millah,
“community,” also means “nation” in the biblical sense), first of all
eradicated distinctions based on race, ethnicity, or language. Second,
by according protection to minorities on the basis of religion, it
therefore created the means for these religions to survive in contrast
to the situation

in, let us say, Europe, where after Christianization, other religions
such as those of the Druids and the ancient Germans were totally
eradicated, as were certain later movements within Christianity such as
the Cathars.

In the Islamic world today, however, no nation lives any longer under
the old Ottoman millat system, but people live according to the
Western-style idea of citizenship in a nation. The modern nation-state
system removes distinctions based on religion, at least in theory, but
at the expense of subordinating minority and majority religious laws to
secular laws. And yet within that system based on nationalism, people
continue to insist upon the significance of religious laws and
practices, and the very tension between the two has made the question of
minorities more difficult than before. In days of old the Kurds did not
have the same problems with the Turks and Iraqi Arabs that they do now,
nor did the Copts in Egypt experience the same tensions they now face
with the so-called fundamentalists, who are themselves reacting to the
secularization of the laws of the land.

ISLAMIC SOCIETY: THE IDEAL AND THE PRACTICE OF THE GOOD LIFE
------------------------------------------------------------

It is essential to distinguish between the ideal society described in
the Quran and*Hadith* and historical Islamic society. If the two were
identical, there would be no evil or shortcomings in the world, and the
world would not be the world with all its imperfections. In fact,
throughout their own history, Muslims have looked upon the society of
Medina at the time of the Prophet as the ideal society, as the golden
age of Islam, religiously speaking, and have sought to emulate that
society to the extent possible, but have always fallen short.
Generations of young Muslims have been told stories of that period,
when, one might say, Heaven and earth touched either other. I remember
as a child hearing stories about the Prophet or other great early saints
helping the poor, being honest in all affairs, administering justice,
and the like from my parents and others.

Almost always, numerous contemporary actions in society were contrasted
with the ideals set forth by them. Yet tallying up and bemoaning
shortcomings is far less profitable than seeking to understand the
extent to which Islamic ideals have been implemented and realized in
each Islamic society despite the imperfections inherent in the human
state, imperfections that the original teachings of Islam itself have
taken into consideration. Although every subsequent generation of
Muslims has fallen below the standards established by the Prophet in
Medina and despite human frailties, each generation until modern times
has in fact realized many of the values established by Islam within the
society in which it lived.

The ideal norms of society as envisaged by the Quran and*Hadith* include
the establishment of justice and equality before the Divine Law,
economic fair play, and the just distribution of wealth, while
legitimizing private property and encouraging economic activities,
equitable treatment of all human beings (Muslims and non-Muslims living
as members of their own respective religious communities within Islamic
society), and the creation of a religious social environment in which
the presence of the Transcendent is never forgotten. In such a society
family bonds are honored over tribal ones, but the truth is considered
to be above even family affiliations. It was Christ who said, “Leave all
and follow me” and that one should hate one’s parents if they oppose the
truth. Likewise, the Quran states, “We have enjoined on human beings
kindness to parents, but if they strive to make you join with that of
which you have no knowledge, then obey them not” (29:8).

Since the goal of Islamic society is to make possible “Thy will be done
on earth,” in the ideal society it is the duty of each Muslim, as stated
in several Quranic verses, to “enjoin the good and forbid the wrong”
(3:110). This does not mean that individual Muslims should interfere in
the affairs of others; rather, each person has the social responsibility
to make certain that moral authority reigns in the community.

In such a society keeping the peace and fostering social harmony are
requirements, but if moral authority is destroyed for one reason or
another and the religious norms flouted by those who wield political
power, then there is a right to rebellion and the reestablishment of an
order based on ethical norms and the Divine Law.

Also in the ideal Islamic society, virtue, goodness, and knowledge
should be the only criteria for honoring and elevating individuals. The
hierarchy of society should be based on the God-fearing quality called
taqwa and on knowledge, both of which the Quran refers to explicitly.
All other honors and distinctions should be evaluated in light of the
truth of the transience of the world. This ideal has not been totally
realized, but devout Muslims remain very much aware of it, as seen in
the attitude of many powerful rulers toward the saintly and the
knowledgeable. Even in my own life I have witnessed the great respect
shown to virtuous and pious scholars not only by ordinary people, but
also by the wealthy and the politically powerful.

Islamic social teachings also include support and help for those who
have been oppressed or deprived in one way or another. In the reform
that Islam carried out in Arabian society, it sided with the poor, and,
like Christ, who said, “Blessed are the poor,” the Prophet said,
“Poverty is my pride.” Of course, in both instances poverty means, above
all, spiritual poverty, but also on the material level the Prophet, like
Christ, lived in simplicity and was closer to the poor and weak than the
wealthy and the powerful.

Although the Prophet said that wealth is like a ladder with which one
can either ascend to Heaven or descend to hell, he always emphasized
that the poor must be helped and respected regardless of their lack of
worldly provisions.

Likewise, Islamic social ideals emphasize being kind to slaves, treating
women gently, and being generous to those who have suffered economic
loss and are in debt or others in society whom modern sociologists would
call the deprived classes.

Again, these and other ideals were not always fully realized by later
Islamic societies, but as ideals set forth for one generation after
another, they are crucial for the understanding of the dominant values
in Islamic society. Of course, the sentiment that “my religion is the
best” is to be found of necessity in every religious climate, and the
Islamic is no exception. The Quran, in fact, refers to Muslims as the
best community. But in practice individual Muslims often found that
certain virtues that were supposed to be displayed among members of the
Islamic community were in fact lacking in their own but found in members
of other religious communities. For example, usually those who have
performed the hajj and are called hajjiare deeply respected as pious and
trustworthy, a reputation most have lived up to, but there have been
exceptions, deceptive hajjis who, in the guise of piety, have often
dealt dishonestly with their customers in the bazaar. In my own family
in Persia we always bought our carpets from an extremely honest Jewish
rug dealer, and everyone in the family used to say that he was as honest
as a real hajji. In any case the dynamics between ideals and everyday
practices for Muslims, as for Jews, Christians, or Hindus, is a
complicated matter.

They should not lead to either a self-righteous attitude or the
deprecation of one’s own religious community as being devoid of any
virtues. As far as the Islamic world is concerned, both of these
attitudes have been expressed by outsiders as well as by small groups
within Islamic society itself in

modern times. The phenomenon has led to unfortunate extremist positions
and movements.

THE STRUCTURE OF ISLAMIC SOCIETY
--------------------------------

Of course, not all Islamic societies are exactly alike and it would be
wiser to speak of Islamic societies rather than society if one were to
analyze every part of the ummah in detail. But for our present purpose
and concentrating on the heartland of the Islamic world, where classical
Islamic civilization was created, it is possible to speak about Islamic
society when trying to bring out salient features of social structure
shared by countries as far apart as Morocco and Persia. In contrast to
the West and also Hindu India before modern times, Islamic society did
not possess as rigid a stratification and there was, relatively
speaking, more dynamism and fluidity within Islamic society than was the
case with its two neighbors in medieval times. Social mobility in
Islamic society was achievable, especially through the acquiring of
religious knowledge, on the one hand, and personal, military, and
administrative prowess, on the other.

There was, strictly speaking, no feudal system in Islam, and there was
nothing corresponding exactly to the landed aristocracy in the West with
its lords and other feudal powers, although, in certain lands such as
Persia and what is today Pakistan, powerful landowners existed and in
fact still exist.

Nor did the peasantry play as important a role as it did in medieval
European society.

One important factor present in Islamic society but absent from the
Christian West was the nomadic element.

In fact, as the great fourteenth-century Tunisian historian Ibn Khaldun,
whom many consider to be the father of sociology, wrote, the rhythm of
Islamic history can be understood as the constant interplay between
sedentary people and nomads. The Arabs were originally nomads, while
Islam arose in Mecca, which was a sedentary environment.

Yet something of what one might call “nomadic spirituality,” with its
emphasis upon the transience of the world, closeness to nature, love of
language, and respect for the power of the word, is contained within the
spiritual perspective of the Islamic revelation itself and is manifested
clearly in Islamic art. On the social level also the constant dynamic
between the nomad and the urban dweller continued throughout most of
Islamic history.

The Prophet sought to replace tribal bonds with those of the Islamic
community, or ummah, dominated by the truth of the Quranic revelation.
Although he succeeded to a large extent, tribal allegiances did not by
any means disappear and occasionally burst forth in political movements
based on tribal affiliations. This tension between the unifying force of
Islam and the dispersing and centripetal forces of tribalism has
manifested itself in many ways in Islamic history and is still alive
under new forms. Some have, in fact, interpreted the present opposition
of local cultural, ethnic, and religious forces to globalization as
“tribalism” and have considered both tribalism and globalization to be
enemies of democracy. Such an analysis must not, however, be confused
with the role and function of tribalism in Islamic history, which was
witness to the tension between the nomads and sedentary people but also
to the positive role of the tribal nomads in the constant renewal and
revival of sedentary life and even in the unification of vast areas of
the Islamic world under one “global” order as we see with the

Seljuqs and Ottomans. The civilization of Islam, which was global in its
own way, was created in urban environments, and, in fact, during the
medieval period the Islamic world had many cities of much greater
population than the largest European cities of the time. But the city is
at once the locus of refinement in the arts and sciences, on the one
hand, and moral decadence and excessive luxury, on the other. The city
has produced great sages and saints, but it is also the only place that
has produced skeptics and even atheists.

History has not recorded any nomadic agnostics or skeptics, not to
mention atheists. Even the Quran alludes to the fact that every city
will be punished one day before the end of time.

In the Islamic world, nomads, who constantly threatened the cities,
would invade and dominate them once decadence had set in. The nomads
would inject new energy into the city, revive its moral character, and
help keep the fire of tradition burning. Then they in turn would become
sedentary, gradually losing their nomadic virtues and becoming immersed
in decadent luxury until they were themselves swept over by a new wave
of nomadic invasion. The Islamic world knew not only Arab nomads, but
also Turkic ones, who began to migrate to the heartland of the Islamic
world from the tenth century onward, and later the Mongols, who
destroyed much of Islamic sedentary life, but also rejuvenated its art
and architecture as well as its political power. To this day, despite
the forced settlement of so many nomads, there are still Arab, Black,
and Berber nomads in all of North and Saharan Africa, Turkish and Turkic
nomads in Anatolia, Persia, and Central Asia, Arab nomads in Saudi
Arabia, Yemen, Jordan, Syria, and Iraq, and even Iranian tribes such as
the Pashtus, some of whom have now settled, in both Afghanistan and
Pakistan. Even Egypt, which has been a sedentary society from time
immemorial, has nomads in the south. Just recently, while visiting the
tomb of a great Sufi saint in southern Egypt, I was surprised to
discover that the Egyptian desert near the Sudanese border is still
dominated by nomadic tribes. So one can hardly overemphasize the
importance of the nomadic element, socially, psychologically, and
spiritually in Islamic society. Moreover, one must not forget that
something of the nomadic spirit survives even among those who have
become settled in towns, for as the Arabic adage affirms, “You can take
a nomadic boy out of the desert, but you cannot take the desert out of
that boy.”

As for classes within sedentary Islamic society, the most important
before the advent of recent social changes included the learned and the
scholarly (‘ulama’), the ruling and military class, the merchants, the
guilds, and in certain areas such as Egypt and Persia the peasantry. The
‘ulama’, meaning literally “those who know,” referred originally to
savants in every field, including astronomy and medicine, not only
Islamic Law, and it is still used to some degree in this general sense.
But gradually it gained the more particular meaning of religious
scholars, especially those who specialized in knowledge of the*Shari‘ah*
. Although there is no priesthood in Islam, this class is the closest to
that of rabbis in Judaism and to a lesser extent priests in Christianity
or the Brahmins in Hinduism, although their religious function is not
exactly the same. Throughout Islamic history the ‘ulama’,

who to this day usually wear the dress of the Prophet and a turban to
follow his example, have been the guardians and interpreters of
the*Shari‘ah* . As a result, they have wielded great power and before
modern times supervised both the educational and judicial activity of
Islamic society. They were also traditionally protectors of the people
against the power of political and military authorities. Generally
Twelve-Imam Shi‘ite ‘ulama’ have been more powerful than Sunni ones
because, in contrast to the latter, they have been traditionally
independent of political power and collected religious taxes directly,
so that they have also been to a great extent economically independent.
The Islamic Revolution of Iran in 1979 would not have been possible if
such a power had not existed at the same time. The direct political rule
of the ‘ulama’ in Iran today, for the first time in Islamic history,
has, however, posed important challenges to it as a distinct religious
class within Persian society and to its role and function within that
society.

Many Sufis have been among the ‘ulama’, and most Sufi masters are also
well versed in Islamic Law, but they do not constitute a distinct class
in Islamic society. They, in fact, constitute a “society” within society
to which men and women from all walks of life can belong. According to
a*hadith* , “There is no monasticism in Islam,” and the Quran states,
“The monasticism which they invented for themselves, We did not
prescribe for them” (57:27). Therefore there is no distinct class of
monks in Islamic society, but the ideal of leading a spiritual life
devoted wholly to God has been realized within the Sufi orders, which
are integrated outwardly within society at large. It is also interesting
to note that although Islam did not accept the monastic institution, the
Prophet and, following him, generations of Muslims have looked very
kindly upon Christian monks.

There is, moreover, a Sufism meant for the spiritual elite, who usually
study advanced texts of Sufism combined with advanced spiritual
practice, and there is a popular Sufism that brings the blessings, or
barakah, of Sufism to a large number of people who usually participate
in it passively and do not travel actively on the path to spiritual
perfection of the first group. This distinction between the elite
(*khawass* ) and commoners (*‘awamm* ), so conspicuous in Sufism, can in
fact be found throughout Islamic society and must not be confused with
“elitism” in the modern sense. Today the word “elite” is disliked in
public discourse especially in America, but in fact it exists in various
domains of life and corresponds to what is widely practiced openly in
its Islamic sense. For example, a small number of mathematicians know
advanced mathematics. They are the elite of this field, while the rest
of us are “commoners” in this domain. But one of the commoners can be an
elite in knowledge of the medical properties of herbs, in which a
mathematician who belongs to the elite in mathematics is a commoner. It
is in this sense that the important category of khawas and*‘awamm* used
by the Sufis and elsewhere in Islamic society must be understood. When
used in an absolute sense*khawass* refers to those who possess advanced
spiritual knowledge and exceptional virtue.

The practitioners of Sufism on all its different levels constitute an
important group in Islamic society, even if not sociologically distinct
as a class, and they have exercised great influence over the ages on
fields as far

apart as the inner life and public ethics, psychology and art,
metaphysics and the guilds, poetry and politics. Sufism cannot be
reduced to its social manifestations or analyzed simply in sociological
terms. But one cannot understand the structure of Islamic society
without considering fully the significance of the Sufis along with the
‘ulama’ and other distinct classes.

If in a sense the ‘ulama’ and the Sufis, at least their leaders,
correspond to the sacerdotal class in medieval Christianity, the
political and military classes in Islam can also be compared to their
counterpart in the Christian West, although the differences between the
types of monarchy and political aristocracy in the Islamic world and the
West as well as differences in hereditary titles must be fully
considered.

Besides the supreme ruler of society, whether he is a caliph, sultan, or
amir, whom we have already discussed, Islamic society has always had two
groups involved in the political and military life of the country. The
first is the class of administrators and the second that of the
military.

The class of administrators developed early in Islam on the basis of
older Persian Sassanid models. In earlier Islamic history this class was
practically the only one in Islamic society outside of the cadre of
‘ulama’ to be well educated as a class in the arts of reading, writing,
logic, and so forth; it even played a role in the development of a new
style of Arabic associated with the activity of those who worked in the
various diwans, which came to be known later in the West as ministries.
The contribution of this class to Islamic learning, literature, ethics,
and political thought as well as the running of the state has been of
great importance in Islamic history. During the ‘Abbasid caliphate, from
the eighth to the thirteenth century, while the Arabic element was
primarily associated with religion and the Turkic element with military
power, the Persian element was associated most of all with
administration, and some of the most outstanding grand-viziers, or prime
ministers, of the Arab caliphs or later Turkic sultans were Persian.

The military class has of course been important throughout Islamic
history, as it has been in other societies, although Islam never
emphasized the hereditary aspect as much as did many other traditional
cultures. With the breakdown of the traditional political structures in
modern times, however, many Islamic countries were witness to a military
coup followed by a military rule very different from the traditional
Islamic political order. Traditionally, a new military commander who was
able to establish rule became a sultan or amir, but he was still bound
by the*Shari‘ah* and traditions of rule. Such is not the case with the
modern military dictators who took over the reins of power in so many
Islamic countries during the second part of the twentieth century.

The merchant class has always played a major role in Islamic society and
has been an important guardian of Islam. The Prophet began his adult
life as a merchant and his wife Khadijah was also a major merchant in
Mecca.

From the beginning, the profession was considered a very honorable one,
and the merchant class played a greater role in Islamic society than did
the mercantile class in medieval Europe before the rise of the
bourgeoisie in Italy during the Renaissance. To this day the bazaar is
not only the heart of business activity in the still relatively
traditional Islamic cities, but the

religious heart of the urban environment as well, where major mosques
and religious schools are usually located. In Persian as in other
Islamic languages, the term bazari, that is, a merchant in the bazaar,
is associated with piety and religious fervor, and this class has always
been close to the ‘ulama’. I still remember my childhood days when
during the mourning period of Muh. arram my mother would take me to the
Tehran bazaar, where I was so moved by all the black flags and curtains
covering everything. To this day the most intense religious activities,
such as religious processions in streets and functions within mosques,
in Persia are associated with the bazaar. Nor are matters different in
the Arab world. The heart of Cairo is the mosque of Ra’s al-H. usayn,
and whenever I visit it, inevitably I also pay a visit to the
Khan-Khalili bazaar adjacent to it, where one observes clearly the
wedding between religious piety and trade.

In traditional Islamic society a major institution associated with the
bazaar and the production of goods was the guilds (as.naf). Considered
to have been founded by ‘Ali ibn AbiTalib, the guilds combine
apprenticeship in various arts and crafts with moral and spiritual
discipline. In the guilds the masters are usually also moral and
spiritual teachers, and apprentices receive initiation into a guild once
they meet the moral and practical qualifications for acceptance.

The Islamic guilds are like the medieval European guild of masons, which
was a secret organization with knowledge of both theory and practical
techniques that was transmitted orally. In fact, Freemasonry began when
the guild of masons became “speculative” and cut off from the practice
of masonry and turned into a secret organization with particular
political and social goals. Although European Freemasonry came into the
Islamic world through colonizing powers in the nineteenth century, the
Islamic guilds themselves never underwent such a transformation. They
remained closely wed to Sufism and the spiritual practices of the
Islamic religion. With the advent of modern technology and the
introduction of industrialism into many parts of the Islamic world, many
of the guilds disappeared, but some survive to this day from Fez to
Benares. It is interesting to note that the famous Benares silk has been
made and is still made to a large extent by Muslim guilds of weavers and
cloth printers. A few decades ago when I visited this holiest of Hindu
cities, I was astonished to see the traditional Islamic guild still very
much alive; the master of the guild that made the most beautiful saris
was one of the dignitaries of the local branch of the Qadiriyyah order,
which is one of the oldest Sufi orders.

Finally, in discussing the structure of Islamic society one must mention
the peasantry, which of course exists throughout the Islamic world but
which, except in certain areas, has not played the same central
historical role it has in the West. In such lands as Egypt, parts of
Persia, and the Punjab, there has always existed a large peasantry,
which has usually been educated religiously from urban centers.

In such lands the peasantry has also been a conservative social force
and has provided many of the religious students for madrasahs in bigger
cities, students some of whom later became major religious leaders.
Popular Sufism has also been strong among the peasantry, as we see among
the

*fillah in* of Egypt and in the spread of Maraboutism, which is a
popular Sufi movement, in North and West Africa.

ISLAM AND SLAVERY
-----------------

Islam came into a world in which slavery was almost universally
practiced. The Quran and*Hadith* advise kindness toward slaves and their
humane treatment and encourage setting them free. The Prophet himself
bought the Persian slave Salman and immediately freed him, making him a
member of his family. It is important to note that in Islamic society
slavery was not equated with racism. Turkic slaves became military
commanders and kings and leaders, as did some Black African slaves.
Moreover, there was a great deal of intermarriage, and usually a slave’s
descendants would sooner or later melt into the general texture of
society.

There were of course Arab slave traders in Africa as well as European
ones, but despite the fact that European colonial powers made the
presence of Arab slave traders an excuse to colonize Africa, there has
never been a Harlem or an Anacostia in any Islamic city. Even where
there is a strong Black African presence, as in Arabia or Morocco, there
is no feeling of racial distinction. Today in any grand mosque in
Morocco at the time of prayers one sees worshipers ranging from Black
Africans to blue-eyed Berbers, but one does not have a feeling of racial
heterogeneity.

Many pious Muslims also refused to have slaves and wrote against it, but
the practice in its Islamic form, which meant ultimate integration
rather than segregation, continued sporadically but less frequently
until the nineteenth century, when under internal forces and the impact
of the ideas of Abraham Lincoln and others it was discontinued. If some
write today that slavery is still practiced here and there, as in the
Sudan or some other African lands, it is more like the slavery of
sweatshops in China or the West today. In neither case is it a prevalent
practice, nor are such practices condoned by religious authorities.
Before modern times both Christians and Muslims had slaves, which does
not mean that either religion created or encouraged slavery.

Various groups, not only Black Africans, were brought into the Islamic
world as slaves, but all of them became soon integrated into the ummah,
and Islamic society was never witness to the types of practices that
went on in the American South before the Civil War. What is most
important to understand is that even when it was practiced, slavery was
not wed to racism in the Islamic world and therefore former slaves were
soon integrated through intermarriage with the rest of the society in
most parts and during most periods of Islamic history.

THE FAMILY WITHIN ISLAMIC SOCIETY
---------------------------------

The basic unit of Islamic society is the family, which as a result of
the Quranic revelation came to replace the Arab tribe as the immediate
social reality for the individual. One of the most important social
reforms carried out by Islam was the strengthening of the family and the
bonds of marriage.

In Islamic society, as in many other traditional societies, the family
is not limited to the nuclear family of parents and children, but is
made up of the extended family including grandparents, uncles, aunts,
in-laws, and cousins.

The extended family plays a major role in the upbringing of children, in
protecting the younger generation from external social and economic
pressure, and in transmitting religion, customs, traditions, and secrets
of the family trade.

One can hardly overemphasize the role of the extended family in Islamic
society even today.

The impact of modernism has destroyed many Islamic institutions, but
not, as yet, the family. In the West the extended family became reduced
to the nuclear family and more recently, through a kind of splitting of
the social atom, the nuclear family has been further distilled into the
single-parent family, and the institution of the family as such has been
placed under severe strain. Most Muslims look upon these developments in
Western society, along with new sexual mores and new female and male
roles, as incomplete social experiments the results of which are still
uncertain, and not as definitely established and time-honored models to
be emulated. This issue has therefore become a point of contention
between certain ultramodernist circles in the West and the Islamic
world, but then many modern practices are opposed with equal severity by
conservative Jews and Christians within the West itself. The attitude of
the ordinary Muslim to all these recent social experimentations with
marriage and the family is not much different from those of traditional
Jews and Christians in the West. I know of many Jewish, Protestant, and
Catholic families in America who, in their understanding of the meaning
and significance of the family, feel closer to their Muslim neighbors
than to some of their own childhood friends.

As for the question of marriage itself, one cannot understand its status
in Islam without first comprehending the significance of sexuality for
Muslims. In classical Western Christian theology, sexuality itself is
associated with original sin and accepted only as a means of
procreation. To practice it in the context of the religion therefore
requires that it be sanctified through the sacrament of marriage. In
Islam, as in Judaism, sexuality itself is sacred and a blessing.
Therefore, there is no need of a sacrament, in the Christian sense, to
sanctify it. Rather, marriage in Islam is a contract drawn according to
the*Shari‘ah* to legitimize the sexual act within marriage and to
protect the rights of both partners. In both Christianity and Islam,
however, as in Judaism, sexual activity outside of marriage is not
allowed and is considered a sin in the eyes of God.

Islam does legally allow divorce, but makes it morally and socially
difficult. According to a*hadith* , of all the things that God has
permitted, what He hates most is divorce. That is why, although legally
it seems easy

for a man to divorce his wife and a wife also has certain grounds for
divorcing her husband, including being neglected and not supported, in
practice divorce is relatively rare, especially in the more traditional
segments of Islamic society, certainly much rarer than in present-day
Europe or America.

The current perception in the West about women’s rights in Islamic
society in matters of family and divorce is not accurate, because it
fails to take into consideration the many social and ethical factors
involved in most family situations, although there are, alas, also many
tragic injustices.

As far as actual practices in questions of family law and divorce are
concerned, there is much debate going on in the Islamic world today
about protecting the rights of women whose husbands abuse them but
refuse to divorce them, and family courts have been established in many
countries to try to administer justice according to the spirit and law
of the Quran rather than current customs. There are, needless to say,
abuses in Islamic society in this matter as there are elsewhere, but
Islam emphasizes the importance of family and marriage and the
responsibility that God has placed on the shoulders of both husband and
wife, even if some of those who call themselves Muslims do not fulfill
those responsibilities.

As for marriage itself, it must be recalled that the Christian and
Islamic marriages are based upon two different spiritual prototypes.
That is why Christians and even post-Christians in the West identify
marriage solely with monogamy, while Islam includes the possibility of
polygamy in certain cases and situations. No one has expressed this
difference of prototypes better than Titus Burckhardt, one of the most
profound Western scholars of the Islamic tradition. He writes:

Europeans tend to look on Muslim polygamy as sexual licence. In so
doing, they forget that the “licence” is largely compensated for by the
monastic seclusion of family life. The essential point, however, is that
Islamic marriage presupposes a completely different spiritual prototype
from that of Christian marriage:

Christian monogamy reflects the marriage of the church-or the soul-to
Christ, and this union is founded on a personal and non-transferable
love.

Islamic polygamy on the other hand finds its justification in the
relationship of the one Truth (al-H. aqq), to its several animic
“vessels”: Man, as spiritual officiant*(imam)* of his family, represents
the Truth; his role corresponds to the “active” vessel, namely the
Spirit; whereas his wife corresponds to the “passive” vessel, namely the
soul. This is also why a Muslim man may marry a Christian or Jewish
woman, whereas a Muslim woman may only take a husband of the same faith
as herself. These spiritual prototypes- both cases-are not something
imposed on marriage from the outside, but inhere in the nature of
things.

The symbolism in question is not necessarily in everyone’s
consciousness, far from it, but it is inherent in the respective
tradition, and therefore part of the collective mentality.1

The spiritual principles and prototypes mentioned here do not in any way
mean to reduce the relation of man and woman to simply that of the
active and passive principles.

As in the Far Eastern tradition, where males and females possess both
yin and yang, but in different proportions, so in the Islamic
perspective the male is not simply equated with the active principle and
the female with the passive, for both the male and female contain both
elements within their nature. What is elucidated by Burckhardt are the
spiritual prototypes and principles involved.

If for Christians the multiple marriages of the Prophet diminish his
spiritual status, for Muslims they ennoble sexual union and sanctify it.
Moreover, if one relates marriage to the sexual act and accepts that
there should be no sexual activity outside of marriage, then there has
probably been a lot less promiscuity in the Islamic world, with
polygamy, than there has been in the West, even before the 1960s sexual
revolution, with its claim to monogamy. The Islamic world has for so
long been accused in the West of being sexually licentious, while
Christianity is pictured as favoring chastity and being severely opposed
to extramarital sexual activity. The social reality is quite something
else. There is no doubt that there is some polygamy in the Islamic
world, and also temporary marriage in Shi‘ism, but most men are
monogamous and there is little extramarital sexual activity in
traditional Islamic society. Moreover, there is also a great deal of
extramarital sexual activity in the West, although polygamy is not
officially practiced. In Islamic society, illicit sexual practice is
rare, although it is not totally absent, and there are practically no
illegitimate children because in all types of marriages, including the
temporary, children are officially recognized by law and the father has
the duty to support them.

The Prophet said, “Marriage is half of religion,” and to marry is
considered by Muslims a blessed way to follow the prophetic Sunnah,
although it is not technically required by the*Shari‘ah* . Because of
the religious significance of marriage, nearly everyone within the
Islamic world, even in big cities, is married, and great pressure is put
on the young to marry, especially to avoid sinful actions. There are
hardly any unmarried men and women in Islamic society; only a few are to
be found here and there. In the countryside even more than in cities, a
woman whose husband has died often marries another man even if she is
not young and has many children. Likewise, a widower is usually
pressured to remarry.

Even those who are not married, male and female, usually live with
relatives and are part of the larger extended family.

THE MALE AND FEMALE IN THE ISLAMIC PERSPECTIVE
----------------------------------------------

From the point of view of Islam, the distinction between the male and
the female is not only biological or even psychological, but has its
root in the Divine Nature Itself. The Quran asserts, “Glory to God, Who
created in pairs all things” (36:36), and also, “We have created you in
pairs” (78:8). The male and the female polarization is an essential part
of the mystery of God’s creation. Each gender is fully human with an
immortal soul, and both sexes share equally in their religious
responsibilities and are equal before God’s laws. And yet each sex
complements the other and together, like the yin-yang symbol of the Far
East, they form a circle, which symbolizes perfection, totality, and
completion.

That is why the male and female both vie with each other and are
attracted to each other. The alchemy of marriage and sexual union has
the power to transmute and complete each side through the realization of
both complementarity and wholeness through a love that transcends the
two sides and yet encompasses them, a love that is rooted in God.

The bond between two hearts is made by God, as usual Islamic formulas of
marriage state, and the love of one spouse for the other is an earthly
reflection of the love of the soul for God, although the male and female
forms of spirituality are not the same. This intimate bond between the
male and female in marriage is indicated in the verse, “They [your
wives] are raiment for you and ye are raiment for them” (2:187). Each
spouse is a raiment for the other not only in the sense that he or she
covers the intimate life and even faults of the other from public view
as our clothing covers our bodies, but also in the sense that the
raiment is the thing closest to our body. Husband and wife should be
also the closest being to each other. Needless to say, not all marriages
turn out to be perfect, neither in the Islamic world nor in the West.
But the ideals set forth in the Quran have remained very much alive in
every generation of Muslims and continue to be so today.

### WOMEN IN THE FAMILY AND IN SOCIETY

###

Since the rise of feminism in the West, whole forests have been cut down
to produce books by Western observers on the subject of women in Islam.
In most cases current Western ideas have been chosen as absolute
criteria to judge women in other societies and to preach to them about
how they should behave. In the West today there is a tendency toward
what one might call “the absolutization of the transient.”

Each decade absolutizes its own fashions of thought and action without
the least pause and consideration of the fact that a decade later those
very fashions and ideas will be buried in the dustbin of history as one
turns to a new decade. Nowhere is this phenomenon more evident than in
the question of women’s rights and roles. If the West were carrying out
this debate in 1900, there would be very different criteria for
judgment, and most likely in 2100 there will be still others. Rather
than using the question of women in Islam as a ram with which to batter
the gate of Islamic society as a part of a new “crusade” coming from the
West, it is best to first understand the situation from the point of
view of Islam and Islamic society and then make

whatever criticism one wants based on objective awareness of what
criteria one is using.

It is, first of all, essential to realize that what is observed in the
Islamic world is the result of not only explicit Islamic teachings, but
also the customs and habits of the societies into which Islam entered.
For example, in what is called the Middle East today, not only Muslim
but also Jewish and Christian women have always covered their hair. The
covering of the face is not mentioned in the Quran, nor was it practiced
by the women around the Prophet; it was adopted from Persian and
Byzantine models. In view of the fact that female education and the
participation of women in politics were not common practice before
modern times in non-Islamic societies as far away as Japan, China, and
other Asian societies, it seems incorrect to highlight what is called
the “patriarchal nature of Islamic society” as a unique phenomenon
associated with Islam alone. Somehow, however, nearly all the criticism
coming from secularist feminists is aimed these days at the Islamic
world without bothering to ask practicing Muslim women themselves-

women from the mainstream of Islamic society, not just those from the
completely Westernized fringes-what their problems really are.

The teachings of Islam emphasize that, although men and women stand
equally before God and the Law, they should complement each other in
family and social life.

Equality before God and the Law does not destroy the reality of
complementarity. Some have asked me if men and women are equal in Islam.
My answer has always been that before God, in the face of the ultimate
eschatological realities, and before the Law, yes, but in this world,
not always.

Women are not equal to men, but neither are men equal to women, a truth
to which some American authors have been referring recently as
distinctions between “persons from Mars” and “persons from Venus.”

The traditional structure of Islamic society is based not on
quantitative equality, but on the reality of complementarity, although
there are exceptions. In this complementarity of functions, the man is
seen as the protector and provider of his family and its imam,
religiously speaking.

The woman is the real mistress of the household, in which the husband is
like a guest. Her primary duty has been seen as that of raising of
children and attending to their earliest education, as well as being the
basic buttress of the family.

Like all traditional societies, Islam has honored the work of homemaker
and mother as being of the highest value, to the extent that the Prophet
said, “Heaven lies under the feet of mothers.” Islamic society has never
thought that working in an office is of a higher order of importance for
society than bringing up one’s children. Also an economic system was
created in the cities, where, by and large, but not always, the wife was
not forced for economic reasons to leave the home and her children
during the day. From the Islamic point of view, the right of a child to
a full-time mother rather than a nanny or day-care provider is more
essential than many rights held dear today.

Within the home Muslim women usually wield great power and authority. In
my own very large extended family on both the paternal and maternal
side, I have known many mothers who were every bit as powerful and even
autocratic as the most forceful “Jewish mother” or “Italian mother.”

Anyone who thinks that in Islamic society women have always been weak,
downtrodden, and oppressed beings simply does not know the inner
workings of a Muslim family.

The Vision of Community and Society 191

The number of husbands oppressed by their wives is probably no smaller
in Islamic society than anywhere else. That does not mean, however, that
there has not been in the past or does not exist in the present terrible
treatment of some wives by Muslim husbands, despite the explicit
injunction of the Quran to honor the possessions of one’s wife and to
deal kindly with her, as when it says, “Consort with them in kindness”
(4:19). Considering the practices that were going on in pre-Islamic
Arabia, the regulations of Islam effected a remarkable transformation in
bestowing economic and social rights upon women and protecting them from
injustice.

Nevertheless, human beings being what they are, there continue to be
Muslim husbands who are cruel toward their wives and who abuse them
physically-against the injunctions of Islam. But of course we know only
too well that there are also many shelters for battered women in America
and Europe, and this problem is not confined to any single part of the
world. But to neglect for one moment the power that most Muslim women
wield within the family and in the most important decisions affecting
the lives of family members is simply to misunderstand the actual role
and status of women in Islamic society.

As was stated before, in Islam the economic responsibility for
supporting the family resides with the husband, even if the wife happens
to be wealthy. The Quranic law of inheritance, according to which a male
inherits twice as much as a female, must be understood in light of the
husband’s responsibility to support the whole family financially while
the wife can do with her wealth as she wills. The famous Quranic verse
“Men are the protectors and maintainers of women” (4:34) must be
understood in this economic and social context, not taken to mean that
the husband controls the wife’s whole life. As for the testimony of two
women equaling that of one man in legal matters, this concerns cases of
crime and wrongdoing and not every form of testimony, as some jurists
interpreted it later. When it comes to bearing witness to a crime, the
Quranic injunction takes into consideration the more merciful, gentle,
forgiving, and nurturing nature of women in comparison to that of men;
the injunction does not at all belittle women-quite the contrary.

Islamic sources do not at all prevent Muslim women from working and
receiving wages. In the agricultural sector of traditional Islamic
society women always worked with men and were also very active in many
of the arts and crafts.

To this day most of the carpets and kilims of various Islamic countries
are woven by women. Islam gave women complete economic independence

even from their husbands, and over the ages many women have also engaged
in trade and been merchants, as was the Prophet’s wife Khadijah.

Likewise, there is no objection in principle to Muslim women
participating in politics. Before modern times there were even
occasionally Muslim queens who ruled independently and many others who
exerted great political power behind the scenes. If one objects that
there were few such female political figures, one could answer that the
same held true for Christian Byzantium or Confucian China and that this
limitation was not imposed by the Quran. In fact, the granddaughter of
the Prophet, Zaynab, played a major political role in early Islamic
history, as did a number of other women. In modern times three Islamic
countries have had women prime ministers and the Islamic Republic of
Iran, which was established to implement Islamic teachings in the
country, has a female vice-president and many other female officials,
including members of the parliament.

As for education, there is a*hadith* according to which seeking
knowledge is a religious obligation for every Muslim, male and female.
Throughout Islamic history girls usually completed only the elementary
Quranic schools and only a few advanced further-not because of Islamic
teachings, but because of social conditions-and from time to time women
have become Islamic scholars. Sayyidah Nafisah, whose sanctuary in Cairo
is a major center of pilgrimage to this day, was so learned in the
science of*Hadith* that occasionally the greatest Islamic scholar of the
day, Imam al-Shafi‘i, would consult with her. Women, in fact, played an
especially important role in the transmission and study of*Hadith* .
Also throughout Islamic history, there have been many women Sufis, some
of whom were very learned, and fine women poets, from Rabi‘ah
al-‘Adwiyyah, who lived in the eighth century, to Parwin E‘tes.ami, who
lived in the twentieth. Again, one must not equate educational practices
in some parts of the Islamic world in modern times, such as Afghanistan
under the Taliban, although they claimed to speak in the name of Islam,
with the general Islamic view toward women’s education. If one looks at
such major Islamic countries as Egypt and Iran today, one sees a very
large number of women in nearly every field of education, sometimes
equaling or even surpassing men in number in the faculties of certain
major universities.

The views of Islam concerning women bring us back to the question of the
veil and covering. For a long time the West has had a distorted, exotic
image of the mysterious Islamic world: women were covered head to toe in
public, while harems of naked women were depicted reclining by indoor
pools in so many nineteenth-century “orientalist” paintings in Europe.
These depictions had much more to do with rebellion in the West against
the restraints of the Victorian era going back to the sexual paradigm of
Christianity, but they nevertheless introduced to Western society a
completely false image of Muslim women. During the colonial period, head
cover was taken by European colonizers as a sign of female oppression in
Islamic society and Muslim modernists opted for this view themselves, as
we see in the forced unveiling of women in Turkey and Iran by Ataturk
and Reza Shah, respectively. As a result of these events, one sees today
a whole spectrum of women, from those fully veiled to those in
miniskirts, in many

Muslim countries and especially in the Middle East, where more women
have discarded their traditional dress than elsewhere in the Islamic
world, such as South or Southeast Asia.

It is therefore especially important to be clear regarding the Islamic
teachings on this matter. The Quran commands both men and women to dress
modestly and not display their bodies, and the Prophet asserted that
modesty is a central character trait of Islam. It also commands women to
cover their “ornaments”*(zinah)* , which is usually understood to mean
their hair and, of course, their bodies. On the basis of this
injunction, various forms of dress were developed in different parts of
the Islamic world, but some forms of dress were carryovers from earlier
pre-Islamic Near Eastern societies. In the earlier communities of Jews
and Christians, women also covered their hair. The iconography of the
Virgin in Christian art always shows her with her hair covered, and
until quite recently Georgian and Armenian Christians as well as
Oriental Jewish women covered their hair, as did Muslims. The covering
of the hair was taken by women to be a natural part of life as a sign of
modesty and especially a sign of respect before God. Even in the West
until a generation ago Catholic women would not go to church without
covering their heads.

Who has said that uncovering one’s hair is more liberating than covering
it? This is a very complex issue that, as far as the Islamic world is
concerned, must be decided along with other women’s issues by Muslim
women themselves on the basis of Islamic teachings and prevalent social
norms, not by others. Until thirty years ago, Muslim women who received
Western education and became modernized would usually discard their head
covers, but gradually matters began to change. Today in many countries,
such as Egypt, many highly educated women freely choose to cover their
hair again as a sign of self-identity and protection. Paradoxically, in
the one Islamic country that is the most modernized and claims to be
secularized in the European way, that is, Turkey, women do not have the
right to cover their hair in public buildings, this ban showing total
disregard for free choice and women’s rights, so central to the concern
of Western feminists.

The question of the veil and many other crucial issues having to do with
education, legal rights, and so on have become the focus of attention of
a number of Muslim women who want to modernize the rest of society after
the model of the West, whatever that model, which is still in a state of
flux, might be. They are abetted in this task by Western secularist
feminists and certain other elements that would like to secularize
Islamic society. It is unfortunate that most Western feminists do not
bother to understand the underlying philosophy of the relation between
men and women in Islam and, in fact, in other non-Western societies.

Nor do they offer a clear alternative model that would have meaning for
the vast majority of Muslim women.

During the last two decades a new movement has begun among believing
Muslim women themselves to gain the rights they believe the Quran
and*Hadith* accord them, but that local social customs and regulations
have prevented them from gaining. This so-called Islamic feminism is
much more pertinent than Western-style feminism as far as the future of
Islamic society

is concerned, because those women who pursue it, most of whom are pious
Muslim women, do so from within the Islamic worldview. Furthermore, they
also know much better than their Western counterparts what their own
real problems are. In any case, women’s issues-their education, legal
rights, participation in political affairs, and so forth-are one of the
major challenges facing the Islamic world today, one that each part of
the Islamic world has been trying to deal with on the basis of Islamic
teachings and its own customs and traditions, in spite of the constant
pressure from various forces in the West.

ISLAM AND THE INTEGRATION OF SOCIETY
------------------------------------

Through the imposition of a Divine Law, the inculcation of moral values
within its members, and the creation of bonds of relationship, Islam
played a major role in the integration of human society. A series of
concentric circles can represent the areas of relationship. At the
center is the relationship between the individual and God. Surrounding
that center is the circle of the family, then of the quarter of one’s
city or town, then of one’s “nation” (wat.an) in the traditional sense
of the term, then the Islamic community*(ummah)* , and finally all of
humanity and in fact creation as a whole. In the same way that each
circle in the series has the same center, each of these relationships
was and remains based on the basic relationship between the human being
and God.

Tawhid, or unity, which is the central doctrine of Islam and which also
means “integration,” therefore began with the integration of the
individual soul into its Center, where God resides, and then extended to
bonds between members of the family and other increasingly larger
groupings The Vision of Community and Society 197 until it encompassed
the whole of creation. Despite the relentless downward march of time and
numerous vicissitudes, Islam was able to integrate society to a large
extent and create an ummah that stretched from the Atlantic to the
Pacific. This ummah in turn created Islamic civilization, one of the
major global civilizations, which, despite some weakening from the
eighteenth century onward, is still very much alive. The Islamic ummah
and civilization have seen periods of decline and rejuvenation, the
appearance of those who have misled the people as well as authentic
“renewers”*(mujaddid)* who, as promised by the Prophet, have
periodically revitalized the religion and Islamic society from within.

Today the Islamic ummah, politically segmented and divided as never
before, faces unprecedented challenges from the onslaught of modern
secularism and consumerist globalization, challenges much greater than
what it faced during the Mongol invasion. Of course, modern secularism
and now globalization are also challenges to Judaism and Christianity in
the West, but in their cases the challenges come from within their own
society. For the Islamic ummah, it comes from the outside and is
supported by exceptional military, economic, and political power.
Reaction to this outside pressure has taken many forms, sometimes
violent ones that go against the very tenets of Islam. These are,
however, peripheral and transient phenomena. The profounder reality is
the traditional religious truths of Islam embedded deep in the heart of
Islamic society, which will have to survive these enormous challenges
without betraying the principles of Islam itself.

More than ever before, it is important to remember that the empire of
Islam resides in the hearts of men and women and not in worldly power
alone. To perpetuate the life of the ummah and the rule of this
“spiritual empire,” it is essential to remember the truths for which
Islam was revealed and the Prophet sent as the Messenger to the world.
In one of his most famous*hadiths* the Prophet said, “I was sent in
order to perfect [for you] the virtues of character.”

The role of Islamic society has always been to make possible the
attainment of virtue and the perfection of character, and such Muslim
authorities as al-Farabi, like Plato, divided societies according to
their ability to provide an environment that would foster this inner
perfection of moral and spiritual qualities of the members of society.
From the Islamic point of view, the value of a society before the eyes
of God lies in its virtuous quality, its moral excellence, and not in
power or wealth. It is this basic truth that Muslims must remember as
they confront the powerful forces of secularism, globalization, and
consumerism that threaten the very foundations of the Islamic order.
