CHAPTER FIVE: COMPASSION AND LOVE, PEACE AND BEAUTY
===================================================

***My Mercy and Compassion embrace all things.***

***Quran 7:156***

***Those who believe and do good works, the Infinitely Good will appoint
for them love.***

***Quran 19:96***

***God is He than Whom there is no god, the Sovereign Lord, the Holy
One, Peace.***

***Quran 59:23***

*God is beautiful and loves beauty.*

**Hadith**

COMPASSION, LOVE, PEACE, AND BEAUTY AS DIVINE QUALITIES
-------------------------------------------------------

According to a well-known*hadith* , on the Throne of God is written,
“Verily My Mercy and Compassion precede my Wrath.” To be sure there is
Divine Justice and need for justice in the world, as there is Divine
Rigor and Wrath related to the Divine Majesty described so powerfully in
both the Bible and the Quran. But the inner dimension of reality is
inseparable from that Divine Mercy and Compassion but for which there
would be no creation. Since this world is the creation of God, it must
reflect His Qualities, and Islamic spiritual teachings emphasize that in
fact the whole universe is nothing but the interplay of the reflections
of God’s Names and Qualities. Therefore His Names of Beauty and Mercy
must be reflected in His creation as much as His Names of Majesty and
Justice. Furthermore, the former Names, having to do with the inner
dimension of the Divine Reality, take precedence when it comes to the
inner life of the soul of the Muslim.

The idea propagated by certain Western scholars and Christian apologists
that the God of Islam is only the God of Justice but not of Mercy,
Compassion, and Love is totally false. God’s Mercy, Compassion,
Forgiveness, and Love are mentioned more times in the Quran than are His
Justice and Retribution. All the four concepts mentioned in the title of
this chapter, namely, Compassion (which is inseparable from Mercy in the
Islamic view), Love, Peace, and Beauty, are Divine Names whose
reflections must therefore be part of the very substance and root of the
existence of human beings as well as that of other creatures.

COMPASSION AND MERCY
--------------------

Of special significance for the understanding of the Islamic perspective
on creation and revelation is the notion and reality of mercy and
compassion. As the Quranic verse cited above bears witness, the Mercy
and Compassion (*rahmah* ) of God embraces all things, and in fact the
world would not exist if there were to be no*rahmah* . The term*rahmah*
, which means both “mercy” and “compassion,” is related to the two
Divine Names*al-Rahman* , the Infinitely Good, and al-Rah. im, the
All-Merciful, with which every chapter of the Quran except one
commences. They are also the Names with which daily human acts are
consecrated.

Because these Names are interwoven into every aspect of the life of
Muslims, life is thereby wrapped in Divine Goodness, Mercy, and
Compassion, which are inextricably associated with the Arabic word
al-*rahmah* . Moreover, this word is related to the Arabic term for
“womb,” rah. im.

Therefore, it might be said that the world issues from the womb of
Divine Mercy and Compassion. This truth is emphasized by Sufis who, as
already mentioned, claim that the very substance of cosmic existence is
the “Breath of the Compassionate.” God breathed upon the archetypal
realities of this world, and the consequence of this action was the
realm of separative existence we call the world. It is most significant
that this “Breath”*(nafas)* is associated with the goodness and
compassion of God and not some other quality. Compassion is therefore at
the root of our very existence, the gate through which both revelation
and creation were brought forth and therefore a central reality in all
aspects of human life. Every aspect of the traditional life of Muslims
over the ages has been intertwined with*rahmah* and inseparable from it,
since compassion is woven into the very fiber of human existence.

A poem of Rumi states, “Mus.t.afa [the chosen one-

Muh. ammad] came to bring about intimacy and compassion*(hamdami)* .”
The term*hamdami* in Persian means literally “having the same breath,”
therefore indicating close intimacy and what some ancient philosophers
called sympatheia, which is closely related to compassion. Spiritually,
the very message of the Prophet and the revelation of the Quran were to
bring about a full flowering of the compassion that relates all beings
to each other by the very fact that they exist. The Prophet is himself
called*rahmah* to all the worlds, and his inner reality plays a most
important role in the spiritual economy of Islamic life as far as
compassion and mercy are concerned.

If one asks how compassion and mercy function concretely in Islamic
life, the answer begins with the distinctions between the relation of
God to the individual, the individual to God, human beings to each
other, and humanity to the rest of creation. As far as the relation of
God to the individual and in fact to all of His creation is concerned,
it always involves compassion and mercy. In addition to*al-Rahman* , the
Infinitely Good, and al-Rah. im, the All-Merciful, God is also known as
al-Karim, the All-Generous, al-Ghafur, the All-Forgiver, and al-Lat.if,
the All-Kind. He possesses also other Names and Qualities that indicate
His Compassion

toward His creation and His Mercy, but for which there would be no
religion, no human salvation, and in fact no existence. It is impossible
for a Muslim to pray to God or even to think of God without awareness of
this essential dimension of Compassion and Mercy, without, however,
losing sight of the Divine Majesty, before which one must always remain
in reverential awe.

I recall from the numerous Islamic holy sites I have visited, where one
hears hundreds of audible supplications to God by women and men that
besides the word*Allah* , or*Khuda* in Persian, no word is heard more
often than*Raman* ,*Rahim* , and*rahmah* . I remember especially this
prayer uttered in Arabic with the utmost sincerity by a simple woman: “O
Lord, have Mercy and Compassion, for if Thou dost not have Mercy, who
will have mercy?” The heartfelt prayer of this simple pilgrim epitomizes
the quintessential Islamic attitude toward God as the source of
compassion and mercy. No matter what one has done in life, one should
never lose hope in His Compassion and Mercy, for as the Quran states,
“And who despaireth of the Mercy of his Lord save those who go astray”
(15:56), and “Do not despair of God’s Mercy” (39:53). A Muslim’s prayer
always contains an appeal to His dimension of Compassion and Mercy. This
attitude can be summarized in the Quranic verse, “Have mercy upon us for
Thou art the best of those who show mercy” (23:109). We may lose faith
in the compassion and mercy of human beings and even close friends,
although even this despair is spiritually incorrect, but we should never
lose faith or hope in God’s Compassion and Mercy. It might be said that
in the Islamic universe the Face of God turned toward His creation is
inseparable from His Compassion and Mercy, while the face of men and
women turned toward their Lord must always be based on appeal to that
Divine Compassion and Mercy that “embraceth all things.”

As for the relationship between human beings, not only do the
injunctions of the*Shari‘ah* recommend and require acts of compassion,
charity, and mercy toward the poor, the sick, the weak, orphans, and the
needy, but Islamic ethics, based on the model of the Prophet, emphasizes
over and over again the importance of the virtues of compassion and
charity, mercy and forgiveness. Muslims should be strict with
themselves, but generous and compassionate toward those around them.
This begins with the family, where the Quran and*Hadith* emphasize in
numerous verses the importance of exercising ihsan, that is, spiritual
virtue and goodness, which includes compassion and kindness toward one’s
parents, spouse, children, and other family members.

Compassion and generosity must, moreover, be in deeds as well as in
words, and here the whole tradition of adab, or traditional courtesy,
manners, and comportment, plays a central role in making compassion,
generosity, and the selfdiscipline and nobility that are inseparable
from them a concrete reality.

Beyond the family there is the general category of neighbor, which
usually includes one’s physical neighbors and those living nearby.
Again, there are numerous teachings in the Quran and*Hadith* emphasizing
the importance of having compassion toward the people who are one’s

neighbors and being aware of their needs. Then beyond one’s neighborhood
there is society at large, in which the same attitude of compassion and
kindness must exist even beyond the boundary of one’s religion.

When one looks at Islamic societies as a whole, one becomes aware how
socially and economically significant the acts of compassion and mercy,
in fact, are in the lives of so many people, especially the poor.
Without these religiously motivated acts of compassion and charity, the
social order would collapse, since in many places in the Islamic world
governments are not strong or wealthy enough to provide a minimum income
for all their citizens. Consequently the welfare of the poor is left to
a large extent to the mercy of private individuals and institutions, all
motivated, not by some kind of secularist altruism, but by the Islamic
emphasis upon the importance of compassion, charity, kindness, and mercy
to those less fortunate who turn to those better off for help. The hand
of the needy beggar asking for help is in the deepest sense the Hand of
Divine Mercy extended to us, for in extending our compassion and mercy
to one of God’s creatures we become ourselves recipients of Divine
Mercy.

The last relation to consider is that of human beings to the nonhuman
world. Despite the terrible abuse of both animals and vegetation in many
big Islamic cities filled by recently uprooted people no longer in
harmony with their natural environment, Islamic teachings themselves
emphasize that compassion, mercy, and kindness must be extended to
animals and plants as well as to human beings.

Already in medieval Islamic cities there were animal hospitals and
endowments established for the keeping of horses and donkeys that had
become ill or incapacitated. The Prophet dealt with animals gently, and
many hadiths refer to the importance of showing kindness to them as well
as of respecting the life of the vegetal world, of not destroying trees
and other vegetation unless absolutely necessary. Traditional Islamic
societies have many examples of the exercise of compassion and mercy
toward nonhuman realms of life as well as the human order.

Needless to say, not all Muslims heed the teachings of Islam as far as
compassion, mercy, generosity, and kindness are concerned, any more than
do all Jews, Christians, or even Buddhists, whose whole religion is
based on the two foundations of compassion and enlightenment. Human
imperfection is not the monopoly of any single people, race, or
religious community; it exists everywhere. It is essential to bring out
the significance of compassion and mercy in the Islamic religious
universe, not in order to claim that all Muslims have abided by the
teachings of their religion concerning this central matter, but to
refute the false conception propagated by some in the West that Islam is
a religion without compassion. If an impartial observer were to visit,
let us say, ten major sacred sites in ten Islamic countries and record
how many times in one hour words related to compassion and mercy, the
Arabic*rahmah* , are heard in the supplications and prayers arising from
the hearts of those assembled at such sites, it would become clear how
central compassion and mercy are to the Islamic understanding of God,
the relation between human beings and God, and the rapport between human
beings and all of His creation. The goal of Islam has always been to
train

individuals to be aware of God’s Compassion and Mercy, to rely in their
spiritual life upon these Divine Qualities, and to reflect these
qualities in their human form in their relations with all other beings
in God’s creation.

The aim of the Quranic revelation has also been to create a
compassionate society, a society not based on ruthless competition and
individualistic selfishness, but on the awareness that to gain inner
felicity and be worthy of receiving God’s Mercy and Compassion, we must
exercise compassion and kindness toward others. In giving on the basis
of compassion and mercy to others, we also give ourselves to God and
gain freedom from the prison of our limited ego.

### LOVE

###

One of God’s Names is al-Wadud, Love, and in the Quran there are
numerous references to love, or hubb, as when it is said, “God will
bring a people whom He loveth and who love Him” (5:54). There is a
certitude for Muslims that God is all-loving, as He is all-compassionate
and allforgiving, as stated in the verses, “Surely my Lord is
All-Merciful, All-Love” (11:90) and “He is the All-Forgiving, the
All-Loving” (85:14). Even the Prophet’s following of God’s commands is
related to his love for God, for as the Sacred Text states, “Say (O
Muhammad): If ye love God, follow me” (3:31). One of the titles of the
Prophet is in fact H. abib*Allah* , usually translated as “Friend of
God,” but meaning also “Beloved of God.”

In Christianity it is said that God is Love, and often from that
perspective Islam is criticized for having a conception of God that
lacks love. In this context it is of interest to turn to the observation
of an outsider from the medieval period, the famous Jewish sage and poet
Abraham ibn Ezra, who wrote:

The Muslims sing of love and of passion The Christians of war and
revenge The Greeks of wisdom and devices The Indians of parables and
riddles And the Israelites-songs and praises to the Lord of Hosts.1

The assertion that Muslims do not know Divine Love is as absurd as
claiming that Muslims know nothing of Divine Compassion. Neither Judaism
nor Hinduism identifies God simply or purely with love, but that does
not mean either of these religions, any more than Islam, is devoid of
the notion of Divine Love, which flowered in them in the form of the
Hasidic and bhakti movements, respectively. Islam states that God is
Love, since this is one of His Divine Names, but it does not identify
God solely with love, for He is also Knowledge and Light, Justice and
Majesty as well as Peace and Beauty, but He is never without love and
His Love is essential to the creation of the universe and our relation
with Him.

It is important to note that in the Islamic perspective God’s Compassion
for the world is not identified with suffering.

Rather, it is translated into love. God’s Essence transcends the created
and temporal order, and He cannot suffer in His Essence for what happens
in that order. This aspect of Islam is therefore in contrast to the
theme of the suffering servant in messianic Judaism and the “suffering
of God” in many strands of Christianity. As already mentioned, in the
Islamic perspective God “loved” to be known and therefore created the
world. Therefore love runs through the vein of the universe and, like
compassion, is inseparable

from existence. There is no realm of existence where love does not
manifest itself in some way. One can even say that, metaphysically
speaking, the gravitational attraction of physical bodies for each other
is a particular instance of the universal principle of love operating on
the level of physical reality.

On the more practical level, love in the life of Muslims has its
exemplar in the love of God for the Prophet and the Prophet for Him. For
human beings the love of God necessitates the love of the Prophet, and
the love of the Prophet and the saints, who are his spiritual or
biological progeny, necessitates the love of God. There are,
furthermore, many levels of love natural to human beings: romantic love,
love of children and parents, love of beauty in art and nature, love of
knowledge, and even love of power, wealth, and fame, which, however,
since they are turned toward the world, pose a danger for the soul. In
the Islamic perspective, all earthly love should be in God and not
separated from the love of God, and any love that excludes God and turns
us away from Him is an illusion that can lead to the ruin of the soul.
The Islamic sages have in fact asserted the doctrine that only the love
of God is real love and all other love is metaphorical love. But
metaphorical love is also real on its own level and is in fact a Divine
gift, if it is understood properly and used as a ladder to reach real
love, which is the love for the Source of all love, which is God.

The dimension of love gushed forth in Islam within Sufism and resulted
in some of the greatest literary works about mystical love ever written.
This perennial spring of inspiration began to inundate the soul and
spirit of Muslims early in the history of Islam with the appearance of
the woman saint of Basra, Rabi‘ah al-‘Adawiyyah. Her beautiful Arabic
poems on the love of God are recited to this day in the Arab world even
by popular singers. In one of her moving poems she writes:

Two ways I love Thee: selfishly, And next, as worthy is of Thee.

’Tis selfish love that I do naught Save think on Thee with every
thought.

’Tis purest love when Thou dost raise The veil to my adoring gaze.

Not mine the praise in that or this, Thine is the praise in both, I
wis.2

Although in Sufism love is never separated from knowledge, some schools
have emphasized one and some the other. In early Islamic history the
School of Khurasan in Persia was especially identified with love and its
greatest masters, such as Bayazid Bast.ami, Abu Sa‘id Abi’l-Khayr, and
especially Ah.mad Ghazzali, who developed a whole metaphysical language
based on ‘ishq, or intense love, wrote some of the most memorable hymns
to Divine Love.

This tradition finally led to what some have considered the greatest
mystical poetry ever written, namely, that of the thirteenth-century
poet Jalal al-Din Rumi, who was Persian but spent most of his life in
Anatolia and is buried in Konya in present-day Turkey. Rumi, who calls
love “our Plato and Galen” and says that when the pen comes to the
question of describing what love is, it breaks in half, is today the
most widely read poet in America. This supreme troubadour of Divine
Love, along with Ibn ‘Arabi, who lived a generation before him,
represents the highest peak of Islamic spirituality in that period that
saw the inner renewal and revival of the spiritual dimensions

of Islam and the creation of a sweet spring of spiritual knowledge and
love whose tributaries have watered various Islamic lands from the
Atlantic to the Pacific during the past seven centuries.

Such extensive manifestation of love within the Islamic religious
universe was not in spite of Islam, but because of it. It cannot be
traced to any foreign influences any more than Christian treatises on
love can be reduced to the reading of Neoplatonic sources without
consideration of the love for Christ. The very presence of this vast
literature on Divine Love in nearly every Islamic language from Arabic
and Persian to Turkish and Swahili, as well as most of the local
languages of India and Southeast Asia, is the best external sign of the
significance of the dimension of love in the inner life of Islam. This
outpouring was so extensive and powerful in expression that it even
influenced Jewish, Christian, and Hindu writers and spiritual
practitioners.

Raymond Lull, a Franciscan theologian who wrote against Islam, also
composed a treatise entitled The Lover and the Beloved, in which he
imitated Sufi terminology, and the greatest mystical writers of
sixteenth-century Spain, St.Teresa of Avila and St. John of the Cross,
adopted numerous Sufi symbols for the love of God. The inner signs of
this dimension of love have always remained a secret between a human
being and God, as they have in other religions, between “a people whom
He loveth and who love Him” (5:54) to quote the Quran, and this intimate
nexus between the soul and God is beyond external description.

It is a fire that can only be known if it gives off sparks, as it has
fortunately done in the luminous writings of those “lovers of God,”
those Islamic fedeli d’amore, who have expressed something of that love
in human language. But then there are many fires that do not give off
sparks.

Some might claim that all this Sufi emphasis upon love is only for the
Sufis and has nothing to do with the rest of Islamic society. Nothing
could be further from the truth, if one considers traditional Islamic
society and not modernist or “fundamentalist” circles. Poetry
celebrating the love and the yearning of the soul for God spread
throughout traditional society and was often memorized by ordinary men
and women who recited and still recite such verses with the deepest
feeling and existential identification rather than simply as literature
of historical significance.

Over forty years ago, when Lahore was still a beautiful garden city, I
remember visiting the tomb of the famous Sufi saint Mian Mir in the
fields outside the city, a sanctuary now surrounded by the horrid sprawl
of the once beautiful Lahore. It was nighttime, and I decided to take a
horsedrawn carriage called a tonga back to town. The driver appeared to
be very poor and was scantily dressed. At the beginning of our trip, he
greeted me with the Islamic greeting and asked me in Urdu where I was
from. I answered in Persian that I was from Persia. He became excited
and smiled. Then he began to recite God knows how many sublime Persian
poems of ‘At.t.ar, Rumi, H. afiz., and others on Divine Love and the
nostalgia of the soul for God, rendering all those poems as if he had
experienced what was described in them and had composed the poems
himself.

That example-riding in that carriage that night under the starry sky of
the Punjabi countryside listening to an illiterate tonga driver reciting
some of the most sublime mystical love poetry ever written, reciting
both from memory and from the center of his heart-shows how universal
the living reality of the love for God is in the Islamic spiritual
universe.

This love uses the sublime language of Sufi poets, but this poetry
speaks for all those Muslims, technically Sufi and non-Sufi alike, who
are aware of God’s Love for His creation, those whose own love for God,
hidden within the very primordial substance of their souls, has begun to
stir and the steed of whose souls has turned in the direction of that
spiritual homeland from which they have come and to which they yearn to
return.

### PEACE

###

If one walks along the Ganges River in Benares, one keeps hearing the
phrase “Shanti, shanti, shanti,” meaning “Peace, peace, peace,” and when
one sees Jews greeting each other, one hears “Shalom” and from Muslims
“Salam,” while for nearly two millennia the chant of “Pacem, pacem,
pacem” has reverberated in the houses of worship dedicated to the figure
known as the Prince of Peace.

There is no major religion that does not emphasize peace, although only
small groups such as the Quakers or Mennonites could afford to be
pacifists. All the major religions preach peace, yet have to face
occasions when war has become inevitable for one reason or another.
Christ spoke of turning the other cheek, yet for centuries in Europe
major and minor wars were fought in the name of Christianity or a
particular brand of Christianity.

And yet in the West Islam is often singled out as being warlike and the
“religion of the sword” in contrast primarily to Christianity as the
religion of peace. Although such a major spiritual text of Hinduism as
the Bhagavad Gita was revealed in the middle of a battlefield and the
Old Testament has many more passages dealing with war than the Quran,
among many Christians the opprobrium against religious war is generally
saved for Islam. As this book is being written, some Filipinos are
writing about how peaceful Christianity is in contrast to Islam by
conveniently forgetting that, according to Spanish chronicles, when the
Spaniards invaded the Philippines they defeated the Islamic sultanate,
with its seat in Manila, and then slaughtered tens of thousands of
Muslims, forcing the rest of those they were able to conquer to convert
to Catholicism, as they had done to Jews and Muslims in Spain. Moreover,
in the West the spread of Islam is associated with the “sword,” while
hardly anyone ever mentions the brutal manner in which northern
Europeans were forcefully converted to Christianity and the older
European religions destroyed. Even the Crusades, carried out in the name
of Christianity, did not succeed in changing the Western image of Islam
as the “religion of the sword” and Christianity as the religion of
peace.

It is true that the sacred history of Islam begins as an epic with the
rapid spread of the Arabs outside of Arabia in an event that changed
world history forever. But this rapid expansion did not mean forced
conversion of Jews, Christians, Zoroastrians, or others. In Persia three
hundred years after Muslim rule much of the country was still
Zoroastrian, and the province of Mazandaran by the Caspian Sea did not
embrace Islam until the tenth

century. In most areas Islamization was a gradual process. The history
of Islam, like that of Judaism and Hinduism, is intertwined with a
sacred epic, but that does not mean that Islam is any more or less the
“religion of the sword” or the “religion of peace” than any other
religion.

Since this accusation against Islam as the “religion of the sword” has
continued in the modern West, which has fought more deadly wars than any
other civilization, contemporary Muslims have usually developed a
defensive attitude and simply respond that the very name Islam is
related to the word salam, which means “peace.” This response is,
however, not sufficient. They need to point out that, since the goal of
all authentic religions is to reach God Who is Peace and the Source of
all peace, Islam also aims to lead its followers to the “Abode of Peace”
and to create peace to the degree possible in a world full of
disequilibrium, tension, and affliction. Furthermore, Islam has sought
to limit war by legislating conditions pertaining to it, as will be
discussed in the next chapter, and succeeded during the fourteen
centuries of its history in reaching the goal of creating inner peace to
a remarkable degree, while in the creation of outward peace it was
certainly no less successful than any of the other major traditional
civilizations such as the Japanese, Chinese, Hindu, or Christian. It is
high time to put aside this curious historical characterization of Islam
in a West that has carried out wars over the five continents often in
the name of Christianity and even eradicated whole ethnic groups with
impunity because they were not Christians.

It is easy for Muslims and Christians, or for that matter Hindus,
Confucians, or Buddhists, to point to episodes of war in the history of
other religions. The history of all societies, whether religious or
secular, is replete with such examples, because human beings contain in
their fallen state the seeds of strife and contention and take recourse
in aggression and war, using for their cause whatever idea or ideology
has the power to move people. When most Westerners were devout
Christians, it was Christianity that was the banner under which wars
were fought, and when religion became weak, nationalism, Fascism,
Communism, and other ideologies as well as economic interests took its
place. In the Islamic world, because religion remains a powerful force,
its name is still used in support of whatever causes arise that lead to
contention and conflict, although the Quran emphasizes that war must be
only for defense of one’s homeland and religion and not be offensive and
aggressive. When we return to the teachings that are at the heart of all
authentic religions, however, we see that the role of each religion is
to seek to bring about peace and to accentuate those religious teachings
that emphasize both heavenly and earthly accord, harmony, and peace.
Seen in this light, it becomes clear how central in fact the emphasis on
peace is in the teachings of Islam as traditionally understood.

Everyone today speaks of the need for peace, thanks partly to modern
military technology, which has brought the horrors of war to a level
inconceivable to even the most warlike people of old. But there is also
an innate yearning for peace in the soul of human beings that is
certainly not derived from experience. Even those who have never
experienced peace

yearn for it. One might therefore ask why people seek peace. Islamic
teachings have a clear answer to this question, one that clarifies the
concept and reality of peace in the Islamic context. In the Quran God
refers to Himself as al-Salam, or Peace, so that one could, as a Muslim,
say that God is Peace and our yearning for peace is nothing more than
our yearning for God. Deep down in our primordial nature there is still
the recollection of the peace we experienced when we bore witness to
God’s Lordship in pre-eternity before our fall into this world of
forgetfulness. Through a process we might liken to Platonic
recollection, we still recall now and then that peace that Christ said
“passeth all understanding.”

For Muslims, only religion is able to take us back to the “Abode of
Peace,” which is ultimately paradisal reality and Divine Presence. “God
guideth him who seeketh His good pleasure unto paths of peace” (5:16).
Over and over again the Quran identifies peace with the paradisal
states: “And they call upon the dwellers of paradise: Peace be unto you”
(7:46); the phrase “peace be unto you” is also the Muslim greeting
taught by the Prophet as the greeting of the people of paradise. “In
paradise there is not idle chatter but only the invocation of peace”
(19:62). “‘Peace’-such is the greeting from the Lord All-Compassionate”
(36:58). In paradise there is “naught but the saying ‘peace, peace’”
(56:26).

Precisely because it is a celestial quality, peace is not easy to attain
either outwardly or inwardly. To have outward peace, one must be at
peace with oneself, and to be at peace with oneself, one must be at
peace with God. Human beings have been created in the “form” of God,
according to the*hadith* already cited. Therefore every element of the
soul is of some value. The problem is that the soul of the fallen human
being has become chaotic, and various elements are no longer in their
proper place. The great plays of Shakespeare can be understood as
depicting this inner drama of the soul. In Hamlet, all is not well in
the kingdom of Denmark, and the situation has become chaotic because no
one is in his or her right place. The kingdom of Denmark is our soul,
within which matters have to be put straight and elements put in their
right place before harmony and peace can be established. But it is
impossible for the soul to achieve this task by itself. It needs the
help of Heaven. Like other spiritual traditions, Islam insists that
without surrender to God (taslim, which has the same root as peace,
salam), we cannot attain peace, and without peace within ourselves there
can be no external peace.

In the general discussion of peace today this hierarchy is often
forgotten. Secularized men and women, for whom the spiritual world has
become unreal, limit their vision of reality to the earth and life in
this world; so they naturally want to live in peace and avoid the
dangers of war and strife. But this talk of peace goes on while modern
society is carrying out a brutal war against the natural environment and
while, within human society, competition based on greed often eclipses
compassion and the sense of social responsibility. Consequently,
although there is no global war today, smaller wars, local strife, and
acts of terror abound around the globe, not to mention the continuing
economic and ecological warfare going on against nature in the name and
under the banner of peace and prosperity.

From the Islamic point of view, since Peace (al-Salam) is a Name of God
and all peace is a reflection of that Divine Name, the question can be
asked why God should allow humanity to live at peace in the
forgetfulness of Him, negligent of the goal for which men and women were
created.

For Muslims, the idea of living at peace while denying God is totally
absurd, because only God can put the chaos and strife within the human
soul in order, and when there is no peace within, there will be no peace
without. Islamic teachings contain many injunctions for settling
disputes between people and nations with the aim of establishing peace.
But the highest goal of Islam is to lead the soul to the “Abode of
Peace” by guiding us to live a virtuous life and to establish inner
harmony with the help of Heaven.

For Islam, as for all authentic traditions, the goal of religion is to
save the human soul and consequently establish justice and peace in
society so that people can live virtuously and live and die “in peace,”
which in the deepest sense means in the blessed state that leads to the
experience of celestial peace. In Buddhism, the spiritual practices that
lead to escape from samsara and entry into nirvana on the basis of the
doctrine of no-self represent another perspective of the same reality.
Buddhism is there to save its followers from samsara and the wheel of
rebirth, suffering, and death, as other religions are there to save
their adherents from the world. Islam has been there to remind its
followers over the ages that there is no possibility of peace on earth
without peace with Heaven, and today it is called upon to also assert
that peace with Heaven requires, as never before, peace between the
messages that, through Divine Wisdom, have descended from Heaven over
the ages. As Rumi has said, If thou fleest with the hope of peace and
comfort, From that side thou shalt be afflicted with misfortune.

There is no treasure without wild beasts and traps, There is no peace
except in the spiritual retreat of God.3

When speaking of peace, one should never forget the famous Quranic
verse, “He it is who made the Divine Peace (al-sakinah) to descend in
the hearts of believers” (48:4). Whether one speaks of sakinah, or the
Hebrew equivalent*shekinah* , or for that matter pacem or shanti, the
reality emphasized by Islam remains that the source of peace is God Who
is Himself Peace and without Whom there can be no peace on earth.

### BEAUTY

###

Like compassion, love, and peace, beauty is seen as a Divine Quality in
Islam, one of God’s Names being al-Jamil, the Beautiful. Furthermore,
according to the*hadith* quoted at the beginning of this chapter, God
loves beauty, meaning that the qualities of beauty and love are
intertwined on the Divine plane. And this reality is reflected on the
human plane as well by the fact that our soul loves what it perceives as
beautiful and sees as beautiful what it loves. Beauty also has the power
of radiation and emanation and shares therefore a basic characteristic
with compassion and mercy. Furthermore, beauty brings about
collectedness and helps the scattered elements of the soul gather
together in a state of calm. Beauty is therefore also related to peace
and has a remarkable pacifying power over the soul, a quality that is
essential to Islamic spirituality, as reflected so clearly in Islamic
art.

But what is beauty? In the Islamic universe, as in other traditional
worlds, beauty is not simply a subjective state existing only “in the
eye of the beholder,” although each human being usually has the capacity
to appreciate certain kinds of beauty and not others. Beauty is a
dimension of reality itself, and throughout the ages Islamic
philosophers and mystics have confirmed in their own terms the Platonic
dictum “Beauty is the splendor of the truth.” Now, the Arabic word
haqiqah means both “truth” and “reality” and the*Divine Name al-Haqq*
indicates the union of the two in God Who is both the Truth in its
absolute sense, the Truth that makes us free, as Christ asserted, and
absolute Reality.

Metaphysically speaking, since God is both Truth and Reality, He could
not but be beautiful. As the Sufis would say, ultimately all beauty is
the radiation on a particular level of reality of the Beauty of the Face
of the Beloved.

One might say that Islam is the religion of beauty, which it never
separates from goodness. In today’s world, goodness and beauty have
become separated from each other, and even religious people inclined
toward the good often consider beauty a luxury. Some modern religious
thinkers in the West have even developed a “cult of ugliness,” the
result of which is a large number of horrendously ugly churches to be
seen especially in some Catholic countries, where one also finds the
most beautiful manifestations of Christian architecture. Needless to
say, this “cult of ugliness” has now also spread to the Islamic world,
which knows many mosques that are in no way behind their Western
counterparts in ugliness. They do not, however, represent Islamic art or
thought but simply external influences.

In any case, in the traditional Islamic perspective beauty and goodness
are inseparable. In fact, in Arabic the word husn means both “beauty”
and “goodness,” while*qubh* . means both “ugliness” and “evil.”

One might say that goodness corresponds to the outer dimension and
beauty to the inner dimension of things, not that there is no outward
beauty or inward goodness. There is a very telling saying in connection
with this question that also clarifies the complementarity between the
male and female, or yin and yang, which are seen cosmologically and
spiritually as well as on the human level. It is said in Islam that a
woman’s beauty is outward and her goodness inward, while a man’s
goodness is outward and his beauty inward. Like the yin and yang, which
complement each other and together make the perfect circle associated
with the Tao, beauty and goodness complement and are inseparable from
each other. In the Islamic perspective the role of religion is not only
to teach the practice of goodness, but also to disseminate beauty on all
its levels, spiritual, intellectual, and physical.

It is said in Buddhism that the Buddha image saves souls through its
beauty. One might say, likewise, that the very beauty of Quranic
recitation is salvific. In traditional Islamic society one never hears
the Word of God except in beautiful chanting, which moves the very depth
of the soul of even those Muslims who do not know Arabic and do not
comprehend the message of what is recited. The same holds true for the
writing of the

Quran, which is the fountainhead of all Islamic calligraphy. From the
earliest days, the Sacred Text was written in beautiful calligraphy, and
certainly throughout the centuries the most beautiful books produced in
any generation of Muslims have been the Quran. In the eyes and ears of
Muslims the central theophany of their religion, namely the Quran, has
always been associated with beauty, as have sites and structures
associated with religious matters. Nor has this emphasis upon the link
between beauty and the sacred been unique to Islam. Before modern times
the most beautiful art of all civilizations was the sacred art
associated directly with the rites and practices of religion, as seen in
Gothic cathedrals, Torah scrolls, Hindu and Buddhist temples, and
various types of icons, not to mention the sonoral arts of music and
poetry.

It might be asked why, if Islam can be called the religion of beauty,
religious thinkers, Islamic as well as Jewish and Christian, have also
warned that the soul can be ensnared by beauty and distracted from God,
and why some great mystics have avoided having or being surrounded by
beautiful objects. The answer is that precisely because beauty is a
powerfully attractive theophany, or visible manifestation, of the Divine
Reality, it has the power to draw the soul to itself and can cause some
to mistake that theophany for the Origin of all theophanies. It is
precisely beauty’s ability to attract the soul that makes it a
double-edged sword. Beauty is at once a royal path to God and an
impediment to reaching God if it is taken as a god in itself. One might
say that if there were no beauty in this world, there would be no
worldly distraction for the soul and every soul would be drawn only to
God. In a sense the spiritual life would not be a challenge and the
grandeur of the human state would itself be diminished. What makes the
spiritual quest heroic is precisely that the soul must learn to distance
itself from the worldly, which nevertheless appeals to it as attractive
and beautiful, in order to reach the Source of all beauty.

It is here that the element of asceticism comes in, for Islam as for
other religions. In order to see earthly beauty as a ladder to Divine
Beauty, it is first of all necessary for the soul to pull its roots from
this world and plant them in God. Hence the necessity of ascetic
practice and spiritual discipline. There is no religious law and
spiritual path that does not contain at least some ascetic practices. In
Islam, although excessive asceticism as practiced by certain monks or
yogis is not acceptable, asceticism and spiritual selfdiscipline
certainly exist, as one sees in the prayers and the fast. Through the
disciplines of the*Shari‘ah* , the soul is prepared to accept further
spiritual discipline and embark upon the spiritual path that leads to
God, where the source of attraction that makes this journey possible is
beauty and love. There is also, of course, in addition, the spiritual
and initiatic power (wilayah/walayah) transmitted through the Prophet to
all later generations of Muslims who have sought and still seek to
behold even in this life the incomparable beauty of the Face of the
Origin of all beauty. For the realized sages, all beauty is the
reflection of Divine Beauty. The soul of such persons has passed beyond
the danger of being ensnared by the reflection of Beauty from beholding
the Beautiful. For such persons no earthly beauty can become an obstacle
to God. On the contrary, every form of beauty here

below offers the occasion for the recollection of the Beauty of God and
the remembrance of beholding the Beauty of His Countenance in our
preeternal encounter with our Lord when we attested, according to the
Quran, to His Lordship.

Islamic thought and artistic sensibility have always associated beauty
with reality and ugliness with nonexistence.

Today, it has become fashionable for many to seek the ugly and the evil
and to parade them as the real, while the beautiful and the good are
cast aside as being irrelevant, secondary, and ultimately unreal. For
example, the media often search and search to find some evil in a
person’s life and then exaggerate it to such an extent that the good and
the beautiful in that life are completely overshadowed.

Even in the photography and film used in the media, the ugly is often
more emphasized than the beautiful. The reign of the machine and the
creation by modern human beings of an artificial urban ambience cut off
from nature, which is overwhelmingly beautiful, have caused many to take
the ugly to be the norm and the real while beauty is seen as a luxury
for the rich. This is diametrically opposed to the Islamic perspective,
which has always been opposed to the “cult of ugliness” and has always
remembered that beauty, far from being a luxury, is as necessary for the
soul as the air we breathe is for the body. It is no accident that only
in those urban settings deprived of sacred and traditional art and the
harmony and beauty of nature have agnostics and atheists arisen and
thrived. Islamic civilization avoided this pitfall by creating an art
and architecture both beautiful and still in touch with nature and its
underlying rhythms and harmonies.

Wherever it went, throughout its history, Islam created an atmosphere of
beauty. According to a hadith, “God hath written beauty upon the face of
all things.” The mission of Islam has always been to guide the soul to
God both through the Divine Law and the creation of art through which
the beauty written by God on the face of things would be unveiled. There
has never been an authentic expression of Islam without beauty, and one
could even say that the criterion of beauty can be used along with that
of the truth to judge the authenticity of the claims of any movement
today that seeks to use the name of and identify itself with Islam. The
Quranic verse “God is with the good” (29:69) can also be translated “God
is with those enmeshed in beauty.”

THE SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE OF ISLAMIC ART
-----------------------------------------

One cannot speak of beauty in the Islamic context without saying
something about Islamic art and its spiritual and religious
significance. Since Islam seeks to embrace all of life, it had to create
its own art just as it brought forth the Divine Law. Now, human beings
both act and make. The*Shari‘ah* concerns the plane of action, while
Islamic art is concerned with the principles and methods of the making
of things.

Both Islamic art and Islamic Law derive from the Quranic revelation and
the*Sunnah* of the Prophet, but they do so in different ways.
The*Shari‘ah* is based on the legal aspects of the revelation and the
literal and outward meaning of the Quran and Sunnah, while Islamic art
is derived from the haqiqah, or inner truth, of these sources. As in
other major traditions such as Christianity, Hinduism, and Buddhism, the
sacred art of Islam is related to its very essence and heart. If one
wants to understand what Christianity is, all one needs to do is to go
inside Chartres Cathedral and behold the sacred space and forms that
surround the observer.

Or what better explanation of Japanese Buddhism than the Golden Temple
in Kyoto? Once a European asked Titus Burckhardt, who more than any
other Westerner has succeeded in revealing the meaning and spiritual
significance of Islamic art, what Islam was. He answered, “Go and see
the Ibn T. ulun Mosque in Cairo.” He could have said the same of many
other masterpieces of Islamic architecture, from the Mezquita in Cordova
to the Qayrawan Mosque in Tunis to the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem or
the Shah Mosque in Isfahan and the Sult.an Ah.mad Mosque in Istanbul.

For Westerners sensitive to art, Islamic art is in fact one of the best
means of understanding the heart of Islam. The metaphysical reason why
something in the material world made of brick, stucco, or stone can play
such a role is that, according to the famous Hermetic saying, “That
which is lowest symbolizes that which is highest.” By virtue of
belonging to the physical level of reality, the plastic and sonoral arts
are able to symbolize and reflect the highest level of reality, which is
the Divine Realm. Far from being something peripheral, Islamic art is a
central manifestation of the Islamic religion. It not only plays a
decisive and essential role in the life of Muslims, but is also a key
for the understanding of the deepest dimensions of Islam, if one is
willing to seek beyond mere formal appearances.

In Arabic the words used for art are fann and s.ina‘ah.

The second word, like the original Greek term techne and the Latin ars,
means simply to make something according to the correct principles. The
first means the know-how in doing or making anything correctly and must
be combined with wisdom, or hikmah, to become operative as art. In
traditional Islamic society art was life itself and not a particular
activity, and everything from sewing to cooking to playing music or
composing poetry had its own fann. Once A. K. Coomaraswamy, the great
twentieth-century Indian expert on traditional metaphysics and art, said
that in modern society the artist is a special kind of person, while in
traditional society every person is a special kind of artist. This
observation holds completely true for traditional Islamic society as
well, where no distinction was made between

fine arts and industrial arts or major and minor arts or religious and
secular art. Everything was marked by the seal of Islamic spirituality.

Of course, each civilization has its own hierarchy of arts based on the
formal structure of the religion that created that civilization. For
example, in the West the highest form of art has been painting because
of the centrality of the icon in Christianity. In contrast, there is no
iconic presentation in Islamic art, since Islam, like Judaism, prohibits
the painting or sculpture of the image of the Divine and its sacred art
is aniconic. For Islam the highest art is, as in Christianity, related
to the Word of God, which for Islam, however, is not a person named
Christ, but a book known as the Quran. The writing of the Word of God,
that is, calligraphy, and chanting of it, that is, Quranic psalmody,
stand at the top of the hierarchy of the arts. Next comes architecture,
essentially of the mosque, but also extending to other forms, where the
Word of God in the form of the chanting of the Quran reverberates. The
art of dress, both male and female, follows, because after our body
nothing is as close to our soul as the clothing we wear. Much of the
artistic creativity of Muslims went into the art of the dress based on
the modesty ordained by the Quran, the theomorphic nature of the human
being and its sacerdotal function in the world, and the sharp
distinction between the complementary functions of men and women,
including the complementary nature of the beauty belonging to each
gender.

After dress come the articles of the house, the so-called minor arts,
such as carpets, textiles, utensils, and the like, which affect the soul
much more than paintings hanging on the walls of palaces or museums do.
Then there is the art of the book, which includes paintings usually
called miniatures. These were originally illustrations for various
scientific, literary, and historical texts, but later developed as
refined Persian miniatures, which reached their peak of perfection from
the fourteenth to the sixteenth centuries.

The Persian miniature also led later to the Ottoman and Moghul schools
of miniature painting.

Although some Persian miniatures are among the great masterpieces of
world art and Islamic paintings in general are deeply appreciated in the
West, painting as a whole does not occupy the same position in Islamic
art as it does in Western art. But that does not mean that all forms of
painting were prohibited in Islam. What is forbidden is the painting or
sculpture of the Divine and of the Prophet.

Furthermore, Islam opposes a naturalistic art that would seek to imitate
God’s creation without being able to breathe life into it; hence the
almost complete lack of the art of sculpture in Islam. The few lions or
other animals that do appear in some gardens are highly stylized. As a
whole, Islamic piety tries to avoid setting before believers any images
that might become idols or negatively affect the imaginative faculty.
Therefore, there are no images of any kind in any mosques or other
places of worship, and the Quran and*Hadith* are never illustrated. The
prohibition of nonnaturalistic paintings has been strongest historically
among Arabs, who as Semites are in greater danger of confusing image and
idol than most other ethnic groups.

Among Persians, Turks, Indian Muslims, Malays, and Black Africans the
prohibition has not been as strict. In modern times, of course, there
are painters everywhere, including in the Arab world, but most modern
paintings, even if they are sometimes inspired by traditional Islamic
themes and motifs, are not really Islamic art, but Westerninspired art
executed by artists who are Muslims.

A word must also be said about music and poetry, both of which are
sonoral arts and must be considered separately from the hierarchy listed
above. Although the Quran is poetry of the highest quality and
eloquence, it is not called poetry in the usual sense; in fact, in one
of the Quranic chapters entitled “The Poets” it is said, “As for the
poets, the erring follows them” (26:224). But this criticism was cast
not against poetry in general, but rather against the influential poets
of pre-Islamic Mecca, soothsayers who would compose poetry for any
patron without being concerned with the truth (although their poetry was
of a very high quality). In fact, as a result of the impact of the
Quran, poetry became a highly appreciated art in Islam, and major works
of poetry appeared in Arabic, Persian, Turkish, and other Islamic
languages, some of which are among the greatest masterpieces of world
literature. Wherever Islam has gone, poetry has flourished, and to this
day poetry is very much alive as a major cultural force in nearly every
Islamic society, where it plays a much more central role culturally,
religiously, and socially than it does in America and in most European
countries today.

Many Westerners have heard that music is forbidden in Islam and may have
even heard Muslim individuals from certain religious backgrounds express
the same opinion. Yet the Quran, whose psalmody is the supreme sonoral
sacred art in Islam, and the call to prayer are chanted musically
throughout the Islamic world, and if one turns on the radio in a country
such as the Islamic Republic of Iran one will hear the most sublime
pieces of classical Persian music played throughout the day. The
question of the legality of music in Islam is a complex one and the
Quran, it seems providentially, did not leave specific injunctions
concerning it. However, on the basis of the*Sunnah* of the Prophet and
the general tenor of the teachings of the Quran, music developed
differently than it did in the West. First of all, for the chanting of
the Quran and other liturgies the Arabic term musiqa, which is derived
from the same Greek word that is the origin of the English word “music,”
has never been used. Moreover, the chanting of the Quran is always done
only with the human voice, and musical instruments are not allowed in
mosques. In the early history of Christianity also the use of
instruments was forbidden in sacred music, as we see with Gregorian
chant. Second, certain kinds of music, such as music played at weddings,
for the march of caravans, and for military expeditions, were allowed
explicitly by the Prophet and in fact the earliest Western military
bands were based on Ottoman models.

We even have Mozart’s famous “Turkish March.” As for other forms of
music, what incited the passions toward evil acts was forbidden, and the
door was left open for the development of the spiritual music that came
to be cultivated by the Sufis over the centuries.

Several decades ago the world-famous violinist Yehudi Menuhin came to
Tehran, and we arranged for him to hear classical Persian music for the
first time. After listening to the concert he said, “This music is the
ladder between the soul and God.” Being the great musician and human
being that he was, he detected immediately the spiritual quality of this
classical musical tradition, a quality also shared by classical Arabic,
Turkish, Muslim Indian, and other traditions as far away as the
Sundanese music of Java. The famous theologian and Sufi al-Ghazzali
wrote that music intensifies the passions within the soul. If the
passion is directed toward God, it makes this passion more powerful and
increases the fire of love for God; and if there exists passion for
worldliness, it increases the soul’s worldliness and tendency toward
concupiscence. Islam was fully aware of this reality and limited
exteriorized forms of music in favor of interiorized music, which
increases the love for God, is the means of recollection of paradisal
realities, and intensifies the upward currents that help the wings of
the soul to fly to its original celestial homeland.

The traditions of music in the Islamic world are among the richest in
the world. Over the ages they have not only enriched the lives of
numerous Muslims and played an important role in Sufi practice, they
have also influenced Western music in many ways. Whenever I hear
flamenco music I feel as if I were hearing classical Arabic or Persian
music. The Western lute was adapted from the Arabic ‘ud, as the name
itself reveals, and the guitar is the child of the Persian tar. Today
there is much interest in the Islamic musical traditions in the West, in
a musical language that speaks of the deepest realities of Islam without
the use of alien theological categories.

In recent years many heard of the Taliban’s banning of music in
Afghanistan, a land that has always been a treasurehouse for several
musical traditions in the Islamic world.

But this ban was far from being a common norm in Islamic history.
Rather, it was like certain bans imposed in the past by strict
Protestant groups on certain forms of art, including music, in the West.
In the traditional Islamic world, one always heard and still hears to a
large extent the sound of spiritual songs*(nashid)* in Egypt; the ney of
the Mawlawis in Turkey; the tar and santur playing the dastgahs, or
systems of classical Persian music, in Persia; the Andalusian orchestra
in Morocco; the qawwali (made famous in the West by Nus.rat Fatih. ‘Ali
Khan) in Pakistan and Muslim India; rhythmic drumbeats in Muslim Black
Africa; and many other forms of spiritual music that permeated the air
and accompanied throughout their lives those sensitive to the melodies
and harmonies of music. Far from being un-Islamic, as some have claimed,
the art of music in the Islamic world is one of the most powerful and
universal means of expressing what lies at the heart of the Islamic
message, which is the realization of the beauty of the Divine Face and
surrender to that Reality which is at once Beauty and Peace, Compassion
and Love.

Islamic art in its many forms is of the greatest import for the
understanding of the essence of Islam and a central means of
transmitting its message to the contemporary world. When one thinks of
Islam, one should go beyond the repetitive scenes on television of wars
and battles, which

unfortunately abound in today’s world, to behold the peace and harmony
of Islamic art seen in the great mosques, traditional urban settings and
gardens, and the rhythm and geometry of calligraphy and arabesque
designs; read in the poems that sing of the love that permeates all of
God’s creation and binds creatures to God; and heard in the strains of
melodies that echo what we had experienced in that primordial morn
preceding creation and our descent into this lowly world. Today more
than ever before, the understanding of Islamic art is an indispensable
key for the comprehension of Islam itself. Those who are sensitive to
the language of traditional art and the beauty of a paradisal order that
emanates from it as well as the intellectual principles conveyed through
it can learn much from this art.

IHSAN: VIRTUOUS BEAUTY, BEAUTIFUL VIRTUE
----------------------------------------

The highest form of beauty in this world is the beauty of the human
soul, which is related to ihsan, a term that means at once beauty,
goodness, and virtue. To possess ihsan is to have the virtues of
generosity and love and to live at peace in one’s Center, where God
resides. The Quran states, “Surely We created man in the best of
stature” (90:4). The word “best” in this verse is ah. san, which comes
from the same root as ihsan and also means “beauty.” The verse could
therefore also be translated as “in the most beautiful stature.” To
embellish the soul with beauty, or ihsan, through spiritual practice is
therefore to realize the original beauty of the soul and to return it to
its primordial state of “the most beautiful stature.” To gain and
practice ihsan is also to respond with the beauty of one’s soul to the
Creator, Who is called the best or most beautiful of creators in the
Quran (23:14) and to Whom belong the most beautiful Names (7:180). Even
the famous Quranic verse “Is the reward of goodness ought save
goodness*(ihsan)* ?” (55:60) can also be understood to mean “Is the
reward of beauty but beauty?” Is the reward of the soul beautified
through ihsan but the Beauty of the One?

The goal of human life is to beautify the soul through goodness and
virtue and to make it worthy of offering to God Who is the Beautiful.
Those who possess ihsan think through ihsan and act and create with
ihsan. Their thoughts are based on the truth of which beauty is the aura
and splendor, their actions are always based on ihsan as goodness, and
what they create reflects the beauty of the object “written by God upon
its face” as well as the beauty of the soul of the artisan. To possess
ihsan is to be open to the Divine Compassion and Mercy and to be
compassionate toward others. It is to love God and His creation in Him.
It is to live at peace in the Center of one’s being in a state of
equilibrium and harmony with the worlds within and without. And it is to
be immersed in beauty on all its levels of manifestation, beauty that
liberates us from the confinements of earthly existence and ultimately
immerses us in the ocean of Divine Infinitude. To realize ihsan is,
according to the already quoted*hadith* of Gabriel, to worship God as if
we were to see Him, and if we were not to see Him, He would see us. It
is therefore to live in Divine Intimacy, where the perfume and vision of
God’s Compassion, Love, Peace, and Beauty are most evident. The person
who has realized ihsan is fully aware of the centrality of the qualities
of compassion and love, peace and beauty in the Islamic spiritual
universe and is able to see with the inner eye the verse written on the
Divine Throne, “Verily My Mercy and Compassion precede My Wrath.”
