CHAPTER SEVEN: HUMAN RESPONSIBILITIES AND HUMAN RIGHTS
======================================================

***He it is who produceth gardens. . Eat ye of the fruit thereof when it
fruiteth, and pay the due thereof upon the harvest day.***

***Quran 6:141***

*Let me free so that like the Sun I shall wear a robe of fire, And
within that fire like a Sun to adorn the world.*

*Rumi*

*But is it always man who “chooses”? And who then is this “man who
chooses”? Where is his limit and his center?*

*If it is man who defines himself, what objective value can be attached
to this definition? And if there is no objective value, no transcendent
criterion, why think?*

*If it is enough to be a man in order to be in the right, why seek to
refer to human error?*

*Frithjof Schuon*

TO BE HUMAN
-----------

Before speaking of human responsibilities or rights, one must answer the
basic religious and philosophical question, “What does it mean to be
human?” In today’s world everyone speaks of human rights and the sacred
character of human life, and many secularists even claim that they are
the true champions of human rights as against those who accept various
religious worldviews. But strangely enough, often those same champions
of humanity believe that human beings are nothing more than evolved
apes, who in turn evolved from lower life forms and ultimately from
various compounds of molecules. If the human being is nothing but the
result of “blind forces” acting upon the original cosmic soup of
molecules, then is not the very statement of the sacredness of human
life intellectually meaningless and nothing but a hollow sentimental
expression? Is not human dignity nothing more than a conveniently
contrived notion without basis in reality? And if we are nothing but
highly organized inanimate particles, what is the basis for claims to
“human rights”? These basic questions know no geographic boundaries and
are asked by thinking people everywhere.

Christianity in the West has sought to answer them on the firm
theological basis that “human beings were created in the image of God”
and it is the immortal soul and the spark of the Spirit within men and
women that constitutes the basis for human dignity, the sacredness of
human life, and ultimately human rights. In fact, many Christian
thinkers, both Catholic and Protestant, as well as Jewish thinkers
insist that human dignity is based on the Divine Imprint upon the human
soul and that historically in the West the idea of human rights, even in
its secularized version, is derived from the religious conception of the
human state.

For Islam, likewise, human beings are defined in their relation to God,
and both their responsibilities and rights derive from that
relationship. As mentioned earlier, Islam believes that God breathed His
Spirit into Adam and according to the famous hadith, “God created Adam
in His form,” “form” meaning the reflection of God’s Names and
Qualities. Human beings therefore reflect the Divine Attributes like a
mirror, which reflects the light of the Sun. By virtue of being created
as this central being in the terrestrial realm, the human being was
chosen by God as His vicegerent (khalifat*Allah* ) as well as His
servant (‘abd*Allah* ). As servants human beings must remain in total
obedience to God and in perfect receptivity before what their Creator
wills for them. As vicegerents they must be active in the world to do
God’s Will here on earth. The Islamic conception of insan, or man, as
the anthropos encompassing both the male and female states, can be
summed up as the wedding of these two qualities in him.

But God has also given human beings free will; this means that they can
rebel against their own primordial nature and become active against
Heaven and passive to their own lower nature and the world of the
senses, so that not all human beings remain God’s servants and
vicegerents. In fact, the perfection of these passive and active modes
belongs to the prophets and saints alone. Nevertheless, all human beings
possess dignity, and their lives are sacred because of that primordial
nature, which all the progeny of Adam and Eve carry deep within
themselves.

Throughout Islamic history many philosophical, theological, and mystical
discussions have taken place about this issue, but one basic element
with which all schools of Islamic thought and in fact ordinary believers
agree is the truth that God is our creator, or, philosophically
speaking, the ontological cause of our existence. It is therefore we who
owe everything to Him and our rights derive from our fulfilling our
responsibilities toward Him and obeying His Will.

To understand our relation to God, we must first ask what God wants of
us. The Quran makes this demand clear when it states, “I have not
created the jinn and humanity except to worship Me” (51:56); also
“Verily I, I am God.

There is no God save Me. So worship Me and establish prayers for My
remembrance” (20:14). The word “worship” (‘ibadah) in Arabic also means
“service.” To worship God is also to serve Him. Many interpretations
have been given of the term ‘ibadah by commentators; its meaning ranges
from ordinary acts of worship to loving and knowing God. The purpose of
human existence is considered by Islam to be the worship and service of
God, and only in carrying out the aim and purpose of our existence are
we fully human. Otherwise, although we carry the human reality within
ourselves, we fall short of it and live beneath the fully human state.

HUMAN RESPONSIBILITIES
----------------------

Responsibility comes from the word “response,” and one might say, in the
Islamic context, that all of our responsibilities issue from that
original response to God, when, according to the Quran, before the
creation of the world God addressed all the children of Adam asking
them, “Am Human Responsibilities and Human Rights 277

I not your Lord?” and they said, “Yes” (7:172). In this affirmation lie
all our responsibilities as human beings, for in saying “yes” we
accepted the Divine Trust*(amanah)* , which we must bear in this world.
At the heart of this trust resides the affirmation of Divine Oneness and
acts of worship and service. The very word for servant (‘abd) of God is
related to the word for worship and service (‘ibadah). To accept to be
God’s servant and to represent Him in this world means, above all,
worshiping and serving Him. All the rights we have issue from the
fulfilling of our responsibilities, and in the Islamic perspective
responsibilities always precede rights. Although everyone these days
speaks all the time of human rights and little of human
responsibilities, in practice, even in the modern West, in many cases
responsibilities precede rights. For example, we have to be responsible
drivers before we are given the right to drive on public roads, and we
have to accept the responsibility of mastering the laws of the land
before being given the right to practice law. In Islam this relationship
is not a matter of expediency, but of principle, and its acceptance
dominates the cultural and intellectual landscape.

Now, we have responsibilities not only toward God, but also toward His
creation. Traditional religious texts, in fact, delineate a hierarchy of
responsibilities for human beings.

At the apex are our responsibilities and duties toward God through acts
of worship and service and obedience to His Law. Then there is the
responsibility one has toward oneself.

Since human life is sacred and is not created by us, we are responsible
for trying to keep our souls as well as bodies healthy and not causing
ourselves spiritual or physical harm (unless it is in battle or some
other cause for the welfare of others or in self-defense). Therefore, as
already stated, suicide is considered a grave sin in Islam. The modern
idea that “This is my body and I can do whatever I want with it” is
totally absent from the Islamic perspective; Islam states, “My body is
not mine, for I did not create it- it belongs to God.” Responsibility to
ourselves also, of course, involves our soul and mind. Our greatest
responsibility to ourselves is, in fact, to try to save our soul and to
be good. This is not at all a selfish act, because one cannot do good
unless one is good, and to save one’s soul is also to introduce virtue
and goodness into the ambience in which we live. We also have the
responsibility to our minds to seek knowledge and the truth to the
extent possible.

Next in the hierarchy we have responsibility toward society, starting
with our family. This set of responsibilities ranges all the way from
working honestly to support ourselves and our families, to performing
acts of charity, to respecting others and strengthening community bonds,
to supporting and sustaining all that is positively creative in human
society. The vast spectrum

of these social responsibilities is delineated in traditional works on
the*Shari‘ah* and ethics and cannot be enumerated here. Furthermore, the
world around us is not limited to the human sphere-

we also have responsibilities toward animals and plants and even
inanimate parts of nature such as water, air, and soil.

This latter set of responsibilities involves what modern Western writers
now refer to as environmental ethics. Our rights on all different levels
derive from the acceptance of our responsibilities, which precede our
rights in a principial manner. To flout responsibilities in the name of
inalienable rights is not at all within the Islamic perspective and is
considered putting the cart before the horse.

The question arises, however, about those who do not fulfill their
responsibilities. Do they then have no rights? In everyday life in
society it is not difficult to provide an  answer. If we do not fulfill
our responsibilities at work, we will be fired and have no right to
receive a salary, or if we have too many traffic violations, which means
that we are irresponsible drivers, our license and right to drive will
be taken away. The question becomes more difficult in the modern context
when we refer to that first category of responsibilities, that is, our
duties and responsibilities toward God. In modern society, the rights of
citizens do not change whether those citizens fulfill their
responsibilities toward God or even believe in God or not.

Some in the West have contrasted this state of affairs with the
situation in the Islamic world and claim that, from the Islamic point of
view, such persons would have no rights. This assertion is, however, not
at all true. If certain Muslims fall into religious and intellectual
doubt even about God’s existence, their right to the protection of their
life and property by society still remains as long as they do not try to
impose their views on others or act against social norms and laws. Even
if they hold philosophical discussions on such matters, their basic
rights cannot be removed.

Needless to say, throughout Islamic history some have been imprisoned or
occasionally even put to death for theological and religious reasons,
but usually their situation has involved a political dimension, and in
any case such occurrences have been much rarer in Islamic history than
in Western history. The usual Islamic theological and juridical
reasoning followed for the protection of such people is that as long as
a person is alive, he or she may always come back to God, and that
therefore the life of such a person must be protected like any other. As
for performing acts of worship, that is between each individual and God,
and Islamic society cannot force anyone to carry out acts of worship.
What is expected of everyone is to observe the*Shari‘ah* as law in
public and as it concerns others and not to break religious injunctions
publicly; this is analogous to prohibitions in the Christian or even
post-Christian West against performing acts against public morality.

HUMAN RIGHTS
------------

It is only in light of this understanding of human responsibilities that
the question of human rights must be considered.

To comprehend the meaning of human rights in the Islamic context, it is
essential to ask how Muslims refer to the concept of “rights” and what
they understand by it. In Arabic the basic term for “right” is haqq,
which is first of all a Name of God, who is al-H. aqq, that is, Truth
and Reality.

The term haqq also possesses the meaning of “duty” as well as “right,”
obligation as well as claim, law as well as justice.

It means also what is due to each thing, what gives reality to a thing,
what makes a thing be true. Its derivative form, ih. qaq, means to win
one’s rights in a court of law, while another derivative, tah. qiq,
means not only to ascertain the truth of something, but on the highest
level to embody the truth. The term haqq, which is one of the richest in
the Arabic language, involves God, the Quran (which is also called al-h.
aqq), law, our responsibilities before God and His Law, as well as our
rights and just claims.

Everything by virtue of the fact that it exists has its haqq, which
means both responsibilities to God and rights. Each thing has its due by
virtue of the nature with which it has been created. Rights do not
belong to human beings alone, but to all creatures. Today, as a result
of an emphasis of human rights over the rights of other creatures, we
are rapidly destroying the natural environment, and as a result people
now speak of animal or plant rights. This latter perspective  is
perfectly in accord with the Islamic view, according to which rights are
not the prerogative of the human state alone, but belong to all
creatures. In the deepest sense “rights” means to give each being,
including ourselves as human beings, its due (h. aqq).

Turning to the more specific question of human rights as currently
understood in the West, according to Islam human beings have rights that
are directly related to the responsibilities they have accepted as God’s
servants and vicegerents on earth. These rights range from the religious
and personal to the legal, social, and political. The first rights of
human beings concern their immortal souls. Men and women have the right
to seek the salvation of their souls, which Islam, like other religions,
considers our first duty toward ourselves and toward God, to Whom we
must offer our souls. This right means the freedom of conscience in
religious matters. God does not wish to compel His creatures to believe
in Him, but wants them to do so on the basis of their own free will and
conscience. To obey the laws of society is one thing, but to be coerced
to have faith is quite another. The great drama of every human soul to
accept or reject the call of Heaven is inseparable from the human state
itself, and Islam, while emphasizing our duties to God, also emphasizes
our right and even duty to engage in this drama. No external authority
can take this right- and duty-away. Furthermore, the right to practice
one’s religion or not to, as long as the latter does not destroy social
norms and laws, is at the heart of the Islamic understanding of human
rights. The rights of non-Muslims to practice their religion is also
guaranteed by Islamic Law, as mentioned above, unless it is a
pseudo-religion or cult, which Islam has opposed as much as have

Christianity and other traditional religions. Needless to say, the
understanding of what constitutes an authentic religion and what
constitutes a cult is not the same in the traditional Islamic world and
in modern Europe and America, where many cults, some quite dangerous,
dot the landscape, but the principle of the right to the practice of
one’s religion, whether it is Islam itself or any of the other heavenly
inspired religions, is ingrained in the Islamic understanding of human
rights. Furthermore, in this crucial matter there is no difference
between men and women, who stand equal before God.

Next are personal rights pertaining to one’s life, property, personal
choices, and so forth. According to the principles of Islam, which have
not always been followed any more than have those of Christianity, every
human being has the right to life and the possession of property unless
he or she commits crimes, as a result of which society takes away
certain or all of these rights. Human beings also have the right of
choosing their personal way of living in such matters as what form of
livelihood to engage in, whom to marry, how to raise their family, where
to live, and so on.

Of course, in every society there are external constraints, including
economic ones, that do not always allow these rights to be fulfilled
according to one’s wishes, but the principles are there. For example, in
contrast to many premodern societies, Islamic society allowed each
individual according to the law to learn and practice whatever
profession he or she wanted and in practice could follow.

Likewise, according to Islamic Law both women and men have the right to
choose their spouse. Now, in practice there have often been family
pressures and economic and other considerations that have limited this
right, especially for many women, but the social pressure exerted by
many families has had nothing to do with the rights accorded by Islam to
both men and women to choose their mates freely.

In this matter, again, the situation in the Islamic world has  not been
very different from that in various Western societies until quite
recently and in many cases even today.

In speaking about personal rights, one must remember that the thrust of
the message of Islam is not only to give rights to human beings to
perform this or that act, but especially to encourage them to lead a
good life in every way possible. If certain personal rights such as
sexual promiscuity have been taken away in Islam, it has been done in
light of what religion considers to be the attainment of the good, which
is the goal of human existence and the purpose of human rights. From the
religious point of view, not only must rights follow obligations, but
they must themselves be conditioned by various “thou shalt nots” in
order to guarantee the rights of others and also the right of our
immortal soul to be protected against the tendencies toward evil that
each of us bears within himself or herself.

As for legal rights, which include the right to equality before the law
and the right to a trial and self-defense, they are defined and in
principle defended by Islamic Law itself.

They include the right to be treated equally before the law, right to a
fair trial and self-defense. In traditional Islamic society, where the
Divine Law

was widely applied, these matters were handled according to extensive
procedures developed by Islamic jurists. Since the nineteenth century in
numerous Islamic countries many of the laws as well as court procedures
have come to be based on European models, while the judiciary has at the
same time lost much of its independence. Needless to say, in many
instances tyrannical governments have prevented the legal rights of many
from being upheld, and consequently today there is a great deal of
pressure by Muslims within various Islamic societies to allow everyone
to live according to the rule of law and to have the legal rights of all
members of society respected. When we speak of legal rights in Islam, we
do not therefore mean simply what is going on in the Islamic world
today, but the teachings of Islam itself.

Even more problematic than legal rights in the Islamic world today are
political rights, which, in their current Western understanding, are, of
course, a modern idea neither understood nor applied in other parts of
the world in the same way as they are in countries that are culturally
European. The whole array of historical processes-democracy rebelling
against dictatorship, freedom of the individual versus tyranny,
transformation from the England of George III to the America of
Washington and Jefferson, the Third Reich and present-day Germany, the
Gulag and Yeltsin’s Russia-belong to Western history and do not have
their equivalents in the Islamic world, which has had its own distinct
struggles in the colonial and postcolonial periods. It is not possible
to delve into all these issues here, but we must always remember the
differences in the historical experiences of Islam and the modern West.
What we need to focus on, however, is the classical Islamic ideal of
political rights, which serves as a background for all that goes on in
this domain today in various Islamic countries.

Traditionally, Muslims were to be consulted in matters of rule, and each
person had the right to live in justice and the right to fight against
injustice and oppression. With the rise of secularism, many people in
the West saw the rule of God through religion as tyranny and identified
the tyranny of their rulers with the tyranny of religion, as is seen so
clearly in the French Revolution. In contrast, in the Islamic world the
tyranny of worldly rulers was never identified with what agnostic
philosophers in the West called the tyranny of religion, and in this
matter there are certain resemblances  between the views of Islam and
those of America’s founding fathers. Nor must the situation in the
present-day Islamic world be confused with what occurred historically in
the West, despite the presence of a small but vocal secularized minority
in various Islamic countries for whom political rights mean freedom from
tyrannical rule as well as secularization in the Western sense.

In much of the Islamic world today, Muslims are governed by dictatorial
regimes, usually supported by the West if they happen to have a
pro-Western stance and preserve Western interests. Muslims see Islam as
a means of protecting themselves against this worldly tyranny as they
had done in ages past. One of the appeals of so-called fundamentalism is
this deeply rooted Islamic view of the role of religion in protecting
the people from tyranny. In any case, under no condition should the lack
of political

rights in many Islamic countries today be seen as being simply the
Islamic understanding of this matter. In the political realm there is
much turmoil in the Islamic world today resulting from the consequences
of the colonial period, the destruction of many traditional
institutions, and the establishment of governments that are not based on
the culture and religion of the people themselves. These governments are
supported and sustained by powers from another civilization that still
dominate much of the Islamic world and make it impossible for authentic
structures and norms to be born from within Islamic society itself. If
there were really free elections in the Islamic world today, in nearly
every country there would come to power a less Western-oriented regime;
it would not be necessarily anti-Western, but it would place the
interests of Islamic society itself above everything else.

Many who criticize Islamic countries for their lack of political rights
are shedding crocodile tears, for in their hearts they are happy that
such is the case and that in not many places in the Islamic world are
members of society allowed to exercise their political rights according
to classical Islamic teachings.

In discussing the whole question of human rights, it is essential to
realize how the cultural values of each society determine to a large
extent its understanding of this term.

At the present moment many in the West consider human rights to be
universal. Yet the Western understanding of this term has itself changed
over time. Moreover, over the years Western powers have often used this
issue for political gain and sometimes with astounding hypocrisy, which
has amazed not only non-Westerners, including Muslims, but also those in
the West who believe sincerely in human rights as they understand them.
In addition, the issue of human rights has become central in the
struggle between forces of globalization and forces seeking to preserve
local cultures, economies, and ways of life. One cannot in all honesty
discuss human rights on a global scale without turning to these issues
and also to the different understandings that various cultures and
civilizations, including the Islamic, have of human rights on the basis
of their understanding of what it means to be human.

Let us for a moment compare priorities in human rights according to the
secular and the Islamic understandings of what it means to be human.
From the secular point of view, the human being is a purely earthly
creature and what matters most is the rights of the individual as a
purely earthly being. If one curses God or Christ on the street today in
some American city, nothing will happen legally, but if one insults an
individual, one can be arrested or sued. Clearly in this perspective,
the rights of the individual stand above not only those of God, but also
those of faith as a social and  public reality. The priorities in the
Islamic world are reversed. The rights of God stand above the rights of
human beings, and for a person to insult the religion of others is not
considered a right at all, even if the prevention of such an act
decreases one’s individual rights. The same holds true for questions of
morality, including sexual morality, over which there has been so much
debate during the past few decades even in America and Europe, and the
issue of “freedom of speech” as individual right versus the rights of
the public.

This difference in priorities came out clearly a few years ago in the
infamous Salman Rushdie affair, where a writer of Islamic Indian
background living in England wrote a blasphemous work seeking to
denigrate and destroy a central part of Islamic sacred history. The
publication of his work led to riots, which resulted in several deaths,
and finally to his condemnation to death by Ayatollah Khomeini, followed
by severe reaction from Western writers, especially secularist ones. One
side argued that what was most important was the right of the individual
to free speech; the other championed the right of a society to preserve
its sacred history.

Lest one think that this is only a dichotomy between Islam and the West,
one should recall that blasphemy laws are still on the books in Great
Britain, although they do not include blasphemy against Islam. In any
case, it was difficult in the Rushdie affair for either side to
understand the intensity of the indignation of the other, for each was
operating from within a different worldview and with a different set of
priorities.

If a debate were to be carried out today on the question of the
understanding of human rights and the hierarchy presumed within it, one
of the Westerners on the panel might say that Muslim women have few
rights. A Muslim mother might answer that Western children have few
rights;

their most basic right, that of having a full-time mother, has been
taken away by a new economic system in which many mothers are forced to
spend, at best, a couple of hours each day of so-called quality time
with their children after a full day’s work and in a state of fatigue.
The Muslim might add that, after the need for a mother, the most basic
right of a child is to have two parents, and that this right is taken
away from nearly half of the children in many sectors of Western society
by complex socioeconomic factors and the prevalent “morality,” which
places the desires of the individual above responsibility in marriage to
one’s spouse and children. A Westerner might say that most Muslims do
not have the right to a vote that counts for anything. A Muslim might
respond that he agreed, but, as important as the right to vote was,
along with it came the “right” to gain a livelihood in a just and
reasonable manner and not by struggling from morning to night as a
result of difficult economic conditions, many of them due to what is
called the international economic and political order. Other Muslim
debaters might further add that in their village, they always voted for
their village elder on the basis of his experience and character,
whereas in so many places, especially America, the choices offered in an
election are strongly conditioned by the pressure of financial factors
that have nothing to do with authentic democracy.

The debate could continue for a long time, but at the end the Muslim
interlocutors would thank their Western counterparts and state that they
were grateful for their concern, but that if they really wanted to be
friends and fellow human beings, they should not impose their views but
ask the Muslim team what they considered to be the rights that were most
missing in their lives and that their Western  friends could help to
realize. If human rights are related to love of humanity, they must be
combined with humility,

not hubris. One of the Muslims might ask a Westerner if she would like
to experience humiliation instead of humility.

What would happen if a group of human rights activists in Cairo with
access to all the international media kept holding press conferences, at
which a few token Americans were present, on the rights of battered
women and alcohol abuse or the tragedy of adolescent pregnancy in
America?

Would this moralistic hectoring be real concern for human rights in
America, or an attempt to humiliate those who are unlike the activists
and hold a value system the activists do not accept, even if the
activists’ own value system is in constant flux and transition?

Anything less than mutual respect in understanding the other side makes
a sham of the question of human rights.

And when the issue of human rights is used as a tool for policy by
Western powers, it tends to nullify the efforts of those in the West
who, with sincerity and good intention, are seeking to help others all
over the globe to preserve the dignity of human life, a belief that not
only Muslims, Christians, and those from other religions, but also many
secularists share.

FREEDOM FROM RELIGION VERSUS FREEDOM OF RELIGION
------------------------------------------------

The very thought of freedom creates joy in one’s mind and heart, and
there is no man or woman in the East or West who does not cherish
freedom. But what is freedom? We need to answer this question in a
fundamental way, especially since “freedom” has now become a shibboleth
of the West, especially America, that is then presented to the world as
the highest ideal. To answer the question in the Islamic context, it is
first necessary to remind ourselves how religions in general view this
matter.

The very word “religion” in English comes from the Latin religare,
meaning “to bind,” which seems to be the opposite of “to free.” The Ten
Commandments, which form the foundation of Jewish and Christian
morality, consist of a number of “thou shalt nots,” that is, limitations
rather than freedoms. The Gospel of John (8:32) speaks of the Truth,
which will set us free, but only if one accepts the conditions set by
Christ, “If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take
up his cross, and follow me” (Matt. 8:34). In the Indian religions
freedom is also identified with deliverance from the bondage of all
limitation, or what Hindus call moks´a, and from the recurring cycles of
samsaric existence, or the chain of births and deaths in the world of
becoming, which Buddhism emphasizes. In most sacred scriptures freedom
is identified with release from the limitations of our own existence,
rather than the freedom of the individual qua ego. As many Muslim sages
have said, religion is to enable us to gain freedom from the self and
not to abet the freedom of the self.

Metaphysically speaking, God alone is infinite; so God alone is absolute
freedom. Every mode of separative existence is limitation and to some
degree bondage. Only in God are we truly free, and He has given us free
will in order that we may freely submit this free will to His Will in
order to gain genuine freedom, freedom from the prison of our limited
egos and our never-ending passions generating unending waves of unreal
wants and desires, which are then turned into needs. Once it was asked
of the prince of the Sufis of Khurasan, Bayazid, “What do you want?” He
answered, “I want not to want.” That is ultimate freedom,  which Islam,
like other heavenly inspired religions, places at the center of its
teachings. That is why the Quran, like the Bible or the Vedas, for that
matter, never speaks of freedom in quantitative and earthly terms, but
seeks to help one unbind the tethers that confine one’s immortal soul to
the dictates of the lower passions. And that is also why Sufism, the
inner dimension of Islam concerned with spiritual training of the soul,
speaks so often of freedom, but always as freedom from the self, not of
the self. In the deepest sense even our outward love for freedom is
nostalgia for the freedom of the infinite expanses of the Divine
Empyrean.

The attitude of Islam toward freedom is based on this metaphysical
reality. Like other traditional religions, Islam sees its role as that
of helping human beings to overcome the clutches of the power of their
lower souls and thereby to be able to gain real freedom, rather than to
foster an individualism that, in the guise of freedom, only strengthens
the bonds of slavery of our immortal soul to that powerful slave master
within it that is

the agent of rebellion, passion, concupiscence, and ultimately bondage.
This highest sense of freedom has, however, never prevented Islam from
believing that human beings should possess the freedom to live in
dignity in this world and to practice their duty toward God as His
servants and toward His creatures as His vicegerents. Indignation and
rebellion against tyranny have always been encouraged in Islam.

There is, however, an important distinction that needs to be clarified.
For a person of faith, whether Jew, Christian, or Muslim, to love God
and obey His commandments is not considered a loss of freedom. In
contrast, those who have lost their faith regard that submission itself
as a loss of freedom. In the American Revolution, the founding fathers
made clear that the freedom of religion was a cardinal human right, but
for many during the more than two centuries that have followed, this
right has come to mean freedom from religion, not of religion. Current
cultural wars in America over school prayer and other issues pertaining
to the separation of church and state bring out this distinction
clearly. Now, obviously the secularizing experience of the West during
the past centuries has not been shared by the Islamic world, and most
Muslims still live in the world of faith, in which submission to God is
not seen as a curtailing of one’s freedom any more than going to church
and obeying the teachings of Christ would be seen as a restriction of
freedom for a devout Christian. In both cases the acceptance of the
authority of God would be seen as the gateway to the gaining of real
freedom. It is simply meaningless for secularized Western intellectuals
seeking to flee religion in order to gain “freedom” to try to apply
their existential plight to Muslims who still live in the world of
faith.

The love of God and surrender to His Will do not mean, however, for one
moment that Muslims therefore have no interest in political and social
freedom. The human desire for freedom according to who one is and what
one’s cultural values are is a universal trait, and throughout history
Muslims have shown as much desire for freedom for themselves and their
society as anyone else, as the courageous wars of independence fought
against the British, the French, the Russians (which is still going on
in Chechnya), and others bear witness. Paradoxically, after all these
struggles, most Muslim societies came to be saddled with governments
that have provided less freedom to them than before. Not only because of
modern technology, which makes the state so much more powerful than in
earlier times, but also because of the loss of many traditional
institutions, the modernized parts of the Islamic world  enjoy less
freedom today than they did before the modern period. The contrast
between talk about freedom by the West and pursuit of self-interest,
usually of an economic nature, which causes support of oppressive
regimes in much of the Islamic world, is certainly not lost on the
general Islamic public.

If one asks if Muslims want freedom, the answer is definitely yes. But
the vast majority of Muslims would add that, first of all, for them
freedom does not mean freedom from God and religion; they would embrace
other freedoms, provided they do not destroy their faith and what gives
meaning to their lives. Second, they would point out that to be free
means also to be free to understand what one means by freedom. They
certainly do not want

“freedom” to be imposed on them as an ideology by a more powerful West
that knows better than they do what is good for them. Coercion under the
guise of freedom is still coercion.

What Muslims would like most of all is to be allowed the freedom to
confront their own problems and find their own solutions. During all
those centuries when the West was experimenting with all kinds of ideas
and institutions, from the French Revolution to Napoleon, from the
Bolshevik Revolution to Fascism and Nazism, from laissezfaire capitalism
to socialism and back, the dynamic came from within Western civilization
itself and the West had the freedom to develop as it did, for better or
worse, without outward constraint. There was no external force, no
powerful civilization breathing down its neck and preventing it from
acting freely from within itself to create new institutions and norms as
it deemed necessary. The Islamic world does not have such a privilege.
The very Western civilization that talks of freedom has placed numerous
constraints on the Islamic world in the name of protecting its own
“interests,” constraints that are greater obstacles to freedom of action
than any that could come from within Islamic society itself.

Under such pressure some Muslims during the last century turned to
Western liberalism, others to Marxism while the Soviet world was still
alive, and yet others to politicized forms of Islam. But none of these
movements has been free of the external constraints the West did not
have to face in its own recent historical development. In any case, the
Islamic world certainly seeks its freedom, but wishes to do so according
to its own understanding of the nature of the human state, its ultimate
goal of freedom in God, and, in light of that reality, freedom in the
human order. Muslims are no less intelligent than other communities, and
if given the freedom, they could discern for themselves between venom
and the elixir of life offered to them in their societies.

What the Islamic world would like most from the more powerful West,
which keeps preaching freedom, is to be given this freedom by the West
itself, so that the Islamic world can respond to the challenges of the
present-day world on the basis of its own inner dynamic. But most in the
Islamic world realize that this wish is not going to be realized and
that the West’s geopolitical and economic interests in the Islamic world
take precedence over the question of real freedom. And so Muslims must
find a way themselves to struggle for freedom, rule of law, and human
rights, all Islamically understood, while under unprecedented external
and internal constraint and without sacrificing the possibility of that
spiritual freedom that is the ultimate goal of human life on earth.

Muslims agree that Islam is pertinent to all conditions and
circumstances, including therefore the present one.

Hence serious Muslims must seek to act correctly and to  seek freedom
despite outward constraints and not to blame their own lack of
initiative and drive and their inability to overcome inertia on outside
forces. It is possible to live Islamically even in the most difficult
historical circumstances and to seek at least certain kinds of freedom
on the basis of Islamic understanding,

even in situations where both external and internal constraints are ever
present.

CONTEMPORARY MUSLIM RESPONSES TO THE ISSUE OF FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Far from being passive to the challenges posed by the West on the issues
of freedom and human rights, during the past few decades many Islamic
responses have been issued by those who have tried to analyze what
freedom is for an Islamic society today beyond going to the ballot box,
and what both theoretical and practical engagement on the question of
human rights involves. In most Islamic countries there are now human
rights groups, opposed by some governments and even considered agents of
the West in others. There have also been extensive discussions among
theologians, philosophers, and jurists, including some of the most
eminent traditional authorities, on the question of Islam and human
rights. Many deliberations, conferences, and debates at the beginning of
the fifteenth century of the Islamic calendar, corresponding to the
early 1980s, led to the publication of an Islamic declaration of human
rights that gained the support of many traditional Muslim authorities
and many notable organizations and has become widely disseminated
throughout the Islamic world.

Based totally on the Quran and Hadith, the rights enumerated in this
document include the right to life, freedom, equality, and prohibition
against impermissible discrimination; the right to justice, fair trial,
protection against abuse of power, protection against torture,
protection of honor and reputation, and asylum; the rights of
minorities; the right of participation in the conduct and management of
public affairs; the rights of belief, thought, and speech; freedom of
religion, free association, freedom to pursue what concerns the economic
order, protection of property, social security, and founding a family
and related matters; the rights of married women; and the right to
education, privacy, and freedom of movement and residence.

A skeptical Westerner might say that these are simply modern Western
concepts of human rights couched in Islamic terms. The reality of the
matter is that every one of these rights is supported by Quranic
and*Hadith* references.

Surely what constitutes the content of human rights, and not its form,
is not specifically modern, but is to be found in one way or another in
moral and spiritual teachings of various religions and the writings of
moral philosophers from many lands stretching from China to France,
including, of course, those of the Islamic world. What this and similar
documents present are responses of the Islamic world to the challenge
posed by the West on this matter, but the substance of the response
comes from Islam itself.

Some may say that even if these are Islamic ideals, they are not
realized in the Islamic world today. Such an observation is true to some
extent, but not absolutely. But the Islamic world is not unique in this
matter. No society from China to Mexico lives up to such ideals. Nor
does the West itself live up to these ideals completely, as one sees in
the continuous presence of racism in America. To be fair, one would have
to say that some of these ideals are more fully realized in the West and
some in the Islamic world, if the full gamut of human rights in relation
to our duties to God  and His creation are taken into consideration. In
any case, the mainstream of Islamic

thought does not have a dispute with the West, even its secularist
component, on the question of the substance of human rights or even the
necessity of their implementation. Where there is a basic difference is
on the relation between human rights and human responsibilities and also
on our rights vis-à-vis God’s rights over us and the rest of His
creation. On this issue many Western Jewish and Christian thinkers are
in fact closer to their Muslim counterparts than to their secularist
compatriots.

On the practical level, despite numerous political and social obstacles,
in recent years in several Islamic countries there have been
developments toward greater respect for the law and the rights and
freedom guaranteed therein. In countries as different as Malaysia,
Indonesia, and Iran, there is an attempt afoot to develop what is called
an Islamic civil society governed by law, a society that would not be
secularized yet be a civil society in which the rights of citizens would
be guaranteed. The dichotomies established by so many so-called experts
in the West between a “theocracy” and a secular society and government
in the Islamic world are simply false and do not apply to the Islamic
world. Saudi Arabia or Iran are not theocracies in the Western
understanding of this term, and Egypt is not secular.

The Islamic world today is in the process of responding to the
challenges posed by modernism in this as in other domains. Many
experiments are under way in countries as different as Turkey and Iran.
And because this process is carried out under conditions in which there
is not complete freedom either within or without, sometimes extreme
forms of action manifest themselves with tragic consequences.

But these tragic eruptions must not make one forget that on the deeper
level something much more basic is happening. And what is happening is
the response to the difficult challenges of the modern world by a major
world civilization, which, despite its current political and military
weakness, has the spiritual resources to emphasize the significance of
human dignity and the rights that God has bestowed upon human beings and
at the same time to never tire of emphasizing that all our rights issue
from the fulfillment of our responsibilities to God and His creation and
that without accepting our responsibilities emphasis upon our rights
alone can turn us into a species that is at once endangered and
endangering.

THE 303 HUMAN CONDITION AND THE ROLE OF ISLAM
---------------------------------------------

Since the beginning of the decade of the 1990s, a number of leading
figures in the West have sought to create a universal declaration of
human responsibilities to complement the one on human rights declared by
the United Nations.

Many have become aware that the sole emphasis on human rights without
emphasizing our responsibilities to the rest of society and also the
natural environment can only accelerate the suicidal course that the
modern and now postmodern world seems to be taking. One does not need to
be a prophet to realize that the rapid destruction of both the natural
environment and the social fabric of the most highly industrialized
societies cannot but end in total disaster for the whole of humanity.
Islam has a crucial role to play in bringing out the primacy of
responsibilities over rights in accordance with its vision of the human
being as a theomorphic being and its emphasis on the ontological
reliance of human beings upon God. It can also be a major force, perhaps
the most powerful on earth, to oppose the  process of the
desacralization of both human beings and nature, a process the result of
which is the monumental crisis we now face.

Beyond the din of political and military confrontations going on today,
Muslim thinkers must address themselves to the questions of human
responsibilities and human rights, joining hands with both Western and
other thinkers engaged in such matters globally, bringing to the table
without apology the Islamic contribution to these vital subjects and
especially the emphasis upon the theocentric worldview and sacred
conception of creation, which are not only Islamic but are shared in one
form or another by all the historical religions. The participation on a
global scale by Muslims in the creation of awareness of human
responsibilities to complement and precede human rights is itself a
responsibility of primary order placed by God upon the shoulders of
those Muslims endowed with sufficient knowledge combined with virtue to
carry out such a task.

Within the Islamic world itself, Muslim thinkers must address themselves
to the ever greater understanding of human rights on the basis of the
Islamic conception of the nature of the human being. All the elements of
human rights as delineated in the Islamic declaration above are found
within traditional Islamic sources, from the Quran and*Hadith* to
poetry, aphorisms of sages, and works of moral philosophers and Sufis.
But they need to be reformulated in a contemporary context in such a way
as to be able to respond to modern Western challenges and also the
current situation within various Islamic societies. Why must there be
respect for human life and in fact all of life? If all Muslims are equal
before the law, why is this not actually the case in so many Muslim
societies, and what about non-Muslims? What is the foundation of the
freedom of religion and worship? To what extent is personal life
sacrosanct and what is the limit of state intrusion upon personal life?
Such questions must be answered in a clear and convincing manner for the
present generation of Muslims, not by quoting Jean-Jacques Rousseau and
John Locke as an earlier generation of

Muslim modernists did with blatant lack of success, but by drawing from
the most authentic sources of the Islamic tradition.

The Islamic understanding of human rights will not necessarily be
identical with the most current Western interpretations of it, but that
is not a negative matter at all. What is important is that the Islamic
response be authentic and deeply rooted in the Islamic tradition. The
attempt to harmonize the Islamic understanding of these matters with the
current Western appraisal of these issues is not only metaphysically and
religiously not always feasible, but also impossible in practice,
because the Western understanding of these issues is constantly changing
from decade to decade. What is important for Islam is to accept the
challenge of the reality of the issues involved and then provide Islamic
responses, which may in fact be also of interest to certain Western
thinkers grappling with the pertinence of these issues on a global
scale.

A particularly difficult task, which is also a new one requiring
intellectual effort*(ijtihad)* on the highest level by Muslims, is
determining the rights of those who do not believe in God and therefore
in any responsibilities that people of faith believe they have toward
God. The classical Islamic works on ethics and rights, whether written
from a juridical, philosophical, or theological point of view, envisaged
a universe in which there was a multiplicity of religions, as we have
already discussed in the first chapter of this book. Today there is a
new situation in the modern and  post-modern world that is indeed an
anomaly in world history.

Since extensive secularism developed within the West itself, through a
gradual process, the attitude of Western Christian thinkers could
accommodate itself to secularism over time.

For Islamic theological thought, the presence of a powerful secularist
force in the world appears as a great shock, despite the advent of
modernism starting two centuries ago in many Islamic lands and after
seventy years of domination of a good part of the Islamic world by the
officially atheistic Soviet regime. Today, the mainstream of Islamic
thought, both Sunni and Shi‘ite, must address itself to this question of
secularism and agnosticism as it did in earlier days concerning the
rights of followers of other religions within the Islamic community.
Whatever understanding of human rights from the Islamic perspective
comes to dominate the center of consciousness of the Islamic community
in the future, it must take account not only of followers of other
religions, a matter that is relatively easy in light of the Quranic
doctrine of the universality of revelation, but also of those who do not
believe in any transcendent or immanent Principle beyond the human. And
that is more difficult to achieve in light of the Islamic conception of
the human state. Yet it is a task to which the ‘ulama’, or religious
scholars, who wield influence over the people and who are the guardans
of the*Shari‘ah* , as well as other Islamic thinkers must address
themselves. This task will of course become easier if those within the
Islamic world who have decided to leave the world of faith do not act as
a fifth column for modern Western secularism. But even if this is the
case, a way has to be found to protect their rights under the law along
with those of non-Muslims of no religious persuasion who happen to be
living within the Islamic world.

Islamic thought must also challenge on the highest intellectual level
the current Western notion that the presentday Western understanding of
human rights is universal, which in this context means global. Now, all
values are related to the worldview, or Weltanschauung, within which
they are understood, and not all worldviews are the same.

The religious worldviews have basic principles in common that they do
not share with views that deny the Transcendent and the Sacred. When it
comes to the question of the human state, Christians speak of people
being the children of God, Muslims of their being His vicegerents on
earth, and both of humans being made in the “image” or “form” of God,
although with different meanings of the term “image” or “form.” Hindus
speak of the sacrifice of the Primordial Man to create the world and
Neo-Confucianism of the human being as an anthropocosmic being and
bridge between Heaven and earth. These views can be easily correlated,
but they cannot be harmonized with a view of the human being as an
aggregate of molecules brought together by chance out of the original
cosmic soup.

Nor can human rights, which must of necessity be based on the concept of
who the human being is, be considered global and universal because of
such crass differences about what constitutes the human state. Islamic
thinkers must come forward to point out that, yes, there are human
values that are global, such as respect for human life or opposition to
torture, but other human rights are dependent upon the worldview of
various civilizations that together compose humanity. Are the rights of
human beings more important than the rights of God? Can we have human
rights without human responsibilities? Are political rights superior to
economic rights? Do the rights of the individual have priority over
those of the community? If human rights  are not to be a form of
cultural and political coercion in the name of the love of humanity, the
answer of various religions, cultures, and civilizations to such
questions must be respected whatever the current strength in this world
of these religions or cultures might be. One of the roles of Muslims as
members of a major world civilization is to answer such questions in all
honesty from the Islamic point of view. It is also to insist upon mutual
respect between civilizations and the values they bear instead of
accepting one-sided imposition. It is, moreover, to seek actively to
cooperate with not only Westerners, but also with members of other
cultures and civilizations to point to those values that we do all hold
dear and that must be respected by everyone if we are going to live and
function as human beings on a globe on which there seems now to be no
other choice but to live in mutual respect with compassion and love for
others or to perish together.

Not only the Islamic world, not only the West, but the whole world is
passing through one of the darkest pages of its history, which no amount
of triumphalism and chestbeating can hide. In these dark times Muslims
must remain vigilant as never before about all that goes on about them
and concerning all those who use the name of Islam for various purposes,
including deviant ones. On the basis of the traditional teachings of
Islam, some of which have been outlined above, they must be as critical
of what goes on among themselves in the form of bigotry and fanaticism
as they are

of the shortcomings of modern Western societies, from sexual promiscuity
and the breakdown of the family to the desecration and destruction of
the natural environment.

Muslims must fulfill their responsibilities before God and His creation
as taught in Islam, responsibilities for which they were created as
human beings, and on the basis of these responsibilities they must seek
to exercise the rights God has given them while also respecting the
rights of others.

In a world in which the hierarchies of the states of being are denied,
and in the minds of many, human beings are elevated to the level of God,
and the “kingdom of man” has come to replace the “Kingdom of God,” it is
the duty of Muslims to proclaim the primacy of the Sacred, the absolute
necessity of sacred laws as foundations for social morality, the
ultimate goal of human life beyond the earthly, the centrality of
justice in human society, and the need to seek peace within before
searching for outward peace. Muslims must remind themselves again of
their responsibilities to God, to human beings, and to the natural world
and also of their basic rights, the most important of which is the right
to be God’s servant and vicegerent here on earth. They must extend their
hand in friendship to followers of other religions as ordered by the
Quran and to live and let live with regard to those who have moved away
from the world of faith altogether. They must even extend their hand to
those Christian and primarily Protestant evangelists who express
ignorant, hurtful, and even malicious and egregious views about Islam.
Muslims must in this case turn the other cheek and prove in their
actions that for them also Christ is sent by God and his words revered.

Men and women in the West who are still devoted to the life of faith
should also know that those closest to them in this world are Muslims,
if only the veils of mutual misunderstanding and distrust, which have
grown so thick of late, were to be rent asunder. Every practicing
Muslim, which includes the vast majority of the population of the
Islamic world, could not but agree that his or her highest wish is none
other than the prayer uttered by Christ, “Thy Will be done on earth as
it is in Heaven.” No matter what the aberrations that cloud the horizons
today, the Islamic tradition remains and must remain witness to God’s
Oneness and dedicated to the effort to carry out His Will here on earth.

Only in remaining true to itself, clinging to the “firm cable” mentioned
in the Quran and the message it has been destined to bear in this world,
will the Islamic community fulfill its duties before God and the rest of
humanity and contribute as the “middle people” to the creation of
harmony between religions, peoples, and civilizations the world over.
Only in turning to the heart of its teachings will Islam be able to bear
witness in this age of forgetfulness to the basic truth about the nature
of human beings as creatures destined for the spiritual world with the
possibility even in this world of “seeing God everywhere,” creatures who
are agents of His Will here on earth, bearers of peace, and channels of
the waters of compassion that issue from the spring of Life Divine.
