EPILOGUE: THE ETHICAL AND SPIRITUAL NATURE OF HUMAN LIFE, EAST AND WEST
=======================================================================

The Quran asserts that God is the Lord of both the East and the West and
also that the Blessed Olive Tree, which symbolizes the spiritual axis of
the world, is of neither the East nor the West. It is more necessary
today than at any other time in history to realize the universal nature
of the truth, which belongs to both the East and the West and yet is
confined to neither. And yet there are those in the West who see Islam
as the “totally other” and then vilify and identify it with all that
they disdain, while there are also those in the Islamic world who look
upon the West as the innate enemy of Islam. Those who realize that God
is the Lord of both the East and the West must raise their voices
against such ignorant and sometimes malefic attitudes.

There is not, however, a simple symmetry between East and West today.
Before modern times the “Abode of Islam” was the only “other” the West
knew, and the selfconsciousness of Western civilization during its
period of maturation and its crystallization was to a large extent
defined by that “other.” For Islam, however, there were several other
civilizations, such as those in India and China, with which it had
contact and which it saw as the “other.”

This factor itself contributed, through Islam’s image of itself as the
central world civilization, to the neglect for several centuries by
Muslims of the rise of European power during the Renaissance and the
major intellectual and religious transformations that were taking place
at that time in the West, including the rise of modern science followed
by the new technology.

Some have tried to fault Islamic civilization for not following the same
trajectory of development that took place in Europe and have asked,
“What went wrong?” in reference to the Islamic world. If we look at
world history, however, the question should not be “What went wrong in
the Islamic world?” but “What went wrong in Europe?” The very question
“What went wrong?” implies a norm or a right against which something is
judged to be wrong. Now, the global norm was once traditional
civilizations based on religious and spiritual principles and rooted in
a theocentric or anthropocosmic worldview, as we see in Japanese,
Chinese, Hindu, Islamic, Byzantine, and medieval European civilizations.
It was postmedieval Europe that deviated from this norm by substituting
an anthropocentric worldview for a theocentric one, making human beings
the measure of all things or, to use a religious language, replacing the
“Kingdom of God” with the “kingdom of man.” This “freedom” of reason
from revelation and intellectual intuition, combined with emphasis upon
humanism, rationalism, empiricism, and naturalism, led to many new
developments, including a new science based on power rather than wisdom,
and made it possible for Europe to expand over the globe and become
dominant over other civilizations. It led to the Industrial Revolution,
modern technology, and modern medicine. Now, modern medicine has
eradicated many diseases but has also caused the population explosion,
while modern technology has created many comforts along with the
catastrophic destruction of the natural environment.

The death of tens of millions of Europeans in the twentieth century,
thanks to modern means of warfare, combined with the loss of the meaning
of life, the secularization of the world, the dehumanization of
humanity, the breakup of the social fabric, the unprecedented
destruction of nature and many other consequences of modern
civilization, led a number of leading Western thinkers and poets during
the last century to profoundly criticize the course taken by modern
Western civilization. If not everyone has read René Guénon’s masterful
Crisis of the Modern World, most people in America are familiar with T.
S. Eliot’s The Waste Land and some remember Theodor Roszak’s Where the
Wasteland Ends, along with many other works written by European and
American authors during the past decades either depicting the
spiritually tragic condition of human life in modern society or
criticizing the tendencies driving modern Western civilization to its
destruction.

Are all these criticisms to be forgotten and modern civilization made
the norm that is right and in comparison to which everything else is
considered wrong? No thinking person who is aware of what we are doing
to our natural environment and what forces are tearing away the fabric
of our society and, more important, our souls can claim that the path
followed by the West should be the norm by which one should judge other
civilizations, Islamic or otherwise. Moreover, if Islamic or Chinese
civilizations had followed the same course as the postmedieval West and
we had had the Industrial Revolution not only in England, but also in
China, India, Persia, Turkey, and Egypt, the environmental impact would
have been so great that we might not even be around today to pose the
question of what went wrong.

In reality, each civilization, whether in East or West, has decayed and
deviated in its own way and must pose the question to itself about what
went wrong, rather than exclaiming with hubris and self-righteousness
about what went wrong somewhere else because the people in that
“somewhere else” have not followed its way of thinking and acting. We
must desist from identifying ourselves with pure goodness and the other
with pure evil. Even Christ said only God is good in the absolute sense.
Each civilization must become ever more aware of its own shortcomings
and evil elements as well as its virtues and what is good in it. Muslims
must ask themselves what went wrong within their own societies, but the
West must also pose the same question about itself. And this task of
self-examination is even more urgent for the West, for at this
particular juncture of human history it possesses much greater power
than other civilizations and has greater global influence.

Moreover, today one can no longer speak strictly of the West and the
Islamic world as two civilizations facing each other across a line like
two armies ready to do battle in medieval times. In days of old Islam
occupied the southern shores of the Mediterranean and the West the
northern shores, and later the Ottomans occupied eastern Europe and
Western civilization ruled from Vienna west. Today the relation between
the Islamic world and the West is more like the yin-yang symbol of the
Far East. Let us recall that there is an element of yin in yang and of
yang in yin and together they

comprise a circle, which is the symbol of totality. Likewise, there are
many Westerners living in the Islamic world along with many Westernized
Muslims and there are also sizable Islamic communities in both Europe
and America. Whereas the contribution of Westerners in the Islamic world
to the West is essentially economic and to some extent political, the
contribution of Muslims living in the West to the Islamic world itself
is primarily intellectual and only secondarily economic. In fact, at no
time in Islamic history have so many influential intellectual leaders of
Islam lived outside the “Abode of Islam” in another civilization, which,
interestingly enough, provides the favorable climate for free
intellectual discourse not found under present-day conditions in many
Islamic countries themselves.

The destinies of the West and the Islamic world are intertwined in such
a way that one cannot reduce the situation simply to “us” and “them” in
total mutual exclusion.

It is in the destiny of not only Islam and the West but all other
civilizations to be forced to confront at this particular moment of
history the powerful forces of globalization.

If secularism sought earlier to demolish and destroy the older
worldviews based on the Sacred, the process of globalization as usually
understood seeks in an ever more accelerated manner to articulate a
single worldview and “value system.” But this “value system” is what one
might call “trans-human,” because it is based on the ephemera of the
marketplace and its corporate denizens and not on enduring truths and
spiritual values. The political and economic objects of globalization
are therefore as inimical to the perennial values of religion as the
forces of secularism were in earlier days and still are today. In this
unprecedented historical situation, fraught with the greatest danger for
the whole spiritual legacy of humanity, it is essential that the
particular aspects of each tradition be preserved and sharpened, that
the universal aspects be recalled, and that both be used to inform other
traditions. It is only on the basis of a positive and mutually enriching
dialogue between religious traditions that respects their
particularities as well as recognizes the universal truths lying in
their heart or center that the answers must be sought for the most acute
problems facing humanity today.

In this critical moment of human history both Muslims and Westerners,
and in fact all human beings, must seek to live an ethical life based on
mutual respect and greater knowledge of each other. Turning more
particularly to Islam and the West, it must be emphasized that whether
we are Muslims, Jews, Christians, or even secularists, whether we live
in the Islamic world or the West, we are in need of meaning in our
lives, of ethical norms to guide our actions, of a vision that would
allow us to live at peace with each other and with the rest of God’s
creation. It is in the achievement of this task that both the formal
aspect and the inner message of Islam as well as those of other
religions can come to our aid as can nothing else in this world. Of
special importance is the inner message, for this message is none other
than the universal truth that was placed by God in the hearts of all
human beings and that stands at the center of all heavenly revelations.

The heart of Islam is also the Islam of the heart, which is that
spiritual virtue, or ihsan, that enables us “to see God everywhere” and
to be His “eyes, ears, and hands” in this world. The heart of religion
is the religion of the heart, wherein all external forms are
transcended, the heart that according to the Prophet is “the Throne of
the Infinitely Good and Compassionate.” It is within this religion of
the heart that is to be found that eternal wisdom, or sophia, which
shines like a jewel at the center of every Divine message.

This wisdom alone can provide for us, in this period of darkness and
confusion, the light of harmony based on principial knowledge and the
warmth of compassion and love of the other. As the last major historical
religion in this cycle of human existence, Islam has been able to
preserve to this day, and despite all the external turmoil and even
subversion of our times, that message of the eternal sophia in its
heart. To understand Islam fully is to understand this universal message
from the heart and the manner in which the external elements of the
tradition are related to this hidden center.

Muslims themselves must draw ever more from these inner springs of
wisdom and all men and women of good will in the West must seek to
understand Islam in light of these central truths, which are also to be
found in Judaism, Christianity, and other religions. We must all seek to
rediscover the heart of religion, which is also the religion of the
heart, to drink deeply of the spring of wisdom gushing forth from the
heart, to live in peace and harmony on the basis of the universal truths
contained in the perennial wisdom shared by all traditions, and to love
all of God’s creation as the consequence of being ourselves touched by
the love and compassion of the One who resides in our hearts.

Nothing less than the wisdom and love of the religion of the heart can
save us in a world torn apart by so much evil and selfishness, a world
that has the chimerical dream of living in peace in the forgetfulness of
God. The heart of Islam is none other than the witnessing to the oneness
of the Divine Reality, the universality of the truth, the necessity of
submission to His Will, the fulfilling of human responsibilities, and
respect for the rights of all beings. The heart of Islam beckons us to
awaken from the dream of forgetfulness, to remember who we are and why
we are here, to know and respect the religions of others. It is for
Muslims to heed the call from the heart of Islam and live an ethical and
spiritual life accordingly, but it is also for those in the West who
seek meaning in their lives to turn to their own center and to realize
that in coming to know better the heart of Islam they may gain more than
greater insight into another religion and civilization; they may gain
greater insight into their own heart and soul. The heart of any religion
is none other than that single, universal Truth that resides at the
heart of all authentic religions and that is itself the foundation of
the religion of the heart.

In love no difference there is between monastery and Sufi tavern of
ruins, Wheresoever it be, there is the glow of the light of the
Beloved’s Face.

**Hafiz** .

*Wa’Llahu a‘lam-And God knows best.*


