Rivalry and poison of Damascus
==============================

But its rival, the city of Damascus, fattened on luxury and Byzantine
magnificence. Its tinsel glory sapped the foundations of loyalty and the
soldierly virtues. Its poison spread through the Muslim world. Governors
wanted to be kings. Pomp and selfishness, ease and idleness and
dissipation grew as a canker; wines and spirituous liquors, scepticism,
cynicism and social vices became so rampant that the protests of the men
of God were drowned in mockery. Mecca, which was to have been a
symbolical spiritual centre, was neglected or dishonoured. Damascus and
Syria became centres of a worldliness and arrogance which cut at the
basic roots of Islam.

Husayn the Righteous refused to bow to worldliness and power

We have brought the story down to the 60th year of the Hijra. Yazid
assumed the power at Damascus. He cared nothing for the most sacred
ideals of the people. He was not even interested in the ordinary
business affairs of administration. His passion was hunting, and he
sought power for self-gratification.

The discipline and self-abnegation, the strong faith and earnest
endeavour, the freedom and sense of social equality which had been the
motive forces of Islam, were divorced from power. The throne at Damascus
had become a worldly throne based on the most selfish ideas of personal
and family aggrandisement, instead of a spiritual office, with a sense
of God-given responsibility. The decay of morals spread among the
people.

There was one man who could stem the tide. That was Imam Husayn. He, the
grandson of the Prophet, could speak without fear, for fear was foreign
to his nature. But his blameless and irreproachable life was in itself a
reproach to those who had other standards. They sought to silence him,
but he could not be silenced.

They sought to bribe him, but he could not be bribed. They sought to
waylay him and get him into their Power. What is more, they wanted him
to recognise the tyranny and expressly to support it. For they knew that
the conscience of the people might awaken at any time, and sweep them
away unless the holy man supported their cause. The holy man was
prepared to die rather than surrender the principles for which he stood.


