Journey through the desert
==========================

Imam Husayn left Mecca for Kufa with all his family including his little
children. Later news from Kufa itself was disconcerting. The friendly
governor had been displaced by one prepared more ruthlessly to carry out
Yazid's plans.

If Husayn was to go there at all, he must go there quickly, or his
friends themselves would be in danger. On the other hand, Mecca itself
was no less dangerous to him and his family. It was the month of
September by the solar calendar, and no one would take a long desert
journey in that heat, except under a sense of duty. By the lunar
calendar it was the month of pilgrimage at Mecca. But he did not stop
for the pilgrimage.

He pushed on, with his family and dependants, in all numbering about 90
or 100 people, men, women and children. They must have gone by forced
marches through the desert. They covered the 900 miles of the desert in
little over three weeks. When they came within a few miles of Kufa, at
the edge of the desert, they met people from Kufa. It was then that they
heard of the terrible murder of Husayn's cousin Muslim, who had been
sent on in advance. A poet that came by dissuaded the Imam from going
further.

“For,” he said epigramatically, “the heart of the city is with thee but
its sword is with thine enemies, and the issue is with God.” What was to
be done? They were three weeks' journey from the city they had left. In
the city to which they were going their own messenger had been foully
murdered as well as his children. They did not know what the actual
situation was then in Kufa. But they were determined not to desert their
friends.


