Water cut off; Inflexible will, Devotion and Chivalry
=====================================================

For ten days messages passed backwards and forwards between Karbala’ and
Kufa. Kufa wanted surrender and recognition. That was the one thing the
Imam could not consent to. Every other alternative was refused by Kufa,
under the instructions from Damascus. Those fateful ten days were the
first ten days of the month of Muharram, of the year 61 of the Hijra.

The final crisis was on the 10th day, the Ashura day, which we are
commemorating. During the first seven days various kinds of pressure
were brought to bear on the Imam, but his will was inflexible. It was
not a question of a fight, for there were but 70 men against 4,000.

The little band was surrounded and insulted, but they held together so
firmly that they could not be harmed. On the 8th day the water supply
was cut off. The Euphrates and its abundant streams were within sight,
but the way was barred. Prodigies of valour were performed in getting
water. Challenges were made for single combat according to Arab custom.

And the enemies were half-hearted, while the Imam's men fought in
contempt of death, and always accounted for more men than they lost. On
the evening of the 9th day, the little son of the Imam was ill. He had
fever and was dying of thirst. They tried to get a drop of water. But
that was refused point blank and so they made the resolve that they
would, rather than surrender, die to the last man in the cause for which
they had come. Imam Husayn offered to send away his people.

He said, “They are after my person; my family and my people can go
back.” But everyone refused to go. They said they would stand by him to
the last, and they did. They were not cowards; they were soldiers born
and bred; and they fought as heroes, with devotion and with chivalry.


