Lesson of the Tragedy
=====================

That briefly is the story. What is the lesson? There is of course the
physical suffering in martyrdom, and all sorrow and suffering claim our
sympathy, ---- the dearest, purest, most outflowing sympathy that we can
give. But there is a greater suffering than physical suffering. That is
when a valiant soul seems to stand against the world; when the noblest
motives are reviled and mocked; when truth seems to suffer an eclipse.

It may even seem that the martyr has but to say a word of compliance, do
a little deed of non-resistance; and much sorrow and suffering would be
saved; and the insidious whisper comes: “Truth after all can never die.”
That is perfectly true. Abstract truth can never die. It is independent
of man's cognition. But the whole battle is for man's keeping hold of
truth and righteousness.

And that can only be done by the highest examples of man's conduct -
spiritual striving and suffering enduring firmness of faith and purpose,
patience and courage where ordinary mortals would give in or be cowed
down, the sacrifice of ordinary motives to supreme truth in scorn of
consequence.

The martyr bears witness, and the witness redeems what would otherwise
be called failure. It so happened with Husayn. For all were touched by
the story of his martyrdom, and it gave the deathblow to the politics of
Damascus and all it stood for. And Muharram has still the power to unite
the different schools of thought in Islam, and make a powerful appeal to
non-Muslims also.


