Commemoration of great virtues
==============================

There has been in our history a tendency sometimes to celebrate the
event merely by wailing and tribulation, or sometimes by symbols like
the Tazias that you see in India, - Taboots as some people call them.
Well, symbolism or visible emblems may sometimes be useful in certain
circumstances as tending to crystallise ideas.

But I think the Muslims of India of the present day are quite ready to
adopt a more effective way of celebrating the martyrdom, and that is by
contemplating the great virtues of the martyr, trying to understand the
significance of the events in which he took part, and translating those
great moral and spiritual lessons into their own lives. From that point
of view I think you will agree that it is good that we should sit
together, even people of different faiths, - sit together and consider
the great historic event, in which were exemplified such soul-stirring
virtues as those of unshaken faith, undaunted courage, thought for
others, willing self-sacrifice, steadfastness in the right and
unflinching war against the wrong.

Islam has a history of beautiful domestic affections, of sufferings and
of spiritual endeavour, second to none in the world. That side of Muslim
history, although to me the most precious, is, I am sorry to say, often
neglected. It is most important that we should call attention to it,
reiterated attention, the attention of our own people as well as the
attention of those who are interested in historical and religious truth.

If there is anything precious in Islamic history it is not the wars, or
the politics, or the brilliant expansion, or the glorious conquests, or
even the intellectual spoils which our ancestors gathered. In these
matters, our history, like all history, has its lights and shades. What
we need especially to emphasise is the spirit of organisation, of
brotherhood, of undaunted courage in moral and spiritual life.


