Geographical Picture
====================

In placing before you a geographical picture of the tract of country in
which the great tragedy was enacted, I consider myself fortunate in
having my own personal memories to draw upon. They make the picture
vivid to my mind, and they may help you also. When I visited those
scenes in 1928, I remember going down from Baghdad through all that
country watered by the Euphrates river. As I crossed the river by a
bridge of boats at Al-Musaiyib on a fine April morning, my thoughts
leapt over centuries and centuries.

To the left of the main river you have the old classic ground of
Babylonian history; you have the railway station of Hilla; you have the
ruins of the city of Babylon, witnessing to one of the greatest
civilisations of antiquity. It was so mingled with the dust that it is
only in recent years that we have begun to understand its magnitude and
magnificence. Then you have the great river system of the Euphrates, the
Furat as it is called, a river unlike any other river we know. It takes
its rise in many sources from the mountains of Eastern Armenia, and
sweeping in great zig-zags through rocky country, it finally skirts the
desert as we see it now.

Wherever it or its interlacing branches or canals can reach, it has
converted the desert into fruitful cultivated country; in the
picturesque phrase, it has made the desert blossom as the rose. It
skirts round the Eastern edge of the Syrian desert and then flows into
marshy land. In a tract not far from Karbalaâ€™ itself there are lakes
which receive its waters, and act as reservoirs. Lower down it unites
with the other river, the Tigris, and the united rivers flow in the name
of the Shatt-al-Arab into the Persian Gulf.


