Preface
=======

The Definition of Culture
-------------------------

Culture has been defined in many different ways by cultural experts and
scholars. The Encyclopaedia Britannica has so far[^1] cited 164 various
definitions of culture. By studying these definitions carefully, it may
be concluded that some of them intend to identify certain cultural
elements, e.g. scientific culture, artistic culture, literary culture
and moral culture, all of which serve only to describe various aspects
of the cultural phenomenon such as art. Some definitions refer to
pursuant culture, and some others depict pioneer culture, although they
do not directly do so.

Let us consider a simple example to elaborate on the fact that all the
existing definitions fail to put forth a thorough explanation of
culture. Suppose a number of people are trying to find the centre of a
circle by considering many points in it. Clearly, none of them would
prove to be the real centre; thus, cultural scholars and sociologists
have not taken into serious consideration the true identity of man,
which lies in the boundary between nature and the supernatural.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
دوسر هر دو حلقهء هستى به حقيقت به هم توقيوستي
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Truly, it was you who made the circle of the universe whole.”* (Sheikh
Mahmoud Shabestan)

Instead, they have merely studied some of the cultural elements,
especially physical phenomena and cultural activities. Therefore, it is
obvious that the number of physical outcomes could lead to countless
definitions, much higher than 164. In proof of this, notice the neglect
toward the innate virtues of culture, the aspect of virtual beauty to
name one. On the contrary, culture consists of two parts: internally
virtual and externally virtual. The most complete definition that can be
derived from most of the present ones is:

*“Culture is the necessary or proper quality in man's physical mental
activities, based on sound logic and emotions rising from sensible
evolutionary lifestyles*.[^2]

The elements and examples presented in the current encyclopaedias and
lexicons refer to qualities of both necessity and appropriateness. In
other words, they consist of proper facts and also necessities for human
life. French Encyclopaedias state that:

*“Culture consists of all the knowledge acquired by man or society, such
as a set of activities based on various socio-historical rules, or
structures caused by changes in behaviour or deeds due to specific
educational conditions”*

The sentences above include both, the absolute vital and also the
unnecessary but proper conditions of life. However, as we will see
further on, the necessities and proper conditions do not totally exclude
man’s personal needs. Some experts believe that culture consists not
only of the essentials of life, such as natural sciences or humanities,
but only the suitable aspects worthy of forming the basis of a culture.
Here we must keep in mind two important principles.

**One:** The more distance between culture and natural life and
fatalistic facts, and also the more evolutionary virtual facts it
includes, the more human it will be.

**Two:** The highly elevated spiritual value according to which man
constantly wishes to fill every aspect and action of his life with
excellent virtues.

On the basis of these two rules, some idealistic and pioneering
anthropologists believe that culture has always played a major role in
the evolutionary progress of mankind.

Concern about the Future of Evolutionary Culture
------------------------------------------------

If a day comes when humans begin to lose the desire to reach harmony in
dignified freedom, unconscious fatalism will put them in a mechanical
life ignorant of the truth, and call it human unity. If someday the
plague of deculturization infiltrates humans so strongly that it even
ruins the common virtues of evolutionary cultures in various nations, it
would unquestionably reveal the shameful incompetence of their leaders.

Despite centuries of evolutionary endeavour by holy prophets men of
wisdom, moralists, and the sacrifices of those martyred for the sake of
freedom and human dignity, social leaders today have not only proved
themselves unable of uniting mankind in search of spiritual and
behavioural harmony based on evolutionary cultural virtues, but have
also lowered man to ignorant components of a machine.

They have deprived man of the glorious life he deserves, and restricted
him to only the physical desires of life, such as greed for power,
dominance and selfishness. On that terrible day, which might not be so
distant, history's sensitive conscience and God, who provided men with
conscience to guide them through time, will take revenge on those who
have demolished human dignity and values.

All authentic human cultures, holy prophets, distinguished
anthropologists, moralists and those who have contributed to the culture
of man's history clearly show that the only way to establish harmony and
dignity among mankind is definitely through elevated virtues and morals,
not mechanical characteristics and qualities. The reason is that the
more man deviates from highly moral virtues, the more influenced he will
be by his natural animal self. Animals also possess this kind of
self -although in a more limited form -whereas in humans it handles the
essence of man, for human capacities are so many and mighty that they
mutually infect the universe and their peers.

The natural self knows no sympathy, emotions or logic. It totally
ignores conscience, evolution and culture. However, unless these great
human virtues are achieved, human unity and brotherhood would be merely
a dream, for selfishness and greed for personal desires are a natural
part of the animal self, which has led to the countless wars and
atrocities in the history of man.

Islamic culture has thus shown great concern for the future of modern
societies. Yet, some Western scholars have not only foreseen the demise
of Western culture, but also believe it to be happening at the moment.
Albert Schweitzer thus describes the critical state Western culture is
in:

*“It is obvious to everyone that we are heading for cultural
self-destruction. What is left for us today is by no means safe, for it
has not come under destructive pressure yet, and is surely too frail to
be* *able to resist it. Modern man has much less capacity for culture
nowadays, because his environment has damagingly degraded his
spirit.”*[^3]

Schweitzer believes that industrialized man is devoid of freedom, unable
to focus his thoughts, incomplete, and in danger of losing his human
self. He further adds:

*“Society has developed so sophisticatedly that it can secretly control
men, and has made him so dependent on his society that he gives up his
entire aspect of thinking and reasoning... therefore, we have entered a
new era of medieval times. Thought has deliberately been abandoned in
the name of freedom and men are controlled by their societies. We have
inevitably lost faith in the truth because we have sacrificed our mental
independence. We have disturbed our own mental-emotional balance.
Inadvertent attention in any aspect can lead to thoughtless
establishment.*[^4]

Schweitzer considers “inadvertent struggles” another characteristic of
industrial societies. During the last few centuries, men have been
working like machines, not human beings. The essence of humanity has
been contaminated, and never generations lack the necessary factors for
human evolution:

*“Adults are drowned in work, increasingly submitting to superficial
disturbance absolute passiveness; ignoring their own “ego” and deviation
has become their physical need*.”[^5]

In his conclusion, Schweitzer emphasizes that man should reduce the
pressure of his worldly struggles and avoid frills

Schweitzer; a Protestant, agreed with the Dominican Reverend Eckhart
that

*“Man should not submit himself to the spiritual isolation considered
'selfishness; he should actively contribute to developing his society to
the highest possible level of morals. If nowadays only few people still
possess human emotions, it is because they tend to sacrifice their piety
and moral values for their own native land –they never exchange cultural
values with other societies that could guide them toward high spiritual
development.*[^6]

Schweitzer then concludes that the current social and cultural
foundations are leading us to a disaster that precedes a second
Renaissance even greater than the original- unless we wish to
self-destruct

*“During the second Renaissance, mentally originated activities will
prove crucial; in fact, mental activities have been the only logical and
practical principal man has come up with in his historical evolution
...I have no doubt that if we act thoughtfully, the revolution will take
place.*[^7]

However, the second revolution may be, its basis will definitely be
moderate selfishness, greed for power and pleasure, for without
religious influence, the revolution would be impossible. It is quite
likely that it be a religious revolution, which Islam -especially the
Shiites -have been a waiting, in order to form a divine global society.

It is a certain fact claimed by scholars of the humanities and positive
philosophies that in our era, crucial changes are on the horizon.
Whatever kind of evolution if may be, it will certainly concern human
beings. In assessment of the coming dramatic evolution, two major
theories have arisen:

**The First Theory:** pessimistically believes that human beings are
heading for spiritual and moral breakdown. Even if humans are not
totally demolished, they will become selfish, greedy living beings
lacking logic and conscience, drowning in their desires, and have no
choice but to fit in the machine like nuts and bolts.

**The Second Theory:** an optimistic one, states, “The evolution will
once again revive original values by considering man's intrinsic
capacities for evolution, and thus regain him his true self.”

Evidence shows the latter to be preferable, provided cooperation -and if
necessary, even sacrifice on behalf of the leaders of the society
alongside men of true wisdom and authentic scholars of culture and
humanities. But if, Heaven forbid, the selfish and power-greedy keep on
injuring humanity, and neglect the suicidal fall that awaits all of us,
the underlying evolution will definitely follow the first, pessimistic
theory -if, of course, it does not lead to the annihilation of the world
and its dwellers. According to that theory, humans will be degraded as
worthless as gears in a machine.

Considering man's intrinsic need for seeking excellent values and his
long-established passion for evolutionary culture, and having in mind
God's unquestionably wise will, we support the second theory, and
predict a prosperous and encouraging future after man undergoes a great
deal of suffering. Among the primary reasons for our logical optimism is
the fact that man possesses the virtual desire for excellent
evolutionary culture, and is always eager to protect himself from
various events that threaten mankind.

The Importance of Research on Definitions of Culture
----------------------------------------------------

In this section, after examining comprehensive definitions of culture in
various peoples and nationalities, we will come to the undeniable
conclusion that since mankind essentially desires culture; he will
prevail amidst all forces, greed and sensuality. As the glorious Koran
says:

*“God sends down out of heaven water, and the watercourses flow each in
its measure, and the torrent carries a swelling scum; and out of that
over which they kindle fire, being desirous of ornament or ware, out of
that rises a scum like it. So God strikes both the true and the false.
As for the scum, it vanishes as jetsam, and profits men abiding in the
earth. Even so God strikes his examples*.[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قرن ها بكنشت اين قرت نويست ماه ان ماه است واب وان اب نيست
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Centuries passed; and came a new one; the moon is the same, but not the
water.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عدل ان عدل است وفضل ان فضل هم ليك مستبدل شد اين قرن وامم
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Justice and greatness have not changed; however, this century and its
people have. After all these centuries,*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قرن ها بر قرن ها رفت اي همام وين معانى بر قرار و بر دوام
  </p>
</blockquote>

O *important one, none of these concepts have been affected*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شد مبدل اب اين جو جند بار عككس ماه وعكس اختر برقرار
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The water in the stream has changed, but the reflection of the moon and
the stars remain.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بس بنايش نيست بر اب روان بلكه بر اقطار اوج اسمان
  </p>
</blockquote>

*So its base must be high in the sky, not in the water.”*

The main reason for studying the supplied definitions of culture in the
best-known encyclopaedias and some lexical and sociological references
is to prove whether all societies of mankind believe that the true
meaning of ***culture*** includes the proper, deserving human evolution
or not, and that even if the selfish, greedy or nihilists attempt to
degrade it to a paradise of banal phenomena which they call culture, it
would still be false and antihuman.

It is the variety in scholars' points of view in interpreting culture
that has brought about a myriad of definitions, whereas they are all in
agreement about the main core of culture. As we will see later on, some
of the current differences are due to time and some popular phenomena,
and some others are caused by environmental features and various
perceptions of ideologies. For example, ***farhang**,* the equivalent in
Farsi for *culture,* means to pull[^9]; it also refers to a branch bent
down and covered with soil to help it grow, and able to be planted
elsewhere.

The Arabic equivalent for culture, ***al-thiqafa**,* means triumph,
intelligence and skill, and also means talent for science, crafts and
life nature.[^10]

In French, ***culture*** has derived from the Latin word ***cultural**,*
which means cultivating the earth for agriculture; in also means
planting.[^11]

In the German language, it conveys raising bacteria and other living
matter on a background of prepared food; cultivating and protecting
farms; and also a new group of organic living matter.[^12]

And finally, in Russian it means determining the extent of man's
influence on nature and his achievements in doing so.

Interrelations among Definitions of Culture
-------------------------------------------

Taking the various concepts of culture throughout history into
consideration, we can form a comprehensive definition: a general concept
conveying victory, cunning and understanding in Arabic; planting and
farming in Persian; and cultivating the soil and agriculture in Latin.

However, our studies do not intend to prove that culture shares the same
etymology in all lexicons and encyclopaedias around the world. But we
are confident that the word culture and its synonyms in the lexicons of
nations of ancient civilizations, all generally convey planting,
capability of agriculture and organic life heading toward all features
of fine intelligent and artistic life.

In Search of the Comprehensive Valuable Truth called Culture
------------------------------------------------------------

Let us presume the term conveying fine valuable culture in different
ethnic groups and nations throughout history -that undergoes virtual
changes and has recently found entirely new meanings -is ***culture**,*
which in ancient Persian means laying down a branch in order to raise it
as a shrub, and has gradually changed to convey wisdom, education, and
great intelligence. Let us also presume that the word *“**culture**”*
has been used in its filthiest ways. However, changes in a word's
meaning cannot demolish the concrete truth in *logical life.*

For example, consider the Persian word *“**qanoon**”,* which means a
musical instrument. Years later it was used to convey the truth, or an
important lifetime spent interpreting the truth. If we suppose that in
some societies, tyrants use such words as they desire regardless of the
true meanings they have, should we come to the conclusion that
***qanoon*** has lost its fixed meaning which refers to the relationship
between man and his own self, God, the universe, or his fellow men? It
would definitely be wrong, for the events depicting the relationship
between man, God and other beings are unquestionably unchangeable, even
if they are not termed ***qanoon.***

In the next chapters, we will strive to find the fixed comprehensive
truth which, whatever called, never loses its crucial role to
man -unless man gives up his identity in his world of machines to such
an extent that his life, soul and true self are totally demolished; or
as Tyler has said, “evolve into an intelligent ape[^13] and eventually
become a part in the machinery.

[^1]: Up to 1952.

[^2]: Of course, the above definition only applies to pioneer societies,
whereas pursuant culture does not focus on progress or evolution.

[^3]: To Have or To Be? by Erich Fromm.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: The Koran, Mc Milan, 1991; Sura Ar Ra’ad 13:17

[^9]: The Dehkhoda Persian Encyclopaedic Dictionary

[^10]: The Jahangiri Dictionary.

[^11]: Larrouse Dictionary.

[^12]: Duden Dictionary.

[^13]: Edward Burnett Tyler (1882-1917), distinguished English
anthropologist.


