Definitions of Culture in Well-known Dictionaries and Encyclopaedias
====================================================================

It is obviously impossible to compile and study all of the current
definitions of culture in one single volume. However, we can refer to
distinguished dictionaries and encyclopaedias and explore the main ones
given by established scholars around the world.

Culture Described in Persian Reference Books
--------------------------------------------

“Farhang (derived from farhandge), (the Farsi equivalent for culture)
refers to knowledge, intelligence, wisdom, accountability, a Persian
lexicon, Keikavus’ mother, and a branch put in soil to be planted
elsewhere. It also means a water drain.”[^1]

Hossein ibn Fakhruddin Hassan Anjui Shirazi believes *“farhang to have
six various meanings:*

**First***, knowledge*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فلك ر قدر تو اندوخته بسى رفعت خرد ز راى تو اموخته بسى فرهنك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Your value has greatly elevated the heavens, and intelligence has
gained much culture from your ideas.”* (Kamal Ismail)

**Second***, manner*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مرد را ور هذر فرهنجد توسنى از سرش بياهنجد
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“If man acquires culture alongside his art, will be able to manage any
severity”* (Sanai)

**Third***, intelligence*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نه دانش باشد انكس رانه فرهنك كه وقت اشتى بيش اورد جنك
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“One who raises war at peace-time, knows no knowledge or culture.”*
(Nezami)

**Fourth***, a book containing Persian words and their meanings*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
نوشتست بخت از بى كام خويش بر اوراق فرهنك او نام خويش
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Fate has written his name in its own desire on the pages of culture.”*
(Souzani)

**Fifth,** *it is Keikavus’* *mother's name*

**Sixth,** *a branch buried in soil so that it would become a shrub and
be planted somewhere else.”*[^2]

Explaining the entry “farhang” in his Persian encyclopaedia, the late
Dehkhoda has cited many verses by distinguished literary figures in
Persian in order to further illustrate the vast range and depth of
culture in Persian literature.

The Persian Encyclopaedia reads: “Culture shows a peoples' life style
and traditions in anthropology. Its English equivalent was first used
academically in the nineteenth century by Sir E.B. Tyler. The concept of
culture has proved so useful that it is now also used in other fields of
sociology, literature and biology. Culture has been the distinctive
point between mankind and animals ever since the rising of man.

The traditions, ideas and conditions of a group are passed on through
its generations mostly by education, not genetically. Following customs
is enforced in each culture through its own special system of rewarding
and punishment. Language and other symbolic tools do play an important
role in the transfer of culture between generations, but some kinds of
behaviour can be achieved solely by experience. Every society possesses
its own specific “cultural basics” which include all organizations
necessary to man, e.g. social organizations, religion, political
organizations, economic organizations, and material culture (tools,
devices, weapons, clothing, etc.). Sophisticated societies are
distinguished from “primitive” ones in the complexity of their cultural
bases. However, these two terms must always be considered relatively.

Basically, each human community has a definite culture, but in complex
societies, secondary cultures can also branch out of its national,
social and religious conditions. On the other hand, peaceful or even
hostile cultural contact can lead to common cultures acceptable by
various nations -based on the fact that co-culturalism can exist and
each side may adopt the other's traditions. The characteristics of a
culture may be spread directly or indirectly among its groups. Such a
process is called diffusion.

A cultural area is a land where some features of a culture are visible.
Various schools of thought have emerged in anthropology attempting to
account for how cultures work, develop and spread, but all agree on a
vast evolutionary process throughout the history of man, especially in
technical and economic domains. However, the evolution has not taken
place at the same rate for all nations, and is still incomplete in many
of them, although at times co-culturalism can integrate several steps
into one.

In the first phase, food-hunting, small groups of nomadic hunters,
fishermen and fruit pickers move from one place to another in search of
food. They live temporarily in caves or other shelters, as in the lower
and middle Stone Age.

The next phase is producing food, in which man has learned how to tame
animals and use plants. He lives in small settlements, like the upper
Stone Age.

After that, civil life began, evidence of which can be found in great
ancient civilizations.

Categorizing a contemporary culture should not be done solely on the
basis of its technical or industrial progress. For example, today's
food-hunters, e.g. native Australians are not comparable with lower
Stone Age hunters 25,000 years ago, because ancient systems of
relationships and religion must have been different.”[^3]

We may now come to consider these points:

**1.** No dictionary or encyclopaedia has provided a clear-cut, specific
definition of culture. The reason is not negligence on behalf of
scholars in identifying culture, but due to the great diversity in
cultural elements and phenomena, which prevent a fixed comprehensive
definition. Neglect in achieving a complete definition could also be due
to some cultural researchers ignoring its spiritual and supernatural
meanings -an ignorance which has unfortunately infected some people.

**2.** “Culture has been the point of distinction between man and other
animal species.”[^4]

If we are to take into account meritorious deeds and phenomena in our
definition of culture, we would have to search for the distinctions
between man and animals before the existence of culture in man’s
fatalistic life, for some scholars consider meritorious phenomena and
deeds prior to his compulsory affairs in life, e.g. thinking about
preparing a settlement, developing legal relationships among a society,
social management, etc.

**3.** “In all, all anthropologists approve of a step-by-step
evolutionary process in the history of mankind, particularly in
technical and economic areas.”[^5]

A few points must be considered concerning the above statement:

**a.** Since freedom of will is equal to authority in the definition of
evolution -particularly value evolution -the technical and economic
aspect brought up by compulsory life affairs therefore cannot be
included in the concept of culture, as forced efforts to provide a home
cannot be thought of as culture.

**b.** “The evolutionary process throughout the history of mankind has
not taken place at the same rate all over the world, and some cultures
have not completed it.”[^6]

This is an absolutely correct fact, also applicable to scientific and
technological progress made by civilizations; in other words, no theory
or school of thought is able to prove these events advancing in a
direct, orderly fashion.

Anyone aware of the development of science and civilizations admits that
the factors causing their existence have not only been irregular, but
totally unpredictable.

**c.** “Sometimes co-culturalism can integrate a few of the phases in
the process. In the first step, food seeking, small groups of nomadic
hunters, fishermen and fruit pickers move form one place to another in
search of food.”[^7]

Here we can see phenomena concerning culture and its mutation -which,
however, due to their fatalistic nature - cannot be included in the
evolutionary concept of culture.

Culture in Arabic Reference Books
---------------------------------

The Arabic equivalent for culture is the word *al-thiqafa* which means
“victory, intelligence and skill, and also talent for science, crafts
and literature.”[^8]

“Its root, *thaqaf*, means skilful, clever, brilliant and
victorious.”[^9]

To find a definition of culture and the topics concerning it, it is best
to look up ***al-thiqafa*** and ***al-adab**.*[^10]

Al-Monjad thus defines *al-adab:* “An *adib* is a person familiar with
literature. Its plural form is *oda'ba.* An *adib* is well-trained in
lexical and literary subjects, and possesses great culture. *Adab* means
science and knowledge as a whole or a particular field. It also means
what a person or object morally deserves, e.g. how one should behave in
a classroom, or as a judge, etc.[^11]

In the following verses also, *adab* refers to culture, and conveys
knowledge and demonstration of fine morals according to appropriate
principles achieved through conditions in one's lifetime.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كن ابن من شئت واكتسب ادبا نعنيك محموده عن النسب
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Acquire knowledge and culture, no matter what family you may have been
raised.. Culture will make you independent of any relation.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ان الفتى من يقول ها انا ذا ليس الفتى من يقول كان ابى
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Truly, a free man is one who can claim, “This is who I am, not am so
and so’s son*[^12]*.*

Culture in French Reference Books
---------------------------------

Deriving from the Latin word *cultural,* it means fertilizing (soil),
production, or planting. Culture also has several figurative meanings:

**1.** Enhancing mental strength, e.g. mental culture.

**2.** One's whole acquired knowledge, for example general culture,
literary culture, philosophical culture, classic culture and massed
culture[^13] which spread by means of mass media.

**3.** A series of activities based on various socio-historical
guidelines, and also structures pertaining to a specific behaviour or
performance caused by the education of a particular social group; for
instance, a special culture in the society that relates that to Western
culture.

**4.** Culture in French has also been referred to the physique; for
example, in ancient texts, *culture physique* means physical education
and culturalism refers to gymnastics.[^14]

Another reference book reads, “In the fifteenth century, *culture*
derived from the Latin word *cultural,* which means fertilizing;
likewise, *cultivar,* meaning planting and cultivating was used in the
twelfth century.”[^15]

The Rober Encyclopedia has thus defined culture:

*“All of the knowledge that provides mankind with the power to criticize
and the taste for judgment.”*

It then asks the reader to refer to words such as knowledge, education,
training, and science, adding that.

*“Culture is what remains in man's mind when all else is forgotten.
Adjectives like vast, strong and high hove been used to describe it.”*

Two points should be considered about the definition of culture in
French reference books.

**1.** A careful study of the above definitions shows that the majority
of the meanings provided are based on virtual facts which remain
unchanged even if the objects or persons applicable to them do, unless
the whole nature of mankind undergoes complete metamorphosis and becomes
a helpless thing like animals or objects or parts of machinery. However,
literary and philosophical culture will be unaffected, for their bases
are truly unchangeable.

It is impossible to change the truly original facts shown to the French
by Victor Hugo in ***Les Miserables*** Even Sartre and his like, with
all their novel phrases and terms tending to influence the
simple-minded, failed to eliminate Victor Hugo's ***Les Miserables***
from the culture of mankind. Likewise, the dogmatic writers of our own
era could not eliminate the role of Mowlavi's ***Mathnavi*** in great
human culture; all they achieved was brainwashing the simple-minded with
their contradicting jargon.

They felt that they were fulfilling their own selfishness, which was a
grave mistake itself; selfishness is an insatiable flame that only
quenches when it has burned itself out, no matter how many others it
also victimizes in the process.

**2**. Categorizing the meaning of culture into the real and the
figurative leads to three possibilities: first, some meanings may be
archaic, e.g. agriculture and cultivation of the soil, which is the
Latin meaning for culture. Some other meanings are frequently used
regardless of their older ones. The second possibility is that culture
initially meant agriculture, but through gradual use in texts of high
moral values, was transformed to a new meaning. Third, the old meaning
of culture, i.e. cultivating and using a potential, is an unchangeably
comprehensive reality applicable to various things, e.g. the soil,
trees, animals and human beings.

Therefore, metaphor interpretations in this case cannot have a definite,
evidential reason. We also must keep in mind that if a word changes in
meaning, its original meaning, conveying definite true fact(s) is not
necessarily omitted.

Culture in View of German Reference Books
-----------------------------------------

The Duden Dictionary thus defines culture:

All of the aspects of mental or artistic life;

The fine aspect of life;

Raising bacteria and other living matter on a platform made of food;

Cultivating agricultural soil;

A new species of organic life.

Another reference, defining culture as all aspects of a nation's
lifestyle, lists them as:

a) Human activities in order to fulfil man -and his society's basic
requirements, such as food, clothing, shelter, health care and
environmental protection.

b) Providing the means needed for all human activities such as science,
industry, construction, organizations, etc

c) Efforts have been made ever since mankind inhabited the earth and
culture arose with them towards providing human character with
originality, finesse and form, limiting inferior human desires and
transforming them into highly elevated needs.

The first significant point about the above definition is that such
encyclopaedias, having mentioned the highest facts of value defining
culture -such as giving form, originality and delicacy to man's
character and transforming his mediocre desires into high moral
needs -state that “culture began when mankind arose on earth.” In other
words, the facts described as meaning(s) of culture are unchangeable,
and cannot be contaminated by the new worthless meanings added to
culture nowadays, considering “what man's talents show” and “what his
values represent.”

Culture in the Encyclopaedia Americana
--------------------------------------

“Culture, a vast concept, has been used by sociological and
anthropological experts. Its other meanings refer to educated persons,
i.e. those who are well-composed and are familiar with culture and the
fine arts of life.

Specialized discussions on culture arose in anthropological texts of the
mid-nineteenth century. Sir Edward Burnett Tyler, the English
anthropologist, used the term “culture” to represent a developed series
of ideas and what arises out of historical experiences. In 1910,
American anthropologists used culture to show the specific
characteristics of peoples in societies. In the 1930s, Ruth Benedict
described culture as those patterns of thought and action that makes one
distinct among others.

The word “culture” is of much significance to sociological experts, for
it provides the simplest concept for expressing the behaviour and
history of mankind. For instance, compared to the term “society” -which,
by definition, refers to an organized group dependent upon each, other
who coexists inside a system in order to continue their production and
life -culture has vaster applications. Culture shows the behavioural
content of the society. The point here is: Why has culture found so many
various definitions?

The reason is that culture does not consist of a single, homogeneous
topic or refer to an individual. It covers many elements, including
ideas, emotions, values, ends, behaviours, tendencies and experiences.”

The Evolution of Culture
------------------------

Studying the process of evolution in the history of culture, we come to
three significant points: first, culture can form the distinction
between human characteristics and animal norms. Secondly, the observed
behavioural pattern is due to the outcomes of man's cause-and-effect
physical development. Thirdly, population growth and the cultivation of
man's surroundings have led to cultural manners focusing on symbols and
language, in turn resulting in a vast treasure of thoughts and ideas
throughout history. Considering it through a vaster point of view, we
may realize that culture is not the fulfilment of one of man's needs,
but a manner-based phenomenon aiming to provide magnificent virtues of
life to creatures potentially possessing it.

Man, having the capability to build tools and use them for various
purposes, can obviously think of different subjects, interrelate and
organize his thoughts and develop a new idea. It is also possible to
pass on the findings of one generation to the next through transcription
and records. No other living creature has such abilities. Culture found
its true identity through the development of such commitments.

Culture: A Lifestyle
--------------------

Cultural variables are based upon man's creativity and talent for
imagination. Human beings are able to conceive any manner of behaviour
or meaning of human life. However, there are limits to practical and
economic life that restrict the process of developing and establishing
variable forms of concepts and social life.

The economic and materialistic aspects of man's life have, in various
stages, become his ability to transform his natural surroundings into
higher comfort and more property. Although the artistic, research and
philosophical aspects of culture have also developed, we are not sure if
they have done so in certain stages.

All in all, absolute diversity in cultures on earth seems to be fading
away. The increase in Western, industrialized lifestyles spreading
around the world has influenced many unique distinctions at the cost of
replacing them with industrial civil patterns.

Historians and anthropologists believe that cultural diversity must have
reached its peak during the 14th and 15th centuries; i.e. before
Europeans began to infiltrate into the lifestyles of other nations.

Cultural Elements
-----------------

Analyzing cultures requires certain concepts. First, we can categorize
cultural elements according to quantity and basic principles. However,
using specific terms will lead to the same series and usages. Apart from
classifying the constituents of culture, other concepts are also
necessary for research and utilization of culture. Here, we are faced
with two significant ideas: concepts and actions.

Each cultural element (showing ideas on behavioural patterns, or
objectives) includes all interpretations or symbols of the mental
reactions of those facing the element.

The usage of a cultural element is determined by its researcher, not an
individual caused by the culture. Sociologists have also categorized
culture into two schools of thought which are to fulfil man's mental
needs.

Cultural Manner
---------------

Pattern-based manners can also be defined in culture using a specific
method; in other words, culture can be used to define the way to do
certain things in society.

Therefore, “cultural subgroups” convey certain methods for some of the
actions in specific parts of the society. Thus, Afro-Americans in the
United States have lifestyles very different from others, although the
all live in one country. Culture used in behavioural manners is mostly
applied to solve problems.

There are several points to consider here:

**1**. “Its (culture's) secondary concepts symbolize educated,
well-cultured people.” It is incorrect to call this a secondary concept,
for any individual who possesses the virtual characteristics called
culture can be considered a cultural person, as we would regard anyone
that has the qualities and manners of civilization civilized. The
concept and term “civilization” is not a sideline concept for civilized
man, and so neither is culture.

**2.** The text, unfortunately, does not mention the time-honoured
originality of cultural phenomena such as science, education, moral
virtues, and art.

**3.** “All in all, anthropologists agree on the fact that culture,
unlike instinctive or hereditary patterns, consists of behavioural
learning methods and ways to adopt them.”

Since cultural elements and activities concern the appropriate values of
man’s life, we must point out that the intrinsic culture-seeking
potentials in humans are virtual, and activating them calls for need and
conscious effort. For example, the potential need for acquiring science,
art and moral virtues exists in humans regardless of time or
geographical issues, but using it in reality requires education and
practical admittance.

**4.** A considerable point in the Encyclopaedia Americana is, “The term
'culture' is of high importance to sociologists, for it provides the
simplest concepts needed to express human behaviour and history. For
instance, compared to the term “society” -which, by definition, refers
to an organized group dependant upon each other coexisting inside a
system in order to continue their production in life -culture has vaster
applications. Culture shows the behavioural content of the society.”

It is true that culture is highly important, but we must note that its
importance is not due to the fact that it provides the simplest concept
expressing the history and behaviour of mankind, for the simplicity of a
mass abstract noun, such as law, pleasure, sorrow, generosity or reality
cannot possibly lead to its comprehensive explanation. Therefore,
encyclopaedias and dictionaries have begun research to find the complete
truth about culture -and have so far led to around 164 definitions of
it-likewise; much effect has been put into research on the concept of
law.[^16]

This is the best reason for the complexity in the definitions of
culture. The fact stated by the encyclopaedia, “Why has culture found
some many various definitions? The reason is that culture is a
homogeneous topic and does not pertain to one individual alone; it
covers a great many elements of high diversity, such as ideas, emotions,
values, intentions, actions, tendencies and experiences,” needs more
accurate consideration, for it is true that the various definitions of
culture are not homogeneous.

This best proves that finding a comprehensive commonality among the
existing 164 definition has not been what all the dictionaries and
encyclopaedias have been struggling for. Considering the diversity among
human souls, it would be extremely hard to do so, even in case of the
examples we have mentioned (emotions, values, goals, actions, tendencies
and experiences).

**5.** The theory that “Culture shows the behavioural content of the
society,” depicts the resulting outcome, of culture, not the facts
facing it.

In other words, the theory believes that the culture of a society lies
in the behavioural aspects of its inhabitants; however. it does not
mention the intrinsic factors of culture, i.e. moral virtues and
aesthetic values Considering the principle that “no effect can totally
reveal its cause,” our objection is quite justified. For instance, much
effort is made nowadays to advertise a culture like goods all over the
world. Is the reason behind the aesthetic efforts truly serving mankind,
or to increase consumer demands? Those who regard culture a purely
behavioural subject should have a convincing explanation ready for such
problems.

**6.** The Encyclopaedia Americana states three points about the
evolution of culture:

**First**: “Culture is exclusive to humans, not all living beings.”  
 This point, as far as our knowledge of biology is concerned, seems to
be totally accurate.

**Second**: “Such behaviour is a result of cause and Effect outcomes in
human; physical development.”

This point calls for a more scientific analysis; if “human physical
development” means that a significant extent of cultural effects appear
as intrinsic outcomes in the body and its development (such as mental,
emotional, etc effects), it is quite reasonable; however, if this means
limiting cultural effects in the physique, it would not be acceptable,
since human spiritual evolution by means of internal factors such as
religion, accountability, morals, love and humanitarianism proves highly
more fruitful than depicting physically human cultural development.

**Thirdly:** the fact that “Population growth and the consumption of
natural resources, have caused cultural norms to result in a treasure of
ideas and approaches throughout history, based on symbols and language,”
can also be accepted, except a short point of interpretation that is
necessary about “cultural norms.” Since there is no comprehensive
definition of culture in such texts, “cultural norms” remain
unexplained.

**7.** The text reads, “Considering the vastness of culture, it is not
what primitive men invented owing to their needs; culture is a
manner-based phenomenon tending to supply beings with the great moral
life they potentially had.”

This theory calls for more careful attention, for mutual coexistence
between men and the serious cooperation and harmony it demanded, was
undoubtedly essential; in other words, the gradual necessity of force
balance and sacrificing endless personal desires -which caused
destructive disturbance -led man to accepting limited desires in order
to make mutual coexistence feasible This was the beginning of co-
existential culture, which was established by men in completely free
will, not by force. The text then states, “Man, who is able to build
tools, and use them in different jobs, can definitely also think of
various ideas, interrelate them, and come up with new ones.” Obviously,
as the need for physical tools existed, human spiritual life also needed
the most basic cultural factors.

Let us consider the following statements in order to further elaborate
on our point:

“Delicate philosophical ideas and elevated religious beliefs are
generally intertwined in legends, like an ore containing both coal and
gold. Unless mythological analyses separate myth from ideological units,
it would be impossible to explore the treasures of human thought buried
in legends.

Regardless of the entertaining lullaby-like aspect of myths and legends,
in fact, it is the existence of such highly original thought supplies
unconsciously lying in various contexts that makes studying mythology
inevitable for researchers of the history of the development of
philosophical schools of thought, anthropologists, sociologists,
theologists, idealists, scholars of humanities and literature, and those
who aim for awaking the conscience of mankind.

One of the best ways to discover the basic origins of legends is
definitely compiling an alphabetical glossary of the main terms and
concepts, and foreign legends.”[^17]

Distinguished historians also agree on this:

“It is not logical that arts and supernatural facts such as man's desire
for beauty, truth, and the good- generally, the “ideal” -are totally
separate from the physical needs he fulfils in order to stay alive. The
reason is that we believe the best way to a successful life is to feel
that human life is a meritorious truth.

Some experts have come to believe that primitive men struggling with
their surroundings, either found no chance to discover their spiritual
truth, or felt no desire for the *internal* tendencies towards eternal
facts and supernatural discoveries.

However, scholars who know human nature correctly believe that primitive
men were not obsessed with the practical aspects of life like their
predecessors are nowadays, and even had spiritual affairs, and used
their emotions to colour the objects around him, to look beyond their
natural appearance and realize their supernatural meanings.

Thus, the emotional values lying in objects became more significant than
their natural features. If we consider carefully the life of ancient
Australians in the vast plains -usually thought of as the poorest of
people due to high violence and social maladjustment -we would discover
from the mysteries in their lifestyle, that even every cane or stone
they used contained historical or traditional characteristics.
Therefore, canes and stones used in ancient eras were related to secrets
in the human surroundings of that time that are not conceivable now.
However, man did consider himself the happiest creature on earth.

In brief, since the earliest times, men have been both physical and
spiritual; both realistic and idealistically perfectionist.”[^18]

**8**. The text says, “...culture is a part of human creativity and
imagination as a manner of life -the basis for cultural variables. Man
can conceive almost any behavioural state or interpretation of human
life. There are, of course, some obstacles on the way to establish
stable forms of social and life variables, due to biological and
economic realities.

The economic and materialistic aspects of human life have apparently in
the course of time turned into the transform of his natural environment
into greater wealth and luxury. Aspects of culture such as arts,
research and philosophy have developed in some periods, but their
continuity is doubted. All in alt, cultures of the world are losing
their absolute diversity.

As modern industrial lifestyles spread throughout the world; much rare
cultural diversity have been sacrificed to make way for industrial civil
life. Anthropologists and historians believe cultural variety to have
been at its peak during the 14th and 15th centuries -shortly before
European began to infiltrate the lifestyles of other countries.”

There some points in the above statements that require further study and
criticism:

**a)** The statement, “Cultural variables are based on creativity and
imagination” is generally correct and acceptable, but the point is that
the cultural constants inside humans need to be discovered and
distinguished from variable cultural examples; the above statement not
only ignores this point, but even makes it more mysterious later on in
the passage: “All in all, the cultures on earth are apparently losing
their diversity.”

**b)** The text reads, “Man can conceive almost any behavioural state or
interpretation of human life.”

The above sentence is somewhat ambiguous, for if the physical outcomes
of human behaviour are meant, they are obviously noticeable through
studying ideas and senses by means of behavioural research. And if the
focus is upon the total identity and internal and external results and
reasons for human behaviour -as most scholars around the world have
admitted, the number of human faculties and capabilities that still
remain unknown far exceed his known abilities; such a general statement
would require revision.

This is also applicable to the next phrase- “interpretation of human
life,” for our knowledge of the true nature and factors of the existence
of living beings is extremely meagre, so our interpretation of life
would be highly limited and superficial. Let us consider the theory
proposed by a distinguished Russian biologist:

"*Every object in the world can be thought of as both living and
lifeless. Accepting such an approach makes such questions like "What is
life? What objects can be considered alive, and which* *cannot? How did
life arise?*” *meaningless. As we know, the definition of "life" is
still struggling in dispute, and many scholars have failed to achieve
it.”*[^19]

After comprehensive research on life and its development, he adds:

*“It is only by means of such an evolutionary approach that we can not
only discover what goes on in the bodies of living beings, but also
provide answers to the seven million “whys” we confront on our path to
discovering the true essence of* *life*”[^20]

However, since discovering why the phenomenon “life” has progressed so
evolutionarily is as bard as the other discoveries about life, we must
say that discovering the true essence of life in every object, makes us
face seven million “whys” plus one.

**c)** It then comes to the conclusion that:

*“However, the diversity among cultures on earth is apparently fading
away with industrial Western lifestyles spreading out throughout the
world; some rare diversities have disappeared to make way for industrial
civil life.”*

The encyclopaedia unfortunately refuses to mention any of the causes or
positive negative outcomes of its predictions.

We must first address the problem whether cultural diversity on earth is
deteriorating by itself, or by fate, or powerful dictators striving to
strip man of any freedom, dignity or the life he deserves?

We then face the question whether industrial societies spreading
throughout the world will destroy only the rare differences or influence
all cultural distinctions and therefore also abolish the identity of
culture itself?

The first statement, “The diversity of cultures on earth will gradually
fade away”, implies that an identity named culture will not be able to
withstand Western industrial lifestyles, which is likelier than other
possibilities. If so, there would be no creature called “man” on earth
any longer, and no sign of his great potentials, abilities, ideals and
beauty either.

In other words, if Western industry dominates the world, we would face a
clock work of machinery instead of man or humanity. If such a vision
embraces reality, and man loses his life, culture, ideologies and
ideals, the motive for living would either remain or be destroyed; if
the latter proves true, the world would turn into a huge industrial
factory, which may continue functioning until its resources run out, but
will eventually destruct; that is, of course, if the greedy dictators
allow life to last so long.

On the other hand, if the motive for life survives, it will overflow
time and time again, bring industry under man's control and prevent life
from being sacrificed by ignorant dictators and anti-moralist gluttons
for power. In other words, when culture vanishes from the earth -the
background for the evolution of man's life -it would definitely mean the
end of life.

**9.** The encyclopaedia does not go into explaining definitions,
classifications, significance, changes or transfer in “cultural
elements”, so we cannot make any comments on this matter.

**10.** The encyclopaedia presents a definition of culture in order to
elaborate cultural styles, but does not explain the nature or
fundamentals of culture. If what the author(s) have tried to convey is
merely that “culture can by applied to certain social procedures”, their
concept of culture is not at all clear.

After our study and criticism of the treatise on culture presented in
the encyclopaedia, we may undoubtedly claim that since the main issue
here is mankind, it is impossible to achieve any acceptably true facts
about the highest of human concepts -such as culture, just to name
one -which all nations, even the most industrially sophisticated, may
agree upon unless we all come to an agreement on the identity and
characteristics of man.

Culture Seen by the International Grolier Encyclopaedia
-------------------------------------------------------

“In biology, culture refers to a group of living cells or organisms
grown artificially, such as several kinds of micro organisms like
bacteria, yeast and fungus growing and reproducing, in a medium. The
word 'culture' has two main applications:

**1**. It refers to any product of a great civilization, such as art,
literature or philosophy; therefore, it could colloquially refer to
highly educated persons.

**2.** Anthropologists use the term 'culture' to distinguish man's
history and life. For instance, the creation of ideas, thoughts, habits
and objects leading to man's ever-complicating coexistence with his
surroundings.

In this book, we shall deal with the second meaning of culture, which
has academic and historical usages. The latter meaning of culture leads
to three major domains:

**a.** culture as an evolutionary concept,

**b**. culture as a descriptive concept,

**c.** culture as a lifestyle or human behaviour .

The development of the concept of culture also depends on the above
categorization. At first evolutional research (such as Darwin's studies
on biological evolution) appears. Then we come to descriptive treatises
on culture, coinciding with the early 20th century developments in
research on peoples and cultures. Finally, various cultural forms and
changes in human behaviour are to be studied.

As an evolutionary concept, culture indicates those characteristics that
distinguish man from other animals; characteristics that have evolved
through million of years since life arose on earth. The fossils found
from the Ice Age made by humans or humanlike creatures, each provide a
history. Wherever there is a sign of thought or conscious human activity
in order to control or respond to his surroundings, there is also
culture.

Such evidence, in the shape of stone tools at least 700,000 years old,
alongside Autralopithecus fossils has been found in south Africa.”[^21]

Culture in the World Book Encyclopaedia
---------------------------------------

“Culture is a term that sociologists apply to all patterns of life.
Colloquially, culture means activities like arts, literature or music,
but sociologists also include in it all thoughts, imaginations and all
methods made by a group. Therefore, arts, beliefs, habits, innovations,
inventions, language, technology and traditions are all part of culture.

Civilization is a term similar to culture, except that civilization
pertains to highly sophisticated patterns of life, whereas culture is a
way of life; whether simple or consisting of detailed ideas, culture is
made up of ways man has learned to behave, feel or think (and not his
involuntary biological functions).

Any human being works, understands and thinks in a manner that shows his
culture. In other words, culture refers to functions man as learned to
work, understand others or express his ideas more efficiently

Some animals, guided by their genetic instincts, follow certain patterns
of behaviour. Animals naturally inherit the methods of searching for
such requirements as food or shelter. The distinctive point between man
and animals in this case is that man is capable of experiencing
alternative methods for providing his shelter and achieves better
results through his own attempts. There is no end to man's struggle
towards faster, easier and better achievements. Culture consists of a
series of experiences acquired by every part of the human body.

Sigmund Freud, the well-known Austrian psychologist, sees culture as an
artificial instrument man uses in order to improve his physical
faculties (like dentures or glasses). He believes culture, like any
other man-made tool, enables him to do what his body could not manage.

For instance, if man had arrows, he would not require forks or hooks; if
he had tame horses, he would never have to run; and without culture, he
would not be able to send astronauts to the moon and provide them with
enough technology to survive.

The human body needs oxygen, a certain temperature and many other
necessities in order to remain alive. Likewise, man-made instruments and
other cultural facilities enable him to overcome the limitations of his
unpleasant surroundings and survive.”

Then the text goes on to define primitive culture as a simple survival
tool, and quotes Sir Edward Burnett Tyler's definition of culture:

“Tyler, the distinguished English anthropologist, defines culture as
other scholars do nowadays. In his 1971 book on primitive culture, he
defines culture as:

*"A series of any beliefs or ideas (general or complicated) including
science, ideologies, arts, morals, law, traditions and any other habit
or capability man may have acquired as a member of his society.”*

The origin of human culture dates back to prehistoric times. Some
milestones in its process can be named as:

1. The development of tools and instruments,

2. The rise of agriculture,

3. The growth of large cities,

4. The progress in scribing and calligraphy.”[^22]

The article continues with explanations on each of them. The World Book
Encyclopedia presents five different viewpoints in defining culture:

1. Culture as all modes of life.

2. Culture meaning various activities, e.g. arts, literature and music.

3. Folk culture includes all thoughts, mental perceptions and methods
for performing group actions. Therefore, culture consists of arts,
beliefs, ideologies, traditions, inventions, innovations, languages,
habits and technology.

4. Culture consists of the modes man acquires in his behaviour, emotions
and thought (except his involuntarily biological functions).

5. Culture includes all experiences gained by various parts of the body.

The text finally introduces Freud, who considers culture equivalent to
the most normal of tools and absolutely natural phenomena limited to the
physical aspects of man's life. The most significant definition given in
the text pertains to Tyler.

Surprisingly, the fourth definition contradicts the fifth; the fourth
definition separates man's “naturally biological” functions from
culture, whereas the fifth -particularly Freud -says nothing about
supernatural phenomena or facts.

How Does Culture Change?
------------------------

All cultures are constantly changing. Changes may happen rapidly or
slowly. Since culture consists of various factors, changes in one will
also affect the others. Some sociologists believe much social
maladjustment is due to unequal changes in different cultural
components. When some parts tend to lag behind others, cultural
retardation develops. Most of the cultural retardation observed in the
history of the United States concerns ideas, traditions and mental
matters. Science and technology advances so rapidly that it often
overtakes culture and leaves it behind.

Therefore, guiding the leaders of technology today -who lucratively
provide themselves with power and authority -toward more consideration
for human culture and moral virtues may prove in vain, or perhaps cause
them to become even more resistant toward it, and strengthen the advance
of technology. Therefore, it is best to address societies where the
fundamentals of human culture still exist, and hope for a day when they
lead a cultural renaissance.

A point ought to be emphasized here, although we will address the issue
when we explore disharmony in cultural elements. The point is that
unfortunately, scholars currently presenting definitions and
characteristics for culture do not distinguish the stable sections of
culture from its variable parts.

The unchangeable cultural elements depending on man's fixed needs should
be distinguished from the change-prone elements; however, the two are
usually integrated, which leads to errors in cultural activities and
understanding. Let us now consider the general, unchangeable principles
of culture which are not to be mistakenly mixed with its variable
examples. For example:

1. Eagerly seeking greatness is an undefiable principle, despite the
variety of its outcomes in different people.

2. Respect, which is reflected in human cultures in forms such as love
and devotion for fellow beings.

3. Man's intense need for a meritorious life.

4. Adjusting and correcting the four relationships: man-himself,
man-God, man-universe, man-fellow beings.

Culture Seen by Argentine References
------------------------------------

“Etymologically, culture means cultivating the earth and reflects the
relationship between men and the earth, although its meaning has
undergone change through time. The simplest definition of culture
describes it as a series of physical and spiritual advantages a human
community acquires in order to establish harmonious coexistence in its
national society.” Argentina's scholars, lexicographers, historians,
philosophers and even revolutionary anti-imperialist sociologists have
defined culture as mentioned above. As well as being a true fact
existing outside man's physique, culture also has mental aspects.

Most intellectuals have failed to understand the comprehensive quality
of culture, for they are obsessed with individualistic civil culture
(and also affected by Imperialistic culture infiltration), and therefore
cannot realize how vast the concept of culture really is. It goes far
beyond that, in fact. This is why we are addressing Chinese, Spanish,
French and Latin American cultures.

Imperialism is constantly influencing the masses, “democratizing”
cultures by imposing its own imperialistic culture, luring intellectuals
towards its anti-revolutionary goals, spreading huge amounts of
publications and movies. By presenting imaginary tales of big city life
and imperialistic centre lifestyles, they create a mirage of a luxurious
life. They have thus estranged millions of their own culture by
spreading American patterns of life. Although America has presented the
lifestyle, Americans themselves are devoid of historical or cultural
background.

In South America, native cultures were unable to resist imperialistic
propaganda, so alien cultures succeeded in separating the middle and
well-to-do classes from the country's national culture. As imperialism
falls astray now, native and alien cultures, still in constant conflict,
continue to divide the people. The first impact reflects in arts. It is
not surprising that is South American folk art (in Brazil and Mexico,
for instance) shows significantly political background. The reason is
the endless folk culture and increasing revolutionary conscience of
third-world South American artists.”[^23]

We now should point out a few things concerning the above text:

**1**. The briefest definition given here for culture is the same as the
comprehensive one presented in other well-known encyclopaedias. Since we
have already treated them, there is no need for further elaboration.

**2.** “As well as being a true fact existing outside man's physique,
culture also has mental aspects.” This is absolutely correct, and we
will address it later on in our discussion entitled: “Culture is a
Bi-polar Truth.”[^24]

**3.** “Culture is also a historical reality.” Considering the
definition of culture and its historical effects, it is obviously a
reality arisen from man's original needs.

**4.** “Intellectuals are mostly unable to understand the comprehensive
identity of culture.” The reason is the great diversity among cultural
elements and outcomes which inhibit a comprehensively common concept.
However, if we consider culture as a progressive reality, we may present
a definition based on the one given during the first sections of this
book, which can include all of the elements and outcomes of culture:

*"Culture consists of the appropriate qualities or meritorious methods
for man's spiritual and physical activities, based on logical thinking
and emotions arisen from sensible evolution.”*

**5.** The other reason mentioned why the comprehensive identity of
culture has not been understood, lies in cultural invasion -and also due
to Imperialistic cultural invasion. “We have already mentioned that the
issue currently is not cultural invasion, but deculturization, for in
order to generalize and globalize culture according to the definition
above, obviously invasion and opposition are totally unnecessary, for
all of mankind eagerly desires a culture so developed that it would
guarantee their spiritual and physical evolution.

**6.** “By influencing the masses, 'democratizing' culture and imposing
Imperialistic cultures, Imperialism is luring intellectuals towards its
own anti- revolutionary goals.”

“Democratizing culture” is equivalent to “pursuant culture”, which
totally neglects the moral, political, literary, artistic or religious
development of man, for the motto of pursuant culture can be defined as:

“*What I want is certified, only because I want it”.*

**7**. “By mass-producing publications and films, they are constantly
deteriorating the minds of the masses. A mirage of a luxurious life is
created through showing fairy tales of big city life in Imperialist
centres. Millions have been infatuated by American lifestyle propaganda,
and have become estranged with their own culture.”

Such statements need no further comment. However, those who lead the
operations aimed to destroy other cultures should have in mind that all
human societies resemble a swimming pool, if in which a small stone is
thrown in its corner, waves large and small will diffuse in all parts of
the pool. The adverse results of destructing cultures will definitely
infect all human communities. Once, a father got angry with his young
son and said, “I will take you by the ear and swing you around the
yard.” When his son asked, “If you do so, father, will you swing, too?”
The father immediately let go of him. He was a highly intelligent
father, for he at least valued his own safety.

**8**. “Millions have been alienated from their culture.”  
 This magnificent statement reflects its writer's deep thoughtfulness
and sense. It is clear that pioneer cultures affect human souls so
profoundly that their destruction will lead to the deterioration of
man's own identity.

**9**. “Foreign and native cultures still divide people into separate
groups, which are constantly in conflict.”

Cultural conflicts can damage every aspect of people's social lives.

Culture in the Encyclopaedia Britannica
---------------------------------------

“Culture can be defined through man's behavioural characteristics, as
well as other factors affecting his behavioural development, especially
culture, language, ideologies, habits, traditions, laws, social
organizations, devices, techniques, works of art, religious rituals,
ceremonies, etc. The existence and the application of culture strangely
depend on a particular human faculty, which is commonly called the
capacity for sensible or abstract thought.

However, since strong evidence of sensible thought has also beep
reported in animals, the meaning of “abstract” falls into doubt.
Therefore, we had better express man's unique capability to abstract
through the term “symbolizing”. Symbolizing includes selecting symbols
to represent specific objects or events unable to be realized through
our senses.

A good example is verbal eloquence. The sound included in the word “dog”
provides no hint of its meaning. Obviously, its meaning arises from a
conventional agreement selected by humans. Symbol selection is behaviour
independent of the physical senses.

As Edward Burnett Tyler, the English anthropologist stated in 1871:

‘Culture consists of a complete series of knowledge, beliefs, arts,
morals, laws, traditions and any other abilities, capacities or habits
acquired by man as a constituent of his society.’

According to Tyler's definition, culture is attainable only by humans.
His statements won the approval of other anthropologists for fifty
years. Advances in anthropology, however, led to deeper studies on
identity and concepts and in turn various definitions.

In 1952, two American anthropologists, A.L. Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn
cited 164 different definitions of culture in their work, ***Culture: A
Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions**.*

In their view -and also as many other scholars nowadays see it -the best
definition of culture consists of an abstraction; to be more precise,
abstract human behaviour .

Such concepts prove to be either incomplete or vague. The existence of
behavioural patterns -frameworks of behaviour, whether inherited
genetically or acquired socially -have been undoubtedly proven in non
human species (e.g. honeybees, ants and termites).

The abstract concept of culture poses first the question culture is real
(for abstraction is at times considered inconceivable); secondly, it
defies the existence of culture. Therefore, as the non biological
science of mankind, culture cannot exist without real visible phenomena,
for it has been regarded as both real and nonexistent.

Kroeber and Kluckhohn eventually concluded that if culture is regarded
as equivalent to behaviour, its identity would bring it into the domain
of psychology. Therefore, their conclusion was that culture consists of
abstractions of observable behaviours.

Now rises the question how we would abstract wedding rituals or pottery
according to Kroeber and Kluckhohn's pattern? Such questions lead to
problems they have not considered. Perhaps Leslie A. White's solution in
his 1959 work, *The Concept of Culture,* may prove useful. White argues
that, “The point is not whether culture is indeed a reality or a mental
concept; its scientific interpretation should anyhow be carefully
studied. Anything or any event leads to behaviour when studied in
relation to human organisms.

When studied not in relation to human organisms but to others, it
becomes culture -for instance the prohibition against marrying one's
mother-in-law or stepmother consists of a series of concepts, attitudes
and actions. If they are regarded in relation to human organisms, i.e.
the organism's functions, they can be named behaviour.

Therefore, if we consider the prohibition against marrying one's
mother-in-law or stepmother in relation to social compositions,
settlements, traditional segregations of man and woman and their roles
in society and upholding the good, it could be regarded as culture.

This distinction has been used for years; many words are considered
behaviour due to their pertaining actions. However, if words are
considered in relation to each other -studying their lexical
definitions, grammatical and structural usage -they will become part of
language, and would enter not only psychology, but also linguistics.
Thus, culture is a term referring to a category of items and events
depending upon conventional symbols studied in a framework of the
supernatural content of man's life.”

Now let us consider the points of importance presented in the
Encyclopaedia Britannica:

**1.** “Culture can be defined through man's behavioural
characteristics, as well as other factors affecting his behavioural
development, especially culture, language, ideologies, habits,
traditions, laws, social organizations, devices, techniques, works of
art, religious rituals, ceremonies, etc.”

The problem with the above statements is that:

**a**. Including culture in its own definition does not seem to make
sense, for the defining items ought to be clearer than those which are
to be defined; using an object to elaborate itself traps us in a vicious
circle.

**b**. Including particular human behavioural patterns in the definition
of culture is not sufficient, for such patterns, e.g. language, belief,
and habits, express only a few of the results of culture, not culture
itself: “The existence and application of culture calls for a uniquely
specific human faculty.”

Obviously, unless that unique faculty is known, the true identity of
culture would remain unsolved, particularly since the results of
cultural elements are so diverse that sometimes it is impossible to
combine them into one general concept that can be called the identity of
culture. For instance, works of art that oppose morals or religion
cannot be united to convey culture. The encyclopaedia thus elaborates on
the cultural faculty.

*“Such a faculty is commonly known as the capacity of logical or
abstract thought”*

It then objects to this term, and adds, “However, there is proven
evidence of logical thought in animals, so the meaning of abstraction
here is unclear.”

We must say that even if living organisms other than man possess the
faculty of logical thought, they would be incomparable to man, for human
thoughts are conscious, and definitely use abstract principles. In
nonhuman life, as far as we know, it merely moves from the beginning
steps to results; in other words, their actions aim for providing the
beginning steps, like nesting as a preliminary step towards mating and
reproduction.

However, the statement, “The meaning of abstraction is unclear” reflects
an obvious mistake about the delicate functions of the brain. Some
people think that the functions performed by the brain and everything
pertaining to the “self” can be studied by the same methods used for
physical phenomena.

They ignore the fact that we will never be able to discover the true
identity of self-consciousness. However, a developed brain is not only
self-conscious, but also capable of understanding and performing
abstraction. Describing such internal functions is as hard as explaining
joy, sorrow, surprise or responsibility.

**c.** “Thus, symbolizing is a more suitable term for expressing the
unique capacity for abstraction in men.”

We must remember that symbolizing, as other words, is just a
conventional term, and cannot reflect its content. Two illustrating
examples can elaborate this point in the subsequent sentence.

**2.** Culture is “a complete set of knowledge, beliefs, arts, morals,
laws, traditions and any other capacities or habits acquired by man as a
member of the society.”

If the above-mentioned phenomena refer to interrelated realities
affecting each other's qualities and also quantity, their combination
can express the unique reality named culture; however, we have already
seen that deriving a definition of culture is not possible merely
through determining one or several culture phenomena.

The statement, “If we could maintain a relationship with the whole
identity of culture through identifying cultural phenomena, we would no
longer need to fully comprehend the definition of culture” is incorrect,
for it is based on the false premises that we can establish a
relationship with the whole identity of culture by identifying a few
cultural phenomena; the ability to figure out the true identity of
objects merely by studying a few of its effects is a grave mistake. In
proof of it, we must say:

Man Innately Desires to Figure out the Truth about Elevating Culture
--------------------------------------------------------------------

It is proven clear to any researcher on culture who has accomplished
discoveries about it that without culture, man would not only lose his
dignity, self-respect, his valuable “freedom” and the life he merits,
but even consider them as harmful hallucinations; as we all know, if
such basics of life vanish, the only logic remaining in man's individual
or social life would be the passageways to nihilism, power and pleasure.
Obviously, if power and pleasure dominate man's life, no necessity or
meritorious value could prevail, and even their opposing factors would
also be demolished, even though they may be justified.

It is amazing that most academic authorities on the -humanities still
continue to attempt to prove the fact that man is heading for true
greatness, with such deceiving eloquence that any simple mind believes
them. Some put on such a detailed display of complex jargon that even
other scholars might be forced to assume it to be unquestionably true.

High claim for man's progressive evolution aims to sacrifice all of the
cultures and peoples around the world -who basically agree on logical
principles -to feed their technological monster. One day, the monster
might strangle its own operators to death, and eliminate any chance for
them to relive their painfully eventful story which ends in suicide.

A significant point comes to attention here, which can also influence
human life evolution: all around the world there are hundreds of
seminars, conferences, and vast studies on man and his relationship with
technology, and still, there is no indication of a serious attempt to
discover a reasonable identity of culture and its relation to mankind.
Perhaps the few honest authorities on humanities are totally in despair
about the unstoppable demise of humanity.

Therefore, let us uphold our heart-warmingly reviving culture and
introduce it to other people, and have community leaders do their best
to help the process before it is too late. Then, they will definitely
admit that ruling over one human being who enjoys dignity, logical
freedom and the life he/she deserves, is better than ruling over
millions devoid of them, who have only been labelled “human” by history
after the Cro-Magnons.

**3.** “As Kroeber and Kluckhohn and also many other currently leading
scholars see it, the best definition of culture consists of an
abstraction -to be more precise, an abstraction of human behaviour .” If
the above sentences refer to a dimension of reality, not only is it
generally correct, but in fact Kroeberand Kluckhohn have pointed out an
important aspect of culture (the internally innate pole) which is also
the abstract aspect of culture.

This is an absolutely correct point, for the non-instinctive, calculated
movements and accountable behaviours observed in some animals, refers to
meritorious values conveying the general concept of culture, which is
undoubtedly abstract (as is the general concept of beauty).

The regular behaviour seen in honeybees, ants and termites depends on
their unconscious instincts, not conscious merits or freedom; therefore,
if Kroeber and Kluckhohn believe the abstract definition of culture to
be the best one, they are gravely mistaken. It would be like defining
beauty as “an abstract concept”, which reveals nothing at all about the
qualities or identity of beauty.

In brief, we must note that the general truths about culture -beauty,
greatness, etc -consist of two poles:  
 The first, the innately internal pole, which includes mentally abstract
concepts describing general definitions. The other pole is observable,
i.e. those behaviours and effects seen physically.

Thus, we may put the theory of culture being an abstract concept in the
encyclopaedia in opposition with Kroeber and Kluckhohns's viewpoints.
The encyclopedia states that:

*The concept of culture as an abstraction poses first the question
whether culture is real (for at times. abstraction is considered
inconceivable), and then defies it.”*

The authors of the encyclopaedia must keep in mind that defying abstract
realities such as culture, beauty and greatness could first cast doubt
upon all scientific principles -which are definitely derived from
generally abstract issues and regular phenomena in the world and then
even question the integrity of mathematical and geometrical laws. Such a
presumption could put all of human knowledge and everything man has
acquired through mental abstraction in the shadow of serious
uncertainty, or even defy them all.

**4.** The encyclopaedia states that, “Therefore, as the non-biological
study of mankind, culture would be consistent both nonexistent and real,
and could not remain without actual worldly events.”

Unless interpreted correctly, the statements above could prove
unreasonable, for if we judge the reality of objects biologically, we
would have to defy all of man's psychological activities, for they are
non-biological.

It is scientifically reasonable to accept the existence of internal,
psychological and mental facts, even though their external effects would
require observable behaviour and imagination in visible phenomena.

**5**. The statement, “Therefore, Kroeber and Kluckhohn concluded that
culture is an abstraction of observable behaviour” flaws in its
sense-based deduction is that Kroeber and Kluckhohn have neglected the
distinction between the facts that “Observable behaviour provides the
basis for abstract mental realities like culture, beauty and justice”
and “Observable behaviour leads to the abstraction of culture”.

Scientific observations and analyses on abstract facts have shown that
culture, beauty, justice, etc, are bipolar abstract facts (consisting of
virtual and observable poles), and the resulting behaviour account for
the observable one. It is incorrect to suppose that such realities arise
from abstractions of observable behaviour.

**6.** We may conclude from the above item that Kroeber and Kluckhohn's
conditional theory -”If culture is regarded as identical to behaviour,
it would naturally become a psychological issue” -calls for some
rethinking, for bipolarity should not make culture a domain of
psychology, as is the case in beauty consisting of two pokes (internal
virtues and external virtues).

However, such issues can be studied in terms of psychological and also
scientific matters, but they do not necessarily afflict their abstract
reality.

**7.** The text reads. “Perhaps Leslie A. White's suggestions presented
in his 1959 work, *The Concept of Culture,* may provide a solution.
White reasons that it is important to take into consideration the
scientific interpretation of culture, not whether it is a reality or
just a mental concept.”

This point also needs to be modified, for in order to fully comprehend
the scientific interpretation of culture, it is at least as important as
other essential factors defining culture to determine whether culture is
a really external fact or just mental- if not the most important, for
the qualities of a mental fact highly differ from those of physically
observable ones, even if the two share a common abstract concept. It
then adds:

*“Whenever objects or events are considered in terms of their relation
with human organisms, they lead to behaviour Otherwise, i.e. when they
are considered only in relation to each other, they would by definition
result in culture* “

The point rising here is, what is meant by “objects and events” in
relation to human organisms? If they mean all- external or
internal -factors and motives, the point would prove to be true, for
human organisms are obviously prone to any external or internal
influence, which lead to behaviour, whether being merely a reflex or
causing mental or bodily functions. However, if “events and objects”
convey externally physical phenomena, they would only account for a
certain extent of behavioural factors.

On the other hand, the statement, “If studied independent of human
organisms -i.e., only in relation to each other -they would by
definition result in culture,” is somewhat unclear, for billions of the
components of the universe are constantly affecting each other, but many
of such effects may not fit into culture. As we have already seen, the
primary basis of culture is the virtually internal pole relating to
human life merits such as “What it is like” and “What it *should* be
like”, which lead to man's aims and ideas in such issues.

**8**. “Thus, culture is a term referring to a class of objects or
events depending on conventional symbols considered as part of man's
supernatural content.”

Culture as seen by Russian Encyclopaedias “Culture is a series of social
achievements consisting of physical or mental advances used by the
community, and also those cultural traditions serving man's future
progress.

In societies suffering from struggling classes, culture inevitably
becomes class-biased. The opposite of culture is barbarity, savagery or
cultureless ness. A true understanding of culture is only feasible on
the basis of socioeconomic guidelines and sequences of social
organizations brought about by defining productive forces, production
processes, social relationships and the qualities of any given society.

Yet, culture cannot replace these concepts, for it includes all
achievements of any range -mental or physical -altogether, whose
characteristics determine historical periods for various societies,
peoples or nations.

Culture consists of man's creative activities, and is the most
significant sign of his advance level. Culture derives from the Latin
word *cultural* (agriculture), which means mowing, producing and
processing; it originally conveyed man's influence on nature,
determining his achievements and the factors playing a role in them. The
latter meaning was most used in the bourgeois culture era, and was seen
frequently in the works of 19th century historians, anthropologists and
archaeologists, which led at that time to the term “The History of
Culture.”

The concept of culture consists of two parts, physical and mental. The
physical aspect shows man's ability against the forces of nature.
Physical culture conveys man's progress in understanding nature, the
community, and also the scope of his vision and progressive thoughts and
knowledge. Tools are the most prominent symbol of physical culture.

Mental culture consists of social achievements in morals, arts, science
and philosophy. It also represents man's political and legal
relationships and advances. Mental culture is used to determine the
extent of progress made in social, political or legal relationships.
Language, speech, thought, logic and behavioural principles make up the
phenomena of human life.”[^25]

The following comments may be presented on the above statements:

**1.** It is true that culture is of high importance in man's progress,
and as a principle, the main role of culture is to be progressive.  
 However, what eventually can be named pioneer culture? The question is
left unanswered.

**2.** The statement, “In societies suffering from class struggles,
culture inevitably becomes class-biased” is correct from a certain
viewpoint, but on the other hand also calls for reconsideration. What is
meant here by “struggling” classes? If the struggle involves positive
competition instead of harmful conflicts, culture can definitely serve
the development of such a progressive society. Also, if we were to have
a systematically organized community, culture would again prove to be
dynamically progressive, and aim for the advancement of the whole
society.

**3**. “The opposite of culture can be stated as barbarity, savagery, or
cultureless ness”

The important point seen here is how meritorious culture is, despite
those who regard it as social customs and traditions. No matter how
deserving and elevating social traditions may be, we based the
definition of the identity of culture (given at the beginning of this
discussion) upon its meritorious ness. Therefore, since the highest
human virtues and principles make up culture -and defying them would
defy the whole of humanity - “The opposite of culture is barbarity,
savagery or cultureless ness.”

**4**. Further on, we encounter two contradicting statements:

a. “A true understanding of culture is only feasible on the basis of
socioeconomic guidelines and sequences of social organizations brought
about by defining productive forces, production processes, social
relationships and the qualities of any given society.”

b. “Yet, culture cannot replace such concepts, for it includes all
achievements of any range -mental or physical- altogether”, for
understanding a true fact means acquiring knowledge of it without the
influence of any presumed principles or accepted ideals.

In other words, it is scientifically vital to strongly avoid using our
physical senses (laboratory devices, tools enhancing human senses, etc)
as much as possible to discover realities as they truly are. By
gathering more experience and knowledge, we can free ourselves from the
conflicting points in our scientific domains.

Culture in Italian Encyclopaedias
---------------------------------

“Culture is the series of mental and social knowledge which can be
acquired through vast study -though never completely.

A cultured person aims to develop intelligent thought in himself/
herself, feel it flowing through his body, and use it to quench his
mental desires. In fact, he tends to activate his peers' -or even his
predecessors' -thoughts, and purify their mental processes.

The most dangerous enemy of culture is fashion, which can demolish all
cultural values. Fashion tends to constantly substitute novelties for
the old. It even destroys itself.

The history of culture is an average of the tastes, knowledge and moral
and/or religious beliefs existing in a certain location and era.

Civilization consists of the artistic, scientific, economical and moral
life aspects dominant over a nation, era or all of mankind.

Culture depicts intellectual lifestyle and thought, and its reflection
upon a generation or a country. This definition obviously also conveys
the concept of civilization in Italian.

Culture, derived from *cultivure,* means planting, developing a farm; it
also conveys all of man's mental or acquired knowledge, especially
academic levels of literature, art, music, history, philosophy, etc.

Culture is not only a mental issue, but also spiritual, relating various
branches of knowledge (as its spiritual aspect) to developing tastes and
attitudes.

As a generalization of the above statements, we come to the culture of a
nation, era, or cultural development and the history of culture.

In anthropology, as well as sociology and psychology, culture is
considered a human community's organization or characteristics,
including the goals, virtues, symbols, beliefs and behavioural patterns
common among most of its members.”

Let us now take a few points helpful to our understanding of culture
into further consideration:

**1.** “Culture is the series of mental and social knowledge which can
be acquired through vast study -though never completely.”

Clearly, although this definition presents some components of culture to
a certain extent, the identity of culture -the main core of the
definition -remains unmentioned nevertheless.

Two points are worth considering:

**a.** It is undeniably true that acquiring the whole of mental or
social knowledge requires vastly extensive study.

**b.** Such vast studies would still prove inadequate for achieving
complete mastery of culture and its components and outcomes.

**2**. “A cultured person aims to develop intelligent thought in
himself, feel it flow through his body, and use it to quench his mental
desires.”

This statement shows man's authentic eagerness for culture. Indeed, when
man selects his culture consciously and freely, he must have found it
sufficiently deserving for him to feel it flow through his body and
quench his intellectual needs with it. Obviously, no sensible person,
consciously aware of his benefits and perils, would choose an animal or
filthy quality as his culture, or become so attached to it that it would
flow through his/her veins. This is the virtual meritorious ness a
dynamically objective human culture should have. Otherwise, the
significant species known as “homo sapiens” would definitely disappear
from the face of the earth.

**3**. “The most dangerous enemy to man is fashion, which demolishes all
cultural values.”

If only today's cultural leaders would carefully and adequately consider
this critical issue -the conflict between fashionism and a dynamic,
objective culture they could save mankind from a hemlock that deviates
man's spirit from following his virtues, pulls people so deeply into
consumerism that it demolishes their health, possessions and dignity,
throws their spirit into the darkness of despair and infidelity,
wandering in artificial ruins made by their greedy rulers.

As the encyclopaedia states, “Fashion is always substituting novelties
for the old”; therefore, fashionism and dynamic, original cultures would
always conflict, for if man does not use his enormous sense of novelism
in order to gradually renew his spiritual and psychological virtues, he
would undoubtedly apply it to superficial fashion games. Cultures of
dynamic originality are based upon fixed principles much higher than
changes in appearance. The encyclopaedia puts it very delicately:
“Fashion can even destroy itself.”

**4**. “The history of culture is an average of the tastes, knowledge
and moral and/or religious beliefs existing in a certain location and
era.”

Provided that the above statement is *based on the permanent principles
of the culture,* it would be perfectly correct: the history of the
culture of a given society at a certain point of time and location can
be expressed by the average of tastes, knowledge or moral and/or
religious beliefs based on permanent human principles, not the average
of variable, baseless outcomes of alien cultures spreading from one
society to another. If it is not stated it the basis of fixed
principles, however, it would prove prone to defiance.

**5**. “Culture includes intellectual lifestyle and thought, and its
reflection upon a generation or a country. This definition obviously
also conveys the concept of civilization in Italian.”

As an indication of one of the aspects of culture, this statement is
correct. But further elaboration on “intellectual thought and its
reflection upon a generation or a country”, especially “intellectual
thought”, may reveal one of the most important constituents of the
definition of culture.

**6**. “Culture is not only a mental issue, but also spiritual, relating
various branches of knowledge (as its spiritual aspect) to developing
tastes and attitudes. As a generalization we come to the culture of a
nation, era, or cultural development and the history of culture.”

These valuable statements prove that the identity of culture does not
only reflect the thought of a community; likewise, the thoughts of the
members of the society cannot represent their culture either. The
spiritual aspect of culture, i.e. man's evolutional development towards
high moral virtues, consists of an important part of culture, and would
be worthless without it.

Culture as Seen by Greek Reference Books
----------------------------------------

“Of Latin origin, *culture* means agriculture. In the last two decades,
however, ideological and social class changes turned it in Greek into
*cultural,* which means agriculture, and also physical and mental
development through education, evolution, culture, and intellectual
training.

Greek dictionaries provide agriculture, education, training, culture and
civilization as its synonyms. Occasionally, when one is labelled as
***culture yaris**,* it humorously means a person pretending to be
interested in cultural matters in order to show off before others.

In Greek, culture is seldom consisted of a series of meanings; for Greek
is such a vastly rich language that there is a specific term for each
object or concept; therefore, the five synonyms provided for culture are
easily applicable to their proper cases, each of which convey a certain
aspect of culture.”

Here are the three most significant points arising from the definition
of culture in the Greek Encyclopaedia.

**a)** Its cultural elements are mostly of evolutional value, and the
world “development” is stated.

**b)** It introduces “intellectual training” as one of the concerned
parts. Obviously, “intellectual” cannot be limited to mere thought, but
must include mental activities based on moral virtues.

**c)** Culture conveys variety: "In Greek, *culture* is seldom consisted
of a series of meanings, for Greek is such a vastly rich language that
there is a specific term for each object or concept.”

We will discuss this significant point further later on.

Culture as Seen in Spanish Encyclopaedias
-----------------------------------------

The Royal Spanish Academy's Dictionary metaphorically describes culture
as “the result of developing human knowledge and perfecting it through
practice.”

***Space Calpe**,* the best-known Spanish encyclopaedia available,
defines culture as being “the mental or physical developmental state of
a nation or peoples.”  
 The encyclopaedia considers illustration ***(illustracon)*** and
civilization as synonyms for culture. *Salvat* presents a philosophical
definition of culture:

*“The series of definite productions of humans as creative beings able
to change themselves as well as their surroundings.”*

The definition provided in the Royal Spanish Academy Dictionary is more
likely real than metaphorical, considering its frequent usage and
approval by the *Space Calpe.* Perhaps this mistake (which also occurs
in the French encyclopaedia) lies in the lack of distinction between a
word's actual meanings at a certain time with those other points of
time, which is caused by the expansion of the depth of meanings of a
word as time goes on.

Considering the Latin origin of the word -meaning agriculture,
fertilizing, and raising plants and living beings - the subsequent
meanings of culture arisen in Eastern countries may also be associated
with the original ones as its examples, results, or even real meanings
education, fertilizing human knowledge, or purifying it through
practice. If there were nothing in common between its new meaning “the
mental or physical developmental state of a nation or peoples” and
‘civilization’ and its old ones, even if the older meanings were
contradicted, they would still remain real. In other words, culture
would be a verbal portmanteau among various realities.

The second statement, “The series of definite makings of humans as
creative beings able to affect themselves and their surroundings” also
depicts the element of man's innovativeness and his capability to change
his environment.

Culture as Seen by Chinese Encyclopaedias
-----------------------------------------

The Sea of Words thus defines culture: “All of the physical of spiritual
wealth created by man throughout social history consists of culture.
Culture is a social phenomenon, and each society possesses a culture
appropriate to its own social physical development. As an ideology,
culture represents the politics and economy of the society, which
greatly affect its socioeconomic survival. In class-orientated
societies, culture also has class-biased qualities.

Proletariat culture, critical of man's historical achievements, makes
use of all the experience gained from class struggles, productional
struggles and academic experiments and develops.”

The above definition brings us to several points:

**1**. The statement, “All of the physical and spiritual wealth created
by man throughout social history makes up culture” implies that *The Sea
of Words* considers all of these treasures as culture; in other words,
each of these components cannot individually be culture. Unless, of
course, supposing the components of the definitions were not related,
and the omission of any of them would not demolish culture. Therefore,
it is obvious that we literally mean “all”, and culture includes each
and every one of its components.

**2**. In order to define the identity of culture by using a definition,
the words forming the definition should be clearer than culture (the
“defined”); yet, culture nowadays is more easily understood than words
like  
 “all of the physical and mental wealth”, etc. by people.

**3**. How can physical wealth possibly be included in the meaning of
culture?

**4.** “Culture is a historical phenomena.” This is absolutely correct,
provided that we accept that culture arises, continues and evolves
throughout history, rather than being fatalistically brought about by
it, for our definition of culture was based upon “qualities” and ways of
a meritorious, sensible life. Therefore, since fatalistic phenomena
totally ignore values and merits, culture cannot depend on fatalistic
historical factors.

**5.** “Each society possesses a culture appropriate to its own social
physical development.”

The following point shows that this statement calls for revision.

The fact- that each society has an appropriate culture of its own is not
applicable to all cultural phenomena or elements, for throughout time
and even today, human societies share a series of cultural commonalities
like literary culture, artistic culture, moral culture and ideological
culture; although each of these concepts differ characteristically in
aspects such as literature, arts, morals and ideology, cultural
diffusion from one of these aspects to another in one society or among
several societies is quite common.

If nations and peoples were not basically so common in culture, today's
vast mutual cultural understanding could next exist. The phrase “social
physical development” verifies our point, for if we were to evaluate a
society's cultural development on the basis of its physical production
growth, finding a few common points of qualitative and quantitative
growth among some societies would definitely lead to common cultural
elements.

**6**. “As an ideology, culture represents the politics and economy of
the society, which greatly affect its socioeconomic survival.”

In comparison to an original Chinese economic, political and legal
theory –“Economic affairs, especially those concerning production and
its tools, quality and quantity make up the most fundamental element of
every aspect of human life, whether economy, politics, morals, law, etc.

The above statement is contradicted, for it believes that culture (an
ideology) determines the socio-politics and socioeconomics, whereas the
theory states that politics, economics and even culture are reflected by
fundamentally important economic affairs. The current harmony in
manufacturing methods and financial viewpoints and also the vast
difference existing among cultures and ideologies requires more careful
attention.

Due to its political viewpoints, the definition provided for culture in
the Chinese encyclopaedia has undergone deep reconsideration by scholars
today. However, had Chinese scholars considered their vast history and
culture more carefully, they would have found an incredible wealth of
cultural elements rarely found in any other society. Perhaps the
originality of diverse cultures in China has led to the tumultuous early
to mid-20th century cultural diversities.

As ***The Ancient History of Chinese Philosophy*** reads:

“The general trend during this era was destructively sceptic, casting
criticizing doubt upon all basic foundations, even family and marriage.
Liang Chi Chao (1873-1929), the well-known scholar, compares it with the
Renaissance in Europe.

Indeed, all of the thoughts of this era are closely related to the
socio -political events occurring then. Christianity has found strong
support in China, bringing with it Western knowledge and philosophy,
particularly John Dewey's pragmatism and Karl Marx's dynamic theories;
both have had profound influence upon Chinese intellectuals.
Distinguished writers like Tolstoy, Ibsen, Guy de Moupassant, Shelley,
Emerson, Marx and Engels have had a strong effect on causing such a
novel atmosphere.”[^26]

As we will see, a certain viewpoint rising in order to determine the
fate of culture cannot destroy the original cultures of a civilized
society.

“Philosophy develops alongside other political, social, religious and
artistic changes, all of which are used to depict the culture of a
country. Therefore, it would be natural for a primary school of research
criticism to arise during this last phase of total changes, and put the
new Confuscian eras of Song and Ming up to ridicule.

They are China's most meticulous critiques ever. Although their
radically critical ideology can be regarded as pragmatistic, it would
still not qualify as a philosophical school of thought, for it
emphasizes the study of language and criticizing texts rather than
truly- philosophical research. Criticism, in fact, as the most effective
motivation during this era, could itself lead to a new school of Chinese
philosophical principles.

The consequent effect of such critical spirit is the movement entitled
“New Culture.” Its leaders, hailing Western positivism and pragmatism as
their major inspirations, and the knowledge of social development and
democracy as their goals, regarded the Confucian primary school equal to
their predecessors' conservatism. “Down with Confucian and his
followers,” was their motto. However, it was not easy to demolish the
ideals -of millions of Chinese people, and a struggle began -and, sadly,
still goes on.

Once, all was turned inside out, except for China. Now, however, nothing
in China has escaped change. The most conservative nation in history has
become the most radical, and tends to demolish all traditions, once
regarded valuable, all organizations, monuments or moral and virtual
norms. However, it is not possible to destroy ancient ideas and customs
established since the era of ancient philosophers, and replace them with
Marxist ideological brainwashing. The old virtues and morals still
remain engraved in peoples' minds. The Chinese prefer harmony,
compatibility and composition -none of which fit into Marxist
ideologies. Knowing this, Communists have attempted to adapt
Marxist-Leninist theories to suit traditional Chinese humanitarian
beliefs.

This does not mean that Chinese philosophy is robust, for as we have
already seen, it is all but that.

Although Chinese philosophy - as of other nations -has suffered much
change and upset, very seldom has it adopted anything from foreign
cultures without adapting it specifically to Chinese philosophy. In
fact, the natural harmony within Chinese philosophy is the key factor to
its flourish. Any influences not adjustable to its evolutional harmony
have faded away.”[^27]

As Durant quotes from Hu Shih:[^28]

“Taking the innovative trends of philosophy in 5th, 4th and 3rd century
China into consideration adds to its respect.”

We must state that Hu Shih, although a pioneer of the “New Mutiny
Movement”, has intelligently recognized how worthy his predecessors
were, and thus expressed the most important issue in his country:

“If accepting a new civilization would mean uprooting the old rather
than combining with it, mankind would undoubtedly suffer extremely heavy
losses.[^29]

Therefore, the real question is how we can adopt a new half-civilization
able to adjust itself to our own, and survive.”

Culture in the Japanese Encyclopaedias
--------------------------------------

Culture has thus been defined in Japanese reference books: “Efforts
towards making use of nature or natural resources in order to improve
man's life.

**a**. Knowledge, arts, religion and man's spiritual achievements.

**b**. Technical achievements equivalent to civilization. The word
culture means:  
 1. Civilization,  
 2. Civilizing, and  
 3. Gentleness and Exquisiteness.

In the above-mentioned definition of culture, both bringing into use
natural talents and resources in order to improve man's life, and the
highest human capabilities, talents and phenomena, e.g. science, arts,
religion and other spiritual achievements have been included.

In item b, civilization has been cited as one of the meanings of
culture. Civilization, growth, evolution and development and other such
concepts can all be regarded as results of culture, for culture -by
definition[^30] -is what links all definitions; culture determines a
society's goals and ideals, and indicates guidelines and motives to
attain them. However, we must keep in mind that the
results -civilization, development and evolution -in turn affect
cultural elements.

In all, the definitions of culture in Japanese encyclopaedias clearly
affirm the evolutional, meritorious reality of culture.

Culture as Seen in Indian Encyclopaedias
----------------------------------------

“As a whole, civilization in India is more alive than anywhere in the
world, and one of the oldest. Few countries have been conquered, and
even fewer have such diverse climate, traditions and languages as India.
The reason why Indian civilization has survived is the harmoniously
structured legends and social values, which have found their true
identity after fifty years of struggle, gradual acceptance, and
evolutional combination.

In a country as vast as India, alien occupation, war or victory (the
factors leading to harmony or decomposition in empires or kingdoms) have
not caused India to suffer the emigration of its population, another
culture replacing its own, or physical influence on its nation's
customs. The key to survival in India lies in certain organized customs,
beliefs and qualities its nation possesses; Dharma and keeping on with
the four balanced aims in life:[^31] Artha, the desired ideal, Karma
(deeds), Moksa (freedom) and deliverance, all of which rule people
supernaturally.

The final word on civilizational achievement of India is that one's
caste[^32] or actions are determined by one's Dharma inductions. Every
individual should search, study and eventually elevate a certain series
of approved rules and duties based on the necessities of life.

In his work Mahabharata,[^33] Krisna[^34] describes Dharma as a
protective activity, consisting of social order and universal harmony,
both of which prevail in the Indians' minds. It is such a divinely
universal justice that forms the rules making and protecting the
universe and logic.

Dharma has depicted and adjusted peoples' social life and attempts
towards their goals, and has been described throughout history as the
undisputed key to the existence of social relationships and liberating
forces arisen from mutual dependency and unity.

The individual end, attaining perfection, also the communal end in
culture, is achieving undisputed balance and reality in man's universal
existence and universal society (**paramataman**)- worshipped and named
**Narayana** in Indian - both of which mutually depend on each other .

The Hindu Philosophy of Culture
-------------------------------

**“**The most logical, powerful and glorious representation of Indian
philosophy and culture is undoubtedly the statue of the heavenly spirit
***Shivamahayovara*** (three sculptures in one), located in a temple on
the island Elephanta.

The main face of the absolute, bright sculpture -***tatpurusa
saclastiva*** -does not face any direction, and is located beyond its
own limits.

***Aghora***, the figure on the right, looks fearsome, angry and
aggressive, and is a symbol of disapproval and destruction. The left
figure, ***Uma***, Shiva's bejewelled wife, represents positive games
and movements, love and affection.”[^35]

In Indian culture, ***Uma*** (also called Secti), carrying a water lily,
is a symbol of Artha and Karma goals. Aghora, the right figure carrying
a snake through his fingers, symbolizes Dharma goals; Moksa,
righteousness and liberty, whereas the main figure -Tatpurusa -considers
the harmonious and repetitive structure of nature, silence and activity
and peace, all to be temporary. Like any other phenomenon, they rise,
reproduce and then decompose

Universal legends and forms, along with symbols, statues and the
pictures seen in many sacred Indian books have played a significant role
in spreading Indian culture, and even provided a framework for studying
Asian cultures, and giving them form and structure.

More significant examples of these legends are: Jatakas, Puranas,
Agamas, Tantras and single texts like Saddharma, Lalitavistara. Only
through scholasticism, literature and art can one understand the spirit
of India, the inspirations throughout its history and its relationships
with the outside world. India's fundamental cultural references, and all
of its classes of people, even those descending from nomadic, Iranian,
Syrian or merchant ancestors, sooner or later were dominated by the idea
that life is temporary. The necessity of moral virtues (Karma),
emigration, belief in the existence of spiritual social ranks, the
sacred and dynamic form of family life and responsibilities, the ideal
of brotherhood among men, expressing affection for others, aesthetic
attitude towards life and its consequential emotions and desires, have
arisen in a both abstract and centralized manner.

These social virtues -which form the generalities of a civilization must
have been supernaturally human for its basics, unity, expansion and
generalization to be used frequently throughout time, helping form
empires and renaissances, and keeping people's zeal for life burning in
times of despair.

Geographical Influences upon Cultural Expansion
-----------------------------------------------

Culture is an anthropological term including everything, from the
customs people follow when they eat or produce coal to how they
construct their buildings; the social, moral and religious virtues
highly popular to them, or the accepted trends used to satisfy the more
intellectual minds. The fact that India more or less succeeded in
protecting its protected cultural evolution, is partly due to the
geographical features of the country, whose location has kept it away
from excessive visitors.

Furthermore, the Himalayan Mountains form a natural barrier in the north
of India, preventing invaders and keeping Indian culture quite
safe.”[^36]

The most striking fact about Indian culture is: “The individual end,
attaining perfection, also the communal end in culture, is achieving
undisputed balance and reality in man's universal existence and
universal society (paramataman) -worshipped and named *narayana* in
India - both of which mutually are dependent upon each other.”

Considering such evolutional principles, belief in god and the
supernatural, we should also take other Indian cultural elements into
consideration.

Indian culture is incredibly unique among all other cultures throughout
the world -whether old and new, Western or Eastern. In a nutshell, all
positive or negative capabilities imaginable for man can be seen in
Indian culture. It includes a variety of issues, from purely scientific
approaches to man and the universe, and even absolutely mystic,
philosophical and fictional approaches. As some scholars on India have
claimed, “India is like a mass of coal containing lodes of diamond.”

**1**. Here, there is a variety of beliefs, from pure idealism to
realism, from the goodness of mankind to his lethal threats, and also a
vast range of theories, speculations and conclusions on the universe,
God, egos and so on.

**2**. Indian ideologies are mainly religious, and are accepted owing to
peoples' religious faith. Will Durant's theory on it is quite worthy of
consideration:

“Religion is incredibly strong and important in India -more than any
other country. The fact that Indians have been conquered many times by
alien rulers shows that they do not care who dominates or exploits them.
The main point was religion not politics; the spirit not the body; the
immortal other world, not this mortal, worthless life.

When Ashuka undertook absolute piety, he nevertheless remained faithful
to the Hindu religion, which shows the powerful influence of this
religion on even the strongest of men. In the present century, again it
was a man of piety who united all of India for the first time throughout
its history, not a politician.[^37]

This proves how profoundly critical the role of Islam has been in
guiding mankind and uniting religion and politics.

Religion cannot merely be regarded semantically, i.e. by only
considering supernatural aspects, and ignoring materialistic, economic,
legal, political and artistic affairs or issues adjusting human life
virtues, for none of man's potentials cannot embrace reality without a
logical connection between man's physical, social and worldly affairs
with his supernaturally spiritual. It is such neglect of man's life in
the four relationships (man-himself, man-God, man-universe and man-other
humans) that has led to a Persian saying, “Ever since he broke up with
his dear aunt, he's been thinking about conquering India.”

Will Durant's mistake in interpreting Ghandi's attempt to liberate India
was ignoring the fact that managing all the tedious social activities of
negative resistance is impossible without knowing the principles of
politics, even though the negative resistance against the enemy may be a
religious and spiritual one; since moral, religious, political, legal
and revolutions should be based on man's original needs, any
constructive revolution must have been established on the basis of human
spiritual motives. Hence, some sociological experts have stated that any
change truly advantageous to humanity, must definitely arise from
religious motivation.

The Essence of Life in Indian Culture
-------------------------------------

Essentialism is quite common throughout Indian culture, although it is
mostly based on emotions rather than reasonable deduction. With the
exception of feeling the existence of God, its essence is the highest,
most significant feeling of humans, especially because the higher the
essence is, the more elegantly glorious it will be. However, there are
several points of significance to be considered on this cultural
element:

**a**. How valuable is well-reasoned life? Is life virtually so
gloriously priceless that man can do nothing but sacredly respect it?

This is incorrect, for any living thing of any situation, does not
necessarily possess highly valuable merits; even man, the most complete
of all creatures, is at times so dangerously rotten that he is ready to
destroy millions of lives -maybe even the whole world -for just a few
moments of his own pleasure. If man cannot justify bloodthirsty tyrants
like Ghengiz Khan or Nero, he would find no other reality provable
either. Has God truly created such glorious value in life?

The answer is yes, but we must keep in mind that although God has
granted man the potential for glory and valour, the potential is
variable; like the God-given potentials for dignity and grace, for which
if man does not choose the path of righteous morality, he would be
doomed to fall.

The phenomenon called life is also seen thus in a value-based point of
view; i.e. life is the phenomenon which man was given the God-given
potential to make real; therefore, when used unlawfully, the potential
would naturally fade away, or even turn into anti-life and disturb other
living things. In such cases, life will fall into anti-values.

Hence, no original human culture is able to absolutely uphold the value
of life.

**b**. Would a culture regarding life as so extremely valuable, allow a
group of people claiming to be supporters of culture to slay human
beings influenced by propaganda and politics, without confirming its
lawful, critical necessity for life? In other words, despite having a
strong element like essentialism of life, how does Indian culture
explain the killings of Muslims there?

**c.** The belief that meta-psychosis leads to a great deal of suffering
and at times loss of life -and provides the chance for greedy tyrants to
ravage their country - also needs reconsideration, for in human logic
fails in such cases, the existence of “reasonable life” would no longer
be acceptable.

Having studied Indian culture, we now address a few concepts concerning
culture in the Academy of Lalitkala:

“An academy determines national stability, as well as the perfect
character, capacity and facts of life, and continues on its way despite
the immense contradictions remaining. Keeping on with such ideas about
protecting cultural heritage, establishing a knowledge of the arts among
people, and encouraging creativities and visual arts in a vast scale,
have been some our academy's goals.[^38]

These statements contradict the following, for the former describe
culture as an everlasting flow, whereas the subsequent state, “Anything
going on alongside with people is human culture. Human beings have
unstable behaviour, which varies with time and location. Human societies
and behaviour have constantly changed throughout history, and new
findings and experiences have influenced man's behaviour. Likewise,
man's experiences, culture and behaviour affect all social influences.
Therefore, culture should be regarded as a part of our man-made
surroundings.”

As you see, besides contradictions in describing culture in stability or
variation, considering human behaviour as original is also another one
of the current superficial deductions of the text. Unfortunately, such
anti-cultural imitations have spread out of Skinner and Watson’s[^39]
works into other societies. As we have frequently repeated, few parts of
the humanities have escaped the destructive harm of behaviourism.

Culture in African Encyclopaedias
---------------------------------

### A. Kenya

“Culture is peoples' lifestyle used in a certain period of time in order
to deal with social, political and economic challenges. Kenyan culture
has originated from three native communities:

1. The Cushites (the Buran, Somali and Randil tribes)  
 2. The Nilotes (the Luvo, Kolenjin and Masaee tribes)  
 3. The Bantu (the Kikoyo, Lohya, Lamba and Mijkenda tribes)

Kenyan culture in general is influenced by its tribal organizations, and
is a mixture of several native tribe cultures.”[^40]

This definition is obviously limited to the applications of culture, not
its definition or characteristics.

### B. Namibia

“After Namibia declared independence, since English was accepted as the
sole official language of the country, the definitions for culture in
its reference books have also been derived form English encyclopaedias,
despite diverse cultures dominating the various ethnical groups and
tribes existing in the country.

For example, each ethnical group tends to express respect for its own
tribe's customs and traditions in affairs like marriage, food, manners
and morality as the culture of the whole society, whereas non-native
emigrants from Europe and South Africa bring along a culture totally
different from the Bushmans or other primitive tribes.

In general, the definition may be stated as the capability of various
tribes and communities to adapt oneself with public laws.

The English-based definition moved on to -and even accepted by -Namibia
or other African societies cannot convey the essence of “true culture”
in these societies, as laws transferred to other countries are unable to
meet their real legal needs. Therefore, it is added, “despite diverse
cultures dominating the various ethnical groups and tribes existing in
the country.”

If the imported culture exceeds the native in strength and executive
quality, it would definitely dominate the country; however, the
established ideals, beliefs and logical conscience-based ideologies are
too strong to fail to resist foreign cultures.

### C. Other African Countries

By referring to expert research on African societies, we can address
culture in other countries in Africa. Uli Bayer, for instance, has
presented highly significant material.

“Delicate philosophical thoughts and highly religious beliefs have
always existed beside simple-minded superstitions in legends; they
resemble a huge ore of coal, containing randomly distributed lodes of
diamond Therefore, unless we do not extract them out of the fairy tales
through analysis of the legend and divide them into primitive thought
groups, we may never be able to discover the essence hidden inside
delicate human thoughts and legends

As a matter of fact besides the playful lullaby-like aspect of legends
and fairy tales, it is the existence of the most original resources of
human thought belonging to various peoples in them that make researchers
of philosophical thought, development history, upholders of human
conscience, anthropologists, sociologists, theologians comparing
different religions, ideologists and other scholars of the humanities
and folklore literature inevitably attracted to them.”[^41]

The significant point about culture in African countries is that, unlike
other continents where political, economical, legal and cultural changes
happen gradually, highly intense changes in Africa have since the
earliest times defied the usual process, turning primitively virtual
culture into a complicated network dominated by technology.

Clearly, African countries have suffered two kinds of cultural
invasions, which can be categorized according to social and cultural
lifestyles:

the culture of the invading societies;

generally mechanistic culture, relatively close to their national
culture.

The rise of religious cultures like Islam and Christianity in Africa
has, of course, familiarized them with spiritual cultures which aid them
to live by principles common in other main cultures of the world.

Culture as Seen in Polish Reference Books
-----------------------------------------

“Culture means the series of achievements made by human civilization
activities throughout its evolution. Creative activity by people
constantly enhances these achievements. Culture also determines the
extent of progress made by the society or a certain class of people,
which depends on natural forces, the level of public knowledge, artistic
creativity and forms of social coexistence. The term “culture” is
applied to various aspects, and finds different meanings in fields like
literature, scientific, texts, and everyday conversation. Many years
ago, culture was categorized to:

1. Physical culture, meaning tools and equipment and also skills used in
social production and enrichment.  
 2. Mental culture, including all scientific, artistic, social
organization, and moral achievements.  
 3. Individual culture, conveying the culture of the individuals in the
society.  
 4. Tool culture, conveying all physical advances.

Currently, a different type of categorization is used to define culture.
On this basis, culture means:  
 1. How we express (language, attitudes, behaviours),  
 2. Dominating nature (industry, techniques, and health care)  
 3. Social organizations (the government, law, morals, ethics)  
 4. Individual knowledge (religion, the supernatural, ideology),  
 5. Artistic or literary creativity, and  
 6. Mental activities (knowledge, science).”[^42]

Culture in Finnish Encyclopaedias
---------------------------------

“Culture: 1. (seldom used to convey) agriculture or planting several
shrubs, 2. (main meaning) situation of physical and spiritual
accomplishments (and all of their effects) made by man, a nation or a
group of people at a certain period of time, 3. a) expanding physical
and spiritual abilities and characteristics, b) exquisite beauty in
customs, traditions, and the value expressed in the arts or generally in
any other aspects of human life”.[^43]

“Culture: civilization, agriculture; primary meaning: farming.

1. Protection and development of natural surroundings, land, plants and
animals in order to fulfil man's vital needs.  
 2. Human activities and productions achieved in technology, science,
arts and religion.  
 3. Man's spiritual development.  
 4. The essence of a nation's (or a group of nations') greatness.

Culture can be categorized into various cultural domains like customs,
mental conceptions, education, lifestyles, justice, politics, science,
arts and religion.”[^44]

The first statement – “(seldom used to convey) agriculture or planting
several shrubs” is quite significant, for it requires the Latin meaning
of culture {agriculture and other pertaining meanings to it) which later
infiltrated into most European dictionaries and encyclopaedias to have
been the oldest one, which has been cited by the authors as a reminder
alongside the newer meanings, Since the attention to the archaic quality
of agriculture as a meaning of culture has been fading away in Finnish
and other encyclopaedias and even in conversation the question is why
the French Encyclopaedia has cited planting (wheat) and fertilizing the
soil as the primary meaning?

Culture in Swedish Encyclopaedias
---------------------------------

“Culture agriculture; originally, cultivating the earth. More general
meaning, all human activities, also results of spiritual and physical
activities passed on to the next generations, The more common meaning of
culture is spiritual development in fields like knowledge, literature,
arts and religion. In archaeology, culture pertains to the remains of a
certain geographical location at a given point of time.”[^45]

Again, as in the previous definitions, the evolutionary, virtual quality
of the vital phenomenon, culture, has been conveyed through listing some
of its effects: “spiritual development in fields like knowledge,
literature, arts and religion”, for they are -and will always
be -undoubtedly the highest ways to human evolution.

Culture in Danish Encyclopaedias
--------------------------------

“Derived from the Latin word ***cultra**,* culture means agricultural,
development and production. Culture represents the series of processes
used by human beings to change natural phenomena. In its limited
meaning, culture depicts earth fertilization, raising and improving
trees, production and purification of bacteria, and the results of such
development.

From a broader point of view, it means all human activities -and their
outcomes -whether physical or non-physical, which are passed on to the
next generation in form of social heritage, rather than genetically.

In philosophy, culture traditionally pertains to individuals,
representing man's objective activities concerning himself, his
environment, self-enhancement and attaining the highest moral virtues.

Sociologically speaking, man is part of a whole. Therefore, the term
“culture” should be considered in association with society .Thus, the
definition for culture would be: the vast and complex series of
knowledge, ideologies, arts, morals, traditions or any capability
acquired by man as a member of society.[^46]

Sociology basically draws a line between physical and non-physical
culture. Furthermore, it tries to combine *culture* with *society,*
since it considers all human phenomena to be dependent upon social
culture. Thus, social roles are to some extent determined by culture. In
fact, when people are colloquially regarded as cultured, it merely means
how close they are to the culture of the higher social classes, and
“high or low” culture actually shows how similar peoples' culture is to
18th or 19th century European or American culture.”[^47]

The Danish encyclopaedia’s definition and description of culture brings
us to several points:

**1.** Culture is the knowledge acquired through mental and physical
activities used by man in order to change his natural surroundings.

**2.** “In its limited meaning, culture depicts earth fertilization,
raising and improving trees, production and purification of bacteria,
and the results of such development.”

The phrase “limited meaning” in the above statement lacks precision. As
in other dictionaries and encyclopaedias, it would have been more
appropriate had it been regarded as the primary, or one of the other
meanings of culture.

**3**. The general meaning of culture includes “all human
activities -and their outcomes -whether physical or non-physical, which
are passed on to the next generation in form of social heritage rather
than genetically”

This statement clearly depicts the (relative) stability of
cultures -which is absolutely correct, for phenomena and activities
heading for destruction cannot have a role in establishing the
fundamental basics of man's virtually proper lifestyle.

**4.** “In philosophy, culture traditionally pertains to individuals,
representing man's objective activities concerning himself, his
environment, self- enhancement and attaining the highest moral virtues.”

This statement obviously approves that culture is an objective human
activity pertaining to man's own self, his peers, his environment and
also his self-development aiming for the highest spiritual virtues,
clearly an evolutional phenomenon.

**5.** The sociological claim, “Man is part of a whole…..” is absolutely
correct, and in approval of almost every encyclopaedia published by
civilized countries all around the world.

**6**. “Sociology....tries to combine *culture* with *society,*
considering the fact that all human phenomena are dependent upon social
culture.”

The point here is that, if human development and evolution had been
followed as a principle throughout history, philosophical and
sociological approaches would have enhanced each other, rather than fall
separate.

**7**. One of the final statements reads, “when we speak of 'high and
low' culture, we actually mean how close people's culture is to 18th and
19th century European and American culture.”

The author(s) have astonishingly based the criterion for high or low
culture on 18th and 19th century cultures of Europe and America, whereas
other societies, e.g. Eastern countries, possess cultures much better
established, more delicate and more evolutional.

Culture Seen in Turkish Reference Books
---------------------------------------

“Culture is consisted of a nation's way of thought and works of art
resulted in by imitation, criticism and experiences acquired throughout
life; any lifestyle caused by connecting thoughts with hearing;
improving thought levels and standards of social life through criticism,
appreciation, comparison and gathering necessary information.”

The significant point in these statements is, “improving the level of
thought and standards of social life through Criticism, appreciation,
Culture is, of course, a factor in improving thoughts and social
lifestyles. The point lacking attention here is the evolutional aspect
of culture, which has been emphasized by almost all distinguished
encyclopaedias around the world.

Here are more statements on culture quoted from another Turkish
reference book:

“The word “culture” found its way into the Turkish language from French
and Latin after young Turks came to office in 1910, when Mustapha Kamal
began vast cultural changes; it generally means civilizations remaining
from the past. Its other meanings are:

a nation or peoples' specific cultural or civilizational change;  
 one's knowledge and cultural learning;  
 purifying on element or substance of unwanted alien material;  
 biological processes in agriculture, or raising-various bacteria.”

Culture in the Encyclopaedia of Human Rights
--------------------------------------------

Culture, every human's right to contribute to cultural life, has been
presented in the World Treaty on Human Rights as:

Article 1027: Every human being is entitled to the right to live freely,
contribute to his society's cultural lifestyle, and enjoy its scientific
and artistic advantages. Everyone has the right to be provided with
material and moral support caused by scientific endeavours or literary
and artistic works.  
 This right has been further emphasized in the Treaty of Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights.

Article 1051: All member countries of this treaty are in official
agreement on these rights for every human being:  
 a. to contribute to cultural life;  
 b. to use the advantages of scientific advances and its applications;  
 c. to be physically and morally supported for one's scientific literary
or artistic accomplishments.

Article 2015: Members of this treaty are to play an active role towards
the achievement of these ends by means of developing science and
culture.

Article 3015: Members of this treaty totally agree on the right of free
research in scientific and creative domains.

Article 4015: All members of the treaty acknowledge the necessity of
international cooperation towards scientific and cultural development.

Defending human rights against racial injustices in cultural issues has
been emphasized in this treaty.  
 Article 5: In accordance with the fundamental rights stated in Article
2 of this treaty, all members pledge to prevent any kind of racial
injustice -whether in race, skin colour, nationality or ethnic group -so
that any human being can enjoy equal rights, especially in:

**a**. economics, particularly social and cultural rights;  
**b.** the right to participate in cultural activities. The treaty also
prohibits any kind of sexist, biased injustice or cruelty to women.

Article 13: Membering countries are to make any effort towards dealing
with socioeconomic injustices to women, so that women and men may have
equal rights, particularly in sports events and all cultural activities.

The UNESCO officially undertakes the responsibility of safeguarding and
supervising support and development of cultural rights. The UNESCO
relies on these agreements in order to attain its goals: the UNESCO
treaty on protecting cultural possessions during military invasion,
approved on May 14, 1954, also known as the Hague Treaty; its protocol,
May 14, 1954; the UNESCO treaty on preventing smuggling, importing or
exporting cultural monuments and objects, November 14, 1970.

The treaty on the protection of cultural heritage, November 16, 1972;
the statement on the Principles of Cultural International Cooperation,
November 14, 1966; the UNESCO statement on Principles of Satellite
Transmitter Usage for Free Information flow, and Cultural Exchange,
November 15, 1972 and also the UNESCO statement on Mass Media
Participation and Role in Enhancing Peace and International
Relationships, and Protecting Human Rights; Fighting Racial Injustice
and War, November 28, 1978.

Other approved agreements aiming to protect cultural rights include an
article obliging all museums to be available to all people, December 14,
1960; recommendations on preventing illegal import or export of cultural
objects, November 19, 1964; recommendations on national support of
cultural and natural heritage, November 16, 1972; recommendations on the
protection of historical places, November 26, 1976; recommendations on
the protection of contemporary historical monuments.

November 28, 1978; UNESCO'S advice on the situation of artists, October
27, 1980, along with the international treaty on social and cultural
rights sanctioned by the Socio-economical Commission on May 11, 1976,
according to which the UNESCO is to regularly report to the commissions
the progress in issues concerning its duties in the rights explained in
Article 18. Information on the progress of the contents of Article 15 of
the treaty -on the right to attend cultural activities -are recorded as
UNESCO's economical, legal, cultural and social rights advances.[^48]

Points of Common Approval between Islamic Culture and Human Rights
------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Both Islamic Culture and the Human Rights agree on items (a) and (b)
for Article 1027.  
 2. Items (a), (b), and (c) of Article 1015 are also culturally agreed
upon.  
 3. Likewise Articles 2015, 3015, 4015 and 5.  
 4. In Article 13, the two cultures do not agree in their approaches to
the different rights considered for men and women.[^49]

The Criterion in Islamic Culture
--------------------------------

Any cultural phenomenon or activity opposing the highest human virtues,
like morals or religion, is unacceptable in Islam. Culture, or any
phenomenon or culture arising as culture in the society which is in
conflict with human dignity and the perfectionistic tendencies in man,
however attractive it may be, is prohibited by Islam.

This is the most important duty of a dynamic culture, which is strongly
supported in Islam.

[^1]: Borhan-e-Qate (The Undefiable Proof), by Mohammad Hussein Khalaf
Tabrizi.

[^2]: Jahangiri Dictionary.

[^3]: The Persian Encyclopaedia, see culture.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Ibid.

[^6]: Ibid.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: See Lessan-ol-Arab, al-marja; also Al-Monjad, thaqaf.

[^9]: Encyclopaedia, by Farid Vadjdi, see thaqaf.

[^10]: The current encyclopaedias, e.g. Farid Vadjdi's, do not mention
any of the recent discussions, or fervid research done on culture.

[^11]: Al-Monjad, see Adab.

[^12]: It has been said that Imam Ali (a) wrote these Arabic verses.

[^13]: Culture de masse.

[^14]: Dictionary Encyclopédique Noms Communs, Hachette, 1991.

[^15]: Jean Mathieu, Dictionary Etymologique, Rosay, Paris, 1992.

[^16]: See Culture: A Critical Review of Concepts and Definitions, by
A.L Kroeber and Clyde Kluckhohn, quoted in the Encyclopaedia Americana.

[^17]: Africa, Legend of Creation by Uli Bayer.

[^18]: History of the World, Hamilton, Vol.1.

[^19]: Life Nature and the origins of Evolution Oparin

[^20]: 1bid

[^21]: International Grolier Encyclopaedia

[^22]: World Book Encyclopaedia.

[^23]: The National Identity of Argentina, by Juan Jose.

[^24]: p 142

[^25]: Constantinov. Encyclopaedia of Philosophy.

[^26]: The ideas of such personalities would definitely differ a great
deal, or even contradict. Merely supposing that they were influential in
the Chinese society, sufficiently proves that China must have possessed
a culture to prepare its intellectuals to accept such a vast range of
diverse - or contradicting -schools of thought.

[^27]: Chu Jai, Winberg, Ancient History of Chinese Philosophy, and Will
Durant, History of Civilization, Vol.1.

[^28]: Hu Shih (1891-1962), Chinese philosopher.

[^29]: Will Durant, History of Civilization, Vol.1.

[^30]: See p.1

[^31]: The four elegant Buddhist realities forming the base of Buddhism.

[^32]: Indian religious sect.

[^33]: The great legendary Hindu book.

[^34]: One of the three Hindu Gods described in Mahabharata.

[^35]: Radha Kamal Mukerjee, The Culture of India.

[^36]: Ibid.

[^37]: Will Durant, History of Civilization. Vol. I

[^38]: The Encyclopaedia of India.

[^39]: Contemporary originalist theorists.

[^40]: The Encyclopaedia of Kenya.

[^41]: Uli Bayer, Africa, Legends of Creation

[^42]: The General Encyclopaedia.

[^43]: The Finnish Dictionary.

[^44]: The Finnish Encyclopaedia

[^45]: Bra Bokers Lexicon.

[^46]: Quoted from Edward Burnett Tyler, English anthropologist.

[^47]: The Gylelendals Encyclopaedia.

[^48]: The Encyclopaedia of Human Rights.

[^49]: For a further detailed treatise, see M.T. Ja'fari, Universal
Human Rights: from the Viewpoints of Islam and the West. pp.292-306


