Appendix
========

Let us first consider the ideas of several Western scholars on the
history of science in Islamic societies:[^1]

John Bernal has written:

*"Islam has been the religion of science and knowledge from the very
beginning. Furthermore, unlike the Roman Empire, Islamic cities did not
isolate themselves from the rest of the East. Islam was where Asian and
European sciences met. Thus, inventions were made that were totally
unknown -or even unachievable- to Greek or Roman technology, such as
steel products, silk paper and enamelled chinaware. Such inventions also
led to other advances, bringing about more activity in the West and
eventually the 17th* *and 18th* *industrial revolutions.”*[^2]

Isaac Asimov explains:

*"In the seventh century, the Arabs conquered Damascus, and then Egypt,
thus inheriting a vast treasure of Greek knowledge and science.*

*This historical paint is highly significant, for if Muslims hadn't
become so powerful and sophisticated, the whole civilized world might
have become a battle field for barbarian tribes.*

*During the thousand years of the Byzantine Empire, science and
technology were completely forsaken among the intense struggles and
battles for power. Calinicus was the only glitter of science and wisdom
in that era. Western Europe was in a deep sleep of ignorance and
darkness. The Muslims were the only guardians of science. They not only
saved Greek science and philosophy by translating them, but also
enriched science with their amazing works of research and excellent
books. Alchemy was of particular interest to them.*[^3]

Sigrid Hunke agrees:

*"We have inherited science and technology not only from Rome and
Greece, but also from the world of Islamic thought.* The *West
undoubtedly owes Islam a great deal.”*

Philip Hitti adds:

*"No civilization achieved as much scientific progress during the
medieval era as the Muslims did.”*

John Bernal writes:

“The *Muslims were culturally independent, and received a warm welcome
having conquered the Mediterranean areas… In fact, it would have been
more logical to consider the history of science confined to the period
between the seventh (1st century Hijra) and fourteenth centuries* ...The
*basic topics (of Islamic culture) are interestingly not only worldly,
but also scientific. This is why Christian universities followed Islamic
methods ...It was the Muslims who taught the Europeans how to make and
use paper in the 12th century.*[^4]

We must remember that since the final end of Islam is achieving a
*reasonable life,* posing the question whether Islam considers science
necessary or not, is like asking whether Islam considers reasonable life
a necessity or not, for science -discovering reality -is a part of the
context of reasonable life. If we study almost 700 Koranic verses and
hundreds of *hadith* cited in reliable Islamic reference books, we will
find that Islam believes that living without a knowledge of the
realities of man and the universe is not living at all, and realize how
ridiculous it is to question the value of science in Islam. In order to
study the influence of these references on Muslims, it is best to refer
to the great number of Muslim scientists and scholars throughout
history.

Bertrand Russell admits:

*"The Muslims had a more experimental approach in their scientific
research -particularly in chemistry -than the Greek, They endeavoured to
turn cheap metals into gold, discover the secrets of alchemy and reach
the elixir of life, because they had a deep respect for chemistry.*

*During all the years of ignorant and darkness, it was the Muslims who
actually advanced civilization, and any knowledge gained by late
medieval scholars, like Roger Bacon, was based on Islamic science.”*[^5]

Aldo Mili writes:

*"Arabic knowledge, which provided the basis for the new European
civilization, lost its worldwide acclaim in the l3th century.*

Alfred North Whitehead adds:

*"The Byzantine and the Muslims were civilizations themselves, so their
cultures retained their innate forces, reinforced by physical and
spiritual adventures. They traded with the Far East and widened their
territory in the West, made laws, created new forms of art, took an
analytical approach to theology, revolutionized mathematics and enriched
medicine.*[^6]

George Sarton believes:

*"Perhaps the most significant -but still the least visible -scientific
development during the medieval era, was the establishment of empirical
thought. The Muslims made possible the progress of this way of thinking
up to the 12th century...Even a brief description of how Islam has
developed science would exceed the capacity of this book. They did far
more than just translating Greek scientific references. They not only
passed science on to the next generations, but also provided their own
innovations.*

*Creating a new universal excellent scientific civilization in less than
two centuries is quite an achievement, and we cannot praise it
enough.”*[^7]

In ***Allah's Sun Shines on the West**,* Sigrid Hunke adds:

*"Using their scientific research and experience, the Muslims changed
the raw material they got from the Greek into a new face of science. In
fact, it was the Muslims who established the role of experience in
scientific endeavour... Not only did the Arabs save the Greek
civilization from fading away, but also introduced empirical scientific
methods in chemistry, natural sciences, arithmetic, algebra, zoology,
trigonometry and social sciences. Furthermore, many of their inventions
and discoveries in various fields of science were stolen or pertained to
others.”*

Gustav Le Bon, the French researcher believes:

*"Up to the 15th* *century, no quotation was credited unless it had been
quoted by the (Muslim) Arabs. George Bacon, Leonardo do Vinci, Arnold,
Raymond Loli, Villano, St. Thomas, Great Albert and* *Alfons the Tenth
were either trained in Islamic schools or wrote about them. Renagne, the
French philosopher believes that the Great Albert learned all he knew
from Avicenna, and St. Thomas' philosophy originates from Ibn Rushd.
For* 500 *to* 600 *years books written by Muslims dominated European
textbooks*.*”*[^8]

Let us return to John Bernal, who has divided great scientific
endeavours into three periods:

“There have been three great periods of scientific endeavours: 9th -
century Islam, 11th-century Spain and 13th-century France.”

Thus, can we still claim that Muslims imitated others' science?

Their empirical method was not incidental; it is derived from Islamic
reference books. Imam Ali (a) has frequently emphasized the necessity of
science. Here are a few of his *hadith* on this matter:

1- *Experience leads to new science.*[^9]  
 2- *There are two types of wisdom: natural and experience-based. Both
are quite advantageous.*[^10]  
 3- *The value of man’s ideas depends on his experience.*[^11]   
 4- *Accurate calculation leads to success and it is experience can
cause accurate calculation*  
 5- *Wisdom lies in keeping and using one's experience*[^12]  
 6- *Cruel is the one who deprives himself of the treasure of wisdom and
experience he has*[^13]

Examples of the Amazing Flourish of Science and Objective Culture in Islam
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Pierre Rosseau writes:

*"Only three centuries after the demise of the Prophet of Islam, Qartaba
with the population of one million, had* 80 *public schools* - *almost
equivalent to today's universities -and a library containing* 600, 000
*books in Arabic, which had become the main language of science around
the world.*[^14]

Let us now take a look at some of the libraries built by Muslims:

1. *The library of the observatory at Maragheh, built by Khwajah
Nasiruddin Tousi, containing* 400,000 *books.*

2. *The library of Najaf in the 10th century (about the time Sheikh
Tousi lived) contained* 40, 000 *books*

3. *During the reign of the Baghdad Caliphs, one library had* 100,000
*books.*

4. *Azizi, the Caliph of Cairo, had a library containing* 1,600,000
*books,* 6500 *volumes of which were on mathematics and* 18000 *others
on philosophy. His son, as his successor, did a great deal to develop
the library, and built 18 study halls near it.*

*In addition, governors and visitors throughout history have played a
significant role in gathering books and constructing libraries that
paved the path toward scientific advance. Mahlabi left after his death a
library of* 170, 000 *books. His young colleague, Saheb-ibn-Ibad, had
collected* 206,000 *books, and one of Saheb’s judges had collected over
a hundred thousand books. These figures are, nevertheless, approximate.
Many librarians were busy working in Cairo, where only two of the
libraries had* 2,200,000 *books. In* 891, *there were a hundred
libraries in Baghdad”*[^15]

[^1]: This appendix has been compiled from Allameh Jafari's
Interpretation of the Nahjol-balagheh, Vols. 19 and 22.

[^2]: John Bernal, Science in History.

[^3]: Isaac Asimov, The Encyclopaedia of Science and Industry.

[^4]: John Bernal, Science in History.

[^5]: John Bernal, Science in History.

[^6]: Alfred North Whitehead, The Story of Thoughts.

[^7]: George Sarton, The Story of Science.

[^8]: Gustave Le Bon, The Islamic and Arab Civilization.

[^9]: Hassan ibn Ali ibn Shu'ba, Tohaf-ol-oghoul.

[^10]: Allameh Majlesi, Beharul-Anwar.

[^11]: Abdul-vahed Amedi, Ghorar-ol-hekam va Dorar-ol-kalem.

[^12]: Nahj-ol-balagheh, Letter No.31 (Imam Ali's letter to Imam Hassan)

[^13]: Ibid., Letter No.78.

[^14]: Pierre Rosseau, The History of Science.

[^15]: Sigrid Hunke, Allah’s sonne Uber den Abendland (Allah’s Sun
Shines Upon the West.)


