Translator’s Preface
====================

***In His Name, the Most High***

Faith is the most important element in each individual’s life. Faith is
the means by which a person chooses to do or not do something. Our faith
determines our future both in this world and the hereafter. For example,
in this world, one would choose his career based upon his faith. In the
hereafter, one’s good deeds will be accepted or rejected based upon his
faith. The strength of an individual’s faith is seen in his daily life
and how he achieves his goals.

There have been many attempts in writing and publishing material
containing outlines of beliefs and practices. Some are from people who
profess belief in one God, others are from atheists; some are condensed,
others are comprehensive; some are logical, others are traditional; some
are philosophical, others are theological; some are concerning ancient
faiths, others are about recent ones; some are original and others are
derivative. However, all are efforts to either teach one’s own belief to
others to convince them, or to teach followers of the same faith their
own faith.

This book contains both logical and textual proofs for the tenets of
Islam. It is written by one of the leading figures of the Religious
Seminary in Qum. It is the largest Shi’ite religious seminary,
containing over sixty thousand students and researchers.

The highest level in the Shi’ite Traditional Usuli Seminary is the
*Kharij*. In Qum, the most popular teacher of *Kharij* in terms of
attendance and material, is the Grand Ayatullah Shaykh Husayn Vahid
Khorasani (may Allah protect him), the author of this book.

The present book is being taught in many religious institutes around the
world and is being translated into many different languages and I
thought it would be a valuable asset for the English speaking community.
I personally found this book to be extremely beneficial; hence, I
translated it into English. May Allah accept it for me and my parents’
hereafter, *amin*.

Ali Raza Rizvi  
 London, England


