The Twelve Imams (as)
=====================

What has preceded are concise proofs on the issue of divine leadership
in the righteous school of thought. The Shi’ahs believe that the divine
leaders of the Muslims after the Prophet (S) are the Twelve Infallible
Imams (as) and that the Prophet (S) specified them as:

First: Al-Imam ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib, Commander of the Faithful [*Amir
al-Mu’minin*] (as)

Second: Al-Imam al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali, the Oldest Grandson [*al-Sibt
al-Akbar*] (as)

Third: Al-Imam al-Husayn ibn ‘Ali, Master of the Martyrs [*Sayyid
al-Shuhada’*] (as)

Fourth: Al-Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn, Beauty of the Worshippers [*Zayn
al-’Abidin*] (as)

Fifth: Al-Imam Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, the Splitter of Knowledge [*al-Baqir*]
(as)

Sixth: Al-Imam Ja’far ibn Muhammad, the Truthful [*al-Sadiq*] (as)

Seventh: Al-Imam Musa ibn Ja’far, the Controller of anger [*al-Kadhim*]
(as)

Eighth: Al-Imam ‘Ali ibn Musa, the Content [*al-Rida*] (as)

Ninth: Al-Imam Muhammad ibn ‘Ali, the Generous [al-Jawad] (as)

Tenth: Al-Imam ‘Ali ibn Muhammad, the guide [al-Hadi] (as)

Eleventh: Al-Imam al-Hasan ibn ‘Ali, the Soldier [al-’Askari] (as)

Twelfth: Al-Imam al-Hujjat ibn al-Hasan al-’Askari, the Rightly Guided,
the Awaited [al-Mahdi al-Mawud] (as)

Previous proofs on the divine leadership of the Commander of the
Faithful ‘Ali (as) are sufficient. However, a separate discussion on the
proofs of the divine leadership of each one of the Imams (as) is
necessary regarding his knowledge, acceptance of the prayer and the
stipulation of the previous divine leader [*Imam*].

The objective of this chapter is to state the glad tidings in the
Prophetic traditions about the Twelve Imams (as) in Sunni sources, which
have been transmitted with the title of ‘Twelve Khalifas’ and ‘Twelve
Amirs’. Below are some of them:

It has come in *Sahih al-Bukhari*: It is reported on the authority of
Jabir ibn Samurah that he said: I heard the Prophet (S) saying: *There
will be Twelve Commanders.* He says that he (S) then said something I
did not hear, so my father told me that he said that they will all be
from Quraysh.[^1]

It has come in *Sahih Muslim*: It is reported on the authority of Jabir
ibn Samurah that he said: I entered the presence of the Prophet (S) with
my father. I heard him (S) saying: **Surely this command will not end
until there will be Twelve Successors [Khalifah**]. He says that he then
said something quietly, so I asked my father: What did he (S) say? He
replied: They are all from Quraysh.[^2]

It has come in both *Sahih Muslim* and *Musnad of Ahmad*: It is reported
on the authority of Jabir ibn Samurah that he said: I heard the Prophet
(S) saying: *The command of the people will not pass until twelve men
command over them.* He says that the Prophet (S) then said something
which I could not hear, so I asked my father: What did he (S) say? He
replied: The Prophet (S) said: *They will all be from Quraysh.*[^3]

It has come in *Sahih Ibn Habban*: I heard the Messenger of Allah (S)
saying: *There will be twelve successors after me and all of them will
be from Quraysh.*[^4]

It has come in *Sunan al-Tirmidhi*: *There will be Twelve Commanders
after me.* The reporter says: He then said something I did not
understand. Therefore, I asked the one beside me, he said: *All of them
will be from Quraysh.*[^5]

It has come in *Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal*: *There will be Twelve
Successors after me and all of them will be from Quraysh.*[^6]

And it has also come: *There will be Twelve Commanders after me.* Then I
don’t know what he said so I asked all the people present, they all
said: He (S) said: *They are all from Quraysh.*[^7]

It has come in *Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal*: *There will be Twelve
Commanders after me.* Then he said something I could not hear, so I
asked someone beside me, and he said: *They are all from Quraysh.*[^8]

It has in *Musnad Ahmad*: *There will be Twelve Commanders after me.*
Then he said something quietly. The reporter says that I asked someone
sitting next to me about what he (S) said? He replied: *They are all
from Quraysh.*[^9]

It has come in *Musnad by Ibn Ju’d*: *There will be Twelve Commanders
afer me.* Husayn has reported in his narration that then he said
something I did not understand. One reporter said that I asked my
father. Another said that I asked the people. The reply was: *They are
all from Quraysh.*[^10]

It has come in *Musnad Abu Ya’la*: The Prophet (S) said: *This relgion
will remain till the Day of Judgment and there will be Twelve Successors
over you, all of whom will be from Quraysh.*[^11]

It has come in *Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal*: It is reported on the
authority of Jabir ibn Samurah that he said: The Messenger of Allah (S)
delivered a sermon to us in ‘Arafat saying: *This matter will remain
honourable, mighty and distinct against the opposition so long as the
Twelve have the sovereignty, all of them.* Then he (S) said something
that I did not understand, so I asked my father about what he said after
that. Thus, he replied: *All of them are from Quraysh.*[^12]

It has come in *al-Mustadrak* *al-Hakim*: It is reported from Masruq
that he said: One night we were sitting with ‘Abd Allah. He was reading
us the Qur’an. One man asked him, “O Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman, did you all ask
the Messenger of Allah (S), how many caliphs will rule this nation? ‘Abd
Allah replied, “No one before you have asked me this since I have come
to Iraq. Yes, we did ask him and he (S) said: *Twelve, the number of the
chieftains of the Children of Isra’il*.”[^13]

The traditions regarding this topic are numerous.[^14] Their
transmissions are from the best of the companions, like Ibn ‘Abbas, Ibn
Mas’ud, Salman al-Farisi, Abu Sa’id al-Khudri, Abu Dharr, Jabir ibn
Samurah, Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah, Anas ibn Malik, Zayd ibn Thabit, Zayd ibn
Arqam, Abu Thumamah, Wathilah ibn al-Asqa’, Abu Ayyub al-Ansari, ‘Ammar
ibn Yasir, Hudhayfah ibn Usayd, ‘Imran ibn Husayn, Sa’d ibn Malik,
Hudhayfah ibn al-Yaman, Abu Qutadah al-Ansari and others.

Here we number some significant points in these traditions:

The number of the successors (of the Prophet) is restricted to twelve.

These twelve successors will continue till the Day of Judgment.

The honour of Islam and the Muslims is dependent on their obedience.

The religion will be established both intellectually and practically
through them, because the intellectual establishment of religion will
take place through the commentator of the Qur’an and through the one who
explains its realities and cognitions. The practical establishment will
take place through the executor of its laws and just rules. These two
important goals cannot be achieved except under special circumstances
with these twelve divine leaders.

Choosing the example of the chieftains of the Children of Isra’il from
all other examples is significant, because their succession was not
chosen by people, rather it was specified by Allah. Thus, Allah, the
Exalted, said about the chieftains:

***And We raised up among them twelve chieftains.***[^15]

These divine leaders [*Imams*] are from Quraysh.

Are there any caliphs who have these specifications, except for those on
the Right Path? Is it possible to define the Twelve Divine Leaders
except with our divine leaders (as)? Has the honour of Islam and its
aims been achieved during the caliphate of Yazid son of Mu’awiyyah and
his likes?

Some of the learned researchers of the Sunnis have admitted that the
glad tidings of the Prophet (S) cannot be implied onto any but the
twelve divine leaders (as). Thus, it has come in *Yanabi’ al-Mawaddah*
of al-Qanduzi:

“Some of the researchers have said: Surely, the traditions indicating
that the successors of the Prophet (S) will be twelve are famous and
from many different chains of transmissions. With the passing of time
and the change of circumstances, it is known that the intent of the
Messenger of Allah (S) from this tradition was the twelve Imams from his
Household and Progeny.

For it is not possible to apply this tradition onto the caliphs that
came after him from his companions as they were less than twelve. It
cannot be applied to the Ummayyad kings as they were more than twelve;
also, because of their horrible oppression, except for ‘Umar ibn ‘Abd
al-’Aziz. Furthermore, they were not Hashimites.

Based on the tradition from ‘Abd al-Malik on the authority of Jabir: The
Prophet (S) said: *They are all from Bani Hashim.* This tradition is
preferred over the other one because of the claim of the low voice of
the Prophet (S), because the other narrators do not like the succession
of the Hashimites. It also cannot be applied to the ‘Abbaside kings as
they were more than twelve as well, and also because they did not abide
by the verse:

***Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for my near
relatives.***[^16]

Thus, this tradition must be applied to the twelve Imams from his
Household and Progeny (as), because they were the most learned of their
time, the most honourable, the most splendid, the most pious, the most
devout, the highest in nobility, the best in family and the best before
Allah.

Their knowledge was from their forefathers, which was connected to their
great-grandfather the Prophet (S). It was hereditary and directly
imparted by Allah. The knowledgeable, the researchers, the mystics and
the fortunate have recognised them as such.”[^17]

The intent of the Prophet (S) about the twelve successors is the twelve
Imams from his Household (as). The tradition of the Two Weighty Things
and other traditions mentioned in this book and elsewhere bear witness
to and prefer this fact.

It is reported from al-Suday in his Commentary (of the Qur’an), who is a
Sunni scholar and is trustworthy for them, “When Sarah began to dislike
the position of Hajar, Allah, the Exalted, revealed to Ibrahim: Leave
with Isma’il and his mother for the house of the assigned Prophet (S).
For indeed, I will spread your progeny (on Earth) and will give them
power over the ones who deny me. I will make from his Progeny twelve
great men.”[^18]

The above also confirms what is in the present day Torah:

And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!

And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou
shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him for
an everlasting covenant, and with his seed after him.

And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and
will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve
princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation.[^19]

\*\*\*

There are many authentic traditions that stipulate the divine leadership
of the Twelve Imams (as) from our (Shi’ah) sources. It suffices to study
their transmission to the Infallibles (as) due to its continuous
transmission [*tawatur*]. In this concise work we will only mention two
transmissions of the tradition known as the tradition of the Tablet
[*hadith al-lawh*]. It has been transmitted with many chains of
transmissions by the greatest experts of traditions. Some of these are
reliable:

The First Transmission
----------------------

The report of Shaykh al-Saduq (ra) from Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (as), on
the authority of Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari saying: I entered the
presence of Fatimah (as) while a tablet was in front of her which
contained the names of the successors from her progeny. I counted them
to be twelve, the last being al-Qa’im. There were three named Muhammad
and four ‘Ali, may the blessings of Allah be upon them all.[^20]

The Second Transmission
-----------------------

This transmission contains prophecies of the unseen. The content of this
tradition prove it to be issued from the infallible. The greatest of our
experts in traditions have reported it, like Shaykh al-Saduq, Shaykh
al-Mufid and Shaykh al-Tusi, may Allah increase their status. They have
reported it on the authority of ‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Salim, on the
authority of Abu Basir from al-Imam al-Sadiq (as) saying: My father (as)
said to Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah al-Ansari:

*I have a matter to discuss with you. When do you have time so that I
can sit alone with you and discuss it?* Jabir replied to him: Whenever
you want. One day my father sat down with him and said: *O Jabir, tell
me about the tablet which you saw in the hand of my grandmother, Fatimah
the daughter of the Messenger of Allah (as). What did my mother inform
you about what is written in that tablet?*

Jabir said: I take Allah as my witness that one day I entered the
presence of your mother Fatimah (as) during the life of the Messenger of
Allah (S). Thus, I congratulated her on the birth of al-Husayn. I saw in
her hands a green tablet. I thought it was made of emerald. It had white
writing like that of the colour of the sun. I asked her: May my father
and mother be your ransom, O daughter of the Messenger of Allah (S).
What is this tablet? She answered: *This is the tablet that Allah gave
to his Messenger (S) as a gift. It contains the names of my father, my
husband, my two sons and the successors from my progeny. My father gave
it to me to give me the glad tidings.* Jabir said: Your mother Fatimah
(as) gave it to me. I read it and made a copy from it.

My father said to him: *O Jabir, can you show it to me?* Jabir replied:
Yes. Then my father walked with him to his house. My father took out a
fine paper and said: *O Jabir, look in your book while I read to you.*
Therefore, Jabir looked in his copy while my father read to him. Not a
single word differed between the two. Jabir says: I take Allah as my
witness that that is how I saw it written in the tablet:

**In the Name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful, this is a letter
from Allah, the Honourable, the All-Wise to Muhammad, His Prophet, His
light, His representative, His veil and His guide. The Trustworthy
Spirit brought it down from the Lord of the Worlds.**

**Muhammad, revere My Names and thank Me for My bounties. Do not reject
My blessings. Surely, I am Allah, there is no god but I, the Destroyer
of the tyrants, the Granter of victory to the oppressed and the
Compensator of all rewards. Certainly, I am Allah there is no god but I.
Thus, whoever places hope in the mercy of someone other than Me and
fears the justice of other than Me, then I will punish him a punishment
that I will not give to anyone in this worlds. Only worship Me and only
rely on Me.**

**Surely, I did not send a Prophet whose days have completed and his
time has finished except that I made for him a successor. I have given
you priority over all Prophets and I have given priority to your
successor over all successors. I have honoured you with your two young
brave grandsons, Hasan and Husayn. I have made Hasan the source of My
Knowledge after the completion of his father’s period. And I have made
Husyan the treasure of My revelation.**

**I have honoured him with martyrdom and have made his end fortunate. He
is the greatest of all the martyrs and the highest of them in status. I
have placed My complete word with him and My considerable proof with
him. Through his progeny I will reward and punish. The first one of them
is ‘Ali, the master of the worshippers and the beauty of My previous
beloved ones. His son resembles his grandfather, Mahmud. He is Muhammad,
the splitter of My Knowledge and the source of My Wisdom.**

**The doubters in Ja’far will be destroyed quickly. The one who rejects
him is like the one who rejects Me. This My word is true that I will
honour the place of Ja’far and I will please him amongst his followers,
helpers and friends.**

**After him will be Musa, whose time will see dark mischief, because the
thread of My obligation does not break and My proof is not hidden.
Indeed, My guardians will drink from the cup of perfection. Whoever
rejects anyone of them has rejected My blessing. And whoever changes a
single verse from My Book has related falsehood to Me.**

**Woe onto the rejecting liars of ‘Ali, My Guardian and Helper, after
the completing period of Musa, My servant, My beloved and My chosen one.
I will place the weighty responsibilities of Prophethood with him. I
will try him proficiently for it. A mischievous proud man will kill him.
He will be buried in a city that the pious servant has built next to the
worst of My creation.**

**This My word is true that I will please him with Muhammad, his son and
his successor** **after him and the inheritor of his knowledge. He is
the source of My Knowledge, the repository of My secrets and My proof
over My creation. No servant will believe in him except that I will make
the Paradise his place of rest. I will accept his intercession for
seventy of his family members for whom the Hell would have become
obligatory.**

**For his son ‘Ali, My Guardian, My Helper, My witness over My creation
and My trustworthy over My revelation, I will end with fortune. I will
bring forth from him the caller to My path and the treasure of My
Knowledge, al-Hasan.**

**I will complete that with his son M u h a m m a d, the mercy for the
universe. He will have the perfection of Musa, the magnificence of ‘Isa
and the patience of Ayyub. My beloved ones will be humiliated during his
period. Their heads will be given as gifts like the heads of Turks and
Daylamis. They will be killed, burnt, will be frightened, terrified and
fearful. The Earth will be coloured with their blood. The afflicted
sounds of their women will circulate.**

**Those are My true beloved Gurdians. Through them I will remove every
dark mischief. I will remove the earthquakes through them and remove the
burdens and chains through them. They are upon whom is blessing and
mercy from their Lord. And they are the rightly-guided.**

‘Abd al-Rahman ibn Salim says that Abu Basir said, “If you only hear
this one tradition during all your life then it is sufficient for you.
Preserve it from all those who do not deserve it.”[^21]

\*\*\*

The proofs regarding the divine leadership of the Infallible Imams (as)
are more than can be counted in this concise book. We will end this
brief section with a noble sermon from Imam al-Sadiq (as) describing the
status of infallibility and the divine leadership. The master of the
experts of the traditions, Muhammad ibn Yaqub al-Kulayni has transmitted
it from Muhammad ibn Yahya,[^22] on the authority of Ahmad ibn Muhammad
ibn ‘Isa,[^23] on the authority of al-Hasan ibn Mahbub,[^24] on the
authority of Ishaq ibn Ghalib[^25] from Imam Ja’far ibn Muhammad
al-Sadiq (as), a sermon in which the status and the attributes of the
Imams (as) has been described:

*Surely, Allah, the Mighty and High, elucidated His religion through the
Imams of guidance from the Household of our Prophet (S). He has made His
path shine through them. He has opened the* *hidden sources of His
Knowledge through them. From the Ummah of Muhammad (S), whoever
recognises the obligatory right of his Imam has found the sweetness of
the faith. He has also come to know the brilliance of his Islam, because
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has appointed the Imam as a banner for
His creation.*

*He has made the Imam a proof over His bounties and His universe. Allah
has dressed him with the crown of honour and has covered him with the
light of the Almighty. Due to this the Imam has support from the
heavens. The bounties are never disconnected from him. No one can reach
what is with Allah except through the Imam. Allah does not accept the
deeds of His servants without the recognition of the Imam. He knows what
may come to him of the obscurities of the darkness, the puzzles of the
practices and the doubts of the temptations.*

*Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, always chooses an Imam for His
creation, one after the other from the sons of al-Husayn. He selects
them. He is pleased with His creation through them and approves of them.
Whenever an Imam passes away from them then Allah appoints for His
creation another one as a clear sign, illuminating guide, right leader
and learned proof.*

*The Imams are from Allah. They guide to the righteousness and judge
with justice. They are the proofs of Allah and they call towards Him.
They are His custodians in His creation. The people owe them their
guidance. They give light to the civilisations. The inherited
possessions grow due to their blessing. Allah has made them a means of
life for mankind. They are lights in the darkness, the keys of speech
and the pillars of Islam. Due to them, the extents of Allah flow in them
for that which is ordained.*

*Therefore, the Imam is the chosen and the selected. He is the saviour
guide. He is the awaited one who will rise. Allah has chosen him for
that. When He created the Imam, He created him as His special creation.
Before He created the creation, He created the Imams under the right
side of His throne in a state that He granted them the wisdom of His
unseen knowledge. He chose them for His Knowledge due to their
purification.*

*The Imams were to remain from Adam (as) and they were the best of the
children of Nuh (as). They were the chosen ones from the progeny of
Ibrahim (as) from the children of Isma’il. They are the chosen ones from
the progeny of Muhammad (S). They are always observed by Allah’s vision.
They are protected and preserved by Allah’s cover. The tricks of Iblis
(Satan) and his army are pushed away from them.*

*The hollow darknesses and the effusions of every unjust are kept away
from them. The evil loathers are diverted from them. They are free from
all imperfections and protected from all (spiritual) calamities. They
are infallible of all errors and protected from every indecency. In
their young age they are known for their forbearance and goodness. In
their old age they are ascribed with chastity, knowledge and virtue.
They support the command of their fathers, while keeping quiet during
the lives of their fathers.*

*When the period of their father ends and the Divine Will ends with him,
and the Divine Intent comes to him for His love and his father departs
from this world, then the command of Allah transfers to him. Allah then
makes His religion follow him and makes him the proof over His*
*servants. Allah raises the Imam in His land and endorses him with His
spirit. He gives the Imam His Knowledge and informs him of His
conclusive explanation. He entrusts His secret with the Imam and assigns
him the greatest command.*

*Allah informs the Imam with the virtue of the explanation of His
Knowledge. He raises the Imam as a banner for His creation and makes him
a proof over the inhabitants of His universe. He makes him a light for
the followers of His religion and a custodian over His servants. Allah
is pleased with him as the Imam for them. He entrusts His secret with
the Imam and places His Knowledge with him.*

*He reveals His Wisdom to the Imam and observes him for His religion.
Allah revives the courses of His path, divine duties and the divine law
through the Imam. The Imam rises with justice with dismay of the
ignorant and baffle of the controversial. He stands with radiant light,
practical cure, shining truth and flourishing explanations. He stands on
the right path, upon which his forefathers, the truthful, passed.*

*None but the mischievous ignore the right of such a learned Imam. None
but the misled reject them. No one turns away from them except that he
rebels against Allah, the Mighty and High.*[^26]

Indeed, every sentence of this noble sermon requires detailed
explanation. We suffice with a few points:

**(a)**

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) made ‘the Imams of guidance’ the topic of his
sermon to clarify the necessity of the existence of the Imam for the
people:

***(Remember) the day when We will call every people with their
Imam.***[^27]

The divine leader of the people must be the leader of guidance. As
Allah, the Exalted says:

***And We made of them Imams to guide by Our command.***[^28]

***You are only a warner and (there is) a guide for every
people.***[^29]

The recognition of the Imam of guidance is based on the recognition of
guidance. Recognition of guidance requires contemplation upon the verses
of the Book that have come about this topic, which exceed two hundred
and ninety verses. This short book does not allow us to explain them.

The guidance is perfection for the creation: *He said:*

***Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its creation, then guided it
(to its goal).***[^30]

***Glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High, Who creates, then makes
complete, and Who makes (things) according to a measure, then guides
(them to their goal).***[^31]

The guidance of every created being is in accordance with its creation.
Therefore as the human being is the best of creation, then his guidance
is the highest level of the perfection of all creations.

The Imam (as) has explained the greatness of the status of divine
leadership by describing them as the Imams of guidance. In fact, he has
clarified the specific characteristics of the Imam and what are the
requirements of this status for those who observe and reflect.

After a brief summary the Imam (as) goes into detail. He explained the
position of the divine leader [*Imam*] in the divine religion. The Imam
is the interpreter of the principles of faith and its branches, because
Allah, the Exalted, has not endorsed the views of the creation, which
are open to error and dispute. Error and dispute in religion are two
calamities that invalidate the purpose of divine law and these two
engulf the people into the darkness of misguidance.

In fact, Allah, the Exalted, has not left a single iota of ambiguity and
discrepancy about the principles of His faith and its branches which the
Imams of guidance have not explained. As the Imam (as) said: *Surely,
Allah, the Mighty and High, elucidated His religion through the Imams of
guidance from the Household of our Prophet (S).*

**(b)**

The human being, in accordance with his nature, seeks his Exalted
Creator. The goal of this nature is not achieved except by sincerely
reaching the path to Allah, which is the right religion: *Say:*

***This is my way: I call to Allah, I and those who follow me being
certain.***[^32]

The factors that led astray from the religion of Allah, the Exalted, are
present in every age, like human error and desire, and the misleaders
from Allah’s path from the jinn and man: ***And follow not (other) ways,
for they will lead you away from His way;***[^33] ***They have taken a
small price for the communications of Allah, so they turn away from His
way; surely evil is it that they do**.*[^34] Thus, the presence of an
Imam is necessary to fulfil the purpose of creating this nature—that is
to reach Allah—and legislating the right path—that is the religion and
the way to Allah—when he (as) said: *He has made His path shine through
them.*

**(c)**

The purpose of creating the human intellect is to make him realise the
reality of knowledge and recognition. The human being demands with the
tongue of his nature, from the Giver of wisdom and perception: O Lord,
show me the things as they are. Give me self-recognition and make me
realise my origination, my presence in this world and my end.

The thirst of human perception is not quenched except by the spring of
life of divine knowledge. Otherwise, the result of the human philosophy
is also confusion of the perfect beings, which is that they should know
that they do not know.

Hence, it is necessary that there be a human being who has access to the
spring of life and sources of knowledge and wisdom to quench the thirst
of reaching the reality by his own hand. Only thus the purpose of
creating wisdom and perception is fulfilled. For this reason, the Imam
(as) has said in a reliable citation: *Whoever believes that Allah
protests through a servant in His land, but hides from him all that
which he requires then he has related falsehood to Allah.*[^35]

Undoubtedly, the belief that Allah has made a human being a proof over
His servants, that He has covered from His proof what His servants are
in need of and that He does not teach him, is an accusation upon Allah,
the Exalted. This notion has originated from their not knowing the
endless Knowledge, Power and Wisdom. Thus, the Imam (as) said: *He has
opened the hidden sources of His Knowledge through them.*

**(d)**

*Allah has dressed him with the crown of honour.* The crown of dignity,
which is on the head of the Imam (as), is knowledge and power. Thus, it
has been reported from Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (as) that when asked about
the signs of the Imam (as) he replied: *His knowledge and the acceptance
of his prayer.*[^36]

This sign is because the origin of disarray and insignificance in human
beings is ignorance and incapability. Since the Imam is the teacher of
the Book of Allah, and he does not separate from it on the basis of the
stipulation in the tradition of the Two Weighty Things, and the Book
explains everything in accordance with the Word of the Exalted:

***And We have revealed the Book to you explaining clearly
everything;***[^37]

therefore, no knowledge from the knowledge of the Divine Book escapes
him.

This point can be derived from a reliable tradition: It is reported on
the authority of Ibn Bukayr from Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Sadiq (as) that, “I
was with the Imam when Sulayman was mentioned to him and the knowledge
he was given and the kingdom he was bestowed. Thus, the Imam (as) said
to me: What was given to Sulayman ibn Dawud? Surely, he only had one
word from the great names. And as for your master for whom Allah has
said:

 ***Say: Allah is sufficient as a witness between me and you and whoever
has knowledge of the entire Book.***[^38]

By Allah, ‘Ali had the knowledge of the complete Book. I said: By Allah,
you are saying the truth. May I be your ransom!”[^39]

Thus, due to the connection with Allah’s affair, the Imam has every
prayer granted to him. With this knowledge and power, he is dressed with
the crown of honour.

**(e)**

*Allah has covered him with the light of the Almighty.* The word ‘light’
is annexed to the Holy Name ‘Almighty’. The annexation to any divine
name acquires its qualities simply due to the annexation.

Allah is the Almighty who restores every broken thing: *O Setter of
broken bones.*[^40]

The Imam is covered with the light of the Almighty so that he can
restore every break or defect regarding Islam and the Muslims.

**(f)**

*The Imams are from Allah. They guide to the righteousness and judge
with justice.* The Imam is the chosen human being from Allah, the
Exalted. He is the selected one by Allah’s selection and raised by Allah
for the divine leadership and guidance. Thus, when an Imam passes away
then Allah appoints another one in his place as a clear sign,
illuminating guide, right leader and learned proof to serve the purpose
of human creation and the sending of the Prophets (as). That purpose can
be summarised in two expressions: guidance to the righteous and justice
for the righteous. These two are the outcome of the theoretical and
practical wisdom, and the conclusion of human perfection in intellect
and intent.

These two matters are ascertained through intellect, that understands
things as they are, and through intent that rises for every action as it
should. This is the status of intellectual and practical infallibility,
and why the Imam (as) said: *The Imams are from Allah. They guide to
righteousness and judge with justice.*

**(g)**

*Allah has chosen him for that. When He created the Imam, He created him
as His special creation.* Allah made the intrinsic nature of the Imam
under the right side of His throne. Allah nurtured him with His vision
and grants him the wisdom to His unseen knowledge. There is no course
for anyone to it:

***Except to him whom He chooses as an apostle.***[^41]

In this origination, as for lineage, the Imams are from the best of the
progeny of Nuh (as), from the chosen ones of the children of Ibrahim
(as), from the selected ones of the offspring of Isma’il (as) and the
most sincere from the progeny of Muhammad (S). In their physical form,
the Imams are free from all deficiencies, and in their spirit they are
infallible from all errors and protected from all sins.

Iblis (Satan) has been kept away from their holy beings as he has been
quoted:

***Then by Thy Might I will surely make them all live an evil life,
except Thy servants from among them, the purified ones.***[^42]

This is due to the honour that has come their way under the shadow of
Allah’s service:

***Surely, as regards My servants, you have no authority over
them.***[^43]

The speech of the Imam (as): *then the command of Allah transfers to
him* indicates that the command of Allah transfers from the former Imam
to the subsequent one. This command is that which has come in an
authentic tradition from al-Sadiq (as): *Surely, Allah is One, Unified
in Oneness. He is Peerless in His Command. Thus, He created a creation
to whom He gave power over that command. O son of Abu Ya’fur, we are
that creation. We are the proofs of Allah over His servants. We store
His Knowledge and we are firm with it.*[^44]

**(h)**

*Allah endorses him with His spirit.* The spirit that Allah has endorsed
the Imam with is explained in the authentic tradition reported on the
authority of Abu Basir saying: I heard Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) saying:

***And they ask you about the soul. Say: The soul is one of the commands
of my Lord.***[^45]

The Imam (as) said: *This (soul) is superior to (the angels) Jibra’il
and Mika’il. It was not with anyone who has passed away except Muhammad
(S) and it is with the Imams (as). It directs them. It is not that
whatever is demanded is found.*[^46]

**(i)**

*He gives the Imam His Knowledge.* It has come in an authentic tradition
from Abu Ja’far (as) saying: *Surely, Allah has Knowledge that no one
knows other than Him and He has knowledge that He has given to His
angels, His prophets and His messengers. Thus, we have all that.* He
then pointed to his chest.[^47]

**(j)**

*He entrusts His secret with the Imam.* It has come in an authentic
tradition reported on the authority of Mu’ammar ibn Khalad from Abu
al-Hasan (as) that: *The knower cannot inform of what he knows because
it is a secret of Allah. He gave the secret to Jibra’il (as). Jibra’il
brought it to Muhammad (S) and Muhammad (S) gave it to whomever Allah
willed.*[^48]

**(k)**

*Allah is pleased with them as the Imams for them.* Undoubtedly, the
*Ummah* needs an Imam. The Imam must be one with whom Allah is pleased.
However, who is the Imam with whom Allah is pleased?

Between knowledge and ignorance, Allah is pleased with knowledge:

***Say:*** ***Are those who know and those who do not know
alike**?*[^49]

Between safety and calamity, He is pleased with safety:

***With it Allah guides him who will follow His pleasure into the ways
of safety.***[^50]

Between wisdom and foolishness, He is pleased with wisdom:

***He grants wisdom to whom He pleases, and whoever is granted wisdom,
he indeed is given a great good.***[^51]

Between justice and injustice, He is pleased with justice:

***Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of
good**.*[^52]

Between truth and falsehood, He is pleased with truth:

***And say: The truth has come and the falsehood has vanished; surely
falsehood is a vanishing (thing)**.*[^53]

Between right and wrong, He is pleased with right**:**

***They shall not speak except he whom the Beneficent permits and who
speaks the right thing.***[^54]

Therefore, Allah would only be pleased with an Imam for the *Ummah* who
has the attributes which Allah is pleased with. Amongst those attributes
are knowledge, justice, safety, wisdom, righteousness, truth and
guidance.

From another angle, we see that choosing the best is liked by Allah, the
Exalted:

***Therefore give good news to My servants, those who listen to the
word, then follow the best of it**.*[^55]

Allah also orders to take hold of the best:

***And enjoin your people to take hold of what is best thereof.***[^56]

He commands for the best speech:

***And say to My servants (that) they speak that which is best**.*[^57]

He commands to have disputations—if need be—in the best manner:

***And have disputations with them in the best manner**.*[^58]

When it is necessary, repel and reject in the best way**:**

***Repel evil by what is best.***[^59]

Allah rewards for the best deeds:

***And We will most certainly give them their reward for the best of
what they did.***[^60]

He reveals that which is best:

***Allah has revealed the best announcement.***[^61]

Now then, is it possible that He would choose someone for divine
leadership who is not the best, the most perfect, the most virtuous, the
most learned, the most just, etc. and someone who does not contain the
noble characteristics mentioned in the tradition?

The necessity of commanding to follow the best is that the best be
followed. Then how can it be logical that Allah would be pleased with
the leadership and obedience of someone who is not the best?

***And who is better than Allah to judge for a people who are
sure?***[^62]

Hence, the Imam (as) has said: *Allah assigns him the greatest command.
He informs the Imam with the virtue of the explanation of His Knowledge.
He raises the Imam as a banner for His creation and makes him a proof
over the inhabitants of His universe. He makes them a light for the
followers of His religion and a custodian over His servants. Allah is
pleased with them as the Imams for His creation.*

\*\*\*

The Followers of the Twelve Imams
---------------------------------

**The Shi’ahs (Followers) of the Twelve Imams (as) (Shi’at al-A’immat
al-Ithnai ‘Ashar)**

According to the commentaries of the Sunnis and Shi’ahs,[^63] the
Shi’ahs of the Household (as) are the ones for whom this verse is
revealed, the Exalted said:

..***(As for) those who believe and do good, surely they are the best of
men.***[^64]

Allah, the Exalted, says:

***Only Allah is your guardian and His Messenger and those who believe,
keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while they bow.***[^65]

According to the Shi’ah and Sunni reports and what the commentators of
the two schools of thought have mentioned, this verse was revealed in
praise of the Commander of the Faithful ‘Ali (as).[^66]

After this verse, the Glorified said**:**

 ***And whoever takes Allah and His Messenger and those who believe for
a guardian, then surely the party of Allah are they that shall be
triumphant.***[^67]

It is reported that Nawf al-Bakali said to the Commander of the Faithful
(as): O Commander of the Faithful, describe for me your Shi’ahs. Thus,
‘Ali (as) cried for his Shi’ahs and then said: *O Nawf, my Shi’ahs by
Allah, are the forbearing, the learned about Allah and His religion,
abiding His obedience and His Command.*[^68]

Allah, the Glorified, said:

***And whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favours from among the prophets and the truthful
and the martyrs and the good, and a goodly company are they.***[^69]

The Shi’ahs are on the religion of their Imams (as). Their religion is
piety, chastity, truthfulness, goodness, striving, honesty with just and
unjust, lengthy prostrations, nightly prayers, refraining from forbidden
acts, awaiting the relief with patience, keeping good company, being
good to neighbours…[^70]

The Shi’ahs are people free from evil morals and adorned with noble
deeds. In this brief work, we will suffice with the mention of two
traditions regarding evil and noble deeds. Their every sentence contains
doors of practical wisdom for whoever contemplates upon them; albeit
this is not the place to explain them.

### First Tradition

The Commander of the Faithful (as) said to a man who asked him to
admonish him:

*Do not be like him who hopes for (bliss in) the next life without
action, and delays repentance by lengthening desires, who utters words
like ascetics in this world but acts like those who are eager for it. If
he is allowed something from it he does not feel satisfied and if he is
denied he is not content.*

*He is not grateful for what he begets and covets for an increase in
whatever remains with him. He refrains others but not himself. He
commands others for what he himself does not do. He loves the virtuous
but does not behave like them. He hates the vicious but himself is one
of them. He dislikes death because of the excess of his sins, but
adheres to that for which he is afraid of death.*

*If he falls ill he feels ashamed. If he is healthy he feels secure and
indulges in amusements. When he recovers from illness he feels vain
about himself. When he is afflicted he loses hope. If* *distress befalls
him he prays like a bewildered man. When he finds ease of life he falls
into deceit and turns his face away. His heart overpowers him by means
of imaginary things, while he cannot control his heart by his
conviction.*

*For others he is afraid of small sins, but for himself he expects more
reward than his performance. If he becomes wealthy he becomes
self-conscious and falls into vice. If he becomes poor he despairs and
becomes weak. He is brief when he is doing good things, but goes too far
when he is begging. When passion overtakes him he is quick in committing
sin but delays repentance. If hardship befalls him he goes beyond the
canons of the (Islamic) community.*

*He describes instructive events but does not take instruction himself.
He preaches at length but does not accept any preaching for himself. He
is tall in speaking but short in action. He aspires for things that will
perish and ignores things that will last for good. He regards profit as
loss and loss as profit. He fears death but does nothing in its
anticipation.*

*He regards the sins of others as big but considers the same things for
himself as small. If he does something in obedience to Allah he
considers it much but if others do the same he considers it small. He
therefore rebukes others but flatters himself. Entertainment in the
company of the wealthy is dearer to him than remembrance (of Allah) with
the poor.*

*He orders others for his own interests and does not do so against
himself for others’ interests. He guides others but misguides himself.
He is obeyed by others but he himself disobeys (Allah). He seeks
fulfilment of obligations (towards himself) but does not fulfil his
obligations (towards others). He fears the people (and acts) for other
than his Lord and does not fear his Lord in his dealings with the
people.*[^71]

### Second Tradition

It has come in the authentic report of ‘Abd Allah ibn Bukayr from Abu
‘Abd Allah Ja’far ibn Muhammad, blessings of Allah be upon them both,
saying:

*We indeed love our Shi’ah, the ones who are wise, understanding,
learned, forbearing, moderate, patient, truthful and honest.* He then
added: *Surely, Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, has distinguished the
prophets with excellence in conduct. Whoever has this trait should thank
Allah for it. Whoever does not have this trait should beseech Allah for
it.* The reporter says: I said: May I be your ransom, what is that? He
replied: *Piety, contentment, patience, thankfulness, forbearance,
chastity, generosity, courageousness, zeal, goodness, truthfulness and
honesty.*[^72]

Below, we explain these characteristics.

#### Wisdom (‘Aql)

The Imam (as) gave precedence to wisdom, because wisdom is the pillar of
humanity.[^73]

It is reported from the Messenger of Allah (S): *Allah has not given
anything better than wisdom to the servants. Hence, a wise person’s
sleep is better than an ignorant one’s vigilance. A wise person’s state
of not fasting is better than the fast of an ignorant. The stay of a
wise is better than the travel of an ignorant. Allah does not send a
messenger or a prophet unless he is complete in wisdom and his wisdom is
better than that of all of his people.*

*A prophet keeps in himself better efforts than all the diligent. The
wise do not fulfil the obligations of Allah without wisdom. None of the
worshippers can ever reach the level of the virtue of the worship of the
wise. Indeed the wise are those who possess understanding and for whom
Allah, the Mighty and High has said:* ***Only those possessed of
understanding will mind***[^74]***.***[^75]

#### Keeping the Promise (Wafa)

The Imam (as) ended with the keeping of promises. It is reported from
Abu Malik that: I said to ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (as): Inform me of all the
religion. He (as) replied: *Saying the truth, ruling with justice and
keeping the promise.*[^76]

It is reported that Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) said: *Allah does not permit
anyone of the people to go against three things: being kind to parents
whether they are good or evil, keeping promise to those good and evil,
and honesty to good and evil.*[^77]

It has come in an authentic tradition on the authority of Abu Ja’far
(as) from his father (as) that: *Whoever has four characteristics his
Islam is complete, he will be purified of his sins and he will meet his
Lord, the Mighty and High, in a state when He is pleased with him: He
who keeps his promise with people for the sake of Allah, the Mighty and
High, whose tongue utters truth with people, who feels diffidence of
doing any evil before Allah and the people, and whose manner with his
family is good.*[^78]

It is transmitted from Abu Ja’far (as) that: *Four things cause rapid
punishment: a person, to whom you have carried out a favour, recompenses
you with evil; a man who you do not do any wrong to treats you unjustly;
a person with whom you made a promise on a matter, then you kept your
promise with him but he betrayed his promise; and a person whose
relatives establish ties with him but he breaks ties with them.*[^79]

Al-Sadiq (as) has transmitted from his forefathers (as) that: The
Messenger of Allah (S) said: *The closest one of you to me tomorrow will
be the most truthful, the most honest, the most complete in keeping
promise, the best in conduct and the closest one to the people.*[^80]

Imam Ali (as) in his will to al-Ashtar said: *Beware of bragging over
your subjects for having done good to them or exaggerating in doing
something that was your duty or making promises then breaking them,
because bragging nullifies good, exaggerating takes away the light of
truth and breaking the promise causes hate from Allah and the people.
Allah, the Exalted, says:* ***It is most hateful to Allah that you
should say that which you do not do***[^81]*.*[^82]

The Imam (as) then described the excellence in conduct, which is:

#### Piety (Wara’)

It has come in a reliable [*muaththaq*] tradition on the authority of
‘Amr ibn Sa’id ibn Hilal al-Thaqafi from Abu Abd Allah (as) that: I said
to him, “I only see you once in a few years. Tell me something that I
should abide by.” Thus, he (as) said: *I prescribe to you God-wariness,
piety and diligence. Beware that diligence is not useful unless there is
piety with it.*[^83]

In an authentic tradition from Abu ‘Abd Allah (as), it has come: *We do
not count a person to be a believer until he intentionally obeys all of
our commands. Beware, indeed obeying our command intentionally is piety.
Therefore, beautify yourselves with it. May Allah have mercy on you.
Inflict our enemies with piety, may Allah raise you.*[^84]

The Commander of the Faithful (as) was asked, “Which of the deeds is the
best before Allah?” He replied: *Total submission and piety.*[^85]

It is reported from Abu ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad Ja’far (as) that he
said: *Be God-wary, be God-wary, upon you is piety, truthfulness,
honesty, chastity of stomach and private-parts. You will be with us in
the highest escort.*[^86]

It is transmitted from Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) that he said: Among the calls
of Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, to Musa (as) was: *O Musa, the close
ones to Me do not do anything to become close to Me other than remain
pious and refrain from forbidden things. For, I will certainly permit
them to Paradise and will not place anyone with them.*[^87]

#### Contentment (Qunu’)

It is reported from ‘Ali (as) that: *Contentment is as good as estate
and good moral is as good as* *a blessing.* He (as) was asked about the
Word of the Exalted: ***We shall revive him with a good life.***[^88] He
replied: *It is contentment.*[^89]

It is reported from Al-Sadiq (as) that: *Whoever is content with his
share is at rest from grief, lying and trouble. Whoever has lack of
contentment has an increase in desire and greed. Desiring the world is
the origin of all evil. The one who has desire and greed cannot be saved
from Hell unless he repents.*

This is why the Prophet (S) said: *Contentment is a sovereignty that
does not come to an end and the pleasure of Allah, the Exalted, rides
it. It carries the content to his abode. Therefore, have trust in Allah
in what you do not have and be pleased with what He has given you. Have
patience in what afflicts you because that is a determined matter.*[^90]

It is reported from Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (as) that he said: *He who is
only content with abundant sustenance, then it is not sufficient for him
to do anything but abundant deeds. He who is content with humble
sustenance, then it is sufficient for him to do small deeds.*[^91]

It is reported on the authority of Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) that the
Commander of the Faithful (as) said: *O son of Adam, if you want from
this world only that which will suffice you, then the slightest of what
is in it will suffice you. And if you want more than that which will
suffice you, then all that which is in it will not suffice you.*[^92]

Abu Ja’far (as) said: Beware of aspiring he who is above you for Allah,
the Mighty and High, says to His Prophet (S):

 ***And let not their property and their children excite your
admiration;***[^93]

and He says**:**

***And do not stretch your eyes after that with which We have provided
different classes of them, (of) the splendour of this world’s
life.***[^94]

If you get any of that then remember the life of the Messenger of Allah
(S), because his food was barley, his sweet was dates and his fuel was
palm leaves, if he obtained that.[^95]

Al-Rida (as) related from his forefathers (as) saying: Abu Ayyub Khalid
ibn Zayd came to the Messenger of Allah (S) and said: O Messenger of
Allah, admonish me in short words so that I may memorise them. The
Prophet (S) stated: *I advise you of five things: Be hopeless of what
is* *in the hands of people, as that is self-sufficiency. Beware of
greed, because it brings poverty. Perform your prayers as your farewell
(from the world). Be careful of what you give as an excuse, and choose
for your brother what you choose for yourself.*[^96]

#### Patience (Sabr)

Allah, the Exalted, said:

***O you who believe! Take assistance through patience and
prayer.***[^97]

It has come in an authentic tradition on the authority of al-Fadl from
Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Sadiq (as) that: *Patience is to faith like the head
is to the body. Therefore, if the head goes so does the body. Similarly,
if patience parts so does faith.*[^98]

It is related on the authority of Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) that the Messenger
of Allah stated: *A time will come when a king will not become a king
except by killing and oppression, a wealthy will not become wealthy
except by usurping and miserliness, and no one would be able to love
except by losing faith and following evil desire. Whoever reaches such a
time, then he must have patience over poverty even if he can become
wealthy, he must have patience over dislike even if he can love, and he
must have patience over humility even if he can have dignity. Allah will
bestow such a person with the reward of fifty truthful ones who have
testified for me.*[^99]

An authentic tradition from Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) from the Messenger of
Allah (S) states: *Allah, the Mighty and High, said: I have indeed made
this world a loan for my servants. Therefore, whichever one of my
servants gives me a loan, whatever I like I give ten times to seven
hundred times in place of one. However, if he does not give me a loan
then I take away from him something by force. If he shows patience over
it then I give him three virtues, of which if I gave even one of to my
angels they would be pleased with Me for it.*

Then Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) recited the Word of Allah, the Mighty and High:
***Who, when a misfortune befalls them, say: Surely we are Allah’s and
to Him we shall surely return. Those are they on whom are blessings;***
this is one of the three, ***and mercy from their Lord,*** this is
second, ***and those are the followers of the right course**,*[^100] and
this the third. Then the Imam (as) stated: *This is for someone from
whom Allah takes away something by force.*[^101]

In an authentic tradition Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) says: *Be patient upon
difficulties, excel in patience upon obligations, and remain steadfast
about the Imams (as).*[^102]

It is related from al-Rida (as) that: *On the Day of Judgement a caller
will call, ‘Where are the ones who were patient?’ Hence, a group of
people will rise. Then the caller will call again, ‘Where are the ones
who took patience?’ Then another group of people will rise.* The
narrator said: May I be your ransom, what are the patient and those who
took patience? The Imam (as) replied: *The first group are the ones who
were patient upon fulfilling their obligations and the second group are
the ones who refrained from the forbidden acts.*[^103]

It is related on the authority of ‘Ali (as) saying: *The Messenger of
Allah (S) said: Patience is of three types: patience upon hardships,
over obedience and against sins. Whoever has patience upon hardship,
until he fights it with good commemoration then Allah writes for him
three hundred levels of reward, the difference between each level is
like the distance between the heavens and the earth. Whoever has
patience over obedience, Allah writes for him six hundred levels of
reward, the difference between each level is the distance between the
boundaries of the earth to the empyrean. Whoever has patience against
sins, Allah writes for him nine hundred levels of reward. The difference
between each level is the distance between the boundaries of the earth
to the end of the empyrean.*[^104]

#### Thankfulness (Shukr)

Allah, the Exalted, said:

***Why should Allah chastise you if you are grateful and believe? And
Allah is the Multiplier of rewards, Omniscient.***[^105]

***There surely came over man a period of time when he was a thing not
worth mentioning. Surely We have created man from a small life-germ
uniting (itself): We mean to try him, so We have made him hearing,
seeing. Surely We have shown him the way: he may be thankful or
unthankful.***[^106]

***Give thanks, O family of Dawud! And very few of My servants are
grateful.***[^107]

***Grateful for His favours; He chose him and guided him on the right
path.***[^108]

It is related on the authority of Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) that: Allah, the
Mighty and High, revealed to Musa (as): *O Musa, thank Me the way I
deserved to be thanked.* Musa (as) asked: *O my Lord, how do I thank You
the way You deserve to be thanked, because each time I thank You that is
in itself a blessing from You?* Allah answered: *O Musa, now you have
thanked Me when you have come to know that even the direction for
thanking to thank Me is from Me.*[^109]

In an authentic tradition on the authority of Isma’il ibn al-Fadl
saying: Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) said: When you begin your morning or evening
then say ten times: *O Allah, whatever blessing You have bestowed upon
me this morning and any well-being in my religion or worldly affairs is
from You alone. You have no partners. All praise is for You. O Lord, I
am grateful to You for everything for this until You become pleased and
even after You are pleased.*

If You say this then you have performed your gratitude for the blessings
that Allah has blessed you with in that day and night.[^110]

In another authentic tradition on the authority of Hafs ibn al-Bakhtari
that Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) said: *Prophet Nuh (as) used to say this
prayer*[^111] *when he began his morning. Hence, he (as) was titled a
very grateful servant.* He (as) then added: The Messenger of Allah (S)
said: *Whoever trusts Allah is saved.*[^112]

It is related on the authority of al-Sadiq (as) on the authority of his
forefathers (as) saying: *A person who is not fasting and is thankful
has the recompense of a fasting person whose fast is rewarded. A healthy
thanking person has the reward of an ill that has patience, and
charitable thankful person has the reward of a disadvantaged content
one.*[^113]

In an authentic tradition from Abu ‘Abd Allah al-Sadiq (as) that he said
to one of his students, “O Mu’awiyyah, whoever obtains three things will
not be deprived of three things, whoever obtains prayer will be granted
the answer, whoever obtains gratitude will be granted more, and whoever
obtains trust in Allah will be granted sufficiency. Indeed, Allah, the
Mighty and High, says in His Book: ***And whoever trusts in Allah, He is
sufficient for him;***[^114] **He also says:** ***If you are grateful, I
would certainly give to you more,***[^115] and He says: ***Call upon Me,
I will answer you*** [^116]**.”**[^117]

#### Forbearance (Hilm)

Forbearance is to control oneself from outburst of rage, and balance of
the faculty of anger.

It is related on the authority of Al-Rida (as) saying: *A person cannot
become a true worshipper until he becomes forbearing.*[^118]

It is related on the authority of Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (as) that: ‘Ali
ibn al-Husayn (as) used to say: *A man who forbears at the time of anger
amazes me.*[^119]

It is also related on the authority of Abu Ja’far (as) that: Indeed,
Allah, the Mighty and High, loves the modest and the forbearing.[^120]

It is related on the authority of the Commander of the Faithful (as)
that: *There is no honour more elevating than forbearance.*[^121]

It is related from al-Rabi’, an attendant of al-Mansur, the caliph that:
Al-Mansur said to al-Sadiq (as), “Relate to me a tradition from yourself
that I may be admonished from it, and it may be an obstacle for me from
grave offenses.” Thus, al-Sadiq (as) said: *You must abide by
forbearance, because it is a pillar of knowledge. Hold yourself at the
time of showing power because if you do what you have power over then
you are as if you have given life to anger or given health to hatred or
you like to be remembered with tyranny. You must know that if you punish
someone who deserves it, then you will be described as just and I do not
know a state better than the state of justice. A state that causes
thankfulness is better than a state that causes patience.* Al-Mansur
said, “You have admonished me and what a nice job you have done. You
have said it concisely.”[^122]

It is related on the authority of ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (as) that: *Allah
does not like any swallowing better than two swallowings: swallowing of
anger when a beliver resists it through forbearance and swallowing of
distress when a believer resists it through patience.*[^123]

It is related on the authority of Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) that: *Whoever has
three qualities in him, his faith is complete: he who has patience when
oppressed, suppresses his anger, and reckoned but forgives and forgets,
then he is amongst those who Allah will enter in the Paradise without
account and will intercede for the good and bad.*[^124]

It is in the will of the Commander of the Faithful (as) to his son
al-Hasan (as): *O my son, wisdom is a friend of man, forbearance is his
assistant, friendliness is his father and patience is his best
soldier.*[^125]

The word of the Exalted is sufficient regarding the significance of
forbearance:

***And not alike are the good and the evil. Repel (evil) with what is
best, when lo! He between whom and you was enmity would be as if he were
a warm friend. And none are made to receive it but those who are
patient, and none are made to receive it but those who have a mighty
good fortune.***[^126]

#### Modesty (Haya’)

Modesty is to take hold of oneself from shameful deeds.

It is related on the authority of Mu’adh ibn Kathir from one of the two
(as) that: ***Modesty and faith are combined together. If one of them
leaves the other one follows.***[^127]

It is related on the authority of Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) that the Messenger
of Allah (S) said: ***If someone has four qualities in him and even if
he was full of sins from his neck to the feet, then Allah will change
them to good deeds: truthfulness, modesty, good conduct and
thankfulness.***[^128]

#### Generosity (Sakha’)

It is related on the authority of Ja’far ibn Muhammad (as) that he
related from his father (as) that his forefathers (as) related saying:
the Messenger of Allah (S) said: ***Generous is close to Allah, close to
people, and close to the Paradise. On the contrary, the miser is far
from Allah, far from people, and far from the Hell.***[^129]

\*\*\*

Here conclude the noble ethics which every Shi’ah must have. Whoever
desires perfection in humanistic virtues must ponder upon the words of
the infallible Household (as), and in the implications of their
traditions. They are the mines of knowledge and wisdom. We will mention
three traditions here:

It is related from the Prophet (S) that: **The faith of a believer does
not attain completion until he embraces one hundred and three attributes
in action, practice, intention, hidden and apparent.**

The Commander of the Faithful (as) asked: *O Messenger of Allah (S),
what are those one hundred and three attributes?*

The Prophet (S) said: *O ‘Ali (as), among the attributes of a believer
are that his thinking is free, his report is inherent, his knowledge is
immense, and his forbearance is great. He is nice in discord and
generous at request. He is the most open-hearted of people and most
humble in spirit. A believer’s laugh is through his smile. His gathering
is training. He reminds the negligent and teaches the ignorant. He does
not hurt the ones that hurt him and does not tackle a subject that is
not his. He does not rejoice at misfortune and does not backbite anyone.
He is clear from forbidden acts and upright from doubts.*

*He gives plenty, but harms less. He is an aid for the stranger and a
father to the orphan. His joy is on his face and his grief is in his
heart. He is cheerful in poverty. He is sweeter than honey and harder
than rock. He does not reveal a secret and does not tear down the cover.
A believer* *has subtle movements and pleasant views. He worships much.
He is respectful, sociable and silent. He is forbearing when
unrecognised and extremely patient with the ones who harm him.*

*He honours the elderly and has mercy upon the small. He is honest when
trusted and far from disloyalty. His friend is piety and his oath is
chastity. A believer has much caution and fewer faults. His movements
are manners and his speech is amazing. He holds his slips and does not
follow on defectiveness.*

*He is dignified, patient, content, thankful, quiet, truthful, kind,
virtuous, forbearing, gentle, pure and distinguished. He does not accuse
or lie, nor does he backbite or swear. He is neither envious nor
miserly. He is cheerful and smiling. He is neither sensitive nor
spying.*

*He aims for the best of the matters and more brilliant of the ethics.
He is comprised in Allah’s protection and supported with Allah’s
direction. He is resilient and firm with certainty. He does not harm the
one who hates him and does not sin with the one he loves. He is patient
in difficulties. He does not oppress nor act outrageously. He does not
act with greed. Poverty is his motto and patience is his mantle. He has
modest expense and is incredibly helpful. He fasts excessively, stands
long in prayers, and sleeps little.*

*His heart is devout and his knowledge is pure. When he overpowers, he
forgives and when he promises, he fulfils. He fasts with desire and
prays with respect. He carries out his act with goodness as if he sees
it. He lowers his glance. He is generous, does not reject who asks, and
is not miserly to one who requires something. He keeps kinship with
brothers and continuously performs good deeds.*

*His speech is balanced and he speaks quietly. A believer neither drowns
in hatred nor is destroyed in love. He does not accept falsehood from
his friends nor does he reject righteousness from his enemy. He does not
learn except for knowing and does not know except for practicing. His
resentment is minute and his gratitude is plenty. In the day he seeks
sustenance and at night he cries over his mistakes.*

*If he enters upon a course with worldly people, he is the nicest of
them, and if he enters upon a course with Godly people, he is the most
godfearing of them. He is not satisfied with any doubtful thing in his
income and does not compromise in his religion. He is compassionate over
his brother in errors and protects what has passed of his old
friendship.*[^130]

It is related on the authority of ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-’Abidin
(as) that: *If you see a person whose manner and direction are good, his
speech is calm, and his actions are humble, then do not hasten to be
deceived by him. There are many people who are incapable of obtaining
the world and from mounting onto that which is prohibited due to the
weakness of their determination, their contempt and their cowardice.
Thus, they display their religion as a trap for obtaining the world.
They mingle with the people for showing off and when it is possible for
them, they dive into the prohibited.*

*If you find him abstaining from forbidden wealth then do not hasten to
be deceived by him,* *because the desires of people are different. There
are many people who distance themselves from forbidden wealth, even if
it is plenty. However, they cannot control their lust and if they are
faced with it, they commit the prohibited.*

*If you see him abstaining from lust, then do not hasten to be deceived
by him until you see his wisdom, because there are many people who
abstain from that. However, they do not have firm wisdom. Thus, they
cause more mischief due to their ignorance than virtue due to their
wisdom.*

*If you discover him to have firm wisdom then do not hasten to be
deceived by him, unless you see if his desires are in control of his
wisdom or if his wisdom is in control of his desires. Does he love evil
ranks or abstain from them? There are many people who lose both this
world and the hereafter by abstaining from worldly rank for the sake of
this world. They find the joy of evil rank to be better than the joy of
wealth and permissible bounties. They refrain from all those seeking
rank. And when it is said to him to fear Allah, then* *pride carries him
off to sin, therefore hell is sufficient for him;* ***and certainly it
is an evil resting place**.*[^131]

*He acts rashly; the first evil leads him to extreme loss. His Lord
pulls him after demanding from him what he cannot do in his sin. He
makes legal that which Allah made forbidden and makes illegal that which
Allah made permissible. He does not care about what he overlooks from
his religion if he reaches the rank for which he was pretending to be
pious. They it is upon whom are Allah’s wrath and curse, and He has
promised them a disgraceful punishment.*

*On the contrary, he is truly the best person who makes his desires
subservient to the command of Allah and makes every effort to please
Allah. He sees humiliation in the company of truth closer to eternal
honour than honour in the company of falsehood. He knows that the bad
times he goes through in this world will result in the eternal blessing
of an abode which will not perish or come to an end. Similarly, he knows
that the good times he will see due to following his evil desires will
cause him to face a punishment that will not end or decline. Thus, such
a person is a good person. Grab hold of such a person and follow his
way. Through him find access to your Lord, because God does not reject
his prayer and does not disappoint his request.*[^132]

The Imam (as) is explaining that the criteria of human perfection are
neither words and humble actions, nor abstention from desire of wealth
and food. In fact, the criterion of human perfection is a wisdom
purified from the grime of desire so that it can be a source of virtue
and reform, and a soul that obeys Allah’s commands. It should be such
that it cannot be deceived by any desire, even the desires of fame and
status, that would leave honour in the company of falsehood and would
choose humility in the company of truth.

A ninety-four year old man named ‘Unwan al-Basri narrates that: **“**I
had been studying under Malik ibn Anas for a number of years. When
Ja’far al-Sadiq (as) came to Madinah, I went to visit him and was
interested in learning from him just as I had been learning from Malik.
He said to me one day: “I am a man much sought after and am also
occupied by various supplications throughout the day and the night so
please do not disturb me in my state of supplication and go and learn
from Malik and study under him, just as you were doing before.”

I became sad on hearing this and left the Imam’s presence, and said to
myself, “If the Imam had perceived any good in me he would not have
prevented me from studying under him and learning from him.” I then went
to the mosque of the Holy Prophet (S) and I gave my salutations to him,
then I turned from the grave and prayed two cycles of prayer at the
*rawdah*[^133] and said supplicating Allah (SWT): “O Allah (SWT)! O
Allah (SWT)! I beseech You please make Ja’far’s (as) heart incline
towards me, and grant me from his knowledge that which will guide me on
the right path.”

Then I returned home, sad and upset, and did not even attend Malik b.
Anas’s study circles for my heart was filled only with love for Ja’far
(as). I did not leave my house except to attend congregational prayers,
until I finally ran out of patience. When I could bear it no longer, I
put my shoes and my cloak on, and made my way to Ja’far’s (as) house
after the ‘Asr (afternoon) prayer.

When I arrived at his house, I sought permission to enter, and a servant
of his came out and asked me what I wanted. I replied: “I’ve come to
extend my salutations to the noble one. He said that the Imam was busy
praying. So I waited on the doorstep, and it wasn’t long before the
servant came out again and said: “Come in by the grace of Allah (SWT).”

So I entered and greeted the Imam, and he returned my greeting, saying:
“Take a seat and may Allah (SWT) forgive you.” So I sat down. Then he
bowed his head, looking down for quite a long time before he asked me my
title, to which I replied: “Abu ‘Abd Allah.” He said: “May Allah (SWT)
extend your progeny and enable you to succeed in doing what pleases
Him.” Upon hearing this, I thought to myself that if I were to take away
nothing of benefit from this visit except this prayer (that he had
wished for me), it would be more than enough.

Then he bowed his head down again for a while, then raised it saying: “O
Abu ‘Abd Allah, what do you want?” I replied: “I asked Allah (SWT) to
give me a place in your heart and to grant me benefit from your
knowledge, so I hope that Allah (SWT) will grant me what I asked Him for
with respect to you.”

The Imam said: “O Abu ‘Abd Allah, knowledge is not acquired through
learning. Rather it is a light that illuminates in the heart of one who
wants Allah (SWT) to guide him. So if you want knowledge, first seek
true servitude (to Allah (SWT)) within yourself. And seek knowledge
according to its use (i.e. what you can act upon) and ask Allah (SWT) to
make you understand, and He will make you understand.”

I asked: “O noble one” and he immediately said: “Call me Abu ‘Abd
Allah”, so I started again: “O Abu ‘Abd Allah, what constitutes true
servitude to Allah (AS)?” He replied: “Three things, 1) that in all that
Allah (SWT) has placed at his disposal, the servant does not consider
any of it his own possession, for verily servants do not have the right
to ownership. They see all wealth as belonging to Allah (SWT) and so
they dispose of it as Allah (SWT) commands them to. 2) that the servant
does not make plans for himself (i.e. does not see himself as the
executer of his plans), and 3) that the servant occupies himself solely
with observing what Allah (SWT) has commanded and refraining from that
which He has forbidden.

So when the servant does not see any of the wealth at his disposal as
his own, giving from it in the way of Allah (SWT) becomes easy for him.
When the servant entrusts all his plans to the Master Planner, the
tribulations of this world become insignificant in his eyes. When the
servant occupies himself with observing Allah’s (SWT) commands and
refraining from what He has forbidden, he no longer has time for showing
off and useless debates with people.

So when Allah grants (SWT) these three characteristics to a servant, the
world (i.e. worldly matters), Satan and people (and their opinions)
become insignificant in his eyes, and he does not seek after worldly
gains to amass possessions, nor does he demand fame and status from
people, and nor does he waste his time on futile things. This is but the
first stage that the pious God-conscious ones (*muttaqun*) reach. Verily
Allah (SWT) says in the Holy Qur’an:

*“**As for the future abode, We assign it to those who have no desire to
exalt themselves in the earth nor to make mischief, and the good end is
for those who are God-conscious (muttaqun).”***[^134]

I asked: “O Abu ‘Abd Allah, please give me some advice.” The Imam
replied, “I advise you on nine issues. Know that they are my advice
especially to those who strive on the path to Allah (SWT), and I beseech
Allah (SWT) to help you act upon this advice. Three of them do with
self-discipline, three do with clemency towards others, and three do
with knowledge, so learn them well, and do not take them lightly”.

I emptied my heart of all else in order to receive this advice, and the
Imam continued: “As for the three pieces of advice on self-discipline –
firstly, do not eat that which you have no appetite for, for this brings
about idiocy and stupidity. Secondly, do not eat unless you are hungry,
and thirdly, when you do eat, eat only that which is lawful (*halal*)
and begin in the Name of Allah (SWT), and remind yourself of the
tradition of the Prophet (S): “There is no vessel that man fills worse
than his own stomach.” So if you must fill it, then allow one third of
it for food, another third for drink, and keep the last third for air.

The three pieces of advice to do with clemency are – firstly, if someone
were to say to you: ‘If you dare say a word, I’ll give you ten back,’
then you should be such as to reply, ‘Even if you say ten words, you
will not hear a single one back from me.’ Secondly, when someone insults
you, say: ‘If you are right in what you are saying, then may Allah (SWT)
forgive me for it, and if you are wrong then may He forgive you for it.’
Thirdly, when someone treats you harshly, return it with good counsel
and pray for Him.

As for the advice to do with knowledge – firstly, ask the scholars that
which you are ignorant of, but do not ask them obnoxiously or testingly.
Secondly, do not act based on your own opinion about something, and
exercise precaution in all things wherever possible. And thirdly, beware
of giving religious decrees and legal opinions as you would beware of a
lion, and do not put your neck at stake for people to walk all over.

Now please take your leave O Abu ‘Abd Allah, for I have advised you, and
please do not preoccupy me further from my supplications, as I am a man
who does not waste his breath. *‘***And peace be on him who follows the
guidance*****.’*****”**[^135]

\*\*\*

We will suffice by mentioning these traditions and will not embark on
their commentary because each of these traditions, in fact, each
sentence of these traditions, contains treasures of knowledge and
recognition. We will elaborate a sentence from this tradition, which is
his (as) word: *If you want knowledge, first seek true servitude within
yourself.*

Servitude is either relative, meaning it rotates around the subject that
it is related to, or it is real, meaning it implies servitude of the
essentially in need to the Self-Sufficient in essence.

Whoever knows his self, knows that his self does not belong to him and
he does not control anything for himself either useful or harmful, nor
does he control his death or life or rising again. He would recognise
his Lord with the words of Abu ‘Abd Allah (as): *None but Allah can
create something out of nothing. None but Allah can transfer one
substance into another. None but Allah can transfer existence into
non-existence.*[^136]

He would learn that the relationship of everything to Allah’s Intent,
other than Allah Himself, is like the relationship of shapes present in
the mind to those in the surroundings. The difference between the two
relationships is astonishing, as the shapes present in the mind decline
with slumber and sleep, whereas people and minds are stationary due to
the Everliving, the Self-subsisting, Whom slumber does not overtake nor
sleep. There is no likeness of His Subsistence and Creation. However,
the Glorified said:

***O people! A parable is set forth, therefore listen to it: surely
those whom you call upon besides Allah cannot create a fly, though they
should all gather for it, and should the fly snatch away anything from
them, they could not take it back from it, weak are the invoker and the
invoked.***[^137]

Whoever reflects upon the creation of a fly and upon the strengths and
the body Allah has endowed it with, will realise that whatever other
than Allah is called upon is incapable of creating its body and shape,
and giving life to its dead substance. We are unable to comprehend what
subtle wisdom is placed in its creation. Whoever reflects upon the
incapability of the ones called upon other than Allah, that they cannot
take back this weak creation, would acknowledge that they are servants
that belong to Allah and have no power. The explanation of the Word of
the Exalted would be understood after this verse:

***They have not estimated Allah with the estimation that is due to Him;
most surely Allah is Strong, Mighty,***[^138]

and this verse would also be understood:

***There is no one in the heavens and the earth but will come to the
Beneficent Allah as a servant.***[^139]

Whoever understands real servitude knows that it demands the reality of
servitude, which takes a servant to the reality of worship. The status
of the liberated people is purely for Allah. They worship Allah to thank
Him and not due to fear or hope.

Those who want to perfect their souls must perceive actual servitude,
and render it the right it deserves. Its right is to find in oneself the
reality of servitude, which is the key to knowledge, and it is not
taught. Surely knowledge is a light, which Allah casts into the heart of
whoever He wishes to guide. This is the elevation of perfection, which
the servants of Allah attain through crossing the stages of knowledge of
certainty, the revelation of certainty and the truth of certainty. For
this reason, the Imam (as) said: *If you want knowledge, first seek true
servitude within yourself.*

The purpose of this point is not to research into the depths of this
tradition; however, it is to remind us to reflect upon the words of the
infallible Household (as). We ask Allah for the direction to His
servitude and worship, which is the ultimate goal of the creation. The
Word of the Exalted is sufficient for the one hoping to reach the stage
of servitude:

***And the servants of the Beneficent Allah are they who walk on the
earth in humbleness, and when the ignorant address them, they say:
Peace. And they who pass the night prostrating themselves before their
Lord and standing. And they who say: O our Lord! Turn away from us the
punishment of Hell, surely the punishment thereof is lasting.***

***Surely it is an evil abode and (evil) place to stay. And they who
when they spend, are neither extravagant nor parsimonious, and (keep)
between these the just mean. And they who do not call upon another god
with Allah and do not slay the soul, which Allah has forbidden except in
the requirements of justice, and (who) do not commit fornication and he
who does this shall find a requital of sin;***

***The punishment shall be doubled to him on the Day of Resurrection,
and he shall abide therein in abasement; Except him who repents and
believes and does a good deed; so these are they of whom Allah changes
the evil deeds to good ones; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful. And
whoever repents and does good, he surely turns to Allah a (goodly)
turning.***

***And they who do not bear witness to what is false, and when they pass
by what is vain, they pass by nobly. And they who, when reminded of the
communications of their Lord, do not fall down thereat deaf and
blind.***

***And they who say: O our Lord! Grant us in our wives and our offspring
the joy of our eyes, and make us guides to those who guard (against
evil). These shall be rewarded with high*** ***places because they were
patient, and shall be met therein with greetings and salutations.
Abiding therein; goodly the abode and the resting-place.***[^140]

This is a minute piece of the immense literature that is transmitted
regarding noble ethics and good manners. It is sufficient for any
sensible person who wishes to perfect his soul with virtues. This little
collection can take mankind to perfection.

We will end this discussion with the words of the Commander of the
Faithful (as) that describe his true followers:

It is related that a companion of the Commander of the Faithful (as)
called Hammam, who was a man devoted to worship, said to him: O
Commander of the Faithful, describe to me the pious man in such a way as
though I may see him.

The Commander of the Faithful (as) avoided the reply and said: *O
Hammam, fear Allah and perform good acts because verily ‘Allah is with
those who guard (themselves against evil), and those who do good (to
others).’*[^141]

Hammam was not satisfied with this and insisted that he speak.
Thereupon, the Commander of the Faithful (as) praised Allah and extolled
Him and sought His blessings on the Holy Prophet (S) and then spoke:
*Now then, Allah the Glorified, the Sublime, created the creation. He
created them without any need for their obedience or security from their
sinning, because the sin of anyone who sins does not harm Him, nor does
the obedience of anyone who obeys Him benefit Him. He has distributed
among them their livelihood, and has assigned them their positions in
the world.*

*Thus, the God-fearing in it are the people of distinction. Their speech
is to the point, their dress is moderate and their gait is humble. They
keep their eyes closed to what Allah has made unlawful for them, and
they put their ears to that knowledge which is beneficial to them. They
remain in the time of trials just as they remain in comfort. If there
had not been fixed periods (of life) ordained for each, their spirits
would not have remained in their bodies even for the twinkling of an eye
because of (their) eagerness for the reward and fear of chastisement.
The greatness of the Creator is seated in their heart, and so everything
else appears small in their eyes. Thus, to them Paradise is as though
they see it and are enjoying its favours. To them, Hell is also as if
they see it and are suffering punishment in it.*

*Their hearts are grieved, they are protected against evils, their
bodies are thin, their needs are scanty, and their souls are chaste.
They endured (hardship) for a short while and, consequently, they
secured comfort for a long time. It is a beneficial transaction that
Allah made easy for them. The world aimed at them, but they did not aim
at it. It captured them, but they freed themselves from it by ransom.*

*During night they are upstanding on their feet reading portions of the
Qur’an and reciting it in a well-measured way, creating through it grief
for themselves and seeking by it the cure for their* *ailments. If they
come across a verse creating eagerness (for Paradise) they pursue it
avidly, and their spirits turn towards it eagerly, and they feel as if
it is in front of them. Yet, when they come across a verse which
contains fear (of Hell) they bend the ears of their hearts towards it,
and feel as though the sound of Hell and its cries are reaching their
ears. They bend themselves from their backs, prostrate themselves on
their foreheads, their palms, their knees and their toes, and beseech
Allah, the Sublime, for their deliverance. During the day they are
enduring, learned, virtuous and God-fearing. Fear (of Allah) has made
them thin like arrows. If anyone looks at them he believes they are
sick, although they are not sick, and he says that they have gone mad.
In fact, great concern (i.e., fear) has made them mad.*

*They are not satisfied with their meagre good acts, and do not regard
their major acts as great. They always blame themselves and are afraid
of their deeds. When anyone of them is spoken of highly, he says: ‘I
know myself better than others, and my Lord knows me better than I know.
O’ Allah do not deal with me according to what they say, and make me
better than they think of me and forgive me (those shortcomings) which
they do not know.’*

*The peculiarity of anyone of them is that you will see that he has
strength in religion, determination along with leniency, faith with
conviction, eagerness in (seeking) knowledge in forbearance, moderation
in riches, devotion in worship, gracefulness in starvation, endurance in
hardship, desire for the lawful, pleasure in guidance and hatred from
greed. He performs virtuous deeds but still feels afraid. In the evening
he is anxious to offer thanks (to Allah). In the morning his anxiety is
to remember (Allah).*

*He passes the night in fear and rises in the morning in joy, fear lest
the night is passed in forgetfulness and joy over the favour and mercy
received by him. If his self refuses to endure a thing which it does not
like he does not grant its request towards what it likes. The coolness
of his eye lies in what is to last forever, while from the things (of
this world) that will not last he keeps aloof. He transfuses knowledge
with forbearance, and speech with action.*

*You will see his hopes simple, his shortcomings few, his heart fearing,
his spirit contented, his meal small and simple, his religion safe, his
desires dead and his anger suppressed. Good alone is expected from him.
Evil from him is not to be feared. Even if he is found among those who
forget (Allah), he is counted among those who remember (Him); yet, if he
is among those who remember, he is not counted among the forgetful. He
forgives him who is unjust to him, and he gives to him who deprives him.
He behaves well with him who behaves ill with him.*

*Indecent speech is far from him, his utterance is lenient, his evils
are non-existent, his virtues are ever-present, his good is at the
forefront and mischief has turned its face (from him). He is dignified
during calamities, patient during distresses, and thankful during ease.
He does not commit excess over him whom he hates, and does not commit
sin for the sake of him whom he loves. He admits truth before evidence
is brought against him. He does not misappropriate what is placed in his
custody, and does not forget what he is required to remember. He does
not call others bad names, he does not cause harm to his neighbour, he
does not feel happy at others’ misfortunes, he does not enter into wrong
and does not go out of right.*

*If he is silent his silence does not grieve him, if he laughs he does
not raise his voice, and if he is* *wronged he endures till Allah takes
revenge on his behalf. His own self is in distress because of him, while
the people are in ease from him. He puts himself in hardship for the
sake of his next life, and makes people feel safe from himself. His
keeping away from others is by way of asceticism and purification, and
his nearness to those to whom he is near is by way of leniency and
mercifulness. His keeping away is not by way of vanity or feeling of
greatness, nor his nearness by way of deceit and cheating.*

It is related that Hammam passed into a deep swoon and then expired.
Then the Commander of the Faithful (as) said: *Verily, by Allah I had
this fear about him.* Then he added: *Effective advices produce such
effects on receptive minds.* Someone said to him: O Commander of the
Faithful, how is it that you do not receive such an effect?

The Commander of the Faithful (as) replied: *Woe to you. For death there
is a fixed hour which cannot be exceeded, and a cause which does not
change. Now look, never repeat such talk which Satan had put on your
tongue.*[^142]

This is an example of the teachings of our Imams (as) and the training
of our leaders (as). Thus, if Islam had not been covered with the
delusions of its followers and the light of the guidance of the Imams of
the Muslims had not disappeared in the actions of the ones claiming to
follow them, then the meaning of this verse would have come into sight:

***He it is Who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the true
religion that He may make it prevail over all the religions.***[^143]

[^1]: Sahih al-Bukhari: Kitab al-Ahkam, vol. 8, pp 127; Musnad Ahmad bin
Hanbal: vol. 5, pp 93.

[^2]: Sahih Muslim: vol. 6, pp 3.

[^3]: Sahih Muslim: vol. 6, pp 3; Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal: vol. 5, pp
98.

[^4]: Sahih Ibn Habban: vol. 15, pp 43.

[^5]: Sunan al-Tirmidhi: vol. 3, pp 340.

[^6]: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal: vol. 5, pp 92.

[^7]: Ibid.

[^8]: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal: vol. 5, pp 99.

[^9]: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal: vol. 5, pp 108.

[^10]: Musnad by Ibn Ju’d: pp 390, no. 266.

[^11]: Musnad Abu Ya’la: vol. 13, pp 456.

[^12]: Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal: vol. 5, pp 93.

[^13]: Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn: vol. 4, pp 501.

[^14]: Al-Mustadrak ‘ala al-Sahihayn: vol. 3, pp 618; Sunan Abu Dawud:
vol. 2, pp 309; Musnad Ahmad bin Hanbal: vol. 1, pp 398, & 406, vol. 5,
pp 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 94, 95, 97, 100, 101, 106, 107 & 108; Musnad Abu
Ya’la: vol. 8, pp 444, vol. 9, pp 222; Al- Mu’jam al-Kabir: vol. 2, pp
196, 197, 199, 206, 207, 208, 214, 215, 218, 223, 226, 240, 248, 253,
254 & 255, vol. 10, pp 157, & vol. 22, pp 120; Al-Mu’jam al-Awsat: vol.
1, pp 263; Al-Ahad wa-al-Mathani: vol. 3, pp 128; Al-Tarikh al-Kabir by
al-Bukhari: vol. 3, pp 185, vol. 8, pp 410; Tahdhib al-Kamal: vol. 3, pp
223, & 224, vol. 33, pp 272; Al-Thiqat by Ibn Habban: vol. 7, pp 241;
Tabaqat al-Muhaddithin in Isbhan: vol. 2, pp 89; Musnad Abu Dawud
al-Tiyalisi: pp 105 & 180; Ta’jil al-Manfa’at bi-Zawa’id Rijal
al-A’immat al-Arba’ah: pp 538; Tarikh Baghdad: vol. 14, pp 354; Tarikh
Madinah Damishq: vol. 21, pp 288, vol. 32, pp 303; …; Siyar A’lam
al-Nubala’: vol. 8, pp 184; and other many more Sunni sources. Kashf
al-Ghita’: vol. 1, pp 7; ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rida (A): vol. 1, pp 49, ch. 6,
hadith no. 9; Al-Khisal: pp 467…; Al-Amali by al-Saduq: pp 386, ch. 51,
hadith no. 4, pp 387…; Kamal al-Din wa Tamam al-Ni’mat: pp 68 & 271, …;
Kifayat al-Athar: pp 35, 49, &…; Rawdat al-Wa’izin: pp 261 & 262;
Dala’il al-Imamat: pp 20; Sharh al-Akhbar: vol. 3, pp 400; Kitab
al-Ghaybah: pp 103, 117, 118, 120 &…; Al-Ghaybah by al-Tusi: pp 128 &…;
Manaqib Al Abu Talib: vol. 1, pp 295; Al-’Umdah: pp 416 &…; Al-Tara’if:
pp 169 &…; and other Shi’i sources.

[^15]: Holy Qur’an, 5: 12.

[^16]: Holy Qur’an, 42: 23.

[^17]: Yanabi’ al-Mawaddah: vol. 3, pp 292.

[^18]: Kashf al-Ghita’: vol. 1, pp 7.

[^19]: Genesis: 17.

[^20]: Kamal al-Din wa Tamam al-Ni’mah: 269.

[^21]: Al-Kafi: vol. 1, pp 527, ch. The Twelve Imams.

[^22]: Al-Najashi says in his praise: He was the Shaykh of our teachers
in his time. He was trustworthy and eminent. He reported some six
thousand traditions.

[^23]: He is the Shaykh of the residents of Qum. He is distinguished
from them and is their jurist. He needs no defence. He is from the
companions of al-Rida, al-Jawad and al-Hadi (A).

[^24]: He is one of the four that were the pillars of their time. He is
one of the companions of the consensus [ashab al-ijma], on whom all the
schools of thought (of the Shi’ah) have a consensus that whatever is
transmitted from them with an authentic chain is correct. He is among
the companions of Imam al-Kazim and Imam al-Rida (A).

[^25]: He has specific narrations in his authentication from the likes
of Safwan ibn Yahya.

[^26]: Al-Kafi: vol. 1, pp 203, Kitab al-Hujjah: Fadl al-Imam wa
Sifatuh, hadith no. 2.

[^27]: Holy Qur’an, 17: 71.

[^28]: Holy Qur’an, 32: 24.

[^29]: Holy Qur’an, 13: 7.

[^30]: Holy Qur’an, 20: 50.

[^31]: Holy Qur’an, 87: 1-3.

[^32]: Holy Qur’an, 12: 108.

[^33]: Holy Qur’an, 6: 153.

[^34]: Holy Qur’an, 9: 9.

[^35]: Basa’ir al-Darajat: pp 143, part 3, ch. Nadir, hadith no. 4.

[^36]: ‘Uyun Akhbar al-Rida (A): vol. 2, pp 200, ch. 46, hadith no. 1.

[^37]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 89.

[^38]: Holy Qur’an, 13: 43.

[^39]: Basa’ir al-Darajat: pp 232, part 5, ch. Knowledge of the Imam
(A).

[^40]: Tafsir al-’Ayyashi: vol. 2, pp 198, hadith no. 88 ch.12; Misbah
al-Mutahajjid: pp 228.

[^41]: Holy Qur’an, 72: 27.

[^42]: Holy Qur’an, 40: 82-3.

[^43]: Holy Qur’an, 15: 42.

[^44]: Al-Kafi: vol. 1, pp 193, hadith no. 5.

[^45]: Holy Qur’an, 17: 85.

[^46]: Al-Kafi: vol. 1, pp 273, hadith no. 4.

[^47]: Basa’ir al-Darajat: part 2, pp 130, ch. The Imams (A)… hadith no.
5.

[^48]: Basa’ir al-Darajat: part 8, pp 398, ch. The Imams (A)… hadith no.
6.

[^49]: Holy Qur’an, 39: 9.

[^50]: Holy Qur’an, 5: 16.

[^51]: Holy Qur’an, 2: 269.

[^52]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 90.

[^53]: Holy Qur’an, 17: 81.

[^54]: Holy Qur’an, 78: 38.

[^55]: Holy Qur’an, 39: 18.

[^56]: Holy Qur’an, 7: 145.

[^57]: Holy Qur’an, 17: 53.

[^58]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 125.

[^59]: Holy Qur’an, 23: 96.

[^60]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 97.

[^61]: Holy Qur’an, 39: 23.

[^62]: Holy Qur’an, 5: 50.

[^63]: Al-Tibrani has said in Jami’ al-Bayan: vol. 30, vol. 335: Ibn
Hamid related to us that: ‘Īsa ibn Farqad related to us on the authority
of Abu al-Jarud, on the authority of Muhammad ibn ‘Ali that: Surely they
are the best of men. The Prophet (S) said: O ‘Ali, it you and your
Shi’ahs. Al-Durr al-Manthur: vol. 6, pp 379: Ibn ‘Asakar has transmitted
on the authority of Jabir ibn ‘Abd Allah that: We were in the presence
of the Prophet (S), when ‘Ali came so the Prophet (S) said: I swear by
the One in Whose hand is my life, surely he (‘Ali) and his Shi’ah are
the successful ones on the Day of Judgment. This verse was revealed
then: Those who believe and do good, surely they are the best of men.
Ever since then, whenever ‘Ali would come, the companions of the Prophet
(S) used to say: The best of men has come. Ibn ‘Uday has transmitted on
the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas saying: When this verse was revealed: Those
who believe and do good, surely they are the best of men; the Prophet
(S) said to ‘Ali that: That is you and your Shi’ahs on the Day of
Judgment, pleasing (Him) and pleased (from Him). Ibn Mardawayh has
transmitted on the authority of ‘Ali that: The Messenger of Allah said
to me: Did you not hear the Word of Allah: Those who believe and do
good, surely they are the best of men; that is you and your Shi’ahs. My
promise with you and your Shi’ahs is the Pool [hawd] when the nations
will come there for accountability, you will be called with the title:
The ones with shining foreheads. Al-Shawkani has transmitted in Fath
al-Qadir: vol. 5, pp 477, from Ibn ‘Asakar saying: Ibn ‘Asakar in Tarikh
Madinat Damishq: vol. 42, pp 371: on the authority of Jabir ibn ‘Abd
Allah that: We were with the Prophet (S) so ‘Ali ibn Abu Talib came, the
Prophet (S) said: My brother has come to you. He then turned to the
Ka’bah and struck it with his hand and said: I swear by the One in Whose
hand is my life, surely he (‘Ali) and his Shi’ah are the successful ones
on the Day of Judgment. He then added: Surely, he is the first of you to
believe. He is the most faithful with the covenant of Allah and the most
firm on the Command of Allah, the most fair for the public, the best
distributor with equality and he is the best of you in virtue before
Allah. Thus, this verse was revealed: Those who believe and do good,
surely they are the best of men. The companions of the Prophet (S) used
to say whenever ‘Ali would come: The best of men has come. Refer to
Yanabi’ al-Mawaddah: vol. 1, pp 197, 223, vol. 2, pp 357, 452;
Al-Sawa’iq al-Muhriqah: ch. 11, part 1, verse: 11, pp 161; and other
Sunni Commentary and Traditional sources. It has come in al-Mahasin:
vol. 1, pp 171, hadith no. 140: From Abu Ja’far (A) about the Word of
Allah, the Exalted: Those who believe and do good, surely they are the
best of men; saying: They are the Shi’ahs of the Household (A). It has
come in Rawdat al-Wa’izin: pp 105: Al-Baqir (A) said: The Messenger of
Allah (S) said to ‘Ali starting with the verse: Those who believe and do
good, surely they are the best of men; they are you and your Shi’ahs.
Our meeting place is the Pool. When the people are being resurrected,
you and your Shi’ahs will be satisfied, quenched of thirst, with shining
foreheads. It has come in Sharh al-Akhbar: vol. 1, pp 202, hadith no.
167: It is reported on the authority of ‘Abd Allah ibn Muhammad ibn
‘Umar ibn ‘Ali that he said: This verse was revealed for ‘Ali and his
Shi’ahs: Those who believe and do good, surely they are the best of men.
Al-Amali by Al-Shaykh al-Tusi: pp 252, 405 & 671; Mishkat al-Anwar: pp
167; and other Shi’ah sources.

[^64]: Holy Qur’an, 98: 7.

[^65]: Holy Qur’an, 5: 55.

[^66]: Dhakha’ir al-’Uqba: pp 102; Al-Mu’jam al-Awsat: vol. 6, pp 218;
Ma’rifat ‘Ulum al-Hadith: pp 102; Sharh Nahj al-Balaghah by Ibn Abu
al-Hadid: vol. 13, pp 277; Nazm Durar al-Simtayn: pp 86; Jami’ al-Bayan
(Tafsir al-Tabari): vol. 6, pp 389; Ahkam al-Holy Qur’an, vol. 2, pp
557; Shawahid al-Tanzil: vol. 1, pp 209 to 253 & 403; Al-Jami’ li-Ahkam
al-Holy Qur’an, vol. 6, pp 221; Tafsir Ibn Kathir: vol. 2, pp 74;
Al-Durr al-Manthur: vol. 2, pp 293; Tarikh Madinah Damishq: vol. 42, pp
357; Al-Bidayat wa-al-Nihayah: vol. 7, pp 394; and other Sunni sources.
Al-Kafi: vol. 1, pp 289 & 427; Da’a’im al-Islam: vol. 1, pp 16;
Al-Khisal: pp 580; Al-Amali by Al-Saduq: pp 186, majlis 26, hadith 4;
Rawdat al-Wa’izin: pp 92; Manaqib Amir al-Mu’minin (A): vol. 1, pp 151,
170 & 189; Al-Amali by Al-Shaykh al-Tusi: pp 549, ch. 24, hadith no. 4;
Al-Ihtijaj: vol. 1, pp 73 & 202; Tafsir al-’Ayyashi: vol. 1, pp 327;
Tafsir al-Qummi: vol. 1, pp 170; Tafsir Furat al-Kufi: pp 125; Tafsir
al-Tibyan: vol. 3, pp 558; and other Shi’ah sources.

[^67]: Holy Qur’an, 5: 56.

[^68]: Al-Amali by Al-Shaykh al-Tusi: pp 576, ch. 24, hadith no. 3.

[^69]: Holy Qur’an, 4: 69.

[^70]: Al-Khisal by Al-Saduq: vol. 2, pp 479, ch. 12, hadith no. 46.

[^71]: Nahj al-Balaghah: Saying no. 150. Sayyid Radi says: If this book
(Nahj al-Balaghah) had contained nothing save this short utterance, it
would have sufficed as a successful piece of preaching, a specimen of
high philosophy, an object of wisdom for the onlooker and a source of
instruction for the meditative watcher.

[^72]: Al-Amali by Al-Shaykh al-Mufid: pp 192.

[^73]: Al-Kafi: vol. 1, pp 25.

[^74]: Holy Qur’an, 13: 19.

[^75]: Al-Mahasin by Al-Barqi: vol. 1, pp 193, ch. al-’Aql, hadith no.
11.

[^76]: Al-Khisal by al-Saduq: vol. 1, pp 113, ch. 3, hadith no. 90.

[^77]: Al-Khisal by al-Saduq: vol. 1, pp 128, ch. 3, hadith no. 129.

[^78]: Al-Khisal by al-Saduq: vol. 1, pp 222, ch. 4, hadith no. 50.

[^79]: Al-Khisal by al-Saduq: vol. 1, pp 230, ch. 4, hadith no. 71.

[^80]: Al-Amali by al-Tusi: pp 229, ch. 7, hadith no. 53.

[^81]: Holy Qur’an, 61: 3.

[^82]: Nahj al-Balaghah: letter no. 53.

[^83]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 76, ch. piety, hadith no. 1.

[^84]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 78, ch. piety, hadith no. 13.

[^85]: Al-Amali by al-Saduq: pp 479, ch. 62, hadith no. 4.

[^86]: Al-Amali by al-Tusi: pp 222, ch. 8, hadith no. 34.

[^87]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 80, ch. refraining from forbidden acts,
hadith no. 3.

[^88]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 97.

[^89]: Nahj al-Balaghah: short sayings no. 229.

[^90]: Misbah al-Shari’ah: pp 203, ch. 98.

[^91]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 138.

[^92]: Ibid.

[^93]: Holy Qur’an, 9: 85.

[^94]: Holy Qur’an, 20: 131.

[^95]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 137.

[^96]: Al-Amali by al-Tusi: pp 508, ch. 18, hadith no. 18.

[^97]: Holy Qur’an, 2: 153.

[^98]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 89.

[^99]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 91.

[^100]: Quran: 2: 156-7.

[^101]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 92 & with slight difference in Al-Khisal by
al-Saduq: vol. 1, pp 130, ch. 3, hadith no. 135.

[^102]: Tafsir al-Qummi: vol. 1, pp 129, explanation of ch. 2, verse
200.

[^103]: Ibid.

[^104]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 91.

[^105]: Holy Qur’an, 4: 147.

[^106]: Holy Qur’an, 76: 1-3.

[^107]: Holy Qur’an, 34: 13.

[^108]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 121.

[^109]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 98.

[^110]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 99.

[^111]: i.e. the previous prayer.

[^112]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 99.

[^113]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 94.

[^114]: Holy Qur’an, 65: 3.

[^115]: Holy Qur’an, 14: 7.

[^116]: Holy Qur’an, 40: 60.

[^117]: Al-Khisal: vol. 1, pp 101, ch. 3, hadith no. 56.

[^118]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 111.

[^119]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 112.

[^120]: Ibid.

[^121]: Al-Amali by Shaykh Saduq: pp 399, ch. 52, hadith no. 9.

[^122]: Al-Amali by Shaykh Saduq: pp 711, ch. 39, hadith no. 9.

[^123]: Al-Khisal: vol. 1, pp 50, ch. 2, hadith no. 60.

[^124]: Al-Khisal: vol. 1, pp 104, ch. 3, hadith no. 63.

[^125]: Al-Amali by Shaykh al-Tusi: pp 146, ch. 5, hadith no. 53.

[^126]: Holy Qur’an, 41: 34-35.

[^127]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 106.

[^128]: Al-Kafi: vol. 2, pp 107.

[^129]:

[^130]: Kitab al-Tamhis: pp 74.

[^131]: Holy Qur’an, 2: 206.

[^132]: Al-Ihtijaj by Al-Tabarsi: vol. 2, pp 52 & Bihar al-Anwar: vol.
2, pp 84.

[^133]: It is an area near the Prophet’s (S) grave which is considered
to be a piece of Paradise.

[^134]: Holy Quran, 28:83

[^135]: Bihar al-Anwar: vol. 1, pp 224, & Mishkat al-Anwar: pp 562.

[^136]: Shaykh Saduq, Divine Unity: pp 68, ch. 2, hadith no. 22.

[^137]: Holy Qur’an, 22: 73.

[^138]: Holy Qur’an, 22: 74.

[^139]: Holy Qur’an, 19: 93.

[^140]: Holy Qur’an, 25: 63-76.

[^141]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 128.

[^142]: Nahjul Balaghah: sermon no. 192.

[^143]: Holy Qur’an, 48: 28.


