Introduction
============

***In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful***

**All praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds. Blessings of Allah be
upon our master Muhammad and his Purified Progeny, especially the
remaining one from Allah in the earths.**

This book is about the Branches of Religion. However, I have placed this
foreword with the aim of introducing the Roots of Religion. For
instance, when referring to degrees of light, sunlight and candlelight
are two different degrees of the reality of light. Likewise, there are
different stages of understanding the Roots of Religion.

This introduction is a little sparkle for the travellers of this path.
Its purpose is to provide a general understanding rather than a detailed
and profound understanding of a research stage.

We have tried to ensure that in this book the preliminaries for the
logical proofs are easy to comprehend. For the textual proofs, we have
transmitted from traditional books of both Shi’ahs and Sunnis, as well
as popular history books.

Our traditions which we have transmitted from these sources are
reliable, both in terms of the reporters and what has been reported.

Because the Book and the Sunnah awaken (human) nature and contain the
most acceptable laws of wisdom, the use of the light of the verses from
the Qur’an and the noble *ahadith* (traditions) is the basis of the
Clear Religion.

Since the general public will use this book, we have not addressed some
technical issues. Due to précis, in this small effort, it has not been
possible for us to satisfy the topic as it deserved, in terms of study
and research. However, the easy cannot be abolished for the difficult.
And what cannot be obtained in its entirety should not be left out in
its entirety.

Before we begin explaining the Roots of Religion we must mention some
preliminaries:


