Basic Preliminaries
===================

Necessity of Obtaining Recognition
----------------------------------

The possibility of a Beginning and a Return necessitates the study and
the struggle to obtain religious recognition. The human being believes
in the possibility that there may be a Creator for this world who is
All-Knowing and All-Wise, that death is not the end of human life, that
there is a purpose behind his creation, and that the Creator has made a
law for him to follow, which if he does not implement, he will be placed
in eternal adversity.

Human nature requires that he gives importance to this possibility; no
matter how little it may be, because the outcome is enormously
dangerous. Its prevention is to study the reality of this issue and not
rest until and unless one reaches a clear result, either in its negation
or confirmation.

It is like if someone suspects the presence of some explosives in his
house, or if someone suspects an electrical fault that would cause the
house to burn down with everyone in it. That person will not sit still
for a moment; rather, he will search until he is certain that the danger
is not present.

Human Need of a True Religion
-----------------------------

Human beings are made up of body and spirit, and intellect and desires.
Due to this composition, it is man’s nature to search for material and
spiritual privilege. He tries to obtain the perfection which is the
purpose of his existence.

From another viewpoint, every human being has two aspects to his life:
personal and social. Likewise, even though every part of the human body
has its own function, it also has an effect in connection with all other
parts of the body.

Based on this example, human beings require a system and set of laws in
order to have a good personal and social life, and to achieve material
and spiritual privilege.

This system and set of laws is that true religion, which the human
nature necessarily requires:

***Then set your face upright for religion in the right state—the nature
made by Allah in which He has made men.***[^1]

Hence, there is perfection for every being, which cannot be reached
without following a specified practice for its perfection and nurture.
Human beings are not exempted from this law:

***He said: Our Lord is He Who gave to everything its creation, then
guided it (to its goal).***[^2]

Effect of Religion on Personal Life
-----------------------------------

A human’s life has a root and branches, a main text and margins. The
root is the human being himself, while the branches and margins are his
attachments such as wealth, status, spouse, children and relatives.

Due to the love human beings have for themselves and their attachments,
they are connected to two scourges: distress and fear; distress over
what he does not have and fear of losing what he does have.

Faith in Allah eliminates these two scourges from their roots, because
faith in Allah, the All-Knowing, the All-Powerful, the All-Wise, the
Most Merciful, makes the human being rise to his duties. When he
performs his duties as a servant to his Lord, he knows that Allah, the
Exalted, due to His wisdom and mercy, will make him reach what is good
and prosperous for him, and He will save him from what would result in
evil and regret.

All realities are metaphors when compared to the absolute reality, like
a mirage which seems like water to the thirsty. When the human being
finds the absolute reality, he will not miss anything. His faith
becomes: *What is with you passes away and what is with Allah is
enduring.*[^3]

He does not find in himself any attraction for the worldly debris, to
distress over not having something or fear for its decline:

***Now surely the friends of Allah—they shall have no fear nor shall
they grieve. Those who believe and guard (against evil): They shall have
good news in this world's life and in the hereafter; there is no
changing the Words of Allah; that is the mighty achievement.***[^4]

In this worldly life, the cause of nervous breakdowns in human beings is
anxiety from the pleasure in conquering materialistic desires, and the
fear and regret of not reaching them.

The only thing that gives peace to human beings in the waves of this
flood is the faith in Allah:

***So that you may not grieve for what has escaped you, nor be exultant
at what He has given you***[^5]

***Those who believe and whose hearts are set at rest by the remembrance
of Allah; now surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts set at
rest.***[^6]

Effect of Religion on Social Life
---------------------------------

The human being possesses the two faculties of desire and anger. If the
faculty of desire of wealth overcomes him, then the treasures of the
earth will not satisfy him. Even more, if the desire of status and power
overtakes him, then even ruling the whole of the earth will not satisfy
him. In fact, he will aspire to extend his sovereignty to other stars:

***And Fir’awn said: O Haman! Build for me a tower that I may attain the
means of access, the means of access to the heavens.***[^7]

Indeed, the oppressive human desires of hunger, lust, wealth and status,
which are served by the faculty of anger to feed its endless desires,
are not humble before anything. They do not stop at any boundary, nor do
they turn away from wasting any entitlement.

A life with all these desires can only result in corruption in life.
With this anger there is no result but bloodshed, which destroys tilth
and stock. In fact, human beings are capable of using their intellectual
powers to discover secrets of the universe in order to attain their
unlimited evil desires. Thus, they will drag the human life on this
planet to ruin and destruction.

***Corruption has appeared in the land and the sea on account of what
the hands of men have wrought.***[^8]

The only power that can control the defiant human self, take hold of
excess anger and desire, train him until he becomes modest and
establishes personal and social rights, is the faith in Allah and the
Return, and reward and punishment. For, indeed the belief in Allah, Who

***(He) is with you wherever you are,***[^9]

and with the requital, which:

***So, he who has done an atom's weight of good shall see it, and he who
has done an atom's weight of evil shall see it.***[^10]

This belief raises the human being to every good and stops him from
every evil. Hence, they will follow the philosophy of reconciliation
rather than struggle for existence.

Distinction of the Science of the Principles of Faith
-----------------------------------------------------

Since it is a part of their nature, human beings love to seek knowledge.
After all, what makes the human a human is intellect. The fruit of
intellect is knowledge. This is why if you call an ignorant ‘ignorant,’
he will be hurt, even though he knows that he is ignorant. On the
contrary, if you called him ‘knowledgeable,’ he will be pleased, though
he knows that he is not knowledgeable.

As Islam is the religion of nature, it has compared knowledge and
ignorance to light and darkness, and to life and death.

*Indeed, it (knowledge) is light. It arises in the heart of whomsoever
Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, wills to guide.*[^11]

*A learned between the ignorant is like a living between the dead.*[^12]

All sciences are distinctive in themselves. However, the status of all
sciences is different based on a number of issues: the topic, the
result, and the method of reasoning used in them. Thus, the science
discussing the human is more honourable than that of studying plants,
due to the honour of human beings over plants.

The science studying human safety is more honourable than the one
studying the security of human wealth, due to the honour of the human
being over his wealth. The science that results in evidence is more
honourable than the one that results in supposition, due to the honour
of certainty over assumption.

Based on this, the most honourable of all sciences is the one whose
topic is Allah, the Blessed and Exalted. Bearing in mind that the
connection between Allah, the Exalted, and other than Him is not that of
the oceans to the drop, nor of the sun to an atom. Rather, it is of the
Everlasting to those that are temporary. With a profound vision, it is
not possible for the needy in essence to be compared with the Needless
in essence:

***And the faces shall be humbled before the Living, the
Self-Subsistent.***[^13]

The fruits of studying this science are faith and good deeds, both of
which are the only means of human privilege in this world and the
hereafter. They also fulfil the personal and social rights:

***Whoever does good whether male or female and he is a believer, We
will most certainly make him live a happy life.***[^14]

The method of analysis used in this path is reasoning and proof that is
useful for certainty, which leaves no path for conjecture.

• ***Call to the way of your Lord with wisdom,***[^15]

• ***follow not that of which you have not the knowledge;***[^16]

• ***surely conjecture will not avail aught against the truth.***[^17]

Thus, the implication of this noble tradition is clarified: *The most
honourable of all obligations, and the most important one of them, is
for mankind to recognise the Lord and acknowledge the service to
Him.*[^18]

Condition for Attaining Recognition and Faith in Allah
------------------------------------------------------

When a human being sees any visible existence, he looks and searches for
its Creator. Human nature is thirsty for understanding the One who gives
existence its beginning and its end.

However, the gem of faith in Allah and His recognition, which is the
most precious gem from the treasure of knowledge and recognition, is not
achievable by the one who is regarded as an oppressor to this faith and
recognition. This is based on the rule of justice, because bestowing
wisdom to the one who does not deserve it is oppression against wisdom,
and holding back wisdom from one who deserves it is oppression upon the
person who deserves it.

It is impossible for a human being to deny the belief in God and the
Return in any state, unless he encompasses all beings and chains of all
causes and effects, and still does not find God and the Return. So long
as this does not happen, his certainty in the nonexistence of God and
the Return is impossible. In fact, what is possible is ignorance of the
two.

Consequently, justice demands that the nonbeliever in Allah’s existence
must follow the demand of doubt verbally and practically. He must admit
not knowing and must not claim knowing the nonexistence of God.

For example, if one gives the possibility that a god may exist, belief
in whom may cause him eternal privilege, and disbelief in whom may cause
him eternal adversity; then his logical responsibility is to not deny
Him with his tongue or heart and to always investigate about Him with
all of his abilities.

He should take precaution in his practice so that he may not lose
eternal privilege and should not be placed in eternal adversity, in case
there is a God. That is just like the intellect commanding to abstain
from tasty food which may contain poison that can cause death.

All those who doubt Allah’s existence, if they did what justice demands
them to do, will most certainly achieve recognition and faith:

***And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways.***[^19]

Otherwise, the stains of oppression regarding this reality make it
impossible to achieve the recognition of that Holy Exalted God:

***He grants wisdom to whom He pleases, and whoever is granted wisdom,
he indeed is given a great good;***[^20]

***and Allah causes the unjust to go astray, and Allah does what He
pleases.***[^21]

After consideration of these preliminaries we begin the explanation of
the Principles of Faith:

[^1]: Holy Qur’an, 30: 30.

[^2]: Holy Qur’an, 20: 50.

[^3]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 96.

[^4]: Holy Qur’an, 10: 62-4.

[^5]: Holy Qur’an, 57: 23.

[^6]: Holy Qur’an, 13: 28.

[^7]: Holy Qur’an, 40: 36-7.

[^8]: Holy Qur’an, 30: 41.

[^9]: Holy Qur’an, 57: 4.

[^10]: Holy Qur’an, 99: 7-8.

[^11]: Mishkat al-Anwar: pp 563.

[^12]: Al-Amali by al-Mufid: pp 29, al-Majlis no. 4, hadith no. 1;
Al-Amali by al-Tusi: pp 521, al-majlis no. 16, hadith no. 55.

[^13]: Holy Qur’an, 20: 111.

[^14]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 97.

[^15]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 125.

[^16]: Holy Qur’an, 17: 36.

[^17]: Holy Qur’an, 10: 36.

[^18]: Kifayat al-Athar: 262.

[^19]: Holy Qur’an, 29: 69.

[^20]: Holy Qur’an, 2: 269.

[^21]: Holy Qur’an, 14: 27.


