The Ways of Attaining Faith in Allah
====================================

The ways through which one may attain faith in Allah, the Exalted, are
many:

As for the godly ones, then the proof for them over His existence and
means of His recognition is He Himself:

• ***Is it not sufficient as regards your Lord that He is a witness over
all things?***[^1]

• *He Who guides to Himself through Himself.*[^2]

• *I have come to know You through You and You have guided me to
Yourself.*[^3]

For others, we will indicate only a few ways to be concise:

First Way
---------

When a human being looks at himself or anything else he can perceive,
when he observes its parts and particles, he notices that no parts are
impossible in existence. He also notices that none of them are necessary
in existence nor necessary in nonexistence, hence they are all possible
beings.

Thus, everything which is possible in its existence and its nonexistence
requires a cause that brings it to being. The example of that is of the
two sides of a balance, neither of the two can sway over the other
without the addition of something else. Likewise, a possible being
requires a cause for it to exist, or it will be nonexistent due to the
nonexistence of a cause.

Since every particle from the parts of this universe requires a cause
for its existence, it either gives existence to itself or something
similar gives it existence. As for its giving existence to itself, then
it was nonexistent. How could it give something which it did not have?
As for something similar to itself, then the same applies to it. When it
is not possible for it to give existence to itself then how could it
give existence to something else? This rule applies to all parts of the
universe and to the entire universe as well.

The light in the air, which does not have light in its essence, is proof
over the existence of the One who brought about the light. He must have
it in His essence; otherwise, He will not be able to lighten the air. It
is impossible for one who is dark in essence to give light to itself,
let alone give light to others.

Thus, the existence of the universe and the perfection of the existence,
like life, knowledge and power, are proof over the existence of an
Originator, whose existence, life, knowledge and omnipotence are present
in His essence and are not referred to other than Him:

***Or were they created without there being anything, or are they the
creators?***[^4]

A man entered the presence of Imam Abu al-’Ali al-Rida (as) and said: O
son of the Messenger of Allah (S)! What is the proof that the universe
emerged?

*He (as) replied: You did not exist, and yet you came into being. You
already know that you have not created yourself, and that you have not
been created by someone like you.*[^5]

Abu Shakir al-Daysani asked Imam al-Sadiq (as): How can you prove that
you have a Creator?

Consequently, he (as) responded: *I found myself not free from one of
two possibilities: either I have created myself, or someone else has
created me. If I have created myself, then I am not free from one of two
meanings: either I created myself while I was already existent, or I
created myself while I was nonexistent. Hence, if I created myself, and
I already existed, then I was self-sufficient of giving existence to
myself. And if I was nonexistent, then you know that the nonexistent
cannot bring about a thing. Therefore, the third meaning is proven that
I have a Creator and that is Allah, the Lord of the Universe.*[^6]

A thing that did not exist and then came into being has either brought
itself into being, or someone else has brought it into being. If it
brought itself into being then it must have brought itself into being
when it was either already existent or it was nonexistent. If it was
already existent, then that necessitates creating something which
already exists, which is impossible. And if it was nonexistent then that
necessitates a nonexistent to be the cause of an existent, which is also
impossible.

If someone else brought Him into being, and if that other being was
similar to Him in that it was nonexistent first then became existent,
then the same ruling will apply to that thing, without any difference.

This is why the intellect requires that anything which did not exist and
then came into existence, must have a Creator, who does not have any
nonexistence.

Therefore, it becomes apparent that all beings of the universe and their
alteration are proof over the existence of their Creator, Who does not
have a creator. All created beings are proof over the existence of a
Creator, Who is not created.

Second Way
----------

Suppose someone discovers a paper in the desert which contains all the
letters of the alphabet in order from a to z. Then the conscience of
every man will bear witness that the writing of those letters and their
sequence is the result of understanding and perception. If he finds on
the paper a word composed from those letters or a symmetrical speech,
then he will believe that the composer is knowledgeable and
well-informed. He will reason that the composer has knowledge and
wisdom.

Then, is the formation of a plant from its basic origin, a lesser
indicator of the knowledge and wisdom of its Creator than the
composition of a sentence, which is an obvious indicator of the
knowledge of the composer? What is wrong with man that with one
sentence, he reasons that its composer has knowledge and wisdom? Yet,
with a plant, he fails to reason that its Creator has knowledge and
wisdom.

What is this wisdom and knowledge that made a plant from water and soil
that decays the husk of the seed, and gives life to its core?

He gave the root of a plant the power to tear out from the earth and
draw nourishment from the darkness of the soil. From every piece of
land, He has prepared nourishment for different kinds of plants and
trees. Every plant and tree finds its nourishment from the soil. He has
made the roots of all trees draw only the nourishment specific to them,
resulting in their specific fruits.

He made the roots combat the gravity of the earth, thus, they send water
and nourishment to the branches and the twigs of the tree. While the
roots work in the depths, He made the branches, twigs and leaves work to
attain light and air. *Therefore, He made everything easy when He
created it.*[^7]

No matter how hard the human being works in changing this wise practice,
to make the roots go up to the sky—which are made to go to the depths of
the ground, and to make the branches go in the ground—which are made to
work in air, they will find them combating this human practice. They
continue their natural course:

***and you shall not find any change in the course of Allah.***[^8]

Pay attention to the creation of a tree, from the stem to the thousands
of leaves; indeed, it is a marvellous structure that amazes the
intellects. What gave each one of the cells of the leaves the power to
absorb water and nourishment from the depths of the earth through the
roots? Who gave them the connection between the sky and earth? The
difference between day and night, and the harmony in growth, which
finishes the seed in its roots and branches but preserve it in its
fruits, why is this law of nature effective in its life? It is
sufficient for mankind to believe in the endless knowledge and wisdom
behind it.

***Nay, He Who created the heavens and the earth, and sent down for you
water from the cloud; then We cause to grow thereby beautiful gardens;
it is not possible for you that you should make the trees thereof to
grow. Is there a god with Allah? Nay! They are people who
deviate.***[^9]

***Is it you that produce the trees for it, or are We the
producers?***[^10]

***We*** ***cause to grow in it of every suitable thing.***[^11]

Indeed, whichever plant or tree you look at, you will find from its
roots to its fruits, a sign of the Creator’s knowledge, power and
wisdom. They surrendered in their way, which has been made for their
nurture and guidance:

 ***And the herbs and the trees do prostrate (to Him).***[^12]

\*\*\*

Similarly, paying attention to the life of each animal guides us to
Allah, the Exalted.

Abu Shakir al-Daysani came to Imam al-Sadiq (as) and said, “O Ja’far ibn
Muhammad, guide me to my Lord.”

Thus, Abu ‘Abd Allah (as) said to him: *Sit down.* He had a young boy,
who had an egg in his hand and was playing with it. So Abu ‘Abd Allah
(as) said: *Young lad, bring me the egg.* So he brought it to him. Abu
‘Abd Allah (as) further said:

*Daysani, this is a concealed stronghold. It has a solid cover, and
inside the solid cover there is a soft layer. Inside the soft layer
there is the egg yolk and the albumin. Neither does the egg yolk mix
with the albumin, nor does the albumin mix with the egg yolk. Each
remains in its state.* *No informer comes out of it to inform of its
usefulness, nor has a defect informed of its decay.* *No one knows
whether it will make a male or a female. Colours like that of the
peacocks burst out of it. Do you not think that it is the product of a
Planner [Mudabbir]?*

He put his head down for a long time, then said: “I bear witness that
there is no god but Allah, Alone. He has no associates, and Muhammad is
His Servant and Messenger, and you are an Imam and a Proof from Allah
for His Creation. I repent for the misguidance in which I was in.”[^13]

Which planning has created this strong eggshell of pure lime and
consigned astonishing secrets in it? What planning is it that has formed
this eggshell, from the feed that the birds eat, into a white house that
is a peaceful place for the growth of a chicken? Who placed the sperm in
the egg, like the pearl in the shell?

The embryo is not attached to the mother, neither is there any womb to
provide nourishment. Hence, the nourishment is provided inside the
eggshell. A delicate membrane is placed between the wall of the tough
eggshell and the chicken and its nourishment, which protect it from
being harmed. Then, in the same dark surroundings, all parts of the
animal are formed, such as the bones, muscles, veins, nerves and senses,
and each one is placed in its own position.

From all those parts, if one only pays attention to the composition of
an eye, he will ponder on how delicate its creation is. Its placement in
its position is so astonishing for the intellect on its own, let alone
the rest of the body.

Since this chicken will have to feed by picking seeds from between the
earth and stones, He equipped it with a tough beak from the horns of the
animals, so that it does not hurt itself from the earth. To ensure that
the chicken does not miss, He gave it a craw to collect all the seeds in
it and preserve them there, gradually sending them to its digestive
system. Then He covered its delicate skin with feathers and wings that
protect it from hot and cold, from injury and other animals.

He did not only suffice the chicken with the necessities of life, but He
also gave him the physical beauty of colourful feathers. The Imam (as)
said: *Colours like that of the peacocks burst out of* *it.*

From the hen’s body, balanced heat is required for the development of
the chicken. The bird that does not keep still except during the
darkness of the night, sits still in its place to heat the eggs for the
duration that is required to form the embryo, and hence the chicken.
What wisdom is it that makes this constantly moving bird keep still so
that life comes about in the new chicken?

Which teacher taught the bird how to turn over the egg in such a way
that a chicken is formed, with no parts misplaced? And who taught the
chicken to break the eggshell with its beak when its formation is
completed, and it is ready to enter a new life full of energy?

What meticulousness and mercy has entered the hen that, against its
instinct, it protects the life of the chicken? A reform occurs in the
life of the hen that makes her stand up to protect and defend her
chicken. The hen makes her chest a shield to guard her chicken. This
emotional state continues until the chicken becomes able to carry on
with its own life.

Is it not sufficient for us to take notice of an egg so that it may
guide us to *Who creates, then makes complete, and Who makes (things)
according to a measure, then guides (them to their goal).*[^14] This is
when the Imam (as) said: *Do you not think that it is the product of a
Planner [Mudabbir]?*

He put his head down for a long time, then said: “I bear witness that
there is no god but Allah, Alone. He has no associates, and Muhammad is
His Servant and Messenger, and you are an Imam and a Proof from Allah
for His Creation. I repent for the misguidance in which I was in.”

\*\*\*

Indeed the Omniscient, the Omnipotent, the All-Wise, Who nurtured the
seed from the darkness of the earth, and the One who nurtured the
chicken in the darkness of the egg, has done so for a specific objective
and purpose. He has nurtured the human sperm in the darkness of the womb
for an objective and a purpose. The sperm was a drop in its beginning,
not worth mentioning. It did not have body parts or human strengths.

Thus, Allah prepared it with all kinds of provisions for the life after
birth. He prepared it, for example, with bones of all kinds and sizes
for serving different purposes. He lit the lamp of perception with the
brain which astonishes the intellects. Man remains alive due to millions
of heartbeats each year, which continue day and night.

Paying attention to the formation of the simplest human body part is
sufficient for instilling faith in the Creator, the Honourable, the
Omniscient. For instance, the teeth are created in three types: front
incisors teeth, canine teeth and molar teeth. What would happen in terms
of biting the food and chewing it, if the molar teeth were in place of
the front teeth and vice versa? What would happen in terms of beauty and
ugliness?

What would happen if the eyebrows were below the eyes, or the opening of
the nose was upwards rather than downwards?

All human activities, from building the earth, farming, building huge
strong structures, to handling delicate fabrics and even tinier things
are dependent on the fingers and the growth of nails.

Which power and wisdom is it that made the substance of the nails
available in human food? He made the food go through chewing, digestion
and absorption, so that it could enter the veins and reach the tips of
the fingers. Then the nails become hard, so the purpose of their
creation is served. The flesh of the fingers and the nails are separate
from each other but are joined in such a way that they do not normally
come off. Under normal circumstances, human beings cannot bear the pain
if their nails are torn or broken. However, when their purpose is
served, they grow out of their place in such a way that human beings can
cut their nails without any trouble.

It is astonishing that the nutrients, which flow through the veins,
provide nutrition for the tough parts like the bones and the nails as
well as for the delicate parts like the eyes.

What will happen to the structure of human life if the sustenance given
to its parts is switched, so that the nutrition that should be given to
the nails was given to the eyes, and vice versa?

\*\*\*

These examples are the simplest signs of knowledge and wisdom, which do
not require intense contemplation:

 ***and in your own souls, will you not then see?***[^15]

Yet, what if we reach the depths of the secrets of the creation, through
specialisation in medical science and use of complicated equipment?

***Do they not reflect within themselves?***[^16]

Although the learned have made great efforts in understanding this
being, they have yet to discover the secrets in the creation of his
skin. So then, how will they understand his core and inner self? The
faculty of desire is to attract the comfortable, the faculty of anger to
protect the comfortable and reject the painful. In order to maintain a
balance between the two powers, he has been given the intellect for
practical balance and the five senses for theoretical balance.

***And if you would count Allah's favours, you will not be able to
number them.***[^17]

Which pen of knowledge and wisdom is it that wrote this book full of
wisdom on the drop of water?

***So let man consider of what he is created: He is created of water
pouring forth.***[^18]

***He creates you in the wombs of your mothers—a creation after a
creation—in triple darkness.***[^19]

What knowledge, power and wisdom is it that created from a floating drop
of water a sound human being, who through his intellect and perception
becomes aware of the zenith of the horizon and the souls?

***Read and your Lord is Most Honourable, Who taught (to write) with the
pen. Taught man what he knew not.***[^20]

He takes the earth and the sky as the scope of his thoughts and powers.

***Do you not see that Allah has made what is in the heavens and what is
in the earth subservient to you, and made complete to you His favours
outwardly and inwardly? And among men is he who disputes in respect of
Allah though having no knowledge nor guidance, nor a book giving
light.***[^21]

What can the human being say to this knowledge, power, mercy and wisdom,
except for what Allah, the Mighty and High, has already said:

***So blessed be Allah, the best of the creators.***[^22]

What can he do except drop into prostration and say: **Glory be to my
Lord, the Most High, and Praise be to Him.**

\*\*\*

As for the Word of the Exalted:

***We will soon show them Our signs in the Universe and in their own
souls, until it will become quite clear to them that He is the
truth.***[^23]

One must glance at the universe, which contains millions of suns, moons
and stars. The light of some of these reaches the Earth in thousands of
light-years. Some of them are thousands of times greater than the Earth.

The distance between each one of them is very well calculated and each
one is in its specified orbit. All of these have balanced attraction and
repulsion, as none of them collide with each other.

***Neither is it allowable to the sun that it should overtake the moon,
nor can the night outstrip the day; and all float on in a
sphere.***[^24]

This Earth, which is pivotal to human life, is encompassed by gases that
protect it from thousands of luminous meteors in space, which can
destroy once they enter the atmosphere of the Earth.

He has made the distance between the sun and the Earth well-measured. It
changes to provide the proper conditions, in the best way possible, in
terms of light and heat, for the formation of mines and the growth of
plants, animals and humans.

The motion of the Earth is systematic in location and transference. This
is to form the day and night, and sunrise and sunset in most of the
Earth. The light for human life is acquired with the sunrise. It is then
that they start their activities for their sustenance. At sunset, the
night appears and darkness takes over, for bringing the peace and
harmony necessary for the continuation of life and resting. Therefore,
the sun does not give light constantly, nor does it cut it off
completely, so that the way of life does not become abandoned.

***And He it is Who made the night and the day to follow each other for
him who desires to be mindful.***[^25]

***And out of His mercy He has made for you the night and the day, that
you may rest therein, and that you may seek of His grace.***[^26]

***Say: Tell me, if Allah were to make the night to continue incessantly
on you till the day of resurrection, who is the god besides Allah that
could bring you light? Do you not then hear?***[^27]

Therefore, light and darkness, and day and night, regardless of their
extreme contradiction, are still united and assist each other. They both
hold hands with each other for one purpose! The day makes what is in the
Earth visible and the night makes what is in the sky visible to the
human being. Thus, the kingdom of the heavens and the Earth is
accessible to his physical and mental perception.

The day and night turn the pages of the book of human existence in order
that she may read the verses of her Lord from the page of the heavens
and the earth.

***Do they not consider the kingdom of the heavens and the earth and
whatever things Allah has created?***[^28]

***And thus did We show Ibrahim the kingdom of the heavens and the earth
and that he might be of those who are sure.***[^29]

How astonishing is it that a person who understands some beings,
reflects upon a few laws of nature and secrets of the universe, and this
fits the criterion for knowledge and wisdom? On the other hand, how is
it possible to perceive that the Creator of the mind and thoughts,
Legislator of the laws running the universe and Innovator of the secrets
of the creation, does not have knowledge and wisdom?

All of what has been achieved by the learned from the secrets of the
universe and its laws is like a drop of information from the ocean of
the unknown,

***and you are not given aught of knowledge but a little.***[^30]

How can wisdom accept that the human who has the ability to copy a few
lines from the book of existence is knowing and wise, while the author
of the book of existence and the Creator of the copier does not have
knowledge and information?

Of course not! Hence, you will see that even the one who rejects the
Omniscient and the Omnipotent Creator, his nature bears witness over
Him:

***And if you ask them, Who created the heavens and the earth and made
the sun and the moon subservient, they will certainly say, Allah. Whence
are they then turned away?***[^31]

***And if you should ask them, Who created the heavens and the earth?
They would most certainly say: The Mighty, the Knowing One, has created
them.***[^32]

An atheist entered the presence of al-Rida (as) when he had some people
in his presence.

Therefore, Abu al-Hasan al-Rida (as) asked him: *O man! Can you not see
that if your view is correct, and it is absolutely not, then we are
equal, despite our prayers, fasting, alms-giving, and the beliefs we
profess have not harmed us?*

The atheist remained silent.

Then Abu al-Hasan (as) added: *However, if our view is the correct one,
which is certainly the case, then you are lost, and we are saved.*

The man said: May Allah’s mercy be upon you! Can you describe to me how
He is and where He is?

The Imam (as) answered: *Woe to you! Verily, you are misguided. He
originated the “where”* *since He existed when there was no “where.” He
originated the “how” since He existed when there was no “how.” He cannot
be described in terms of “how” or “where,” nor can He be perceived by
any of our senses, or gauged by any other means.*

The man said: Then surely He is nothing if He cannot be perceived by any
of the senses.

Abu al-Hasan (as) said: *Woe to you! Will you deny His Lorship simply
because your senses cannot perceive Him? Although our senses fail to
perceive Him, we know for certain that He is our Lord despite arguments
to the contrary.*

The man said: Then tell me, since when has He existed?

Abu al-Hasan said: *If you can tell me when He did not exist, I can tell
you when He did exist.*

The man said: Then how can we prove His Existence?

Abu al-Hasan (as) replied: *Verily, when I contemplate my body and see
that it is impossible for me to increase or decrease its breadth and
height, to keep unpleasant things away from it, or draw benefits to it,
then I know that this structure has a Maker. I acknowledge His Existence
on the basis of the planets which orbit in the celestial sphere by His
Command. I acknowledge His Existence on the basis of the production of
clouds in the sky.*

*I acknowledge His Existence on the basis of the movement of the winds.
I acknowledge His Existence on the basis of the movement of the sun, the
moon, and the stars. When I consider all the wonders of creation, I know
that they are the product of a Determiner [Muqaddir], and an Originator
[Munshi’].*[^33]

The meaning of the word of the Imam (as): *…then we are equal despite
our prayers, fasting…* is that the religious duties of the faith, good
deeds and refraining from evil, are the source of satisfaction for the
soul and improvement of society. Even if these actions were in vain,
abiding by them is a minute effort, due to the possibility of the
existence of God and the Return. It is also necessary for removing the
harm and attaining the good, which has no limit.

The meaning of his word (as): *He originated the “where”…* is that place
and state are two accidental things. Allah is the Creator of substances
and accidents. Then how is it sensible to relate the Creator with what
He has created?

Besides, the created cannot be an attribute of the Creator, because
describing the Creator with the description of the creation necessitates
that the Creator is in need of His creation. This is why He cannot be
confined by place and state. He cannot be sensed by the senses and
cannot be compared with anything.

The meaning of his word (as): *Woe to you! Your senses cannot perceive
Him.* The one who confines the existence to senses is neglectful of the
fact that the sense is present, but He cannot be perceived with sense.
For example, the ear may be present but there may be nothing to hear and
the eye is present but there may be nothing to be seen.

The human being perceives that the endless should be unlimited, while
every sensed thing is limited. There are many internal and external
beings which are beyond sense and perception.

This man was deluded in his assumption that existence is restricted to
the sensed being. Therefore, he rejected the Creator of the senses and
the sensed. Hence, the Imam (as) guided him to realise that the Creator
of the sense and the sensed, the imagination and the imagined, the
understanding and the understood cannot be contained by senses,
imaginations and understandings; for, every perceiving power is
encompassed by what perceives it.

The Creator has encompassed the creation. Thus, it is not possible that
the Creator of the senses, imaginations and understandings, Who
encompasses them, is also encompassed by them. This would mean that the
encompassing one would be the encompassed.

Then, if Allah, the Exalted, could be sensed or imagined or understood
(completely), then the mind would contain Him. He would become identical
to what perceives Him from these powers and would be combined. The
combined from a dimension would necessitate the separation from a
dimension.

Thus, His existence would be composed of the two. Such a composition is
from the description of the created and not the Creator. Therefore, if
Allah, the Exalted could be contained in senses, imagination and
intellect, then He would be created and not the Creator.

Third Way
---------

Indeed, the occurrence of evolution in matter and nature is a proof over
the existence of a superior power over them both; because matter and
material beings require location and parallel. For example, a body
cannot become hot due to the effect of fire unless it has a connection
and location near it. The lamp that lights the atmosphere has a location
and connection.

It is impossible for location and connection to exist with the
nonexistent. Therefore, it is impossible for matter and nature to have
an effect on different beings which were previously nonexistent. The
existence of whatever was nonexistent before is proof over the existence
of a power that is not in need of the effects of location and
connection. It has to be beyond the bodies and its likes.

***His command, when He intends anything, is only to say to it: Be, so
it is.***[^34]

Fourth Way
----------

Faith in Allah, the Exalted, is innate in human nature. Therefore,
humans naturally find themselves to be weak and needy beings who must
refer to an Omnipotent and seek help from a Self-Sufficient. However,
different occupations distract him and his emotional attractions to his
likenesses veil him from his nature and recognition.

When he is placed in danger and loses hope from all means of salvation,
he sees himself helpless, so he wakes up to his sleeping nature. Thus,
unwillingly he turns to the Omnipotent and the essentially
Self-Sufficient to which he refers and naturally seeks help from.

***Say: Who is it that delivers you from the dangers of the land and the
sea (when) you call upon Him (openly) humiliating yourselves, and in
secret: If He delivers us from this, we should certainly be of the
grateful ones.***[^35]

***And when distress afflicts a man he calls upon his Lord turning to
Him frequently; then when He makes him possess a favour from Him, he
forgets that for which he called upon Him before, and sets up rivals to
Allah that he may cause (men) to stray off from His path.***[^36]

***He it is Who makes you travel by land and sea; until when you are in
the ships, and they sail on with them in a pleasant breeze, and they
rejoice, a violent wind overtakes them and the billows surge in on them
from all sides, and they become certain that they are encompassed about,
they pray to Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience: If Thou dost
deliver us from this, we will most certainly be of the grateful
ones.***[^37]

A man asked Imam al-Sadiq (as): O son of the Messenger of Allah! Those
who debate with me have confused me. Guide me to Allah. What is He?

Hence, he (as) replied to him: *O servant of Allah! Have you ever ridden
a boat?*

The man said: Of course.

The Imam (as) responded: *Then did it ever sink, leaving you without a
boat to rescue you, and with insufficient strength to swim?*

He answered: Yes.

The Imam (as) asked: *At that moment, did your heart have faith in
something All-Powerful that could rescue you from your difficult
situation?*

Thus, the man replied: Certainly.

Al-Sadiq (as) said: *Then that thing is Allah, the All-Powerful, the One
who Rescues when there is no rescuer, and the One who Helps when no help
is available.*[^38]

It is possible for humans to attain this recognition and natural
connection with Allah in states other than necessity, i.e. freewill,
with the two wings of knowledge and practice:

**The First:** The veil of ignorance and negligence departs due to the
light of intellect and he sees that the existence of all beings and
their perfection is not due to itself or due to himself. He knows that
all end to the Almighty.

***He is the First and the Last and the Ascendant (over all) and the
Knower of hidden things, and He is Cognizant of all things,***[^39]

***He is Allah the Creator, the Maker, the Fashioner; His are the most
excellent names.***[^40]

**The Second:** The turbidity of sins, lowliness and darkness declines
from the essence of his spirit due to purification of the soul and
devoutness. Indeed, the servant is only veiled from his Lord due to
ignorance, negligence and the darkness of sins and lowliness. Therefore,
it is mandatory for him to strive in removing it with knowledge and
practice.

***And (as for) those who strive hard for Us, We will most certainly
guide them in Our ways.***[^41]

Imam al-Sadiq (as) said to Ibn Abu al-’Awja’,

*“How is He hidden from you when He showed you His Omnipotence in your
own self? He brought you into being when you did not exist. His
Omnipotence is shown in your old age after youth, in your strength after
weakness, and in your weakness after strength; in your illness after
health, and your health after illness; in your pleasure after anger, and
your anger after pleasure; in your sadness after happiness, and your
happiness after sadness; in liking after disliking, and in disliking
after liking; in deciding after refusing, and in refusing after
deciding; in kindness after meanness, and in meanness after kindness, in
your exhortation after apprehension, and apprehension after exhortation;
in your hope after despair, and your despair after hope;* *in the idea
which was not in your imagination, and in the distance between what you
believed from your mind.”*

Ibn Abu al-’Awja’ said, “He was still counting to me (the proofs of) His
Omnipotence in my own self, which I could not reject, until I started
believing that Allah would appear between me and him.”[^42]

[^1]: Holy Qur’an, 41: 53.

[^2]: Bihar al-Anwar: vol. 84, pp 339.

[^3]: Al-Sahifat al-Sajjadiyyah: Supplication during every Dawn of the
Month of Ramadan. Iqbal al-A’mal: pp 67.

[^4]: Holy Qur’an, 52: 35.

[^5]: Al-Tawhid: pp 286, ch. 42, hadith no. 3.

[^6]: Ibid: pp 285, ch. 41, hadith no. 10.

[^7]: ‘Awali al-Liali: vol. 4, pp 22, hadith no. 67; Al-Tawhid: pp 356,
ch. 58, hadith no. 3.

[^8]: Holy Qur’an, 33: 62.

[^9]: Holy Qur’an, 27: 60.

[^10]: Holy Qur’an, 56: 72.

[^11]: Holy Qur’an, 15: 19.

[^12]: Holy Qur’an, 55: 6.

[^13]: Al-Kafi: vol. 1, pp 80; Al-Tawhid: pp 120, ch. 9, hadith no. 1;
Al-Ihtijaj: vol. 2, pp 70.

[^14]: Holy Qur’an, 87: 2-3.

[^15]: Holy Qur’an, 51: 21.

[^16]: Holy Qur’an, 30: 8.

[^17]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 18.

[^18]: Holy Qur’an, 86: 5-6.

[^19]: Holy Qur’an, 39: 6.

[^20]: Holy Qur’an, 96: 3-5.

[^21]: Holy Qur’an, 31: 20.

[^22]: Holy Qur’an, 23: 14.

[^23]: Holy Qur’an, 41: 53.

[^24]: Holy Qur’an, 36: 40.

[^25]: Holy Qur’an, 25: 62.

[^26]: Holy Qur’an, 28: 73.

[^27]: Holy Qur’an, 28: 71.

[^28]: Holy Qur’an, 7: 185.

[^29]: Holy Qur’an, 6: 75.

[^30]: Holy Qur’an, 17: 85.

[^31]: Holy Qur’an, 29: 61.

[^32]: Holy Qur’an, 43: 9.

[^33]: Al-Tawhid: pp 244, ch. 36, hadith no. 3; Al-Kafi: vol. 1, pp 78,
hadith no. 3.

[^34]: Holy Qur’an, 36: 82.

[^35]: Holy Qur’an, 6: 63.

[^36]: Holy Qur’an, 39: 8.

[^37]: Holy Qur’an, 10: 22.

[^38]: Al-Tawhid: pp 225, ch. 31, hadith no. 5; Ma‘ani al-Akhbar: pp 4,
hadith 2.

[^39]: Holy Qur’an, 57: 3.

[^40]: Holy Qur’an, 59: 24.

[^41]: Holy Qur’an, 29: 69.

[^42]: Al-Tawhid: pp 122, ch. 9, hadith no. 4; Al-Kafi: vol. 1, pp 75.


