Divine Unity (Tawhid)
=====================

Divine Unity refers to the belief that Allah is One. He is not composed
of parts and attributes, because any composed being is in need of parts
and the one who composes it. Also, it is impossible for the being that
is in need to give existence to itself, let alone give existence to one
other than itself. Divine Unity is also the belief that Allah has no
partners in Divinity or in His attributes.[^1]

We will now explain some proofs of Divine Unity:

First Proof
-----------

If there were numerous gods then for each one of them to be a god, it
would require them to share Divinity. Each one of them requires
distinction from the other to confirm duality. Thus, each one would be
composed from what they both share and in what they both differ.

Second Proof
------------

Existence of more than one god, without distinction, is impossible.
Distinction is a cause of absence of what the other god may have of
perfection. The one lacking perfection is in need. Therefore, the chain
of need must end at the Self-Sufficient in essence from all dimensions.
Otherwise, it would necessitate for all possible beings to be
nonexistent, because the one that does not possess existence, cannot
give it.

Third Proof
-----------

Indeed, Allah, the Exalted, is present without limitation. As ‘Ali (as)
says: *Limitation and end do not apply to Him,*[^2] because every
limited being is composed of essence and the limitation of that essence.
The limitation of essence would mean absence of perfection, which is in
addition to that essence.

Thus, this composition is the worst of its types, as composition can be
between two existing things or between one existence and one
nonexistence. The supposed composition would be between an existence and
a nonexistence. However, all types of compositions are impossible for
Allah, the Exalted.

The existence which has no limitation must be One for which a second
cannot be conceived, because conceiving a second to Him would
necessitate limiting Him. A limitation is composed of existence and
nonexistence.

Every composed is in need of what it is composed of. Therefore,
association in Divinity ends in making the god in need of nonexistence.
The Glorified Allah is Unique in essence and attributes. Hence, He has
no second to Him, neither confirmed nor conceived.

Fourth Proof
------------

Indeed, the unity in the system of all parts of the universe, and in the
universe as a whole, proves the Oneness of the Creator. A close
examination of the system and composition of every part of the
categories of the universe, and their connection with each other,
reveals that both parts of the universe and the universe as a whole are
created by One, Omniscient, Omnipotent and All-Wise Creator.

Indeed, the formation of the parts of a tree, the parts of the body of
an animal and its strength, their connection with each other, their
connection with the Earth and the sun, the connection of the solar
system with other solar systems and the galaxy, in one sentence is:
Verily, from the composition of an atom and what goes on around it to
the composition of the sun and the galaxies, reveal that the Creator of
all is One:

***And He it is Who is God in the heavens and God in the earth; and He
is the Wise, the Knowing.***[^3]

***men! Serve your Lord Who created you and those before you so that you
may guard (against evil). Who made the earth a resting place for you and
the heaven a canopy and (Who) sends down rain from the cloud then brings
forth with it subsistence for you of the*** ***fruits; therefore do not
set up rivals to Allah while you know.***[^4]

Fifth Proof
-----------

Imam al-Sadiq (as) was asked, “Why is it not permissible that there be
more than one creator of the universe?” Thus, he (as) replied:
*…Furthermore, if you claim that there are two gods, there must be a
division between them both, which has always existed, and that division
would have to be a third god. However, if you claim that there are three
gods, then there must be two divisions between them, leaving us with
five gods, and so on ad aeternum.*[^5]

Sixth Proof
-----------

The Commander of the Faithful (as) said to his son al-Hasan (as):
*Beware, O son that if your Lord had an associate then his messengers
would have certainly come to you and you would have seen signs of his
sovereignty and dominion. You would have learnt his actions and
attributes. However, He is One God like He has described Himself.*[^6]

The outcome of the faith in Oneness of Allah, the Exalted, is His Unity
of Service, because other than Him do not deserve service and cannot
attain it. As everything and everyone other than Him is His servant:

***There is no one in the heavens and the earth but will come to the
Beneficent Allah as a*** ***servant.***[^7]

Furthermore, service to other than Allah, the Exalted, is humiliation
from the humiliated and begging from the needy. In fact, it is
humiliation even for humility and is begging from the need itself.

***O men! You are they who stand in need of Allah, and Allah is He Who
is the Self-Sufficient, the Praised One.***[^8]

Verily, faith in His Oneness and that every being is from Him, due to
Him and will return to Him, is summarised in three sentences: There is
no god but Allah; There is no power and no strength except Allah;

***And*** ***to Allah all things return.***[^9]

Fortunate is he who remembers these pure words constantly, and sleeps
and wakes with them, and lives and dies upon them. Thus, he will succeed
in reality:

***Surely we belong to Allah and to Him we shall surely return.***[^10]

The Effect of Divine Unity on Man and Society
---------------------------------------------

Amongst the effects that occur when mankind reaches the reality of
Divine Unity, is that the thinking and intent of an individual and
society must focus on one goal. There is no goal higher than that. In
fact, there is no other goal but:

***Say: I exhort you only to one thing, that rise up for Allah's sake in
twos and singly.***[^11]

Even when the focus of the rays of the human soul is on nonessential
points, it can do amazing things. However, if the rays of the human soul
in thinking and intent focused on one reality, which is the beginning
and the end of existence, and ***the Light of the heavens and the
earth**,*[^12] then to what stage will this man achieve?

If the individual and the society reach the status, concerning which the
Glorified and Exalted says:

***Surely I have turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who
originated the heavens and the earth, and I am not of the
polytheists,***[^13]

then through their connection with Allah and moulding with Allah’s
ethics, they will become such a source of goodness, privilege and
perfection that cannot be described.

To end this discussion, we will mention the word which is a fort of
Allah for protection from the wrath of this world and the hereafter. Abu
Hamzah reported on the authority Abu Ja’far al-Baqir (as) saying: *There
is nothing greater in reward than testifying that: There is no god but
Allah [La ilaha illa Allah], because nothing equals Allah, the Mighty
and High, and nobody shares His Power.*[^14]

From this tradition, we conclude that just as there is no equal or
associate with Allah, the Exalted, in His Command; similarly, there is
no deed equal to the testimony: **there is no god but Allah [La ilaha
illa Allah].** Likewise, there is nothing equal in reward for this deed.

Indeed, the verbal testimony **there is no god but Allah [La ilaha illa
Allah],** protects the soul, wealth and honour in this world. Moreover,
testimony with the heart causes salvation from the wrath of Hell in the
hereafter, and success to the highest level of Paradise. Thus, this
sacred word is the manifestation of mercy of both the beneficence
[*al-rahmaniyyah*] and the mercifulness [*al-rahimiyyah*].

It is reported from al-Sadiq (as): *Verily, Allah, Blessed and Exalted
be He, has taken an oath by His Dignity and Glory that He will never
punish the people who believe in His Unity with Hell-fire.*[^15]

It is reported from the Prophet (S): *The one whom Allah has blessed
with belief in Divine Unity shall have Heaven as his reward.*[^16]

Surely whoever remembers these words constantly, the vessel of his heart
will be secured with the anchor of **there is no god but Allah [La ilaha
illa Allah]** from the abyss of destruction and the waves of fear of
calamities, whispers and evils:

***Those who believe and whose hearts are set at rest by the remembrance
of Allah; now surely by Allah's remembrance are the hearts set at
rest.***[^17]

The word: **There is no god but Allah [La ilaha illa Allah],** is a
remembrance that can be said loudly or quietly. Thus, it is the
combination of hidden and apparent remembrance. It contains the sacred
word “Allah.” It is reported from the Commander of the Faithful (as)
that it is the greatest name of Allah, the Exalted.

***Say: Tell me if the chastisement of Allah should overtake you or the
hour should come upon you, will you call (on others) besides Allah, if
you are truthful? Nay, Him you call upon, so He clears away that for
which you pray if He pleases and you forget what you set up (with
Him).***[^18]

Abu Sa‘id al-Khudri reported from the Prophet (S) that he said*:*
*Allah, Mighty be His Glory, said to Musa (as), “O Musa! If everything
that exists in all the heavens, their inhabitants, and the seven earths,
were placed in one side of the scale, and ‘there is no god but Allah’
was placed in the other side, then ‘there is no god but Allah’ would tip
the scale.”*[^19]

Thus, nothing from the earth, the heavens, the material and the abstract
things, can equal ‘there is no god but Allah.’ None perceive its
reverence but the ones who have reached the reality of negation and
proof, as this testimony relates.

[^1]: There are stages of Divine Unity. We will briefly mention them:
Unity of Essence: Every being is composed except the Holy God. Indeed,
He is the One for Whom Oneness is a part of His Essence. Everything
other than Him can be divided either in existence, like the body to
matter and shape; or in imagination, like the time into moments; or in
the mind, like the human being into humanity and existence. The division
of every existing being has a limited end. However, Allah is unlimited:
Say: He Allah is One. Shurayh ibn Hani reports on the authority of his
father saying: On the Day of the Battle of Jamal, a Bedouin stood before
the Commander of the Faithful (A), and asked, “O Commander of the
Faithful! Do you say that Allah is One?” He says: the people attacked
him saying that “O Bedouin! Do you not see the state of mind of the
Commander of the Faithful?” So the Commander of the Faithful (A) said:
Leave him alone. Verily, what this Bedouin seeks to know is what we are
seeking to establish by fighting these people. He (the Commander of the
Faithful) then said: O Bedouin! The statement that ‘Allah is One’ is of
four types: Two types cannot be applied to Allah, the Mighty and High;
while the two other types can be applied to Him. As for the two types of
statements that cannot be applied to Him, the first is the claim that
Allah is One in a numerical sense. Such a statement cannot be applied to
Allah, because as the One, He has no second, and He is not subject to
mathematical calculation. Do you not see that he who claims that Allah
is the third of the three has disbelieved (in Him)? The second statement
which cannot be applied to Allah is the claim that He is One with
humankind. Since He derives the species from the genus, He cannot be
described through anthropomorphism [tashbih]. Our Lord is Higher and
more Exalted than this. As for the two types of statements that can be
applied to Allah, the first would be to say that He is the One who
resembles none. This is a proper description of our Lord. The second
statement which can apply to Allah is the statement that He, the Mighty
and High, is Alone, in the sense that He is Indivisible in Existence
[wujud], Intellect [‘aql], and Thought [wahm]. That is another dignified
description of our Lord, the Mighty and High. (Shaykh Saduq, The Book of
Divine Unity: pp 83, ch. 3, hadith 3). Unity of Essence and Attributes
The meaning of this is that His Attributes of Essence, like Ever-Living,
Omniscience and Omnipotence, are a part of His Essence. Otherwise,
separation of essence and attributes would necessitate composition and
division. The composed of components needs parts, and also needs one who
composes it. If the attributes were in addition to the essence, then it
would necessitate that the essence is vacant from the attributes of
completion. From another angle, if the attributes were in addition to
the essence, it would also necessitate that the essence would be vacant
from the attributes of completion and the attributes will be joined to
possible being. In fact, this would necessitate that His essence also be
possible being, because the one vacant of attributes of completion and
carrying possibility, requires self-sufficiency in its essence. The
Commander of the Faithful (A) said: The best of service is to
acknowledge the existence of Allah. The foundation of acknowledgement of
Allah is to profess His Unity. Allah’s Unity is established through the
denial of descriptions, since all intellects bear witness that
descriptions are created, and whatever is created requires a Creator who
is neither identifier or identified. Every identifier and identified is
connected, and connection is evidence of occurrence. (Shaykh Saduq,
Divine Unity: pp 34, ch. 2, hadith 2). Unity of Divinity And your God is
One God! There is no god but He; He is the Beneficent, the Merciful.
(Holy Qur’an, 2:163). Unity of Lordship Say: What! Shall I seek a Lord
other than Allah? And He is the Lord of all things. (Holy Qur’an,
6:164). O my two mates of the prison! Are sundry lords better or Allah
the One, the Supreme? (Holy Qur’an, 12:39). Unity of Creating Say: Allah
is the Creator of all things, and He is the One, the Supreme. (Holy
Qur’an, 13:16) And those whom they call on besides Allah have not
created anything while they are themselves created. (Holy Qur’an,
16:20). Unity of Service Say: Do you serve besides Allah that which does
not control for you any harm, or any profit? (Holy Qur’an, 5:76). Unity
of Command and Order Surely His is the creation and the command; blessed
is Allah, the Lord of the worlds. (Holy Qur’an, 7:54). Judgment is only
Allah's. (Holy Qur’an, 12:40). Unity of Fear But do not fear them, and
fear Me if you are believers. (Holy Qur’an, 3:175). Therefore fear not
the people and fear Me. (Holy Qur’an, 5:44). Unity of Sovereignty And
say: (All) praise is due to Allah, Who has not taken a son and Who has
not a partner in the kingdom. (Holy Qur’an, 17:111). Unity of Benefit
and Harm Say: I do not control any benefit or harm for my own soul
except as Allah please. (Holy Qur’an, 7:188). Say: Then who can control
anything for you from Allah if He intends to do you harm or if He
intends to do you good. (Holy Qur’an, 48:11). Unity of Sustenance Say:
Who gives you the sustenance from the heavens and the earth? Say: Allah.
(Holy Qur’an, 34:24). Or who is it that will give you sustenance if He
should withhold His sustenance? (Holy Qur’an, 67:21). Unity of Reliance
And rely on Allah; and Allah is sufficient for a Protector. (Holy
Qur’an, 33:3). Allah, there is no god but He; and upon Allah, then, let
the believers rely. (Holy Qur’an, 64:13). Unity of Intention of Deeds
And noone has with him any boon for which he should be rewarded, except
the seeking of the pleasure of his Lord, the Most High. (Holy Qur’an,
92:19-20). Unity of Honour This stage is for the ones who witness the
destruction of the universe and its perishing. They fully comprehend:
Everything is perishable but He, (Holy Qur’an, 28:88) everyone on it
must pass away, and there will endure forever the person of your Lord,
the Lord of Glory and Honour. (Holy Qur’an, 55:26-27). The Divine Unity
of Honour in nature manifests into the Divine Unity of Honour in choice
through their striving for Allah. Then it would be confirmed what has
been entrusted in the souls from the knowledge and the free-will without
their free-will. Hence they reach what the Exalted has said: And the
faces shall be humbled before the Living, the Self-Subsistent. (Holy
Qur’an, 20:111), up to the Word of the Exalted: Surely I have turned
myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who originated the heavens and the
earth. (Holy Qur’an, 6: 79).

[^2]: Nahj al-Balaghah: sermon no. 186.

[^3]: Holy Qur’an, 43: 84.

[^4]: Holy Qur’an, 2: 21-22.

[^5]: Shaykh Saduq, Divine Unity: pp 243, ch. 36, hadith 1.

[^6]: Nahj al-Balaghah: letter no. 31.

[^7]: Holy Qur’an, 19: 93.

[^8]: Holy Qur’an, 3: 15.

[^9]: Holy Qur’an, 3: 109.

[^10]: Holy Qur’an, 2: 156.

[^11]: Holy Qur’an, 34: 46.

[^12]: Holy Qur’an, 24: 35.

[^13]: Holy Qur’an, 6: 79.

[^14]: Shaykh Saduq, Divine Unity: pp 19, ch. 1, hadith 3.

[^15]: Ibid: pp 20, ch. 1, hadith 6.

[^16]: Shaykh Saduq, Divine Unity: pp 22, ch. 1, hadith 17.

[^17]: Holy Qur’an, 13: 28.

[^18]: Holy Qur’an, 6: 40-41.

[^19]: Shaykh Saduq, Divine Unity: pp 19, ch. 1, hadith 34.


