Divine Justice (‘Adl)
=====================

The Proofs for the Justice of Allah, the Mighty and High, are many. We
will mention a few here.

First Proof
-----------

Every human being, even though he may not be religious, perceives
through his nature the goodness of justice and the evil of oppression.
In fact, even if the oppressor himself was described as an oppressor, he
would feel hurt and would dislike it. On the contrary, if he was
described as just, he would feel delighted and pleased.

If a criminal and oppressor, who wastes all his aspirations following
his desires and anger, was taken to court and the judge rules for him
falsely due to bribe or fear of the criminal’s power, then the criminal
would feel pleased, but his logic and instinct would rule against the
judgment. Hence, he will believe the judge to be lowly.

On the contrary, if the judge does not take the bribe or the criminal’s
position into any consideration and rules with justice, then the
oppressor would be angry at him. However, his instinct will look at the
judge and his ruling with respect and admiration.

If this is the case with a human being, then how is it possible for
Allah, Glory be Him, to be an oppressor in His sovereignty and rule? It
is He who made human nature to accept justice as good and injustice or
oppression as evil. He intends for the human being to adapt to justice
and refrain from the dirt of oppression. He, the Exalted, has commanded
through His Word:

***Surely Allah enjoins the doing of justice and the doing of
good,***[^1]

***Say: My Lord has enjoined justice,***[^2]

***O Dawud ! Surely We have made you a ruler in the land; so judge
between men with justice and do not follow desire.***[^3]

Second Proof
------------

Certainly, oppression occurs due to one of three reasons and all of them
are impossible to be related to Allah: either due to ignorance of the
evil; or due to incapability in reaching the goal except through
committing oppression; or due to nonsense and vanity. Allah is free from
ignorance, incapability and nonsense.

Thus, His Knowledge of everything, His Power over everything and His
Wisdom that reaches everything requires that He be Just and free from
any kind of oppression and evil.

Third Proof
-----------

Oppression is a deficiency. If Allah, the Exalted, was an oppressor then
it would necessitate that He was composed of both deficiency and
perfection, and of existence and nonexistence. This is the worst of the
types of compositions, as mentioned earlier. In addition to that, the
composed of both perfection and deficiency is in need and limited.
Neediness and limitation are attributes of creation and not the Creator.

In conclusion, Allah, Blessed and Exalted be He, is Just in creating the
universe:

***Allah bears witness that there is no god but He, and (so do) the
angels and those possessed of knowledge, maintaining His creation with
justice; there is no god but He, the Mighty, the Wise.***[^4]

He is Just in His laws and regulations:

***Certainly We sent Our messengers with clear arguments, and sent down
with them the Book and the balance that men may conduct themselves with
equity.***[^5]

And He is Just in the accountability of His servants on the Day of
Judgment:

***And the matter shall be decided between them with justice and they
shall not be dealt with unjustly.***[^6]

A man asked Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (as): Verily, Divine Unity and Divine
Justice are the foundations of faith. Since His Knowledge is so great,
it is not possible for even a wise man to understand it all. So, teach
me something that is easy to understand and easy to memorise. He (as)
answered: *As for Divine Unity, do not describe your Lord the way you
describe yourself. As for Divine Justice, do not apply to your Lord any
of the shortcomings that you may apply to yourself.*[^7]

He (as) said to Hisham ibn al-Hakam: *Should I not give you a sentence
concerning Divine Justice and Divine Unity?* He said, “Of course. May I
be your ransom!” He replied: *Justice is not to blame Him and Divine
Unity is not to imagine Him.*[^8]

The Commander of the Faithful (as) said: *Whatever you repent for from
Allah, the Exalted, is from you, and whatever you praise Allah, the
Exalted, for is from Him.*[^9]

[^1]: Holy Qur’an, 16: 90.

[^2]: Holy Qur’an, 7: 29.

[^3]: Holy Qur’an, 38: 26.

[^4]: Holy Qur’an, 3: 18.

[^5]: Holy Qur’an, 57: 25.

[^6]: Holy Qur’an, 10: 54.

[^7]: Shaykh Saduq, Divine Unity: pp 96, ch. 5, hadith 1.

[^8]: Bihar al-Anwar: vol. 5, pp 58.

[^9]: Al-Tara’if: 329.


