Prelude
=======

At the outset, it seems appropriate to allude to a number of essential
points that are both relevant to the system of devotional acts and to
other discussions.

**First**: Clearly, the circle of recommended rites in general and
recommended devotional acts in particular is considerably large, even
though some of these have no documented evidence of having been issued
by one of the Holy Infallibles (‘a); as such, they cannot be recommended
or authorized by the sources of religious laws. As a result, one should
perform these acts under the probability that they are a requirement of
religious law. This sort of intention is in the terminology of Shi’ite
jurisprudence called *raja' al-matlubiyyah* (Probability of
Requirement).

In this respect, several authentically reported traditions hold that
when a believer practices an act which is transmitted to him by someone
from the Holy Prophet (S), with the intention of gaining its reward,
then Almighty Allah will record for him that reward even if it has been
untrue.

In Shi’ite jurisprudence, the tenor of such traditions lies under the
rule of Concession in the Proof of Recommended Acts.[^1]

All the same, we will mention the recommended rites and devotional acts
mentioned in validly reported traditions that confirm their
recommendation and validity, and we will try to choose the examples of
rites and acts that generally conform with the invariable line of the
chains of authority that are reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a).
Consequently, these acts will be considered recommended, in their
capacity as examples of the general line adopted by the Holy Imams (‘a),
even if we lack specific evidence of their recommendation.

**Second**: In sessions of devotional acts, we notice that there is a
variety and a combination of various devotional acts, such as ceremonial
purity (represented by the ritual ablution and bathing), prayers,
supplications, litanies, almsgivings, fasting, and the like. This
reveals that these devotional sessions have a common method and goal,
which entails that human perfection can be attained through no other
means than the mixture of these devotional acts, since the spiritual and
psychological needs of man are various and miscellaneous. In view of
this fact, it is necessary to take much interest in such variety of
devotional acts in all sessions in order to achieve this perfection and
it is necessary, not to restrict oneself to a definite sort of
devotional act.

**Third**: The intensified course of devotional acts in daily worship,
or at other times, may create the misconception that Islam calls man to
turn away from performing his social duties, both individual and
collective, and devote all his time to devotional acts, such as prayers,
fasting, supplications, etc. Suspension of social activities will
naturally turn human life into monasticism which is forbidden by Islam.

Islam lays great emphasis on the social aspect of human life, which we
have discussed in the previous books of this series and has preferred it
to various sorts of recommended devotional acts. The Economic System
emphasizes that earning a lawful living is the best sort of worship,
seeking of knowledge for a single hour is preferred to seventy-years of
worship, settlement of disagreements among individuals and groups is
better than all prayers and fasting, and meeting brothers-in-faith and
fulfilling one’s duties towards them is also preferred to all
recommended prayers and fasting. All these examples demonstrate the fact
that carrying out social duties is preferred to the practice of
recommended devotional acts

Through this intensified course of devotional acts, Islam only intends
to give man the opportunity to make the totality of his life acts of
worship, although it already offers him priority and variety in the
practice of acts of obedience to enable him to attain self-perfection
without having to violate the social equilibrium.

General Methodology
-------------------

The acts of worship system is characterized by all-inclusiveness and
variety, as it represents the chief goal of man’s existence and
creation, as maintained by Almighty Allah:

> وَمَا خَلَقْتُ الْجِنَّ وَالْإِنْسَ إِلَّا لِيَعْبُدُونِ (56)

I have not created the jinn and the men except that they should serve
Me. (51:56)

Thus, the methodology of the system of acts of worship, as set up by
Islam and elucidated by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), is comprehensive and
all-inclusive, for all time to come.

This methodology of the system of acts of worship falls within two main
areas:

**The First group of acts** involves **timed devotional acts** dedicated
to certain hours, days, or anniversaries, including the daily, weekly,
monthly, and yearly acts of worship.

**The Second group of acts** includes **untimed devotional acts.**

[^1]: - The Rule of Concession in the Proofs of Recommended Acts
(al-tasamuh fi addillat al-sunan) is a jurisprudential principle
entailing inclusion of a certain state within a common ruling even if
this state has not been adequately proven as belonging to it.


