Chapter Two: Untimed Acts Of Worship
====================================

Prelude
-------

The untimed acts of worship are not dedicated to a certain time but can
be practiced at any time according to oneâ€™s special circumstances and
personal choice, or whenever the qualifications of their obligation or
recommendation are met. For instance, although *jihad* is an obligatory
act of worship, it is not dedicated to a certain time; rather, it is
associated with its necessity and the fulfillment of its conditions.

This chapter will be dedicated to discussing five untimed acts of
worship only: prayer, fasting, supplication, remembrance (*dhikr*), and
*jihad*.

As for the other devotional acts, some of them have been previously
discussed. For instance, almsgiving and paying the *zakat* (poor-rate)
and *khums* (one-fifth) taxes have been discussed in the section on the
economic system of the virtuous community. Kind treatment and manners
have been discussed in the section regarding the general system of
social relations.

As for enjoining the right and forbidding the wrong, which are among the
most important obligations and duties in Islam, their laws can be found
within the laws and Islamic view of *jihad* since they are part of the
devotional acts that contribute to maintaining worship and religious
laws. They are therefore related to the issues of the supreme religious
authority (*wilayah*), as has been previously confirmed.

In the first chapter of this volume devotional acts in their capacity as
particular to certain times have been discussed. In this chapter, we
will discuss untimed devotional acts.


