Supplication
============

In its capacity as one of the most preferred devotional acts,
supplication (*du’a'*) has been emphatically encouraged by the Holy
Qur'an on more than one occasion, such as in the following verses:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ
الدَّاعِ إِذَا دَعَانِ فَلْيَسْتَجِيبُوا لِي وَلْيُؤْمِنُوا بِي
لَعَلَّهُمْ يَرْشُدُونَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***When My servants ask you concerning Me, then surely I am very near. I
answer the prayer of the suppliant when he calls upon Me. So, they
should answer My call and believe in Me that they may walk in the right
way. (2:186)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ادْعُوا رَبَّكُمْ تَضَرُّعًا وَخُفْيَةً إِنَّهُ لَا يُحِبُّ
الْمُعْتَدِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Supplicate your Lord humbly and secretly. Surely, He does not love
those who exceed the limits. (7:55)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ مَا يَعْبَأُ بِكُمْ رَبِّي لَوْلَا دُعَاؤُكُمْ فَقَدْ كَذَّبْتُمْ
فَسَوْفَ يَكُونُ لِزَامًا
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Say: My Lord would not care for you were it not for your
supplication, but you have indeed rejected the truth; so, that which
shall cleave shall come. (25:77)***

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَقَالَ رَبُّكُمُ ادْعُونِي أَسْتَجِبْ لَكُمْ إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Your Lord says: Call upon Me, I will answer you. Surely, those who
are too proud for My service shall soon enter hell abased. (40:60)***

Moreover, the Holy Qur'an has quoted supplications from a number of
prophets and righteous people who had to encounter critical situations.
Due to their supplications, Almighty Allah saved them.

Supplication in its origin is a religious duty and true believers are
required to pray to Almighty Allah and supplicate to Him generally, as
is indicated and confirmed by the abovementioned Qur'anic verses and
many traditions.

In his book of *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through a valid
chain of authority that Sadir asked Imam al-Baqir (‘a), “Which
devotional act is the best?”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا مِنْ شَيْءٍ أَفْضَلُ عِنْدَ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مِنْ أَنْ يُسْأَلَ
وَيُطْلَبَ مِمَّا عِنْدَهُ وَمَا أَحَدٌ أَبْغَضُ إِلَى اللهِ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ مِمَّنْ يَسْتَكْبِرُ عَنْ عِبَادَتِهِ وَلاَ يَسْأَلُ مَا
عِنْدَهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*In the sight of Almighty Allah, nothing is better than asking Him and
imploring Him for what He has in possession. No one is more hateful in
the sight of Him than one who is too arrogant to serve Him and to
implore Him for what He has in possession.*[^1]

According to another validly reported tradition that is quoted by Shaykh
al-Kulayni on the authority of Hammad ibn ‘Isa, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُدْعُ وَلاَ تَقُلْ قَدْ فَرِغَ مِنَ الأَمْرِ; فَإِنَّ الدُّعَاءَ هُوَ
الْعِبَادَةُ. إِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَقُولُ: "إِنَّ الَّذِينَ
يَسْتَكْبِرُونَ عَنْ عِبَادَتِي سَيَدْخُلُونَ جَهَنَّمَ دَاخِرِينَ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Always pray to (Almighty Allah) and do not consider the matter to
have ended, because supplication is surely worship. Almighty Allah says,
“Surely, those who are too proud for My service shall soon enter hell
abased. (40:60)”***[^2]

According to another validly reported tradition, Maysir ibn ‘Abd
al-’Aziz has reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said to him:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أُدْعُ وَلاَ تَقُلْ إِنَّ الأَمْرَ قَدْ فُرِغَ مِنْهُ. إِنَّ عِنْدَ
اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ مَنْزِلَةً لاَ تُنَالُ إِلاَّ بِمَسْأَلَةٍ، وَلَوْ
أَنَّ عَبْداً سَدَّ فَاهُ وَلَمْ يَسْأَلْ لَمْ يُعْطَ شَيْئاً، فَسَلْ
تُعْطَ. إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ مِنْ بَابٍ يُقْرَعُ إِلاَّ يُوشَكُ أَنْ
يُفْتَحَ لِصَاحِبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Always pray to (Almighty Allah) and do not consider the matter to have
come to an end. There is a rank with Almighty Allah that cannot be
attained except by imploring to Him. If a servant shuts his mouth and
does not pray for anything, he will not be given anything. Therefore,
always pray so that you will be given. Verily, a door that is always
knocked will sooner or later be opened for the knocker.*[^3]

Other traditions have defined supplication as:

• The key to all mercies,

• The attainment of all requests,

• The armor of faithful believers,

• The essence of worship,

• The less the supplication, the more the tribulations,[^4]

• The weapon of faithful believers,

• The pillar of religion,

• The defender against evil of enemies and tribulations before, when,
and even after they befall,[^5]

• The remedy of all maladies.[^6]

Motives for Responding to Supplications
---------------------------------------

The following etiquettes that must be followed when supplicating can be
grounds for having the prayers responded to:

• A suppliant, upon supplicating, should raise the hands, turn them
over, move them in a way indicating submission, deference, and
humility,[^7] and pass them, upon completion, over the face, the head,
and the chest.

• A suppliant should be attentive and sincerely beseeching.

• A suppliant should have full trust and hope in Almighty Allah.[^8]

• A suppliant should pave the way to beseech for his/her personal
requests by words of praise, thanks, and glorification of Almighty
Allah.

• A suppliant should invoke blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his
Household to supplicate for personal requests. In fact, a supplication
is enshrouded until the suppliant invokes Almighty Allah’s blessings
upon the Holy Prophet and his Household.[^9]

• Just like beginning any supplication by invoking blessings upon the
Holy Prophet and his Household, it is highly advisable to conclude the
supplication with the same invocation. In this respect, Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كَانَتْ لَهُ إِلَى اللهِ حَاجَةٌ فَلْيَبْدَأْ بِالصَّلاَةِ عَلَى
مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ ثُمَ يَسْأَلْ حَاجَتَهُ ثُمَّ يَخْتِمْ
بِالصَّلاَةِ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ، فَإِنَّ اللهَ عَزَّ
وَجَلَّ أَكْرَمُ مِنْ أَنْ يَقْبَلَ الطَّرَفَيْنِ ثُمَّ يَدَعَ
الْوَسَطَ إِذْ كَانَتِ الصَّلاَةُ عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ لاَ تُحْجَبُ
عَنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever wishes a request to be granted by Almighty Allah, should begin
his supplication by invoking blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his
Household and conclude it with the same invocation, because Almighty
Allah is too generous to respond to the two ends of a supplication and
reject the center. He never rejects any invocations of His blessings
upon the Holy Prophet and his Household.*[^10]

• A suppliant should weep or try to weep and shed some tears, be they as
small as a fly’s head.[^11]

• A suppliant should acknowledge and confess his/her sins and implore
forgiveness.[^12]

• A suppliant should beseech Almighty Allah in the name of the Holy
Prophet and his Household (S), by making them the intercessors for
having his/her supplication responded.[^13]

• A suppliant should call upon Almighty Allah by repeating such
expressions like the following words ten times at least before
submitting the request:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا اللَهُ يَا رَبِّ يَا سَيِّدَاهُ يَا رَحْمٰنُ يَا رَحِيمُ يَا
اَرْحَمَ ٱلرَّاحِمِينَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah! O my Sustainer! O my Lord! O All-beneficent! O All-merciful! O
Most Merciful of all those who show mercy!*

It is reported that whenever a faithful believer utters such expressions
before mentioning his/her request, Almighty Allah will answer him/her,
saying, “I am here to respond to you, My servant, pose your
request.”[^14]

• A suppliant should mention his/her requests by name and in detail.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ تَبَارَكَ وَتَعَالَى يَعْلَمُ مَا يُرِيدُ الْعَبْدُ إِذَا
دَعَاهُ، وَلَكِنَّهُ يُحِبُّ أَنْ تُبَثَّ إِلَيْهِ الْحَوَائِجُ،
فَإِذَا دَعَوْتَ فَسَمِّ حَاجَتَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah, the Blessed and Exalted, does know what His servant wants from
Him; yet, He likes requests to be submitted verbally before Him.
Therefore, when you supplicate Him, mention your requests by name.*[^15]

• A suppliant should be insistent in supplication and repeat it
frequently. A tradition holds that Almighty Allah likes the insistence
of those who entreat Him persistently.[^16]

• A suppliant should pray to Almighty Allah confidentially when
beseeching Him for private affairs. A tradition states that a
confidential supplication is equal to seventy public ones.[^17]

• While supplicating, a suppliant should surrender to Almighty Allah’s
will by saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَا شَاءَ ٱللَّهُ وَلاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِٱللَّهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Only that which Allah wills shall come to pass. There is neither might
nor power save with Allah.*

It is reported that when one adds these two phrases to one’s
supplication, Almighty Allah will say, “This servant of Mine has yielded
and surrendered to My decree. Therefore, (O angels) grant him his
request.”[^18]

• A suppliant should declare repentance, show piety, and abstain from
violating the prohibitions of Almighty Allah. In this connection, it is
reported that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ سَرَّهُ أَنْ يُسْتَجَابَ لَهُ دَعْوَتُهُ فَلْيُطِبْ مَكْسَبَهُ،
فَإِنَّ الرَّجُلَ يَرْفَعُ اللُّقْمَةَ إِلَى فِيهِ فَمَا يُسْتَجَابُ
لَهُ دَعْوَةُ أَرْبَعِينَ يَوْماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever wishes to have his supplication responded to should seek legal
earnings only, for a single illegally-earned morsel that is raised to
his mouth prevents response to his supplication for forty days.*[^19]

• For supplicating to Almighty Allah, it is advisable that four or forty
persons gather and supplicate congregationally. When such a group
gathers to supplicate collectively for an affair, response will be more
attainable.[^20]

Whenever a matter distressed him, Imam al-Baqir (‘a) used to bring
together all his women and children. As he supplicated, they would say
‘Amen (so be it)’.[^21]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الدَّاعِي وَالْمُؤَمِّنُ شَرِيكَانِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The suppliant and the reciters of ‘Amen’ are partners (in the
supplication and reward).*[^22]

• A suppliant is required to include as many persons as possible in
his/her supplication and avoid supplicating for himself/herself
exclusively. This is based on the following tradition that is reported
from the Holy Prophet (S):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا دَعَا أَحَدُكُمْ فَلْيُعِمَّ فَإِنَّهُ أَوْجَبُ لِلدُّعَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whenever one of you supplicates, let him make his supplication general,
because this makes the response more attainable.*[^23]

Other traditions have urged the supplicants to add the following prayer
to their supplications, because this brings about a great reward:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ ٱغْفِرْ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَٱلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ وَٱلْمُسْلِمِينَ
وَٱلْمُسْلِمَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, (please) forgive the believing men and women and the Muslim
men and women.*[^24]

• A suppliant should not exceed the limits in supplication and should
not supplicate for things that are improper, unwarranted or aberrant.

In this respect, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ الْعَبْدَ يَكُونُ مَظْلُوماً فَلاَ يَزَالُ يَدْعُو حَتَّى
يَكُونَ ظَالِماً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A wronged servant (of Allah) may keep on imprecating evil on the
wronging party so excessively that he himself turns into a
wrongdoer.*[^25]

• Before supplicating, a supplicant is required to give back all things
that he has seized illegally from others and to please all those whom he
has wronged. In this regard, a tradition holds that Almighty Allah says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَعِزَّتِي وَجَلاَلِي، لاَ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ مَظْلُومٍ دَعَانِي فِي
مَظْلَمَةٍ وَلأَِحَدٍ عِنْدَهُ مِثْلُ تِلْكَ الْمَظْلَمَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*By My Almightiness and Majesty I take this oath: I will never respond
to the supplication of a wronged person with regard to the issue in
which he has been wronged as long as he has wronged others in the same
way.*[^26]

• A suppliant should be ceremonially pure and should have performed the
ritual ablution (*wudhu'*) before supplicating.

• A suppliant should face the kiblah direction while supplicating.

• A suppliant should give alms before supplicating.

• A suppliant should have already supplicated Almighty Allah before the
befalling of an ordeal.

• A faithful believer should ask his brothers-in-faith to supplicate for
him, since the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَيْسَ شَيْءٌ أَسْرَعَ إِجَابَةٍ مِنْ دَعْوَةِ غَائِبٍ لِغَائِبٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Nothing is swifter in response than the supplication of an absent
person to another absent one.*[^27]

It is also reported that Almighty Allah never rejects the supplication
of a faithful believer for his brother-in-faith who does not know about
it; rather, He, the Almighty, responds and decrees the same thing for
the supplicant.[^28]

Before mentioning one’s personal needs, a suppliant should supplicate
for forty faithful believers. This is another sort of generalization in
supplication, yet in a special method.[^29]

More Motives
------------

In addition to the aforementioned factors, there are more reasons that
contribute to response of supplications related to the time, place, and
condition of the suppliant.

The Best Times for Supplicating
-------------------------------

As for the best time of supplicating,[^30] these times are as follows:

• Thursday Nights and Fridays, especially the last hour of Fridays

• The last third of the night

• The month of Ramadhan

• The three Nights of Qadr, especially the eve of the twenty-third of
Ramadhan

• The night and day of ‘Arafat. Here, supplication is preferred to
fasting. In fact, it is recommended to fast on this day only when such
fasting will not detract from supplicating.

• The night and day of the Divine Mission (i.e. 27th of Rajab)

• The nights and days of the two ‘«ds

• The first night of Rajab

• The fifteenth night and day of Rajab

• The first night of Sha’ban

• The Holy Prophet’s birthday

• Midday

• The time between dawn and sunrise

• Sunset

• The blowing of the wind

• The vanishing of shadows

• Rainfall

• The first shedding of the blood of a slain faithful believer in war

Best Situations for Supplicating
--------------------------------

• Recitation of the Holy Qur'an

• Recitation of the call to prayer (i.e. *adhan*)

• The meeting of two hosts for the purpose of winning martyrdom[^31]

• Prayer of the wronged, because, in the expression of a tradition,
“nothing can screen it from advancing directly towards the Divine
Throne”[^32]

• Shuddering (having a convulsive tremor of the body)

• Inclination toward shedding tears (caused by a sad or moving feeling)

• When the sun is at its zenith, or starting to decline

• At this very time, the doors to the heavens are opened, the help of
the angels is expected, and the response of the Almighty Lord is
awaited.[^33]

• Upon completion of prayers

• The time between two obligatory prayers

• The time of breaking a fast[^34]

Places of Supplicating
----------------------

As for the best places of supplicating, the following can be mentioned:

• The Sacred Mosque of Makkah

• The holy places where the rituals of *Hajj* are performed.

• The Fount of Mercy (*mizab al-rahmah*) above Hijr Isma’il (a fence
near the Holy Ka’bah).

• The Station of Prophet Abraham (‘a) (*maqam Ibrahim*)

• The Black Stone (*al-hajar al-aswad*)

• The area between the Station of Abraham (‘a) and the gate of the Holy
Ka’bah

• Inside the Holy Ka’bah

• The Zamzam Spring

• On al-Safa

• On al-Marwah

• The Holy Monument (*al-mash’ar al-haram*)

• The three statues known as *al-jamarat*

• The first glance of the Holy Ka’bah[^35]

• The Holy Prophet’s tomb

• The Holy Prophet’s Mosque, especially the area between his tomb and
minbar

• The holy shrine of Imam Husayn (‘a)

• The holy mosques, like the Kufah Mosque

Conditions of Supplicating
--------------------------

Supplications are responded under the following conditions:

• The supplications of the observers of fasting

• The supplications of the ailing and the performers of *Hajj* and
*‘Umrah*

• The supplications of three persons meeting at the home of one of their
brothers-in-faith who is not expected to betray them

• The imprecations of the wronged persons upon those who have wronged
them and those who have had a hand in such wrongdoings

In this connection, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ أَبِي يَقُولُ: إِتَّقُوا دَعْوَةَ الْمَظْلُومِ فَإِنَّ دَعْوَةَ
الْمَظْلُومِ تَصْعَدُ إِلَى السَّمَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*My father used to say: Avoid the imprecation of the wronged, because it
directly ascends to the heavens.*[^36]

• The prayers of a poor believer for his brother-in-faith who helps him,
and his imprecations (of evil) upon his brother-in-faith who rejects to
help him although he can easily do it, are responded to

• The prayers of a sick person for those who visit him

• The prayers of the beggars for those who give them

• The prayers of travelers

• The prayers of fathers for their pious sons and their imprecations
upon their disobedient sons

• The prayers of just leaders

• The prayers for neighbors[^37]

When Supplications are Rejected
-------------------------------

According to the traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), supplications that
are in violation of the rules and principles, as well as the natural and
legal means that Almighty Allah has put at the disposal of man to help
him manage all his affairs, are always rejected. In plainer words, when
man has sufficient capability of managing an affair that Almighty Allah
wants him to do, but he, instead, stands still and depends upon
supplicating to Him for managing such affairs, then Almighty Allah will
never respond to him.

Traditions have mentioned some samples of such persons whose
supplications are never responded:

(1) Those who are capable of seeking earnings—a duty commanded by
Almighty Allah—but they instead sit in their houses and supplicate to
Him to give them sustenance.

(2) Those who can divorce wives who are committing iniquity but instead
keep them and imprecate them.

(3) The creditors who are too lenient towards documenting the loans they
give to others by means of having witnesses or any other means, but when
the debtors deny such loans, they imprecate them.

(4) Those who imprecate (evil or curse) neighbors that annoy them while
they can move to other places.

(5) Those who profligately waste the fortunes that Almighty Allah has
given to them and then supplicate to Him to give them sustenance.

(6) Those who commit acts of disobedience to Almighty Allah by usurping
the rights of others while they are capable of avoiding such illegal
acts, and who later do not repent and submit to Almighty Allah.

The supplications and imprecations of such classes of people are never
responded.[^38]

From the above we can understand that whenever the individuals of a
community desire to change their conditions, they must first of all
change what is in their inner selves. To this general rule, the Holy
Qur’an has referred, saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللَّهَ لَا يُغَيِّرُ مَا بِقَوْمٍ حَتَّى يُغَيِّرُوا مَا
بِأَنْفُسِهِمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***Surely, Allah does not change the condition of a people until they
change their own condition. (13:11)***

Of course, such changes cannot come by means of supplication; rather,
practical steps bring about the change. Only then can the supplication
be effective in removing the obstacles and preparing for the
out-of-reach causes.

Special Directions
------------------

In addition to the previous instructions, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) taught
the individuals of the virtuous community special manners of
supplicating. They, therefore, taught them how to supplicate and what to
say in their supplications. Although the traditions that demonstrate
such manners are too many, we will restrict the discussion of this topic
to the following points:

Imprecation of Punishment on the Enemies
----------------------------------------

Just like the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), the individuals of the
virtuous community used to suffer from great numbers of enemies and
ill-wishers. In their capacity as the true faithful believers, their one
and only weapon was seeking Almighty Allah’s help against these enemies.
Some traditions have reported some occasions on which the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) and their followers used to resort to supplication in order to save
themselves from their opponents. Let us now refer to a few samples of
such events.

Quoted from the book known as *Rijal al-Kashshi*, Al-Masma’i has
reported that when Dawud ibn ‘Ali, one of the tyrants of the ‘Abbasid
dynasty, arrested al-Mu’alla ibn Khunays, one of the intimate companions
of Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), and intended to kill him, al-Mu’alla asked him to
allow him to meet the people, claiming that he had many debts and much
money to declare openly before the people. Hence, when al-Mu’alla was
allowed to meet the people in the marketplace, he declared, “O people, I
am al-Mu’alla ibn Khunays! Some of you may know me. I want you to
witness that whatever estate, money, debt, slave, or house, be it little
or much, is now gifted to Ja’far ibn Muhammad.”

Upon hearing this declaration, the police chief officer became angry and
killed al-Mu’alla. Once he was informed about this event, Imam al-Sadiq
(‘a), followed by his son Isma’il, angry and hastening, left his house
and came to Dawud, “You have killed my follower and seized my money!”
said the Imam (‘a).

“No,” answered Dawud, “I have neither killed your follower nor seized
your money.”

“By Allah I swear it,” said the Imam (‘a), “I will imprecate Almighty
Allah’s punishment upon the one who killed my follower and seized my
money.”

“I did not kill him,” said Dawud, “it was my police chief officer who
did it.”

“Was it under your permission or not?” asked the Imam (‘a).

“No,” answered Dawud, “it was not under my permission.”

The Imam (‘a) turned his face towards his son, Isma’il, and ordered him
to deal with that police chief officer.

Immediately, Isma’il, unsheathing his sword, headed for the office of
that chief officer and killed him there…

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) spent that whole night in worship, standing up and
prostrating. At the last hour of that night, he said this imprecation in
his prostration:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي أَسْأَلُكَ بِقُوَّتِكَ الْقَوِيَّةِ وَبِمَحَالِكَ
الشَّدِيدِ وَبِعِزَّتِكَ الَّتِي خَلْقُكَ لَهَا ذَيْلٌ أَنْ تُصَلِّيَ
عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَأَنْ تَأْخُذَهُ السَّاعَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, I do beseech You in the name of Your powerful power, Your
mighty prowess, and Your Almightiness to which all Your creatures are
docile, (please) send blessings upon Muhammad and the Household of
Muhammad and grasp him (i.e. Dawud) at this very hour.*

No sooner did the Imam (‘a) finish his prayer than Dawud died.[^39]

Sahl ibn Ziyad is reported to have quoted Ishaq ibn ‘Ammar as narrating:

I complained to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) about one of my neighbors who used to
annoy me. The Imam (‘a) asked me to imprecate him. As I did, nothing
changed. I then returned to the Imam (‘a) and complained that my
imprecation had done nothing to that man. “How did you imprecate upon
him?” asked the Imam (‘a). “Whenever I met him, I would do so,” I
answered. “No,” the Imam (‘a) taught, “You must imprecate him when he
leaves and when he turns his back.” Soon after that, Almighty Allah
spared him the trouble.[^40]

Shaykh al-Kulayni, in *al-Kafi*, has reported Yunus ibn ‘Ammar as
saying:

I, once, complained to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) about a neighbor from the
tribe of Quraysh and the clan of Muhriz who used to defame me by name.
Whenever I passed by him, he would cry out, “This Rafidhi is carrying
funds to Ja’far ibn Muhammad.”

The Imam (‘a) taught me to imprecate him, saying, “In the last
prostration of the first two units of the Night Prayer, imprecate
Almighty Allah’s punishment on this man. You may begin your imprecation
with statements of praising and glorifying Almighty Allah after which
you may say the following: O Allah, so-and-so (mention his name and his
father’s) is defaming, offending, enraging, and exposing me to repulsive
things. O Allah, (please) hit him with a swift dart, causing him to be
distracted from me. O Allah, (please) hasten his death time, cut off his
existence, and make this to happen immediately at this very hour, O
Lord.”

When we returned to Kufah, I asked my family members about the man, and
I was told that he was suffering an ailment. Forthwith, we heard
lamentations coming from his house declaring his death.[^41]

Invoking Allah’s Curse upon a Lying Party (Mubahalah)
-----------------------------------------------------

In situations of argument, disputation, and failure of methods of logic
and excellent preaching to guide to the right path, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
taught their partisans to resort to the reciprocal invocation of Allah’s
curse upon the wrong party—a method inspired from the teaching of the
Holy Qur'an with regard to the disputation between the Holy Prophet (S)
and the Christians of Najran.

In *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported that Abu-Masruq said to
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “Whenever we debate with people (regarding the
question of which sect represents the genuine line of Islam), we provide
as evidence texts of the Holy Qur'an, but they distort their meanings.
When we provide this holy verse**, ‘*****O you who believe, obey Allah
and obey the Messenger and those in authority from among you.***
**(4:59),’** they claim that this verse was revealed to express
obedience to the commanders of detachments. When we provide as evidence
this holy verse, **‘*****Only Allah is your Leader and His Messenger and
those who believe, those who keep up prayers and pay the poor-rate while
they bow.*** **(5:55),’** they claim that this verse was revealed to
express the leadership of the believers. When we provide this holy
verse, **‘*****Say: I do not ask of you any reward for it but love for
my near relatives.*** **(42:23),’** they claim that it was revealed to
express love for the relatives of Muslims, etc.”

The Imam (‘a), upon hearing this, said, “If it is so, then invite them
to *mubahalah*.”

“How is that?” Abu-Masruq asked.

The Imam (‘a) taught, “You may reform yourself for three days (i.e.
prepare yourself for this challenge and avoid committing any acts of
disobedience to Almighty Allah), observe fasting, and bathe yourself
ritually. The other party and you may then meet in the desert. When you
are there, interlace the fingers of your right hands with his fingers,
and treat him fairly by beginning with yourself in this invocation of
curse upon the lying party. You may say the following formula of
invocation: ‘O Allah, O Lord of the seven skies and the seven (layers
of) the earth, Knower of the unseen and the seen, All-beneficent, and
All-merciful! If Abu-Masruq denied a truth or claimed falsely, then pour
down upon him a thunderbolt from heaven or a painful chastisement. But
if *so-and-so* (i.e. the other party) denied a truth or claimed falsely,
then pour down upon him a thunderbolt from heaven or a painful
chastisement.’ If you do all that, you will soon see the outcome of this
invocation on the other party.”

Abu-Masruq commented, “When I invited them to this challenge, I could
not find any single person accepting to do it.”[^42]

According to another validly reported tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said
to Abu-Ja’far Muhammad ibn al-Nu’man:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
خَاصِمُوهُمْ وَبَيِّنُوا لَهُمُ الْهُدَى الَّذِي أَنْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ
وَبَاهِلُوهُمْ فِي عَلِيٍّ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Debate with them, show them the true guidance you are following, and
challenge them to an invocation of curse with regard to the priority of
‘Ali (‘a).*[^43]

In the previous books of the security system of the virtuous community
and the social relations system, we have confirmed that the invitation
to following the true party is a duty commissioned by Almighty Allah,
but the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) suspended carrying out this duty on account of
the special political circumstances to which the individuals of the
virtuous community were subjected.

This method of invoking a curse upon the lying party (i.e. *mubahalah*)
is another demonstration of this fact.

Showing the Points of Error in Supplications
--------------------------------------------

In the course of building a virtuous community, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
corrected the points of error their followers might commit upon
supplicating, addressing, and speaking to Almighty Allah. Corrections
can be deduced from traditions, some of which are:

Safwan ibn Yahya has reported al-Kahili as saying that he wrote a letter
to Imam al-Ridha (‘a), asking his opinion about the supplication that
beings with, “*All praise be to Allah to the utmost of His knowledge.*”
He received an answer from the Imam (‘a) teaching him to change the
phrase of “*to the utmost of His knowledge*” into “*to the utmost of His
pleasure.*”[^44]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have narrated that when Imam ‘Ali (‘a)
heard someone saying, “*O Allah, I do seek Your protection against
temptation*,” he said to him, “You are seeking the protection of
Almighty Allah against your property and children! Instead, you should
say, ‘*O Allah, I do seek Your protection against the misleading
temptations*.’ Almighty Allah says, ‘*Your property and your children
are a temptation.* (8:28)’”[^45]

In *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported on the authority of Aban
ibn ‘Abd al-Malik on the authority of Bakr al-Arqat (on the authority of
Shu’ayb) that someone visited Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) and said, “May Allah
lead you to more success! I am totally loyal to you, but when I was
stricken by harsh poverty, I sought the help of my family members and
relatives. However, this has increased nothing but more aloofness from
them.”

The Imam (‘a) answered, “What Almighty Allah has given you is definitely
better than what He has taken from you.”

The man said, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you! Pray to Allah for
me that He may make me dispense with all His creatures.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ اللهَ قَسَّمَ رِزْقَ مَنْ شَاءَ عَلَى يَدَيْ مَنْ شَاءَ،
وَلَكِنْ سَلِ اللهَ أَنْ يُغْنِيَكَ عَنِ الْحَاجَةِ الَّتِي
تَضْطَرُّكَ إِلَى لِئَامِ خَلْقِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Verily, Allah has put the sustenance of him whom He willed in the hands
of others whom* *He willed. Yet, you should pray to Him to help you
dispense with needs that compel you to resort to the lowly of His
creatures.*[^46]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is also reported to have said:

In the presence of my father, a man, supplicating to Allah, said, “O
Allah, (please) make us dispense with all of Your creatures.”

“Do not say it in this way,” my father taught, “Rather, you should say,
‘*O Allah, make us dispense with the wicked ones of Your creatures.*’
Verily, a faithful believer cannot dispense with his
brothers-in-faith.”[^47]

In *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported Imam al-Ridha (‘a) as
saying:

In the presence of Imam al-Baqir (‘a), a man, supplicating to Almighty
Allah, said, “O Allah, I do beseech You to give part of Your
legally-gotten sustenance.”

“You have just besought the sustenance of the prophets,” the Imam (‘a)
commented. “Rather, you should say, ‘*O Allah, I beseech You for
sustenance that is legally-attained, abundant and pleasant.*’”[^48]

Spontaneous Supplications are the Best Supplications
----------------------------------------------------

A supplication may be of two forms:

The first form entails the spontaneous supplications that one may
compose of his own accord to express glorification and praise of
Almighty Allah or to express his own emotions, feelings, and requests
from Him.

The second form entails the special formulas of supplications that are
reported from the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (‘a) or mentioned
in the Holy Qur'an.

Just as the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) taught their followers methods and formulas
of supplication, they also urged them to supplicate of their own accord
in order to educate and train them to invent and excel in praying to
Almighty Allah, which is a sort of righteous deed. They also intended
such spontaneous supplications to express the sentimental and spiritual
states that interact with their feelings and prerequisites so that the
practice of supplicating would be easy, within reach, and correspond to
current needs, without memorization or following written texts.

Nonetheless, the reported formulas of supplications maintain their
supreme ranks and vital roles in education, purification, and expression
of feelings.

In this regard, Sayyid Ibn Tawus, quoting Sa’d ibn ‘Abdullah in his book
of *Du’a'*, has reported that when Zurarah asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) to
teach him a supplication, the Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ أَفْضَلَ الدُّعَاءِ مَا جَرَى عَلَى لِسَانِكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The best of supplications are those which you compose of your own
accord.*[^49]

In his book of *al-Khisal*, Shaykh al-Saduq has reported Muhammad ibn
Isma’il as quoting Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as saying:

*There is no specific supplication to be said in the following seven
situations: (1) Prayers at funerals, (2) supplications during the ritual
prayers (i.e. Qunut), (3) supplicating at al-Mustajar (the opposite of
the gate of the Ka’bah), (4) supplicating at al-Safa, (5) supplicating
at al-Marwah, (6) supplicating during the ritual halt on Mount ‘Arafat,
and (7) supplicating during the two-unit Circumambulation Prayer.*[^50]

Some traditions have interpreted this teaching as an inducement of ease
in supplication.

Shaykh al-Kulayni in *al-Kafi* and Shaykh al-Tusi in *Tahdhib al-Ahkam*
have reported that Bakr ibn Habib asked the Imam (‘a) as to what
supplication he should say in the *Qunut* and *Tashahhud*.

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
قُلْ بِأَحْسَنَ مَا عَلِمْتَ، فَإِنَّهُ لَوْ كَانَ مُوَقَّتاً لَهَلَكَ
النَّاسُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*You should say the best thing you know. If there were certain formulas
to be said, then all people would be destroyed.*[^51]

According to another tradition, the Imam (‘a) has said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَوْ كَانُوا كَمَا يَقُولُونَ وَاجِباً عَلَى النَّاسِ هَلَكُوا.
إِنَّمَا كَانَ الْقَوْمُ يَقُولُونَ أَيْسَرَ مَا يَعْلَمُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Had it been obligatory upon people to say a certain formula of
supplication, they all would be destroyed. However, the people used to
say the easiest of what they knew.*[^52]

Objectives of Supplicating
--------------------------

We can construe a general concept of the most significant features in
the following points:

**1.** Supplication is a method of education, purification, and
sanctification. It also identifies the most proper manner of addressing
the Lord with words of glorification, praise, and thanks, in addition to
resorting to Him, calling down His mercy, and beseeching Him for
granting needs. Obviously, these manners are taught by the special
formulas and styles of supplication and the means, of guaranteeing the
response of the supplicated Lord, that are instructed by the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a).

**2.** The supplicatory prayers are expressions of a practical attitude
of man towards His Sustainer and Creator. They therefore express man’s
belief in Almighty Allah, commitment to serving Him, and belief in the
unseen and its role in and connection with the material life of human
beings. For these reasons, supplication enlists one to perform religious
duties.

**3.** The Almighty Creator has created this universe according to a
firmly compact, flawless, and comprehensive system. This system involves
two aspects one of which is compulsory, in the sense that it is related
to creation which man has no power to change, while the other is
optional, in the sense that it is contingent upon the will of man to
bring about the causes, outcomes, and consequences related to his will.

As an influential factor in this comprehensive system, supplication
enters this system through the relationship between man’s will, deed,
and behavior and the divine will that is totally overpowering and
dominating whatever is in existence, including man and his will. By
means of supplication, this divine will becomes responsive to man’s will
and call according to certain conditions, criteria, and regulations.

These conditions and regulations can be presented in the following
points:

**a)** The response of the Divine Will to supplications is contingent
upon the level of relationship between man and his Lord, identified
through man’s deeds, behavior, and perfection in his correspondence with
the religious laws and provisions decided by Almighty Allah. In other
words, the more man responds to divine laws and provisions, the more the
Lord responds to man’s supplications, will and desires.

**b)** Response to supplicatory prayers is also conditional upon the
amount of the supplicant’s devotion to Almighty Allah in times of
urgency, feeling of absolute need for Him, resorting to Him, having hope
in Him, and recognizing Him.

**c)** A suppliant must exert all possible and legal efforts and
energies to attain his need when all other doors are blocked. A
supplication can thus be defined as request for operating the power of
Almighty Allah in a field that is unattainable for man. Accordingly,
supplication is not a compensation for the human will by the Divine
Will; otherwise, the divine logic for creating man as a willful being
would be lost.

**d)** Response to supplications is contingent upon the absence of a
person’s voluntary and optional obstacles that result from his behavior
and deeds and necessitate rejection of his supplication for help and
assistance.

**e)** Response of supplications is also contingent upon the absence of
other interests related to the supplicant himself or to other righteous
people that require delay in or nullity of response.

About this condition, a part of a supplication reads:

*…but when Your response is delayed, out of ignorance I blame You
although perhaps slowing down may be a blessing in disguise because You
alone know the consequences of all matters.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
فَإِنْ اَبْطَاَ عَنِّي عَتَبْتُ بِجَهْلِي عَلَيْكَ وَلَعَلَّ ٱلَّذِي
اَبْطَاَ عَنِّي هُوَ خَيْرٌ لِي لِعِلْمِكَ بِعَاقِبَةِ ٱلاُمُورِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Referring to this fact too, the Holy Qur'an states:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَسَى أَنْ تَكْرَهُوا شَيْئًا وَهُوَ خَيْرٌ لَكُمْ وَعَسَى أَنْ
تُحِبُّوا شَيْئًا وَهُوَ شَرٌّ لَكُمْ
  </p>
</blockquote>

***It may be that you dislike a thing while it is good for you and it
may be that you love a thing while it is evil for you. (2:216)***

Through a valid chain of authority, Shaykh al-Kulayni, in his book of
*al-Kafi*, has reported Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Abi-Nasr as saying:

One day, I visited (Imam) Abu’l-Hasan Musa ibn Ja’far al-Kazim (‘a) and
said to him, “May Allah accept me as ransom for you! I have been
beseeching Almighty Allah for granting me a request for more than a
year, but the response has been delayed, so I felt something must be
improper about it.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَحْمَدُ، إِيَّاكَ وَالشَّيْطَانَ أَنْ يَكُونَ لَهُ عَلَيْكَ
سَبِيلٌ حَتَّى يُقَنِّطَكَ. إِنَّ أَبَا جَعْفَرٍ صَلَوَاتُ اللهِ
عَلَيْهِ كَانَ يَقُولُ: إِنَّ الْمُؤْمِنَ يَسْأَلُ اللهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ
حَاجَةً فَيُؤَخَّرُ عَنْهُ تَعْجِيلُ إِجَابَتِهِ حُبّاً لِصَوْتِهِ
وَاسْتِمَاعِ نَحِيبِهِ. وَاللهِ مَا أَخَّرَ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ عَنِ
الْمُؤْمِنِينَ مَا يَطْلِبُونَ مِنْ هَذِهِ الدُّنْيَا خَيْرٌ لَهُمْ
مِمَّا عَجَلَ لَهُمْ فِيهَا، وَأَيُّ شَيْءٍ الدُّنْيَا؟ إِنَّ أَبَا
جَعْفَرٍ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ كَانَ يَقُولُ: يَنْبَغِي لِلْمُؤْمِنِ
أَنْ يَكُونَ دُعَاؤُهُ فِي الرَّخَاءِ نَحْواً مِنْ دُعَائِهِ فِي
الشِّدَّةِ، لَيْسَ إِذَا أُعْطِيَ فَتَرَ، فَلاَ تَمَلَّ الدُّعَاءَ
فَإِنَّهُ مِنَ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ بِمَكَانِش. وَعَلَيْكَ بِالصَّبْرِ
وَطَلَبِ الْحَلاَلِ وَصِلَةِ الرَّحِمِ، وَإِيَّاكَ وَمُكَاشَفَةَ
النَّاسِ فَإِنَّا أَهْلَ الْبَيْتِ نَصِلُ مَنْ قَطَعَنَا وَنُحْسِنُ
إِلَى مَنْ أَسَاءَ إِلَيْنَا، فَنَرَى وَاللهِ فِي ذَلِكَ الْعَاقِبَةَ
الْحَسَنَةَ. إِنَّ صَاحِبَ النِّعْمَةِ فِي الدُّنْيَا إِذَا سَأَلَ
فَأُعْطِيَ طَلَبَ غَيْرَ الَّذِي سَأَلَ وَصَغُرَتِ النِّعْمَةُ فِي
عَيْنِهِ فَلاَ يَشْبَعُ مِنْ شَيْءٍ، وَإِذَا كَثُرَتِ النِّعَمُ كَانَ
الْمُسْلِمُ مِنْ ذَلِكَ عَلَى خَطَرٍ لِلْحُقُوقِ الَّتِي تَجِبُ
عَلَيْهِ وَمَا يَخَافُ مِنَ الْفِتْنَةِ فِيهَا. أَخْبِرْنِي عَنْكَ،
لَوْ أَنِّي قُلْتُ لَكَ قَوْلاً أَكُنْتَ تَثِقُ بِهِ مِنِّي؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Ahmad, beware of letting Satan have a way against you that he may
make you lose hope! Abu-Ja’far (al-Baqir), Allah’s blessings be upon
him, used to say, “It happens that a faithful believer beseeches
Almighty Allah for something, but Allah delays the response out of His
love to hear the voice of that believer and to listen to his crying out
to Him.” By Allah I swear, He has never delayed responding to the
faithful believers who ask for some worldly things when these things
would be better for them than what He has already given them.” What is
the value of this world? Abu-Ja’far used to say, “A faithful believer is
required to supplicate to Almighty Allah in situations of prosperity in
the same way as he supplicates in situations of misery. He thus must not
slow down supplicating when he is prosperous.” Therefore, never be weary
of supplicating because it enjoys a considerable value in the sight of
Almighty Allah.*

*Likewise, abide by patience, seeking legal earnings, and building good
relations with your relatives. On the other hand, beware of behaving
impudently towards people, because we, the Ahl al-Bayt, always build
good relations with those who rupture their relations with us and we
behave kindly towards those who mistreat us. By doing so, we expect only
good outcomes. I swear it by Allah. When the wealthy people in this
world are granted their needs whenever they ask, they ask for things
that they do not need. Consequently, they disregard the wealth they have
to the degree that nothing will satiate them. When graces are given in
abundance to a Muslim, his duties with regard to these graces increase,
and he will not care if he fails in this test. If I say* *something to
you, will you accept it from me in full trust?*

Abu-Nasr answered, “Of course I will. May Allah accept me as ransom for
you! If I do not put my trust in you while you are the proof of Allah
for His creatures, in whom else can I trust?”

The Imam (‘a) said:

> فَكُنْ بِاللهِ أَوْثَقَ فَإِنَّكَ عَلَى مَوْعِدٍ مِنَ اللهِ. أَلَيْسَ
> اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ يَقُولُ:" وَإِذَا سَأَلَكَ عِبَادِي عَنِّي
> فَإِنِّي قَرِيبٌ أُجِيبُ دَعْوَةَ الدَّاعِ إِذَا دَعَانِ(186)"
> وَقَالَ: " لَا تَقْنَطُوا مِنْ رَحْمَةِ اللَّهِ(53)" وَقَالَ: "اللَّهُ
> يَعِدُكُمْ مَغْفِرَةً مِنْهُ وَفَضْلًا(268)" فَكُنْ بِاللهِ عَزَّ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَجَلَّ أَوْثَقَ مِنْكَ بِغَيْرِهِ، وَلاَ تَجْعَلُوا فِي أَنْفُسِكُمْ
إِلاَّ خَيْراً فَإِنَّهُ مَغْفُورٌ لَكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Thus, you should trust Almighty Allah more than anyone else, for He
promises (to respond to your supplications). Is it not that He, the
Almighty and Majestic, says,* ***“When My servants ask you concerning
Me, then surely I am very near. I answer the prayer of the suppliant
when he calls on Me. (2:186)”*** *He also says,* ***“Do not despair of
the mercy of Allah. (39:53)”*** *He also says,* ***“Allah promises you
forgiveness from Himself and abundance. (2:268)”*** *Thus, trust
Almighty Allah more than anyone else. Do not feel in yourselves towards
Him anything other than good, for you will be forgiven.*[^53]

Reported Formulas of Supplications
----------------------------------

Many and various formulas of supplication that vary in length, contents,
and style have been reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), including
marvelous and superb supplications, addressing, praising, thanking,
glorifying, begging, confessing, and resorting to Almighty Allah.

This great moral, literary, eloquent, and spiritual fortune is
considered one of the distinctive features of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
School and obviously indicates their superior standing and rank and
their Imamate and supremacy over all other people.

In the previous chapters and sections of this book, we have referred to
a large number of such formulas of supplications, demonstrating that the
Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) gifted us special supplicatory
formulas for each occasion, condition, and time, especially on the
blessed anniversaries, holy places, and devotional rites. There are many
lengthy books comprising these supplications.

Amongst the Holy Imams (‘a), Imam ‘Ali and Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) are
particularly known for reporting such distinctive supplicatory formulas
like *Du’a' al-Sabah* (Supplication of the Morning), *Du’a' Kumayl*
(Supplication of Kumayl), the Fifteen Whispered Supplicatory Prayers,
and many others. The book of supplication known as *al-Sahifah
al-’Alawiyyah* (The Book of ‘Ali (‘a)) is the best example in this
regard.

The book entitled *al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah* (which comprises the
supplications of Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a)) is too famous to require
introduction. If we add the famous supplication known as *Du’a'
Abi-Hamzah al-Thumali* and the collection of the other supplications of
Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a), the total will be six books.

There are some other supplications by the other holy Imams (‘a) such as,
Imam Husayn’s supplication on the Day of ‘Arafat, Imam al-Baqir’s *Du’a'
al-Baha'* (Supplication of Splendor), Imam al-Mahdi’s *Du’a' al-Iftitah*
(Supplication of Commencement), and Imam al-Hadi’s *al-Ziyarah
al-Jami’ah* (the Comprehensive Formula of *Ziyarah*).

To include all such formulas of supplication reported from the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) requires lengthy books. We can therefore notice that the
scholars of the virtuous community, especially in the first ages,
compiled lengthy books about this topic apart from their famous books on
traditions. Further acquaintance with these supplications can be
obtained by referring to these books.

However, we will hereinafter list some famous supplicatory formulas,
which can be found in the famous and widely circulated book of *Mafatih
al-Jinan* in addition to Shaykh al-Tusi’s *Misbah al-Mutahajjid*, Shaykh
al-Kaf’ami’s *al-Misbah*, Sayyid Ibn Tawus’s *Iqba al-A’mal*, and many
other reference books:

• *Du’a' Kumayl*

• *Du’a' al-Simat* (Supplication of Attributes)

• *Du’a' al-’Asharat* (Supplication of the Tens)

• *Du’a' al-Sabah* (Supplication of the Morning)

• *Du’a' al-Jawshan al-Kabir* (The Major Supplication of the Coat of
Armor)

• *Du’a' al-Jawshan al-Saghir* (The Minor Supplication of the Coat of
Armor)

• *Du’a' al-Mashlul* (Supplication of the Lame)

• *Du’a' al-Mujir* (Supplication of the Succoring)

• *Du’a' Yastashir* (Supplication of the Counseling)

• The Fifteen Whispered Prayers

• *Du’a' al-Iftitah* (Supplication of Commencement)

• *Du’a' al-Baha'* (Supplication of Splendor)

• *Du’a' Abi-Hamzah al-Thumali*

• *Du’a' al-Sahar* (Supplication at Early Dawn)

• *Al-Munajat al-Sha’baniyyah* (The Whispered Prayer of Sha’ban)

• *Du’a' Makarim al-Akhlaq* (Supplication of Nobility of Character)

There are also some famous supplications that are not reported as
ascribed to the Holy Imams (‘a), such as the famous supplication known
as *Du’a' al-Nudbah* (Lamentation).

These formulas of supplicatory prayers represent a practical school and
methodology that man may benefit from once he applies them to the
details of his life activities. These advantages can be summed up thus:

1. Details of these supplicatory formulas teach the most proper way of
speaking to the Almighty.

2. They introduce the attributes, manners, graces, and gifts of the
Almighty.

3. They encourage piety, repentance for one’s sins, repeated turning to
the Lord in penitence, and abstention from violating His prohibitions.

4. They urge commitment to nobility of character, treat compliance with
one’s personal lusts and desires, and help provide power over desires
and deviations.

5. They diagnose points of defect in one’s behavior.

6. They familiarize people with and lead them to perform righteous deeds
and high-ranking conduct according to religious law.

7. They disclose the means Satan usually uses to tempt man and the tiny
cracks through which he may take hold of him.

8. They present generally everything that is needed by man in this world
as well as the world to come.

[^1]: - \`Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 90:294, H. 23.

[^2]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:187, H. 1 & 4.

[^3]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:188, H. 5.

[^4]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:184, S. 1.

[^5]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:201, S. 3.

[^6]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:213, S. 4.

[^7]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:214, S. 5.

[^8]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:220, H. 1, 6,
7, and 9.

[^9]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:236, S. 10.

[^10]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:243, H. 26,
as quoted from Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:494, H. 16.

[^11]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:224, S. 7.

[^12]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:227, S. 8.

[^13]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:244, S. 11.

[^14]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:257, S. 12.

[^15]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:197, H. 1, as
quoted from Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:467, H. 2.

[^16]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:263, S. 14.

[^17]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:273, S. 16.

[^18]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:274, S. 17.

[^19]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:294, S. 24,
as quoted from \`Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 90:357, H. 16.

[^20]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:298, S. 25.

[^21]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:487.

[^22]: - Ibn Fahad al-Hilli, \`Uddat al-Da\`i, pp. 146.

[^23]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:301, S. 26.

[^24]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:314, S. 29.

[^25]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:325, S. 34.

[^26]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:345, S. 45.

[^27]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:510.

[^28]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:304, S. 9.

[^29]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:317, S. 30.

[^30]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:277, H. 1.

[^31]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:277, H. 2.

[^32]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:277, H. 3.

[^33]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:277, H. 8.

[^34]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:279, H. 12.

[^35]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:280.

[^36]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:302, H. 1.

[^37]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:302, S. 27.

[^38]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:321, S. 33.

[^39]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:327, S. 35,
H. 2.

[^40]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:327, S. 35,
H. 7.

[^41]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:327, S. 35,
H. 11.

[^42]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:327, S. 36,
H. 1.

[^43]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:327, S. 36,
H. 4.

[^44]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:335, S. 37,
H. 1.

[^45]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:335, S. 38,
H. 1.

[^46]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:336, S. 40,
H. 1.

[^47]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:336, S. 40,
H. 3.

[^48]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:319, H. 4.

[^49]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:337, H. 1.

[^50]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 3:321, H. 5.

[^51]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 5:334, H. 21. A
similar tradition is mentioned in the same reference book, carrying
number 22.

[^52]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 5:335, H. 26.

[^53]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 2:448, H. 1.


