Daily Devotional Acts
=====================

Daily Prayers, Supererogatory Prayers and Details
-------------------------------------------------

According to the code of Islamic law, the performance of the daily
ritual prayer is obligatory five times a day amounting to seventeen
units of prayer (i.e. *rak’ah*); two at dawn (before sunrise), four just
after midday, four in the afternoon, three at dusk (immediately after
sunset), and four in the earlier hours of night. This is an object of
agreement among all Muslims. On journeys, the four-unit prayers become
two units; however, jurisprudents of the various Muslim sects disagree
regarding some details and certain conditions.

Along with its particularities, the ritual prayer is one of the most
significant pillars on which Islam has been founded. It also represents
the best example of the unity of the Muslim nation, since all agree upon
it.

It is also the best of all devotional acts after the recognition of
Almighty Allah, as is maintained by some traditions because it expresses
the relationship and connection between man and the Almighty—a
relationship that must be constant and never cut off. For this reason,
prayer must not lapse under any circumstance; rather, it must be
performed in all states, including health and sickness, security and
fear and, when no other means is possible it must even be performed
through gestures.[^1]

One of the highly recommended acts is to offer a number of units of
prayer before and after these ritual obligatory prayers. Such
supererogatory prayers are *nawafil* (sing. *nafilah*) or *rawatib*.

In the traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), the number of the units of
these daily supererogatory prayers is twice the number of units of
obligatory prayers. They are thirty-four units in all; four units before
dawn, eight before afternoon, eight before evening, four after sunset,
two in the sitting position after the early night prayer (regarded as
one unit only), eight for the night prayer, whose time is between
midnight and dawn, two after the night prayer (called *al-Shaf’*), and
one after that (called *al-Witr*).[^2]

Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through an authentic chain of authority
that Hannan that ‘Amr ibn Hurayth asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) to inform him
about the prayers the Holy Prophet (S) used to offer.

The Imam (‘a) thus answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
كَانَ النَّبِيُّ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ يُصَلِّي ثَمَانِيَ
رَكَعَاتِ الزَّوَالِ وَأَرْبَعاً الأُولَى، وَثَمانِياً بَعْدَهَا،
وَأَرْبَعاً الْعَصْرَ، وَثَلاَثاً الْمَغْرِبَ، وَأَرْبَعاً بَعْدَ
الْمَغْرِبِ، وَالعِشَاءَ الآخِرَةَ أَرْبَعاً، وَثَمَانِيَ صَلاَةَ
اللَّيْلِ، وَثَلاَثاً الْوِتْرَ، وَرَكْعَتَيِ الْفَجْرِ وَصَلاَةَ
الْغَدَاةِ رَكْعَتَيْنِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Holy Prophet (S) offered eight units before the four units of the
obligatory afternoon prayer. He offered four units of the obligatory
afternoon prayer; then three units of the obligatory sunset prayer with
four units after that; four units of the obligatory early night prayer;
eight units of the night prayer with three units of the Witr prayer; two
units of the obligatory dawn prayer with two units after that.*[^3]

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شِيعَتُنَا أَهْلُ الْوَرَعِ وَأَهْلُ الْوَفَاءِ وَالأَمَانَةِ وَأَهْلُ
الزُّهْدِ وَالْعِبَادَةِ، أَصْحَابُ إحْدَى وَخَمْسِينَ رَكْعَةً فِي
الْيَوْمِ وَاللَّيْلَةِ، الْقَائِمُونَ بِاللَّيْلِ وَالصَّائِمُونَ
بِالنَّهَارِ، يُزَكُّونَ أَمْوَالَهُمْ، وَيَحِجُّونَ الْبَيْتَ
وَيَجْتَنِبُونَ كُلَّ مُحَرَّمٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Our Shi’ah are the people of piety, faithfulness, and honesty. They are
the people of asceticism and worship. They perform fifty-one units of
prayer in a single day and night. They pass their nights in devotional
acts and their days fasting. They purify their wealth, go on pilgrimage
to the House of God, and refrain from committing any forbidden act.*[^4]

In the book entitled *Misbah al-Mutahajjid*, Shaykh al-Tusi reports Imam
al-Askari (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
عَلاَمَاتُ الْمُؤْمِنِ خَمْسٌ: صَلاَةُ الْخَمْسِينَ، وَزِيَارَةُ
الأَرْبَعِينَ، وَالتَّخَتُّمُ فِي الْيَمِينِ، وَتَعْفِيرُ الْجَبِينِ،
وَالْجَهْرُ بِبِسْمِ اللهِ الرَّحْمَنِ الرَّحِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The signs of true faithful believers are five: Offering the fifty
prayers, visitation (of holy shrines) on the Day of Arba’in, wearing a
ring on the right hand, pressing the forehead, and raising the voice
with bismi-llahir-rahmanir-rahim.*[^5]*,*[^6]

More Privileges
---------------

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School has had a number of advantages over the
other Muslim sects with regard to prayer and its details. These
advantages may be cited as follows:

**First**: Unlike the other Muslim jurisprudential schools, the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) School abides by reciting *Surah al-Fatihah* and one other
entire *Surah* in the first two units of all prayers.[^7]

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School also recites the *basmalah*
(*bismi-llahir-rahmanir-rahim*) in *Surah al-Fatihah* and in all other
*Surah*s, because it is an inseparable part of all *Surah*s of the Holy
Qur'an as believed by all Shi’ite jurisprudents, and maintained by many
traditions and historical practice. Besides, the fact that all
calligraphies of the Holy Qur'an, which Muslims have honestly
transmitted since the time of the Holy Prophet (S) and up to the present
day, entail that the *basmalah* is an inseparable part of the *Surah*s.

**Second**: According to the jurisprudence of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a)
School, the *basmalah* should be recited audibly even in the prayers
where the recitations of the Qur'anic texts must be uttered inaudibly,
such as the obligatory afternoon and evening prayers. This matter was
turned into a political issue during the reign of Mu’awiyah when the
true righteous Muslims were distinguished from the pro-Umayyad groups
through this in particular, especially after Mu’awiyah decided to cancel
out reciting the *basmalah* audibly in the prayers—an event to which
some historical texts have referred.

**Third**: The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School abides by the ruling that
prostration must be done on earth directly or on whatever plants the
earth produces except plants that are edible and plants used to make
cloth. In this ruling, jurisprudents of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School
depend upon traditions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and Imam
al-Sadiq’s verdict that reads:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَجُوزُ السُّجُودُ إلاَّ عَلَى الأَرْضِ أَوْ مَا أَنْبَتَتْهُ
إِلاَّ مَا أُكِلَ أَوْ لُبِسَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Prostration is impermissible unless made on earth or on plants produced
by the earth, except those eaten or converted into cloth.*[^8]

Likewise, Shi’ite scholars are reported to have forbidden prostration on
cotton and linen, because Imam al-Baqir (‘a) is reported as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يُسْجَدُ عَلَى الثَّوْبِ الْكَرْسَفِ وَلاَ عَلَى الصُّوفِ وَلاَ
عَلَى شَيْءٍ مِنَ الْحَيْوَانِ وَلاَ عَلَى حُطَامٍ وَلاَ عَلَى شَيْءٍ
مِنَ الثِّمَارِ وَلاَ عَلَى شَيْءٍ مِنَ الرِّيَاشِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*It is not permissible to prostrate on cotton cloth, nor on wool, nor on
a part of an animal, or any food, or any part of fruits, or any part of
furniture.*[^9]

This ruling is supported by the following Prophetic tradition that is
reported by al-Bukhari, Muslim, al-Tirmidhi, al-Nasa'i, Ibn Majah,
al-Darimi, and Ahmad ibn Hanbal:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
جُعِلَتْ لِيَ الأَرْضُ مَسْجِداً وَطَهُوراً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The earth has been made for me a prostration place and pure.*

Likewise, al-Bukhari, Muslim, and al-Nasa'i have reported the Holy
Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الأَرْضُ لَكَ مَسْجِدٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The earth is a place of prostration for you.*[^10]

Sunni master Hadithists have also reported the Holy Prophet (S) as
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ تَتِمُّ صَلاَةُ أَحَدِكُمْ حَتَّى يَتَوَضَّأَ كَمَا أَمَرَ اللهُ
تَعَالَى ثُمَّ يَسْجُدُ مُمَكِّناً جَبْهَتَهُ مِنَ الأَرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The prayer of any of you is imperfect unless you perform the ritual
ablution (wudhu') exactly as Almighty Allah has ordered and then
prostrate yourselves on the earth by making your foreheads touch the
earth.*[^11]

These Hadithists also report Khabbab to have said that they (i.e. the
Muslims) complained to the Holy Prophet (S) about the heat of the earth
that scorched their foreheads and noses when they prostrated in prayers
on the earth directly, but he refused to accommodate their
complaints.[^12]

In spite of the existence of so many traditions, all Sunni jurisprudents
have disobeyed this ruling and deemed it permissible to prostrate on all
things.

In view of these points, the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) comply
with this ruling and sometimes carry with them a cake of dry clay or
clean stone to prostrate on when they cannot find ground on which they
can prostrate in prayer.

Attempting to confuse the Shi’ah and arouse spurious arguments and false
accusations against them, the enemies of the Shi’ah have falsely claimed
that the Shi’ah worship these stones although they are in fact
prostrating ON these materials, not TO them. We seek Allah’s protection
against such false accusations.[^13]

Fourth: Adherents of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School recite the phrase
*hayya ‘ala khayr al-’amal* (Come to the best deed) twice in the *adhan*
(the ritual call to prayer) and *iqamah* (the prefatory part of the
ritual prayers) after the phrase *hayya ‘ala al-falah* (Come to
prosperity). The Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) confirmed it to be
an inseparable part of the ritual *adhan* and *iqamah*.

Unlike the other schools of jurisprudence, the Zaydiyyah,[^14] in
addition to the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School, abide by this ruling which has
become one of the distinctive features of the Shi’ah.

As for the third *shahadah* (creed)[^15] that the Shi’ah include in the
*adhan* and *iqamah*, all jurisprudents of the virtuous community
unanimously agree that this phrase is not part of the ritual *adhan* and
*iqamah.* It is, therefore, incorrect to say it with the intention of
its being part of the *adhan*, as it would then become a forbidden
innovation.

However, the followers of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) say it in the middle of
the ritual *adhan* and *iqamah* making it one of the distinctive
features and mottos that distinguish them from the other Muslims. There
are two main reasons for this action:

1. This statement by the Shi’ah only intends to expressly declare their
loyalty to Imam ‘Ali (‘a), because he suffered immense injustice and
harm. The harshest injustice was practiced by the Umayyads and the
Nawasib (the anti-Shi’ah) who adopted the course of cursing him from the
pulpits of mosques (i.e. *minbar*: a set of steps in mosques from which
sermons are delivered) and in the Friday Prayer sermons (i.e.
*khutbah*). Reacting to these wicked attempts to deform the perfect
picture of this divine personality, the Shi’ah emphasize their loyalty
to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) whenever they have an opportunity to do so.

2. In various stages of their history, the Shi’ah suffered immense
persecution because of false accusations and charges. One of these
accusations was the charge of exaggeration about Imam ‘Ali (‘a) and his
descendants. As a result, they raise this motto with the aim of
confirming that their belief in Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is no more than showing
loyalty to him, believing in his Imamate, divinely designated
leadership, and religious authority, and being the proof of Almighty
Allah for His creatures. All this originated from the instruction of the
Holy Prophet (S) who declared on the day at Khumm Spring (i.e. Ghadir):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ كُنْتُ مَوْلاَهُ فَهَذَا عَلِيٌّ مَوْلاَهُ. اللَّهُمَّ وَالِ مَنْ
وَالاَهُ وَعَادِ مَنْ عَادَاهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Behold! ‘Ali is now the master of every one who has regarded me as his
master. O Allah, (please) support whoever supports ‘Ali and be the enemy
of whoever incurs the hostility of ‘Ali…*[^16]

The Shi’ah thus hold that Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is a servant of Almighty Allah
and one of His most intimate saints, no more.

**Fifth**: The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School permits the combining of the
midday with the afternoon obligatory prayers at one time and the sunset
with the early night prayers at one time, without need of a particular
excuse for such combining. In this ruling, this school depends upon
traditions that have been reported from the Holy Prophet (S) and the
Holy Imams (‘a).

In the most reliable Sunni books of Hadith which Sunnis consider
thoroughly authentic, it is reported on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas that
the Holy Prophet (S) performed the eight units of the midday and
afternoon obligatory prayers together; and seven units of the sunset and
early night obligatory prayers without separating (in time) one prayer
from the other. This tradition has been reported by the five Sunni
master Hadithists,[^17] one of whom is Muslim (al-Nayshaburi) who
reported the tradition in the following form:

*The Messenger of Allah combined the midday with the afternoon
(obligatory) prayers and the sunset with the early night prayers in
Madinah although there was neither fear nor rain.*

When Ibn ‘Abbas was asked about the reason, he answered, “The Prophet
did not want the matter (of prayer) to be a burden upon his
people.”[^18]

In *‘Ilal al-Ahkam*, Shaykh al-Saduq has reported, through a valid chain
of authority, that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said, “The Messenger of Allah (‘a)
performed the midday and the afternoon prayers together, although there
was no reason or cause for that. When ‘Umar, who challenged him the
most, asked whether a change had occurred in the rulings of prayer, the
Holy Prophet (S) answered, ‘No, I only want to make the matter more
feasible for my people.’”[^19]

Individuals of the virtuous community combine these sets of prayers most
of the time as a constant course, although the Holy Prophet (S) and the
Holy Imams (‘a) generally used to perform each prayer separately (i.e.
each one in its definite time) as is maintained by many other
traditions.[^20]

**Sixth**: The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School rubs the feet with the water of
*wudhu'* instead of washing them in the ritual ablution (*wudhu'*) for
the prayer, unlike other Muslims who usually wash their feet, except in
certain states when they rub their sandals with water—a practice that is
deemed legal and adopted by some Muslim jurisprudential schools.

In their practice, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers rely upon
the holy verse of ablution, which reads:

> يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا قُمْتُمْ إِلَى الصَّلَاةِ
> فَاغْسِلُوا وُجُوهَكُمْ وَأَيْدِيَكُمْ إِلَى الْمَرَافِقِ وَامْسَحُوا
> بِرُءُوسِكُمْ وَأَرْجُلَكُمْ إِلَى الْكَعْبَيْنِ (6)

***O you who believe, when you rise up to prayer, wash your faces and
your hands as far as the elbows, and rub (with water) your heads and
your feet to the ankles. (5:6)***

Although this holy verse clearly states that the feet, like the head,
should be rubbed with water and washing is not mentioned for the feet,
Muslim scholars other than the Shi’ah have interpreted this holy verse
according to their own logic and joined the ‘feet’ to the ‘faces’ and
‘hands’ based upon some traditions, contradicting the obvious meaning of
the holy verse.[^21]

Post-Prayer Litanies
--------------------

The post-prayer litanies are supplications, doxologies, and invocations
said after the obligatory prayers. Emphasis on these litanies has been
laid by the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (‘a) in many traditions.
Following the obligatory prayers with supplications, doxologies, and
invocations is a well-confirmed tradition by which all Muslims abide.

Once again, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and the virtuous community are
distinguished from others with regard to these post-prayer litanies in
the following points:

1. Litanies of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and their followers are more
comprehensive and all-inclusive than others.

2. There are many traditions of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) carrying
supplications, doxologies, and litanies said after prayers.

3. In the literature of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), each supererogatory prayer
has its own litanies in addition to the general post-prayer litanies
said after all obligatory prayers.

**The most favored post-prayer litany is the following:**

*Repeat the following phrase three times:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللّهُ اَكْبَرُ
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Allah is the Greatest.*

*Repeat the following invocation three times:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

O Allah, send blessings upon Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad.

*Finally, say the following litany:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللُّهُ إِلَهاً وَاحِداً وَنَحْنُ لَهُ مُسْلِمُونَ
لاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللّهُ وَلاَ نَعْبُدُ إِلاَّ إِيَّاهُ مُخْلِصينَ
لَهُ ٱلدِّينَ وَلَوْ كَرَهَ ٱلْمُشْرِكُونَ لاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللّهُ
رَبُّنَا وَرَبُّ آبَائِنَا ٱلا وَّلِينَ لاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ اللّهُ
وَحْدَهُ وَحْدَهُ وَحْدَهُ ا نْجَزَ وَعْدَهُ وَنَصَرَ عَبْدَهُ وَا
عَزَّ جُنْدَهُ وَهَزَمَ ٱلا حْزَابَ وَحْدَهُ فَلَهُ ٱلْمُلْكُ وَلَهُ
ٱلْحَمْدُ يُحْيي وَيُميتُ وَيُميتُ وَيُحْيي وَهُوَ حَيٌّ لاَ يَمُوتُ
بِيَدِهِ ٱلْخَيْرُ وَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْء قَديرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There is no god save Allah; One and Only God; and we are submissive to
Him. There is no god save Allah and we worship none save Him, making our
devotion sincere in His sight, even* *though the polytheists may detest
it. There is no god save Allah; (He is) Our Lord and the Lord of our
fathers of old. There is no god save Allah; alone, alone, alone. He has
truly fulfilled His promise, granted His servant victory, made powerful
His soldiers, and defeated the parties alone. So, sovereignty be His and
praise be His. He grants life and causes to die and, after causing to
die, raises from the dead; while He is eternally ever-living and He
never dies. All goodness is by His Hand, and He has power over all
things.*

Another most favored post-prayer litany is the famous invocation known
as *Tasbih al-Zahra'*, which consists of one hundred phrases praising
Almighty Allah. The most famous and considerable form of it is to say
*allahu-akbar(u)* (Allah is the Greatest) thirty-four times,
*alhamdu-lillah(i)* (Praise be to Allah) thirty-three times, and
*subhanallah(i)* (Glory be to Allah) thirty-three times.[^22]

Additional post-prayer litanies include reciting *Ayat al-Kursi*
(2:255), *Surah* *al-Falaq* (No. 113), *Surah* *al-Nas* (No. 113), and
*Surah* *al-Tawhid* (No. 112), the prostration of thanks (*sajda
al-shukr*) and many other post-prayer supplications that can be found in
books on supplications.[^23]

Recitation of the Holy Qur'an
-----------------------------

Recitation of the Holy Qur'an is one of the daily acts of worship. In
this respect, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), through a valid chain of authority, is
reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
الْقُرْآنُ عَهْدُ اللهِ إِلَى خَلْقِهِ، فَقَدْ يَنْبَغِي لِلْمَرْءِ
الْمُسْلِمِ أَنْ يَنْظُرَ إِلَى عَهْدِهِ وَأَنْ يَقْرَأَ مِنْهُ فِي
كُلِّ يَوْمٍ خَمْسِينَ آيَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The Qur'an is Almighty Allah’s trust that He has entrusted to His
creatures. Therefore, a Muslim individual is required to pay regard to
this trust and recite fifty verses of it everyday.*[^24]

According to another validly reported tradition, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) has
said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَنْبَغِي لِلرَّجُلِ إَذَا أَصْبَحَ أَنْ يَقْرَأَ بَعْدَ التَّعْقِيبِ
خَمْسِينَ آيَةً.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*At the beginning of the day, it is required to recite fifty verses of
the Qur'an after post-prayer invocations.*[^25]

According to another tradition, the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
مَنْ قَرَأَ كُلَّ يَوْمٍ مِائَةَ آيَةٍ فِي الْمُصْحَفِ بِتَرْتِيلٍ
وَخُشُوعٍ وَسُكُونٍ، كَتَبَ اللهُ لَهُ مِنَ الثَّوَابِ بِمِقْدَارِ مَا
يَعْمَلُهُ جَمِيعُ أَهْلِ الأَرْضِ. وَمَنْ قَرَأَ مِائَتَيْ آيَةٍ
كَتَبَ اللهُ لَهُ مِنَ الثَّوَابِ مَا يَعْمَلُهُ أَهْلُ السَّمَاءِ
وَأَهْلُ الأَرْضِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Whoever recites one hundred verses from a copy of the Qur'an everyday
with modulation, reverence, and tranquility, Almighty Allah will record
for him a reward that is equal to the reward of the deeds of the
inhabitants of the earth. Whoever recites two hundred, Almighty Allah
will record for him a reward equal to the reward of the deeds of the
inhabitants of the heavens and the earth.*[^26]

From the many traditions regarding the recitation of the Holy Qur'an, we
can conclude the following instructions:

1. It is advisable to recite the Holy Qur'an and ponder and contemplate
upon it.

2. When Paradise, Hellfire, or the other exhortative topics are recited,
the reciter is required to pause a while and think deeply.

3. Recitation of the Holy Qur'an should be done with reverence.

4. The Holy Qur'an must not be recited heedlessly because an impetuous
manner has been described by traditions as prattle.

5. It is recommended not to recite more than one part (*juz'*)[^27] of
the Holy Qur'an per day so as not to recite it entirely in less than a
month.[^28]

The Best Times of Worship in a Day
----------------------------------

According to traditions and instructions of the Holy Imams (‘a), the
best times of worship during a 24-hour day are the last third of
night—‘night’ begins at sunset and ends at the rise of dawn—and the
period between dawn and sunrise. These two times are distinguished for
prayers, supplications, litanies, and whispered prayers.

Traditions have drawn attention to the necessity of spending the dawn in
acts of worship and warned against sleeping in the period between dawn
and sunrise, which should be spent doing supplications, litanies,
recitation of the Holy Qur'an, and earning a lawful living.

The two times of sunrise and sunset have also been introduced as the
best times of worship in the Holy Qur'an which recommends mentioning
Almighty Allah at these two times. It thus reads:

> وَاذْكُرِ اسْمَ رَبِّكَ بُكْرَةً وَأَصِيلًا (25)

***Glorify the name of your Lord morning and evening. (76:25)***

Many supplicatory prayers and litanies are to be said in the morning and
evening. Shaykh al-Qummi, in *Mafatih al-Jinan*, has cited some of these
supplications, the most important of which are *Du’a' al-’Asharat* and
Imam Zayn al-’Abidin’s supplications in the morning and evening.[^29]

Voluntary Prayers and Prayer of Inadvertence
--------------------------------------------

In addition to their encouragements to offer the daily supererogatory
prayers, the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), have encouraged
offering more prayers voluntarily,[^30] especially at night. Among these
prayers are the following:

1. A voluntary ten-unit prayer after the obligatory sunset prayer

2. A voluntary twelve-unit prayer everyday

3. A voluntary four-unit prayer after the obligatory afternoon prayer

4. A special voluntary four-unit prayer before or after noon

5. A voluntary two-unit prayer between the obligatory sunset and early
night prayer. According to some traditions, this prayer is called the
Will Prayer or *Salat al-Ghufaylah* (prayer of inadvertence) familiar to
the individuals of the virtuous community. This prayer is offered in a
particular way. It consists of two units: in the first unit, after
*Surah al-Fatihah*, you recite the following verses of (*Surah*
al-Anbiya' 21:87-88):

> وَذَا النُّونِ إِذْ ذَهَبَ مُغَاضِبًا فَظَنَّ أَنْ لَنْ نَقْدِرَ
> عَلَيْهِ فَنَادَى فِي الظُّلُمَاتِ أَنْ لَا إِلَهَ إِلَّا أَنْتَ
> سُبْحَانَكَ إِنِّي كُنْتُ مِنَ الظَّالِمِينَ (87) فَاسْتَجَبْنَا لَهُ
> وَنَجَّيْنَاهُ مِنَ الْغَمِّ وَكَذَلِكَ نُنْجِي الْمُؤْمِنِينَ (88)

***And (mention) Dhu’n-Nun (Jonah), when he went off in anger and deemed
that We would not suppress his sustenance. But he cried out in the
darkness, “There is no god save You. Be You Glorified! Lo! I have been a
wrongdoer.” Then we heard his prayer and saved him from the anguish.
Thus, we save the believers.***

In the second unit, the following verse (6:59) should be recited after
*Surah al-Fatihah*:

> وَعِنْدَهُ مَفَاتِحُ الْغَيْبِ لَا يَعْلَمُهَا إِلَّا هُوَ وَيَعْلَمُ
> مَا فِي الْبَرِّ وَالْبَحْرِ وَمَا تَسْقُطُ مِنْ وَرَقَةٍ إِلَّا
> يَعْلَمُهَا وَلَا حَبَّةٍ فِي ظُلُمَاتِ الْأَرْضِ وَلَا رَطْبٍ وَلَا
> يَابِسٍ إِلَّا فِي كِتَابٍ مُبِينٍ (59)

***And with Him are the keys of the Invisible. None but He knows them.
And He knows what is in the land and the sea. Not a leaf falls but He
knows it, not a grain amid the darkness of the earth, naught of wet or
dry but (it is noted) in a clear record.***

After reciting this verse, you should raise both hands for Qunut,[^31]
saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي اَسْئَلُكَ بِمَفَاتِحِ ٱلْغَْيِبِ ٱلَّتِي لاَ
يَعْلَمُهَا إِلاَّ ا نْتَ اَنْ تُصَلِّيَ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّد وَآلِهِ وَا
نْ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, I beseech You in the name of the Keys of the Invisible (world)
that none knows save You; (please) send blessings upon Muhammad and his
Household and...*

You may then mention your needs.

Then, you should say the following:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ ا نْتَ وَلِيُّ نِعْمَتِي وَٱلْقَادِرُ عَلَىٰ طَلِبَتِي
تَعْلَمُ حَاجَتِي فَا سْئَلُكَ بِحَقِّ مُحَمَّد وَآلِهِ عَلَيْهِ
وَعَلَيْهِمُ ٱلسَّلاَمُ لَمَّا قَضَيْتَهَا لِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, You are the source of all graces that I have, You have the
power to respond to my request, and You know my needs; I therefore
beseech You in the name of Muhammad and his Household, peace be upon him
and them, to grant me my needs.*

You may then pray to Him for your personal needs, for traditions hold
that any one who offers this prayer and supplicates to Almighty Allah
will have his requests granted.[^32]

6. One thousand units of prayer in 24 hours, a whole day. It is worth
mentioning that the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) used to practice
this voluntary act persistently.

[^1]: - The Holy Prophet (S) is reported through valid chains of
authority to have said at the final hours of his blessed lifetime:
لَيْسَ مِنِّي مَنِ اسْتَخَفَّ بِصَلاَتِهِ وَلاَ يَرِدُ عَلَيَّ
الْحَوْضَ.He that belittles his prayer does not belong to me and will
not join me at the Divine Pond.Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), through a valid chain
of authority, is reported to have said at the final hour of his
lifetime: لاَ تَنَالُ شَفَاعَتُنَا مَنِ اسْتَخَفَّ بِالصَّلاَةِ.Our
intercession shall never reach him who belittles his prayer.Al-Hurr
al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 3:16, H. 7 & 3.

[^2]: - This number of units of prayer, which has been proficiently
maintained by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) as they received it from the Holy
Prophet (S), is one of the features that distinguish the Ahl al-Bayt
(‘a) School from the other Muslim schools. The dawn supererogatory
prayer and the night prayer are the most preferable of all the
supererogatory prayers, since many traditions highlight the merits and
rewards obtained from performing these two prayers.

[^3]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 3:33, H. 6.

[^4]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, Sifat al-Shi\`ah, pp. 2; \`Allamah al-Majlisi,
Bihar al-Anwar 68:167, H. 33 as quoted from the previous reference book.

[^5]: - To explain, this tradition can be quoted as follows: The signs
of a faithful believer are five: (a) Offering fifty-one units of prayer
(a day): seventeen units of the obligatory prayers and thirty-four of
the supererogatory (nafilah), (b) visiting (Imam al-Husayn’s tomb) on
Arba\`in, the twentieth of Safar; forty days after the martyrdom of Imam
Husayn (‘a), (c) wearing a ring in the right hand, (d) pressing the
forehead (by frequent prostration to Allah), and (5) saying aloud:
bismi’llahi’rrahmani’rrahim (basmalah: In the Name of Allah, the
All-beneficent, the All-merciful). [Translator]

[^6]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 10:373, H. 1. “Offering
the fifty” mentioned in this tradition stands for the fifty-one units of
prayers that are offered daily. In many traditions, the number fifty
replaced the actual number fifty-one either for brevity or because the
two-unit prayer that is offered in a sitting posture after the early
night obligatory prayer has not been counted in this tradition.

[^7]: - This law is almost unanimously agreed upon by the Shi\`ite
jurisprudents although there are a few scholars that have cited that it
is not obligatory to recite a lengthy Surah completely.

[^8]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, \`Ilal al-Shara'i\` 2:341, S. 42, H. 1.

[^9]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, Kitab al-Khilaf 2:436.

[^10]: - Mansur \`Ali Nasif, al-Taj al-Jami\` lil-Usul 1:230, 234;
al-Mu\`jam al-Mufahras li’alfaz al-Hadith, A. s-j-d 2:424, 428.

[^11]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, Kitab al-Khilaf 2:434 as quoted from Sunan
Abi-Dawud 1:227, H. 858.

[^12]: - Shaykh al-Tusi, Kitab al-Khilaf 2:436. As a footnote, the
author has mentioned that this tradition has been reported in Sahih
Muslim 1:433, H. 619, Sunan Ibn Majah 1:222, H. 675, Sunan al-Nasa'i
1:247, Musnad Ahmad 5:108-110, and Sunan al-Bayhaqi 2:105.

[^13]: - It can be seen that the individuals of the virtuous community
usually carry with them a piece of clay taken from the soil of Imam
Husayn’s tomb (in Karbala') on which they prostrate in prayers. In a
booklet entitled ‘al-Turbah al-Husayniyyah’, the great scholar, Shaykh
Muhammad Husayn Kashif al-Ghita', has discussed this issue thoroughly.
The individuals of the virtuous community are advised to prostrate on
the stone floor of mosques, especially the Sacred Mosque in Makkah,
reed-mats or other materials upon which it is lawful to prostrate. They
should not carry cakes of clay to these places in order to avoid
spurious charges and oppressive campaigns which the enemies of Islam and
ignorant people wage against them. Finally, it is Almighty Allah Who is
the patron of success, rightfulness, and victory.

[^14]: - The Zaydiyyah is a Muslim sect believing in Zayd, the son of
Imam \`Ali ibn al-Husayn (‘a), as the Imam after his father. As a
condition of Imamate, they specify that the true Imam is the one who
leads an armed uprising against the tyrannical ruler. Their school of
jurisprudence is greatly influenced by the Sunni jurisprudence.
Presently, they live in northern Yemen although they have a history in
some regions of Iran.

[^15]: - The Shi\`ah include in the adhan the phrase, “ashhadu anna
\`aliyyan waliyyu allah (I bear witness that \`Ali is the leader by
Allah’s command)” after the phrase, ‘ashhadu anna muhammadan rasulu
allah (I bear witness that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah)’, as the
third creed. In this, they rely on many narrations reported from the
Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (S) stating that the phrase,
“Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah” is not mentioned or written above
the gate of Paradise apart from the phrase, “\`Ali is the leader by
Allah’s command.” However, this does not indicate that the Shi\`ah claim
that Imam \`Ali (‘a) is a prophet, or a god…etc. Allah forbid!

[^16]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 1:292, H. 3.

[^17]: - Namely, al-Bukhari, Muslim, al-Tirmidhi, Ibn Dawud, and
al-Nasa'i.

[^18]: - Mansur \`Ali Nasif, al-Taj al-Jami\` lil-Usul 1:148.

[^19]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 3:161, H. 2.

[^20]: - This issue requires much investigation. Since performing the
two prayers at the same time is no more than lenience granted for
Muslims in order to make the matter (of performing prayers) easier for
them, and the Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (‘a) used to perform
each prayer separately in its definite time, why are the Shi\`ah then
committing themselves to this combining of prayers all the time? Beyond
doubt, to perform two prayers at one time is easier, especially when we
take into consideration the current social circumstances, the nature of
work, and the structure of modern cities and societies. We may now ask
whether this commitment of combining prayers is a manifestation of the
Holy Imams (‘a) desire to ease human life in the future or the result of
the social and political circumstances their followers had to encounter
throughout the history of Islam that forced them to decrease their
performance of prayers to some extent. There is a validly reported
tradition, which suggests that the reason for such combining of prayers
is to perform the two prayers at the best time of performance of one of
them when there is no supererogatory prayer offered between the two.
Yet, if there is a supererogatory prayer to be offered between the two,
then to combine the two obligatory prayers becomes void. This tradition
thus reads: Two prayers are combined when there is no supererogatory
prayer to be offered between them, but if there is any, then combining
is canceled. Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 3:163, H. 3.
According to this tradition, the jurisprudentially educated individuals
of the virtuous community must separate prayers because they have to
offer supererogatory prayers between each pair of prayers, especially
the sunset and early night prayers. At any rate, the individuals of the
virtuous community are supposed to pay attention to this recommended
Prophetic practice and demanding religious manner.

[^21]: - In his book entitled ‘Masa’il Khilafiyyah (Controversial
Jurisprudential Issues)’ \`Allamah Sharaf al-Din, dealing with certain
issues like rubbing the feet with water in prayers, combining two
prayers, rulings of the basmalah, has undoubtedly proven that the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) School is following the right path in all these issues.

[^22]: - This invocation has been mentioned in the traditions of other
Muslim sects, although somewhat different, which is to repeat the three
phrases thirty-three times each ending with the phrase allahu-akbar. One
tradition only has mentioned that the phrase allahu-akbar should be
repeated thirty-four times.

[^23]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 12-22. In this
book, general post-prayer litanies (that may be said after all prayers)
and particular ones (that are defined for each prayer) are mentioned.

[^24]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 4:849, H. 1.

[^25]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 4:849, H. 3.

[^26]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:48, H. 3.

[^27]: - The Holy Qur'an is divided into thirty parts (juz') and sixty
sub-parts (hizb). [Translator]

[^28]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:51, S. 13.

[^29]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 22-23. See also
Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 15:444-457.

[^30]: - Some traditions may hint that these voluntary prayers overlap
the daily supererogatory prayers. However, Almighty Allah best knows.

[^31]: - Qunut is an act of raising the hands for supplication in the
second units of prayers.

[^32]: - These voluntary prayers have been mentioned by al-Hurr
al-\`Amili in the fifth volume of his book Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah, pages
247, 246, 250, 286, 247, and 249 respectively.


