Weekly Acts of Worship
======================

Fridays and Thursday Nights
---------------------------

Fridays and Thursday nights represent the climax of devotional acts
during the week. In addition to the daily devotional practices, Friday
represents the climax of devotional acts.

Gradation and acceleration of the devotional rate is a method largely
used by Islam. With regard to daily worship, acceleration of devotional
acts begins at night and in the period of the early dawn up to the time
of the obligatory dawn prayer. With regard to weekly worship, this
process begins on Thursday night and continues up to the afternoon
congregational prayer on Friday.

With regard to monthly worship, the apogee lies within the nights of the
full moon (i.e. 13th, 14th, and 15th of the month according to the
Islamic lunar calendar). With regard to yearly worship, this process
hits its peak in the month of Ramadhan although it starts at the
beginning of Rajab.

With regard to the devotional acts in the month of Ramadhan, this
process is at its highest during its last ten nights, especially the
nights of Qadr, and ends on the night before ‘«d al-Fitr.

Supplications of the Days of the Week
-------------------------------------

There is a supplication for each day of the week. These supplications
are reported from Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a). They contain highly
regarded contents and the name of the day to which it is dedicated.
These supplications, again, can be found in some versions of the book
*al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah* and Shaykh al-Qummi’s *Mafatih al-Jinan*.

Prayers of the Days of the Week
-------------------------------

Shaykh al-Tusi, in his book of *Misbah al-Mutahajjid*, has reported from
the Holy Prophet (S) (or on the authority of Anas), a number of
recommended prayers for each day of the week except Friday.

As to Sayyid Ibn Tawus, he has reported—in his book of *Jamal al-Usbu’*
through a chain of authority extending to Imam al-Hasan al-Askari (‘a)—a
number of prayers for each day of the week. The majority of these
prayers and a number of the previously mentioned ones have been reported
by Shaykh al-Kaf’ami in his book of *al-Misbah*.[^1]

Shaykh al-Tusi, in the same abovementioned book, has reported, although
without mentioning the chain of authority, a number of prayers whose
rewards are dedicated to the Holy Prophet (S) and the other Infallibles
(‘a). Each prayer is offered on each day of the week and then dedicated
to each one of the Holy Infallibles (‘a) respectively. These prayers
spread over the days of two weeks.[^2]

[^1]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 5:289-294.

[^2]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 5:284.


