Monthly Acts of Worship
=======================

Devotional acts repeated each month are limited because the daily,
weekly, yearly course of devotional acts and those dedicated to the
various anniversaries and occasions are distributed among the months of
the year. Nonetheless, some devotional acts are reported as recommended
every month at regular intervals.

Prayer on the First Day of the Month
------------------------------------

There is a special prayer, with special acts offered on the first day of
each month. Some religious scholars[^1] used to offer this prayer on a
regular basis and pay special attention to it. According to the report
of Shaykh al-Tusi—in his book of *Misbah al-Mutahajjid* and through a
chain of authority, which has been determined to be authentic by some
scholars, such as al-Wahid al-Bahbahani—Imam al-Jawad (‘a) has said:

*At the beginning of each month and on the first day, a two-unit prayer
may be offered. In the first unit, Surah al-Fatihah is recited once and
Surah al-Tawhid repeated thirty times. In the second, Surah al-Fatihah
is recited once and Surah al-Qadr repeated thirty times. After
completing it, alms should be given. One who does so will gain safety
throughout that month.*[^2]

Sayyid Ibn Tawus has reported, without mentioning the chain of
authority, another two-unit prayer. In each unit of this prayer *Surah
al-Fatihah* and *Surah* *al-An’am* (No. 6) are recited once, to be
offered on the eve of the first day of each month.

Three-Day Fasting Each Month
----------------------------

As maintained by numerous traditions, one of the highly recommended acts
performed by the Holy Prophet (S) persistently up to the end of his
blessed lifetime was to fast on three days each month.

In his book of *man-la-yahdhuruhu’l-faqih*, Shaykh al-Saduq has reported
through a valid chain of authority that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

*The Holy Prophet (S) observed fasting for such a long time that people
thought that he would not break his fast. He then broke his fast for
such a long time that they thought that he would never fast anymore. He
then followed the practice of Prophet David (‘a) in fasting; that is, he
fasted once every two days. Until he departed life, he used to regularly
fast for three days every month. About this method of fasting, he said,
“Fasting on these three days is equal (in reward) to fasting for one’s
whole lifetime and it removes satanic insinuation.”… He used to fast on
the first Thursday of every month, the first Wednesday after ten days of
the same month, and on the last Thursday.*[^3]

According to another validly reported tradition, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a),
commenting on this issue, has said:

*My father used to say, “None is more hated by Almighty Allah than one
who, when informed about what the Holy Prophet (S) did, says, ‘Almighty
Allah will not torture me if I do not show painstakingness in praying
and fasting,’ thinking that because he himself failed to do certain
supererogatory acts the Holy Prophet (S) omitted doing them as
well.”*[^4]

In his book of *al-Muqni’ah*, Shaykh al-Mufid reported the Holy Prophet
(S) to have said:

*“When the deeds of my people were shown before me, I found defects and
flaws in the majority of them. I therefore added to each obligatory
prayer a supererogatory one whose units are twice as many the units of
the obligatory so that the obligatory prayer of one who offers the
supererogatory will be accepted. Verily, Almighty Allah is too Merciful
to refuse, even the third of a deed, which one of His servants does for
His sake.*

Thus, Almighty Allah has imposed upon you the offering of seventeen
units of prayer every day and night, but the Holy Prophet (S) added
thirty-four units. Likewise, Almighty Allah imposed fasting during the
month of Ramadhan every year, but the Holy Prophet (S) made it sixty
days in a year so as to perfect the duty of fasting. He therefore made
it a tradition to fast three days every month; the first and last
Thursdays of the month, and the Wednesday in the middle of the
month.[^5]

According to other traditions, this is the most important fasting
especially for those who are unable to fast in Ramadhan, being too weary
to fast on those days. Permission has been given to delay the fasting of
these days to winter or any other appropriate days. Moreover, other
traditions have allowed making up the fasting of these days at other
times or replacing them with alms that may be given as half a bushel of
food for each day.

Other traditions recommend fasting on the so-called white days of each
month: the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth.

[^1]: - The supreme religious authority, Sayyid Muhsin al-Hakim, used to
offer this prayer regularly.

[^2]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 5:286.

[^3]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:303, H. 1.

[^4]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:305, H. 5. From this
tradition and others like it we can infer the accuracy of the course of
equilibrium and moderation in acts of worship and the inaccuracy of the
course of extremism and overdoing.

[^5]: - As is maintained by some other traditions, the sixty-day fasting
is completed by the recommended fasting during the month of Sha\`ban.


