The Three Blessed Months
========================

The Month of Rajab
------------------

### Merits of Rajab

Many traditions reported from the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) demonstrate the
excellence and merits of the month of Rajab.[^1] In his books,
*al-Majalis* and *Thawab al-A’mal*, Shaykh al-Saduq has reported that
Abu-Sa’id al-Khidri quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَلاَ إِنَّ رَجَباً شَهْرُ اللهِ الأَصَمُّ وَهُوَ شَهْرٌ عَظِيمٌ،
وَإِنَّمَا سُمِّيَ الأَصَمَّ لأَِنَّهُ لاَ يُقَارِبُهُ شَيْءٌ مِنَ
الشُّهُورِ حُرْمَةً وَفَضْلاً عِنْدَ اللهِ، وَكَانَ أَهْلُ
الْجَاهِلِيَّةِ يُعَظِّمُونَهُ فِي جَاهِلِيَّتِهِمْ، فَلَمَّا جَاءَ
الإِسْلاَمُ لَمْ يَزْدَدْ إِلاَّ تَعْظِيماً وَفَضْلاً. أَلاَ إِنَّ
رَجَباً شَهْرُ اللهِ، وَشَعْبَانُ شَهْرِي، وَرَمَضَانُ شَهْرُ
أُمَّتِي. أَلاَ فَمَنْ صَامَ مِنْ رَجَبٍ يَوْماً إِيـمَاناً
وَاحْتِسَاباً إسْتَوْجَبَ رِضْوَانَ اللهِ الأَكْبَرَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Behold! The month of Rajab is the all-holy month of Almighty Allah and
it is a great month. It has been described thus because no other month
can reach its holiness and excellence before Almighty Allah. Although
they were ignorant, the people of the pre-Islamic era used to hold this
month in the highest regard, and when Islam came, this month increased
even more in veneration and excellence. Behold! Rajab is the month of
Almighty Allah, Sha’ban is my month, and Ramadhan is the month of my
people. Behold! Whoever observes fasting on one day of this month,
believing in its excellence and intending to seek the pleasure of the
Lord, will bindingly win the Grand Pleasure of the Lord.*

The Holy Prophet (S) then enumerated many rewards for those who fast for
any number of days this month.[^2]

Shaykh al-Saduq has also reported Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَجَبٌ نَهْرٌ فِي الْجَنَّةِ أَشَدُّ بَيَاضاً مِنَ اللَّبَنِ وَأَحْلَى
مِنَ الْعَسَلِ، فَمَنْ صَامَ يَوْماً مِنْ رَجَبٍ سَقَاهُ اللهُ مِنْ
ذَلِكَ النَّهْرِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Rajab is (the name of) a river in Paradise that is whiter than milk and
sweeter than honey. Hence, if one fasts for even a single day in Rajab,
Almighty Allah will allow him to drink from that river.*[^3]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَجَبٌ شَهْرٌ عَظِيمٌ يُضَاعِفُ اللهُ فِيهِ الْحَسَنَاتِ وَيَمْحُو
السَّيِّئَاتِ. وَمَنْ صَامَ يَوْماً مِنْ رَجَبٍ تَبَاعَدَتْ عَنْهُ
النُّارُ مَسِيرَةَ سَنَةٍ، وَمَنْ صَامَ ثَلاَثَةَ أَيَّامٍ وَجَبَتْ
لَهُ الْجَنَّةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Rajab is a great month during which Almighty Allah doubles the rewards
of good-actions and erases the punishments for evil-actions. If one
fasts on one day in Rajab, Hellfire moves away from him, a distance of
one year of walking. One who fasts for three days in Rajab will
bindingly win Paradise.*[^4]

Through a number of chains of authority, some of which are valid, Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ نُوحاً عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ رَكِبَ السَّفِينَةَ أَوَّلَ يَوْمٍ
مِنْ رَجَبٍ، فَأَمَرَ عَلَيْهِ السَّلاَمُ مَنْ مَعَهُ أَنْ يَصُومُوا
ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمِ. مَنْ صَامَ ذَلِكَ الْيَوْمَ تَبَاعَدَتْ عَنْهُ
النَّارُ مَسِيرَةَ سَنَةٍ، وَمَنْ صَامَ سَبْعَةَ أَيَّامٍ أُغْلِقَتْ
عَنْهُ أَبْوَابُ النِّيرَانِ السَّبْعَةُ، وَمَنْ صَامَ ثَمَانِيَةَ
أَيَّامٍ فُتِحَتْ لَهُ أَبْوَابُ الْجِنَانِ الثَّمَانِيَةُ، وَمَنْ
صَامَ خَمْسَةَ عَشَرَ يَوْماً أُعْطِيَ مَسْأَلَتَهُ، وَمَنْ زَادَ
زَادَهُ اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*On the first of Rajab, (Prophet) Noah (‘a) embarked on the Ark; he
therefore ordered those who accompanied him to fast on that day. If one
fasts on this day in Rajab, Hellfire will go away from him a distance of
one year on foot. If one fasts for seven days of Rajab, the seven gates
of the Fire will close in his face. If one fasts for eight days of
Rajab, the eight gates of Paradise will be wide open before him. If one
fasts for fifteen days, his request will be granted. If one fasts for
more days, he will gain more rewards from Almighty Allah.*[^5]

### Rites of Rajab

Shaykh al-Qummi, in *Mafatih al-Jinan*, has divided the rites of Rajab
into two sections.

**The first section** comprises the general rites that one is advised to
practice each day of the month. These rites are as follows:

### Supplications

A number of supplications with highly regarded contents should be
recited every day of Rajab as reported from Imam Zayn al-’Abidin, Imam
al-Sadiq, and Imam al-Mahdi, peace be upon them all.[^6]

### Formulas of Ziyarah

There is a special formula of *ziyarah* that can be read when visiting
the tombs of all the Holy Imams (‘a) which is known as *al-ziyarah
al-rajabiyyah* (i.e. the *ziyarah* of Rajab).[^7]

### Litanies

Various formulas seeking forgiveness are reported for every day in
Rajab, such as the following one, which should be repeated one hundred
times followed by almsgiving:

*I ask the forgiveness of Allah. There is no god save Him, He is alone
without any partner, and I repent before Him.*[^8]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ا سْتَغْفِرُ ٱللّهَ ٱلَّذِي لاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ وَحْدَهُ لا شَرِيكَ
لَهُ وَا تُوبُ إِلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The following litany is advised to be repeated one thousand times every
day in Rajab:

There is no god save Allah.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللّهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Another litany that is advised is repeating one hundred times every day
in Rajab is the following:

*Glory be to God, the All-majestic. Glory be to Him other than Whom none
should be glorified. Glory be to the All-honorable, the All-dignified.
Glory be to Him Who has dressed Himself with grandeur that fits none but
Him.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ الإِلٰهِ ٱلْجَلِيلِ سُبْحَانَ مَنْ لاَ يَنْبَغِي
ٱلتَّسْبِيحُ إِلاَّ لَهُ سُبْحَانَ ٱلا عَزِّ ٱلا كْرَمِ سُبْحَانَ مَنْ
لَبِسَ ٱلْعِزَّ وَهُوَ لَهُ ا هْلٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Reports advise that one who is incapable of fasting during the month of
Rajab may repeat this litany one hundred times each day.[^9]

### Recitation of the Holy Qur'an

It is highly recommended to recite the Holy Qur'an in general and in
particular to repeat *Surah* *al-Tawhid* ten thousand times throughout
this month.[^10]

Likewise, it is recommended to repeat the following *Surah*s and
litanies three times each day and each night in the months of Rajab,
Sha’ban, and Ramadhan:

*Surah al-Fatihah*, *Ayat al-Kursi*, *Surah* *al-Kafirun*, *Surah*
*al-Tawhid*, *Surah* *al-Falaq*, *Surah* *al-Nas*, and the following
litany:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ ٱللّهِ وَٱلْحَمْدُ لِلّهِ وَلاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللّهُ
وَٱللّهُ ا كْبَرُ وَلاَ حَوْلَ وَلاَ قُوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِٱللّهِ
ٱلْعَلِيِّ ٱلْعَظِيمِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All glory be to Allah; all praise be to Allah; there is no god save
Allah; Allah is the Greatest;* *and there is neither might nor power
save with Allah, the All-high the All-great.*

The following invocation:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, send blessings upon Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad.*

The following supplication:

*O Allah, (please do) forgive the believing men and women.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ ٱغْفِرْ لِلْمُؤْمِنِينَ وَٱلْمُؤْمِنَاتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

The following prayer of forgiveness, four hundred times:

*I pray to Allah for forgiveness and I repent before Him.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ا سْتَغْفِرُ ٱللّهَ وَا تُوبُ إِلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Whoever does the above, will have all his sins forgiven, no matter how
many they are.

This rite combines recitations of the Holy Qur'an with litanies and
supplications.

### Multiform Prayers

On each night of Rajab, it is recommended to offer the following
prayers:

**A two-unit prayer**, in each unit of which *Surah al-Fatihah* is
recited once and *Surah* *al-Tawhid* one hundred times,

**A ten-unit prayer**, in each unit of which *Surah al-Fatihah* is
recited once, *Surah* *al-Kafirun* once, and *Surah* *al-Tawhid* three
times.

**A sixty-unit prayer**, of which a two unit prayer is offered on each
night of the month In each unit *Surah al-Fatihah* is recited once,
*Surah* *al-Kafirun* three times, and *Surah* *al-Tawhid* once. Upon
completion, the hands should be raised towards the sky and the following
litany recited:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللّهُ وَحْدَهُ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَهُ لَهُ ٱلْمُلْكُ
وَلَهُ ٱلْحَمْدُ يُحْيِي وَيُمِيتُ وَهُوَ حَيٌّ لاَ يَمُوتُ بِيَدِهِ
ٱلْخَيْرُ وَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ اَللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَى
مُحَمَّدٍ ٱلنَّبِيِّ ٱلا مِّيِّ وَآلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There is no god save Allah, the One and Only, without any partner. To
him is the kingdom and to Him is all praise. He gives life and causes to
die while He is Ever-living and never dies. In His hand is the good and
He has power over all things O Allah, (please) bless Muhammad, the
Meccan Prophet, and his Household.*

It is then recommended to pass one’s hands over the face while saying
the last sentence of this litany. A great reward awaits those who offer
these prayers.[^11]

**The Second Section** deals with devotional acts performed on the
special nights and days of Rajab. The most important of these acts are
as follows:

### Acts of the First Night and Day of Rajab

On the first day of Rajab, it is recommended **to fast**. Next, say a
special supplication on sighting the new moon (at night), then bathe,
visit Imam Husayn (‘a) (at night and during the day) as has been
previously instructed, and offer **a twenty-unit prayer after the
obligatory sunset prayer,** in each unit of which *Surah al-Fatihah* and
*Surah* *al-Tawhid* should be recited.

The first night of Rajab is one of the four nights (of the year) that
should be spent in acts of worship.

On this night, **a thirty-unit prayer,** in each unit of which *Surah
al-Fatihah* is recited once, *Surah* *al-Kafirun* once, and *Surah*
*al-Tawhid* three times, should be offered. There is also another prayer
of two units, in each unit of which *Surah al-Fatihah* is recited once
and *Surah* *al-Inshirah* (No. 94) three times. A supplication reported
from Imam al-Jawad (‘a) is said in addition to other acts.[^12]

In addition to fasting on the first day of Rajab, the famous thirty-unit
prayer of Salman al-Farsi is started on this day by offering ten units,
the second ten units are offered on the fifteenth, and the third on the
last day of the month. This highly regarded prayer is followed by a
litany and a supplication.[^13]

### Salat al-Ragha'ib (Prayer of Desires)

On the first Thursday night of Rajab, after fasting during the day, it
is highly recommended to offer the **twelve-unit prayer known as**
***Salat al-Ragha'ib*****,** which is offered in the period between
sunset and the early night prayer. Upon accomplishment of this prayer,
it is recommended to repeat the invocation of Almighty Allah’s blessings
upon the Holy Prophet and his Household seventy times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِ مُحَمَّدٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, send blessings upon Muhammad and the Household of Muhammad.*

Then, one should prostrate and repeat the following litany seventy
times:

*Glorified (is He). Holy (is He). (He is) the Lord of the angels and the
Spirit.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبُّوحٌ قُدُّوسٌ رَبُّ ٱلْمَلاَئِكَةِ وَٱلرُّوحِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then, raise the head from the prostration and repeat the following
litany seventy times:

*O my Lord, (please) forgive (me), have mercy (upon me), and overlook
(my wrongdoings) that You know. Surely, You are the Most High, the
Greatest.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَبِّ ٱغْفِرْ وَٱرْحَمْ وَتَجَاوَزْ عَمَّا تَعْلَمُ إنَّكَ اَنْتَ
ٱلْعَلِيُّ ٱلاَعْظَمُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

One may then return to the prostration position and repeat the same
litany seventy times:

*Glorified (is He). Holy (is He). (He is) the Lord of the angels and the
Spirit.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبُّوحٌ قُدُّوسٌ رَبُّ ٱلْمَلاَئِكَةِ وَٱلرُّوحِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then, one may pray to Almighty Allah to grant him his requests, which
will be granted if Allah wills.

About this prayer, the Holy Prophet (S) is reported to have said:

*I swear this by Him Who grasps my soul in His Hand: no male or female
servant (of Allah) offers this prayer but that Allah shall certainly
forgive all his or her sins even if they are as much as the foam of
seas. He/she shall gain the right to intercede for seven hundred persons
from his/her relatives already sentenced to Hellfire.*[^14]

### Prayer on the Bright (Moonlit) Nights of Rajab, Sha’ban, and Ramadhan

It has been reported that whoever offers this prayer will win the merits
of the three months and will have all his sins, except polytheism,
forgiven by Almighty Allah. Two units of this prayer may be offered on
the thirteenth night, four units on the fourteenth, and six on the
fifteenth. In each unit, *Surah al-Fatihah*, *Surah* *Yasin* (No. 36),
*Surah* *al-Mulk* (No. 67) and *Surah* *al-Tawhid* are recited once.
Each couple of units should be separated from the next couple by the
*Taslim* statement.

On the fifteenth day of Rajab, the famous devotional act known as the
Ummi-Dawud Rite may be done. This practice begins by fasting on the
fifteenth day, reciting the Holy Qur'an and offering supplicatory
prayers. Its advantage is that it contributes to having one’s requests
granted by Almighty Allah, relieves one’s agonies, and saves one from
the harm of tyrannical rulers. Details of this practice have been
mentioned in *Mafatih al-Jinan*. It is highly recommended to fast on the
thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth of Rajab.

### Rites of the Night of Mid-Rajab

On the fifteenth night of Rajab, it is recommended to take the ritual
bath (*ghusl*), visit Imam Husayn (‘a), offer the second part of the
prayer of Salman al-Farsi, offer another special prayer, and say a
supplication that is dedicated to this day, and spend the whole night in
devotional acts. Moreover, this night shares with the twenty-seventh
night of the month in a special prayer.

### Rites of the Twenty-Seventh Night and Day of Rajab

A previous reference has been made to this day, which is celebrated by
the Shi’ah as the **Day of the Divine Mission**.

About the rewards of the rites that are practiced on the twenty-seventh
night of Rajab, Imam al-Jawad (‘a) is reported to have said:

*There is a night in Rajab, which carries for people goodness that is
more beneficial to them than whatever is exposed to sunlight. It is the
twenty-seventh night in the morning of which the Holy Prophet’s Divine
Mission started. Verily, one who does acts of worship on this night will
have the same reward as one who has worshipped Almighty Allah for sixty
years.*

When the Imam (‘a) was asked about the rites to be practiced on this
night, he answered:

*After you offer the Evening Prayer if you take a nap, you will wake up
at any hour before midnight. You may then offer a twelve-unit prayer, in
each unit of which you may recite Surah al-Fatihah and any other short
Surah from the Mufassal, which begins with Surah Muhammad (No. 47) up to
the end of the Holy Qur'an. You should separate each couple of units
with the Taslim statement. After accomplishing this prayer, you should
recite Surahs al-Fatihah, al-Falaq, al-Nas, al-Tawhid, al-Kafirun,
al-Qadr, and Ayat al-Kursi each seven times. After all this, you should
say the following doxology and supplication:*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَلْحَمْدُ لِلّهِ ٱلَّذِي لَمْ يَتَّخِذْ وَلَداً وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ
شَرِيكٌ فِي ٱلْمُلْكِ وَلَمْ يَكُنْ لَهُ وَلِيٌّ مِنَ ٱلذُّلِّ
وَكَبِّرْهُ تَكْبِيراً اَللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي ا سْا لُكَ بِمَعَاقِدِ
عِزِّكَ عَلَىٰ ا رْكَانِ عَرْشِكَ وَمُنْتَهَىٰ ٱلرَّحْمَةِ مِنْ
كِتَابِكَ وَبِٱسْمِكَ ٱلا عْظَمِ ٱلا عْظَمِ ٱلا عْظَمِ وَذِكْرِكَ ٱلا
عْلَىٰ ٱلا عْلَىٰ ٱلا عْلَىٰ وَبِكَلِمَاتِكَ ٱلتَّامَّاتِ ا نْ
تُصَلِّيَ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَآلِهِ وَا نْ تَفْعَلَ بِي مَا ا نْتَ ا
هْلُهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All praise be to Allah, Who has not taken to Himself any son, and Who
has no partner in sovereignty, nor has He any protecting friend through
dependence. And magnify Him with all magnificence. O Allah, verily I
beseech You in the name of Your Dignity on the pillars of Your Throne,
and in the name of Your utmost Mercy in Your Book. I beseech You in the
name of Your Name—the Greatest, the Greatest, the Greatest, and in the
name of Your Mention—the Highest, the Highest, the Highest, and in the
name of Your Words, the perfect, that You may bless Muhammad and his
Household and do with me that which befits You.*

*You may then submit your desires.*[^15]

On this night too, it is recommended to perform the ritual bath, visit
Imam ‘Ali (‘a), and offer the prayer to which an earlier reference has
been made within the rites regarding the night of mid-Rajab.[^16]

On the last day of Rajab, it is recommended to offer the rest of the
units of the prayer of Salman al-Farsi, perform the ritual bath, and
fast, for this deed contributes to having all the sins forgiven, both
the past and the coming.[^17]

The Month of Sha’ban
--------------------

### Merits of Sha’ban

Many traditions have been reported about the merits of the month of
Sha’ban and the great rewards obtained from practicing devotional acts
during it. The Holy Prophet (S), to whom this month is attributed, used
to fast during this month and encourage others to imitate him by
connecting the fasting of this month with the obligatory fasting of
Ramadhan.

Shaykh al-Qummi has referred, yet briefly, to some of these traditions.

Imam Ja’far al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to have said:

*Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) used to gather all his
companions at the beginning of Sha’ban and say to them, “O my
companions, do you know what this month is? It is Sha’ban. The Holy
Prophet (S) used to say, ‘Sha’ban is my month.’ You should thus fast
during this month as a sign of your love for your Prophet (S) and as a
sign of seeking nearness to your Lord. I swear by Him, Who grasps my
soul in His Hand, that I heard my father Husayn (‘a), saying that he
heard Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), saying: ‘Any one
who fasts during Sha’ban for the love of the Messenger of Allah (S) to
seek nearness to Almighty Allah, Almighty Allah will love him, and draw
him nearer to Himself on the Day of Resurrection, and definitely reward
him with Paradise.’”*[^18]

Shaykh al-Tusi has narrated on the authority of Safwan al-Jammal that
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) instructed him to urge all people that he knew to
fast during Sha’ban.

“May Allah accept me as ransom for you! There is a reason for this
instruction. Is there not?” asked Safwan al-Jammal.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) answered:

Yes, there is. When his eyes fell on the new moon of Sha’ban, the
Messenger of Allah (S) ordered somebody to declare the following to the
people of al-Madinah:

“O people of Yathrib, I bring the message of Allah’s Messenger (S) to
you all. Verily, Sha’ban is my month; therefore, may Allah have mercy
upon him who helps me undertake my month.”

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) then added:

The Commander of the Faithful (Imam ‘Ali) used to say, ‘I never missed
fasting during Sha’ban since I heard the call of the Messenger of Allah
(S) about this month. Furthermore, I shall never miss it as long as I am
alive, Allah willing.’

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) further said:

*To fast for two consecutive months is considered as Almighty Allah’s
acceptance of one’s repentance.*[^19]

Isma’il ibn ‘Abd al-Khaliq narrated that when the subject of fasting
during Sha’ban was once discussed in the presence of him, Imam Ja’far
al-Sadiq (‘a) said:

*The merits of fasting during Sha’ban are so great that even one who
sheds inviolable blood is expected to be forgiven.*[^20]

Through a valid chain of authority, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported that
al-Halabi, once, asked Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) whether any of his fathers
fasted during Sha’ban.

He was thus answered as follows:

*The best of all my fathers did. That is, the Holy Messenger (S).*[^21]

According to another tradition also reported by Shaykh al-Kulayni
through a valid chain of authority, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) has said:

*When they had some days to fast, the wives of the Holy Prophet (S)
would postpone them to the month of Sha’ban so that they would not
prevent him from getting what he might want from them. In Sha’ban, they
and the Holy Prophet (S) would fast. The Holy Prophet (S) used to say,
“Sha’ban is my month.”*[^22]

In *man-la-yahdhuruhu’l-faqih*, Shaykh al-Saduq has reported through a
valid chain of authority from some scholars—and others from other chains
of authority—that Imam al-Baqir (‘a) said:

*Whoever fasts during the month of Sha’ban, his fasting will purify him
of all oaths and vows made to commit disobedience including oaths
uttered in anger. When a person regrets such oaths, this acts as an
apology for them.*[^23]

In *Thawab al-A’mal*, Shaykh al-Saduq has also reported, through a valid
chain of authority on the authority of Isma’il ibn Ziyad on the
authority of Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), that the Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
شَعْبَانُ شَهْرِي، وَرَمَضَانُ شَهْرُ اللهِ وَهُوَ رَبِيعُ
الْفُقَرَاءِ. وَإِنَّمَا جُعِلَ الأَضْحَى لِيَشْبَعَ مَسَاكِينُكُمْ
مِنَ اللَّحْمِ فَأَطْعِمُوهُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Sha’ban is my month and Ramadhan is the month of Allah. It is also the
springtime of the poor. The ‘«d al-Adhha Feast has been established so
that the indigent among you may eat their fill of meat; therefore, you
should serve them with meat.*[^24]

It has been also narrated that fasting during the month of Sha’ban is
one of the means of gaining the Holy Prophet’s intercession on the Day
of Resurrection[^25] and to fast during as many days as possible of this
month improves one’s livelihood, protects against the evil of enemies,
and allows entrance to Paradise.[^26]

### Rites of Sha’ban

As usual, Shaykh al-Qummi has divided the rites of Sha’ban into two
sections: The first section involves the general rites that are
practiced each day in the month without distinction, while the second
section involves the particular rites that are dedicated to certain days
and nights of the month.

The rites of the earlier section can be summarized thus:

### Fasting

The most important and highlighted rite in the month of Sha’ban is
fasting, which is the distinctive feature of this month, as understood
by the abovementioned traditions.

### Litanies

On every day of Sha’ban, it is highly recommended to say certain
litanies, especially implorations seeking forgiveness. According to
several traditions, it is greatly encouraged to implore Almighty Allah
for forgiveness seventy times a day. One who practices it regularly will
be included in the Holy Prophet’s group on the Day of Resurrection and
gain the nearness of Almighty Allah. He will be granted remission of
Hellfire and permission to pass the Discriminating Bridge (*sirat*) into
Paradise and the Abode of Settlement and have all his sins forgiven by
Almighty Allah, even if they be as many as the stars in the sky.

Other traditions have confirmed that to repeat the prayer seeking
forgiveness seventy times a day in Sha’ban is equal to repeating it
seventy thousand times during other months. The formula of this prayer
may be one of the following:

*I seek the forgiveness of Allah and I pray to Him for approval of my
repentance.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ا سْتَغْفِرُ ٱللّهَ وَا سْا لُهُ ٱلتَّوْبَةَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
ا سْتَغْفِرُ ٱللّهَ ٱلَّذِي لاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ هُوَ ٱلرَحْمٰنُ
ٱلرَّحِيمُ ٱلْحَيُّ ٱلْقَيُّوْمُ وَا تُوبُ إِلَيْهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*I seek forgiveness of Allah, there is no god save Whom, the
All-beneficent, the All-merciful, the Ever-living, the Everlasting, and
to Him I turn repentant.*[^27]

Another litany that is reported directly from the Holy Prophet (S) in
Sayyid Ibn Tawus’s *Iqbal al-A’mal* is recommended to be repeated one
thousand times every day during the month of Sha’ban for great reward:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللّهُ وَلاَ نَعْبُدُ إِلاَّ إِيَّاهُ مُخْلِصِينَ
لَهُ ٱلدِّينَ وَلَوْ كَرِهَ ٱلْمُشْرِكُونَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*There is no god save Allah; and we serve none save Him, being sincere
to Him in obedience, though the unbelievers are averse.*[^28]

### Almsgiving

Because Sha’ban is described by some traditions as the springtime of the
poor, it is highly recommended to give as many alms as possible during
this month. Other traditions describe almsgiving in Sha’ban as follows:

*Verily, if any one of you gives alms in Sha’ban, Almighty Allah will
breed and multiply those alms in the very same way you breed your
camels. Hence, these alms will be as huge as Mount Uhud on the Day of
Resurrection.*[^29]

Moreover, to give alms in this month, even if they be as small as a half
date, brings about release from Hellfire.[^30]

### Invocations of Blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his Household

During the month of Sha’ban, it is highly recommended to invoke Almighty
Allah’s blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his Household as much as
possible. In this respect, Ahmad ibn ‘«sa, in his book of *al-Nawadir*,
has reported through a valid chain of authority that Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
quoted the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
رَجَبٌ شَهْرُ الإسْتِغْفَارِ لأُِمَّتِي. أَكْثِرُوا فِيهِ مِنَ
الإسْتِغْفَارِ، فَإِنَّهُ غَفُورٌ رَحِيمٌ… وَأَكْثِرُوا فِي شَعْبَانَ
مِنَ الصَّلَوَاتِ عَلَى نَبِيِّكُمْ… وَإِنَّمَا سُمِّيَ شَعْبَانُ
شَهْرَ الشَّفَاعَةِ لأَِنَّ رَسُولَكُمْ يَشْفَعُ لِكُلِّ مَنْ يُصَلِّي
عَلَيْهِ فِيهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*For my people, Rajab is the month of praying for forgiveness;
therefore, implore Almighty Allah for forgiveness in this month as
frequently as possible. In Sha’ban, invoke Almighty Allah’s blessings
upon your Prophet as many times as possible. The month of Sha’ban is
called the month of intercession, because your Messenger will intercede
for every one who invokes Almighty Allah’s blessing upon him in this
month.*[^31]

Some traditions carry a wonderful formula of invoking Almighty Allah’s
blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his Household in the month of
Sha’ban along with a magnificent supplication through which the
suppliant seeks the mediation of the Holy Prophet (S).[^32]

### Supplications and Whispered Prayers (Munajat)

There are special supplications and whispered prayers to be said on
every day of Sha’ban. Although traditions have not referred to certain
supplications in this respect, the Whispered Prayer (*Munajat*) that is
reported by Ibn Khalawayh who ascribes it to Imam ‘Ali (‘a) and the Holy
Imams (‘a) is familiarly known. This piece of whispered prayer, known as
*al-Munajat al-Sha’baniyyah*, contains highly regarded Gnostic
statements.[^33]

The second section involves the rites to be done on **special nights and
days of Sha’ban.** Books of *ziyarah* and recommended acts, as well as
some traditions, reveal that there are five times in which special
interest should be taken. These times are as follows:

#### First: The first night and day of Sha’ban

Much emphasis has been laid on fasting on the first day of Sha’ban.
Sayyid Ibn Tawus has mentioned a prayer to be offered on the first three
nights of this month.

#### Second: Thursdays of Sha’ban

There is a special two-unit prayer, in each unit of which *Surah
al-Fatihah* is recited once and *Surah* *al-Tawhid* repeated one hundred
times to be offered on the Thursdays of Sha’ban. Upon completion, the
invocation of Almighty Allah’s blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his
Household is repeated one hundred times. Once this prayer is offered,
all the requests of this world and the Next World will be granted.

#### Third: The Third of Sha’ban

Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Misbah al-Mutahajjid*, has reported on the authority
of Imam al-Hasan al-’Askari (‘a) the recommendation of fasting on the
third of Sha’ban, which is the birth anniversary of Imam Husayn (‘a). On
this day too, there is a special supplication to be said. In fact, this
supplication involves statements of beseeching Almighty Allah in the
name of Imam Husayn (‘a) and the Holy Imams (‘a). It also holds highly
regarded contents that express loyalty to Imam Husayn (‘a) and the Holy
Imams (‘a) and commitment to their course.

Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) is reported to recommend saying the supplication that
Imam Husayn (‘a) said on ‘Ashura' after he had been surrounded by the
enemies.[^34]

#### Fourth: The mid-Sha’ban Night

Previous references given in the section regarding specific nights and
days confirm the merits and rites of this night.

#### Fifth: The Last Days and the Last Night of Sha’ban

About these days, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) is reported to have said: If one
fasts during the last three days of Sha’ban in order to attach it to the
obligatory fasting of Ramadhan, Almighty Allah will determine that he
has fasted for two consecutive months.[^35]

Abu’l-Salt al-Harawi has narrated that when he visited Imam al-Ridha
(‘a) on the last Friday of Sha’ban, the Imam said to him:

*O Abu’l-Salt, the majority of the days of Sha’ban have passed. This is
its last Friday. You should thus make up for what you have missed in
this month by working hard in the rest. You may supplicate, implore
forgiveness of Almighty Allah, recite the Holy Qur'an, and repent to
Almighty Allah for your sins so that you arrive at the month of Ramadhan
with pure sincerity to Him. You must fulfill all the trusts that you are
responsible for settling, you must not bear malice against any of your
brethren-in-faith, and you must give up any sin that you commit. Fear
Almighty Allah and trust Him secretly and openly, for* ***‘If any one
puts his trust in Allah, then Allah shall be a sufficient protector for
him. Allah will surely accomplish his purpose. Verily, for all things
has Allah appointed a due proportion.’(65:3)***

In the rest of the days of Sha’ban, you may repeat much the following
supplication, for Almighty Allah saves many people from Hellfire on
account of the sanctity of this month:

*O Allah, If You have not forgiven us in the past days of Sha’ban,
(please do) forgive us in* *the rest of it.*[^36]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ إِنْ لَمْ تَكُنْ غَفَرْتَ لَنَا فِيمَا مَضَىٰ مِنْ
شَعْبَانَ فَٱغْفِرْ لَنَا فِيمَا بَقِيَ مِنْهُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Likewise, a supplication to be said on the last night of Sha’ban and the
first night of Ramadhan is reported from Imam al-Sadiq (‘a).[^37]

The Month Of Ramadhan
---------------------

### Merits of Ramadhan

Traditions have described Ramadhan as the most preferred of all months
without exception. The Holy Qur'an reads:

> شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ الَّذِي أُنْزِلَ فِيهِ الْقُرْآنُ هُدًى لِلنَّاسِ
> وَبَيِّنَاتٍ مِنَ الْهُدَى وَالْفُرْقَانِ(185)

***The month of Ramadhan is that in which the Qur'an was revealed, a
guidance to men and clear proofs of the guidance and the distinction.
(2:185)***

Another reason is that it contains the Night of Qadr, which is more
preferred than one thousand months. It is also a blessed night on which
all divine decrees are decided.

Almighty Allah has imposed fasting during this month because of its
excellence and high regard so that people pay more attention to it.

**Ramadhan is thus the month of:**

• **Fasting**

• **Patience and devotional acts, because there are many supererogatory
prayers and rites to be carried out during this month**

• **Devotional confinement to mosques (*****i’tikaf*****)**

• **The Holy Qur'an and the learning of religious laws and beliefs**

• **Supplications, whispered prayers, and litanies**

• **Almsgiving and generous spending**

• **Struggle with the self and against enemies**

• **Repentance**

• **Forgiveness and mercy**

• **Release from Hellfire and gaining of Paradise**

One of the most magnificent texts about the merits and excellences of
Ramadhan may be the Holy Prophet’s famous sermon that he (S) delivered
on the last Friday of Sha’ban to make people realize the actual standing
of the month of Ramadhan.

This sermon has been reported by Shaykh al-Saduq in his two books of
*al-Amali* and *‘Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha* through a highly valid chain of
authority known as the Golden Chain of Authority:[^38]

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّهُ قَدْ أَقْبَلَ إِلَيْكُمْ شَهْرُ اللَّهِ
بِالْبَرَكَةِ وَالرَّحْمَةِ وَالْمَغْفِرَةِ شَهْرٌ هُوَعِنْدَ اللَّهِ
أَفْضَلُ الشُّهُورِ وَأَيَّامُهُ أَفْضَلُ الأَيَّامِ وَلَيَالِيهِ
أَفْضَلُ اللَّيَالِي وَسَاعَاتُهُ أَفْضَلُ السَّاعَاتِ هُوَشَهْرٌ
دُعِيتُمْ فِيهِ إِلَى ضِيَافَةِ اللَّهِ وَجُعِلْتُمْ فِيهِ مِنْ أَهْلِ
كَرَامَةِ اللَّهِ أَنْفَاسُكُمْ فِيهِ تَسْبِيحٌ وَنَوْمُكُمْ فِيهِ
عِبَادَةٌ وَعَمَلُكُمْ فِيهِ مَقْبُولٌ وَدُعَاؤُكُمْ فِيهِ مُسْتَجَابٌ
فَسَلُوا اللَّهَ رَبَّكُمْ بِنِيَّاتٍ صَادِقَةٍ وَقُلُوبٍ طَاهِرَةٍ
أَنْ يُوَفِّقَكُمْ لِصِيَامِهِ وَتِلاوَةِ كِتَابِهِ فَإِنَّ الشَّقِيَّ
مَنْ حُرِمَ غُفْرَانَ اللَّهِ فِي هَذَا الشَّهْرِ الْعَظِيمِ
وَاذْكُرُوا بِجُوعِكُمْ وَعَطَشِكُمْ فِيهِ جُوعَ يَوْمِ الْقِيَامَةِ
وَعَطَشَهُ وَتَصَدَّقُوا عَلَى فُقَرَائِكُمْ وَمَسَاكِينِكُمْ وَ
قِّرُوا كِبَارَكُمْ وَارْحَمُوا صِغَارَكُمْ وَصِلُوا أَرْحَامَكُمْ
وَاحْفَظُوا أَلْسِنَتَكُمْ وَغُضُّوا عَمَّا لا يَحِلُّ النَّظَرُ
إِلَيْهِ أَبْصَارَكُمْ وَعَمَّا لا يَحِلُّ الاسْتَِماعُ إِلَيْهِ
أَسْمَاعَكُمْ وَتَحَنَّنُوا عَلَى أَيْتَامِ النَّاسِ يُتَحَنَّنْ عَلَى
أَيْتَامِكُمْ وَتُوبُوا إِلَى اللَّهِ مِنْ ذُنُوبِكُمْ وَارْفَعُوا
إِلَيْهِ أَيْدِيَكُمْ بِالدُّعَاءِ فِي أَوْقَاتِ صَلَوَاتِكُمْ
فَإِنَّهَا أَفْضَلُ السَّاعَاتِ يَنْظُرُ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ فِيهَا
بِالرَّحْمَةِ إِلَى عِبَادِهِ يُجِيبُهُمْ إِذَا نَاجَوْهُ
وَيُلَبِّيهِمْ إِذَا نَادَوْهُ وَيَسْتَجِيبُ لَهُمْ إِذَا دَعَوْهُ
أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّ أَنْفُسَكُمْ مَرْهُونَةٌ بِأَعْمَالِكُمْ
فَفُكُّوهَا بِاسْتِغْفَارِكُمْ وَظُهُورُكُمْ ثَقِيلَةٌ مِنْ
أَوْزَارِكُمْ فَخَفِّفُوا عَنْهَا بِطُولِ سُجُودِكُمْ وَاعْلَمُوا
أَنَّ اللَّهَ تَعَالَى ذِكْرُهُ أَقْسَمَ بِعِزَّتِهِ أَنْ لا يُعَذِّبَ
الْمُصَلِّينَ وَالسَّاجِدِينَ وَأَنْ لا يُرَوِّعَهُمْ بِالنَّارِ
يَوْمَ يَقُومُ النَّاسُ لِرَبِّ الْعالَمِينَ أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ مَنْ
فَطَّرَ مِنْكُمْ صَائِماً مُؤْمِناً فِي هَذَا الشَّهْرِ كَانَ لَهُ
بِذَلِكَ عِنْدَ اللَّهِ عِتْقُ رَقَبَةٍ وَمَغْفِرَةٌ لِمَا مَضَى مِنْ
ذُنُوبِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O people, the month of Allah (Ramadhan) has come to you with blessings,
mercy, and forgiveness. This is the noblest of the months to Him. Its
days are the noblest of days. Its nights are noblest of the nights. It
is the month in which you are invited to be Allah’s guests. You have
been established as those honored by Him in this month. Your breathing
in this month is considered words of His glorification, your sleeping is
worship, your deeds are accepted by Him, and your supplications to Him
are fulfilled. Then, ask Allah, your Lord, with sincere intentions and
pure hearts to help you succeed in fasting this month and reciting His
Book.*

*Whoever is deprived of Allah’s forgiveness in this great month is at a
real loss. Remember the thirst and hunger of the Day of Resurrection
through this thirst and hunger. Give charity to your poor and indigent
ones, respect your elder ones, be kind to the younger ones, visit your
relations of kin, watch your tongues, lower your eyes against what they
are forbidden to look at, and guard your ears against what they are
forbidden to hear. Be kind to other people’s orphans so that others may
be kind to your orphans. Repent before Allah for your sins.*

*Raise your hands up towards Him in supplication at the times of prayer.
These times are the noblest of the hours during which the Honorable and
Exalted God looks upon His servants with mercy, responds when they make
supplications to Him, replies to them when they call Him, and fulfills
for them what they ask for. O people, you are tied down by your deeds.
Free yourselves by means of supplications. Your backs are overburdened
with your sins. Make them lighter by means of extended prostrations.*

*Know that the Sublime God has sworn by His Honor that He will not
punish or throw into Hellfire those who pray and fall in prostration on
the Day on which all the people will rise for the Lord of the Worlds. O
people, the reward with the Honorable and Exalted God for whoever
provides for the breaking of the fast of any believer in this month is
like that of freeing a slave and the forgiveness of all past sins.*

The people said, “O Prophet of God, not all of us are able to do that.”

Then, the Holy Prophet (S) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اتَّقُوا النَّارَ وَلَوْ بِشِقِّ تَمْرَةٍ. إتَّقُوا النَّارَ وَلَوْ
بِشَرْبَةٍ مِنْ مَاءٍ. أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ مَنْ حَسُنَ مِنْكُمْ فِي
هَذَا الشَّهْرِ خُلُقُهُ كَانَ لَهُ جَوَازاً عَلَى الصِّرَاطِ يَوْمَ
تَزِلُّ فِيهِ الأَقْدَامُ وَمَنْ خَفَّفَ فِي هَذَا الشَّهْرِ عَمَّا
مَلَكَتْ يَمِينُهُ خَفَّفَ اللَّهُ عَلَيْهِ حِسَابَهُ وَمَنْ كَفَّ
فِيهِ شَرَّهُ كَفَّ اللَّهُ عَنْهُ غَضَبَهُ يَوْمَ يَلْقَاهُ وَمَنْ
أَكْرَمَ فِيهِ يَتِيماً أَكْرَمَهُ اللَّهُ يَوْمَ يَلْقَاهُ وَمَنْ
وَصَلَ فِيهِ رَحِمَهُ وَصَلَهُ اللَّهُ بِرَحْمَتِهِ يَوْمَ يَلْقَاهُ
وَمَنْ قَطَعَ فِيهِ رَحِمَهُ قَطَعَ اللَّهُ عَنْهُ رَحْمَتَهُ يَوْمَ
يَلْقَاهُ وَمَنْ تَطَوَّعَ فِيهِ بِصَلاةٍ كَتَبَ اللَّهُ لَهُ
بَرَاءَةً مِنَ النَّارِ وَمَنْ أَدَّى فِيهِ فَرْضاً كَانَ لَهُ ثَوَابُ
مَنْ أَدَّى سَبْعِينَ فَرِيضَةً فِيَما سِوَاهُ مِنَ الشُّهُورِ وَمَنْ
أَكْثَرَ فِيهِ مِنَ الصَّلاةِ عَلَيَّ ثَقَّلَ اللَّهُ مِيزَانَهُ
يَوْمَ تَخِفُّ الْمَوَازِينُ وَمَنْ تَلا فِيهِ آيَةً مِنَ الْقُرْآنِ
كَانَ لَهُ مِثْلُ أَجْرِ مَنْ خَتَمَ الْقُرْآنَ فِي غَيْرِهِ مِنَ
الشُّهُورِ. أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ إِنَّ أَبْوَابَ الْجِنَانِ فِي هَذَا
الشَّهْرِ مُفَتَّحَةٌ فَسَلُوا رَبَّكُمْ أَنْ لا يُغَلِّقَهَا
عَلَيْكُمْ وَأَبْوَابَ النِّيرَانِ مُغَلَّقَةٌ فَسَلُوا رَبَّكُمْ أَنْ
لا يُفَتِّحَهَا عَلَيْكُمْ وَالشَّيَاطِينَ مَغْلُولَةٌ فَسَلُوا
رَبَّكُمْ أَنْ لا يُسَلِّطَهَا عَلَيْكُمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Fend off the Fire from yourselves (by providing for the breaking of the
fast of any believer) even if it be with a piece of a date. Fend off the
Fire from yourselves (by providing for the breaking of the fast of any
believer) even if it be with a sip of water. O people, whoever behaves
courteously in this month will easily cross the Discriminating Bridge on
the Day of Judgment on which one’s steps are not firm. Allah will ease
the reckoning of whoever takes it easy with those whom his right hand
possesses (i.e. servants) in this month. On the Day one meets Him, Allah
will withhold His Wrath from whoever controls his wickedness in this
month. On the Day one meets Him, Allah will honor whoever honors an
orphan in this month. On the Day one meets Him, Allah will shower His
mercy upon whoever maintains family ties in this month. Allah will
deprive of His mercy whoever breaks off his family ties in this month.
He will record release from Hellfire for whoever offers even a single
unit of recommendable prayers.*

*The reward of whoever carries out an obligatory duty in this month is
seventy times as much as that of one who carries out the same duty in
other months. The Balance of Deeds of whoever invokes Allah’s blessings
upon me a lot will be more positive on the Day of Judgment on which the
Balance of Deeds of some people will be negative. The reward of whoever
recites one verse of the Qur'an in this month is like the reward of one
who recites the whole Qur'an in other months. O people, the gates of
Paradise are open in this month. Therefore, ask your Lord not to close
them in your faces. Similarly, the gates of Hellfire are closed.
Therefore, ask your Lord not to open them up to you. Satan is chained
down. Therefore, ask your Lord not to let him overcome you.*

The Commander of the Faithful (Imam ‘Ali (‘a)) said, “I stood up and
said, ‘O Prophet of Allah, what are the noblest of deeds in this month?’

The Holy Prophet (S) said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
يَا أَبَا الْحَسَنِ أَفْضَلُ الأَعْمَالِ فِي هَذَا الشَّهْرِ الْوَرَعُ
عَن مَحَارِمِ اللَّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Abu’l-Hasan, the noblest of deeds in this month are abstaining from
what the Honorable and Exalted God has forbidden…*[^39]

Delineation the merits of the month of Ramadhan is too vast to be
covered in this book because this month holds a special significance and
the traditions about its merits are numerous. However, the most
important topics that are covered by the abovementioned sermon of the
Holy Prophet (S), as well as the traditions of the Holy Imams (‘a) can
be summarized in the following points:

1. One should take advantage of this blessed month in which all rites
gain special meaning, quantity and quality. In this great devotional
season, punishments for evil acts and rewards for kind acts are
multiplied. Finally, a golden opportunity to change all past activities
into righteous acts or even into the highest ranks of righteousness is
available in this month.

2. Fasting during this month does not only mean abstaining from eating
and drinking, but also from all forbidden evil acts in addition to
turning away from all weaknesses and flaws.

3. In this month, diversity in devotional acts and a practical
demonstration of the deeds that take one nearer to Almighty Allah are
visible in the coming presentation of the devotional acts and rites of
this month.

4. An all-inclusive and comprehensive practical course of worship has
been set up in this month to accelerate the devotional practices to
cover the entire time of this month.

5. As has been previously cited in our discussion of the Night of Qadr
within the particular days and nights of the year, Almighty Allah, in
this month in general and on the Night of Qadr in particular, makes
crucial decisions about man’s destiny and the descent of His mercy upon
His creatures.

6. In this month, man is spiritually, morally, and ethically equipped
for resuming higher and more perfect activity after ‘«d al-Fitr.

All Muslims pay much attention to the month of Ramadhan. As a result,
this month, in its totality, identifies Muslims and distinguishes them
from all other nations and groups.

However, the course that has been established by the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) is
still different in particularities and details from the devotional
courses adopted by other Muslims for this month.

### Rites of Ramadhan

The rites of Ramadhan can be divided into two main parts. We will try to
restrict our discussion to mentioning the titles of these rites along
with a reference to their contents, leaving the details, which are too
many, to the famous Shaykh al-Qummi’s *Mafatih al-Jinan*.

The **first part** of the devotional acts of Ramadhan involves the
**common devotional acts** that are practiced throughout this month
without distinction as to the day.

The **second part** involves the devotional acts that are dedicated to
**certain nights or days** of the month.

### First Part: The Common Devotional Acts of Ramadhan

This part is further subdivided into four sections:

• Devotional Acts Common to the Nights and Days

• Devotional Acts Common to the Nights

• Devotional Acts Common to Early Dawn

• Devotional Acts Common to Daytime

#### Devotional Acts Common to the Nights and Days

Authors of books on supplications and devotional acts have mentioned a
number of acts, some of which are as follows:

#### Supplications after each obligatory prayer or at all times

Shaykh al-Qummi has cited three supplications to be said after the
obligatory prayers and one supplication to be recited at any time. This
supplication is known as *Du’a' al-Hajj*.[^40]

These four supplications comprise highly regarded contents, including
implorations to gain divine permission to perform the ritual *Hajj*
Pilgrimage, to observe the Night of Qadr as it should be observed, to be
released from Hellfire, to gain Paradise, to have one’s sustenance
expanded, and to concern oneself with solving the problems of Muslims
and achieving their interests.[^41] Shaykh al-Kulayni and Shaykh
al-Saduq, through a valid chain of authority, have mentioned another
supplication with more details.[^42]

#### Recitation of the Holy Qur'an

It is highly recommended to recite, read, and ponder over the Holy
Qur'an as much as possible during the month of Ramadhan. According to
some traditions, although it is recommended to read the whole Qur'an
once every month during other days and months, it is more highly
recommended to read the whole Qur'an once every three days in
Ramadhan.[^43]

Through a valid chain of authority, Shaykh al-Kulayni has stated that
Imam Musa al-Kazim (‘a) deemed recommended reading the Holy Qur'an
entirely once or even more every day or night of Ramadhan. Then, the
Imam (‘a) mentioned a great reward for dedicating the reward of such
entire recitation to the Holy Prophet and Imams (‘a). One of these
rewards is the dedicator will be included with their group on the Day of
Resurrection.[^44]

#### Litanies

It is recommended to engage in repeating words of seeking forgiveness
from Almighty Allah (*istighfar*), glorifying Him (*tasbih*), praising
Him (*hamd*), and professing that He is the One and Only God (*tahlil*)
and the Most Great (*takbir*). It is reported that when the month of
Ramadhan begins, Imam Zayn al-’Abidin (‘a) would utter no other words
than words of *tasbih*, *istighfar*, and *takbir*.[^45]

#### Prayers

The Holy Imams (‘a) prepared a course of supererogatory prayers for the
nights and days of this month, recommending offering them as much as
possible.

#### Devotional Acts Common to the Nights of Ramadhan

Authors of books on supplications and devotional acts have mentioned a
number of acts, some of which are as follows:

#### Breaking the Fast

As fasting ritually extends from dawn to dusk, it should be broken
immediately after that by eating and drinking. It is however recommended
to delay it after the performing of the obligatory sunset prayer. It is
also recommended to break the fast with a date or a sweet food.

While breaking the fast, it is recommended to say a litany or a
supplication the most famous formula of which is the following:

O Allah, For Your sake have I fasted, with Your sustenance have I broken
my fast, and in You have I trusted.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ لَكَ صُمْتُ وَعَلَىٰ رِزْقِكَ ا فْطَرْتُ وَعَلَيْكَ
تَوَكَّلْتُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Upon eating the first bite, it is recommended to say the following:

*In the Name of Allah; the All-beneficent, the All-merciful. O Liberal
in forgiving: (please) forgive me.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بِسْمِ ٱللّهِ ٱلرَّحْمٰنِ ٱلرَّحِيمِ. يَا وَاسِعَ ٱلْمَغْفِرَةِ
ٱغْفِرْ لِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Such matters bring about a great reward, such as forgiveness and gaining
the rewards of all those who have fasted that day.

It is also recommended to recite *Surah* *al-Qadr* just before breaking
the fast.[^46]

#### Almsgiving

One of the highly recommended acts is to give alms during the nights of
Ramadhan, and especially at the time of breaking the fast. When such
alms are the food with which the fast is ordinarily broken, no matter
how little the amount is, even if it is just a few dates or a drink of
water, according to one’s capacity, it brings about a great reward. He
gains the reward of the deeds done by that fasting person out of the
power he has obtained from the food that he gave to him as alms, and
winning the reward of manumitting thirty slaves. In addition, the
supplication of the almsgiver will be responded to.[^47]

#### Recitation of the Holy Qur'an

On the nights of Ramadhan, it is highly recommended to recite certain
chapters of the Holy Qur'an, such as *Surah* *al-Qadr* one thousand
times and *Surah* *al-Dukhan* (No. 44) one hundred times, when
possible.[^48]

#### Supplications

The most important formula of supplication said on the nights of
Ramadhan is *Du’a' al-Iftitah*, which is an invocation of Allah’s
blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his Household, a special
supplication for the Awaited Imam al-Mahdi (‘a), and statements that are
regarded as highly spiritual which encourage a person to engage in
self-struggle.

Shaykh al-Qummi has also cited three other formulas of supplication for
the nights of Ramadhan.[^49]

#### Prayers

It is recommended to offer one thousand units of prayer that are
distributed among the nights of Ramadhan and called the Ramadhan
supererogatory prayers. Although there is more than one formula for the
distribution of these units of prayer among the nights of Ramadhan,
Shaykh al-Qummi, following Shaykh al-Mufid, has chosen a certain formula
and described it as the most familiar. This formula is as follows:

On the first twenty nights of Ramadhan, twenty units of this prayer
should be offered each night with an interval between each two units. To
explain, eight units should be offered after the obligatory sunset
Prayer and the others after the obligatory early night prayer. The total
is thus four hundred units and the remainder is six hundred. These six
hundred units should be offered on the three Nights of Qadr, which are
the nineteenth, the twenty-first, and twenty-third of the month. Two
hundred units should be offered on each of these three Nights. Thus, one
thousand units will be completed.

It is also recommended to offer a two-unit prayer each night, reciting
*Surah al-Fatihah* once and repeating *Surah* *al-Tawhid* three times.
After completion of the prayer, the following litany may be said:

*Glory be to Him Who watches over, never leaves anything undone nor is
neglectful. Glory be to Him Who is Merciful and never does a thing in
haste. Glory be to Him Who is vigilant and never forgets one thing over
another. Glory be to Him Who is alert and steady, never engrossed with a
thing so as to overlook another.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ مَنْ هُوَ حَفِيظٌ لاَ يَغْفُلُ سُبْحَانَ مَنْ هُوَ رَحِيمٌ
لاَ يَعْجَلُ سُبْحَانَ مَنْ هُوَ قَائِمٌ لاَ يَسْهُو سُبْحَانَ مَنْ
هُوَ دَائِمٌ لاَ يَلْهُو.
  </p>
</blockquote>

After this litany, it is recommended to repeat the following statement
seven times:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَ ٱللّهِ وَٱلْحَمْدُ لِلّهِ وَلاَ إِلٰهَ إِلاَّ ٱللّهُ
وَٱللّهُ ا كْبَرُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*All glory be to Allah, all praise be to Allah, there is no god save
Allah, and Allah is the Greatest.*

After that, it is recommended to say the following supplication once:

Glory be to You, Glory be to You, Glory be to You. O All-Great, forgive
my grave sins.

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
سُبْحَانَكَ سُبْحَانَكَ سُبْحَانَكَ. يَا عَظِيمُ ٱغْفِرْ لِيَ
ٱلذَّنْبَ ٱلْعَظِيمَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

Then, it is recommended to invoke blessings upon the Holy Prophet and
his Household ten times:

*O Allah, (please do) send blessings upon Muhammad and upon his
Household.*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ صَلِّ عَلَىٰ مُحَمَّدٍ وَعَلَىٰ آلِهِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

About this prayer, Shaykh al-Kaf’ami has mentioned that whoever offers
it will have seventy thousand of his sins forgiven by Almighty
Allah.[^50]

#### Devotional Acts Common to Early Dawn

Authors of books on supplications and devotional acts have mentioned a
number of acts, some of which are as follows:

#### Having the Early Dawn Meal (Suhur)

It is highly recommended to eat or drink something at early dawn,
preferably flour or dates. For this meal, there are some etiquettes, one
of which is to recite *Surah* *al-Qadr*.

#### Supplications and Whispered Prayers

Supplications and whispered prayers are the most important deeds of
early dawn. The most significant and famous supplication is known as
*Du’a' al-Baha*', which involves statements of glorification of Almighty
Allah and imploring in the name of His attributes. About this
supplication, which is reported from Imam al-Ridha (‘a) to be ascribed
to his grandfather Imam al-Baqir (‘a), it is reported that it
contributes to granting one’s requests.

In addition, there is the most magnificent supplication that is reported
by Abu-Hamzah al-Thumali carrying his name.

Abu-Hamzah al-Thumali has reported that Imam ‘Ali ibn Husayn Zayn
al-’Abidin (‘a) used to pray the whole night throughout Ramadhan. During
the last hour of night, he used to say the following supplication:

*O Allah, do not discipline me by means of Your punishment and do not
subject me to Your planned strategy…*

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِلٰهِي لاَ تُؤَدِّبْنِي بِعُقُوبَتِكَ وَلاَ تَمْكُرْ بِي فِي
حِيلَتِكَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

Very long, eloquent, refined in style and composition, this supplication
holds highly considerable contents and a variety of diction. It plays a
vital role in spiritual education, evolution and perfection, and
reinforces one’s relationship with Allah. It also teaches one how to
talk to Him confidentially and how to praise and glorify Him.

Furthermore, this supplication presents the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) and
confirms their matchless knowledge, leadership, and vital role in the
lives of Muslims. It also demonstrates their course in building a
virtuous community and their supreme goals, one of which is to create a
morally and spiritually perfected group in society.

In addition to these two supplications, there are others to be said at
early dawn and can be found in *Mafatih al-Jinan*.[^51]

#### Devotional Acts Common to Daytime

Authors of books on supplications and devotional acts have mentioned a
number of acts, some of which are as follows:

#### Supplication

A set of texts and supplicatory formulas have been reported to be said
during the daytime of Ramadhan. The most important of these is the
supplication that begins with the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللَّهُمَّ هٰذَا شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ ٱلَّذِي اَنْزَلْتَ فِيهِ القُرْآنَ
هُدَىً لِلنَّاسِ وَبَيِّنَاتٍ مِنَ ٱلْهُدَىٰ وَٱلفُرْقَانِ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, this is the month of Ramadhan in which You revealed the
Qur'an, guidance for humankind and clear proofs of true guidance and
distinction (between the right and the wrong)…*

This supplication has been reported by Shaykh al-Tusi, in *Misbah
al-Mutahajjid*, and Sayyid Ibn Tawus, in *Iqbal al-A’mal*.[^52]

There is also another supplication the first statements of which are
similar to the statements of the previously mentioned supplication of
*Du’a' al-Baha'*. However, this supplication then moves to invoke
blessings upon the Holy Prophet, his Household, the prophets, and the
angels. It then presents statements of praying for and praising the Holy
Prophet (S).[^53]

#### Litanies and Doxologies

Litanies, statements of glorification enumerating the attributes of
Almighty Allah are to be said on every day of Ramadhan. In this regard,
a ten-passage litany explaining the hearing, sight, creation, knowledge,
and kingdom of Almighty Allah, as well as many other similar matters, is
to be repeated every day in Ramadhan.[^54]

#### Invocations of Blessings

Shaykh al-Tusi and Sayyid Ibn Tawus have cited a wonderful piece
invoking Almighty Allah’s blessings upon the Holy Prophet and his
Household, as well as praising and commending them, to be said every day
in Ramadhan. This invocation begins with the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
{إِنَّ ٱللّهَ وَمَلاَئِكَتَهُ يُصَلُّونَ عَلَىٰ ٱلنَّبِيِّ يَا
اَيُّهَا ٱلَّذِينَ آمَنُوٱ صَلُّوٱ عَلَيْهِ وَسَلِّمُوٱ تَسْلِيماً.}
لَبَّيْكَ يَا رَبِّ وَسَعْدَيْكَ وَسُبْحَانَكَ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*“Verily, Allah and His angels send blessings upon the Prophet, O you
who believe, call for Divine blessings on him and salute him with a
becoming salutation.” Here I am at Your service, my Lord! Doing that
which pleases You, and glory be to You…*[^55]

### Second Part: Devotional Acts Dedicated to Certain Nights and Days

This part can be subdivided into the following sections:

The Devotional Acts of Welcoming the month of Ramadhan

The Devotional Acts of the Bright Nights

The Devotional Acts on the Nights of Qadr

The Devotional Acts on the Last Ten Nights

The Devotional Acts on Certain Days of Ramadhan

#### Devotional Acts on the First Night and Day

Islam and the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have devoted special attention to the
first night and day of Ramadhan and confirmed a number of matters to be
done on this night and day, the most important of which are the
following:

#### Watching the New Moon

Authoritative traditions narrate that the Holy Prophet (S) and his
Household (‘a) used to watch for and welcome the new moon of the month—a
procedure that has become one of the highly regarded recommendable
acts.[^56] In this respect, many supplicatory formulas reported from the
Holy Prophet (S) and the Holy Imams (‘a) have been mentioned for this
procedure. However, the forty-third supplication of *al-Sahifah
al-Sajjadiyyah* may be presented as the most magnificent formula in this
respect.[^57]

#### Ritual Bathing

On the first night of Ramadhan, it is recommended to perform the ritual
bath and ceremonially purify oneself by immersing oneself in a flowing
river or pouring thirty handfuls of water on the head.

#### Visiting Imam Husayn (‘a)

It is also highly recommended to perform visitation of Imam Husayn (‘a)
this night from close (at his holy shrine) or by reading his *ziyarah*
from afar.

#### Supererogatory Prayers

The supererogatory prayers of Ramadhan should be started this night.
Another two-unit prayer, in each unit of which *Surah al-Fatihah* and
*Surah* *al-An’am* (No. 6) are recited may be offered. Upon
accomplishment, it is recommended to beseech Almighty Allah’s protection
against fears and ailments.

#### Supplications

Many supplicatory formulas have been reported to be read on the first
night of Ramadhan. One of these is the supplication reported by Ibn
Tawus from Imam al-Jawad (‘a). This supplication begins with the
following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ يَا مَنْ يَمْلِكُ ٱلتَّدْبِيرَ وَهُوَ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ
قَدِيرٌ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, O He Who controls the management of all affairs, and has power
over all things!*

The two *Du’a' al-Jawshan al-Kabir* and *Du’a' al-Hajj* supplications
are also reported to be read on this night.

All the previous devotional acts for the first night of Ramadhan are
also performed on the first day of Ramadhan, although with some
different formulas for prayers and supplications, except watching for
the new moon and visiting Imam Husayn (‘a).

‘Allamah al-Majlisi states that Shaykh al-Kulayni, Shaykh al-Tusi, and
others have reported through a valid chain of authority that Imam
al-Kazim (‘a) used to say a special supplication on the first of
Ramadhan. This supplication begins with the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ إِنِّي اَسْئَلُكَ بِٱسْمِكَ ٱلَّذِي دَانَ لَهُ كُلُّ شَيْءٍ
وَبِرَحْمَتِكَ ٱلَّتِي وَسِعَتْ كُلَّ شَيْءٍ…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah I beseech You, in the name of Your name before which everything
kneels down and in the name of Your mercy which encompasses
everything…*[^58]

#### Devotional Acts on the Bright Nights of Ramadhan

A special prayer, mentioned within the devotional acts of Rajab, is
common to the bright (i.e. moonlit) nights of the three months.
Therefore, the fifteenth night of Ramadhan is included.

In addition, it is recommended to perform the ritual bath and offer
other prayers on the bright nights of Ramadhan. However, the fifteenth
night is distinguished by visiting Imam Husayn (‘a) and offering some
prayers. One of these prayers is a ten-unit one, offered at the tomb of
Imam Husayn (‘a) after the obligatory early night prayer. This prayer
is, of course, different from the eight-unit night prayer. Another
prayer to be offered this night is a hundred-unit prayer, in each unit
of which *Surah al-Fatihah* is recited once and *Surah* *al-Tawhid* ten
times.[^59]

### Rites of the Nights of Qadr

In the previous discussion of the particular days and nights of the
year, we mentioned both the common and the private rites of the three
Nights of Qadr. We also pointed out the significance of the Night of
Qadr.

#### Devotional Acts of the Last Ten Nights of Ramadhan

The last ten nights of Ramadhan enjoy such a special significance that
the Holy Prophet (S) used to roll up his bed and prepare himself for
worship on these nights. To devote one’s efforts to devotional acts on
these ten nights denotes an acceleration of the devotional movement of
Ramadhan, especially when we take into consideration the fact that the
Night of Qadr is one of these ten nights.

Some devotional acts and special supplications are devoted to these
nights. For each night, a special supplication has been reported in
addition to other supplications that are common to the ten nights. One
of these is the supplication that begins with the following statement:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اَللّهُمَّ إِنَّكَ قُلْتَ فِي كِتَابِكَ ٱلْمُنْزَلِ: ”شَهْرُ رَمَضَانَ
ٱلَّذِي اُنزِلَ فِيهِ ٱلْقُرْآنُ“…
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, You have said in Your revealed Book: “The month of Ramadhan in
which the Qur'an was revealed…”*

On the twenty-seventh night, it is recommended to take the ritual bath
and to repeat the following supplication throughout the night:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ ٱرْزُقْنِي ٱلتَّجَافِيَ عَنْ دَارِ ٱلْغُرُورِ وَٱلإِنَابَةَ
إِلَىٰ دَارِ ٱلْخُلُودِ وَٱلاِسْتِعدَادَ لِلْمَوْتِ قَبْلَ حُلُولِ
ٱلْفَوتِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, (please) provide me with alienation from the abode of
delusion, turning to the abode of eternity, and readiness for death
before it is too late.*

On the last day and night of Ramadhan, some special devotional acts,
bidding this month farewell, have been reported:

• Performing the ritual bath on the last night

• Visiting Imam Husayn (‘a)

• Reciting *Surah*s *al-An’am* (No. 6), *al-Kahf* (No. 18), and *Yasin*
(No. 36)

• Repeating the forgiveness-seeking prayer one hundred times

• Saying a number of supplications, the most favorable being the
forty-fifth supplication of *al-Sahifah al-Sajjadiyyah* and the
following one reported from Imam al-Sadiq (‘a):

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
اللَّهُمَّ لاَ تَجْعَلْهُ آخِرَ ٱلْعَهْدِ من صِيَامِي لِشَهْرِ
رَمَضَانَ وَاَعُوذُ بِكَ اَنْ يَطْلُعَ فَجْرُ هٰذِهِ ٱللَّيْلَةِ
إِلاَّ وَقَدْ غَفَرْتَ لِي.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*O Allah, (please) do not determine my observance of fasting in this
month of Ramadhan to be the last of my observances of fasting. I seek
Your protection against this day dawning before You forgive me.*

This supplication contributes to having one’s sins forgiven.

#### Particular Acts of Days and Nights

Quoting ‘Allamah al-Majlisi in *Zad al-Ma’ad*, Shaykh al-Qummi has
mentioned special prayers to be offered on each night of Ramadhan and
special supplications to be said on each day in *Mafatih al-Jinan*.[^60]

This vast and diverse devotional course intends to make man attain
self-perfection and serve Almighty Allah on earth and be qualified and
prepared for the crucial decisions that are made about this community on
the Night of Qadr. The night of ‘«d al-Fitr is the night of the
fulfillment of promised rewards.

### Hajj and the First Ten Days of Dhu’l-Hijjah

*Hajj* is one of the most important devotional acts of Islam. According
to some traditions, it follows the ritual prayer with regard to its
significance and favorability in the list of the Islamic devotional
acts. Moreover, *Hajj* has been described as one of the two *jihads*
(i.e. holy struggle).

In this respect, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported through a valid chain of
authority that ‘Abdullah ibn Yahya al-Kahili heard Imam al-Sadiq (‘a)
quoting the Holy Prophet (S) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
هُوَ أَحَدُ الْجِهَادَيْنِ، هُوَ جِهَادُ الضُّعَفَاءِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Hajj is one of the two jihads. It is the jihad of the weak.*

Commenting on this saying, Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) says:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
وَنَحْنُ الضُّعَفَاءُ. أَمَا إِنَّهُ لَيْسَ شَيْءٌ أَفْضَلَ مِنَ
الْحَجِّ إِلاَّ الصَّلاَةَ، وَفِي الْحَجِّ هَهُنَا صَلاَةٌ وَلَيْسَ
فِي الصَّلاَةِ قَبْلَكُمْ حَجٌّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*We are the weak. Verily, there is nothing better than Hajj except the
ritual prayer; however, there is prayer in the Hajj but there is no Hajj
in the prayer.*[^61]

*Hajj* is also the support of the religion and the foundation of its
existence. It is thus reported:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لاَ يَزَالُ الدِّينُ قَائِماً مَا قَامَتِ الْكَعْبَةُ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*This religion is kept existent as long as the Ka’bah is still
standing.*[^62]

The *Hajj* has a historical root that extends to the time before the
existence of Adam (‘a) on earth although the divine call to perform
*Hajj* as an obligatory duty upon all people actually began at the time
of Prophet Abraham (‘a).

In this regard, Shaykh al-Kulayni, through a valid chain of authority,
has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا أَفَاضَ آدَمُ مِنْ مِنَى تَلَقَّتْهُ الْمَلاَئِكَةُ فَقَالَتْ:
يَا آدَمُ، بُرَّ حَجَّكَ. أَمَا إِنَّا قَدْ حَجَجْنَا هَذَا الْبَيْتَ
قَبْلَ أَنْ تَحُجَّهُ بِأَلْفَيْ عَامٍ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When Adam (‘a) returned from Mina (as a ritual practice), he was
received by the angels who said to him, “Make lawful your Hajj, for we
have been going on Hajj to this house two thousand years before
you.”*[^63]

Through another valid chain of authority, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported
Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَمَّا أُمِرَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ وَإِسْمَاعِيلُ عَلَيْهِمَا السَّلاَمُ
بِبِنَاءِ الْبَيْتِ وَتَمَّ بِنَاؤُهُ، قَعَدَ إِبْرَاهِيمُ عَلَى
رُكْنٍ ثُمَّ نَادَى: هَلُمَّ الْحَجَّ. فَلَوْ نَادَى هَلُمُّوا إِلَى
الْحَجِّ لَمْ يَحِجَّ إِلاَّ مَنْ كَانَ يَوْمَئِذٍ إِنْسِيَّاً
مَخْلُوقاً، وَلَكِنَّهُ نَادَى: هَلُمَّ الْحَجَّ. فَلَبَّى النَّاسُ
فِي أَصْلاَبِ الرِّجَالِ: لَبَّيْكَ دَاعِيَ اللهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ.
لَبَّيْكَ دَاعِيَ اللهِ. فَمَنْ لَبَّى عَشْراً يَحِجَّ عَشْراً، وَمَنْ
لَبَّى خَمْساً يِحِجَّ خَمْساً، وَمَنْ لَبَّى أَكْثَرَ مِنْ ذَلِكَ
فَبِعَدَدِ ذَلِكَ، وَمَنْ لَبَّى وَاحِداً حَجَّ وَاحِداً، وَمَنْ لَمْ
يُلَبِّ لَمْ يَحِجَّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When the construction of the House was completed by Abraham (‘a) and
Ishmael (‘a) by the command of Almighty Allah, Abraham (‘a) sat in a
corner and called out, “Come you all to the Hajj.” If he had called out,
“Come to the Hajj,” none would have come except the human beings of that
time, but when his call was, “Come you all to the Hajj,” all people even
the unborn in the loins of their fathers responded to him, saying, “We
do respond to the caller of Allah. We do respond to the caller of
Allah…” Thus, those who repeated this statement of response ten times
will go on Hajj ten times. Those who repeated it five times will go on
Hajj five times and so every one will go on Hajj as many times as he
repeated this statement. Likewise, he who repeated it once only will go
on Hajj once only and who had not responded will not go on Hajj* *at
all.*[^64]

Performing the *Hajj* Pilgrimage is obligatory only once upon any adult
who possesses the expenditure of the *Hajj* journey along with an amount
sufficient to provide livelihood to one’s dependents, and that such a
journey will not cause disorder in one’s livelihood or personal
conditions. At the same time, it is highly recommended to go on *Hajj*
as many times as possible—an act that is preferred to many other
devotional acts.[^65]

It is also impermissible to suspend the *Hajj* or to leave the Holy
Ka’bah unvisited. In this regard, it is obligatory upon the supreme
religious authority to force people to perform this religious duty and
fund their journeys if they cannot find money to do so.

Detailed guidance on the performance of this duty is available in books
on the practical laws of *Hajj*, known as *manasik al-Hajj* (Rites of
the *Hajj*).

#### Categories of the Ritual Hajj

To a great extent, all Muslims unanimously agree upon classifying the
ritual *Hajj* into three categories and upon the basic details of each
category. This is of course one of the divine blessings with which
Muslims are endued and one of the matters that expresses their unity.

The categories of *Hajj* are thus three:

**1.** ***Hajj al-Tamattu’***: The most significant and preferred
category of *Hajj*, *Hajj al-Tamattu’* is obligatory upon every adult
person (old enough to carry out religious duties) who is capable of
carrying out this duty and whose place of dwelling is more than ninety
kilometers away from the city of Makkah. Referring to such people, the
Holy Qur'an says:

> ذَلِكَ لِمَنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ أَهْلُهُ حَاضِرِي الْمَسْجِدِ
> الْحَرَامِ(196)

***This is for him whose family is not present in the Sacred Mosque.
(2:196)***

In the Muslim jurisprudential terminology, they are called *ahl al-afaq*
(People of the Horizons).

**2.** ***Hajj*** **al-Ifrad**: This category of *Hajj* is obligatory
upon those who live near Makkah and are present in the Sacred Mosque. In
it the performer (of *Hajj*) is required to enter into the state of
*Ihram* (i.e. put on two ceremonially white pieces of cloth and pledge
to abandon the forbidden acts that violate one’s *Hajj* or *‘Umrah*).
They start either from the *Miqat* (the starting points for *Hajj*) or
from their houses and then perform a single *‘Umrah* (i.e. minor *Hajj*)
only. This category of *Hajj* is different from the earlier in the point
that it does not require offering a sacrifice to the Holy Ka’bah or
slaughtering an animal. Additionally, entering into the state of *Ihram*
for this category of *Hajj* is different from the earlier category.

**3.** ***Hajj*** **al-Qiran**: This category of *Hajj* is similar to
the abovementioned one with one difference. The pilgrim is required to
mark the offering that he must offer to the Holy Ka’bah from the first
moment of entering the state of *Ihram* until he slaughters it at Mina
on the Day of ‘«d al-Adhha.

#### Rites of Hajj al-Tamattu’

In brief, in *Hajj al-Tamattu’* a pilgrim enters the state of *Ihram* to
perform the *‘Umrat al-Tamattu’*[^66] from one of the five places known
as *Mawaqit* (sing. *Miqat*) and which had been marked out by the Holy
Prophet (S) for the people of the remote horizons as follows:

(1) Masjid al-Shajarah, which is also called Dhul-Halifah or Abyar ‘Ali:
the starting point (i.e. *Miqat*) from which the people of Madinah and
those who pass by it start their ritual *Hajj*.

(2) Al-Juhafah: the starting point from which the people of Sham
(currently Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, and Palestine) and those passing by
it start their *Hajj*.

(3) Wadi-’Aqiq: the starting point from which the people of Iraq and
those passing by it start their *Hajj*.

(4) Qarn al-Manazil: the starting point from which the people of
al-Ta'if (a city in western Saudi Arabia, in al-Hijaz Province) and
those passing by it start their *Hajj*.

(5) Yalamlam: the starting point from which the people of the Yemen and
those passing by it start their *Hajj*.

Entering into the state of *Ihram* means to take off one’s ordinary
clothes and put on two unstitched pieces of cloth worn as shirt and
apron. Then, the pilgrim utters the statement of *Talbiyah* (i.e.
responding to the call of *Hajj*), which is in the following form:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَبَّيْكَ اللَّهُمَّ لَبَّيْكَ. لَبَّيْكَ لاَ شَرِيكَ لَكَ لَبَّيْكَ.
إنَّ الْحَمدَ وَالنِّعْمَةَ لكَ والْمُلْكَ. لاَ شَرِيكَ لَكَ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Here I am responding to You, O Allah, here I am. Here I am, You have no
partner, here I am. Surely, praise, grace, and kingship are Yours. You
have no partner.*

A pilgrim must also abstain from a set of matters some of which are
inherently forbidden while others are not, such as touching women, using
perfume, wearing clothes other than the two pieces of *Ihram*, covering
the head with anything, engaging in disputes, hunting, and others.

A pilgrim must then present himself in Makkah to circumambulate the Holy
Ka’bah seven times, beginning and ending at the corner on which the
Black Stone is placed. Then, he must offer the two-unit prayer of
circumambulation at the place known as the Station of Abraham (‘a)
(*Maqam Ibrahim*).

Afterwards, he must go to al-Safa to begin performing the rite of
*Sa’y*[^67] from al-Safa to al-Marwah, two small hillocks between which
a pilgrim must run slowly seven times; four times from al-Safa to
al-Marwah and three times the other way so as to end up at al-Marwah.

The next rite is to have his hair cut short and his nails trimmed.

Immediately after performing this rite, a pilgrim may release himself
from the state of *Ihram* and return to his normal state. However, he
must wait for the time of *Hajj* to begin. Once it begins, he is
required to enter into a new state of *Ihram* for the *Hajj* from the
holy city of Makkah on the eighth of Dhu’l-Hijjah. On this day, he must
leave for Mount ‘Arafat and stay there from midday to the sunset of the
ninth of Dhu’l-Hijjah. This rite is known as halting at ‘Arafat.

After sunset, he must come down this mountain and move towards the Holy
Monument (i.e. *al-Mash’ar al-Haram*) where he must stay until sunrise.

On the tenth of Dhu’l-Hijjah, he must come to Mina to perform the rite
of stoning the ‘Aqabah statue (*jamarat al-’aqabah*) with seven small
pebbles that he must gather from the Holy Precinct of Makkah and the
Holy Monument. He must then sacrifice an animal offering, which must be
a sheep, a cow, or a camel, and then shave or have the hair of his head
cut short. Only then, can he release himself from the state of *Ihram*
and do all the legal things that have been made forbidden to him as long
as he was in the state of *Ihram*, except touching women and using
perfumes.

He must then come to the Holy House again, circumambulate it seven
times, offer a two-unit prayer at the Station of Abraham (‘a), and run
seven times between al-Safa and al-Marwah. Only then can he use perfume.

In order to have intimacy made lawful for him, he must perform another
seven-round circumambulation, known in the jurisprudential terminology
of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) School as *Tawaf al-Nisa'* and in the
terminology of the other Muslim schools as *Tawaf al-Wada’* (Farewell
Circumambulation).

On the eleventh and twelfth nights of Dhu’l-Hijjah, a pilgrim is
required to spend half of the night (either from nightfall to midnight,
or from midnight to its last hour, at least) at Mina, although it is
recommended, and even obligatory under certain circumstances, to spend
the thirteenth night there, too.

On the eleventh and twelfth days, and even the thirteenth day for those
who spent the last night at Mina, a pilgrim must stone the three statues
(known as *al-jamarah al-sughra*, *al-jamarah al-wusta*, and *jamarat
al-’Aqabah*) with seven pebbles each.

This is a summary of the method and obligatory rites of *Hajj
al-Tamattu’* according to the jurisprudence of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a),
although there are further details, manners, recommended acts, and even
duties to which a pilgrim may be exposed while performing this category
of *Hajj*. However, there is no space to mention all these in this book.

This method is largely followed by the other Muslim sects with the
exception of a very few details, options, and advancing or delaying in
the performance of certain rites and in the rulings appertaining to
certain acts of a pilgrim.

#### Distinctive Features of Hajj

Under this title, we can refer to three features by which the worship of
*Hajj* is distinguished from the other devotional acts.

**First**: *Hajj* comprises several sorts of devotional acts, such as
prayer, fasting, *jihad*, and almsgiving. The ritual circumambulation of
the Holy House is a sort of prayer, in addition to the ritual prayer
that follows each practice of circumambulation, known as *Salat
al-Tawaf* (Circumambulation Prayer). Entering into the state of *Ihram*,
which imposes abstaining from certain good things and desires, is a sort
of fasting. Sacrificing and offering an animal to the Holy Ka’bah is a
sort of almsgiving.

The hardships undergone by a performer of *Hajj*, such as the hardship
of taking long journeys to Makkah and the exhaustive efforts that come
from carrying out the rituals of the *Hajj*, are a sort of *jihad*.
Besides, the ritual *Hajj* involves other devotional acts, such as
halting at a mountain, stoning the three statutes, that represent Satan,
with pebbles, and having one’s hair cut short or shaved. All these
devotional acts are distinctive, unlike all other acts of worship.

**Second**: *Hajj* is a large collective practice and Muslims of various
social classes and from every remote path gather on certain days to
perform this religious duty collectively and respond to the divine call
of Prophet Abraham (‘a). They all move on the same highland and in a
unified form to express the actual equality of all human beings and
practically achieve the perfect unity of the Muslim nation.

**Third**: The purpose behind the practice of this worship is
wide-ranging at both the individual and collective level and in various
aspects, including the material, spiritual, social, political, economic,
educational, and moral.

Although explanation of this point requires elaborative discourse, it
seems possible to explain it by citing some traditions of the Ahl
al-Bayt (‘a) that deal with some of the spiritual and material aspects
and the holy purpose of this worship.

Imam ‘Ali (‘a) is reported to have said:

> فَرَضَ عَلَيْكُمْ حَجَّ بَيْتِهِ الحَرَامِ، الَّذِي جَعَلَهُ قِبْلَةً
> لِلاَْنَامِ، يَرِدُونَهُ وُرُودَ الاَنْعَامِ، وَيأْلَهُونَ إِلَيْهِ
> وُلُوهَ الحَمَامِ. جَعَلَهُ سُبْحَانَهُ عَلاَمَةً لِتَوَاضُعِهمْ
> لِعَظَمَتِهِ، وَإِذْعَانِهِمْ لِعِزَّتِهِ، وَاخْتَارَ مِنْ خَلْقِهِ
> سُمَّاعاً أَجَابُوا إِلَيْهِ دَعْوَتَهُ، وَصَدَّقُوا كَلِمَتِهُ،
> وَوَقَفُوا مَوَاقِفَ أَنْبِيَائِهِ، وَتَشَبَّهُوا بمَلاَئِكَتِهِ
> المُطِيفِينَ بِعَرْشِهِ، يُحْرِزُونَ الاْرْبَاحَ فِي مَتْجَرِ
> عِبَادَتِهِ، وَيَتَبَادَرُونَ عِنْدَهُ مَوْعِدَ مَغْفِرَتِهِ. جَعَلَهُ
> سُبْحَانَهُ لِلاِسْلامِ عَلَماً، وَلِلْعَائِذِينَ حَرَماً، فَرَضَ
> حَجَّهُ، وَأَوْجَبَ حَقَّهُ، وَكَتَبَ عَلَيْكُمْ وِفَادَتَهُ، فَقَالَ
> سُبْحَانَهُ: وَلِلَّهِ عَلَى النَّاسِ حِجُّ الْبَيْتِ مَنِ اسْتَطَاعَ
> إِلَيْهِ سَبِيلًا وَمَنْ كَفَرَ فَإِنَّ اللَّهَ غَنِيٌّ عَنِ
> الْعَالَمِينَ (97)

*Allah has made obligatory upon you the pilgrimage (Hajj) to His sacred
House, which is the turning point for the people who go to it as beasts
or pigeons go towards spring water. Allah, the Glorified, made it a sign
of their supplication before His Greatness and their acknowledgment of
His Dignity. He selected from among His creation those who upon
listening to His call responded to it and testified to His word. They
stood in the position of His Prophets and resembled His angels who
surround the Divine Throne securing all the benefits of performing His
worship and hastening towards His promised forgiveness. Allah the
Glorified made it (His sacred House) an emblem for Islam and an object
of respect for those who turn to it. He made* *obligatory its pilgrimage
and claim on you, holding you responsible to discharge it.*

*Thus, Allah the Glorified said,* ***“And (purely) for Allah, is
incumbent upon mankind, the pilgrimage to the House, for those who can
afford to journey thither. And whoever denies, then verily, Allah is
Self-sufficiently independent of the worlds. (3:97)”***[^68]

Within the famous tradition that al-Fadhl ibn Shadhan has reported from
Imam al-Ridha (‘a) with regard to the logic for the religious duties,
Imam al-Ridha (‘a) has said:

> …فَإِنْ قَالَ فَلِمَ أُمِرَ بِالْحَجِّ؟ قِيلَ لِعِلَّةِ الْوِفَادَةِ
> إِلَى اللَّهِ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَطَلَبِ الزِّيَادَةِ وَالْخُرُوجِ مِنْ
> كُلِّ مَا اقْتَرَفَ الْعَبْدُ تَائِباً مِمَّا مَضَى مُسْتَأْنِفاً
> لِمَا يَسْتَقْبِلُ مَع مَا فِيهِ مِنْ إِخْرَاجِ الأَمْوَالِ وَتَعَبِ
> الأَبْدَانِ وَالاشْتِغَالِ عَنِ الأَهْلِ وَالْوَلَدِ وَحَظْرِ
> الأَنْفُسِ عَنِ اللَّذَّاتِ شَاخِصاً فِي الْحَرِّ وَالْبَرْدِ ثَابِتاً
> ذَلِكَ عَلَيْهِ دَائِماً مَعَ الْخُضُوعِ وَالاسْتِكَانَةِ
> وَالتَّذَلُّلِ مَعَ مَا فِي ذَلِكَ لِجَمِيعِ الْخَلْقِ مِنَ
> الْمَنَافِعِ فِي شَرْقِ الأَرْضِ وَغَرْبِهَا وَمَنْ فِي الْبَرِّ
> وَالْبَحْرِ مِمَّنْ يَحِجُّ وَمِمَّنْ لا يَحِجُّ مِنْ بَيْنِ تَاجِرٍ
> وَجَالِبٍ وَبَائِعٍ وَمُشْتَرٍ وَكَاسِبٍ وَمِسْكِينٍ وَمُكَارٍ
> وَفَقِيرٍ وَقَضَاءِ حَوَائِجِ أَهْلِ الأَطْرَافِ فِي الْمَوَاضِعِ
> الْمُمْكِنِ لَهُمُ الاجْتَِماعُ فِيهَا مَعَ مَا فِيهِ مِنَ
> التَّفَقُّهِ وَنَقْلِ أَخْبَارِ الأَئِمَّةِ عَلَيْهِمُ السَّلاَمُ
> إِلَى كُلِّ صُقْعٍ وَنَاحِيَةٍ كَمَا قَالَ اللَّهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ:
> "وَمَا كَانَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ لِيَنْفِرُوا كَافَّةً فَلَوْلَا نَفَرَ
> مِنْ كُلِّ فِرْقَةٍ مِنْهُمْ طَائِفَةٌ لِيَتَفَقَّهُوا فِي الدِّينِ
> وَلِيُنْذِرُوا قَوْمَهُمْ إِذَا رَجَعُوا إِلَيْهِمْ لَعَلَّهُمْ
> يَحْذَرُونَ" (122) فَإِنْ قَالَ فَلِمَ أُمِرُوا بِحَجَّةٍ وَاحِدَةٍ لا
> أَكْثَرَ مِنْ ذَلِكَ. قِيلَ، لأَِنَّ اللَّهَ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ وَضَعَ
> الْفَرَائِضَ عَلَى أَدْنَى الْقَوْمِ قُوَّةً كَمَا قَالَ عَزَّ
> وَجَلَّ: "لِيَشْهَدُوا مَنَافِعَ لَهُمْ" (28) يَعْنِي شَاةً لِيَسَعَ
<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
لَهُ الْقَوِيُّ وَالضَّعِيفُ وَكَذَلِكَ سَائِرُ الْفَرَائِضِ إِنَّمَا
وُضِعَتْ عَلَى أَدْنَى الْقَوْمِ قُوَّةً وَكَانَ مِنْ تِلْكَ
الْفَرَائِضِ الْحَجُّ الْمَفْرُوضُ وَاحِداً ثُمَّ رَغَّبَ بَعْدُ
أَهْلَ الْقُوَّةِ بِقَدْرِ طَاقَتِهِمْ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*…If he asks, ‘Why have we been ordered to go on the Hajj pilgrimage?”
It is said: This is because it is a form of going towards Allah the
Exalted and Majestic, asking him for numerous rewards, departing from
all evils that one has committed, being repentant for all that he has
done in the past, and starting anew what he will do in the future. The
Hajj pilgrimage is also done so that one expends his wealth, puts
himself to physical trouble, experiences separation from his spouse and
children, avoids lust and pleasure, and suffers from the troubles of the
trip in the hot and cold weather, in fear, for a long interval in
humility, submission, and humbleness.*

*In addition, the Hajj pilgrimage carries great benefits for all people
(such as learning to desire Almighty Allah, fear Him, abandon
hardheartedness, make continuous reference to Him, and not lose one’s
hope and expectation). It reminds people of fulfilling their duties
towards their Lord and towards all people: people who live in the
deserts or at sea, partake in the Hajj pilgrimage or not, import goods,
do business, sell or buy, are dealers or needy, rent riding animals or
are too poor to rent any riding animals to go on the Hajj pilgrimage.*

*It also includes the fulfillment of the needs of the people who live in
the vicinity where the Hajj pilgrims gather. It includes the training of
individuals in the narration of the traditions from the Immaculate Imams
(‘a) from one region over to another region. Almighty Allah has said,*
***“If a contingent from every expedition remained behind, they could
devote themselves to studies in religion and admonish the people, when
they return to them, that thus they may learn to guard themselves
against evil. (9:122)”***

*He has also said,* ***“So that they may witness advantages for them.
(22:28)”*** *If he asks, “Why have we been ordered to go on the Hajj
pilgrimage once and not more?” It is then said: It is because Almighty
Allah established the obligatory deeds taking into consideration the
weakest* *people as He, the Exalted and Majestic, has said, ‘…He must
make an offering, as he can afford, but if he cannot afford it…’ This
refers to a sheep that both the rich and the poor can offer. The other
obligatory deeds are established considering the weakest people. One of
the obligatory deeds is to go on the Hajj pilgrimage, which is
obligatory once in one’s lifetime. God has encouraged the rich people to
perform it as often as they can.*[^69]

#### Characteristics of the Ahl al-Bayt’s View of Hajj

It seems proper to refer, yet briefly, to the Ahl al-Bayt’s view of the
*Hajj* and their understanding of the role that this worship can play in
the life of the Muslim nation in general and the virtuous community in
particular. *Hajj*, in its capacity as a religious duty, unites the
words of Muslims and expresses the concord and entity of the Muslim
nation.

The following distinctive features can add to the general understanding
of all Muslims regarding *Hajj*:

#### Great Interest

The Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) took great interest in *Hajj*. They have discussed
all the affairs and details of *Hajj* and given vivid explanations about
its reality, history, excellence, value, role, and goals. They have also
discussed in detail the laws appertaining to the rites and categories of
*Hajj* and presented the various problems and their solutions in the
light of the laws of Islam.

By making a simple and swift comparison between the traditions of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) about *Hajj* and the traditions that are reported from
others, we can obviously notice the difference. Comparatively, the
number of traditions in which the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have discussed the
questions of *Hajj* and transmitted, both directly and indirectly, the
Holy Prophet’s words and deeds in this regard is quantitatively[^70] and
qualitatively many times as much as the traditions that are reported
from the other Muslim schools in the same field.

The following two samples will confirm this obvious truth:

The tradition that the major Sunni reference books of Hadith report from
Imam al-Baqir (‘a) on the authority of Jabir ibn ‘Abdullah al-Ansari
presents many details about the Holy Prophet’s last *Hajj* (known as the
Farewell Pilgrimage) that cannot be found in any other tradition
mentioned in these reference books. This tradition represents a
jurisprudential basis for all Muslim schools of jurisprudence in the
field of the laws of *Hajj*.[^71]

Shaykh al-Saduq, through a valid chain of authority, has reported that
Zurarah ibn A’yun once said to Imam al-Sadiq (‘a), “May Allah accept me
as ransom for you! I have been asking you about the laws of *Hajj* for
forty years and you have always given me answers.”

The Imam (‘a) answered:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
بَيْتٌ حُجَّ إِلَيْهِ قَبْلَ آدَمَ بِأَلْفَيْ عَامٍ تُرِيدُ أَنْ
تُفْنِيَ مَسَائِلَهُ فِي أَرْبَعِينَ عَاماً؟
  </p>
</blockquote>

*A house to which pilgrimages were made two thousand years before the
creation of Adam (‘a)—do you expect that you can learn all about it in
forty years only?*[^72]

This answer obviously shows the wide-ranging scope of the Holy Imam’s
practical interest in the topic of *Hajj*, just as they show their great
interest in the historical aspect of this worship.

#### Comprehensiveness of the Devotional Content of Hajj

Not to speak of their vast concentration on *Hajj*, we notice that the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) also took much interest in the devotional contents of
all of its rites and laws. We cannot find a performer of *Hajj*
practicing any rite without a supplication or a litany before, during,
or after it. More precisely, supplications and litanies accompany a
performer of *Hajj* from the time he intends to perform *Hajj* until he
returns home. Hundreds of traditions deal with this topic.[^73]

In a coming chapter, we will discuss some details of the vast devotional
contents of *Hajj*.

#### Visiting the Holy Prophet (S), the Holy Imams (‘a), and Places of Worship

Performers of *Hajj* complete this obligatory devotional act by visiting
the Holy Prophet’s (S) tomb and mosque—an act common to all
Muslims.[^74] However, the Holy Imams of the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) have given
this topic much more significance with regard to both quantity and
quality.

**With regard to quantity**, they encourage their followers to visit the
tombs of the Holy Imams (‘a) buried in the al-Baqi’ Cemetery: Imam Hasan
ibn ‘Ali (al-Mujtaba), Imam ‘Ali ibn al-Husayn (Zayn al-’Abidin), Imam
Muhammad ibn ‘Ali (al-Baqir), and Imam Ja’far ibn Muhammad (al-Sadiq),
peace be upon them all.

They also recommend visiting the tomb of Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' (‘a)—the
veracious and pure—the daughter of the Holy Prophet (S). She is said to
have been buried in her house[^75] that is adjacent to the Holy
Prophet’s Mosque.

In addition, the Holy Imams (‘a) have recommended visiting the tombs of
the Holy Prophet’s wives, Lady Fatimah bint Asad (Imam ‘Ali’s mother),
the other righteous companions of the Holy Prophet (S), and the martyrs
of the Battle of Uhud, topping the list being Hamzah ibn ‘Abd
al-Muttalib, the Holy Prophet’s (S) uncle.

In addition to the previous, there is much interest in visiting mosques
and other places where the Holy Prophet (S) offered prayers and said
supplications and particular places where historical events or bestowing
of divine gifts took place. The following mosques top this list:

• **Mosque Qaba**

• **Mosque al-*****Fath***

• **Mosque al-Qiblatayn**

• **Mosque Uhud**

• **Imam ‘Ali Mosque**

• **Salman al-Farsi Mosque**

• **Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' Mosque**

• **Mosque al-Ghumamah (the cloud)**

Other places the Holy Imams (‘a) have recommended visiting are:

• **Ummu-Ibrahim’s Chamber** (known as *mashrabat ummi-ibrahim*).

• **Al-Abtuh** in the holy city of Makkah where there are the tombs of
Lady Khadijah (‘a) (the Mother of the Believers: the Holy Prophet’s
first wife and Lady Fatimah al-Zahra'‘s mother), Abu-Talib (‘a), and
other righteous personalities of the early age of Islam.

• **Abu-Talib’s Col** (where the Holy Prophet (S), along with his
relatives from the Hashemites, were put under a harsh siege by the
polytheists of Makkah at the beginning of his promulgation of Islam).

• **Hira' Cave** (where the Holy Prophet (S) used to worship Almighty
Allah secretly before he received the divine revelation).

• **Al-Arqam House** (where the first group of Muslims, led by the Holy
Prophet (S) met secretly to discuss the affairs of Islam).

• **Dar al-Nidwah** (the place where the chiefs of Quraysh would meet to
discuss the latest issues).

The Holy Imams (‘a) also recommended visiting all sites that were
connected with the history of Islam and reminded Muslims of the dignity,
honor, sacrifices, and difficulties that faced the divine mission of
promulgating Islam to establish a good link between them and the great
history of their religion. They hoped this would arouse their spirit of
determination and renaissance, and create the qualities of independence,
and self-respect in them.[^76]

**With regard to quality**, the Ahl al-Bayt (‘a) look at visiting the
Holy Prophet (S) and Imams (‘a) as perfection and completion of the
ritual *Hajj*. Many traditions declare and confirm this fact openly. In
this connection, Imam al-Ridha (‘a) is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِنَّ لِكُلِّ إِمَامٍ عَهْداً فِي عُنُقِ أَوْلِيَاءِهِ وَشِيعَتِهِ،
وَإِنَّ مِنْ تَمَامِ الْوَفَاءِ بِالْعَهْدِ وَحُسْنِ الأَدَاءِ
زِيَارَةَ قُبُورِهِمْ. فَمَنْ زَارَهُمْ رَغْبَةً فِي زِيَارَتِهِمْ
وَتَصْدِيقاً بِمَا رَغِبُوا فِيهِ كَانَ أَئِمَّتُهُمْ شُفَعَاءَهُمْ
يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The disciples and followers of every Imam (‘a) are connected to him
with a binding covenant that they must fulfill. Among the items of an
excellent fulfillment of these covenants is indeed the visiting of the
Imams’ (‘a) tombs. Hence, if one visits their tombs willingly and with
the intention* *of accomplishing their desire, the Imams (‘a) will
intercede for that person on the Day of Resurrection.*[^77]

Isma’il ibn Mahran has reported Imam al-Sadiq (‘a) as saying:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
إِذَا حَجَّ أَحَدُكُمْ فَلْيَخْتِمْ حَجَّهُ بِزِيَارَتِنَا; لأَِنَّ
ذَلِكَ مِنْ تَمَامِ الْحَجِّ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*Any one of you who goes on Hajj must conclude his Hajj by visiting us
because this is the finalization of Hajj.*[^78]

Imam ‘Ali, the Commander of the Faithful (‘a), is reported to have said:

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
أَتِمُّوا بِرَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَآلِهِ حَجَّكُمْ
إِذَا خَرَجْتُمْ إِلَى بَيْتِ اللهِ; فَإِنَّ تَرْكَهُ جَفَاءٌ
وَبِذَلِكَ أُمِرْتُمْ، وَأَتِمُّوا بِالْقُبُورِ الَّتِي أَلْزَمَكُمُ
اللهُ عَزَّ وَجَلَّ زِيَارَتَهَا وَحَقَّهَا، وَاطْلُبُوا الرِّزْقَ
عِنْدَهَا.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*When you go on pilgrimage to the House of Allah, finalize your Hajj by
visiting the Messenger of Allah (S) because to avoid doing this is a
type of alienation from him, while you are ordered to avoid alienating
yourself. Also, finalize your Hajj by visiting the tombs that Almighty
Allah has ordered you to visit and to carry out your duties towards
them. Seek sustenance at these tombs.*[^79]

In *al-Kafi*, Shaykh al-Kulayni has reported Imam al-Baqir (‘a) as
saying

<blockquote dir="rtl">
  <p>
تَمَامُ الْحَجِّ لِقَاءُ الإِمَامِ.
  </p>
</blockquote>

*The acme of Hajj is to visit the Imam (‘a).*[^80]

[^1]: - Rajab is the seventh month in the Islamic (lunar) calendar. It
comes after Jumada al-Thaniyah (II) and before Sha\`ban. In addition to
Muharram, Dhu’l-Qa\`dah and Dhu’l-Hijjah, Rajab is one of the Four
Sacred Months in Islam.

[^2]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:352, H. 9. According to
several traditions, Ramadhan is the month of Almighty Allah—known by all
Muslims. It is, therefore, probable that a mistake had taken place in
the recording of this tradition with regard to this topic specifically.

[^3]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:350, H. 3.

[^4]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:350, H. 4.

[^5]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:348, H. 1 & 2 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Saduq’s man-la-yahdhuruhul-faqih, al-Muqni\`,
al-Muqni\`ah, Thawab al-A\`mal, and al-Khisal, and Shaykh al-Tusi’s
Misbah al-Mutahajjid and Tahdhib al-Ahkam, as well as many other
reference books. Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, in Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah, and Shaykh
al-Qummi, in Mafatih al-Jinan, have referred to another number of
traditions about the excellence and merits of Rajab as well as the
rewards of imploring Almighty Allah for forgiveness, and performing acts
of worship in it.

[^6]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 132-137.

[^7]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 136.

[^8]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:359, H. 3.

[^9]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:358, H. 1.

[^10]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:361, H. 6.

[^11]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 138.

[^12]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 140-141.

[^13]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 142.

[^14]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 5:233. See also Shaykh
al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 139.

[^15]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 148.

[^16]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 149.

[^17]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 154.

[^18]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 154.

[^19]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:378, H. 33 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Tusi’s Misbah al-Mutahajjid.

[^20]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:360, H. 1.

[^21]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:372, H. 11 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Saduq’s Thawab al-A\`mal.

[^22]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:360, H. 1, 2 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Kulayni’s Furu\` al-Kafi and other reference books.

[^23]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:362, H. 7 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Saduq’s man-la-yahdhuruhul-faqih, Ma\`ani al-Akhbar, and
Thawab al-A\`mal, Shaykh al-Kulayni’s al-Kafi, and Shaykh al-Tusi’s
Misbah al-Mutahajjid and Tahdhib al-Ahkam.

[^24]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:372, H. 12 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Saduq’s Thawab al-A\`mal.

[^25]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:373, H. 16.

[^26]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:375, H. 24.

[^27]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:378-380, H. 1, 2, 4,
5, & 6.

[^28]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:378-380, H. 8.

[^29]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:378-380, H. 3 & 7.

[^30]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:378-380, H. 1.

[^31]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:381, H. 10.

[^32]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:365, H. 18; Shaykh
\`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 156.

[^33]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 156-169.

[^34]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 164-165.

[^35]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:370, H. 8.

[^36]: - Shaykh \`Abbas al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 171.

[^37]: - Ibid.

[^38]: - The Golden Chain of Authority (al-Salsalah al-Dhahabiyyah)
reads as follows: Imam al-Ridha (‘a) has reported on the authority of
his father, Imam al-Kazim (‘a), on the authority of his father, Imam
al-Sadiq (‘a), on the authority of his father, Imam al-Baqir (‘a), on
the authority of his father, Imam Zayn al-\`Abidin (‘a), on the
authority of his father, Imam Husayn (‘a), on the authority of his
father, Imam \`Ali (‘a), on the authority of the Holy Prophet (S) who
said…

[^39]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 7:226, H. 20.

[^40]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 9:74 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi and Shaykh al-Kaf\`ami’s al-Misbah.

[^41]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 176-177.

[^42]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 9:71, H. 163.

[^43]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 9:13, H. 26, as
quoted from Shaykh al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi.

[^44]: - Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 9:178, as quoted
from Shaykh al-Kulayni, Usul al-Kafi.

[^45]: - Ibid. Such reports indicate the general state of the Imam (‘a)
in this month. Of course, the Imams (‘a) would repeat these devotional
words as long as they would not contradict carrying out more important
devotional acts or deeds, such as working towards settling necessary
daily activities.

[^46]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 178.

[^47]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 178.

[^48]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 179. Seemingly, to
repeat Surah al-Qadr is equivalent to the litanies of Ramadhan or
replacing the required recitation of the Holy Qur'an for those who
cannot recite it in such a condensed manner. However, Almighty Allah
knows best.

[^49]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 179-183.

[^50]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 183-184.

[^51]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 184-202. It is worth
mentioning that on each night of Ramadhan, at early dawn, or after that,
it is obligatory to remember fasting the next day.

[^52]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 202.

[^53]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 207.

[^54]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 213-214.

[^55]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 210.

[^56]: - Moreover, Shaykh al-Qummi has mentioned that this procedure has
been deemed obligatory by some scholars.

[^57]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 215.

[^58]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 217-121. Although it is
reported that Imam al-Kazim (‘a) recommended praying to Almighty Allah
with this supplicatory formula on the first day of the year, experts
have understood that the Imam (‘a) meant the first day or night of
Ramadhan.

[^59]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 223.

[^60]: - Shaykh al-Qummi, Mafatih al-Jinan, pp. 238-242. On page 242,
Shaykh al-Qummi has mentioned a notice to be worth considered.

[^61]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 8:77, H. 2 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Kulayni, Furu\` al-Kafi.

[^62]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 8:14, H. 5 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Kulayni, Furu\` al-Kafi and reported through a valid
chain of authority.

[^63]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 8:5, H. 6 as quoted from
Shaykh al-Kulayni, Furu\` al-Kafi.

[^64]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 8:5, H. 9.

[^65]: - In many traditions, Hajj is preferred to manumission of slaves,
giving of alms, and even holy struggle against enemies. It is
recommended to prefer going on Hajj for one’s personal worldly affairs.
In view of such matters and more details, the Hajj, in the sight of the
Ahl al-Bayt (‘a), enjoys high value and a distinctive particularity. See
Sayyid al-Borujerdi, Jami\` Ahadith al-Shi\`ah 10:149-216 Section:
Merits of the Hajj.

[^66]: - \`Umrat al-Tamattu\` is the lesser Hajj (pilgrimage) to Makkah
made independently or at the same time of the ritual Hajj, and
consisting of a number of devotional rituals performed within the city.
\`Umrat al-Tamattu\` must be connected to the ritual Hajj.

[^67]: - Sa\`y is the ritual of running between Hill al-Safa and Hill
al-Marwah seven times.

[^68]: - Nahj al-Balaghah, Sermon No. 1.

[^69]: - Shaykh al-Saduq, \`Uyun Akhbar al-Ridha 1:126.

[^70]: - For instance, the author of Jami\` Ahadiih al-Shi\`ah has cited
eight hundred and thirty one traditions about the history, excellence,
and general affairs of the Hajj.

[^71]: - Mansur \`Ali Nasif, al-Taj al-Jami\` lil-Usul 2:153 as quoted
from Sahih Muslim and Sunan Abi-Dawud.

[^72]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 8:7, H. 12 as quoted
from Shaykh al-Saduq’s man-la-yahdhuruhul-faqih.

[^73]: - For instance, al-Hurr al-\`Amili, in Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah
8:248-338 have dedicated sixty eight sections of his book to discussing
the details of the Hajj.

[^74]: - Exceptions are the Wahhabis who deem forbidden preparing for
visiting the Holy Prophet’s tomb. However, they deem it acceptable for
those who are present at al-Madinah. According to their laws, it is
lawful to prepare oneself for visiting the Holy Prophet’s Mosque at
Madinah and then visiting the Holy Prophet’s tomb may come in the margin
of visiting his mosque.

[^75]: - About the burial place of Lady Fatimah al-Zahra' (‘a), there
are many probabilities, the most apparent of which is that she was
buried in her house. However, there is another probability that she was
buried in al-Baqi\` Cemetery. The disagreement about the burial place of
this veracious and pure lady resulted from the historical fact that she,
owing to certain political reasons, willed her burial place to be
unknown to people and specifically asked Imam \`Ali (‘a), her husband,
not to allow Abu-Bakr and \`Umar to participate in her funeral ceremony
because she died without forgiving them. This fact has been reported by
all Muslims.

[^76]: - Unfortunately, it can be noticed that there is currently an
attempt through well-organized campaigns to eradicate these traces and
cast screens upon them. The perpetrators hope that by attracting
attention away from these places they will succeed in making the
pilgrims forget them.

[^77]: - \`Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:116, H. 1.

[^78]: - Al-Hurr al-\`Amili, Wasa’il al-Shi\`ah 14:324, H. 1.

[^79]: - \`Allamah al-Majlisi, Bihar al-Anwar 97:139, H. 2.

[^80]: - Shaykh al-Kulayni, al-Kafi 4:549, H. 2.


