Vii. Mystic Self-consciousness
==============================

Mystic self-consciousness is the knowledge of self in relation to
Allah. According to the mystics this relation is not of that kind which
normally exists between two things existing side by side, such as the
relation between a man and other members of his society. It is that kind
of relation that exists between a main and a subsidiary, or a genuine
and a figurative. In the terminology of the mystics themselves, it is
the relation between the limited and the absolute.

The feelings of a mystic or a sufi are different from that of a
liberal-minded. They do not represent the consciousness of the inner
anguish felt by man as a natural need of him. A liberal-minded first
becomes aware of the anguish prevailing outside and then feels it within
himself. On the other hand, the anguish of the mystic is an inner
consciousness of a spiritual need just as a physical pain is the warning
of the existence of a physical need.

The anguish felt by a mystic is different from that felt by a
philosopher also. Both of them long for truth. But the philosopher wants
to know the truth, whereas the mystic wants to reach it and be absorbed
in it.

The anguish of a philosopher is a characteristic that distinguishes him
from all other phenomena of nature - the plants, the animals and the
inorganic matter. No existing thing in nature except man longs to have
knowledge. But the anguish of the mystic is that of intense love and
spiritual exaltation. It is a thing which is missing not only in
animals, but even in angels whose very essence is self-consciousness.
The anguish of a philosopher is the proclamation of his instinctive need
of seeking knowledge, which man by nature wants to acquire.

The anguish of a mystic, on the other hand, is the proclamation of the
instinctive need of his sense of love which wants to soar and cannot be
satisfied unless he touches the truth with his entire existence. A
mystic believes that real self-consciousness is nothing other than
having knowledge of Allah. According to him, what the philosopher calls
the ego of man is not the real ego. It may be man's spirit, soul or the
factors determining his existence. The real ego is Allah. Only by
breaking through the factors determining his existence, man can know his
real self.

The philosophers and the scholastic theologians have written a great
deal on the subject of self-consciousness. But no knowledge of self can
be obtained through such methods. Those who believe that what these
philosophers have discovered concerning self-consciousness is a fact are
sadly mistaken. They wrongly take swelling for fatness.

In reply to the question, what self and ego are, Shaykh Mahmud of
Shabistar has composed his celebrated, mystic poem known as Gulshan-i
Raz. In it he says:

"When truth assumes a fixed shape because of determining facts, in
words it is expressed as 'I' and 'You'. But in reality 'I' and 'You' are
mere manifestations of one real existence. Bodies and souls are the
reflections of the same light which sometimes appears in a lamp and
sometimes in a mirror".

Criticizing the views of the philosophers about soul, ego and
self-consciousness he says:

"You think that the word 'I' always refers to the soul. You do not know
what is self, because you follow reason. 'I' and 'You' are above body
and souls, for both of them are a part of the ego. 'I' does not refer to
any particular person so that it might refer to his soul. Try to be
above all creation. Renounce the world and you will automatically become
the world yourself".

So according to the mystic soul or life is not the ego, nor the
knowledge of them amounts to self-consciousness. Soul and life are only
the manifestations of ego and self. The real ego is Allah. When man
annihilates himself and breaks the factors determining his existence, no
trace of his life and soul is left. At that time the drop of water which
had separated from the sea, returns to the sea and is obliterated there.
That is the stage of real self-consciousness. At this stage man sees
himself in everything and everything in himself. Thus he becomes aware
his real self. VIII. Prophetic Self-Consciousness:

Prophetic self-consciousness is different from all other kinds of
self-consciousness. A Prophet has a Divine consciousness as well as a
profane consciousness. He is devoted to Allah as well as to His
creation. That does not mean that he believes in any sort of dualism or
that half of his attention is towards Allah and another half towards the
creation. His goal and objective are not divided at all. The Holy Qur'an
says:

"Allah has not put two hearts into the bosom of any man." (Surah
al-Ahzab, 33:4) With one heart one cannot have two sweethearts.

The Prophets are the champions of monotheism. There can be no question
of any trace of polytheism in all that they do, neither in their
doctrine, nor in their goal, nor in their devotion. The Prophets love
every particle of the world as a manifestation of the person and the
attributes of Allah.

A poet says:

"I am happy with the world because this thriving world is His and I
love the whole world because the whole world is His".

The love of the holy men for the world is a reflection of their love
for Allah and not a love for anything besides Him. They are concerned
with the creation only because of their devotion to the Creator, and not
for any other reason. Their sole aim and desire is to go up (promote
their spiritual power) step by step towards Allah and lift others along
with them.

The career of the Prophets begins with an intense Divine love which
pushes them forward to the proximity of Allah and quickens their
evolution. It prompts them to undertake the journey which is known as
'the journey from the created to the Creator'. The keen and intense
feeling of this Divine love does not allow them to rest for a moment
till they, in the words of Imam Ali, reach the "place of security".

The end of this journey is the beginning of another journey which is
known as the "journey from Allah to Allah". It is during this journey
that they are filled with truth and achieve still another kind of
evolution.

A Prophet does not stop even at this stage. Having been filled with
truth, completed the circle of existence and having become conversant
with spiritual stations, he is raised as a Prophet and then begins a
third journey of his, which is from Allah to people. But this does not
mean his return to the point from where he had started and the loss of
all that he had achieved. He returns with all his achievements intact.
His journey from Allah to the people is performed with Allah and not
away from Him. This is the third stage of the evolution of a Prophet.

His being raised as a Prophet at the end of his second journey means
the birth of self-consciousness in respect of people out of his
self-consciousness in respect of Allah and the birth of devotion to
people out of his devotion to Allah.

With his return to people the fourth journey of a Prophet and a fourth
period of his evolution begins. During this journey he moves among the
people alone with Allah. He moves among them in order to lead them to
unbounded perfection by the way of truth, justice and human values and
to give a concrete shape to their limitless hidden capabilities.

From here it is clear that what is the final goal to a liberal-minded
reformer is only one of the stages to a Prophet to cross which he helps
people. Similarly the highest point which a mystic or a Sufi may claim
to have attained is only a point on the way of a Prophet. Describing the
difference between prophetic and mystic types of self-consciousness, Dr.
Iqbal says:

"Prophet Muhammad of Arabia ascended the highest Heaven and returned. I
swear by Allah that if I had reached that point, I should never have
returned". These are the words of a great Muslim saint, Abdul Quddus of
Gangoh. In the whole sufi literature it will probably be difficult to
find words which in a single sentence disclose such an acute perception
of the psychological difference between the Prophetic and the mystic
types of consciousness.

The mystic does not wish to return from the repose of unitary
experience; and if he does return, as he must, his return does not mean
much for mankind at large. The Prophet's return is creative. He returns
to insert himself into the sweep of time with a view to control the
forces of history and thereby to create a fresh world of ideals". (The
Reconstruction of Religious thought in Islam, pp. 143 - 144)

At present we are not concerned whether the mystic interpretations are
correct or otherwise. What is an indisputable fact is that a Prophet in
the beginning has an intense longing for Allah. That is the only anguish
which he feels. He seeks Allah and soars towards Him. He draws on that
source. Then he feels sympathy with his fellow-beings.

The sympathy of a Prophet is different from that of a liberal-minded
reformer or a philanthropist. It is not simply a human sentiment, nor is
it like the feeling of pity excited by the sight of a crippled man. A
Prophet's anguish is of an entirely different nature and bears no
resemblance with the other compassionate feelings and sentiments. His
self-consciousness in respect of people is also unique. The fire which
inflames his soul is quite different.

It is true that the personality of a Prophet gets so expanded that not
only his life gets united with the lives of all others, but his
personality takes the whole world under its fold. He feels sorry for the
sufferings of mankind. The Holy Qur'an says: "There has come to you a
Messenger from among yourselves to whom your misfortune is too hard to
bear and who is eager to see that you prosper." (Surah al-Tawbah,
9:128)

Addressing the Holy Prophet it says: "Yet you will possibly destroy
yourself with grief, feeling sorry for them if they do not believe in
this statement (the Quran)." (Surah al-Kahf, 18:6)

It is true that a Prophet is grieved for the hunger, deprivation,
disease, poverty, persecution and harassment of the people. He feels so
worried that he cannot sleep peacefully because of his apprehension that
somebody might be hungry in the farthest corner of the country. Imam Ali
once said:

"What a bad idea it would be that I should ever be overwhelmed by my
evil desires and should be led by my greed to choose tasty dishes while
there may be in Hijaz or Yamamah somebody who has no hope of getting
coarse bread and who has never eaten to his fill! Is it reasonable that
I should sleep satiated while there are empty bellies and burning hearts
around me?" (Peak of Eloquence, Letter-45)

These sentiments should not be considered to be the result of simple
compassion, kind-heartedness or fellow-feeling. A Prophet, being a human
being, has in the beginning of his career all human virtues in the same
form and colour as other human beings have. But after his entire
existence is inflamed by a Divine flame, his virtues take a new shape
and a new colour that is a Divine colour.

Those who are trained by a Prophet are absolutely different from those
who are trained by a liberal-minded reformer and the society that is
formed by him is different from the society formed by the thinkers and
the intellectuals.

The main difference is that a Prophet tries to stir up the instinctive
forces of man. He stimulates man's mysterious consciousness and kindles
his hidden love. A Prophet calls himself a 'reminder' or an 'awakener'.
He creates in man sensitiveness to the entire existence, and transfers
his own self-consciousness in respect of the whole existence to other
people. As for the liberal-minded reformer, he at the most awakens the
social conscience of the individuals and acquaints them with their
national or class interests.

**Notes**


15. Islamic conception of man's innate nature is different from that of
Descartes, Kant, etc. Man's innate nature does not mean the actual
existence of certain amount of understanding or the actual existence of
certain tendencies and desires in him from his very birth, or as the
philosophers say that man is born with rationality and will.

Similarly Islam does not accept the theory of the Marxists and the
Existentialists who deny the existence of innate nature and say that man
is born like a blank sheet and is equally receptive to any idea which is
imprinted on his mind.

According to Islam in the beginning of the period following his birth
man has certain potential tendencies towards the realization of which he
wants to move. An inner force drives him towards his goal, of course
with the help of, external conditions. If he actually achieves what is
befitting of him, he secures what is called humanity.

If an actuality other than that is imposed on him by compelling
external factors, he becomes a deformed being. That is the only
plausible explanation of the metamorphosis of man of which even the
Marxists and the Existentialists talk.

From the point of view of this school, the relation between man at the
birth and the human values and virtues is similar to the relation
between a sapling of pear and a fully grown tree of it. An inner link
with the help of external factors turns a sapling into a tree. This
relation is not similar to that existing between a plank of wood and a
chair, for in this case only external factors turn the former into the
latter.


