Demerits of Man
===============

At the same time the Holy Qur'an has strongly reproached and censured
man. It says that:

"He has proved a tyrant and a fool." (Surah al-Ahzab, 33:72)

"Surely he is very ungrateful." (Surah al-Hajj, 22:66)

"When he thinks that he is self-contented, he revolts." (Surah
al-'Alaq, 96:7)

"Man is very hasty." (Surah Bani Isra'il, 17:11)

"When misfortune befalls man, he prays to Us, reclining on his side,
standing or sitting. But as soon as We have relived him of his
suffering, he passes on as if he never invoked Us in connection with his
affliction." (Surah Yunus, 10: 12)

"Man has always been very grudging." (Bani Israil, 17:100)

"Man is more contentious than anything else." (Surah al-Kahf, 18:54)

"Man has been created impatient - fretful, when evil befalls him, and
when good befalls him grudging." (Surah al-Ma'arij, 70:19 - 20)


**Is Man By Nature Good or Bad?**

What conclusion can we draw from all this? Is man from the viewpoint of
the Holy Qur'an good and bad simultaneously, and not only that but
extremely good and extremely bad at the same time. Is man two-natured?
Is one half of him light and the other half darkness? How is it that the
Holy Qur'an on the one hand praises him so highly and on the other
denounces him so badly?

The fact is that the Holy Qur'an does not praise and censure man
because he is a two-natured being and one half of his nature is laudable
and the other half is censurable. The Holy Qur'an is of the view that
potentially man has all the good points, but he has to actualize them.

It is he who is the builder of himself. The main condition of man's
actually attaining the good qualities which he potentially possesses is
his 'faith'. Faith begets piety, meritorious deeds and effort for the
cause of Allah. Through faith knowledge becomes a useful implement
instead of being a tool of evil desires. Therefore it is the real man,
the vicegerent of Allah before whom the angels prostrate themselves.
Everything is for him who possesses all human virtues that is the man
plus faith, not the man minus faith.

The man minus faith is defective. Such a man is greedy, bloodthirsty,
miserly and stingy. He is an unbeliever and worse than a beast.

In the Holy Qur'an there are verses which make it amply clear what type
of man is commended and what type of man is denounced. These verses show
that a man lacking in faith and unattached to Allah is not a true man.
The man who gets attached to the single Reality and gets satisfaction in
believing in Him and remembering Him, he possesses all the superb
qualities. But if a man is unattached to that Reality, that is Allah, he
is like a tree which has been disconnected with its root. As an example
we quote here two verses:

"By the time, surely man is in a state of loss, save those who believe,
do good deeds, exhort one another to truth and exhort one another to
endurance." (Surah al-Asr)

"We have created for Hell many of the jinn and men. They have hearts,
but do not understand with them; they have eyes, but do not see with
them; and they have ears, but do not hear with them. They are like
beasts or even further astray." (Surah al-A'rif, 7:179)


