Multi-dimensional Being
=======================

From what has been said it may be derived that though man has many
things in common with other living beings, yet he is quite different
from them. Man is a material as well as a spiritual being. Each of the
points which make man entirely different from other living beings, gives
him a new dimension. The areas of difference are three:

i. Area of the discovery of the self and the world.

ii. Area of the tendencies which act upon human mind.

iii. Area of the way how man is influenced by his natural tendencies
and how he makes a selection out of them.

As far as the discovery of the self and the world is concerned, an
animal knows the world by means of its senses. This quality is shared by
man with other animals. In this respect some animals have even a keener
sense than man. But the information which is fed by the senses to
animals or man is only superficial and external. Senses cannot go deep
into the nature of things, nor into their logical relations.

Besides his senses man has another power which enables him to perceive
and discover himself and the world. This mysterious power of
understanding is not possessed by other living beings. Man with his
power of understanding discovers the general laws of nature and by means
of this knowledge he practically controls nature and makes it of service
to him.

In the earlier discussions also we referred to this kind of knowledge
which is peculiar to man and pointed out that the mechanism of
intellectual understanding is one of the most complex mechanisms of the
existence of man. If this mechanism works accurately, it opens a
wonderful way to man knows himself. By means of it man can discover many
realities which he cannot make contact through his senses.

It is through this mysterious power which is peculiar to him that man
can acquire the knowledge of the things which are beyond his sensual
perception, especially the philosophical knowledge of Allah.

As far as the area of tendencies and urges is concerned, man like other
animals is influenced by the natural and material urges and impulsions.
His inclination to food, to sleep, to sexual affairs, to rest etc.,
pulls him towards matter and nature. But these are not the only urges
which man has. He is attracted toward many other things which are not
material, that is they have no size and weight and cannot be measured by
any material yardstick. The spiritual tendencies and urges which have so
far been identified and accepted are as follows:

**(i) Knowledge and Information:**

Man does not want knowledge only to apply it to nature and to utilize
it for improving the quality of his material life. In man there exists
an instinct of inquisitiveness and finding out the truth. Man requires
knowledge for its own sake and enjoys it. Besides being a means of
living a better life and discharging the responsibility in a better way,
knowledge as such is desirable.

As far as man's life is concerned it makes no difference whether he
knows or does not know the secrets of what exists beyond the galaxies,
but he still prefers to know them. Man by virtue of his nature dislikes
ignorance and is keen to acquire knowledge. Hence knowledge is an
intellectual dimension of man's existence.

**(ii) Moral Goodness:**

Man performs certain acts not with a view to get any benefit out of
them or with a view to avert any loss or damage, but purely under the
impact of certain sentiments called moral sentiments. He performs them
because he believes that his humanness requires him to perform them.
Suppose a man has been stranded in a desolate wilderness.

He has no food and expects no relief. He is threatened by the danger of
death every moment. In the meanwhile another man appears. He helps him
and saves him from death which seemed to be imminent. Thereafter these
two men are separated and do not see each other. After many years the
man who was one day in distress, sees his old saviour in a pitiable
condition. He recollects that this very person saved his life one day.

In such circumstances, will not the conscience of this man direct him
to take some action? Will it not say that a favour must be matched with
a reciprocal favour? Will it not tell him that he is under an obligation
to show his gratitude to his benefactor? We think that the answer is in
the affirmative.

If this man renders immediate help to that person, what will the
conscience of other people say? If he remains indifferent and does not
show slightest reaction, what will their conscience say?

There is no doubt that in the first case the conscience of other people
will appreciate his action and will applaud him and in the second case
will blame and disparage him. It is moral conscience of man which says:
"The reward of goodness is nothing but goodness" (Surah ar-Rahman,
55:60)

Hence, he who requites goodness with goodness should be acclaimed and
he who remains indifferent to the acts of favour done to him should be
blamed and criticized. Acts performed at the instance of moral
conscience are called acts of moral goodness.

Moral goodness is the criterion by which many of human acts are judged.
In other words, man does many things only because of their moral value
without taking into consideration their material side. This is also one
of the characteristics of man and one of his spiritual dimensions. Other
living beings have no similar standard by which their actions may be
judged. Moral goodness and moral value have no meaning for an animal.

(iii) Beauty:

Another mental dimension of man is his interest in beauty and
appreciation of the beautiful. His aesthetic sense plays an important
role in all spheres of his life. Man wears clothes to protect himself
against the heat of summer and the cold of winter. But he gives equal
importance to the beauty of colour and stitching of his clothes. He
builds a house for living in it. But he pays more attention to the
beauty of the house than to anything else.

He observes the aesthetic principles in the selection of his dining
table and dining crockery and even in the arrangement of his food on the
table. Man likes his features to be beautiful, his clothes to be
beautiful, his name to be beautiful, his hand-writing to be beautiful,
his city and its roads to be beautiful and all spectacles before his
eyes to be beautiful. In short he wants a hallow of beauty to encircle
his entire life.

For an animal the question of beauty does not arise. What is important
to it is its food and not the beauty of that. It is not interested in a
beautiful saddle, beautiful scenery, a beautiful abode etc.


**(iv) Adoration and Worship:**

The sense of adoration and worship is one of the oldest and the most
stable manifestations of the human soul and one of the most important
dimensions of the existence of man. The study of anthropology shows that
wherever and whenever man has existed, adoration and worship have also
existed.

Only the form of worship and the deity to be worshipped have differed.
The form of worship also has varied from dances and rhythmical group
movements accompanied by some liturgy and recitations to the highest
form of humbling oneself and the most progressive recitations. The deity
has varied from pieces of wood and stone to the eternally self-existing
being free from all temporal and spatial restrictions.

Worship was not invented by the Prophets. They only taught the proper
way of its performance. In addition they prevented and prohibited the
worship of any being other than Allah, the One.

According to the indisputable religious teachings and the view
expressed by some scholars of the history of religion like Max Mueller,
the primitive man was a monotheist, worshipping one single true Deity.
The worship of the idols, the moon, the stars or the men is a sort of
later deviation.

In other words it did not happen that man began with the worship of
idols, the men or any other creatures and gradually with cultural
development reached the stage of worshipping Allah, the One. The sense
of worship which is often called religious sense generally exists among
most individuals. We earlier quoted Erich Fromme as saying that:

"Man may worship living beings, trees, golden or stone-idols, the
invisible God, a saint or a demon; he may worship his ancestors, his
nation, his class, his party, or money and prosperity......... he may be
conscious of his religious beliefs as distinguished from his
non-religious beliefs or, on the contrary, he may think that he has no
religion. It is not the question whether he has or has not a religion;
the question is what religion he has?". . . . .

William James, as quoted by Dr Iqbal, says:

"The impulse to pray is a necessary consequence of the fact that whilst
the innermost of the empirical selves of a man is a self of the social
sort, it yet can find its only adequate socious (its 'great companion')
in an ideal world. . . . . . Most men, either continually or
occasionally, carry a reference to it in their breasts. The humblest
outcast on this earth can feel himself to be real and valid by means of
this higher recognition". (The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in
Islam, p. 89)

Professor William James in regard to the universality of the presence
of this sense among all individuals says:

"It is probable that men differ a great deal in the degree in which
they are haunted by this sense of an ideal spectator. It is much more
essential part of the consciousness of some men than of others. Those
who have the most of it are possibly the most religious men. But I am
sure that even those who say that they are altogether without it deceive
themselves and really have it in some degree". (The Reconstruction of
Religious Thought in Islam)

The creation of the fictitious heroes out of the athletes,
intellectuals or religious men is due to the human sense of
sanctification which wants to have a laudable and adorable being and to
extol him so lovingly as to make him supernatural.

Modern man's exaggerated praise of the national or party heroes and his
adoration of his party, doctrine, ideology, flag, homeland and his
readiness to make sacrifice for these is due to this very sense. The
sense of adoration is an instinctive desire to worship the supermost
perfectness and beauty free from every defect, deficiency or blemish.
The worship of any created thing in any form is a sort of deviation of
this sense from its normal course.

By means of worship man wants to soar from his limited existence and
join a truth not subject to any defect, deficiency, annihilation or
limitation. The great scientist of our times, Einstein says:

"In this state the individual realizes the paltriness of his aims and
ambitions and feels the greatness and awe produced on his mind by what
is supernatural and metaphysical ... Prayer as a means of spiritual
illumination is a normal and vital act by which the little island of our
personality suddenly discovers its situation in a larger whole of life".
(The Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam)

Worship and adoration indicate a possibility, a desire of going out of
the sphere of material things and an inclination to join a higher and
wider horizon. Such a desire is peculiar to man. As such worship is
another mental and spiritual dimension of man.

The variation from individual to individual in being affected by
various urges and impulses and the choice he may exercise between them,
are the questions which we propose to discuss next.


