Diverse Powers of Man
=====================

Power or force need not be defined. The factor from which some effect
is produced is called power or force. Everything existing in the world
is the source of one or more effects. Therefore everything whether it is
inorganic matter or a plant or an animal or man, has some power or
force, which if accompanied by consciousness, perception and desire is
called ability.

One of the differences between the animals and man on the one hand, and
the plants and the inorganic matter on the other is that unlike the
inorganic matter and the plants, the animals and man can use a part of
their power as motivated by their own desire, intention, inclination or
some fear. A magnet has the property of attracting iron automatically as
a result of some sort of natural compulsion.

But the magnet is neither aware of its working nor does by its own
inclination, desire or any fear demands that it should attract iron. The
same is true of fire which burns, of a plant which grows of a tree which
blossoms and bears fruit. But the animal when it walks knows what it is
doing. It walks because it wants to do so. It is under no compulsion to
walk. That is why it is said that the animal walks of its own choice. In
other words, some powers of an animal are subordinate to its choice, and
work only when it wants.

The same is the case with a part of man's powers also. Some of his
powers are subordinate to his choice. But there is one difference. The
choice of an animal is controlled by its natural and instinctive
inclinations. An animal has no power to resist the dictates of its
instincts. As soon as it is internally attracted to a certain direction,
it is automatically drawn to it.

It can neither withstand its inner inclination, nor can it consider its
pros and cons. It cannot think of any action to which it is not inclined
presently but which is demanded by far-sightedness.

But that is not the case with man. He has the power to withstand his
inner inclinations and impulsion and not to act according to them. Man
has this power of discrimination because he possesses another power
which is called will and which in turn works under the direction of
reason or man's intellectual faculty. It is reason which forms an
opinion and it is will that puts it into practice.

It is clear from what has been mentioned above that in regard to his
various powers man is distinct from animals in two respects. Firstly, he
possesses a number of inclinations and spiritual drives which enable him
to extend the sphere of his activities to the higher horizon of
spiritualities while other animals cannot step outside the limits of
material affairs.

Secondly, he is equipped with the powers of reason and will; and as
such can withstand his natural inclinations and can free himself from
their compelling influence. He can rule over all his propensities and
bring them under the control of his reason. He can fix a limit to each
of his inclination, which is the most valuable kind of freedom.

This great power is peculiar to man and is not shared by any other
animal. It is this power which has made man fit to be obligated to
observe the precepts of religion, has given him the right of choice and
has made him a really free, volitive and choosing being.

Inclinations and drives are a sort of bond between man and an external
centre, which pulls him towards itself. The more he submits to his
inclinations, the more he loses his self-control and enters a state of
internal lethargy and misery. His destiny falls into the hand of an
external force which may pull him to any direction. On the contrary the
force of reason and will is an inner force and a manifestation of the
real personality of man.

When a man procures the support of his reason and will, he gets
together his own forces, breaks off with external influences, makes
himself free and becomes an 'independent island' in the ocean of this
world. By means of his reason and will man becomes master of himself,
and his personality gains strength.

To gain control and mastery of one-self and to get rid of the influence
of impulses and drives are the true objects of Islamic training which
aims at spiritual freedom.


**Self-Consciousness**

Islam very keenly wants that man should know himself and should find
out his position in the universe. The Holy Qur'an has laid all that
stress on man so that he should know himself as he is, and should
realize his position and status in the world with a view to occupy there
a high position befitting him.

The Holy Qur'an is a book which teaches man how to build himself. It is
not a book of theoretical philosophy concerned only with discussions and
views. Whatever view it puts forward is meant for implementation and
taking action.

The Holy Qur'an wants that man should discover himself. But this
discovery of self does not mean that he should find out what his name
is; what his father's name is; in which year he was born; which country
he belongs to; with whom he has married or how many children he has.

This self is the same thing which has been given the name of 'Divine
spirit'. To know this self means that man should be conscious of his
dignity and nobility and should apprehend that his indulgence in any
kind of meanness is far below his high position. He should realize his
own sacredness so that the sacred, moral and social values may have a
meaning for him.

When the Holy Qur'an says that man is a chosen being, it wants to make
it clear that he is not an accidental being brought into existence by
certain blind and deaf incidents like the accidental combination of
atoms! The Holy Qur'an says that he is a chosen being, and for that
reason has a mission and a responsibility.

There is no doubt that in this terrestrial world man is the strongest
and the most powerful being. If we compare the earth and all that exists
on it to a manor, we can say that man is the lord of this manor. But let
us see whether man has been chosen to be the lord or he has imposed
himself on the world by means of some force or fraud.

Various schools of material philosophy assert that it is a mere
accident that man has come to power. It is obvious that with this
presumption the question of any mission and responsibility becomes
meaningless.

From the viewpoint of the Holy Qur'an man has been selected to be the
lord of the earth by virtue of his competence and fitness. He has not
come to power by force or as the result of any struggle. He has been
chosen by the highest competent authority, which is none other than
Allah, the Almighty, and as such, like any other selected being he holds
a mission and bears a responsibility. His mission being from Allah, his
responsibility is also towards Him.

The belief that man is a chosen being and has been brought into
existence with a purpose, produces one kind of psychological effects in
the individuals, and the belief that he is the outcome of a number of
aimless accidents produces another kind of psychological effects.

Self-consciousness means that man should realize his real position in
the world. He should know that he is not merely a terrestrial being. He
has a reflection of Divine spirit in him. Man should know that he is
ahead of the angels in cognition. He is free, has the power of choosing
and willing, and is responsible for himself and others. His
responsibility includes improving the world and making it thrive. The
Holy Qur'an says: "He has brought you forth from the earth and has made
you husband it." (Surah Hud, 11:61)

Man should know that he is a trustee appointed by Allah and that he has
not gained superiority by chance. Hence it does not befit him to
despotically acquire everything for himself and think that he has no
responsibility or duty.


